No. 94-749 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


oe 


JOHN J]. HURLEY, Individually and the 


SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 


Petitioners, 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, An Unincorporated Association, 
By and Through TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, 
and CATHLEEN FINN, Acting on Their Own Behalf 
and on Behalf of the Association, 


Respondent. 


RESPONDENT’S SUGGESTION OF MOOTNESS 


JOHN Warp, Of Counsel 
ZALKIND, RODRIGUEZ, LUN1 
& DUNCAN 
65A Atlantic Avenue 
Boston, MA 02110 
(617) 742-6020 
Counsel of Record for Respondent 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


—— 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Paes) 8 ef eee ee Tere ee eer ere re 2 
Il. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACK- 

ek eee Tre rer rr eT er re re er re rer re ee 3 


Re rer ere rey rere rere 8 


il 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Aikens v. State of California, 406 U.S. 813 (1972)...... 13 
Board of License Commissioners of Tiverton v. Pastors, 

GOD UTS. ZOO CRISS eos ns es leesannas as Vareresa ee Pe 
County of Los Angeles v. Davis, 440 U.S. 625 (1979) .... 11 
DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974)............. 11 
Doremus v. Bd. of Education of the Borough of Hawt- 

og a SR. 2S,’ ) ee eed 12 
Gilligan vo. Morgan, 413 U.S. 1 (1973) .. 0.65205 .00000% 10 


Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of 
Boston v. City of Boston, 418 Mass. 238, 636 
PR SAPS LOPORD a vive cece sven peewee aeeueee ne a oe 


Lewis v. Continental Bank Corp., 494 U.S. 472 (1990) ...3, 8 
Princeton University v. Schmid, 455 U.S. 100 (1982) 


Skin dk Win ciel Aa Gee MA ae 0D A kK Ae ae 8, 9, 13 
Railroad Commission of Texas v. Pullman Co., 312 

Sst Me CA OED 6 woe ence csc ndennccvenae ee eeeeee nian 12 
SEC v. Medical Committee for Human Rights, 404 

a. Me SOTA 5k ns on na cone ah ee eaen eee eee 11 


South Boston Allied War Veterans Council, et al. v. 
City of Boston, et al., C.A. No. 94 -11402MLW (D. 
GIN 4 ca hoe Sends Sein av aksis Oe Renee era 2 


U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner Mall Partner- 
RP, nin US» cane VAS S. CR BOG CIO ae cicina ss 12 


United States v. W.T. Grant Co., 345 U.S. 629 (1953) .. & 11 


Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U.S. 147 (1975)............ 10 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
MISCELLANEOUS 
L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law (2d ed. 1988) .... 11 


R. Stern, E. Gressman, et al., Supreme Court Prac- 
ae ai civ hreb pds cae bs eceassee’s u 


No. 94-749 
+ 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
t 


JOHN J. HURLEY, Individually and the 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 


Petitioners, 


V. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, An Unincorporated Association, 
By and Through TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, 
and CATHLEEN FINN, Acting on Their Own Behalf 
and on Behalf of the Association, 


Respondent. 
¢ 
RESPONDENT’S SUGGESTION OF MOOTNESS 
¢ 


In keeping with counsel’s continuing duty to keep 
the Court apprised, without delay, of any developments 
which may affect the outcome of the case, Board of License 
Commissioners of Tiverton v. Pastore, 469 U.S. 238, 240 
(1985) (per curiam), Respondent respectfully calls the 
attention of the Court to the following matters, which 
render the present controversy moot: 


1. Subsequent to the adverse ruling by the 
state courts in the present case, Petitioners 
“enacted Rules and Regulations regarding the 
theme, the conditions of participation in future 
parades, and have prepared a document which 
will be distributed to all future participants, 


advising them that they must conform to [Peti- 
tioners’] Parade Rules and Regulations.” South 
Boston Allied War Veterans Council, et al. v. City of 
Boston, et al., C.A. No. 94-11402MLW (D. Mass.) 
[hereafter “Federal District Court Case”], Peti- 
tioners’ Verified Complaint, Paragraph 58. 


2. On January 17, 1995, the United States 
District Court for the District of Massachusetts 
issued a declaratory judgment, based in part on 
changes made by Petitioners after the adverse 
rulings in state court, holding “that conditioning 
the issuance of a permit for [Petitioners’] 1995 
St. Patrick Parade on the inclusion of [Respon- 
dent] violates [Petitioners’] right of expressive 
association under the First Amendment of the 
United States Constitution.” Federal District 
Court Case at 69. 


I. INTRODUCTION 


In this Memorandum, Respondent will suggest that 
Petitioners’ undertaking to structure future Evacuation 
Day/St. Patrick’s Day Parades in a way materially differ- 
ent from the Parade that gave rise to the judgment of the 
Supreme Judicial Court, now pending on certiorari in this 
Court, renders the controversy moot. Respondent’s rea- 
soning is as follows: (a) the state courts below made it 
quite clear that their holding, that application of the state 
anti-discrimination statute to the Parade did not offend 
the First Amendment, was predicated upon very specific 
facts relating to how Petitioners conducted past Parades; 
(b) Petitioners have made what they contend are material 
changes in the Parade subsequent to the state court rul- 
ings, and have indeed, based on at least some of these 


changes, obtained a federal court order excluding 
Respondent from this year’s Parade; (c) as a consequence, 
the judgment of the Supreme Judicial Court no longer 
speaks to the current realities of the controversy, and the 
parties have no real and personal stake in attacking or 
défending it. A victory for Respondent in this Court 
would not provide it with the relief granted in the courts 
below. As for Petitioners, they claim to have changed the 
rules of the Parade, and thus the facts that were respon- 
sible for their defeat, so that a favorable opinion in this 
Court, while undoubtedly comforting, would be purely 
advisory. Under these circumstances, this case is moot. 
See, e.g., Lewis v. Continental Bank Corp., 494 U.S. 472, 478 
(1990). 


Il. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND. 


The questions presented to this Court by Petitioners 
are (1) whether “the Supreme Judicial Court of the Com- 
monweaith of Massachusetts violated the First and Four- 
teenth Amendment rights of the Petitioners when it 
compelled the Petitioners to include, in their privately 
organized Parade, a message the Petitioners deemed 
unwanted and antithetical” and (2) whether “Petitioners’ 
refusal to include a gay, lesbian, and bisexual message 
within a private parade can be declared unlawful dis- 
crimination by the government without violating the 
Petitioners’ First and Fourteenth Amendment rights.” 
Petition for Certiorari at i and Appendix B at B28. 


After a four-day trial, the Massachusetts Superior 
Court found the following pertinent facts, among others: 
(1) Petitioners exercised no genuine selectivity in 


choosing Parade participants and sponsors; (2) Peti- 
tioners had no written procedures for selecting Parade 
participants or sponsors; (3) Petitioners did not generally 
inquire into the specific messages or views of each appli- 
cant; (4) applications from new groups were voted on in 
“batches”; (5) some groups participated in the 1993 
Parade by simply showing up at the Parade without 
submitting any application; (6) other groups gained 
entrance by contribution rather than by the application 
process; (7) admission procedures were not uniformly 
applied; and (8) the Petitioners “always opted for hetero- 
geneousness” and diversity rather than focusing on a 
specific message, theme or group. Petition for Certiorari, 
Appendix B at B6-B8, B24-B25. 


Based on these factual findings, the Superior Court 
held that Petitioners’ event was a public, open, recre- 
ational event rather than a private parade and thus was a 
“public accommodation” within the purview of Mass. 
G.L. c. 272, § 92A. (Id. at BY and B27). In addition, the 
Superior Court held that it was “impossible to discern 
any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to 
protection under the First Amendment.” (Jd. at B25). 
However, the Superior Court was careful to note that 
“[t]his is not to say, ... . that the Parade can never 
become a protected First Amendment activity. It simply 
has not been one in the past and is not one now.” (Id. at 
B25 n.27). 


The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court affirmed 
the trial court’s factual findings and ruling as to the 
violation of the state “public accommodations” statute as 
well as its rejection of the Petitioners’ First Amendment 
claims. At the same time, the Supreme Judicial Court was 


careful to note that “[w]le do not suggest that every 
parade is nonexpressive or that every parade is neces- 
sarily a place of public accommodation. Rather, we base 
our conclusion on the unique nature of the facts found as 
to the parade in controversy.” Irish-American Gav, Lesbian 
and Bisexual Group of Boston |“GLIB” v. City of Boston, 418 
Mass. 238, 250 n.18, 636 N.E.2d 1293 (1994); Petition for 
Certiorari, Appendix C at C13-C14. 


After the Supreme Judicial Court issued its Order on 
March 11, 1994, Petitioners canceled the March 20, 1994 
Parade and took significant steps to alter “the unique 
nature of the facts found as to the parade in controversy” 
in the state court proceedings. 


On April 19, 1994, Petitioners adopted written Stan- 
dards and Regulations for the governance of the Parade. 
See Federal District Court Case, Affidavit of John J. 
Hurley, July 11, 1994.! 


1 The new Standards and Regulations announce that Peti- 
tioners will henceforth: 

(1) identify the Petitioners’ themes or messages, i.e., to 
honor St. Patrick; to celebrate the Petitioners’ version of the role 
of traditional families throughout Irish history; and to com- 
memorate the Petitioners’ rejection of “judicially imposed mes- 
sages on the parade of Sunday, March 20, 1994.” (Standards & 
Regulations, J 1(a) and Conclusion); 

(2) establish formal, written procedures for selecting par- 
ticipants or sponsors, including a requirement that a letter of 
acceptance from the Parade Committee is necessary to partici- 
pation as is a signed Parade Participation Agreement form. (Id., 


WI 2(a)-2(g)); 


On April 20, 1994, the Petitioners applied for a per- 
mit to conduct the 1995 parade in accordance with their 
newly-promulgated Standards and Regulations. Peti- 
tioners indicated that the Parade would be “by invitation 
only” and set forth a three-fold theme first articulated in 
the April 19, 1994 Standards and Regulations: (1) to honor 
St. Patrick; (2) to celebrate the role of traditional families 
in Irish history; (3) and to commemorate the rejection of 
judicially-imposed messages on the 1994 parade. Letter 
from John J. Hurley to Francis Tramontozzi, April 20, 
1994. By letter dated May 2, 1994, the City of Boston 
declined to act on the Petitioners’ request, stating that it 
was premature. Letter from Francis Tramontozzi to John 
J. Hurley, May 2, 1994. 


On July 12, 1994, the Petitioners commenced an 
action in the United States District Court for the District 
of Massachusetts. Petitioners represented in their federal 
court complaint that they had altered the nature of the 


(5) control any form of expression or message by sign, 
banner, symbol, word or deed deemed unsuitable by the Parade 
Committee by determining that only “banners, themes, mes- 
sages, or displays approved by the Committee are allowed in 
the parade.” (Id., [J 4(a), 4(j), 4(k)); and 

(4) obtain from potential participants, through a signed 
Parade Participation Agreement, a statement of, among other 
things: (a) the nature and content of the participant’s signs or 
banners to be carried or displayed and any materials to be 
distributed; and (b) the participant’s affirmation of the honesty 
and completeness of its representations, particularly anything 
“which might impact or adversely affect or alter in any way the 
expression intended as the theme of this Parade as articulated in 
the Standards and Regulations, Section I.” (Parade Participation 
Agreement, pp. 2-3). 


1995 Parade by adding a theme protesting the Supreme 


Judicial Court’s decision against them and by adopting 
written Standards and Regulations that they indicated 
would be permanent.? 


On January 17, 1995, the United States District Court 
(Wolf, J.) issued a Memorandum and Order declaring that 
“conditioning the issuance of a permit for the Veterans’ 
1995 St. Patrick Day Parade on the inclusion of GLIB 
violates the Veterans’ rights of expressive association 
under the First Amendment of the United States Consti 
tution.” Federal District Court Case, Memorandum and 
Order, Jan. 17, 1995, slip op. at 69).9 


° In their verified complaint in the Federal District Court 
Case, Petitioners expressly allege that “in consideration of foot- 
note [27 in the Massachusetts Superior Court decision which 
noted that ‘[t]his is not to say, however, that the Parade can 
never become a protected First Amendment activity’] txe Vet- 
erans have defined in writing the theme of the Mares 19, 1995 
St. Patrick’s Day parade, and have enacted Rules and Regula- 
tious regarding the theme, the conditions of participation in 
future parades, and have prepared a document which will be 
distributed to all future participants, advising them that they 
must conform to the Veterans’ Parade Rules and Regulations.” 
(Complaint, J 58). 

3 Judge Wolf relied on the inclusion of the protest theme as 
the grounds for his decision rather than the change in the rules. 
He was of the view that principles of collateral estoppel pre- 
vented him from deciding whether the new rules altered the 
Parade sufficiently to nullify the holdings of the state courts. 
Federal District Court Case, slip op. at 43. 


III. DISCUSSION. 


A case is moot if the passage of time and intervening 
events have cost it “its character as a present, live contro- 
versy of the kind that must exist if [this Court is] to avoid 
advisory opinions on abstract questions of law.” Princeton 
University x Schmid, 455 U.S. 100, 103 (1982) (per curiam) 
quoting from Hall v. Beals, 396 U.S. 45, 48 (1969) (per 
curiam). In the present case, this Court has been asked to 
review a prospective injunctive order that was based ona 
Parade that was conducted under rules and with themes 
that, by Petitioners’ representations, no longer obtain. On 
the basis of their representations, Petitioners have suc- 
ceeded in excluding Respondent from the 1995 Parade. 
Thus, in the absence of a claim for money damages, it 
appears that nothing remains of the controversy that the 
Supreme Judicial Court sought to resolve in the judgment 
now pending on review in this Court. 


For the purposes of this Court’s Article III mootness 
assessment, the pertinent question is whether the parties 
have a genuine personal stake in this Court’s determina- 
tion of the legal issues they have brought before the 
Court. See Lewis v. Continental Bank Corp., 494 U.S. at 478, 
479 (“parties must continue to have a ‘personal stake’ in 
the outcome of the lawsuit”; “ . . . the Article III question 
is not whether the requested relief would be nugatory as 
to the world at large, but whether [the prevailing party] 
has a stake in that relief”). Respondent suggests that the 
controversy addressed by the courts below is no longer a 
live one. The parties may indeed be at odds in the future 
over whether Respondent can participate in future 
Parades. However, Petitioners’ actions have made that a 
different controversy, based on facts that Petitioners 


claim are materially different, and raising different legal 
issues. 


It is irrelevant for mootness purposes whether Peti- 
tioners’ actions will, or will not, ultimately lead to a 
different legal result in the Massachusetts courts as to any 
violation of the state public accommodatioiis laws or, for 
that matter, as to any violation of Petitioners’ First 
Amendment rights. What does matter is that Petitioners 
have presented a new factual situation that requires a 
fresh legal determination of the rights of the parties. As 
events have developed, the only act which the decision 
below could affect was the exclusion of Respondent from 
the 1994 Parade, the date of which is irretrievably gone. 
As demonstrated by the Federal District Court Case, 
Respondent’s rights with respect to future Parades will be 
decided on the basis of different facts, possibly resulting 

- in different legal consequences. Therefore, the injunction 
granted below has become moot. See Stern, et al., 
Supreme Court Practice at 712 & n.16 (7th ed. 1993) 
(citing cases). 


Where factual circumstances have changed, this 
Court has not hesitated to hold a controversy moot. For 
example, in Princeton University v. Schmid, 455 U.S. 100, a 
non-student was arrested for distributing political mate- 
rials on campus without the permission required under 
University rules. The University, joined as a party to state 
court proceedings, urged its federal constitutional rights. 
However, while review was pending, the University 
“substantially amended its regulations governing solicita- 
tion, distribution of literature, and similar activities on 
University property by those not affiliated with the Uni- 
versity.” Id. at 103. Finding that the “issue of the validity 


10 


of the old regulation [was] moot” and that the validity of 
the revised regulation was not addressed below, this 
Court dismissed the appeal. Id. at 103; cf. Gilligan v. 
Morgan, 413 U.S. 1 (1973) (claim for injunctive relief 
against the National Guard arising out of events at Kent 
State; there had been a number of changes in the factual 
situation, including new “use of force” rules by the 
National Guard and revised training-procedures; three 
members of the Court’s five-member majority saw some 
basis for a conclusion of mootness; the four dissenters 
were convinced of mootness; and two concurring Justices 
found all but a small portion of the claim to be moot). 


Moreover, none of the exceptions developed in-this 
Court’s mootness jurisprudence are applicable to this 
matter. The present case does not present a matter capa- 
ble of repetition yet evading review. The case would. 
presumably not be moot if the factual circumstances on 
which the lower courts predicated their ruling remained 
unchanged, despite the fact that Parades have come and 
gone. However, when the facts change and the legal 
issues change with them, it cannot be said that “the same 
complaining party would be subjected to the same action 
again.” Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U.S. 147, 149 (1975) (per 
curiam). That is the case here. 


Further, Petitioners cannot complain about a dis- 
missal for mootness because it is Petitioners’ own actions 
that have brought about this result. Indeed, Petitioners 
took very specific actions with the intention of taking 
themselves outside the purview of the decisions below. 
Having reaped the benefits of their actions in the federal 


11 


district court litigation, they must also bear the conse- 
quences of having divested this Court of jurisdiction. 


Nor is this is a factual situation invoking the “volun- 
tary-cessation” doctrine of United States v. W.T. Grant Co., 
345 U.S. 629 (1953) and its progeny. That doctrine applies 
where the defendant below puts an end to a chalienged 
practice and claims that its action has mooted the contro- 
versy. Here, Petitioners have not ceased their challenged 
practice, i.e., the exclusion of Respondent from the 
Parade. Rather, Petitioners have worked —- successfully to 
date — to alter the legal framework in which their ongoing 
intent to exclude GLIB will be considered by the courts. 


In sum, this case is moot both as a matter of the 
requirements of Article III as well as for prudential rea- 
sons. While prudential grounds might support stretching 
the bounds of mootness in some cases, this is not such a_ 
case. See generally Tribe, American Constitutional Law 
§ 3.11, p. 93 (2d ed. 1988). On the contrary, the tension 
between the state anti-discrimination statute and the First 
Amendment should not be decided on the basis of 
ephemeral facts that have already changed enough to 
have persuaded the federal district court to grant Peti- 
tioners the relief they have sought. In this context, it 


4 Even if the “voluntary-cessation” doctrine were somehow 
to apply in this case, there is no reasonable expectation that the 
Petitioners will return to the manner of running their parade as 
they did in 1993 (and intended to in 1994) where the courts 
below have warned them away from such a course. In such 
circumstances, this Court has found cases to be moot. See, e.g., 
County of Los Angeles v. Davis, 440 U.S. 625, 631-633 (1979); 
DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312, 318 (1974); SEC v. Medical 
Committee for Human Rights, 404 U.S. 403 (1972). 


12 


should be remembered that the state courts have made 
clear their view that the reach of the “public accommoda- 
tion” provision of the state anti-discrimination law 
depends on the specific facts of the case, as does the 
applicability of Petitioners’ First Amendment defense. 
(“We do not suggest that every parade is nonexpressive 
or that every parade is necessarily a place of public 
accommodation. Rather, we base our conclusion on the 
unique nature of the facts found as to the parade in 
controversy.” Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 
Group of Boston v. City of Boston, 418 Mass. at 250 n.18.) 
Under the new facts created by Petitioners’ actions, the 
state court may ultimately hold that post-1994 Parades 
are not “public accommodations” as a matter of state law, 
thereby avoiding the constitutional question. Cf. Railroad 
Commission of Texas v. Pullman Co., 312 U.S. 496 (1941). 


For all of the foregoing reasons, Respondent submits 
that the case is moot.° 


> Respondent submits that the proper action in this case is a 
dismissal without vacating the lower court’s decision. As the 
Court recently made clear in U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner 
Mall Partnership, __ U.S. ___, 115 S. Ct. 386 (1994), mootness by 
“happenstance” provides reason to vacate the jadgment below 
while mootness by voluntary action of the losing party does not 
entitle the losing party to vacatur. Id. at 391-392 and n.2. “The 
denial of vacatur is merely one application of the principle that 
‘{a] suitor’s conduct in relation to the matter at hand may disen- 
title him to the relief he seeks’.” Id. at 392, quoting from Sanders v. 
United States, 373 U.S. 1, 17 (1963). 

In the present case, mootness is the result of the voluntary 
actions of the petitioners; and, therefore, the petitioners are not 
entitled to vacatur of the judgment below. 

In addition, in cases from state courts, vacatur has not been 
the Court’s invariable practice. Doremus v. Bd. of Education of the 


13 


Kespectfully submitted, 


JoHN Warp, of Counsel 
ZALKIND, RODRIGUEZ, LUNT 
& DUNCAN 
65A Atlantic Avenue 
Boston, MA 02110 
(617) 742-6020 
Counsel of Record for Respondent 


DATED: January 26, 1995 


Borough of Hawthorne, 342 U.S. 429, 434 (1952) (while the 
Supreme Court may not do so, state courts may render an 
opinion on a federal constitutional question even if it could be 
regarded as only advisory); Bd. of License Commissioners of Tiver- 
ton v. Pastore, 469 U.S. 238 (writ dismissed as moot); Aikens v. 
State of California, 406 U.S. 813 (1972) (per curiam) (writ dis- 
missed as moot); see Princeton University v. Schmid, 455 U.S. 100 
(appeal dismissed as moot). 


