No. 94-749 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 
IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION, 
BY AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, 
AND CATHLEEN FINN, ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 


Respondents. 


On Certiorari to the Supreme Judicial Court 
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 


— CS 


PETITIONER’S RESPONSE TO RESPONDENTS’ 


SUGGESTION OF MOOTNESS 
PAT A. CIPOLLONE CHESTER DARLING 
GERALD F. MASOUDI Counsel of Record 
PAUL B. TAYLOR 306 Dartmouth Street 
KIRKLAND & ELLIS Boston, MA 02116 
655 15th Street, N.W (617) 536-2050 
Suite 1200 : 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 879-5000 

Counsel for Petitioners 


“BEST AVAILABLE COPY [nee 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ..................... li 
ie ck cic ak ws wo ROE RS 2 
ee CaS) 4b bs an bac wa ek Oko kes 4 
ha) oak caw ene Leet o Cokes S 8 


(i) 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 


A.Y. Allee v. Medrano, 


416 U.S. 802 (1974) ...... 0.0. ee eee. 


Allied War Veterans Council, et al. v. City of 
Boston, et al., 


No. 94-11402MLW (D. Mass. 1995) ..... 


Carroll v. President and Commissioners of 
Princess Anne, 


393 U.S. 175 (1968) ................. 


United States Parole Commission v. Geraghty, 


445 U.S. 388 (1980) ................. 


United States v. W.T.Grant Co., 


POP a hi awh ees ces 


Walker v. City of Birmingham, 


A me, ere 


Page 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Huited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-749 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 
IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION, 
BY AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, 
AND CATHLEEN FINN, ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 

Respondents. 


On Certiorari to the Supreme Judicial Court 
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 


PETITIONER’S RESPONSE TO RESPONDENTS’ 
SUGGESTION OF MOOTNESS 


This appeal is not moot. The appeal concerns a 
decision of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts 
(“SJC”) which violates the first amendment nights of 
petitioners John J. Hurley and the South Boston Allied War 
Veterans Council (“the Veterans”), based on that Court’s 
interpretation and application of the Massachusetts Public 
Accommodations Statute, M.G.L. c. 272 §§ 92A & 98, and the 
United States Constitution. First, as a result of the 
Massachusetts decision, the Veterans currently live under a 
permanent injunction which acts as a prior restraint on their 


2 


free expression, in stark violation of the first and fourteenth 
amendments to the United States Constitution. Second, the 
Veterans have been subjected to substantial fines because of 
activity protected by the first and fourteenth amendments.’ 
Finally, the Veterans are potentially subject to criminal 
penalties arising out of the Massachusetts Court’s decision—all 
because they wish to exercise fundamental first amendment 
rights. 

None of this has been altered or affected in any way by 
the recent decision of the U.S. District Court for the District of 
Massachusetts, which forms the sole basis for respondents’ 
Suggestion of Mootness. This case remains a live controversy 
in which the Veterans have an obvious and critical stake. The 
appeal is therefore far from moot. This Court’s consideration 
of this live controversy is the only hope of ending an ongoing 
violation of the Veteran’s constitutional rights. 


BACKGROUND 


Respondents’ Suggestion of Mootness is founded 
entirely on their interpretation of a declaratory judgment issued 
on January 17, 1995 by the United States District Court for the 
District of Massachusetts, Allied War Veterans Council, et 
al. v. City of Boston, et al., No. 94-11402MLW (D. Mass. 
1995), and its effect on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court decision that is the subject of this appeal. The recent 
federal district court case deals exclusively and narrowly with 
this year’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade, which includes a protest 
theme in response to the censorship of the free expression of 
the petitioners by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In 
contrast, the decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court, which is the subject of this appeal, concerns the 
traditional St. Patrick’s Day Parade held by the Veterans. The 
usual parade is not a protest, but a celebration honoring St. 


In addition, the Veterans have been ordered to pay $42,046.98 in 
attorneys fees to the respondents in this case, and another motion for an 
additional $43,711.96 is still pending against them. 


3 


Patrick and expressing support for traditional religious and 
cultural values. 


The parade as traditionally constituted by the 
petitioners is enjoined from proceeding as it has in the past. As 
such it was held to be violative of a Massachusetts Public 
Accommodations Law. The judgment and order enjoining the 
Veteran’s expression, and imposing financial penalties, 
remains in effect today. Perhaps more egregiously, the 
Massachusetts Court’s decision attempts to expressly dictate 
the expressive content of the parade. In other words, the 
Veterans are no longer allowed to express what they have 
expressed annually for forty-seven years. If left unchallenged, 
the decision of the Supreme Judicial Court will remain the law 
in Massachusetts, the Veterans will be forced to pay substantial 
fines penalizing the content of their speech, and they will live 
under a prior restraint preventing them from ever again 
expressing themselves as they have for nearly half a century. 


Petitioners’ Suggestion of Mootness misstates many 
facts and mischaracterizes both the recent decision by the U.S. 
District Court in Massachusetts and the Massachusetts 
Supreme Judicial Court. A reading of both decisions 
/ immediately reveals the meritless nature of petitioners’ 
: eleventh-hour mootness suggestion. The federal district court 


in Massachusetts stated repeatedly, clearly, and explicitly that 

the Court considered a limited controversy, and that its 
) consideration of that limited controversy has no bearing on the 
| ongoing dispute over the decision of the Massachusetts 
| Supreme Judicial Court. 


) The United States District Court for the District of 
| Massachusetts addressed the issues of free expression and 
association surrounding the “materially different” Saint 
Patrick’s Day Parade scheduled by the Veterans for 1995. 
| District Court Op. at 3. The District Court correctly recognized 
| this protest component of the 1995 parade as a “new 
controlling fact,” District Court Op. at 4, and it made clear that 
| its decision should not be regarded as a comment on the 


4 


correctness of the prior decisions of the courts of the 
Commonwealth that are at issue before this Court. The federal 
district court went to great lengths to emphasize that it was 
deciding a very narrow issue regarding only the 1995 Veterans’ 
parade. The district court stated unequivocally that it was not 
addressing or deciding any issue presently before this Court 
relating to the decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court: “Nor should this decision be regarded as a comment on 
the correctness of the prior decisions of the courts of the 
Commonwealth concerning the unfortunately enduring dispute 
between the Veterans and GLIB. Only the Supreme Court can 
review the Supreme Judicial Court’s decision regarding the 
1993 Parade; it has agreed to do so. This Court has addressed 
a materially different matter.” District Court Op. at 7 : 
(emphasis added). 


ARGUMENT 


A case is moot only if the issues presented are no longer 
live or if the parties lack a legally cognizable interest or 
“personal stake” in the case. United States Parole 
Commission v. Geraghty, 445 U.S. 388, 395 (1980). Neither 
is true here. In this case, the Veterans assert that the 
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court’s permanent injunction 
violates their fundamental constitutional rmghts. § The 
Massachusetts Court issued a permanent injunction against the 
traditional parade, and levied fines and other financial 
penalties. If the Veterans win in this Court they will be freed 
from the injunction and the fines. They again will be able to 
conduct the parade exactly as they did before the 
Massachusetts Court entered its injunction? They will no 


Any suggestion that the Veterans have “permanently” altered the 
regulations governing the parade, Resp. Br. at 7 n.2, or that “there is no 
reasonable expectation that the petitioners will return to the manner of 
running their parade as they did in 1993 (and intended to in 1994) where the 
courts have warned them away from such a course,” Resp. Br. at 11 n.4, is 
false. The Veterans emphatically wish to return to the way they have run 
(continued...) 


a 


5 


longer be subjected to the onerous penalties on speech imposed 
by the court below. There simply can be no more serious or 
“legally cognizable” interest, nor a more personal stake, than 
the vindication of the fundamental rights of free expression and 
free association guaranteed by the United States Constitution. 


In this case, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is not 
only permanently banning the Veterans’ speech in the future 
based solely on its content, but also exacting financial (and 
possibly criminal) penalties based solely on the content of the 
Veterans’ past speech. It cannot be seriously asserted, then, 
that this case is moot. This case presents the Court with an 
ongoing and egregious violation of the constitutional rights of 
the Veterans. The harm from such a violation is irreparable. 
The controversy is live. The stakes are high. Any suggestion 
of mootness is specious. 


The ongoing effect of the decision of the Supreme 
Judicial Court is most directly illustrated by the very fact that 
the Veterans have been forced by the Massachusetts Court to 
drastically alter the content of this year’s parade. As stated, 
this year’s parade is not the usual celebration, but also features 
a protest theme against the state-imposed bar on the traditional 
parade. The non sequitur that provides the sole basis for the 
respondents’ mootness suggestion is that because a federal 
court has held that the Constitution protects the 1995 protest 
parade, this Court is now prevented from considering the 
merits of the main controversy arising from the deprivation of 
constitutional rights which is itself the subject of the protest 
theme of this year’s parade. To state this position is to refute 
it. 


The Veterans have temporarily altered their conduct to 
protest recent decisions by the Commonwealth courts. The 
addition of a protest component to the traditional celebration of 


? (...continued) 
the parade for the last 47 years. That is precisely why the Veterans 
petitioned this Court to review this case. 


6 


St. Patrick, the traditional family, and the values it exemplifies 
is an emergency response to recent judicial mandates forcing 
the association of two radically disparate groups representing 
two radically different messages. This protest is a temporary 
divergence from the goals that have traditionally motivated the 
parade organizers, namely the honoring of St. Patrick and the 
celebration of the important role traditional families and values 
play in society. ‘his change is a direct response to adverse 
decisions by the Massachusetts courts which have outlawed the 
expressive content of the Veterans’ traditional parade. 


Under GLIB’s reasoning, any time a court issues a prior 
restraint on speech, and the speaker abides by the injunction 
not to speak, then the very act of remaining silent renders the 
case moot. So, according to GLIB, because there is no more 
speech, there can be no more dispute over a permanent order 
preventing such speech, even though the existence of the 
injunction is the sole reason for the silence. Therefore, if a 
litigant chooses to abide by an injunction while his appeal is 
pending, GLIB argues such compliance itself renders an appeal 
moot. In other words, only lawbreakers can appeal. Such 
tortured reasoning falls under its own weight. It would leave 
litigants with the Hobson’s choice of either defying a court 
order and risking civil and criminal contempt sanctions, or 
abiding by the order and, by that very act, forfeiting their 
appeal. 


Further, as this Court has often observed, even 
“voluntary cessation of allegedly illegal conduct does not 
deprive the tribunal of power to hear and determine the case, 
1.e., does not make the case moot.” United States v. W.T.Grant 
Co., 345 U.S. 629, 632 (1953). “Nor can it be argued that the 
case has become moot because respondents have abandoned 
their efforts as a result of the very harassment they sought to 
restrain by this suit.” 4. Y. Allee v. Medrano, 416 U.S. 802, 810 
(1974). This state-forced change in the Veterans’ speech does 
not support mootness, but rather powerfully establishes the 


7 


continuing force of the underlying order and the necessity for 
this appeal.’ 

The continuing effect of the Massachusetts decision on 
the Veterans is also illustrated by the fact that the city of 
Boston would not issue the Veterans a parade permit this year 
unless the Veterans certified that they would comply with the 
Superior Court’s permanent injunction and not exclude GLIB 
from the 1995 parade. District Court Op. at 16. As in 
Carroll v. President and Commissioners of Princess Anne, 393 
U.S. 175, 179 (1968), the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court’s decision “continues to play a substantial role in the 
response of officials to their activities,” id. at 350, and as the 
Court held in that case, “[i]n these circumstances, [the Court’s] 
jurisdiction is not at an end.” Jd. As the federal district court 
stated, “[o]nly the Supreme Court can review the Supreme 
Judicial Court’s decision regarding the 1993 parade,” as it 
addressed “a materially different matter” than that which was 
before the district court. District Court Op. at 7.. 


The decision of the SJC continues to play a substantial 
role in the response of state officials to the actions of the 
Veterans in organizing the parade, making the decision the core 
of an ongoing controversy. The SJC’s decision, if left to stand, 
will forever prevent the Veterans from returning their parade 
to its traditional purpose, namely, the celebration of the 
traditional family and the values it exemplifies. The Veterans 


> The cases cited by the respondent on the “voluntary cessation” doctrine 
are corzpletely inapposite. In those cases, the defendant voluntarily ceases 
an offending activity because of pending litigation and an impending court 
order, and then asks the court to find the controversy moot so as to avoid the 
court order. The voluntary cessation doctrine prevents defendants from 
mooting cases on the eve of judgment and repeating the offending behavior: 
the case is not moot unless “there 1s no reasonable expectation that the 
wrong will be repeated.” United States v. W.T. Grant Co., 345 U.S. at 633 
In this case, on the other hand, the defendants (petitioners) have ceased the 
prohibited activity only because of an actual court order, and it is the 
plaintiffs (respondents) who wish to declare the controversy moot. 


| 
’ 
| 
; 
; 
; 
| 


8 


have followed the course directed by this Court in Walker v. 
City of Birmingham, 388 U.S. 307 (1967). They have sought 
judicial review of an injunction and refrained from disobeying 
it, no matter how well-founded their doubts have been as to its 
validity. In identical circumstances, when such a course has 
been pursued by petitioners in view of the continuing vitality 
of their grievance, this Court has stated “we cannot say that 
their case is moot.” Carroll, 393 U.S. at 179. 


Finally, GLIB critically undermines its mootness 
argument and reveals its true motives in its discussion of 
vacatur in the final footnote to its mootness brief. There GLIB 
asserts that the appeal of the Massachusetts decision should be 
dismissed as moot, but that the state decision and the prior 
restraint and penalties it imposes should not be vacated. By 
this statement, GLIB reveals its clear understanding that the 
decision of the Massachusetts Court continues to have force 
over the parties to this appeal and to directly affect their rights. 
Why else would GLIB insist that the decision be left 
undisturbed? 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, this Court should now 
resolve “the unfortunately enduring dispute between the 
Veterans and GLIB.” District Court Op. at 7. This is a case 
involving a prior restraint on speech. It is a case involving 
fines and fees levied to punish speech based solely on its 
content. To be moot a decision must have no effect on the 
parties. This case has a direct, ongoing, and irreparable effect 
on the Veterans. This case is not moot. It is urgent. This 


Court certainly retains 
controversy. 


PAT A. CIPOLLONE 
GERALD F. MASOUDI 
PAUL B. TAYLOR 
KIRKLAND & ELLIS 

655 15th Street, N.W. 
Suite 1200 

Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 879-5000 


9 


the power to resolve this live 


Respectfully submitted, 


CHESTER DARLING 
Counsel of Record 
306 Dartmouth Street 
Boston, MA 02116 
(617) 536-2050 


DWIGHT G. DUNCAN 
Southern N.E. School of Law 
333 Faunce Corner Road 

N. Dartmouth, MA 02747 


DANIEL J. SUMPTION 
28 Constitution Road 
Charlestown, MA 02129 


WILLIAM M. CONNOLLY 
546 E. Broadway 
S. Boston, MA 02127 


Counsel for Petitioners 


Dated: February 6, 1995 


