Frrrnp 
FEB 9 1995 
No. 94-749 
: Dikdez OF WE megy 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
* 


JOHN J. HURLEY, Individually and the 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 


Petitioners, 


V. \ 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, An Unincorporated 
Association, By and Through TIMOTHY DALEY, 
BARBRA KAY, and CATHLEEN FINN, Acting on 
Their Own Behalf and on Behalf of the Association, 


Respondent. 


+ 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari To The 
Supreme Judicial Court Of Massachusetts 


+ 


RESPONDENT’S REPLY CONCERNING MOOTNESS 
¢ 


JOHN Warp, Of Counsel 

Counsel of Record 

Davip DUNCAN 

ZALKIND, RODRIGUEZ, LUNT 
& DUNCAN 

65a Atlantic Avenue 

Boston, MA 02110 

617-742-6020 


Counsel for Respondent 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


<—) ae eee 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


RESPONDENT’S REPLY CONCERNING MOOTNESS 


(1) The Existence of a “Permanent” Injunction.. 2 


(2) Liability for Fines and Attorneys’ Fees ...... 9 


(3) Danger of Criminal Prosecution............. 10 


re | Peery er err erry eT eres ee rere 11 


il 


TABLE .OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
CASES 
Allee v. Medrano, 416 U.S. O02 (i974)... cnnccvccanwess 4 
Application of Kingsley, 802 F.2d 571 (1st Cir. 1986) ..... 3 
Carroll v. President & Commissioners of Princess 
Aune, 303 US. 175 (IGGR «60 ccs ccseseea terre ese ee 6 
Lewis v. Continental Bank Corp., 494 U.S. 472 (fed- 
OPNE BAW) oo. cen nes ce aettaceernsdasee eee 10 
McCollester v. City of Keene, N.H., 668 F.2d 617 (1st 
es PEPePeeeEee reer er ee ee eee ee 11 
Ott v. Boston Edison Co., 413 Mass. 680, 602 N.E.2d 
~ Sy | er errrere riers rr er 10 
Princeton University v. Schmid, 455 U.S. 100 (1982)..... 7 
Regional Rail Reorganization Act Cases, 419 U.S. 102 
UWI oy ccvccinskcecieelee eee 11 
South Boston Allied War Veterans Council v. City of 
Boston, No. 94-11402MLW (D.Mass 1995)........... 7 
United States Parole Commission v. Geraghty, 445 
OS. SOD CRUD neo eidins os shoo ee oe eee eee 5 
STATUTES 
WR USA. S FOGG. ices ekcee skies hss eee 9 
Mines. Caonerel Laws, ¢. 1510, 86 05546563 esesanee ) 


No. 94-749 
¢ 


In The 
Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
* 


JOHN J. HURLEY, Individually and the 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED VETERANS COUNCIL, 


Petitioners, 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, An Unincorporated 
Association, By and Through TIMOTHY DALEY, 
BARBRA KAY, and CATHLEEN FINN, Acting on 
Their Own Behalf and on Behalf of the Association, 


Respondent. 
+ 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari To The 
Supreme Judicial Court Of Massachusetts 


e 


RESPONDENT’S REPLY CONCERNING MOOTNESS 
+ 


Paying scant attention to the actual facts as they have 
developed, Petitioners resist Respondent’s Suggestion of 
Mootness. Stripped of rhetoric, Petitioners’ objections to 
mootness amount to these: (1) the existence of a “perma- 
nent” injunction creates a burden on the exercise of Peti- 
tioners’ yet-to-be-established First Amendment rights, 
which burden will be lifted if Petitioners prevail on the 


merits in this Court; (2) Petitioners have been subjected to 
fines that victory in this Court will annul; and (3) Peti- 
tioners might be criminally prosecuted for their past acts 
of discrimination unless this Court finds their past con- 
duct protected. Petitioners’ Response to Respondents’ 
Suggestion of Mootness [“Response”] at 1-2. None of 
these “reasons” withstand scrutiny. 


(1) The Existence of a “Permanent” Injunction. 


Petitioners now assert that the state court injunction 

is an ongoing burden on their conduct of future parades. 

his argument is a flat contradiction of Petitioners’ earlier 

recognition of the transitory nature of the injunction, 

whose ongoing viability was specifically linked by the 

Massachusetts courts to the possibility of changes in the 
nature of the parade: 


Although the Plaintiffs [Respondent in this 
Court] have obtained a permanent injunction, 
the injunction is conditional. The Plaintiffs are 
judicially empowered to march in the Veterans’ 
Parade, and the Veterans are required to accept 
the Plaintiffs in their Parades on the same terms 
and conditions as other participants, as long as 
the Veterans’ Parades are not First Amendment 
activities. The judgment is the equivalent of an 
unresolved chord, in that within the court’s 
decision, it was stated that the Veterans’ Parade 
could become a “protected First Amendment 
activity” (F. p. 31 n.27) 


Defendants’ [Petitioners’] Opposition to Plaintiffs’ 
[Respondent’s] Motion to an Award of Attorneys’ Fees 
and Costs Against the South Boston Allied War Veterans 
Council and John J. Hurley [“Opposition to Attorneys’ 


Fees”], GLIB v. John J. Hurley, et al., C.A. No. 92-1518, 
92-1518A. (September 27, 1994.) (Emphasis in original.) 


Recognizing the Massachusetts court’s sensitivity to 
First Amendment concerns, Petitioners, by promulgating 
written standards, have endeavored to take advantage of 
that sensitivity in order to obviate the force of that court’s 
injunction. They were entitled to do this, although they 
were certainly not obligated to do so. But having made 
this choice, Petitioners cannot also be heard to say that 
they have not changed the facts in a legally significant 
way, thereby rendering the controversy that brought 
them to this Court moot. 


Taking the state court’s express statement that its 
determinations were fact-specific to the Parade as it 
found it to have been constituted in 1993 together with 
the changes in Parade rules made by Petitioners to insure 
First Amendment protection for future Parades, it is clear 
that the state court injunction no longer speaks to future 
parades. Indeed, Petitioners have insisted that this is so 
in the above quoted language and in their pleadings in 
federal court. The factual predicates of the state court’s 
action having been changed, nothing this Court might say 
about things as they were in 1993 will affect the conduct 
of any future Parade. 


Petitioners argue that the controversy is not moot 
because their actions in thus altering their conduct were 
an “emergency response” to the unwanted “judicial man- 
dates.” Response at 5-6. In the first place, Petitioners 


were under no compulsion to change the nature of their 
parade, and even if they felt strong incentive to do so, 
this does not necessarily avoid mootness. See Application 


of Kingsley, 802 F.2d 571, 577 (1st Cir. 1986) (appellant 
seeks order in forfeiture action to allow occupancy in 
residence pending outcome of action; his agreement with 
government allowing him to occupy residence subject to 
conditions mooted his claim, despite element of duress 
forcing appellant into agreement). 


The present case does not bear comparison to Allee v. 
Medrano, 416 U.S. 802 (1974), cited by Petitioners, where 
Texas law enforcement agencies used force and intimida- 
tion against union members and officials to discourage 
organizing activities, and then in this Court urged moot- 
ness when the union members abandoned their organiz- 
ing efforts in the face of this vicious and illegal 
harassment. Id. at 806-809. Nothing in this case remotely 
resembles the actions of the law enforcement agents in 
Medrano. 


Moreover, Petitioners have decidedly not abandoned 
their activities, and indeed will march in 1995 without the 
participation of Respondents. Had this Court not granted 
certiorari in this case, and had the federal court not 
intervened in the 1995 Parade on the basis of the “protest 
theme,” Petitioners would undoubtedly certainly have 
been before the state court arguing that new facts ren- 
dered the injunction moot, so that they could conduct 
future parades without Respondent. 


Petitioners’ argument misses the point in another 
way as well. The 1994 Parade has come and gone, and the 
same will be true of the 1995 Parade before this Court 
decides the merits of this case. Thus nothing that this 
Court does will affect the 1994 or 1995 Parades, nor can 


this Court’s decision affect any putative First Amend- 
ment chill that Petitioners allegedly have experienced up 
to the present time. Rather, as Respondent has previously 
explained,! the issue is whether the effect on future 
Parades of the injunctive remedy ordered by the Massa- 
chusetts courts is sufficient to present a live case or 
controversy in which Petitioners have a personal stake. 
United States Parole Commission v. Geraghty, 445 U.S. 388, 
395 (1980). As Petitioners themselves have acknowl- 
edged, the injunction will have prospective effect only 
“as long as the Veterans’ Parades are not First Amend- 
ment activities.” Seeking to ensure that future Parades 
unquestionably are First Amendment activities, Peti- 
tioners have adopted rules that establish in writing Peti- 
tioner’s asserted right to insist that “only banners, 
themes, messages, or displays approved by the Commit- 
tee are allowed in the parade.” See Respondent's Sugges- 
tion of Mootness at 7 n.2 (citing Petitioners’ new 
Standards and Regulations at Paragraph 4). Wholly apart 
from the “protest theme,” which Petitioners may or may 
not choose to retain in the future, the “new rules” clearly 
seek to take the state court trial judge at his word and 
establish beyond dispute that future Parades will be 
beyond the reach of the state anti-discrimination statute 
and the state court injunction. Under these circumstances, 
it is untenable, as well as irrelevant, to claim that the 
present controversy is exempt from mootness because the 
injunction constitutes a “state-forced change in [Peti- 
tioners’] speech,” Response at 6, based on the fact that 
Petitioners have taken steps meant to unequivocally 


' Respondent’s Suggestion of Mootness at 9. 


assert their First Amendment rights as to future Parades. 
The rules Petitioners promulgated did not constitute con- 
formity with the state court injunction or cessation of 
action in response to that injunction, but an effort to moot 
it and continue in their chosen course. It is equally insup- 
portable for Petitioners to claim that their purported 
assertion of First Amendment rights is “temporary,” as if 
they are planning to relinquish the protection of the First 
Amendment at some future time. See Response at 4 n.2. 


Nor is it the case, as Petitioners assert, citing Carroll 
v. President & Commissioners of Princess Anne, 393 U.S. 175 
(1968), that the state court injunction continues to play a 
role in official response to Petitioners’ activities. In Car- 
roll, members of a white supremacist group alleged that 
the continuing effect of a ten day restraining order, 
affirmed by the Maryland Court of Appeals, had a lasting 
effect on their ability to hold rallies in Princess Anne, 
Maryland. The order by its terms only prevented one 
rally, but the petitioners alleged that the affirmance of the 
order by the Maryland Court of Appeals resulted in the 
denial of at least one other permit outside the ten day 
period. Id. at 177-78. This Court agreed that the case was 
not moot because the Court of Appeals’ decision played a 
substantial role in the response of officials to requests by 
the petitioners for other permits. Id. at 178. 


In the present case, in contrast, there was no denial of 
a permit. Petitioners had a permit for 1994 which they 
chose not to use. As for 1995, the federal district court 
action has resulted in a declaration the Petitioners are 
entitled to a permit to conduct the Parade not subject to 
the state court injunction, and based on the City of Bos- 
ton’s representations to the federal district court, a permit 


will issue and Petitioners will hold the 1995 Parade with- 
out Respondents’ participation. See South Boston Allied 
War Veterans Council v. City of Boston, No. 94-11402MLW 
(D.Mass 1995), slip op. at 69. The issuance of permits in 
future years, unlike the case presented in Carroll, depends 
on a new determination by the state court, on the basis of 
Petitioners’ “new rules,” adopted by Petitioners in an 
effort to ensure First Amendment protection, and on the 
basis of their unambiguous and uncoerced intent to trans- 
form future Parades from what the state courts have 
found to have been “open recreational events” into First 
Amendment activity. 


Princeton University v. Schmid, 455 U.S. 100, 103 (1982) 
(per curiam), cited by Respondent in its Suggestion of 
Mootness, and ignored by Petitioners in their Response, 
is emphatically on point. In that case, Princeton Univer- 
sity had regulations in effect at the beginning of the 
lawsuit that required non-students who wished to distrib- 
ute materials on campus to receive permission from Uni- 
versity officials. Id. at 101. Schmid violated that rule and 
was convicted of criminal trespass. The New Jersey 
Supreme Court invited the University to intervene and 
participate as a party. The University did so. When the 
New Jersey Supreme Court reversed Schmid’s conviction, 


2 It is disingenuous, to say the least, for Petitioners to claim 
that mootness would penalize them for obeying a court order. 
Response at 6. Petitioners did not disobey the order to include 
Respondent in the 1994 Parade but neither did they obey it. As 
for 1995, they have obtained the relief they sought in federal 
court and will have a Parade “honoring St. Patrick” without the 
presence of Respondent. 


Princeton appealed to this Court, alleging that the judg- 
ment below violated its First, Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendment rights. Id. This Court dismissed the appeal, 
stating: 


The New Jersey Supreme Court noted that while 
the case was pending on appeal, the University 
substantially amended its regulations [relating 
to distribution of materials on campus by those 
not affiliated with the University]. The opinion 
below rested on the absence of a reasonable 
regulatory scheme governing expressional activ- 
ity on University property, but the regulation at 
issue is no longer in force. Furthermore, the 
lower court’s opinion was careful not to pass 
on the validity of the revised regulation under 
either the Federal or the State Constitution. 
Thus the issue of the validity of the old regula- 
tion is moot, for this case has “lost its character 
as a present, live controversy of the kind that 
must exist if we are to avoid advisory opinions 
on abstract questions of law.” 


Id. at 103 (citation omitted; emphasis added). In the pre- 
sent case, the Massachusetts courts were equally careful 
to tailor their holding to the prior factual regime under 
which Petitioners conducted the Parade. Having now 
announced that there are “new rules” designed to protect 
the “traditional themes” of the Parades, Petitioners have 
mooted the issue originally presented to this Court, 
whether the Massachusetts courts rightly decided that the 
First Amendment did not shield Petitioners from the 
reach of the public accommodation statute in conducting 
the parade as then constituted. 


(2) Liability for Fines and Attorneys’ Fees. 


Petitioners assert that they “have been subjected to 
substantial fines because of activity protected by the first 
and fourteenth amendments.” Response at 2. They 
neglect to mention that the penalty alluded to was 
imposed in an entirely separate case that is not before this 
Court, Patrick Ward v. South Boston Allied War Veterans 
Council, MCAD No. 92-BPA-0014. A petition to review 
that case, see Mass. Gen. Laws, c. 151B, § 6, filed in 
Massachusetts Superior Court, No. CV-94-00456, was dis- 
missed for lack of service on May 25, 1994. 


Under these circumstances, there is no merit to the 
argument that the Patrick Ward case, now dismissed, 
gives Petitioner’s a live stake in the present case. If this 
Court were to reverse the Supreme Judicial Court’s deci- 
sion in this case, it would not relieve plaintiffs of any 
penalties imposed in that case.* 


* Moreover, the penalty at issue was levied for Petitioners’ 
behavior in the 1992 Parade, an event which raised legal issues 
quite different from those in the present case. The City of Boston 
was a major actor in the 1992 Parade. Indeed, Respondent won 
the right to march in the 1992 Parade on the theory that the City 
of Boston, and Petitioners, “acting under color of state law, have 
deprived [Petitioners] of the rights to freedom of speech, asso- 
ciation, assembly, and equal protection of the laws in violation 
of the first and fourteenth amendments to the U.S. Constitution, 
42 U.S.C. § 1983, and Articles 1 and 16 of the Massachusetts 
Declaration of Rights.” Verified Complaint, Irish-American Gay, 
Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, etc. v. City of Boston, et al., 
Civil Action No. 92-1518 [“No. 92-1518”], paragraph 35. 
Respondent also relied on the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act 
and a claim for breach of contract, both claims reaching both the 
City and Petitioners. Verified Complaint, paragraphs 36-40. The 


10 


As for the issue of attorneys’ fees, the trial court's 
award of fees to Respondent in the present case is cur- 
rently on appeal by Petitioners. The issue of the 1992 
attorneys’ fees remains undecided, but, as with the penal- 
ties, that Parade raises issues of state action not present in 
the current case. In any event, a claim for attorneys’ fees 
cannot enliven an otherwise moot controversy. Lewis v. 
Continental Bank Corp., 494 U.S. 472, 480 (federal law) 
(1990); Ott v. Boston Edison Co., 413 Mass. 680, 683, 602 
N.E.2d 566, 588 (1992) (Massachusetts law). In addition, 
Respondent no longer has any wish to seek to collect 
attorneys’ fees, either for the 1992 case or for the present 
case, and counsel represents to the Court that appropriate 
steps to permanently relinquish those claims will be 
taken forthwith. 


(3) Danger of Criminal Prosecution. 


The last discriminatory act on the part of Petitioners 
occurred in early 1993, when Respondent was denied a 
registration form for the 1993 Parade. No criminal pros- 
ecution has been undertaken against Petitioners, and two 
years later there is no evidence that any is contemplated. 
Under these circumstances, the threat of criminal 


Superior Court (Zobel, J.) found that Respondent was entitled to 
a restraining order requiring that they be permitted to march in 
the 1992 Parade because, in relevant part, he found that Respon- 
dent was likely to succeed on its claim that it would otherwise 
be deprived of its constitutional right of peaceable assembly. 
No. 92-1518, Proceedings, March 11, 1992, at 10. No appeal was 
taken from that order. 


11 


prosecution is chimerical, and will not confer jurisdiction 
of an otherwise moot controversy upon this Court. See 
Regional Rail Reorganization Act Cases, 419 U.S. 102, 143 n. 
29 (1974); McCollester v. City of Keene, N.H., 668 F.2d 617, 
619-20 (1st Cir. 1982) (to present a live controversy based 
on threat of criminal sanctions, there must be a “realistic 
danger of prosecution.”) 


CONCLUSION 


The “unfortunately enduring dispute” between Peti- 
tioners and Respondent may continue. Indeed, Peti- 
tioners have taken the position that it is “type of conflict 
that cannot be resolved in a court of law.” Opposition to 
Attorneys’ Fees at Paragraph 11. At this juncture, it is 
clear that Article III bars this Court’s advice on a phase of 
the dispute that Petitioners have made irrelevant by their 
subsequent conduct. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JoHN Warp, of Counsel 

Counsel of Record 

Davip DUNCAN 

ZALKIND, RODRIGUEZ, LUNT 
& DUNCAN 

65a Atlantic Avenue 

Boston, MA 02110 

(617) 742-6020 


Counsel for Respondent 


DATED: February 9, 1995 


