~ RFITED 

i‘) 
No. 94-749?) | yyy a3 1994 
In the QPAME GF WHE GLEKK | 


Supreme Court of the United States j 


OcrosBer TERM, 1994 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INnpivipva.ty, ANpb 
THE SOUTH BOSTON 
ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL, 
PETITIONERS, 

v. 
IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND 
BISEXUAL GROUP OF BOSTON, 

AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION By AND THROUGH, 
TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY anp CATHLEEN FINN, 
ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF AND ON BEHALF OF 
MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF THE 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 


RESPONDENT'S BRIEF IN OPPOSITION - 


Puuiuie M. Cronin 


Counsel of Record 
Peaspopy & ARNOLD 
50 Rowes Wharf 
Boston, MA 02110 
(617) 951-2100 
CuarcretTia V. DiBartoto Mary L. Bonauto 
Peasopy & ARNOLD Gay & LESBIAN ADVOCATES 
50 Rowes Wharf & DEFENDERS 
Boston, MA 02110 P.O. Box 218 
Boston, MA 02112 
GRETCHEN VAN Ness JouNn Warp 
ATTORNEY AT Law ZALKIND, Ropricuez, LUNt & DUNCAN 
60 State Street 65A Atlantic Avenue xy 
Boston, MA 02109 Boston, MA 02110 E v \ 
Blanchard Press, Inc., Boston, Mass — Law Printers (617) 426-6690 \"¢- 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Reasons Why the Petition Should be Denied ........ 2 
I. The Petition Should be Denied Because This Case 
Presents No “Special and Important Reasons” 
Warranting the Exercise of This Court’s Extraor- 
Ce BI ios Saeed reek as bee tx os 2 
1. The Decision of the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court Presents no Conflict with the 
Decisions of Any Other State or Federal Court 2 
2. No Federal Question is Presented in This 
Case, and the Decision of the Massachusetts 
Supreme Judical Court Fully Comports with 
the Binding Precedent of This Court...... 6 
II. The Petition Impermissibly Seeks to Have This 
Court Sit as a Court of Error Over the Mas- 
sachusetts Supreme Judicial Court............ 8 
1. The Decision of the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court is Fully Supported by Substan- 
RS a ee pee eee 
OPE ee ee ne ee ee ee 9 


ie) 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 
Page 
City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989)........ 4 
Clark v. Community for Creative Nonviolence, 468 U.S. 
| PE 4 
Concord Rod & Gun Club v. Massachusetts Comm’n 
Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716 (1988)....... 6 
Grayson v. Harris, 267 U.S. 352 (1925).............. 8 
Local Finance Co. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against 
Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10 (1968)............... 6 


New York County Board of Ancient Order of Hiber- 
nians v. Dinkins, 814 F. Supp. 358 (S.D.N.Y. 1993) 3 
Portland Ry. Co. v. Railroad Comm’n., 229 U.S. 397 


CRUD iw ncn ue Bie a eb Cale eee 8 
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 (1984). 7 
United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968) ........ 4 


Other Authorities 


United States Constitution, First Amendment .... Passim 
Massachusetts General Laws c. 272, §§ 92A and 98... 6 


In the 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTosBeER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-749 


JOHN J. HURLEY, Inpivipua.ty, anp 
THE SOUTH BOSTON 
ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL, 
PETITIONERS, 


v. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND 
BISEXUAL GROUP OF BOSTON, 

AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION By AND THROUGH, 
TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY anp CATHLEEN FINN, 
ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF AND ON BEHALF OF 
MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 

RESPONDENTS. 


| ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF THE 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 


RESPONDENT'S BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 


The Respondent, Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 
Group of Boston, (“GLIB”), respectfully requests that this 
Court deny the petition for Writ of Certiorari seeking review 
of the opinion of the Supreme Judical Court of the Common- 
wealth of Massachusetts in this case. The opinion is reported at 
418 Mass. 238 (1994) and appears in the Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari at Appendix Cl. 


2 
Reasons Why the Petition Should be Denied 


I. THe Peririon SHOuLD Be Deniep Because Tuts CASE 
PRESENTS No “SPECIAL AND IMPORTANT REASONS” 
WARRANTING THE EXERCISE OF THIS Court's ExtTRa- 
ORDINARY JURISDICTION. 


Rule 10.1 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the United 
States provides that a writ of certiorari will be granted “only 
when there are special and important reasons therefor.” At 
issue in this case is the decision of the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court upholding the trial court’s finding that Boston’s 
annual Evacuation Day/St. Patrick’s Day Parade is a place 
of public accommodation under state law, and upholding the 
trial court’s finding that the Petitoners discriminated against 
the Respondents on the basis of sexual orientation in violation 
of state law by excluding them from this public celebration. 

Nothing about this state-law decision makes it “special and 
important” under Rule 10.1. The decision fully comports with 
the binding precedent of this Court, as well as the well-settled 
principles guiding application of the public accommodations 
law in Massachusetts. In addition, the decision is fully sup- 
ported by the facts adduced at trial, which were closely 
scrutinized by the Supreme Judicial Court. For the reasons 
discussed more fully below, this Court should decline to exer- 
cise its extraordinary jurisdiction in this case. 


1. The Decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Judical 
Court Presents No Conflict with the Decisions of Any 
Other State or Federal Court 


Pursuant to Rule 10.1(b)' of the Rules of the Supreme 
Court, a writ of certiorari may be granted when a state court 
“has decided a federal question in a way that conflicts with 
the decision of another state court of last resort or of a United 


' Subsection (a) of Rule 10.1 does not apply in this case. 


a 


3 


States court of appeals.” The decision of the Massachusetts 
Supreme Judicial Court presents no conflict with the decision 
of any other high court and it presents no conflict with any 
decision of a United States Court of Appeals. Petitioners 
attempt to create a conflict by reaching for the 1993 decision 
of the United States District Court of the Southern District 
of New York in New York Board of Ancient Order of Hiber- 
nians v. Dinkins, 814 F. Supp. 358 (S.D.N.Y. 1993),? but even 
a cursory examination of that decision shows that the two 
cases are inapposite. 

In the Dinkins case, the District Court, based upon the par- 
ties’ agreed statement of uncontested facts, made detailed fac- 
tual findings regarding the following: the history and compo- 
sition of New York City’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade (A6-A7); 
the identity of the Parade’s sponsor (“The AOH is an organiza- 
tion comprised of Roman Catholic men of Irish descent .. .” 
A6); the financing of the Parade (“The AOH and the Parade 
Committee privately finance the Parade exclusively by means 
of private donations.” (A6); the theme of the Parade (“The 
Parade celebrates, inter alia, freedom and Irish culture and 
heritage.” (A7); the application process (“The AOH has 
adopted rules for the Parade to prevent any group or person 
from using the Parade as a vehicle or forum to pursue any 

. agenda inconsistent with the message, values and view- 
point of the AOH, or ... with the teachings of the Roman 
Catholic Church.” (A7-A8); the nature of the holiday com- 
memorated by the Parade (St. Patrick’s Day) (A6-A7); the 
Parade route (“For over seventy years the Parade has taken 
place on Fifth Avenue starting at 11:00 a.m. on the day of 
the Roman Catholic liturgical feast day of St. Partick.” (A6); 
and the applicable law (A18-A25). Based on its analysis, the 
District Court concluded that New York’s St. Partick’s Day 
Parade is the expression of the Ancient Order of Hibernians 
and is, therefore, protected by the first amendment to the 
United States Constitution. 


* Petition for Writ of Certiorari at Appendix Al. 


4 


In the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group of 
Boston case, the Supreme Judical Court upheld the trial 
court’s detailed factual findings regarding the following: the 
history and composition of Boston’s Evacuation Day/St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade (C6-C8); the identity of the Parade’s 
sponsors (the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council); the 
financing of the Parade (“Until 1993, the City provided 
approximately twenty-five percent of the Parade’s total costs.” 
(B17); the theme of the Parade (“[I]t is ‘impossible to discern 
any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to protec- 
tion under the First Amendment.’” (C13); the application 
process (“there are no written procedures, criteria, or stan- 
dards for selecting participants or sponsors of the parade.” 
(C8); the nature of the holidays commemorated by the Parade 
(“The judge noted Evacuation Day ‘commemorates General 
Washington’s initial military victory over the British in 1776, 
and the British departure from South Boston. It is an officially 
recognized historical event in Massachusetts and a Suffolk 
County holiday ...’” (C5 n.7); the Parade route (“The 
Parade has followed substantially the same route in South 
Boston for at least forty-seven years ...” (C7); and the 
applicable law (C9-C16). Based on its close scrutiny of the 
facts found by the trial court, the Supreme Judicial Court 
determined that Boston’s Evacuation Day/St. Patrick’s Day 
Parade constitutes a place of public accommodation under 
Massachusetts General Laws c.272, sections 92A and 98, and 
it rejected the Petitioners’ argument that the Parade was an 
exercise of their first amendment rights. (C14). 

Both the District Court and the Massachusetts courts fol- 
lowed the applicable decisions of this Court in analyzing the 
asserted first amendment claims. United States v. O’Brien, 
391 U.S. 367, 376 (1968) (not all conduct is protected speech 
even if so labeled by the actor); Clark v. Community for Crea- 
tive Nonviolence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 n.5 (1984) (one seeking 
protection under the first amendment must show that he is 
entitled to it, as there is no presumption of expressivness); see 
also City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 17, (1989) (court may 


5 


properly test sincerity of first amendment claim but not the 
“truth” of protected cont.:nt). That the two courts reached 
different conclusions is evidence of this simple fact: each 
Parade is unique and the two Parades are very different from 
the other. 

In Dinkins, the District Court described the differences 
between the two Parades as follows: 


The Boston Parade celebrates not only St. Patrick’s Day, 
but also Evacuation Day. Evacuation Day com- 
memorates the March 17, 1776 departure of British 
troops from Boston. The parade conveys a general 
celebratory message in general support of ‘traditional 
values.’ ... The fact that this ‘traditional values,’ multi- 
purpose parade requires ‘detailed participation by city 
agencies in planning and execution’ clearly illustrates the 
civic nature of the parade. ... In light of these factors, 
the [Massachusetts] Court held that the defendant 
permit-holders were ‘custodians of a civic celebration.’ 


(A23-24). The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court 
described the New York Parade as follows: 


At the outset, we noted that Hibernians is distinguishable 
from the facts of this case because in Hibernians, the 
judge found that the Ancient Order of Hibernians in fact 
used the parade as a means of expression, that the admis- 
sion process was selective, and that it had adopted rules 
to prevent parade participants from using the parade as 
a forum to express views inconsistent with the views of 
the Ancient Order of Hibernians or the Roman Catholic 
Church. 


We also note that the New York parade celebrates only 
St. Patrick’s Day, while the Boston parade celebrates, in 
addition, Evacuation Day. © 


(C13 & n.17). 


6 


Not every St. Patrick’s Day Parade is identical. When the 
outcome of two cases is compelled by the unique facts of each 
case, there is no conflict within the meaning of Rule 10.1(b). 


2. No Federal Question is Presented in this Case, 
and the Decision of the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court Fully Comports with the Binding 
Precedent of this Court 


Rule 10.1(c) provides that a writ of certiorari may be 
granted when a state court decides “an important question of 
federal law which has not been, but should be, decided by 
this Court, or has decided a federal question in a way that 
conflicts with applicable decisions of this Court.” The ruling 
of the Supreme Judicial Court could not be clearer. In this 
case the Commonwealth’s court of last resort has not decided 
a federal question — it has properly determined the meaning 
of an important state statute: the Massachusetts public accom- 
modations law. Massachusetts Genera! Laws c.272, §§92A 
and 98. First enacted in 1865 and amended and expanded 
numerous times since that date, most recently in 1989 to pro- 
hibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, the 
public accommodations statute embodies the Common- 
wealth’s strong public policy against all forms of discrimina- 
tion in places of public accommodation. The decisions of the 
Supreme Judicial Court recognizes this vital public policy and 
have directed a broad and inclusive reading of the statute. 
Concord Rod & Gun Club v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against 
Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 720 (1988) (public accommo- 
dations law serves a “broad, remedial purpose” and should 
be given a “broad, inclusive interpretation”) (quoting Local 
Finance Co. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimina- 
tion, 355 Mass. 10, 14 (1968)). 

The Supreme Judicial Court and the trial court fully consi- 
_ dered and rejected the Petitioner's first amendment claims: 


7 


[T]here was no error in [the trial court’s} finding that 
the parade was not used by the council for expressive pur- 
poses, and that, as a result, the defendants could not 
cloak their discriminatory acts in the mantle of the First 
Amendment. 


C15. As the Supreme Judicial Court recognized, because there 
is no presumption of expressive activity, invoking the first 
amendment begins the court’s inquiry — it does not end it. 
Ciark, supra. The Supreme Judicial Court properly deter- 
mined that there is no expressive purpose in this Parade. 

The decision of the Supreme Judicial Court is correct as it 
comports with the binding precedent of this Court. In Roberts 
v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 (1984), this Court first 
considered whether a state public accommodations law 
infringed upon the first amendment free association rights of 
members of a private club. In that case, this Court determined 
that the operation of the public accommodations law abridged 
no more speech and association than was necessary to accom- 
plish the important purposes of the non-discrimination sta- 
tute. 468 U.S at 629. The decision of the Supreme Judicial 
Court in this case, in contrast, presents in many ways an easier 
question. First, the public accommodation at issue is, in the 
words of the trial court, an “open recreational event,” and 
not a private club. B27. Second, both the trial court and the 
Supreme Judicial Court found that there was no basis for the 
Petitioner’s assertion that the Parade constitutes their speech 
or expressive association. (B23-B25; C13-C15). In this case, 
there could be no infringement, however slight, of the Peti- 
tioner’s first amendment rights because this Parade never fell 
within the reach of the first amendment. This case presents 
no important question of federal law which has not been set- 
tled by this Court. 


8 


Il. THe Perition IMPERMISSIBLY SEEKS TO Have Tuis Court 
Str as A Court oF ErRRoR OvEeR THE MASSACHUSETTS 
SUPREME JUDICIAL CourT 


As the preceding discussion has shown, the Petitioners have 
presented no basis for the exercise of this Court’s extraordinary 
jurisdiction under Rule 10.1 of the Rules of the Surpeme 
Court. Petitioners’ sole purpose in seeking a writ of certiorari 
is to have this Court sit as a court of error and reverse the 
decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court. This 
is not the purpose of a writ of certiorari. The facts fully sup- 
port the Supreme Judicial Court’s decision. 


1. The Decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court is Fully Supported by Substantial Evidence. 


The Supreme Judicial Court closely scrutinized the facts 
found by the trial court; see e.g., C5-C7 & n.9, and deter- 
mined that the findings of the trial court were supported by 
the evidence. Generally this Court will not disturb factual 
findings and conclusions of law based on subtantial evidence. 
Grayson v. Harris, 267 U.S. 352, 358 (1925); Portland Ry. 
Co. v. Railroad Comm'n, 229 U.S. 397, 412 (1913). The 
Supreme Judicial Court recognized the fact-intensive nature 
of this case when it stated the following: 


[W]e uphold the findings and rulings of the judge based 
on the record before us, particularly the history and 
nature of the parade here at issue. We do not suggest that 
every parade is nonexpressive or that every parade is 
necessarily a place of public accommodation. Rather, we 
base our conclusions on the unique nature of the facts 
found as to the parade in controversy. 


(C13-Cl4 n.18). Under these circumstances, this Court 
should decline to disturb Supreme Judicial Court's 
findings of fact and conclusions of law in this case. 


) 
Conclusion 


For these reasons, the petition for writ of certiorari should 


be denied. 
Respectfully submitted, 


Puitip M. Cronin, Esq. 
Peapopy & ARNOLD 

50 Rowes Wharf 
Boston, MA 02110 

(617) 951-2100 

Counsel for Respondent 


