94 749 OCT 24 19% 


No. 
OpbICE—OEIHE CLERK 


IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL, 
PETITIONERS, 


Vv. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION 
By AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, Anpb 
CATHLEEN FINN, AcTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON A PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


TO SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI. 


CHESTER DARLING DwiGHT G. DUNCAN 
Counsel of Record SOUTHERN N.E. SCHOOL OF LAW 
306 Dartmouth Street 333 Faunce Corner Road 


Boston, Massachusetts 02116 N. Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747 
(617) 536-2050 | 


WILLIAM M. CONNOLLY DANIEL J. SUMPTION 

546 E. Broadway 28 Constitution Road 

S. Boston, Massachusetts 02127 Charlestown,.Massachusetts 02129 
Of Counsel 


BATEMAN & SLADE. INC BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 


b I 


i 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW. 


I. Whether the Supreme Judicial Court of the Common- 
wealth of Massachusetts violated the First and Fourteenth 
Amendment rights of the Petitioners when it compelled the 
Petitioners to include, in their privately organized Parade, a 
message the Petitioners deemed unwanted and antithetical? 

II. Whether Petitioners’ refusal to include a gay, lesbian 
and bisexual message within a private parade can be declared 
unlawful discrimination by the government without violating 
the Petitioners’ First and Fourteenth Amendment rights as 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Questions presented for review 


Table of authorities cited 
Opinions below 
Jurisdiction 


Constitutional provisions involved 


Statutes involved 


Statement of the case 


Reasons for granting the writ 


I. The highest court in Massachusetts has unconsti- 
tutionally abridged the veterans’ rights of free 
speech guaranteed under the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution 


A. This parade was speech protected by the First 


B. 


and Fourteenth Amendments 


The courts of Massachusetts impermissibly 
examined, analyzed and evaluated the content 
of speech and expressive activity 


(i) Content-evaluation and examination 
(ii) The SJC and expressive association 
(iii) No discrimination found 

(iv) State action 


The state, in compelling the inclusion of an 
unwanted and antithetical message, violated 
the veterans’ First Amendment guarantee of 
freedom of speech 


II. This decision, if not reversed, will have profound 
effects upon the exercise of First Amendment 
rights, not only within Massachusetts, but within 
other state and federal jurisdictions 


Conclusion 


17 


18 
21 


iV 


Table of Authorities Cited. 


CASES. 
Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Education, 431 U.S. 209 
(1977) 18 
Boos v. Barry, 485 U.S. 312 (1988) 13 


Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92 (1972) 16 


Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 


U.S. 288 (1984) if. 
Concord Rod & Gun Club v. MCAD, 402 Mass. 716 
(1988) 16 


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York v. Public Service 
Comm'n, 447 U.S. 530 (1980) 11 


Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536 (1965) 7 
Dallas v. Stranglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989) 14, 15 
Directors of Rotary Int’l v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 

(1984) 16 
First National Bank v. Bellotti, 371 Mass. 773 (1976) 10 
First National Bank v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765 (1978) 10 
Forsyth County v. Nat. Movement, 112 S.Ct. 2395 

(1992) 13 
Gay Veterans Association v. American Legion, 621 

F.Supp. 1510 (S.D.N.Y. 1985) 10n 


Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104 (1972) —_7, 20 
Gregory v. Chicago, 394 U.S. 111 (1969) 1] 
Hague v. C.1.0., 307 U.S. 486 (1939) 7 
Hudgens v. N.L.R.B., 424 U.S. 507 (1976) 11 


Invisible Empire of the Knights of the KKK v. Mayor of 
Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281 (1988) 7, 10n, 18 


— er a ee ee ——— - 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES CITED (CONT’D) Vv 


Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of 
Boston v. City of Boston, South Boston Allied War 
Veterans Council, Superior Court Civil Action No. 
92-1518 (1993) 2 


Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of 
Boston & others v. City of Boston, SJC 06498 (July 


il, 1994) 2 
Irish-American Gay Group of Boston v. Boston, 418 

Mass. 238 (1994) 5 
Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184 (1963) 10, 11, 13 
Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414 (1988) 9 
New York County Board of Ancient Order of Hiberni- 

ans v. Dinkins, 814 F.Supp. 358 (1993) 7, 14, 15n 


[Case Fully Reproduced in Appendix A] 
New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964) 10, 13 
Perry Educ. Assoc. v. Perry Local Educator’s Assoc.., 


460 U.S. 37 (1983) 7 
Police Dept. of Chicago v. Mosley, 48 U.S. 92 (1972) 
7, 16 
Redgrave v. B.S.O., 855 F.2d 888 (1988), cert. denied, 
488 U.S. 1043 (1988) 20 
Riley v. National Federation of the Blind, 487 U.S. 781 
(1988) 9 
Sanders v. U.S.,518 F.Supp. 728 (D.D.C. 198!), aff’d 
679 F.2d (D.D.C. 1982) 18, 20 
Schad v. Borough of Mt. Ephram, 452 U.S. 62 (1981) = ‘11 
Shelley v. Kraemer, 341 U.S. | (1948) 17 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 449 (1958) 11 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147 (1969) 7 


Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516 (1945) 18 


vi TABLE OF AUTHORITIES CITED (CONT’D) 


United States v. O’Brien, 88 S.Ct. 1673 (1968) 12 
Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705 (1977) 16, 17, 18 


STATUTES AND RULES. 


United States Constitution 


First Amendment passim 
Fourteenth Amendment passim 


United States Code 


28 U.S.C. § 1257(a) 2 
Massachusetts Declaration of Rights 
Article | 3 


Article 16 


Massachusetts General Laws 


c. 272, § 92A 3 
c. 272, § 98 3 


No. 


IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL, 
PETITIONERS, 


v. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION 
By AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, Anpb 
CATHLEEN FINN, ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON A PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI. 


Petitioners, John J. Hurley and the South Boston Allied War Veterans 
Council, respectfully pray that a writ of certiorari issue to review the 
judgment and opinion of the Supreme Judicial Court of the Common- 
wealth of Massachusetts entered on March 11, 1994. 


2 


Opinions Below. 


The Opinion of the Supreme Judicial Court for the Common- 
wealth of Massachusetts in /rish-American Gay, Lesbian and 
Bisexual Group of Boston & others v. City of Boston,SJC- 
06498 (July 11, 1994), is attached hereto in the Appendix C 
to the Petition for Writ of Certiorari (C 1). The Opinion and 
Judgment of the Superior Court of the Commonwealth of Mas- 
sachusetts, /rish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group 
of Boston v. City of Boston, South Boston Allied War Veterans 
Council, and John J. Hurley, Superior Court Civil Action No. 
92-1518, (December 24, 1993) is attached hereto in the Appen- 
dix B to the Petition for Writ of Certiorari (B 1). 


Jurisdiction. 


On March 11, 1994, the Supreme Judicial Court of the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts affirmed the Judgment and 
Order of the Superior Court, dated December 24, 1993. See 
Appendices C and B, respectively. A Petition for Rehearing, 
after extensions of time granted by the Supreme Judicial Court, 
was timely filed and was denied on July 26, 1994. See Appen- 
dix D. 

The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1257 (a). 


Constitutional Provisions Involved. 


This case involves portions of the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution: 

“Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom 
of speech... . 


%9 


3 


U.S. Constitution, Amendment I. 

“Nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or 
property without due process of law... ” 
U.S. Constitution, Amendment XIV, § 1. 


Statutes Involved. 


The statute involved is Massachusetts General Law chapter 
272, sections 92A and 98. M.G.L. c. 272 §§ 92A and 98. 


Statement of the Case. 


On November 15, 1993, Respondent, Gay, Lesbian, & 
Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB) sued the Respondent, City 
of Boston, and Petitioner, Allied War Veterans Council of 
South Boston (Veterans) and John J. Hurley, individually alleg- 
ing (a) that the Petitioners had lawfully excluded GLIB from 
the 1992 and 1993 St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day Parades in 
South Boston, in violation of Massachusetts penal statute G.L. 
c. 272, §§ 92A & 98, the First and Fourteenth Amendments 
to the U.S. Constitution, and articles 1 and 16 of the Massa- 
chusetts Declaration of Rights; and (b) that the Veterans were 
State actors, and thus, GLIB’s exclusions constituted state ac- 
tion under the Fourteenth Amendment and violative of GLIB’s 
First Amendment rights. The Veterans argued that theirs was a 
privately funded, permitted parade, protected by the First and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, and fully 
reflective of their traditional religious and social values. 

The Federal question regarding the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments was raised by the Veterans in the trial court. 
“The Veterans argue that their Parade is a form of speech 
protected by the First Amendment via the Fourteenth Amend- 


4 


ment, and that their speech will be effectively diluted or dis- 
torted if they are required to include GLIB in their Parade.” 
Appendix B at B23. The Veterans cross claimed against the 
City for unlawful interference with their Parade. 

On December 15, 1993, the Superior Court issued its find- 
ings of Fact, Rulings of Law, and Order of Judgment. The 
court found no state action and dismissed all claims against 
the City. Since the Petitioners were private actors, the court 
dismissed GLIB’s First and Fourteenth Amendment claims 
against the Petitioners. The court found the Veterans’ privately- 
funded, permitted parade to have no expressive purpose, to 
be a public event, a place of public accommodation and an 
open recreational event, and that the Veterans discriminated 
against GLIB on the basis of values and messages, i.e. sexual 
orientation. 

After an analysis of the content of the Parade and a review 
of the participants, the trial court found it “impossible to discern 
any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to protec- 
tion under the First Amendment.” Appendix B at B25. The 
court further found that “the Veterans’ right of expressive 
association is not unduly burdened by the statute’s (M.G.L. 
c. 272) restriction.” Appendix B at B25. The Veterans were 
permanently ordered and enjoined: a) from discrimination 
against GLIB on the basis of sexual orientation with respect 
to participation in the Veterans’ annual St. Patrick’s Day/ 
Evacuation Day Parade; and b) to accomodate in the Parade 
in all respects representatives of GLIB on the terms and con- 
ditions generally applicable to all other parade participants. 

On March 11, 1994, a majority of the Justices of the Supreme 
Judicial Court of Massachusetts affirmed the Judgment of the 
Superior Court dated December 24, 1993. (SIC No. 94-64948) 
Appendix C. 

The Federal question regarding the claim of infringement 
of the Veterans’ First and Fourteenth Amendments rights was 
again presented and considered by the Supreme Judicial Court 


z 
3 
; 
3 


5 


on appeal. The S.J.C., applying the standard of whether the 
findings below were “clearly erroneous”, upheld the lower 
court’s ruling that the parade was not a protected expression 
under the U.S. Constitution. “[T]here was no error in [the trial 
court's] finding that the parade was not used by the Council 
for expressive purposes, and that, as a result the [Veterans] 
could not cloak their discriminatory acts in the mantle of the 
First Amendment.” Appendix C at C15, 16. 

A dissenting opinion in the case held the parade to be pro- 
tected speech, and found the trial judge’s findings to be an 
unconstitutional, content-based classification of the speech. 
Appendix C at C21. The dissent further found the order of the 
trial court to be a “flagrant violation of the Veterans Council’s 
First Amendment rights.” Appendix C at C26. 

An application to the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachu- 
setts, was made on May 13, 1994, for Motion to Enlarge Time 
for Filing the Veterans’ Petition for Rehearing and allowed on 
May 16, 1994. On July 11, 1994, the written decision of the 
Supreme Judicial Court of the Commonwealth of Massachu- 
setts was issued. /rish-American Gay Group of Boston v. Bos- 
ton, 418 Mass 238. (1994) Appendix C. 

On July 26, 1994, the Supreme Judicial Court for the Com- 
monwealth of Massachusetts considered and denied the Vete- 
rans’ Petition for Rehearing. Appendix D at D1. 


Reasons for Granting the Writ. 


In an astounding decision which conflicts with the well 
settled law and doctrines of this Court, the Massachusetts 
courts have abdicated their duty to preserve and to protect the 
guarantees of its citizens’ First Amendment rights, and the 
liberty interests and due process of law mandated by the Four- 
teenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Su- 


6 


preme Judicial Court of Massachusetts (SJC), in affirming the 
judgment of the trial court, ruled that: (1) a privately sponsored 
parade was not speech protected by the First Amendment; (2) 
a parade which reflected the organizers’ “traditional religious 
and social values” was a parade without “any specific expres- 
sive purpose” (Appendix C at C6 and C13, respectively); and 
(3) the trial court’s evaluation of the content of a parade organ- 
ized by a private sponsor was merely an examination to deter- 
mine if speech was involved at all. Appendix C atC16n.20. 

The affront to the First Amendment, which is now law in 
Massachusetts, is so great in its abridgment of the Petitioners’ 
speech, that it resulted in the Petitioners cancelling their 1994 
parade rather than showcasing a message they deemed offen- 
sive and antithetical. The dissent wrote: 


“That the judge’s decision and order requiring the 
Veterans Council to allow GLIB to march and to 
express itself as a group is a flagrant violation of the 
Veterans Council’s rights is an unavoidable conclu- 
sion . . . Our holding today, while, to some, seem- 
ingly pushes us forward, really pushes us back over 
200 years, to an era that lacked the protection guaran- 
teed by the First Amendment.”’ Appendix C at C26. 


In asking this Court to grant certiorari and reverse the deci- 
sion of the SJC, the Petitioners point not only to the effect a 
denial of certiorari will have on their First Amendment protec- 
tions now and in the future, but note the effect a denial will 
have on First Amendment expressions elsewhere. 


7 


THE HIGHEST COURT IN MASSACHUSETTS HAS UNCON- 
STITUTIONALLY ABRIDGED THE VETERANS’ RIGHTS OF 
FREE SPEECH GUARANTEED UNDER THE FIRST AND Four- 
TEENTH AMENDMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES CON- 


STITUTION. 


This Parade was speech protected by the First and 


Fourteenth Amendments. 


A parade is, by its nature, a pristine form of speech. 
See, Perry Educ. Assoc. v. Perry Local Educator's 
Assoc, 460 US 37, 45, 103 S.Ct. 948, 954 (1983); 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 US 147, 152 
S.Ct. 935, 939 (1969); Cox v. Louisiana, 379 US 
536, 554-55, 85 S.Ct. 453, 4644-65 (1965); Invisible 
Empire of the Knights of the KKK v. Mayor of Thur- 
mont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 286-87 (D.Md. 1988). In 
parades, people gather together for the purpose of 
expressing their message. See, e.g., /d. The public 
thoroughfares of our nation are the public fora in 
which the issues of the day can be debated and where 
individuals seek to engage in basic expressive activ- 
ity, such as parading. /bid. Grayned v. City of 
Rockford, 408 US 104, 115, 92 S.Ct. 2294, 2303 
(1972) (citing Police Dept. of Chicago v. Mosley,48 
US 92, 94-96 (1972)); Hague v. C.J.0., 307 US 
486, 515, 59 S.Ct. 954, 963 (1939). Every parade 
is designed to convey a message. /bid. As such, a 
parade organized by a private sponsor is the quintes- 
sential exercise of the First Amendment right of free- 
dom of expression. /bid. 


New York County Board of Ancient Order of Hibernians v. 
Dinkins, 814 F. Supp. 358, 366 (1993) Appendix A at A18. 


iii 


8 


In the Massachusetts decision, now before this Court, Justice 
Nolan wrote in dissent: 


Today will be regarded as a sad and frustrating day 
in the history of the First Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. Today, a majority of this court 
upholds, and thereby endorses, a trial judge's flag- 
rant violation of the free speech rights of citizens of 
this Commonwealth . The majority acquiesces in a 
judge’s order instructing a private group that if it 
wishes to express itself at all, it must include in its 
expression a particular idea, one with which the 
group does not agree. One must strain to recall or 
even to imagine such an obvious violation of the 
revered rights to free speech. 


Appendix C at C17-C18. 


The dissent noted that the Veterans raised the issue of free 
speech throughout the trial, in their memorandum and in their 
briefs on appeal. Appendix C at C6. The Veterans also stated 
that their parade was meant to “express traditional religious 
and social values.” Appendix C at C19. The Massachusetts 
trial court dismissed speech on the grounds that “[g]iven the 
Veterans lack of selectivity in choosing participants and failure 
to circumscribe marchers’ messages, it is impossible to discern 
any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to protec- 
tion under the First Amendment.” Appendix B at B25. 


The Veterans clearly articulated an expressive purpose for 
their parade to reflect “their traditional religious and social 
values.” Appendix C at C6. Whether the Veterans achieved 
their expressive purpose, however, should have been deter- 
mined by the Veterans, not the courts. “The First Amendment 


7) 


mandates that we presume that speakers, not the government, 
know best both what they want to say and how they want to 
say it.” Riley v. National Federation of the Blind, 487 US 
781, 790-91 (1988). “The First Amendment protects the [Peti- 
tioners’] right not only to advocate their cause, but also to 
select what they believe to be the most effective means for so 
doing.” Meyer v. Grant, 486 US 414, 424 (1988). 

Contrary to the findings of the court, the Veterans were 
selective in who they allowed to march. Even the SJC acknow- 
ledged that: “Participants from previous parades are sent an 
application for the upcoming parade. Those who have not 
previously participated and who inquire about participation in 
the parade are sent applications .. . The council votes on 
applications for participation in ‘batches’, and the council does 
not generally inquire into the message or views of each appli- 
cant.”” Appendix C at C65. The SJC glossed over these facts, 
relying on the findings of the trial judge that anybody could 
virtually show up, pay a fee and march. Appendix C at C68 
n.13. At trial, however, this finding was contradicted by testi- 
mony from various parties. It was noted that between 90 and 
95% of all participants were repeat participants.' Trial trans- 
cripts at 245, 380. The Boston Police Department testified that 
the police would try to evict any person or group showing up 
and marching without the Veterans’ permission.’ In a parade 


‘Trial testimony of John J. Hurley, Trial Transcript page A-380: 
“Q. But the fact is, would you agree, with Mr. Lyons when he testified that 
about 90% to 95% of the participants in the parade have marched before? 
A. Yes, that’s true.” 


*Trial testimony of Boston Police Superintendent Thomas P. Maloney. Trial 
Transcript page A-234: 
“Q And if there is someone in a — let's confine ourselves to the 1992 parade, 
Superintendent. If a group jumped into the line of march, that was not listed on 
the roster, and was observed by yourseif or your colleagues, what next would 
happen? 
A. We probably would have consulted with the parade organizers to find out if 
they approved or concurred with this other group into the parade. If they did not, 
we would try to eject them from the parade route.” 


10 


consisting of over 10,000 marchers, the trial court could not 
point to a single case where a person or group showed up, 
paid a fee and marched without the Veterans’ permission. 
Indeed, the very fact that the parade was a permitted event 
meant that the Veterans, in satisfying the City’s legitimate 
time, manner and place concerns, had to define the size of the 
parade before a permit was issued. This, coupled with the fact 
that a parade roster is printed weeks in advance of the parade, 
indicating who would be marching, renders the finding of an 
“open recreational event” ludicrous. Appendix B at B27. These 
findings are subject to review by the Supreme Court. Jacobellis 
v. Ohio,378 US 184, 190, and n. 6. (1963). In fact, under 
the standard laid down in Jacobellis, the SJC should have 
undertaken an independent review of the fact finding, as op- 
posed to the application of the “clearly erroneous” test. Appen- 
dix C at 1298. See also, New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 US 
254, 285 (1964); First National Bank v. Bellotti, 435 US 765, 
787 (1978); First National Bank v. Bellotti, 371 Mass. 773, 
793 (1976). 

As for the finding that the Veterans did not circumscribe 
messages, the fact is that the Veterans excluded GLIB, ROAR 
(an anti-busing group), the KKK, and a truck displaying anti- 
gay signs, and also circumscribed the messages of the groups 
Mass Right to Life and NORAID (Northern Irish Aid). This 
exclusion and circumscription of messages was of “no legal 
relevance” to the SJC. Appendix C at 1296, n. 10. The Court 
erred in dismissing the relevance of these exclusions.’ 

As this Court has noted, marching and parading fall well 
within the sphere of conduct protected by the First Amendment. 


‘Gay Veterans Association v. American Legion, 621 F.Supp. 1510 (S.D.N.Y. 
1985) (The American Legion may exclude a group of gay veterans wishing to 
marc» wnder self-identifying banner as privately organized parade does not become 
a Stat’ -tor merely because it celebrates a state holiday, Veterans Day.) (aff'd by 
the § nd Circuit orally from the bench Nov. 8, 1985, without written decision). 
See KKK v. Mayor of Thurmont, infra at 289. 


11 


Gregory v. Chicago, 394 US 111, 112 (1969); Shuttleworth 
v. Birmingham, 394 US 449, 460 (1958). “[E]ntertainment as 
well as political and ideological speech, is protected... ” 
Schad v. Borough of Mt. Ephram, 452 US 62, 65 (1981). 


~ hen tee deen EE ‘ 


B. The Courts of Massachusetts impermissibly examined, 
analyzed and evaluated the content of speech and expressive 
activity. . 


The very fact-finding engaged in by the trial court was itself 
an impermissible and unconstitutional intrusion into the Vete- 
rans’ parade and should have been reviewed by the SJC. Jacob- 
ellis v. Ohio, 378 US 184, 190, and n. 6 (1963). 


(i) Content-evaluation and examination. 


The government may not consider either content or subject 
matter of the speech. Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y. v. 
Public Service Comm'n, 447 US 530, 536 (1980). “Above all 
else, the First Amendment means that government has no 
power to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, 
its subject matter, or its content.” Hudgens v. N.L.R.B., 424 
US 507, 520 (1976). 

The courts of Massachusetts impermissibly extended this 
Court’s doctrine of time, place and manner regulation by citing 
Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 US 288, 
293, n. 5 (1984), as standing for the proposition that: “In order 
to rely on the protections of the First Amendment for speech 
or expressive association, the defendants initially had to dem- 
onstrate that the parade truly was an exercise of those First 
Amendment rights (citation omitted). This, the judge found, 
they did not do.” Appendix C at C14. Of course, Clark did not 
stand for this proposition. When this Court in Clark wrote that 
“it is the obligation of the person desiring to engage in assertedly 


12 


expressive conduct to demonstrate that the First Amendment 
even applies,” this Court was not referring to a clearly expres- 
sive activity such as a parade, but rather was referring to ques- 
tionably expressive activities such as camping and slecping. 
Clark, supra. The question was whether a rule prohibiting 
sleeping and camping in an area of a public park impermissibly 
infringed on the message of the demonstrators who asserted 
that sleeping and camping overnight were integral to their 
speech. This Court said the regulation was “clearly [a limita- 
tion] on the manner in which the demonstration could be carried 
out.” Clark at 294. A time, place and manner restriciton is only 
valid if it is content neutral, narrowly tailored to serve a sig- 
nificant governmental interest, and leaves open adequate alter- 
native channels for speech. /d..at 293. Nowhere in Clark did 
this Court seek to determine whether the organizers of the 
demonstration shared common views, or whether the partici- 
pants were close personal friends, or mere interested strangers. 
Yet, this is what the Massachusetts courts did in this case. 
The Massachusetts courts also cited U.S. v. O’Brien, 88 S.Ct. 
1673 (1968), to support Clark, (Appendix C at C16, n.20), 
but in U.S. v. O’Brien, this Court assumed that burning a 
draft registration card was expressive conduct, whereas the 
Massachusetts courts said the Veterans parade was neither 
speech nor expressive conduct. 

In answering the Veterans’ argument that the trial court 
impermissibly evaluated content, the SJC noted that the trial 
judge merely “examined whether there existed speech or any 
other activity protected by the First Amendment.” Appendix 
C at Cl6n. 20. The trial judge went much further. He not only 
examined the relationship of the parade organizers to the par- 
ticipants, but also examined the relationship of the participants 
to each other, going so far as to speculate about the motives 
and viewpoints of the participants in the parade. Appendix B 
at B24. The trial judge concluded: “A proper celebration of 


13 


St. Patrick’s and Evacuation Day requires diversity and inclu- 
siveness.”’ Appendix B at B24 (Emphasis supplied). “Diversity 
should be the hallmark of their parade.” (Emphasis supplied) 
Appendix B at B28. The SJC dissent characterized this last 
statement as a “crude regulation of the content.”” Appendix C 
at C26. 

The SJC improperly endorsed the examination of the con- 
tent, organization and viewpoints in the Petitioners’ 1993 
Parade. The trial court, for its part, simply ignored the Veter- 
ans’ freedom of speech claims. The denial of federal rights 
by a state requires an independent examination by this Court 
of the whole record, as the judgment constitutes a forbidden 
intrusion of free expression. See New York Times v. Sullivan, 
376 US 254, 285 (1964); Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 US 184 
(1963). This is especially so, when the examination is based 
on an analysis founded on errors of fact, surmise, conjecture 
and speculation. E.g., Appendix C at C12, n.13 and C25 n.4. 

The trial judge conducted an inappropriate appraisal of the 
facts, and formed an opinion relating to the content of the 
Petitioners’ parade, see, Forsyth County v. Nat. Movement, 
112 S.Ct. 2395 (1992); Boos v. Barry, 485 US 312, 334 
(1988). 


(ii) The SJC and Expressive Association. 


Although the Veterans repeatedly raised their free speech 
rights, Appendix C at C4, and repeatedly argued that their 
Parade was their expression, their speech, Appendix C at C19, 
n.1, and C4, the trial court reduced the Veterans’ claims to 
one of expressive association: 


The Veteran Council contends that it may lawfully 
exclude GLIB because neither the public accommo- 
dations statute nor the 14th Amendment applies to 
its Parade. The Veterans argue that the Fourteenth 
Amendment is irrelevant because there is no state 


14 


action; and the statute is inapplicable because the 
Parade is not a place of public accommodation, and 
because application of it would be an impermissible 
infringement of the Veterans’ constitutional right of 
expressive association. 


Appendix B at B2. 


“It is this right [expressive association] that the Veterans 
claim would be unconstitutionally burdened by application of 
the public accommodation statute.” Appendix B at B23. The 
trial court egregiously ignored the Veterans’ freedom of speech 
claims. 

The trial court also mischaracterized the expressive associa- 
tion running the Parade. It was uncontroverted that the Veterans 
Council is an expressive association. The trial court, however, 
viewed the parade itself as an association comprised of parade 
participants and parade organizers. 


Where, however, the association consists of *|s]tran- 
gers to one another . . . and [the association] admits 
all who are willing to pay the admission fee, . . . 
such a coming together to engage in [a] recreational 
[activity] . . . is not protected by the First Amend- 
ment.” Dallas v. Stranglin, 490 US 19, 26, (1989). 
In the instant case, the parade is more akin to a ‘social 
association.’ See Dallas, supra. Participation in the 
parade is not limited on the basis of similarity of 
viewpoints. 


Appendix B at B24. 


Unless the trial and Supreme Judicial Court believed that 
the Allied War Veterans Council was itself a group of strangers 
to one another coming together in a parade with no expressive 


AGS nee 


15 


purpose, who else but participants and organizers could the 
courts have been referring. 

The trial court cited Dallas v. Stranglin to make the point 
that the parade was a social, nonexpressive association. In 
citing Dallas, the Massachusetts trial court stretched its reason- 
ing to embrace the facts of a dance hall case, and to apply 
those facts to a parade. In contrast, in a parade case with 
virtually identical facts, AOH v. Dinkins, the court explicitly 
declined to reach the issue of expressive association, and in- 
stead decided that case solely on freedom of speech.* 

The Allied War Veterans Council clearly articulated a mes- 
sage. Appendix C at C6 and C19. Yet, the trial court and the 
SJC noted that the parade was more akin to a “social associa- 
tion”. Appendix B at B29. The Court also noted that the Parade 
was comprised of diverse groups espousing a myriad of themes. 
Appendix B at B7 and B24. The Court stated “[c]ontact be- 
tween the Veterans and the various participants is casual, often 
occurring at best, a few times a year .. . no argument has 
been made that the Veterans share a personal aspect of their 
lives with the various participating groups.” Appendix B at 
B23 at n.26. Beyond a doubt, the trial court and the SJC erred 
in defining the expressive association as parade organizers and 
their invited participants. 


‘In AOH v. Dinkins, federal judge Duffy distinguished the AOH parade from 
the Veterans’ parade, as the latter had been described by Massachusetts Judge 
Zobel. Zobel, in February of 1993, described the Veterans as mere “custodians of 
a civic celebration” and the Veterans’ 1992 parade as requiring “detailed participa- 
tion by City agencies in planning and execution.” Appendix A at A23. Judge Zobel 
identified the issue just prior to the March 1993 parade as follows: “Defendants 
want a ‘traditional parade’ expressing their ‘values’. They regard Plaintiffs’ views 
as antithetical to those values and to the ethnic-religious component of the parade. 
Thus, allowing Plaintiffs to participate in the parade would impermissibly conflict 
with Defendants’ rights of expression under the federal and Massachusetts Constitu- 
tions.” Zobel Order of February 19, 1993. In December of 1993, however, Massa- 
chusetts trial judge Flannery ruled that the Veterans privately ran and organized 
the parade (Appendix B at B! and B22), that the Veterans were not state actors, 
and that there was no state action involved in the parade other than the usual and 
customary public safety and sanitation services. Appendix B at B10, B22. 


16 


Because the trial court and the SJC applied membership 
cases to the parade, Concord Rod & Gun Club v. MCAD, 402 
Mass. 716, 720, 524 N.E.2d 1364 (1988), Directors of Rotary 
Int'l v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 617 (1984), the courts 
improperly drew the inference that the parade was a member- 
ship organization. It is not. It is the Veterans’ expressive activ- 
ity — their speech. “A parade is, by its nature, a pristine form 
of speech.” Appendix A at A18. The error of the SJC’s affirma- 
tion can be found in the words of the majority in Roberts . . 
“On its face, the Minnesota Act does not aim at the suppression 
of speech, does not distinguish between prohibited and permit- 
ted activity on the basis of viewpoint, and does not license 
enforcement authorities to administer the statute on the basis 
of such constitutionally impermissible criteria. Nor does the 
Jaycees contend that the Act has been applied in this case for 
the purpose of hampering the organizations’ ability to express 
its views . . .” Roberts at 623-34 (citations omitted). In this case, 
the Veterans argued repeatedly that their parade was their speech, 
and that forcing the Veterans to carry a message they found 
objectionable was unconstitutional. Just as selective exclusion 
from a public forum by the state may not be based on content, 
Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley, 408 US 92 (1972), neither may 
a citizen be compelled to express the ideological views of the 
state. Wooley v. Maynard, 430 US 705, 717 (1977). 


(iii) No discrimination found. 


The trial court found that: “The defendants’ final position 
was that GLIB would be excluded because of its values and 
messages, i.e. its members’ sexual orientation.” Appendix B 
at B4 n.5. The trial judge confused a group’s message with 
the group’s members sexual orientation. The fact is, the Vet- 
erans never inquired into participants’ sexual preferences. The 
Dissent made this point forcefully: 


17 


“There is no evidence in the record that the Veterans 
Council ever inquired into the sexual preference of 
any person intending to march in the parade, includ- 
ing members of GLIB; there is no evidence that the 
Veterans Council ever excluded any homosexual or 
bisexual; there is evidence in the record that the 
Veterans Council would let the members of GLIB 
march without a banner identifying the group.” 
Appendix C at C25. 


(iv) State Action. 


“(T]he action of the state courts and judicial officers in their 
official capacities is to be regarded as action by the state.” 
Shelley v. Kraemer, 341 US 1, 14 (1948). The actions of the 
state courts in Massachusetts deserve no special consideration. 
The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, acting under 
color of state law, abridged the constitutionally protected rights 
of free speech being exercised by the Veterans in contravention 
of the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. 


C. The State, in compelling the inclusion of an unwanted 
and antithetical message, violated the Veterans’ First 
Amendment guarantee of freedom of speech. 


Once the SJC endorsed the trial court’s examination of 
“whether there existed speech or any other activity protected 
by the First Amendment”, Appendix C at C16, n.20, in the 
Veterans’ parade, and upheld the trial court’s impermissible 
determinination that there was none, the damage to the Veter- 
ans’ free speech rights was completed. As the dissent noted, 
“([R]egardless of whether the parade has one message, ten 
messages, or no message at all, if GLIB’s particular message 


18 


is not in the parade, it cannot constitutionally be forced on the 
Veterans Council. Thus, although an individual who drives his 
automobile may have no expressive purpose for doing so, the 
State cannot require him to foster a message while driving that 
he otherwise would not.” Appendix C at C20 (citing Wooley 
v. Maynard, supra.) In Sanders v. U.S., 518 F.Supp. 728, 
730 (D.D.C. 1981), aff'd 679 F.2d (D.D.Cir. 1982), the fed- 
eral court upheld the arrest of a single intruder on an event 
sponsored by another individual. In /nvisible Empire, KKK v. 
Mayor of Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 287-88 (D.Md. 1988), 
the federal court ruled that the N.A.A.C.P. could not march 
in the KKK’s parade. “The NAACP in this case is seeking 
more than attendance at the parade; they are seeking to take 
part in the KKK’s speech itself by participating in the parade.” 
This, the court said, was impermissible. Yet, that intrusion is 
precisely what the SJC affirmed in this case. 

The Petitioners have a right to be free from government 
compulsion to adopt speech. As this case involves a privately 
funded and privately organized parade, the state cannot compel 
the Petitioners to subsidize a forum or speech by those with 
ideological messages rejected for inclusion by the organizers. 
Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Education, 431 US 209 (1977). The 
very purpose of the First Amendment is to foreclose public 
authorities from assuming a guardianship of the public mind. 
Thomas v. Collins, 323 US 516, 545 (1945). 


Il. THis Decision, IF Not REVERSED, WILL HAVE PrRo- 
FOUND EFFECTS UPON THE EXERCISE OF FIRST AMEND- 
MENT RIGHTS, NOT ONLY WITHIN MASSACHUSETTS, BUT 
WITHIN OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL JURISDICTIONS. 


The SJC has ordered Petitioners to include in their parade 
a message which they view as antithetical to their theme. As 
Justice Nolan noted in dissent, “this court upholds, and thereby 


a ee 


a a a a ee Te 


19 


endorses, a trial judge’s flagrant violation of the free speech 
rights of citizens of this Commonwealth. The majority acqui- 
esces in a judge’s order instructing a private group that if it 
wishes to express itself at all, it must include in its expression 
a particular idea, one with which the group does not agree. One 
must Strain to recall or to even imagine such an obvious viola- 
tion of the revered right of free speech.” 

Appendix C at C18. 

If the decision of the SJC is not reversed, then the govern- 
ment, through the simple expedient of declaring a private 
parade or demonstration a “public accommodation”, can dilute, 
distort and contradict, by government order, the whole pcint 
of a privately organized and funded parade or demonstration. 
By the same token, the National Socialist Party could conceiv- 
ably be ordered to be included, if they so desired, in a “Salute 
to Israel Parade”; the KKK in a private civil rights celebration 
honoring Martin Luther King; and Act-Up in a religious pro- 
cession. 

It is beyond dispute that the First Amendment rights of 
everyone requires that there be no forced mixing of messages. 
This kind of court-ordered homogenization of speech, the 
forced mixing of conflicting messages, is a ludicrous parody 
of our tradition of free speech. As Justice Nolan noted, “(t]he 
[trial] judge’s crude regulation of the content of the Veterans 
Council’s speech is epitomized by the last sentence of his 
decision: ‘Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of the [Veterans 
Council's] parade.’ Appendix C at C26. 

Such a result runs afoul of well-settled First Amendment 
law, as interpreted by this Court and by the Federal Circuit 
Courts of Appeal. “The right to use a public place for expressive 
activity may be restricted only for weighty reasons. Clearly, 
government has no power to restrict such activity because of 
its messages . . . For example, two parades cannot march 
on the same street simultaneously, and government may allow 


20 


only one.” Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 US 104, 115 
(1972). Accord, Sanders v. US, 518 F.Supp. 728 (D.C.D.C. 
1981), aff d without opinion, 679 F.2d. 262 (D.C.Cir. 1982); 
Redgrave v. BSO, 855 F.2d. 888, 906 (Ist Cir. 1988), cert. 
denied, 488 US 1043 (1980) (“We have been unable to find 
any case, involving the arts or otherwise, in which a state has 
been allowed to compel expression.”’) 

The decision of the Supreme Judicial Court is not just an 
affront to the Allied War Veterans Council of South Boston 
or to the citizens of Massachusetts, rather it is an injury and 
affront to the First Amendment rights of citizens everywhere 
in our nation. This case and its result, the cancellation of the 
Veterans’ St. Patrick’s Day Parade in 1994, was widely cov- 
ered by the media. For the courts to compel the Veterans to 
include in their traditionally-themed parade a group with an 
antithetical message is to bring us one step closer to the creation 
of state orthodoxy, where only politically correct speech is 
permissible. What the courts in Massachusetts have done is 
to separate multi-thematic, celebratory parades from narrowly- 
focused demonstrations, and to declare the former unprotected 
by the First Amendment. 

Now, in Massachusetts, the sponsors of a parade may be 
exposed to criminal sanctions if their expression does not con- 
form to what a trial judge or permitting authority deems to be 
a “proper”, “focused”, “properly sponsored” or “inclusive” 
parade. Such governmental control over speech is expressly 
forbidden by the First Amendment. 


SD a Ed Ae PM ne Nill SERN LE OR AB SAE Tien he 


Se ieee De ee Se ge oe 


tier tea ae CA ae BS 


5 
{ 
‘ 
j 
] 
: 
y 
; 
; 
4 
f 


21 
Conclusion. 


Petitioners pray that certiorari should issue. 


Respectfully submitted, 


CHESTER DARLING, 
Counsel of Record, 
306 Dartmouth Street 
Boston, Massachusetts 02116 
(617) 536-2050 


APPENDIX. 
Table of Contents. 


Appendix A 
Appendix B 
Appendix C 


Appendix D 


Al 
Bl 
Cl 
D1 


istics matali 


Al 
APPENDIX A. 


NEW YORK COUNTY BOARD OF ANCIENT 
ORDER OF HIBERNIANS, Plaintiff, 


Vv. 


David N. DINKINS, individually and in his Capacity as Mayor 
of New York City; The City of New York, The Police Depart- 
ment of the City of New York, Raymond Kelly, as Police 
Commissioner of the City of New York, and St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade Committee, Inc., Defendants. 


No. 93 Civ. 0281 (KTD). 


United States District Court, 
S.D. New York. 


Feb. 26, 1993. 


Sponsor of St. Patricks Day parade brought action challeng- 
ing city’s decision to require sponsor to allow homosexual 
organization to march in parade as condition of parade permit. 
The District Court, Kevin Thomas Duffy, J., held that city 
violated sponsor’s First Amendment free speech rights by or- 
dering sponsor to allow homosexual organization to march in 
parade under its own banner. 


Ordered accordingly. 


1. Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


St. Patrick’s Day parade sponsored by private organization 
was protected free speech under First Amendment. U.S.C.A. 
Const.Amend. |. 


A2 
2. Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


Parade organization by private sponsor is exercise of First 
Amendment right of freedom of expression. U.S.C.A. Const. 
Amend. |. 


3. Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


In exercising First Amendment right of free speech, message 
intended to be conveyed by parade sponsored by private organi- 
zation is to be determined by parade sponsor and not by state 
or city. U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 1. 


4. Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


City violated First Amendment free speech rights of sponsor 
of St. Patrick’s Day parade by ordering sponsor to allow homo- 
sexual organization to march in parade under its own banner. 
U.S:C.A. Const.Amend. |. 


5. Constitutional Law 90.1(4). 


Municipality may constitutionally restrict right to use public 
streets, as it must exercise great deal of control over traffic 
regulation and public safety. U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 1. 


6. Constitutional Law 90.1(4). 


Municipal restrictions on use of public streets may seek to 
regulate only time, place and manner of parade, so long as 
those restrictions are justified without reference to content of 
regulated speech, are narrowly tailored to serve significant 
governmental interest, and leave open ample alternative chan- 
nels for communication of information. U.S.C.A. Const. 
Amend. |. 


" a Hines os a “. 


AB 
7. Constitutional Law 90(3) 


If government’s purpose underlying regulation is justified 
without reference to content of regulated speech, then inciden- 
tal infringement of First Amendment is constitutional, notwith- 
standing disparate impact. U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. | 


8. Constitutional Law 91 


Implicit in right to engage in activities protected by First 
Amendment is corresponding right to associate with whomever 
one chooses; this freedom of association embraces concomitant 
right not to associate with whomever one chooses. U.S.C.A. 
Const.Amend. |}. 


Gleason & Mathews, New York City (Ernest L. Mathews, 
Jr., MauraR. Cahill, Paul H. Hugel, of counsel), for plaintiff. 


O. Peter Sherwood, Corp. Counsel of the City of New York, 
New York City (Florence A. Hutner, Lorna B. Goodman, 
Asst. Corp. Counsels, of counsel), for defendants David N. 
Dinkins, The City of New York, The Police Dept. of the City 
of New York, and Raymond Kelly. 

Gilroy Downes Horowitz & Goldstein, New York City 
(Lawrence C. Downes, of counsel), for defendant St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade Committees, Inc. 

Shearman & Sterling, New York City (R. Paul Wickes, 
Clare O’Brien, of counsel), for intervenors Irish Lesbian and 
Gay Organization. 

New York Civil Liberties Union Foundation, New York City 
(Norman Siegel, Arthur N. Eisenberg, of counsel), for amicus 
curiae. 

Burlingham Underwood, New York City (John G. Ingram, 
Philip A. Nemecek, of counsel), for amicus curiae St. Patrick’s 
Society of Brooklyn, St. Patrick's Society of the Borough of 


A4 


Queens, United Irish Counties Ass’n of New York, Inc. and 
The Grand Council of United Emerald Societies, Inc. 

Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, Washington, DC (Thomas 
Clark, Gary Born, of counsel), for amicus curiae Religious 
Coalition and Parade Coalition. 

Putney, Twombly, Hall & Hirson, New York City (Norman 
Fassler, of counsel), for amicus curiae Religious Coalition and 
Parade Coalition. 

Center for Constitutional Rights, New York City (Joan P. 
Gibbs, Suzanne L. Shende, of counsel), for amicus curiae. 


MEMORANDUM & ORDER 
KEVIN THOMAS DUFFY, District Judge: 


This is one of those unusual cases where the issue presented 
by all counsel has remained constant and clear. It is the facts 
surrounding the issue that seem to be in a total state of flux. 

Broadly stated, the issue is whether the City of New York 
(“City”) can compel the Ancient Order of Hibernians 
(“AOH”)', a private and long-standing sponsor of New York’s 
St. Patrick's Day Parade, to alter the message that it wishes 
to convey in the Parade by requiring it to include, in the Parade 
and under their own banner, the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organi- 
zation (“ILGO”), an organization whose tenets are allegedly 
inconsistent with the message of the Parade’s sponsors. 

At my request, counsel for the parties, prepared and filed 
an agreed statement of uncontested facts after I held a confer- 
ence on Tuesday, February 2, 1993. I have adopted as many 
of these agreed upon facts as possible. I scheduled argument 
on Monday, February 22, 1993, and was apprised that certain 
facts had changed. At that hearing I advised the parties not to 
change the facts again. No matter what protestations of good 

‘AOH in this opinion will refer to the New York County Board of the AOH. 
The State and National AOH organizations will be referred to as “State AOH™ or 
“National AOH.” 


~~ 


BT EE Te OL Pe ET eer 


AS 


will the parties offered on that date, the facts have changed 
once again. 

Indeed, one of the most difficult tasks in this matter is to 
get a handle on the facts and the real position of the parties. 
At times it seemed that the attorneys were acting as navigators 
attempting to get a fix on their location while aboard a melting 
ice flow in the midst of a tempest. Counsel for the City, for 
example, argued at one point, that the City would be willing 
to permit, without conditions, the AOH to march in a parade 
on some city street other than Fifth Avenue on March 17th at 
11:00 a.m. See City Defendants’ Memorandum of Law In 
Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and 
In Support of City Defendants’ Cross-Motion for Summary 
Judgment (“City’s Mem.”) at 13; Hutner Affidavit { 4 and 
Exh. A, dated Feb. 11, 1993. The City’s latest position, how- 
ever, is that the City would deny the AOH the Parade permit 
unless AOH “includes the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization 
in the parade under its own banner.” See Letter to this court 
from Corporation Counsel, dated Feb. 17, 1993. 

At one point, over a year ago, the AOH argued to Judge 
Pierre Leval of this court that there was a waiting list of 
organizations who wanted to participate in the St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade and that ILGO would have to wait its turn to be 
considered for inclusion in the Parade. Judge Leval denied 
relief to ILGO for various reasons including, in part, because 
he believed the AOH had a valid waiting list and ILGO could 
not jump in front of other organization applicants who precede 
it on the list. J/LGO v. N.Y. State Board of Ancient Order of 
Hibernians, 788 F.Supp. 172, 179 (S.D.N.Y. 1992). Yet, it 
may well be that the “waiting list” was merely a sham and an 
“attempt to diffuse the situation,” because the AOH has now 
Stated that under no circumstances would they allow ILGO to 
march. Transcript, Argument held February 22, 1993 (“Tr.”) 
at 7-8. 


A6 


Within the last two weeks, ILGO protested to the state court 
that the dispute as presented there was moot. Yet, in argument 
to this court on February 22, 1993, ILGO took the position, 
without any change of facts, that this court should abstain in 
deference to the state court. Tr. at 59. 


Statement of Facts. 


The St. Patrick’s Day Parade has been a fixture of the New 
York City scene for well over two hundred years. The first 
New York St. Patrick’s Day Parade took place in 1762. The 
AOH has sponsored the Parade virtually every year out of the 
last one-hundred and fifty-three years, and in the years that 
the AOH has not conducted the Parade, an affiliated Hibernian 
group has done so. For over seventy years, the Parade has 
taken place on Fifth Avenue starting at 11:00 A.M. on the day 
of the Roman Catholic liturgical celebration of the feast day 
of St. Patrick. This day generally is March 17th, but the liturg- 
ical celebration is changed when March 17th falls on a Sunday. 

The AOH is an organization comprised of Roman Catholic 
men of Irish descent who comply with the Roman Catholic 
rite’s requirement that every adult must receive communion 
at least once during the Easter Season. The AOH has apparently 
set out other strictly religious requirements for membership. 
Every year, under the guidance of the AOH, each contingent 
that marches in the St. Patrick’s Day Parade selects two dele- 
gates to be part of the “St. Patrick’s Day Parade and Celebration 
Committee” (“Parade Committee’). This Parade Committee 
is responsible for taking care of the myriad details and arrange- 
ments inherent in running the Parade. 

The AOH and the Parade Committee privately finance the 
Parade exclusively by means of private donations. The only 
public assistance received by AOH is for the police and sani- 
tation services, which the City affords to every public gathering 
in the City. 


ee re eC ‘ 


: 
3 
3 
§ 


A7 


The AOH, the Grand Marshal of the Parade, and members 
of the Parade Committee start the St. Patrick’s Day celebration 
by attending mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral on Fifth Avenue. 
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York reviews the 
Parade from the steps of the Cathedral. Various units in the 
Parade carry banners depicting St. Patrick and other saints of 
the Roman Catholic Church. Notwithstanding this connection 
to the Roman Catholic Church, it is abundantly clear that some 
of the marchers participating in the St. Patrick's Day Parade 
are neither members of the AOH nor members of the Roman 
Catholic Church. Indeed, anyone who has watched the St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade can attest to the fact that not everyone 
in the Parade is Irish, although at times it has been said that 
on St. Patrick’s Day, everyone in New York is Irish. The 
Parade marchers generally number in the vicinity of 150,000, 
with between one and two million on-lookers. The New York 
St. Patrick’s Day Parade is carried by at least one local televi- 
sion station and quite often parts of it are shown on national 
television. 

The St. Patrick’s Day Parade is billed as the largest annual 
civilian Parade in the world. The Parade celebrates, inter alia, 
freedom and Irish culture and heritage. Traditionally, elected 
officials have marched in the Parade regardless of their religi- 
ous or political affiliation or of their position on any issue. 
Joint Statement of Uncontested Facts (“Jt.Stmt.”) at 4 13. 

The AQOH has applied for and received a Parade permit from 
the New York City Police Department (“NYPD”) authorizing 
it to conduct the St. Patrick’s Day Parade on Fifth Avenue for 
more than seventy years. Jt.Stmt. at { 9. The NYPD maintains 
a list of organizations that traditionally conduct annual Parades 
in the city and has, in the past, had the practice of granting 
permits to the organizations on that list. The AOH has been 
the organization on that list which conducts the St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade. Jt.Stmt. at { 10. 


A8 


The AQOH has adopted rules for the Parade to prevent any 
group or person from using the Parade as a vehicle or forum 
to pursue any political, social or commercial agenda inconsis- 
tent with the message, values and viewpoint of the AOH,? or 
whose purposes, principles or agenda are inconsistent with the 
teachings of the Roman Catholic Church. Jt.Stmt. at § 12. It 
is the position of the AOH that the determination of whether 
a particular purpose, principle or agenda is inconsistent with 
the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church rests within the 
discretion of the AOH. 

In October, 1990, ILGO requested that the Parade Commit- 
tee allow it to march under its own banner as an affiliated unit 
im the 199] Parade. The Parade Committee denied ILGO’s 
request for various reasons. AOH now maintains that the denial 
of ILGO’s request was occasioned by the AQH’s “policy 
against the inclusion of groups advocating messages contrary 
to the parade sponsor's [message] and the Catholic Faith.” 
Jt.Stmt. at § 14. 

Thereafter, the City administration urged the AOH to admit 
ILGO to the 1991 Parade. When AOH refused to do so, a com- 
promise was struck whereby ILGO members were permitted 
to march in 1991, not as an affiliated unit, but as guests of a 
Hibernian unit. Mayor Dinkins marched with ILGO rather than 
at the head of the Parade, where the Mayor usually marches. 
Jt.Stmt. at { 14, 15. All of the parties agree that the “1991 
Parade experienced discord and unseemly interchanges be- 
tween ILGO members and the Parade’s audience.” Jt.Stmt. at 
{ 16. 

I cannot envision a Parade put on by any organization that 
would restrict its participants solely to those individuals who 


*In the past, the AOH has excluded from the Parade a number of proposed 
contingents, including Robert Kennedy as a political office seeker; the Right-To-Life 
Organization; the Budweiser team of horses; etc. See Decision of Administrative 
Law Judge Maldonado, at 8, attached to the Hartnett Affidavit as Exh. 7. 


ee 


ee ee eee 


A9 


have never sinned. Such a gathering surely would be quite 
small in number, and those who would hold themselves out 
as entitled to participate most likely would be hypocrites. 

Statistically speaking (150,0009 marchers Xx 200 plus 
years), there seems to be little possibility that 1991 was the 
first year gays or lesbians marched in the St. Patrick’s Day 
Parade. Indeed, it would appear that over the years the Parade 
participants surely included certain individuals whose sexual 
orientation would not meet with the public approval of the 
AOH and the Parade Committee. Whether the AOH and the 
Parade Committee knew of the sexual orientation of such par- 
ticipants at the time of those Parades, is unclear. The AOH 
maintains, however, that individual members of ILGO (and 
those marchers whose sexual orientation is different from that 
approved of by the AOH) are welcome to march in the Parade 
without a banner as guests of the various Parade contingents. 
Neither the City nor ILGO contest the good faith of this offer, 
nor is there any basis to doubt that it is the policy of the AOH 
and the Parade Committee. Indeed, it seems that where there 
have been organizations not permitted to march as identifiable 
organizations, their members have still been included in the 
Parade; e.g., the Right-To-Life Organization. 

I must conclude, therefore, that the true reason the AOH 
and the Parade Committee seek to exclude ILGO is because 
ILGO would insist on marching under a separate banner that 
would, in effect, identify the AOH as condoning sexual prac- 
tices contrary to the message that the AOH believes the Parade 
should convey. Accordingly, I do not address the arguments 
regarding [LGO’s exclusion on the basis of a waiting list or 
as a consequence of its behavior in the 1991 Parade. 

With respect to the 1992 Parade, the Police Commissioner 
awarded the permit for the Parade to the State Branch of the 
Ancient Order of Hibernians (“State AOH”). This precipitated 
litigation in the state courts which eventually was settled with 


AlO 


the AOH conducting the Parade pursuant to the permit issued 
to the State AOH. 

On January 23, 1992, the New York City Commission on 
Human Rights (“HRC”) commenced a proceeding pursuant to 
the City Human Rights Law to compel compliance with 
## 8-107(2) and 8-108.1 of the New York City Administra- 
tive Code. In that proceeding the HRC alleged that the AOH 
discriminated against ILGO because of the sexual orientation 
of that group’s members. A cease and desist order was sought 
against the AOH, and a further order was sought from the 
HRC for the establishment and maintenance of a parade appli- 
cation system for the New York St. Patrick's Day Parade under 
the continuing supervision of a Commission Administrative 
Law Judge. On February 17, 1992, ILGO was permitted to 
intervene as a party in the HRC proceeding. Hearings were 
held on March 6th and 9th, 1992, before the Commission's 
Chief Administrative Law Judge Rosemarie Maldonado, 

On March 13, 1992, the HRC Administrative Law Judge 
issued a recommended decision, the conclusions of which in- 
cluded: “(1) that the Parade was a public accommodation sub- 
ject to the Human Rights Law; (2) that plaintiff had violated 
the Human Rights Law by excluding ILGO in 1991; and (3) 
that the application of the City Human Rights statute to the 
Parade would violate the First Amendment rights of the Parade 
sponsors.” Jt.Stmt. at 18. 

ILGO was not permitted to march as an affiliated unit in 
the 1992 Parade. However, apparently at the insistence of 
Mayor Dinkins, ILGO was permitted to hold its own demon- 
stration from 60th Street to 66th Street on Fifth Avenue just 
prior to the Parade, and was given a special place on Fifth 
Avenue cordoned off by the police from which to “review” 
the Parade. Virtually every elected city official who normally 
marches in the AOH Parade, chose instead to march in ILGO’s 
Parade. Although the Mayor was ill and could not march, “he 


All 


announced that, if he could, he would march in ILGO's 
Parade.” Jt.Stmt. at § 19. 

On October 27, 1992 the City Human Rights Commission 
rendered a final decision and order. The Commission adopted 
its Administrative Law Judge’s recommended decision and 
order with respect to the first two holdings thereof, but ruled 
that the application of the Human Rights Law would not violate 
the sponsor's First Amendment rights. 

' Specifically, the Commission held as follows: 


In order to prevail, Respondents [/.e., AOH] must dem- 
onstrate that application of the Human Rights Law’s pro- 
hibition against discrimination on the basis of sexual 
orientation to its Parade procedures would unconstitution- 
ally infringe upon Respondents’ rights of free speech, 
expressive association and free exercise as guaranteed by 
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution 
and/or by the New York State Constitution, Article |, 
Sections 1, 3, 8 and 9. We find that Respondents have 
failed to make such a showing. 

Respondents argue that the Parade is a celebration of 
Irish Roman Catholic heritage. [(footnote omitted)]. They 
allege that among the unwritten requirements for inclusion 
in the Parade is that no group admitted have a political 
agenda or an agenda contrary to the teachings of the 
Roman Catholic Church. They argue that ILGO advocates 
the right to pursue a homosexual lifestyle and is thus in 
violation of Church doctrine. 


y+ ke * * & ok 


We disagree with the Administrative Law Judge’s anal- 
ysis that, under the Roberts test, the relief requested by 
Complainant cannot be granted. Rather, we find that under 
this test the relief requested by Complainant must be 
granted. 


Al2 


The characteristics of the Parade define the parameters 
of the First Amendment rights implicated. After examin- 
ing the record below and reviewing the parties’ comments, 
we find that the St. Patrick’s Day Parade is a secular 
event which is a celebration of a broad range of values 
surrounding Irish heritage. In her Findings of Fact, the 
Administrative Law Judge found that the Parade cele- 
brates secular, religious, cultural, historical, civic and 
numerous other aspects of Irish culture. . . . Respondents’ 
associational right is thus the right to associate with per- 
sons who support the broad celebratory goals of the Parade 
rather than, as Respondents argue, the right to associate 
merely with those who adhere to any one element of Irish 
heritage, such as Catholicism. 


* * * * * *x 


For the above reasons, Respondents’ contention that 
the Parade represents symbolic speech of a type or charac- 
ter which would be unconstitutionally altered by the inclu- 
sion of ILGO is unpersuasive. 

We hold that inclusion of ILGO would not impair Re- 
spondents’ right of association. The fact that the Parade 
is sponsored by an Irish-Catholic organization does not 
change the analysis here. The right of association con- 
templates not merely the nature of the association, but 
the message conveyed or the ideas expressed by way of 
that association. See Roberts |v. U.S.| 468 U.S. 609 [104 
S.Ct. 3244, 82 L.Ed.2d 462] [(1984)]. 


* * * * * * 


In general, in like cases involving parades, the degree 
of exclusivity or diversity will be a factor to be considered. 
However, the fact that the organizers of a given parade 
open it to some does not necessarily mean that the state 


Al3 


may require them to open it to all who express an interest 
in participating. Thus, we may envision a scenario, per- 
haps even in the St. Patrick’s Day Parade, where exclusion 
would be appropriate. This would be determined, how- 
ever, on a case-by-case basis. Where a parade organizer 
shows that its First Amendment interests take precedence, 
it will prevail on the second prong of the Roberts test. 
Respondents simply have not made this showing here. 


New York City Commission on Human Rights v. Ancient Order 
of Hibernians in America, Inc., et al., Case No.: MPA-0362 
(Oct. 27, 1992) at 4-13, attached to Hartnett Affidavit at Exh. 
8. (citations omitted). 

It is interesting to note that in determining the question as 
to whether a parade can be a “public accommodation,” neither 
the Administrative Law Judge nor the New York City Human 
Rights Commission makes any reference to a judicial or ad- 
ministrative opinion in a case involving parades. Apparently, 
the closest to a parade-type decision that the Administrative 
Law Judge and the Commission could find to support their 
determination that the Parade be regarded as a public accommo- 
dation is a case involving the New York City Marathon. New 
York Roadrunners Club v. State Division of Human Rights, 
81 A.D.2d 519, 437 N.Y.S.2d 681 (Ist Dep’t 1981), aff'd, 
SSN.Y.2d 122,447N.Y.S.2d 908, 432 N.E.2d 780 (1982) 

An action was commenced in the Supreme Court of the 
State of New York, New York County, to review the decision 
of the City Human Rights Commission. In the same proceeding 
the Commission cross-petitioned for enforcement of its order. 
The case, entitled Beirne v. New York City Commission on 
Human Rights, was assigned to Justice Alice Schlesinger. 

Meanwhile, on November 2, 1992, the AOH applied to the 
New York City Police Department for a parade permit allowing 
it to conduct the 1993 St. Patrick’s Day Parade. Applications 


Al4 


for a permit were also filed by two other organizations; (i) the 
St. Patrick’s Day Parade Committee, Inc. (this membership 
corporation is not to be confused with the Parade Committee 
mentioned above. It will be referred to henceforth as the “Cor- 
porate Committee”); and, (ii) the Brooklyn Night Court 
Emerald Society. This was the first time ever that three appli- 
cations for the permit for the St. Patrick's Day Parade were 
submitted. Jt.Stmt. at §) 22. 

On December 10, 1992, the Police Department, for the first 
time, required the applicants for the St. Patrick’s Day Parade per- 
mit to submit information concerning their plans for the Parade, 
including the identity of all marching units. Jt.Stmt. at { 23. 
Apparently all three of the applicants complied with this request. 

The Beirne case was argued before Justice Schlesinger on 
January 5, 1993. She took the matter under submission, prom- 
ising a decision during the week of January 18, 1993. Jt.Stmt. 
at | 24. On January 8, 1993, the Police Commissioner of New 
York, Raymond Kelly, announced that he had awarded the 
permit for the St. Patrick's Day Parade to the Corporate Com- 
mittee for the following reasons: “(1) that the views and prac- 
tices of plaintiff [AOH] in excluding ILGO were inconsistent 
with the City’s ‘policy of inclusion’; (2) that the City Human 
Rights Commission had determined that ‘the sponsors of the 
1992 Parade, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, violated the 
City Human Rights Law by excluding’ [LGO; and (3) that 
planning for the Parade needed to proceed expeditiously and 
could not await judicial review of the Commission decision 
in the Beirne case.” Jt.Stmt. at § 25. 

Apparently the briefs in the Beirne case were filed on or about 
January 10, 1993. On January 11, 1993, Justice Schlesinger ruled: 


In light of the City’s decision as to the Award of a permit 
to sponsor the 1993 St. Patrick’s Day Parade to an organi- 
zation other than the AOH, namely, the St. Patrick’s Day 


Al5 


Parade Committee, Inc., this court believes that the instant 
action, challenging an order of the Commission on Human 
Rights to the AOH that ILGO be given the opportunity 
to march in this year’s Parade (see paragraph # 2 of the 
orders at page 16), is moote. 


Order of Justice Schlesinger, attached to the Hartnett Affidavit 
at Exh. 20. 

This left the AOH in a “Catch-22” position: the Police Com- 
missioner would not issue a permit for the St. Patrick’s Day 
Parade to the AOH unless the New York City Human Rights 
Commission order was judicially set aside; and, the New York 
State Courts refused to consider the order of the New York 
City Human Rights Commission unless the New York City 
Police Commissioner issued the permit to the AOH. 

Accordingly, on January 15, 1993, the AOH started the 
instant action for injunctive relief under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 
(the Civil Rights Act) and under the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States. Specifi- 
cally, the AOH seeks to enjoin the City defendants from depriv- 
ing the AOH of those rights by refusing to issue to AOH the 
permit to conduct the 1993 St. Patrick’s Day Parade. 

At a conference on February 2, 1993, I advised all of the 
parties that the AOH could move for temporary relief or for 
summary judgment (without the necessity of further formal 
notice) by filing its motion papers on or before February 5, 
1993, with responsive papers due from the City on February 
11, 1993 and any reply papers by February 16, 1993. The 
City was deemed to have filed a formal answer and a cross-mo- 
tion for summary judgment. Accordingly, I requested the sub- 
mission of a joint statement of uncontested facts. Thereafter, 
I permitted [LGO to appear as an intervening defendant in this 
case. Various amicus curiae requested permission to file briefs 
on behalf of one side or the other. All were permitted. 


Al6 


Originally, the Corporate Committee was a defendant in 
this matter. On February 11, 1993, the Corporate Committee 
returned to the City the St. Patrick’s Day Parade permit that 
it had been issued. The City then solicited applications for a 
new permit to conduct the 1993 New York St. Patrick’s Day 
Parade. The AQOH filed the one and only timely application 
for the Parade permit. 

On February 17, 1993, the City defendants, by their counsel, 
addressed the following letter to this court: 


Dear Judge Duffy: 


As we informed Your Honor in our letter of February 
11, 1993, the facts underlying this case have changed as 
a result of the return of the permit granted to the St. 
Patrick's Day Parade Committee. Since we reopened the 
application process, the City received one application for 
a permit for the parade submitted by the Ancient Order 
of Hibernians. 

Today, the City defendants determined that they will 
not grant County AOH the permit it seeks because County 
AQOH has announced that it will not comply with the order 
of the New York City Commission on Human Rights 
dated October 27, 1992 requiring County AOH to include 
the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization in the parade 
under its own banner. Thus, the case is not neither moot 
nor premature as we stated last Thursday and we respect- 
fully request that the Court render its decision. 


Letter to this court from Corporation Counsel, dated February 
17, 1993. 

On Thursday, February 18, 1993, I advised all the parties 
that I would hold a hearing on Monday, February 22, 1993 
to try to sort out the issues left for decision under the changed 
circumstances. 


‘ snes 


ee Cree a eee 


Al7 


During this same period (the week of February 14, 1993) 
the AOH, the City, the ILGO had a conference in which they 
discussed whether they should request Justice Schlesinger of 
the State Court to reconsider her decision tht the matter before 
her had become moot. Apparently, a conference call was made 
to Justice Schlesinger during which counsel for ILGO insisted 
that nothing had changed and asserted that the action in the 
New York State Supreme Court continued to remain moot. 
Tr. at 59. Apparently, Justice Schlesinger accepted ILGO’s 
argument and did not change her determination as to the moot- 
ness of the Beirne case. 

On the morning of February 22, 1993 argument was held 
before this court for approximately two hours. Advance notice 
of this argument was well publicized in the media with stories 
of the forthcoming argument being carried by every major 
New York City newspaper, and most New York City radio 
and television stations. No other applications for the Parade 
permit were filed as of the time of the argument, nor did any 
other parties request intervention in this case. 

At the end of the argument, I once again requested of counsel 
to the parties that the facts within their control not be changed 
again so that a decision could be rendered as expeditiously as 
possible. 

Late on that same afternoon, I received phone calls from 
counsel for the City defendants and the AOHO advising me that 
there had been two new applications for the Parade permit and 
that an Order To Show Cause had been signed in the State Court 
as to why one of the applicants should not immediately receive 
the Parade permit.’ 


‘One of the new applicants, the Brooklyn Night Court Emerald Society, served 
the parties on February 23 with a “Motion to Intervene and In Opposition to AOH’s 
Motion for Relief and In Support of a Motion to Dismiss” returnable on February 
23 before this court. This may have been intended simply as a lark. It clearly 
violates the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the Local Rules in various ways, 
but particularly with regard to the proper notice required to be given to the parties. 
In any event, I will treat it totally as a nullity. 


Al8 
DISCUSSION 


[1] The main problem with the logic of the decision of 
the City’s Human Rights Commission is that it starts the 
analysis at the wrong end. The first question that should have 
been considered is not whether the New York St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade is a public accommodation, but whether the Parade 
and its message constitutes speech protected by the First 
Amendment guarantee of Freedom of Speech. Insofar as a 
parade constituted protected free speech, it cannot be a public 
accommodation. 

[2] A parade is, by its nature, a pristine form of speech. 
See Perry Educ. Assoc. v. Perry Local Educator's Assoc.., 
460 U.S. 37, 45, 103 S.Ct. 948, 954, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983); 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147, 152, 89 S.Ct. 
935, 939, 22 L.Ed.2d 162 (1969); Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 
536, 554-55, 85 S.Ct. 453, 464-65, 13 L.Ed.2d 471 (1965); 
Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Mayor 
of Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 286-87 (D.Md.1988). In 
parades, people gather together for the purpose of expressing 
their message. See id. The public thoroughfares of our nation 
are the public fora in which the issues of the day can be debated 
and where individuals seek to engage in basic expressive activ- 
ity, such as parading. /d.; Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 
U.S. 104, 115, 92 S.Ct. 2294, 2302, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972) 
(citing Police Department of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 
92, 94-96, 92 S.Ct. 2286, 2289-90; 33 L:Ed.2d 212 (1972)): 
Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization, 307 U.S. 
496, 515, 59 S.Ct. 954, 963, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939). Every 
parade is designed to convey a message. /d. As such, a parade 
organized by a private sponsor is the quintessential exercise 
of the First Amendment right of freedom of expression. /d. 

[3] The First Amendment guarantees an individual the 
right to free speech, “a term necessarily comprising the decision 
of both what to say and what not to say.” Riley v. Nat’ s Federa- 


Al9 


tion of the Blind of North Carolina, 487 U.S. 781, 796-97, 
108 S.Ct. 2667, 2677-78, 101 L.Ed.2d 669 (1987). In exercis- 
ing this right, the message intended to be conveyed by a parade 
sponsored by a private organization is to be determined by the 
parade sponsor and not by the state or the city. See Grayned, 
408 U.S. at 115, 92 S.Ct. at 2302; Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 
1197, 1201 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 916, 99 S.Ct. 
291, 58 L.Ed.2d 264 (1978); Invisible Empire, 700 F.Supp. 
at 286-87. To hold otherwise would give local government 
the right to censorship over the thoughts and speech of the 
people. /d.; see also Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public 
Utilities Commission, 475 U.S. 1, 10-11, 15-17, 106 S.Ct. 
903, 908-09, 911-12, 89 L.Ed.2d 1 (1986) (state could not 
compel company to include in its billing a third party’s message 
it disagreed with); Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 48-55, 
105 S.Ct. 2479, 2485-89, 86 L.Ed.2d 29 (1985) (First Amend- 
ment adopted to curtail power of Congress to interfere with 
individual’s freedom to “express himself in accordance with 
the dictates of his own conscience”); Miami Herald Publishing 
Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241, 256, 94 S.Ct. 2831, 2838, 41 
L.Ed.2d 730 (1974) (forcing newspapers to print candidates’ 
replies to editorials is an impermissible burden on editorial 
control and judgment); Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 
402, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1792, 10 L.Ed.2d 965 (1963) (government 
may “not compel affirmance of a repugnant belief . . . nor 
penalize or discriminate against individuals or groups because 
they hold views abhorrent to the authorities”); West Virginia 
State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 634, 63 S.Ct. 
1178, 1183, 87 L.Ed. 1628 (1934) (state has no power to force 
individual to profess any statement of belief). 

[4] The message that the AOH, as Parade sponsor, wishes 
to convey is to honor the patron saint of Ireland and to proclaim 
their allegiance to the Roman Catholic Church and its teach- 
ings. Plaintiff's Memorandum of Law In Support of Motion 


A20 


for Summary Judgment or a Preliminary Injunction (“AOH 
Mem.”) at 9. 

On the other hand, the Administrative Law Judge rejected 
this and found that the Parade is a place of public accommo- 
dation. Decision of Administrative Law Judge Maldonado, at 
2, attached to the Hartnett Affidavit at Exh. 7 [hereinafter 
referred to as “ALJ Maldonado Decision”’]. As to the message 
of the Parade, the Administrative Law Judge and the City 
Human Rights Commission determined that: 


The Parade is also a civic celebration, billed as the 
“largest civilian annual parade in the world” and is or- 
ganized for the pleasure of all New Yorkers. It draws 
over 150,000 marchers and over two million spectators. 

. . . [T]he Parade is “an American institution” which 
“celebrates the fact that all Americans, native and imimi- 
grant alike, enjoy the freedom of the City on the streets 
of New York and, by implication, throughout our great 
land.” The organizers operate the Parade for the benefit 
of all New Yorkers and are concerned that “the total 
Parade. . . remain large in numbers, orderly, and colorful 
in order to hold the respect and admiration of the citizens 
of New York, retain their good will and continue to have 
them as its supporters.” 


ALJ Maldonado Decision at {| 10-11. (citations omitted). 
In restating the message of the Parade the Human Rights 
Commission went far beyond a mere re-articulation of it. No 
one has suggested that the Parade sponsors and their represen- 
tatives are so bereft of fluency in the English language that, 
if they believed that the message of the Parade should be 
“secular” or “American institution” or “a celebration of free- 
dom” or even traditional values, baseball and apple pie, the 
Commission would have had to make the staterrent for them. 


eniek ee ee 


— ee Se 


ee ee ee end 


A21 


In fact, the message was dramatically changed in content. This 
the City defendants cannot do without violating the First 
Amendment rights of the Parade sponsors. This is so fundamen- 
tal as not to require citation. 

It may well be helpful, however, to remind the parties of 
what the United States Supreme Court held in a slightly differ- 
ent context: 


The First Amendment protects the right of individuals to 
hold a point of view different from the majority and to 
refuse to foster, in the way [the State] commands, an idea 
they find morally objectionable. 


Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715, 97 S.Ct. 1428, 1435, 
51 L.Ed.2d 752 (1977). 

The manner and means by which the message is also a matter 
of constitutionally protected free speech. The AOH and the 
Parade sponsors have made it abundantly clear that they are 
unwilling to accept ILGO as a separate contingent in the Parade. 
Indeed, they seem willing to abandon the Parade to avoid that 
situation. Yet, the City Human Rights Commission has ordered 
them to “include the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization in 
the parade under its own banner.” See Letter to this court from 
Corporation Counsel, dated February 17, 1993. 

In so doing the City defendants have violated the Parade 
sponsor’s rights to free speech. See Invisible Empire, 700 
F.Supp. at 288. The United States Supreme Court has already 
held that “[cJompelled access like that ordered in this case 
both penalizes the expression of particular points of view and 
forces speakers to alter their speech to conform with an agenda 
they do not set. . . . The Commission’s . . . order also imper- 
missibly requires appellant to associate with speech with which 
appellant may disagree.” Pacific Gas, 475 U.S. at 9, 15, 106 
S.Ct. at 908, 911. That, however, is exactly what the City 


A22 


defendants are trying to do by requiring the inclusion of ILGO 
in the New York St. Patrick’s Day Parade. 

[5-7] This is not to say that a governmental regulation may 
never restrict a parade. A municipality may constitutionally 
restrict the right to use the public streets, as they must exercise 
a great deal of control over traffic regulation and public safety. 
Shuttlesworth, 394 U.S. at 152, 89 S.Ct. at 939. Such restric- 
tions, however, may seek to regulate only the time, place and 
manner of a parade, so long as these restrictions “are justified 
without reference to the content of the regulated speech, that 
they are narrowly tailored to serve a significant governmental 
interest, and that they leave open ample alternative channels 
for communication of the information.” Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791, 109 S.Ct. 2746, 2753, 105 
L.Ed.2d 661 (1980) (citing Clark v. Community for Creative 
Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 3068, 82 
L.Ed.2d 221 (1984)). Additionally, incidental restrictions on 
speech have been upheld where the purpose of the offending 
regulation is unrelated to the content of the expression. Ward, 
491 U.S. at 781, 109 S.Ct. at 2746. The controlling inquiry 
in such cases focuses on whether the government has regulated 
the speech because it disagrees with its content. /d. Thus, if 
the government’s purpose underlying the regulation is justified 
without reference to the content of the regulated speech, then 
the incidental infringement of the First Amendment is constitu- 
tional, notwithstanding disparate impact. /d. 

Here the City has attempted to change the message of the 
Parade and the way that message would be conveyed. The 
imposition of such conditions can hardly be confused with the 
permissible restrictions that regulate time, place or manner. 
Thus, because there is no “content neutral” justification for 
the City’s actions which could excuse the infringement, they 
violate the First Amendment. 

The AQOH also raises the argument that the activities of the 
City defendants have violated the AOH’s right to freedom of 


A23 


association under the First Amendment. There may well be 
substance to this argument. 

[8] Implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by 
the First Amendment is a corresponding right to associate with 
whomever one chooses. See Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 
468 U.S. 609, 622, 104 S.Ct. 3244, 3251, 82 L.Ed.2d 462 
(1983); Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Educ., 431 U.S. 209, 233-34, 
97 S.Ct. 1782, 1798-99, 52 L.Ed.2d 261 (1977). This freedom 
of association embraces the concomitant right not to associate 
with whomever one chooses. See Roberts, 468 U.S. at 623, 
104 S.Ct. at 3252 (citing Abood, 431 U.S. at 234-35, 97 S.Ct. 
at 1799-1800). 

I find it unnecessary, however, to rule on this issues. 

The AOH also argues that the City defendants have violated 
their religious freedom. I am in no way ruling on that particular 
issue nor do I believe that anyone can properly rule on it in 
the present state of this record. 

Counsel have also directed my attention to a recent decision 
from a Massachusetts Superior Court regarding the Boston St. 
Patrick’s Day/Evacuation Day Parade. /rish American Gay, 
Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston, et al. v. City of 
Boston, et al., Superior Court of Mass., Suffolk County, Civ. 
No. 92-1519 (Feb. 19, 1993). In the Boston case, the Court 
granted the Irish American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group 
of Boston an injunction to prevent the defendants from inter- 
fering with their participation in the parade. It is argued that 
this decision should persuade me to enforce the City defend- 
ants’ order requiring the inclusion of ILGO in the AOH Parade. 

The Boston Parade celebrates not only St. Patrick’s Day, 
but also, Evacuation Day. Evacuation Day commemorates the 
March 17, 1776 departure of British troops from Boston. The 
parade conveys a general celebratory message in n general sup- 
port of “traditional values.” 

Although the Court pressed counsel to articulate the ‘views’ 
or ‘message’ [sought to be] express[ed] by means of the parade, 


A24 


counsel could say nothing beyond a litany of ‘traditional 
values,’ which included the Red Sox and apple pie. 

Memorandum and Order of the Court at k 2. The fact that 
this “traditional values,” multi-purpose parade requires “de- 
tailed participation by city agencies in planning and execution” 
clearly illustrates the civic nature of the parade. From the 
Order of the Massachusetts Court, it appears that last year the 
exact same problem was before the Court and was resolved 
in the same way. No problem was caused thereby and no 
appeal was taken from the Order. In light of these factors, the 
Court held that the defendant permit-holders were “the custo- 
dians of a civic celebration.” 

The AOH and the Parade Committe, on the other hand, are | 
private sponsors of the New York St. Patrick’s Day Parade 
and seek to convey a real message in a parade devoted solely 
to celebrating St. Patrick’s Day with minimai city involvement. 
The AQOH, unlike the Boston sponsors, most certainly are not 
the “custodians of a civic celebration.” I find this decision to 
be totally inapposite to the instant case. 

In sum, in the case at bar involving only the New York St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade, this court holds that the ruling of the 
City’s Human Rights Commission is violative of the First 
Amendment in two aspects: (1) by rejecting the message that 
the AOH claimed for the Parade and by substituting its own 
version of what the Commission thought the message of the 
Parade was or should be, the City defendants have attempted 

——— ~ to dictate what the Parade sponsors would think; and, (2) by 
forcing the inclusion of ILGO in the parade, the Commission 
sought to dictate how the Parade sponsors would express their 
thoughts. Such activity (telling citizens what they must think 
and how they must express themselves) is something one would 
expect from the “Thought Police” described by George Orwell. 
The humor of naming the thought police the “Human Rights 
Commission” is particularly Orwellian. 


See ea eee 


A25 


This court does not mean to suggest that the members of 
the City Human Rights Commission intentionally set out to 
violate the First Amendment to the Constitution. Surely, they 
are good persons, motivated by good intentions. But it is the 
American way for political leaders to seek to convince citizens 
of the correctness of some view by persuasion and not by fiat. 

This court holds no brief for either side in this controversy. 
However, everyone should recognize that the undermining of 
the freedom of any individual is the undermining of the free- 
doms of us all. See Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 1197, 1210 (7th 
Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 916, 99 S.Ct. 291, 58 
L.Ed.2d 264 (1978). Suffice it to say that the job of this court 
is to uphold the Constitution of the United States and that is 
all I am trying to do. 


THE REMEDY 


Perhaps, because of the haste with which this case was 
brought on, without even formal motion papers, or the time 
pressure caused by the fact that the date for the Parade is so 
close at hand, no one has discussed the relief which should 
be granted. The demand in the Complaint requests this court to: 


(a) Preliminarily and permanently enjoin City defend- 
ants from continuing the acts, practices, and policies com- 
plained of herein which violated plaintiff's right to free- 

_dom of speech, expression, association and free exercise 
of religion as guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution; 

(b) Preliminarily and permanently enjoin City defend- 
ants from continuing the acts, practices, and policies com- 
plained of herein which violate 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983; 

(c) Direct Defendants Police Commissioner and Police 
Department to revoke, cancel and annul the permit issued 
to the Defendant Committee to parade on Fifth Avenue on 


A26 


March 17, 1993 and compel said City defendants to issue 
a permit to plaintiff to conduct a parade on Fifth Avenue 
on March 17, 1993; 

(d) Grant a permanent injunction against the City de- 
fendants prohibiting them from obstructing or interfering 
with plaintiff's conducting of the Parade; 

(e) Award attorney’s fees to the plaintiff as authorized 
by 42 U.S.C. § 1988; and 

(f) Grant such additional and further relief as the court 
deems just and equitable. 


Complaint, ad damnum clause at 11. 

The memorandum of the AOH submitted on its motion 
claims that it “is entitled to summary judgment granting a 
permanent injunction. In the alternative, plaintiff's motion for 
a preliminary injunction should be granted. . . . AOQH’s Mem. 
at 18. 

Clearly, summary judgment is inappropriate in a case such 
as this where the facts have seemed to shift as the desert sands 
in the midst of a wind storm. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 2511, 91 L.Ed.2d 
202 (1986); United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 
655, 82 S.Ct. 993, 993, 8 L.Ed.2d 176 (1962). This leaves 
the question as to whether a preliminary injunction should be 
issued to stop the City’s violation of the AOH’s constitutional 
rights to free speech. As I have outlined above, it is clear that 
the City has violated the AOH’s right to freedom of speech. 
Normally a court only has to determine that a constitutional 
right is being violated as to one of the parties for an injunction 
to issue. In the instant case, however, entities other than the 
AQH also have constitutional rights which must be considered. 

ILGO has not requested anything other than inclusion in the 
AOH Parade. It may be politic for the City to offer some other 
perquisite to ILGO, but this court cannot fashion any relief what- 


A27 


soever for ILGO since it has failed to ask for any relief. One 
thing is certain, however, no one can force the inclusion of 
ILGO in the AOH Parade. 

Nor can this court fashion any relief whatsoever for the 
other applicants for the St. Patrick’s Day Parade permit because 
neither of them have filed proper motions to intervene in this 
court. 

The last question then is what relief must be granted to the 
AOH. Over the years, the City has maintained a file of organi- 
zations entitled to parade permits. Indeed, Chief Judge Motley 
of this court in another parade case involving New York City 
said: 


[The City] as a matter of administrative policy, reserves 
certain routes, dates, times and places for what have be- 
come annual events. For instance, a parade permit is 
reserved for the New York County Board of the Ancient 
Order of Hibernians for the St. Patricks [sic] Day Parade 
on March 17. A permit will be issued for no other parade 
on Fifth Avenue other than the Gay Pride Parade on the 
last day of June. 


Gay Veterans Association, Inc. v. The American Legion—New 
York County Organization, 621 F.Supp. 1510, 1516(S.D.N_Y. 
1985). 

If it were not for the intervention of the patently unconstitu- 
tional Human Rights Commission decision in this matter, the 
AQOH would have the permit to conduct the 1993 New York 
St. Patrick’s Day Parade. It is entitled to that as preliminary 
relief; along with an order directing the City not to interfere 
with the conduct of the AOH’s 1993 New York St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade by requiring the inclusion of any contingent which 
has not been approved by the AOH and the Parade Committee. 
This order is preliminary in nature and is intended to cover 
only the 1993 New York St. Patrick’s Day Parade. 

SO ORDERED. 


Bl 
APPENDIX B. 


; COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 


SUFFOLK, ss. SUPERIOR COURT 
| CIVIL ACTION 
No. 92-1516 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN 
AND BISEXUAL GROUP OF BOSTON, ' 
Plaintiff, 


wv. 


ee 


CITY OF BOSTON, SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED WAR 
VETERANS COUNCIL, anno JOHN J. “WACKO” HURLEY,’ 
Defendants. 


FINDINGS OF FACT, RULINGS OF LAW, AND 
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT 


This case involves the claimed right of the plaintiff, Irish- 
American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB), 
to march in Boston’s annual St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day 
Parade (Parade) over the opposition of the defendants, South 
Boston Allied War Veterans Council (Veterans or Veterans 
Council), who organize and run the Parade. GLIB contends 
that its exclusion from the Parade violates G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A 
and 98, which prohibit sexual orientation discrimination in 
places of public accommodation. GLIB also alleges that the 
Veterans’s exclusion of GLIB from the Parade abridges GLIB 


ria AeA tin PP i le TI Nc SI tm SOE A Pa ni AE alee Nt el tlh ne tise arate 


‘ By and through Timothy Daley and Cathleen Finn, individually and as represen- 
tatives of the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston. 
: ‘John J. “Wacko” Hurley is named as a defendant both individually and as a 
; representative member of the South Boston Allied War V terans Council. 


B2 


members’ constitutional rights to freedom of expression and 
association and denies them equal protection of the laws as 
guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution and Articles | and 16 of the Mas- 
sachusetts Declaration of Rights. GLIB seeks declaratory and 
permanent injunctive relief. The Veterans Council contends 
_ that it may lawfully exclude GLIB because neither the public 
accommodations statute nor the 14th Amendment applies to 
its Parade. The Veterans argue that the Fourteenth Amendment 
is irrelevant because there is no state action; and the statute is 
inapplicable because the Parade is not a place of public accom- 
modation, and because application of it would be an impermis- 
sible infringement of the Veterans’ constitutional right of ex- 
pressive association. 

The City of Boston (City) is also a defendant. GLIB alleges 
that the Parade is subject to the 14th Amendment, and therefore 
exclusion of it on account of its sexual orientation offends the 
equal protection clause and interferes uniawfully with its free- 
doms of association and expression. The Veterans cross-claim 
against the City for its unlawful interference with their Parade. 
The City denies that the Parade is a state action event and 
denies the Veterans cross-claim allegations. 

On the basis of a four-day bench trial, which heard 12 
witnesses and received 113 exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact and conclusions of law as required by Mass. 
R. Civ. P. 52(a). 


Discussion. 


GLIB alleges that by denying its members the right to register 
for and march in the 1993 Parade because of their sexual 
orientation, both the City and the Veterans violated G.L. 
c. 272, §§ 92A and 98 (the public accommodations law). 
Section 98 prohibits “any distinction, discrimination or restric- 


B3 


tion on account of . . . sexual orientation . . . in any place of 
public accommodation, resort or amusement” and the aid or 
incitement thereof. G.L. c. 272, § 98. 

In January of 1992, Barbra Kay and others’ founded the Irish- 
American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston 
(“GLIB”). As the name tells, GLIB is an organization of Irish- 
Americans who are gay, lesbian, or bisexual, and their suppor- 
ters. A social organization, GLIB was formed to march in the 
St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day Parade. GLIB’s purposes were 
threefold: to express its members’ pride in their dual identities; 
to demonstrate to the Irish-American and to the gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual communities the diversity within those respective 
communities; and to show support for the Irish-American gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual men and women in New York City 
(“ILGO” members) who were seeking to participate in the 
New York St. Patrick’s Day Parade. GLIB has regular meetings 
about once a month, produces a newsletter for members, main- 
tains a voicemail box, and has published an informational 
brochure. GLIB members also participate in various cultural 
and social activities, including the 1993 Dorchester Day Parade 
and a fundraising walkathon for the AIDS Action Committee. 

When the Veterans initially denied GLIB’s application to 
participate in the 1992 Parade, they cited “safety reasons and 
insufficient information regarding [the] social club.” Exh. 72. 
GLIB marched uneventfully in the 1992 Parade under court 
order.* In 1993, the Veterans again denied GLIB permission 
to participate in the Parade, asserting the decision to exclude 
groups with sexual themes merely formalized that the Parade 
expresses traditional religious and social values. Exh. 43. At 
the recent trial, John J. Hurley equivocated about his reasons 
for excluding GLIB but ultimately testified that he would never 


‘Cindy Toombs and Ellie Rudolph. 


‘Irish American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group of Boston v. City of Boston, 
C.A. No. 92-1518 (Suffolk Super. Ct., March 11, 1992, Zobel, J.). 


B4 


allow GLIB to march.* These shifting explanations for exclud- 
ing GLIB demonstrate the pretextual nature of these excuses. 
Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Thur- 
mont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 287 (D. Md. 1988). The evidence 
establishes that GLIB was excluded from the Parade on account 
of its members sexual orientation, and I so find. See also 
Meredith v. Fair, 305 F.2d 343, 361 (Sth Cir. 1962) (finding 
no valid, non-discriminatory reason for University to reject 
Meredith).° 

In order for the public accommodations law to apply, how- 
ever, the Parade must be “a place of public accommodation, 
resort or amusement” as defined by section 92A. The plaintiff 
urges that the statute should be construed broadly in order to 


“Hurley speaks for the Veterans Council and he testified on its behalf. He 
indicated that the objection to GLIB’s participation was based on the belief, although 
unsubstantiated, that its members were also members of the ACT-UP and Queer 
Nation. The group’s potential for being disorderly was offered as a reason for 
excluding it. The defendant's final position was that GLIB would be excluded 
because of its values and its message, f.e., its members’ sexual orientation. Tr. 
of Closing Arg. pp. 43, 51-52 (Nov. 23, 1993). 


“Several cases, although they are distinguishable on other grounds, illuminate 
the invalidity of the Veterans’ purported reasons for excluding GLIB. Excluding 
all sexual themes not only contravenes the First Amendment's prohibition on 
content-based restrictions. see Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y. v. Public Service 
Comm'n of N.Y., 447 U.S. 530, 537-38 (1980)9 (prohibiting discussion of an 
entire topic violates the First Amendment), but is a form of discrimination itself. 
See Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 8 (1967) (rejecting notion that equal application 
of miscegenation statutes did not constitute invidious racial discrimination). Conse- 
quently, the Veterans’ exclusion of GLIB under the guise of excluding all groups 
with sexual themes violates the public accommodations law’s prohibition on sexual 
orientation discrimination. Moreover, denying GLIB’s participation because some 
of its members might be associated with a radical group assumes guilt by association 
but is not proof of disruptiveness. See Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 189-91 
(1972) (assumed association with national group advocating violence did not con- 
stitute evidence that local group would be disruptive). The record demonstrates no 
basis for concluding that GLIB’s participation would incite imminent lawlessness. 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444, 447 (1969). Just as undifferentiated fear or 
apprehension of disturbance is not enough to overcome the right of freedom of 
expression, see Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 
508 (1969), the Veterans’ denial of GLIB’s application due to the purported associ- 
ation of some of its members would not withstand scrutiny under the statute. 


SOR Ne Lael ae Os Oe MN 


anita ee one A NST 


ERROR ll nal BOR EGTA TIE 


a ee pe: 


ae ee ee ere oe Eee 


a la eK Ok NO Sale hit ic 


et a A il. ca a ICE 


SP AL OE A TERT A At NA I ol 


BS 


effectuate its remedial purpose. The Veterans argue that a 
parade, unlike a tavern or a barbershop, can not be a “place 
of public accommodation, resort or amusement.” Although 
our courts have held preliminarily that the Parade is subject 
to the statute, /rish American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group 
of Boston v. City of Boston, No. 93-J-183 (Mass. App. Ct. 
March |, 1993, Brown, J., single justice) (affirming prelimi- 
nary injunction requiring GLIB’s inclusion in 1993 Parade); 
Irish American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group of Boston v. 
City of Boston, C.A. No. 92-1518 (Suffolk Super. Ct. Feb. 
19, 1993, Zobel, J.); Jrish American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual 
Group of Boston v. City of Boston, C.A. No. 92-1518 (Suffolk 
Super. Ct. March 11, 1992, Zobel, J.), the Veterans point to 
an expression of judicial doubt on the subject, South Boston 
Allied War Veterans Council v. The Honorable Hiller B. Zobel, 
C.A. No. 93-10509-WF (D. Mass. March 11, 1993, Wolf, 
J.) (noting public accommodations statute does not expressly 
include parades). 

The statute defines a place of public accommodation, resort 
or amusement as: “any place . . . which is open to and accepts 
or solicits the patronage of th= general public and, without 
limiting the generality of this definition, whether or not it be 
. . . (6) a boardwalk or other public highway; .. . [or] (8 a 
place of public amusement, fecreation, sport, exercise or enter- 
tainment.” G.L. c. 272, § 92A. As an initial matter, the Parade 
must be found to be “a place.” United States Jaycees v. Massa- 
chusetts Commission Against Discrimination, 391 Mass. 594, 
603 (1984). The statute specifically identifies “a boardwalk or 
other public highway” or “a place of public amusement, recrea- 
tion, sport, exercise or entertainment” as places within the 
purview of the statute. 

For at least the past 47 years, the Parade has traveled the 
same basic route along the public streets of South Boston, 
providing entertainment, amusement, and recreation to partici- 


B6 


pants and spectators alike. Even if the examples enumerated 
in the statute (inn, theatre, etc.) restricted the general statutory 
language, which they do not, Local Finance Co. v. Massachu- 
setts Commission Against Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10, 13 
(1968), the public streets of South Boston can be fairly charac- 
terized as a boardwalk or a place of amusement, recreation, 
or entertainment during the hours of the Parade. Given the 
Supreme Judicial Court’s directive that the statute be given a 
broad inclusive interpretation so that it may achieve its goal 
of eliminating and prevent discrimination. Concord Rod & 
Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Commission Against Discrim- 
ination, 355 Mass. 10, 14 (1968), I find that the Parade through 
the streets of South Boston constitutes “‘a place” within the 
meaning of G.L. c. 272, § 92A. Compare United States 
Jaycees v. Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination, 
391 Mass. 594 (1984) (finding discriminatory membership 
policy not subject to G.L. c. 272, § 92A because criterion of 
“place” not established); see also New York Roadrunners Club 
v. State Division of Human Rights, 81 A.D.2d 519, 437 
N.Y.S.2d 681, 682 (1981) (route of New York Marathon 
found to be a place of public accommodation). 

In denying the applicability of the statute, the Veterans 
contend that theirs is a private parade. I disagree. As in Concord 
Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Commission Against 
Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 721 (1988), the lack of 
genuine selectivity in choosing participants and sponsors dem- 
onstrates that the Parade is a public event. The following 
participants and/or sponsors were featured in the 1992 Parade: 
Patriot Missile Raytheon Corporation, Hallamore Clydesdale 
Horses, 98.5 Mix FM Radio Van, Boston Municipal Police 
Department, Irish Basketball Players, South Boston Resident 
Group, MBTA Color Guard, Vehicles and McGruff the Crime 
Dog, South Boston Against Drugs (“SOBAD”) float, Marion 
Manor Seniors float, National Parks Service Rangers and Vehi- 


B7 


cles, South Boston Baptist Bible Trolley float, Vietnam Era 
Veterans, Princeman Singing Group, Leukemia Society, City 
Councillors Rosaria Salerno, Albert “Dapper” O’ Neil and John 
Nucci, WZOU 94.5 FM Trollet float, Houlihan’s, Amrheim’s 
and Irish Mist Restaurants, Shuberts Smoke Shop, Hub Video, 
Miss South Boston, Miss Ice-O-Rama and Miss Jr. Ice-O- 
Rama, Lexington Minutemen, AFL-CIO Trolley float and mar- 
chers, various high school bands, NORAD (Irish Northern 
Aid), Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Salem N.H. Joe 
Clowns, WZLX FM, WAAF FM Rock Bus, and others. The 
1993 Parade featured many of the same participants and spon- 
sors, as well as the Boston Bruins, MASSPORT, Budweiser. 
Mt. Washington Bank, Pepsi, various candidates for city coun- 
cil, various state representatives and senators, the Cycling 
Murrays, Citizens Committee for JFK Day, Massachusetts 
Water Pollution Control Association, South Boston Savings 
Bank, all declared and undeclared mayoral candidates in Bos- 
ton, and others. Put differently, the interests and viewpoints 
represented are truly catholic: commercial (Budweiser), reli- 
gious (Southie Baptists); political (Councillor O'Neil), elee- 
mosynary (Leukemia Society), patriotic (Vietnam Veterans), 
moral (Massachusetts Citizens for Life), theatrical (Joey 
Clowns), athletic (Boston Bruins), public service (Massport), 
trade union (AFL-CIO), and so on. Indeed, since 1947 the 
only groups that have been excluded from the Parade besides 
GLIB have been the Ku Klux Klan and ROAR (Restore Our 
Alienated Rights).’ Neither of these groups, however, is pro- 
tected under G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98. 

The Veterans Council has no written procedures, criteria, 
or standards for selecting participants or sponsors. Applications 
for participation in the next year’s Parade are sent to all previous 


The Veterans denied ROAR permission to participate based on its anti-busing 
message. 


B8 


previous participants. Those who call to inquire about partici- 
pating in the Parade are sent applications, and depending upon 
the monies available they are reimbursed for their travel ex- 
penses or costs of performance. Applications from new groups 
are voted on in batches,“ and the Veterans do not generally 
inquire into the specific messages or views of each applicant. 

In addition, some groups participate in the Parade without 
submitting an application to the Veterans Council. For in- 
stance, in 1993, the Boston Bruins did not apply to the Veterans 
Council, but simply showed up at the Parade and marched. 
Other groups gained entrance by making a contribution to the 
Parade rather than filling out an application form.’ Thus, the 
procedures for admittance into the Parade are not uniformly 
applied. 

Moreover, South Boston’s St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day 
Parade is a public celebration of longstanding. It celebrates 
both St. Patrick’s Day and Evacuation Day. Evacuation Day, 
which also falls on March 17, commemorates General Wash- 
ington’s initial military victory over the British in 1776, and 
the British departure from South Boston. Exh. 92. It is an offi- 
cially recognized historical event in Massachusetts and a Suf- 
folk County holiday. '° 

During the first half of this century, the South Boston Citi- 
zens Association and the City of Boston organized the various 


“Regardless of the formality of a vote by the Veterans Council, | find that the 
decision on participation (when there is a decision, see infra) is made by the 
defendant Hurley. Whether the Veterans Counci genuinely votes or merely rubber- 
stamps Hurley's decision is immaterial because en the question of GLIB’s partici- 
pation Hurley and the Veterans Council are of one mind. 

* Participants not filling out appiclation forms included the Massachusetts Water 
Pollution Control Association, newly declared mayoral candidates, and others. 


“ The General Court of Massachusetts established Evacuation Day in 1938. See 
G.L. c. 6, § 12K. It is a paid holiday for city employees and a holiday for Boston 
Public Schools. A variety of activities take place from March | to March 17 to 
celebrate Evacuation Day, including a boxing show, the Ice-O-Rama, a basketball 
freethrow contest, historic and memorial exercises, a swimming event, an Irish 
forum, among others. 


OD BM male wit eve 


B9 


Evacuation Day activities. In 1901, the City celebrated the 
125th anniversary of Evacuation Day by a parade, artillery 
salute, concert, and fireworks display, among other events. In 
1947 Mayor James Michael Curley granted the Veterans Coun- 
cil authority to organize and conduct the Parade.'' Since that 
time, the City has annually granted the Veterans a parade 
permit.'? No other applicant has applied for the permit. 

Over the years, the Parade has featured as many as 20,000 
participants and as many as 1,000,000 spectators. In 1992, 
the Parade featured about 10,000 participants and 750,000 
spectators. The 1993 Parade, postponed due to inclement wea- 
ther, had fewer than 10,000 participants, about 400,000 spec- 
tators, and was aired live by Boston’s c&émmunity access cable 
television channel. The Parade is one of the six largest parades 
held in Boston annually, and the largest New England event 
for Irish-Americans, their friends, and well-wishers. 

Given the lack of selectivity exerted by the Veterans over 
the Parade participants and sponsors, as well as the Parade’s 
historical roots, | conclude that the Parade is a public event. 
Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Commission 
Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 721 (1988). As such, 
| find that the Parade constitutes a public accommodation 
within the meaning of G.L. c. 272, § 92A. Consequently, the 
Veterans’ exclusion of GLIB based on the sexual orientation 
of its members violates the public accommodation statute. 

By its terms, G.L. c. 272, §.98 also forbids aiding or inciting 
discrimination based on sexual orientation in places of public 


"The Veterans Council is an unincorporated association, consisting of members 
who are elected from various South Boston Veterans of Foreign Wars, American 
Legion, and Disabled Veterans Posts. 


* The City of Boston Transportation Department (BTD) has authority to issue 
permits for all parades within the City of Boston. Parades are !awful only if the 
BTD has issued a permit for it. Acts, 1929, c. 263, § 2 as amended; Rules and 
Regs. of BTD, Art. VIII, § 1 as amended through Jan. 2, 1988. Neither the BTD 
nor the City charge a fee for parade permits. 


B10 


accommodation, resort or amusement, and GLIB alleges that 
the City by its conduct has violated the statute. Did the City’s 
involvement in the 1993 Parade constitute aiding or inciting 
the Veterans in their violation of GLIB’s rights under the public 
accommodations statute? '* 

The following facts were adduced at trial. The City, through 
the BTD, provides services for the six largest parades in Bos- 
ton: posting “no parking” signs along the route, ticketing and 
towing vehicles along the route; and occasionally erecting 
barriers or roping the route. The City also provides myriad 
services through the Office of Business and Cultural Develop- 
ment to any parade sponsors at their request. These services 


.__-include the use of the City’s printing services and planning 


and organizational assistance. Additionally, the City provides 
police, fire, emergency, and public works services to every 
parade or function in the City comparable to the Parade. 
Although the City’s involvement dates back to the Parade’s 
beginning, over the years the City has divorced itself from the 
Parade. Thus, for the 1993 Parade, the City’s involvement 
consisted of the participation of city vehicles such as fire, 
ambulance, and police in the Parade itself. The City also 
supplied clean up services for the 1993 Parade costing a total 
of approximately $8,000. This amount is comparable to other 
parades of similar size.'* Many of these services constitute rou- 


‘The City’s involvement in the 1992 Parade is not before this court as the 
plaintiffs failed to file a complaint before the Massachusetts Commission Against 
Discrimination. Since violations of the public accommodations law fall within the 
purview of the G.L. c. 151B, § 5, the filing of a prior complaint with the MCA 
is a jurisdictional prerequisite that cannot be waived. See Ackerson v. Dennison 
Mfg. Co., 624 F.Supp. 1148, 1150 (D. Mass. 1986) (jurisdictional requirement 
cannoi be waived); East Chop Tennis Club v. Massachusetts Comm'n Against 
Discrimination, 364 Mass. 444, 446 (1973) (G.L. c. 272, § 98 falls within the 
ambit of G.L. c. 151B, § 5). 


‘In 1993, the Bunker Hill Day Parade route cost $9,369.91 to clean, while the 
Columbus Day and Dorchester Day Parades cost $6,189.23 and $7,815.38, respec- 
tively. 


Bil 


tine functions of government See Otway v. City of New York, 
818 F.Supp. 659, 654 (S.D.N.Y. 1993) (providing police and 
sanitation services for parade are a legitimate governmental 
function and do not constitute the establishment of religion in 
violation of the First Amendment). 

In mid-November of 1992, GLIB notified the Mayor of its 
intention to march in the 1993 Parade. On the same day, 
Richard A. Dimino, Commissioner of the BTD, wrote to the 
Veterans asking them to submit their 1993 permit application 
by mid-December and asking whether they planned to abide 
by the 1992 court order. The Veterans refused to state whether 
they would comply with the 1992 order and demanded that 
the BTD immediately issue the 1993 permit. 

In determining whether to issue a permit, the City may 
consider only time, place, manner, and public safety. See Cox 
v. New Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569, 576 (1941).'> The City may 
not consider either the content or subject manner of the speech 
in its decision to grant a permit. Consolidated Edison of N.Y. 
v. Public Service Comm’ n of N.Y., 447 U.S. 530, 536 (1980). 


For while a municipality may constitutionally impose 
reasonable time, place, and manner regulations on the 
use of its streets and sidewalks for First Amendment pur- 
poses .. . and may even forbid altogether such use of 
some of its facilities . . . what a municipality may not 
do under the First and Fourteenth Amendments is to dis- 

_ criminate in the regulation of expression on the basis of 
the content of that expression. . . . Above all else, the 
First Amendment means that government has no power 
to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, 
its subject matter, or its content. 


'* Acts, 1929, c. 263, establish the Boston Traffic Commission and define its 
powers. The BTD has its own rules and regulations as well which set forth other 
considerations. See BTD, Rules and Regs., Art. VIII, § *(a) and (b). 


B12 


Hudgens v. National Labor Relations Board, 425 U.S. 507, 
520 (1976) (internal quotations and citations omitted). 

Sensing its dilemma, the City turned to the court for guid- 
ance; it moved for clarification as to whether the 1992 order 
also applied to the 1993 Parade. That motion was denied. /rish 
American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group of Boston v. City 
of Boston, C.A. No. 92-1518 (Suffolk Super. Ct. Dec. 11, 
1992, Zobel, J.). 

On December 16, 1992, the BTD contacted the Veterans 
by a letter stating that “‘as a public official, the Commissioner 
is mindful that the parade organization and conduct are subject 
to anti-discrimination laws which extend to many protected 
characteristics including sexuai orientation, as set forth in 
Chapters 151B and 272, Sections 92 and 98, of the General 
Laws.” 

Exhibit 11. On December 23, 1992, the BTD issued to the 
Veterans a conditional permit for the 1993 Parade, requiring 
the Veterans to cooperate with the Boston Police Department 
in devising a public safety plan for the Parade in the event 
that the court ordered GLIB’s participation. The Veterans com- 
plied with this condition and on February 16, 1993, the City 
granted the Veterans a permit for the 1993 Parade. On February 
19, 1993, the court granted GLIB a preliminary injunction 
enjoining the Veterans from excluding GLIB from the 1993 
Parade. 

GLIB contends that the City’s actions in granting the Vete- 
rans a permit, knowing that the Veterans intended to exclude 
GLIB from the Parade in violation of the public accommoda- 
tions statute, amounts to a violation of G.L. c. 272, § 98. 
Additionally, GLIB argues that by failing to enforce the public 
accommodations law, the City aided the Veterans in their 
violations of G.L. c. 272, § 98. Although the clause of the 
relevant statute relating to liability for aiding or inciting dis- 
crimination in a place of public accommodation has not been 


B13 


interpreted by our appellate courts, I hold that the City’s actions 
do not rise to that criminal statutory level of assistance or 
incitement. 

While the City could have required the Veterans to promise 
to admit GLIB into the Parade in compliance with the public 
accommodations law, see Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 193 
(1972) (college administrator could constitutionally require 
group seeking official university recognition to affirm in ad- 
vance its willingness to abide by reasonable campus laws), 
the applicability of the public accommodations statute was in 
dispute at the time. See South Boston Allied War Veterans 
Council v. The Honorable Hiller B. Zobel, C.A. No. 93- 
10509-WF (D. Mass. March 11, 1993, Wolf, J.) (questioning 
applicability of G.L. c. 272, § 98 to parades). Although the 
City is obliged by its own ordinances not to discriminate in 
places of public accommodations on the basis of sexual orien- 
tation, Boston City Ordinances c. 16, § 406 (1984), it is like- 
wise prohibited from abridging the First Amendment rights of 
its citizens, which the Veterans claimed to be exercising. 
Hudgens v. National Labor Relations Board, 425 U.S. 507, 
520 (1976). Therefore, while I conclude that the City’s inaction 
was discreditable, it was not aiding or inciting under G.L. 
c. 272, § 98. 

The most that can be said of the City’s conduct is that it 
allowed the Veterans to hold a parade, for without a permit a 
parade is not lawful. But issuing a parade permit is a neutral 
act. Otway v. City of N.Y., supra at 662. Moreover, the City 
did not encourage, assist, or act in cooperation with the Vet- 
erans in their attempt to discriminate against GLIB. As in 
cases discussing “aiding” in terms of accomplice liability, there 
must exist a “purposive attitude toward” accomplishing the 
result. United States v. Peoni, 100 F.2d 401, 402-403 (2d Cir. 
1938); see also Commonealth v. Raposo, 413 Mass. 182, 185 
(1992) (discussing accomplice liability). GLIB has failed to 


B14 


demonstrate that the City intended to facilitate the discrimina- 
tion against GLIB by granting the Veterans a permit. See 
Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Thur- 
mont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 287 (D.Md. 1988) (granting of parade 
permit and police presence does not constitute state espousal 
of discriminatory policies). To the contrary, the City’s then 
Mayor attempted to persuade the Veterans to allow GLIB to 
march. Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that the 
City aide or incited the Veterans in violating GLIB’s rights 
under G.L. c. 272, § 98. 

GLIB also challenges its exclusion from the Parade on the 
ground that such action violates its members’ constitutional 
rights of freedom of expression and association and denies 
them equal protection of the laws as guaranteed by the First 
and Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
A finding of state action is necessary to implicate these federal 
consttutional guarantees. See, e.g.. San Francisco Arts & 
Athletics, Ine. v. United States Olympic Committee, 483 U.S. 
522, 542 (1987) (fundamental inquiry focuses on whether a 
governmental actor is involved to implicate constitutional pro- 
hibitions); Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830, 837 (1982) 
(First and Fourteenth Amendments apply to acts of the state, 
not to the actions of private individuals or entities); Lugar v. 
Edmonson Oil Co., Inc., 457 U.S. 933, 936 (1982) (state 
action requirement reflects fact that constitutional mghts are 
protected only against governmental infringement). Thus, we 
must determine whether the City’s involvement in the Parade 
is sufficient to establish the requisite state action so as to 
implicate the United States Constitution. See Phillips v. Youth 
Development Program, Inc., 390 Mass. 652 (1983) (discussing 
State action requirement). 

GLIB seeks injunctive relief, so while the City’s role in the 
1992 Parade is relevant and admissible as evidence, its current 


BI5 


and prospective participation is more significant.’ Assuming 
that the Parade began as a civic celebration, the present question 
is whether the City has sufficiently disengaged itself from the 
Parade to negate a finding of state action." 

Various activities that are ostensibly private have been found 
by different analyses to be state action for constitutional pur- 
poses. Elections to public office are governmental functions 
that cannot be put out of the Constitution’s reach. Terry v. 
Adams, 345 U.S. 461 (1953). Private use of state processes 
or mechanisms may be state action. Batson v. Kentucky, 476 
U.S. 79 (1986) (racially discriminatory jury challenges); Shel- 
ley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. | (1948) (state enforcement of private 
racially restrictive covenants). Private discrimination may be- 
come state action when it is implemented by public authorities. 
Evans v. Newton, 382 U.S. 296 (1977) (city operation of 
privately donated racially segregated park). A typically private 
enterprise is subject to constitutional requirements where it 
maintains a mutually dependent relationship with the state. 
Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority, 365 U.S. 715 (1961) 
(privately owned restaurant in a City-owned parking garage). 

In asserting its constitutional claims here, GLIB contends 
that the City is inextricably intertwined in the sponsorship and 
planning of the Parade so as to require a finding of state action. 
In so concluding, GLIB relies on Evans and Burton, above. 
Additionally, GLIB argues that while parades are not tradition- 
ally a governmental function, this Parade is such. 

The City maintains that its participation does not amount to 
State action as that concept is now defined by the Supreme 
Court. Predictably, the Veterans go farther: they argue that 
the only state action here is the City’s attempt to interfere 
impermissibly with their private Parade. 

r The C ity’s involvement in the 1992 Parade would present a closer question as 
to state action, but it is not before me here. 


’ The plaintiff does not argue that the Parade is immutably public. GLIB concedes 
that the Parade could be privatized; it argues that the City has not done so. 


B16 


The City is correct that the Supreme Court has narrowed 
the state doctrine since the days of Evans and Burton."* But 
that truism does not decide this case. The relevant questions 
here are: is this Parade a governmental function that has been 
delegated to the Veterans to perform; is the Parade a typically 
private function, but one so suffused with City participation 
as to transform it into a state action event; is the Parade a state 
mechanism or process which the Veterans seek to use; is there 
a mutually dependent relationship between the City and the 
Veterans’ enterprise. 

First, organizing or running a celebratory parade is not tradi- 
tionally a governmental function in the sense of conducting a 
public election or running a town. Marsh v. Alabama, 326 
U.S. 501 (1946); Phillips v. Youth Development Program, 
Inc., 390 Mass. 653, 654-55 (1983). And the Veterans are 
not clothed with official authority to enable them to stage the 
Parade. Moreover, the Parade is a public event in the sense 
that it serves its spectators by entertaining them, but that does 
not make it state action. Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 
830, 842 (1982). 

Second. a typically private event or activity may be state 
action where it is so extensively sponsored, regulated, and 
sometimes financed by the state that its choices must fairly be 
said to be made by the public authorities or required by them. 
Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982). GLIB maintains 
that such an elaborate financial and regulatory nexus is the 
case here. 


“One commentator has recently put it as follows: “Moose Lodge |v. Irvis, 407 
U.S. 163 (1972)] marked a significant contraction of the state action doctrine. The 
Supreme Court has consistently rejected invitations to jettison the doctrine by 
overruling the Civil Rights Cases and has insisted that state action is present only 
when private parties perform customary governmental functions, or when the state 
has required or actively encouraged the challenged private conduct, or when the 
conduct may be attrbuted to a state official or to a party acting in concert with 
state officials.” Porter, State Action, The Oxford Companion To The Supreme Court 
of the United States, 823 (Hall, ed. New York, 1992). 


B17 


In support of its nexus argument, GLIB points to the follow- 
ing facts. Up through the 1992 Parade, the City provided the 
use of its official seal, printing services, and direct funding to 
participants and sponsors.’ Until 1993, the City provided 
approximately twenty-five percent of the Parade’s total costs 
through the Office of Business and Cultural Development. The 
City also identified and contacted potential participants and 
disseminated information regarding the Parade. These actions, 
however, do not differ from the assistance the City offers other 
parade organizers. City monies are also available for other 
events and parades as well. Indeed, the City points out that 
its involvement here is less than it is in some other comparable 
events. The Veterans’ Chief Marshal applies for this Parade 
permit, whereas the Independence Day Parade is a City event 
for which the City or one of its departments secures the permit. 
Exh. 85, 86.” 

The focus in this inquiry is not on the overall relationship 
between the City and the Veterans, but rather on the City’s 
involvement in the Veterans’ decision to exclude GLIB. Phil- 
lips v. Youth Development Program, Inc., 390 Mass. 652, 
655 (1983). That the City granted the Veterans a parade permit 
does not render the Veterans a government actor. See San 
Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic 
Committee, 483 U.S. 522, 543 (1987) (Congress’ grant of a 
corporate charter to Committee did not make the Committee 
a government agent); /nvisible Empire of the Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan v. Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 287 (D. Md. 
1988) (police presence and granting parade permit does not 
constitute state espousal of discriminatory practices); Gay Vet- 
erans Ass'n, Inc. v. American Legion, 621 F.Supp. 1510, 


“Similar amenities are available to all parades of comparable size. 


‘Evidence was not offered about the December i2, 1993, Sleigh Bell Parade, 
which may have been an enterprise of the Boston Convention & Visitatio Bureau. 
Boston Globe, December 13, 1993, p. 19. 


B18 


1517 (S.D.N.Y. 1985) (issuing a parade permit does not 
amount to state action). Here, the City opposed the Veterans’ 
discrimination, at least rhetorically, but even acquiescence in 
the Veterans’ discriminatory actions does not rise to the level 
of state action. Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982). 
It cannot be said that the City’s regulatory scheme in issuing 
parade permits encouraged the Veterans to exclude GLIb from 
the Parade. Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982) 
(state will be held responsible tor a private decision only when 
it provides coercion or significant encouragement); accord 
Ponce v. Basketball Federation of Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, 760 F.2d 375, 378 (Ist Cir. 1985); Phillips v. Youth 
Development Programm, inc., 390 Mass. 652, 655 (1983). 
While a fimancial nexus may be indicative of state action, 
the City’s financial involvement here does not warrant such a 
finding. While the Veterans decided which bills to submit to 
the City for the reimbursement of the various marching groups 
for the 1992 Parade, the City paid the requested amounts 
directly to the participants and/or sponsors after the Parade. 
These contributions of the City prior to the 1993 Parade are 
insufficient to establish the required nexus where the City’s 
financial support in no way encouraged or compelled the Vet- 
erans to exclude GLIB from the Parade. Blum v. Yaretsky, 
457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982). Additionally, although the City 
made funds available to reimburse Parade participants and 
sponsors for the 1993 Parade, none were used. Moreover, the 
Mayor's reception to raise funds fo rthe Veterans’ does not 
transform a public event into a state action event. See San 
Francisco Art & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Com- 
mittee, 483 U.S. 522, 544 (1987) (government may subsidize 
private entities without constitutional responsibility attaching). 
GLIB’s inability to identify any action by the City which in 
fact motivated the Veterans’ private discriminatory actions 
precludes a finding of state action under the nexus approach. 


B19 


See Ponce v. Basketball Federation of the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, 760 F.2d 375, 378 (1st Cir. 1985) (failure to 
point to specific governmental actions motivated private actors 
discriminatory conduct fatal to constitutional claim). 

Third, it cannot be said that there is state action here because 
the Parade is a governmental mechanism which the Veterans 
seek to make an instrument of discrimination. Compare Batson 
v. Kentucky, above. The Veterans do not seek to involve the 
City in their decision to exclude GLIB and, as noted above, 
the Parade is not a state-created mechanism or procedure. 

Finally, state action will be found where there exists a “sym- 
biotic relationship” between the government and the private 
actor. Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation, Inc. 
v. Faneuil Hall Marketplace, Inc., 745 F.Supp. 65, 72 (D. 
Mass. 1990). The Court has described a symbiotic relationship 
as one of interdependence and joint participation. Burton v. 
Wilmington Parking Authority, 365 U.S. 715, 725 (1961). 

In support of its state action argument, GLIB notes that the 
Chief Marshal and Parade Adjutant for the 1992 Parade were 
City employees.*' The evidence reveals that becoming Chief 
Marshal is a process of “coming up through the ranks,” and 
the Chief Marshal then selects the Parade Adjutant. With re- 
spect to the 1992 Parade, the Veterans Council elected Thomas 
J. Lyons, a city employee, as the Chief Marshal, to be the 
1992 Parade Adjutant.” Vaillancourt conducted his duties of 
organizing the parade primarily before or after work, and on 
the weekends. GLIB contends that the activities of these indi- 
viduals leads to the conclusion that the state is inextricably 
involved in the Parade. I find, however, that Lyons’ election 
had nothing to do with his status as a city employee.’ Neither 

' The Chief Marshal and Parade Adjutant are in charge of organizing the Parade. 

* At this time, Lyons was the Deputy Commissioner of Veterans Affairs for the 
City. Vaillancourt was an employee of the Veterans Affairs Department of the City. 


‘Prior to Lyons’ election, a city employee had not been elected to the position 
of Chief Marshall in 40 years. 


B20 


Lyons’ nor Vaillancourt’s involvement in the Parade consti- 
tutes any participation on the City’s part, and I so find. 

The most important factor in this type of state action is the 
extent to which the City derives an economic benefit from the 
Veterans’ discrimination. Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 
830, 843 (1982); Ponce v. Basketball Federation of the Com- 
monwealth of Puerto Rico, 760 F.2d 375, 382 (1st Cir. 1985); 
Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation, Inc. v. 
Faneuil Hall Marketplace, Inc., 745 F.Supp. 65, 73 (D. Mass. 
1990); see also Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority, 365- 
U.S. 715, 724 (1961) (finding a direct economic relationship 
between restaurant’s discriminatory policies and State’s finan- 
cial position). With respect to the 1993 Parade, the City set 
aside $9,000 from its public celebrations budget. Exh. 87. 
The Veterans did not submit any bills to the City for reimburse- 
ment.* The Veterans did not use the City’s printing services 
or request any assistance from the Office of Business and 
Cultural Development in obtaining marchers for the 1993 
Parade. The Boston Public Works Department erected a set 
of bleachers to serve as a reviewing stand along the parade 
route, various police, fire, and emergency service vehicles and 
personnel participated in the Parade, and the City provided 
police and sanitation services. But those amenities did not 
profit the City. 

After the Veterans publicly announced that they would not 
use public monies to help finance the 1993 Parade, the Mayor 
hosted a reception in honor of the Parade Committee. The 
reception was held at a city-owned facility and the City printed 
the invitations which contained the official City seal. Suggested 
donations for attendance were $25 per person. Although the 
amount of monies collected as a result of this event are not in 


“The same amount was set aside for the 1992 Parade. Exh. 87. The budget for 
fiscal year 1994 does not contain any provision for the 1994 Parade. Exh. 88. 


B21 


evidence, approximately 200 people attended the event. The 
Mayor collected contributions for the Veterans Council before, 
during, and after the reception which he then turned over to 
the Veterans. In addition, some contributions were sent directly 
to the Veterans Council. 

As set forth above, the City issued the Veterans a conditional 
parade permit requiring the Veterans to cooperate in the devel- 
opment of a public safety plan in the event that the court 
mandated GLIB’s participation. The City also sought judicial 
clarification of the 1992 court order in connection with the 
1993 Parade. Most notably, the Boston Police Department 
determined GLIB’s placement in the 1993 Parade processional 
after GLIB received a preliminary injunction requiring its in- 
clusion. /rish American Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Group of 
Boston v. City of Boston, C.A. No. 92-1518 (Suffolk Super. 
Ct. Feb. 19, 1993, Zobel, J.). 

Unlike Burton, above, in which “profits earned by discrimi- 
nation not only contribute top, but also are indispensable ele- 
ments in, the financial success of a governmental agency,” 
365 U.S. 715, 724 (1961), no such financial benefit to the 
City has been demonstrated here. Rather, as noted above, the 
City has expended monies on the Parade prior to 1993. Further- 
more, the Mayor’s reception raised for the Parade were in the 
form of checks made out to the Veterans Council, not the City. 
This can be contrasted with a city-run event, such as First 
Night, perhaps, in which the City provides entertainment to 
those who purchase tickets directly from the City. 

Moreover, if a symbiotic relationship actually existed, the 
City would not have been able to remove itself from the Parade 
without discontinuing the Parade altogether. See Burton v. 
Wilmington Parking Authority, 365 U.S. 715, 725 (1961) 
(finding of state action justified where the state is in a position 
of interdependence with the private entity). Even if the City’s 
involvement in the Parade prior to 1993 could establish the 


B22 


requisite state action, the City has sufficiently removed itself 
from the Parade business so as to negate any such findings. 
Consequently, | find no symbiotic relationship exists between 
the City and the Veterans. 

Accordingly, I find that the City’s involvement in the Parade 
does not amount to state action. I also find that the Veterans’ 
Council did not act on behalf of the City, but instead acted as 
a private party. Since the conduct of private parties is beyond 
the Constitution’s scope, GLIB’s constitutional claims must 
fail. San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States 
Olympic Committee, 483 U.S. 522, 547 (1987); Rendell-Baker 
v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830, 837 (1982); Phillips v. Youth Develop- 
ment Program, Inc., 390 Mass. 652 (1982).*° 

GLIB’s constitutional arguments (post-trial Memorandum, 
pp. 17-27) appear to assume that the Massachusetts Constitu- 
tion, like the Federal Constitution, protects their activities 
against state action interference only, not against private inter- 
ference. That limitation upon the reach of the Commonwealth's 
Constitution's protections is questionable. Batchelder v. Allied 
Stores International, Inc. , 388 Mass. 83, 88-93 (1983); O’Con- 
nell v. Chasdi, 400 Mass. 686, 693-94 (1987). Also question- 
able is whether the Articles relied on by GLIB, one and sixteen, 
prohibit public or private sexual orientation discrimination. In 
any event, I do not reach those issues because the statute, 
G.L. c. 272, §§ 92, 98A, clearly applies here. Similarly, 
because I find that this Parade is not a state action event, I do 
not decide whether the discrimination here offends the Four- 
teenth Amendment. 

Because I find that the public accommodations statute 
applies to the Parade, the next question is whether the statute 
as applied in the circumstances of this case abridges the Vet- 

‘Tt must be emphasized that this finding in no way immunizes the City against 
a different result should it undertake (or resume) greater participation in the Parade. 


B23 


erans First Amendment rights. The Veterans argue that their 
Parade is a form of speech protected by the First Amendment 
via the Fourteenth Amendment, and that their speech will be 
effectively diluted or distorted if they are required to include 
GLIB in their Parade. 

The First Amendment protects two types of association from 
governmental interference. Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 
468 U.S. 609, 617 (1984). First, it protects an individual’s 
right to enter into and maintain certain intimate or private 
relationships against unjustified governmental interference. /d. 
at 617-18; Board of Directors of Rotary International v. Rotary 
Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 544 (1987); Concord Rod & 
Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Commission Against Discrim- 
ination, 402 Mass. 716, 721 (1988). This right is not at issue 
here.*° Second, the First Amendment also protects the right of 
expressive association. It is this right that the Veterans claim 
would be unconstitutionally burdened by application of the 
public accommodations statute. 

The right of expressive association protects individuals’ free- 
dom to associate for the purpose of engaging in protected 
speech or religious activities. Board of Directors of Rotary 
International v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 544 
(1987); Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts 
Commission Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 721 
(1988). This right necessarily includes the freedom not to 
associate. Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 
209, 234-35 (1977). Where an association “is organized for a 


The right of intimate association refers to those relationships that presuppose 
“deep attachments and commitments to the necessarily tew other individuais with 
whom one shares not only a special community of thoughts, experiences, and 
beliefs but also distinctly personal aspects of one’s life.” Roberts v. United States 
Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 620 (1984). Contact between the Veterans and the various 
participants is casual, often occurring at best a few times a year and usually only 
in reference to the Parade. Indeed, no argument has been made that the Veterans 
share personal aspects of their lives with the various participating groups or sponsors. 


B24 


specific expressive purpose and ... it will not be able to 
advocate its desired viewpoints nearly as effectively if it cannot 
confine its membership to those who share the same sex, for 
example, or the same religion,” a nondiscrimination condition 
may unconstitutionally infringe on the right of expressive asso- 
ciation. New York State Club Ass'n, Inc. v. City of New York, 
487 U.S. 1, 13 (1988); see also Invisible Empire of the Knights 
of the Ku Klux Klan v. Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281, 289 
(D.Md. 1988). Where, however, the association consists of 
“[{s]trangers to one another . .. and [the association] .. . 
admits all who are willing to pay the admission fee, . . . such 
a coming together to engage in [a] recreational [activity] . . . 
is not protected by the First Amendment.” Dalias v. Stanglin, 
490 U.S. 19, 25 (1989). 

In the instant case, the Parade is more akin to a “social asso- 
ciation.” See Dallas, above. Participation in the Parade is not 
limited on the basis of similarity of viewpoints. The Parade 
celebrates a public holiday, and it is composed of diverse 
groups espousing myriad themes and values. The Parade is 
eclectic in every sense. It includes patriotic, commercial, polit- 
ical, moral, artistic, religious, athletic, public service, trade 
union, and eleemosynary themes. In fact, some of the messages 
expressed in the Parade contradict those espoused by other 
participants. For example, Gillette, a non-union company par- 
ticipated, as did the AFL-CIO. Moreover, some AFL-CIO 
marchers carried signs which read “Boycott Miller Beer,” con- 
flicting with the various sponsoring bars and pubs who sell 
such products. The only common theme among the participants 
and sponsors is their public involvement in the Parade. Indeed, 
the Veterans’ position is paradoxical: a proper celebration of 
St. Patrick’s and Evacuation Day requires diversity and inclu- 
siveness; an assertion of a right of expressive association re- 
quires focus on a specific message, theme, ©. group — perhaps 
a Temple or Parish congregation. See. e.g., New York County 
Bd. of Ancient Order of Hibernians v. Dinkins, 814 F.Supp. 


B25 


358, 367 (S.D.N.Y. 1993) (finding the New York St. Patrick’s 
Day Parade conveyed a distinct message: proclaiming alle- 
giance to the Roman Catholic Church and honoring the patron 
saint of Ireland). The Veterans have always opted for hetero- 
geneousness. Given the Veterans lack of selectivity in choosing 
participants and failure to circumscribe the marchers’ message, 
it is impossible to discern any specific expressive purpose enti- 
tling the Parade to protection under the First Amendment. 
Even if the statute does work some slight infringement on 
the Veterans’ right of expressive association, that infringement 
is justified by the State’s interest in eradicating sexual orienta- 
tion discrimination. Board of Directors of Rotary International 
v. Rotary Club of Duarie, 481 U.S. 537, 549 (1987); Roberts 
v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 623 (1984). On its 
face, the statute does not seek to suppress speech. Rather, its 
goal is to eliminate discrimination which is unrelated to the 
suppression of expression. Board of Directors of Rotary Inter- 
national v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 549 (1987); 
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 624 (1984). 
Moreover, the Veterans’ right of expressive association is not 
unduly burdened by the statute’s restriction. The statute does 
not mandate GLIB’s inclusion into the Parade; it only prevents 
GLIB’s exclusion simply because of its members’ sexual orien- 
tation. Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Com- 
mission Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 722 (1988). 
Consequently, any incidental abridgement of the Veterans’ 
speech is no greater than necessary to accomplish the statute’s 
legitimate purpose. Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 
609, 628-29 (1984). Accordingly, I rule that the nondiscrimi- 
nation condition imposed by the public accommodations statute 
does not violate the Veterans’ right to expressive association.”’ 


“This ts not to say, however, that the Parade can never become a protected 
First Amendment activity. It simply has not been one in the past and is not one now. 


B26 


In seeking permanent injunctive relief, GLIB asks that the 
court not renew the conditions on its participation which accom- 
panied the preliminary injunction of February 22, 1993.** 
GLIB’s participation in the 1992 and 1993 Parades was peace- 
able and orderly. Moreover, except for reiterating unsubstan- 
tiated concerns, neither the Veterans nor the City has shown 
that conditions applicable only to GLIB should be imposed.” 


“The conditions were: 


“1. No more than twenty-five (25) individuals (“the Group”) will march. 
2. Each such individual shall wear a readily identifiable badge or insignia 
indicating membership in the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 
Group of Boston, which insignia shall be made known to the parade authorities 
and the Boston Police officer in charge of parade security no less than five 
(5S) hours before the scheduled start of the parade. 

3 All terms and conditions with [sic] bind all other parade participants shall 
bind the group. 

4. The group shall display a single cloth banner carried at waist level. 

5. The group’s members shall carry no placards or posters other than the 
banner nor any other written material. 

6. No group member, individually or in concert with any other or others, 
shall distribute by any manner or means any pamphlet, object or material 
of any kind whatsoever. 

7. The group shall cooperate with and obey the appropriate orders of any 
Boston Police Department officer on duty tn or about the vicinity of the parade 
8. All members of the group shall conduct themselves in a peaceful and 
orderly manner, with due regard for the public’s safety. 

9. Violation of any of the foregoing terms will constitute grounds for an 
automatic and immediate revocation of the right to march of both the indi- 
vidual or the group as a whole. 

10. Any dispute with respect to any term of this Order shall be decided on 
the spot by the Officer in Charge of the Community Disorders Unit of the 
Boston Police Department or his designated representative; and if he desig- 
nates a representative, such designee is to be made known no later than five 
hours before the scheduled start of the Parade to Plaintiffs Timothy Daley 
and/or Cathleen Finn and to Defendant John J. Hurley (and/or his designated 
representative).” 


Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston v. City of Boston, 
Civ. No. 92-1518A (Suffolk Super. Ct. Feb. 22, 1993, Zobel, J.). 


“The disruption caused by spectators cannot be a basis for refusing GLIB's 
request. See Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 433 (1984) (“Private biases may be 
outside the reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them 
effect.”); Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Thurmont, 700 
F.Supp. 281, 285 (D.Md. 1988). 


B27 


Of course, GLIB is not entitled to special benefits, but neither 
should it be subject to special burdens. Therefore, I hold that 
GLIB is entitled to participate in the Parade on the same terms 
and conditions as other participants. See Invisible Empire of 
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 
281, 285-86 (D.Md. 1988) (enjoining the imposition of condi- 
tions on KKK march where no evidence of disruption by mar- 
chers). 

In their cross-claim against the City, the Veterans allege 
that by seeking judicial clarification of the prior court order 
for the 1993 Parade, and by conceding the applicability of 
certain anti-discrimination laws, the City violated the Veterans’ 
rights to freedom of speech, association, assembly, free exer- 
cise of religion, and equal protection of the laws in violation 
of the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution, and Articles |, 12, 16 and 19 of the Massachusetts 
Declaration of Rights (Count I). Furthermore, the Veterans 
contend that the City’s initial rejection and subsequent delay 
in issuing the Veterans a parade permit, along with the City’s 
aforementioned actions, interfered with the Veterans’ constitu- 
tional rights in violation of G.L. c. 12, §§ 11H and 111 (Count 
Il). The Veterans seek a permanent injunction prohibiting the 
City from attempting to control the content of the Veterans’ 
speech embodied in any future parades. 

As explained above, the Veterans’ Parade is not an exercise 
of their constitutionally protected right of expressive associa- 
tion. It is an open recreational event that is subject to the public 
accommodations law. Therefore, the City’s gestures toward 
compliance with that law did not violate the constitutional 
rights of the Veterans. Similarly, with respect to G.L. c. 12, 
$§ 11H and 111, the Veterans do not have a right to exclude 
GLIB that is “secured by the constitution or laws of the United 
States, or . . . the commonwealth.” Therefore, the Veterans 
do not have a claim against the City for interference with their 


B28 


exercise of such a right. Moreover, even if the Veterans were 
correct about their rights, the City’s mistake of law about 
GLIB’s rights and those of the Veterans would not constitute 
the “threats, intimidation or coercion” proscribed by the Mas- 
sachusetts Civil Rights Act, c. 12, § 11H. Layne v. Superin- 
tendent, 406 Mass. 156, 158 (1989). 

In summation: “the Veterans exclusion of GLIB from the 
St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day Parade violates G.L. c. 272, 
$§ 92A and 98, the public accommodations law; absent state 
action, the exclusion does not violate GLIB’s rights under the 
Federal Constitution; the broadly inclusive Parade is not con- 
Sstitutionally protected expressive association; the Veterans’ 
cross-claims that the City has violated their constitutional and 
statutory rights are meritless; GLIB’s motion for an order au- 
thorizing its participation in the Parade subject to generally 
applicable terms and conditions will be allowed. 

History does not record that St. Patrick limited his ministry 
to heterosexuals or that General Washington’s soldiers were 
all straight. Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of their 
Parade. 


ORDER 


For the foregoing reasons, it is herey ADJUDGED that the 
Defendant Veterans Council violated the plaintiffs’ (GLIB’s) 
rights to be free from sexual orientation discrimination in a 
place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement in vio- 
lation of G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98. It is therefore DECREED 
that the defendant Veterans Council is permanently enjoined 
from preventing plaintiff GLIB from participating in the St. 
Patrick’s/Evacuation Day Parade because of the group mem- 
bers’ sexual orientation. The preliminary injunction issued on 
February 22, 1993 is hereby DISSOLVED. The plaintiff may 
submit a proposed permanent injunction, preferably by agree- 


B29 


ment as to form. It is further ORDERED that the defendant 
Veterans Council shall allow plaintiff GLIB to participate in 
the Parade in the same manner and under the same terms and 
conditions applicable to all other participants in the Parade. 


J. Harold Flannery 
Justice of the Superior Court 


DATED: December 15, 1993 


Cl 
APPENDIX C. 


418 Mass. 238 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN 
AND BISEXUAL GROUP OF 
BOSTON & others,' 


v. 


CITY OF BOSTON & others.’ 


Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, 
Suffolk. 


Argued March 10, 1994. 
Decided July 11, 1994. 


Irish-American gay, lesbian and bisexual group sought to 
march in Boston’s St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade, 
and parade organizers refused. The Superior Court, Suffolk 
County, J. Harold Flannery, J., granted permanent injunctive 
relief to group, and organizers appealed. The Supreme Judicial 
Court, Liacos, C.J., held that: (1) organizers violated public 
accommodation law, which prohibits discrimination based on 
sexual orientation in public places, by not allowing group to 
march, and (2) public accommodation law did not violate or- 
ganizers’ First Amendment rights. 

So ordererd. 

Nolan, J., dissented with opinion. 


other members of the Irish- American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston. 


South Boston Allied War Veterans Council and John J. “Wacko” Hurley, indi- 
vidually and as a representative member of the Council. 


1. Civil Rights 119.1 


Boston’s St. Patrick's Day-Evacuation Day Parade fell 
within scope of public accommodation law which prohibits 
discrimination based on sexual orientation in admission to or 
treatment in any place of public accommodation, resort or 
amusement, and therefore parade organizers violated law by 
refusing to allow Irish-American gay, lesbian and bisexual 
group to march in parade, where parade occurred on public 
city streets and provided entertainment, recreation, and amuse- 
ment to participants and spectators, and almost any individual 
or group would be admitted to parade if they applied or showed 
up at start of parade and offered to make contribution to council 
organizing the parade. M.G.L.A. c. 272, §§ 92a, 98. 


2. Civil Rights 119.1 
Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


Application of public accommodation law, which prohibits 
discrimination based on sexual orientation, to Boston’s St. 
Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade, to allow Irish-American 
gay, lesbian and bisexual group to march tn parade, did not 
violate parade organizers’ First Amendment rights where 
parade organizers did not use parade for expressive purposes, 
but instead allowed participation by nearly every individual 
and group that wanted to participate. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend. 
1; M.G.L.A. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. 


3. Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


Not every parade is per se an exercise of rights protected 
by First Amendment. U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. |. 


C3 
4. Civil Rights 103 
Constitutional Law 90.1(4) 


Public accommodation law, which, inter alia, prohibits dis- 
crimination based on sexual orientation in admission to or 
treatment in any place of public accommodation, resort or 
amusement, was not unconstitutionally vague and overbroad 
in that it allegedly reaches constitutionally protected speech 
where law, by its terms, did not reach speech or expression 
or association protected by First Amendment and did not allow 
judge or any public official to examine content of speech. 
U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 1; M.G.L.A. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. 


Chester Darling, Boston, for John J. Hurley & another. 

Philip M. Cronin, Boston (Mary L. Bonauto, Portland, ME, 
with him), for plaintiffs. 

Claudia Billings McKelway, Deputy Corp. Counsel (Krisna 
M. Basu, Asst. Corp. Counsel, with her), for the City of Boston. 

Andrew J. McCauley, New York City, for Catholic League 
for Religious and Civil Rights, amicus curiae, submitted a brief. 

George P. Napolitano, Special Asst. Atty. Gen. , & Elizabeth 
S. Hendler, Boston, for Massachusetts Comm'n Against Dis- 
crimination, amicus curiae, submitted a brief. 


Before LIACOS, C.J., and ABRAMS, NOLAN, O’CON- 
NOR and GREANEY, JJ. 


LIACOS, Chief Justice. 


The defendanis, South Boston Allied War Veterans Council 
(council)* and John J. “Wacko” Hurley (Hurley), appeal from 


‘The council is an unincorporated association consisting of members elected 
from various South Boston veterans’ groups. 


C4 


a judgment of the Superior Court dated December 24, 1993, 
which, among other things, granted permanent injunctive relief 
to the plaintiffs.* * On appeal, the defendants raise a myriad 
of issues: (1) whether the annual St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation 
Day Parade sponsored by the council and held in the South 
Boston section of Boston is speech protected by the First and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and 
art. |, as amended, art. 12, art. 16, as amended, and art. 19 
of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights; (2) whether the 
trial judge committed error when he “examined, evaluated and 
passed judgment on the content of the parade and deemed that 
content unworthy of constitutional protection, thereby enabling 
the court to apply statutory law to speech, in violation of the 
|council’s] Federal and State [c]onstitutional rights of freedom 
of speech, expression, exercise of religion, assembly, and due 
process and equal protection of the laws, as enumerated in the 
First and Fourteenth Amendments [to] the United States Con- 
stitution, and arts. |, 12, 16 and 19”; (3) whether a parade is 
a place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement under 
the public accommodation discrimination law, G.L. c. 272, 
$§ 92A, 98; (4) whether the judgment of the Superior Court 
constituted a “prior restraint of the [council’s] Federal and 
State constitutional rights of freedom of speech, expression, 


‘Unless otherwise indicated, we use the term “defendants” to refer to the council 
and to Hurley, collectively. We acknowledge the assistance provided to us by the 
briefs of the amici, Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination and the 
Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights. 

‘We granted the defendants’ application for direct appellate review. After oral 
argument on March 10, 1994, we issued an order on March 11, 1994, affirming 
the judgment of the Superior Court and noting that an opinion or opinions would 
follow. We did so upon the request of the city so that it could plan adequately for 
the public safety related to the parade, scheduled for March 20, 1994. 

The order states: “ORDERED, that the following entry be made in the docket, 
viz.,—A majority of the Justices having concluded that there was no error below, 
the judgment of the Superior Court, dated December 24, 1993, is affirmed. Opinion 
or opinions to follow.” On March 15, 1994, we denied the defendants’ motion for 
stay of judgment and order. This opinion ts issued to explain the basis for that order. 


C5 


exercise of religion, assembly, and due process and equal pro- 
tection of the laws as enumerated in the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments. . . and arts. |, 12, 16 and 19”; (5) whether the 
issuance of a parade permit by operation of law converts a 
place of public accommodation to the exclusive use of the 
private permit holder; (6) whether the judgment of the Superior 
Court “should be reversed as to the liability of the City of 
Boston to the Veterans as the findings of fact by the trial judge 
were clearly [241] against the weight of the uncontroverted 
evidence”; (7) whether “the City of Boston, acting under color 
of law, [did] threaten, intimidate, coerce, deprive and interfere 
with the [council’s] Federal and State rights of freedom of 
speech, expression, exercise of religion, assembly, and due 
process and equal protection of the laws as enumerated in the 
First and Fourteenth Amendments. . . and arts. 1, 12, 16 and 
19. . . and in violation of the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act, 
G.L. c. 12 [$8 11H, 111], 42 U.S.C. § 1983, City of Boston 
Traffic Rules and Regulations Art. VIII (as amended through 
January 2, 1988); and City of Boston Ordinance of 1984, c. 
16 (as amended by [c.] 17 and [c.] 18”; (8) whether G.L. 
c. 272, §§ 92A and 92, are unconstitutionally overbroad and 
vague; and (9) whether the judgment of the Superior Court 
should be reversed because the “finding [of the trial judge] of 
discrimination [perpetrated by the council] was faulty in its 
reasoning, unsupported by the record, and against the weight 
of the evidence.” We discuss those issues we deem relevant 
to this appeal. 

We state the facts found by the trial judge.° In January, 
1992, several individuals, including the plaintiff Barbra Kay, 
formed the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group 
of Boston (GLIB). GLIB is a social organization consisting of 
individuals who are homosexual or bisexual and their support- 


“The judge presided over a four-day bench trial at which twelve witnesses testified 
and 113 exhibits were admitted in evidence. 


C6 


ers. GLIB was formed to march in the annual St. Patrick's 
Day-Evacuation Day Parade’ held in South Boston. GLIB’s 
purposes are to express its members’ pride in their dual identi- 
ties as Irish or Irish-American persons who are also homosexual 
or bisexual, to demonstrate to the Irish-American community 
and te the gay, lesbian, and bisexual [242] community the 
diversity within those respective communities, and to show 
support for the Irish-American homosexual and bisexual men 
and women in New York City who were seeking to participate 
in that city’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade. 

GLIB submitted an application to the council to march in the 
1992 parade. The council denied the application, citing “safety 
reasons and insufficient information regarding [the] social club.” 
Ultimately, GLIB was allowed to march in the 1992 parade under 
court order, with several restrictions placed on its participation 
that were not applied to other participants in the parade. 

The following year, GLIB sought permission to participate 
in the 1993 parade. The council refused to admit the group, 
asserting that the “decision to exclude groups with sexual 
themes merely formalized that the Parade expresses traditional 
religious and social values.” The judge found that excluding 
groups with sexual themes was itself a form of discrimination 
in violation of the public accommodation law's prohibition 
against discrimination based on sexual orientation. 

At trial, Hurley “equivocated about his reasons for excluding 
GLIB” but ultimately testified that he would never allow them 
to march in the parade.* The judge concluded that the inconsis- 


’The judge noted Evacuation Day “commemorates General Washington's initial 
military victory over the British in 1776, and the British departure from South 
Boston. It is an officially recognized historical event in Massachusetts and a Suffolk 
County holiday. . . . The General Court of Massachusetts established Evacuation 
Day in 1938. See G.L. c. 6, § 12K." 


“The judge noted that “Hurley speaks for the Veterans Council and he testified on 
its behalf. He indicated that the objection to GLIB’s participation was based on the 
belief, although unsubstantiated, that its members were also members of ACT-UP 


C7 


tent and changing explanations for excluding GLIB demon- 
strated the “pretextual nature” of those explanations. The judge 
found that GLIB was excluded from the parade because of the 
sexual orientation of its members. Based on our view of the 
record before us, we cannot say that this finding of the judge 
was Clearly erroneous. Mass.R.Civ.P. 52(a), 365 Mass. 816 
(1974). Cox v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 414 Mass. 375, 
384, 607 N.E.2d 1035 (1993). 

[243] The judge concluded that the parade constitutes a 
public accommodation under G.L. c. 272, § 92A (quoted, 
infra at 1297). In arriving at that conclusion, the judge relied 
on the lack of selectivity exerted by the veterans over the 
parade’s participants and sponsors and the parade’s historical 
roots. The judge found that “[{d]Juring the first half of this 
century, the South Boston Citizens Association and the City 
of Boston organized the various Evacuation Day activities. In 
1901, the City celebrated the 125th anniversary of Evacuation 
Day by a parade, artillery salute, concert, and fireworks dis- 
play, among other events. In 1947 Mayor James Michael Cur- 
ley granted the [council] authority to organize and conduct the 
Parade. Since that time, the City has annually granted the 
[council] a parade permit. No other applicant has applied for 
the permit. 

“Over the years, the Parade has featured as many as 20,000 
participants and as many as | ,000,000 spectators. In 1992, the 
Parade featured about 10,000 participants and 750,000 spec- 
tators. The 1993 Parade, postponed due to inclement weather, 
had fewer than 10,000 participants, about 400,000 spectators, 
and was aired live by Boston’s community access cable televi- 
sion channel. The Parade is one of the six largest parades held in 


and Queer Nation. The group's potential for being disorderly was offered as a 
reason for excluding it. The defendant's final position was that GLIB would be 
excluded because of its values and its messages, /.e., its members’ sexual orienta- 
tion. 


C8 


Boston annually, and the largest New England event for Irish- 
Americans, their friends, and well-wishers.” 

The Parade has followed substantially the same route in 
South Boston for at least forty-seven years, “providing enter- 
tainment, amusement, and recreation to participants and spec- 
tators alike.”” The council has demonstrated a lack of selectivity 
in admitting participants and sponsors.” The judge [244] charac- 
terized the parade by noting that “the interests and viewpoints 


represented are truly catholic; commercial . . ., religious. . ., 
political . . ., eleemosynary . . ., patriotic . . ., moral. . ., 
theatrical . . ., athletic . . ., public service . . ., trade union 


. . ., and so on. Indeed, since 1947 the only groups that have 
been excluded from the Parade besides GLIB have been the 
Ku Klux Klan and ROAR (Restore Our Alienated Rights). 
Neither of these groups, however, is protected by G.L. c. 272, 
§§ 92A and 98.” '° 


*The following, among others, sponsored or participated in the 1992 parade: 
Raytheon Corporation (Patriot Missile); Hallamore, Clydesdale Horses; radio station 
98.5 Mix FM: Boston municipal police department; Irish basketball players; South 
Boston resident group; Massachusetts Bay Transportatio Authority color guard; 
“McGrult the Crime Dog”; South Boston Against Drugs (SOBAD),; Marion Manor 
Nursing Home, National Parks Service; South Boston Baptist “Bible Trolley”; 
Vietnam Era Veterans; Princeman singing group; Leukemia Society; City Council- 
lors Rosaria Salerno, Albert “Dapper” O'Neil and John Nucci; radio station WZOU 
94.5 FM; Houlthan’s restaurant; Amrheins restaurant; Irish Mist restaurant; Shuberts 
Smoke Shop; Hub Video; Miss South Boston; Miss Ice-O-Rama; Miss Junior 
Ice-O-Rama; Lexington Minutemen, AFL-CIO; various high school bands; 
NORAID (Northern Ireland Aid); Massachusetts Citizens for Lite; “Joey Clowns” 
of Salem, New Hampshire, and radio stations WZLX FM and WAAF. 

In addition to many of the above, the following and others sponsored or partict- 
pated in the 1993 parade: Boston Bruins hockey club, Massachusetts Port Authority, 
Budweiser beer, Mt. Washington Bank, Pepsi Cola, several candidates for city 
council, various State representatives and senatore, the “Cycling Murrays,” Citizens 
Committee for JFD Day, Massachusetts Water Pollution Control Association, South 
Boston Savings Bank, all declared and undeclared mayoral candidates in Boston; 
and others. 


“ROAR was excluded because of its antibusing message. The judge made no 
finding as to why the Ku Klux Klan was excluded. 

The council argues that the Massachusetts Right to Life group and a truck carrying 
antihomosexual signs also were excluded, and that the message of NORAID was 
limited. Assuming this to be true, we perceive no legal relevance of this fact to 
the findings of the judge or to the conclusion we reach. 


C9 

Additionally, the judge found that there are no written pro- 
cedures, criteria, or standards for selecting participants or spon- 
sors of the parade. Participants from previous parades are sent 
an application for the upcoming parade. Those who have not 
previously participated and who inquire about participation in 
the upcoming parade are sent applications. Some groups re- 
ceive reimbursement for their parade-related expenses. The 
council votes on applications for participation in “batches,” 
and the council generally does not inquire into the message or 
views of each applicant." 

[245] Certain groups or individuals have been allowed to 
participate in the parade even if they have not submitted an 
application prior to the parade. In 1993, members of the Boston 
Bruins hockey club merely showed up at the start of the parade 
and were permitted to march, without having filed an applica- 
tion. Others, such as the Massachusetts Water Pollution Con- 
trol Association and several mayoral candidates, gained 
entrance by making a contribution to the parade without filling 
out an application. The judge concluded that the procedures 
for admittance into the parade was not uniformly applied. 

Based on the foregoing, the judge concluded that “it is 
impossible to discern any specific expressive purpose entitling 
the Parade to protection under the First Amendment... . . [T]he 
[council’s}] Parade is not an exercise of their constitutionally 
protected right of expressive association. It is an open recrea- 
tional event that is subject to the public accommodation law. 
.. . [T]he [council’s] exclusion of GLIB from the . . . Parade 
violates G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98, the public accommoda- 
tions law; absent state action, the exclusion does not violate 
GLIB’s rights under the Federal Constitution; the broadly in- 
clusive Parade is not constitutionally protected expressive asso- 


‘The judge found that, despite the formality of voting on applications by the 
council, decisions regarding participation are made by Hurley. The judge also 
found that, as to participation by GLIB, the council and Hurley are of the same 
opinion. 


C10 


ciation; the [council's] cross-claims that the City has violated 
their constitutional and statutory rights are meritless.” 

The judge dismissed GLIB’s claims against the city and 
entered judgment for the city on those claims.'? The judge 
dismissed the council’s cross claims against the city and entered 
judgment for the city on those claims. Finally, the judge issued 
the following order: “The defendants South Boston [246] Allied 
War Veterans Council, John J. “Wacko” Hurley, their officers, 
agents, servants, employees, attorneys, and all other persons 
in active concert or participation with them who have actual 
notice of this Order: (a) are permanently enjoined from discrim- 
inating against the plaintiff on the basis of sexual orientation 
with respect to participation in the defendant's annual St. Pat- 
rick’s/Evacuation Day Parade: (b) shall accommodate in the 
Parade in all respects representatives of the plaintiff on the 
terms and conditions generally applicable to all other Parade 
participants.” 

[1] The plaintiffs invoked and the judge essentially relied 
on the public accommodation law, G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 
98. Among the prohibitions in those sections is the prohibition 
against discrimination based on sexual orientation in the admis- 
sion to or treatment in any place of public accommodation, 
resort or amusement. G.L. c. 272, § 93. “A place of public 
accommodation, resort or amustment™ is “defined as and shall 
be deemed to include any place, whether licensed or un- 
licensed, which is open to and accepts or solicits the patronage 
of the general public and, without limiting the generality of 
this definition, whether or not it be (1) an inn, tavern, hotel, 
shelter, roadhouse, motel, trailer camp or resort for transient 


“In their brief, the plaintiffs did not take issue with the dismissal of their claims 
against the city. The plaintiffs seek to raise this issue tor the first time in a reply 
bref. It does not appear from the record that the plaintiffs filed a cross appeal, 
and therefore its doubtful that they had the right to tile a reply brief. Mass.R.App.P. 
l6(c), as amended, 399 Mass. 1217 (1987). Absent a cross appeal, the plaintiffs” 
claim of error on this issue ts not properly before us 


Cll 


or permanent guests or patrons seeking housing or lodging, 
food, drink, entertainment, health, recreation or rest; (2) a 
carrier, conveyance or elevator for the transportation of per- 
sons, whether operated on land, water or in the air, and the 
stations, terminals and facilities appurtenant thereto; (3) a gas 
station, garage, retail store or establishment, including those 
dispensing personal services; (4) a restaurant, bar or eating 
place, where food, beverages, confections or their derivatives 
are sold for consumption on or off the premises; (5) a rest 
room, barber shop, beauty parlor, bathhouse, seashore facili- 
ties or swimming pool, except such rest room, bathhouse or 
seashore facility as may be segregated on the basis of sex; (6) 
a boardwalk or other public highway; (7) an auditorium, 
theatre, music hall, meeting place or hall, including the com- 
mons halls of buildings: (8) a place of public amusement, 
recreation, sport, exercise or entertainment, (9) [247] public 
library, museum or planetarium; or (10) a hospital, dispensary 
or clinic operating for profit . . .” (emphasis supplied). G.L. 
c. 272, § 92A. 

The judge ruled that the parade was a place of public accom- 
modation within the ambit of § 92A. The language of § 92A 
itself and our case law require that the statute be given a broad 
and inclusive interpretation. Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. 
v. Massachusetts Comm'n Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 
716, 720, 524 N.E.2d 1364 (1988). Local Fin. Co. v. Massa- 
chusetts Comm'n Against Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10, 14, 
242 N.E.2d 536 (1968). Section 92A itself specifically includes 
‘a boardwalk or other public highway,” G.L. c. 272, § 92A(6), 
and also includes “a place of public amusement, recreation, 
sport, exercise or entertainment,” G.L. c. 272, § 92A(8). The 
plain language of the statute shows that the St. Patricks Day- 
Evacuation Day Parade falls within the scope of the public 
accommodation law. The parade occurs on the public strees 
of South Boston. Nothing in § 92A or any other statute suggests 


C12 


that a boardwalk or other public highway loses its character 
as a place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement, 
which it gains by operation of that statute, merely because a 
parade is conducted there. Given that the statute is remedial 
and was intended to be interpreted broadly and inclusively, 
Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc., supra, such a narrowing 
interpretation would be contrary to the intent of the Legislature 
which we have heretofore perceived. 

In addition, the judge found that the parade provides enter- 
tainment, recreation, and amusement to the participants as well 
as to the spectators, and that, in essence, almost any individual 
or group would be admitted to the parade if they either apply or 
show up at the start of the parade and offer to make a contribu- 
tion to the council.'’ We cannot say, [248] based on the evidence 
in the record before us, that these findings by the trial judge were 
clearly erroneous. See Mass.R.Civ.P. 52(a); Cox v. New En- 
gland Tel. & Tel. Co., 414 Mass. 375. 384, 607 N.E.2d 1035 
(1993). Thus, the parade additionally falls within the public 
accommodation law under G.L. c. 272, § 92A(8)." 


‘The defendants argue that, by operation of law, issuance of a parade permit 
closes the streets of the parade route to the public. We need not decide whether 
that is true. The findings of the judge suggest that virtually any member or group 
drawn from the public may apply or pay to enter the parade. Thus, while spectators 
along the route during the parade cannot join the parade, they most likely would 
have been able to join if they had applied or appeared at the start of the parade 
and paid a fee. Under the defendants’ reasoning, a restaurant which admits only 
diners who have made reservations or those who generously tip the maitre d* would 
be exempt from the public accommodation laws. Such a result would be contrary 
to the purposes of the public accommodation laws. See Concord Rod & Gun Club, 
Inc., supra. 

‘The defendants argue that, since the parade is an event rather.than a fixed, 
physical location, it is not a “place” as required by G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98. 
The common meaning of the word indeed has physical connotations, but it also 
has temporal connotations as well. See Webster's Third New Int'l Dictionary, 1727 
(1961). In light of the remedial nature of this statute, and the Legislature's intention 
that it be it be interpreted broadly and with an eye toward inclusiveness, we cannot 
adopt the restrictive definition of “place” advanced by the defendants. Concord 
Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Comm'n Against Discrimination, 402 
Mass. 716, 720,524. N.E.2d 1364 (1988). Local Fin. Co. v. Massachusetts Comm'n 


C13 


[2] The defendants assert that the public accommodation 
law, as applied to the parade, violates their rights under the 
First Amendment to the United States Constitution.'* In discus- 
sing [249] the First Amendment rights of the defendants, the 
judge referred to their right of expressive association. See 
generally Directors of Rotary Int'l v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 
481 U.S. 537, 544-49 (1987). On appeal, the defendants argue 
that their right to freedom of speech was implicated and that 
this right, see generally Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 
U.S. 147, 152 (1969), not their right of expressive association, 
was the operative right in this case. For the purposes of this 
case, however, we need not decide whether the free speech 
rights or the expressive association right, or both, might be 
implicated by the factual situation asserted by the defendants. 
This is so because, as the judge found, it is “impossible to 
discern any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to 
protection under the First Amendment.” '° 


Against Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10, 14, 242 N.E.2d 536 (1968). See United 
States Jayvcees Vv. Massachusetts Comm'n Against Discrimination, 391 Mass. 594, 
611-12, 463 N.E.2d 1151 (1984) (Abrams, J., concurring in part and dissenting 
in part, with whom Hennessy. C.J., and Liacos, J., joined). 

The defendants’ reliance on the majority opinion in United States Jaycees, is mis- 
placed. In that case, the organization was found not to be a place of public accommo- 
dation because it maintained no physical place of operations in Massachusetts. United 
States Jaycees, supra at 603, 463 N.E.2d 1151. It cannot be said of the parade that it 
is not associated with some physical place or location in Massachusetts. 


The defendants attempt to invoke the free speech and associational rights 
guaranteed by the Constitution of the Commonwealth. Aside from referring to our 
Constitution in the argument headings of their brief, however, the defendants make 
no separate argument under our Constitution. Accordingly, the defendants have 
waived those issues and we do not address them. Mass.R.App.P. 16(a)(4), as 
amended, 367 Mass. 921 (1975). Similarly, the defendants do not argue in their 
brief as to their asserted rights under the religious freedom and equal protection 
provisions of either the Massachusetts or the Federal Constitution. We do not 
address those issues. /d. 


‘To be clear, the inquiry focuses on the rights of the members of the council 
and whether they exercised those rights through the parade, not on the rights of 
the parade or the parade participants. 


C14 


[3] The defendants assert that a parade is a “pristine form 
of speech,” and refer us to New York County Bd. of Ancient 
Order of Hibernians v. Dinkins, 814 F.Supp. 358 (S.D.N.Y. 
1993) (Hibernians), among other cases. That case involved a 
group of homosexuals and bisexuals who wanted to march in 
the New York City St. Patrick’s Day Parade. /d. at 360-61. 
At the outset, we noted that Hibernians is distinguishable from 
the facts of this case because in Hibernians, the judge found 
that the Ancient Order of Hibernians in fact had used the 
parade as a means of expression, that the admission process 
was selective, and that it had adopted rules to prevent parade 
participants from using that parade as a forum to express views 
inconsistent with the views of the Ancient Order of Hibernians 
or the Roman Catholic Church. Hibernians, supra at 361-62, 
367.'’ Such is not the case here. Furthermore, “contrary to the 
assumption of the defendants, not every [250] parade is per 
se an exercise of those rights protected by the First Amendment. 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, supra (‘parading may nonethe- 
less constitute {a] method[] of expression entitled to First 
Amendment protection’ [emphasis supplied]).'*” 

In order to rely on the protections of the First Amendment 
for speech or expressive association, the defendants initially 
had to demonstrate that the parade truly was an exercise of 
those First Amendment rights. Clark v. Community for Crea- 
tive Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 n.5 (1984). This, the 
judge found, they did not do. 


We also note that the New York parade celebrates only St. Patrick's Day, 
while the Boston parade celebrates, in addition, Evacuation Day. See New York 
County Bd. of Ancient Order of Hibernians vy. Dinkins, 814 F.Supp. 358, 368-69 
(S.D.N.Y. 1993). It was partly on this basis that the judge characterized the Boston 
parade as a “public event.” 


“We note also that we uphold the findings and rulings of the judge based on 
the record before us, particularly the history and nature of the parade here in issue. 
We do not suggest that every parade is nonexpressive or that every parade is 
necessarily a place of public accommodation. Rather, we base our conclusions on 
the unique nature of the facts found as to the parade in controversy. 


C15 


“In arguing for reversal, the defendants point to evidence 
in the record suggesting that the parade did have an intended 
message (i.e., that the parade was intended as an expressive 
vehicle). This evidence and other extensive evidence, including 
a videotape of the 1993 parade, however, were before the 
judge when he made his decision, and we assume that he 
considered all the evidence. It was for the judge to assign the 
appropriate weight and credibility to the evidence presented 
to him. The defendants failed to demonstrate and, on our own 
review of the record, we could not conclude that the findings 
of the judge were clearly erroneous.”” Mass.R.Civ.P. 52(a). 
Cox v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., supra.” 

[251] We conclude, therefore, that the judge committed no 
error when he found that the defendants discriminated against 
the plaintiffs because of the plaintiffs’ sexual orientation in 
refusing to admit them into the parade, which is a place of pub- 
lic accommodation. Likewise, there was no error in his finding 
that the parade was not used by the council for expressive pur- 


The dissent suggests that the finding of the judge that the parade did not have 
an expressive purpose was clearly erroneous because the parade provides entertain- 
ment to the spectators. Aside from the fact that the defendants themselves did not 
assert this as evidence of an expressive purpose, we are puzzled by the dissent’s 
assertion, without citation, that the mere provision of entertainment would transform 
the parade into an expressive event. This assertion is especially puzzling in light 
of the detailed and exhaustive discussion by the judge of the evidence which led 
him to conclude that the parade was a Civic, nonexpressive celebration. Cf. Augat, 
Inc. v. Aegis, Inc., 417 Mass. 484, 497, 631 N.E.2d 95 (1994) (Nolan, J., 
dissenting) (this court may not “ignore both the record and the trial judge's findings 
of fact by baldly ‘assuming’ facts on its own to reach an alternative conclusion 
which it feels is appropriate”). 

The dissent’s reliance on Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715, 97 S.Ct. 
1428, 1435, 51 L.Ed.2d 752 (1977), is misplaced. Post at 1302-03. The private 
automobile of a New Hampshire resident could not possibly be characterized as a 
public accommodation. Here, on the contrary, the judge found, we agreed, and 
the dissent assumes, that the parade is a public accommodation within the statute. 
Thus, the burden was on the defendants to demonstrate that they were exercising 
their First Amendment rights and as a result were entitled to exemption from the 
public accommodation laws. See Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 
468 US. 288, 293 n.5, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 3069, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984). 


Cl6 


poses, and that, as a result, the defendants could not cloak 
their discriminatory acts in the mantle of the First Amendment. 

[4] The defendants argue that the public accommodation 
law, G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98, is unconstitutionally vague 
and overbroad. It does not appear from the record, submitted 
by the defendants, that they raised these issues below. We 
shall address them nevertheless because the claim is of possible 
public significance and because we can dispose of them briefly. 

The defendants argue that the public accommodation law is 
overbroad because it reaches constitutionally protected speech 
in that it allows the court to examine the content of speech 
with standardless discretion. This is not so. By their terms, 
G.L. c. 272, $$ 92A and 98, facially do not reach a speech 
or expression or association protected by the First Amendment. 
They do not allow a judge, or any public official, to examine 
the content of speech.*” Now would we inter[252]pret those 
sections so that they could reach and unconstitutionally infringe 
on speech. Cf. R.A.V. v. St. Paul, Minn., —_ U.S. ; ’ 
112 S.Ct. 2538, 2542, 120 L.Ed.2d 305 (1992); Forsyth 
County, Ga. v. Nationalist Movement, if : 
112 S.Ct. 2395, 2401-2402, 120 L.Ed.2d 101 (1992); Broad- 
rick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 613, 93 S.Ct. 2908, 2916, 
36 L.Ed.2d 830 (1973).*' We already have concluded that, in 
this case, the public accommodation law did not infringe on 
the defendants’ First Amendment rights. 


“Contrary to the defendants’ assertion, the judge did not inquire into the content 
of speech in this case. Instead, he examined whether there existed speech or any 
other activity protected by the First Amendment. That he permissibly can, and 
must, do. See United States vy. O' Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 376, 88 S.Ct. 1673, 1678, 
20 L.Ed.2d 672 (1968) (not all conduct is protected speech even if so labeled by 
the actor); Clark, supra, 468 U.S. at 293 n.5, 104 S.Ct. at 3069 n.5 (one seeking 
relief under First Amendment must show that he is entitled to it, since there is no 
presumption of expressiveness). 


*' We leave open for an appropriate case the question whether the public accom- 
modation law permissibly could be applied to a genuine exercise of First Amendment 
rights. See R.A.V. v. St. Paul, Minn., __. U.S. —_, —_, 112 S.Ct. 2538, 2542, 
2548, 120 L.Ed.2d 305 (1992). 


Cl7 


The defendants’ vagueness argument is that “ ‘men of com- 
mon intelligence must necessarily guess at [the] meaning [of 
the public accommodation lawj.’ Connally v. General Con- 
struction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391 [46S.Ct. 126, 127, 70 L.Ed. 
322] (1926).” The defendants argue this is true, because three 
State judges (two in the Superior Court and one in the Appeals 
Court) have interpreted the statutes as reaching parades and one 
Federal judge has suggested that the statute was ambiguous. 

We note that the judges mentioned by the defendants did 
not find that the statute applied to parades in general, but rather 
to the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade in particular, 
because of the unique characteristics of the parade. The defend- 
ants’ argument rests on the assumption that the statute reaches 
their speech. The judge below found and we have affirmed, 
however, that the defendants did not prove that they truly were 
exercising First Amendment rights. Thus, their vagueness ar- 
gument fails because it rests on a faulty assumption. Further- 
more, the public accommodation law gives persons of ordinary 
intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibit- 
ed, provides standards to those who must enforce those laws, 
and does not inhibit the valid exercise of First Amendment 
rights. See Grayned v. Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-109, 92 
S.Ct. 2294, 2298-99, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972). 

[253] Because the defendants had no right to discriminate 
against members of GLIB, by operation of logic the city could 
not possibly have interfered with or infringed on any of their 
rights as asserted by the defendants. Thus, the judge properly 
dismissed the defendants’ cross claims against the city. 


NOLAN, Justice (dissenting). 


Today will be regarded as a sad and frustrating day in the 
history of the First Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion. Today, a majority of this court upholds, and thereby 
endorses, a trial judge’s flagrant violation of the free speech 


C18 


rights of citizens of this Commonwealth. The majority acqui- 
esces in a judge’s order instructing a private group that if it 
wishes to express itself at all. it must include in its expression 
a particular idea, one with which the group does not agree. 
One must strain to recall or even to imagine such an obvious 
violation of the revered right to free speech. 

The majority upholds a Superior Court judge’s decision that 
the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council’s (Veterans 
Council) exclusion of the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and 
Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB) from the St. Patrick’s Day- 
Evacuation Day Parade violates GLIB’s members’ statutory 
right to be free from discrimination on the basis of their sexual 
preference in place of public accommodation, and that the 
application of the statute to the facts of this case does not 
violate the Veterans Council’s rights under the First Amend- 
ment. It is because I conclude that the Veterans Council’s 
rights were violated by the judge’s decision and order compel- 
ling it to allow GLIB to march and express its message in the 
Veterans Council’s parade that I dissent from the decision of 
the majority. 

1. G.L. c. 272, $$ 92A, 98. The majority finds no error 
in the judge’s determination that the conduct of the Veterans 
Council in excluding GLIB from its parade violates the Com- 
monwealth’s accommodation law, G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. 
I do not fully concur with the judge’s reasoning in determining 
the applicability of the statute. Further, for [254] reasons dis- 
cussed, infra, I do not agree that the judge’s findings support 
his conclusion that the conduct of the Veterans Council violated 
the statute, even if it otherwise applies. I reserve extended 
discussion on these matters, however, and proceed to issues 
concerning rights under the First Amendment. I shall assume 
for the purpose of the following discussion that the statute 
applies to the conduct of the Veterans Council. 

2. First Amendment. The judge limited his discussion of 
the First Amendment to the freedom of expressive association. 


C19 


He ruled that the freedom of speech was not at issue. This 
determination is erroneous. The defendants’ freedom of speech 
is certainly at issue in this case — and was properly raised 
and argued' — and is violated by the judge’s application of 
G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. 

a. Freedom of speech. The First Amendment to the Consti- 
tution of the United States reads, in part: “Congress shall make 
no law .. . abridging the freedom of speech.” Through the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, the 
First Amendment limitation on Congress’ power to legislate 
is applied to the legislative power of the States. Wallace v. 
Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 49-49, 105 S.Ct. 2479, 2485, 86 L.Ed.2d 
29 (1985). Further, “*[t]hat the action of state court and judicial 
officers in their official capacities is to be regarded as action 
of the State within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment, 
is a proposition which has long been established.” Shelley v. 
Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 14, 68 S.Ct. 836, 842, 92 L.Ed. 1161 
(1948). Thus, it is as constitutionally objectionable for a judge 
sitting in a court of this Commonwealth to issue an order 
improperly “abridging the freedom of speech,” as it is for 
Congress to enact a law doing the same. 

As a general proposition, the State acts within its power 
when it enacts reasonable “time, place and manner” reg- 
ula[255]tions which affect speech of expression. Cox v. New 
Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569, 576, 61 S.Ct. 762, 766, 85 L.Ed. 
1049 (1941) (“If a municipality has authority to control the 
use of its public streets for parades or processions, as it undoub- 
tedly has, it cannot be denied authority to give consideration, 
without unfair discrimination, to time, place and manner in 
relation to the other proper uses of the streets”). Conversely, 


‘The Veterans Council presented argument on the freedom of speech throughout 
the proceedings in this case. In particular, argument on the issue was presented at 
trial, in the defendants’ memorandum in support of proposed findings of facts and 
proposed conclusions of law, and in the defendants’ briefs on appeal. 


C20 


restrictions on the content of speech are generally improper. 
See Riley v. National Fed'n of the Blind of N.C., 487 U.S. 
781, 798, 108 S.Ct. 2667, 2678, 101 L.Ed.2d 669 (1988) 
(“|The State’s] content-based regulation is subject to exacting 
First Amendment scrutiny”); Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. 
v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 558, 95 S.Ct. 1239, 1246, 43 
L..Ed.2d 448 (1975), quoting Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 
372 U.S. 58, 70, 83 S.Ct. 631, 639, 9 L.Ed.2d 584 (1963) 
(“Any system of prior restraint . . . “comes to this Court bear- 
ing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity’ ”’); 
Police Dep't of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 96, 92 S.Ct. 
2286, 2290, 33 L.Ed.2d 212 (1972) (‘government may noi 
grant the use of a forum to people whose views it finds accept- 
able, but deny use to those wishing to express less favored or 
more controversial views”). The freedom of speech comprises 
both the right to speak and the right to refrain from speaking. 
Riley, supra, 487 U.S. at 795, 108 S.Ct. at 2626. Wooley v. 
Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715,97S.Ct. 1428, 1435, 51 L.Ed.2d 
752 (1977). Thus, “[t]he First Amendment protects the right 
of individuals . . . to refuse to foster . . . an idea they find 
morally objectionable.” Wooley, supra. “Mandating speech 
that a speaker would not otherwise make necessarily alters the 
content of the speech.” Riley, supra. 

In the present case, the judge’s decision and order requires 
the Veterans Council to allow the members of GLIB to march 
in the parade as an identifiable group.° As noted by the judge 
and the majority, GLIB’s organizational purposes are expres- 
Sive in nature; to express its members’ pride in their sexual 
preference; to demonstrate to the community the [256] diversity 
which exists therein; and to show support for homosexuals 


*The judgment states in part: “|The defendants] shall accommodate in the Parade 
in all respects representatives of [GLIB] on the terms and conditions generally 
applicable to all other Parade participants.” His decision makes clear that this 
entails allowing the members of GLIB to march in a group, identifying themselves 
as members of the group, and identifying the group through a banner. 


C21 


and bisexuals in New York who sought to march in a St. Pat- 
rick’s Day Parade in New York City. The Veterans Council, 
as license holder of the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day 
Parade, determines who marches in the parade. Except for 
GLIB, there would be no group marching in the parade whose 
message supports homosexuality or bisexuality. Therefore, the 
judge’s decision and order permitting GLIB to march as an 
identifiable group results in GLIB’s message being added to 
the parade. This is “[m]andating speech that [the Veterans 
Council] would not otherwise make,” and is thus content-based 
regulation. Riley, supra. 

Supreme Court cases concerning content-based regulation 
of speech examine such regulation with a strict scrutiny, or 
“exacting” scrutiny standard. See, e.g., Riley, supra, 487 U.S. 
at 798, 108 S.Ct. at 2678; Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public 
Utils. Comm'n of Cal., 475 U.S. 1, 19-20, 106 S.Ct. 903, 
913, 89 L.Ed.2d 1 (1986); Wooley, supra, 430 U.S. at 716, 
97 S.Ct. at 1436. If we assume that evisceration of discrimi- 
nation on the basis of sexual preference is a compelling State 
interest, the judge's action in this case is not narrowly tailored 
to attaining that end: “[T]he State can serve that interest through 
means that would not violate [defendants’] First Amendment 
rights.” Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., supra, 475 U.S. at 19, 106 
S.Ct. at 913. To compel the Veterans Council to express 
GLIB’s message is not narrowly tailored to the State’s interest. 
It unnecessarily hampers the free speech of the Veterans Coun- 
cil. It goes beyond merely regulating discriminatory conduct, 
and requires a private group, the Veterans Council, to promote 
GLIB’s ideals. This is unconstitutional: “[W]here the State’s 
interest is to disseminate an ideology, no matter how acceptable 
to some, such interest cannot outweigh an individual’s First 
Amendment right to avoid becoming the courier for such mes- 
sage.” Wooley, supra, 430 U.S. at 717, 97 S.Ct. at 1436. 

It is important to note that the Veterans Council does not need 
a narrow or distinct theme or message in its parade for it to be 


Caz 


protected under the First Amendment. Both the judge and the 
majority try to illustrate that the parade is a public celebration 
with no distinct, unified theme; the impli[257]cation is that it 
is not expressive activity, and is therefore not worthy of First 
Amendment protection. This analysis is erroneous for two 
reasons. First, regardless of whether the parade has one mes- 
sage, ten messages, or no message at all, if GLIB’s particular 
message is not in the parade, it cannot constitutionally be 
forced on the Veterans Council. Thus, although an individual 
who drives his automobile may have no expressive purpose 
for doing so, the State cannot require him to foster a message 
while driving that he otherwise would not. Wooley, supra at 
717, 97 S.Ct. at 1436 (violation of the First Amendment to 
require defendants to display “Life Free or Die” on their license 
plates). Second, the finding that the parade lacks an expressive 
purpose is clearly erroneous. The Veterans Council obtains a 
license, collects funds, and privately organizes the St. Patrick's 
Day-Evacuation Day Parade each year. They do so knowing 
that their efforts will provide entertainment to the hundreds of 
thousands of spectators who line the streets of the South Boston 
section of Boston to watch in celebration of St. Patrick’s Day 
and Evacuation Day. The judge would have us believe that 
the Veterans Council and all the parade participants show up 
solely for their own entertainment, and that any entertainment 
of the viewing public is merely incidental.‘ This defies logic, 
yet is just one of many gaps in reason created by the trial judge's 


‘The judge relies on the Supreme Court case of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 
19, 25, 109 S.Ct. 1S91, 1595, 104 L.Ed.2d 18 (1989), wherein the Court ruled: 
“the activity of . . . dance-hall patrons — coming together to engage in recreational 
dancing — is not protected by the First Amendment.” The case is inapposite. 
Unlike the participants in the Veterans Council's parade, patrons in the dance hall 
did not gather to dance for the purpose of entertaining others in celebration of a 
holiday. The parade is conducted for the entertainment of hundreds of thousands 
of people; the dance-hall patrons whose conduct was at issue in Dallas, did not 
gather for the purpose of entertaining others. 


C23 


flagrant efforts to forego extending to the Veterans Council 
their deserved First Amendment rights. 

The judge’s order clearly violates the Veterans Council’s 
freedom of speech. 

b. Freedom of association. The judge determined, and the 
majority agreed, that the Veterans Council’s First Amend-[258] 
ment freedom of expressive association is not unconstitution- 
ally infringed by requiring GLIB to march as a groupo in the 
parade. I disagree. 

The freedom of expressive association is the “right to associ- 
ate for the purpose of engaging in those activities protected 
by the First Amendment — speech, [among others].” Roberts 
v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 618, 104 S.Ct. 3244, 
3249, 82 L.Ed.2d 462 (1984). Much like the related, broader 
freedom of speech, “[f]reedom of association . . . plainly pre- 
supposes a freedom not to associate.” /d. at 623, 104 S.Ct. 
at 3252, citing Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Ed., 431 U.S. 209, 
234-35, 97 S.Ct. 1782, 1799, 52 L.Ed.2d 261 (1977). Infringe- 
ments on the right not to associate are examined under strict 
scrutiny; “Infringements on that right may be justified by reg- 
ulations adopted to serve compelling state interests, unrelated 
to the suppression of ideas, that cannot be achieved through 
means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms.” 
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, supra, and cases cited. It 
is established, however, that, “[i]f a club seeks to exclude 
individuals who do not share the views that the club’s members 
wish to promote,” the law may not require association. New 
York State Club Ass'n v. City of New York, 487 U.S. 1, 13, 
108 S.Ct. 2225, 2234, 101 L.Ed.2d 1 (1988). 

As discussed above, the Veterans Council organizes the 
parade for expressive purposes: to entertain the hundreds of 
thousands of spectators who view the parade each year in 
celebration of St. Patrick’s Day and Evacuation Day. Again 
assuming, without deciding, that evisceration of discrimination 


C24 


on the basis of sexual preference is a compelling State interest, 
State regulation in furtherance of this end must be narrowly 
tailored to attaining it. Thus, requiring the Veterans Council 
not to exclude the members of GLIB on the basis of their 
sexual preference may be a constitutionally valid infringement 
on the Veterans Council's rights; however, precluding the Vet- 
erans Council from disallowing the members of GLIB from 
expressing themselves as a group is not related to the State’s 
interest, and is therefore unconstitutional. In other words, be- 
cause the judge’s decision and order require the Veterans Coun- 
cil to allow GLIB to express itself, they [259] violate the rule 
that, [where] a club seeks to exclude individuals who do not 
share the views that the club’s members wish to promote, the 
Law [may] erect| ] no obstacle to this end.” New York State 
Club Ass'n, supra. 

It is important to note that this case is distinguishable from 
those that involve exclusion of individuals whose message and 
protected status may be inseparable. For example, in /nvisible 
Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Mayor, Bd. of 
Comm'rs, & Chief of Police of Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281 
(D.Md.1988), a private group comprising numerous African 
Americans sought to enforce agains the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) 
an antidiscrimination statute in an effort to participate in the 
KKK ’s planned parade. The Federal District Courtf determined 
that permitting the group to participate would be unconstitu- 
tional, as the mere presence of African Americans in the KKK’s 
parade would frustrate the KKK’s message of white separatism. 
fd. at 289. This is distinguishable from the present case: the 
mere presence of homosexuals or bisexuals in the parade likely 
would not frustrate any message of the Veterans Council. This 
is so because GLIB’s message is separable from its members’ 
status as homosexuals or bisexuals. Thus, the presence of 
homosexuals or bisexuals, not outwardly identifiable as such, in 
the parade would likely not affect any message of the Veterans 


OF 


Council, while the presence of those same individuals marching 
as an identifiable group —- the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian 
and Bisexual Group of Boston — would. 

As discussed above, mandating mere association in this case 
may be constitutional; mandating a message is not. At the very 
least, the judge’s decision and order, insofar as it compels the 
Veterans Council to allow the members of GLIB to march and 
express themselves as a group in the Veterans Council’s parade 
and violates the First Amendment. 

3. Other matters. Aside from the the judge’s improper re- 
fusal to address the issue of freedom of speech and his errone- 
ous analysis of the issue of freedom of association, his decision 
and order includes other serious errors of law, reason, and fact 
which warrant discussion. 

[260] “In his decision, the judge equates excluding a group 
on the basis of its message or values with exclusion on the 
basis of its members’ sexual preference: “The defendant’s final 
position was GLIB would be excluded because of its values 
and its message, /.e., its members’ sexual orientation” (empha- 
sis added). This is clear error, and may have led to a baseless 
finding that the Veterans Council discriminated on the basis 
of GLIB’s members sexual preference. If the Veterans Council 
excluded GLIB because of its message, and not specifically 
because of its members’s sexual preference, then the statute 
was not violated. See G.L. c. 272, § 92A. Indeed, overwhelm- 
ing evidence exists throughout the record which indicates that 
GLIB was excluded because of its message, and not because 
of its members’ sexual preference.” * Conversely, the only 


‘There is no evidence in the record that the Veterans Council ever inquired into 
the sexual preference of any person intending to march in the parade, including 
the members of GLIB; there is no evidence that the Veterans Council ever excluded 
any homosexual or bisexual not a member of GLIB; the judge found that not all 
members of GLIB are homosexual or bisexual; there ts evidence im the record that 
the Veterans Council would let the members of GLIB march without a banner 
identifying the group. 


C26 


evidence which supports a finding of discrimination was that 
many of GLIB’s members are homosexual and GLIB was 
excluded, and that the Veterans Council had, in the past, 
proffered different reasons for its decision to exclude GLIB.° 

“Relatediy, the judge state that, even if the Veterans Coun- 
cil’s assertion that it excluded GLIB wsa under a policy of 
excluding all sexual themes was true, ‘[e]xcluding all sexual 
themes .. . contravenes the First Amendment's prohibition 
on content-based restrictions.’ This is a flagrantly erroneous 
statement of law. The judge found that there was no State 
action here; certainly private parties may exclude any topic 
[261] or theme they want from their expression. This statement 
is an example of quintessential content-based regulation of 
speech which is plainly prohibited by the First Amendment, 
and it illustrates the confused understanding of the First 
Amendment by the judge and by this court, through its acqui- 
escence.” 

4. Conclusion. That the judge’s decision and order requir- 
ing the Veterans Council to allow GLIB to march and to 
express itself as a group is a flagrant violation of the Veterans 
Council's First Amendment rights is an unavoidable conclu- 
sion. The judge’s crude regulation of the content of the Vete- 
rans Council’s speech is epitomized by the last sentence of his 
decision: “Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of [the Vete- 
rans Council’s] parade.” 

We have never been in the busineess of protecting only 
internally consistent, narrowly focused, politically sensitive 
speech. It is a travesty that we today vacate this precedent. 
Our holding today, while, to some, seemingly pushes us for- 
ward, really pushes us back over 200 years, to an era that 
lacked the protection guaranteed by the First Amendment. I 
diss. *t. 


‘[t is important to note that each of the reasons for excluding GLIB proffered 
by the Veterans Council is not discriminatory. At various times throughout the 
past years, the Veterans Council proffered the following reasons for excluding 
GLIB: the Veterans Council was not provided with enough information about GLIB 
on its application; it was concerned with the safety of the group's members and 
the members of the public; and it excluded all sexual themes from the parade. 


DI 
APPENDIX D. 


Supreme Judicial Court for the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
1412 Courthouse, Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
(617) 557-1020 


Chester Darling, Esquire 
306 Dartmouth Street 
Boston MA 02116 


RE: No. SJC-06498 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEX- 
UAL GROUP OF BOSTON & others 

VS. 

CITY OF BOSTON vs. SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED 
WAR VETERANS COUNCIL & another 


NOTICE OF DENIAL OF PETITION FOR REHEARING 


The Petition for Rehearing filed in the above captioned case 
has been considered by the court and is denied. 


Very truly yours, 


Jean M. Kennett, Clerk 
Dated: July 26, 1994 


To: Mary Lisa Bonauto, Esquire 
John P. Ward, Esquire 
Gretchen Van Ness, Esquire 
Philip M. Cronin, Esquire 
Claudia B. McKelway, Ass’t Corp. Counsel 
Chester Darling, Esquire 
George P. Napolitano, Special A.A.G. 
Elizabeth S. Hendler, Esquire 
Andrew McCauley 


