TS I GI, Rear 
Supreme Court, U.S, 


FILED 
1995 


No. 94-749 


yas ee > 
[ee ae _---— meres \, 
eer 


Tinsinsatenenemenmenen ean 


In the Supreme Court of the United States — 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY, AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL. 
PETITIONERS, 


Vv. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION, 
By AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, anpb 
CATHLEEN FINN, ACTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 
RESPONDENT. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


TO THE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


DwiGHT G. DUNCAN CHESTER DARLING 
SOUTHERN N.E. SCHOOL OF LAW Counsel of Record 
333 Faunce Corner Road 306 Dartmouth Street 


N. Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747 Boston, Massachusetts 02116 
(617) 536-2050 


WILLIAM M. CONNOLLY DANIEL J. SUMPTION 

546 E. Broadway 28 Constitution Road 

S. Boston, Massachusetts 02127 Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 
BATEMAN & SLADE, INC BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 


Table of Contents. 


Reply Brief for Petitioners 


I. Respondent’s Assertion That The Veterans Are 
Merely Administering A Parade For The City Is 
Erroneous. 


II. GLIB Has A Message. The Veterans Object Not 
To GLIB’s Members’ Sexual Orientation But To 
Their Message. 


III. The Veterans Know What They Do Not Want To 
Say Through Their Parade, And They Have 
Decisively Acted Accordingly. 


IV. The Statute As Interpreted, And The Injunction 
Applying It, Directly Burden Speech. 


Conclusion 


Table of Authorities Cited. 


CASES. 


Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969) 
Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 1197 (7th Cir. 1978) 


Consolidated Edison Co. v. Public Service Comm’n, 
447 U.S. 530 (1980) 


Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536 (1965) 


Forsyth County v. Nationalist Movement, 112 S.Ct. 
2395 (1992) 


Gay Veterans Ass’n v. American Legion, 621 F.Supp. 
1510 (S.D.N.Y. 1985) 


Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. 
Mayor of Thurmont, 700 F.Supp. 281 (1988) 


15 
19 


il TABLE OF AUTHORITIES CITED (CONT'D) 


Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of 
Boston v. City of Boston, 418 Mass. 238 (1994) ae 


Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964) 14 
Pacific Gas and Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Comm'n, 

475 U.S. 1 (1986) 16 
Prune Yard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74 

(1980) 16 
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538 (1992) 17 
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147 (1969) 15 
Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705 (1977) 16 


STATUTES. 
Massachusetts General Laws 


c. 272, § 98 13 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


Tom Coakley, “Evolution of a holiday, Boston-style,” 


Boston Globe, March 17, 1995 2n 
John Finnis, Law, Morality and Sexual Orientation, 69 

Notre Dame L. Rev. 1049, 1053-54 (1994) On 
Nan D. Hunter, /dentity, Speech and Equality, 79 Va. 

L. Rev. 1695 (1993) Y 
Thomas Sowell, Ethnic America, Introduction and 

Chapter |, “The Irish” 2n 


Larry W. Yackle, Parading Ourselves: Freedom of 
Speech at the Feast of St. Patrick, 73 B.U. L. Rev. 
791, 866-67 (1993) Sn, lin, 12, 14n, 16, 18 


eo  —— 


No. 94-749 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


JOHN J. HURLEY, INDIVIDUALLY, AND THE 
SOUTH BOSTON ALLIED WAR VETERANS COUNCIL. 
PETITIONERS, 


v. 


IRISH-AMERICAN GAY, LESBIAN AND BISEXUAL 
GROUP OF BOSTON, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION, 
By AND THROUGH TIMOTHY DALEY, BARBRA KAY, anp 
CATHLEEN FINN, AcTING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF 
AND ON BEHALF OF MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION, 
RESPONDENT. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


As this Reply Brief will show, the Respondent’s Brief mis- 
represents facts, misrepresents the record, and misrepresents 
the Veterans’ case. This misrepresentation is crucial, because, 
as Respondents claim, this case turns on the facts. Resp. Br. 
2. What the facts describe is a conflict between two sides: a 
longstanding private group that runs a parade, and a newly- 
formed group that has lately sought to use that parade to make 
its Own statement. : 


2 


As such, this is a case primarily about the First Amendment, 
as indeed the Veterans have argued from the beginning. As 
private actors, the Veterans have a First Amendment right to 
express anything they wish, without being forced by the gov- 
ernment to express anything they do not. 

GLIB has absolutely no claim on the Veterans’ Parade since 
it could sponsor another parade at any other time, or on any 
other street in the City of Boston. In other words, it can have 
its own parade and offer its own message. The fact that GLIB 
has been largely successful in its state-compelled intrusions 
into the Veterans’ Parade should concern all private sponsors 
of speech conducted in a public forum. 

For forty-seven years, the Allied War Veterans Council of 
South Boston has organized and run a hugely popular but 
distinctly private parade in the neighborhood of South Boston. 
This is the Veterans’ annual celebration commemorating St. 
Patrick, the Patron Saint of Ireland and the Archdiocese of 
Boston, and the British Evacuation of Boston in 1776.' 


‘Evacuation Day is a limited Public Holiday, celebrated only in Suffolk County, 
Massachusetts. While the Respondent's Brief characterizes it as “a civic holiday 
centered on a municipal parade,” (Resp. Br. 4), the city does not conduct any 
Evacuation Day activities, with the exception of allowing a day off for municipal 
employees. The Respondent does concede that “March 17, of course, also happens 
to be St. Patrick's Day.” (Resp. Br. 3). Interestingly, Author Thomas O'Connor, 
Professor of History at Boston College, quoted in a Boston Globe article by Tom 
Coakley, Globe Staff, March 17, 1995: Evolution of a holiday, Boston-style, tells 
a different story of how the holiday evolved. Giving workers a day off for St. 
Patrick's Day would have violated church-state separation and the sensibilities of 
the Yankee establishment, he said. Therefore, “at a time where it would have been 
impossible to get a holiday to celebrate a Catholic saint, the way around it was to 
get a holiday for Evacuation Day. It was a political disguise.” During the middle 
of the nineteenth century, an era when the Know-Nothing movement gained ascen- 
dancy in this country, Irish Catholics were openly prohibited from taking part in 
July 4th parades. In response, they formed their own parades, thus giving mse to 
thousands of annual St. Patrick’s Day parades conducted throughout the nation. 
See Thomas Sowell, Ethnic America, Introduction and Chapter |, “The Irish.” 


3 


I. RESPONDENT’S ASSERTION THAT THE VETERANS ARE 
MERELY ADMINISTERING A PARADE FOR THE City Is 
ERRONEOUS. 


The central facts regarding parade ownership are resolved 
by the findings of the trial court, which the Supreme Judicial 
Court affirmed: (1) that the city’s involvement in the Parade 
did not amount to state action; and (2) that the Veterans are 
private actors (Cert. Pet. App. B22). 

Respondent apparently accepts these findings, but nonethe- 
less insists on the fiction that the Veterans are merely adminis- 
tering the Parade on the city’s behalf. “The Parade was once 
formally under the City of Boston’s management.” (Resp. Br. 
4). “The Parade belongs, and has always belonged, to all 
citizens of Boston.” (Resp. Br. 20). “[T]he City conducted 
[the Parade] for years and . . . the Council has more recently 
conducted [it.]” (Resp. Br. 31). “[T]he Council functions 
chiefly as the administrator of theevent. . .” (Resp. Br. 32). 

Respondent attempts to raise the state action issue through 
the back door (Resp. Br. 21-22 n.17), despite the fact that the 
law of the case foreciosed this issue. Not only did Respondent 
fully litigate this matter at trial, but the trial judge found against 
GLIB on state action. When the Veterans appealed the case 
to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, Respondent’s 
brief, dated March 2, 1994, stated ti.at the “Court should deny 
the Veterans Council appeal and aiiirm in all respects the 
ruling of the trial Court below.” (Appellees’ Brief at 35). When 
GLIB broached the issue of state action in its Reply Brief to 
the Supreme Judicial Court, the Court summarily rejected it. 
Irish American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston 
v. City of Boston, 418 Mass 238, 245 n.12, 636 N.E. 2d 1293, 
1297 n.12 (1994). Nor was it among the Questions Presented 
in the Petition for Certiorari in this case. 

In any event, the major difficulty with Respondent’s mis- 
leading argument is that it is carried on the shoulders of apoc- 


4 


rypha and anecdote. The city’s position regarding parades was 
described by Assistant Corporation Counsel McKelway at trial: 
“The City is not in the business of running parades and there 
will be testimony that, of the approximately two hundred 
parade permits issued annually by the City, there is only one 
that the City actually runs and that is the Fourth of July Parade. 
It is not the St. Patrick’s Day parade. The Veterans have run 
that parade for at least forty-seven, maybe forty-eight years 
now.” ( Tr. p. 38). 

Additionally, city attorney McKelway read into the record 
of the trial the response of the Mayor of the City of Boston, 
Raymond Flynn, to an interrogatory submitted by Petitioners 
regarding ownership of the parade. The Mayor responded: 


To the best of my knowledge, the Allied War Vete- 
rans Council plans, organizes, administers, coordi- 
nates, promotes, publicizes, and executes the Evacu- 
ation Day/St. Patrick’s Day Parade. The city’s func- 
tion in relation to the parade from 1990 to 1993, as 
with all other private parades, was to ensure that the 
event is properly permitted through the Department 
of Transportation and to engage in appropriate action 
to protect the public safety through the Police Depart- 
ment, Fire Department, Department of Health and 
Hospitals, and the Public Works Department. 


Tr. 472-473. 

The uncontroverted facts in this case are that the city of 
Boston issues between two hundred and two hundred and fifty 
parade permits each year to private groups in the city of Boston. 
Tr. 182. The permit issued to the Veterans is but one of many 
issued to private parties to celebrate various occasions. 

GLIB had a full and fair opportunity to explore its unsup- 
ported assertion in the lower courts. City defendants were 


SS 


5 


available to substantiate or deny this belief, and to subject 
themselves to questioning under oath as to the truthfulness of 
their testimony. GLIB did not question the mayor, the licensing 
authority, the Veterans, nor the police department with regard 
to this point. We have no idea what Mayor Curley said almost 
a half century ago, or whether the city even issued permits 
during that period. He purportedly gave permission to the 
Veterans to run the Parade. However, today, when a group-~ 
wishes to conduct a parade, an application for a permit must 
be made to the Boston Transportation Department. Tr. 183. 

If there is an agreement between the city and the Veterans 
to have the Veterans administer this parade, no rationale for 
this venture has been offered by Respondent. Moreover, it is 
ludicrous to suggest that the Veterans would wage a costly 
three-and-a-half-year campaign to retain control of their Parade 
if they or the city had an agreement that the Veterans only 
administer this event on the city’s behalf. Were that the case, 
it is far more likely the Veterans would simply have said to 
the city, “You run your parade and we'll run ours,” or alterna- 
tively, the city would likely have said to the Veterans, “You 
are hereby disfranchised.” It is that simple. It is utterly illogical 
to accept the Respondent's position, and there is no evidence 
in the record to suggest that the city of Boston and the Veterans 
engaged in a scheme to exclude GLIB from the Veterans’ 
Parade.’ 

Lastly on this point, in the hope of showing a nexus, GLIB 
hopes to attach significance to the fact that March 17th is 
Evacuation Day, and that over the years the governor of the 
Commonwealth has issued a proclamation to honor the occa- 


“As noted by Larry W. Yackle, Parading Ourselves: Freedom of Speech at the 
Feast of St. Patrick, 73 B.U. L. REV. 791, 866-67 (1993), “It can scarcely be 
denied that the mayors in both cities [Boston and New York] have used their good 
offices in a genuine effort to bring ILGO and GLIB into the fold . . . I hesitate 
to say that... Ray Flynn . committed the very discriminatory actions [he] 
worked so hard to avert. I certainly would conclude that Dinkins and Flynn were 


6 


sion. Resp. Br. 10. A ceremonial Proclamation encouraging 
citizens to celebrate a particular holiday carries no force of 
law for the citizenry of Massachusetts. Moreover, in recent 
times the St. Patrick’s Day Parade has been held on the Sunday 
closest to March 17th, and thus never on the public holiday 
that commemorates Evacuation Day. As the court ruled in Gay 
Veterans Ass'n, Inc. v. American Legion, 621 F. Supp. 1510, 
1517 (S.D.N.Y. 1985): 


Plaintifis argue that the American Legion Parade is 
a public torum because its purpose is to celebrate a 
public holiday, Veterans Day, on a public street. 
This, however, does not turn a private parade into 
a public forum. Under New York law, the sponsor- 
ship of parades to celebrate Veterans Day is not an 
exclusively public function. 


The Petitioners are not custodians of a public celebration in 
any sense. They are not designees of the city, nor do they 
exercise their constitutional rights at the public’s pleasure. 
Contrary to GLIB’s assertion, and notwithstanding conclusory 
statements in Professor Yackle’s law review article regarding 
detailed participation by the city,’ the record simply does not 
support the claim that the city ever conducted or managed the 
St. Patrick’s Day/Evacuation Day Parade. 


responsible for what happened in the practical sense that they failed to do all they 
might have to change the result. Yet, current state action doctrine would presumably 
find that argument insufficient.” 


‘Protessor Yackle is on the Respondent's Brief in this case. His law review 
article was submitted ‘n draft form to the trial court at the end of the trial in this 
case along with GLIB’s Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. 


7 


If. GLIB HAs A MESSAGE. THE VETERANS OBJECT NoT To 
GLIB’s MEMBERS’ SEXUAL ORIENTATION BUT TO THEIR 
MESSAGE. 


The argument on this point may sound like double- 
talk on first hearing, but there is some substance to 
the claim that the exclusion of gay and lesbian 
groups, aS opposed to individual homosexuals 
marching with other units, is not discrimination on 
the basis of sexual orientation at all, but rather is 
discrimination on the basis of the point of view that 
ILGO and GLIB represent. Those organizations do 
have a message of their own, namely the message 
that forms their raison d'etre. . . . [I]n this particular 
First Amendment context, where speech claims are 
set over against each other, it seems perfectly reason- 
able, even essential, that those who command the 
public forum be permitted to bar those with conflict- 
ing views. 


Larry W. Yackle, Parading Ourselves: Freedom of 
Speech at the Feast of St. Patrick, 73 B.U. L. REV. 
791, 851 (1993). 


In its Brief, Respondent claims that “the message [GLIB] 
wish[es] to convey by participating in the Parade is simply the 
existence of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals as part of the 
Irish-American community.” Resp. Br. 30 n. 21. Respondent 
concedes that “GLIB . . . would have contributed a message 
if it had been allowed to participate.” /d. at 32. However, 
there is no need to rely on hypothetical assurances of GLIB’s 
communicative purpose. The simple fact is that GLIB did 
participate under its own banner in both the 1992 and 1993 
Parades. The banner proclaimed and celebrated GLIB’s pride 
in its dual heritage: “Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 


8 


Group of Boston” adorned with green shamrocks enclosing 
pink triangles. (J.A. A67; Ex. 84 videotape of 1993 Parade). 
GLIB had expressive purposes, as found by the trial judge. 
(Cert. Pet. App. at B3, CS.) It celebrated its “diversity,” regard- 
less of how that fit into the Veterans’ celebration. It is a “divers- 
ity” that oddly enough seeks forced inclusion. Judge Flannery, 
equating GLIB’s messages and values, /.e., its viewpoint, with 
sexual orientation, ruled: “A proper celebration of St. Patrick's 
and Evacuation Day requires diversity and inclusiveness,” 
(Cert. Pet. App. at B24), and that “Inclusiveness should be 
the hallmark of their Parade.” /d. at B28. 

The Respondent admitted through its lead counsel at trial: 
“We will also show that the thrust of the action by the Veterans 
and the city is not to make a determination of GLIB as an 
organization or to criticize GLIB. The thrust of this is to pre- 
clude GLIB’s message from being heard either in Boston or 
elsewhere.” (Tr. 26-7). 

Sull, GLIB contends that the Veterans merely have “to allow 
GLIB marchers to march while self-identifying as lesbians, 
gay men or bisexuals by means of a banner.” Resp. Br. 28. 
As Nan D. Hunter, a lesbian scholar, wrote: 


The idea of identity is more complicated and unstable 
than either simply status or conduct. It encompasses 
explanation and representations of the self. Self-rep- 
resentation of one’s sexual identity necessarily in- 
cludes a message that one has not merely come out, 
but that one intends to be out — to act on and live 
out that identity. Notions of identity increasingly 
form the basis for gay and lesbian equality claims. 
Those claims merge not only status and conduct, but 
also viewpoint, into one whole. To be openly gay, 
when the closet is an option, is to function as an 
advocate as well as a symbol. 


9 


Identity, Speech and Equality, 79 VA. L. REV. 1695 (1993).* 

Judge Flannery equated GLIB’s message with the sexual 
orientation of its members. “GLIB would be excluded because 
of its values and its message, i.e., its members’ sexual orienta- 
tion. Tr. of Closing Arg. at 43, 51-52 (Nov. 23, 1993)” (Cert. 
Pet. App. at B4 n. 5). As the transcript references in the trial 
court’s opinion make clear, the Veterans freely admitted that 
they were discriminating against the messages and values of 
GLIB, i.e., its viewpoint. But the equation of its message with 
its members’ sexual orientation was an error of law. The trial 
judge stated: “Excluding all sexual themes not only contravenes 
the First Amendment prohibition on content-based restriction 
— but is a form of discrimination itself.” /d. at B4.n. 6. This col- 
lapsing of the distinction between the message and the messen- 
ger is acritical error. For all the Veterans knew, and for all they 
cared, heterosexual members or sympathizers of GLIB could be 
marching behind GLIB’s banner, since membership in GLIB 
depended on support for its goals. Tr. 98. Even if all the march- 
ers behind GLIB’s sign were “straight,” however, the exclusion 
of the group would still legally be discrimination on the basis of 
sexual orientation, under the trial judge's reasoning. 


‘From quite a different perspective, Oxford scholar John Finnis noted that “[t)he 
phrase ‘sexual orientation’ is radically equivocal. Particularly as used by promoters 
of ‘gay mghts,’ the phrase ambiguously assimilates two things which the standard 
modern position carefully distinguishes: (1) a psychological or psychosomatic dis- 
position inwardly orienting one towards homosexual activity; (II) the deliberate 
decision so to orient one’s public behavior as to express or manifest one’s active 
interest in and endorsement of homosexual conduct and/or forms of life which 
presumptively involve such conduct.” Finnis continues: “It is also widely observed 
that laws or proposed laws outlawing ‘discrimination based on sexual orientation’ 
are always interpreted by ‘gay nghts’ movements as going far beyond discrimination 
based merely on A’s belief that B is sexually attracted to persons of the same sex. 
Instead (it is observed), ‘gay rights’ movements interpret the phrase as extending 
full legal protection to public activities intended specifically to promote .. . 
homosexual conduct.” Law, Morality and “Sexual Orientation,” 69 NOTRE DAME 
L. REV. 1049, 1053-54 (1994) 


10 


Respondent’s Brief makes much of the Veterans’ reasons 
for not allowing GLIB to march, reasons which the trial judge 
deemed pretextual. “Only when the ‘sexual themes’ rationali- 
zation collapsed as well, did the Council develop the First 
Amendment argument pressed here,” (Resp. Br. at 13), imply- 
ing that the First Amendment was simply a pretext for discrimi- 
nation, lately developed by the Veterans. Professor Yackle’s 
article, however, clearly recognized that the Veterans had relied 
early in 1992 principally upon the First Amendment in rejecting 
GLIB: 


[Tjhe Veterans declared that the ‘principle’ [sic] 
reason for excluding GLIB was that the inclusion of 
{GLIB] was ‘not consistent’ with the Veterans’ own 
views, ‘embodied in their parades’. . . . In this last, 
of course, the Veterans asserted their own First 
Amendment right to use the parade to advance a 
private agenda, and within that argument, effectively 
claimed that they need specify no particular message 
other than what was implicit in ad hoc decisions to 
include some groups and exclude others. 


Yackle at 844. 

Indeed, the Veterans’ exclusion of sexual themes was nothing 
other than a First Amendment argument that they — not the 
government — should control the content of their own speech. 
Judge Flannery considered it pretextual, but his reasoning un- 
derlying that determinaticn was clearly erroneous, since it was 
premised on a mistake of law: that a privately-organized event 
cannot exclude sexual themes consistent with the First Amend- 
ment. Cert. Pet. App. at B4 n.6. The trial judge had literally 
turned the First Amendment on its head. 

The trial judge did the same with the Veterans’ expressed 
concerns about the GLIB members’ associations with ACT-UP 


and Queer Nation (Tr. 316),° finding there was “no basis for 
concluding that GLIB’s participation would incite imminent 
lawlessness,” citing Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444, 447 
(1969). As a private actor, the Veterans’ Council did not have 
to meet the First Amendment’s standards binding government, 
since the judge had found that there was no state action. Once 
again, the finding of pretext was based on an error of constitu- 
tional law. The Veterans’ Council is the beneficiary of the 
First Amendment, and not its victim. 


Ill. THE VETERANS KNOW WHAT THEY Do Not WANT TO 
SAY THROUGH THEIR PARADE, AND THEY HAVE DECI- 
SIVELY ACTED ACCORDINGLY. 


The freedom to speak one’s mind includes, in turn, 
the freedom to hold one’s tongue. For the freedom 
“not to speak publicly” serves “the same ultimate 
end as freedom of speech in its affirmative aspect.” 
The freedom to speak or not to speak includes, as 
well, the freedom to decline to mouth the messages 
of others. When government mandates “speech that 
a speaker would not otherwise” utter, it “necessarily 
alters content.’ The First Amendment thus protects 


‘Barbra Kay admitted at trial that she was a member of Queer Nation when 
applying to march in the Parade and that she was named in periodicals or newspapers 
as having called Cardinal O'Connor a homophobe. Tr. 92. “Kay herself made no 
secret of her association with Queer Nation.” Yackle, Parading Ourselves, 73 
B.U. L. REV. 791, 840 (1993). Respondent's Brief characterizes this concern of 
the Veterans as “suspicions that some members of GLIB were also members of 
ACT-UP and Queer Nation” (at 39). Parade official Thomas L. Lyons testified as 
to his concern about people from the protest at Holy Cross Cathedral in the South 
End participating in the Parade. Tr. 272. “In the summer of 1990, ACT-UP/Boston 
disrupted the ordination of several young priests at the Holy Cross Cathedral in 
the South End. The protestors staged a mock gay wedding, shouted vulgarities, 
and threw condoms at priests and their families.” Yackle, Parading Ourselves at 
838. 


12 
citizens from being punished for failing to endorse 
an ideological cause for which they have no sym- 
pathy, and, accordingly, refusing to enhance “the 
relative voice” of “opponents.” 


Yackle, Parading Ourselves at 802-03. 

The whole point of the Veterans’ Parade is to celebrate St. 
Patrick’s Day and the British withdrawal from Boston. Most 
of the time, the Veterans have had no problem with would-be 
participants in their Parade. A marching band of bagpipers 
requires little analysis. 

On occasion, however, groups have participated bearing 
messages the Veterans judged inappropriate for their parade. 
When a local anti-busing group applied to march in the 1970s, 
the Veterans said no. J.A. A&6. When an anti-abortion group 
applied to march in the late 1980s, the Veterans circumscribed 
their message. J.A. A92-93. When NORAID wanted to march, 
the Veterans also modified its message. J.A. A93. When the 
Ku Klux Klan applied to march in 1993, the Veterans said 
no. J.A. A92. When a truck with anti-gay signs tried to enter 
the 1993 Parade, the Veterans said no to them, too (J.A. A79, 
A91), even though the courts had forced the Veterans to include 
a message proclaiming homosexuality which the Veterans dis- 
agreed with.° 

Incredibly, the Supreme Judicial Court found “no legal rele- 
vance of this fact to the findings of the judge or to the conclusion 
we reach.” /rish-American Gay, 418 Mass. at 244 n.10, 636 
N.E.2d at 1296 n.10. But these exclusions were clearly relevant 


“Respondent's Brief makes much of the supposed state of mind of Petitioner 
Hurley in excluding GLIB (Resp. Br. 41-43), and attempts to wrap itself up in 
that subjective finding based on the credibility of Mr. Hurley. /d. at 43-45. But 
Mr. Hurley's testimony was that he was just one vote on the Veterans’ Council 
(J.A. A93), and that the vote to exclude GLIB was unanimous. J.A. A&6. In any 
case, the only discriminatory intent he manifested at trial was discrimination against 
GLIB’s messages and values, and that is constitutionally protected for a private actor. 


13 


to the Veterans’ expressive purpose, whether the Parade was 
open to the general public, whether the Veterans exercised 
control and selectivity over their Parade or were simply “con- 
duits” for the general public, and whether they shaped the 
Parade’s message. Further, the exclusion of the truck with 
anti-gay messages was Clearly relevant to the issue of discrimi- 
nation on the basis of sexual orientation, and the issue of 
“pretext,”’ especially since the Veterans’ exclusion of sexual 
themes was judged to be pretextual. Conveniently, when GLIB 
States in its Brief that “this purported criterion finds virtually 
all messages and identifications acceptable, except for GLIB’s 
identifying banner, which is unerringly singled out for exclu- 
sion,” (Resp. Br. 30), it overlooks the telling exclusion of the 
anti-gay truck from the Parade. 

Like the state courts, the Respondent was apparently unim- 
pressed by this consistent track record: “The occasional exercise 
of selective judgment does not, however, establish a pattern 
of selectivity that would seriously fortify the [Veterans] Coun- 
cil’s argument here.” Resp. Br. 33-34 n.24. The most obvious 
response is that the Veterans have exercised their rights as 
parade organizers to exclude groups and messages whenever 
necessary. Problems haven’t arisen that often, so the Veterans 
haven't had to make many message-based exclusionary judg- 
ments. 

Respondent's Brief also raises the specter of racial or reli- 
gious discrimination if the Veterans’ position were upheld 

(Resp. Br. 24, 29). However, the NAACP marched in the 


| "Judge Flannery was careful to note in his opinion that neither the Ku Klux Klan 
nor ROAR were protected under the public accommodation law. Cert. Pet. App. 
at B7. If the pro-gay sign must be included in the parade, what about the truck 
with the anti-gay sign’? Arguably, of course, by making a “distinction” in a place 
of public accommodation on the basis of sexual orientation, it should be banned. 
But by that test, applied in a viewpoint-neutral and content-neutral way, as it must, 
GLIB’s own sign makes such a “distinction.” Section 98. Thus the overbreadth of 
the public accommodation statutes, as interpreted by the Massachusetts courts, is 
illustrated 


ee 


14 


Parade in the 1960s (J.A. A102); and a Protestant Bible Trolley 
makes an annual appearance. Pet. Br. 14 .n.5. Individuals are 
not discriminated against on the basis of race, sex, religion or 
sexual orientation in this Parade.* However, groups with mes- 
sages of their own are subject to the approval of the parade 
organizers. The Veterans did not exclude the NAACP. It is 
doubtful, however, that they would have admitted the Black 
Panthers. 

GLIB argues that “|p|]resumably, the manager of Ollie’s 
Barbeque [sic] had a point of view about serving African-Amer- 
icans,” citing Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964). 
The manager of Ollie’s Barbecue was not engaged in an expres- 
sive activity. He was engaged in the business of selling food. 
If the patron tried to get into the kitchen and add to the menu, 
or posted a sign on the front door without the proprietor’s 
permission, or started making a speech once inside the restau- 
rant, the analogy would be more apposite. 

The sponsors of a parade have the right under the First 
Amendment to exclude any self-identifying group that it feels 
is not compatible with their parade, whether the identification 
is religious, ethnic, or anything else. If the Veterans wanted to 
exclude, for instance, a club such as the English Union or a 
group proclaiming that they are Japanese Buddhists, or Irish 
Pantheists, or the Aryan Worshippers of Odin, because the 
identification sends a message incompatible with their own 
theme or message, this would certainly be their right. And if 
a self-identifying banner also proclaims a life-style that is incon- 
sistent with the sponsor's own themes, the First Amendment 
right to exclude should be obvious. People cannot constitution- 
ally be compelled to provide a platform for messages they 
di... cree with. 


“in this regard, it should be noted that openly gay city councilor David Scondras 
had marched in the Parade. Tr. 33. Yackle, Parading Ourselves at 836 n.208. 


15 


IV. THE STATUTE AS INTERPRETED, AND THE INJUNCTION 
APPLYING IT, DIRECTLY BURDEN SPEECH. 


Once a statute or regulation targeted at discrimination in a 
place of public accommodation is applied to a parade organized 
by private sponsors, the First Amendment is necessarily and 
directly implicated. Of course, all types of protected speech 
could be curtailed on the streets under the the pretext of protect- 
ing some public good or advancing some public interest, and 
for this reason such attempts have been regularly struck down. 
See Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147, 152 (1969); 
Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 554-57 (1965); Invisible 
Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Mayor of Thur- 
mont, 700 F. Supp. 281, 286-87 (D. Md. 1988); Collin v. 
Smith, 578 F.2d 1197, 1201 (7th Cir. 1978); Forsyth County 
v. Nationalist Movement, 112 S. Ct. 2395 (1992). 

Strict scrutiny obviously applies because this case involves 
the Veterans’ speech, as well as their right to be free from 
compelled speech. Because the trial court equated messages 
and values with sexual orientation, and the Supreme Judicial 
Court affirmed that equation, the public accommodation law 
now prohibits discrimination on the basis of message in a 
privately organized, privately financed, permitted parade. As 
such, the public accommodation law triggers strict scrutiny. 
The injunction, in requiring that the Veterans not exclude GLIB 
from marching in the parade on the basis of sexual orientation 
under the usual terms and conditions, meant beyond cavil that 
GLIB’s messages were to be included, given that the trial court 
equated sexual orientation with GLIB’s messages and values. 
If the celebration or proclamation of homosexuality is deemed 
by parade organizers to be inconsistent with the organizers’ 
traditional religious and social beliefs, then a law compelling 
the parade organizers to include this message as part of their 
expression must be subject to strict scrutiny. Moreover, such 
compelled speech has been found by this court to be unconstitu- 


16 


tional. Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705 (1977); Consolidated 
Edison Co. v. Public Service Comm'n, 447 U.S. 530, 536 
(1980); Pacific Gas and Electric Co. v. Public Utilities 
Comm'n, 475 U.S. 1, 12 (1986) (‘PruneYard thus does not 
undercut the proposition that forced associations that burden 
protected speech are impermissible.”) 

It would be ironic if those expressing hate messages had 
their day on the streets, but those celebrating and affirming 
their traditional religious and social values were excluded, or 
worse, subjected to a governmental system that required them 
to explain, justify, or rationalize their beliefs to a doubtful, 
suspicious, Sarcastic, Or oppressive authority —— whether that 
authority came in the form of the courts, or from a licensing 
authority.” 

Unfortunately, in the Veterans’ case, their desire to run a 
traditional parade conflicted with the political agenda of others 
who saw in the parade an opportunity to advance their own 
cause on the streets of South Boston. The strategic importance 
of the political statement was best summarized by Professor 
Yackle. “The parade,” Prof. Yackle wrote, “plainly reflects 


* This is what at least one of the co-signers of the Respondent's brief has suggested: 
“| will urge city officials in New York and Boston to take responsibility for planning 
and conducting these two great street parties and, in so doing, to ensure both that 
all members of the community may attend and that anyone who wishes by attending 
to express a message Is free to do so. Concomitantly, city authorities should weed 
discriminatory features out of their existing schemes for dispensing permits for 
privately sponsored parades. Such permits should be freely distributed to competing 
groups, whose messages should be considered only to promote expression. Officials 
should try to accommodate a group's special interest in a particular street or date, 
but should not be obliged routinely to turn major arteries over to private processions. 
When the precise character of a message warrants it, city officials should exempt 
a parade from the local anti-discrimination ordinance. If a group seeks such a 
dispensation, it should be invited to explain how its compliance with the anti-dis- 
crimination law would dilute its message, and city officials should make that 
explanation known to the public. As a general matter, then, city officials should 
take parade cases as they come —- attempting to be genuinely neutral with respect 
to permit applicants, but recognizing that the proper result in a case often requires 
an investigation of the facts and hard judgment. Suffice it to say, I think the 
Constitution should be read to endorse this practical approach.” Yackle, supra at 796 


17 


the larger social and political developments currently under 
way and must be seen in that overarching context along with 
other related flashpoints — gays and lesbians in the military, 
same sex marriages, dependent benefits for gay partners — 
and dozens of others.” 

This case presents a viewpoint discrimination problem simi- 
lartothatinR.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538 (1992). 


Displays containing some words — odious racial 
epithets, for example — would be prohibited to pro- 
ponents of all views. But [other words] would seem- 
ingly be usable ad libitum in the placards of those 
arguing in favor of racial, color, etc. tolerance and 
equality, but could not be used by that speaker’s 
opponents. . . [The government] has no such author- 
ity to license one side of a debate to fight freestyle, 
while requiring the other to follow Marquis of 
Queensbury Rules. 


Id. at 2547-49. Interestingly enough, one of GLIB’s amici 
argues that “‘a gay and lesbian pride parade may exclude those 
bringing a message of antipathy towards lesbians and gay men,” 
because “their participation would conflict with the expressive 
purpose of the parade.’”’'® Anti-Defamation League Br. 11. 
Respondent argues that, “[b]y its own submissions, the Council 
has not had, and does not have, an ‘anti-gay’ message to 
convey” (Resp. Br. 34 n. 25), and thus cannot justify GLIB’s 
exclusion on that basis. In other words, if the Veterans’ Parade 
were truly hateful towards gays and lesbians, they could then 
exclude GLIB. That First Amendment protection should depend 
upon being hateful as opposed to remaining silent, all under the 


Cathleen Finn, a member and spokesperson of GLIB who testified at trial, 
stated that “if a group was not going to participate in the spirit of gay pride and 
in the gay pride parade, they shouldn't be allowed to participate.” Tr. 134. 


het 


18 


pretext of vindicating anti-discrimination law, is truly mind- 
boggling. The rule GLIB proposes is, in effect, you cannot dis- 
criminate against gay pride messages unless you are really hate- 
ful. In any case, the public accommodation law cannot be 
allowed to trump the First Amendment. 

In sum, GLIB’s position invites continual litigation about 
every privately-sponsored parade. Professor Yackle has written 
that “extant constitutional doctrine does not generate a clear 
answer, but only beckons a difficult exercise in balancing — in 
every case and in every year.” Yackle, Parading Ourselves at 
868. Without a reversal of the lower courts’ decisions in this 
case, the Veterans’ Council will be compelled to either 1) 
silence its voice, as in 1994; 2) conduct future Parades with the 
governmentally enforced inclusion of a message and viewpoint 
favored by the state, as in 1992 and 1993; or 3)submit its claim 
that it has reformulated the Parade into a protected expression to 
a judge for his or her approval, as in 1995. Based on the record 
in this case, the Petitioners ask for a resounding and categorical 
First Amendment ruling that will protect privately organized 
parades from governmental control of content. 


A parade “falls within the sphere of conduct protected 
by the First Amendment.” Indeed, one can scarcely 
imagine a more definitive and graphic way for a citi- 
zen to manifest himself to the world than to march 
down the street, arm-in-arm with friends and neigh- 
bors, displaying his allegiances for all to see. To 
abandon the anonymity of the crowd and take a place 
in the lists is to affirm as few other actions can the 
ideas and people one calls her own. To parade is to 
proclaim who, what, and of what you are — to identi- 
fy yourself with a community of thought and com- 
radeship in the most elemental sense. 


Yackle, Parading Ourselves at 797. 


19 


Conclusion 


For these reasons and those stated in our opening brief, the 
judgments and orders of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court and the Superior Court should be reversed and vacated.'' 


DWIGHT G. DUNCAN CHESTER DARLING 

SOUTHERN N.E. Counsel of Record 
SCHOOL OF LAW 306 Dartmouth Street 

333 Faunce Corner Road Boston, Massachusetts 02116 


N. Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747 (617) 536-2050 


WILLIAM M. CONNOLLY DANIEL J. SUMPTION 
546 E. Broadway 28 Constitution Road 
S. Boston, Massachusetts 02127 Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 


‘Contrary to Respondent's assertion that the Massachusts courts “got it nght,” 
(Resp. Br. 48), and that their judgment should be affirmed, Petitioners list some 
of the more egregious errors in these decisions: 

A. Dismissing the Veterans’ stated expressive purpose of celebrating their religi- 
ous and social values. 

B. Equating a message with people's sexual orientation. 

C. Ruling that a private event cannot exclude sexual themes, and that it is discrim- 
ination under the statute to do so. 

D. Attributing the unanimous decision of the Veterans’ 60-man Council to 
exclude GLIB solely to John Hurley, and imputing Hurley's alleged discriminatory 
intent to the whole Council. 

E. Ruling that an expressive event, such as a parade, had to be sufficiently 
focused to get First Amendment protection. 

F. Determining that the fact that the Veterans had excluded other groups and 
messages from their Parade in the past was irrelevant. 

G. Declaring that one has the burden of first proving a First Amendment nght 
in order to be protected from the forced showcasing of another's unwanted message. 

H. Classifying an expressive event as an association, and applying the criteria 
of membership organizations to a parade. 

I. Stating that the Parade “simply has not been [a protected First Amendment 
activity] in the past and is not one now” (emphasis added) when the court had no 
significant record of the 45 other parades the Veterans ran prior to 1992. Cert. Pet. 
App. at B25 n.27. 


