
[PDF PAGE 1]
a 
No. 94-1705 | = 
IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
a ee 
October Term, 1994 
Aston A. Beadle, 
Petitioner, 
W « 
City of Tampa, 
Respondent. 
On Petition for A Writ of Certiorari 
To The United States Court of Appeals 
For the Eleventh Circuit 
BRIEF IN OPPOSITION TO PETITION FOR 
WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
Thomas M. Gonzalez 
Counsel of Record 
Mark A. Hanley 
Of Counsel 
Thompson, Sizemore & Gonzalez, P.A. 
P.O. Box 639 
Tampa, Florida 33601 
(813) 273-0050 
Counsel for Respondent 
i LAER S90 


[PDF PAGE 2]


[PDF PAGE 3]
QUESTION PRESENTED 
I. Whether the Eleventh Circuit erred in affirming the Magistrate Judge’s decision when it found that requiring the City of Tampa Police Department to grant special shift exceptions to Plaintiff Beadle so as to accommodate his 
religious beliefs, that this would result in a greater than de minimis cost to the City, therefore, the City met its obligations under Title VII. 


[PDF PAGE 4]
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 
Petitioner: Aston A. Beadle 
Respondents: City of Tampa Police Department, 
a division of the City of Tampa 
City of Tampa, the employer, is a municipal 
corporation. Therefore, it has no parent 
companies or subsidiaries. Respondent makes 
this declaration pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 
29. 
ii 


[PDF PAGE 5]
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
(umwaeawe PE lw tll ltl tll tl tll i 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING ........ ii 
pe. 1ii 
pe gs kt | V 
a ee «§ «¢ «= «eo es $ 6 es 46 % 1 
nnn ¢ 6 as 6 «6 @ « 2 ss » « 1 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED ...... 2 
wamemees Ge THE CASE. we te th tl hl tll 3 
A. meaevene PaCte . 2 te tw te 3 
B. The Trial Court’s Decision .. ) 
Cc. The Court of Appeals Decision . 10 
REASONS FOR DENYING THE WRIT ...... 10 
a nnn 3 =. . &6 + & «© os © 2 & @ 12 
A. THE ALLOCATION OF THE PARTIES’ 
RESPECTIVE BURDENS IN A TITLE 
VII RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION 
0 Be a eae 13 
B. BOTH LOWER COURTS CORRECTLY HELD 
THAT TO FURTHER ACCOMMODATE 
PLAINTIFF’S RELIGIOUS BELIEFS 
WOULD HAVE CREATED MORE THAN A 
iii 


[PDF PAGE 6]
A ONT ea 
DE MINIMIS COST TO THE 
DEFENDANT oa eae eS 
C. BOTH LOWER COURTS CORRECTLY 
CONSIDERED THE NATURE OF 
DEFENDANT ’S BUSINESS WHEN 
DETERMINING WHETHER BEADLE ’S 
REQUESTED ACCOMMODATION AMOUNTED 
TO MORE THAN A DE MINIMIS COST 
TO THE DEFENDANT ... +. « « 20 
D. PLAINTIFF'S ARGUMENT THAT HE 
SHOULD HAVE BEEN TEMPORARILY 
ACCOMMODATED UNTIL A PERMANENT 
ACCOMMODATION COULD BE WORKED 
OUT IS WITHOUT MERIT .... . 24 
E. TO HAVE A HIGHER THRESHOLD FOR 
UNDUE HARDSHIP THAN "DE 
MINIMIS," THE COURT WOULD BE 
INFRINGING ON THE ESTABLISHMENT 
CLAUSE TO THE UNITED STATES 
ee ye iy tt a a a ee ee 26 
es oe Fis A a ee a ee ee ee ae ae ee Oe 30 
iv 


[PDF PAGE 7]
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Ackerman v. Amtrak, 772 F. Supp. 579 (S.D. Fla. 
1990) 17 
Ansonia Bd. of Educ. v. Philbrook, 
479 U.S. 60, 107 §.Ct. 367, 93 L.Ed. 
2d 305 (1986) “an Gr a ee o, 24, &5 
Blair v. Graham Correctional Center, 782 F. 
Supp. 411 (C.D. Ill. 1992), aff'd, 4 F.3d 
996 (7th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 1993 
Mi DRAGS 450RSS 6 kn oe ee 2 
Brener v. Diagnostic Center Hospital, 
G7i F.26 243 (30R Cis. 1982) « « » 13, 14, 17 
Brown v. Keebler Co., 62 Fair Empl. Prac. 
Cas. (BNA) 1170 (N.D. Geo. 1993), aff'd, 
37 F.3d 637 (llth Cir. 1994) eo 15 
Cook v. Chrysler Corp., 779 F. Supp. 1016 
(E.D. Mo. 1991), aff'd, 981 F.2d 336 
(8th Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 113 S. 
Ct. 2953 (1993) NE ne a ee a3, i8 
EEOC v. Heil-Quaker Corp., 55 Fair Empl. 
Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1895 (M.D. Tenn. 1990) ae & , 
Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., 
472 U.S. 703 (1985) i. « © 6 ew 2 wee Bee oe 
Mann v. Frank, 795 F. Supp. 1438 
(W.D. Mo. 1992) Ne ear ae ae 15 
Mathewson v. Fla. Game & Fresh Water 
Fish Comm'n, 693 F. Supp. 1044 
(M.D. Fla. 1988), aff'd, 871 F.2d 123 
eee es Ce be ee ek ee a 13-15 


[PDF PAGE 8]
Sey 
Meadows v. Golden Grain Macaroni Co., 
45 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 235 
(N.D. Ill. 1987) 25 
Miller v. Drennon, 56 Fair Empl. Prac. 
Cas. (BNA) 274 (D. S.C. 1991), aff’d, 
966 F.2d 1443 (4th Cir. 1992) . 14, 22, 27, 
29, 30 
Murphy v. Edge Memorial Hospital, 
550 F. Supp. 1185 (M.D. Ala. 1982) . 14, 15, 
Pe 
Pinsker v. Joint Dist. No. 28J, 735 
¥.2d 368 (10th Cir. 1984) «+++ 2s es 14 
Rvan v. U.S. Dep't of Justice, 950 F.2d 
458 (7th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 
@. Ct. 2309 (1992) . - +--+ « « « Bh, 17, 22 
Trans World Airlines, inc. Vv. Hardison, 
Wr .6. 63 (1977) . - + + « « Sy, 35, 27, 26 
United States v. City of Albuquerque, 
545 F.2d 110 (10th Cir. 1976), cert. 
denied, 433 U.S. 909 (1977) » bee 17, 20, 22 
Yott v. North American Rockwell Corp., 
602 F.2d 904 (9th Cir. 1979), cert. 
denied, 445 U.S. 928 (1980) .- «© «© «+ » 17 
Statutes and Rules: 
oe wee .c. 6 1BS6tE} «© 2 ew we ee ee ee 2 
42 U.S.C. § 1983 ("§ 1983") - + + + + + + + 28 
42 U.S.C. § 2000e, et seq. (Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended) ks Oo 
vi 


[PDF PAGE 9]
ae Oe ees oe a SS oS ewe 
eee Ie ee eee 
S2 U.S.C. § 2000@"2(R) « « s ws we wo we we ew 2 
vil 


[PDF PAGE 10]


[PDF PAGE 11]
No. 94-1705 
IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
October Term, 1994 
ASTON A. BEADLE, 
Petitioner, 
vs. 
CITY OF TAMPA, | 
Respondent. 
OPINIONS BELOW 
The opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit is reported at 42 F.3d 633 
(llth Cir. 1995). 
The Memorandum Opinion of the United States 
District Court for the Middle District of 
Florida, Tampa Division, which was entered on 
October 1, 1994, is unreported and is contained 
in the appendix at pages 11A-28A in petitioner’s 
Petition for Writ of Certiorari. 
JURISDICTION 
Invoking federal jurisdiction under Title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 
42 U.S.C. § 2000e, et seg., and under 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1331 (general federal question jurisdiction), 
the petitioner brought this suit in the United 
States District Court for the Middle District of 


[PDF PAGE 12]
Florida, Tampa Division. On October 4, 1993, 
the district court entered judgment on the 
merits in favor of the defendants. 
On January 18, 1995, in response to 
petitioner’s appeal, the Eleventh Circuit 
entered a judgment and order affirming the 
district court’s judgment. 
The jurisdiction of this Court to review 
the judgment of the Eleventh Circuit is invoked 
under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 
42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a) provides: 
It shall be an unlawful employment practice 
for an employer -- 
(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to 
discharge any individual, or otherwise to 
discriminate against any individual with 
respect to his compensation, terms, 
conditions, or privileges of employment, 
because of such individual’s race, color, 
religion, sex, or national Origin; or 
(2) to limit, segregate, or classify his 
employees or applicants for employment in 
any way which would deprive or tend to 
deprive any individual of employment 
Opportunities or otherwise adversely 
affect his status as an employee, because 
of such individual's race, color, 
religion, sex, or national origin. 
42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j) provides: 
The term “religion” includes all aspects 
of religious observance and practice, as 


[PDF PAGE 13]
well ae belief, unless an employer 
demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate to an employee’s or prospective employee’s religious 
observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s 
business. 
42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(h) provides in pertinent part: 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to apply different standards of compensation, or different terms, 
conditions, or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit 
system ‘ provided that such 
differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
A. Relevant Facts 
The Defendant, City of Tampa, is a municipal corporation, and at times relevant to this case in 1988, the City’s Police Department ("the Police Department" ) employed 955 individuals. The Police Department conducts its patrol law enforcement operations through its two “uniform” districts or divisions covering 
different geographical regions of the City. Defendant’s Police Department also operates the Tampa Police Academy ("the Academy") to train its patrol officers (R1-41-VIII-D). 


[PDF PAGE 14]
During an employee’s first year of 
employment with the Police Department, the 
officer serves a one year probation (R4-71-182). 
During the first year of employment, an employee 
is not entitled to any leave time (R4-71-183). 
Additionally, the employee is not entitled to any comp time (Id.). No vacation time is 
available for the first six (6) months (DX 6 at 
§ 19.4) 
Plaintiff’s terms and conditions of employment were covered by a collective 
bargaining agreement. Under the terms of the 
above-described collective bargaining agreement, 
it provides in § 11.3: 
11.3 Work Assignments. When skill, 
performance, and ability are equal, 
and in the sole opinion of the 
supervisor the tasks to be performed 
will not be affected, classification 
seniority shall be considered a 
factor in work assignments for patrol 
officers within a uniform district 
squad. Seniority shall not be a 
consideration when training is a 
factor in work assignments. 
After orientation, Plaintiff entered the 
Academy on February 22, 1988. The Academy 
lasted sixteen (16) weeks until May 27, 1988. 
At that time in 1988, Academy graduates were 
randomly assigned by the Personnel Bureau to the 
patrol division field training squads. Such assignments also would depend on the number of 
available training offiters. Training squads 
consist of a sergeant, a corporal, and officers 
who had specific course training in functioning 
as a field training officer and this training is 
over and above regular patrol officer training 
(R1-41-VIII-L; R4-71-180-182). 


[PDF PAGE 15]
Defendant’s field training program in 1988 
consisted of four phases for a total of 16 
weeks.’ The first phase consisted of a two-week 
orientation period within which the recruit 
would not be graded and was to merely ride with 
a field training officer to acquaint the recruit 
with certain types of calls and the area of 
patrol. The next portion of the training 
consisted of a four week training period within 
which the recruit would be graded by his or her 
field training officer. During this initial six 
week period, the recruit was assigned to his 
initial training squad, and in the case of 
Plaintiff, the first six weeks would have been 
spent on Sergeant Cook’s squad. The next two 
training phases consist of two four-week periods 
during which the recruit is assigned to a 
“sister” training squad and to a different field 
training officer. There is value to the change 
in training officers during this "swap" as it 
allows the recruit an advantage of seeing 
different methods of supervision and different 
methods of training from different officers. 
Also, it allows the officer to patrol different 
areas of the City. During the final two week 
phase of the program, the recruit returns to his 
original squad and his original field training 
officer to complete his evaluation and field 
training (R1-41-VIII-M; DX 9; R4-71-107-108, 
180-183, 206, 237-239). 
Since the inception of the field training 
program in which Plaintiff initially 
participated, a recruit fresh out of the Academy 
Occasionally, in an “unusual” situation, 
training would be extended for those individuals 
who did not successfully complete the training 
within 16 weeks. 


[PDF PAGE 16]
had never been placed on anything other than a 
field training squad (R4-71-207). The only 
exception to this occurred on a single occasion 
when there were a surplus of recruits and during 
the initial two-week orientation phase, the 
recruits were temporarily assigned to ride in 
patrol vehicles with police officers who were 
not field training officers. The recruits, 
however, still were required to be graded by 
field training officers (R4-71-239-241). 
When Plaintiff was given his initial 
training assignment, other than for “downtown 
squads" (which were not training squads (R4-71- 
205-208)), all of Defendant’s patrol squads, 
including the training squads, were on a four 
(4) 10-hour days on/three (3) day off rotating 
shift system. In 1988, the days off for such 
squads rotated forward one day every 56 days 
(R1-41-VIII-N; R4-71-106, 184). 
Plaintiff’s initial assignment was to 
Sergeant Cook’s squad. Plaintiff’s days off 
were Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. 
Plaintiff did not have his Sabbath off from work 
(R1i-41-VIII-S; R&-71-59). 
During his first week of work, Plaintiff 
met with Sergeant Cook to request the upcoming 
Saturday off so that he could observe his 
Sabbath. Sergeant Cook referred Plaintiff's 
request to Major Pegram. Major Pegram in turn 
met with Colonel Fox. On June 17, 1988, Major 
Pegram granted Plaintiff his request for 
Saturday, June 18, as absent without pay (R4-71- 
60, 213-214). Major Pegram informed Plaintiff 
that he would accommodate Plaintiff for this 
request only. Plaintiff was told that, in the 
future, no further accommodations could be made 
(R4-71-108, 187, 214). 


[PDF PAGE 17]
The following week, Plaintiff tried to get the following Saturday off from work to observe his Sabbath. Plaintiff again met with Major Pegram (R4-71-61, 214). A series of meetings by Plaintiff with Defendant’s command staff then followed, including meetings by Plaintiff with Captain Walker, Colonel George Fox, Colonel 
Curtis Lane and Chief A.C. McLane. Chief McLane Stated to Plaintiff to the effect that the Police Department could not make any special arrangement for Plaintiff’s Sabbath (R4-71-61- 
63). 
Approximately one day later, either Wednesday or Thursday, June 22 or 23, 1988, 
Plaintiff met with Major Pegram to inform him that he wished to resign from the Police Department (R4-71-67, 68, 235). 
As found by both lower courts, Beadle’s 
request for a permanent day off during his field 
training in June 1988 would be detrimental to the consistency of his training (R4-71-238-39). 
Specifically, as testified by former Colonel Fox, the objective of the field training program 
is to expose the officer to just about every Situation that the officer may encounter as a uniformed officer (R4-71-182). That is the reason why officers rotate among different field training officers. It gives the officers the chance to see the techniques used by different 
officers as well as being exposed to different 
parts of the City, where problems can differ from neighborhood to neighborhood (R4-71-238). 
The consistency of the training program is absolutely necessary (Id.). It is extremely 
important to the continuity of the training 
program that the police officers be trained 
under different training officers (R4-71-182, 238-240). For Plaintiff to be assigned a particular field training officer during his 
7 


[PDF PAGE 18]
i a TR F 
entire training would be detrimental to the 
program (lId.). If the Defendent did not 
properly train its police officers, the City 
could be subjected to great liability (R4-71- 
239). Accordingly, to accommodate Plaintiff’s 
religious beliefs would have created an undue 
hardship and burden on the City of Tampa (R4-71- 
191-210). This probably explains why Beadle 
conceded that he knew of no accommodation 
available to him (R4-71-141-142). 
Finally, during the trial of the companion 
case to this action, Beadle v. Hillsborough 
County Sheriff's Office, et al.,* two expert 
witnesses testified: Richard Kiekbusch for the 
Defendant, and Douglas Bennett for’ the 
Plaintiff.’ Both expert witnesses concurred 
that in law enforcement, safety is the most 
important issue. Both also concurred that you 
should not compromise safety, and by permitting 
of a permanent day off, this could affect 
employee morale which, in turn, affects the 
safety of a law enforcement operation. Mr. 
Bennett also testified that while he would 
accommodate the religious desires of a Seventh 
Day Adventist, like Mr. Beadle, who wanted 
Saturdays off to observe his faith, he would not 
accommodate Methodists, Baptists and Cetholics 
because they would want Sunday off. In his 
words: 
* A Petition for Writ of Certiorari in the 
Sheriff’s case is also pending before this 
Court. See Beadle _v. Hillsborough County 
Sheriff’s Office, Case No. 94-1610. 
3 By agreement of counsel, the testimony 
of these two witnesses were applicable to both 
actions. 


[PDF PAGE 19]
The way its worked out over the years 
in the state of Tennessee, applicants 
regularly ask that question. They 
are regularly told ‘No, we do not 
make accommodations to let people off 
on Sundays.’ (R-3-103-04). 
B. The Trial Court’s Decision 
In his Findings of Fact, the Magistrate Judge found, among other things, "At the trial, the City command officers testified that assignments to a particular training squad without rotation is detrimental to the consistency of the training and results in lack of proper training. According to the Caty, it is extremely important to the continuity of the training that the officers be trained under different field training officers." 
Additionally, the Magistrate also found, “According to the City, the value of the change during this ‘swap’ [referring to the rotation of field training officers during the initial 16 week training phase] is to allow the recruit to see different methods of supervision and different methods of training from different 
officers. The City also contends that this method of training allows the officer to patrol different areas of the City.” 
Based partly upon these findings of fact, the Magistrate Judge concluded, "{rjequiring the department to grant shift exceptions to Beadle would be to incur a greater than de minimis cost because of the public health, safety and welfare 
considerations associated with police work. Title VII does not require the employer to assure the individual the opportunity to observe religious practices at all costs. See Ansonia 


[PDF PAGE 20]
Bd. of Educ. v. Philbrook, 479 U.S. 60, 107 
S.Ct. 367, 93 L.Ed. 2d 305 (1986)." 
Cc. The Court of Appeals Decision 
The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals 
affirmed the decision of the Magistrate Judge in 
favor of the City of Tampa. 
In addressing the issue of undue hardship, 
the Eleventh Circuit found, "[t]he Department 
assigned recruits to several different training 
officers during the course of their training so 
that the recruits could experience varying 
methods of supervision and observe other patrol 
areas in the City." 42 F.3d at 634. The 
Eleventh Circuit went on to note "In order to 
accommodate Beadle’s religious practices, the 
Department would have been forced to assign him 
to another training squad and not to reassigning 
him during the third phase of training. Beadle 
admits that he would not have experienced the 
educational benefits of working with different 
training officers ...." 42 F.3d at 637. The 
Eleventh Circuit then concluded as follows: “We 
agree with the magistrate court’s refusal to 
interfere with the Department’s scheduling and 
training programs. When the employer’s business 
involves the protection of lives and property, 
‘courts should go slowing restructuring [its] 
employment practices.’ Albuquerque, 545 F.2d at 
114. We conclude that the magistrate court did 
not err when it found that requiring the 
Department to grant shift exceptions would 
result in a greater than de minimis cost and 
that the city had met its obligation under Title 
VII.” 42 F.3d at 636-37. 
10 


[PDF PAGE 21]
REASONS FOR DENYING THE WRIT 
The gravamen of Plaintiff Beadle’s argument is that this Court should overturn eighteen years of precedents established by this Court in Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63 (1977), and hold that undue hardship means substantial economic burden or Significant burdens on the employer rather than what this Court held in Hardison that “undue hardship” is any cost to the employer that is more than de minimis. Trans World Airlines, Inc. vy. Hardison, 432 U.S. at 84. Beadle’s argument is not supported by a single post-Hardison 
decision. 
Alternately, Beadle claims that this Court Should accept certiorari and hold that unless the employer suffers "costs" in terms of monetary costs, then no matter what other economic burden the employer may suffer in accommodating the employee, it is by Plaintiff Beadle’s definition not an “undue hardship." The absurdity of this position is best illustrated in this particular case. Specifically, the evidence in this case shows that unless Beadle completed the field training program as it existed at the time, he would not enjoy the full benefits of the program by having the opportunity of working with different field training officers, on different shifts, and in different locations of the City. Therefore, he would potentially put his and other officers’ lives at risk because of his inadequate training. While arguably the monetary "cost" of training Beadle by assuring him Saturdays off would not have cost the City of Tampa any additional money, it would have cost the City of Tampa something much more important: human lives. Every municipality should put more importance on the lives of its police officers 
a4 


[PDF PAGE 22]
than dollars and cents. Accordingly, to suggest that the City of Tampa did not incur undue hardship because it does not monetarily cost the City any additional money to accommodate Beadle, but instead it puts police officers lives at risk, simply makes no sense and one which this Court has never adopted. 
Plaintiff’s final position is that the lower court allegedly created an exception from Title VII’s religious accommodation requirements for municipal law enforcement agencies. As will be explained below, neither the Defendant nor the lower courts have taken the position Suggested by Beadle. However, as agreed by all parties, the determination of what constitutes reasonable accommodation should be based on a case-by-case basis. Moreover, as numerous cases have held, when the nature of the employer's business is in the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community, this factor should be considered in determining what constitutes reasonable accommodation and undue hardship. 
In summary, neither lower courts committed error in their determination in favor of the Defendant. Moreover, there is no reason why this Court should rewrite 18 years of precedent and hold that undue hardship means substantial burden on the employer. Accordingly, this Court should not exercise its discretionary jurisdiction and grant Plaintiff Beadle’s Petition for Writ of Certiorari. 
12 


[PDF PAGE 23]
LEGAL ARGUMENT 
A. THE ALLOCATION OF THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE BURDENS IN A TITLE VII RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION CASE‘ 
In religious discrimination cases brought under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e - 2000e-17, a plaintiff has the initial prima facie burden of proving "‘he had a bona fide religious belief that conflicted with an employment requirement, that he informed his employer of this belief and that he was discharged for failing to comply with the conflicting employment requirement.’" Mathewson Vv. Fla. Game & Fresh Water Fish Comm'n, 693 F. Supp. 1044, 1050 (M.D. Fla. 1988), aff'd, 871 F.2d 123 (llth Cir. 1989), citing Brener v. Diagnostic Center Hospital, 671 F.2d 141, 144 (Sth Cir. 1982). 
Once a plaintiff has carried his initial prima facie burden, the burden shifts to the defendant to show either (1) that it offered the plaintiff a reasonable accommodation of his religious practices, or (2) that any accommodation of the plaintiff's practices would result in undue hardship to the employer. Mathewson, 693 F. Supp. at 1050. As to defendant’s first alternative production, a reasonable accommodation, the defendant is not required, as suggested by Beadle, to give 
4 
At trial and on appeal, the City argued that the lower courts should never even get to the merits of the case because Beadle knowingly and voluntarily waived his Title VII rights when he signed ae release. Both lower courts disagreed. That issue is not before the Court. 
13 


[PDF PAGE 24]
plaintiff a choice among several accommodations; 
nor is defendant required to demonstrate that 
alternative accommodations proposed by plaintiff entail undue hardship. Mathewson, 693 F. Supp. at 1050, citing, Ansonia Board of Education v. 
Philbrook, 107 S.Ct. 367 (1986). Moreover, 
defendant is not required to accommodate the religious practices of plaintiff in exactly the way the plaintiff would like to be accommodated. 
Pinsker v. Joint Dist. No. 283, 735 F.2d 388 
(10th Cir. 1984). Nor does Title VII require defendant to accommodate plaintiff’s religious 
practices in a way that spares plaintiff any 
cost whatsoever. Brener, 671 F.2d at 141, 145- 
46. 
As stated above, in determining the degree 
of reasonable accommodation required, the courts have traditionally looked to the nature of 
defendant’s business. When the defendant's 
business concerns the protection of the public’s 
health, safety or welfare, the courts have held 
that very little is required of the defendant to make a reasonable accommodation. See, e.g., 
Blair _v. Graham Correctional Center, 782 F. 
Supp. 411 (C.D. Ill. 1992), aff'd, 4 F.3d 996 
(7th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 1993 WL 501913 
(1994)(corrections officer); Ryan v. U.S. Dep’t 
of Justice, 950 F.2d 458 (7th Cir. 1991), cert. 
denied, 112 S. Ct. 2309 (1992)(FBI agent); 
United States v. City of Albugquergue, 545 F.2d 
110 (10th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 433 U.S. 909 
(1977) (firefighter); Murphy v. Edge Memorial 
Hospital, 550 F. Supp. 1185 (M.D. Ala. 1982)(pharmacists); and Miller v. Drennon, 56 
Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 274 (D. S.C. 1991), 
aff'd, 966 F.2d 1443 (4th Cir. 1992) (paramedic). 
This balancing of interests was best summarized 
by the Tenth Circuit in United States v. City of 
Albuguergue, 545 F.2d 110 (10th Cir. 1977), 
14 


[PDF PAGE 25]
cert. denied, 433 U.S. 909 (1976), when the court stated: 
In our view when the "business" of an 
employer is protecting the lives and 
property of a dependent citizenry, 
courts should go slow in restructuring his employment 
practices (citation omitted). 
Id. at 114. 
Only if the defendant is unable to put forth any evidence of a reasonable accommodation, does the employer need to put forth evidence of an undue hardship. See, e.g., Mathewson, 693 F. Supp. at 1050; Mann v. Frank, 795 F. Supp. 1438 (W.D. Mo. 1992), and Brown v. Keebler Co., 62 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1170 (N.D. Geo. 1993), aff'd, 37 F.3d 637 (llth Cir. 
1994). This is because "“[{o]nce the employer 
[Defendant] has demonstrated that it has offered @ reasonable accommodation to the employee 
[Plaintiff], the statutory inquiry ends.” Cook, 779 F. Supp. at 1016, 1022, Citing Ansonia, 
supra. If defendant fails to put forth any evidence of a reasonable accommodation, then 
defendant must put forth evidence of an undue hardship by either showing (1) the accommodation 
compromises the employment entitlement of other 
employees, or (2) the cost of the accommodation 
is more than de minimis. Murphy, supra, citing 
Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63, 75 (1977). If defendant proves either a reasonable accommodation or an undue hardship, 
judgment must be entered in its favor. Since 
the Eleventh Circuit focused on the Magistrate Judge’s finding of undue hardship, Defendant 
15 


[PDF PAGE 26]
will address the correctness of that portion of the decision.° 
B. BOTH LOWER COURTS CORRECTLY HELD THAT TO FURTHER ACCOMMODATE PLAINTIFF ’S RELIGIOUS BELIEFS WOULD HAVE CREATED MORE THAN A DE MINIMIS COST TO THE DEFENDANT 
Plaintiff asserted at trial and on appeal that the Defendant could have accommodated him by transferring him to Sergeant Dawson’s training squad. After this transfer, Plaintiff Suggests he should not have rotated off Sergeant Dawson’s training, but remained with him throughout his training. Plaintiff then suggest that after completion of his training, he should have been assigned the downtown squad which did not work on Saturday and Sundays. As the evidence showed, and the lower courts correctly found, this recommended accommodation would have created more than a de minimis cost to the Defendant. Specifically, the Magistrate Judge found, “However, the Court concludes that requiring the Department to grant shift 
° Defendant contends that the Magistrate Judge was correct when he ruled that the Defendant met its duty of reasonable accommodation when it offered its neutral shift rotating system. Since the Eleventh Circuit’s opinion did not focus on this issue, neither will this brief. However, in Support of its position that its neutral rotating shift system was a reasonable accommodation to Plaintiff Beadle, Defendant incorporates its argument put forth in its Brief in Opposition to Beadle’s Petition for Writ of Certiorari in Beadle v. Hillsborough County Sheriff’s Office, et al., No. 94-1610 (pp.14-18) (the companion case) currently pending before this Court. 
16 


[PDF PAGE 27]
exceptions to Beadle would be to incur greater 
than a de minimis cost because of the public health, safety and welfare considerations 
associated with police work" (R2-78-21). 
As stated above, in determining what is a reasonable accommodation, and by analogy, what 
constitutes a de minimis costs, courts have 
employed a balancing of interest test between the religious beliefs of the employee and the nature of defendant’s business. (See further 
discussion in Section C, infra. ) Since 
Defendant is in the business of protecting the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, very little hardship is required before a de minimis cost is found on the defendant. See City of 
Albuquerque, supra; Blair, Supra; Ryan, supra; 
Murphy, supra; Brener, supra; and Miller, supra. 
As noted in Beadle’s Petition and as the court 
in Yott v. North American Rockwell Corp., 602 F.2d 904, 909 (9th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 445 
U.S. 928 (1980) held, “Further, a standard less 
difficult to satisfy than the ‘de minimis’ standard for demonstrating undue hardship 
expressed in Hardison is difficult to imagine." 
Courts have held in a variety of circumstances that having to guarantee an employee off for his Sabbath creates an undue 
hardship. For example, in Hardison, supra, the court held that allowing an employee off on his Sabbath is an undue hardship because of the loss 
of efficiency it creates in the other jobs. Likewise, in EEOC v. Heil-Quaker Corp., 55 Fair 
Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1895 (M.D. Tenn. 1990), 
the court held that undue hardship may also 
consist of increased safety hazards, 
corresponding increased risk of liability, 
increased cost of workers’ compensation and decreased employee morale. In Ackerman v. 
Amtrak, 772 F. Supp. 579 (S.D. Fla. 1990), the 
17 


[PDF PAGE 28]
court held that undue hardship could consist of possible loss of efficiency that may result from being understaffed and the friction it creates with other co-employees. Finally, in Cook v. Chrysler Corp., 779 F. Supp. 1016 (E.D. Mo. 1991), aff'd, 981 F.2d 336 (8th Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 2953 (1993) the court held that undue hardship could be shown by proving the hard feelings and animosity that may be created by allowing the employee to transfer Or Swap days off. 
All of the above reasons (loss of efficiency, increased safety risk, increased liability and decrease in employee morale) were found to exist in this case. These hardships were testified to by Defendant’s witnesses and both experts. Accordingly, the accommodations suggested by the Plaintiff amounted to more than a de minimis cost to the Defendant. Therefore, their is no reason to disturb the findings of the lower courts. 
Beadle realizes the difficulty of this Court to accept certiorari because of both lower courts’ determination that to further accommodate his religious beliefs, the City would have incurred more than a de minimis cost. Accordingly, Plaintiff has tried to cleverly argue that both lower courts found only a "burden" of accommodating the Plaintiff and not a “cost." This argument lacks merit for two reasons. First and foremost, the lower courts both found that to further accommodate Plaintiff Beadle would have resulted in more than a de minimis cost. Additionally, Plaintiff’s argument that burden is not the same as costs as that term has been used by this Court and lower courts is without merit. 
18 


[PDF PAGE 29]
In analyzing Plaintiff’s argument, the appropriate starting point is clearly Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, supra. In 
discussing the issue of undue hardship, this 
Court first stated: 
The Court of Appeals also suggested 
that TWA could have permitted 
Hardison to work a four-day week if 
necessary in order to avoid working 
on his Sabbath. Recognizing that 
this might have left TWA short-handed 
on the one shift each week that 
Hardison did not work, the court 
still concluded that TWA would suffer 
no undue hardship if it were required 
to replace Hardison either with 
supervisory personnel or with 
qualified personnel from other 
departments. Alternatively, the 
Court of Appeals suggested that TWA 
could have replaced Hardison on his 
Saturday shift with other available 
employees through the payment of 
premium wages. 
432 U.S. at 84-85. The Hardison court then went 
on to hold: 
Both of these alternatives would 
involve cost to TWA either in the 
form of lost efficiency in other jobs 
or higher wages. 
432 U.S. at 84 (emphasis supplied). Moreover, 
the Court went on to state: 
The dissent argues that ‘the cost to 
TWA either paying overtime or not 
replacing respondent would [not] have 
been more than de minimis. Post, at 
19 


[PDF PAGE 30]
2281 n.6. This ignores, however, the express finding of the District Court that ‘[bJoth of these solutions would 
have created an undue burden on the 
conduct of TWA’s business. ’ 
432 U.S. at 84 n.15 (emphasis supplied). Moreover, the Eleventh Circuit correctly noted in its opinion, "The Court [referring to the Court in Hardison] has also recognized that the phrase ‘de minimis cost’ entails not only monetary concerns, but also the employer’s burden in conducting its business." 42 F.3d at 636. 
Hardison and its progeny have held that undue hardship can be defined in terms of both economic costs to the employer and the burden on the employer such as loss of efficiency, 
increased risk, decreased employee morale. To Suggest as Plaintiff Beadle has that the City would incur undue hardship only if it had to pay overtime, but not if the City has one less patrol officer on the street, thereby endangering lives, makes no logical sense and has no legal support. 
Cc. BOTH LOWER COURTS CORRECTLY CONSIDERED THE 
NATURE OF DEFENDANT’S BUSINESS WHEN DETERMINING WHETHER BEADLE’S REQUESTED 
ACCOMMODATION AMOUNTED TO MORE THAN A DE MINIMIS COST TO THE DEFENDANT 
As the Magistrate Judge correctly found and as affirmed by the Eleventh Circuit, "Each case necessarily depends upon its own facts and circumstances, and in a sense every case boils down to a determination as to whether the employer acted reasonably." (R-78-18), citing, United States v. City of Albuquerque, 545 F.2d 110, 114 (10th Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 433 
20 


[PDF PAGE 31]
U.S. 909 (1976). Because the courts utilize a 
case-by-case analysis, it follows that an 
employer’s duty to accommodate varies from case 
to case. 
Other than City of Albuquerque, there are 
few Title VII religious accommodation cases 
involving public employers in a public safety, 
law enforcement or correctional function. In 
Blair _v. Graham Correctional Center, 782 F. 
Supp. 411 (C.D. Ill. 1992), aff'd, 4 F.3d 996 (7th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 1993 WL 501913 
(1994), the court considered a Seventh Day 
Adventist correctional officer’s claim of 
religious discrimination against the Illinois 
Department of Corrections. Much like the Tenth 
Circuit in City of Albuquerque, in analyzing 
reasonable accommodation under Title VII, the 
Blair court reasoned, “[iJn a paramilitary 
organization, it is even more difficult to 
accommodate employees who are restricted as to 
their assignments in view of the fact that the 
demands may overwhelm the organization." 782 F. 
Supp. at 414. The court applied this standard 
to a correctional facility: 
The personnel structure of Graham 
Correctional Center is analogous to a 
paramilitary organization. This 
Court notes the importance to the 
public interest in having a full 
staff of corrections officers on duty 
every hour of every day of the week, 
including sabbaths and religious 
holidays and in an institution such 
as Graham Correctional Center. 
Obviously, most everyone prefers not 
to work weekends and holidays. .. . 
If Defendants were required to amend 
the union agreement in order to 
accommodate all employees, religious 
21 


[PDF PAGE 32]
practices, they would run the risk of having the correctional institutions undermanned, thereby endangering 
other employees and society. 
782 F. Supp. at 414. 
Similarly, the court considered the mission of the defendant employer, the FBI, in Ryan v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 950 F.2d 458 (7th Cir. 1991). In Ryan, an FBI agent refused a case assignment based on a personal religious belief which prevented him from investigating anti- military activity. In upholding the employer’s discharge, the Seventh Circuit commented: 
Sympathy for a dedicated agent trapped between his career and his faith comes easily . . . It igs difficult for any Organization to accommodate employees who are choosy about assignments. For a paramilitary organization, the tension is even greater. ... With good will all around, and flexibility on the part of Ryan’s fellow agents, it just might be possible to make a go of it. Title VII does not, however, compel the FBI to attempt this . . . Compelled, as it is by Title VII, to have one rule for all of the diverse religious beliefs and practices in the United States, the FBI may choose to be stingy with exceptions lest the demand for them overwhelm it. 
Id. at 462. 
Likewise in Murphy, a case involving licensed practical nurses and Miller, a case 
22 


[PDF PAGE 33]
involving EMS paramedics, the courts found that 
the employer did not discriminate against the 
employee on the basis of their religion. Both 
courts noted the importance of the particular 
public safety functions that the employer was 
performing. 
Surely, no one can argue that the job 
functions of a police officer are any less 
important to the public’s health, safety and 
welfare than FBI agents, firefighters, LPNs or 
EMSs. In short, Defendant has not been able to 
locate a single decision where an employer was 
found to have discriminated against an employee 
on the basis of their religion where the 
employer is engaged in the protection of the 
health, safety and welfare of the general 
public. As the Magistrate Judge noted and the 
Eleventh Circuit concurred: 
Although the cases reflect the view 
that the trial court must evaluate 
reasonable accommodation and undue 
hardship in light of the employment 
context of each case, the Court is 
unable to find any authority which 
would require a public health or 
safety agency to grant such an 
employee an exception from’ the 
customary neutral rotating shift 
system used by law enforcement 
agencies in order to accommodate the 
Sabbath requirements of the officer 
(R2-78-20). 
Plaintiff Beadle states in his Petition 
"The Court did not rely on any evidence of 
adverse public health, safety or welfare 
consequences, but simply made a per. se 
determination that law enforcement positions are 
exempt from Title VII accommodation 
23 


[PDF PAGE 34]
requirements" (Pet. Writ Cert., p.23). There is 
no where in either of the lower courts’ 
decisions that specifically hold that law 
enforcement departments, as a matter of law, are 
exempt from Title VII accommodation 
requirements. Moreover, both lower court 
decisions cited to numerous record evidence 
about the undue hardship associated with 
accommodating Plaintiff’s religious beliefs. 
Plaintiff’s argument is, therefore, without 
merit. 
D. PLAINTIFF’S ARGUMENT THAT HE SHOULD 
HAVE BEEN TEMPORARILY ACCOMMODATED 
UNTIL A PERMANENT ACCOMMODATION COULD 
BE WORKED OUT IS WITHOUT MERIT 
During trial and on appeal, Plaintiff 
suggested that he should have been allowed to 
transfer to Sergeant Dawson’s squad instead of 
Sergeant Cook’s squad so his days off would have 
initially been Thursday, Friday and Saturday 
during the first fifty-day cycle. Plaintiff 
then argues that he should have been further 
accommodated by not transferring off Sergeant 
Dawson’s training squad so that he could have 
continued to have Thursday, Friday and Saturdays 
off during his entire training period. 
Plaintiff then suggests that after the 
completion of the training he should have been 
given one of the more favorable assignments that 
typically did not work weekends. As was 
discussed above, and as found by both lower 
courts such accommodations would have been 
detrimental to the continuity and consistency of 
the training program, therefore, the cost of 
this accommodation was more than de minimis. 
Moreover, such temporary accommodations would 
not have solved the problem at hand and the City 
was not required to temporarily accommodate him. 
24 


[PDF PAGE 35]
Plaintiff’s argument that he should have been temporarily accommodated until he completed his field training is too speculative for the Court. Specifically, in Meadows v. Golden Grain Macaroni Co., 45 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 235, 244 (N.D. Ill. 1987), the court in a religious discrimination suit, stated: 
But even if the court were to conclude that Golden Grain should have granted Meadows a temporary 
shift exchange of sixty or ninety 
days, there is no evidence that 
ultimately, Meadows’ discharge could have been avoided. It is clear that on July 30, 1984, slightly less than one year after Meadows’ discharge, 
Fred Militech, an employee with less 
seniority than Meadows was able to bid successfully on a first shift janitor job, but the court would be engaging in sheer speculation were it to try to divine whether, had Meadows 
been granted a temporary. shift change, an acceptable position would 
have become vacant before the company 
required him to return to his assigned shift. This court does not believe it can grant relief on such 
speculative basis (emphasis added). 
Id. at 244. 
In this case, the lower courts would have 
been engaging in pure speculation to assume that if Plaintiff had completed his training, he would have been given an assignment that did not require him to work his Sabbath. Thus, the lower courts correctly refused to engage in speculation by assuming that if the Plaintiff 
25 


[PDF PAGE 36]
had completed his training, he would have been given such an assignment. 
E. TO HAVE A HIGHER THRESHOLD FOR UNDUE 
HARDSHIP THAN "DE MINIMIS," THE COURT 
WOULD BE INFRINGING ON THE ESTABLISHMENT 
CLAUSE TO THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION 
In his Petition, Plaintiff Beadle makes 
several references to the Establishment Clause 
in the United States Constitution in regard to the Court’s determination of what constitutes 
undue hardship. Plaintiff relies upon Professor Michael McConnell in support of his position that the Supreme Court misinterpreted the Establishment Clause in its implicit ruling in the Hardison decision. Defendant believes that when this Court ruled on what constituted undue hardship in its Hardison opinion, it was clearly aware of the Establishment Clause and, 
therefore, its holding is consistent with the requirements of Title VII. 
Defendant does agree with Plaintiff that this Court should be mindful of the Establishment Clause. As Plaintiff’s own expert testified, he would give special preference to the Seventh Day Adventist over the desires of Methodists, Baptists, Catholics, and the like. 
The City of Tampa, as a municipal corporation, 
would be dangerously close to violating the Establishment Clause if it recognized the religious beliefs of the Seventh Day Adventist 
by accommodating their beliefs, but refuses to do so for the Methodists, Baptists, Catholics 
and the like. 
Defendant does not deny that the courts 
have recognized that there is a tension between 
the duty of religious accommodation under Title VII and the Establishment Clause. Few courts 
26 


[PDF PAGE 37]
have discussed the precise issue of whether a public employer, such as Defendant, which accommodates a plaintiff by granting a permanent day off thereby violates the Establishment Clause to the rights of other public employees of Defendant.® 
Defendant relies upon language contained in the concurring opinion of Justice O'Connor in Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., 472 U.S. 703 (1985). In Caldor, the Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause a Connecticut state statute which prohibited Connecticut employers from disciplining employees for refusing to work on their Sabbath. in her concurring opinion, Justice O’Connor clarified her position that the majority’s holding in Caldor should not be read to invalidate Title VII's religious accommodation provisions. Justice O’Connor explained, “[{l]ike the Connecticut Sabbath law, Title VII attempts to lift a burden on religious practice that is imposed by private employers and hence it is not the sort of accommodation Statute specifically contemplated by the Free Exercise Clause. id. at 712 (O'Connor, J. concurring)(emphasis in original). In her concurring opinion, Justice O'Connor also notes, "The statute singles out Sabbath observers for special and, as the Court concludes, absolute protection without according similar benefits to the ethical and religious beliefs and practices of other private employees." 472 U.S. at 709 (emphasis supplied). Furthermore, Justice O’Connor states, "These provisions preclude employment discrimination based on a person’s 
. As discussed, infra, the court in Miller, supra, has at least discussed this issue. 
27 


[PDF PAGE 38]
religion and require private employees to 
reasonably accommodate the religious practices 
of employees unless to do so would cause undue 
hardship to the employer’s business." 472 U.S. 
at 713 (emphasis supplied).Defendant suggests 
that Justice O’Connor’s emphasis on “private” 
employers calls into question whether Title 
VII’s religious accommodation requirements 
entirely reach public employment. In other 
words, it is one thing for a private employer to 
be required to give an accommodation to its 
employees, but it is entirely another matter for 
a public employer to grant a public employee a 
permanent religious holiday vis-a-vis his fellow 
employees. 
At least one court follows a similar 
interpretation of Caldor. In Miller, supra, the 
court found that giving a public employee 
plaintiff the accommodation he requested 
constitutes a violation of the Establishment 
Clause. Specifically, in Miller, as discussed 
above, the plaintiff was an EMS paramedic who 
had a religious~—based reservation against being 
assigned to a shift where he would be stationed 
alone with a female co-worker. Plaintiff 
claimed religious discrimination under Title VII 
and also sued under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 ("§ 1983") 
claiming that his public employer’s failure to 
accommodate his belief was a violation of the 
free exercise clause of the constitution. In 
rejecting plaintiff's claims, the court 
explained: 
Here, it is undisputed that the 
rotating schedule was implemented by 
the County in furtherance of its 
legitimate needs. The County had a 
legitimate interest in reducing its 
overtime costs and more evenly 
distributing the workload among its 
28 


[PDF PAGE 39]
EMS personnel. The incidental effect 
of the rotating schedule policy may 
have been to interfere with 
plaintiff's religious beliefs and 
practices, but that is not sufficient 
to implicate the Free Exercise 
Clause, much less to constitute a 
violation thereof. 
Miller, 56 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. at 280. The 
plaintiff also asserted under the Free Exercise 
Clause that the defendant County would have to 
meet the familiar constitutional standard of 
showing a compelling governmental interest and 
taking the least restrictive alternative. The 
court disagreed and reasoned: 
Moreover, plaintiff cannot prevail 
under the ‘compelling state 
interests--least restrictive 
alternative’ analysis he advocates. 
To permit plaintiff to be exempt from 
assignment at certain locations or to 
exempt him from assignments with a 
female partner solely because of his 
religious beliefs would single out 
his religious beliefs for preferable 
treatment. Such action would, when 
undertaken by Lexington County, 
constitute a violation oof the 
Establishment Clause. See Estate of 
Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., 472 U.S. 
703 (1985)(law requiring employers to 
permit employees not to work on 
Sabbath violates Establishment 
Clause). Avoiding a violation of the 
Establishment Clause, is by 
definition, a compelling state 
interest (emphasis supplied). 
29 


[PDF PAGE 40]
Miller, 56 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. at 280, citing, Caldor, 472 U.S. 703. Reading Caldor and Miller together, from Justice O’Connor’s emphasis on the term "private" employers and the court in Miller emphasizes that a preferential shift assignment “undertaken by Lexington County," a public employer, would be unconstitutional, demonstrates that there is a distinction to be drawn between public and private employers in terms of determining whether an accommodation by a public employer consisting of a permanent Shift assignment constitutes a violation of the Establishment Clause. As Defendant argues above, not only is Defendant not required by Title VII to accommodate Plaintiff by giving him preferential treatment including a permanent shift assignment or a specific training schedule, were Defendant to do so, it would be in violation of the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution under the reasoning in Caldor and Miller. 
CONCLUSION 
Plaintiff has made the same legal arguments to the Magistrate Judge and the Eleventh Circuit as he does to this Court. Both lower courts have properly disagreed with his interpretation of the law. Both lower courts have correctly applied United States Supreme Court and Eleventh Circuit precedents in ruling that the City of Tampa did not discriminate against him. Accordingly, there has been no error committed by either of the lower courts and there is no reason why this Court should grant Plaintiff’s Petition for Writ of Certiorari. 
30 


[PDF PAGE 41]
Dated this 17th day of May, 1995. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Thomas M. Gonzalez 
Thompson, Sizemore & Gonzalez, P.A. 109 North Brush Street, Suite 200 
Post Office Box 639 
Florida 
(813) 273-6050 
Fax: (813) 273-0072 
Tampa, 
Counsel for Respondents 
Of Counsel: 
Mark A. Hanley 
Thompson, Sizemore & Gonzalez, P.A. 
P.O. Box 639 
Tampa, Florida 33601 
