
[PDF PAGE 1]
29
OCTOBER TERM, 1995
Syllabus
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the tenth circuit
No. 94–7427.
Argued October 3, 1995—Decided November 7, 1995
During petitioner Libretti’s trial on federal drug and related charges, he
entered into a plea agreement with the Government, whereby, among
other things, he pleaded guilty to engaging in a continuing criminal
enterprise under 21 U. S. C. §848; agreed to surrender numerous items
of his property to the Government under §853, which provides for crimi-
nal forfeiture of drug-tainted property; and waived his constitutional
right to a jury trial.
At the colloquy on the plea agreement, the trial
judge explained the consequences of Libretti’s waiver of the latter right,
but did not expressly advise him as to the existence and scope of his
right under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 31(e) to a jury determi-
nation of forfeitability.
After sentencing Libretti to imprisonment and
other penalties, the judge entered a forfeiture order as to the property
in question despite Libretti’s objection to what he saw as a failure to
ﬁnd any factual basis for the entire forfeiture.
The Court of Appeals
rejected both of Libretti’s challenges to the forfeiture order, ruling that
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(f) does not require a district
court to ascertain a factual basis for a stipulated forfeiture of assets and
that Libretti had waived his Rule 31(e) right to a jury determination
of forfeitability.
Held:
1. Rule 11(f)—which forbids a court to enter judgment upon “a plea
of guilty” without assuring that there is “a factual basis” for the
plea—does not require a district court to inquire into the factual basis
for a stipulated forfeiture of assets embodied in a plea agreement.
Pp. 37–48.
(a) The Rule’s plain language precludes its application to a forfeit-
ure provision contained in a plea agreement.
The Rule applies only to
“a plea of guilty,” which refers to a defendant’s admission of guilt of a
substantive criminal offense as charged in an indictment and his waiver
of the right to a jury determination on that charge.
See, e. g., United
States v. Broce, 488 U. S. 563, 570.
In contrast, forfeiture is an element
of the sentence imposed following a plea of guilty, and thus falls outside
Rule 11(f)’s scope.
That forfeiture operates as punishment for criminal
conduct, not as a separate substantive offense, is demonstrated by the


[PDF PAGE 2]
30
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
text of the relevant statutory provisions, see, e. g., §§848(a) and 853(a),
by legislative history, and by this Court’s precedents, see, e. g., Alex-
ander v. United States, 509 U. S. 544, 558.
Caplin & Drysdale, Char-
tered v. United States, 491 U. S. 617, 628, n. 5, distinguished.
In light
of such weighty authority, the Court is not persuaded by Libretti’s in-
sistence that the forfeiture for which §853 provides is, in essence, a
hybrid that shares elements of both a substantive charge and a criminal
punishment.
Pp. 38–41.
(b) Libretti’s policy arguments for construing Rule 11(f) to reach
asset forfeiture provisions of plea agreements—that the Rule’s factual
basis inquiry (1) is essential to ensuring that a forfeiture agreement is
knowing and voluntary, (2) will protect against government overreach-
ing, and (3) is necessary to ensure that the rights of third-party claim-
ants are fully protected—are rejected.
Pp. 41–44.
(c) The District Court did not rest its forfeiture order solely on the
stipulation contained in the plea agreement.
There is ample evidence
that the District Judge both understood the statutory requisites for
criminal forfeiture and concluded that they were satisﬁed on the facts
at the time the sentence was imposed.
Pp. 44–48.
2. On the facts of this case, Libretti’s waiver of a jury determination
as to the forfeitability of his property under Rule 31(e)—which provides
that, “[i]f the indictment . . . alleges that . . . property is subject to
criminal forfeiture, a special verdict shall be returned as to the extent
of the . . . property”—was plainly adequate.
That waiver was accom-
plished by the plea agreement, in which Libretti agreed to forfeiture
and waived his right to a jury trial, together with the plea colloquy,
which made it abundantly clear that the plea agreement would end any
proceedings before the jury and would lead directly to sentencing by
the court.
Accordingly, Libretti cannot now complain that he did not
receive the Rule 31(e) special verdict.
The Court rejects his argument
that the Rule 31(e) right to a jury determination of forfeitability has
both a constitutional and a statutory foundation, and cannot be waived
absent speciﬁc advice from the district court as to the existence and
scope of this right and an express, written waiver.
Given that the
right, as an aspect of sentencing, does not fall within the Sixth Amend-
ment right to a jury determination of guilt or innocence, see, e. g.,
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U. S. 79, 93, but is merely statutory in
origin, the plea agreement need not make speciﬁc reference to Rule
31(e).
Nor must the district court speciﬁcally advise a defendant that
a guilty plea will result in waiver of the Rule 31(e) right, since that
right is not among the information that must be communicated to a


[PDF PAGE 3]
31
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
defendant under Rule 11(c) in order to ensure that a guilty plea is
valid.
Pp. 48–51.
38 F. 3d 523, afﬁrmed.
O’Connor, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, Parts I and II–A of
which were joined by Rehnquist, C. J., and Scalia, Kennedy, Souter,
Thomas, Ginsburg, and Breyer, JJ., Parts II–B and II–C of which were
joined by Rehnquist, C. J., and Kennedy, Souter, Ginsburg, and
Breyer, JJ., and Parts III and IV of which were joined by Rehnquist,
C. J., and Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Breyer, JJ.
Souter, J., post,
p. 52, and Ginsburg, J., post, p. 53, ﬁled opinions concurring in part
and concurring in the judgment.
Stevens, J., ﬁled a dissenting opinion,
post, p. 54.
Sara Sun Beale, by appointment of the Court, 514 U. S.
1095, argued the cause for petitioner.
With her on the briefs
was Paul K. Sun, Jr.
Malcolm L. Stewart argued the cause for the United
States.
With him on the brief were Solicitor General Days,
Assistant Attorney General Harris, Deputy Solicitor Gen-
eral Dreeben, and David S. Kris.*
Justice O’Connor delivered the opinion of the Court.†
Petitioner Joseph Libretti pleaded guilty to engaging in a
continuing criminal enterprise, in violation of 84 Stat. 1265,
21 U. S. C. §848 (1988 ed. and Supp. V), and agreed to forfeit
numerous items of his property to the Government.
We
must decide whether Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
11(f) requires the District Court to determine whether a
factual basis exists for a stipulated asset forfeiture embodied
in a plea agreement, and whether the Federal Rule of Crimi-
*Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the Forfeiture
Endangers American Rights Foundation by Brenda Grantland; and for
the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers by David B. Smith
and Richard J. Troberman.
†Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas join all but Parts II–B and II–C
of this opinion.
Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join only Parts
I and II.


[PDF PAGE 4]
32
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
nal Procedure 31(e) right to a special jury verdict on forfeit-
ure can only be waived following speciﬁc advice from the
District Court as to the existence and scope of this right
and an express, written waiver.
I
In May 1992, Joseph Libretti was charged in a multicount
superseding indictment with violations of various federal
drug, ﬁrearms, and money-laundering laws.
Included in the
indictment was a count alleging that Libretti engaged in a
continuing criminal enterprise (CCE), in violation of 21
U. S. C. §848, by operating a cocaine and marijuana distri-
bution organization in Wyoming and Colorado from 1984
to 1992.
Conviction under §848 subjects a defendant to,
among other penalties, “the forfeiture prescribed in sec-
tion 853.” 1
21 U. S. C. §848(a).
Accordingly, the indict-
1 Section
853(a)
provides
for
criminal
forfeiture
of
drug-tainted
property:
“(a) Property subject to criminal forfeiture.
Any person convicted of
a violation of this subchapter or subchapter II of this chapter punishable
by imprisonment for more than one year shall forfeit to the United States,
irrespective of any provision of State law—
“(1) any property constituting, or derived from, any proceeds the person
obtained, directly or indirectly, as the result of such violation;
“(2) any of the person’s property used, or intended to be used, in any
manner or part, to commit, or to facilitate the commission of, such viola-
tion; and
“(3) in the case of a person convicted of engaging in a continuing crimi-
nal enterprise in violation of section 848 of this title, the person shall
forfeit, in addition to any property described in paragraph (1) or (2), any
of his interest in, claims against, and property or contractual rights afford-
ing a source of control over, the continuing criminal enterprise.
“The court, in imposing sentence on such person, shall order, in addition
to any other sentence imposed pursuant to this subchapter or subchapter
II of this chapter, that the person forfeit to the United States all property
described in this subsection.
In lieu of a ﬁne otherwise authorized by
this part, a defendant who derives proﬁts or other proceeds from an


[PDF PAGE 5]
33
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
ment further alleged that the Government was entitled to
forfeiture of property that was obtained from or used to facil-
itate Libretti’s drug offenses, including, but not limited to,
various assets speciﬁed in the indictment.
See Fed. Rule
Crim. Proc. 7(c)(2) (“No judgment of forfeiture may be en-
tered in a criminal proceeding unless the indictment or the
information shall allege the extent of the interest or prop-
erty subject to forfeiture”).
Trial began in September 1992.
The Government pre-
sented testimony from 18 witnesses, including several indi-
viduals who had purchased cocaine or marijuana from Li-
bretti, to establish Libretti’s involvement in the possession
and distribution of considerable amounts of narcotics.
The
testimony also reﬂected Libretti’s purchase of a home, an
automobile, and dozens of automatic and semiautomatic
weapons during a time when he had only modest sources
of legitimate income.
Finally, the testimony revealed that
Libretti stored large amounts of money and drugs in safety
deposit boxes and storage facilities away from his home.
Following four days of testimony, Libretti and the Govern-
ment entered into a plea agreement, by the terms of which
Libretti agreed to plead guilty to the CCE count of the in-
dictment (count 6).
The Government in return agreed not
to pursue additional charges against Libretti and to recom-
mend that he be sentenced to the mandatory minimum of 20
years’ imprisonment.
Paragraph 10 of the plea agreement
provided that Libretti would
“transfer his right, title, and interest in all of his assets
to the Division of Criminal Investigation of the Wyo-
offense may be ﬁned not more than twice the gross proﬁts or other
proceeds.”
In addition, §853(p) provides that, when property subject to forfeiture
under subsection (a) cannot be recovered for various reasons, “the court
shall order the forfeiture of any other property of the defendant up to the
value of” the forfeitable but unrecoverable assets.


[PDF PAGE 6]
34
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
ming Attorney General including, but not limited to: all
real estate; all personal property, including guns, the
computer, and every other item now in the possession
of the United States; all bank accounts, investments,
retirement accounts, cash, cashier’s checks, travelers
checks and funds of any kind.”
Two other paragraphs of the plea agreement also made refer-
ence to the contemplated forfeiture.
Paragraph 2 described
the maximum statutory penalty for the offense to which Li-
bretti agreed to plead guilty, which included “forfeiture of all
known assets as prescribed in 21 U. S. C. §853 and assets
which are discovered at any later time up to $1,500,000.”
In
paragraph 9, Libretti agreed to “identify all assets that were
used to facilitate his criminal activity” and to “provide com-
plete ﬁnancial disclosure forms requiring the listing of assets
and ﬁnancial interests.”
Finally, Libretti acknowledged in
the agreement “that by pleading guilty to Count Six of the
Indictment, he waive[d] various constitutional rights, includ-
ing the right to a jury trial.”
It is beyond dispute that
Libretti received a favorable plea agreement.
The Gov-
ernment recommended that Libretti receive the minimum
sentence for conviction under §848, and agreed to drop all
other counts in the indictment.
One of those counts charged
Libretti with use of a ﬁrearm equipped with a silencer
during the commission of a drug offense, which mandates a
30-year sentence consecutive to the term of imprisonment
on the underlying drug offense.
18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1).
Li-
bretti also faced a potential ﬁne of up to $2 million.
21
U. S. C. §§848(a), 853(a).
At the subsequent hearing on the plea agreement, the trial
judge advised Libretti of his rights, including his right to
a jury trial.
The court also clariﬁed the consequences of
Libretti’s plea, including the facts that a plea of guilty would
mean “the end of this trial,” that “the jury [would] not . . .
decide whether [he’s] guilty or not,” and that “all the prop-
erty that’s described in . . . Count 6 could be forfeited to


[PDF PAGE 7]
35
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
the United States.”
App. 87, 88.
Libretti was then placed
under oath.
He admitted that his plea was voluntary and
indicated that he had read and understood the signiﬁcance of
the indictment and the plea agreement, including the fact
that “all of [his] property could be forfeited, the property
that is owned by [him] by reason of any drug transaction.”
Id., at 100.
Libretti’s only question about the plea agree-
ment pertained to paragraph 2, which provided for future
forfeiture of assets up to $1,500,000.
The District Court as-
sured Libretti that future forfeiture would be limited to sub-
sequently discovered drug-tainted assets, and that his future
legitimate income would not be forfeited.
Id., at 88–89.
After a lengthy exchange, in which the court reviewed each
subparagraph describing the violations that composed the
CCE charge and Libretti acknowledged each factual allega-
tion, the District Court found that the guilty plea was volun-
tary and factually based.
Id., at 121.
Following preparation of a presentence report, the District
Court held a sentencing hearing, at which Libretti was sen-
tenced to 20 years’ imprisonment, to be followed by 5 years
of supervised release, and ordered to pay a $5,000 ﬁne as well
as a mandatory $50 assessment and to perform 500 hours
of community service.
The Government ﬁled a motion for
forfeiture of Libretti’s assets, in keeping with the plea agree-
ment.
Libretti’s counsel offered no objection at the sentenc-
ing hearing, declaring that the forfeiture statute was “a
harsh law” and “a bitter pill dealt by Congress,” but conced-
ing that it was “a pill we must swallow.”
Id., at 149.
At
the conclusion of the hearing, however, Libretti stated on the
record that he “would just like to object to what [he saw] as
a failure to ﬁnd any factual basis for the whole forfeiture.”
Id., at 154.
The District Judge noted the objection, but re-
plied that “the evidence that I heard before me in the two
[sic] days of trial I think is sufﬁcient to warrant the granting
of forfeiture.
I think I have no alternative.”
Ibid.
On
December 23, 1992, the District Court entered an order


[PDF PAGE 8]
36
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
of forfeiture pursuant to 21 U. S. C. §853.
The order listed
speciﬁc property to be forfeited, including a parcel of real
property in Wyoming, two condominiums, two automobiles,
a mobile home, a diamond ring, various ﬁrearms, cash, sev-
eral bank accounts, and a number of cashier’s and traveler’s
checks.
App. 155–164.
One check was forfeited as a substi-
tute asset.
Id., at 162.
Libretti ﬁled an appeal from the
order of forfeiture.
While this appeal was pending, the District Court enter-
tained third-party claims to some of the property ordered
forfeited.
See 21 U. S. C. §853(n).
Following a March 1993
hearing, the court amended its forfeiture order to return cer-
tain property to the third-party claimants.
The court also
modiﬁed its order with respect to Libretti, stating that “it
may be unjust to enforce the speciﬁc forfeiture provisions in
the plea agreement” and reasoning that Libretti’s concession
to forfeiture in the plea agreement provided insufﬁcient basis
for the order of forfeiture.
App. 309.
The court ordered a
Magistrate to conduct a hearing at which Libretti would be
given the opportunity to show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that any portion of his property was not subject to
forfeiture.
Upon motion by the Government, the District
Court stayed the proceedings before the Magistrate Judge
pending resolution of Libretti’s appeal.
The Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit rejected both
of Libretti’s challenges to the forfeiture order.
38 F. 3d 523
(1994).
The court ruled ﬁrst that the District Court lacked
jurisdiction to consider Libretti’s claims to the property or-
dered forfeited at the third-party hearing, because Libretti
had ﬁled a notice of appeal.
After noting the divergence in
the Courts of Appeals regarding the applicability of Rule
11(f) to forfeiture provisions in plea agreements, the court
rejected Libretti’s contention that Rule 11(f) requires a dis-
trict court to ascertain a factual basis for a stipulated forfeit-
ure of assets.
This conclusion, the Court of Appeals rea-
soned, follows from the fact that forfeiture “is a part of the


[PDF PAGE 9]
37
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
sentence, not a part of the substantive offense.”
Id., at 528.
The Court of Appeals also determined that Libretti had
waived his Rule 31(e) right to a jury determination of forfeit-
ability, despite the fact that the District Court did not ex-
pressly advise Libretti of the existence and scope of that
right during his plea colloquy.
Id., at 530–531.
We granted
certiorari to resolve disagreement among the Circuits as to
the applicability of Rule 11(f) to asset forfeiture provisions
contained in plea agreements 2 and the requisites for waiver
of the right to a jury determination of forfeitability under
Rule 31(e).3
514 U. S. 1035 (1995).
II
Libretti insists that the District Court’s forfeiture order
must be set aside (or at least modiﬁed), because the court
neglected to establish a “factual basis” for forfeiture of the
2 Compare United States v. Reckmeyer, 786 F. 2d 1216, 1222 (CA4) (Rule
11(f) applies to forfeiture provisions in plea agreements), cert. denied, 479
U. S. 850 (1986), and United States v. Roberts, 749 F. 2d 404, 409 (CA7
1984) (same), cert. denied, 470 U. S. 1058 (1985), with United States v.
Boatner, 966 F. 2d 1575, 1581 (CA11 1992) (Rule 11(f) does not apply to
stipulated forfeiture provisions in plea agreements), United States v.
Bachynsky, 949 F. 2d 722, 730–731 (CA5 1991) (Rule 11(f) does not apply
to forfeiture provisions, but a forfeiture order will be upheld only if the
record provides a factual basis for forfeiture), cert. denied, 506 U. S. 850
(1992), and 38 F. 3d 523, 528 (CA10 1994) (case below).
3 Compare, e. g., id., at 531 (“speciﬁc reference to” the Rule 31(e) right
to a special jury verdict is not required when a defendant’s “unambiguous
plea agreement” and “knowing and voluntary plea” establish waiver);
United States v. Robinson, 8 F. 3d 418, 421 (CA7 1993) (“[A] defendant’s
waiver of his statutory right [under Rule 31(e)] to have a jury determine
which portion of his property is subject to forfeiture is only valid if know-
ingly and voluntarily made”); United States v. Garrett, 727 F. 2d 1003,
1012 (CA11 1984) (a defendant has a constitutional right to a jury trial to
determine forfeitability; waiver of that right must be in writing), aff’d on
other grounds, 471 U. S. 773 (1985); United States v. Zang, 703 F. 2d 1186,
1194–1195 (CA10 1982) (“The parties can waive their right to a special
verdict [under Rule 31(e)] by not making a timely request”), cert. denied,
464 U. S. 828 (1983).


[PDF PAGE 10]
38
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
property covered by the order under Federal Rule of Crimi-
nal Procedure 11(f).
Absent such a ﬁnding, Libretti argues,
even his concession to forfeiture in the plea agreement can-
not authorize the forfeiture.
A
Libretti’s ﬁrst claim is that the Rule by its very terms
applies to a forfeiture provision contained in a plea agree-
ment.
Accordingly, our analysis must begin with the text
of Rule 11(f):
“Determining Accuracy of Plea.
Notwithstanding the
acceptance of a plea of guilty, the court should not enter
a judgment upon such plea without making such inquiry
as shall satisfy it that there is a factual basis for the
plea.”
By its plain terms, the Rule applies only to a “plea of guilty.”
Our precedent makes clear that this language refers to a
defendant’s admission of guilt of a substantive criminal of-
fense as charged in an indictment and his waiver of the right
to a jury determination on that charge.
See, e. g., United
States v. Broce, 488 U. S. 563, 570 (1989) (“By entering a plea
of guilty, the accused is not simply stating that he did the
discrete acts described in the indictment; he is admitting
guilt of a substantive crime”); North Carolina v. Alford, 400
U. S. 25, 32 (1970); Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U. S. 238, 242
(1969); McCarthy v. United States, 394 U. S. 459, 466 (1969).
With this deﬁnition in mind, we have held that a district
judge satisﬁes the requirements of Rule 11(f) when he “de-
termine[s] ‘that the conduct which the defendant admits con-
stitutes the offense charged in the indictment or information
or an offense included therein to which the defendant has
pleaded guilty.’ ”
Id., at 467 (quoting Advisory Committee’s
Notes on Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11, 18 U. S. C. App., p. 730).
A forfeiture provision embodied in a plea agreement is of
an entirely different nature.
Forfeiture is an element of the


[PDF PAGE 11]
39
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
sentence imposed following conviction or, as here, a plea of
guilty, and thus falls outside the scope of Rule 11(f).
The
text of the relevant statutory provisions makes clear that
Congress conceived of forfeiture as punishment for the com-
mission of various drug and racketeering crimes.
A person
convicted of engaging in a continuing criminal enterprise
“shall be sentenced . . . to the forfeiture prescribed in section
853.”
21 U. S. C. §848(a) (emphasis added).
Forfeiture is
imposed “in addition to any other sentence.”
21 U. S. C.
§853(a) (emphasis added).
See also 18 U. S. C. §1963 (for-
feiture is imposed “in addition to any other sentence” for a
violation of the Racketeer Inﬂuenced and Corrupt Organiza-
tions Act (RICO)).
The legislative history of the Compre-
hensive Crime Control Act of 1984, Pub. L. 98–473, Tit. II,
98 Stat. 1976, also characterizes criminal forfeiture as pun-
ishment.
See, e. g., S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 193 (1983) (crimi-
nal forfeiture “is imposed as a sanction against the defendant
upon his conviction”).
Congress plainly intended forfeiture
of assets to operate as punishment for criminal conduct in
violation of the federal drug and racketeering laws, not as a
separate substantive offense.
Our precedents have likewise characterized criminal for-
feiture as an aspect of punishment imposed following convic-
tion of a substantive criminal offense.
In Alexander v.
United States, 509 U. S. 544 (1993), we observed that the
criminal forfeiture authorized by the RICO forfeiture statute
“is clearly a form of monetary punishment no different, for
Eighth Amendment purposes, from a traditional ‘ﬁne.’ ”
Id.,
at 558.
Similarly, in United States v. $8,850, 461 U. S. 555
(1983), we recognized that a “criminal proceeding . . . may
often include forfeiture as part of the sentence.”
Id., at 567.
And in Austin v. United States, 509 U. S. 602 (1993), we con-
cluded that even the in rem civil forfeiture authorized by 21
U. S. C. §§881(a)(4) and (a)(7) is punitive in nature, so that
forfeiture imposed under those subsections is subject to the
limitations of the Eighth Amendment’s Excessive Fines


[PDF PAGE 12]
40
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
Clause.
509 U. S., at 619–622.
Libretti himself conceded
below that criminal forfeiture “is a part of the sentence, not
a part of the substantive offense.”
38 F. 3d, at 528.
It is true, as Libretti points out, that we said in Caplin &
Drysdale, Chartered v. United States, 491 U. S. 617 (1989),
that “forfeiture is a substantive charge in the indictment
against a defendant.”
Id., at 628, n. 5.
That statement re-
sponded to the defendant’s claim that his Sixth Amendment
right to counsel “for his defense” could be transformed into
a defense to a forfeiture count in the indictment.
We in-
tended only to suggest that a defendant cannot escape an
otherwise appropriate forfeiture sanction by pointing to his
need for counsel to represent him on the underlying charges.
Elsewhere in that opinion we recognized that forfeiture is a
“criminal sanction,” id., at 634, and is imposed as a sentence
under §853, id., at 620, n. 1.
Libretti nonetheless insists that the criminal forfeiture for
which §853 provides is not “simply” an aspect of sentencing,
but is, in essence, a hybrid that shares elements of both a
substantive charge and a punishment imposed for criminal
activity.
In support of this contention, Libretti points to
three Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure that, according to
him, treat forfeiture as a substantive criminal charge.
Rule
7(c)(2) provides that “[n]o judgment of forfeiture may be en-
tered in a criminal proceeding unless the indictment or the
information shall allege the extent of the interest or prop-
erty subject to forfeiture.”
If the indictment or information
alleges that a defendant’s property is subject to forfeiture,
“a special verdict shall be returned as to the extent of the
interest or property subject to forfeiture, if any.”
Fed. Rule
Crim. Proc. 31(e).
And a ﬁnding of forfeitability must be
embodied in a judgment.
Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 32(d)(2)
(“When a verdict contains a ﬁnding of criminal forfeiture,
the judgment must authorize the Attorney General to seize
the interest or property subject to forfeiture on terms that
the court considers proper”).


[PDF PAGE 13]
41
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
Although the procedural safeguards generated by these
Rules are unique in the realm of sentencing, they do not
change the fundamental nature of criminal forfeiture.
The
fact that the Rules attach heightened procedural protections
to imposition of criminal forfeiture as punishment for certain
types of criminal conduct cannot alter the simple fact
that forfeiture is precisely that: punishment.
The Advisory
Committee’s “assumption” that “the amount of the interest
or property subject to criminal forfeiture is an element of
the offense to be alleged and proved,” Advisory Committee’s
Notes on Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 31, 18 U. S. C. App., p. 786,
does not persuade us otherwise.
The Committee’s assump-
tion runs counter to the weighty authority discussed above,
all of which indicates that criminal forfeiture is an element
of the sentence imposed for a violation of certain drug and
racketeering laws.
Moreover, even supposing that the Com-
mittee’s assumption is authoritative evidence with respect to
the amendments to Rules 7, 31, and 32, it has no bearing on
the proper construction of Rule 11.
Tome v. United States,
513 U. S. 150 (1995), is not to the contrary.
The Tome plural-
ity treated the Advisory Committee’s Notes on Federal Rule
of Evidence 801(d)(1)(B) as relevant evidence of the drafters’
intent as to the meaning of that Rule.
513 U. S., at 160–
163.
In contrast, Libretti seeks to use the Note appended
to Rule 31 to elucidate the meaning of an entirely distinct
Rule.
We cannot agree that the Advisory Committee’s
Notes on the 1972 amendment to Rule 31(e) shed any particu-
lar light on the meaning of the language of Rule 11(f), which
was added by amendment to Rule 11 in 1966.
B
Libretti next advances three policy arguments for con-
struing Rule 11(f) to reach asset forfeiture provisions of plea
agreements.
First, he claims, Rule 11(f)’s factual basis in-
quiry is essential to ensuring that a forfeiture agreement is
knowing and voluntary.
Next, Libretti declares that a Rule


[PDF PAGE 14]
42
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
11(f) inquiry will protect against Government overreaching.
And lastly, Libretti insists that a factual basis inquiry is nec-
essary to ensure that the rights of third-party claimants are
fully protected.
We consider these contentions in turn.
We are unpersuaded that the Rule 11(f) inquiry is neces-
sary to guarantee that a forfeiture agreement is knowing and
voluntary.
Whether a stipulated asset forfeiture is “factu-
ally based” is a distinct inquiry from the question whether
the defendant entered an agreement to forfeit assets know-
ingly and voluntarily.
Libretti correctly points out that
Rule 11(f) is intended to ensure that a defendant’s “plea of
guilty” is knowing and voluntary.
McCarthy, 394 U. S., at
472 (the Rule 11 inquiry is “designed to facilitate a more
accurate determination of the voluntariness of [a] plea”);
Advisory Committee’s Notes on Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11, 18
U. S. C. App., p. 730 (Rule 11(f) protects defendants who do
not “realiz[e] that [their] conduct does not actually fall within
the charge”).
But a “plea of guilty” and a forfeiture provi-
sion contained in a plea agreement are different matters
altogether.
Forfeiture, as we have said, is a part of the
sentence.
If the voluntariness of a defendant’s concession
to imposition of a particular sentence is questionable, the
relevant inquiry is whether the sentencing stipulation was
informed and uncoerced on the part of the defendant, not
whether it is factually sound.
Libretti’s second argument—that a Rule 11(f) factual basis
inquiry is necessary to prevent prosecutorial overreaching—
proves equally unavailing.
As Libretti properly observes,
§853 limits forfeiture by establishing a factual nexus re-
quirement: Only drug-tainted assets may be forfeited.
Li-
bretti suggests that failure to ensure, by means of a Rule
11(f) inquiry, that this factual nexus exists will open the door
to voluntary forfeiture agreements that exceed the forfeiture
authorized by statute, particularly in light of the Govern-
ment’s direct ﬁnancial interest in forfeiture as a source of
revenue and the disparity in bargaining power between the


[PDF PAGE 15]
43
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
Government and a defendant.
We recognized in Caplin &
Drysdale that the broad forfeiture provisions carry the po-
tential for Government abuse and “can be devastating when
used unjustly.”
491 U. S., at 634.
Nonetheless, we con-
cluded that “[c]ases involving particular abuses can be dealt
with individually by the lower courts, when (and if) any such
cases arise.”
Id., at 635.
However valid Libretti’s concern
about prosecutorial overreaching may be, Rule 11(f) simply
does not, on its face, address it.
We do not mean to suggest that a district court must
simply accept a defendant’s agreement to forfeit property,
particularly when that agreement is not accompanied by a
stipulation of facts supporting forfeiture, or when the trial
judge for other reasons ﬁnds the agreement problematic.
In
this regard, we note that the Department of Justice recently
issued a Revised Policy Regarding Forfeiture by Settlement
and Plea Bargaining in Civil and Criminal Actions, Directive
94–7 (Nov. 1994), to instruct that, among the procedures
necessary to ensure a valid forfeiture agreement, “[t]he set-
tlement to forfeit property must be in writing and the de-
fendant must concede facts supporting the forfeiture.”
Id.,
at 13.
In this case, however, we need not determine the
precise scope of a district court’s independent obligation, if
any, to inquire into the propriety of a stipulated asset forfeit-
ure embodied in a plea agreement.
We note that the Sen-
tencing Guidelines direct only that a district court “may” ac-
cept an agreement reached by the parties as to a speciﬁc,
appropriate sentence, as long as the sentence is within the
applicable guideline range or departs from that range “for
justiﬁable reasons.”
United States Sentencing Commission,
Guidelines Manual §6B1.2(c)(2) (Nov. 1993).
Libretti’s plea
agreement correctly recognized that the District Court was
not bound by the parties’ agreement as to the appropriate
sentence: “[T]he sentencing judge is neither a party to nor
bound by this plea agreement and is free to impose whatever
sentence he feels is justiﬁed.”
App. 81, ¶11.


[PDF PAGE 16]
44
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
Libretti ﬁnally argues that a Rule 11(f) factual basis in-
quiry is essential to preserving third-party claimants’ rights.
A defendant who has no interest in particular assets, the
argument goes, will have little if any incentive to resist for-
feiture of those assets, even if there is no statutory basis for
their forfeiture.
Once the Government has secured a stipu-
lation as to forfeitability, third-party claimants can establish
their entitlement to return of the assets only by means of the
hearing afforded under 21 U. S. C. §853(n).
This hearing,
Libretti claims, is inadequate to safeguard third-party
rights, since the entry of a forfeiture order deprives third-
party claimants of the right to a jury trial and reverses the
burden of proof.
He concludes that insisting on a factual
basis inquiry before entry of the forfeiture order will lessen
the need for third-party hearings following a broad-ranging
forfeiture agreement, and may even result in the conserva-
tion of scarce judicial resources.
Whatever the merits of
this argument as a matter of policy, Congress has deter-
mined that §853(n), rather than Rule 11(f), provides the
means by which third-party rights must be vindicated.
Third-party claimants are not party to Rule 11(f) proceed-
ings, and Libretti’s assertion that their interests are best
protected therein ﬁts poorly within our adversary system
of justice.
C
Contrary to the suggestion of the dissent, post, at 57, the
District Court did not rest its forfeiture order on nothing
more than Libretti’s stipulation that certain assets were for-
feitable.
In fact, there is ample evidence that the District
Court both understood the statutory requisites for criminal
forfeiture and concluded that they were satisﬁed on the facts
of this case at the time the sentence was imposed.
First,
the District Judge correctly recognized the factual nexus
requirement established by §853.
App. 89 (change-of-plea
hearing) (“[I]t has to be the product of a drug transaction to
be forfeited”).
Count 6 of the indictment speciﬁed numerous


[PDF PAGE 17]
45
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
items of property alleged to be subject to forfeiture under
that statute, including a parcel of real property in Wyoming;
two automobiles; over $100,000 in cash proceeds from drug
transactions; $12,000 in cash that Libretti had stored inside
a paint can at his home; a diamond ring; “[a]ll United States
currency and travelers checks” recovered from Libretti’s
storage lockers, safes, home, and person; a mobile home; a
computer system; four bank accounts; two GNMA invest-
ment certiﬁcates; bonds; three cashier’s checks; and the con-
tents of two safe deposit boxes.
Additional property was
identiﬁed in a bill of particulars and a restraining order is-
sued, and subsequently amended, by the District Court pur-
suant to 21 U. S. C. §853(e) (“Upon application of the United
States, the court may enter a restraining order . . . to pre-
serve the availability of property described in subsection (a)
of this section for forfeiture under this section”).
After one
week of trial, the parties submitted to the court an agree-
ment which set out, in detail, speciﬁc items of property to be
forfeited following Libretti’s plea of guilty, including “all real
estate; all personal property, including guns, the computer,
and every other item now in the possession of the United
States; all bank accounts, investments, retirement accounts,
cash, cashier’s checks, travelers checks and funds of any
kind.”
App. 81.
The plea agreement also explained that
the maximum penalty for the offense to which Libretti
agreed to plead guilty included “forfeiture of all known
assets as prescribed in 21 U. S. C. §853 and assets which are
discovered at any later time up to $1,500,000.”
App. 79.
Before issuing the order of forfeiture, the trial judge lis-
tened to four days of testimony, in which Government wit-
nesses detailed numerous drug transactions with Libretti.
See, e. g., 2 Tr. 124–126, 137–139; 3 id., at 271–272; 4 id., at
495–501; 5 id., at 946–949.
One witness recounted Libretti’s
purchase of a home in 1985 with a $100,000 down payment,
at a time during which he was earning an annual salary of
approximately $20,000.
2 id., at 179–180, 210–216; App. 123


[PDF PAGE 18]
46
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
(Presentence Report, Prosecutor’s Statement ¶6); Presen-
tence Report ¶37.
Another told of Libretti’s purchase of a
sports car with a check for $19,114.
5 Tr. 907–913.
Other
witnesses described Libretti’s possession, in his capacity as
a federal ﬁrearms dealer, of numerous automatic and semi-
automatic ﬁrearms, later determined to be worth at least
$243,000.
See, e. g., 2 id., at 140–141, 156–162; 5 id., at 844–
853; App. 123 (Presentence Report, Prosecutor’s Statement
¶9).
One witness testiﬁed that Libretti admitted having
“quite a bit of money stashed away” in safe deposit boxes,
5 Tr. 834, and on at least one occasion had “a couple thou-
sand” dollars in cash “sitting around,” id., at 835.
Other
witnesses established that Libretti often stored cash and
drugs in safe deposit boxes and storage facilities away from
his home.
See, e. g., 2 id., at 155–156; 4 id., at 718–720, 738–
743.
One of Libretti’s drug customers testiﬁed that he
broke into a storage facility at which Libretti had rented a
storage locker and discovered a briefcase containing a large
amount of cash (later estimated in the presentence report to
be approximately $150,000), a large block of cocaine, and ﬁve
large trash bags, at least one of which was ﬁlled with mari-
juana.
Id., at 558–566, 588–589.
Prior to sentencing, the court received the presentence in-
vestigation report, which contained, among other things, a
summary of Libretti’s legitimate income during the relevant
time periods.
During 1985 and 1986, Libretti worked as a
restaurant and grocery store manager, earning approxi-
mately $20,000 per year.
In early 1987, he was employed as
a temporary stock broker and was paid on commission only.
Later that year, he managed a Tenneco thrift store.
In
1989, Libretti reported an income of approximately $50,000
from his ﬁrearms business.
During 1988 and 1989, Libretti
also owned a partnership interest in two condominiums; he
reported that the rental income did not meet his expenses
and thus he did not earn a proﬁt.
Between June 1989 and
his arrest in December 1991, Libretti worked as a full-time


[PDF PAGE 19]
47
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
accounting supervisor, earning a salary of approximately
$40,000 per year.
Presentence Report ¶¶35–37.
Included in the presentence report was a prosecutor’s
statement detailing the amounts of cocaine and marijuana
involved in Libretti’s drug operation and various sums of
money Libretti earned from his drug dealing.
App. 122–
135.
The statement described Libretti’s substantial expend-
itures, including the $100,000 cash deposit on a house in 1985
($72,000 of which was derived from Libretti’s sale of drugs)
and the purchase of a $20,000 mortgage in 1986 (again, alleg-
edly with proceeds from his distribution of drugs).
Id., at
123.
Paragraph 12 reported that Libretti had opened a safe
deposit box in 1987 in which he placed $48,000 in cash.
On
another occasion, Libretti placed approximately $10,000 into
an account bearing his brother’s name.
Id., at 124–125.
The statement described Libretti’s practice of storing large
amounts of cash and drugs in safes, storage lockers, and safe
deposit boxes.
Id., at 124, 129.
Libretti also stored drugs,
a weapon, and a cashier’s check for $65,000 in his personal
locker at his place of employment.
Id., at 129.
The state-
ment related Libretti’s investment of at least $243,000 in nu-
merous ﬁrearms.
Id., at 123–124.
These funds again re-
portedly derived from Libretti’s drug distribution activities;
the statement indicated that “Libretti’s gun business was
used to launder drug proceeds” and served as a means by
which Libretti could “justify his income since [he] was not
working at times during the conspiracy and, when he was
working, was not bringing in the money that would pay for
the Lakewood house and other investments.”
Id., at 127.
Finally, the statement suggested that substantial sums of
cash derived from Libretti’s drug activities were never re-
covered by law enforcement authorities.
Id., at 134.
De-
fense counsel conceded at the sentencing hearing that “the
[presentence] report of Mr. Libretti’s background, education,
ﬁnancial circumstances are [sic] accurate.”
Id., at 138.
In
light of these facts, defense counsel acknowledged that “the


[PDF PAGE 20]
48
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
forfeiture is going to take regular money and illegal money
under the substitute assets” provision of §853.
Id., at 149.
In view of the plea agreement, the indictment, and the
amended restraining order, the trial judge issued an order
forfeiting to the Government the Wyoming lot, both condo-
miniums, both automobiles, $8,000 in cash proceeds of Libret-
ti’s drug transactions, the diamond ring, the mobile home, all
ﬁrearms, an IRA account, three bank accounts, bonds, two
GNMA certiﬁcates, and several cashier’s and traveler’s
checks.
One check was ordered forfeited as a substitute
asset “for assets dissipated and otherwise expended by Li-
bretti.”
Id., at 162.
It is not, as Libretti maintains, implausible that the court
concluded on the record before it that the forfeiture order
was appropriate.
Following Libretti’s objection to the for-
feiture order for lack of factual foundation, the trial judge
replied that “the evidence that I heard before me in the two
[sic] days of trial I think is sufﬁcient to warrant the granting
of forfeiture.”
Id., at 154.
We cannot say that the District
Judge, despite his subsequent uncertainty, erred in issuing
the forfeiture order on the facts before him.
III
Libretti also challenges the adequacy of his waiver of a
jury determination as to the forfeitability of his property
under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 31(e).
The right,
he argues, has both a constitutional and a statutory founda-
tion, and cannot be waived absent speciﬁc advice from the
district court as to the nature and scope of this right and an
express, written agreement to forgo the jury determination
on forfeitability.
We disagree.
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 31(e) provides that,
“[i]f the indictment or the information alleges that an inter-
est or property is subject to criminal forfeiture, a special
verdict shall be returned as to the extent of the interest or
property subject to forfeiture, if any.”
Libretti would have


[PDF PAGE 21]
49
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
us equate this statutory right to a jury determination of for-
feitability with the familiar Sixth Amendment right to a jury
determination of guilt or innocence.
See, e. g., United States
v. Gaudin, 515 U. S. 506, 511 (1995) (“The Constitution gives
a criminal defendant the right to demand that a jury ﬁnd
him guilty of all the elements of the crime with which he is
charged”).
Without disparaging the importance of the right
provided by Rule 31(e), our analysis of the nature of criminal
forfeiture as an aspect of sentencing compels the conclusion
that the right to a jury verdict on forfeitability does not fall
within the Sixth Amendment’s constitutional protection.
Our cases have made abundantly clear that a defendant does
not enjoy a constitutional right to a jury determination as
to the appropriate sentence to be imposed.
See, e. g.,
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U. S. 79, 93 (1986) (“[T]here
is no Sixth Amendment right to jury sentencing, even where
the sentence turns on speciﬁc ﬁndings of fact”); Cabana v.
Bullock, 474 U. S. 376, 385 (1986) (“The decision whether
a particular punishment . . . is appropriate in any given
case is not one that we have ever required to be made by a
jury”); Spaziano v. Florida, 468 U. S. 447, 459 (1984) (no
right to a jury determination as to the imposition of the
death penalty).
Given that the right to a jury determination of forfeitabil-
ity is merely statutory in origin, we do not accept Libretti’s
suggestion that the plea agreement must make speciﬁc refer-
ence to Rule 31(e).
Nor must the district court speciﬁcally
advise a defendant that a plea of guilty will result in waiver
of the Rule 31(e) right.
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
11(c) details the information a district court must communi-
cate to a defendant in order to ensure that a guilty plea is
valid.
Advisory Committee’s Notes on 1974 Amendment of
Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11(c), 18 U. S. C. App., p. 731 (the Rule
“codiﬁes . . . the requirements of Boykin v. Alabama, 395
U. S. 238 . . . (1969), which held that a defendant must be
apprised of the fact that he relinquishes certain constitu-


[PDF PAGE 22]
50
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court
tional rights by pleading guilty”) (emphasis added).
Spe-
ciﬁc advice regarding the Rule 31(e) right is not among the
Rule 11(c) safeguards, and we decline Libretti’s invitation
to expand upon the required plea colloquy.
That is not to
say, however, that a trial judge may not mention the nature
and scope of the Rule 31(e) right during a plea colloquy.
In
fact, the Advisory Committee’s Notes make plain that “a
judge is free to” inform a defendant about speciﬁc conse-
quences that might follow from a plea of guilty if the judge
“feels a consequence of a plea of guilty in a particular case is
likely to be of real signiﬁcance to the defendant.”
Advisory
Committee’s Notes on 1974 Amendment of Fed. Rule Crim.
Proc. 11, 18 U. S. C. App., p. 731.
On these facts, Libretti’s waiver of a jury determination
as to the scope of forfeiture was plainly adequate.
In the
plea agreement, Libretti “acknowledge[d] that by pleading
guilty to Count Six of the Indictment, he waive[d] various
constitutional rights, including the right to a jury trial and a
speedy trial.”
App. 80.
He stipulated to the forfeiture of
speciﬁc assets.
Id., at 80–81.
The District Court engaged
Libretti in an extensive colloquy at his change-of-plea hear-
ing, during which the court reviewed with Libretti the con-
sequences of his guilty plea, including the fact that the plea
would result in dismissal of the jury.
Libretti’s responses
made clear that he fully understood the nature and conse-
quences of his guilty plea and was prepared to be sentenced
in accordance with the plea agreement.
At the sentencing
hearing, neither Libretti nor his counsel speciﬁcally objected
to resolution of forfeiture issues by the court without a jury.
See, e. g., id., at 150, 154.
In addition, Libretti was represented by counsel at all
stages of trial and sentencing.
Apart from the small class
of rights that require speciﬁc advice from the court under
Rule 11(c), it is the responsibility of defense counsel to
inform a defendant of the advantages and disadvantages of
a plea agreement and the attendant statutory and con-


[PDF PAGE 23]
51
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
stitutional rights that a guilty plea would forgo.
Libretti
has made no claim of ineffectiveness of counsel before this
Court.
As we noted in Broce, “[a] failure by counsel to pro-
vide advice may form the basis of a claim of ineffective as-
sistance of counsel, but absent such a claim it cannot serve
as the predicate for setting aside a valid plea.”
488 U. S.,
at 574.
Of course, a district judge must not mislead a defendant
regarding the procedures to be followed in determining
whether the forfeiture contemplated in a plea agreement will
be imposed, nor should the court permit a defendant’s obvi-
ous confusion about those procedures to stand uncorrected.
On this record, however, we ﬁnd no hint that Libretti labored
under any misapprehension.
Although the District Judge
did not spell out for Libretti that, had he declined to enter a
plea of guilty, and had the trial gone forward, the jury would
eventually have been required to determine which of Libret-
ti’s assets were forfeitable, when viewed in its entirety, the
plea colloquy made it abundantly clear that the plea agree-
ment would end any proceedings before the jury and would
lead directly to sentencing by the court.
As the Court of
Appeals observed, “there is no evidence at [the change-of-
plea] hearing that [Libretti] wanted a jury trial on the for-
feiture issue, or thought he was going to have one.”
38
F. 3d, at 531.
Taken together, the plea agreement and the
plea colloquy waived Libretti’s right to insist on a jury deter-
mination of forfeitability under Rule 31(e).
IV
For these reasons, we reject Libretti’s challenges to the
District Court’s forfeiture order.
Under the plain language
of Rule 11(f), the District Court is not obliged to inquire into
the factual basis for a stipulated forfeiture of assets embod-
ied in a plea agreement.
And because Libretti agreed to
this forfeiture and waived his “right to a jury trial,” he can-
not now complain that he did not receive the special jury


[PDF PAGE 24]
52
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of Souter, J.
verdict on forfeitability for which Rule 31(e) provides.
Ac-
cordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is afﬁrmed.
It is so ordered.
Justice Souter, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
I join in the judgment and Parts I and II of the Court’s
opinion.
I would not reach the question of a Sixth Amend-
ment right to trial by jury on the scope of forfeiture or
whether the Constitution obliges a trial court to advise a
defendant of whatever jury trial right he may have.
In
cases like this one, any such right to instruction will be satis-
ﬁed by the court’s obligatory advice to the defendant of the
right to jury trial generally.
See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc.
11(c)(3) (“Before accepting a plea of guilty . . . the court must
address the defendant personally in open court and inform
the defendant of, and determine that the defendant under-
stands, . . . that the defendant has . . . the right to be tried
by a jury”).
It is reasonable to understand the scope of the
right as covering all matters charged in the indictment,
which under Rule 7(c)(2) will include the forfeiture claim.
Since a defendant will have been provided a copy of the in-
dictment, see Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 10 (“The defendant shall
be given a copy of the indictment or information before being
called upon to plead”), and will have heard it read or summa-
rized, see ibid. (“Arraignment shall be conducted in open
court and shall consist of reading the indictment or informa-
tion to the defendant or stating to the defendant the sub-
stance of the charge”), he will naturally understand that his
right to jury trial covers a verdict on the forfeiture claim.
If, in speaking to the defendant or in other statements
within his hearing, the court should afﬁrmatively say or sug-
gest that the right to jury trial would not extend to the for-
feiture, that would be error under the current law, whatever
the constitutional status of that right may be.
While there
is some reason to argue that the court’s colloquy with the


[PDF PAGE 25]
53
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Opinion of Ginsburg, J.
defendant in this case was misleading, see App. 87 (“[I]f you
plead guilty . . . . the jury is not going to decide whether
you’re guilty or not”), I think Justice Ginsburg is right to
conclude otherwise, for the reasons given in her separate
opinion.
Justice Ginsburg, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
Rule 11(f), I agree for reasons the Court states, does not
impose on district courts an obligation to ﬁnd a “factual
basis” for asset forfeitures stipulated in a plea agreement.
I therefore join in Parts I and II of the Court’s opinion and
concur in the judgment.
But the jury-trial right for which
Rule 31(e) provides, as I see it, must be known in order to
be given up voluntarily.
I therefore set out brieﬂy my view
of the second issue the Court decides.
At the plea hearing, the District Court carefully and com-
prehensively informed Libretti that his guilty plea would
waive his right to jury trial on the crimes charged in the
indictment.
The court did not then refer to the unusual
jury-trial right on criminal forfeiture provided by Rule 31(e)
of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure:
“If the indictment or the information alleges that an in-
terest or property is subject to criminal forfeiture, a
special verdict shall be returned as to the extent of the
interest or property subject to forfeiture, if any.”
See also Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 7(c)(2) (“No judgment of for-
feiture may be entered in a criminal proceeding unless the
indictment or the information shall allege the extent of the
interest or property subject to forfeiture”); Fed. Rule Crim.
Proc. 11(c)(1) (court must address defendant personally in
open court and inform him of “the nature of the charge”
when plea of guilty is offered).
Just as intelligent waiver of trial by jury on the underlying
offense requires that the defendant be advised of the right,


[PDF PAGE 26]
54
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Stevens, J., dissenting
so waiver of the extraordinary jury-trial right on forfeiture
should turn on the defendant’s awareness of the right his
plea will override.
That right, uncommon as it is, may not
be brought home to a defendant through a bare reading of
the forfeiture clause in the indictment.
Clarity, however, is
easily achieved.
In cases like Libretti’s, trial judges can
readily avoid unknowing relinquishment of the procedural
right to a jury verdict on forfeiture by routinely apprising
defendants, at plea hearings, of Rule 31(e)’s atypical special-
verdict requirement.
Failure to mention Rule 31(e) at Libretti’s plea hearing is
not cause for revisiting the forfeiture of his property, how-
ever, because at least two pretrial references were made to
Rule 31(e)’s requirement.
First, there was a brief exchange
between court and counsel on the need for a special-verdict
form.
1 Tr. 8.
Second, and more informative, the trial
judge explained to the jurors during voir dire that the indict-
ment included
“a provision for a forfeiture of all property of any kind
constituting or derived from proceeds that Mr. Libretti
received directly or indirectly from engaging in said
continuing criminal enterprise.
And that’s a subject
matter on which the jury will be required at the end
of the case to answer a speciﬁc question relating to it.”
Id., at 188.
In view of this statement to the lay triers—telling them in
Libretti’s presence that they would be called upon speciﬁ-
cally to decide the matter of forfeiture—Libretti cannot
persuasively plead ignorance of the special-verdict right
Rule 31(e) prescribes.
Justice Stevens, dissenting.
While I agree with the Court’s conclusions (1) that Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(f) does not create a duty to
determine that there is a factual basis for a forfeiture of


[PDF PAGE 27]
55
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Stevens, J., dissenting
assets pursuant to 21 U. S. C. §853 and (2) that the record in
this case does establish a factual basis for forfeiting the
assets described in Count 6 of the indictment, I believe
it important to emphasize the underlying proposition that
the law—rather than any agreement between the parties—
deﬁnes the limits on the district court’s authority to forfeit
a defendant’s property.
Moreover, entirely apart from Rule
11(f), the district court has a legal obligation to determine
that there is a factual basis for the judgment entered upon a
guilty plea.
For that reason, the Court of Appeals was
plainly wrong in holding that simply because the defendant
unequivocally agreed to “ ‘forfeit all property,’ ” the law au-
thorized the forfeiture of all of his assets.
38 F. 3d 523, 526
(CA10 1994).
The facts of this case well illustrate the particular need
for the district court to determine independently that a fac-
tual basis supports forfeiture judgments that it enters pursu-
ant to plea agreements.
As the Court correctly notes, this
defendant received a favorable plea agreement.
The record
demonstrates that the facts would have supported a much
longer term of imprisonment than was actually imposed.
In
such circumstance, it is not unthinkable that a wealthy de-
fendant might bargain for a light sentence by voluntarily
“forfeiting” property to which the government had no statu-
tory entitlement.
This, of course, is not the law.
No matter
what a defendant may be willing to pay for a favorable sen-
tence, the law deﬁnes the outer boundaries of a permissible
forfeiture.
A court is not free to exceed those boundaries
solely because a defendant has agreed to permit it to do so.
As Judge Cudahy aptly put it, “[t]he mere fact that the de-
fendant has agreed that an item is forfeitable, in a plea agree-
ment, does not make it so.”
United States v. Roberts, 749
F. 2d 404, 409 (CA7 1984).
The proposition that the law alone deﬁnes the limits of a
court’s power to enter a judgment can be traced to this
Court’s early precedents.
In Bigelow v. Forrest, 9 Wall. 339


[PDF PAGE 28]
56
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Stevens, J., dissenting
(1870), the Court explained that a court “transcend[s] its ju-
risdiction” when it orders the forfeiture of property beyond
that authorized by statute.
Id., at 351.
In a similar vein,
Ex parte Lange, 18 Wall. 163 (1874), concluded that a judg-
ment imposing punishment in excess of statutory authoriza-
tion is not merely voidable, but “void.”
Id., at 178.
Pre-
cisely because extrastatutory punishments implicate the
very power of a court to act, the district court must, entirely
apart from the speciﬁc procedure mandated by Rule 11(f),
satisfy itself that there is a factual basis for any judgment
entered pursuant to a guilty plea that threatens to exceed
statutory bounds.1
Were a court to do otherwise, it would
permit the parties to deﬁne the limits of its power.
In sum, Rule 11(f) does not create a substantive right.
Instead, it prescribes a procedure that is intended to pro-
tect every defendant’s pre-existing right not to receive any
sentence beyond statutorily prescribed limits.
Rule 11(f)
states that if there is no factual basis for the guilty plea, the
court has no power to “enter a judgment upon such plea
. . . .” In so stating, the Rule does not impliedly authorize
courts to impose sentences upon a plea of guilty greater than
the maximum prescribed for the admitted offense.
The
pre-existing substantive limits on the court’s power to im-
pose a judgment upon a plea of guilty, which apply to the
forfeiture aspect of the judgment as well as to the ﬁnding of
guilt, preclude such a result.
Nothing in the Rule suggests
otherwise.
Because the foregoing thoughts are implicit in this Court’s
independent examination of the record to assure itself that
there is indeed a factual basis for the forfeiture of the prop-
erty described in Count 6, and for the further conclusion that
the forfeiture order does not extend beyond the line that the
law has drawn, I endorse almost all of the Court’s opinion.
1 Of course, the court’s power to act is not similarly implicated when it
imposes a sentence that is arguably erroneous but nonetheless within the
range authorized by statute.


[PDF PAGE 29]
57
Cite as: 516 U. S. 29 (1995)
Stevens, J., dissenting
Nevertheless, I do not agree with the Court’s disposition of
the case because I believe the opinion of the Court of Ap-
peals can fairly be read to approve of the forfeiture of all
petitioner’s property, rather than just the assets described
in Count 6.2
Although the majority marshals ample support for much
of the forfeiture authorized here, the record simply does not
provide a factual basis for the whole of it.
For example,
nothing in the Court’s opinion provides a basis for concluding
that the small bank account that petitioner opened while a
young boy, and which had not been augmented since 1975,
should be subject to forfeiture.
Nor can all of his assets
necessarily be deemed subject to forfeiture as “substitute
assets.”
As the Court recognizes, the District Court deter-
mined that only one check was subject to forfeiture on that
basis.
Ante, at 48.
The sole basis for the wholesale forfeiture afﬁrmed here
stems from one paragraph in the defendant’s plea agreement
which states his willingness to “transfer his right, title, and
interest in all of his assets to the Division of Criminal Inves-
tigation of the Wyoming Attorney General.” 3
App. 81.
As
I have explained, however, a defendant’s bare stipulation
does not determine what property a court may forfeit.
The
district court must independently make that determination.
Here, the record reveals that the District Court had not de-
termined that a factual basis existed for the sweeping for-
feiture it ordered.
Indeed, the District Court subsequently
sought to hold a hearing for the very purpose of determining
whether a factual basis existed.
The District Court was
precluded from undertaking that necessary inquiry only be-
cause this pro se petitioner ﬁled an early notice of appeal
2 Moreover, I agree with Justice Ginsburg that the jury trial
right that Rule 31(e) provides must be known in order to be given up
voluntarily.
3 The record does not make clear why the property would be transferred
to state, rather than federal, law enforcement authorities.


[PDF PAGE 30]
58
LIBRETTI v. UNITED STATES
Stevens, J., dissenting
that divested the court of jurisdiction.
However, that juris-
dictional bar did not, and could not, relieve the District Court
of its prior duty to ﬁnd a factual basis for its forfeiture
judgment.
Because the District Court had not assured itself that its
judgment fell within the bounds established by law, and be-
cause the record does not support the conclusion that it did,
I would vacate and remand for further proceedings consist-
ent with this opinion.
