[PDF PAGE 1]
22
OCTOBER TERM, 1995
Syllabus
LOUISIANA v. MISSISSIPPI et al.
on exceptions to report of special master
No. 121, Orig.
Argued October 3, 1995—Decided October 31, 1995
Louisiana’s bill of complaint in this original action asks the Court, inter
alia, to deﬁne the boundary between that State and Mississippi along a
7-mile stretch of the Mississippi River.
The case is here on Louisiana’s
exceptions to the report of the Special Master appointed by the Court.
Held: Louisiana’s exceptions are overruled.
The case is controlled by the
island exception to the rule of the thalweg.
The latter rule speciﬁes
that the river boundary between States lies along the main downstream
navigational channel, or thalweg, and moves as the channel changes with
the gradual processes of erosion and accretion.
The island exception to
that rule provides that if there is a divided river ﬂow around an island,
a boundary once established on one side of the island remains there,
even though the main downstream navigation channel shifts to the is-
land’s other side.
Pursuant to the island exception, the Special Master
placed the boundary here at issue on the west side of the area here in
dispute, thereby conﬁrming Mississippi’s sovereignty over the area.
The Master took that action after ﬁnding that the area derived from
Stack Island, which had originally been within Mississippi’s boundary
before the river’s main navigational channel shifted to the east of the
island, but which, through erosion on its east side and accretion on its
west side, changed from its original location, next to the river’s Missis-
sippi bank, to its current location, abutting the Louisiana bank.
The
Master’s ﬁndings and conclusions are carefully drawn and well docu-
mented with compelling evidence, whereas Louisiana’s theory of the
case is not supported by the evidence.
Pp. 24–28.
Exceptions overruled, and Special Master’s report and proposed decree
adopted.
Kennedy, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.
Gary L. Keyser, Assistant Attorney General of Louisiana,
argued the cause for plaintiff.
With him on the brief were
Richard P. Ieyoub, Attorney General, Jack E. Yelverton,
First Assistant Attorney General, and E. Kay Kirkpatrick,
Assistant Attorney General.

[PDF PAGE 2]
23
Cite as: 516 U. S. 22 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
James W. McCartney argued the cause for defendant
Houston Group.
Robert R. Bailess argued the cause for
defendant State of Mississippi.
With them on the brief
were Mike Moore, Attorney General of Mississippi, Robert
E. Sanders, Assistant Attorney General, and Charles Alan
Wright.
Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court.
Like the shifting river channel near the property in dis-
pute, this litigation has traversed from one side of our docket
to the other.
We must ﬁrst recount this procedural history.
In an earlier action, Mississippi citizens sued in the United
States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi
to quiet title to the subject property.
Certain Louisiana citi-
zens were named as defendants.
The parties asserted con-
ﬂicting ownership claims to an area of about 2,000 acres,
stretching seven miles along the Louisiana bank of the Mis-
sissippi River, near Lake Providence, Louisiana.
The State
of Louisiana and the Lake Providence Port Commission in-
tervened in that action and ﬁled a third-party complaint
against the State of Mississippi.
Concerned, however, with
the jurisdiction of the District Court to hear its matter, Loui-
siana took the further step of instituting an original action
in this Court, and it ﬁled a motion here for leave to ﬁle a bill
of complaint.
We denied the motion.
Louisiana v. Missis-
sippi, 488 U. S. 990 (1988).
The District Court heard the case pending before it and,
in an order by Judge Barbour, ruled in favor of Mississippi.
Louisiana, however, prevailed in the United States Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, 937 F. 2d 247 (1991), and we
granted Mississippi’s petition for certiorari.
503 U. S. 935
(1992).
After hearing oral argument on both substantive issues
and jurisdiction, we resolved only the latter.
We held that
there was no jurisdiction in the District Court, or in the
Court of Appeals, to grant any relief in the quiet title action

[PDF PAGE 3]
24
LOUISIANA v. MISSISSIPPI
Opinion of the Court
to one State against the other, that authority being reserved
for jurisdiction exclusive to this Court.
Mississippi v. Loui-
siana, 506 U. S. 73, 77–78 (1992); see also 28 U. S. C. §1251(a).
We remanded the case so the complaint ﬁled by Louisiana
could be dismissed in the District Court and for the Court
of Appeals to determine what further proceedings were
necessary with respect to the claims of the private parties.
Upon remand, Louisiana asked the District Court to stay
further action in the case to allow Louisiana once again to
seek permission to ﬁle a bill of complaint in this Court.
The
District Court agreed, noting that our decision on the bound-
ary issue would solve the District Court’s choice-of-law prob-
lem and would be the fairest method of resolving the funda-
mental issue for all parties.
Louisiana did ﬁle a renewed motion in our Court for leave
to ﬁle a bill of complaint.
We granted it, allowing leave to
ﬁle against Mississippi and persons called the Houston
Group, who asserted ownership to the disputed area and
who supported Mississippi’s position on the boundary issue.
Louisiana asked us to deﬁne the boundary between the two
States and cancel the Houston Group’s claim of title.
After
granting leave to ﬁle, we appointed Vincent L. McKusick,
former Chief Justice of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court,
as Special Master.
The case is now before us on Louisiana’s
exceptions to his report, and there is no jurisdictional bar to
our resolving the questions presented.
We deem it necessary to do no more than give a brief
summary of the law and of the Special Master’s careful and
well-documented ﬁndings and conclusions, for Louisiana’s
exceptions have little merit and must be rejected.
The controlling legal principles are not in dispute.
In all
four of the prior cases that have involved the Mississippi
River boundary between Louisiana and Mississippi, we have
applied the rule of the thalweg.
Louisiana v. Mississippi,
466 U. S. 96, 99 (1984); Louisiana v. Mississippi, 384 U. S.
24, 25–26, reh’g denied, 384 U. S. 958 (1966); Louisiana v.

[PDF PAGE 4]
25
Cite as: 516 U. S. 22 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
Mississippi, 282 U. S. 458, 459 (1931); Louisiana v. Missis-
sippi, 202 U. S. 1, 49 (1906).
Though there are exceptions,
the rule is that the river boundary between States lies along
the main downstream navigational channel, or thalweg, and
moves as the channel changes with the gradual processes of
erosion and accretion.
Louisiana v. Mississippi, 466 U. S.,
at 99–101; Arkansas v. Tennessee, 397 U. S. 88, 89–90 (1970).
There exists an island exception to the general rule, which
provides that if there is a divided river ﬂow around an island,
a boundary once established on one side of the island remains
there, even though the main downstream navigation channel
shifts to the island’s other side.
Indiana v. Kentucky, 136
U. S. 479, 508–509 (1890); Missouri v. Kentucky, 11 Wall. 395,
401 (1871).
The island exception serves to avoid disturbing
a State’s sovereignty over an island if there are changes in
the main navigation channel.
The Special Master found that the disputed area derived
from an island, known as Stack Island, that had been within
Mississippi’s boundary before the river’s main navigational
channel shifted to the east of the island.
The Special Master
found that, through erosion on its east bank and accretion on
its west bank, Stack Island changed from its original loca-
tion, next to the Mississippi bank of the river, to its current
location, abutting the Louisiana bank.
Pursuant to the is-
land exception, then, the Special Master placed the boundary
on the west side of the disputed area, conﬁrming Mississippi’s
sovereignty over it.
Because the land is located in Missis-
sippi, the Special Master found that Louisiana had no stand-
ing to challenge the Houston Group’s claim of title.
Louisiana advances a different version of events.
It con-
cedes that there did exist a Stack Island in 1881 and that it
was formed in Mississippi territory.
In that year the land
was surveyed for a federal land patent that was later granted
to the Houston Group’s predecessor in interest, Stephen
Blackwell.
Louisiana maintains that two years later, in
1883, Stack Island washed away and was replaced by mere

[PDF PAGE 5]
26
LOUISIANA v. MISSISSIPPI
Opinion of the Court
alluvial deposits, which at various times over the last 100
years were not sufﬁcient in size or stability to be deemed an
island.
Some of these alluvial deposits may or may not have
gravitated to the disputed area; nonetheless, according to
Louisiana, the disputed area was not formed from anything
that can be said to be Stack Island but rather was formed
by random accretion to the west bank of the river.
The Special Master rejected Louisiana’s theory as not sup-
ported by the evidence, and we agree.
The only evidence
that Louisiana presented to support its theory of Stack Is-
land’s disappearance is a Mississippi River Commission map
dated April 1883.
The map was prepared in 1881, with hy-
drographic data added in an overlay in 1883.
Of particular
interest is a solid green line labeled as the “present steam-
boat channel” that runs over a portion of Stack Island as it
was drawn in 1881.
Louisiana’s expert interpreted that
green line to mean that Stack Island had disappeared by
1883.
The Special Master questioned the authenticity of the doc-
ument because testimony suggested that no such map had
been published by the Mississippi River Commission and be-
cause a different map published by the Commission the same
month, April 1883, showed Stack Island in existence.
Even
if we assume the document’s authenticity, however, it does
not settle the question, for we agree with the Special Master
that boats could have passed close enough to the island with-
out the entire island having disappeared.
Louisiana’s read-
ing of the document was contradicted, moreover, by the
sworn testimony of Stephen Blackwell and two other wit-
nesses given on May 5, 1885, stating that Blackwell and his
family had lived on Stack Island continuously from April 2,
1882, to the date of the testimony and were cultivating 20
acres.
Furthermore, in November 1883, six months after
Stack Island was supposed to have vanished, the Mississippi
River Commission, in reporting on its construction of dikes
just north of Stack Island, stated that “ ‘this work showed

[PDF PAGE 6]
27
Cite as: 516 U. S. 22 (1995)
Opinion of the Court
good results, forcing the main channel of the river to the
right of the island and building a bar to the head of Stack
Island, as shown by the high-water survey of April 1883.’ ”
Report of Special Master 20.
Like the Special Master, we are unconvinced that Stack
Island disappeared in 1883.
Louisiana alleges other disap-
pearances, including one as recently as 1948.
We ﬁnd no
credible evidence of these disappearances, but instead ﬁnd
compelling evidence of Stack Island’s continued existence.
We note ﬁrst that the north portion of Stack Island has 70-
year-old cottonwood trees growing on it and that long-time
residents of the area report no disappearances of the island.
The record, moreover, contains numerous maps of the region
beginning with the 1881 patent survey and coming into the
present era, and every one of them shows the existence of
Stack Island.
With the exception of a single exhibit, dated
1970, all of the maps and mosaics show a land mass that the
mapmaker identiﬁes by name as Stack Island, even for the
years since 1954 when that land mass has no longer been
insular in form.
These maps show Stack Island’s progres-
sion from the Mississippi side of the river to the Louisiana
side.
When the maps are superimposed one over the other
in chronological order, the successive maps show a land mass
covering a signiﬁcant portion of Stack Island shown on the
preceding map.
The maps satisfy us that Stack Island did
not wash away and is now the disputed area.
We need not delve into the proper deﬁnition of an island,
as Louisiana would have us do, because the Special Master
adopted Louisiana’s rigorous test, and found that Stack Is-
land satisﬁed it.
Louisiana raises no exceptions to that portion of the Spe-
cial Master’s report ﬁnding that Louisiana lacked standing
to challenge the Houston Group’s claim of title.
Louisiana
requests a new trial of the supplemental hearing before the
Special Master but offers no sound reason in support of that
request, so we must deny it.

[PDF PAGE 7]
28
LOUISIANA v. MISSISSIPPI
Opinion of the Court
We have considered Louisiana’s other exceptions and ﬁnd
them insubstantial.
The exceptions of Louisiana are over-
ruled, and the Special Master’s report and proposed decree
are adopted.
It is so ordered.
