OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


VIMAR SEGUROS Y REASEGUROS, S.A.., 
PETITIONER, 


Vv. 


M/V SKY REEFER, HER ENGINES, ETC., 
AND M.H. MARITIMA, S.A.., 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


STANLEY MCDERMOTT III LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS 


Varet & Fink, P.C. Counsel of Record 
53 Wall Street ADAM C. SLOANE 
New York, NY 10005 Mayer, Brown & Platt 
(212) 858-5407 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 778-0611 
Counsel for Petitioner 


Vimar Seguros Y Reaseguros, S.A. 


—Sx 


oe 7 * 
BE ey ee 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 


Ilva (USA), Inc. v. Alexander’s Daring 
M/V, 10 F.3d 255 (Sth Cir. 1993) 


State Establishment for Agricultural 
Product Trading v. M/V Wesermunde, 
838 F.2d 1576 (11th Cir.), cert. 
denied, 488 U.S. 916 (1988) 


Union Insurance Society of Canton, Ltd. 
v. Elikon, 642 F.2d 721 (4th Cir. 1981) 


Statutes 


9 U.S.C. 16(b)(1) 
28 U.S.C. 1292(b) 


Miscellaneous 


Uniform Ocean Bills of Lading — Hague 
Rules, H.R. Rep. No. 2218, 74th Cong., 
2d Sess. 7 (1936) 


In the Supreme Court of the Anited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-623 


VIMAR SEGUROS Y REASEGUROS, S.A.., 
PETITIONER, 


We 


M/V SKY REEFER, HER ENGINES, ETC., 
AND M.H. MARITIMA, S.A., 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


As we explained in the petition (at 10), the court of 
appeals has decided an important and recurring question of 
federal maritime law — and has done so in direct (and 
acknowledged) conflict with the Eleventh Circuit's decision 
in State Establishment for Agricultural Product Trading v. 
M/V Wesermunde, 838 F.2d 1576, cert. denied, 488 U.S. 916 
(1988). Applying two “canons of statutory interpretation” 
(Pet. App. 11a), the court held that Section 2 of the Federal 
Arbitration Act “removes” foreign arbitration clauses “from 
the grasp of COGSA.” The court’s decision undermines the 
purposes of COGSA, invokes mistaken principles of statutory 


2 


construction, and imposes needless, and costly, uncertainty 
for maritime transactions. 


Respondents concede most of this. They acknowledge 
(Opp. 3), as they must, that the First Circuit’s decision is 
squarely in conflict with the Eleventh Circuit’s decision in 
Wesermunde. They do not dispute that the question presented 
is both important and recurring. And they do not deny that 
the decision beiow creates significant difficulties for maritime 
commerce: as amicus Maritime Law Association puts it 
(Amicus Br. 10), the court of appeals’ decision “deprive[s] 
maritime commercial interests of precisely those elements the 
Court has long endeavored to propagate: certainty, 
predictability, and uniformity.” 


Respondents nevertheless ask the Court to deny the 
p ‘ition on three grounds. First, they assert (Opp. 2) that the 
petition is “premature” because the case is in an interlocutory 
posture, and “[fa}fter the arbitration in Japan concludes, 
[petitioner] may no longer wish to challenge the validity of 
the foreign arbitration clause” (ibid.). Second, respondents 
contend that the Court should withhold a grant “until other 
courts of appeals have the opportunity to address the issue” 
(id. at 4). Finally, respondents argue (id. at 4-6) that the 
court of appeals’ decision is correct. As we show below, 
none of these is a persuasive reason to deny further review. 


1. There is no reason to require petitioner to arbitrate 
its claim in Japan before it may petition this Court for further 
review. As respondents themselves recognize (Opp. 3), the 
question whether foreign arbitration clauses are enforceable 
is squarely presented in this case and requires no additional 
factual development. It is ripe for review now: as the 
district court explained when it certified the question for 
immediate review, the issue presents “a question of statutory 
interpretation which is not fact-specific” and “involves a 
serious legal issue, on which courts have disagreed, which 
doubtless will arise in future cases.” Pet. App. 28a. 


3 


Respondents have simply “not demonstrated that the costs 
associated with immediate appeal would be unduly. 
prejudicial, as compared with the expense and potential waste 
associated with pursuing arbitration in Japan, which may later 
be invalidated.” Id. at 29a. 


Moreover, petitioner’s central submission is that COGSA 
relieves shippers of the burden of arbitrating overseas. It is 
no answer to suggest that petitioner should first submit to a 
vexatious (and unlawful) arbitration in Japan and only 
afterwards seek review of the legitimacy of such arbitration. 
Respondents do not explain why petitioner should be put to 
that burden when the question is clearly presented now, the 
conflict was squarely acknowledged, and the pending 
arbitration in Japan will shed no additional light on the legal 
issues at stake. Respondents no doubt hope that the burden 
of arbitrating in Japan (and the unpredictability of later 
review) would force petitioner to discount and settle its claims 
against its will and interest, in which event the foreign 
arbitration clause would take its toll and yet escape further 
review entirely. 

2. It goes without saying that “[i}t is not necessary for 
the Court to grant certiorari in every case where the lower 
courts differ” (Opp. 3). But that is hardly a reason to deny 
certiorari in this case. First, as we have noted, the question 
whether foreign arbitration clauses may be enforced is clearly 
presented in this case and is ripe for review: it is a pure 
question of law and respondents do not deny that this case is 
an appropriate vehicle for resolving the issue. Second, 
although there is, to be sure, only one other court of appeals 
decision on point, it is squarely in conflict, and the court 
below expressly acknowledged the conflict and rejected the 
conflicting authority. Third, the lower federal courts have 
already garnered the requisite “experience with conflicting 
interpretations of federal rules” (Opp. 4). Indeed, as 
respondents concede, a wide array of district courts have 


4 


addressed the issue and reached starkly conflicting results. 
See Pet. 23 n.18.' 


Finally, it is no answer to suggest, as respondents do, 
that the Court should simply wait for the next case. As 
respondents themselves recognize (Opp. 2), it is exceedingly 
difficult to secure appellate review of orders requiring 
arbitration. Absent certification, the FAA precludes review 
of an order staying litigation pending arbitration. 9 U.S.C. 
16(b)(1). See Ilva (USA), Inc. v. Alexander’s Daring M/V, 
10 F.3d 255 (Sth Cir. 1993) (dismissing under 9 U.S.C. 
16(b) an appeal from an order staying litigation pending 
arbitration, despite appellant’s waiver of its arbitration rights 
in the notice of appeal). Generally speaking, it is only when 
(as here) a district court agrees to certify the arbitration order 
under 28 U.S.C. 1292(b), and the court of appeals accepts 
certification, that a party can obtain review of an order 
enforcing a foreign arbitration clause. 


In short, if respondents had their way, district courts 
could (and assuredly would) continue to enforce foreign 
arbitration clauses, effectively insulated from appellate 
review. For the reasons set out in our petition (at 16-24), 
that outcome is inconsistent with the text and purposes of 
COGSA and imposes needless costs and uncertainties for 

3. Respondents urge the Court to deny certiorari 
because, in their view, the court of appeals’ decision is 
correct. Opp. 4-6. But respondents overlook all three of our 
challenges to the decision below on the merits. See Pet. 16- 
21. Respondents offer no rationale for the distinction 


' Respondents observe that “more of these cases enforce [foreign 
arbitration] clauses than invalidate them.” Opp. 3 n.2. Perhaps. 
The question, however, is not how the cases line up, but rather the 
fact that there is a deep and abiding conflict. Respondents concede 
that there is. 


5 


effectively created by the court of appeals between foreign 
forum selection clauses (which the court acknowledged are 
unenforceable under COGSA (see Pet. App. 6a)) and foreign 
arbitration clauses (which the court enforced). See Pet. 16- 


18. Nor do respondents deny that the court of appeals’ 
decision guts the purposes of COGSA and introduces 


significant “uncertainty concerning the responsibilities and 
liabilities of carriers, the responsibilities and rights of 
shippers and the liabilities of underwriters who insure 
waterborne cargo.” Union Ins. Soc. of Canton, Lid. v. 
Elikon, 642 F.2d 721, 723 (4th Cir. 1981). See Pet. 18-21. 
And although respondents agree with the court of appeals that 
the FAA and COGSA are “in conflict” (Opp. 4), they never 
explain why the two statutes cannot be reconciled according 
to their plain terms. See Pet. 20-21. 


4. The short of the matter is this: The court of appeals’ 
decision is wrong, is concededly in conflict with the Eleventh 
Circuit’s decision in Wesermunde, and resolves an important 
and recurring question of federal law (that unfortunately 
escapes ready appellate review in the ordinary course). 
Amicus Maritime Law Association — which “represents a 
broad constituency inclusive of ship and cargo owners, 
charterers, shippers, forwarders, seamen, longshoremen, 
passengers, insurers, and others” (Amicus Br. 2) — has put 
it squarely: “Without knowing which of the two approaches 
will apply, shippers and carriers face uncertainties that will 
be translated into expensive litigation. The resulting litigation 
will do little either to advance the important federal interests 
in the uniformity of maritime law or to facilitate private 
arbitration efforts.” Jd. at 11-12. 


Respondents offer no reason why shippers and carriers 
should absorb those costs — costs that Congress expressly 


sought to minimize when it enacted COGSA. See Uniform 
Ocean Bills of Lading — Hague Rules, H.R. Rep. No. 2218, 
74th Cong., 2d Sess. 7 (1936). The petition for a writ of 
certiorari should be granted. 


6 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, and the reasons stated in our 
petition, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be 
granted. 


Respectfully submitted. 


STANLEY MCDERMOTT III LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS 


Varet & Fink, P.C. Counsel of Record 
53 Wall Street ADAM C. SLOANE 
New York, NY 10005 Mayer, Brown & Platt 
(212) 858-5407 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 778-0611 
Counsel for Petitioner 


Vimar Seguros Y Reaseguros, S.A. 


NOVEMBER 1994 


