z 
ne 
? 
. 


“ee 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Se a ED 6 bh has see Oe ee cadiads il 
POE EE Eo ce cecectsioctuciadeahitan l 
PEPETE GE GEGEN cence cicseceecsvivsuss 2 


ARGUMENT: THE DECISION OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT SHOULD 
Se PE: 90. 00456068 Ch CGEE NG Oe ERRORS 2 


I. UNDER THE McDONNELL DOUGLAS PROOF SCHEME 
A CLAIMANT MUST ESTABLISH THAT A YOUNGER 


REPLACEMENT IS OUTSIDE THE PROTECTED CLASS 
IN THE ABSENCE OF OTHER PROBATIVE EVIDENCE 
OF DISCRIMINATION IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH A 
PRIMA FACIE CASE OF AGE DISCRIMINATION ... 2 


A. A Prima Facie Case under the ADEA Requires 


Vv ich 
Raises An Inference Of A Nexus Between The 
Plaintiff's Age And The Empl 
i cists cee hy oee kes Raa bach os ke 62 2 


erence Of _Iil Age 


i. Cre eee. 4 
C. The Fourth Circuit Approach Does Not Pro- 
hibi ishi fer- 
in tra- 
I -o. b'6'4 6 0 04 6446 946-04 cu RS 8 5 
Il. SOUND PUBLIC POLICY SUPPORTS THE FOURTH 
Sa Cs cebectndsbihuswacées eaaes 6 


RD séc bade Whe ante bu yds wee eRe 7 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES 


EEOC vy. Western Electric Co., Inc. 
713 F.2d 1011 (4th Cir. 1983)....................... 


Corp.,133 L.Ed2d 405 (November 13, 1995)............. 
Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978) 
Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins, 50S US. __, 
a 
Holley v. Sanyo Mfg.,771 F.2d 1161 (8th Cir. 1985) ....... 
International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. United States, 
gi ea aa 
Laugesen v. Anaconda Company, 

510 F.2d 307 (6th Cir. 1975) ....................... 
Loeb vy. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003 (ist Cir. 1979)... ... 
—_ Sherwin-Williams Co.. 

681 F.2d 230 (4th Cir.1982) ........................ 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 
ES passim 


Meinecke v. H & R Block Income Tax School Inc. , 
li hoy). 


AR ee 


*** 


O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp. 
I a ecneeccec 


ae i 
Price v. Maryland Casualty Co., 

561 F.2d 609 (Sth Cir. 1977) ....................... 3 
Steckler v. Motorola, Inc., 703 F.2d 392 (9th Cir. 1983) _... 6 
St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, U.S. _, 

I arti gy 2,4 
Tall Bravo Pitino } . 

61 F.3d 1241 

SE ee rs ae 4 
Texas D Te ty Afi Burdi 

I a a 3 
Walker v. Nationsbank of Florida, N.A., 53 F.3d 1548 
SEER GS Ea Ss 4 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS 

29 U.S.C. §$§ 621-634 (1970 & Supp IV 1974) ....... passim 


te 


l 
INTEREST OF AMICUS 


New England Legal Foundation ("NELF"), a non-profit, public 
interest law firm, was incorporated in 1977. Its membership 
consists of corporations, individuals and others who believe in 
NELF's mission of promoting balanced economic growth for New 
England, protecting the free enterprise system and defending 
economic rights. NELF's more than 130 members and supporters 
include a cross-section of large and small corporations from all 
parts of New England and the United States. NELF has regularly 
appeared in state and federal court, as party or counsel, in cases 
raising issues of general economic significance to the business 
community. See, ¢.g., Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins, 505 U.S. __., 
120 L.Ed. 2d 868 (1992); Ernst & Young, L.L.P. v. R.l. Depositors 
Economic Protection Corp.,133 L.Ed 2d 405 (November 13, 1995). 


NELF is deeply concerned about the application of the Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act ("ADEA" or the “Act"). 
Differing interpretations of that Act can seriously and adversely 
impact employment decisions in which NELF'’s members and 
supporters are involved. Due to the potential for significant legal 
exposure arising out of legitimate employment decisions, NELF is 
concerned about the significant negative impacts of a reversal of 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit's decision 
in this case. More broadly, NELF is concerned that a reversal of 
the decision below may encourage other courts to expand the 
liability of an employer to an employee at the expense of sound 
business judgment/decisionmaking. 


NELF, therefore, seeks to file a brief amicus curiae in support 
of Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp. ("Consolidated Coin"), the 
Respondent in this action. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 37.2, 
NELF has obtained consent for the filing of this amicus brief from 
counsel for the petitioner and the respondent. 


ein ee 


. 


2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


NELF accepts and relies upon the statement of the case 
contained in the Respondent's Brief. 


ARGUMENT: 


i. UNDER THE McDONNELL DOUGLAS PROOF SCHEME 
A CLAIMANT MUST ESTABLISH THAT A YOUNGER 


REPLACEMENT IS OUTSIDE THE PROTECTED CLASS 
IN THE ABSENCE OF OTHER PROBATIVE EVIDENCE 
OF DISCRIMINATION IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH A 
PRIMA FACIE CASE OF AGE DISCRIMINATION. 


A | 
SS ae Introduction Of S Evid Whic! 
Raises An Inference Of A Nexus Between The 
Plaintiff's Age And The Emp! Decisi 


In McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. “Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), 
this Court “established an allocation of the burden of production 
and an order for the presentation of proof in Title VII ne 


tory-treatment cases." St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, _ 

, 113 S. Ct. 2742 (1993). Under McDonnell Douglas, a Jee 
facie case requires the presentation of evidence which will sustain 
an inference of unlawful discrimination. Furnco Construction Corp. 
vy. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). This Court has not specifically set 
forth the necessary elements of a prima facie case under the Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act ("ADEA" or the “Act").' In 
recent years, lower courts have utilized the McDonnell Douglas 
analysis as a guide for ADEA cases. See Lovelace v. Sherwin- 
Williams Co., 681 F.2d 230, 239 (4th Cir. 1982); Loeb v. Textron, 


' The ADEA forbids discrimination based on an individual's age. The Act's 
protections are limited to individuals who are at least forty (40) years old. 29 
U.S.C. § 631(a). 


aw 


ew _—— 


3 


Inc. 600 F.2d 1003, 1010 (ist Cir. 1979); Price vy. Maryland 
Casualty Co., 561 F.2d 609 (Sth Cir. 1977). 


In the present case, the Fourth Circuit properly required the 
plaintiff to introduce evidence which satisfied this Court's require- 
ment that a prima facie case be established only by introducing 
facts which, if otherwise unexplained, give rise to a sustainable 
inference of illegal discrimination. See e.g. International Brother- 
hood of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 344, 358 (1977); 


Texas Dept. of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 254 
n.6 (1981); Hicks, 113 S. Ct. at n.3. The Fourth Circuit required 


the plaintiff to prove the following facts in order to establish a 
prima facie case of age discrimination under the ADEA: 


(1) [he] is in protected age group; (2)[he] was discharged 
or demoted; (3) at the time of discharge or demotion, 
{he} was performing his job at a level that met his 
employer's legitimate expectations, and (4) following his 
discharge or demotion, [he] was replaced by someone of 
comparable qualifications outside the protected class. 


O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., 56 F.3d 542, 546 
(4th Cir. 1995) (emphasis added). 


The prerequisites to a prima facie case set out by the Fourth 
Circuit are appropriate in a situation where, as here, the age 
characteristic of the replacement is the only circumstantial evidence 
presented to satisfy the required inference that age was a motivat- 
ing factor in the challenged employment decision. 


B. An Age Comparison Alone Is Insufficient To 
: An Inf Of Illegal Age Discrimi- 
nation. 
The critical determination in this type of litigation is whether 
plaintiff has proven by a fair preponderance of the evidence that an 


4 


impermissible consideration, such as gender or age, was a substan- 
tial motivating factor in the challenged employment decision. In 
the context of the McDonnell Douglas scheme, the mere compari- 
son of ages, without more, is insufficient to support an inference 
that age played a determining role in the discharge decision. No 
inference can be generated because no disparate treatment which 
requires an explanation has occurred. It is simply a fact of life that 
when an older employee is replaced, more often than not a younger 
person will be hired. Thus, the replacement of an older employee 
with a younger person, without more, does not support a conclusion 
that the employment action was a product of illegal age discrimina- 
tion with any reasonable probability. See e.g. Laugesen v. 
Anaconda Company, 510 F.2d 307, 313 n. F.2d 1062, 1066 (4th 
Cir. 1980). 


For purposes of prima facie analysis, the inference of illegal 
discrimination is generated by the fact that a non-protected person 
is being favored over a protected person. “The fourth element 
required to establish a ‘prima facie case’ of discrimination was 
intended to demonstrate unequal treatment by the relatively 
objective evidence of replacement by a member of a non-protected 
class." EEOC v. Western Electric Co., Inc., 713 F.2d 1011, 1014- 
15 (4th Cir. 1983). This approach is consistent with the inference 
recognized by numerous courts in both the Title VII and ADEA 
context. See e.g., Hicks, US. , 113 S. Ct. at 2745; Meinecke 
v. H & R Block Income Tax School Inc., 66 F.2d 77, 83 (Sth Cir. 
1995); Talley v. Bravo Pitino Restaurant, Lid., 61 F.3d 1241, 1247 


(6th Cir. 1995); Walker v. Nationsbank of Florida, N.A., 53 F.3d 
1548, 1556 (11th Cir. 1995). 


The Fourth Circuit appropriately applied this logic to the 
ADEA setting and adhered to the statutory distinction between 
protected (age forty and over) and non-protected (under age forty) 
age groups established by Congress in the ADEA. See 29 U.S.C. 
§ 631(a). This approach is necessary to support an inference of 
illegal discrimination where the claimant seeks to rely on the age 


aS Pew! + Swe 


5 


characteristic of the replacement as part of a McDonnell Douglas 
prima facie case. Moreover, this approach is consistent with the 


legislatively dictated "protected" and “unprotected” categories. 
Those categories reflect a Congressional intent to address and 
combat stereotypes that arise merely because one is a member of 
a particular class. 


The text of the ADEA does not create any hierarchy within the 
protected class. Clearly, Congress did not intend to set forth a 
general rule that every employment decision that involves two 
workers must always favor the older employee. Mere chronologi- 
cal age distinctions between two protected persons do not trigger 
an employer's legal liability under the ADEA. If Congress had 
wanted to create such a liability scheme it could have specifically 
done so. Consequently, this Court should affirm the Fourth 
Circuit's approach which relied on the statutorily created classes. 


C. The Fourth Circuit Approach Does Not Pro- 
Class Comparison. 

It is important to acknowledge that the Fourth Circuit approach 
does not preclude a plaintiff from establishing an age discrimina- 
tion claim where the replacement is also within the protected class. 
The McDonnell Douglas proof scheme is not the only method of 
establishing an ADEA claim.’ The fact that a plaintiff must point 
to a replacement outside the protected class when relying solely on 
the replacement's age and utilizing the McDonnell Douglas test, 
does not affect his/her ability to rely on an intra-protected age 
group comparison as circumstantial evidence of discrimination 
under traditional methods of proof. Although an intra-group 
comparison without more is insufficient to support an inference of 


> Moreover, the age of a replacement is not the only means of establishing 
an inference of age discrimination under the rubric of McDonnel! Douglas. 


6 


age discrimination, a 63 year old employee can still demonstrate 
that he/she was discriminated against when his/her replacement was 
42 years old, so long as he/she can present evidence of actual 
eceiaimetion 


Il. SOUND PUBLIC POLICY SUPPORTS THE FOURTH 
CIRCUIT'S DECISION. 


The approach used by the Fourth Circuit is buttressed by 
considerations of social policy. No reasonable person can avoid 
greater the likelihood that his/her replacement will in fact be 
younger. Most of the time when an employee in his/her late fifties 
or sixties is replaced it is by a younger person. The older the 
replaced employee, the greater the ratio between the number of 
potential replacements who are younger and the number who are 
older. Clearly, therefore, replacement by a younger person in and 
of itself does not support the requisite inference of illegal discnm- 
nation, particularly where, as here, the replacement is also a 
member of the protected class. 


The ADEA does not require that every plaintiff in a protected 
age group be allowed a trial simply because he was discharged 
during a reduction in force. Holley v. Sanyo Mfg..771 F.2d 1161, 
n.1 (8th Cir. 1985). The prima facie case plays an important role 
in helping “distric! courts identify meritless suits and stop/ping} 
them short of full iial.” Steck! v. Motorola, Inc., 703 F.2d 392, 
394 (9h Cir. 1983). An approach such as the one advocated by 
the Petitioner, whereby a plaintiff could establish a prima facie case 
merely by showing that he/she was replaced by a younger em- 
ployee would thwart achievement of this goal. Moreover, it would 
unfairly shift the balance of rights between employers and employ- 
ees iN a manner inconsistent with the statutory scheme enacted by 
Congress and result in needless expenditures of time, money and 


7 


If the approach taken by the Fourth Circuit is not sanctioned, 
legitimate business decisions of employers will be further tainted 
in order to avoid potential, mentless discrimination claims. For 
example, each and every time an employer makes a decision to hire 
or fire an older worker he/she must evaluate the likelihood that a 
lawsuit will be brought and that the decision will have to be 
legitimized by a preponderance of the evidence. As a practical 
matter, particularly in light of the additional expense of litigation, 
in termination/replacement cases these considerations will most 
likely result in preferences toward older employees whenever there 
is some doubt whether the empioyer's explanations will be 
sanctioned by a judge or jury. Unfortunately, this will occur even 
in cases where the decision is made without regard to an em- 
ployee's age. There is no support for such preferential treatment in 
either the language or the legislative history of the ADEA. This 
situation will be exacerbated if a plaintiff is allowed to establish a 
prima facie case merely by showing that the replacement is a 
younger member of the protected class. Moreover, no positive 
social benefit will be derived from such a scheme in instances 
where the only evidence in support of an age discrimination claim 
is the fact that the replacement is younger. 


At the other end of the spectrum lies the prospect that the 
Petitioner's position could actually harm some older employees. If 
employers feel that the ADEA will make it significantly more 
difficult to replace older employees, they may be deterred from 
hiring otherwise attractive candidates for employment out of a fear 
that they will never be able to replace that employee without facing 
the time and expense of a jury trial. Consequently, forty and fifty 
year old individuals may find it harder to find employment. 
Clearly, such a result is the exact opposite of what the ADEA was 
intended to accomplish and would unfairly burden both employers 
and older employees. 


The approach taken by the Fourth Circuit balances the 
legitimate concerns of both employers and employees by requiring 


an employee who seeks relief under the ADEA to at least establish 
that the replacement was a member of the unprotected class or 
provide some evidence, direct or circumstantial, indicative of illegal 
discrimination. This minimum requirement will limit the number 
of specious claims brought against an employer who makes a 
legitimate business decision that happens to result in replacement 
by a younger individual. At the same time, this approach will 
adequately protect the rights of older employees with legitimate 
claims. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above and articulated in the Brief of 


the Respondent, NELF respectfully requests that this Court affirm 
the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth 
Circuit. 


Respectfully submitted, 
NEw ENGLAND LEGAL FOUNDATION 


Boston, MA 02111 
(617) 695-3660 


DATED: Boston, Massachusetts: January 30, 1996. 


J\WPALAW\CCOIN\AMICUS BRIEF 


