App. 24 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF NORTH CAROLINA 
CHARLOTTE DIVISION 


C-C-91-227-P 
JAMES O’CONNOR, 
Plaintiff, 
V. 


CONSOLIDATED COIN 
CATERERS CORPORATION, 


Defendant. 


MEMORANDUM OF 
DECISION AND 
ORDER 


(Filed 
July 27, 1993) 


Ne ee eee eee ee” 


THIS MATTER is before the Court on motion, filed 
June 16, 1993, of Consolidated Coin Caterers Corporation 
(“Consolidated”) for summary judgment. Plaintiff James 
O’Connor filed a response and an affidavit on July 6, 
1993, and July 9, 1993. Consolidated followed with a 
reply on June 19, 1993. 


O’Connor’s complaint alleges a violation of the Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. 
Specifically, O’Connor alleges that although Consolidated 
told him that his position was eliminated as part of a 
reduction in force, Consolidated actually filled his posi- 
tion with a younger man. Now, after the conclusion of 
discovery, Consolidated has moved for summary judg- 
ment. 


Summary Judgment Standard 


Summary judgment is appropriate when the plead- 
ings, responses to discovery, and the record reveal that no 


App. 25 


genuine issue of any material fact exists and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The party moving for summary 
judgment has the initial burden of showing that no genu- 
ine issue of any material fact exists and that the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex 
Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). After the moving 
party has met its burden, the non-moving party must 
come forward with specific facts showing that evidence 
exists to support its claims and that a genuine issue for 
trial exists. Id.; Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio 
Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587 (1986); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e) (in 
response to motion for summary judgment, “adverse 
party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials 
of the adverse party’s pleading, but the adverse party's 
response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this 
rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is a 
genuine issue for trial”). When considering motions for 
summary judgment, courts must view facts and infer- 
ences in the light most favorable to the party opposing 
the motion for summary judgment. Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 
587-88; United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655 
(1962). When, however, the evidence from the entire 
record could not lead a rational fact-finder to find for the 
non-moving party, no genuine issue for trial exists and 
summary judgment is appropriate. Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 
587. 


Factual Background 


O’Connor began his employment with Consolidated 
in 1978. Consolidated principally operates cafeterias and 


App. 26 


vending machines in industrial plants. O’Connor man- 
aged a territory for Consolidated while he was in its 
employ. In December of 1989, O’Connor became the dis- 
trict manager for the region known in the company as 
“4Cs South.” Four Cs South, centered in Charlotte, 
encompassed much of southern and western North Caro- 
lina until July of 1990 when Ed Williams, O’Connor’s 
immediate supervisor, reallocated some of O’Connor’s 
territory to another manager. On August 9, 1990, Consoli- 
dated terminated O’Connor and demoted one other man- 
ager as part of a reorganization or reduction-in-force. 


Prior to O’Connor’s termination, Consolidated and 
its parent company, Canteen Corporation (collectively 
“Consolidated/Canteen”), operated three districts in 
North Carolina and one district in South Carolina. After 
the reorganization and the consequent reduction-in-force 
of managers in August of 1990, Consolidated and Can- 
teen operated only two districts in North Carolina and 
South Carolina collectively. As noted above, O’Connor 
was terminated and another manager, Allen Hunter, 
demoted to achieve the reduction in force. Both O’Connor 
and Hunter were over 50 at the time. Consolidated / 
Canteen retained Ed Finnell, age 40 at the time, and Mike 
Kiser, age 35 at the time. O’Connor’s old district was 
combined into the new Four Cs South which was placed 
under the supervision of Finnell. The new Four Cs South 
also included Finnell’s old district, Canteen’s operations 
in Columbia, Spartanburg, and Greenville, South Caro- 
lina. 


App. 27 


Discussion 


To prove a case of age discrimination, the plaintiff 
must demonstrate that: he was an employee covered by 
the Act at the time of the unfavorable employment deci- 
sion, i.e., that he was over forty years of age; he suffered 
an unfavorable employment action at the hands of an 
employer covered by the Act, e.g., discharge; and, the 
unfavorable employment action occurred “under circum- 
stances in which the employee’s ‘age was a determining 
factor’ in the action in the sense that “ ‘but for’ his 
employer’s motive to discriminate against him because of 
his age, he would not [have suffered the action].” Lovelace 
v. Sherwin-Williams Co., 681 F.2d 230, 238 (4th Cir. 1982) 
(citation omitted). 


The plaintiff may prove these substantive elements in 
either of two ways. First, the plaintiff may rely on ordi- 
nary principles of proof just as in any case. In other 
words, the plaintiff could rely on any direct or indirect 
evidence admissible under the rules of evidence to prove 
his case by a preponderance of the evidence. If the plain- 
tiff were not able to carry his burden of proof, the defen- 
dant-employer would be entitled to judgment as a matter 
of law and the case would not go to the jury. Id. at 239 
Second, the plaintiff may rely on the scheme of proof 
initially applied to Title VII “disparate treatment” cases 
and known as the McDonnell-Douglas proof scheme. See 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973) and 
Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248 
(1980). This scheme of proof favors the plaintiff initially 
by allowing him to rather easily establish a presumption 
of discrimination that, once established, compels the 


App. 28 


defendant-employer to demonstrate a legitimate, non- 
discriminatory reason for the unfavorable employment 
decision. 


The prima facie case of age discrimination under the 
McDonnell-Douglas proof scheme requires that the plain- 
tiff prove four objective elements, to-wit: (1) he was in the 
protected age group class under the Act at the time of the 
unfavorable employment decision; (2) he was discharged; 
(3) at the time of the discharge, he was performing his job 
at a level that met his employer’s legitimate expectations; 
and (4) following the discharge, he was replaced by 
someone of comparable or lesser qualifications outside 
the protected class. Equal Employment Opportunity Comm. 
v. Western Elec. Co., 713 F.2d 1011, 1014 (4th Cir. 1983). 
The Court must grant summary judgment if the plaintiff 
does no present evidence of each of these four elements; 
“the claimant should not be permitted to establish a 
‘prima facie case’ by satisfying only the first three ele- 
ments.” Id. at 1014-1015. 


Although the Fourth Circuit has recognized that the 
fourth element, as stated, is not rigidly applicable to 
reduction-in-force cases, id. at 1014, it has not foreclosed 
the application of the fourth element to such cases. In 
fact, the Court has stated that even in reduction in force 
cases, the employee must demonstrate that the employer 
“did not treat age neutrally in its [employment deci- 
sions].” Id. at 1015; Equal Employment Opportunity Comm., 
955 F.2d 936, 943 (4th Cir. 1992) (citing Western Electric, 
713 F.2d at 1014-1015). Western Electric was a large scale 
reduction in force in which 225 employees were adversely 
affected. Id. at 1013. The instant reduction is not nearly so 


App. 29 


large or complex; only two employees, O’Connor and 
Hunter, were adversely affected. 


The fourth element of the McDonnell-Douglas proof 
scheme does not normally “fit” well in reduction-in-force 
cases because the adversely affected employee cannot 
point to a replacement with whom the discharged 
employee would logically compare himself. Id. at 1014. In 
this case, however, there is no such problem. As noted 
above, the reorganization combined O’Connor’s old dis- 
trict, Four C south, with the South Carolina district. Fin- 
nell was the manager of the old South Carolina district. 
The most obvious choices to supervise the new, enlarged 
district would have been Finnell or O’Connor. Because 
Consolidated /Canteen chose Finnell to head the new dis- 
trict and take over O’Connor’s responsibilities, Finnell 
essentially replaced O’Connor. Indeed, O’Connor testifies 
in his affidavit that Consolidated/Canteen replaced him 
with Finnell. Affidavit of Plaintiff (filed July 9, 1993) at 
q 9. 


In the instant case, therefore, O'Connor has not pro- 
duced evidence of the fourth element of age discrimina- 
tion under the McDonnell-Douglas proof scheme. The 
fourth element requires that the employee-plaintiff show 
that the employer has replaced the plaintiff with a person 
outside the protected class.! Alternatively, the employee- 


' The Court is fully aware of cases in other circuits that in 
which the various circuits decline to apply this rule and merely 
require the age-discrimination plaintiff to demonstrate that he 
was replaced by a younger person even if the younger person is 
also in the protected class. See Carter v. City of Miami, 870 F.2d 
578, 583 n.14 (11th Cir. 1989) (compiling cases). The Court 
declines to follow these nonbinding precedents. 


App. 30 


plaintiff may present other objective evidence that the 
employer has not treated age neutrally. The protected 
class consists of all employees age 40 and over at the time 
of the unfavorable action. 29 U.S.C.A. § 631 (West 1985 & 
Supp. 1993). At the time of the unfavorable action, 
August 9, 1990, Finnell was 40 years old.? Because Finnell 
was within the protected class and O’Connor has pre- 
sented no other evidence of that Consolidated /Canteen 
did not treat age neutrally in deciding to terminate him, 
the Court finds that O’Connor cannot rely on the McDon- 
nell-Douglas proof scheme. 


O’Connor, however, may prove his case — and defeat 
this motion for summary judgment — using traditional 
principles of proof. 713 F.2d at 1014. The principle issue 
in dispute here is motivation. O’Connor proffers both 
direct and indirect evidence in his effort to demonstrate 
discriminatory intent. The direct evidence consists of 
three remarks that Ed Williams, the decisionmaker for 
Consolidated/Canteen, made. First, O’Connor testified 
that Williams remarked —- two days prior to O’Connor’s 
termination — “It’s about time we started to get some 
young blood in this company.” O’Connor deposition at 
44. Williams made this comment in response to the state- 
ment of Don Dillingham, another employee, that he was 
about to turn 50. 


Second, O’Connor testified that Williams remarked — 
within two weeks of O’Connor’s termination — “O’Con- 
nor, you’re two [sic] damn old.” O’Connor dep. at 46. 


2 Finnell turned 41 on August 27, 1990, three weeks after 
O’Connor’s termination. 


App. 31 


O’Connor also testified that Williams remarked — during 
the same conversation — “O’Connor, you're too damn old 
for this kind of work.” O’Connor, however, also testified 
that he did not remember anything else about the conver- 
sation, including the context of the remarks, the general 
subject of the conversation, or the length of the conversa- 
tion. O'Connor dep. at 46-47. 


Third, O’Connor testified that Williams stated - 
sometime during June or July of 1990 - that O’Connor 
was too old to play eighteen holes of golf for five consec- 
utive days. O’Connor, Williams and another employee 
were watching a playoff of a golf tournament. While 
watching the tournament, O’Connor remarked that he 
“couldn't walk that many rounds of golf for five days to 
play 18 holes for five days.” To this comment, Williams 
responded that O’Connor was “too old.” O’Connor dep. 
at 49. 


O’Connor has not presented any evidence that links 
these three remarks to the decision to discharge him. 
Stray comments cannot prove age discrimination. In 
order for O’Connor to rely on these comments to prove 
age discrimination, he must demonstrate that they were 
related to the decision to discharge him. Equal Employ- 
ment Opportunity Comm. v. Clay Printing Co., 955 F.2d 936, 
942 (4th Cir. 1992). An age discrimination plaintiff must 
demonstrate that a nexus exists between allegedly dis- 


criminatory statements and the unfavorable employment 
decision at issue. Id. 


In the instant case, O'Connor has not demonstrated 
any nexus between Williams’ three comments and the 
decision to discharge him. The first comment, “It’s about 


App. 32 


time to get some young blood in this company,” was 
made in response to an employee’s own comment on his 
age. This comment did not indicate an intent to discharge 
older employees. In Clay Printing, the decisionmaker had 
made comments such as, “too many people have been 
around here too long and make too much money,” and “if 
employees had been there 10 years or more, they needed 
to move on,” along with references to the company’s 
need to “attract newer, younger people” and “young 
blood,” were not probative of age discrimination or a 
discriminatory purpose. Id. at 942. The Court found that 
these comments reflect the need of all companies to hire 
young employees constantly in order to remain vital. The 
Court noted Chief Judge Haynsworth’s comment on this 
need and the failure of these type comments to show age 
discrimination: 


In any enterprise, today’s juniors will be tomor- 
row’s seniors. Today’s seniors can help create a 
foundation for tomorrow's growth and prosper- 
ity, but future realization of the potential of an 
enterprise lies principally with those who will 
be in positions of leadership and responsibility 
in the future. 


Id. (quoting Smith v. Flax, 618 F.2d 1062, 1066 (4th Cir. 
1980)). Likewise, the Court finds that Williams’ comment 
on the need for young blood in the company is not 
probative of a discriminatory intent. 


Williams’ second comment, “O’Connor, you're too 
damn old for this kind of work,” also is not probative of 
discriminatory intent. The context of the statement must 


App. 33 


indicate discriminatory intent. O’Connor, however, testi- 
fied that he did not remember the context or the subject 
matter of the comment. As such, plaintiff has not estab- 
lished a nexus between this comment and the decision to 
discharge him. 

Williams made the third comment, that O’Connor 
was “too old,” in response to O’Connor’s admission that 
he could not walk eighteen holes of golf on five consecu- 
tive days. Because O’Connor was not a golfer, but rather 
a general manager in a catering and vending business, 
Williams’ comment has no probative value. Clearly, Wil- 
liams’ comment did not have any nexus to the decision to 
terminate O’Connor. 


O’Conner [sic] has also proffered indirect evidence of 
discriminatory intent. O’Conner [sic] argues that he has 
“substantial indirect evidence tending to show that he 
was performing well, and that he was better qualified to 
continue employment than was Ted Finnell. . . . ” O’Con- 
nor’s “substantial evidence,” however, consists only of 
his comparison with Ted Finnell. Most of the indirect 
evidence that Plaintiff proffers is nothing more than a 
historical narrative of Plaintiff's employment with Con- 
solidated. The last paragraph of the “Concluding Portion 
of Memorandum in Response to Motion for Summary 
Judgment” contains the only possibly probative evidence: 

Plaintiff had a better track record than did Fin- 

nell. At the time of plaintiff's termination, his 

next previous performance evaluation was 

“commenable [sic] minus,” whereas Finnell’s 

was “com t minus.” Plaintiff placed consis- 

tently hi in his salary class than did Finnell 
within his salary class. 
The first statement is merely a conclusion, not evidence. 
The second statement, although true, is not probative of 


App. 34 


the performance of each person at the time of the termi- 
nation. The evaluations of Finnell and O’Connor were 
made eight to nine months before the decision to termi- 
nate O’Connor. This type of evidence - historical evi- 
dence of job performance removed in time from the date 
of the unfavorable decision — is not probative of discrimi- 
natory intent. O’Conner [sic] has presented no evidence 
to support the conclusion that he was fulfilling the legiti- 
mate expectations of his employer at the time of the dis- 
charge (or at least performing on the same level as 
Finnell). Plaintiff simply has presented no specific evi- 
dence of the level of his performance relative to Finnell’s 
performance at the time of discharge. As such, O’Conner 
[sic] has not carried his burden of proof. Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256-257 (1986) (plaintiff, 
in response to adequately-supported motion for summary 
judgment, has burden of producing evidence that would 
support jury verdict). 


Because O’Conner [sic] cannot present the objective 
evidence necessary to rely on the McDonnell-Douglas 
scheme of proof and cannot present direct or indirect 
evidence necessary to prevail under traditional principles 
of proof, the Court must grant summary judgment for 
Defendant. 


NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that Consoli- 
dated’s motion for summary judgment will be 
GRANTED. The Court will file simultaneously with this 


App. 35 


memorandum of decision a judgment dismissing the 
plaintiff's action with prejudice. 


This the 27th day of July, 1993. 


/s/ Robert D. Potter 
ROBERT D. POTTER 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT JUDGE 


App. 36 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


FILED 
May 31, 1995 


No. 94-1214 
CA-91-277-C-C-P 


JAMES O’CONNOR 
Plaintiff-Appellant 


Vv. 


CONSOLIDATED COIN 
CATERERS CORPORATION 


Defendant-Appellee 


EQUAL EMPLOYMENT 
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 


Amicus Curiae 


On Petition for Rehearing with 
Suggestion for Rehearing In Banc 


Appellant filed a petition for rehearing with sugges- 
tion for rehearing in banc. The EEOC filed a motion for 
leave to file a brief for amicus curiae in support of the 
suggestion for rehearing. 


Judge Butzner voted to grant panel rehearing. Judges 
Hamilton and Luttig voted to deny panel rehearing and 
the motion of the EEOC. 


No member of the Court requested a poll on the 
suggestion for rehearing in banc. 


App. 37 


The Court denies the petition for rehearing with sug- 
gestion for rehearing in banc. 


Entered at the direction of Judge Hamilton for the 
Court. 


For the Court, 


/s/ Bert M. Montague 
CLERK 


App. 38 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 


FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 
FILED 


June 8, 1995 
No. 94-1214 


O’Connor v. Consolidated Coin 


MANDATE 


The judgment of this Court dated 4/21/95 takes effect 
today. 


BERT M. MONTAGUE 
CLERK 


) 

) 

) 

. ) 
CONSOLIDATED COIN 
) 

) 

) 


App. 39 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF 
NORTH CAROLINA CHARLOTTE DIVISION 


C-C-91-277-P 


JAMES O’CONNOR 


Plaintiff, ORDER 


" (Filed Jan. 7, 1994) 


CATERERS, CORP. 
Defendant. 


THIS MATTER is before the Court on Plaintiff's 
motion, filed August 6, 1993, for a new trial. Since the 
motion is filed under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59, 
and this Court conducted no trial, the Court will treat it 
as a motion for relief from judgment based upon newly 
discovered evidence under Federal Rule of Civil Pro- 
cedure 60(b). 


This Court entered summary judgment against Plain- 
tiff on July 27, 1993. The Court entered summary judg- 
ment on the ground that Plaintiff had demonstrated 
insufficient evidence to link derogatory remarks by Mr. 
Ed Williams (Plaintiff's boss) about Plaintiff's age to the 
decision to fire Plaintiff. 


The motion presently before the Court is premised 
entirely upon newly discovered evidence embodied in 
the affidavit of Philip Dennis. Mr. Dennis’s affidavit 
states, inter alia, tat the day after Plaintiff was fired, Ed 
William’s [sic] told Dennis his boss (Ted Arts) instructed 


App. 40 


him to fire Plaintiff. Dennis asked Williams why Plaintiff 
was fired and he replied he thought it was because, “all 
of us were getting old, that Jim was getting old, and that 
there were three other persons around the office who 
were turning 50.” Dennis Affidavit, pp. 1-2, { 2. Dennis’s 
affidavit also states that Williams told him Ted Arts, not 
Williams, made the decision to fire Plaintiff. 


Plaintiff concludes the Dennis affidavit provides a 
link between the age derogatory remarks and the deci- 
sion to fire Plaintiff and creates a genuine issue of mate- 
rial fact concerning who made the decision to fire 


Plaintiff. 


ANALYSIS 


The standard of law governing a Rule 60 motion 
requires that the movant demonstrate: 


1) the evidence is newly discovered since the 


judgment was entered; 

2) due diligence on the part of the movant to 
discover the new evidence has been exercised; 
3) the evidence is not merely cumulative or 
impeaching; 

4) the evidence is material; 

5) the evidence is such that is likely to produce 
a new outcome if the case were retried, or is 
such that would require the judgment to be 


amended. 
Boryan v. United States, 884 F.2d 767 (4th Cir. 1989). 


Based upon the Court’s review of the Dennis affi- 
davit and the oral argument submitted to the Court, the 
Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate 


App. 41 


either that the evidence in the affidavit would likely 
produce a new outcome or that Plaintiff exercised due 
diligence to discover that evidence. 


The evidence in the affidavit would not likely pro- 
duce a different result because it does not definitively 
establish the missing link between the decision to fire 
Plaintiff and a prohibited age bias against Plaintiff. The 
Dennis affidavit does not demonstrate that Plaintiff's fir- 
ing was motivated by his age. Instead, the affidavit at 
best demonstrates that Williams believed Plaintiff was 
fired because of his age. The affidavit neither states that 
Arts directed Williams to fire Plaintiff because of his age, 
nor that Williams himself decided to terminate Plaintiff 
because of his age. Hence, there remains no direct evi- 
dence that Plaintiff was fired because of his age. 


The affidavit also does not created [sic] a dispute of 
fact that necessitates the relief Plaintiff seeks. Without 
some proof of an improper motive for firing Plaintiff, the 
question of who fired him is not material, even if dis- 
puted. Who fired Plaintiff is irrelevant unless it can be 
shown he was fired unlawfully by someone. Firing an 
employee without an improper motive is not prohibited 
by Title VII. 


Laying aside the fact that the Dennis affidavit would 
not likely change the result, it was also not discovered 
after the exercise of due diligence. Plaintiff cannot deny 
he had reason to know Dennis would be a worthy person 
to depose and that, had Plaintiff chosen to, he could have 
been deposed. 


App. 42 


Plaintiff offers two reasons why Dennis was not 
questioned. First, because Dennis may have been reluc- 
tant to tell the truth under oath while on Defendant's 
payroll. Second, that it would have been too costly for 
Plaintiff to depose Dennis. Of course, these rationale 
assume Dennis was known to the Plaintiff as a candidate 
for deposition. Yet, these reasons do not eliminate the 
simple fact that Dennis was known to Plaintiff, could 
have been deposed and was not. 


Plaintiff’s concern that a witness might not be forth- 
coming under oath is purely a hypothetical concern that 
was factored into his litigation strategy. To say that a 
witness may not have said what the Plaintiff wanted to 
hear during a deposition does not indicate due diligence 
was exercised in finding and questioning him. Indeed, 
had Dennis been questioned and yet not disclosed what 
he is now saying, it could be more credibly argued that 
the evidence was not discoverable with the exercise of 
due diligence. Still, Dennis was not questioned. 


Moreover, Dennis was admittedly known to Plaintiff 
prior to the initiation of his suit as one who had contact 
with Defendant’s management, a person within the class 
of older employees, and one who would be a likely 
candidate to unearth evidence of improper company bias 
against older employees in general and Plaintiff speci- 
fically. Yet, for reasons assuredly known to Plaintiff and 
his counsel, but not particularly relevant to this inquiry, 
Dennis was not questioned about his knowledge of the 
circumstances surrounding Plaintiff's firing even though 
he lived in Plaintiff's home town of Charlotte, North 


Carolina. 


App. 43 


Plaintiff’s concern about containing costs is certainly 
prudent, but it does not show that due diligence was 
exercised in discovering a known potential witnesses’ 
knowledge about his lawsuit. It only shows that counsel 
opted for one course of litigation strategy over another 
within the parameters of his client’s limited resources. 
But this is always the case in litigation. This “prohibitive 
cost as due diligence” approach would permit virtually 
any undiscovered evidence to be offered up after an unfa- 
vorable trial or a summary judgment motion on the 
ground that it was too costly to find it before the plaintiff 
lost. That is assuredly not the standard of law for due 
diligence. 


Plaintiff’s election to prefer one litigation strategy 
over another does not transform the decision not to 
depose Dennis into the exercise of due diligence. Quite to 
the contrary, it demonstrates that Plaintiff elected not to 
exercise any diligence at all respecting a known potential 
witness for reasons wholly within his sound judgment. 


NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that Plain- 


tiff’s notice for relief from judgment be, and hereby is, 
DENIED. 


This the 6th day of January, 1994. 


/s/ Robert D. Potter 
ROBERT D. POTTER 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT JUDGE 


