SOURCE: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-1994-title21/html/USCODE-1994-title21.htm
Official 1994 edition, extracted from full Title 21.
360j. General provisions respecting control of devices intended for human use


(a) General rule
Any requirement authorized by or under section 351, 352, 360, or 360i of this title applicable to a device intended for human use shall apply to such device until the applicability of the requirement to the device has been changed by action taken under section 360c, 360d, or 360e of this title or under subsection (g) of this section, and any requirement established by or under section 351, 352, 360, or 360i of this title which is inconsistent with a requirement imposed on such device under section 360d or 360e of this title or under subsection (g) of this section shall not apply to such device.
(b) Custom devices
Sections 360d and 360e of this title do not apply to any device which, in order to comply with the order of an individual physician or dentist (or any other specially qualified person designated under regulations promulgated by the Secretary after an opportunity for an oral hearing) necessarily deviates from an otherwise applicable performance standard or requirement prescribed by or under section 360e of this title if (1) the device is not generally available in finished form for purchase or for dispensing upon prescription and is not offered through labeling or advertising by the manufacturer, importer, or distributor thereof for commercial distribution, and (2) such device—
(A)(i) is intended for use by an individual patient named in such order of such physician or dentist (or other specially qualified person so designated) and is to be made in a specific form for such patient, or
(ii) is intended to meet the special needs of such physician or dentist (or other specially qualified person so designated) in the course of the professional practice of such physician or dentist (or other specially qualified person so designated), and
(B) is not generally available to or generally used by other physicians or dentists (or other specially qualified persons so designated).
(c) Trade secrets
Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the Secretary or his representative under section 360c, 360d, 360e, 360f, 360h, 360i, or 374 of this title or under subsection (f) or (g) of this section which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection (a) of section 552 of title 5 by reason of subsection (b)(4) of such section shall be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed and may not be used by the Secretary as the basis for the reclassification of a device from class III to class II or class I or as the basis for the establishment or amendment of a performance standard under section 360d of this title for a device reclassified from class III to class II, except (1) in accordance with subsection (h) of this section, and (2) that such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees concerned with carrying out this chapter or when relevant in any proceeding under this chapter (other than section 360c or 360d of this title).
(d) Notices and findings
Each notice of proposed rulemaking under section 360c, 360d, 360e, 360f, 360h, or 360i of this title, or under this section, any other notice which is published in the Federal Register with respect to any other action taken under any such section and which states the reasons for such action, and each publication of findings required to be made in connection with rulemaking under any such section shall set forth—
(1) the manner in which interested persons may examine data and other information on which the notice or findings is based, and
(2) the period within which interested persons may present their comments on the notice or findings (including the need therefor) orally or in writing, which period shall be at least sixty days but may not exceed ninety days unless the time is extended by the Secretary by a notice published in the Federal Register stating good cause therefor.
(e) Restricted devices
(1) The Secretary may by regulation require that a device be restricted to sale, distribution, or use—
(A) only upon the written or oral authorization of a practitioner licensed by law to administer or use such device, or
(B) upon such other conditions as the Secretary may prescribe in such regulation,

if, because of its potentiality for harmful effect or the collateral measures necessary to its use, the Secretary determines that there cannot otherwise be reasonable assurance of its safety and effectiveness. No condition prescribed under subparagraph (B) may restrict the use of a device to persons with specific training or experience in its use or to persons for use in certain facilities unless the Secretary determines that such a restriction is required for the safe and effective use of the device. No such condition may exclude a person from using a device solely because the person does not have the training or experience to make him eligible for certification by a certifying board recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or has not been certified by such a Board. A device subject to a regulation under this subsection is a restricted device.
(2) The label of a restricted device shall bear such appropriate statements of the restrictions required by a regulation under paragraph (1) as the Secretary may in such regulation prescribe.
(f) Good manufacturing practice requirements
(1)(A) The Secretary may, in accordance with subparagraph (B), prescribe regulations requiring that the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, pre-production design validation (including a process to assess the performance of a device but not including an evaluation of the safety or effectiveness of a device), packing, storage, and installation of a device conform to current good manufacturing practice, as prescribed in such regulations, to assure that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with this chapter.
(B) Before the Secretary may promulgate any regulation under subparagraph (A) he shall—
(i) afford the advisory committee established under paragraph (3) an opportunity to submit recommendations to him with respect to the regulation proposed to be promulgated, and
(ii) afford opportunity for an oral hearing.

The Secretary shall provide the advisory committee a reasonable time to make its recommendation with respect to proposed regulations under subparagraph (A).
(2)(A) Any person subject to any requirement prescribed by regulations under paragraph (1) may petition the Secretary for an exemption or variance from such requirement. Such a petition shall be submitted to the Secretary in such form and manner as he shall prescribe and shall—
(i) in the case of a petition for an exemption from a requirement, set forth the basis for the petitioner's determination that compliance with the requirement is not required to assure that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with this chapter,
(ii) in the case of a petition for a variance from a requirement, set forth the methods proposed to be used in, and the facilities and controls proposed to be used for, the manufacture, packing, storage, and installation of the device in lieu of the methods, facilities, and controls prescribed by the requirement, and
(iii) contain such other information as the Secretary shall prescribe.

(B) The Secretary may refer to the advisory committee established under paragraph (3) any petition submitted under subparagraph (A). The advisory committee shall report its recommendations to the Secretary with respect to a petition referred to it within sixty days of the date of the petition's referral. Within sixty days after—
(i) the date the petition was submitted to the Secretary under subparagraph (A), or
(ii) if the petition was referred to an advisory committee, the expiration of the sixty-day period beginning on the date the petition was referred to the advisory committee,

whichever occurs later, the Secretary shall by order either deny the petition or approve it.
(C) The Secretary may approve—
(i) a petition for an exemption for a device from a requirement if he determines that compliance with such requirement is not required to assure that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with this chapter, and
(ii) a petition for a variance for a device from a requirement if he determines that the methods to be used in, and the facilities and controls to be used for, the manufacture, packing, storage, and installation of the device in lieu of the methods, controls, and facilities prescribed by the requirement are sufficient to assure that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with this chapter.

An order of the Secretary approving a petition for a variance shall prescribe such conditions respecting the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, packing, storage, and installation of the device to be granted the variance under the petition as may be necessary to assure that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with this chapter.
(D) After the issuance of an order under subparagraph (B) respecting a petition, the petitioner shall have an opportunity for an informal hearing on such order.
(3) The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee for the purpose of advising and making recommendations to him with respect to regulations proposed to be promulgated under paragraph (1)(A) and the approval or disapproval of petitions submitted under paragraph (2). The advisory committee shall be composed of nine members as follows:
(A) Three of the members shall be appointed from persons who are officers or employees of any State or local government or of the Federal Government.
(B) Two of the members shall be appointed from persons who are representative of interests of the device manufacturing industry; two of the members shall be appointed from persons who are representative of the interests of physicians and other health professionals; and two of the members shall be representative of the interests of the general public.

Members of the advisory committee who are not officers or employees of the United States, while attending conferences or meetings of the committee or otherwise engaged in its business, shall be entitled to receive compensation at rates to be fixed by the Secretary, which rates may not exceed the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade GS–18 of the General Schedule, for each day (including traveltime) they are so engaged; and while so serving away from their homes or regular places of business each member may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. The Secretary shall designate one of the members of the advisory committee to serve as its chairman. The Secretary shall furnish the advisory committee with clerical and other assistance. Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply with respect to the duration of the advisory committee established under this paragraph.
(g) Exemption for devices for investigational use
(1) It is the purpose of this subsection to encourage, to the extent consistent with the protection of the public health and safety and with ethical standards, the discovery and development of useful devices intended for human use and to that end to maintain optimum freedom for scientific investigators in their pursuit of that purpose.
(2)(A) The Secretary shall, within the one hundred and twenty-day period beginning on May 28, 1976, by regulation prescribe procedures and conditions under which devices intended for human use may upon application be granted an exemption from the requirements of section 352, 360, 360d, 360e, 360f, 360i, or 379e of this title or subsection (e) or (f) of this section or from any combination of such requirements to permit the investigational use of such devices by experts qualified by scientific training and experience to investigate the safety and effectiveness of such devices.
(B) The conditions prescribed pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include the following:
(i) A requirement that an application be submitted to the Secretary before an exemption may be granted and that the application be submitted in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify.
(ii) A requirement that the person applying for an exemption for a device assure the establishment and maintenance of such records, and the making of such reports to the Secretary of data obtained as a result of the investigational use of the device during the exemption, as the Secretary determines will enable him to assure compliance with such conditions, review the progress of the investigation, and evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the device.
(iii) Such other requirements as the Secretary may determine to be necessary for the protection of the public health and safety.

(C) Procedures and conditions prescribed pursuant to subparagraph (A) for an exemption may appropriately vary depending on (i) the scope and duration of clinical testing to be conducted under such exemption, (ii) the number of human subjects that are to be involved in such testing, (iii) the need to permit changes to be made in the device subject to the exemption during testing conducted in accordance with a clinical testing plan required under paragraph (3)(A), and (iv) whether the clinical testing of such device is for the purpose of developing data to obtain approval for the commercial distribution of such device.
(3) Procedures and conditions prescribed pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) shall require, as a condition to the exemption of any device to be the subject of testing involving human subjects, that the person applying for the exemption—
(A) submit a plan for any proposed clinical testing of the device and a report of prior investigations of the device (including, where appropriate, tests on animals) adequate to justify the proposed clinical testing—
(i) to the local institutional review committee which has been established in accordance with regulations of the Secretary to supervise clinical testing of devices in the facilities where the proposed clinical testing is to be conducted, or
(ii) to the Secretary, if—
(I) no such committee exists, or
(II) the Secretary finds that the process of review by such committee is inadequate (whether or not the plan for such testing has been approved by such committee),

for review for adequacy to justify the commencement of such testing; and, unless the plan and report are submitted to the Secretary, submit to the Secretary a summary of the plan and a report of prior investigations of the device (including, where appropriate, tests on animals);

(B) promptly notify the Secretary (under such circumstances and in such manner as the Secretary prescribes) of approval by a local institutional review committee of any clinical testing plan submitted to it in accordance with subparagraph (A);
(C) in the case of a device to be distributed to investigators for testing, obtain signed agreements from each of such investigators that any testing of the device involving human subjects will be under such investigator's supervision and in accordance with subparagraph (D) and submit such agreements to the Secretary; and
(D) assure that informed consent will be obtained from each human subject (or his representative) of proposed clinical testing involving such device, except where subject to such conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, the investigator conducting or supervising the proposed clinical testing of the device determines in writing that there exists a life threatening situation involving the human subject of such testing which necessitates the use of such device and it is not feasible to obtain informed consent from the subject and there is not sufficient time to obtain such consent from his representative.

The determination required by subparagraph (D) shall be concurred in by a licensed physician who is not involved in the testing of the human subject with respect to which such determination is made unless immediate use of the device is required to save the life of the human subject of such testing and there is not sufficient time to obtain such concurrence.
(4)(A) An application, submitted in accordance with the procedures prescribed by regulations under paragraph (2), for an exemption for a device (other than an exemption from section 360f of this title) shall be deemed approved on the thirtieth day after the submission of the application to the Secretary unless on or before such day the Secretary by order disapproves the application and notifies the applicant of the disapproval of the application.
(B) The Secretary may disapprove an application only if he finds that the investigation with respect to which the application is submitted does not conform to procedures and conditions prescribed under regulations under paragraph (2). Such a notification shall contain the order of disapproval and a complete statement of the reasons for the Secretary's disapproval of the application and afford the applicant opportunity for an informal hearing on the disapproval order.
(5) The Secretary may by order withdraw an exemption granted under this subsection for a device if the Secretary determines that the conditions applicable to the device under this subsection for such exemption are not met. Such an order may be issued only after opportunity for an informal hearing, except that such an order may be issued before the provision of an opportunity for an informal hearing if the Secretary determines that the continuation of testing under the exemption with respect to which the order is to be issued will result in an unreasonable risk to the public health.
(h) Release of information respecting safety and effectiveness
(1) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which a detailed summary of information respecting the safety and effectiveness of a device which information was submitted to the Secretary and which was the basis for—
(A) an order under section 360e(d)(1)(A) of this title approving an application for premarket approval for the device or denying approval of such an application or an order under section 360e(e) of this title withdrawing approval of such an application for the device,
(B) an order under section 360e(f)(6)(A) of this title revoking an approved protocol for the device, an order under section 360e(f)(6)(B) of this title declaring a protocol for the device completed or not completed, or an order under section 360e(f)(7) of this title revoking the approval of the device, or
(C) an order approving an application under subsection (g) of this section for an exemption for the device from section 360f of this title or an order disapproving, or withdrawing approval of, an application for an exemption under such subsection for the device,

shall be made available to the public upon issuance of the order. Summaries of information made available pursuant to this paragraph respecting a device shall include information respecting any adverse effects on health of the device.
(2) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which each advisory committee established under section 360e(g)(2)(B) of this title shall make available to the public a detailed summary of information respecting the safety and effectiveness of a device which information was submitted to the advisory committee and which was the basis for its recommendation to the Secretary made pursuant to section 360e(g)(2)(A) of this title. A summary of information upon which such a recommendation is based shall be made available pursuant to this paragraph only after the issuance of the order with respect to which the recommendation was made and each summary shall include information respecting any adverse effect on health of the device subject to such order.
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (4), any information respecting a device which is made available pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection (A) may not be used to establish the safety or effectiveness of another device for purposes of this chapter by any person other than the person who submitted the information so made available, and (B) shall be made available subject to subsection (c) of this section.
(4)(A) Any information contained in an application for premarket approval filed with the Secretary pursuant to section 360e(c) of this title, including clinical and preclinical tests or studies, but excluding descriptions of methods of manufacture and product composition, that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a device shall be available 1 year after the original application for the fourth device of a kind has been approved by the Secretary, for use by the Secretary in approving devices, or determining whether a product development protocol has been completed, under section 360e of this title, establishing a performance standard under section 360d of this title, and reclassifying devices under subsections (e) and (f) of section 360c of this title, and subsection (l)(2) of this section. The Secretary shall deem devices that incorporate the same technologies, have the same principles of operation, and are intended for the same use or uses to be within a kind of device.
(B) The Secretary, contemporaneously with the approval of the fourth device of a kind, shall publish an order in the Federal Register identifying the four devices of a kind that have been approved under section 360e of this title and the date on which the data contained in premarket approval applications for the devices will be available to the Secretary for use, as described in subparagraph (A).
(C) The publicly available detailed summaries of information respecting the safety and effectiveness of devices required by paragraph (1)(A) shall be available for use by the Secretary as the evidentiary basis for the regulatory action described in subparagraph (A).
(D)(i) This paragraph shall become effective—
(I) on November 15, 1990, for devices for which four devices of a kind were approved on or before December 31, 1987, and
(II) on November 15, 1991, for devices not described in subclause (I).

(ii) For each device described in clause (i)(I), the Secretary shall publish a notice in the Federal Register setting forth the date, which shall be not earlier than 1 year after the date of the notice, that data identified in subparagraph (A) shall be available for the use of the Secretary.
(E)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), the approval date of a device, for purposes of this paragraph, shall be the date of the letter of the Secretary to the applicant approving a device under section 360e of this title and permitting the applicant to commercially distribute the device.
(ii) For each device described in subparagraph (D)(i)(II) for which the original application for a fourth device of a kind is approved by the Secretary before November 1, 1991, the approval date of the fourth device of a kind shall be deemed to be November 15, 1991.
(F) Any challenge to an order under subparagraph (B) shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of the Federal Register notice referred to in such subparagraph.
(i) Proceedings of advisory panels and committees
Each panel under section 360c of this title and each advisory committee established under section 360d(b)(5)(B) or 360e(g) of this title or under subsection (f) of this section shall make and maintain a transcript of any proceeding of the panel or committee. Each such panel and committee shall delete from any transcript made pursuant to this subsection information which under subsection (c) of this section is to be considered confidential.
(j) Traceability
Except as provided in section 360i(e) of this title, no regulation under this chapter may impose on a type or class of device requirements for the traceability of such type or class of device unless such requirements are necessary to assure the protection of the public health.
(k) Research and development
The Secretary may enter into contracts for research, testing, and demonstrations respecting devices and may obtain devices for research, testing, and demonstration purposes without regard to section 3324(a) and (b) of title 31 and section 5 of title 41.
(l) Transitional provisions for devices considered as new drugs or antibiotic drugs
(1) Any device intended for human use—
(A) for which on May 28, 1976 (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the “enactment date”) an approval of an application submitted under section 355(b) of this title was in effect;
(B) for which such an application was filed on or before the enactment date and with respect to which application no order of approval or refusing to approve had been issued on such date under subsection (c) or (d) of such section;
(C) for which on the enactment date an exemption under subsection (i) of such section was in effect;
(D) which is within a type of device described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) and is substantially equivalent to another device within that type;
(E) which the Secretary in a notice published in the Federal Register before the enactment date has declared to be a new drug subject to section 355 of this title; or
(F) with respect to which on the enactment date an action is pending in a United States court under section 332, 333, or 334 of this title for an alleged violation of a provision of section 331 of this title which enforces a requirement of section 355 of this title or for an alleged violation of section 355(a) of this title,

is classified in class III unless the Secretary in response to a petition submitted under paragraph (2) has classified such device in class I or II.
(2) The Secretary may initiate the reclassification of a device classified into class III under paragraph (1) of this subsection or the manufacturer or importer of a device classified under paragraph (1) may petition the Secretary (in such form and manner as he shall prescribe) for the issuance of an order classifying the device in class I or class II. Within thirty days of the filing of such a petition, the Secretary shall notify the petitioner of any deficiencies in the petition which prevent the Secretary from making a decision on the petition. Except as provided in paragraph (3)(D)(ii), within one hundred and eighty days after the filing of a petition under this paragraph, the Secretary shall, after consultation with the appropriate panel under section 360c of this title, by order either deny the petition or order the classification, in accordance with the criteria prescribed by section 360c(a)(1)(A) of this title or 360c(a)(1)(B) of this title, of the device in class I or class II.
(3)(A) In the case of a device which is described in paragraph (1)(A) and which is in class III—
(i) such device shall on the enactment date be considered a device with an approved application under section 360e of this title, and
(ii) the requirements applicable to such device before the enactment date under section 355 of this title shall continue to apply to such device until changed by the Secretary as authorized by this chapter.

(B) In the case of a device which is described in paragraph (1)(B) and which is in class III, an application for such device shall be considered as having been filed under section 360e of this title on the enactment date. The period in which the Secretary shall act on such application in accordance with section 360e(d)(1) of this title shall be one hundred and eighty days from the enactment date (or such greater period as the Secretary and the applicant may agree upon after the Secretary has made the finding required by section 360e(d)(1)(B)(i) of this title) less the number of days in the period beginning on the date an application for such device was filed under section 355 of this title and ending on the enactment date. After the expiration of such period such device is required, unless exempt under subsection (g) of this section, to have in effect an approved application under section 360e of this title.
(C) A device which is described in paragraph (1)(C) and which is in class III shall be considered a new drug until the expiration of the ninety-day period beginning on the date of the promulgation of regulations under subsection (g) of this section. After the expiration of such period such device is required, unless exempt under subsection (g) of this section, to have in effect an approved application under section 360e of this title.
(D)(i) Except as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), a device which is described in subparagraph (D), (E), or (F) of paragraph (1) and which is in class III is required, unless exempt under subsection (g) of this section, to have on and after sixty days after the enactment date in effect an approved application under section 360e of this title.
(ii) If—
(I) a petition is filed under paragraph (2) for a device described in subparagraph (D), (E), or (F) of paragraph (1), or
(II) an application for premarket approval is filed under section 360e of this title for such a device,

within the sixty-day period beginning on the enactment date (or within such greater period as the Secretary, after making the finding required under section 360e(d)(1)(B) of this title, and the petitioner or applicant may agree upon), the Secretary shall act on such petition or application in accordance with paragraph (2) or section 360e of this title except that the period within which the Secretary must act on the petition or application shall be within the one hundred and twenty-day period beginning on the date the petition or application is filed. If such a petition or application is filed within such sixty-day (or greater) period, clause (i) of this subparagraph shall not apply to such device before the expiration of such one hundred and twenty-day period, or if such petition is denied or such application is denied approval, before the date of such denial, whichever occurs first.
(iii) In the case of a device which is described in subparagraph (E) of paragraph (1), which the Secretary in a notice published in the Federal Register after March 31, 1976, declared to be a new drug subject to section 355 of this title, and which is in class III—
(I) the device shall, after eighteen months after the enactment date, have in effect an approved application under section 360e of this title unless exempt under subsection (g) of this section, and
(II) the Secretary may, during the period beginning one hundred and eighty days after the enactment date and ending eighteen months after such date, restrict the use of the device to investigational use by experts qualified by scientific training and experience to investigate the safety and effectiveness of such device, and to investigational use in accordance with the requirements applicable under regulations under subsection (g) of this section to investigational use of devices granted an exemption under such subsection.

If the requirements under subsection (g) of this section are made applicable to the investigational use of such a device, they shall be made applicable in such a manner that the device shall be made reasonably available to physicians meeting appropriate qualifications prescribed by the Secretary.
(4) Any device intended for human use which on the enactment date was subject to the requirements of section 357 of this title shall be subject to such requirements as follows:
(A) In the case of such a device which is classified into class I, such requirements shall apply to such device until the effective date of the regulation classifying the device into such class.
(B) In the case of such a device which is classified into class II, such requirements shall apply to such device until the effective date of a performance standard applicable to the device under section 360d of this title.
(C) In the case of such a device which is classified into class III, such requirements shall apply to such device until the date on which the device is required to have in effect an approved application under section 360e of this title.

(5)(A) Before December 1, 1991, the Secretary shall by order require manufacturers of devices described in paragraph (1), which are subject to revision of classification under subparagraph (B), to submit to the Secretary a summary of and citation to any information known or otherwise available to the manufacturers respecting the devices, including adverse safety or effectiveness information which has not been submitted under section 360i of this title. The Secretary may require a manufacturer to submit the adverse safety or effectiveness data for which a summary and citation were submitted, if such data are available to the manufacturer.
(B) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), after the issuance of an order under subparagraph (A) but before December 1, 1992, the Secretary shall publish a regulation in the Federal Register for each device which is classified in class III under paragraph (1) revising the classification of the device so that the device is classified into class I or class II, unless the regulation requires the device to remain in class III. In determining whether to revise the classification of a device or to require a device to remain in class III, the Secretary shall apply the criteria set forth in section 360c(a) of this title. Before the publication of a regulation requiring a device to remain in class III or revising its classification, the Secretary shall publish a proposed regulation respecting the classification of a device under this subparagraph and provide an opportunity for the submission of comments on any such regulation. No regulation under this subparagraph requiring a device to remain in class III or revising its classification may take effect before the expiration of 90 days from the date of the publication in the Federal Register of the proposed regulation.
(C) The Secretary may by notice published in the Federal Register extend the period prescribed by subparagraph (B) for a device for an additional period not to exceed 1 year.
(m) Humanitarian device exemption
(1) To the extent consistent with the protection of the public health and safety and with ethical standards, it is the purpose of this subsection to encourage the discovery and use of devices intended to benefit patients in the treatment and diagnosis of diseases or conditions that affect fewer than 4,000 individuals in the United States.
(2) The Secretary may grant a request for an exemption from the effectiveness requirements of sections 360d and 360e of this title for a device for which the Secretary finds that—
(A) the device is designed to treat or diagnose a disease or condition that affects fewer than 4,000 individuals in the United States,
(B) the device would not be available to a person with a disease or condition referred to in subparagraph (A) unless the Secretary grants such an exemption and there is no comparable device, other than under this exemption, available to treat or diagnose such disease or condition, and
(C) the device will not expose patients to an unreasonable or significant risk of illness or injury and the probable benefit to health from the use of the device outweighs the risk of injury or illness from its use, taking into account the probable risks and benefits of currently available devices or alternative forms of treatment.

(3) No person granted an exemption under paragraph (2) with respect to a device may sell the device for an amount that exceeds the costs of research and development, fabrication, and distribution of the device.
(4) Devices granted an exemption under paragraph (2) may only be used—
(A) in facilities that have established, in accordance with regulations of the Secretary, a local institutional review committee to supervise clinical testing of devices in the facilities, and
(B) if, before the use of a device, an institutional review committee approves the use in the treatment or diagnosis of a disease or condition referred to in paragraph (2)(A).

(5) An exemption under paragraph (2) shall be for a term of 18 months and may only be initially granted in the 5-year period beginning on the date regulations under paragraph (6) take effect. The Secretary may extend such an exemption for a period of 18 months if the Secretary is able to make the findings set forth in paragraph (2) and if the applicant supplies information demonstrating compliance with paragraph (3). An exemption may be extended more than once and may be extended after the expiration of such 5-year period.
(6) Within one year of November 28, 1990, the Secretary shall issue regulations to implement this subsection.


(June 25, 1938, ch. 675, §520, as added May 28, 1976, Pub. L. 94–295, §2, 90 Stat. 565; amended Nov. 28, 1990, Pub. L. 101–629, §§3(b)(2), 4(b)(2), 5(c)(2), 6(b)(2), 11, 14(a), 18(e), (f), 104 Stat. 4514, 4516, 4518, 4519, 4522, 4524, 4529; Oct. 29, 1992, Pub. L. 102–571, title I, §107(10), 106 Stat. 4499.)



References in Text
Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, referred to in subsec. (f)(3), is section 14 of Pub. L. 92–463, which is set out in the Appendix to Title 5, Government Organization and Employees.


Codification
In subsec. (k), “section 3324(a) and (b) of title 31” substituted for reference to section 3648 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529) on authority of Pub. L. 97–258, §4(b), Sept. 13, 1982, 96 Stat. 1067, the first section of which enacted Title 31, Money and Finance.


Amendments
1992—Subsec. (g)(2)(A). Pub. L. 102–571 substituted “379e” for “376”.
1990—Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 101–629, §11(1), substituted “from class III to class II or class I” for “under section 360c of this title from class III to class II” and inserted “(1) in accordance with subsection (h) of this section, and (2)” after “except”.
Subsec. (f)(1)(A). Pub. L. 101–629, §18(e), inserted “pre-production design validation (including a process to assess the performance of a device but not including an evaluation of the safety or effectiveness of a device),” after “manufacture,”.
Subsec. (h)(3). Pub. L. 101–629, §11(2)(A), substituted “Except as provided in paragraph (4), any” for “Any”.
Subsec. (h)(4). Pub. L. 101–629, §11(2)(B), added par. (4).
Subsec. (i). Pub. L. 101–629, §6(b)(2), substituted “section 360d(b)(5)(B)” for “section 360d(g)(5)(B)”.
Subsec. (j). Pub. L. 101–629, §3(b)(2), substituted “Except as provided in section 360i(e) of this title, no” for “No”.
Subsec. (l)(2). Pub. L. 101–629, §18(f), struck out “and after affording the petitioner an opportunity for an informal hearing” after “under this paragraph”.
Pub. L. 101–629, §5(c)(2), substituted “The Secretary may initiate the reclassification of a device classified into class III under paragraph (1) of this subsection or the manufacturer” for “The manufacturer”.
Subsec. (l)(5). Pub. L. 101–629, §4(b)(2), added par. (5).
Subsec. (m). Pub. L. 101–629, §14(a), added subsec. (m).


Effective Date of 1990 Amendment
Section 14(b) of Pub. L. 101–629 provided that: “Subsection (m) of section 520 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act [21 U.S.C. 360j(m)], as added by the amendment made by subsection (a), shall take effect on the effective date of the regulations issued by the Secretary under paragraph (6) of such subsection.”


Report on Humanitarian Device Exemptions
Section 14(c) of Pub. L. 101–629 directed Secretary of Health and Human Services, within 4 years after issuance of regulations under 21 U.S.C. 360j(m)(6), to report to Congress on types of devices exempted, an evaluation of effects of such section, and a recommendation on extension of the section.
References in Other Laws to GS–16, 17, or 18 Pay Rates
References in laws to the rates of pay for GS–16, 17, or 18, or to maximum rates of pay under the General Schedule, to be considered references to rates payable under specified sections of Title 5, Government Organization and Employees, see section 529 [title I, §101(c)(1)] of Pub. L. 101–509, set out in a note under section 5376 of Title 5.



Section Referred to in Other Sections


This section is referred to in sections 331, 333, 351, 352, 353, 360c, 360d, 360e, 360g, 360i, 374, 381, 383 of this title.







§