FOR ARGUMENT | 
In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 
UNITED FooD AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS 
UNION LOCAL 751, 
. Petitioner, 
BROWN Group, INC., d/b/a BROWN SHOE COMPANY, 
Respondent. 
On a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eighth Circuit 
REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 
JONATHAN P. HIATT GEORGE MURPHY 
815 16th Street, N.W. RENEE L. BOWSER 
Washington, D.C. 20006 1775 K Street, N.W. 
MARSHA S. BERZON Washington, D.C. 20006 
Scott A. KRONLAND LAURENCE GOLD 
MARY LYNNE WERLWAS (Counsel of Record) 
177 Post Street, Suite 300 1000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
San Francisco, CA 94108 Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 833-9340 
WILSON - Eres PrinTtiNG Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 
® £5 %. 
° te 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases 
Statutes 
Page 
Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assa’n v. Solomino, 501 
U.S. 104 (1991) | Sh A en Gl a 2 
Blair v. Southern Clay Mfg. Co., 121 SW. 2d 570 
Ss, SO 16 
Croker v. New York Trust Co., 156 N.E. 81 (N.Y. 
a aa a ne 16 
Drewen v. Bank of Manhattan Co. of City of New 
York, 155 A. 2d 529 (N.J. Sup. Ct. 1959) 16 
Fast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83 (1968) ... 18,17 
General Telephone Co. v. E.E.0.C., 446 U.S. 318 
PRR LR ERIN pian Le Ge ES a ERS Pe Se 17 
Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363 
(1982) ....... Te See FO TRIE AE MET EE intel OE 8,9 
Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising 
Comm’n, 482 U.S. 388 (1977) ................-22.....--.. . 17,19 
International Union UAW v. Brock, 477 U.S. 274 
(1986) . th 18 
International ‘Union UAW | v. - Hoosier Cardinal 
Corp., 383 U.S. 696 (1966) . 17 
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 
ERR ES SEI Rice rar AOR es Cad RR EN Se ot =o BEY 12, 13, 14, 15 
Moskal v. United States, 498 U.S. 103 (1990) ~ 
Robles v. EPA, 484 F.2d 843 (4th Cir. 1973) 9 
Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans 
United for Separation of Church & State, Inc., 
re re ee a Scien 14 
Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 (1975)... 17. 18, 19 
White v. Arlen Realty Development Corp., 540 
ae GE COED TIS CIID ccersticencsseenesseteessencindabcdininas 9 
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification 
Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2104: 
§ 2102(a) ........... aaa beg ben akan Sie taddi ie 9 
I —— 
ER He i ee OE REO ETE Ee = 1,3, 4 
§ 2104 (a) (3) —.......... sssielbihasiesebctidalietaadatiadhdctianee mites 1,3 
§ 2104 (a) (5) _.... sonoaheit iiaieiediiiaentenin imental passim 
IER ER Re io a 1 
IED scccdesctssintipihauitians ila ae i a Ps 2 
ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 
Page 
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552 et 
NERS Nite aie Ra Ae aA a AE rc st] 
Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1601 et 8eqj......... 9 
Constitution 
Article IIT a ) | _... passim 
Legislative Materials 
H.R. 1122 (100th Cong., Ist Sess. 1987) fh 
IL.R. 1616 (99th Cong., Ist Sess.) (March 20, 
ED ncccocesnnes 1 
IL.R. 1616 (99th Cong. Ist Sess.) (Oct, 29 , 1985 i. 4 
I1.R. 1616 (99th Cong., Ist Sess.) (Nov. 14. 1985). 1 
IL.R. Conf. Rep. No. 100-576 (100th Cong., 2d Sess. 
1988) . cate 7 
HW.R. Rep. No. 99-336 (99th ‘Cong., ‘Ist Sess.) 
(1985) .............. 4 
H.R. Rep. No. 100-285 (100th. Cong., Ist ‘Sess. 
EE SO I SN ier aay ee 6 
Hearings on H.R. 1122 (100th Cong., od Sess., 
RL Oe ee en ae 8,8 
Committee on Education and Labor, U.S. House of 
Representatives, Legislative History of S.2527, 
100th Congress, Worker Adjustment & Retrain- 
ing Notification Act (1990) ......00000000000000c 10 
S. 538 (100th Cong., Ist Sess. 1987) none 5, 6 
Miscellaneous 
20 C.F.R. § 689.7 (e) ................ MOST ee stat 78 a 11 
a cn 11 
53 Fed. Reg. 43733 (October 28,1988) 10 
53 Fed. Reg. 49065 (December 5, 1988)... 11 
54 Fed. Reg. 16042 (April 20,1989)... 10,12 
54 Fed. Reg. 16059 (April 20,1989) il 
REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 
|. Brown Shoe'’s threshold argument is that Congress 
did not, in the WARN Act, provide that labor organiza- 
tions meeting the statutory definition of “representative” 
may bring a suit such as this one. That Congress did so 
provide could not be more clear. 
A. WARN § 2104(a)(5) provides expressly that on a 
violation of the Act's notice requirements, among those 
persons who may sue “seeking to enforce [the resulting 
statutory] liability” are a “representative of employees or 
a unit of local government aggrieved under paragraph (1 ) 
or (3)." Section 2104(a)(1), in turn, provides for a 
monetary payment to cach “aggrieved employee” inthe 
event of noncompliance with the notice provisions. “Rep- 
resentative” is then defined elsewhere in the statute as “an 
exclusive representative of employees.” § 2102(a)(4). 
“Aggrieved employee” is also a defined term—"“an em- 
ployee who .. . , as a result of the failure by the em- 
ployer to comply with section 2102 of this title, did not 
receive timely notice either directly or through his or her 
representative as required by section 2102 of this title.” 
§ 2104(a)(7). 
The pertinent language of § 2104(a)(5), then, in terms, 
authorizes a “representative”, as defined by the statute, of 
“employees .. . aggrieved”, as defined by the statute, to 
sue for “such liability” as the statute provides those em- 
ployees when their employer does not properly notify 
their representative of a plant closing or mass layoff. 
Brown Shoe, however, maintains that § 2104(a)(5) 
does not mean what it so plainly says on its face. Accord- 
ing to respondent, the word “aggrieved” in § 2104 
(a)(5) is intended to modify not “employees” in the 
phrase “representative of employees” but “representative”, 
and “a union as the statutory ‘representative of employ- 
ees’ is not ‘aggrieved under paragraph (1)... ” Brief 
for Respondent (Resp. Br.) at 11. But § 2104(a)(5) 
does not depend gramatically upon the representative 
being one of the persons § 2104(a)(1) denominates as 
2 
“aggrieved” and on that account entitled to the statutory 
liability established there. Rather, it is sufficient, as re- 
counted above, that the union be the “representative” of 
“employees . . . aggrieved.” That Brown Shoe chooses 
in its brief to italicize the entive ¢ 2104(a)(5) phrase 
in question except “of employees” (Resp. Br. at 1!) be- 
fore proceeding with its analysis of the critical statutory 
language demonstrates that its interpretation does not 
grammatically account for those two words but, instead, 
proceeds as if those words were not part of the text. 
Indeed, since there is no WARN Act lawsuit that a 
“representative of employees,” could file other than one 
for employee monetary relief,’ Brown Shoe's construction 
would render a complete nullity not only the term “of 
employees” in § 2104(a)(5), but the longer phrase “in- 
cluding a representative of employees . . . aggrieved” as 
well, in violation of long-established principles of statutory 
construction. Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Solomino, 
SOL U.S. 104, 112 (1991) (“But of course we construe 
Statutes, where possible so as to avoid rendering super- 
fluous any parts thereof”). The half-hearted suggestion 
made to meet this abnegation of express statutory lan- 
guage—that the “reference to a ‘representative’ . . . con- 
templated the maintenance of class actions” (Resp. Br. 
at 13 n.5)—<does not fill the gap. Congress was, as noted, 
careful in the WARN Act to give us the precise meaning 
of “representative” “[a]s used in this chapter” (§ 2101 
(a)(4))—and that meaning is nor that the “representa- 
tive” is a class action representative.” 
The WARN Act's language and structure, consequently, 
lead inescapably to the conclusion that Congress meant 
'The WARN Act expressly precludes remedies other than those 
spelled out. 29 U.S.C. § 2104(b). 
* Brown Shoe's suggestion as to the role of the term “representa- 
tive” is inconsistent as well with the structure of the remainder of 
§$ 2104/0) (5). That section goes on to provide for suits on behalf 
of “such person or .. . other persons similarly situated.” There 
is, of course, no point in providing twice for class litigation in a 
single provision. 
3 
to permit exclusive representatives to file suit to enforce 
the statutory liability for monetary payments to individual 
employees in the event of employer non-compliance with 
the statute's notification requirement.” 
Once Brown Shoe’s manifest misreading of the statu- 
tory language is exposed, respondent's arguments about 
the anomalies supposedly created by a common sense 
reading of that language collapse. The statute is com- 
fortably read sequentially, so that the “representative of 
employees . . . aggrieved” can sue for the liability due 
those employees (under § 2104(a)(1)), while “a unit 
of local government aggrieved” can sue for the penalties 
due that unit (under § 2104(a)(3)). And, to the ob- 
jection that the class action language does not make 
sense as applied to suits by representatives (Resp. 
Br. at 12), the obvious answer is that the language was 
not intended to cover such suits but other suits, by in- 
dividually aggrieved employees. The statute does not 
require that cases be brought for others similarly situated, 
and the statute therefore makes perfect sense by apply- 
ing the class action language to employee suits and not 
to representative suits. 
B. Nor is it true—even if it were relevant—that the 
provision for suits by representatives as defined in the 
WARN Act “was not a conscious appointment of a union 
as vindicator of its members’ rights but rather a mere rem- 
nant of the previous proposal in which the union was 
actually afforded its own rights and remedy.” Resp. Br. 
*It was obvious to those concerned with the passage of the 
WARN Act that unions could file suit for monetary relief pay- 
able to employees. This awareness is perhaps best illustrated by 
the fact that in the 1987 hearings on the bill, the NAM’s repre- 
sentative complained not that unions could sue but that em- 
ployees could also sue. See Hearings before the Subcommittees 
on Labor-Management Relations and Employment Opportunities 
on H.R. 1122, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. (Mar. 17, 1987) (“Hearing”) 
at 119 (remarks of J. Bruce Johnson on behalf of the National 
Association of Manufacturers) (‘the bill leaves open the possibility 
that suits may be brought by employees ... even if unions or 
other employee representatives do not sue.”) 
4 
at 14. The evolution of the statutory provisions confirms, 
instead, that from an early point in the statute’s evolution 
Congress specifically intended to permit statutory repre- 
sentatives to bring suit for the statutory monetary pay- 
ments due to individual employees under § 2104(a)(1). 
So far as we can tell, the present WARN § 2104(a) 
(5) began life in 1985, as the second sentence of what 
is now § 2104(a)(1), worded so that the section read: 
Any employer who orders a plant closing or mass 
layoff in violation or this Act . . . shall be liable to 
each employee who suffers an employment loss as a 
result of such closing or layoff for reinstatement or 
damages, or both. A person seeking to enforce such 
liability (including a representative of employees) 
may sue for himself or for other persons similiary 
situated, or both in any district court of the United 
States in which the violation is alleged to have oc- 
curred or in which the employer transacts business. 
(H.R. 1616 &§ 6(c), 99th Cong. Ist Sess., as intro- 
duced March 20, 1985.] 
See also H.R. 1616 § 7(b), as reported to the House of 
Representatives (October 29, 1985) (same language): 
H.R. Rep. No. 99-336, 99th Cong. Ist Sess. (1985) at 24 
(summarizing the enforcement provision quoted above ); * 
Substitute for H.R. 1616, 131 Cong. Rec. H 10213 (Nov. 
14, 1985) §$ 7(a)(1) (same language, execpt that “rein- 
statement” no longer appears and suit can be filed only 
for “back pay and related benefits for each day of such 
* The House Report refutes Brown Shoe's insistence that the pro- 
visions regarding who may file suit are essentially venue provisions. 
Resp. Br. at 12. The Report after stating the statutory liability 
to each employee, states: 
A person (including an employee representative) seeking to 
enforce such liability may sue either for himself or for other 
persons similarly situated. Suits may be brought in federal 
district court for any district in which the violation is alleged 
to have occurred .... [/d. at 24) 
This paraphrase, by summarizing in separate sentences the stand- 
ing and venue aspects of the paragraph, makes clear that the pro- 
vision is more than simply a venue provision. 
5 
violation, not to exceed a total of 90 days.”) Under this 
language, it was crystal clear that the “such liability” for 
which an exclusive representative could bring suit was pre- 
cisely the liability for monetary payments to individual 
employees for employer failure to comply with the statute. 
After H.R. 1616 failed (see Brief for Petitioner (Pet. 
Br.) at 20), new bills were introduced in the next Con- 
gress. Those bills were drafted to be more specific about 
the nature of the monetary relief available to individual 
employees, with the result that as now, that relief was 
described in detail in separate, numbered subparagraphs. 
Presumably as a result of this growing complexity, the 
provision regarding authority to bring suit for that relief 
was moved in the House bill into a separate, immediately 
following subsection (H.R. 1122 (100th Cong. Ist Sess. 
Feb. 18, 1987) §§ 355(a)(1) and (2)), and additional 
subsections (b)(1) and (2) were added providing for 
liability to units of local government ((1)) and for en- 
forcement of that liability ((2)).In the Senate bill, the 
provision regarding liability for failure to fulfill statutory 
obligations to units of local governments became (a)(2), 
and a new, catchall enforcement section became (a) (3).° 
S. 538 (100th Cong. Ist Sess. Feb. 19, 1987). In both 
instances, the term “such liability” was retained, and in 
neither instance was there any monetary relief running 
to the representative itself, rather than to individual em- 
ployees and to units of government. Thus, it is apparent 
that no pertinent change from the 1985 versions was in- 
tended; rather, the minor alterations in the enforcement 
section resulted from the need to take structural account 
of the other statutory changes, not here pertinent. 
In the Senate committee, further changes were made in 
the enforcement provision, but of the same housekeeping 
character: That committee added a statutory monetary 
* That section read: 
A person seeking to enforce such liability (including a repre- 
sentative of employees (or a unit of local government) may 
sue either for himself or for other persons similarly situated, 
or both, in any district court of the United States .. . [sic). 
6 
penalty for failure to provide information on request to 
the “representative of the affected employees” or the “unit 
of local government” (S. 538 as reported, 100th Cong. 
Ist Sess. 1987, $8 333, 334(a)(3)), and some clarifying 
provisions regarding liability in its subsections (4) and 
(5). The enforcement language therefore was moved to 
subsection (6), and was drafted to read: 
A person seeking to enforce such liability, including 
a representative of employees or a unit of local gov- 
ernment aggrieved under paragraph (1), (2), or (3), 
may sue either for such person or for other persons 
similarly situated . . . 
Brown Shoe would have it that the intent of this langu- 
age was to permit unions to sue only for violations of 
(3), the provision for monetary relief for failure to pro- 
vide requested information. But, as shown above, the 
express authorization for statutory representatives to file 
suit was in the legislation before there was any monetary 
relief accorded to such representatives, and was from the 
outset directly linked to the liability for monetary relief 
to individual employees. Further, even taken in isolation, 
Brown Shoe’s explanation of the Senate committee en- 
forcement language won't wash: That language includes 
subsection (1), the liability to individual employee sub- 
section, among those on which “a representative of employ- 
ees... aggrieved“ may sue. And, the inclusion of subsec- 
tion (1) would, contrary to statutory interpretation rules, 
have no function under Brown Shoe’s explanation.° 
The Conference report followed, with regard to enforce- 
ment, the basic scheme of the Senate bill. But, since the 
bill no longer contained the section requiring that in- 
formation be provided and therefore provided no relief 
® The House committee did not add a statutory penalty for fail- 
ure to provide information, and left the enforcement provision 
authorizing suits by a “representative of employees” where it had 
been in the House bill as introduced—immediately after, and per- 
taining only to, the section establishing liability for monetary re- 
lief to individual employees; separate subsections provided for 
penalties payable to and enforcement by units of local government. 
H.R. Rep. No. 100-285 (100th Cong., Ist Sess. 1987), at 46-47. 
7 
to anyone for failure to provide information, the 
reference to such relief in the enforcement provision 
was deleted. H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 100-576, 100th 
Cong. 2d Sess. at 463-64. Thus, the Conference ver- 
sion (which remained in the final bill after a veto and 
a separate reenactment of the WARN Act) was with 
respect to court enforcement basically a reprise of the 
Senate bill as introduced in 1987, which in turn was 
simply the second sentence of the original employee mone- 
tary relief section moved and expanded as a result of 
growing statutory complexity. The evolution of § 2104 
(a)(5), in short, makes clear that Congress specifically 
contemplated lawsuits like this one under the WARN 
Act, and expressed that intent consistently in the evolv- 
ing statutory language. 
2. Brown Shoe repeats the same error in its assertion 
that Congress’ reference to union enforcement in § 2104(a) 
(5) was simply a mistake by maintaining that “the statute 
gave a union no right . . . concerning a notice.” Resp. 
Br. at 14." The Act in terms provides that before an em- 
ployer orders a plant closing order, the employer must 
* While Brown Shoe suggests that any injury to the union was 
inadequately pleaded here, the complaint tracks the statutory 
provisions as Congress wrote those provisions: The caption, specify- 
ing that UFCW Local 751 is suing “as representative of the ag- 
grieved employees” (Jt. App. 7), closely paraphrases § 2104(a) (5). 
The complaint goes on to allege that the plaintiff is an “employee 
representative a« defined by ... the Act”, and that “{t|he notice to 
William R. Treece was not in compliance with § 2102(a) (1) be- 
cause William R. Treece is not the exclusive representative of the 
affected employees,” as well as because the notice was untimely. 
Jt. App. 8, 9. The relief sought includes payment of backpay and 
benefits to each of the aggrieved employees, as the statute man- 
dates. Jt. App. at 9-10. 
In other words, the complaint alleges that Brown Shoe was sup- 
posed, under the statute, to provide statutory notice to the union 
but did not, and as a result the employer owes back pay and bene- 
fits under the Act to the employees the union represents. If, as we 
maintain, Congress was entitled to enact the statutory scheme these 
pleadings invoke, nothing in Article III of the Constitution requires 
8 
provide “written notice of such an order . . . to each 
representative of the affected employees.” 29 U.S.C. 
§ 2101(a). Notwithstanding these plain words, Brown 
Shoe insists that Congress “created the statutory notice 
requirement primarily for the benefit of non-union work- 
ers,” and provided for notice to the statutory representa- 
tive simply for the convenience of employers whose em- 
ployees were organized. Resp. Br. at 14-15." 
A. With a statute this clear, it hardly matters why 
Congress chose to provide that the union representing 
employees, if there is one, must be notified of a plant 
closing, any more than it mattered in Havens Realty 
Corp., supra, why Congress chose to mandate that ac- 
curate information regarding the availability of real es- 
tate be provided even to individuals who have no need of 
that information because they are not in fact seeking to 
more precise pleading. See Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 
U.S. 363, 374-75 (1982) (the Article III requirement of injury in 
fact is satisfied by pleading “the denial of the [ plaintiff's} own sta- 
tutory right to truthful information;” facts in addition to the de- 
nial of a statutory right are necessary only if a party is seeking 
to rely on another individual's statutory rights, and must therefore 
plead facts demonstrating its own injury). 
* Once again, Brown Shoe’s argument here is at cjds with the 
views of the NAM representative during the legislative con- 
sideration of the WARN Act. At that time the complaint was 
that “some of the largest unions... are... leaders in this effort 
to require mandated notification of plaint shutdown and layoffs” 
in an attempt to “expand their benefits through legislation .. . 
as proposed here” and thereby “concentrate all of their collective 
bargaining muscle on even higher wage demands .. . with the 
knowledge that Congress will provide the rest of the benefit pack- 
age.” Hearing, supra, at 92 (remarks of J. Bruce Johnson on be- 
half of the National Association of Manufacturers). 
In any event, the fact that Congress in discussing a legislative 
proposal focusses on an application narrower than the range of ap- 
plications the statute’s actual language covers does not thereby 
narrow the statute’s reach. “This Court has never required that 
every permissible application of a statute be expressly referred to 
in its legislative history.” Moskal v. United States, 498 U.S. 103, 
111 (1990). 
9 
rent or buy. Whatever Congress’ purpose, where, as 
here, a statute provides that certain information is to be 
provided to specified individuals or entities, that statute 
thereby “in terms, establishes an enforceable right to 
truthful information;” where the requisite information is 
not so provided, the designated individual or entity “has 
suffered injury in precisely the form the statute was in- 
tended to guard against, and therefore has standing. . .” 
455 U.S. at 373-74." 
Brown Shoe seeks to avoid the clear holding of Havens 
Realty on the flimsy notion that in Havens Realty the stat- 
ute declared it “unlawful” to refuse to provide the req- 
uite information. Resp. Br. at 19. In other words, ac- 
cording to Brown Shoe, the outcome of this case would 
be different if, instead of mandating that “An employer 
shall not order a plant closing” without providing the 
requisite notice “to each representative of the affected 
employees” (29 U.S.C. § 2102(a)), Congress had pro- 
vided that “It shall be unlawful for an employer to order 
a plant closing” without providing that same notice. Noth- 
ing in Havens Realty indicates that this Court’s standing 
holding in that case turned on such linguistic ephemera. 
B. In any event, Congress did have cogent reasons, 
quite aside from mere convenience to employers, for pro- 
viding that the notice obligation runs to unions and not 
merely to each employee in an organized plant. The 
Act’s principal authors summarized those reasons in 
* Federal statutes providing that certain individuals by virtue 
of their status or actions are entitled to mandated information and 
permitting those individuals to enforce the obligation to provide the 
information, without any showing of injury other than the failure 
to receive the mandated information, are common. See, e.g., Free- 
dom of Information Act (FOIA). 5 U.S.C. §552 et seq. Robles v. 
EPA, 484 F.2d 843, 847 (4th Cir. 1973) (right to maintain suit 
to corapel disclosure under FOIA is not dependent “upon the in- 
terest or lack of interest of a party seeking disclosure’); Truth 
in Lending Act (TILA), 15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq. White v. Arlen 
Realty Development Corp., 540 F.2d 645, 649 (4th Cir. 1975) 
(“injury in fact” is satisfied under TILA by failure to receive 
information Congress required be disclosed ) . 
10 
a letter to the Secretary of Labor with regard to the 
Secretary's suggestion, in an early post-Act policy state- 
ment, that “the notice should be served on the closest or 
most direct representative of the affected employees (i.e. 
the local union(s).” Worker Adjustment and Retraining 
Notification Act: Solicitation of Comments in Advance of 
Proposed or Interim Final Rulemaking; Discussion Paper, 
53 Fed. Reg. 43733 (October 28, 1988). The Act’s 
authors objected that while it is desirable that local unions 
be notified as well, “the statute requires that the exclusive 
representative of the employees receive notice,” for “a 
clear policy reason”: 
As the collective bargaining agent, the exclusive 
representative, whether it be an international union, 
a regional union council or a local union, has the 
responsibility and authority to address changes in 
terms and conditions of employment, the effects of a 
plant closing or mass layoff, and cooperative efforts 
at worker readjustment. [Congressional Sponsors Joint 
Letter to U.S. Department of Labor, November 10, 
1988, at 8, reprinted in Committee on Education and 
Labor, U.S. House of Representatives, Legislative His- 
tory of §.2527, 100th Congress, Worker Adjustment 
& Retraining Notification Act (1990) (“Leg. Hist.” ) 
at 114.] 
See also Brief for Petitioner (Pet. Br.) at 18 (sum- 
marizing similar statements during the legislative proc- 
ess); Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Sup- 
porting Petitioner at 15 (same); Preamble to Final De- 
partment of Labor Regulations, 54 Fed.Reg. 16042 
(April 20, 1989) (“[T]he purpose of providing notice to 
the parties mentioned in the Act is to allow each of them 
to take responsible action.” ) 
Moreover, the Department of Labor—expressly _re- 
quired by the Act to promulgate “interpretive regulations 
describing the methods by which employers may provide 
for appropriate service of notice as required by this 
chapter” (29 U.S.C. $ 2107(a))—quite emphatically re- 
jected the contention in crafting those regulations that 
ll 
“the Union’s only role under WARN .. . is to serve as 
the conduit to the affected employees for notice from the 
employer.” Resp. Br. at 17. The final Department of 
Labor regulations do not adopt the Department’s initial 
suggestion that notice be provided to the local union, but 
instead provide for notice to the exclusive representative, 
with only the recommendation that notice be given to 
local union officials as well if the local union is not the 
representative.” 20 C.F.R. § 639.6; 53 Fed. Reg. 49065 
(December 5, 1988). Those regulations also specify 
somewhat different requirements for the content of notices 
to exclusive representatives and to individual employees 
(20 C.F.R. § 639.7(c) and (d)), “designed to provide 
information necessary for each of them to take responsi- 
ble action.” Preamble to Final WARN Regulations 
(“Preamble”), 54 Fed. Reg. 16059 (April 20, 1989). 
And, in response to suggestions made during the regula- 
tory comment period that the regulations mandate notice 
to individual employees where there is an exclusive repre- 
sentative, the Department concluded that requiring either 
the employer or the union to provide such notice would 
be inappropriate: 
[A] commenter suggested that non-members of a 
union should receive individual notice. . . . WARN 
provides that, where there is a representative of af- 
fected employees as of the time of notice, an employer 
must provide notice to that representative rather than 
directly to the workers. Thus, [this] suggestion would 
not be appropriate. .. . 
A commenter suggested that the regulations should 
provide that a union must give notice to the affected 
employees it represents within 3-5 days and that a 
penalty should be imposed upon the union for failure 
to give notice. WARN contains no provisions im- 
posing any notice obligations on unions. The sugges- 
Had the notice to the union been intended merely as an 
efficient way to transmit notice to the employees individually, 
notice to local unions, without regard to their status as exclusive 
representative, would have sufficed. 
12 
tion cannot, therefore, be adopted. [Preamble, supra, 
at 46. } 
C. In short, Congress provided exclusive representa- 
tives with a statutory right to notice and a statutory right 
to sue precisely because the exclusive representative is, 
when it comes to a plant closing, a party whose legal 
status and legal rights and interests as the employees’ 
representative for workplace matters are directly, immedi- 
ately, and adversely affected. For that reason, among 
others, respondents’ invocation of Lujan v. Defenders of 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992)—the only case in this 
Court striking down a Congressional enactment as be- 
yond Congress’ powers under Article III—is unavailing. 
See Pet. Br. at 29-30. 
Lujan involved a statute requiring consultation between 
various governmental agencies, and authorizing “any per- 
son” to sue for violation of that requirement. 504 U.S. 
at 572. The Court noted that it has 
consistently held that a plaintiff raising only a gen- 
erally available grievance about government—claim- 
ing Only harm to his and every citizen’s interest in 
proper application of the Constitution and law, and 
seeking relief that no more directly and tangibly bene- 
fits him than it does the public at large—does not 
State an Article III case or controversy. [504 U.S. at 
573-74.] 
Viewing the question before it as “whether the public in- 
terest in the proper administration of the laws .. . can 
be converted into an individual right by a statute that 
denominates it as such,” (S04 U.S. at 576), the Court 
concluded that Congress may not effect such a conversion: 
If the concrete injury requirement has the separation- 
of-powers significance we have always said, the answer 
must be obvious: To permit Congress to convert the 
undifferentiated public interest in executive officers’ 
compliance with the law into an “individual right” vin- 
dicable in the courts is to permit Congress to transfer 
from the President to the courts the Chief Executive's 
most important constitutional duty, to “take Care that 
13 
the Laws be faithfully executed,” Art. II], §3.... 
We have always rejected that vision of our role[.| 
{504 U.S. at 577.] 
The standing question raised by the Lujan statute is 
far afield from the standing question raised by the WARN 
Act here. In the first place, the WARN Act generates 
none of the concerns about shifting responsibility for the 
enforcement of the jaws from the Executive Branch to 
the Judicial Branch that underlay Lujan. Here, as in 
Havens Realty, Congress’ sole concern was forging a cause 
of action to enforce a federal statutory right between pri- 
vate parties, in a context in which there is no public 
law enforcement role whatever."' In this statutory con- 
text, involving the authority of Congress to define private 
rights and private causes of action to vindicate those 
rights, the Legislature’s power is at its zenith. 
Consequenty, this Court’s standing jurisprudence, as 
Havens Realty illustrates, is that the only pertinent Ar- 
ticle III concern here is whether the resulting WARN Act 
case is presented “in an adversary context and in a form 
historically viewed as capable of resolution through the 
judicial process.” Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83, 93-94 
(1968). Any greater standing limitation on Congress’ 
™ The Court’s plurality opinion in Lujan specifically noted that 
its holding may have no application beyond “suits against the 
government” (504 U.S. at 578), while a concurring opinion char- 
acterized the Court’s holding as defining only an “outer limit 
to the power of Congress to confer rights of action,” leaving that 
power fundamentally intact. 504 U.S. at 580 (Kennedy, J., con- 
curring). The concurring opinion, in particular, ecmphasized that: 
Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate 
chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy 
where none existed before, and I do not read the Courts opinion 
to state a contrary view. [504 U.S. at 580 (Kennedy, J., con- 
curring). | 
12 Our point in emphasizing that this case (like Havens Realty) 
is distinct from the main stream of the Court’s standing cases 
because this is a case between two private parties, is not that, as 
a result, Congress’ actions do not generate any separation of 
powers concerns. Rather, our point is that those concerns are 
14 
Article I powers in this regard would raise separation of 
powers issues of its own, by asserting an extraordinary 
judicial authority to negate Congress’ considered views 
concerning the distribution of rights and obligations 
among private parties. 
This case also differs fundamentally from Lujan in that 
the WARN Act does not create a general cause of action 
to sue over a “generally available grievance” concerning 
compliance with the laws. As the concurring Lujan Jus- 
tices pointed out, the Lujan statute simply conferred a 
right of action that “{did] not of its own force establish 
that there is an injury in ‘any person’. . .” 504 U.S. at 
580 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Here, in contrast, the stat- 
ute first provides that notice is due from the employer to 
the employees’ exclusive representative (not to the public 
at large or, as in Lujan, to some governmental entity), 
and only then authorizes that representative to sue where 
the employer does not provide the notice. Nforeover, the 
union to whom notice is due necessarily has had previous 
direct involvement in the affairs of the plant in question 
through its statutory responsibility for representing the 
workers in the plant, a role which will necessarily be 
affected by the plant closing or mass layoff. 
For these reasons, the union is no mere concerned by- 
stander attempting to vindicate the public interest, or an 
interest the union shares in common with the public at 
large. Thus, the concerns evinced in Lujan regarding 
litigation over claimed injuries felt equally by all mem- 
qualitatively diffeernt—and quantatively less—than where Congress 
authorizes judicial challenges to governmental action. 
That cases finding a lack of Article III standing in disputes 
that do not challenge governmental action are rare is perhaps best 
indicated by the fact that Brown Shoe does not cite any such cases, 
and alters the sense of the primary case that is cited by sub- 
stituting ellipses for the phrase that makes clear that concerns 
about challenges to governmental authority are central in standing 
cases. Resp. Br. at 30; Valley Forge Christian College v. Ameri- 
cans United for Separation of Church & State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 
471 (1982) (emphasis supplied) (“The power to declare the rights 
of individuals and to measure the authority of governments, this 
Court said 90 years ago, ‘is legitimate only as a last resort...’ ”) 
15 
bers of the public have no application. Put another way, 
the statute involved in Lujan would have been parallel 
to the one in this case only if that statute had provided 
for consultation with specified, ascertainable persons or 
groups with an established, statutorily-mandated involve- 
ment in the preservation of endangered species, and then 
authorized those persons or groups to sue if they were 
not so consulted. Nothing in either the Lujan plurality 
opinion or Justice Kennedy's concurring Lujan opinion 
suggests that there is any constitutional question as to 
the validity of that kind of hypothetical statute. 
3. As to the “redressibility” question, we noted in our 
opening brief that where a duty flows to one person at 
least in part to aid that person in forwarding the interests 
of certain individuals, providing monetary relief to the 
benefitted individuals on a suit by that person to redress 
a breach by the defendant of that duty appropriately re- 
dresses the plaintiffs legal injury. Pet. Br. at 32. 
Brown Shoe objects that none of the three examples we 
provided to illustrate this point are precisely like the 
WARN Act. Resp. Br. at 34-35, 40-42. But we are not, 
of course, contending, that this case is a Labor Manage- 
ments Relations Act § 301 case like /nternational Union 
UAW vy. Hoosier Cardinal Corp., 383 U.S. 696 (1966), 
or a third party beneficiary case, or a case in which the 
government is suing to protect the public interest. 
Rather, our point is that in each of these analogous cir- 
cumstances, as here, a recognized, separate legal interest, 
albeit one related to forwarding the welfare of other indi- 
viduals, is vindicated by providing appropriate monetary 
relief to those individuals. Pet. Br. at 35. That the source 
of the legal interest is different from that here— 
contractual, in LMRA § 301 and third-party beneficiary 
cases, and grounded in governmental authority and stat- 
utory authorization in statutes such as Title VII, the 
FLSA and ERISA granting governmental entities the 
right to sue to advance the public interest—has no 
16 
bearing upon whether remedial schemes of this general 
structure somehow run afoul of Article III.” 
Brown Shoe misunderstands, in particular, the perti- 
nence of the third-party beneficiary cases to this case. In 
those cases, the promisee has traditionally been permitted 
to enforce its legally-recognized interest in performance 
of a promise made to the promisee through a suit ordering 
the promisor to pay money to the third-party beneficiary, 
even if the relief granted in the lawsuit will provide no 
direct benefit to the plaintiff. See, e.g., Drewen v. Bank 
of Manhattan Co. of City of New York, 155 A. 2d 529 
(N.J. Sup. Ct. 1959), and case cited id., at 533 (seven- 
teenth century English case holding that where A has prom- 
ised B that A will pay a specified sum of money to C but 
does not do so, B’s administrator can sue for performance 
of that promise even though B's estate “ ‘should receive 
no benefit if he did recover’); Croker v. New York Trust 
Co., 156 N.E. 81, 82 (N.Y. 1927) (where A promises B 
to pay money to C and D, B can sue “to enforce the 
liability of the promisor to the third party beneficiaries;” 
although “the promisee has suffered no pecuniary dam- 
age by the failure of the promisee to perform [and] [h]is 
injury at law is, therefore, purely technical”, the promisee 
nonetheless “is interested in asserting the duty of the 
promisor to carry out the terms of the contract”); Blair 
v. Southern Clay Mfg. Co., 121 S.W. 2d 570, 571 (Tenn. 
1938) (while a third party beneficiary can sue for en- 
forcement of a promise to pay money to him, “[t}he better 
practice . . . is a suit by [the promisee] to enforce the 
obligation for the use of C”). Such cases, then, are “in 
a form historically viewed as capable of resolution through 
‘As the Court recognized in Lujan, supra, the redressibility 
prong of the Article III standing doctrine has to be applied flexibly, 
taking into account the nature of the legal right being enforced. 
For example, “{[a] person who has been accorded a procedural right 
to protect his concrete interests can assert that right without 
meeting all the norma! standards for redressibility and immediacy.” 
504 U.S. at 572 n.7. 
17 
the judicial process” (Flast v. Cohen, supra, 392 U.S. at 
93-94), and are directly relevant to the Article III analy- 
sis here for that reason.”* 
4. Finally, Brown Shoe maintains that Hunt v. Wash- 
ington State Apple Advertising Comm'n, 432 U.S. 333 
(1977), and related cases, preclude Congress from ex- 
pressly permitting the union as a statutorily-designated 
representative of employees to bring suit seeking individ- 
ual monetary relief for those employees. 
Since the plaintiff union is both the holder of the legal 
right the defendant employer is alleged to have violated 
here and an authorized litigant to vindicate that right, 
neither Hunt nor International Union, UAW, supra, nor 
Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 (1975)—all of which in- 
volve situations in which the Congressional or statutory 
4 It is, moreover, difficult to understand Brown Shoe’s remark that 
another set of analogous cases, those involving government suits 
to enforce the public interest which result in payment of monetary 
relief to each of a group of individuals, suggest that Congress did 
not intend to permit unions to bring backpay suits under WARN 
because “the employer has no assurance that any disposition of 
the WARN claim will preclude further litigation by employees. .. .”. 
Resp. Br. at 42. 
The governmental! suits certainly do not establish any principle 
that Congress may not provide a party with a legally-cognizable 
interest in the welfare of certain individuals, a cause of action to 
recover monetary relief for the latter without requiring in that stat- 
ute notice to the individuals and without affording them the right to 
decline participation. To the contrary, General Telephone Co. v. 
E.E.0.C., 446 U.S. 318, 333 (1980), specifically declined to impose 
those requirements while observing that “[t]he courts are not 
powerless to prevent undue hardship to the defendant and should 
perform accordingly” by, inter alia, precluding double recovery and 
requiring any individual who claims under a judgment or settle- 
ment to relinquish the right to bring a second suit. See also Inter- 
national Union 1'AW v. Brock, 477 U.S. 274, 290 (1986). 
Indeed, if each of the employees proceeds individually, as 
employees may under the WARN Act, the employer is surely much 
more likely to face a multiplicity of suits than where the union 
sues for monetary relief for all represented employees. 
18 
obligation enforced ran to individuals rather than to the 
organization bringing suit—are on point.” 
Moreover, even without regard to that critical differ- 
ence in the nature of the legal right enforced, the “asso- 
ciational standing” cases are not informative here. None 
of those cases confronted or resolved the question whether 
Article III, as opposed to prudential considerations, re- 
quires a distinction between injunctive relief and the kind 
of narrowly specified monetary relief the WARN Act 
provides.” 
15 We are puzzled by Brown Shoe’s suggestion that the Question 
Presented in the Petition does not encompass the issue whether 
the third prong of Hunt, precluding associational standing where 
individualized relief is sought, is prudential in the sense that a 
Congressional authorization of such relief can be sufficient to 
satisfy Article III. Associational standing is simply a subcategory 
of representational standing, as this Court’s cases recognize. See, 
e.g., Warth, supra, 422 U.S. at 511 (if the requisite criteria are 
met, an “association may be an appropriate representative of its 
members” (emphasis supplied)); Hunt, supra, 432 U.S. at 345 
(because it meets the requisite standards, “the Commission has 
standing to bring this action in a representational capacity.”) 
Since the Question Presented asks whether Article III precludes 
Congress from permitting the plaintiff union from suing as the 
representative of affected employees (Pet. Br. at (i)), that question 
encompasses representational standing theories generally, including 
a theory premised, like Hunt, on an analogy to associational stand- 
ing. See Petition for Writ of Certiorari at 14-20 (discussing 
Hunt and prudential standing considerations at length). 
16 The relief sought here, moreover, is not the type of indird- 
valized damages relief involved, for example, in Warth. 422 
U.S. at 515 (organization of home builders may not recover for 
business opportunities and profits lost by individual builders). 
Rather, the relief in a WARN Act case will almost always be 
figured from the payroll records of the defendant employer ex- 
clusively, with no need for individual testimony by affected employ- 
ees. (The only exception would occur if the exclusive representative 
attempts to recover under § 2104(a)(1)(B) for medical expenses 
incurred during an employment loss; the Warth line of ca »s, even 
if applicable, would then require only that the particular employees 
for whom such relief is sought be joined in the suit.) 
19 
Respondent insists, nonetheless, that the dicta in Hunt 
to the effect that voluntary associations cannot bring suit 
where “the relief requested requires the participation of 
individual members in the lawsuit” (432 U.S. at 343) is 
constitutionally-based, because of “the redressibility prob- 
lem posed by associational damage suits.” Resp. Br. at 
38." Warth, the case from which the Hunt criteria were 
derived, however, only goes so far as to state that the first 
of the three “associational standing” criteria—that the 
individual members fulfill the bedrock injury-in-fact Article 
III requirement—is constitutionally mandated. Warth, 422 
U.S. at 511 (because “[t}he possibility of representational 
standing . . . does not eliminate the constitutional re- 
quirement of a case or controversy,” an association, in 
order to represent its members, “must allege that its mem- 
bers or any one of them are suffering immediate or threat- 
ened injury as a result of the challenged action.” ) 
The concern articulated in Warth as underlying the 
individualized relief prong, in contrast—whether “it can 
reasonably be supposed that the remedy, if granted, will 
inure to the benefit of those members of the association 
actually injured,” (422 U.S. at 515)— is a sensible pru- 
dential concern that, absent a Congressional or other leg- 
islative or traditional determination that a designated 
representative can seek monetary relief flowing to speci- 
fied individuals, there will be grave difficulty in deter- 
'T Hunt was not a suit seeking individual monetary relief. More- 
over, while Hunt did involve a state agency entrusted with ad- 
vancing the interests of a designated group of individuals rather 
than a voluntary association, that agency was not designated 
by either a state or federal statute or by the federal constitutional 
provision invoked as the authorized representative of the individual 
apple growers for purpose of pursuing individualized monetary re- 
lief. The genera] authority of the Washington State Apple Adver- 
tising Commission “to sue and be sued” (432 U.S. at 338 n.3) as a 
corporate entity does not constitute the kind of express representa- 
tional authorization to protect the legal interests of designated 
individuals involved here and in the various examples discussed 
in our opening brief (at 36-43), nor is there any indication of 
concomitant fiduciary obligations (Pet. Br. at 41). 
20 
mining who among a voluntary association’s members 
is “actually injured” and in assuring that those individuals 
receive the moneys due. Where there is such a Congres- 
sional determination, accompanied, as here, by fiduciary 
or analogous obligations,“* however, the long history of 
representational litigation shows that the statutory des- 
ignation is quite sufficient to indicate “reasonably . . . 
that the relief if granted will inure to” the represented 
individuals, whether the relief is injunctive or monetary. 
Pet. Br. at 42-46.” 
CONCLUSION 
For the reasons stated above and in our opening brief, 
the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Eighth Circuit should be reversed. 
18 The association standing issue concern expressed in Warth with 
regard to individualized relief—like any standing issue concern— 
arises only if suit is actually brought, not by reason of the associa- 
tion’s inaction. And, as noted in our opening brief, once a repre- 
sentative does file a WARN Act suit, the duty of fair representa- 
tion obtains. Pet. Br. at 12, n.4. 
1” We note that Brown Shoe is quite wrong in its suggestion 
that representational litigation depends on the representative hav- 
ing “title.” See Uniform Probate Code §§ 3-101, 102 & comment 
to 711; 33 C.J.S. 2d § 252 (generally executors and administrators 
do not have title to heir’s property). In any event, Warth at most 
suggests that any Congressional action providing representational 
authority in a suit for individual relief be reviewed to determine 
whether the statutory Scherne is reasonably calculated to assure 
that the intended beneficiaries receive the relief to which they are 
entitled. For all the reasons surveyed above and in our opening 
Brief (at 16-27), the interrelated substantive and enforcement 
schemes of the WARN Act meet that test. 
JONATHAN P. HIATT 
815 16th Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
MARSHA S. BERZON 
Scott A. KRONLAND 
MARY LYNNE WERLWAS 
177 Post Street, Suite 300 
San Francisco, CA 94108 
21 
Respectfully submitted, 
GEORGE MURPHY 
RENEE L. BOWSER 
1775 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
LAURENCE GOLD 
(Counsel of Record) 
1000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 833-9340 
