IN THE 
Supreme Court of the Un 
OcTOBER TERM, 1995 
UNITED FooD AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS 
UNION LOCAL 751, 
. Petitioner, 
BROWN Group, INc., d/b/a BROWN SHOE COMPANY, 
Respondent. 
On a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eighth Circuit 
JOINT APPENDIX 
GEORGE R. MURPHY THOMAS C. WALSH 
RENEE L. BOWSER (Counsel of Record) 
1775 K Street, N.W. One Metropolitan Square 
Washington, D.C. 20036 Suite 3600 
MARSHA S. BERZON St. Louis, MO 63102-2750 
177 Post Street, Suite 300 (314) 259-2000 
San Francisco, CA 94108 JAMES N. FOSTER 
JONATHAN P. HIATT 2730 North Ballas Road 
LAURENCE GOLD Suite 200 
(Counsel of Record) St. Louis, MO 63131-3039 
815 16th Street, N.W. Attorneys for Respondent 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 637-5390 
Attorneys for Petitioner 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI FILED AUGUST 25, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED OCTOBER 16, 1995 
® Ee 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
Relevant District Court Docket Entries —........................ l 
Relevant Court of Appeals Docket Entries | em 3 
Complaint in the Instant Case .............. Ce Ee 7 
Appendix A to the Complaint ...........0 11 
Appendix B to the Complaint —.............0000000000000....... 62 
Appendix C to the Complaint Ba Dee 64 
Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff’s Complaint.... 74 
Plaintiff’s Motion to Alter or Amend the Judgment.... 76 
Plaintiff’s Notice of Appeal . idadiadiaaieieeaddadedaatasten aoa 78 
Plaintiff’s Motion to Amend Notice of Appeal ................ 80 
—_ LT 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
No. 4:92-CV-1134 
Loca. 751 UnrTep Foop anp 
COMMERCIAL WORKERS INTERNATIONAL UNION, 
DATE 
6/16/92 
6/22/92 
7/29/92 
8/31/92 
9/9/92 
ind — 
as representative of the aggrieved employees, 
Plaintiff 
v. 
Brown Group, INC., 
Doing business as Brown Shoe Company, 
Defendant 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 
— - _————— 
PROCEEDINGS 
COMPLAINT w/attachments; # Summons Is- 
sued: 1 # Counts: 1 # Days to Respond: 20; 
jury demand (kec) [Entry date 06/17/92] [Edit 
date 06/18/92] 
ACCEPTANCE/ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF 
SERVICE by defendant Brown Group, Inc. on 
6/19/92 (jwh) [Entry date 06/23/92] 
MOTION by defendant Brown Group, Inc. to dis- 
miss for lack of jurisdiction w/memo. (jwh) 
[Entry date 07/30/92] 
RESPONSE by plaintiff Local 751 UFCW to 
motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction w /memo. 
[9-1] (jwh) [Entry date 09/02/92] 
REPLY by defendant Brown Group, Inc. to re- 
sponse to motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction 
w/memo. [9-1] (jwh) [Entry date 09/10/92) 
2 
——=—- —_—-— — 
5/11/93 
5/21/93 
3/7/94 
4/1/94 
PROCEEDINGS 
MEMORANDUM AND ORDER: by Honorable 
Edward L. Filippine granting motion to dismiss 
for lack of jurisdiction w/memo. [9-1] (cc: all 
counsel) (jwh) 
ORDER by Honorable Edward L. Filippine termi- 
nating case w/o prej. (cc: all counsel) (jwh) 
MOTION by plaintiff Local 751 UFCW to alter 
jgm., to amend jgm. (jwh) [Entry date 04/26/93) 
MEMORANDUM by plaintiff Local 751 UFCW 
re: motion to alter jgm. [16-1], re: motion to 
amend jgm. [16-2] (jwh) [Entry date 04/26/93) 
RESPONSE by defendant Brown Group, Inc. to 
motion to alter jgm. [16-1], to motion to amend 
jgm. [16-2] (jwh) [Entry date 05/13/93) 
REPLY by plaintiff Local 751 UFCW to response 
to motion to alter jgm. [16-1], motion to amend 
jgm. [16-2] (jwh) [Entry date 05/24/93) 
MEMORANDUM AND ORDER: by Honorable 
Edward L. Filippine denying motion to alter jgm. 
[16-1], denying motion to amend jgm. [16-2] (cc: 
all counsel) (kmb) [Entry date 03/15/94) 
NOTICE OF APPEAL filed by plaintiff Local 751 
UFCW re: the District Court decision; [21-1] fee: 
$105.00 (lal) [Entry date 04/06/94) 
3 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH DISTRICT 
No. 94-1929 
UNITED Foop AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS 
INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 751, 
as representative of the aggrieved employees, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant 
Vv. 
Brown Group, INc., 
Doing business as Brown Shoe Company, 
Defendant-A ppellee 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 
-——_ — 
DATE PROCEEDINGS 
4/13/94 Civil Case Docketed. (ikl) 
4/13/94 CERTIFIED copies notice of appeal, docket en- 
_ tries. [94-1929] and judgment of 3/7/94 from 
district court [422525] (1kl) 
4/13/94. BRIEFING SCHEDULE: [94-1929] Method of 
Apndx due on 4/25/94; DR apint due on 4/25/94: 
Aplee DR due on 5/3/94; Joint Apndx due on 
5/23/94; Apint brief due on 5/23/94; Aplee brief 
due on 6/22/94; Reply brief due on 7/6/94; (ikl) 
4/25/94. DESIGNATION of record received from Appellant 
UFCW. (94-1929] (mel) 
5/4/94 Motion to Amend Notice of Appeal with attached 
Memorandum in Support from Jerome A. Diekem- 
per for Appellant UFCW. [94-1929] (Ik!) 
DATE 
PROCEEDINGS 
5/5/94 
5/6/94 
5/31/94 
6/2/94 
6/3/94 
6/10/94 
ORDER filed: granting document null [430442-2] 
Appellant Motion to Amend Notice of Appeal is 
hereby ordered taken with the case for considera- 
tion by the panel to which this case is submitted 
for disposition on the merits. [430784] (lkl) 
DESIGNATION of record received from Appellee 
Brown Group. [94-1929] (mel) 
MOTION of International Union, United Auto- 
mobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement 
Workers of America (UAW), Oil Chemical and 
Atomic Workers International Union (OCAWIU), 
the United Mine Workers of America, Interna- 
tional Union, and the Guild/Sugar Law Center for 
Economic and Social Justice for leave to file amicus 
curiae brief on behalf of apint. [440955] w/service 
5/24/94 (mel) 
ORDER filed: Motion of International Union, 
United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural 
Implement Workers (UAW); Oil, Chemical and 
Atomic Workers International Union (OCAWIU); 
the United Mine Workers of America, Interna- 
tional Union; and the Guild/Sugar Law Center for 
Economic and Social Justice for leave to partici- 
pate as amicus curiae has been filed. Parties are 
notified that absent the filing of a formal objection 
within 10 days, the motion will be deemed as 
granted. [94-1929] [441020] (mel) 
RECORDS received: Joint Appendix, consisting 
of 1 Volume(s) 3 copies. [94-1929] (mel) 
RESPONSE of aplee, Brown Group, in opposition 
to amicus motion for leave to file amicus brief filed 
by UAW: Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers; 
United Mine Workers and Guild/Sugar Law Cen- 
ter. [440955-1] [446035]. (mel) 
DATE 
PROCEEDINGS 
6/15/94 
6/16/94 
6/30/94 
8/26/94 
9/22/94 
11/8/94 
12/14/94 
ORDER filed: The motion of the UAW; Oil, 
Chemical and Atomic Workers; United Mine Work- 
ers and Guild/Sugar Law Center for leave to file 
an amicus brief is granted. Their amici brief is 
due June 30, 1994. Appellee’s brief is due August 
1, 1994. Appellee’s objections to the motion are 
denied. The amici may participate in oral argu- 
ment only to the extent appellant relinquishes a 
portion of its time. [440955-1] [446074] (mel) 
BRIEF FILED—Brief of Appellant—UFCW—15 
pgs—w /addendum—10 copies—w /service 6/16/94. 
Defects: SF [94-1929] [448326] (mel) 
BRIEF FILED—Brief of Amicus-Curiae—UAW, 
OCAW, UMW, Guild/Sugar Law Ctr. on behalf of 
apint UFCW 19 pgs—10 copies w/service 6/29/94. 
[94-1929] [452464] (mel) 
BRIEF FILED—Brief of Appellee—Brown Group. 
43 pgs—w /addendum—10 copies—w /service 8/26/ 
94, [94-1929] [475196] (cah) 
BRIEF FILED—Reply brief—UFCW. 14 pgs— 
10 copies—w/service 9/22/94. [94-1929] [484257] 
(cah) 
*SET FOR ARGUMENT*—December in St. Louis. 
[94-1929] (dgh) 
ARGUED AND SUBMITTED IN ST. LOUIS TO 
JUDGES Pasco M. Bowman, Circuit Judge, James 
B. Loken, Circuit Judge, Andrew W. Bogue, Dis- 
trict Judge, South Dakota, Visiting Judge. Kary 
L. Moss for Amicus Curiae Guild/Sugar Law Ctr., 
Amicus Curiae UMW, Amicus Curiae OCAW, 
Amicus Curiae UAW, Renee L. Bowser for Appel- 
lant UFCW. Michelle M. Cain for Appellee Brown 
Group. Rebuttal by: Bowser. RECORDED. [94- 
1929] (paw) 
-_—_ 
DATE 
PROCEEDINGS 
12/20/94 
4/3/95 
4/3/95 
5/1/95 
5/25/95 
5/1/95 
5/5/95 
9/1/95 
28(j) citation received and filed from Appellant 
UFCW TO COURT. [94-1929] [517580] (paw) 
THE COURT: Pasco M. Bowman, James B. 
Loken, Andrew W. Bogue. OPINION FILED by 
Pasco M. Bowman PUBLISHED. [94-1929] 
[554700] (mls) 
JUDGMENT: Pasco M. Bowman, James B. Loken, 
Andrew W. Bogue: The Judgment of the lower 
court is AFFIRMED in accordance with the 
opinion. [94-1929] [554712] (mls) 
PETITION for REHEARING with suggestions 
for rehearing en banc. Filed by Appellant UFCW, 
w/service 5/1/95. TO COURT. [94-1929] (mls) 
JUDGE ORDER: denying petition for Rehearing 
with suggestion for rehearing en banc [566548-1] 
filed by UFCW. Petition for panel Rehearing is 
also denied. [94-1929] [575588] (mls) 
MANDATE ISSUED [94-1929] (mls) 
RECEIPT for Mandate. [94-1929] [580878] 
(mls) 
U.S. Supreme Court notice regarding petition for 
writ of certiorari. Filed in the Supreme Court on 
August 23, 1995. Supreme Ct. Case No.: 95-340 
[94-1929] [615056] (mls) 
[Filed Jun. 16, 1992] 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
EASTERN DIVISION 
Case No. 4:92CV01134ELF 
Jury Trial Demanded 
UNITED Foop AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS UNION LOCAL 
751, AS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE AGGRIEVED EMPLOYEES, 
. Plaintiff, 
BROWN Group, INC., d/b/a BROWN SHOE COMPANY, 
Defendant. 
PLAINTIFF’S COMPLAINT AGAINST DEFENDANT 
FOR VIOLATION OF THE WORKER ADJUSTMENT 
AND RETRAINING NOTIFICATION ACT 
Plaintiff United Food and Commercial Workers Union 
Local 751 (hereinafter identified as “Local 751” or the 
“Union”), through counsel, complains against Defendant 
Brown Group, Inc. d/b/a Brown Shoe Company (here- 
inafter identified as “Brown Shoe”) and shows the court 
the following: 
JURISDICTION 
1. This is an action for monetary damages against 
Brown Group, Inc. d/b/a Brown Shoe Company for its 
failure to provide wages and benefits as required under 
the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
(“WARN”), Title 29, U.S.C. §§ 2101-2104. Jurisdic- 
tion for this complaint is based on Title 28, U.S.C. § 1331 
and Title 29, U.S.C. § 2104(a). 
2. Pursuant to Title 29, U.S.C. § 2104(a)(5), venue 
lies in the Eastern District of Missouri, Eastern Division 
because the employer transacts business in the District. 
PARTIES 
3. Plaintiff United Food and Commercial Workers 
Union Local 751 is an unincorporated association whose 
address is P.O. Box 89 in Dixon, Missouri 65459. 
4. Defendant Brown Group, Inc. d/b/a Brown Shoe 
Company is a corporation incorporated in the state of 
New York with its principal place of business in St. 
Louis, Missouri at 8300 Maryland Avenue. At all times 
material to the events at issue in this complaint, De- 
fendant Brown Shoe operated a shoe manufacturing plant 
on West Sth in the town of Dixon in Pulaski County, 
Missouri 65459. Defendant is an employer as defined by 
§$ 2101(a)(1) of the WARN act. 
CAUSE OF ACTION 
5. Plaintiff is the certified exclusive bargaining rep- 
resentative of the aggrieved Brown Shoe employee on 
whose behalf the relief prayed for herein is sought and 
has been said employees’ representative at all times ma- 
terial to the events at issue in this complaint. Recogni- 
tion of Plaintiff as the employees’ bargaining representa- 
tive is embodied in the Labor Contract, Brown Shoe Com- 
pany and Footwear Division, United Food and Commer- 
cial Workers International Union, Local 751, AFL-CiO 
& CLC, dated September 20, 1990 to August 27, 1993 
which is attached hereto as Appendix A. Plaintiff is an 
employee representative as defined by § 2104(a)(4) of 
the WARN Act. 
6. This action is filed by Plaintiff on behalf of 277 
employees of Defendant’s Dixon plant who were repre- 
sented by Plaintiff on January 17, 1992, the date on 
which Defendant provided Plaintiff written notice of the 
permanent closing of the Dixon plant pursuant to 
§ 2102(a) of the WARN Act. On January 17, 1992, 
the 277 employees were affected employees under 
$ 2101(a)(5) of the WARN Act. 
9 
7. By letter dated January 17, 1992, attached hereto 
as Appendix B, Defendant mailed a written notice to 
William R. Treece that the Dixon plant would be per- 
manently closed and result in the discharge of 277 em- 
ployees represented by Plaintiff. In that letter, the De- 
fendant stated that the displacement of employees would 
begin on March 20, 1992. The notice to William R. 
Treece was not in compliance with § 2102(a)(1) of the 
WARN Act because William R. Treece is not the ex- 
clusive representative of the affected employees. 
8. On January 31, 1992, Defendant began laying off 
the Dixon employees represented by Plaintiff and con- 
tinued laying off employees during February and March, 
1992 without regard to the requirement of the WARN 
Act to delay the layoff of the employees for sixty days 
following the statutory notice. The cumulative impact 
of these layoffs constitutes a plant closing under § 2101 
(a)(2) of the WARN Act which violates § 2102 of the 
WARN Act. 
9. Assuming the January 17, 1992 notice was valid, 
most of the employees represented by Plaintiff experienced 
employment loss as defined by § 2102(a)(6) of the 
WARN Act prior to March 17, 1992, the expiration 
date of the sixty-day notice period and therefore are ag- 
grieved employees under the WARN Act entitled to 
relief as set forth in § 2104 of the Act. The aggrieved 
employees are identified on the list attached hereto as 
Appendix C to this complaint. If no valid notice was 
given, all 277 employees are aggrieved employees en- 
titled to relief under the WARN Act. 
RELIEF 
10. WHEREFORE, Plaintiff demands: 
a) That Defendant pay each of the aggrieved em- 
ployees backpay and fringe benefits, including but not 
limited to, vacation pay, medical expenses, and contri- 
10 
butions to the pension plan, for 60 days or for each day 
of each employee’s employment loss which occurred prior 
to the expiration of a sixty-day period after the employer 
validly served written notice of permanent closing on the 
employees’ representative; 
b) That Plaintiff recover from Defendant the cost of 
this action, including reasonable attorneys’ fees; and 
c) That Plaintiff recover such other and further relief 
on its behalf and that of the aggrieved employees as may 
be proper. 
Dated: June 12, 1992. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Renee L. Bowser 
RENEE L. BOWSER 
Assistant General Counsel 
United Food and Commercial 
Workers International Union 
1775 K Street N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
- and- 
JEROME A. DIEKEMPER 
DIEKEMPER, HAMMOND, 
SHINNERS, TURCOTTE AND 
LARREW, P.C. 
7730 Carondelet, Suite 222 
St. Louis, Missouri 63105 
(314) 727-1015 
Attorneys for United Food and 
Commercial Workers Local 
Union 751 
11 
APPENDIX A 
LABOR CONTRACT 
BROWN SHOE COMPANY 
AND 
FOOTWEAR DIVISION, UNITED FOOD AND 
COMMERCIAL WORKERS INTERNATIONAL 
UNION AFL-CIO & CLC 
LOCAL NO. 751 
Dixon, Missouri 
September 20, 1990 - August 27, 1993 
12 
AGREEMENT 
This Agreement entered into by and between the Brown 
Shoe Company (a member company of Brown Group, 
Inc.), hereinafter referred to as the “Company”, for its 
factory at Dixon, Missouri, and the Footwear Division, 
LOCAL 751, as chartered by the United Food and Com- 
mercial Workers International Union, hereinafter referred 
to as the “Union,” WITNESSETH THAT: 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of their mutual 
promises the parties hereto agree as follows: 
ARTICLE I—RECOGNITION 
SECTION 1. This Agreement pertains only to the 
employees or those who may be employed by the Com- 
pany in this plant and to the Company and its relations 
with the employees only insofar as they directly concern 
the operation of the aforementioned plant with the excep- 
tion of: Office and Clerical] Employees, Commissary 
Clerks, Upper Leather Stock Clerks, Lunchroom Employ- 
ces, Factory Nurse, Foremen, Foreladies, Supervisory 
Trainees, Assistant Foremen, Instructors, Chief Engineer, 
Assistant Engineer and all other supervisory employees 
with authority to hire, promote, discharge, discipline, or 
otherwise effect changes in the status of employees or ef- 
fectively recommend such action. 
Any Upper Leather Stock Clerk or Commissary Clerk 
who 1s at present a member of the Union shall be per- 
mitted to retain such membership. When, however any 
such individual is separated or transferred to other work, 
the job thus vacated shall at such time be removed from 
the bargaining unit. 
SEC TION 2. The Company recognizes the Union as 
the exclusive collective bargaining agency subject to the 
Provisions of the National Labor Relations Act for all 
employees of the Dixon, Missouri plant, and agrees to 
negotiate only with the Union on all matters relative to 
collective bargaining affecting these employees. 
13 
SECTION 3. All employees shall be required as a con- 
dition of employment to become members of the Union 
thirty (30) days after the date of their employment or 
the effective date of this Agreement, whichever is later, 
and shall be required to remain members in good standing 
so long as they shall be employed by the Company. 
The provisions of this Section shall be effective only if 
permitted by State Law. 
SECTION 4. The Union shall immediately after the 
execution date of this Agreement furnish the Company 
with a notarized list of its members in good standing as 
of that date and shall thereafter advise the Company at 
monthly intervals of its new members. 
On receipt of written authorization from an employee 
the Company will during the term of this Agreement or 
any extension or renewal thereof deduct from the em- 
ployee’s pay once each calendar month the amount of 
accumulated Union dues at the rate certified to the Com- 
pany by the Union and also such initiation or reinstate- 
ment fees as are authorized during the current month. 
ARTICLE II—HOURS 
SECTION 1. The present working plan of the factory 
shall continue in effect. This plan of work shall be be- 
tween the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily, unless 
on certain operations the regular starting and stopping 
times are earlier or later than those hours, or unless the 
duration of the lunch period is changed by local agree- 
ment confirmed by written memorandum. This plan shall 
apply to all employees not specifically excluded from the 
bargaining unit as defined in Article I, Section 1 of this 
Agreement. 
The work week shall be considered as beginning on 
Monday. All work over eight (8) hours in a day or any 
work performed on Saturday or a holiday, or in hours 
beyond the regular quitting time or before the regular 
14 
starting time for each operation shall be compensated 
the payment of time and one-half the regular rates. "4 
All work performed on a seventh (7th) consecutive 
work day shall be paid at the rate of double time. An 
employee who is not required to work on Sunday 
ull be paid double time for all work he performed that 
y. 
Watchmen whose regular schedule of work includes 
Saturdays or Sundays or more than eight (8) hours per 
day shall receive overtime payments only for those hours 
worked in excess of their regularly scheduled work day 
or in excess of forty (40) hours a week. 
SECTION 2. The Company will not change an em- 
ployee’s working hours im an unreasonable or unnecessary 
manner in order to avoid overtime payment and will not 
permit an employee to begin work before the regular 
starting time or continue work after the regular closing 
time of the other employees on the same work unless 
agreed to by the Foreman and Shop St 
department. are ae 
Where changes in operation or construction require 
same, the Company may change permanently the regular 
hours of work of the employees on any particular opera- 
tion without being required to pay overtime for the hours 
—_ worked before or after the regular factory working 
Qurs. 
Saturday unless notice is given before noon Friday: fur- 
thermore, no employee who has been notified that he wil 
be required to work on Saturday shall be required to work 
beyond his regular quitting time on the preceding day, 
except in a case of extreme emergency, which shall be 
discussed in advance with the Union. 
15 
Maintenance employees may be notified after 12:00 
noon that overtime will be worked when a machine break- 
down occurs which will affect production if not immedi- 
ately repaired. 
Employees who are responsible for loading and un- 
loading trucks may be notified after 12:00 noon that 
overtime will be worked if such overtime is necessitated 
at the end of the employees’ shift by the late arrival of a 
truck. 
When the Company has notified operators of intent to 
work overtime on any regular work day, it may cancel 
such overtime by giving notice not later than one hour 
before the regular quitting time of such employees. Fail- 
ure to give such notice of cancellation within the time 
specified shall entitle the employees involved to one-quarter 
hour’s wage at straight time. 
SECTION 4. All production work performed during 
the hunch period by employees in the bargaining unit shall 
be on a voluntary basis. All such work shall be paid for 
at one and one-half (1%) times regular rates. The lunch 
period may be reduced in duration by local agreement 
confirmed by written memorandum. 
After the regular quitting time of an employee on the 
Friday workday that precedes vacation closedown, all 
overtime shall be on a voluntary basis, except in the case 
of an extreme emergency which same shall be discussed 
by the Company and Union prior to overtime work. 
SECTION 5S. No work in excess of eight (8) hours 
shall be performed on Saturday unless such additional 
work is agreed to by the Union and each operator is 
given the right to refuse same. 
SECTION 6. When it becomes necessary for a re- 
duction in the daily schedule of a factory or reduction 
in working days per week, the Company shall so advise 
16 
the Local Union and, if possible, indicate the probable 
duration of same. 
SECTION 7. When it is necessary for a department or 
segment thereof to work overtime, the Company shall have 
available for such overtime period whatever number of 
experienced back shoe runners as are required to handle 
the production. 
SECTION 8. Rest periods totalling thirty (30) minutes 
per day shall be granted to conveyor line employees. 
Each factory shall be given the option of continuing its 
present schedule of rest periods or establishing a schedule 
consisting of two (2) ten (10)-minute rest periods in 
the forenoon and one (1) ten (10)-minute rest period in 
the afternoon. 
mum of one hour, on the last working day preceding the 
vacation closedown, the day before a holiday, or the last 
working day preceding a weekend which includes a holiday 
on Monday, provided that the Company has taken pre- 
cautions to see that the operations controlling these jobs 
are discontinued in time to normally permit these op- 
erators to finish work at their regularly scheduled time. 
ARTICLE III—HOLIDAYS 
SECTION 1. The Company shall pay eight (8) hours 
compensation for the following unworked holidays: 
Labor Day Monday, Monday, Monday, 
Sept.3,1990 Sept.2,1991 Sept. 7, 1992 
Sunday, Monday, Wednesday, 
Nov. 11,1990 Nov.11,1991 Nov. 11, 1992 
Thanksgiving Thursday, Thursday, Thursday, 
Nov. 22,1990 Nov.28,1991 Nov. 26, 1992 
Veteran's Day 
Seeestine) Nov. 23,1990 Nov.29,1991 Nov. 27, 1992 
Christmas Tuesday, Wednesday, ° 
~ Dec. 25,1990 Dec. 25,1991 Dec 25, 1992 
Before Or Monday, , Thursday 
So ee Dec. 24,1990 Dec.24,1991 Dec. 24, 1992 
Christmas) 
New Year's Day Tuesday, Wednesday Friday 
Jan. 1, 1991 Jan. 1, 1992 Jan. 1, 1998 
Good Friday Friday, Friday, 
March 29,1991 April17,1992 April 9, 1993 
Memoria! Day > - 
May 27,1991 May25,1992 May 31, 1993 
Independence , x Sunday, 
Day July 4, 1991 July 4, 1992 July 4, 1993 
Friday, 
July 3,1992) July 5, 1993) 
Any factory which has multi-shifts will be scheduled 
In order to be eligible to receive such holiday pay, an 
employee hired after August 30, 1986, must have com- 
pleted the probationary period (Article VI, Section 11) 
prior to the occurance of the holiday. 
medical or personal leave of absence at the time a holiday 
occurs shall be paid said holiday benefits providing he has 
ithin the thirty (30) calendar days preceding 
the holiday and returns to work within the thirty (30) 
calendar days subsequent to the holiday. (An employee 
absent from work on the day before or the day after the 
18 
holiday for personal reasons must have been excused by 
the Foreman or suffering from bona fide illness in order 
to be eligible for hotiday benefits. ) 
Employees will not be required to work beyond their 
regular quitting time on the calendar day immediate y 
preceding a holiday. 
SECTION 4. All overtime beyond regular hours on 
the Friday preceding a holiday occurring on Monday, and 
on the Saturday immediately following a holiday occur- 
ring on Friday, will be on a voluntary basis, except for 
those jobs where damage could result to the work in 
process as specifically enumerated under the Hours section 
of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE IV—-WAGES 
SECTION 1. The present wage classifications and 
rate schedules (including sample extras) shall continue 
in effect as the standard wage classifications and wage 
schedules except as hereinafter provided. 
(A) General Increases. Effective January 27, 1991, 
$.20 per hour will be added to the piece and hourly rates, 
with the addition incorporated into piece rates based on 
the line average of the particular job. 
Effective January 26, 1992, an additional $.20 per 
hour will be added to the piece and hourly rates as above. 
Effective January 24, 1993, an additional $.10 per 
hour will be added to the piece and hourly rates as above. 
Effective June 20, 1993, an additional $.10 per hour 
will be added to the piece and hourly rates as above. 
The present $.40 per hour clock card add-on remains 
as an add-on. 
(B) Guaranteed Minimum. The factory guaranteed 
minimum will be the current Federal minimum wage. 
19 
(C) Wage Progression for Hourly Paid Workers. 
Hourly paid workers shall progress from minimum to the 
maximum of the rate range applicable to the job at a rate 
of five (5) cents per hour increase every four (4) weeks 
until the maximum has been reached. This shall not pre- 
vent the Company from paying a higher rate than pro- 
vided in this paragraph if justified by the ability of the 
individual employee. Equal wages shall be paid for equal 
work. 
SECTION 2. If the parties hereto by negotiation de- 
termine that any standard wage classifications or rate 
schedules are incorrect, insufficient or excessive, than such 
wage classifications or rate schedules shall be adjusted 
either by negotiation or arbitration, and the revised wage 
classifications or rate schedules shall become the standard 
wage classifications or wage schedules replacing those 
formerly in effect. In the revision of existing rates on 
regular jobs or the establishment of rates on new jobs, 
the following factors shall be considered: (a) compara- 
tive importance of the job, (b) amount of skill required, 
and (c) time required to attain such skill. 
Such increases shall be retroactive to the date complaint 
was first presented in writing to the Plant Manager. 
SECTION 3. In the event that at any time either the 
Union or the Company feels that changes in the Com- 
pany’s competitive or economic position justifies a differ- 
ent general level of wages in the plant, it may, by written 
notice, signify its desire that all or certain wage classifi- 
cations or rates be changed and the matter then shall be 
negotiated. If, as a result of consideration of such notice, 
it is determined by negotiation or arbitration that any 
or all standard wage classifications or rates should be 
changed, such wage classifications or rates shall be ad- 
justed, and the revised wage classifications or rates shall 
become the standard wage classifications or rates in place 
of those formerly in effect. Payment on a revised basis 
20 
shall start on the date mutually agreed upon, or if a date 
cannot be agreed upon, shall become effective thirty (30) 
days after written notice was served by the complaining 
party that a change was desired. 
SECTION 4. (A) Temporary Transfers to the Ad- 
vantage of the Company. Any employee transferred tem- 
porarily from his regular work to other work for reasons 
which are to the advantage of the Company will be 
guaranteed his hourly average earned on his regular job 
from the time he leaves his regular job until the time he 
returns thereto or the average hourly rate earned during 
the period of his transfer by operators on the job to which 
transferred, whichever is greater; provided that this shall 
apply only to employees who have more than six (6) 
weeks’ experience on the job to which transferred. If 
such experience is lacking, the transferee shall be guaran- 
teed his hourly average from his regular job for all hours 
worked on the temporary assignment. 
Any employee required, for reasons to the advantage 
of the Company, to do work temporarily transferred from 
its regularly assigned position, shall be guaranteed his 
hourly average on his regular job during the period of 
such transfer. 
Wages earned on temporary work shall not be used in 
computing an employee’s three-week average. 
The Company reserves the sole right to select employ- 
ees for temporary transfers. Any employee selected for 
a temporary transfer for Company convenience shall be 
required to perform the work assigned to him. 
(B) Temporary Transfer to the Advantage of the Em- 
ployee. When no work is available on his own job, an 
employee may accept temporary employment on other 
jobs if avaiiable to him, in which cases he shall be paid 
at the piece work rate applicable to the temporary job 
but not less than his personal minimum, whichever is 
21 
greater, for all time spent on such temporary job or be 
permitted to leave the factory. 
SECTION 5. (A) Learning Time. Wage classifica- 
tions and rate schedules on new and changed operations 
shall be established by the Company. During the first one 
hundred twenty (120) hours of work on new or changed 
operations the operator shall be guaranteed his hourly 
rate based on the average obtained from the previous 
three (3) weeks’ earnings. At the end of the one hun- 
dred twenty (120)-hour period the operator shall be paid 
on a piece work basis unless the General Superintendent 
agrees that the one hundred twenty (120)-hour period 
should be extended. 
All job descriptions on all new or changed operations 
shall be shown as soon as issued to the Shop Steward and 
shall be initialed by him. 
When a new job, a new machine, or a new method 
is introduced into the factory and, after a reasonable 
learning period, the operators thereon fail to reach their 
former line average, the Company and Union shall make 
a joint investigation to determine the cause of such 
failure. 
(B) Non-Challengeability of Rates. Any wage schedule 
or formula for computing piece rates on individual pat- 
terns which has been in effect for as much as six (6) 
months may not be challenged by either party. The only 
challenge which may be made is to the correctness of the 
piece rate computed from said schedule or formula. 
However, if the line average of experienced operators 
for four (4) consecutive weeks falls twenty percent 
(20% ) below the line average of the experienced op- 
erators for the previous season, then the fact that the 
rate on a specific pattern was figured from an estab- 
lished schedule shall not be a bar to an arbitration award 
on that specific pattern. 
22 
“Experienced operators” shall mean the operator has 
six (6) months or more experience on the job. 
A clerical error in computing a piece rate from a 
schedule shall be subject to correction whenever dis- 
covered. The corrected rate will become effective on the 
date of correction. 
Erroneous or misapplied rates on patterns may be cor- 
rected by the Company for up to six (6) months after 
being set. If the Company discovers the misapplication 
after that period, it must notify the operators of such 
mistake. If the Company fails to notify operators and a 
new pattern comes in which involves the identical work 
on that operation of the previous pattern, then the old 
erroneous rate must be paid until the pattern is perma- 
nently removed. 
The misapplied rate continues on the original pattern. 
Changes will be made only on a new pattern after proper 
notification. 
(C) Establishment of New Standard Wage Classifica- 
tions. If any new wage classification or rate established 
by the Company and objected to by the Union within 
ninety (90) days after establishment is revised as the 
result of negotiations or arbitration, the revised wage 
classification or rate shall become the standard wage 
classification or rate and payment on the revised basis 
shall become retroactive to the time of the establishment 
of the original basis. 
(D) Issuance and Challenge of Rates. The Foreman of 
each department shall show to the Shop Steward of his 
department all piece rate and hour rate changes and piece 
rates applicable to new patterns and/or method changes 
as soon as he receives same from the factory office. The 
Steward will initial such changes indicating that he has 
been advised of same. 
No rates will be issued to the operators on operations in 
the Pre-Fitting and Fitting Departments on which rates 
23 
are computed from a schedule or formula until issued by 
the Labor Cost Analysis Department. The employee $ 
three-week straigat time average will be paid until rates 
are issued from the Clayton office. 
Fifteen (15) working days must follow the introduc- 
tion of a new pattern or method before a grievance may 
be filed, and at least some work on such pattern or 
method must be performed on each of five (5) days. The 
fifteen (15)-day period will be extended until work has 
been scheduled on the fifth day, after which a grievance 
may properly be filed. 
Whenever the accuracy of a rate is questioned by the 
operators within six (6) months of the time it was issued, 
and such rate is found to be in error, then backpay will 
be made, where applicable, from the date the pattern 
entered production or the rate was set, whichever is the 
later, and such backpay will be made regardless of 
whether a grievance was filed questioning the rate. 
SECTION 6. Reporting Time. Each time an employee 
is required or permitted to report for work during any day, 
such employee shall be given at least two (2) hours em- 
ployment or paid for same at his average hourly rate 
provided he remains in the plant for at least two ( 2) 
hours and is available for work unless excused. This 
provision shall not apply when work is unavailable because 
of work stoppage, general power failure, cyclone or other 
conditions beyond the control of the Company. 
For overtime work on Saturday, if reporting time must 
be paid, it will be at the rate of time-and-one-half. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the foregoing, an em- 
ployee who is called to work at the regular starting time 
of the factory shall be guaranteed his hourly rate for the 
first two (2) hours of waiting time. If he is required to 
wait for the first two (2) hours of work, he shal be paid 
at his average for the entire two (2)-hour period. In the 
event, however, that work reaches him before the expira- 
tion of the first two (2) hours, he shall be paid for the 
24 
full amount of time intervening between the regular start- 
ing time of the factory and the time work reaches him. 
Where work is available at the regular starting time but 
its flow through a given operation ceases within the first 
two (2)-hour period, the reporting time guarantee will be 
superseded by the waiting time provisions of this contract. 
When an employee has completed all the work before 
him or can see that he will be completely out of work by 
12:00 noon, he shall not later than 11:45 a.m. so advise 
his Foreman or supervisor. Under such circumstances, 
unless the employee is told that he is not to report at his 
regular starting time that afternoon, the Company agrees 
that it will guarantee him two (2} hours of work or pay 
for same during the afternoon shift. 
An employee who wishes to return to work after ab- 
sence caused by illness or other personal reason shall be 
required to notify his Foreman not later than 3:00 p.m. of 
the day preceding his intended return to work. Failure to 
give such notice shall deprive the employee of the right 
to employment on the day of his return unless such im- 
mediate employment is for the convenience of the Fore- 
man. The foregoing shall not apply when the absence 
is for only one (1) day or less. 
SECTION 7. Experimental Operations. Operators shall 
be paid their average when the Company is experimenting 
or when new patterns are introduced until the piece rate 
thereon has been established. The hourly average will 
be paid in either case for all time spent on that particular 
work. Such guaranteed payments shall be approved by 
the Foreman at the end of each day. 
SECTION 8. Learning Time Payment to Promoted 
Employees. Promoted employees while learning new op- 
erations shall be guaranteed one hundred percent (100% ) 
of the hourly average on the job from which they trans- 
ferred. This guarantee shall be effective for the first one 
hundred twenty (120) hours that the employee is on the 
new job. 
25 
SECTION 9. Machine Breakdown Payments. In the 
event an operator is compelled to be without work longer 
than a total of thirty (30) minutes because of machine 
breakdown, he shall be paid his hourly average for all 
succeeding time during that particular day which results 
from machine failure. The thirty (30) minutes’ waiting 
time shall begin from the time the employee notifies his 
Foreman. At the end of the thirty (30)-minute period, 
the operator shall have the option of remaining on the job 
without guaranteed wages or of leaving the plant. In the 
event an operator is authorized by his Foreman to do 
work on his own machine ordinarily done by the plant or 
department machinist, he shall be paid his average hourly 
rate for such work. 
The Foreman shall keep a written record of all time the 
employee reports he is out of work pursuant to the pro- 
visions of this Section. 
SECTION 10. Waiting Time Payments. If during the 
forenoon an operator is required to be without work for 
more than twenty (20) minutes consecutively, he shall be 
paid at his hourly average for waiting time beyond the 
twenty (20) minutes of the first occurrence, or be per- 
mitted to leave the factory. The twenty (20) minute 
period shall be computed from the time the employee re- 
ports to his Foreman that he is without work. If the 
Foreman is not on the floor, it will be considered valid 
notice if the employee notifies the Assistant Foreman, or 
in the case of the Fitting Room, the Floor Lady of the 
section, that there was no work available, and the Assist- 
ants will be responsible for advising the Foreman that 
such a report had been made by the employee as soon as 
possible. (In the event there has been a twenty (20) 
minute waiting period, all subsequent waiting time in the 
forenoon shall be paid for on a cumulative basis.) 
The foregoing procedure shall apply in like manner to 
all work performed after noon of any day. In order to be 
eligible for compensation, an operator must report to his 
26 
Foreman not only at the time he finds he is without work, 
but also after his required waiting period has elapsed. 
Whenever the total “down time” on a conveyor line, 
exclusive of regularly scheduled rest periods, exceeds 
forty-five (45) minutes per day, each employee working 
on said line shall be paid at his hourly average for all 
“down time” in excess of the aforesaid forty-five (45) 
minutes. 
Layoffs shall not be made nor any employee sent home 
on the basis of seniority. No waiting time shall begin and 
no operator shall be sent home as long as there is any 
work ahead of any operator on the particular job. Either 
all or no employees shall be sent home or paid their 
average hourly earnings in the event there is a stoppage in 
the flow of work to their operation. When an operator 
reports he is out of work, the Foreman shall decide at the 
expiration of the required waiting period whether the em- 
ployee shall be sent home or kept on the job. 
The Foreman shall keep a written record of all time 
the employee reports he is out of work pursuant to the 
provisions of this Section. 
SECTION 11. Payment for Attending Company Meet- 
ings. Whenever an employee shall lose time from work 
as the result of a meeting called by the Company, he shall 
be paid at his hourly average for such lost time. This 
provision shall not apply to time spent by an employee 
in the presentation of grievances to the Company. 
SECTION 12. Payment for Jury Service. Employees 
called for jury service shall be reimbursed by the Com- 
pany for the difference between any fees received for said 
service and the earnings they would have received had 
they been available for work. Reimbursement shall cover 
time spent in service and in the collection of fees for said 
service. Employees are expected to work full time when 
not actually in court or doing something in connection 
with such service. 
27 
SECTION 13. Payment for Service at Elections or 
Registrations. Employees called for service as judges, 
clerks or deputies at elections and registrations will be 
paid by the Company whatever sum, if any, in addition 
to the money they receive for that service which is neces- 
sary so that there will be no loss of earnings because of 
such service. 
SECTION 14. Bereavement Pay. In case of death in 
the immediate family, as defined, employees will be paid 
twenty-four (24) hours’ pay at their regular rate of pay, 
exclusive of overtime, and will be allowed time off not 
to exceed twenty-four (24) scheduled hours. An em- 
ployee may, where necessary, take additional time at his 
own expense. 
An employee who must be absent from the factory to 
care for a dying relative in the immediate family, shall be 
paid the Bereavement Pay specified in this Section. 
No such payment shall be paid for any period which 
occurs while an employee is on layoff, or on personal or 
medical leave of absence or for any time for which the 
employee received vacation benefits. 
“Immediate family” as used in the foregoing, is de- 
fined as “spouse, child, parent (or, in the alternative, 
step-parents if the employee was raised in that house- 
hold), brother or sister, parents-in-law, and grandparents” 
who have been in loco parentis to an employee. 
SECTION 15. Payment for Serving at Military Fu- 
neral. Any employee, a member of a military organiza- 
tion, who is requested to serve as a member of an honor 
guard at a military funeral shall be compensated for ac- 
tual time lost while serving in such capacity. 
SECTION 16. Shift Premium. All production worked 
performed on a second shift shall be subject to a premium 
of seven and a half cents ($.075) per hour and such work 
performed on a third or fourth shift subject to a premium 
of ten cents ($.10) per hour. 
28 
SECTION 17 Power Failure. In the event of an out- 
side power failure, the Company will require the opera- 
tors to remain in the factory no longer than forty-five 
minutes. 
In the event of a power failure in the plant, the Com- 
pany will mark the “104 Records” of the operators in- 
volved to indicate the duration of the power failure so 
that if the operator’s average will be used for some 
purpose, such time will be deducted for the purpose of 
computing the individual's average. 
SECTION 18. Payment to Injured Employee. Wf an 
employee is injured in the factory and is required by the 
First Aid Attendant to report directly to a hospital or 
doctor’s office outside the factory for treatment, then 
such time as the employee is absent from his job during 
that day will be paid for by the Company at his average 
if he promptly returns on that day to the factory from 
the doctor’s office or hospital after such treatment. 
SECTION 19. Operators Authorized to Train Employ- 
ees. Operators will be guaranteed their average when 
they are authorized to train other employees if the train- 
ing involves other than observation. 
ARTICLE V—VACATIONS 
SECTION 1. Vacation Period: 
(A) The Company shall grant time off for a summer 
vacation period to all eligible employees as follows: 
1991: June 28, July 1, 2, 3, and 5 
1992: June 26, 29, 30, July 1, and 2 
1993: July 2, 6, 7, 8, and 9 
(B) The Company shall grani time off for a winter 
vacation period to all eligible employees as follows: 
1990: December 21, 26, 27, 28, and 31 
199]: December 23, 26, 27, 30, and 31 
1992: December 23, 28, 29, 30, and 31 
1993: December 22, 27, 28, 29, and 30 
29 
(C) Time off during the summer and winter vacation 
periods will be granted unless special provisions for a 
vacation period exist at a specific facility. 
SECTION 2. Eligibility Requirements, Vacation En- 
titlement, and Payments: (A) Vacation Eligibility: To 
be eligible for vacation payment in any calendar year, an 
employee must have completed one year of employment 
and must have performed 500 hours of compensated serv- 
ice during the calendar year in which the vacation falls. 
(B) Vacation Entitlement: Employees who have met 
the length of employment requirement and who have per- 
formed the 500 hours compensated service required for 
vacation eligibilty shall be entitled to vacation payment 
according the following schedule: 
1. Employees who complete one year’s employment 
shall be entitled to one week's vacation pay during that 
calendar year and thereafter. 
2. Upon completing four years’ employment, em- 
ployees shall be entitled to a second week’s vacation pay 
during that calendar year and thereafter. 
3. Upon completing ten years’ employment, employees 
shall be entitled to a third week's vacation pay during that 
calendar year and thereafter. 
4. Upon completing twenty years’ employment, em- 
ployees shall be entitled to a fourth week’s vacation pay 
during that calendar year and thereafter. 
(C) Vacation Payment: 
1. Employees who are entitled to vacation pay at the 
time of the summer vacation period shall be paid all of 
their vacation pay at that time, except that employees en- 
titled to a second, third, or fourth week may elect instead 
to be paid for those weeks, or some of them, at the time of 
the winter vacation, or at the time taken off, by making 
written request for such payment to the Office Manager 
30 
at least ten working days befote the start of the summer 
vacation period. 
2. Employees not eligible for vacation payment at the 
time of the summer vacation period wil receive vacation 
payment due at the time of winter vacation if they have 
become eligible at that time. 
3. Employees not eligible for vacation payment solely 
due to their failure to fulfill the 500 hours of service re- 
quirement at the summer vacation period will receive their 
vacation payment at the next regular pay period after 
they do meet the 500 hours requirement, if requested by 
them. 
4. Eligible employees, whose anniversary date occurs 
after payment is made at the winter vacation, will receive 
their vacation payment at the next regular pay period. 
SECTION 3. Vacation Benefits for Inductee into Mil- 
itary Service: In the event any employee otherwise eligi- 
ble to receive a vacation with pay during the calendar 
year is inducted into military service before vacation com- 
pensation for which he is eligible has been paid to him, 
he shall receive, at the time of his induction, the vaca- 
tion payment due in lieu of vacation time off. A former 
employee of the company returning to work after service 
in the Armed Forces shall receive vacation benefits due 
for the calendar year of his return without regard to 
hours of actual service performed during that calendar 
year and with the understanding that time spent in mili- 
tary service shall be added to accumulated company ser- 
vice for the purpose of determining vacation entitlement. 
SECTION 4. Vacation Benefits for Employees Sep- 
arated from the Payroll for Various Reasons: 
(A) An employee who resigns, is laid off permanently, 
or is discharged, shall receive at the time of his separa- 
tion, payment in lieu of vacation commensurate with his 
length of service for the calendar year in which his sep- 
31 
aration occurred, only if he has completed at least 500 
hour of active service during that calendar year. 
(B) Employees who are temporarily laid off or on 
leave of absence shall be paid their entire vacation entitle- 
ment at the time of the first vacation period after the 
they —_ 
specified in 2(A). Such employees who are not eligible 
for vacation at the time of the summer vacation period 
may become eligible for vacation payment, or, in the 
case of those who would reach their 4th, 10th, or 20th 
year of service, for an additional week's vacation pay- 
(C) An employee who retires under the Negotiated 
Pension Plan, and is qualified to receive immediate bene- 
fits therefore, shall receive vacation pay for the calendar 
year in which the retirement takes place, in accordance 
with his length of service at the time of his retirement 
without regard to the number of hours of service in the 
new calendar year. 
SECTION 5. Method of Computing Vacation Benefits. 
32 
of the fifty-two (52) weeks and the composite average 
for the year shall be posted prior to computation of vaca- 
tion benefits. In computing the average work week, any 
week in which the plant was closed for the observance of 
a national holiday shall be considered as a forty (40)- 
hour week. 
The amount of benefits for each worker shall not be 
less than forty (40) hours’ pay for those entitled to one 
(1) week’s vacation, nor more than forty-eight (48) 
hours’ pay, regardless of the average hours worked by 
the factory during the preceding year. 
Vacation pay for employees entitled to two (2) weeks’ 
benefits shall be determined by multiplying the one (1) 
week's benefits by two (2); and vacation pay for the 
employees entitled to three (3) weeks’ benefits shall be 
determined by multiplying the one (1) week's benefits by 
three (3): and vacation pay for employees entitled to 
four (4) weeks’ benefits shall be determined by multiply- 
ing the one (1) week’s benefits by four (4). 
33 
Vacation benefits shall be paid to hourly workers as 
well as piece workers, based on earnings during the three 
(3) weeks’ period used for the computation of individual 
averages. 
ARTICLE VI—SENIORITY 
SECTION 1. Transfers Within a Department. When 
an operator is transferred within a department to another 
operation or job within that department on which he has 
no previous experience, his seniority on his new job be- 
gins the date of the transfer. His seniority on any former 
job or jobs is still ia effect. No employee shall be per- 
mitted to acquire additional listing on his seniority card 
because of any reason other than promotion or bidding. 
SECTION 2. Transfer Between Departments. When 
an operator is transferred to another department, his sen- 
iority in the new department begins on the date of trans- 
fer; his seniority in the old department is lost unless he is 
called back to his old operation by the Foreman, said 
transfer to be agreeable to both the Company and Union. 
The above provision has no effect on transfers made prior 
to the date of this Agreement. 
The foregoing shall not apply in the case of an em- 
ployee who follows a machine which has been transferred 
from one department to another. In such cases the em- 
ployee shall retain full seniority rights in his former 
department as long as he continues to work on the trans- 
ferred operation. However, upon completion of one (1) 
year’s service in the new department, the employee's date 
of entrance to his former department shall be established 
as his seniority date in the new department, except that 
in the event the employee shall at any time within the 
year following the transfer bid off the transferred ma- 
chine and or operation, he shall immediately forfeit all 
rights to have his service in the former department added 
to his length of service in the new department. In such 
case he will be permitted to retain seniority rights in his 
34 
former department for one (1) year following his trans- 
fer therefrom but his seniority in the new department 
will date only from his entrance thereto. 
Whenever an operation is transferred from one depart- 
ment to a second department, and the employee on the 
operation transfers to follow his job, such employee can- 
not be replaced by another from within the second depart- 
ment, using the layoff provisions of this Agreement, for 
a period of one year from date of transfer as long as he 
remains on the transferred job. 
SECTION 3. Promotion to Positions Not Included in 
the Bargaining Unit. Any employee promoted to a posi- 
tion excluded from the bargaining unit shall retain in- 
definitely all seniority rights so long as he occupies such 
status in the factory where such rights originated. Such 
employee shall not retain any rights to a specific machine. 
In the event an employee is transferred as an Assistant 
Foreman, Instructor or Foreman Trainee to another of 
the Company's factories, retention of seniority shall be 
limited to eighteen months beginning with the date of 
transfer. 
Any employee promoted to the status of Foreman in 
any of the Company's factories shall retain all seniority 
rights in this factory only for a period of one (1) year 
beginning with the date he assumes the duties of his new 
position. 
If the employee should be demoted by the Company 
while he has the seniority rights mentioned above, he 
shall return to the job he formerly held and will be ac- 
corded all seniority rights on that job and in that depart- 
ment as if he had never been promoted. Such employee 
shall not retain any rights to a specific machine. 
The Company shall notify the Union whenever it in- 
tends to change the status of any employee covered by 
the foregoing and shall give the date when such changed 
Status is to be assumed. 
35 
SECTION 4. Loss of Seniority—Other Employment. 
When an employee leaves the service of the Company for 
the purpose of accepting other employment, he shall lose 
all of his previous seniority. 
An employee shall lose seniority if he is away from 
the factory for eighteen (18) consecutive months. 
SECTION 5. Preferential List: 
(A) Definition and General Provisions. An employee 
laid off because of slack work on his particular operation 
or operations shall not lose his seniority on these opera- 
tions but shall be entitled to be placed on the Preferential 
List of his department for a period not to exceed eighteen 
(18) months. If at any time a vacancy occurs within the 
department and it is not filled by bids within the depart- 
ment, said job shall be offered to employees on the Prefer- 
ential List in order of their senority ratings, subject to 
the restriction that no employee shall have the right to be 
placed on the Preferential List until he has completed 
ninety (90) days’ service in the particular department. 
Any individual laid off because of lack of work on his 
regular operation and because of said reason forced to 
leave the factory shall, if he is interested in being notified 
of any subsequent job opening, sign his name on a list to 
be posted in his own department and indicate thereon the 
date of his layoff. In the event a job vacancy occurs in 
his department, the Shop Steward of said department shall, 
where warranted, advise the laid off employee in sufficient 
time to permit him to bid on said job vacancy. 
A master list will be posted in the foyer of the factory. 
On this list each employee who is laid off will sign his 
name indicating thereon his factory seniority date. If a 
job opening occurs and is not filled by employees within 
the department in which it originates, the Company shall 
by reference to the aforesaid master list call the oldest 
employees in point of factory seniority and offer said job 
to them. 
36 
(B) Procedures. An employee on indefinite layoff from 
his regular job has the right to sign the Preferential List 
and/or bid on any vacant job within the factory. 
When such employee bids on a vacant job, his average 
for purposes of the award is zero. He shall be entitled to 
a trial period of 40 hours and may advise his Foreman 
at the end of any day that he is rejecting the job and will 
return to layoff status. 
An employee who signs the bid for the new job, and 
successfully complete the trial period, shall acquire sen- 
iority on the new job immediately. His department senior- 
ity will be in accordance with the seniority provision of 
this article relating to transfers across department lines. 
If the employee elects not to sign the bid, he acquires 
no seniority on the new job and may be later displaced 
by a probationary operator working toward his seniority 
in the department. 
SECTION 6. Seniority of Employee Fulfilling Re- 
quired Military Service. The provisions of the Veterans 
Reemployment Act are hereby incorporated into and 
made part of this Agreement. The regulations and inter- 
pretations of the governmental agency charged with the 
administration of said Act shall also be incorporated into 
and made part of this Agreement. All questions of re- 
gaining seniority relating to employees covered by said 
Act shall be determined in accordance with the wording 
of said Act and the administrative regulations pertaining 
thereto. In case of replacements necessitated by regular 
employees being called for military service or enlisting 
for such service, the Company shall advise such replace- 
ments at the time of their hiring that their tenure of em- 
ployment is of a temporary nature. 
SECTION 7. Required Notification of Absence. An 
employee who is absent for any cause shall be required to 
give notification to the Company as soon as possible but 
no later than 9:00 a.m. on the first day of absence, stat- 
37 
ing the reason for said absence and its probable duration. 
The Company shall waive the foregoing in any case where 
it was impossible for the employee to give such notice 
within the time specified. 
If at the end of the third day of absence no report has 
been received by the Company, the absentee will be pre- 
sumed to have quit without notice and will be replaced. 
SECTION 8. Seniority Lists and Notification of Job 
Changes. The Company and Union shall develop plans 
whereby employees may readily determine the status of 
their seniority. 
A departmental seniority list shall be posted in each 
department and revised by the Company on June Ist and 
December Ist of each year. 
Whenever an employee changes jobs, a copy of the 
Payroll Change recording such change will be given to 
the Union and the employee who shall initial same and 
shall be kept in the employee’s permanent record. The 
Company shall give to the Secretary of the Local Union 
at the beginning of each week a report indicating all em- 
ployee entrances, exits and job changes which have oc- 
curred during the preceding week. 
SECTION 9. Job Bidding. \n case a new job is 
created or a vacancy occurs, it shall be posted and ad- 
vertised as open for bids; the oldest operator by seniority 
within the department shall have the first choice of bid- 
ding on same. Operators bidding for jobs in this manner 
will be allowed to have an unlimited number of jobs listed 
on their cards. If there are no eligible bidders in the 
department where the vacancy occurs, bids shall be posted 
in other departments. Eligibility of such employees of 
other departments to bid, however, shall be limited to 
those who have had at least two (2) years of service in 
their present department. 
When a job vacancy occurs within a department, it 
shall remain posted for a period of sixteen (16) working 
hours. 
38 
Further, at the same time a job vacancy is posted in 
the department where it occurs, a similar notice shall be 
posted in the factory_lobby inviting employees of other 
departments to enter bids, which would be considered on 
the basis of factory seniority in the event the opening is 
not filled by an employee having seniority in the depart- 
ment of origin. The department and lobby announce- 
ments shall be removed simultaneously at the end of six- 
teen (16) working hours. 
Any other openings resulting from bids on the original 
opening shall remain posted for eight (8) working hours 
with the understanding they shall not be removed before 
8:00 a.m. of the day following the posting. 
The Company reserves the right to challenge the phys- 
ical fitness of any bidder or to show cause why his pro- 
motion would materially decrease production of the fac- 
tory. In such instances the Company and Union shall 
endeavor to agree upon a proper solution for the particu- 
lar problem. 
Promotion shal! be denied an empioyee, regardless of 
his seniority, if (a) in the past year he has had excessive 
unexcused absence, or (b) in the past six (6) months 
he has had excessive reprimands for poor work as com- 
pared with other employees on his job. 
An employee bidding on a job vacancy if successful 
shall be assigned to said job within two (2) weeks fol- 
lowing the closing of the bid unless it is agreed by the 
Company and Union that to do so would seriously im- 
pair the production of the factory. In all events, the job 
seniority of a successful bidder shall begin as of the date 
the job was awarded to him. 
In filling a job vacancy which has been posted for bid, 
the first two bidders listed who actually work on the job 
will be permitted not more than forty (40) hours each 
in which to decide whether they wish to remain on the 
job or not, and if neither accepts, then the balance of 
. 
. 
39 
those listed will be offered the job, in order of seniority, 
without the right to the trial period, until an operator ac- 
cepts or is selected from some other source. 
A successful bidder on a job vacancy entitled to the 40- 
hour trial period as stated above shall be permitted not 
more than forty (40) hours in which to decide whether 
he wishes to remain on the new job. If he fails to express 
his desire to return to his former job within the time 
specified, he shall not be permitted to do so at a subse- 
quent date unless he is laid off of work on the new job 
as a result of his lack of seniority thereon. 
Furthermore, he shall be permitted only two (2) re- 
jections in a period of one (1) year of jobs on which he 
has been a successful bidder. (This shall apply only when 
the bid is on an established job which produces average 
earnings above the factory minimum in effect at the time. ) 
It is further understood that if an employee is moved for 
Company convenience before he has completed his forty 
(40)-hour trial period, he shall begin a new said trial 
period each time he returns to the new job. 
SECTION 10. Eligibility Requirements for Permanent 
Job Transfer. No employee shall be permitted to bid on 
a job of equal or less status than his regular job. In de- 
termining the eligibility of an employee to bid on a job, 
the comparative status of the jobs shall be based upon the 
line average of the bidder’s job and the line average of 
the job on which the bid is entered. This provision shall 
not, in the absence of agreement between the Company 
and Union, replace any existing eligibility determination 
based upon job ratings, and it may be waived by action 
of both the Company and Union if it is apparent the 
health of the bidder necessitates a change of work. 
SECTION 11. Probationary Operators. New employ- 
ees shall be considered as probationers without seniority 
rights until they have received a total of thirteen (13) 
pay checks during the period of their first twenty-six (26) 
weeks of employment, and thereafter their seniority shall 
40 
begin with the date of employment. Probationers shall 
have no right to bid on a job vacancy; however, in the 
event a vacancy on another job occurs and there has been 
no bid thereon, the Foreman shall have the right to move 
a probationer or hire help outside the factory as he may 
see fit. 
A probationary operator may be laid off or dismissed 
during his trial period. The Company’s action with re- 
spect to such probationary employees shall not be subject 
to the grievance and arbitration procedure of this Agree- 
ment. 
When an employee completes his probationary period, 
he will be credited with seniority only on the job on 
which he is employed at that time, with seniority dating 
from his first day of employment on said job. In the 
event, however, that the probationer is transferred tem- 
porarily from the job for which he was originally hired 
and is working on the temporary job at the time his pro- 
bationary period ends, he will be credited with seniority 
on the job on which he was working before the temporary 
transfer took place. 
SECTION 12. Limitation on Number of Bids AI- 
lowed. Any regular operator (one who has completed his 
probationary period) shall be restricted to a maximum of 
one (1) bid during any period of one hundred twenty 
(120) consecutive days; provided, however, that should 
an operator be required to transfer back to a job on 
which he has seniority because work on his regular job 
has been eliminated, the foregoing restrictions on bidding 
shall not apply. 
SECTION 13. Required Return to Higher-Rated Job. 
When a operator bids on a higher-rated job and gains 
seniority thereon and is subsequently, because of lack of 
work, forced to return to his former job, he shall be 
required to return to the higher-rated job when an open- 
ing occurs thereon. (This shall mean that not less than 
four (4) hours’ work is available.) His refusal to do so 
41 
shall result in forfeiture of seniority on said higher-rated 
job unless his average is higher than that of the line on 
the higher-rated job. 
Whenever a job has been filled, the successful bidder 
and the Union shall be notified. 
SECTION 14. Help-Out Operators. Operators may be 
used for half-day or less to help out on any job. If more 
time is needed, the Foreman shall call in help as needed 
to take care of work by recognizing class and seniority 
rights. Before anyone shall have rights on any job at any 
time, he must be experienced on the job and be able to 
take care of his part of the work. 
When an operator is added temporarily to a job in 
order to get the required production through said opera- 
tion, it is understood he shall be removed immediately 
therefrom when it becomes apparent the regular operators 
can handle the normal flow of work on hourly basis with- 
out working overtime. 
SECTION 15. Assigning Pick-up Work. In assigning 
pick-up work, the Company shall offer it to the operator 
in that department who (1) otherwise would be forced 
to leave the factory for lack of work, (2) has the greatest 
department seniority among employees who have com- 
pleted work for the day on their own jobs, and (3) is 
experienced (where experience is required) on said pick- 
up work; provided that the foregoing shall not apply 
where the pick-up work has in the past or on the day in 
question been given as a regular practice to part-time 
employees. 
SECTION 16. Filling Final Inspect Vacancies. The 
Company shall have the sole right, regardless of seniority, 
to select employees to fill vacancies occurring on the job 
of Final Inspect (Packing Department). This shall ap- 
ply only when such job is a full-time job and is not com- 
bined with another job in the department. Any employee 
42 
thus selected by the Company shall retain all seniority 
rights in a former department for one (1) year. Em- 
ployee desiring consideration for such a job shall so ad- 
vise the Company. 
SECTION 17. Filling Trial and Sample Runner Va- 
cancies. Any vacancy on jobs of trial and/or sample 
runner shall be filled at the discretion of the Company 
without being posted for bids. Employees desiring con- 
sideration for such jobs shall so advise their Foreman. This 
provision shall not prevent the displacement of anyone 
of these jobs in the event he has the least seniority in the 
department. 
SECTION 18. Layoff and Return during Workday. 
When an employee has been laid off at any time during 
the workday and has been told he is to report later during 
that day, the exact time for his return shall be specified 
by the Company. 
SECTION 19. Equal Sharing of Work Types on Job. 
A new operator may be assigned appropriate work during 
his training period. As soon as an operator has suffi- 
cient experience, he shall be required to share with all 
other operators each and every type of work on his op- 
eration. Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
limit factory management, the Local Union and the 
Regional Union Office from agreeing to phase certain 
operations. 
SECTION 20. Bumping to Different Machine. When 
an employee has lost as much as two (2) days of work 
as the result of a breakdown of his machine, he shall be 
permitted to move to the machine occupied by the oper- 
ator holding the least job seniority on his particular 
operation. 
SECTION 21. Retraction of Notice of Intent to Quit. 
When an employee advises his supervisor of his intent to 
43 
quit, he shall have until 7:00 a.m. on the third day fol- 
lowing the date on which notice was given in which to 
retract said notice. The Foreman, Shop Steward and em- 
ployee shall sign a notice of intent to quit. The Foreman, 
Shop Steward and employee shall sign a notice that in- 
tent to quit has been retracted. However, if an employee 
actually does quit, he shall not be given this period in 
which to retract his notice. 
SECTION 22. Filling Conveyor Line Utility Job Va- 
cancy. Any vacancy on the utility job of a conveyor line 
shall be filled at the sole discretion of the Company. Any 
employee thus selected by the Company shall retain all 
seniority rights in his former department for one (') 
year. Any employee desiring consideration for such a 
job should so advise the Company. 
SECTION 23. Filling Set-Up or Maintenance Depart. 
ment Vacancies. Whenever a vacancy for Set-Up or 
Maintenance Department Operations occurs, the Com- 
pany shall post a notice to that effect, allowing employees 
to sign such list indicating their interest in being selected 
for the opening. The Company shall have the right to 
select the person to fill such opening or go to the outside 
to fill such vacancy. 
ARTICLE VII—LAYOFF 
SECTION 1. Layoffs and Bumping Rights. When be- 
cause of a slack schedule it becomes necessary to curtail 
work in a department, the following procedure shall be 
followed for each operation: (A) when there are five (5) 
operators or less and one (1) part-time operator is needed, 
the operator having the least seniority will work part-time, 
(B) where there are six (6) or more operators on a job 
requiring a part-time operator, the reduction in work will 
be divided between all of the operators on that job; (C) 
any operator not needed at all shall be laid off. 
In the event it becomes necessary to reduce the force, 
each employee affected by the force reduction shall have 
A ee ae ee 
ator declines this job, he shall be 
Preferential List. = Ge 
SECTION 2. Return to Work After Layoff. An em- 
ployee who has been on layoff for two weeks or less, 
when called back to work, shall report to his Foreman 
within 24 hours of receipt of notice unless he has a 
é been laid off indefi- 
nitely, he shall report to his Foreman within three (3) 
45 
days from the date of receipt of notice of recall or for- 
feit his seniority. When an employee leaves the city, he 
shall leave the factory Office manager his forwarding 
address 
SECTION 3. Permanent Discontinuance of Job. 
(A) Whenever employees are displaced as the result 
of a change in operation or method of construction, the 
Company and Union will confer and seek agreement on 
method to be used in rehabilitating the workers who are 
thus affected. 
Whenever jobs are to be combined in a department, the 
Company will first discuss with the Union as to which 
operators and operations will be involved. 
(B) When a job is being discontinued and is being 
replaced in whole or in part by another operation, the 
displaced employees shall have primary rights, without 
bidding, on the new operation. Only in the event a dis- 
placed employee refused employment on the new opera- 
tion shall the vacancy be posted and bids solicited thereon. 
(1) The number of such affected employees shall 
be determined; 
(2) The youngest employees (in department senior- 
ity) to a number corresponding to (1) shall be 
determined and their jobs listed; 
(3) The employees listed in (1) shall in order of 
departmental seniority be given choice of the 
jobs set forth in (2) or be given the right to go 
(C) Any employee laid off because of the discontinu- 
ance of his job shall be expected to exercise whatever 
seniority or bi ing right he may have on other jobs 
46 
within his own department. In the event the employee 
has no such rights within his own department, he shall 
be permitted to bid on a job in another department and 
shall be given full rights to said job in the event the only 
bidders thereon are temporary or probationary employees, 
or in the event there are no bidders from the department 
wherein the vacancy occurs. 
The foregoing shall in no way amend or alter the pro- 
visions of Section 2 of the Seniority Article concerning 
transfers across department lines. It is, however, under- 
stood that should there be a reinstatement of a discon- 
tinued job, employees formerly employed thereon shall be 
required to return thereto, at which time all former job 
and department seniority shall be restored to them. Their 
seniority in the last department shall be suspended and 
may be exercised only in the event the reinstated job 
were to be subsequently eliminated. 
SECTION 4. Service Record. \f an employee's job 
is eliminated, or he is laid off for lack of work or closing 
of the factory, and obtains permission to transfer to an- 
other one of the Company's facilities, shall retain elig- 
ibility for vacation and retirement benefits without break 
in Company service provided (a) the employee has not 
rejected employment within his own factory on a job on 
which he holds seniority, and (b) the transfer to the new 
factory is completed within one (1) year following the 
elimination of his job. 
ARTICLE VIII—LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
SECTION 1. A leave of absence without pay may be 
granted to an employee, but only upon the joint written 
approval of both the Union and the Company. Any em- 
ployee overstaying an authorized leave of absence will be 
subject to such disciplinary action as the Company may 
determine, including termination. 
47 
SECTION 2. An authorized leave of absence shall 
be without pay and shall include and be limited to the 
following: 
(A) A leave of absence other than medical not to 
exceed thirty (30) days; extension of such leaves may be 
granted in weekly intervals with a valid reason satisfac- 
tory to the Company. 
(B) Medical Leave of Absence. 
men For any employee who has completed the proba- 
tionary period, an initial medical leave of absence in any 
wit Sc teghnn yns  p (30 days) may 
be granted upon written request accompanied by a phy- 
sician’s statement. The leave shall begin on the date speci- 
fied by the employee's physician or by Company determi- 
nation in the absence of a doctor’s statement. An em- 
ployee may request extensions of medical leave in any 
weekly increment up to an additional 4 weeks (30 days) 
upon additional written request accompanied by a phy- 
sician’s statement. The Company may require substantia- 
tion for all such requests by a physician selected by the 
Company. The burden of proof for all leaves is upon the 
employee. Once such a medical leave has been granted, 
the employee has the right to return to his same job 
or exercise his seniority rights in the event his former 
job has been eliminated in his absence. 
In the case of pregnancy, the above sick leave rules 
apply. It is understood that for normal childbirth, the 
disability period approximates six weeks after delivery, 
and medical leave should terminate at that time unless 
there are complications associated with the childbirth re- 
quiring additional medical leave. Additional time off, if 
granted, to spend with the child will be considered other 
than a medical leave of absence. 
An employee returning from a leave under this para- 
graph must notify the Company by 3:00 p.m. the day 
prior to his return. 
48 
(2) Protracte. Convalescence. In the event an em- 
ployee has been out on a medical leave of absence for 
eighteen (18) months, his seniority will terminate at that 
time and his seniority may be regained only in the event 
that: 
(a) the employee’s length of service in the factory 
exceeds the amount of time on leave 
(b) no more than five years’ time has elapsed from 
the date of the original medical leave of absence 
(3) Reinstatement After Medical Leave of Absence 
Exceeding Eighteen Months. Upon being certified phys- 
ically and mentally able to return to his former job by 
his personal physician, as may be confirmed by a physi- 
cian appointed by the Company, the employee shall be 
reinstated to his job if: 
(a) he is capable of doing the job satisfactorily; 
(b) he would have retained the job if he had not 
been on leave 
(c) the job still exists. 
If these conditions are not met, then placement depends 
on his seniority rights as provided in this Article. 
(C) Whenever a leave of absence is expected to con- 
tinue beyond thirty (30) days, the job thus vacated shall 
be posted for bids. The replacement operator shall be 
granted seniority rights to such job. In the event the 
original operator returns to claim his job, the replacement 
operator shall retain the seniority rights thus acquired 
for later exercise should a vacancy occur. 
(D) If the employee fails to report to work at the 
end of his leave of absence, or he accepts other employ- 
ment, then he will be automatically terminated. 
(E) A leave of absence to serve as an official of the 
Union for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months. 
49 
(F) If any employee obtains an authorized leave of 
absence by fraud, then such employee may be discharged 
from employment by the Company. 
(G) An employee whose reason for the leave of ab- 
sence ceases to exist before the end of the official leave 
must return to work and must notify the factory at least 
three days prior to his return. 
ARTICLE IX—HEALTH INSURANCE 
1. The Health and Welfare Plan agreed upon by the 
Parties shall continue in full force and effect for the dura- 
tion of the contract except for the following amendments: 
(A) Weekly Indemnity Benefits: Effective November 
1, 1990, the “Sick and Accident” weekly benefit shall be 
increased to $80.00 per week for up to 15 weeks. Effec- 
tive November 1, 1991, the weekly benefit shall be in- 
creased to $85.00 per week for up to 15 weeks. Effective 
November 1, 1992, the weekly benefit shall be increased 
to $90.00 per week for up to 15 weeks. 
(B) Effective November 1, 1990, the Lifetime Maxi- 
mum Benefit applicable to combined in-patient, Home 
Health Care, and out-patient surgical benefits shall be 
$100,000 per person. Effective November 1, 1992, the 
Lifetime Maximum Benefit shall be $110,000 per person. 
(C) The Company will participate with the employees 
in negotiating discounted programs with providers and 
implement those programs as are acceptable to both 
parties. Discounts will be shared equally. Discount plans 
shall be subject to annual review. 
2. A summary Description of the Plan, as amended, will 
be issued to more fully inform the employees and their 
dependents of the coverage of the Plan. The rights of the 
Parties under the amended Plan are fully set forth in that 
document, and any claims or disputes of claims are to be 
resolved under the Claims Procedure therein, and will 
50 
not be subject to the Grievance Procedure as set forth 
in the Labor Agreement between the Parties. 
ARTICLE X—LIFE INSURANCE 
All employees having sufficient service with the Com- 
pany shall be permitted to carry $5,000 life insurance, 
with a rider covering accidental death and dismember- 
ment, for which they will pay a monthly premium of 
$2.00 per capita. The Plan will also include a double 
indemnity clause, and will provide the right to convert 
upon severance of employment for any reason. Covered 
employees shall be afforded an option to carry an addi- 
tional $5,000 life insurance at an additional monthly 
premium cost of $1.90 per capita. 
Any employee retiring thereafter, upon attainment of 
age 62, will be permitted to maintain $2,000 life insur- 
ance in force by paying eighty cents ($.80) per month 
toward the premium thereof. Such retired employee upon 
reaching age 65 shall then have the option of continuing 
the $2,000 coverage for which he shall pay $24.00 an- 
nually toward the premium thereof or accept a reduction 
in coverage to $1,000 with the Company paying the entire 
premium thereof. 
When an employee is on a medical leave of absence, the 
Company shall notify the President of the Local Union 
before life insurance coverage of such employee is can- 
celled for any reason. 
ARTICLE XI—PENSION PLAN 
1. The Pension Plan agreed upon by the Parties shall 
continue in full force and effect for the duration of this 
contract, except for the following amendments: 
A. Effective January 1, 1991, pension benefits will be 
increased to $7.75 per month per year of credited 
service. 
SI 
B. Effective January 1, 1992, pension benefits will be 
increased to $8.25 per month per year of credited 
service. 
C. Effective January 1, 1993, Pension Benefits will 
be increased to $8.50 per month per year of cred-/ 
ited service. 
D. Employees who have reached the age of 55 and 
have 25 years of credited service may elect early 
retirement with reduced benefits based upon full 
actuarial reduction levels that result in no cost to 
the plan. 
2. Claims for benefits under the Plan are not grievable 
under the grievance and arbitration procedures of this 
contract, because claims procedures covering such are 
defined in the Plan. 
ARTICLE XII—SEVERANCE PAY 
In the event it becomes necessary to close a plant 
permanently, and since the Union recognizes the Com- 
pany’s right to make such a decision, and both the Com- 
pany and the Union acknowledge that a permanent plant 
closing will cause employees affected thereby to lose valu- 
able contract rights, including loss of accrued seniority, 
possible loss of enlarged vacations and other benefits, 
and some employees may sustain loss to sale of their 
homes and have additional costs in relocating, in order to 
offset the effect of such a decision on the employees of 
the plant permanently closed and to partially compensate 
and reimburse them for such losses, severance pay will 
be granted according to the following schedule: 
$30.09 per year of continuous credited service, with 
a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 30 years 
($450.00 to $900.00). 
Such severance pay is not deemed to be and shall not 
be considered unemployment compensation and shall be 
52 
payable in a single payment regardless of whether or not 
the eligible worker has found other employment following 
such permanent plant closing. 
Individuals who are permanently separated as a result 
of the closing of a plant will be allowed to convert their 
health care plan, within thirty-one (31) days of separa- 
tion, without regard to the ten (10)-year minimum service 
requirement (See Article IX, III (E) Conversion.) 
Because of the foregoing, there shall be no further 
obligation on the part of the Company to negotiate with 
the Union concerning the decision to close a plant and 
concerning the effect of such a decision upon the affected 
employees. 
ARTICLE XIII—GRIEVANCES 
SECTION 1. (A) General Procedures. Grievances 
shall be signed and presented by the complaining employ- 
ees to the Shop Steward in the department who shall 
present them in writing to the Foreman of the department 
immediately. If any grievance is not adjusted by this 
procedure, the Shop Steward, accompanied by the Busi- 
ness Agent shall then take the matter up with the Plant 
Manager. No such written grievance shall be submitted 
to the Plant Manager unless it has been investigated and 
approved by the Executive Board or Plant Union Com- 
mittee of the Union. The Plant Manager shall indicate on 
the grievance the date on which it was presented to him 
and on all complaints which do not pertain to piece rates 
shall make answer within the next five (5) working days. 
If the grievance is not settled by these negotiations with 
the Plant Manager, then the Executive Board or Plant 
Union Committee of the Union shall designate representa- 
tives to negotiate with the Plant Manager or such other 
representatives of the Company as shall be designated by 
the Company for such purpose. 
Individual claims for benefits under the Health and 
Welfare, Life and Pension Plan will not be subject to the 
53 
Grievance Procedure inasmuch as claims procedures cov- 
ering such individual matters are specified in those plans. 
All grievances, other than those with specific time 
limits for filing mentioned elsewhere in this Agreement 
must be filed within 30 calendar days of the event which 
caused the grievance. 
(B) Appeals Notification. The Union shall be allowed 
ninety (90) days after answer has been made by the 
Labor Cost Analysis Department or Plant Manager, as 
the case may be, on any grievance to ask for a meeting 
with representatives of the St. Louis Office for purposes 
of reviewing said answers or answers, unless the Company 
is notified of the Union’s desire to appeal its answer on 
any grievance within ninety (90) days, it is understood 
the Union shall forfeit the right to proceed further and 
any such grievance shall be considered as settled. 
SECTION 2. Discharge Grievances. If any employee 
covered by this Agreement be discharged for cause, the 
Company shall show cause upon request of the Union 
provided such request is made in writing within seven (7) 
days after discharge. Grievance pertaining to discharge 
cases will not be considered if not taken up within seven 
(7) days after discharge, but all cases taken up within 
that time shall be settled by the same procedure as pro- 
vided herein for settlement of other types of grievances. 
If consideration of any discharge case results in a decision 
that the employee involved was unjustly discharged, such 
employee shall be reinstated with all rights and privileges 
held before such discharge and full pay for all time lost as 
a result of such discharge, except where any operator has 
been discharged for cause and the Company agrees to 
reinstate said operator then no back pay shall be allowed. 
When a final answer, so specified, has been made by 
the Company either by a Plant Manager or by the 
Executive Offices of the Company to a grievance involv- 
ing the discharge of an employee, the appeals steps in 
54 
the grievance procedure shall be waived and the issue 
may proceed directly to arbitration if timely notice of 
such intent is given by the Union. 
SECTION 3. The Company and the Union shall agree 
upon a regular time and place for the negotiation of all 
grievances and other matters of mutual interest and all 
such matters shall be presented and negotiated at such 
agreed time and place, except that matters requiring 
emergency treatment may be negotiated at any time. 
Grievances pertaining to piece prices shall not be con- 
sidered as of emergency character. 
SECTION 4. Designated representatives of the Union 
shall be allowed time off from work, without pay, to at- 
tend to their duties in negotiating grievances or for other 
proper business of the Union pertaining to this plant with- 
out discrimination or penalty because of such activities. 
SECTION 5. When the Union is unable to reach a 
satisfactory agreement with officials of this plant, com- 
plaints will be taken up within two (2) weeks with des- 
ignated representatives of the General Offices of Brown 
Shoe Company. 
SECTION 6. After an Appeals Meeting has been held 
and final disposition made therein of a grievance, the 
Company shall confirm by memorandum to the Union its 
final answer relative to such grievance. 
SECTION 7. Lockout and Work Stoppage Prohibited. 
During the term of this Agreement there shall be no strike, 
picketing, boycott, sympathy strike, stoppage or other 
interference with work by employees nor lockout by the 
Employer. It is agreed that any employees violating this 
provision shall be considered as having resigned their 
jobs and in such event the vacancies shall be filled in 
accordance with this Agreement. 
SECTION 8. Time Studies Resulting From Grievances. 
In the event that a time study is made by the Company 
55 
as a result of a grievance properly submitted by the 
Union, it is understood and agreed that a representative 
of the Union shall be permitted to be present during the 
making of such test and shall be permitted to view the 
results of the test. The Company in the foregoing cases 
shall furnish to the President of the Local Union a copy 
of the time study summary sheet and shall, if requested, 
permit the Union representative to see the complete data 
sheets pertaining to the time study. 
ARTICLE XIV—ARBITRATION 
SECTION 1. In the event that any matter covered by 
this Agreement cannot be settled through joint conference 
of the Company and Union Representatives, it shall, upon 
written request for arbitration by either the Company or 
the Union to the other, be referred to arbitration. 
Time Limit to Submit Grievances for Arbitration. The 
Company shall not accept a request for arbitration from 
the Union unless said request for arbitration is given 
within one hundred twenty (120) days immediately fol- 
lowing the date of the Appeals Meeting at which the 
Company makes its final answer to any gri¢vance sub- 
mitted, or the date of its final answer, if said final answer 
is given later than the Appeals Meeting. 
SECTION 2. Selection of Arbitrator. In the event 
arbitration is necessary, an Arbitrator shall be selected 
from a panel of Arbitrators to be agreed upon by the 
Company and Union. 
The procedure to be followed in the selection of an 
Arbitrator shall be: 
(1) As soon as the request for arbitration is received, 
within ten days, representatives of both the Company and 
the Union shall meet at a place of their mutual con- 
venience for the purpose of selecting an Arbitrator from 
the above list. 
56 
(2) All names from the above enumerated list shall be 
placed in a container and five (5) names shall be drawn 
therefrom. The five (5) names so drawn shall constitute 
the panel of Arbitrators. 
(3) The Union shall then scratch one of the five names 
on the panel, and a record will be kept of the order in 
which the name was scratched. 
(4) The Company shall then scratch one of the remain- 
ing four names on the panel, and a record shall be kept. 
(5S) The Union shall then scratch another name from 
the panel followed by the Company scratching one of the 
two remaining names. 
(6) The remaining name shall be requested to serve 
as Arbitrator. 
(7) In the event the man whose name was thus se- 
lected is unable or unwilling to serve, the invitation shall 
be extended to the other members of the panel, with the 
Company's second scratch being the first invited, then 
the Union’s second scratch, and thus alternating until an 
Arbitrator is able to serve. 
(8) In the event no member of the panel is able or 
willing to serve, then the names of the other Arbitrators 
in the above list shall be selected in the same manner as 
above, and the same procedure shall be followed until 
the names of all Arbitrators listed have been exhausted. 
(9) In the event of failure to agree on an Arbitrator, 
the parties shall request the Director of the Federal Media- 
tion and Conciliation Service to appoint a neutral Arbi- 
trator to serve. 
(10) The decision of the Arbitrator who hears 
issues presented shall be accepted by both the Union 
the Company and his award shall be fin 
upon both. 
if 
57 
SECTION 3. The cost of arbitration shall be borne 
equally by the Company and Union except tha a pene 
pany shall assume the entire cost of producing the original 
copy of the transcript. 
SECTION 4. Where a party desires to file a brief fol- 
lowing the close of an arbitration hearing, it shall be 
required to do so within the three (3) weeks immediately 
following receipt of transcript of the proceedings. 
SECTION 5S. The Arbitrator shall be required to ren- 
der his decision within the thirty (30) days following his 
receipt of briefs submitted by the parties. 
ARTICLE XV—-MANAGEMENT 
SECTION |. The management and the direction of the 
working force including the right to hire, suspend, trans- 
fer, or discharge for proper cause and the right to relieve 
employees from duty because of lack of work or for other 
proper reasons is vested in the Company; provided, how- 
ever, that this will not be done for purposes of discrimina- 
tion against any member of the Union or in a manner 
contrary to the provisions of this Agreement. 
SECTION 2. The Company shall have the sole right 
to decide the processes of machinery and and equipment 
to be used, types of products to be manufactured, quality 
of material and workmanship required, selling prices of 
products, methods of making and selling products, person- 
nel to be employed in supervisory, clerical and mechanical 
ARTICLE XVI—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION !. Publication of Company Rules. All em- 
ployees covered by this Agreement shall be governed by 
the safety and other rules now in effect and such other 
rules not in violation of the Agreement as may be adopted 
by the Company and published to the employees on 
SECTION 2. Bulletin Boards For Union. The Com- 
pany shall provide a bulletin board on the first floor 
the Uni 
SECTION 4. Providing Tools. The Company shall 
furnish to each employee free of charge all tools 
not turn in the worn tools in exchange for replace- 
ments, the employee will be charged for such replacements. 
Employers who are separated from the Company shall be 
required to return all tools and accessories to the Com- 
pany at the time of separation or shall be charged therefor. 
SECTION 5S. Supervisors Performing Production 
Work. No supervisor shall be used on production work 
59 
a qualified operator is available to perform 
said work. In the event it is necessary to maintain pro- 
duction and no qualified operator is available, a super- 
visor may be used as a replacement for such time as it is 
necessary with the understanding that lot or case number 
work thus performed by him shall be turned in to the 
factory office. 
The foregoing provision shall not prevent a supervisor 
working temporarily for practice purposes so long as the 
regular operator or operators on the job in question shall 
not be subjected to loss of wages as the result of his work. 
SECTION 6. Work Sharing on Samples. Wherever 
piece rates are paid for work on samples, such work shall 
be shared equally by all qualified employees on the line. 
SECTION 7. Payroll Deductions for U.S. Savings 
Bonds. Payroll deductions for the purchase of United 
States Savings Bonds shall be made from each weekly 
pay check. 
SECTION 8. Overtime Premium on Check Stubs. On 
and after October 31, 1966, the Company will show 
overtime premium pay as a separate entry on check stubs. 
SECTION 9. Lights on Parking Lots. The Company 
shall install dusk to dawn overhead lights on factory 
parking lots wherever needed. 
SECTION 10. Air Conditioning. Air conditioning 
shall be started early enough in the morning and con- 
tinued after regular hours whenever a group of employees 
is required to work at such times. 
SECTION 11. Computation of Three Weeks’ Aver- 
—— a 1 2. Establishing Multi-Shift Agreements. 
arises, multi-shift agreements may be negoti- 
ated for the individual factories. : 
ARTICLE XVII—EQUAL EMPLOYMENT 
OPPORTUNITY 
‘ The Company and Union agree that there shall be no 
iscrimination against any employee or applicant for 
employment because of race, religion, color, origin, sex, 
age, physical or mental handicap. 
ARTICLE XVIII—ENERGY CONSERVATION 
If, during the life of this Agreement, any of the utilities 
Or municipalities which supply energy to the Company 
cut energy to the Company or install a temporary or 
emergency plan to conserve energy or order the Company 
to conserve energy, the Company, the Local Union, and 
the Union Offices in St. Louis will meet to discuss the 
best ways to conserve energy with the intention that an 
arrangement agreeable to the Company and the Local 
ee unless the utilities or municipali- 
om to i i 
re a pany to conserve energy in a specific 
ARTICLE XIX—LEGALITY 
All provisions of this Agreement are assumed to be in 
conformity with the applicable laws of the United States 
and of the State in which the factory covered by this 
Agreement is located. If any provisions of the Agree- 
ment are later proven to be contrary to any applicable 
law existing at this time, or passed hereafter, such pro- 
visions shall then be considered void. 
61 
ARTICLE XX—AMENDMENTS 
Amendments to this Agreement may be made at any 
time during the life of this Agreement by mutual consent 
of the parties hereto. Such amendments shall be in writing 
and signed by both parties, shall become a part of this 
Agreement, and shall terminate at the same time as does 
this Agreement, except as continued in full force and 
effect by consent of the parties. Such Agreements as are 
ts to this Agreement shall modify the terms of 
this General Agreement and such modifications shall take 
precedence over the terms of the General Agreement. 
ARTICLE XXI—TERMINATION 
This Agreement shall become effective September 20, 
1990, and remain in effect until August 27, 1993. Should 
either party decide to alter, amend or terminate this 
t on its expiration date, said party shall give 
written notice of such intent to the other party sixty (60) 
days before the expiration date. If the party or parties 
fail to give such notice, the Agreement shall continue in 
full force and effect for another year, and so on from year 
to year until proper notice is given. 
FOR THE COMPANY: For THE UNION: 
FOOTWEAR Division, UNITED Foop 
AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS 
INTERNATIONAL UNION, 
AFL-CIO & CLO 
By /s/ David Rutkowski By /s/ William L. Treece 
Director of Assistant Director For 
Industria! Relations Footwear Manufacturing 
and Processing Division 
By /s/ [Megible] FOOTWEAR DIVISION, 
Plant Manager LocaL 751 
As CHARTERED BY THE UNITED Foop 
AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS 
INTERNATIONAL UNION 
By /s/ Virginia Robertson 
By 
62 
APPENDIX B 
BROWN SHOE COMPANY 
Brown SHOE COMPANY 
8300 Maryland Avenue 
Post Office Box 354 
St. Louis, Missouri 63166 
(314) 854-4000 
David J. Rutkowski 
Vice President 
Industrial Relations 
(314) 854-2615 
January 17, 1992 
Via Certified Mail— 
Return Receipt Requested 
Mr. William L. Treece 
Assistant Director for Footwear, 
Food Processing and Manufacturing 
UFCW 
300 Weidman Road 
Manchester, Missouri 63011 
Dear Mr. Treece: 
The purpose of this notice is to comply with the 
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
(WARN) and provide you, as the collective bargaining 
representative, with the notice required by WARN with 
respect to a plant closing and permanent layoff of em- 
ployees at Brown Shoe Company, West Sth, Dixon, Mis- 
souri 65459. This notice concerns a plant closing and 
permanent mass layoff. 
The scheduled date for the plant closing and permanent 
layoffs is the fourteen (14)-day period beginning on 
March 20, 1992. 
It is anticipated that a total of two hundred and 
seventy-seven (277) employees whom you represent will 
tion names of the employees currently holding 
those affected jobs is attached hereto. While there are 
certain bumping rights under the collective bargaining 
There are governmental agencies which can provide 
you and the employees you represent with information 
on available dislocated worker assistance. For informa- 
tion you may contact Mr. Larry Earley, Director, Division 
of Job Development and Training, 221 Metro Drive, Jef- 
ferson City, Missouri 65109, Telephone Number (314) 
751-7796. 
For further information regarding the plant closedown 
and permanent layoff from Brown Shoe Company you 
may contact me at 
Brown Shoe Company 
8300 Maryland Avenue 
Post Office Box 354 
St. Louis, Missouri 63105 
Telephone Number: (314) 854-2615 
Very truly yours, 
‘s/ David J. Rutkowski 
Davip J. RuTKOWSK! 
Vice President—Industrial Relations 
DJR/sh 
65 
BebRebEPEPeerrrreereerrrereeee 
RPP PPP PPE PPPPPP PPP PPP PPP DPPP 
iS 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/60 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/01/20 
26/81/20 
26/90 20 
26/90/20 
26/90/20 
26/S0/20 
26/0/20 
26/80/20 
26/18/10 
26/18/10 
26/18/10 
LL n 88 36/18/10 6600 
LL n 88 26/08/10 1080 
TL n Ig 26/08/10 8080 
TL n Tg 36/86/10 Tgt0 
LL n st 26/82/10 ¥920 
LL n 8e 26/82/10 osse 
Wh n Tg 26/12/10 2820 
TL n Tg 26/L2/10 TOTO 
TL n tg 26/92/10 TOTO 
LL n LI 26/¥Z/ 10 6800 
TL n Tg 36/82/10 2010 
TL n tg 36/02/10 1920 
LL n 8t 26/02/10 6660 
LL n Tg 26/02/10 9820 
"lL n Ts 26/02/10 $920 
TL n 1g 26/02/10 9820 
"IL n tg 26/81/10 910 
"IL n tg 26/81/10 66F0 
"lL n Tg 26/S1/10 6670 
LL n tg 26/81/10 6070 
LL n 88 26/81/10 86F0 
LL n 88 26/01/10 ¥980 
LL n LI 26/01/10 9STO 
LL n 88 26/01/10 0Zb0 
LL n 98 26/90/10 0ZF0 
LL n 8s 26/20/10 8020 
SNzEIS uojuf, wosTeYy 4M ABC 3SRT ydeq 
9 XIGNAddV 
SI PE-Z9-96F 
TL81-8L-86P 
LOBS-ZP-SSE 
8LE8-88-00¢ 
O61Z-b6-SIP 
vELE-99-00¢ 
9Z9P-LL-9GE 
LILL-OS-Lzs 
S1L6P-SL-009 
1009-99- 16h 
Ajs0Aeg “UOLION 
PM BS ‘e100K_ 
"S SApeyy ‘menow 
‘S epuem ‘esoweiey 
‘OO Bpueig ‘sedurss1y 
"] Ajzequiry “Yosiey 
[93814 ‘UeUIpOOr 
‘V Bpury “yop 
‘M uesng ‘youeig 
"] oudem “xog 
BiBgivg ‘418}804 
‘D Baney ‘Ajleyqey 
‘N BluBsog ‘eqod 
‘f Nita “BmerH 
[eae “KO 
aiuiey ‘uBWwdEYyyD 
"V Bivqieg ‘Yyo[sulas0g 
‘M Bpuesg “‘sajoeg 
‘V Yeqezyg ‘veg 
‘y Adseyg ‘uowy 
“q AouBN ‘uosuyor 
“dd PLA “elnpseH 
‘d pleuog ‘Aeyoiag 
‘y Assia] ‘Aopuvxely 
‘f UAjOIRD ‘suBAg 
‘¢ Se0uesy ‘UBMYyN 
‘d Bpwyed Wed 
‘N AdBayl ‘eouey 
Bing ‘jedoq 
POZP-Z6-L6P ‘qd Aisal “1048 g 
£206-PL-86P ‘'D eq ‘siveg 
1ZZZ-PS-L6P ‘¢ Aypog “Avy 
ZIPS-9L-Z6P ‘W Arey ‘sarjoy 
86SL-8L-68P “] Amey “ARID 
I8PS-99-16h ‘a PeyIW “WAeID 
8S16-0L-009 ‘A ersser ‘dejung 
Z8E8-P9-L6P ‘d Bpewed ‘iepuvxey 
PELS-9E-86P ‘] S107] ‘uBwes|y 
6S8L-99-16P ‘f Platq ‘sepuexely 
L6¥0-0P-66P uuy Of “UOSTIM 
S6LE-8L-TTE ‘f e1pueD ‘uBIOK 
9ZSE-96-96F V aude ‘uopue|D2q 
S681-26-66P I ipa ‘144 
T61TS-0S-1 LS ‘ad Bpupony ‘Moy 
6180-06-L6P “] Ayueag “WOuld 
61S8-89-06F "f Teysseyy ‘ssA My 
9SF8-P8-98P “I preuog ‘af yoouig 
Z0SZ-8P-F6P "A Bqey ‘8770/10; 8] 
68L8-SZ-0EP ‘f AQjowLL ‘sae 
S0ZE-99-FPP ‘y Apury] ‘ueysne, 
P698-ZL-06P atuRljeued “Y41ox 
8ZSL-0L-L8P ‘A sry ‘sulls 
6ZLL-98-86P ‘a Stuueq ‘jeuing 
TPOS-08-88P ‘da W4311qg ‘PN.O 
P908-FL-06P "V 8] “dos}e 
sequiny seAojdwig ewueN eesoidwg 
67 
PEPEEEEPEE 
n 1s 26/62/20 Sgl0 L068-Z8-009 ‘S Bapuvg ‘sexueg 
n Ig 26/bz/Z0 19Z0 Z899-ZE-LEP ‘AW tuuy ‘se 
an 1¢ 24/82/20 ¥920 9008-0L-66F ‘A Spuoanx ‘ody 
an Ig 26/bZ/Z0 6020 LOSb-26-Z6F ‘H “OAH ‘psojyuPy 
a Ig 26/62/20 SLIO I811-O0F-60¢ ‘A Pa, ‘oury] 
n 1g 26/b2/Z0 6920 GSS8-ZL-Z6P ‘M Bupurg ‘Aayey 
a Ig 26/6Z/Z0 8920 96LS-9L-9b9 "] Goueyg ‘ysuny 
n I¢ 26/62/20 1010 90Z0-Fb-06F Aapiys ‘Aoaydwuiny 
n Ig 26/02/20 L9T0 O€8Z-89-66F ‘S Aseyg ‘soyany 
n Ig 26/62/20 6920 9SPL-89-S6P ‘'S tpuerg ‘sepniy 
n I¢ 26/62/20 0610 960L-PZ-982 "] Auuer “yD 
an Ig 26/62/30 6610 b96°9-FE-P6P ‘VY euyneg ‘Aeyquy 
a Ig 26/62/20 1920 Z968-9P-LEP ‘W Bust, ‘104804 
n I¢ 26/P2/Z0 91FO LLSO-08-98F ‘f Aapsomy ‘Aoi gy 
a Ig 26/02/20 Sbz0 b6PL-Z9-16P ‘f *qyey ‘uvoung 
n I¢ 26/b2/Z0 6020 GP98-99-SLzZ “M Usejog ‘ddng 
n Is 26/2/20 9ST0 £668-ZE-812 "I ~Ser0jog ‘Aqjog 
an Ig 26/62/20 1920 SESh-F9-16P “IT P1ozeg ‘padg 
an 1s 26/62/20 6610 LOOP-P8-LEP ‘d Bpeweg ‘uedag 
an Ig 26/82/20 SITIO 1090-08-86F ‘d 4pequry ‘uewmog 
an Ig 26/82/20 LSI0 6089-89-POF ‘f ®pury ‘ye 
a 1s 26/62/20 #920 bSLE-PE-68P ae BAq ‘JexDeg 
n Is 26/62/20 1920 9LES-FP-009 Bye q ‘dweyoneeg 
n Ig 26/62/20 1920 S9LO-8E-F6P ‘A Se10j/0q ‘duiwyonveg 
a Ig 26/2/20 9ST0 SZZP-ZP-66P ‘'V B1S1005 ‘jveg 
a 1¢ 26/bz/Z0 Z010 LE6P-PL-98P "] BuuRig ‘jweg 
an Ig 26/82/20 Z010 bS8I-bS-98F ‘A ep] ‘seyeg 
a 1¢ 26/62/20 LSl0 9899-PP-S6P ‘W All’s “aepuexeyy 
n 1g 26/62/20 1S10 SZLZ-0F-LEP ‘'V¥ BHeWUeH ‘Arexy 
Tg 26/86/20 1920 
"IL n 
"LL n Ig 26/12/20 Lio Z8LL-99-019 eulforey ‘davys 
TL n Tg 26/12/20 0020 9962-28-822 UdIeY ‘syleqoy 
LL n 8f 26/02/20 980 9698-01-Z6F "I Aiieyg ‘sepuexery 
IL n Tg 26/L1/Z0 1920 PPSL-09-ZPP ‘W Bpury ‘seu0se 4 
IL n Tg 26/L1/20 6110 2969-08-E8F f HeorwyD ‘uosdwoyy 
TL n tg 26/LI/Z0 1820 LPPS-99-68P S Bpueig ‘uepyoys 
"IL n Tg 26/LI/Z0 sto SSSh-Z8-86F ‘d surg ‘surjoy 
"IL n tg 26/L1/Z0 £980 0Z19-99-16P SHAY “eory 
"IL n Ig 26/LI/Z0 £980 S99I-PE-98F AY}O10G “YALyman 
IL n Ig 26/L1/Z0 1010 1660-68-65 "T Sfuy ‘s0Suyeery 
"IL n Tg 26/LI/Z0 L610 SIPE-Z6-68P HM BPW ‘Aajey 
"IL n Tg 26/L1/Z0 ¥980 OZLL-9F-998 e18y ‘Aa/ey 
IL n Tg 26/L1/20 6610 O8Lb-FS-00¢ ‘OD 2084s) “SyO1H 
IL n Tg 26/LI/Z0 ogsso £868-09-900 ‘S 488eq ‘prequn 
"IL n Ig 26/LI/Z0 £980 SI9Z-PL-68P "T B4ljeg ‘siaeg 
"IL n Tg 26/L1/20 980 OT8T-08-Cb2 ‘aH Bupg “yesnop 
TL n tg 26/81/20 TOTO 99LL-ZL-98F ‘f SQpIeK ‘s9exeg 
TL n tg 26/21/20 980 LE86-6 1-892 GON ‘uopue]oW_ 
"IL n Tg 26/11/20 sto PLEL-¥8-86b ‘W WOME “40K 
IL n Tg 26/11/20 9820 6LZ29-8E-89E ‘d =BIN] ‘108804 
"IL n tg 26/01/20 TSto SPOL-ZP-bEP W ONY “STITM 
IL n Tg 26/01/20 0Z£0 6PS1-PP-S6F f BPW” ‘Be1 MyM 
IL n Tg 26/01/20 S9T0 Z9LS-99-SZI epucyy ‘ynory 
IL n Ig 26/01/20 ¥9Z0 £906-FP-96F ‘a Buuog ‘sus 
IL n Ig 26/01/20 1920 9B8T-1P-19z BUIN “yequisg 
TL n Tg 26/01/20 svz0 LI80-PS-Z91 "Y our ‘yng 
IL n Tg 26/01/20 8020 861L-9T-109 HM PNG ‘voy 
8nzhS uoIuUs, + UosBey 4M ABQ ys] ydeq 4equinn sefojdwig owen sesojdwy 
"LL n 1¢ 26/60/ $0 ¢9Z0 OSSL-98-16F OUIIAR] ‘AIOHY 
LL a 1¢ 26/90/80 6060 LZ10-¥8-P6F "] Ajzoquiry ‘s98use 4 
"IL a 1g 26/90/80 8980 S018-LZ-Sz9 By ‘seqoy 
IL a I¢ 26/90/80 0010 PZLP-9L-P6P ‘y Bsezay ‘uouUT yo, 
IL a 1g 26/¥0/80 9LIO 9998-FL-L6F ‘¢ Ayeg ‘Aeappor 
IL a Ig 26/80/80 9120 LOIS-PE-89E ‘A BaBqitg ‘jouTe MA 
IL a Ig 26/80/80 $920 9010-Z8-LPS ‘YU Maer ‘jess9eyg 
"IL an Ig 26/80/ $0 ¢920 LS906-9F-L8P ‘y Aavy ‘uosmry] 
IL a I¢ 26/20/80 00z0 PESR-OL-Z6F ‘y Apulp ‘ssi 
LL o 1g 26/20/80 6610 ZI6F-OS-S6F "W WINY “wos MA 
WL a I¢ 26/20/80 L9LO bE96-F9-S6F ‘d Bapurg ‘ayy mM 
IL a Is 26/20/80 9LIO POSI-ZS-98F "] Usryyey ‘joule mM 
LL a Ig 26/20/80 9LIO 686L-F8-86F “d B1osgeq ‘AAILL 
a TL a Ig 26/20/80 L9Z0 86LI1-88-PPS ‘W e8[q ‘uoetinds 
o IL a Ig 26/20/80 r0s0 9F96-F9-S6F ‘A ey ‘uosduig 
LL a Ig 26/20/80 Z910 OFI6-OF-L8P Ayjoi0g ‘divyg 
LL n Ig 26/20/80 b0s0 '962-99-L8P ‘BAW ‘seuyeyos 
IL a Is 26/20/£0 1010 €0Z6-9F-F6F V aipre ‘sulyjoy 
IL a 1g 26/20/80 9820 GOLS-OL-98F epuaig ‘10}04y 
IL a Ig 26/20/80 9820 Z6ZE-RE-LBZ f wey ‘voy 
IL a I¢ 26/20/80 £0s0 LIGR-PL-S8P J omuojy ‘eyouwaoig 
IL an Ig 26/20/80 9LIO 9900-8¢-S6F § udjoueD ‘uosjen 
IL n 1g 26/20/80 Sbz0 06Z1-F8-98P ‘A Bye, “yp Wsi0sseK 
IL a I¢ 26/20/80 0060 6SE8-RS-S6F ‘¢ Bapurg ‘uOsM] 
IL a Is 26/20/80 1880 LILL-Z6-092 ‘H @pulpesoy “yoouquioy 
IL n Ig 26/20/80 OSTO $890-0F-Z6F ‘A Bo] ‘uvpey 
IL a 1g 26/20/80 SISO PLOL-IS-L9S ‘W euyesor ‘zeyjuNy 
LL an Is 26/20/80 8020 S9PL-P8-P6P ‘a paeyory “weqy 
IL an Is 26/20/80 9820 G186-ZE-0Z8 euUuBZNg ‘128UIeS) 
NN 
"IL n 1g 26/20/80 8020 SLEI-88-F6P “M BpueipH ‘suowwg 
"LL n 1s 26/20/80 ¥9Z0 OFPS-8P-68P eulseyD ‘“s1Aed 
IL n 1g 26/20/80 TLe0 0088-08-L6F AWWBL ‘euBt) 
"IL n 1s 26/20/ £0 8060 Z188-PP-68P ‘a ey “xOD 
"IL n 1s 26/20/80 9820 EP88-0L-S6F ‘d Beyg ‘Aejsveg 
"IL n 1g 26/20/80 Tgt0 SP8S-Z9-16F ‘d yesoged “4eqit” 
"WL n Ig 26/20/80 e1eo 8096-09-66F ‘YU Bpesuy “sexe” 
WL n Ig 26/82/20 0060 S8EI-BB-FSS ‘A yeuesie, “wNnywo, 
IL n 8t 26/82/20 6650 SPOL-Z8-L8P ‘¢ [Neg ‘Uepuls 
"IL n Ig 26/8Z/Z0 9820 OSLE-09-88F ‘VY BUY “GpUssesseW 
"WL n I¢ 26/82/30 00c0 0208-99-00¢ "S Bq, ‘AepseULAe] 
"IL n Ig 26/82/20 1920 0806-9F-F6P ‘q euyenbowr “ezuleH 
TL n Ig 26, ¥Z ZO LItO 88ZP-ZB-B6P ‘'§ Buveg “wnyBo, 
IL n Is 26/bZ/Z0 1920 G1SO-8E-88P ‘¢ Ayeog ‘S84 mM 
% IL n 1g 26/82/20 eLlo ZE0P-FE-16P ‘W uvor “Ati 
WL n Ig 26/¥Z/Z0 osto OShZ-9F-68P "W Aajarys “Axspoypoo mM 
TL n 1g 26/02/20 1g20 T18Z-96-L1P *] umeq ‘ieu0suM 
ene n 1g 26/¥2/Z0 PsTtO SOTS-09-F6P ‘gq euajseq ‘pavseut, 
IL n 1g 26/2/20 Zsto SSLL-ZP-P6P ‘f¢ Bpuem ‘Aoosuv, 
WL n 1g 26/2/20 ssto 6F£0-09-16P BINIzV_ “PuUBlyI4ys 
lL a 1g 26/62/20 Isto 68ZE-99-008 UsBYy “UBLAIAIS 
WL n Ig 26/62/20 0610 9189-20-Z0P atuuRy “UOz[ SUIS 
TL n Ig 26/62/20 ¥920 9Z88-PL-S6P "I 18D ‘saves 
TL n 1g 26/62/20 ssto 80Z2-86-60P “] MH1OK “138880 yg 
"LL n Ig 26/62/20 s9Tt0 ZELB-9L-S6P ‘§ Bpueig “surjoYy 
WL n 1g 26/82/20 9sTt0 9991-89-Z6P ‘H Bpucrg “Apeoy 
WL n 1g 26/62/20 LSTO 0092-F9-L8P ‘§ UAlOIBD “Yd 
TL n Tg 26/¥2/ZO ILI0 69Z9-8E-S8E yryeqezt|q ‘U0ss8}0d 
nn — —— —— — ——_—_——_— — 
snyMs uot uoswegy 4MAeqe] = oq sequiny eekoidwy owen sefodug 
70 
PEPPRCEErr rer ere erererereeee 
Status 
BS PRRPPPEPPEEPEPHEPEEHEPEEEPPPPPPPPE 
sf 
eB Be ee on end een end eeeenl 
Reason Union 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
~.. GS. S,, Sa, Se, Sha, Sh, “Sh Se ee ee 
, 4 4. 6. Ss. 4. 4%. Ss... SS. SS. “>. DS “Sp. “De SS ~ Ss S. S 
SSSSSSSSSSSSESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSES 
Last Day Wk 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
/09 
09 
09 
09 
09 
g 
5 Se2haSZFhSSRSRESERS SSIES : 
aE EHH : 
£ Eeegeagedgsegesceesseessaese 
; J , 
‘ i) - a < =j..8% es wd 
fa: ott 9f9< cots puet Ge 
APP re a i cor 
Hvis - 
PEEL IELER PERE REEL EEEE 
71 
PRRPPRPEEEEEEPPPrReeeeeeeeeee 
PRP PPP PEPPER EEPRPePEEPrPPPRPPEPeEREPrD 
hehe tebe te tebebebebetebetetettt LL LLL 
ele eee ee ee ee ee ee ee 
™s “= Ss ss “a Ma MT ME ™~ ™ SSS SlCcoeeesece 
— ~ ™. “ss “es “hs Ths Te TM Mn MA 
SSSSSSSSSSSSsssesseeeeeeeseeeeee 
§38222222222333222923¢ 
323322325 Ba S2'3's 
siantiualaitla 
7 
Union Status 
Last Day Wk Reason 
Dept 
Employee Number 
72 
PEPPEEEEEEEEEEEErPPr rr reeere 
PPPPPPPEPEEEEEEESEPEEEPPPPPPP 
ne ee ee 8 hehehehehe hebhehehenhehehene 
Sa. Sx SS SS. SS Ss Sk SS SS SS. SS SS. SS. SS. SS. SS. SS ~~ ™ ™ ™ ™ ss ™ Ss 
et rt rt tt rt tt tt tt tt et et tet et et et et et 
ee SS ee ee, ee ee 
HET TE 
bed 
Employee Name 
ans 13. aoe nA ereerT 
TL te 
doe a | dl “4G .. = ’ a) 
He iisdah lila 
73 
PEEEEEEEEEEEEEEe Pe Peereereee 
PPPPPPPPPPPPPP PEP PPSP PPP PPRDP 
ec I cc a ce a ee a ee ee a ee ee ee ee ee | 
~SDVNLVALLARLALALS SLRS 
Soe eee ee eee eee eeeemoeesss 
“ss “Ss “Ss Ss Ss. Ss. TS. SS. Ss Ss Ss SS SK SS SS SS SS. SS. SSS SS. SS. SS. SS. SS. SS. SS SS. SS 
= 2323s = 12 D> A 
S ssses S% 
ooo 
HEE Huet nti? 
SLEEP HEE 
7 fait tit sachet, “1: 
ae a 
AHR MN ARs 
74 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
EASTERN DIVISION 
Case No. 4:92CV01134ELF 
UNITED Foop AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS UNION 
Loca. 751, AS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
AGGRIEVED EMPLOYEES, 
Plaintiff, 
v. 
Brown Group, INnc., d b/a 
BROWN SHOE COMPANY, 
Defendant. 
DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO DISMISS 
PLAINTIFF’S COMPLAINT 
Comes now Defendant, BROWN GROUP, INC. dba 
BROWN SHOE COMPANY, by and through its at- 
torneys, pursuant to Rule 12 of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure and moves to dismiss Plaintiff's Complaint in 
its entirety for the following reason: 
Plaintiff's Complaint is subject to Rule 12 dismissal 
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction inasmuch as Plain- 
tiff, as an association, lacks standing under applicable 
Supreme Court and Courts of Appeals precedent to liti- 
gate the above-entitled cause wherein it seeks monetary 
damages for individual members beyond the terms of the 
collective bargaining agreement. 
WHEREFORE, Defendant Brown Group, Inc., dba 
Brown Shoe Company prays that an order of dismissal of 
Plaintiff's Complaint be entered with an award to Defend- 
75 
ant of its attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in the defense 
of this matter. 
Respectfully submitted, 
McManon, BerGcer, HANNA, 
LintHaNn, Copy & McCarTuy 
's' James N. Foster, Jr. 
James N. Foster, Jr. 
's/ Daniel R. Begian 
DANIEL R. BEGIAN 
Suite 200 
2730 North Ballas Road 
St. Louis, Missouri 63131 
Telephone: 314/567-7350 
Attorneys for Defendant 
| Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 
76 
[Filed Apr. 22, 1993] 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
EASTERN DIVISION 
[Title Omitted in Printing] 
MOTION TO ALTER OR AMEND THE JUDGMENT 
COMES NOW Piaintiff pursuant to Rule 59(e) of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and moves the Court 
to alter or amend its judgment in this case by either with- 
drawing its Order dated April 12, 1993 dismissing the 
complaint without prejudice and allowing the suit to 
proceed, as pleaded, due to the special nature of the re- 
lationship of a labor organization, such as plaintiff, and 
its members created under the Labor Management Rela- 
tions Act (29 U.S.C. § 141 et seq.) and recognized by 
Congress in 29 U.S.C. § 2104(5); or by withdrawing its 
Order dated April 12, 1993 and substituting an Order 
granting plaintiff 30 days to file and amended complaint 
seeking declaratory relief and adding affected individuals 
as parties to this action. 
In support of this motion plaintiff respectfully refers 
the Court to plaintiff's memorandum in support. 
Respectfully submitted, 
DIEKEMPER, HAMMOND, SHINNER, 
TURCOTTE AND LarRReEw, P.C. 
7730 Carondelet, Suite 222 
St. Louis, Missouri 63105 
(314) 727-1015 
77 
/s/ Jerome A. Diekemper 
JEROME A. DIEKEMPER 
SHERRIE A. SCHROEDER 
—and— 
RENEE L. BOWSER 
Assistant General Counsel 
United Food and Commercial 
Workers International Union 
1775 K Street N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Attorneys for Plaintiff United 
Food and Commercial Workers 
Union Local 751 
[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 
78 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
EASTERN DIVISION 
[Title Omitted in Printing] 
NOTICE OF APPEAL 
Notice is hereby given that United Food and Com- 
mercial Workers Union Local 751, as representative of 
the aggrieved employees of Brown Shoe Company’s former 
Dixon, Missouri plant, the Plaintiff in the above-named 
case, hereby appeals to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eighth Circuit from an order of this court, denying 
Plaintiff's motion to alter or amend its judgment granting 
a motion to dismiss the action without prejudice based on 
the court’s determination that the Plaintif lacked stand- 
ing under the Worker Adjustment Retraining and Notifica- 
tion Act (“WARN”), 29 U.S.C. §§ 2201 to 2109, to 
pursue its claim entered in this action on the 7th day of 
March, 1994. 
s’ Renee L. Bowser 
RENEE L. BOWSER 
Assistant General Counsel 
United Food and Commercial 
Workers International Union 
1775 K Street, N.W. 
Washington DC 20006 
(202) 466-1593 
—and— 
79 
/s/ Jerome A. Diekemper, Esquire 
JEROME A. DIEKEMPER, ESQUIRE 
Diekemper, Hammond, Shinners 
Turcotte and Larrew, P.C. 
7730 Carondelet, Suit 200 
Clayton MO 63105 
(314) 727-1015 
Attorneys for Plaintiff 
[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 
80 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF MISSOURI 
EASTERN DIVISION 
[Title Omitted in Printing] 
MOTION TO AMEND NOTICE OF APPEAL 
Comes now plaintiff, by counsel, and moves this Court 
for leave to file an amended notice of appeal clearly stat- 
ing that plaintiff is appealing not only from the Court's 
Order dated March 7, 1994 denying plaintiff's motion to 
alter or amend the judgment, but also from the Memo- 
randum and Order dated April 12, 1993 dismissing this 
action for lack of standing. 
In support of this motion, plaintiff refers the Court to 
its Memorandum submitted herewith. 
DIEKEMPER, HAMMOND, SHINNERS, 
TURCOTTE AND LaRREw, P.C. 
7730 Carondelet, Suite 200 
St. Louis, Missouri 63105 
(314) 727-1015 
's’ Sherrie A. Schroder 
JEROME A. DIEKEMPER 
SHERRIE A. SCHRODER 
—and— 
81 
RENEE L. BOWSER 
Assistant General Counsel 
United Food and Commercial 
Workers International Union 
1775 K Street N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Attorneys for Plaintiff United 
Food and Commercial Workers 
Union Local 751 
[Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 
