(| 
- CLERK 
No. 95-323 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
V. 


THOMAS R. NOLAND, TRUSTEE FOR DEBTOR 
First TRUCK LINES, INC. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20520 


(202) 514-2217 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 


Boteler v. Ingels, 308 U.S. 57 (1939) . . . 
Columbia Ribbon Co., In re, 117 F.2d 999 (3d Cir. 
3 ————̃ Ä 
Comstock v. Group of Institutional Investors, 
n 
Nicholas v. United States, 384 U.S. 678 (1966) 
Norwest Bank Worthington v. Ahlers, 485 U.S. 
. — 
Simonson v. Grandquist, 369 U.S. 38 (1962) ........... 


Stebbins v. Crocker Citizens National Bank, 516 
F.2d 784 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 913 


6  csscceccvecnsesonsssscecnssannantsetustapsunmnievtguamessmmasessass 


United States v. Killoren, 119 F.2d 364 (8th Cir.), 


cert. denied, 314 U.S. 640 (1941) 
United States v. Sotelo, 436 U.S. 268 (1978) ........... 


Statutes: 


Bankruptey Act, 11 U.S.C. 101 et seq.: 


11 U.S.C. 9300 (8 5700 (4976). . 
. 
I 
Ir LETT 
13433 — ͤ ae 
JI rr 
D ae 
r dees 


(I) 


— 
— e 2 — 2 18 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-323 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
v. 


THOMAS R. NOLAND, TRUSTEE FOR DEBTOR 
First Truck LINES, INC. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


The court of appeals recognized that Congress— 
writing with precision and detail—expressly provided 
postpetition tax penalty claims of the type involved in 
this case with a statutory “[flirst” priority in the 
distribution of the assets of the debtor's estate (Pet. 
App. Za). See 11 U.S.C. 503(b)1C), 507(a\1). The 
court stated, however, that it did “not see the fairness 
or the justice” of that legislative determination (Pet. 
App. 19a): 


We do not see the fairness or justice in permitt- 
ing the * * * claim for tax penalties * * * to 
enjoy an equal or higher priority with claims 
based on the extension of value to the debtor * * *. 


(1) 


2 


Believing that “fairness” and “justice” support the 
view (which Congress evidently did not share) that 
“claims based on extension of value to the debtor” 
should be paid before postpetition tax penalty claims, 
the court annulled and reversed the statutory priori- 
ties that Congress provided. The court did so quite 
emphatically and directly, by changing the priority 
for the tax penalty claims in this case from “{flirst” 
to “last.” 

For the reasons detailed in our opening brief, the 
“principles of equitable subordination” that are codi- 
fied in Section 510(c)(1) of the Bankruptcy Code (11 
U.S.C. 510(c)(1)) do not support this judicial reinven- 
tion of the priority provisions of the Code. By allow- 
ing the court’s own view of what is “fair” or “unfair” 
to override the express congressional determination 
of the priority to be afforded to these competing 
claims, the court of appeals violated the fundamental 
principle that a bankruptcy court’s equitable powers 
“must and can only be exercised within the confines 
of the Bankruptcy Code” (Norwest Bank Worthing- 
ton v. Ahlers, 485 U.S. 197, 206 (1988)). Principles of 
equitable subordination do not permit a court “to 
contradict statutory or common law when [it] feels a 
fairer result may be obtained by application of a 
different rule.” Stebbins v. Crocker Citizens Na- 
tional Bank, 516 F.2d 784, 787 (9th Cir), cert. denied. 
423 U.S. 913 (1975). They do not permit a court to Say, 
“in effect * * No, the distribution scheme pro- 
vided by [Congress] is a mistake. 516 F.2d at 788. 

As this Court summarized in Comstock v. Group of 
Institutional Investors, 335 U.S. 211 (1948), the doc- 
trine of equitable subordination has the quite 
different and narrower function of punishing credi- 
tors who engage in inequitable misconduct, by 


3 


“depriviing] the wrongdoer of the fruits of his 
wrong Id. at 229. See also Pet. Br. 10-16. It is un- 
disputed that the United States did not engage in any 
inequitable conduct in this case. The doctrine of 
equitable subordination therefore simply does not 
apply. 

Respondent advances several arguments in support 
of the decision below. None of respondent's con- 
tentions substantiates the untenable proposition that, 
by codifying the preexisting “principles of equitable 
subordination,” Congress authorized the courts to an- 
nul and disregard the hierarchy of detailed statutory 
priorities that Congress enacted to govern the rights 
of innocent claimants in bankruptcy cases. All but 
two of respondent's contentions are addressed in our 
opening brief. We reply here to the two contentions 
not previously addressed. 

1. Respondent claims that there is a “bankruptcy 
policy of favoring pecuniary loss claims over 
nonpecuniary loss claims” and that “nonpecuniary 
loss tax penalties * * * have traditionally been 
disfavored” in bankruptcy (Resp. Br. 9, 20-21). These 
assertions are neither relevant nor factually correct. 

Even if one could identify a source (other than the 
provisions of the Code) to determine what is “bank- 
ruptcy policy” and what is not, such “policy” has no 
lawful force if it has not been enacted as positive law. 
A court’s perception of “policy” (as well as its 
perception of “fairness” and “justice”) can not justify 
countermanding the statutory priorities that Con- 
gress has enacted. E.g., United States v. Killoren, 
119 F.2d 364, 366 (8th Cir.) (At he plain mandate of the 
law cannot be set aside because of considerations 
which may appeal to referee or judge as falling within 
general principles of equity jurisprudence”), cert. 


denied, 314 U.S. 640 (1941); In re Columbia Ribbon 
Co., 117 F.2d 999, 1002 (3d Cir. 1941) (a “court may not 
by granting a priority which it deems equitable set 
aside the clear congressional mandate that no such 
priority shall be accorded”). 

Moreover, respondent’s broad contention that 
“bankruptcy policy” disfavors nonpecuniary loss 
penalties is demonstrably incorrect. One need look no 
further than to Sections 503(b)(1) and 507(a)(1) of the 
Bankruptcy Code, which provide “{flirst” priority for 
postpetition tax penalty claims, to see that “bank- 
ruptcy policy” is far more complex and articulated 
than respondent contends.’ As this Court has ex- 
plained, by providing a statutory priority for post- 
petition tax penalties, Congress sought to advance 
the legislative policy of ensuring compliance with the 


' The only category of tax penalties that is “disfavored” in 
bankruptcy is prepetition nonpecuniary loss penalties in 
Chapter 7 cases. See 11 U.S.C. 7264) (subordinating such 
prepetition penalties to general unsecured claims). By con- 
trast, as the court of appeals acknowledged, in providing a 
first“ priority for postpetition tax penalty claims, Congress 
did “not distinguish between tax penalties that are 
compensatory in nature and those that are not” (Pet. App. 
15a). As we discuss in our opening brief (Pet. Br. 19 n.6), 
Congress has made detailed distinctions in the priorities 
provided to tax penalty claims in various differing contexts 
under the Bankruptcy Code. See Pet. App. I4a-l5a (“In 
Chapter 7 cases, Congress assigned differing priorities to pre- 
and post pt it ion penalties. 11 U.S.C. §§ 726(a)(1) and 726(a)(4). 
Section NaN gives administrative expense priority 
to postpetition tax penalty claims.”). The careful distinctions 
that Congress made in providing differing bankruptcy 
priorities for different types of tax penalty claims would be 
rendered meaningless if courts were permitted to apply 
“principles of equitable subordination” to disregard and annul! 
the statutory priorities. See Pet. Br. 20-21. 


5 


tax laws by debtors in bankrupey and thereby ensur- 
ing that such debtors abide by the same rules of law 
that apply to every other business (including those 
with whom they compete). Nicholas v. United States, 
384 U.S. 678, 694 (1966); Boteler v. Ingels, 308 U.S. 57, 
61 (1939).° 

Although the court of appeals evidently disagreed 
with the policy judgment that Congress thus made in 
providing a Affirst“ priority for postpetition tax pen- 
alty claims, the court was nonetheless bound by that 
legislative determination. As this Court emphasized 


* Respondent errs in seeking to rely on Simonson v. 
Grandquist, 369 U.S. 38 (1962), as support for the proposition 
that penalty claims are disfavored in bankruptcy (Resp. Br. 
21). Prior to 1978, prepetition penalty claims had been dis- 
allowed by statute under Section 57(j) of the Bankruptcy Act, 
11 U.S.C. 930 (1976). See Simonson v. Granquist, 369 U.S. at 
40. Although the Court stated in Simonson “that the language 
of §57(j) broadly prohibits the allowance of penalty claims in 
bankruptcy” (369 U.S. at 39), that statement was necessarily 
limited to the prepetition tax penalties involved in that case. In 
Boteler v. Ingels, which was decided two decades before 
Simonson, a unanimous Court had held that Section 57(j) did 
not bar a claim for postpetition penalties incurred by the 
trustee. 308 U.S. at 61. And, four years after Simonson, the 
Court reaffirmed that holding in Nicholas v. United States, in 
concluding that the government's claim for a postpetition tax 
penalty was allowable and entitled to first priority in 
distribution. 384 U.S. at 694 (“the United States is entitled to 
exact the penalties here in question as a legitimate means to 
enforce the prompt filing of the tax returns”). As noted in our 
opening brief (Pet. Br. 21 n.8), the majority and concurring 
opinions in the court of appeals overlooked Nicholas and 
Boteler and thereby erred in stating, without qualification, that 
“prior to 1978, nonpecuniary loss tax penalty claims against the 
estate of the bankrupt were not allowed by law” (Pet. App. 12a; 
see id. at 22a). 


6 


in United States v. Sotelo, 436 U.S. 268, 279 (1978), 
“[hJowever persuasive [alternative policy] considera- 
tions might be in a legislative forum, we as judges 
cannot override the specific policy judgments made by 
Congress in enacting the statutory provisions with 
which we are here concerned.” See also Pet. Br. 14-16 
& n.2. 

2. Respondent contends that, even though Con- 
gress conferred a “[flirst” priority on postpetition tax 
penalty claims as a matter of law, such claims should 
be subordinated as a matter of “equity” (even “with- 
out a finding of inequitable conduct” ( Resp. Br. 24)) in 
order to avoid a perceived inconsistency with other 
provisions of the Bankruptcy Code.’ Respondent 
grounds this contention on the theory that the 
Statutory priority for postpetition tax penalty claims 
is “misguided” and should not be enforced (id. at 25). 

But that assertion is nothing more than a 
contention that courts should disregard the priorities 


* Respondent suggests that equitable subordination of tax 
penalty claims is “not automatic” under the analysis of the 
court of appeals but is instead to “be determined on a case by 
case basis” (Resp. Br. 14). That description of the decision 
below is not correct. The court of appeals held that tax penalty 
claims are to be subordinated solely because it would be more 
“fair” for creditors “with claims based on the extension 
of value to the debtor” to be paid first (Pet. App. 19a). That 
rationale, if valid, would apply in every bankruptcy case 
involving an estate without sufficient assets to pay the claims of 
all creditors. In the rare case in which the estate has sufficient 
assets to satisfy all claims, there would be no need to invoke the 
doctrine of equitable subordination—for all claims would then 
be paid. Moreover, even on “a case by case basis”, courts are 
not permitted to disregard statutory priorities soley on the 
theory that a different priority scheme might be more “fair” in 
a particular case. See Pet. Br. 9-16. 


7 


enacted by Congress if they conclude that “the distri- 
bution scheme provided by the Bankruptcy Code] is a 
mistake” (Stebbins v. Crocker Citizens National 
Bank, 516 F.2d at 788). It is unquestionably not the 
function of a court of equity, however, to “contradict 
statutory or common law” merely because the chan- 
cellor “feels a fairer result may be obtained by appli- 
cation of a different rule.” Id. at 787. See Pet. Br. 11. 
17. 

Moreover, there is nothing “misguided” about the 
detailed and complex set of priorities that Congress 
established in the Bankruptey Code. Respon- 
dent complains that a “[{flirst” priority for tax penalty 
claims would require “any party doing business or 
extending credit postpetition to a trustee or debtor in 
possession” to demand “superpriority status be- 
fore providing goods or services“ (Resp. Br. 24). The 
“superpriority” provisions of the Bankruptcy Code 
permit a party who extends credit to the debtor after 
the petition is filed to obtain a priority “over any or 
all administrative expenses” but only if, inter alia, 
the trustee is otherwise unable “to obtain unsecured 
credit” (11 U.S.C. 3640 (1). Respondent suggests 
that the “delays” inherent in obtaining authorization 
for “superpriority” status from the bankruptcy court 
“could be fatal” to a debtor, and would therefore be 
“contrary to the strong bankruptcy policy in favor of 
rehabilitating or reorganizing debtors” ( Resp. Br. 
24). Respondent thus seems to contend that the prior- 
ity that Congress established for postpetition tax 
penalty claims will frustrate the entire object of the 
Bankruptcy Code. 

It could as easily be contended that, if Congress had 
determined not to provide a first priority for post- 
petition taxes and tax penalties, that determination 


8 


would have frustrated the entire object of the Internal 
Revenue Code.“ The balancing of competing policy 
objectives is an inherently legislative function. Con- 
gress has performed that policy function by enacting 
the complex and detailed scheme of priorities set 
forth in the Bankruptcy Code. It is not the proper 
task of the bankruptcy courts to nullify the choices 
that Congress made based upon the court’s differing 
perception of “fairness” and “justice” (Pet. App. 19a).° 


In enacting the priority scheme of the Bankruptcy Code, 
Congress obviously gave a high priority to ensuring tax law 
compliance. It seems hardly necessary to point out that the 
dilemma that respondent poses—the threatened frustration and 
collapse of the entire bankruptcy scheme of reorganization—is 
most unrealistic. Respondent’s stated concerns are obviously 
entirely irrelevant to a debtor that complies with its lawful 
duties under the Internal Revenue Code and thereby avoids the 
accrual of priority postpetition tax penalties. Moreover, the 
conditions precedent to the allowance of “superpriority” status 
have nothing to do with the risk of tax penalties—they are 
related to whether the credit status of the debtor is such that 
unsecured credit is not available. See 11 U.S.C. 364(c). 

5 Respondent's extended discussion (Resp. Br. 21-22 n.14) 
concerning the priority to be afforded to prepetition penalty 
claims in a case under Chapter 11 is irrelevant to this case, 
which involves the priority to be afforded to a postpetition first 
priority claim in a case under Chapter 7. 


9 


For the foregoing reasons and those set forth in 


our opening brief, the judgment of the court of appeals 
should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


MARCH 1996 


