Supreme Court, Us & 
(30) FI.L rk. D | 


wail? 3 yo 
No. 94 - 1039 dL 133 


a 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE 
October Term, 1994 


ROY ROMER, as Governor of the State of Colorado, 
and the STATE OF COLORADO, 
ee 


RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA ROMERO, LINDA 
FOWLER, PAUL BROWN, PRISCILLA INKPEN, 
JOHN MILLER, the BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT RE-2, the CITY AND COUNTY OF 
DENVER, the CITY OF BOULDER, the CITY OF 
ASPEN, and the CITY COUNCIL OF ASPEN, 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to 
the Supreme Court of the State of Colorado 


JOINT APPENDIX 


GALE A. NORTON®* JEAN E. DUBOFSKY* 
M. OVICH 188i Ninth Street, Ste. 210 
Solicitor Boulder, Colorado 80302 
Colorado Department of Law Telephone: (303) 447-3510 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE 
| Rahs 
Manual: 
Officers’ Bill of Rights) ................ 58 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 33 (Denver Police 
Department Directive) ................. 59 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 118 (Boulder 
COUNG OND vi ccpciccviance en ee 60 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 57 (Boulder 
P6064 dhgaee tabi 62 
Affidavit of Leslie L. Durgin TEU Thee Seo 80 
Dae & eae 4 
; (Boulder V. 
School District Materials) eo b w0.0.o hoteles 82 
Letter of Dani Newsum (Part of 
Defendants’ ExhibitC) ................. 86 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 48 (Aspen 
GEO, 80.558 bce a> oceania a tue 90 
Affidavit of John S. Bennett................. 93 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 117 (Aurora Rule) rte eb we eee 94 
Affidavit of Nancy C. Camey : 0.6.0. se aha 95 
Testimony of Jerome Culp.................. 98 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE 

Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 18 (National Legal 

Foundation letter to Tomy Marco) ......... 100 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 15 

re 104 
Letter of John Franklin (Part of 

Defendants’ ExhibitC) ................ 110 
Affidavit of John Gillespie................. 115 
Defendants’ Exhibit B 

(Talmey/Drake Dec. 1992 Survey) ......... 120 
Attachment to Affidavit of Paul 

(Talmey/Drake Sept. 1993 Survey)......... 126 
Testimony of Wilford Perkins............... 133 
Testimony of Tony Marco ................. 173 
Testimony of Harvey Mansfield ............. 189 
Testimony of Joseph Broadus ............... 202 
Testimony of Robert George ............... 212 
Affidavit of James Hunter ................. 237 
Deposition 

EWE s ed beecctoescicce 266 
Sih ob ob eso ceeceeveccecs 267 


Opinion of the District Court for the City and County of 
Denver, dated January 15,1992 .......... B-l 


Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment of 
Denver, dated December 14, 1993 C-1 


11, 1994 


See, BOP ss 6 6 6c Bae bk hob SoS ROLES A-l 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


December 23, 1992 
December 29, 1992 


January 8, 1993 


January 11-14, 1993 
January 15, 1993 
October 12-22, 1993 
December 14, 1993 
December 22, 1993 
January 7, 1994 


February 9, 1994 


Action 


Complaint Filed 

Motion for Preliminary Injunction 
Filed 

Amended Complaint Filed 

City of Aspen’s and City Council 
for City of Aspen’s Motion for a 
Preliminary Injunction Filed 
Brief in Opposition to Plaintiffs’ 
Motions for Preliminary Injunction 


DISTRI T COURT, CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER, 
COLORADO 


Case No. 92 CV 7223, Courtroom 19 


AMENDED COMPLAINT 


RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA ROMERO, LINDA 
FOWLER, PAUL BROWN, JANE DOE, MARTINA 
NAVRATILOVA, BRET TANBERG, PRISCILLA 
INKPEN, JOHN MILLER, THE BOULDER VALLEY 
SCHOOL DISTRICT RE-2, THE CITY AND COUNTY OF 
DENVER, THE CITY OF BOULDER, THE CITY OF 
ASPEN, and THE CITY COUNCIL OF ASPEN, 


Plaintiffs, 
v. 


ROY ROMER as Governor of the State of Colorado, GALE 
NORTON as Attorney General of the State of Colorado, and 
THE STATE OF COLORADO, 


INTRODUCTION 


This is an action seeking a declaration that Amendment 
2, approved by the Colorado electorate in the general 
election of November 3, 1992, violates the constitutions of 
the United States and the State of Colorado. Amendment 2 


brought under the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act, 
§ 13-51-101, et seq., Rules 57 and 65 of 
of Civil Procedure, and 42 U.S.C. 


: 
ef 


42 U.S.C. § 1983 by virtue of the Supremacy Clause of 
Article IV of the United States Constitution. 


Venue is proper in this Court under Rule 98(c) of the 
Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 


GENERAL ALLEGATIONS 
Background 


1. On November 3, 1992, the following proposed 


amendment to Article II of the Colorado Constitution 
submitted to the voters as Amendment 2: a 


Neither the State of Colorado, through 
any of its branches or departments, nor 
any of its agencies, political subdivisions, 
municipalities or school districts, shall 
enact, adopt or enforce any statute, 
regulation, ordinance or policy whereby 
homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orien- 
tation, conduct, practices or relationships 
shall constitute or otherwise be the basis 
of, or entitle any person or class of per- 


2. On November 5, 1992, the Denver Post reported 
that 811,479 electors had voted for Amendment 2 and 
707,525 electors had voted against it. 


3. On information and belief, a proclamation giving 
effect to Amendment 2 will take place before January 
16, 1993. deni 


Plaintiffs 


4. Plaintiff Richard G. Evans is a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of Denver, Colorado. He is employed 


by the City and County of Denver. Plaintiff Evans is a gay 
man. 


5. Plaintiff Angela Romero is a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of Denver, Colorado. She is employed 
by the City and County of Denver as a police officer. 
Plaintiff Romero is a lesbian. 


6. Plaintiff Paul Brown is a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of Denver, Colorado. He is employed 
by the State of Colorado. Plaintiff Brown is a gay man. 


7. Plaintiff Linda Fowler is a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of Denver, Colorado. She is employed 
as a contract administrator by a private employer. Plaintiff 
Fowler is a lesbian. 


8. "Jane Doe" is the assumed name of a citizen of the 
United States and a resident of Denver, Colorado. She is 
employed by a public entity in Jefferson County. Plaintiff 
Doe is a lesbian. 


9. Plaintiff Martina Navratilova is a citizen of the 
United States and a resident of Aspen, Colorado. She is a 
professional tennis player. Plaintiff Navratilova is a lesbian. 


10. Plaintiff Priscilla Inkpen is a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of Boulder, Colorado. Plaintiff Inkpen 
is an ordained minister. Plaintiff Inkpen is a lesbian. 


11. Plaintiff John Miller is a citizen of the United States 
and a resident of Colorado Springs, Colorado. Plaintiff 
Miller is a Professor of Spanish at the University of 
Colorado - Colorado Springs (UCCS), Chair of the UCCS 
Department of Language and Culture and Chair of the 
University of Colorado’s system-wide University Faculty 
Council. Plaintiff Miller is a gay man. 


12. Plaintiff Boulder Valley School District RE-2 ("the 
School District"), as a Colorado public school district duly 


5 


em GON. © 


constituted pursuant to the laws of Colorado, is a political 
subdivision of the State of Colorado and a 

corporation with its administrative offices located in Boulder 
County, Colorado. The School District acts by and through 
its duly qualified and elected Board of Education. 


6 


canvassed by the Secretary of State within 21 days after the 
election. 


17. Defendant Gale Norton is Attorney General of the 
State of Colorado and required by Colo. Rev. Stat. 
§ 24-31-101(1)(a) to “prosecute and defend all actions and 
proceedings, civil and criminai, in which the state is a party 
or is interested when required to do so by the governor." 


18. Defendant State of Colorado was created under the 
authority of the Enabling Act, Act of March 3, 1875, ch. 
139, 18 Stat. 474, and encompasses the branches, depart- 
ments, agencies, and political subdivisions subject to the 
proscriptions of Amendment 2. 


Factual Allegations 


19. Sections 28-93 through 28-97 of the Denver Muni- 
cipal Code currently protect plaintiffs Evans, Romero, 
Brown, Fowler and Doe from discrimination in employment, 
educational institutions, real estate transactions, public 
accommodations, and health and welfare service on the basis 
of their sexual orientation. If Amendment 2 repeals these 
sections as they apply to gay men, lesbians and bisexuals, 
plaintiffs Evans, Romero, Brown, Fowler and Doe will face 
the real, immediate and substantial 1° sk of discrimination on 
the basis of their sexual orientation in employment, edu- 
cational institutions, real estate transactions, public 
accommodations, and health and welfare services. 


20. Rules and Regulations of the Denver Police Depart- 
ment, RR-}22, and § 117.01 ("Officer’s Bill of Rights") in 
the Police Department Operations Manual currently protect 
plaintiff Romero from discrimination on the basis of her 
sexual orientation. Following enactment of Amendment 2, 
Plaintiff Romero will lose these protections and face the real, 


immediate and substantial risk of discrimination in her 
employment on the basis of sexual orientation. 


21. An executive order issued by Governor Roy Romer 
and dated December 10, 1990, and policy 11-1 of the Code 
of Colorado Regulations currently protects plaintiff Brown 
from discrimination in his employment. Following enact- 
ment of Amendment 2, Plaintiff Brown will lose these 
protections and face the real, immediate and substantial risk 
of discrimination in his employment on the basis of his 
sexual orientation. 


22. On November 28, 1977, the City of Aspen, by and 


Amendment 2 purports to repeal these provisions as they 
apply to gay men, lesbians and bisexuals. If Amendment 2 
repeals this section as it applies to lesbians Plaintiff 
Navratilova will face the real, immediate and substantial risk 
of discrimination on the basis of her sexual orientation in 


25. Sections 12-1-2 through 4 of the Boulder Revised 
Code prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orienta- 
tion in housing, employment and public accommodations. 
Amendment 2 purports to repeal these provisions as they 

apply to gay men, lesbians and bisexuals. If Amendment 2 

so repeals these sections, plaintiff Inkpen will face the real, 
senmnsdlnte and sebectentiel dd of Gactienieation 0a the beaie 
of her sexual orientation in housing, employment and public 
accommodations. 


26. Policy JFH, Student Complaints and Grievances, 
was adopted by the School District’s Board of Education on 
June 18, 1992. Its implementing regulation was issued on 
the same date. Together, Policy JFH and its implementing 
regulation declare that no student shall be subjected to 
discrimination. They establish a procedure which, in 
pertinent part, affords aggrieved students the right to seek 
redress for alleged discrimination expressly including 
discrimination based on sexual orientation. Amendment 2 
will prevent the School District from enforcing Policy JFH 
and its implementing regulation. 


27. Following enactment of Amendment 2, heterosexual 
persons will be able to avail themselves of the above stated 
protections against discrimination on the basis of sexual 
orientation provided that the discrimination is not based on 
a perception that such persons are gay, lesbian or bisexual, 
but gay men, lesbians and bisexuals or persons so perr~ived 
will not be able to avail themselves of the protections. 


28. The defendants are state officials acting under the 
color of state law within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 


29. Following enactment of Amendment 2, plaintiffs 
oe he Gene nae eng 3 eae CE ee 
their sexual orientation. 


CLAIMS FOR RELIEF 
FIRST CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Equal Protection Clause 


30. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 29. 


31. Amendment 2 purports to forbid the courts of the 
State of Colorado from enforcing local ordinances, federal 
or state statutes or constitutional provisions that recognize or 
protect gay men, lesbians or bisexuals. 


32. Amendment 2 affirmatively authorizes, encourages 
and may require public and private discrimination on the 
basis of actual or perceived gay, lesbian and bisexual 
orientation and establishes the right to discriminate against 
gay men, lesbians and bisexuals as one of the basic policies 
of the State of Colorado. 


33. Amendment 2 places substantial and unique burdens 
on gay men, lesbians and bisexuals to obtain legislation, 
executive policies and judicial determinations in their interest 
in state, municipal or school district forums regardless of the 
merits or, or need for, such legislation, policies or 
determinations and creates classifications that impinge upon 
the fundamental rights to vote and to participate equally in 
the political process. This diminished status and resulting 
stigma does not extend to any other group or class of citizens 
under the laws or constitution of the State of Colorado. 


34. For the above stated reasons, Amendment 2 
deprives the plaintiffs of their rights to equal protection of 
the laws as protected by the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983, 


10 


and by the Due Process Clause in Article II, Section 25 of 
the Colorado Constitution. 


SECOND CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Freedom of Association and Expression 


35. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 
through 34. 


36. Amendment 2 disadvantages and discriminates 
against persons who hold a particular point of view by 
excluding a particular idea or belief about sexual orientation 
from being acted on through normal legislative, executive 
and judicial processes in Colorado. 


37. Amendment 2 has the purpose and effect of limiting 
meaningful individual and collective advocacy of political, 
social and economic change on behalf of gay men, lesbians 
and bisexuals in securing equal rights for these persons. 


38. Amendment 2 has the purpose and effect of 
coercing persons to adhere or profess to adhere to a single, 
state-approved belief respecting gay, lesbian or bisexual 

Oo tati 


39. By affirmatively authorizing and encouraging 
discrimination on the basis of gay, lesbian or bisexual 
orientation, Amendment 2 chills the speech of those persons 
who would otherwise freely speak out on matters related to 
gay, lesbian or bisexual orientation. 


40. For the above stated reasons, Amendment 2 violates 
the plaintiffs’ rights under the First Amendment to the 
United States Constitution and Article II, Section 10 of the 
Colorado Constitution. 


11 


THIRD CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Establishment Clause 


41. Plaintiffs 
a incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 


42. Amendment 2 is based upon and embodies a 
particular religious view regarding gay, lesbian and bisexual 
orientation. The primary effect of Amendment 2 is to 
advance a particular religious belief with respect to sexual 


43. Amendment 2 has no secular purpose. Instead, its 


purpose, and is 
me ne oe to advance a particular 


44. For the above stated reasons, Amendment 2 violates 
me oe rights under the First Amendment to the 
States Constitution and Article II, Section 

ee 4 of the 


FOURTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 


46. Amendment 2 denies plaintiffs the fundamental 
right to petition their government for a redress of grievances 
in violation of the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution and Article II, Section 10 of the Colorado 
Constitut; 


12 


FIFTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Vagueness 


47. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs | 
through 46. 


51. By imposing impermissibly vague prohibitions, 
Amendment 2 on its face violates the plaintiffs’ rights under 
the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and 
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, as 
well as the Due Process Clause of Article II, Section 25 of 
the Colorado Constitution and Article II, Section 4 of the 
Colorado Constitution. 


SIXTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Republican Form of Government 


52. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs | 
through 51. 


53. By allowing Colorado voters to deprive plaintiffs of 
certain fundamental rights, as elsewhere alleged in this 
the use of the initiative as a means for adopting 
Amendment 2 is a violation of Article IV, Section 4 of the 


13 


United States Constitution, under which each state and the 
citizens of each state, are guaranteed a republican form of 
ster mea Ny Soap Enabling Act to the Colorado 
Constitution guarantees to the 

pres plaintiffs a republican 


SEVENTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Limits on Initiative 


54. Plaintiffs 
- incorporate by reference paragraphs 1 


55. An initiated constitutional amendment that places 
certain legislation beyond the reach of the general assembly 
violates Article V, section 1(4) of the Colorado Constitution, 
which provides that "[tJhis section [reserving to the people 
the power to initiate amendments to the constitution) shall 
not be construed to deprive the general assembly of the 
power to enact any measure." 


14 


58. The cities of Denver, Aspen and Boulder have 
exercised the home rule powers granted to them by Section 
6 of Article XX of the Colorado constitution to prohibit 
discrimination based on sexual orientation in various settings. 
A construction purporting to void these ordinances as they 
apply to gay men, lesbians and bisexuals would be in conflict 
with the limitation stated in Article XX of the Colorado 
Constitution. 


legislation, regulations and policies beyond the reach of 
municipalities when such legislation, regulations and policies 
are required by local conditions would usurp the powers 
granted to home rule cities by Article XX, Section 6 of the 
Colorado Constitution. Article XX protects those powers 
except when there is an explicit declaration to the contrary. 
Amendment 2 is not such a declaration. 


60. Article XX of the Colorado Constitution, enacted 
in 1902 and establishing home rule authority, operates as an 
implied limitation on Article V, which reserves to the people 
the power to initiate amendments to the constitution, enacted 
as part of the original constitution in 1876. 


NINTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 
Article IX, Section 15 of the Colorado Constitution 
61. Plaintiffs incorporate by reference paragraphs | 
through 60. 


62. Article IX, Section 15 of the Colorado Constitution 
vests in local boards of education the authority to control 
instruction in the public schools of their respective districts. 
Local control by district boards of education is the focus of 
historical development of public education in Colorado. 


15 


67. Amendment 2 prevents state courts from enforcing 
statutes, regulations, ordinances and policies whereby gay, 
lesbian or bisexual Orientation, conduct, practices or 
relationships are the basis of a claim of discrimination. 


existing or future rights of gay men, lesbians or bisexuals. 
Amendment 2 places the state government and municipalities 
in the position of incurring legal liability for violation of the 
constitutional provisions. 


69. For the above stated reasons, Amendment 2 violates 
the Supremacy Clause of Article VI, paragraph 2 of the 
United States Constitution, the Due Process Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
the access to the courts provision of the Colorado 
Constitution, Article II, Section 6. 


ELEVENTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF 


71. Although the People of the State of Colorado retain 
the power to amend the state constitution, the state 
constitution prohibits an amendment that conflicts with the 
federal constitution. Amendment 2 conflicts with the federal 
constitution. 


72. Amendment 2 unlawfully attempts to limit the 
constitutional authority of home rule cities as granted under 
Article XX of the Colorado Constitution to adopt and 
exforce legislation or regulations protecting rights as granted 
to citizens under the Constitution of the United States, 
including legislation and regulations prohibiting 
discrimination within their municipal boundaries on the basis 
of sexual orientation. 


73. For the above stated reasons, Amendment 2 violates 
Article 1, Section 2 of the Colorado Constitution. 


17 


WHEREFORE, the plaintiffs pray for relief and 
judgment as follows: 


A. to declare that Amendment 2 to Article II of the 
Colorado Constitution violates the United States Constitution, 
42 U.S.C. § 1983, and the Colorado Constitution on the 
above enumerated grounds; 


B. to enjoin defendant Romer from proclaiming the 
vote which would otherwise give effect to Amendment 2; 


C. to enjoin defendant Romer from enforcing 
Amendment 2; 


D. to enjoin defendant Norton from enforcing 
Amendment 2; 


BE. to enjoin defendant State of Colorado, including its 
branches, departments, agencies, political subdivisions, 
municipalities and school districts from in any way enforc- 
ing, recognizing or giving effect to Amendment 2. 


F. to declare that the protections adopted by various 
state and local governmental entities prohibiting discrimina- 
tion on the basis of sexual orientation remain in force as 
adopted by the respective entities; 


G. for costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees 
as may be allowed by law; and 


H. for such other and further relief as the Court deems 
just and proper. 


Respectfully submitted this 23rd day of December, 
1992. 


JEAN E. DUBOFSKY, P.C. 


18 


Boulder, CO 80302 
(303) 447-3510 


Jean Winer, #8538 
Attorney at Law 

1942 Broadway, Suite 404 
Boulder, CO 80302 
(303) 938-6836 


David H. Miller, #8405 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES 
UNION OF COLORADO 


555 17th Street, Suite 2900 
P.O. Box 8479 

Denver, CO 80201 

(303) 295-8166 


William B. Rubenstein 

Ruth EB. Harlow 

AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES 
FOUNDATION 

132 West 43rd Street 

New York, NY 10036 

(212) 944-9800 


Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich 


19 


& Rosati 

2 Palo Alto Square 
Palo Alto, CA 94306 
(415) 493-9300 


Mary Newcombe 

Lynn Palma, #8851 

LAMBDA LEGAL DEFENSE AND 
EDUCATION FUND, INC. 

606 South Olive St., Suite 580 

Los Angeles, CA 90014 

(213) 629-2728 


ATTORNEYS FOR PLAINTIFFS 
RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA 
ROMERO, LINDA FOWLER, PAUL 
BROWN, JANE DOE, MARTINA 
NAVRATILOVA, BRET TANBERG, 
PRISCILLA INKPEN, JOHN 
MILLER, THE BOULDER VALLEY 
SCHOOL DISTRICT RE-2 


CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER 
Daniel B. Muse, City Attorney 
Darlene M. Ebert, #8262 

1445 Cleveland Pl., Room 303 
Denver, CO 80202-5375 

(303) 640-2931 


ATTORNEYS FOR CITY AND 
COUNTY OF DENVER 


OFFICE OF BOULDER CITY 
ATTORNEY 

Joseph N. de Raismes, III, #2812 
P.O. Box 791 

Boulder, CO 80306 


20 


(303) 441-3020 


ATTORNEY FOR CITY OF 
BOULDER 


CITY OF ASPEN 


Edward M. Caswall, #10435 
John Paul Worcester, #20610 


130 S. Galena Street 
Aspen, CO 81611 
(303) 920-5055 


ATTORNEY FOR CITY OF ASPEN 
Plaintiffs’ addresses: 


City and County of Denver 
350 City and County Building 
Denver, CO 80202 


City of Boulder 
P.O. Box 791 
Boulder, CO 80306 


City of Aspen 
Aspen City Council 
130 S. Galena 

Aspen, CO 81611 


Boulder Valley School District, RE-2 


6500 E. Arapahoe. 
Boulder, CO 80301 


21 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 46 


STATE OF COLORADO 
EXECUTIVE CHAMBERS 
136 State Capitol 
Denver, Colorado 80203-1792 
Phone (303) 866-2471 
Roy Romer 
Governor 


EXECUTIVE ORDER 
IN CELEBRATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 


WHERBAS, in the State of Colorado we recognize the 


diversity in our pluralistic society and strive to 
bring an end to discrimination in any form; 


WHEREAS, freedom from discrimination is the policy of 
state government; 


WHEREAS, the State of Colorado must continue to take 
positive steps to ensure non-discrimination, 
and assure that all citizens, regardless of race, 
ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, 
religion, or physical or mental disability, have 
an equal opportunity to compete for and obtain 
employment with the State of Colorado; 


NOW, THEREFORE, I, Roy Romer, Governor of the State 
of Colorado, under the authority vested in me under the 
Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, DO 
HEREBY ORDER THAT, with respect to all state employ- 
ees, Classified and exempt: 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 43 
PART 11 
UNFAIR COMPETITION - DECEPTIVE PRACTICES 


10-3-1102. Definitions. As used in this part 11, unless 
the context otherwise requires: 


(1) “Commissioner” means the commissioner of 
insurance. 


(2) “Insurance policy” or “insurance contract" means 
any contract of insurance, indemnity, medical or hospital 


service, suretyship, or annuity issued, proposed for issuance, 
or intended for issuance by any person. 


(2.5) Repealed, L. 81, p. 577, § 5, effective June 4, 
1981. 


Lloyds insurer, surplus line insurer, fraternal benefit society, 
and other legal entities engaged in the insurance business, 
including agents, limited insurance representatives, agencies, 
brokers, surplus line brokers, and adjusters. Such term shall 
also include medical service plans and hospital service plans 
regulated under parts 1 and 3 of article 16 of this title and 
health maintenance organizations regulated under parts 1 and 
4 of article 16 of this title. Such plans and organizations 
shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of insurance 
for purposes of this part 11 only. 


10-3-1103. Unfair methods of competition and unfair 
or deceptive acts or practices prohibited. No person shall 
engage in this state in any trade practice which is defined in 
this part 11 as, or determined pursuant to section 10-3-1107 


24 


to be, an unfair method of competition or an unfair or 
deceptive act or practice in the business of insurance. 


10-3-1104. Unfair methods of competition and unfair 


(A) An application for coverage; or 


(B) Any investigation conducted in connection with an 
application for coverage; 


(VI) Using information about gender, marital status, 
medical history, occupation, reside 8 4 ae 2 
beneficiaries, zip codes, or other territorial designations to 

(VIII) Using sexual orientation in the underwriting 
process or in the determination of insurability; 

(IX) Making adverse underwriting decisions because an 


licant insured has demonstrated concerns related to 
AIDS by seeking counseling from health care professionals; 


10-3-1107. Hearings. Whenever the commissioner has 
reason to believe that any person has been engaged or is 
engaging in this state in any unfair method of competition or 
any unfair or deceptive act or practice, whether defined or 


25 


reasonably implied in this part 11, and that a proceeding by 
him in respect thereto would be to the interest of the public, 
he shall proceed as provided in article 4 of title 24, C.R.S. 
Any final action by the commissioner pursuant to this section 
shall be subject to judicial review by the court of appeals 
pursuant to section 24-4-106 (11), C.R.S. 


10-3-1108. Orders. (1) If, after a hearing conducted 
under section 10-3-1107, the commissioner determines that 
the person charged has engaged in an unfair method of 
competition or an unfair or deceptive act or practice, he shall 
reduce his findings to writing and shall issue and cause to be 
served on such person a copy of such findings and an order 
requiring such person to cease and desist from engaging in 
such method of competition, act, or practice, and, if such act 
or practice is a violation of section 10-3-1104, 10-3-1105, or 
10-18-105, the commissioner may, at his discretion, order 
any one or more of the following: 


(a) Payment of a monetary penalty of not more than 
one thousand dollars for each and every act or violation but 
not to exceed an aggregate penalty of ten thousand dollars, 
unless such person, being an insurer, knew or 
should have known he was in violation of this part 11, in 
which case the penalty shall not be more than five thousand 
dollars for each and every act or violation, but not to exceed 
an aggregate penalty of fifty thousand dollars in any 
six-month period; 


(b) Suspension or revocation of the person’s license if 
he knew or reasonably should have known he was in 
violation of the provisions of this part 11; 


(c) Payment of a contractual claim to an insured or 
beneficiary pursuant to an insurance policy if the commis- 
sioner finds that the violation of this part 11 caused the 
failure to pay the claim, which amount shall be determined 


26 


by te commisione at he Bearing buen the eiony 
evidence presented. This paragraph (c 

Suring the peedency of any civil action seeking a declaratory 
judgment concerning such claims. 


order issued by the commissioner pursuant to 
paragcph () of subsection (1) of this section may be 
to the district court, whereupon the matter shall be 

tried de novo by the district court. 


10-3-1109. Penalty for violation of cease and desist 
orders. (1) Any person who violates a cease and desist order 
of the commissioner issued under section 10-3-1108, and 
while such order is in effect, may, after notice and hearing 
and upon order of the commissioner, be subject, at the 
discretion of the commissioner, to any one or more of the 
following: 


a) A monetary penalty of not more than ten thousand 
sieket ec amiceen cone eat oc vlabidien of on mannet, OF 
a monetary penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for 
each and every act or violation of an individual; 


(b) Suspension or revocation of such person's license. 


10-3-1104 and 10-3-1105. 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 59 
Regulation 4-2-9 


NON-DISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT OF 
ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME 
(AIDS) AND HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS 
(HIV) RELATED ILLNESS BY ISSUERS OF LIFE 
AND HEALTH INSURANCE 


§ I. Authority 


This regulation is promulgated under the authority of 
Sections 10-1-108(8), 10-1-109, 10-8-102 and 
10-3-1104(1)(f)() Colorado Revised Statutes (C.R.S.). 


History.-Eff. 1-1-88. 
§ 0. Purpose 
The purpose of this regulation is to establish standards 


to assure non-discriminatory treatment with respect to AIDS 


and HIV Related Illness in underwriting practices, policy 
forms and benefit provisions utilized by entities subject to 


the provisions of this regulation. 
History .-Eff. 1-1-88. 
§ Il. Scope 


This regulation applies to all Commercial Insurers. 
Nonprofit Hospital and Health Service Corporations, Health 
Maintenance Organizations and Fraternal Benefit Societies 
issuing life and/or health insurance policies, contracts, 


28 


certificates of coverage or subscriber agreements in the State 


of Colorado. 
History .-Eff. 1-1-88. 
§ IV. Standards 


directed toward determining the applicant’s sexual orienta- 
tion. 


B. Sexual orientation may not be used in the underwrit- 
ing process or in the determination of insurability. 


C. Insurance support organizations shall be directed by 
insurers not to investigate, directly or indirectly, the sexual 
orientation of an applicant or a beneficiary. 


D. No question shall be used which is designed to 
establish the sexual orientation of the applicant. 


G. Mutthar Go mactel cutee, ts ae 
the occupation, the gender, medical history, 
beneficiary designation, nor the zip code or other territorial 
classification of an applicant may be used to establish, or aid 


in establishing, the applicant’s sexual orientation. 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 41 


COLORADO CODE OF JUDICIAL CONDUCT 
(Appendix to Chapter 24) 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 42 


COLORADO RULES OF PROFESSIONAL 
CONDUCT 
(Appendix to Chapters 18 to 20) 


Adopted May 7, 1992, Effective January 1, 1993 


RULE 1.2 SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION 


(f) In representing a client, a lawyer shall not engage 
in conduct that exhibits or is intended to appeal to or 
engender bias against a person on account of that person’s 
race, gender, religion, national origin, disability, age, sexual 
orientation, or socioeconomic status, whether that conduct is 
directed to other counsel, court personnel, witnesses, parties, 
judges, judicial officers, or any persons involved in the legal 
ee ed oe cae 


“se * & 


31 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 23 
(DENVER ORDINANCE) 


DENVER 


HUMAN RIGHTS -- PROHIBITION OF 
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT, ETC. 


ARTICLEIV. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINA- 
TION IN EMPLOYMENT, HOUSING AND 
COMMERCIAL SPACE, PUBLIC ACCOMMO- 
DATIONS, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
AND HEALTH AND WELFARE SERVICES 


Sec. 28-91. Intent of council. 
(a) It is the intent of the council that every individual 


shall have an equal opportunity to participate fully in the 
economic, cultural and intellectual life of the city and to 
have an equal to participate in all aspects of life, 


(c) Except where specifically provided, the provisions 
of section 1-13 do not apply to this article. 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 893-91, § 1, 
12-2-91) 


32 


Sec. 28-92. Definitions. 


The following words and terms when used in this article 
shall have the following meanings: 


Age: A chronological age of at least forty (40) years. 


relations. 


Director: The duly appointed executive director of the 
agency for human rights and community relations. 


institution, including an academy, college, elementary or 
secondary school, extension course, kindergarten, nursery, 
school system or umiversity and a business, nursing, 
professional, secretarial, technical or vocational school and 
includes an agent of an educational institution. 


Employee: Any individual employed by or applying for 
employment with an employer. 


i in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks 
het ate cade iin On enn Gell shee 
mean any agent of such a person. 


33 


Plan in which employees participate directly or indirectly and 


not include any individual who is an alcoholic and whose 
unreasonable conduct as a result of use of alcohol is the 
basis on which a covered entity acts; and such term does not 
include an individual who is currently engaged in the illegal 


use of drugs when a covered entity acts on the basis of such 
use. 


Place of public accommodation: 


(1) As defined by section 59-2 of this code: All 
hostels; hotels; motels; rental rooms; rooming 
and/or boardinghouses; eating places; shops and 
stores dealing with goods or services of any kind; 
hospitals; recreational facilities, public parks; 
theaters of all kinds and any establishments licensed 
under chapter 7 (Amusements) of this Code. 


(2) Any establishment licensed under the Colorado 
Liquor Code or the Colorado Beer Code; all banks, 
credit information services and al] other financial 
institutions; imsurance companies and 
establishments of insurance brokers; clinics, dental 
or medical; clubs and lodges; bath houses and 
swimming pools; commercial or public garages, 
public transportation as well as the stations or 
terminals thereof; any establishment offering travel 
or tour services; and public areas and public 
elevators of buildings and structures. 


Real estate broker or salesperson: Any person licensed 
as such in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado 
Real Estate Commission. 


Religious organizations or associations: Any organi- 
zation affiliated with a church, synagogue, congregations, 
parish, brotherhood, religious corporation or any religious 
society engaging in the works of education, benevolence, 
charity or missions. 


35 


Sexual orientation: The status of an individual as to his 


or her heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. 


Transaction in real property: Exhibiting, listing, 
advertising, negotiating, agreeing to transfer or transferring, 
whether by sale, lease, sublease, rent, assignment or other 
agreement, any interest in real property or improvements 
thereon. 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 
Sec. 28-93. Discriminatory practices in employment. 


(a) Generally. It shal! be a discriminatory practice to 
do any of the following acts, based upon the race, color, 
religion, national origin, gender, age, sexual orientation, 
marital status, military status or physical or mental disability 
of any individual who is otherwise qualified: 


(1) By an employer: To fail or refuse to hire an 


applicant or to discharge any individual or other-—— 


wise to discriminate against any individual with 


way which would deprive or tend to deprive any 
individual of employment opportunities or 


(3) 


(4) 


unfair employment practice to 
lt he ls eed 


(c) Exceptions. 


or benefit plan shall excuse the failure to hire any 
individual because of the age of such individual. 


38 


(2) Elderly or physically or mentally disabled. It shall 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


not be discriminatory for employment to be limited 
to the elderly or physically or mentally disabled 
provided that such employment shall not 
discriminate among the elderly or physically or 
mentally disabled on the basis of other discrimi- 
natory criteria eet forth in subsection (a) hereof. 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 893-91, § 2, 
12-2-91) 


(b) Exceptions. It shall not be a discriminatory practice 
for admissions to be limited to persons with physical or 
mental disabilities, of specific religions or gender; except 
that when any of the above exempted colleges offers a 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-95. Discriminatory practices in real estate 
transactions. 


(a) It shall be a discriminatory practice to do any of the 
following acts based upon the race, color, religion, national 
origin, gender, age, sexual orientation, marital status, 


(2) To include in the terms or conditions of a trans- 
action in real property any clause, condition or 
restriction prohibited by this article; 


(3) To refuse to lend money, guarantee a loan, accept 
a deed of trust or mortgage or otherwise refuse to 
make funds available for the purchase, acquisition, 
construction, alteration, rehabilitation, repair or 
maintenance of real property or impose different 
conditions on such financing or refuse to provide 
title or other insurance, relating to the ownership or 
use of any interest in real property; 


(4) To refuse or restrict facilities, service, repairs or 
improvements for a tenant or lessee; 


(5) To communicate, make, print or publish or cause 


indicate any preference, limitation or discrimination Sec. 28-96. Discriminatory practices in places of public 


based on race, color, religion, national origin, accommodation. 
gender, age, sexual orientation, marital status, 
military status, family status or physical or mental (a) It shall be a discriminatory practice to do any of the 
disability of any individual; following acts based upon the race, color, religion, national 
origin, gender, age, sexual orientation, marital status, 
(6) To discriminate in any financial transaction military status or physical or mental disability of any 
involving real property on account of the location individual: 
of residence or business, i.e., to red-line; or 
(1) To deny, directly or indirectly, any person the full 
(7) To restrict or attempt to restrict housing choices or and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, 
to engage in any conduct relating to the sale or facilities, privileges, advantages and accommoda- 
rental of a dwelling that otherwise denies the rental tions of any place of public accommodation. 
or sale or makes it unavailable. 


(2) To communicate, print, circulate, post or mail, or 
(b) Exceptions. otherwise cause, directly or indirectly, to be 
a statement, advertisement or sign which 


(1) It shall not be a discriminatory practice for indicates that the full and equal enjoyment of the 


person to act 

(Zoning) of this Code and nothing in this chapter of and accommodation will be refused, withheld from 
the Code shall supersede any provisions of chapter or denied an individual or that an individual’s 
59 (Zoning) of patronage of or presence at a place of public 


this 
(2) This section shall 


at least one (1) of the units is owner- (b) Exceptions. 

occupied. 

(1) It shall not be a discriminatory practice for a 

(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit group homes, person to act in conformity with chapter 59 

self-care elderly homes, special-care homes or (Zoning) of this Code and nothing in this chapter of 

other facilities whose use is restricted to the elderly the Code shall supersede any provisions of chapter 

Or to individuals with physical or mental 59 (Zoning) of this Code 

disabilities. 

(2) This section shall not apply to multiple-unit 

(4) This article shall not apply to religious organiza- dwellings of not more than two (2) dwelling units 

where at least one (1) of the units is owner- 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) occupied. 


42 43 


(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit group homes, 
self-care elderly homes, special-care homes or 
other facilities whose use is restricted to the elderly 
or to individuals with physical or mental 
disabilities. 


(4) This article shall not apply to religious organiza- 
tions or associations. 


(5S) This article shall not apply to insurance risk 
classification. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-97. Discriminatory practices in health and 
welfare services. 


(a) It shall be a discriminatory practice to do any of the 
following acts, based upon the race, color, religion, national 


(1) To communicate, publish, advertise or represent or 
cause to be communicated, published, advertised or 
represented by any health and welfare agency or 
owner, supervisor, staff person, director, manager 
or Officer thereof, excluding governmental entities 
and political subdivisions, that any of the services, 
programs, benefits, facilities or privileges of any 
health or welfare agency are withheld from or 
denied to any person; 


(2) For any health and welfare agency or worker, 
supervisor, staff person, director, manager or 
officer thereof, excluding governmental entities and 
political subdivisions, to deny or refuse to provide 
access to any of the services, programs, benefits, 


44 


facilities or privileges of any health or welfare 
agency. 


(ob) Exceptions. 


(1) This article shall not apply to religious organiza- 
tions or associations. 


(2) This article shall not apply to insurance risk 
classification. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-98. Coercion or retaliation. 


(a) It shall be a discriminatory practice to coerce, 
threaten, retaliate against or interfere with any person in the 
exercise or enjoyment of or on account of having exercised 
or enjoyed or on account of having aided or encouraged any 
other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right 
granted or protected under this article. 


(b) It shall be a discriminatory practice for any person 
to require, request or suggest that a person retaliate against, 
interfere with, intimidate or discriminate against a person, 
because that person has opposed any practice defined as 
discriminatory or unlawful by this article or because that 
person has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated 
in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing 
authorized under this article. 


(c) It shall be a discriminatory practice for any person 
to cause or coerce or attempt to cause or coerce, directly or 
indirectly, any person to prevent any person from complying 
with the provisions of this article. 

(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


45 


Sec. 28-99. Aiding or abetting. 


It shall be a discriminatory practice for any person to 
aid, abet, invite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the 
acts forbidden under the provisions of this article or to 


attempt to do so. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-100. Conciliation agreements. 


It shall be a discriminatory practice for a party to a 
conciliation agreement made under the provisions of this 
article to violate the terms of such agreement. 

(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-101. Resisting the agency. 


It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully resist, 
impede or interfere with the agency, or any of its repre- 


the agency. The provisions of section 1-13 of this Cod« 
shall apply to violations of this section. Each incident shall 
be treated as a separate offense. 

(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-102. Falsifying documents and testimony. 


It shall be unlawful to willfully falsify documents, 
records or reports which are required or subpoenaed 
pursuant to this article or willfully to falsify testimony or to 
intimidate any witness or complainant. The provisions of 
section 1-13 of this Code shall apply to violations of this 
section. Each incident of such intimidation or falsification 
shall be treated as a separate offense. 

(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


46 


Sec. 28-103. Compliance with article prerequisite for 
licenses. 


All permits or licenses issued by or on behalf of the city 
shall specifically require and be conditioned upon full 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 
Sec. 28-104. Posting of notice. 


(a) Every person subject to this article except private 


investigation. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 
Sec. 28-105. Preservation of business records. 
(a) Where a charge of discrimination has been filed 


(b) All persons subject to this article shall furnish to 
the agency at the time and in the manner prescribed by the 
agency such reports relating to information under their 
control as the agency may require. The identity of persons 
and properties contained in reports submitted to the agency 
under the provisions of this section shall be kept confidential 
and shall not be made public. Every employer, employment 
agency and apprenticeship program, labor organization or 
joint labor/management council subject both to this article 
and to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended 
shall upon request furnish to the agency all reports that may 
be required by the equal employment opportunity 
commission established under the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-106. Powers of agency. 


(a) The agency is hereby empowered to undertake its 
own investigations and public hearings on any racial, 
religious and ethnic or other listed minority group tensions, 
prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and disorder and on any form 
of or reason for discrimination in accordance with section 
28-91 against any person, for the purpose of making 
appropriate recommendations for action, including 
legislation, against such discrimination. 

(b) The agency may adopt such rules and regulations as 


it deems necessary to effectuate and which are not in conflict 
with the provisions of this chapter. 


(c) The agency may at its discretion choose to refer the 


investigation of any complaint to any other investigatory 
body, whether public or private, with which it shall arrange 


to perform such investigation. 


(d) The agency may hold hearings pursuant to section 
28-111, subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance, 


48 


with due process requirements. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


respondent, and shall set forth the substance thereof and such 
other information as may be required by the agency. Any 
complaint under this article shall be filed with the agency 
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the occurrence of 


the agency. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-108. Investigation. 


(a) Within fifteen (15) days of the filing of any 
complaint, the agency shall serve a copy thereof upon the 
respondent and upon all persons it deems to be necessary 
parties and shall arrange for prompt investigation in 


49 


i 

: 
ul 
Hi 
A 


i 
i 
f 
EE 


| 
a 
F 
aft 
233 
i} 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


50 


Sec. 28-111. Hearings. 
(a) The agency may hold a formal hearing upon a 


notice which shall state the time and place of the hearing. 


(b) In accordance with rules adopted by the agency, 
discovery procedures may be used by the agency and the 
parties as provided by the Colorado Rules of Municipal 


proven otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


_ Sec. 28-112._Decision and order. 


(a) If after a hearing the agency determines that a 


51 


(1) The hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of em- 
ployees with or without back pay; 


(2) The restoration to the membership in any res- 
pondent labor organization, admission to or 


(3) The extension of full, equal and 


(4) Appropriate injunctive relief: 


(5) The payment of hearing costs as in the judgment of 
the agency will effectuate the purposes of this 
article, including a requirement for a report as to 
the manner of compliance with such decision and 
order. 


(b) If upon all the evidence the agency finds that a 


respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, 
the agency shall issue and cause to be served on the 


(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 893-91, § 3, 
12-2-91) 
Sec. 28-113. Judicial review. 


Any person suffering a legal wrong or adversely 
affected or aggrieved by an order or decision of the agency 
in a matter pursuant to the provisions of this article is 
entitled to a judicial review thereof in accordance with 


52 


Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106 upon filing in the 
appropriate court a written complaint for such review. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-114. Enforcement and order. 


following service of its order, the agency will conduct 
further enforcement proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-115. Referral! to licensing agencies. 


Whenever it appears that the holder of a permit or 
license issued by any agency or authority of the city, is a 
person against whom the agency after a hearing has rendered 
a decision and order that a discriminatory practice or a 
violation of this article has occurred pursuant to section 28- 
112, the agency, notwithstanding any other action it may 
take under the authority of the provisions of this article, may 
refer to the proper entity of the City the facts and identities 
of all persons involved in the complaint for such action as 
such agency or authority in its judgment considers 
appropriate based upon the facts thus disclosed to it. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


Sec. 28-116. Effective date. 


This article shall become effective February 1, 1991. 
(Ord. No. 623-90, § 2, 10-15-90) 


53 


Section 19-10 Actions Subject to Appeal 
(Effective November 1, 1978; Rules Revision Memo 106A) 


29, 1988; Rules Revision Memo 113B) 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 36 


Federico Pefia CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER 
Mayor CITY AND COUNTY BUILDING 
DENVER, COLORADO 80202 


AREA CODE 303 575-2721 
PROCLAMATION 


WHEREAS, December 10th commemorates National Hu- 
man Rights Day; and 


WHEREAS, It is the policy of the City & County of 
Denver to see that each individual shall have 
equal access to municipal employment and city 
services; and 


WHEREAS, It is the City of Denver’s policy to bring about 
mutual understanding and respect among its 
individual citizens; and 

WHEREAS, The City remains committed to its Affirmative 
Action policy and policies of non-discrimina- 
tion; and 


WHEREAS, Active measures to strengthen that policy will 


55 


the policy set forth herein and shall issue a report 
thereon to the Mayor and the administrative head 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 32 
(DENVER POLICE DEPARTMENT 
OPERATIONS MANUAL) 


RR-128 Impartial Attitude 


Members, while being vigorous and unrelenting in the 
enforcement of the law, must maintain a strictly 
impartial attitude toward complainants and violators. 
Members shall at all times consider it their duty to be of 
service to anyone who may be in danger or distress, 
regardless of race, color, creed, national origin, gender, 
age or sexual orientation. 


RR-122 Respect for Fellow Officer 


Officers shall treat other members of the department 
with the respect and response due to them as fellow 
officers. Officers shall not discriminate against one 
another on the basis of race, color, creed, national 


origin, gender, age or sexual orientation. 


57 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 34 
REV. 12-91 
DENVER POLICE DEPARTMENT 
OPERATIONS MANUAL 
102.00 RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 


102.01 How to Use the Radio 


REV. 12-91 
DENVER POLICE DEPARTMENT 
OPERATIONS MANUAL 
117.00 OFFICERS’ RIGHTS 


117.01 Officers’ Bill of Rights 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 33 
DENVER POLICE DEPARTMENT DIRECTIVE 


TO: All Police Department Personnel 
FROM: James R. Collier, Chief of Police 
DATE: October 29, 1991 

NUMBER: 9i-13 

SUBJECT: Display of Unauthorized Material 


It is the policy of the Denver Police Department to prohibit 
the harassment or belittlement of any employee for reasons 


In order to comply with this policy, please ensure that all 
material posted or exhibited on Departmental premises, 
including but not limited to walls, cabinets, bulletin boards, 
lockers, or other surfaces, must be non-offensive and 


(BOULDER COUNTY POLICY) 
NUMBER: 1.13 
SUBJECT: Multicultural Diversity 
PURPOSE: To declare the County’s commitment to 
multicultural diversity. 
SCOPE: This policy applies to all County 
Departments and all employees of 
County Departments. 
OFFICE OF PRIMARY 


RESPONSIBILITY: Board of County Commissioners’ 


Office 


ORIGINAL DATE: October 1, 1992 


LAST REVISION: October 1, 1992 


POLICY: 


It is an expressed goal of the Boulder 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 57 
(BOULDER ORDINANCE) 


TITLE 12 HUMAN RIGHTS 


Chapter 1 Prohibition of Discrimination in Housing, 
Employment, and Public Accommodations’ 


Section: 


12-1-1 
12-1-2 
12-1-3 
12-1-4 
12-1-5 
12-1-6 
12-1-7 


12-1-8 
12-1-9 


Definitions 

Discrimination in Housing Prohibited 
Discrimination in Employment Practices Prohibited 
Discrimination in Public Accommodations Pro- 
hibited 

Prohibitions on Retaliation for and Obstruction of 
Compliance with Chapter 

Provisions of this Chapter Supplement Other Code 
Sections 

City Manager may Appoint Person to Assist in 
Enforcement 
Administration and Enforcement of Chapter 
Judicial Enforcement of Chapter 


12-1-10 City Contractors Shall not Discriminate 
12-1-11 Authority to Adopt Rules 


12-1-1 


Definitions. 


The following terms used in this chapter have the following 
meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 


(a) “Age” means age between forty and sixty-five years. 


‘Adopted by Ordinance No. 4571, May 19, 1981. Amended 
by Ordinance Nos. 4574 and 4646. Derived from Ordinance No. 


3824. 


62 


(b) 


(c) 


(d) 


(e) 


(f) 


(g) 


(h) 


“Employer” means any person employing any person in 
any capacity. 


“Employment agency" means any person undertaking, 
with or without compensation, to procure employees or 
opportunities to work for any person or holding itself 
out as equipped to do so. 


"Housing" means any building, structure, vacant land, 
or part thereof during the period it is advertised, listed, 
or offered for sale, lease, rent, or transfer of ownership, 
but does not include transfer of property by will or 
gift.” 


"Labor organization” means any organization, or 
committee or part thereof, that exists for the purpose in 
whole or in part of collective bargaining, dealing with 
employers concerning grievances, terms, or conditions 
of employment, or other mutual aid or protection in 
connection with employment.’ 


"Martial status" means both the individual status of 
being single, divorced, separated, or widowed and the 
relational status of cohabitating and being married or 
unmarried. 

"Minor child” means a person under eighteen years of 
age. 

"Person" or "individual" means any individual, group, 
association, cooperation, joint apprenticeship committee, 
joint stock company, labor union, legal representative, 


24-34-501(2), C.R.S. 
*24-34-401(6), C.R.S. 


(i) 


@) 


(k) 


"Physical or mental disability" means a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more 
major life activities, a record of such impairment, or 
being regarded as having such impairment. The term 
excludes current use of alcohol or drugs or other 
disabilities that prevent a person from acquiring, 
renting, or maintaining property, that would constitute 
a direct threat to the property or safety of others, or that 
would prevent performance of job responsibilities. 


“Place of accommodation" means any place of business 
engaged in any sales to the general public and any place 
that offers services, facilities, privileges, or advantages 
to the general public or that receives financial support 
through solicitation of the general public or through 
governmental subsidy of any kind. 


"Sexual orientation” means the choice of sexual 
partners, i.e., bisexual, homosexual or heterosexual. 


Ordinance Nos. 4969 (1986); 5061 (1987). 


12-1-2 Discrimination in Housing Prohibited.‘ 


(a) 


It is an unfair housing practice, and no person: 


(1) Who has the right of ownership or possession or 
the right of transfer, sale, rental, or lease of any 
housing or any agent of such person shall: 


“See 42 U.S.C. $§ 3604-3606. 


64 


do umn, coal Se arpgtsen yeaa tag marital 


seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing or of 
such individual’s friends or associates, but nothing in 
this section prohibits using a form or making a record 
or inquiry for the purpose of required government 
reporting or for a program to provide opportunities for 
persons who have been traditional targets of 
discrimination on the bases here prohibited; 


(2) To whom application is made for financial assis- 


tance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, 
repair, or maintenance of any housing shall: 


65 


(A) Make or cause to be made any written or oral 
inquiry concerning the race, creed, color, sex, sexual 
orientation, marital status, religion, national origin, 


ancestry, pregnancy, parenthood, custody of a minor 
child, or mental or physical disability of an individual 


(B) Discriminate against any individual because of 
the race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, marital 
parenthood, custody of a minor child, or mental or 
physical disability of such individual, such individual’s 
friends cr associates, or prospective occupants or 
tenants in the term, conditions, or privileges relating to 
obtaining or use of any such financial assistance; 


(3) Shall include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease 
of housing any restrictive covenant limiting the use of 
housing on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, sexual 
orientation, marital statvs, religion, national origin, 
ancestry, pregnancy, parenthood, custody of a minor 
child, or mental or physical disability or shall honor or 
exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any such 
restrictive covenant pertaining to housing.’ 


(4) Shall print or cause to be printed or published any 
notice or advertising relating to the transfer, sale, 
rental, or lease of any housing that indicates any 
preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination 
based on race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, 
marital status, religion, national origin, ancestry, 


*§ 24-34-502(1)(C), C.R.S. 
66 


pregnancy, parenthood, custody of a minor child, or 
mental or physical disability; 


(5) Shall aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing 


of this section or attempt either directly or indirectly to 
commit any act prohibited by this section;” 


(7) Shall discharge, demote, or discriminate in matters 
of compensation against any employee or agent because 
of said employee’s or agent’s obedience to the 
provisions of this section; 


(8) Shall: 


(A) Offer, solicit, accept, use, or retain a listing of 
housing with the understanding that an individual may 
be discriminated against in the purchase, lease, or rental 
thereof on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, sexual 

sentati ual status, relie’ ional origin, 
ancestry, pregnancy, parenthood, custody of a minor 
child, or mental or physical disability of such individual 
or such individual’s friends or associates; 


(B) Deny any individual access to or participation 
in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ 
organization or other service, organization, or facility 
relating to the business of selling or renting housing; or 


(C) Discriminate against such individual on the 
basis of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, 


*§ 24-34-502(1)(e), C.R.S. 
67 


(b) 


marital status, religion, national origin, ancestry, 
pregnancy, parenthood, custody of a minor child, or 
mental or physical disability of such individual or such 
individual’s friends or associates.’ 


(9) Shall establish unreasonable rules or conditions of 


occupancy that have the effect of excluding pregnant 
women, parents, or households with minor children. 


The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not 
apply to prohibit: 


(1) Any religious or denominational institution or 
organization that is operated, supervised, or controlled 
by a religious or denominational organization from 
limiting admission or giving preference to persons of 
the same religion or denomination or from making such 
selection of buyers, lessees, or tenants as will promote 
a bona fide religious or denominational purpose; 


(2) The owner of an owner-occupied one-family or 
two-family dwelling or the owner or lessor of a housing 
facility devoted entirely to housing individuals of one 
sex from limiting lessees or tenants to the members of 
one sex; 


(3) A person who seeks to share a dwelling unit with 


(4) The transfer, sale, rental, lease, or development of 
housing designed or intended for the use of the 
physically or mentally disabled, but this exclusion does 
not permit discrimination on the basis of race, creed, 


*42 U.S.C. 3606. 


color, sexual orientation, marital status, religion, 
ancestry, or national origin.’ 


(5) Compliance with any provisions of Chapters 9-3 or 
10-2, B.R.C. 1981, concerning permitted occupancy of 


(a) It is a discriminatory or unfair employment practice, 


and no person: 


(1) Shall fail or refuse to hire, shall discharge, ~hall 
promote or demote, or shall discriminate in matters of 
compensation, terms, conditions, or Privileges of 
employment against any individual otherwise qualified 
or to limit, segregate, or classify employees or appli- 
cants for employment in any way that would deprive or 
tend to deprive any individual of employment 
opportunities or otherwise adversely affect such 
individual’s status as an employee because of the race, 
creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, 
religion, national origin, ancestry, age, or mental or 
physical disability of such individual or such indivi- 
dual’s friends or associates; but with regard to mental or 
physical disability, it is not a discriminatory or unfair 
employment practice for a person to act as provided in 


724-34-502(5), C.R.S. 
*24-34-501(2), C.R.S. 
‘See 42 U.S.C. 2000e. 


this paragraph if there is no reasonable accommodation 
that such person can make with regard to the disability, 
the disability actually disqualifies the individual from 
a eee 


(2) Shall refuse to list and properly classify for 
employment or refer an individual for employment in a 
known available job for which such individual is 
otherwise qualified because of the race, creed, color, 
sex, sexual orientation, marital status, religion, national 
origin, ancestry, age, or mental or physical disability of 
such individual or such individual’s friends or associates 
or to comply with a request from an employer for 
referral of applicants for employment if the request 
indicates either directly or indirectly that the employer 
discriminates in employment on the basis of race, creed, 
color, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, religion, 
national origin, ancestry, age, or mental or physical 
disability; but with regard to mental or physical 
disability, it is not a discriminatory or unfair 
employment practice for an employment agency to 


refuse to list and properly classify for employment or 
refuse to refer an individual for employment in a known 


available job for which such individual is otherwise 
qualified if there is no reasonable accommodation that 
the employer can make with regard to the disability, the 
disability actually disqualifies the individual from the 
ee eee 


3 


*24-34-402(1)(a), C.R.S. 
*24-34-402(1)(b), C.R.S. 


(3) Shall exclude or expel any individual otherwise 
qualified from full membership rights in a labor 
organization, otherwise discriminate against any 
members of such labor organization in the full enjoy- 
ment of work opportunity, or limit, segregate, or 
classify its membership or applicants for miembership, 
or classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment 
such individual in any way that deprives such individual 


individual’s status as an employee or applicant for 
employment because of the race, creed, color, sex, 
sexual orientation, marital status, religion, national 
origin, ancestry, age, or mental or physical disability of 
such individual or such individual’s friends or 
associates; 


(4) Shall print or circulate or cause to be printed or 


either directly oor indirectly, any limitation, 
specification, or discrimination on the basis of race, 
creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, 
religion, national origin, ancestry, age, or mental or 
physical disability or intent to make any such limitation, 


(5) ee ono © 


: 
E 


aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing 
defined in this section to be a discriminatory 


of any act 
or 


(8) Shall use in the recruitment or hiring of individuals 
any employment agency, placement service, training 
school or center, labor organization, or any other 
employee referral source known by such person to 
discriminate on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, 
sexual orientation, marital status, religion, national 
origin, ancestry, age, or mental or physical disability; 


(9) Shall use in recruitment, hiring, upgrading, or 
promoting any test that such person knows or has reason 


72 


(b) 


restriction if a bona fide religious purpose exists for the 
aa 


Ordinance No. 5061 (1987). 


12-1-4 Discrimination in Public Accommodations Pro- 


(a) It is a discriminatory practice, and no person shall: 


(b) 


(1) Refuse, withhold from, or deny to any individual 
because of the race, creed, color, sex, sexual orienta- 
tion, martial status, religion, national origin, ancestry , 
or mental or physical disability of such individual or 
such individual's friends or associates, the full and equal 
enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, 
advantages, or accommodations of a place of public 
accommodation;™ or 


(2) Publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail any 
written or printed communication, notice, or 
advertisement that indicates that the full and equal 
enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, 
advantages, or accommodations of a place of public 
accommodation will be refused, withheld from, or 
denied an individual or that such individual’s patronage 
Or presence at a place of public accommodation is 


individual or such individual’s friends or associates. 


The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not 
apply to prohibit: 


“See 42 U.S.C. 2000a. 
“24-34-601(1), C.RS. 
74 


(1) Persons from restricting admission to a place of 
public accommodation to individuals of one sex if such 
restriction bears a bona fide relationship to the goods, 
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommo- 
dations of such place of public accommodation;* or 


(2) Any religious or denominational institution that is 
operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious or 
denominational organization from limiting admission to 
persons of the same religion or denomination as will 
promote a bona fide religious or denominational 


purpose. 


Ordinance No. 5061 (1987). 
12-1-5 Prohibition on Retaliation for and Obstruction 


of Compliance with Chapter. 


(a) No person shall use a threat, communicated by physical, 


oral, or written means, of harm or injury to another 
person, such other person’s reputation, or such person’s 
property, or discriminate against any person because 
such person has entered into a conciliation agreement 
under this chapter, because the final or any other ruling 
in any proceeding brought under this chapter has been 
in such other person’s favor, because such other person 
has opposed a discriminatory practice, or because such 
other person has made a charge, filed a complaint, 
testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, 
proceeding, or hearing before a person charged with the 
duty to investigate or hear complaints relating to 
problems of discrimination, but this section does not 
apply when the threat involves knowingly placing or 


‘24-34-601(3), C.R.S. 
75 


attempting to place a person in fear of imminent bodily 
injury by use of a deadly weapon; 


(b) No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder, or interfere 
with the performance or the proper exercise of a duty, 
obligation, right, or power of the city manager, the 
municipal court, or other official or body charged with 
a duty, obligation, right, or power under this chapter. 


12-1-6 Provisions of this Chapter Supplement Other 
Code Sections. 


Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the substantive 
terms of this chapter and the remedies herein provided 
supplement those terms and remedies contained in this code 
and other ordinances of the city. 


12-1-7 City Manager may Appoint Person to Assist in 
Enforcement. 


The city manager may appoint a person to carry out any or 
all of the duties, obligations, rights, or powers under the 
provisions of this chapter, who may have such job title as 
the manager designates. 


12-1-8 Administration and Enforcement of Chapter. 


(a) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a violation of 
this chapter may, within ninety days of the alleged 
violation or thirty days after any complaint concerning 
the same matter has been dismissed by another agency 
without a final judgment on the merits, whichever last 
occurs, file a written complaint under oath with the city 


“ex k& ke 


76 


(d) If the city manager does not deem it practicable to 


(e) If a person who has filed a complaint with the city 
to dismiss the complaint under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section or if conciliation attempts as provided in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section are unsuccessful to 
resolve the complaint, the aggrieved party may request 


77 


a hearing before the City of Boulder Human Relations 
Commission’, which shall hold a hearing on the matter. 
If the commission finds violations of this chapter, it 
may issue such orders as it deems appropriate to remedy 
the violations, including, without limitation, orders: 


Ordinance No. 4879 (1984). 


discriminatory 
refusal of employment; make an offer of promotion in 


(5) Requiring that a person found to have violated this 


chapter report compliance with the order or orders 
issued pursuant to this section; and 


“Section 2-3-6, B.R.C. 1981. 
78 


(6) Requiring that a person found to have violated any 
provisions of this chapter make, keep, and make 
available to the commission such reasonable records as 
are relevant to determine whether such person is 
complying with the commission’s orders. 


12-1-9 Judicial Enforcement of Chapter. 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


The city manager may file a criminal complaint in 
municipal court seeking the imposition of the criminal 
penalties provided in Section 5-2-4, B.R.C. 1981, for 
violations of this chapter. 


The city manager may seek judicial enforcement of any 
orders of the human relations commission. 


Any party aggrieved by any final action of the human 
relations commission may seek judicial review thereof 
in the District Court in and for the County of Boulder 
by filing a complaint for review within thirty days after 
the date of the final action under Colorado Rule of Civil 
Procedure 106(a)(4). 


12-1-10 City Contractors Shall Not Discriminate. 


The city manager shall require that all contractors providing 
goods or services to the city certify their compliance with the 
provisions of this chapter. 

12-1-11 Authority to Adopt Rules. 


authorized to adopt rules to implement the provisions of this 
chapter. 


AFFIDAVIT OF LESLIE L. DURGIN 


Leslie L. Durgin, Mayor of the City of Boulder, one of 
the plaintiffs in this action, being upon her oath duly sworn, 
deposes and says as follows: 


1. Iam the Mayor of the City of Boulder ("City” or 
"Boulder"), a plaintiff in this action and appeared as a 
witness at the Preliminary Injunction hearing held in Janu- 
ary, 1993. 


“sa & &* 


22. Although the Boulder ordinance is very broad in its 
application, it should be noted that, notwithstanding the 
statement of the Legislative Council contained in its analysis 
of Amendment Two, Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 17, at Page 14-15, 
and Pastor Van’s and Professor Broadus’ concerns, the First 
Amendment’s “free exercise” clause would provide 
protection for actions of religious groups whenever 
adherence to the ordinance would violate the essential 
religious beliefs of the group. These are the legalities, and 
they are supported by the City’s record in enforcing the 
human rights ordinance since 1974. For example, when a 
free exercise claim was made in a sex discrimination case 
involving a secretary, the defense was carefully investigated 
before it was rejected, because there was no asserted 
point is that if Pastor Van’s religious convictions are such 
that he cannot hire a gay of lesbian as an assistant pastor, or 
a woman as a priest, the City will, or course, recognize 
those concerns. But the City will require some sort of 
showing, so that a secretary or a janitor might have some 
protection, depending on the religious convictions at issue. 


require affirmative action for any protected class. The City 
of Boulder’s affirmative action plan does not address sexual 


orientation, nor has anyone ever suggested to me that it 
should. 


81 


ATTACHMENTS TO AFFIDAVIT OF 
DEAN F. DAMON 
(BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT MATERIAL) 


STUDENT COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES 


It is the policy of the Board of Education that all students be 
2 inate ont ont siscriminati 


Students who are aggrieved by a decision or action of school 
personnel that they believe to be in violation of Board 
policies or school rules, or they believe discriminatory in 
nature shall have available a procedure to inquire concerning 
the decision or action and to express their concerns. Such 
procedure shall not apply to a teacher’s determination of a 
student’s grade, unless the student believes the grade to have 
resulted from discrimination. 


Adopted: June 18, 1992 


CROSS REFS.: AC, Nondiscrimination 

ACA, Nondiscrimination on the Basis 
of Sex 

JB, Equal Education Opportunities 

JF subcodes (all relate to student rights 
and responsibilities) 

JG subcodes (all related to student 
discipline) 

STUDENT COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES 
Students are encouraged to settle at the local school their 
grievances concerning decisions made or actions taken by 
school personnel which they believe to be in violation of 
Board policies or school rules, or discriminatory on the basis 


82 


of race, color, creed, marital status, national origin, gender, 
sexual orientation, or handicap. The purpose of the 
following procedure is to help a student resolve a conflict 


suc. ... The written account should state the injustice or 


in this written statement agree to extend that period. 


If the issue has not been resolved through the use of the 
Student Grievance Liaison, and appeal to the school principal 
or designee for further inquiry or review may be made in 
writing within five (5) school days of the first level decision. 
The school principal or designee shall review all the facts 


school days after the decision at the building level is made. 
The Superintendent shall likewise have the opportunity to 


thereafter. The decision of the Superintendent shall be final 
under this Policy. Policy KL (Public Complaints) provides 


level and b) willing and/or trained to serve as Student 


“a 


concerning the application of this Policy 
It should be understood that this grievance procedure is not 
a due process hearing as that concept is applied in an 


(PART OF DEFENDANTS’ EXHIBIT C) 


August 10, 1992 


Jill Clark 

Legislative Council 

Colorado General Assembly 
State Capitol, Room 029 
Denver, Colorado 80203-1784 


Re: Comment on analysis of Amendment 2 ballot 


Dear Ms. Clark: 


The first version of the 1992 Amendment 2 ballot analysis 
contains a serious misstatement of the law in the City of 
Boulder. The “Local Ordinances” section of the report 
(page 4 of the report) states: 


“However, Se Se 
exempt religious institutions and they are to 
refuse to hire persons or refuse housing, social 
services or public accommodations to individuals 
based upon their sexual orientation. A similar 
exemption is afforded landlords for small rental 
units. In Boulder and Denver, owners with rental 
spaces in their homes or duplexes (in which they 
reside) are exempted from the ordinances." 


The report’s interpretation of the bona fide religious purpose 
exemption contained in the Boulder Human Rights Ordinance 
is inaccurate. 


EMPLOYMENT 


Section 12-1-3(b) of the ordinance (employment practices) 
provides: 


"The provisions of subsection (a) of the section do 
not apply to prohibit a religious organization or in- 
stitution from restricting employment opportunities 
to persons of THE RELIGIOUS DENOMINA- 
TION and advertising such restriction IF A BONA 
FIDE RELIGIOUS PURPOSE EXISTS FOR THE 


RESTRICTION. (Emphasis added). 


In Boulder, religious organizations may refuse to hire 
individuals who are not members of that same denomination 


or faith. But if an individual who was denied employment 
on that basis files a religious discrimination claim against the 
institution, the institution would have to show a bona fide 
religious purpose for requiring it’s [sic] employees to be 
members of the same denomination. For example: A 
private Christian elementary school may require it’s [sic] 
instructors to be members of the Christian faith. If a non- 
Christian applicant is denied employment with the institution 
because the applicant is not a Christian, and subsequently 
files a claim of religious discrimination against the school, 
the school would have to show a bona fide religious reason 
for it’s [sic] requirement. 


The religious exemption provision does NOT permit a 
religious organization to refuse to hire an individual on the 
basis of that person’s race, creed color, sex, SEXUAL 
ORIENTATION, marital status, national origin, ancestry, 
age or mental or physical disability. Using the example of 
the Christian elementary school, the Boulder ordinance does 
NOT permit the school to refuse to hire an applicant on the 
basis of the applicant’s race, sex, sexual orientation, etc.- 
even if the school claimed that hiring such a person would 


87 


be a violation of it’s [sic] religious beliefs or tenets. The 
bona fide religious exemption is a narrow exemption, only 
permitting a religious organization to restrict it’s [sic] hiring 
to individuals who are members of the same religious 
denomination. Religious organizations are exempted only 
from the Boulder ordinance’s prohibition against religious 
discrimination, and even then, only if they can show a bona 
fide religious purpose for their policy. 


PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS 


Section 12-1-4(b)(2) of the Boulder Human Rights Ordinance 
provides that the ordinance does not prohibit the following: 


“Any religious or denominational institution that is 
operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious or 
denominational organization from limiting admission to 
persons of the same religion or denomination as will 
promote a bona fide religious or denominational 


purpose." 


Again, this exemption is a narrow one, allowing a place of 
public accommodation, controlled, operated, or supervised 
by a religious institution, to restrict admission to persons of 
the same religious affiliation, if it can show the restriction 
promotes a bona fide religious purpose. The organization 
CANNOT restrict access or admission on the basis of race, 
creed, color, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, marital status, 
religion, national origin, ancestry, or mental or physical 
disability, even if it claims that it’s [sic] religious or 
denominational tenets require it to do so. 


HOUSING 
The Council’s analysis of the Boulder ordinance’s housing 
exemption states, “In Boulder and Denver, owners with 
rental spaces in their homes or duplexes (in which they 


reside) are exempted from the ordinances." This “. not an 
accurate statement of the law in Boulder. 


Sections 12-1-2(b)(2) and (3) do not prohibit the following: 


"The owner of an owner-occupied one family or two 
family dwelling or the owner or lessor of a housing 
facility devoted entirely to housing individuals of one 
sex from limiting lessees or tenants to the members of 
one sex;" 


"A person who seeks to share a swelling [sic] unit with 
another person from limiting lessees or tenants to 
members of one sex;" 


The ape a hibiti 
contained in the Boulder Human Rights Ordinance do not 
permit the relevant actors to deny housing to an individual 
on the basis of his or her sexual orientation. The provisions 
do permit persons in the circumstances set forth in the 
ordinance to rent or lease their premises to persons of one 
SEX. 


I hope you will incorporate this information in the second 
draft of your report. I am available to answer any questions 


the Council may have about the Boulder Human Rights 
Ordinance. Thank you. 


Sincerely, 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 48 
(ASPEN ORDINANCE) 


Sec. 13-98. Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(a) Definitions. 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Discrimination: “Discrimination” or “to discrimi- 
nate” means, without limitation, any act which 
because of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, 
national origin, sex, age, marital status, physical 
handicaps, affectional or sexual orientation, family 
responsibility, or political affiliation, results in the 
unequal treatment or separation of any person or 
denies, prevents, limits or otherwise adversely 
affects, the benefit or enjoyment by any person of 


Such discrimination is unlawful and is a violation 
of this section, provided, however, that the physi- 
cal condition of an existing building or structure 
shall not, of itself, constitute discrimination. 


Housing: “Housing” means any building, struc- 
ture, vacant land or part thereof during the period 
it is advertised, listed or offered for sale, lease, 
rent or transfer of ownership, and during the period 
while it is being sold, leased or rented. 


Public services or accommodations: “Public 
services or accommodations" means any place of 
business engaged in any sales to the public and any 
place offering services, facilities, privileges, 
advantages or accommodations to the public. 


(b) Discriminatory employment practices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is an employer or 
employment agency, directly or indirectly, to discriminate 
against any employee with regard to application for 
employment, hiring, occupational training, tenure, promo- 
tion, compensation, layoff, discharge, or any other term or 
condition of employment except when based upon a bona 
fide occupational qualification. 


(c) Discriminatory housing practices prohibited. It 
shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to 
discriminate against or to accord adverse, unlawful or 
unequal treatment to any other person with respect to the 
acquisition, Occupancy, use and enjoyment of any housing, 
including the sale, transfer, rental or lease thereof. 


(d) Discriminatory public services and accommodation 
practices prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person 
engaged in providing services or accommodations to the 
public to, directly or indirectly, discriminate against any 
other person by refusing to allow the full and equal use and 
enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, 
advantages, including accommodations, and the terms and 
conditions under which the same are made available, or to 


91 


provide adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any 
person in connection therewith. 


(e) Penalties and civil liability. Any person who 
violates the provisions of subsections (b) through (d) hereof 
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction 
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three 
hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment of not more than 
ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment, at the 
discretion of the court. In addition, any person claiming to 
be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act shall have a 
cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for 
compensatory damages and such other remedies as may be 
appropriate, including specifically the issuing of restraining 
orders and such temporary or permanent injunctions as are 
necessary to obtain complete compliance with this ordinance. 
In addition, the prevailing party shall be entitled to 
reasonable attorney fees and costs. 


(f) Whenever it appears that the holder of a permit, 
license, franchise, benefit, or advantage, issued by the City 
of Aspen is in violation of this section, notwithstanding any 
other action it may take or may have taken under the 
authority of the provisions of this section, the City of Aspen 
may take such action 


permit, franchise, benefit or advantage as it consider 
appropriate based on the facts disclosed to it. (Ord. No. “0- 
1977, § 1) 


AFFIDAVIT OF JOHN S. BENNETT, 
MAYOR OF THE CITY OF ASPEN, COLORADO 


I, John S. Bennett, being first duly sworn according to 
law depose and state as follows as a supplement to my 
ee ee ee oe 
plaintiffs’ motions for preliminary injunctive relief . . 


1. I am the Mayor for the City of Aspen, Colora- 
Gye a 


“xe & © 


6. Since the adoption of the City’s anti-discrimination 
ordinance in 1977, the City has not adopted or legislated 
employment or housing quotas or affirmative action 
programs based upon sexual orientation and none are 


/s/ 
John S. Bennett 


93 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 117 
(AURORA RULE) 


1-1: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE 
ACTION 


The City of Aurora is an equal opportunity employer. No 
person shall be discriminated against because of race, 
religion, color, creed, sex, sexual preference, age, national 
origin, ancestry, marital status, political affiliation, organi- 
zation membership, citizenship, or veteran’s status. In 
addition, no person shall be discriminated against because of 
mental or physical handicaps unless related to a bona fide 
occupational qualification. The City shall develop an 
Affirmative Action plan which identifies the City’s goals. 
Each Department and Division is responsible for achieving 


AFFIDAVIT OF NANCY C. CARNEY 


STATE OF COLORADO ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ARAPAHOB) 


The undersigned affiant, being first duly sworn, deposes 
and states upon oath as follows: 


1. My name is Nancy C. Camey. I am employed as 
the Director of Human Resources for the City of Aurora, 
Colorado. I have held this position since November 7, 
1990. In my capacity as Director of Human Resources, I 
am responsible for the direct supervision of 26 employees 
including the affirmative action officer of the City of Aurora. 


2. The City of Aurora, Colorado’s Equal Opportunity 
and Affirmative Action Policy, as included in the City’s 
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual, was adopted by 
resolution of the Aurora City Council (No. R82-119) on 
November 8, 1982, and states the following: 


1-1: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND 
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 


The City of Aurora is an equal oppor- 
tunity employer. No person shall be 
discriminated against because of race, 
religion, color, creed, sex, sexual prefer- 
ence, age, national origin, ancestry, 
marital status, political affiliation, orga- 
nizational membership, citizenship, or 
veteran’s status. In addition, no person 
shall be discriminated against because of 
mental or physical handicaps unless 
related to a bona fide occupational quali- 
fication. The City shall develop an 


95 


Affirmative Action plan which identifies 
hing go Each Department and 


3. This Policy, in this form, has been in effect since 
November 8, 1982. It applies only to employees of the City 
of Aurora, and does not offer anti-discrimination protection 
to the citizens of Aurora or persons employed within the 
private sector in the City of Aurora. While the Personnel 
Policies and Procedures Manual has been revised over time, 
no changes to Section 1-1, the Equal Opportunity and 
Affirmative Action Policy, have been made since it was 
originally adopted. sg 


4. Pursuant to the Equal Opportunity and Affirmative 
Action Policy, the City of Aurora has developed an 
affirmative action plan with respect to to [sic] race and sex. 
No plan has been developed for the other classifications 
listed in the Policy, such as religion, color, creed, sexual 
preference, age, national origin, ancestry, marital status, 
political affiliation, organizational membership, citizenship, 


or veteran’s status. 


5. To my knowledge, there has never been a request 
to conduct under-uiilization studies or develop an affirmative 
action plan with respect to sexual preference. 


6. The City of Aurora seeks to recruit and retain 
employees based upon their qualifications for the positions 
being filled, without regard to the characteristics listed in 
Section 1-1 of the Personnel Policies and Procedures 
Manual, with the exception of race and sex, which are 
subject to the City’s affirmative action plan. 


October 20, 1993 


TESTIMONY OF JEROME CULP 
(DIRECT EXAMINATION) 


see ¢ 


{v. 19, p. 1391] 


Q. Concerns have been expressed in this case related 
to this issue of remedying discrimination against groups that 
if proper recognition were extended to gays, lesbians, and 
bisexuals, that aff "mative action programs would inexorably 
follow. Let's define some terms. Would you tell the Court 
what affirmative action means in the civil rights law area? 


A. Yeah. Again, I think that the notion of affirmative 
action is a notion that has the most confusion in the public’s 
mind. The public tends to think that any policy that has any 
disparate impact on racial minorities is in fact affirmative 
action. They include any change in existing policies of as 
[sic] affirmative action. And I think one can easily 
distinguish between remedial actions that come about because 
some individual has proven particularized discrimination and 
stronger policies that go from goals to the most strong 
policy, im some sense, quotas. And it’s very clear 
constitutionally that we will only extend some of those 
policies if in fact people have demonstrated a kind of proof 
and a history that 

[v. 19, p. 1392] 


requires them. 


So, for example, with respect to gays, lesbians, and 
bisexuals, it is very unlikely that one would be [sic] want to 


because they haven't suffered the same kind of 
discrimination in terms of access to education, 
access to other things, and other groups have, but that 


5S 
: 
5, 


doesn’t mean that they are not discriminated against when 
people see them or discover that they are gay. So it seems 
to me that, again, this notion is a red herring. Affirmative 
action is a policy that causes people to act irrationally and to 
think irrationally instead of thinking about what the nature of 


the policy is. 


ese ee 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 18 
THE NATIONAL LEGAL FOUNDATION 


13 June 1991 


RE: ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE IN AMENDMENT 
INITIATIVE 


Tony Marco, Co-Chairman 
Colorado Coalition for Family Values 
P.O. Box 49792 

Colorado Springs, CO 80949 


do not get far by asking the electorate for special privileges, 
they do get a good deal of sympathy by asking to be “treated 
just like everyone else.” The presupposition here is that if 
two people love each other they ought to be able to marry, 
and if two men or two women “love” each other they ought 
to be able to marry. Since same sex marriages are not 
recognized in Colorado at present, I feel that the clause 
regarding their legal recognition hurts the initiative without 
really adding anything to it. This leaves us with drafts one 
and two. 


Our first concern is the lead in sentence which begins, 
"NO PROTECTED STATUS..." The question is just 
what should be included in the laundry list regarding 
orientation. The initiative is directed against those engaged 
in same sex activities. The natural pair which comes to 
mind are homosexuals and lesbians. I believe both groups 
should be included. I also believe the term “bisexual” 
should be included for two reasons. The first is that many 
persons who engage in same sex relations attempt make their 
homosexual behavior more “normal” or legitimate by saying 
that they also engage im heterosexual relations. From a 
moral standpoint of course homosexuality and bisexuality are 
indistinguishable. But they are perceived differently. 
Second, it is possible that if bisexuals are not specifically 
included, then homosexuals could claim that the amendment 
does not apply to them because they are bisexual and not 
simply homosexual. For these reasons it is my opinion that 
all three should be included in the language of the initiative. 


The language regarding the agencies of the State of 
Colorado appear to cover everyone in question from the state 
legislature to city government to the local school board. The 
language prohibits them from both enacting and enforcing 
such regulations which is an excellent safeguard. Finally, 
eae pee ee ee 
sex relationships is most crucial clause in the 


101 


homosexuals is in the amendment, it could possibly allow 
homosexuals to argue that they are not asking for any special 
privileges, just those granted to everyone else. I believe that 
“No Special Privileges" is a good motto for the amendment’s 


public campaign, but I fear the possible legal ramifications 
if it is included in the amendment itself. 


damental right to consensual sodomy [see Bowers v. 
Hardwick, 478 US 186, 106 S Ct 2841, 92 L Ed 2d 
140(1986)], but that does not mean that Colorado could not. 


should prevent the type of municipal ordinance which was 
attempted in Colorado Springs and elsewhere in your State. 
There may be some way around the language which I have 
not foreseen, so I certainly encourage you to seek other 
counsel on this matter. My hope is that this brief analysis 


102 


will be of some help in the process. If I may be of any 
further service to you, please do not hesitate to contact me. 


103 


PLAINTIFFS’ EXHIBIT 15 


| (CFV LETTER) 
ooo COLORADO FOR FAMILY VALUES 
July 23, 1992 
Mr. Stan Elofson 
Colorado Legislative Council 


029 State Capitol Building 
Denver, CO 80203-1784 


Dear Stan: 

After a careful reading of the analysis sent to me it is 
evident that the writers of the analysis took great editorial 
privileges slanted to the pro-homosexual point of view. 


I am disappointed that the writers did not stick to stating just 


ing, please understand this, however, if the are to 
have a clear analysis of the amendment both sides of the 
issue must be straight to the point and supported with as 
much imperical [sic] data as possible. 


Two brief examples. First, number three on the 


j 


American society". This statement should be supported by 
some form of reliable evidence or the analysis writers should 
not say it. The lack of facts makes it only conjecture, and 
your analysis should have none of this. The second 
example. Number two on the against portion states, "The 


P.O. Box 190 © Colorado Springs, CO 80901 © (719) 577-4916 @ FAX (719) 577-4805 


104 


amendment attacks home rule autonomy and intrudes into the 
traditional powers of local governments and political 
subdivisions." This is a statement based solely on the 
opinion of those opposed to amendment 2. There are many 
Colorado voters that disagree with it. To simply 
state it as fact (without any reliable evidence to support it) is 
demagoguery in it’s [sic] purest form. I trust you can see 
my point. 


It is very important that the voters get a clear picture of the 
affects [sic] of the amendment through facts. The writers of 
the draft were not interest in this. The work is full of catch 
phrases and misleading, undocumentable statements. It’s not 
the typical excellent work that the legislative Council 
normally produces. 


I’ve attached a suggested analysis, up through arguments for 
the amendment, that presents the straight forward [sic] facts 


members of the crew that came to interview me are 
personally against amendment 2 and have inserted pro- 
homosexual rhetoric into the analysis. Much of it reads like 
it came directly off the word processor of EPOC. 

There will be four people coming to Denver to discuss the 
analysis. Thank you for reading and considering this letter. 
I am looking forward to seeing you on Monday. 
Sincerely, 


/s/ 
Kevin D. Tebedo 


105 


Scope of the issue: 

Homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals claim levels of 
harassment and discrimination against them, in Colorado, are 
high enough to warrant that state, county, and city agencies 


classify “sexual orientation” as an additional class needing 
protections under civil rights laws and ordinances. 


The proponents of Amendment two claim that homosexuals, 
lesbians and bisexuals are not discriminated against enough 
in housing, employment, and public accommodations to 
warrant adding “sexual orientation” as a protected class. 
The proponents also claim that “sexual orientation” does not 
meet the current requirements used by the U.S. Supreme 
Court and Federal civil rights authorities for the granting of 
protected class status. 


Current laws and policies: 


Local: Three cities - Denver, Boulder, and Aspen -- have 
enacted local ordinances that ad [sic] “sexual orientation” to 
the list of protected classes in those ~unicipalities. 


State: Governor Romer issued an executive order (CRS 
24-34-402(1)) effective January 1, 1986 - amended January 
1, 1992 and April 1, 1992 - that adds to state policies against 
discrimination, the term "sexual orientation” . 


Federal: There are no federal civil rights laws or proce- 
dures that protect "sexual orientation” as a minority group or 
protected class. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 identifies race, 
age, gender, nationality, and religion as those classes that 
meet the legal requirements for protection (see definitions in 
this analysis). 


106 


Other states: There are, as of the writing of this analysis, 
seven states (Connecticut, Hawaii, Massachusetts, New 
Jersey, Vermont, Virginia, and Wisconsin) that have 
included “sexual orientation" in the list of protected classes 
in those states. The District of Columbia has also adopted 
an oidinance with the same affect [sic]. 


Impact of the proposal: Passage of amendment 2 would 
amend the state Constitution in Article II, section thirty, so 
as [sic] prohibit the state of Colorado and any of it’s [sic] 
political subdivisions (see definitions) from adopting or 
enacting laws or policies that would add homosexual, 
lesbian, and bisexual orientations to the list of protected 
classes. 


Because the state Constitution has precedence over city 
ordinances, the ordinances in Denver, Boulder, and Aspen 
would be repealed. As would the Governors [sic] executive 
orders. 


Arguments for the amendment 


1. Two reputable marketing studies recently conducted 
(Simmons & Simmons Research, July 1991, and Over- 
Looked Opinions, 1990) have shown that , [sic] as a class of 
people, homosexuals are not economically, and educationally 
have nothing to do with basic civil rights allotted to United 
States Citizens by the Constitution, they are key issues in the 
granting of protections under the definition of “protected 
class”. 


According to Colorado State civil rights authorities with the 
Civil Rights Division and the Civil Rights Commission, the 
only avenue to having a claim to protection is to be given the 


107 


Proponents of amendment 2 feel that individual and group 
civil rights is not a municipal affair. The issue of "sexual 
orientation” is the only civil rights issue being taken to the 
municipal level without the benefit of federally sanctioned 
laws. 


consenting adults is morally wrong. As apposed [sic] to 
39% who did not feel that way. The same poll was taken in 
1978 and shows that 53% felt it was morally wrong and 38% 
felt homosexual behavior was not. This and other similar 
polls call into question whether or not Coloradans accept the 
behavior, and consequences of said behavior, of homosexuals 
as something that should be legitimized by granting 
homosexuals a separate class status. A record number of 
petition signatures were collected from all over the state to 
allow the Colorado voters to express their point of view on 
the November 3, 1992 general election. 


4. The proponents of Amendment 2 claim that giving 
protected status to “sexual orientation” would create a large 


108 


financial burden on businesses in the state. Because "sexual 
orientation” does not exhibit any immutable or readily 
definable (i.e. visual) characteristics, it is left to the word 
only of an individual that he/she is actually homosexual, 
heterosexual, or bisexual. According to professionals with 
the state Civil Rights Division, this poses a significant 
problem for any employer to know when he/she is dealing 
with a protected class. The proponents of Amendment 2 see 
this as an opportunity, for the homosexual community, to 
harass businesses through endless litigation. One of the five 
Supreme Court requirements designed to curb this type of 
threat is that the protected class exhibit immutable, 
distinguishable, readily definable characteristics that define 
them as a discrete group. The supporters of the amendment 
see this as a pertinent problem for Colorado businesses. 


109 


(PART OF DEFENDANTS’ EXHIBIT C) 
From the desk of .. . 
JOHN N. FRANKLIN 


Attorney at Law 


To: Whom It May Concern 

Subject: Special Class Protection or Status for "Gay Sexual 
Ori tati 3” 

Date: March 4, 1992 


“sexual orientation," defined as including homosexuality, 
bisexuality and lesbianism, does not lend itself to what is 
known among Civil Rights authorities as special class 
protection or status. 


I have been an attorney since 1974, serving 
County in various capacities since 1978, and served 
Colorado Civil Rights Commission from 1981-1988, 
as elected Chairman, resigning that position in 1987. 


Tt 


i 
Af 
f 
il 


| 
: 
i 
: 
: 
r 


Civil a and ti ii . . ti issues, and am fre- 
quently consulted by Civil Rights authorities on these issues. 


Based on my experience, both as an attorney and as a 
visually challenged person, I am very familiar with the term 


110 


“protected class status" (a term well-defined and 


fl 
Hq 
oF 
4 
i 
EE 
E 


4 
ict 
mE 

; 


geO HE 


those who have demonstrated true need and discernable 


Therefore, let us first consider this issue of discernable 


far tess ‘aly ete snctaietty eisainiaiaeiinie iabaman Ss 
their employers to be so. But homosexuality would be a 


subjective 
would eligibility for classification as a homosexual, bisexual 
or lesbian be established? Strictly on the basis of personal 
allegation? Would protected class coverage begin only when 
homosexuality? 


instance, if a job applicant is truly homosexual? What might 
be the outcome in the case of an applicant who is not 
homosexual, but perceived by an employer to be so? 


experimental experience 
make him or her eligible for bisexual protected class status? 


be homosexual on January 1, 1992, has always been 
homosexual since birth, or will always remain homosexual? 


While there has been much discussion by gay groups 
their need for protection, I do not perceive there to be 
enough evidence, scientific empirical or otherwise, to 
demonstrate that gays have been victims of discrimination to 
the magnitude that would warrant the intrusion of 
government protection of their interests as a class. 


112 


entire “commune,” to say, "Aren’t we a ‘family,’ too? 
We're all ‘domestic partners.’ Why shouldn’t we have 
"domestic partnership’ benefits?” Or, what would prevent 
heterosexual housemates who aren’t married from benefiting 
from their “domestic partnership" under laws granting 


protected class status to gays? 


Under such laws, it is possible that people who aren’t 
gay might well pretend to be gay, to form “shell” corpora- 
tions attempting to take advantage of minority contract laws. 
If gays were made a specially protected class, it could be 
argued that they be given a certain percentage of such 
contracts, to make up for past wrongs. I fear that those who 
are already economically advantaged would thus be given 
leverage to achieve even greater economic advantage, at the 
expense of those who are truly disadvantaged. 


113 


Lastly, gays already have established recourse against 
discrimination. They have the right to pursue civil litigation 
if they have been defamed or held up to ridicule. They are 
protected against verbal abuse by harassment laws. They are 
entitled under current laws to protection of their own 
property and persons. They are entitled to protection by all 
the criminal laws of this State. 


The basic Civil Rights laws of this country protect all 


520-6485 


114 


AFFIDAVIT OF JOHN GILLESPIE 


I, John Gillespie, being first duly sworn, depose and state 
the following from my personal knowledge: 


1. Iam the Executive Director, Rawhide Boys’ Ranch, 
Route 1, New London, Wisconsin 54961, telephone (414) 
982-6100. Rawhide Boy’s Ranch is located in a rural 
Wisconsin area. 


2. I am submitting this affidavit to illustrate the 
extreme position taken by gays and lesbians on the subject of 
civil rights. I believe, based on my personal experiences, 
that that position is injurious. I do not wish for any other 
organizations or individuals, including those in Colorado, to 
experience what I describe in detail below. 


3. I have acted as Executive Director of Rawhide 
Boys’ Ranch since it was established in 1965. 


4. Rawhide Boys’ Ranch was established by myself, 
my wife, Jan Gillespie, and Bart and Cherry Starr. 


5. Since it was established, Rawhide Boys’ Ranch has 
operated for the purpose of rehabilitating boys who have 
been adjudicated as being delinquents. Boys enrolled at 
Rawhide Boys’ Ranch are boys with extensive juvenile court 
backgrounds. They commonly have a history of criminal 
assault and battery, drug abuse, car theft, breaking and 
entering, or even homicide. 


6. The method employed by the Rawhide Boys’ Ranch 
to rehabilitate the boys emphasizes the use of a model 
traditional Christian family lifestyle. A brochure publish 
[sic] by Rawhide Boys’ Ranch is attached as Appendix 1. 
This includes married heterosexual couples, senior residential 
instructors, residential instructors, and a director of social 


115 


services. Job descriptions for each of these positions are 
attached to this affidavit as Appendices 2-6. 


of ages of boys enrolled is 13 to 18 years of age. Rawhide 


10. Typically, the boys come from a single-parent 
family and have little or no church background. Most of the 
parents or guardians of the boys want the child to receive 
exposure to religion. Therefore, only with the express 
permission of a boy’s parent or guardian, the boys are taken 
to church. If a particular church is requested, Rawhide 
Boys’ Ranch makes the necessary arrangements to satisfy the 
request. 


11. For the period 1974-1991, none of over 77 percent 
of the boys that were enrolled in Rawhide Boys’ Ranch for 
a period of at least 12 months had been incarcerated. 


12. Boys are referred to the Rawhide Boys’ Ranch by 
the counties located within the State of Wisconsin. Enrollees 
are accepted on a first come, first serve basis. A typical 


116 


enrollee is a teenage boy that is both physically and 
emotionally aggressive. 


13. Under the 1982 Wisconsin Fair Employment Act 
("Act"), copy attached as Appendix 7, employment decisions 
based on marital status or sexual orientation were prohibited ’ 
Under the Act, for example, in my opinion, certain actions 
taken by the Catholic church would be illegal. 


14. In the early 1980s, Dane County, Wisconsin, 
mailed Rawhide Boys’ Ranch a questionnaire which sought 
information concerning Rawhide Boys’ Ranch’s employment 
practices as they may concern employment decisions based 
on marital status, sex, and sexual orientation. Rawhide 
Boys’ Ranch responded by indicating that marital status, sex 
and sexual orientation were factors on which it based some 
of its staffing employment decisions. For example, Rawhide 
Boys’ Ranch stated that it only employed heterosexual 
couples that had been married for at least 5 years to serve as 


houseparents. 


15. Apparently, the questionnaire was forwarded to 
then Governor Anthony Earl’s Commission for Gay and 
Department of Social Services to revoke Rawhide Boys’ 
Ranch’s license on the basis of the allegation that the 
Rawhide Boys’ Ranch violated the Act. 


16. Soon thereafter, State Senator Joe Leean obtained 


attached copies of newspaper articles attached as Appendices 
9-15. 


17. Gay and lesbian rights advocates alleged that 
Rawhide Boys’ Ranch was anti-gay or anti-lesbian. This was 
false. Rawhide Boys’ Ranch emphasizes traditional family 
values; it is not anti-gay or anti-lesbian. The Rawhide Boys’ 
Ranch’s philosophy is that parents should be allowed to 
determine what is best for their children. 


18. The debate over whether or not Rawhide Boys’ 
Ranch was in violation of the Act led to an attempt to obtain 
legislation that would exempt Rawhide Boys’ Ranch from the 
Act. 


19. Rawhide Boys’ Ranch spent approximately 
$250,000.00* to engage in mailings, produce a video, and 
retain the services of an individual to tour and speak out in 
support of an exemption for Rawhide Boys’ Ranch. It was 
believed that without the exemption, Rawhide Boys’ Ranch 
would have to close. 


20. Finally, in February 1988 and after years of 
lobbying and despite opposition from Lambda Rights 
Network, see Appendix 16, attached, Assembly Bill 916, 
attached as Appendix 17, was passed into law. The bill 
amended the Act by defining the word “creed” to mean a 
system of religious beliefs, including moral or ethical beliefs 
about right and wrong, that are sincerely held with the 
strength of traditional religious views. As amended by the 
bill, the Act exempted the Rawhide Boys’ Ranch. 


* Rawhide Boy’s Ranch’s 1993 revenues totalled 
approximately $1,035,279.00. 


118 


21. Rawhide Boys’ Ranch’s license has not been 
threatened on the basis of a state civil rights violation since 
the amendment was adopted. 


/s/ 

JOHN GILLESPIE 

Executive Director 

Rawhide Boys’ Ranch 

Route 1 

New London, Wisconsin 54961 
(414) 982-6100 


FURTHER AFFIANT SAYETH NAUGHT. 


119 


DEFENDANTS’ EXHIBIT B 


Talmey-Drake Research & Strategy 
Project 92144 
December 1992 


CHANNEL 4 & THE DENVER POST 
DECEMBER 1992 ISSUES SURVEY RESULTS 


“** & © 


5. In the last election Colorado voters also passed an 


amendment to the State Constitution -- Amendment 2 -- 
that prevents state and local governments from passing 
laws that prohibit discrimination against homosexuals in 
employment and housing. It also repealed existing laws 
that banned discrimination against homosexuals in 
employment and housing in communities that already 
passed such laws. 


The people who opposed Amendment 2 say the 
people who voted for Amendment 2 voted that way 
because they hate homosexuals. Others say that the 
people who voted for Amendment 2 were not so much 
against homosexuals as against laws that would give 
homosexuals special or protected status when it comes 
to housing and employment. What do you think? Do 
you think the majority of those who voted in favor of 
Amendment 2 voted that way because they hate 
homosexuals or because they are against laws that 
would give homosexuals a type of special or protected 
status? 


ee 10% 
SS rer ee 73% 
Both [NO PROMPT] ......... 71% 


minorities and women in housing and employment. 
While many people feel that these laws are good, many 
others feel that society would be better if these laws 
were repealed. How do you feel? Do you feel there 
should be laws that prohibit discrimination aganist [sic] 
ethnic and racial minorities in housing and 

or do you feel that society would be better if these laws 
were repealed? 


There should be laws ........ 74% 
Should be repealed ......... 16% 
Undecided/DK/NS ......... 10% 


Since the passage of Amendment 2 by Colorado voters 
a number of homosexual rights organizations and some 
celebrities have called for a national boycott of Colora- 
do until Amendment 2 is repealed. Have you seen or 
heard anything about this boycott of Colorado? 


And does the call for a boycott of Colorado by homo- 
sexual rights groups make you more likely or less likely 


to support the repeal of Amendment 2. 
SEEN so ta Ka a a6 oes 25% 
EE e's bb 0:0 + ected 43% 
ET aia 6 6m 06.4.0 608 28% 
DK/NS/Undecided .......... 4% 


9. 


10. 


11. 


While some people say that the boycott of Colorado will 
cost the state millions of dollars in lost tourism and 
business, others say that the boycott won’t have much 
effect, but the publicity will actually bring more tourists 
and more business to Colorado. What do you think? 
Will the effect of the boycott hurt the state’s economy 


or in the end will it help it? 
Boycott will hurt economy . 48% 
Boycott will help economy . 20% 
Won’t make any difference . 25% 
BPP crc ettactecscens 7% 


Whether or not you feel the boycott will help or hurt 
Colorado’s economy, do you think Colorado voters will 
vote in favor of repealing Amendment 2 or do you think 


they will vote against repealing it? 
For repealing #2 .......... 36% 
Against Repealing #2........ 49% 
Undecided/DK/NS ......... 14% 
No answer/refused .......... 1% 


Some people say that many in the homosexual commu- 
nity over reacted [sic] to the passage of Amendment 2, 
and have actually hurt their cause. Others, however, 
say that a strong reaction is necessary to change 
peoples’ minds. Again, what do you think? Has the 
reaction to the passage of Amendment 2 hurt the cause 
of gay rights in Colorado or has it helped it? : 


Hurt gay rights ........... 56% 
DEE 5 hig W060 6 6 00-99 6 27% 
Made no difference .......... 6% 
Ey (ald gs 0 0 9 .0.0:3 40.8 11% 


122 


12. In light of the passage of Amendment 2 some people are 


13. 


. 
! 
# 
: 


: 
: 
3 
) 
af 
ft 


‘ 

} 

Fi 
ray 
fe 
<TH 


both male and female homosexuals 
[PROBE TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN "DK/NS" AND 
"NEUTRAL"] 
[ROTATE] —Agree— -Disagree- DK/ 

Stng Some N Some Stng NS 

{a] Homosexuals should 

be allowed to served 

123 


[b) 


[c] 


[d) 


[e] 


[f] 


—Agree— -Disagree- DK/ 
Stng Some N Some Stng NS 


in the armed forces. 41% 18% 5% 8% 


Homosexuality is 
morally wrong. 


A homosexual is more 

likely to sexually 

molest children than 

a person who is 

heterosexual. 4% 2% 5%17% 


Except for their 
choice of sexual 
partners, homo- 
sexuals are not 
really different 
from anyone else. 60% 21% 1% 6% 


31% 9% 7%12% 


When homosexuals 
talk about gay 
rights, what they 
are really saying 
is that they want 
special treatment. 32% 22% 3%12% 
Homosexual couples -- 

that is couples of the 
same sex -- should 
be allowed to adopt 
children. 18% 17% 9%12% 
Most homosexuals 

would rather be 


straight, if they 
124 


22% 6% 


36% S% 


61% 11% 


7% 5% 


28% 3% 


37% 7% 


[h) 


(i) 


Gi) 


(k] 


~Agree— -Disagree- DK/ 
Stng Some N Some Stag NS 


9% 10% 8%19% 32% 22% 


10% 8% 5%21% 52% 4% 


Homosexual behavior 

should be against 

the law, even if it 

occurs between 

consenting adults. 9% 4% 5%14% 64% 4% 


Most homosexuals 
could quit being 
gay if they 


really tried. 11% 8% 7%16% 44% 14% 


40% 28% 5%13% 8% 6% 


125 


(ATTACHMENT TO AFFIDAVIT OF PAUL TALMEY) 


Talmey-Drake Research & Strategy 
Project 93234 SEP93A2. % 
September 1993 


SEPTEMBER 1993 ISSUES 


*s* ee & 


23. In the last election Colorado voters also passed an 
amendment to the State Constitution -- Amendment 2 -- 
that prevents state and local governments from passing 
laws that prohibit discrimination against homosexuals in 
employment and housing. It also repealed existing laws 
that banned discrimination against homosexuals in 
employment and housing in communities that already 
passed such laws. 


The people who opposed Amendment 2 say the 
people who voted for Amendment 2 voted that way 
because they hate homosexuals. Others say that the 
people who voted for Amendment 2 were not so much 
against homosexuals as against laws that would give 
homosexuals special or protected status when it comes 
to housing and employment. What do you think? Do 
~ you think the majority of those who voted in favor of 
Amendment 2 voted that way because they hate 
homosexuals or because they are against laws that 
would give homosexuals a type of special or protected 
status? 


I sg 0 4 cee ees 8% 
DE ne aeiiccocecs 81% 
Both [NO PROMPT] ......... 5% 
ons ewe bbseceéw 4% 


24. In light of the passage of Amendment 2 some people are 


saying that people in Colorado are more prejudiced 
against homosexuals than people in other states. Other 
people say that Coloradans are generally more tolerant 
than people in other states, and that if Amendment 2 
had been on the ballot in other states it would have 
passed in most of them too. What do you think? Are 
people in Colorado more tolerant or less tolerant of 


homosexuals than people in other states. 
EE ews 0:06 © ws0 0% 52% 
Na 65 6 0k 6 0 60 08 14% 
GG « s.k'e 0 0-60 0ON Ba 25% 
ES wae hee ks 5b 04 9% 


25. [ASK ONLY IF Q5 = 1 (REGISTERED VOTER)] 
Now suppose there was an election being held 
today, and voters were being asked to repeal 
Amendment 2 -- the State Constitutional amend- 
ment that prevents state and local governments 
from passing laws that prohibit discrimination 
against homosexuals in employment and housing -- 
would you vote for repealing Amendment 2 or 
would you vote against repealing it. 


Against repeal ... 58% 
on aaa I |. * —>> SKIP TO Q26 


27. Because of the controversy over Amendment 2, we are 


particularly interested in finding out how people feel 
about homosexuality and gay rights issues. I would 


127 


[PROBE TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN “DK/NS" AND 
"NEUTRAL"] 


[b] 


[c] 


[d] 


23% 28% 5%21% 


be allowed to serve 


relationships. 8% 7% 5%20% 


38% 10% 8%13% 


128 


14% 


21% 


55 % 


27% 


-Disagree- DK/ 


9% 


4% 


6% 


6% 


--Agree-- -Disagree- DK/ 


[e] Except for their 


(f] 


(h) 


choice of sexual 
partners, homo- 
sexuals are not 
really different 


from anyone else. 46% 28% 2%11% 9% 4% 


4% 7% 4%20% 59% 6% 


5% 6% 3%10% 71% 6% 


17% 13% 7%15S% 33% 15% 


129 


—Agree-- -Disagree- DK/ --Agree— -Disagree- DK/ 


Stng Some N Some Stng NS Stng_ Some N Some Stng NS 
minorities. 16% 17% 3%16% 44% 5% [0] The government 
should actively 
[j] Homosexual behavior discourage home 
should be against sexual behavior. 17% 9% S5%18% 47% 5% 
the law, even if 
it occurs between [p] An employer should 
consenting adults. 7% 8% 3%22% 55% 5% have the right to 
not hire someone 
[k] When homosexuals because he or she 
talk about gay is a homosexual. 13% 13% 2%19% 51% 3% 
rights, what they 
is that they want have the right to 
special treatment. 35% 24% 1%14% 21% 5% evict a tenant on 
the grounds that 
{1} A dentist should he or she is a 
be allowed to homosexual. 8% 5% 3%22% 59% 4% 
refuse to treat 
someone who has [rf] Homosexuals should 
AIDS or who is HIV not be allowed to 
positive. 34% 28% 6%12% 13% 8% be Scout masters. 26% 14% 6%24% 26% 5% 
[m] An employer should [s) A landlord should 
have the right to have the right to 
fire an employee J refuse to rent to 
on the grounds he someone because 
or she is a homo- he or she is a 
sexual. 1% 6% 3%18% 64% 3% homosexual. 13% 11% 2%20% 51% 3% 
[n] Homosexuals should [t} Homosexual couples 
not be allowed to should be able to 
teach in the public become legally 
schools. 13% 9% 5%27% 43% 4% married. 16% 21% 9%13% 36% 5% 


130 131 


--Agree-- -Disagree- DK/ 
Stag Some N Some Stng NS 


[u] Gay rights are more 
about making homo- 
sexual behavior 
acceptable than 
about equal housing 
and employment 
opportunities. 38% 26% 4%14% 12% 7% 


[v] Homosexual couples -- 
that is couples of 
the same sex —- 
should be allowed 
to adopt children. 15% 16% 5%14% 43% 7% 


28. Shortly after Amendment 2 passed last November, the 
Denver District Court ruled that it could not be enforced 
until there has been a full trial. Some people say that 
if the courts overturn Amendment 2 it shows that the 
people in power in this country will pretty much run 
things the way they want to regardless of what the 
public wants. What do you think? If the courts 
overturn Amendment 2 does it mean that the people in 
power in this country pretty much run things they [sic] 
way they want to regardless of what the public wants, 
or would you think it was overturned for another 


reason? 
People in power ignore public 47% 
a as ee 43% 
Both [NO PROMPT] ......... 2% 
Dri. «nou wo6 6 ae 6 6.4.69 8% 


132 


TESTIMONY OF WILFORD G. PERKINS 
{v. 15, p. 712] 


the witness herein, having been first duly sworn, on oath 
testified as follows: 


THE COURT: Thank you. Please be seated. 

Mr. Perkins, as with the other witnesses, I’Il have 
you swing around and speak directly into that microphone. 
There we go. And if you speak into the flat side, it works 
the best. 

Mr. Kay. 

DIRECT EXAMINATION 

BY MR. KAY: 
Q. Would you state your name, please. 
A. Wilford G. Perkins. 
Q. Mr. Perkins, were do you live? 
A. I live in Colorado Springs. 
“kee « 
[v. 15, p. 713] 


Q. Mr. Perkins, are you involved with an organization 
known as Coloradans for Family Values? 


A. Iam the chairman of the board. 


133 


How long have you been the chairman of the 


bo 


{v. 15, p. 714] 


A. Oh, I think we incorporated in April of °91. 
Approximately. I’m not sure of the exact date. 


Q. How did you come to be involved with Coloradans 
for Family Values? And is that organization sometimes 
called CFV? 


A. Yes, it is. And it’s Colorado for Family Values. 
I became involved as I took part in the discussion of the 
human relations council in Colorado Springs promoting a 
change in the ordinance for the city. 


Q. What kind of change was being promoted in the 
City of Colorado Springs ordinance? 


A. Well, in substance, my initial introduction to it had 
nothing to do with sexual orientation. I, two years ago, 
sexual orientation wasn’t in my vocabulary. I became 
interested when I saw the impact of the change in the human 
relations proposed ordinance that would have an impact on 
me as a business person, and that’s what caught my interest, 
and that’s why I originally went to the hearings that were 
being conducted at the council. 


Q. When was this? 


134 


A. The exact date I don’t recall, but it was -- it was 


prior to our incorporating as a Colorado for Family Values 
[sic]. There was no organization at that time. 


{v. 15, p. 715] 


Q. Let me refer you to what’s tabbed under Exhibit 10 
in that blue book in front of you which is in fact known as 
Exhibit Y for the record. Do you recognize that document? 


A. Not precisely. Is this the final draft of the 
ordinance as it was presented to the City? 


Q. I’m not sure. How many drafts were there? 
A. I don’t know. There were several. 


Q. Do you recognize that as one of the drafts that was 
used with the City of Colorado Springs? 


A. It says that’s what it is, yes. 

Q. Do you recall ever seeing that document? 
A. I’m sure I did. I looked at all of them. 
Q. Did you read all of those documents? 


A. I read them, yes. I’m not an attorney. I read them 
as a lay person. And the things that caught my eye were 
primarily the fact that as a business person, if one of my 
employees filed a complaint against me even though it could 
even be a perceived complaint, and they in the first draft 
said without due recourse of law, they could make me give 
them any information I had in my business or home, and 
then the commission was the judge and jury, and frankly, I 
thought something like that would make a gestapo 


135 


embarrassed and I saw this as a real potential problem for 
business and that’s what got me involved, why I want [sic] 
to the hearings. 


Q. So you want [sic] to the city council hearings on 


this 
[v. 15, p. 715] 
particular amendment to the City’s ordinances? 


A. Yes. Yes, I did. 
Q. Did you speak out at those hearings? 


A. No. In fact, the first meeting I went to there were 
so many people there I couldn’t even get in. 


Q. Did that ordinance have anything to do with sexual 
orientation? 


A. Yes. Sexual orientation was in the wording of it. 
Q. But you were more concerned as a business person? 


MS. WINER: Excuse me, Judge. I’m going to object 
on the leading. 

THE COURT: Sustained. Form of the question. 
Please ask questions in a non-leading manner. 

Q. (BY MR. KAY): What were you concerned about 
that organization? 


A. I was concerned about the impact, as I stated, the 
potential impact of just more red tape and more problems 
involving this type of complaint. 


136 


Q. Did there come a time when you became concerned 
about the sexual orientation aspects of that ordinance? 


A. Well, as I read about it in the papers and then as I 
began to associate more with my friends who were involved 
with this, prior — this issue prior to my involvement, then I 
began to see the impact of the sexual orientation clause. 


{v. 15, p. 717] 


Q. And what did you see as the impact that you were 
concerned about? 


A. Well, I guess I probably went through -- through 
the kind of emotions and thinking that probably a majority 
of people in Colorado on this issue is that prior to this 
involvement with this ordinance and the sexual orientation, 
sexual orientation wasn’t in my vocabulary. As a business 
person, we’ve had homosexual customers. I didn’t consider 
them a threat to anybody. We did business just like 
everybody else. I have homosexual acquaintances. Some 
celibate -- one, not a large number, one is celibate, another 
is practicing. I didn’t -- you know, I -- it just was not an 
issue with me. 


Q. Did you have any homosexual employees at your 
Chrysler dealership? 


A. I don’t know. I may have. I have been asked that 
question by reporters, and I said if I did or if there are now, 
they are doing a good job. 


Q. Do you make sexual orientation an issue at your 
business? 


A. No, we don’t. 


137 


Q. How did your involvement in the Colorado Springs 
ordinance which is in front of you lead to your involvement 
in CFV, Colorado for Family Values? 


A. Well, as I began to become better involved on 
{v. 15, p. 718] 
what the implications of sexual orientation and then to 
understand that this really was the motivating factor in this 
proposed ordinance, and then I began to learn that there 
were ordinances in Boulder and in Aspen, and along about 
this time they were -- there was a vote on referendum type 
vote in Denver that was in progress, which had not caught 


Well, I never thought about these kind of things. 
But - and it’s important to understand and I had to get this 
straight in my head that there has to be a difference from 
this protected class, and as I’ve studied it I understand that 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 began to identify groups of 
people who they termed to be suspect of discrimination, and 
to see whether they should go into a protected class. Which 
of course is what this Amendment is all about. And 


protection from discrimination. If you are left-handed, if 
you are seven feet tall and you are not a basketball player, 
if you are four feet tall, there are problems addressed with 
that, and if you are -- every job description, of course, has 
some discriminating factors in it, so there has to be a 
criteria. And we discovered that this criteria had to do with 
economics and education, the matter of identification, and 
also the fact of political influence. 


And as we went through the whole research, as to 
the economics of this, there had to be a definite history of 
discrimination. I’m sorry to take so much time about this, 
but I had to go through this to understand it, there had to be 
a history of discrimination that had prevented people from 
making an average income. That had denied them from 
access to average educational opportunities. And I guess 
when you look at the Black American situation, back in the 
50’s and early 60’s that there was no question, there had 
been a history of discrimination which prevented them as a 
group, not individually and not isolated instances, but as a 
group from having the capability of making an average 
income and getting adequate educational opportunities. 


When they looked at the political influence, I think 
that’s changed some since then, but at that time they were 


{v. 15, p. 720] 
not politically powerful enough to affect these other 
conditions. And then as I looked at this last classification of 
identification, there was -- with the exception of religion for 
the most part, there was a clearly identifiable immutable 
physical characteristic so society knew they were dealing 
with a protected class person and give them a higher 
consideration. As we looked at the homosexuals, as a 
group, and then we had to figure out that the only way you 
could tell, they would have to say they were. How do -- are 


they economically disadvantaged? And by their own 
139 


research they are not, and you have access to that, and we -- 
and one of the surveys made by a homosexual marketing 
research firm they showed that 20,000 sampling around the 


$32,000 and if you look at the traditional minorities it’s 


And 30 percent, these are approximations, but 30 
percent had advanced degrees. So they weren’t disadvan- 
taged. There had to have been no history of discrimination 
in those areas that affected those two. 


{v. 15, p. 721] 
Q. You are not saying that there was no -- 


MS. WINER: Excuse me, Judge, but I’m going to 
object to the leading. 


THE COURT: Yes. Questions tat start "you are not 
stating" are leading questions. Please rephrase. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): Did you consider whether they 
had been discriminated against other than economically and 
educationally in your analysis? 


A. Well, what we concentrated on was the protected 
class status. You know, discrimination takes forms in a lot 
of things. As an [sic] used car salesman I have experienced 
discrimination. You know, I can do something about what 


140 


people think of me as a used car salesmen who do business 


with me, but as an industry, unfortunately, we have earned 
our reputation, and it’s not a good one. 


Now, does that mean I should go to the city council 
and ask them to write an ordinance to give me more respect 
because I suffer discrimination? I didn’t see any connection 
by the fact that there is discrimination. We have to look at 
does that discrimination impact a group of people to the 
extent they deserve protected class status and the criteria that 
has been used up to this point doesn’t say so. Now that’s 
my impression. 


Q. Did you look at whether they had been subject to 
name calling or gay bashing as people have termed it in 
{v. 15, p. 722] 
the past? 


A. Well, it’s my opinion and I think it’s a matter of 
fact that if someone is -- if a homosexual is harmed 
physically or threatened or their property damaged, 
somebody is breaking the law, and they ought to be 
apprehended and prosecuted. No question about that. Now, 
if that’s taking place and someone is breaking the law, they 
should be prosecuted. 


Q. You looked at education and income? 


A. And we also looked at the idea of political 
influence. 


Q. What did you find there? 
A. Well, I can tell you -—- before the campaign started, 


I was pretty naive about that, but I knew just looking at what 
was going on in this nation that political influence is 


14] 


demonstrated everyday [sic]. Later in the campaign, I got 
a better education on that. But I think -- 


Q. Political influences everyday [sic] by whom? 


A. There’s no question about they are very politically 
affluent, very politically affluent. 


Q. You are talking about the gay and lesbians? 


A. Iam talking about the gay and lesbian community, 
however you want to identify them. 


Q. How do you identify them? 


A. Well, it’s a problem. But basically if somebody 
{v. 15, p. 723] 
tells me they are homosexual, I assume they are. And I 
would say that it basically is the desire to have sex with that 
someone of the same gender. 


Q. How do you identify them as a group? 


A. I can’t. I mean they can form together, I guess, 
and present themselves as a group. But it’s a self identifi- 
cation. That’s one of the problems. 


Q. Have they done that? Have they gotten together in 
groups that you know of? 


A. Yes, they have. The national gay and lesbian task 
force is one of the most influential PAC groups in America. 
So they — when they identify themselves and join organiza- 
tions that say this is what they are, what they propose, I 
guess you have to say, yeah, that must be it. 


142 


Q. What else did you do in your analysis on the sexual 
Orientation issue as it relates to suspect class or protected 
class? 


A. Well, this identification is a very important one, 
because as I looked at that as a business person, if it became 
an advantage to be homosexual, then also one would have to 
say, well, I’m homosexual and if you used the term sexual 
orientation and put it in a protected class, then it means that 
every time a business person makes a personnel decision, 
they open themselves to the potential problem of being 
confronted with I didn’t get that job because I was 
homosexual or I didn’t 

{v. 15, p. 724] 

get that job because I’m heterosexual or I didn’t get that 
promotion or I didn’t get the raise or what have you, and all 
based on whatever they described themselves as being. And 
now, that doesn’t mean they would always win the lawsuit. 
But it means you would always have to defend yourselv and 
you would always face the possibility of losing a case like in 
any of those matters. So as a business person that was 
extremely important to me. 


Q. Any other analysis you did on the protected class 
status and whether it should or should not be granted to — on 
the basis of sexual orientation? 


A. Yes. As we looked at the history of this civil rights 
matter and sexual orientation, who we discovered through 
the last 16, 17 years that the National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force or some other organizations with same motivation 
have been promoting legislation in Congress which would 
include sexual orientation as a protected class under the Civil 
Rights Act of 64. And as we thought about it, and as it 
dies in committee, it has every year, and I think for a very 
good reason, the reason being that sexual orientation is 
everybody. All the time, every situation. Now, to 


143 


assume -- and this is what we used in our campaign, the 
special right of protected class status is a special right. 
Because doesn’t have it in every situation. Now, 
if everybody has this special right in every situation, then 
who has a special right? And the 
[v. 15, p. 725] 

answer is nobody. And who loses in that group? The losers 
are the very people for whom the Civil Rights Act was 
initiated. People who -- groups in society that needed a leg 
up to get started in education, jobs, employment, through 
affirmative action. These are all parts of it making the 
protected class status work. And personally I am very much 
in favor of civil rights. I am very much in favor of groups 
of people who need a leg up in society getting the 
opportunity. And I see this as a real threat to the purpose of 
the Civil Rights Act in 1964. 


Q. And - 
A. If they were to include sexual orientation. 
Q. —- any other analysis you did on this issue? 


A. Well, there was a lot of detail work that was done 
and some of the other fellows could probably address better 
than I. 


Q. Let’s talk about that. Who are the other people 
involved in CFV at its inception? 


A. Well, the two founders of CFV and two people that 
were I think most instrumental were Kevin Tebedo and Tony 
Marco. 


Q. How did you come to be involved with those two 
and their organization known as Colorado for Family 
Values? 


4d 


A. Well, Kevin I did not know. Perhaps I had met 
sometime [sic]. I know his family. I had done business 
with his family and with his mother in particular. 


{v. 15, p. 726] 
Q. His mother is a state legislature [sic]? 


A. Yes, she is a state senator. I had known her 
through other political work. And Tony, I had a slight 
acquaintance with in that we went to the same church. We 
were not -- we just went to the same church and had known 
each other. 


Q. Let me ask you was CFV formed as a religious 
ion or a religious right sation? 


A. Well, we have been confronted with that question 
on many many times, and if you look at the Amendment, it 
doesn’t say anything about immorality or morality or 
criminalization or anything like that. It addresses protected 
class status. Now, people approach the idea of Amendment 
2, many people do, from a religious persuasion. People on 
both sides of the issue. Some say it’s a bad deal. Some say 
it’s a good deal. We did not - Amendment 2 is not a 
religious issue, as a piece of legislation, even though some 
people approach it in that manner. It’s a matter of protected 
class status, and that’s the issue that we argue. 


Q. Is it a religious issue to you? 


A. I would come from a religious persuasion, because 
my faith is very important to me. But that is not the thrust 
of the amendment. Even though someone approaches it 
from a religious prospective on the opposing view they can 
be just genuinely sincere about that. We argued this 
primarily from a 


145 


{v. 15, p. 727] 

civil rights status. Now, in certain environments where we 
were sending information to churches or pastors, we made 
reference to religious issues because that was a -- that was 
their interest. But, if you were to look at our radio spots, or 
you look at our television spots during the campaign, it 
doesn’t address that at all. We do make some reference to 
that in the tabloid that we used during the campaign, but as 
I say, in a political campaign you look at the market that you 
are appealing to with whatever the media you are using, and 
that’s the way you present it, and that’s the way we did. 


Q. So you did have some religious material -- 


MS. WINER: Excuse me, Judge. I would object to 


THE COURT: I’m going to sustain that as well. It’s 
in the nature of a summary; is also in the nature of leading. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): Did you have any religious 
material in your campaign materials? 


Yes, we did. 
Was that the thrust of your campaign materials? 


No, it was not. 


RP PrP PP 


After your involvement with the Colorado Springs 
ordinance -- by the way, what happened to that Colorado 
Springs sexual orientation ordinance? 


A. Well, eventually the city council voted it out 
{v. 15, p. 728] 
eight to one. 


146 


Q. What was your next involvement in the political 
arena as it relates to sexual orientation provisions or laws? 


A. Well, as we began to look at what happened in 
Colorado, and we began to apply what we had thought and 
researched and discussed and considered, we saw that this 
was an issue in the entire state. There were a variety of 
ways it could be approached. But as we considered statutes, 
and we considered possibility of using the legislature, we felt 
like that the best way was to give the entire state an 
Opportunity to vote on the issue and use the initiative 
process, and that’s what we decided to do. 


Q. What made you think it was a statewide issue? 


A. Well, one of the main reasons was that the 
Governor had issued some directive regarding government 
agencies, the human relations or the civil rights commission 
was making it a state issue. 


Q. How were they making it a state issue? 


A. Well, they were implementing this through their 
whole civil rights commission structure. And thinking in 
terms of the nature of civil rights legislation, it’s much 
broader than local areas. And so that when you go through 
the initiative process, you have to gain signatures, and then 


people everywhere in the state, qualified voters, have an 
opportunity to vote on it. And the other reason that we 


wanted to use the 
{v. 15, p. 729] 


initiative process instead of trying to go through the 
legislature, we were very aware of the fact of the very 


strong political influence that the homosexual proponents 
had. And it’s much easier for them to influence a small 


group of legislators as opposed to having everyone have an 
opportunity to express their opinion on the issue. So that 


147 


probability was the most compelling interest that we had in 
going through the initiative process. 


A. How did you come up with the language that 
eventually became known as Amendment 2? 


Q. Well, we employed the use of attorneys that we 
discussed the basic issue that we wanted to address and that 
was protected class status for homosexual and bisexuals and 
lesbians, and we gave that to the attorneys, and they 
massaged it, they were all constitutional attorneys or 
eventually that were called into [sic] critique and to, you 
know, give their impression, because we knew at that time 
we would be going through the process that we are here 
today. And this, of course, is no surprise. So in order to 
be sure that we met the constitutional requirements, we had 
constitutional attorneys draw it up. We had constitutional 
attorneys around the country review it, and this language, I 
didn’t read it all, but I’m sure that’s it, was what we came 
up with. And when we submitted that to the Secretary of 
State, and the Attorney General, they -- I don’t now how 
many appeals there were regarding 

[v. 15, p. 730] 
the wording, but as I recall there were four or five, but to 
my knowledge there was not one word changed in the way 
we originally submitted the proposed amendment. 


Q. Now, you are talking about the petition process —- 
the referendum process that you went through to get 
Amendment 2 on the ballot? 


A;-Yes, that’s correct. We had to get the wording 
approved before we could print the forms to get the 
signatures for the initiative. We had to — that all had to be 
approved before we could start distributing them and getting 
signatures. 


148 


Q. Did you do that process yourself? 


A. Well, I personally yes, I did -- well, you mean 
gathering signatures? 


Q. The whole process, the language being drafted? 
A. No. 


Q. Submission to the Secretary of State, submission to 
the Attorney General, the hearings on the language, 
obtaining the petition signatures, did you do all that? 


A. No. I was in attendance most of the time. A lot of 
that was done by the legal people and Kevin and Tony were 


directly involved more than I was in that, but I was present 
in many of the things that were talked about. 


Q. Was the amendment language eventually approved 
to go on the ballot? 


A. Yes, it was. 
[v. 15, p. 731] 
Q. What did you do then? 


A. Then we went into the process of gaining signatures 
ee ee 
1992. 


Q. How did you do that? 

A. Well, we used the traditional manner of just 
distributing the forms with people who are on your side in 
this issue. There’s two ways to do it, and you can pay to 
have professional petition carriers getting signatures. We 


149 


150 


A. Our argument consistently was throughout the 
campaign that how you have sex for whatever reason is not 


an appropriate criteria for civil rights. 


Q. After you obtained enough signatures to get this 
amendment on the ballot for November of 1992, did you 
conduct a political campaign to support this amendment? 
Yes, we did. 

CFV did that? 
Colorado for Family Values did that, yes. 
And how did you do that? 


Pa Pe Ooh 


Well, we used a lot of the traditional manners of 
conducting a political campaign. We didn’t have the money 
to do some of the things that should be done in a campaign. 
We didn’t have the money to conduct polls. We thought that 
we had done a considerable amount of polling and just 
gathering the 

{v. 15, p. 733] 


signatures, so we had to rely on that. We set up groups of 
people in the communities all over the state to support our 
campaign. We used I think pretty much the traditional 
manners of conducting a political campaign where we could 
afford it. 


Q. Did you have any experience in conducting political 
Campaigns prior to this? 

A. I have been involved in the political campaigns not 
never as a candidate, but I have been campaign manager for 


a couple of -- for city council candidate, for - and then he 
later on went on to be a state representative as a candidate. 


151 


And I’ve been involved in other actions as a business person 
in the last 45 years in Colorado Springs. 


Q. Did CFV produce any written material in support 
of its political campaign to promote Amendment 2? 


A. Yes, we did. One other thing, I am a precinct 
committee member. 


Q. Let’s look —- 


MR. KAY: Before we move on, Your Honor, I would 
move admission of Defendant’s Exhibit Y, the proposed city 
of Colorado Springs sexual orientation ordinance. 


MS. WINER: Your Honor, I don’t think any founda- 
tion has been laid for it. I think that Mr. Perkins has stated 
for the record that he doesn’t know what draft this is or 
whether it is or isn’t what the State has said it is. So that 
would be the basis of my objection. 


{v. 15, p. 734] 
THE COURT: Anything further, Mr. Kay? 


MR. KAY: I think he’s identified it, and that that 
was -- he was involved in that process at the city level. 


THE COURT: The objection is overruled. Mr. 
Perkins hasn’t indicated that this is the final draft which was 
approved, but he has indicated it was one of those, and it’s 
offered for an indication of how he got started in the 
process, and it will be received for that purpose. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): Mr. Perkins, if you'll turn to tab 
8 which is Exhibit W, do you recognize those documents? 


152 


A. Yes, I do. 
Q. What are those documents? 


A. This tabloid -- let me see. Is it all just one 
document? 


Q. It’s a lengthy document with a couple of shorter 
ones in the back. 


A. This is the copy of the tabloid that we distributed 
toward the end of the campaign. 


Q. When you say tabloid, you mean the original of this 
looked like a little newspaper? 


A. That’s correct. 
Q. And it’s been copied in individual little sections? 
A. That’s correct. 


Q. So the original if he had it would open up 
[v. 15, p. 735] 
like a newspaper or tabloid? 
A. That’s correct. 
Q. What's at the back of that, behind the tabloid? 


A. This was a handout that we have used. These two 
are brochures that we used during the campaign. 


The CFV report is a monthly letter that we mailed 


out to our data base, and that we used this after the 
campaign, this started after the campaign. 


153 


Q. Are all those documents that are produced by 
Colorado for Family Values and other than the last CFV 


report were prepared during the campaign? 
A. That’s correct. 


MR. KAY: Your Honor, we would move for admission 
of Exhibit W. 


MS. WINER: We have no objection, Judge. 
THE COURT: W is admitted. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): How many copies of this 
campaign material did you produce and distribute throughout 
the State of Colorado? 


A. The tabloid we printed 800,000. I really don’t 
know exactly how many of the handouts we printed but a 
large number. 


Q. Did you distribute all those throughout the state of 
Colorado during the campaign? 


A. The tabloid which was distributed toward the end 
; [v. 15, p. 736] 
of the campaign, we estimate that we did not have the money 
to mail it, so we delivered them by hand, and we estimate 
that we delivered approximately 750,000. The handouts 
were used -- given to our supporters and they distributed 
those. 


Q. Did Colorado for Family Values do any other 


campaigning in support of Amendment 2 other than publish 
this material and distribute it? 


154 


A. Yes, we did. And I guess it was at that time that 
I was really introduced to the tremendous political influence 
that the homosexual proponents have in Colorado. And not 
only Colorado, but over the country. 


Q. How was that? 


A. Well, bear in mind now I have been in business and 
our company has been in business in Colorado Springs since 
1945. And I started doing television commercials in the 
early 50’s. I just want to give you an example. There are 
three television stations that cover the Colorado Springs 
market, excluding the cable. Two of those stations, and I 
have been a substantial advertiser on all of those stations 
over the years, two of those stations, the news departments 
were so biased on this, it was absolutely amazing to me, and 
I said, hey, guys, I’m a customer, remember? This is old 
Will. I come in here and I give you several thousand dollars 
a month. Lighten up a little. But that didn’t help a bit. 


Q. When you say they are biased, what do you mean? 
{v. 15, p. 737] 


A. I mean in the way they approached this situation. 
They absolutely took our opponent’s position, and we had to 
dig out of a hole every time I talked to them. Let me just 
give you an example that happened one morning. I was in 
Grand Junction, and I have been called by a radio station in 
San Antonio, WOAI wanted an interview, so I made 
arrangements and I called them from the airport in Grand 
Junction and they said, Mr. Perkins, we are going to put you 
on hold for a moment, until the host comes on, and I 
listened to the host give the whole misconception of 
Amendment 2 and just bury me before I’m even introduced 
on the program. 


155 


— 


Q. What was the misconception. 


A. That’s the kind of thing that I experienced all the 
time. 


Q. What is this misconception in the meaning? 


A. Well, the misconception, for instance, he describes 
it as Amendment 2, the amendment that denies homosexuals 
civil rights in Colorado. That’s nonsense. 


Q. Why is that a misconception? 


A. Because we do not deny civil rights for homosexu- 
als in Colorado. They have the same civil rights as 
everybody else. 


Q. What else have you experienced? 


A. Well, I came to Denver to place the television 
spots -- 


[v. 15, p. 738] 
Q. We are talking about the campaign? 


A. I’m talking about the campaign. And we had two 
aspects to our campaign. Civil rights and the behavior 
aspect. Now bear in mind I had no problem with the spots 
except in the Denver market. In one of the stations in 
Colorado Springs, we — where we had the problem was with 
the behavior spots, and let me go into that in detail. We 
didn’t have money to do the traditional television campaigns, 
so we used ten second spots, announcements. In this ten 
seconds -- in these ten second spots there was footage of gay 
pride parades. We didn’t stage the spots. We didn’t 
produce them. They were public parades in San Francisco. 


156 


The first time I saw the footage, I said I don’t think this 
could happen in America. We have tc make absolutely sure 
that this is correct, that we are not using trick photography, 
department and described what we had, and they said, yes, 
that’s the way it is. And we said, Well, Don’t you have any 
laws against obscenity and indecent exposure and that sort of 
thing, and they said, oh, yes, we do, and they said but our 
main job is to keep the peace, and if those people didn’t get 
what they want they get really nasty. And then besides that, 
nobody wanted to lose their job. And I said, what do you 
mean by that? And he said, well, the Mayor’s in the parade. 


Now, the Mayor is now a United States senator. 
{v. 15, p. 739] 

But the situation is this: Even though they had the laws in 
place in San Francisco where this particular group has so 
much influence, they overlook the laws. And they disregard 
them in order to accommodate what they are doing. So we 
felt, knowing full well never saying that all homosexuals 
parade like this, but this is an aspect of what Colorado was 
being asked to embrace and to give protected class status to, 
and we felt that this was an aspect of this whole issue that 
the citizens of Colorado had a right to know about, and it 
was part of their decision making process. 


So in the ten second spots which we heavily 
censored and which we required that they run after 10:00 
p.m. at night, we - I came up. I already purchased the time 
in Denver, the channels, if I remember the channels, I think 
there was 2, 4, 9 and I think 12 bought the time. No 
problem. Later on submitted the footage, submitted the 
actual spots. And they all in Denver said, no, we won’t run 
these. It’s not appropriate for our station. So I went to the 
cable stations and I got the same answer. What had 
happened is that we had been effectively censored from 
Tunning these spots. And bear in mind they ran everyplace 


157 


else in the state, no problems, but only in Denver did they 
say this is not acceptable. 


After the election, NBC aired an hour-long special, 
hosted by Maria Shriver, Prime Time in Denver, carrying 
uncensored footage of the same parade, the same footage we 


o’clock at night, and it was absolutely appropriate at that 
time. That’s the kind of bias that we experienced, and the 
i influence. When you are 


normally the winner. That’s why they were 
ated: wee when we were victorious. They 
were flabbergasted. 


Q. Let’s talk about who supported and who opposed 
this Amendment during the campaign. In the state of 
Colorado, what elected officials came out against Amend- 
ment 2? 


A. Senator Campbell was out spoken [sic] on the issue. 
I’m trying to think of the — there were ads in one of the 
political papers that is distributed before the state 
convention, I forget what the name of the paper is, but I 
remember there were other politicians opposed to us but the 
one that made the biggest impression on me was Campbell. 
What made an even bigger impression on me was the fact 
that the central committee of the democratic party came out 
strongly in opposition of Amendment 2. The Republican 
party did not make any statements about it. To my 
knowledge, there was no candidates making a strong public 
position about Amendment 2 that was brought to my 
attention. 


158 


Q. Other than now Senator Campbell, any other 
candidates that were running for election in November that 
came out against Amendment 2? 


[v. 15, p. 741] 


A. I can’t specifically identify them by name, because 
I don’t remember. There were some, but I don’t know. I 
can’t think of their names at this time. 


Q. How about officials that were not running for 
election, but already elected officials? Any of those come 
out in opposition to Amendment 2? 


A. Well, if you call Governor Romer a politician, you 
would have to say that he was the honorary chairman of 
EPOC, which is our opposing organization. Patricia 
Shroeder, Representative Schroeder was another honorary 
chair person [sic]. The Mayor Webb was in opposition to 
Amendment 2. To my knowledge, the only newspaper 
editorial staff that took our position was the Gazette 
Telegraph in Colorado Springs and the Tribune in Greeley. 
Now, there may have been others but I’m not aware of 
them. 


Q. So two newspapers that you know of supported 
Amendment 2? : 


A. Yes. 


Q. How many newspapers in Colorado came out in 
direct opposition to Amendment 2? 


A. How many are there? 


Q. All the rest came in direct opposition? 


159 


Did any -- 


> Oo Pp © PO 
° 


Does that give you some idea of what media 
influence means? 


Q. - did any elected officials in the State of Colorado, 
state, city, or county, come out in support of Amendment 2? 


A. They may have in private. But after the election, 
there were comments made both ways by some, but during 
the elections and during the campaign, I do not recall that 
kind of support from the Chamber of Commerce. They 
were very politically motivated, and most of the comments 
that came were in opposition to Amendment 2, especially 
after the election. I don’t -- this was a movement of the 
people, not the politicians. They didn’t touch it. 


Q. Did the Colorado Civil Rights Commission take a 
position on Amendment 2? 


A. Yes, they did. 
160 


Q. What was their position? 


A. Their position was in opposition to it and that 
always confused me. The people that the civil rights 
commission purports to represent are the peuple covered 


under 
{v. 15, p. 743] 

the Civil Rights Act. And here’s a piece of legislation that 
could seriously affect civil rights in this nation and this state, 
and former chairman of the civil rights commission, Mr. 
Ignacio Rodriguez, Mr. John Franklin from Mark Probe, 
those three former chairmen of the commission were very 
much in favor of Amendment 2. Men who had devoted their 
lives to this. And so men whose counsel we sought during 
this campaign and publicly took our position, who I consider 
experts on this issue, were 100 percent behind Amendment 
2. And yet the commission under the direction of Jacqueline 
Marquez and Rabbi Steven Foster took an opposite view. 
And it was interesting to me that they would be promoting 
an issue that would be detrimental to the people they 
Tepresent. 


Q. How would it be detrimental? 


A. Because it will dilute the whole meaning of civil 
rights and dilute the resources that are available to be used, 
And Jacqueline Marquez commented in the report I heard 
during the campaign about the fact that they were under- 
staffed and didn’t have the personnel and so forth to meet all 
of the needs of the commission, and Mr. Duran who was 
also one of the civil employees of the civil rights commission 
Stated in some of the material that we used of his that it 
would dilute the resources available to the implementation of 
the civil rights by the commission. 


Q. During the campaign, did CFV take a position on 


161 


[v. 15, p. 744] : 
whether Amendment 2 would affect people’s rights under 
what in Colorado is known as the Smoker’s Bill of rights? 


A. During the campaign we were constantly being 
barraged by the fact that the homosexuals didn’t have any 
recourse if they were fired simply because they were a 
homosexual. The Smoker’s act which was -- I don’t think 
it says anything about smokers -- in fact, I know it doesn’t, 
but it was commonly referred to as the Smoker’s Act 
because it was promoted by the tobacco industry, and in 
1990, it was becoming popular to ban smoking on the job to 
some businesses and so forth, and they were concerned that 
it would be possible for an employer to discharge a person 
who wasn’t actually smoking on the job but he knew they 
smoked in their private life. So the idea basically says, as 
my understanding of the Smoker’s bill, is that it’s illegal to 
discharge someone who is engaged in a legal activity off the 
job. ws ee © Se ee ee 
So we thought about this, and saying, well, now 
homosexuals are just wholesaling being teiteeiean 
because -- only because they are homosexuals, this would be 
a perfect resource for them. Sodomy is legal in Colorado. 
They are claiming that being homosexuals and engaging in 
a legal activity off the job and because somebody fired them 
but they are homosexual that would be a perfect resource. 
And keeping in mind that the Smoker’s Bill went in in 1990. 
Well, during our campaign nobody had used it that way. 
Later on, I guess 

{v. 15, p. 745] 


now there is an attorney here in Denver who used that and 
was awarded a $91,000 judgment for it. 


Q. Why did he claim he was fired, if you know? 


A. AsI understand it, he claim he was fired because 
he was homosexual. 


162 


MS. WINER: Your Honor, I would object. That’s 


THE COURT: It’s hearsay unless you are offering the 
case for the Court to take judicial notice. 


MR. KAY: I would offer the case. It was a Denver 
District Court case and an attorney here in the City and 
County of Denver sued his employer for being terminated. 


MS. WINER: Your Honor, I would object to -- 
THE COURT: If you tell me what the case name is and 


the case number, the Court is able to take judicial notice of 
its own files. 


MR. KAY: It’s Borquez versus Ozer & Mullen. The 


plaintiffs listed Mr. Borquez as a witness throughout this 
entire trial. 


MS. WINER: Your Honor, I have no objection to the 
Court taking judicial notice of the case. 


THE COURT: Thank you. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): Mr. Perkins, did you use the 
term special rights in the Amendment 2 language? 


A. No, we did not. And -- 


{v. 15, p. 746] 
Q. And why not? 


A. Well, as we were getting a consultation from 
attorneys around the country, one of the attorneys that we 
were consulting with was a man by the name of Bnuce 


163 


McCormick, and Mr. McCormick, as he reviewed this 
language, sent us a letter in which he gave us the advice 
that -- and in essence was saying that special rights it not a 
legal term and should not be used in the wording of the 
amendment itself but it would be a good campaign slogan. 


Q. Did you use it as a campaign slogan? 
A. As we thought through our whole campaign, this 


that special right, and we said that’s not appropriate. They 
have equal rights but not special rights. And that was 
basically the thrust of our campaign. 


Q. What happened? Obviously, Amendment 2 passed 
in November. What has happened since the passage? What 
has Colorado for Family Values done since the passage of 
the Amendment in November of 1992? 


A. We have been involved in several things. Shortly 
after it -- as you know, shortly after the election, the suit 
was filed which we are in process here now. The homo- 
sexual proponents initiated a boycott of the state. There had 
been a boycott on my business throughout the campaign. So 

[v. 15, p. 747] 
one of the things that I have done as I have been interviewed 
by radio stations and some television stations around the 
country is to do whatever I could to dispel the basis of this 
boycott. We have been acting as a resource for other states 
which are involved in the same issue who see the threat the 
same way we do. We have prepared information for them 
that would have been extremely useful to us if we had had 
them as we went through our campaign. We have been 
involved in informing our supporters with a monthly 
newsletter, and it’s -- we feel a responsibility to the majority 


164 


voters of Colorado to continue to represent Amendment 2 on 
this -- here in the state of Colorado. 


Q. You mentioned an organization by the name of 
EPOC? 


A. Yes. 


Q. That you said was your opposition. What was 
EPOC? 


A. Well, let’s see. It’s equal opportunities and I forget 
what it stood for, and I told them if you want equal 


opportunities, you already got that, so come on over to our 
side, but they didn’t see it that way. But they were our 
counter part [sic]. 


Q. Do you know -- first of all, how much money did 
Colorado for Family Values raise and spend during the 
election? 

A. Well, approximately $375,000. This was all a 


{v. 15, p. 748] 
matter of record. I don’t have an exact amount but 


approximately that. 
Q. Do you know how much EPOC raised and spent? 


A. Their reports indicated approximately twice that 
much. 


Q. So almost $800,000? 


A. It didn’t include all the free media they got but 
that’s what they spent. 


165 


Q. During the campaign, what position did EPOC take 
on Amendment 2? What was their campaign slogan? 


A. Well, basically, they said we don’t want protected 
class status. We don’t want affirmative action. We just 
want equal rights. And they talked about the protection in 
jobs, housing, and public accommodations. And one debate 
that I had with attorney Pat Steadman at the Brown Palace 
Hotel for the City Club of Denver, he said that’s all we 
want -- 


MS. WINER: Your Honor I’m going to object to the 
hearsay. 


THE COURT: The last question was what was their 
policy or what was their approach against the amendment, 
and all I’m hearing as this is being representative of the 
arguments or the approach that EPOC took, not as hearsay. 
I’m hearing it representative of the opposition. 


Mr. Perkins, you may complete your answer. 
THE WITNESS: Thank you, Your Honor. 
[v. 15, p. 749] 
Mr. Steadman, who was a spokesman for EPOC and I had 


appeared with him on other occasions, made the point that 
all they were interested in was protection in jobs, housing, 


raised their hand. I said how many times when you 
registered at the counter did the clerk ask you if you were 
homosexual. And nobody raised their hand. I said how 


166 


many times when you rented a house or an apartment or 
bought a house or whatever did anybody ever ask you if you 
were homosexual? And nobody raised their hand. And I 
said how many of you when you applied for a job did 
anybody ask you if you were homosexual? And nobody 
raised their hand. I said how many of you employers out 
there know how many homosexuals you have working for 
you? And nobody raised their hand. I said how of 
you care? And nobody raised thzir hand. I said in any of 


those instances, you could mak= it happen. You could make 


MS. WINER: Your Honor I have to object to this 
hearsay. I think it goes way beyond the question that was 
asked as far as what is the position of EPOC. 

THE COURT: Yes, the answer has strayed beyond the 
limits of the question. I think we will take the noon recess 
and we will return at 1:30. 

(A recess was taken.) 


AFTERNOON SESSION, FRIDAY, 
OCTOBER 15, 1993 


(The following proceedings were had and entered of 
record:) 


THE COURT: Mr. Perkins, you can resume the stand. 


167 


THE WITNESS: Thank you. 


THE COURT: Thank you. Mr. Kay, you’re in direct. 
You may continue. 


MR. KAY: Thank you. 
FURTHER DIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. KAY: 


Q. Mr. Perkins, a lot has been said about what 
Amendment 2 does to homosexuals, lesbians and bisexuals. 
Would you tell the Court what you feel Amendment 2 does 
for the citizens of the state of Colorado. 


[v. 15, p. 751] 


A. In terms of the effect on the homosexuals, at no 
time have we ever promoted mistreatment of homosexuals, 
and as I said earlier, if someone is doing that, if they’re 
maligning them, threatening them, whatever, somebody’s 
breaking the law. The laws are in place to protect that, and 
they should be administered. 


As far as. the effect on the rest of the state, our 
objective was to deny protected class status to the homosex- 
ual, bisexual and lesbians, who were the only ones who were 
seeking that on sexual orientation. 


We also said that sexual orientation is not an 
appropriate criteria for civil rights, and that includes 
heterosexuals. 

We think that the crux of the matter and the reason 
we think it’s such a pivotal, important, compelling reason for 
Amendment 2 is the fact that under Amendment 2, 


168 


homosexual proponents can advocate any kind of a program 
they want to in Colorado, but they have to do that as a 
special interest group and not as a protected class, and we 
think that has very important ramifications. 


Take the school situation, for example. If 
homosexual proponents go in and approach the administra- 
tion and say, we think 


And let me give you just an example. I was talking 
with the superintendent of one of the large school districts in 
Colorado Springs, and I said, "Doctor, what will you do 


very concerned about the locker room and the shower room 
and the toilet facilities here at the school. Now, we think 
that there should be a facility for straight boys, there should 
be a facility for homosexual boys, there should be a facility 
for homosexual girls and for straight girls, and we know that 
since sex takes place in the bathroom in some instances” — 
and there’s plenty of documentation to that, "‘we feel like 
there should be supervision in the homosexual bathrooms. ’" 


Now, his remark was — 
169 


MS. WINER: Your Honor, I’d have to object to this 
hearsay. 


[v. 15, p. 753] 


THE COURT: The response f the school superinten- 
dent would be in the nature of hearsay. It’s sustained. 


Q. (BY MR. KAY) can you tell the Court what your 
feelings are about this issue without — 


A. Yes, I can. 


Q. -- giving them what the school administrator may 
have said to you? 


A. The objective of the homosexual proponent is to 
blend the gender issue to where it is not a matter of 


discussion, it’s not an important thing. In the case I 
described, one solution would be to just have one bathroom 


so you wouldn’t have discrimination for anybody, and I 
think this is one of the important reasons that homosexuality 
does not have protected class status, because this issue will 


be debated as this progresses, and that’s why I consider it to 
be extremely important. 


Q. Did you intend Amendment 2 to discriminate 
against homosexuals, lesbians and bisexuals? 


A. Our intention of Amendment 2 was to deny them 
protected class status. It was not a matter of discrimination. 


Q. Do you hold any ill will toward homosexuals, 
lesbians, bisexuals, gay men personally? 


170 


Pea. I’m going to have to say that my experience with 
whole thing has made me more compassionate to 
homosexuals, 

[v. 15, p. 754] 


and I say that in the light of the fact that, as I’ve studied the 
issue for the last months, almost two years, I poured a lot of 
my life into it. I say that and I am more than ever 
convinced that the importance of Amendment 2 is extremely 
pivotal for this state and for this nation even though I’m very 
compassionate to the situation with the homosexuals. 


Q. Have you experienced any problems in your 
personal life as a result of your being involved in the 
Amendment 2 campaign? 

A. This is a very emotional issue. I guess that’s one 
thing everybody would agree on, and some people are prone 
to express their opinions in various ways. My personal 
business has had a boycott on it for several months prior to 
the state. I get — people bring me copies of things that 
appear on fax machines in Colorado Springs referring to me, 
but I understand that. I understand that it’s emotional. It’s 
important to everybody regardless of what side you come 


from, and I don’t make a big deal out of that. 
MR. KAY: That’s all I have, Your Honor. 


s*x*e*# & & 


(CROSS EXAMINATION) 


[v. 15, p. 770] 


171 


Q. Sir, excuse me again. I’ve asked you whether you 
know of any cities or states or municipalities that actually 
have any quotas for gays and lesbians. 


A. Any ordinance that establishes homosexuals as a -- 
or sexual orientation as a protected class -- 


Q. Mr. Perkins? 
A. -- affirmative action is a logical progression. 
“xs & © 
{v. 15, p. 771] 

Q. I'll start from the question before that, then. In the 
Amendment 2 text right there, you also refer to quota 
preferences; isn’t that correct? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. Although you don’t know of any cities or states or 
municipalities that actually have any quotas for gays and 
lesbians, do you? 


A. I said that any ordinance that has protected class 
status, affirmative action is a logical progression of that. 


“xx *& 
[v. 15, p. 786] 
(REDIRECT EXAMINATION) 

Q. Mr. Perkins, how did Amendment 2 fare with the 
religions in the state of Colorado? How many supported and 
how many opposed Amendment 2, if you know? 

172 


see © 


THE WITNESS: Thank you. 


I thought as I looked at this that we would get broad 
support from pastors. We called one meeting. We sent out 
letters to 400 pastors in Colorado Springs asking them to 
come to a meeting where we could explain this, and we had 
two associates show up for that meeting. I tell people that 
I know how General Custer felt the morning he modeled that 


first arrow 
{v. 15, p. 787] 
shirt. That was my first big surprise. 


During the campaign we -- the outspoken people on this 
issue for the most part were -- who were people of the cloth 
were on the other side of this issue. I vividly remember one 
of the captions from -- I think it was the Rocky Mountain 
News that said, "300 Denver Area Pastors Blast Amendment 
a” 


*_s*e# & & 


TESTIMONY OF TONY MARCO 
[v. 15, p. 821] 


the witness herein, having been first duly sworn, on oath 
testified as follows: 


THE COURT: Thank you. Please be seated. 
I'll ask that in your testimony you speak directly to the 


flat side of the microphone. It will assist everyone in 
hearing 


173 


A. Good afternoon. 
Q. Please state your name. 
A 


. My name is Anthony Nicholas Marco. 


x*“x* * * 


{[v. 15, p. 828] 


Q. Mr. Marco, could you describe for us now the 
events that led up to the issue that we are in court today, and 


that is the Amendment 2 initiative process. Are you familiar 
with an organization called Colorado for Family Values? 


[v. 15, p. 829] 

A. Yes, I’m familiar with it. 

Q. What is that organization? 

A. Well, it’s an organization whose goal was very 
simple and direct through the initiative process to put into 
place an amendment which woulc say that homosexual, 
bisexual, and lesbian orientation was not to be granted 
protected class status, and all that coms attendant with that 
status in the state of Colorado. 

Q. How did you personally first get involved with this 
issue of sexual orientation? 


174 


A. Well, that’s an interesting question. It dates back 
to February 6th, 1991. On that date, I had no idea that 
Boulder, Denver, and Aspen, had ordinances granting pro- 
tective class status to gays. A friend of mine called me up 
and said that a bill was to be considered the next day by the 
House Judiciary Committee up here in Denver, HB-1059 to 
be exact, and that this bill would first of all grant for the 
first time legal recognition to sexual orientation equivalent to 
that of ethic [sic] groups. In fact, the bill was entitled 
Ethnic Intimidation Bill. It was authored by Wilma Webb 
who is the wife of Mayor Wellington Webb, and it said 
that -- this added to substantially a previous ethic [sic] 
equivalent to felonies for any group that would - might 
simply make remarks that would make someone feel 
uncomfortable because of their sexual 

{v. 15, p. 830] 

orientation. 


Now, what this represented to me was aggression 
against the fundamental rights to free speech, free associ- 
ation, and potentially free exercise of religious believes [sic] 
of all Colorado citizens, since this was a bill with state-wide 
import, and furthermore, to me, immediately when I heard 
this, I said this is preposterous, the equation of sexual 
orientation with ethnicity to me that represented the colossal 
nonsequitur. And my friend said simply someone needs to 
go up there and testify genes [sic] this will [sic]. 


[v. 15, p. 831] 


Q. How do you believe that HB-1059 equated ethnicity 
and behavior? 


175 


A. Well, quite, simply by extending the same protec- 
tions as it says from harassment, that were enjoyed by 


handicapped people, the aged, a number of other categories, 
and recognized ethnic groups or protected classes extending 
those same protections to gays as an entire class. 


{v. 15, p. 833] 


Q. You used the term “protected class status." Could 
you describe what you mean by that? 


A. Well, I think that the Attorney General of the 
[v. 15, p. 834] 
state of Colorado in their analysis and ballot initiatives 
defined the term quite well. It refers to the awarding of a 


particular recognition under law of a group who has been 
chosen for protection from discrimination and chosen to be 


given the ability to claim discrimination, you know, under 
civil rights laws. 


see © 


[v. 15, p. 836] 


Q. And can you describe the founding of Colorado for 
Family Values for me, please. 


A. First of all, there might be a couple of other 
{v. 15, p. 837] 
items, but that we need to mention that demonstrated what 
I considered to be statewide aggression by gay militants and 
supporters as the fundamental rights of Colorado citizens. 
These two instances of statewide activity were in the -- well, 
three, brought by Governor Romer’s executive order were 


not the only impetus that precipitated Amendment 2. In 
176 


addition, we found as a result of Governor Romer’s execu- 
tive order pressure being exerted by the gay militants on the 
student affairs departments of universities and the University 
of Colorado is to make it mandatory follow all clubs what- 
ever their nature on campus to either accept devout gays in 
membership or to lose all privileges. This is one example of 
this. We have from an article in which Robin Miller who is 
the author of the Colorado Springs ordinance something to 
the effect that there was a broad statewide agenda of the 
militant gay movement which in fact Amendment 2 pretty 
much put on hold because of the necessity to very actively 
oppose passage of the amendment. But all of these questions 
came to bear and came to the point around, oh, February 


15th to February 21st or so, when I began thinking about the 
possibility of finding a way to put a stop to this kind of 


“see & 


{v. 15, p. 839] 


Q. Why did you come to the believe [sic] that a 
statewide measure was appropriate and necessary? 


A. It was necessary because it was obvious that the 
aggression of gay militants through the legislature was not 
going to cease. Secondly the legislature is very vulnerable 
to all kinds of lobbying and other activity without citizens’ 
direct representation on that activity. Lobbying for which I 
discovered gay militants were very very well equipped and 
were very well experienced. And so the only way to insure 
that this kind of activity would stop would be through 
passage of constitutional amendment. And since the citizens 
have the right to enact constitutional amendment through 
Citizen initiative process, this seemed the logic [sic] way to 
accomplish that purpose. 


177 


*“s* & & 


{v. 15, p. 842] 


Q. Now, on the easel behind you is a copy of the text 
of Amendment 2. Can you explain to us how or why the 
language was chosen that you selected to use within the text 
of the initiative? 


sss & © 


THE WITNESS: Okay. The fundamental principal be- 
hind the drafting of the initiative language was quite simply 
to take those factors which we felt that gay militants had 

[v. 15, p. 843] 
themselves said that they desired, plus all of the factors that 
are attendant on achievement of or awarding of protective 
class status and simply say no to those. 


Q. Why did you use the terms homosexual, lesbian, or 
bisexual orientation conduct, practices, or relationship? Why 
did you select that phrase? 


A. Actually, I didn’t select that phrase. That was 
selected and reviewed by the constitutional attorneys 
involved. 


Q. What was CFV’s intent in using that language? 


A. The intent of using that language was quite simply 
to forbid the awarding of protected class status and other 
attendant benefits thereof at that point. And that was, I 
would say, the sole intent of this. Now, I’m not in a 
position to question what the - you know, what these 
constitution attorneys wrote and reviewed, but I can say that 
the protected status terminology came from the second draft 
of the Colorado Springs Human Rights Ordinance, and that, 


178 


of course, was written at least in part by Robin Miller who 
was a devout lesbian attorney. 


Q. How about the phrase minority status? 


A. We took that from Denver. I don’t know whether 
it’s called Human Rights Ordinance or whatever. I have that 
ordinance also. And also some material relating to it in 
some the term minorities is used referring to all those 
protected under that ordinance. 


[v. 15, p. 844] 


Q. How about the phrase quota preferences? 


A. Well, in the Boulder ordinance, I have found a 


phrase that according to former Colorado Civil Rights 
Commission chairman John Franklin, former Colorado Civil 
Rights Attorney Earl Rodriguez, and director of Regional 
Offices for Colorado Civil Rights Division Tom Duran 
allowed for, did not call for but allowed for affirmative 
action for all classes protected under the ordinance, which 
would have included sexual orientation; thus implying 
possible affirmative action benefits. 


The second draft of the Colorado Springs Human 
Rights Ordinance also called for a review of the city’s 
affirmative action policies. Presumably in my thinking it 
allowed for the inclusion of the new classes that now would 
have been protected by that ordinance which included sexual 
orientation. There were a number of other ordinances from 
other places in the country protecting sexual orientation and 
reports that I had that indicated that affirmative action was 
being sought by gay and lesbian relatives in the book after 
the book was written by-- 


179 


[v. 15, p. 845] 


Q. (BY MR. TYMKOVICH): Mr. Marco, what about 
the phrase claim of discrimination? How was that derived? 


A. From my understanding, only groups of joint 
protected status can make claims of discrimination under 


civil rights law, so it was absolutely necessary to include that 
phrase to round off the entire concept of forbidding protected 
class status of sexual orientation. 


Q. How did you intend to affect the rights of gay 
people through the use of that language. 


A. Quite simply to simply say that gays would not be 
recognized as a protected class and therefore not have claims 
of discrimination. The two go inextricably together. There 
is no such thing as a group that enjoys claims of 
discrimination which is not regarded legally as a protected 
class. 


sex e& & & 


[v. 15, p. 846] 


Q. I didn’t ask you the people you intended the 
Amendment 2 to apply to and by its terms it applies to the 
state of Colorado and various entities. What was the 
intention of CFV in drafting that language? 

A. The primary intention was to resist statewide 
aggression on the part of gay militants against the 
fundamental rights of Colorado citizens. 


Q. So it applied to governmental entities? 


180 


A. Yes, governmental entities. And in addition, our 
thinking was that civil rights protections of this sort are a 
matter of statewide concern. My opinion, the application of 
specific civil rights protections from town to town is a 
retrograde principal. I thought the whole issue was settled 
back in 1964. The Civil Rights Act of ’64, which in a sense 
overruled the ability of local jurisdictions to decide whether 
or not they were going to protect certain specific classes. 
Obviously, if it comes extremely inefficient, let’s say they 
have separate water fountains for let’s say African American 
people in one town and not have them in another and to 
conduct business in that way this was also an attempt to 
consolidate the State’s policy with regard to this issue. 


[v. 15, p. 847] 


Q. By its language, it’s intended to apply to political 
subdivisions, municipalities and school districts? 


A. That’s correct. 


A. General statewide import, covering the disposition 
of this issue whenever it occurred. I did realize that this 
would nullify enforcement of Boulder, Denver, and Aspen’s 
gay rights ordinances, but that effect was in fact only 
incidental to the larger purpose of the amendment. 


s+ k& & * 
[v. 15, p. 850] 
Q. What was the intent of the effect of Amendment 2 
on the private sector or private individuals? 


181 


A. It had no intended effect on private sector business 
or employment policies within private corporations, you 
know, there’s no intended effect in that regard. This is 
simply an amendment to limit government from extending 
the protected status to this kind of sexual orientation. 


[v. 15, p. 852] 


Q. What was the purpose that CFV had a concern 
about the local ordinances? 


A. Again, my concern is that this represents a 
retrograde principal in civil rights. I don’t think these kinds 
of issues are a matter of local certain [sic]. Also, my 

[v. 15, p. 853] 

analysis of the strategy of the gay militant movement is that 
gay militancy prefers to begin an attempt to gain larger scale 
protections by first getting passage of smaller-— of 
ordinances on smaller scale in towns and cities around the 
state and then using these as leverage to then approach state 
legislators with concepts of a larger scale, larger scale 
measures. 


Q. And? 

A. And so by dealing with all of this in essence in one 
full swoop, we simply closed the lid on the entire issue here 
in the state of Colorado. 

Q. Was Amendment 2 intended to take away all of the 
legal rights of gay, lesbian and bi 1 individuals in 
Colorado? 


A. No. And of course, I don’t believe for a moment 
that it has that effect. 


182 


A. I don’t see that amendment 2 has any effect on laws 
such as, for example, the so-called Smoker’s Bill which in 
fact doesn’t mention smokers but simply grant protection to 
any citizen from being dismissed for any legal off-the-job 
activity. So I don’t think it affects these kinds of laws that 
may be on the books nor does it affect private corporations 


who may desire to extend employment practice protections 
within the organization to gay people. 


Q. Now, you’ve testified that you proposed special 
rights for gay individuals on civil rights grounds and you 
prepared written materials to reflect yours and the 
organization’s thinking on that. What was the nature of your 
analysis, and why you didn’t believe this group should be 
eligible for protected class status? 


A. Again, in essence, I moved away from using the 
term special rights because it legally has not meaning from 
what I understand. But in terms of protected class status, I 
you understand that the U.S. Supreme Court through a 
number of decisions has delineated certain criteria which 
offer boundaries to groups that are to be recognized a 


183 


suspect classes. These criteria involve, one, the 
demonstration that the entire class has mean income that is 
below the average, as a result of societal pressure or harm 
inflicted on that group for utterly 

[v. 15, p. 855] 
irrational bases. And also under that category would come 
measurable cultural and educational deprivation or 
disadvantage. The second criteria states that the group must 
demonstrate obvious immutable characteristics which clearly 
define it is a class. And the entire class must do so. And 
third criterion is that the group must be demonstrably 
politically powerless, and therefore in need of government 
support, in order to advance its interests and to bring such 
a group to a par in American society. 


[v. 15, p. 861] 


Q. What were some of the consequences of the 
problems you saw if gay individuals did seek protected class 
status that you and your organizaticn objected to? 


A. I think my fundamental objection is that sexual 
orientation affords no rational basis whatsoever on which to 
define or identify the class of people seeking the protections. 
And as far as I’m concemed, this opens the door to an 
enormous amount of potential civil rights fraud. Secondly, 
the inclusion of sexual orientation under whatever definition 
to the realm of protected classes in fact represents a threat to 
the entire structure of civil rights as we know it for the very 
simple reason that if we suddenly allow sexual 

{v. 15, p. 862] 
orientation protected class status, we have effectively made 
nearly a hundred percent, I would suppose, if one says that 
virgins have no sexual orientation, at least nine [sic] percent 
of American society suddenly becomes a protected minority. 


184 


That’s a fundamental observant in my opinion. These 
protections were given to groups who could demonstrate that 
such protections were needed to grant sexual orientation 
protected class status would mean the rendering of entire 
civil rights protections as we have always known them and 


represent classic non-sequitur in an utterly irrational 
principal. 


Q. What concerns did you have about the effect of 
sexual orientation provisions on the business community? 


A. I think possibly Mr. Perkins could speak to that 
better than I could. I don’t know whether it’s permissible 
for me to present a couple of operative scenarios, but in 
essence, granting these protections allows an immediate 
factor of intimidation to enter into the employment practice 
or the practice of hiring in businesses. And for example, 
person might come in under ordinance granting protected 
class status through sexual orientation to apply for a job 
along side an African American person and a woman, let’s 
Say, and say, well, I notice you have a number of African 
American people working here, you have a number of 
women, how many homosexuals do you have? Can you 
imagine this person who’s a Caucasian male and who says I 
am a homosexual and I want this job, you have an 
j [v. 15, p. 863] 
immediate potential threat of a lawsuit if the employment is 
denied and possible grievance complaints on behalf of the 
other two recognized protected classes who were denied that 
job. In that case, the plaintiffs’ definition of sexual 
orientation offer no grounds whatsoever for proof of one’s 
identity in terms of sexual orientation. Sc the potential for 
fraud in cases like that is enormous. 


se** * & 


185 


Q. (BY MR. TYMKOVICH): What were CFV’s 
concerns with respect to private organizations, if any? 


A. In essence, what we saw here was a denial of the 
right of free association without a rational basis. And under 
certain circumstances on behalf of protected 
classes, the category right of free association is suspended 
temporarily so that those classes would not be shut out. 
Now, in this case the denial or the right to free association 
was without a rational basis in my opinion. 


Q. And what was CFV’s concern about the effect of 
sexual orientation provisions on religious organizations or 
{v. 15, p. 864] 

churches? 


A. Well, in essence, this granting protected class status 
of sexual orientation threatened the total demolition of 
various religious denominations, and others who did not or 
whose moral beliefs were not in accord with the gay lifestyle 
or the militant gay political agenda. 


Q. Excuse me, didn’t the ordinances typically have a 
liv: tion? 

A. These religious exemptions are deeply flawed and 
extremely weak in a number of regards. Most of the 
ordinances I have read simply say that the religious 
organization does not have to hire someone who is not of 
their denomination. That offers no protection whatsoever 
because on thing anyone can undergo the membership 
training classes, whatever a church might require, and then 
afterwards in therefore becoming a member of their 
denomination and afterwards say I am a homosexual and I 
wish to seek employment or something or another. 
Secondly, these exemptions do not cover what are known as 
parish church organizations at all since most of these 


186 


{v. 15, p. 865] 
will, hangs over all 58 of the organizations in the form of 


the U.S. Supreme Court precedent Bob Jones University 
versus Simon which ruled that the beliefs of all non-profit 


501(3)(c) organizations must be in accord with pubic policy. 
If for example gays are ever to be cast as a protective class 


to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, all religious exemptions 
would be swept away like match sticks in a hurricane. So 


these are simply what I would call smoke screens to lull 
religious opponents of this kind of legislation to sleep. 


“** * * 
(CROSS-EXAMINATION) 


[v. 16, Pp. 877] 


Q. Now, you’ve got to be a member of a suspect class 
in order to make a claim of discrimination; isn’t that right? 


A. Yes. 


[v. 16, p. 878] 
Q. (BY MS. WINER): In your thinking, the way you 


have though about this and evolved your analysis and written 
about it, as far as you're concerned, you’ve got to be a 


187 


member of a suspect class in order to be able to make a 
claim of discrimination; isn’t that true? 


A. Well, a protected or suspect class. 


Q. So, you’ve got to be a member of either a protected 
class or suspect class? 


A. That is at least my understanding. Again, I’m not 
an attorney so that doesn’t represent an expert opinion. 


*_s* & & 


[v. 16, p. 879] 


Q. Okay. Now, Colorado for Family Values’ 
campaign slogan on Amendment 2 was no special rights; 
isn’t that correct? 


A. That’s correct. 


Q. But special rights is actually a meaningless term, 


isn’t it? 
A. It is a mainly meaningless term. 


Q. Your further involved analysis revealed it was 
meaningless and irrelevant to the real debate; isn’t that 
correct? 


A. I believe that’s true. And I also believe that hate 
as a family value is a meaningless term, as well. These are 
just political slogans. 


Q. But if you could do it all now, if Amendment 2 
hadn’t passed yet, you wouldn’t use no special rights as your 
campaign slogan because it is a meaningless term? 


188 


sss & © 


Q. You believe that the idea of no special rights is 
irrelevant to the real debate, don’t you, sir? 


A. I believe it is. 


s_*s** *& * 


TESTIMONY OF HARVEY C. MANSFIELD, Ph.D. 


[v. 16, p. 988] 


the witness herein, having been first duly sworn, on oath 
testified as follows: 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. TYMKOVICH: 


Q. Could you please state your name and employment, 
sir. 


A. Harvey C. Mansfield. I am a professor of 


[v. 16, p. 989] 
government at Harvard University. 


Q. Is it correct you’ve been called by the State to offer 
opinion testimony on political and structural reasons on 
theory for constitutional reasons such as Amendment 2? 


A. Yes. 


189 


[v. 16, p. 993] 


THE COURT: NN is admitted in evidence and 
Professor Mansfield is received as an expert in those areas, 
political theory, political philosophy, political structures and 

[v. 16, p. 994] 
waa eticnsiions 


Q. Could you briefly describe for the Court generally 
what the framers’ theories of the American constitution are. 


[v. 16, p. 995] 


A. The American constitution is -- was a new kind of 
lic. A republic which had never been seen before, a 
acne All previous republics have been small 
republics which depended upon a strict education to teach 
people to trust one another. And were kept small so that the 
government would not be too large. Those governments 
suffered from terrible failings according to the founders. 
Those would be the republics of ancient Greek [sic] and also 
modern worlds Venus and Hong. For one thing they were 
too weak to sustain themselves against foreign entities. But 
they suffer from the problem of majority faction. Majority 
faction according to Madison’s familiar definition and 
Federalist 10 is a group that acts contrary to the rights of 
individuals or against the public gvod. These majority 
factions were particularly prevalent in small republics 
because the people there could be activated by democracy 
and led into hasty decisions contrary to the rights or contrary 
to the public good. 
So proposed to replace this tradition of small 
nachiieade tae ae This would be a large 
republic that would be strong enough to withstand foreign 


190 


entities and have a strong central government and a strong 
military and a strong executive power too, and which would 
not depend on a strict moral education but rather make 
greater appeal to self interests. And which therefore also 
would not depend on a homogenous nation, but on a 
heterogenous, one 

[v. 16, p. 996] 


composed of many different groups. 


Q. And is that what we mean by our system of 
representative government? 


A. Representative government is a way of making the 
large republic work. It puts government at a distance from 
the people. So that there were appointed judges and 
congressmen and the president or executives with terms were 
not immediately subject to the popular will once they have 
been elected. So in the large republic, it’s kind of a 
constitutional distance between the government and the 
people which enables the government to liberate, slow things 
down, and prevent hasty decision. 


Q. What role do state governments fit within that 
federal structure that you’ve just been describing? 


A. Well, state governments retain for this large 
republic the advantages of small republics because they are 
closer to the people and they allow issues to be taken up at 
a closer and more visible level. And the state governments 
as well as local governments within the states allow the 
people to feel that the government as a whole belongs to 
them. This is also a function of the most popular branch of 
the federal government which according to federalists 
obviously is a house of representatives which is elected every 
other year. 


191 


So the government most [sic] both have this 
constitutional distance, this is a certain distance between the 
[v. 16, p. 997] 
government and the people, in order to make government 
work better and to make it more moderate, and there must 
be a connection between the government and the people. 
Some way of making the people feel that this government is 

theirs. 


Q. Now, you mentioned the term "factions." What do 
we mean my [sic] factionalism or factions within our 
government? 


A. Well, this same definition that Madison gave is still 
useful today. A faction is a group of people who acts 
contrary to the rights of individuals or contrary to the public 
good. And this is the evil which is epidemic. It’s a popular 
government. They start with a commitment to popular or 


stter'an uk eee ae 


majority. Every majority has to be composed because there 
isn’t a simple or obvious majority that can have its will, so 


to speak, automatically. 


So this composed majority consists of a compro- 
mise or a coalition of different groups. 


192 


[v. 16, p. 998] 
Q. How do those coalitions form within our system? 


A. Well, within our system, they form in a number of 
ways, but all of them requiring political activity, especially 
political parties with chief instruments of coalitions built in 
our system, but a private or semi-private so called pressure 
groups also play an important function in this system. 


Q. You are familiar with the election surrounding 
Amendment 2. Is that an example of coalition building its 
proponents, Colorado for Family Values? 


THE COURT: The form of the question is leading. I 
will allow the Professor to answer. I have the sense it is the 
Professor who’s testifying not the podium. 


You may answer, Professor. 


THE WITNESS: Amendment 2 seems very much to be 
in this tradition, American tradition of coalition politics 
because it represents an attempt by a small group at the 
beginning to convince a majority of Coloradans that this 
amendment is something they need. And in order to do that, 
they had to pull together others with different opinions 
somewhat from their own who were willing to agree on this 
particular language. And on this result. For example, not 
just those of the religious right or those who dislike 
homosexuals, but also, say, conservatives who are against 
intrusive government, and liberals who think that the 


sditi 
[v. 16, p. 999] 

of gays to anti-discrimination ordinances dilutes the civil 

rights of other more disadvantaged groups. 


193 


So in our system, it wasn’t the case that the single 
group beginning this movement was sufficient to pull it 
through. In order to do that, it had to moderate its fuse. 


Q. (BY MR. TYMKOVICH): What sort of mecha- 
nisms did the framers counter balance the actions of interest 


groups? 


A. Well, first of all, the large republic itself makes it 
very difficult, just because we have so large a heterogenus 
[sic] nation makes it very difficult for any one group to 
dominate. It always has to get a coalition of alike thinking 
but not perfectly alike thinking groups. So that what we 
have is a nation of minorities, there isn’t any official 
majority in this country. And this is in short by the notion 
of representative government which puts the government as 
a whole at a certain distance from the people, and it is also 
in short by the system of federalism that enables state 
governments to give and to breathe freely within this larger 
atmosphere. 


Q. Now, Colorado and a lot of western states have a 
tradition of the initiative and referendum mechanisms, 


popular democracy, plebiscites. How do such devices fit 
within the constitutional scheme that you’ve been describing? 


A. Well, initiative and referendum are instruments 

I think they are still such to bring government closer to the 
[v. 16, p. 1000] 

people. A kind of criticism of the original founding and a 
Statement that the constitutional distance I was speaking of 
had grown too great and government needed to be brought 
back closer to the people. So the Colorado initiative which 
is very common in this country now [sic] been in Wisconsin, 
California and so on, and it enables the people to make a 


194 


change, from themselves, not 
In fact usually not. In their 


necessarily through the parties. 


Q. And that process is another one of the checks and 
balances that you were describing? 


A. Yes. This is one of the checks that goes to the 
attempt to keep government close to the people. 


Q. How does the initiative mechanism relate to what 
you are describing as the large republic? 


A. It requires since the State, after all, is not a locality 
or a neighborhood but in itself a larger republic than the 
republics of ancient Greece, it remembers there’s a process 
of coalition built in and to be gone through in order to 


secure enough people to make a majority on such a measure 
as Amendment 2. 


Q. I suppose we live in an imperfect Madison 
democracy. What sort of changes have occurred in 
American politics that relate to this process that you’ve been 
describing? 


4 Well, you could look at the Civil War, Amend- 


[v. 16, p. 1001] 
13, 14, and 15th amendments which nationalized and 
constitutionalized the question of , Temoving it from 


Civil Rights Act of 1964 nationalized the question of civil 
rights in order to remove rights from — the rights of 
individuals from the jeopardy they will be in if they were 
ruled over by local and fascias majorities. 


195 


Q. Could you relate to the situation we find ourselves 
in with Amendment 2. 


A. Well, Amendment 2, I think, was an attempt of this 
kind to decide «he westion at the state level and to remove 
the right of local majorities in Boulder and Aspen and 
Denver to pass anti-gay discrimination ordinances. 


Q. And why would our electorate — what are some of 
the reasons why our electorate would want to do that? 


A. They would want to do that to moderate the issue. 
I stead of having it decided by local majorities who felt very 
strongly and were concentrated, it should be decided more 
moderately by a statewide majority that is gathered in a way 
that it insures or at least gives a high probability of a 
compromise in the moderate solution. 


Q. Why would the statewide coalition necessarily be 
more moderate than say the local coalition that you’ve 
[v. 16, p. 1002] 
described? 


A. Well, it wouldn’t necessarily but there’s a good 
probability of it. There’s as much probability as you can 
achieve by the use of governmental forum. The reason is in 
order to get a statewide majority, you have to moderate your 
views, and you have to appeal to people and counties in 
different parts of the state, both rural and city, and also to 
different interests of the state. And particularly to people 
who aren’t closely ideologically involved in the question of 
gay rights. 

Q. So in sum, then, could you describe how this 


process affects the dangers or the issues of factionalism that 
you’ve described. 


196 


A. Well, I think Amendment 2 was an attempt to 
reduce the danger of local fascias majorities who would pass 
intrusive anti-gay ordinances. And it will do so by requiring 
that the decision be made at the statewide level where the 
politicians have to think of the people in the middle, the 
moderates, and the centralists. 


Q. Well, what would be wrong with just leaving the 
issue to local majorities, local governmental counties, local 
cities, which was the status quo prior to Amendment 2? 


A. It could be done, and it is done I think wisely with 
many other issues. But on this one, the people of Colorado 
determined that they wanted a more moderate solution for 


the 

[v. 16, p. 1003] 
state uniformly than would be available to these three 
m a liti or th that ight cl to ioi th : 


Q. Now, Amendment 2 in effect is a restructuring of 
government. What type of issues would an electorate 
normally look to in placing such an issue say in the state 
constitution like Amendment 2 attempts to do? 


A. Well, it would be a kind of issue where there might 
be a hiding partisan or inflamed minority that would want its 
way and get its way in certain municipalities to the 
disadvantage of the minorities living in that locality, just 
what I think happened in this case. 


Q. Can a reconstruction of this sort support stability 
and respect for the political process? 


A. I think so. First, it solves the problem more 
moderately and less intrusively. And second, it gives the 
people a sense that they can -- that the government is not 
alien to them, and that they can get together by their own 


197 


initiative, and thinking in a constitutional mode to produce 
a result that gives them a sense of satisfaction and accom- 
plishment. 


Q. In your opinion as a political theorist and teacher, 
is Amendment 2 an appropriate way to address that response 
and that structural concern? 


A. In my opinion it is. 


Q. What do we mean by the tyranny of the majority, 
[v. 16, p. 1004] 
and how does that fit into the process you’ve been describ- 


ing? 


A. The tyranny of the majority would just be a 
majority faction. Once again, evidencing it is a group acting 
against individual rights or against the public good, and that 
is the special problem of a popular government. Because in 
a popular government, the majority rules. It looks as if any 
majority that’s ruling is legitimate because it goes along with 
a form of government as a whole. So a tyranny -- but 
actually it can be, a majority can be tyrannical. So it’s a 
majority that looks legitimate but isn’t. Therefore a 
particular problem in republican governments. If there’s just 
a minority that’s trying to impose it will, that’s much easier 
to deal with because you simply say that’s a minority and not 
the majority. But if it’s a focus or tyrannical majority, 
there’s a difficulty. 


Q. Some might argue, for example, that Amendment 
2 constitutes a tyranny of the majority. How would you 
respond to that accusation? 


A. Well, that’s the kind of debate which is what one 
would expect in an issue of this kind. I would respond by 
saying that the content of Amendment 2 is the least intrusive 


198 


both politically and morally of any other solution that’s been 
proposed. 


Q. Why would you say that, Professor Mansfield? 


A. It’s the least intrusive politically because it 
[v. 16, p. 1005] 

allows the local minorities who don’t agree with anti-gay 
discrimination ordinances to live according to a regime of 
rights in which there’s no protected status for them. And 
it’s the least intrusive morally because it doesn’t require you 
to take a stand one way or the other on the gay question. 
Even though there is a kind of moral consequence to 
Amendment 2; namely, that it doesn’t result in the moral 
equivalence of heterosexuals and homosexuals. 


ss *# * & 


[v. 16, p. 1007] 


Q. Now, plaintiffs have also argued that Amendment 
2 somehow dismisses debate or reduces the 
among ideas. How would you respond to that criticism? 


A. I think it proves the competition of ideas because, 
as I said, it takes the argument out of the extremes of both 
sides and brings the center or the people in the middle into 
it because Amendment 2 being a statewide question has to -- 
had to appeal to those voters who were not personally or 
deeply involved in the question of gay rights. It had to make 
- the movement behind Amendment 2 had to make general 
and coalition building arguments. These arguments are more 
moderate and also have greater variety than the arguments of 
the yes and no which we find from the extremes. 


199 


Q. Plaintiffs have also argued that Amendment 2 
exacerbates divisiveness without our state. How would you 
respond to that statement? 


[v. 16, p. 1008] 


A. I would say, no, that on the contrary represents a 
solution which permits a kind of live and let live policy, 
which offers the least intrusion into our lives and morals 
much — I think much less than a statewide anti-gay rights 
discrimination law would do. 


Q. Why is that, Professor Mansfield? 

A. That’s because it justifies less intrusion of local or 
state government into people’s behavior and attitudes. It 
provides more respect for the realm of the private both 
politically and morally because I have tried to show morally 
this is an expansive rather than a constricting solution that 
you find in Amendment 2. 

Q. And Professor Mansfield, is it your opinion that 
Amendment 2 is an appropriate way to deal with that issue 
as you’ve described it? 

A. I think it is indeed, yes. 

MR. TYMKOVICH: Thank you. 


*“s*# & & 


(CROSS-EXAMINATION) 
[v. 16, p. 1009] 


Q. Have you looked at the campaign materials used by 
CFV, Colorado for Family Values to see whether or not in 
fact they were appealing to moderates? 


A. I don’t say that every group in the Colorado 
[v. 16, p. 1010] 


Q. Let me ask the question more precisely. You have 
not looked at the campaign materials used by Colorado for 
Family Values, have you? 

A. That’s right. 

Q. So you aren’t aware of the extent to which those 
materials included graphic descriptions of homosexual 
behavior, are you? 


A. I got some inkling of that this morning. 


Q. You would not consider that to be an appeal to 
moderates, would you? 


A. It’s an appeal to — well, one of the groups in the 


Q. But not to moderates? 


A. Yeah -- yes, I mean you are moving my argument 
from moderation as a kind of result of having to appeal to 
many different groups to a group called moderates. 


Q. But you would not consider graphic descriptions of 
homosexual activity by a fringe of the homosexual commu- 
nity to be an appeal to moderates, would you? 

A. No, I wouldn’t, no. 


201 


“e** * 
[v. 16, p. 1012] 


Q. What you call a hypothetical campaign you refer to 
it that way because you don’t know what this campaign 
looked like, do you? 

A. I think Ido. I think that it was not just a campaign 
against pedophilia, but also in great part even much greater 
part based on an argument that government is too intrusive 
and it’s a protected status for gays is the first step towards 
against this sort of special treatment. 


TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH EDWARD BROADUS 
[v. 17, p. 1175] 


the witness herein, having been first duly sworn, on oath 
testified as follows. 


THE COURT: Thank you. Please be seated. 
It appears not to be Morris [sic] Code. 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. KAY: 
Q. Would you state your name for the record. 
A. My name is Joseph Edward Broadus. 


202 


Q. Mr. Broadus, how are you presently employed? 


A. Iam presently employed as an Assistant Professor 
of Law at George Mason University in Arlington , Virginia, 
and also a Special Assistant to Carl Anderson on the United 
States Civil Rights Commission. 


[v. 17, p. 1177] 


Q. What do your duties as special assistant to a 
member of the United States Commission on Civil Rights 
include? 


A. They include both policy analysis and legal analysis 
of issues that have appeared before the Commission and 
evaluation of reports that come in from the National 


Advisory 

{v. 17, p. 1178] 
Commissions and the State Advisory Commissions that the 
Commission has. They are a wide range of duties. They 
are largely those of a special assistant who has to review and 
digest and make comment on matters of importance before 
the Commission. 


ss e# & & 


THE COURT: Professor Broadus is received as an 
expert in constitutional law and civil rights law and may give 
opinions under Rule 702 in those areas. His opinions, 
however, aren’t going to interpret the law for the Court in 
the ruling that it must make. 


ss e*# & & 


{v. 17, p. 1186] 
203 


Q. Has sexual orientation been addressed at the 
national level in either Title 7 or a separate act? 


A. Sexual orientation has been repeatedly considered 
both by the Court as to whether or not it was within the 
inclusion of what was meani by sex within the meaning of 
Title 7 and by Congress because of repeated invitations and 
lobbying attempts to get it included inside Title 7. And 
significantly, despite a lengthy history of effort and many 
debates and considerations, Congress has never found the 
arguments related to sexual orientation inclusion persuasive. 


In a similar way, it can be compared to the way 
[v. 17, p. 1187] 

Congress has treated other kinds of conditions which are 
viewed as being -- as having a behavioral language. For 
example, alcoholism is addressed and considered within the 
context of the Rehabilitation Act. Yet there are limits on the 
ability to consider it because it’s recognized that it could be 
well end [sic] despite the fact that alcoholism represents -- 

may in some cases, as the Supreme Court has urged, in 
some cases have a genetic link, and despite the i 
demeans a personality, despite the fact that it creates a 


z 
ae 


special need for measuring behaviors that have — that really 
are behavioral and measurable, and alcoholism is an example 
of it. Drugs are treated the same way. There are other 
conditions that people have attempted -- that meet those kind 
of criteria. 


The same would be for sexual orientation. 
Compulsive gamblers, for example. 


204 


Q. Have you made an analysis of whether or not in 
your opinion it would be appropriate to place sexual 
orientation under Title 7 on the federal act or on a separate 
act like the ADA or an age discrimination law? 


A. Yes, I have. 
Q. And what is your opinion? 


[v. 17, p. 1188] 


A. My opinion is that the same that Congress has 
mentioned it would be inappropriate to do that. It has all of 
the problems that exist, for example, with alcoholism or 
some of these other conditions, and I would bring your 
attention, for example, alcoholism does not create a 
permanent protection for the party. It simply creates a 
protocol by which the employer and the employee can work 
over some period to attempt to cure -- to cure the problem. 
And if there’s a failure in this process, then normal 
employment procedures can be taken to terminate. 


s**# *& & 


{v. 17, p. 1189] 


Q. (BY MR. KAY): Mr. Broadus, in your review of 
the Boulder, Denver, and Aspen City Ordinances, what were 
you reviewing those for? What were you trying to determine 
from those ordinances? 


A. I was greatly concerned with whether these 
ordinances contained provisions or were structured so as to 
have applications that would raise serious questions about 
whether or not they would impinge upon the right of free 
exercise of religion or association or whether or not they 
would impinge upon the rights of intimate association that 


205 


have to do with a family or the rights of parents to advise 
and counsel their children. 


Q. And those rights that you were concerned they 
might impinge upon, where are those rights found in our 
system of constitutional government? 


[v. 17, p. 1190] 
A. Those rights are found in the First Amendment. 


Q. What is your opinion on the Denver, Boulder, and 
Aspen anti-discrimination statutes and whether they impinge 
on those fundamental rights or not? 


A. My opinion on the statute was, well, they vary in 
their terms and degrees. They all have terms that are deeply 
disturbing on their possible impact on those rights. 


Q. And what are those terms and what are those 
potential impacts on those other fundamental rights? 


A. In the case of the Aspen statute, it is the complete 
indiscriminate application of all these provisions to all of 
those interests without any effort, accommodation, or 
association or limit. 


Q. And what are those accommodations? What could 
have happened to accommodate those fundamental rights of 
free exercise of religion, association, privacy, et cetera? 


A. Well, as I said, the statutes vary. And in the 
Boulder and in the Denver ordinances, there are attempts to 
draft exemptions for religious institutions; although, there is 
not one that drafted, for example, to exempt religious and 
motivated conduct. Typical one is the inclusion of marital 
status as a category. 


206 


In other jurisdictions, it has been held that these 
marital status provisions apply to home owners or small units 
of renters, amounts to a violation of both a freedom of 

{v. 17, p. 1191] 

religion and freedom of association to choose in their home 
to have a provision under the penalty of even of just a 
misdemeanor but under penalty of criminal sanction denies 
a parent the right to control the environment. For example, 
if you are in a situation where you need to rent a room in 
your home that says that you can’t make decisions about 
moral or ethical or other evaluation of character that is 
personal in any range is quite damaging to those association- 
al interests. 


I would say even, for example, the ability to choose 
the person whom shares your home on the basis of religion, 
something that we might not want to see happen in 
commerce, is a right that we might want to preserve in the 
privacy of one’s home because one may want to choose 
intimate associates because of their ability to contribute to 
one’s spiritual growth by your shared practice of religion. 
And there was -- you know, the notion that that person’s 
right to do that, to live inside their own home perhaps and 
commune with people of their own faith and share their 
values that is something that is deeply recognized in our 
society for a long or for a lengthy period of time, and its 
trashed by these ordinances and in a disturbing way. They 
can proceed with complete disregard for that. 


Q. Now, in your review of these three city ordinances, 
do they go beyond the classifications found in federal law for 
civil rights protections? 

{v. 17, p. 1192] 


A. Yes, they do. Yes, they do. They go well beyond 
the classifications found in civil rights protection. 


207 


Q. And do you have an opinion as to the appropriate- 
ness or inappropriateness of that? 


A. I have an opinion as to the appropriateness of it. 
Part of it is -- grows out of a matter that I have just stated, 
and the other part grows out of the inclusion of what may 
well be broad enough to include behaviorially-based activity 
which has generally been against national policy. It’s very 
bad policy to weigh on the side of, you know, one set of 
behaviors as opposed to another. Particularly, for example, 
behavior like marital status. If what we are talking about in 
marital status as one of these clearly spells out is putting the 
weight on cohabitation, it’s at odds where the notion that 
there is a legal status of marriage since what it seems to say 
is that while this status of marriage exists it has to be 
meaningless in that no one can do anything to aid or abet it 
to proceed with complete irrelevance to a category that exists 
at least in part because it’s been found to be in the vital 
interests of the state. 


Q. Do you have an opinion as to whether adding all of 
these additional categories beyond what the federal civil 
rights laws provide for breathe disrespect for civil rights 
laws in general? 


A. Yes, Ido. And the answer is yes. I think one 
{v. 17, p. 1193] 
of the things that’s happened is - and its difficult to weigh 
the impact of this. For example, the ADA which definitely 
does address a very vital question of discrimination against 
the disabled is so loosely worded as to include within its 
provisions almost 80 percent of the American population, 
and we are just lucky that most of those people haven’t had 
the opportunity to find lawyers and proceed in the system 
with their claims. We are just lucky that’s the case. And 
one of the big debates over the enactment of the Americans 
with Disability [sic] Act was between people with no historic 


208 


or critical kind of disabilities, and those with like disabilities 
over what definition should be included in the Act. And 
most of that was loss but as to the kind of provisions that are 
here, for example, you know, escalating cohabitation, you 
know, to the status of a protected class definitely does bring 
the law into disrespect if for no other reason that it makes a 
mockery of those other provisions talking about how vital the 
central marriage is to the society. 


And further, there has been a growing sense, you 
could even find it in the academic literature of debate about 
the religion and the efficacy of Title 7 law and effect upon 
American character itself, not of living in a society where 
we help the truly needy and we attempt to avoid doing 
injury, but the fact that we are evolving in a society of 
victimization where even those who are relativ ely well off 
seek to protect 

[v. 17, p. 1194] 


themselves as being needy and use the power of the State to 
gain what could be a special privilege. 


Earlier I heard some discussion about whether or 
not these statutes or ordinances result in awarding of any 
special privilege i> any class of person and, of course, the 
answer is that every civil rights provision ends up awarding 
special privileges. And it does that because the 
right is vested in the owner. The right to rent or dispose is 
one of the great and honored roots in our society . So if you 
redefine a class that has a right to limit your discretion in 
disposal and use, you have transferred the property right 
from the prior title holder to this class. And that constitutes 
a very large privilege. 


ee ee 
4 


Q. Is there a concern in your opinion -- is there a 
concern with having all these different cities creating 
different classifications which are also different from the 


state civil rights protections group? 


A. Yes. And I think the more troubling concern with 
these ordinances appear to be precisely the kind of warning 
abuse of local majorities. . . . 


ss ee & 


[v. 17, p. 1198] 


Q. Let’s tur our attention now to Amendment 2. 
Have you made an analysis of how Amendment 2 relates to 
these concerns that you’ve expressed about the city ordi- 
nances of Boulder, Denver, and Aspen? 


A. Sure. Yes, I have. 
Q. And? 


A. It’s essential -- essentially what it does is say to 
these local governments that have been so completely 
reckless in their basic concern for the constitutional items in 
the areas of privacy and freedom of association, it says to 
them if you don’t know how to play with your toys, we are 
going to take them away from you. You are simply not 
going to be permitted to legislate in this area. 

Q. "This area" would be in the area of granting 
protected status based on homosexual, bisexual, and lesbian 
orientation? 


A. Yes. 


210 


(CROSS-EXAMINATION) 


{v. 17, p. 1224] 

Q. Now, you have already told us you have no idea 
whether there have been any abuses in Denver, Aspen, or 
Boulder on any of the concerns that you’ve expressed, right? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You've already told us you have no idea about that? 

A. The only -- 

{v. 17, p. 1225] 

Q. You have no information about that, correct? 

A. The only information I have is from the record 
where the parties who supported the measure said that they 
had concerns about both what was happening inside. 

Q. You don’t know of any specific example of the kind 
of abuses that you think ought to drive this wholesale 
sweeping away of rights, correct? You don’t have any 
specific knowledge? 

A. No. 


“*e*# * & 


211 


TESTIMONY OF ROBERT P. GEORGE, Ph.D. 
[v. 18, p. 1282] 


the witness herein, having been first duly sworn, on oath 
testified as follows: 


THE COURT: Thank you. Please be seated. 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. TYMKOVICH: 
Q. Good moming, Professor George. Could you 
ee Oe re ee ee 


A. It’s Robert P. George, and I teach at Princeton 
University. 


Q. How long have you taught at Princeton University? 
A. For eight years. 


: Q. What subject matters do you teach at the Universi- 
ty! 


A. Legal philosophy, civil liberties, American law and 
x*“sk&k *& 


[v. 18, p. 1284] 


Q. Over the past couple cf years, again, could you 
describe the subject matter of the courses that you’ ve taught? 


212 


A. Yes, I have taught course [sic] in philosophy of law 
which considers issues at the juncture of legal, moral, and 


a range of issues of civil rights and liberties that implicate 
important moral considerations. I have taught graduate 
seminars from time to time called American law and theory 
which is a consideration of the writings of American legal 
philosophers from about the time of the founding of the 
Harvard Law School, and again the emphasis of that course 
is on issues relating to morality and law. I have taught an 
undergraduate seminar in the Woodrow Wilson School of 
Princeton on alternate dispute resolution mediation and 
arbitration and so forth and the subject matters of that 
course, and I taught a freshman seminar last year on national 
law theory and the theory of law. 


Q. Have you obtained any awards or fellowship as a 
{v. 18, p. 1285] 
result of your academic work? 


A. Yes. I received various awards as an 
ate at Swarthmore, and a scholarship there. 1 then mceived 
two outside fellowships to attend Harvard. I then got a 
fellowship at Harvard to attend Oxford. 


Q. Have you done any additional work relating to your 
relevant background relating to your law degree? 


A. Yes. I’m of [sic] counsel at a law firm in 
Charleston, West Virginia called Robinson & McElwee. 


Q. I understand you are a Supreme Court fellow. 
What did that involve and when did you do that? 


213 


ft a 


A. That was in the 1989, 90 Supreme Court term, and 
I was a Tom C. Clark Judicial Fellow on the staff of the 
Chief Justice and his administrative assistant. 


“se & © 


[v. 18, p. 1286] 


Q. And have you written any books or edited any 
books? 


A. Yes, Ihave. My book entitled Making Men Moral, 
which is subtitled Civil Liberties and Public Morality was 
published by Oxford University press last month. I’m the 
editor of a book called Natural Law Theory: Contemporary 
Essays, which was published by Oxford University press in 
1992. And I’m the editor of a forthcoming work which is 
now in production called The Autonomy of Law: Essays on 
Legal Positivism, which will also be published by Oxford 
University press. All of those works have as their center 
piece issue considerations of the relationship of law and 
morality. 


Q. And that was also the thesis of your book Making 
Men Moral? 


A. Yes, indeed. 


Q. Have you written any article in the area of sexuality 
or religious sexual conduct? 


A. Various of my articles and in some respects my 
[v. 18, p. 1287] 
book touch on those issues, but I have written one article 
that is centrally focused on them, and that was a review 
essay, a long review of Judge Richard Posner’s book Sex 
and Reason, which was published by Harvard University 


214 


recently, a couple of years ago, and my review is in 
Columbia Law Review. 


Q. Professor George, since you are a Commissioner on 
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, could you explain 
your activity in that regard? 


A. Yes. The United States Commission on Civil 
Rights was founded in 1957. It was created by Congress, 
and then under the 1957 Civil Rights Act, U.S. Civil Rights 
Act, it was then recreated and rechartered under the United 
States Commission on Civil Rights Act which was in 1983. 
It is currently made up of eight commissioners, all of whom 
serve part time. We have a chairman and a vice chairman. 
There is a full time staff director who oversees our staff in 
Washington D.C., and we have six regional offices of the 
Civil Rights Commission. Our jurisdiction extends to the 
investigation of allegations of the denial of voting rights 
based on various criteria, race, sex, religion and so forth, 
and more generally to make recommendations to Congress 
and the President for the reform of civil rights law where in 
the Commission’s judgment have inquired into various 
matters, held hearings and so forth, the Commissioners 
believe that reforms are appropriate. 


Q. What are the nature of the investigations that 


{v. 18, p. 1288] 
the Commission pursues of which you are familiar? 


A. I have only been on the Commission since January 
of this year, so I haven’t had an opportunity to be involved 
in a panuply of the Commission’s activities, but since this 
time I can report that we held three and a half days of 
hearings on the causes of the Los Angeles riots and tried to 
take information from witnesses from Los Angeles as to how 
those tragedies could be avoided in the future. We have a 


comprehensive project which was to investigate racial and 
215 


hearings in Crown Heights, New York, which has also been 
the scene of racial and ethnic tensions. The real focus of 
our Commission’s work at the moment at least is in the 
racial and ethnic area. 


Q. Professor George, what are the protected classes or 
groups under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Commission on 


Civil Rights? 

A. Our statute does not frame the issue in terms of 
protected groups. It rather mentions categories. We, for 
example, investigate voting rights, allegations of voting 
rights, violations where the person making the allegation 
claims to have been denied the right to vote on the basis of 
race, sex, ethnicity, religion, age, or disability. I believe I 


have 
[v. 18, p. 1289] 
covered -- I believe I have covered them all. 


Q. And sexual orientation is not one of those catego- 
ries? 


A. It is not. 


“sxe & *& 


[v. 18, p. 1290] 


THE COURT: Professor George is received as an 
expert in moral philosophy, government and political 
opinion testimony under Rule 702 in those areas. 


216 


MR. TYMKOVICH: Thank you, Your Honor. 


Q. (BY MR. TYMKOVICH): Professor George, you 
are a 
{v. 18, p. 1291] 
student and a teacher of American government. How do you 
define government power? 


A. The authority of government to act for the sake of 
the public good. 


Q. And what sort of theories of government do you 
teach? 


A. Well, let me distinguish a couple of levels. When 
we talk about theories of government on the one hand, we 
might be talking about what I usually refer to as political 
theories. Theories of what the good government -- the best 
government, the ideal government would be like, how it 
should be run and what its concerns should be. We can 
contrast the political theory of Aristotle and Thomas Hobbes 
and an American political theorist such as John Rolls. Now, 
on the other hand, we might distinguish theories of 
government in the following sense: We might distinguish 
the type of government that we have at the federal level in 
the United States; that is to say, a government of delegated 
forbidden by the very theory of the constitution from 
exercising any powers that aren’t given from governments 
like the governments in the several states’ governments of 
general jurisdiction which exercise police powers, powers to 
protect public health, safety, and morals, subject to whatever 
constraints are imposed on those governments by the federal 
or state constitutions or by law. 


[v. 18, p. 1292] 


217 


oe 


Q. Would you explain in a little more detail this 
intersection between law and morality, civil liberties and 
public morality that you’ve mentioned. 


A. Well, I have written a whole book on the subject, 
and to do it justice, I would have to recapitulate much of 
what is in the book. The theme -- one of the central themes 
of the book is that government, particularly governments of 

1 jurisdicti ising policy powers. 


Q. Such as states? 


A. Yes. Very frequently of necessity make moral 
judgments. I’m very critical of the view, in my book, I’m 
very critical of the view that government ought to be or even 
can be neutral with respect to moral questions. The 
questions of law often implicate moral judgments that need 
to be made. Now, among these judgments are judgments 
entitled to exercise free speech within certain limitations, of 
course, is itself a moral proposition. The argument people 
ought to enjoy freedom of religion is a moral proposition. 
Many of the laws that we consider to be the great achieve- 
ments of American politics, for example, our civil rights 
laws are state moral propositions. In many cases, contro- 
versial moral positions on which the state, the government 
is not, it shouldn’t be, and it couldn’t be neutral. 


Q. Wouldn’t there [sic] been a moral judgment that 


forms 
[v. 18, p. 1293] 
the basis of our principle or notions of equality? 


A. Yes. Oh, certainly, certainly. The proposition 
stated in the Declaration of Independence that all men are 
created equally, certainly that’s a moral proposition. We 
embody a proposition like that in our constitution, in law, on 


218 


the federal level, in the equal protection clause, and of 
course, many states have equal protection laws. Our civil 
rights laws aim to protect quality among citizens. 


Q. Why do you say government does not and even 
cannot remain neutral on these questions? 


A. Well, government has to decide, for example, 
whether people are entitled to freedom of speech or freedom 
of religion or equal protection of the laws or they aren’t. 
There’s no avoiding the question. Whichever way you come 
down on it, you’ve made a moral judgment. You can 
pretend that you haven’t made a moral judgment, but you 
have. If you come down saying, no, people are not equal, 
people of a certain age are morally superior and inherently 
have a greater dignity than people of a younger age, and 
black people have less equality than white people, if you 
have made that judgment, you have made a moral judgment. 
In my view, incorrect moral judgment, but a moral 
judgment. 


If you take the view of the Declaration and equal 
protection clause seriously and hold for fundamental equality 
of dignity, then you have stated a moral judgment. 


[v. 18, p. 1294] 


Q. You have written about what you call the moral 
ecology of communities. What do you mean by that, 
Professor George? 


A. I mean by that the framework of expectations and 
that’s abroad in a community relating to 

issues of moral significance. Where people’s actions will 
impact upon their character and likely impact upon others 
whose behavior is affected for good or for ill by their 
example. That’s what I mean by the moral environment of 


219 


Se 


a community or the moral ecology of the community. It’s 
that moral environment or moral ecology that is at stake in 


Q. Would the state of Colorado and its local commu- 
nities - its local cities, its local counties be a community 
that you described? 


A. Yes. Again, subject to the particular rules of the 
state constitution in Colorado. I have not made a study of 
the constitution of Colorado. But I would assume that 
Colorado, like other states, is a governmental general 
jurisdiction, and the municipalities and counties and so forth 
in the state of Colorado participate in derivative fashion in 
the general jurisdiction of the state of Colorado. 


Q. Now, in our system of government not only in 
[v. 18, p. 1295] 
Colorado but other states of general jurisdiction, how do we 
address moral issues politically and culturally? 


A. Well, in certain areas, the moral issues have been 
addressed at the constitutional level. So an issue is as it [sic] 
were taken out of ordinary politics and put in the 
constitution. Now, often since the constitution cannot be 
made to apply clearly and unequivocally in every unantici- 
pated case, it will be necessary for judges exercising their 
authority to interpret the constitution to make what are in 
effect moral judgments. Other times, the constitution does 
not remove the moral question at stake from the ordinary 
processes of politics, and therefore it’s left there. Here, the 
people must deliberate and decide either through their elected 
representatives or themselves by initiative and referendum 
how to resolve the public policy question, which might very 


220 


well be a question of public morality that needs to be 
decided. 


Q. How do we accommodate competing or different 
visions of public morality in such a system? 


A. By argument. It’s very important that free and fair 
for argument take place. It’s critical that those 
who will ultimately decide the question, whether in the 
legislature or by referendum debate the issues and make the 
appropriate resolution. That is where the issue remains in 
the field of politics. If the issue will finally be resolved in 
court, then it’s important that those responsible for ultimately 
[v. 18, p. 1296] 
making that decision entertain fairly and hear the arguments 
on both sides of the question. Since neutrality in a great 
many cases is impossible, and in any event, I think undesir- 
able, it will be necessary for some points of view to win and 
others to lose. And of course, it’s entirely possible that the 
people or their elected representatives or judges interpreting 
the constitution will make a mistake, so that the decisions 
regarding public morality that are made are the wrong 
decisions, they might be decisions that are too permissive, 
they might be decisions that are not permissive enough with 
respect to whatever the moral issue is that is in question. 
But since a decision has to be made, there will necessarily be 
those whose view will not win out. 


Q. In your opinion, Professor George, is there 
anything illegitimate about pursuing moral judgment through 
electoral process? 

A. There can’t possibly be if we believe in democracy. 


Q. Why is that, sir? 


221 


A. Well, these decisions will bear on us from all sides. 
They will have to be made. Virtually any issue will 
implicate at some level certain moral judgments or value 
judgment. Any political issue, unless we are to remove 
those issues through a philosopher king or something, they 
will be made by the people. Those decisions will necessarily 


be 
{v. 18, p. 1297] 

subject, in our country and in this state as well as my home 
state of New Jersey, subject to constitutional limitations. 
You can’t do just anything in the name of public morality. 
You can’t pursue the goal of having a sound moral environ- 
ment, good public mortality [sic] by just any means. There 
are constitutional considerations, constitutional limitations on 
the means that can be used. And sometimes the ends that 
can be pursued. But subject to those limitations, political 
process is an appropriate one for resolving moral questions. 


Q. What type of issues do we typically place in our 
constitutions either at the state or federal level? 


A. Well, issues having to do with the structure of 
government, for example, how the government will be 
structured. Issues having to do with basic civil rights and 
liberties. Issues where the people in their wisdom wish to 
reserve moral judgments to themselves rather than having 
been made by their elected representatives. There are 
probably other categories that aren’t coming to mind, but 
those are some. 


Q. How does constitutionalizing an issue, placing an 
issue in the constitution, address some of those concerns? 


A. Well, it’s placed in the constitution -- that will have 
a couple of implications. One ordinarily at our federal -- in 
our federal government and at the state level, it will mean 
that disputes about its meaning will have to be 


222 


{v. 18, p. 1298] 

resolved in courtrooms rather than at the ballot box, rather 
than at the polls. It also means that in effect the people have 
reserved that decision to themselves, and thereby taking it 
away from or not giving it to their elected representatives. 
I think that’s the crucial implication. So the matter is no 
longer in the ordinary political process. A decision has been 
made by the people through the process of constitution 
making or amending the constitution, and if that’s to be 
changed, it will have to be by the people again. 


Q. Professor George, we have the text of Amendment 
2 on the easel behind you, and on its face it appears to 
reserve and not address moral judgment about homosexuality 
in the state. Does a provision like Amendment 2 really 
weigh into the moral debate? 


A. No. I have seen Amendment 2 before, but would 
you mind if I took a moment to read it again? 


THE COURT: Go ahead. 
Q. (BY MR. TYMKOVICH): Please do. 


A. Well, Amendment 2 certainly embodies the 
judgment of political morality about the appropriate level at 
which to decide the question of whether there will be a 
protected class status bestowed on homosexual, lesbian, or 
bisexual orientation. So, to that extent, it does involve 
moral judgment. 

Q. Is there anything from your reading of Amendment 

[v. 18, p. 1299] 
2 that would prohibit or somehow limit homosexual activity 
or behavior? 

A. I don’t see how it could be interpreted that way. 


223 


Q. Professor George, we in societies -- 


A. Could I also add that I don’t see that it’s inconsis- 
tent with prohibitions on homosexual conduct or certain 
forms of homosexual conduct. It doesn’t require or embody 
any such prohibitions. 


Q. Exactly. Subject to other provisions and conditions 
as the U.S. Supreme Court has interpreted it? 


A. Certainly. 


Q. Professor George, societies make political judg- 
ments about sexual conduct and sexual morality all the time, 
don’t they? 


A. Yes, they do. 


Q. And societies address this troublesome issue of 
homosexuality, homosexual orientation all the time, don’t 
they? 


A. Yes, they do. 


Q. Now, as a professor of philosophy, as a student of 
moral philosophy, if you could just very briefly describe 
some of the major philosophical traditions and how they 
have addressed the issue of sex morality or conduct? 


A. Again, it would be impossible for me in this context 
to be very comprehensive, but if I could mention a few, 
[v. 18, p. 1300] 
that would be helpful. And if you want to raise more, I will 
be happy to do that. 


The classical tradition of philosophy founded by 
Socrates and transmitted to us in the first instance by the 


224 


great student Plato and by Plato’s great student Aristotle and 
picked up by the Roman philosophers and by the great 
midevil [sic] philosophers by Thomas Aquinas, that type of 
philosophy as it bears on sexual conduct tended to take the 
view that sexual pleasure should be sought only in the 
context of marriage. Now they differed on their conven- 
tions, different cultures in which this tradition was embodied 
differently in various respects as to their understanding of 
marriage, but in all of them that I know about, marriage was 
understood to be a committed exclusive heterosexual 
relationship, and it was in this tradition marriage has [sic] 
celebrated not only as a source of children but as a source of 
comfort and joy and companionship for the married spouses. 
An earlier challenger to this tradition was the traditional 
philosophy sometimes called hedonism. Hedonism differed 
radically from the mainstream classical tradition that I have 
just referred to as found by Socrates in its explicit 
celebration as pleasure, as a good, and in some cases as the 
highest good. According to the more radical hedonist, the 
way to life [sic] a valuable life was to live a life pursuant to 
pleasure. 


[v. 18, p. 1301] 
clash of the traditions in the writings of Plato and to a lesser 
extent Aristotle. 


Q. To what extent did the hedonist or Platonic 
philosophers deal with this issue of shame and sexual 
conduct? 


A. Well, the mainstream classical tradition of Socrates, 
Plato, and Aristotle is the one that took very seriously the 
idea that - bad sexual conduct was shameful. It was. 
damaging to the integrity of persons. It was corrupting of 
their moral character, and it was shameful, something that a 
person who had appropriate self respect would not indulge 


225 


ie et te, a ee i i ed a, 


The hedonist tradition is quite different in that 
respect. I mean it’s pleasure is good, perhaps the ultimate 
good and is to be obtained wherever it can be obtained 
without shame subject now to certain limitations. I mean 
even the most radical hedonists ordinarily would not approve 
of destroying others or hurting others in the pursuit of 
pleasure, but nevertheless subject to those limitations, 
pleasures should be sought and could be sought without 
shame, wherever it was to be o| tained. Shame was an issue, 
but it was one where the classical mainstream tradition saw 
it as implementing bad sexual acts; whereas, hedonism 
tended not it [sic] see it implicated there at all. 


Q. Who was the proponent of that view of sexuality? 


A. I think its primary proponents are -- might not 

[v. 18, p. 1302] 
be real historical figures. I think it’s best understood as it’s 
put in the mouths of Socrates opponents and interlocutors of 
Plato’s dialogs involving Socrates. So you have the 
character Calaclees in the dialog making it very powerful 
and there are other figures in other Platonic dialogs who play 
the same. 


Q. Do they make that argument about sexuality? 


A. Yes, in the Gorcegus you get a lively exchange 
between Plato and Socrates who is to be representing Plato’s 
own view and Calaclees over sexuality and particularly over 
homosexuality, and you get what to my mind is quite a clear 
condemnation of homosexual conduct by Socrates, and we 
can infer by Plato. That inference is buttressed by Plato’s 
own later work particularly in the laws where we get a 


226 


closer rejection of homosexual conduct and other forms of 
non-marital sexual conduct. 


Q. Now, you’ve mentioned two major philosophical 
traditions. Are there others that you’ve described? 


A. Certainly there are variances of the hedonist 
anism. Precise definition of epicureanism are controversial 
but people regard that as a highly hedonistic sort of tradition. 
Later we got the development much much later the 

of a school thought called ulitarianism and 
ulitarianism is the view that we live well, we do the morally 

[v. 18, p. 1303] 

right thing when we maximize good and minimize evil, and 
some of the leading, in fact possibly the person we consider 
the founder of ulitarianism provision Jeramy Benship 
understands good and evil in hedonistic terms. He said that 
men are under two masters, pain and pleasure. When we 
say maximum good, we mean maximum pleasure. And 
some of Benship’s later disciples rejected hedonism while 
maintaining his view that the maximum of ethics ought to be 
maximum good, and minimum evil, but what they were 
replacing was his hedonistic conception of good and evil. 
But there are even among contemporary ulitarians there are 
people who differ on this issue. Others rejected hedonism. 
The thing that links them together as ulitarians or as 
philosophers say, conventionalists is the method of moral 
judgment, the method of obtaining good consequences and 


Q. What are the other major philosophical traditions? 
A. You certainly have more traditions of philosophy 
that are embodied in the great religious traditions of the 
west. There’s a very powerful and important string of 
Jewish philosophy, a family of traditions rather than a single 


227 


tradition. There’s a very powerful philosophical tradition in 
the Islamic tradition. Islamic philosophy flourished in the 
middle ages and carries on today. There is a strong tradition 
-- there’s several strong traditions of enlightenment 

[v. 18, p. 1304] 
philosophy. Let me name two of them. One is the tradition 
of moral skepticism of which the philosopher David Huhm 
was the leading figure. And this is a tradition of radical 
doubt with the capacity of reason to make moral 
This tradition was -- came into conflict with the 
[sic] tradition of a German philosopher named Kant, K-a-n-t. 
And Kant held for the ultimate rationality of moral 
judgments; saw moral judgment as a matter of pure practical 
reason. 


Q. And how did the religious traditions fit into that 
[sic] others that you’ve described, the Judaic tradition? 


A. Well, you get feeding into the religious traditions 
are thoughts from religious thinkers outside of those 
traditions as well as from secular thinkers. So, for example, 
the Christian tradition of philosophy which emerges as a 
strong tradition of philosophy in the middle east, like figures 
like Thomas Aquinas takes other large sectors of the classic 
tradition of Plato and Aristotle. 


The same is true of important traditions within 
Jewish philosophy. And Jewish philosophy and Christian 
philosophy in the middle ages also engage with one another 
and have an impact on each other. Enlightened philosophy 
engages with Christianity as well. We ordinarily think of 
Kant as a secular philosopher, and that’s true in the sense 
that he did not appeal to divine revelations for moral 
judgments. In that respect, he was what is sometimes 
referred to as a natural law 

[v. 18, p. 1305] 


228 


philosopher or he was not in the philosophy of Thomas 
Aquinas but he happened to be a Christian, and his thought 
is drawn on by many contemporary Christian philosophers. 


Q. Professor George, if you could summarize, please, 
how dic these various traditions, these various schools of 
thought deal with the issue of sexual conduct in general and 


homosexuality in particular? 


A. I think it’s fair to say that all of these traditions 
took the question of sexual conduct very seriously. They 
saw it as a central moral question and one to be resolved for 
those that believed in the power of reason to resolve moral 
problems by reason. Here, of course, the outlier [sic] would 
be those schools of ethical thought that are skeptical of the 
power of reason. For example, Humes thought, and for 
people in that tradition, reason has no real ultimate power to 
resolve those questions. Humes said that reason is not only 
to be the slave of passions and should never pretend to do 
anything other than to serve and obey him. So his view of 
sexual morality, although I don’t know his scientific 
teachings on it, one would, I think, infer from what he says 
that questions of how one ought to conduct one’s self 
sexually are essentially pragmatic questions; that bad sexual 
conduct would be sexual conduct that would have bad 
consequences for one or others for one or others or people 
around others or one’s society. 


Other traditions treat these questions as serious 
[v. 18, p. 1306] 

moral questions and questions to be resolved by reason, not 
necessarily questions that can be answered by mechanical 
knowns [sic] cranking out the computer solution to a 
question of sexual mortality [sic] but rather by the very 
careful synthetic reflection that’s necessary to resolve any 
complicated moral question, whether in the area of sexuality 
or any other area. 


229 


Q. Bringing then these issues into the 1990’s, how do 
these traditions affect the way we make laws and make 
decisions about public morality today? 


A. Well, there’s not a Kantical tradition today. 
There’s not a single tradition of philosophy that has the whip 
hand that controls our public life. We share, as a society, 
we share a number of moral beliefs, but we divide on others. 
And among those on which we divide are those having to do 
with sexual conduct. And it’s interesting to me that people 
conclusions influencing each others’ judgments on one side 
or the other of these debates. 


Q. How do you mean that? 
A. Well. 


Q. In particular, this debate about how we regulate 
sexual conduct or even homosexuality in our society? 


A. An Aristotelian who would reject certain of Kant’s 
philosophy would nevertheless quite rightly join up with a 


sorts of conduct including homosexual conduct. Sometimes 
there are some Aristolelians and some Kanteans who would 
reject the specific teachings of Aristotle and Kant on 
homosexual acts or converse to sexual acts and would join 
together despite their philosophical differences in arguing for 
the moral value of homosexual conduct. 


Q. Would such moral judgments be rational in your 
opinion, Professor George? 


A. The debate is a debate about reasons. It’s in that 
respect a rational debate. Rational arguments are to be made 


230 


on both sides. One has to decide and if one is a public 
policy maker or if one is a citizen of the state that’s trying 
to decide a public morality issue by referendum, one has to 
decide where the sounder reasons are as far as one could see 
what the truth of the matter is that’s got to be decided, but 
it has to be decided, it seems to me, by evaluating the 
reasons that are given on both sides, the philosophical 
arguments that are to be made for and against. It’s a 
rational debate. 


Q. ‘You couldn’t say that one side of the debate or the 
other is acting erratically or invidiously or prejudicially, 
would you? 


A. It depends on the particular debate. If somebody is 
lying, or manipulating the debate, then people are not 
engaging in rational argument. But on the other hand, it’s 


_ possible in all these areas whether with regard to sexual 


[v. 18, p. 1308] 

morality or other controversial moral questions to debate the 
issues in a rational manner where nobody is lying, nobody 
is manipulating the debate. People are putting forth their 
intellectual contact with those who see it a different way. 
And we have to argue it out. And we might change each 
other [sic] minds in some cases. Someone will hear the 
arguments on both sides and make the decision on that, but 
it’s a debate on which arguments can be put forward on both 
sides. 


Q. That’s what we mean by politics? 
A. At it’s best, that’s what we mean by politics. 


Politics is the reason for public action on both sides of 


231 


al 


Q. Is it safe to say in this debate over how we regulate 
homosexuality that there are reasonable people on both sides 
of the issue? 


A. Oh, absolutely. 


Q. Professor George, you indicated that laws or social 
regulations pertaining to sexuality or homosexuality in 
particular are not based on prejudice or religious beliefs, 
why would you say that? 


A. Could you repeat your question. I’m sorry, I 
couldn’t hear it. 


Q. You indicated that laws pertaining to sexual 
morality or homosexuality in particular are not necessarily 
[v. 18, p. 1309} 
based on religious or sectarian beliefs, revealed reason. 

Why do you say that? 


A. Well, I say that because reasons can be given 
serious significant arguments; in fact, have been given on 
both sides of these questions. It’s possible for someone to 
give an argument in favor of the value of homosexual 
activity without that argument simply being a reflection of 
that person’s desire to engage in that activity or have others 
engage in that active [sic]. In other words, instead of 
relying on one’s sentiments or desires, one can give reasons. 
On the other side of the issue, the same is the case. 
Someone can simply opt out of rationally thinking about the 
issue and simply denounce homosexual activity without a 
moment’s thought because it happens to not strike him as a 
good idea or that person can consider the advanced reasons 
that can be given against homosexual conduct. 


Q. Would it be legitimate for people to bring those 
religious motivations to the public debate? 


232 


A. I don’t think I referred to religious motivations. 
Im talking about the reasons, the publicly accessible reasons 
that can be exchanged between people who might not share 
the same religious views or belong to the same religious 
tradition. Many people have religious beliefs. 


Q. How have those religious beliefs affected their 
views on Civil liberties and on public debate about law? 


[v. 18, p. 1310] 


A. Well, people’s religious beliefs fit into their general 
moral and political beliefs in many ways, and it depends on 
the individual person. Sometimes it depends on the 
individual religious tradition. Some religious traditions are 
more comprehensive than others about matters of political 
morality, personal morality, and some individuals accept by- 
in-large the teachings of their religious tradition. And others 
stay in the religious tradition in some sense while rejecting 
many of its teachings. 


The key thing is that these issues can be publicly 
debated by people of different religious convictions, giving 
and exchanging reasons without any necessary appeal to 
revealed teachings that are not accepted or —- by people who 
aren’t members of that religion or to which they have no 
access since they are outside of a religious tradition. 


Q. Even if people did bring specific religious concerns 
to this public debate, is that legitimate? 


A. Yes. I think it is legitimate the same way it was 
legitimate for Dr. Martin Luther King to appeal to the 
religions in advancing the cause of civil rights. It’s a 
mistake to ask people to ignore or lay aside their religious 
traditions. li’s unfair. I think it’s a violation of their own 
civil rights. I think that it would, in effect, disenfranchise 


233 


religious people from participation in public debate, but what 
religious people can be asked to do is, in the public 


argument, 

{v. 18, p. 1311] 
present public accessible reasons for the points of view, 
whether pro or con on homosexual conduct or any other 
issue, publicly accessible reasons that they have to present. 


[v. 18, p. 1313] 


Q. In your opinion, Professor George, does Amend- 
ment 2 endorse or promote a particular version of moral 
philosophy? 

A. I don’t believe it does. It seems to me that 

{v. 18, p. 1314] 
people from various viewpoints, philosophical backgrounds 
could approve or disprove [sic] of Amendment 2. I can’t 
say that’s an Aristoleian or hedonism amendment or Kantean 
amendment or Hobbesean amendment. 


Q. What do you believe it does then? 


A. I believe it forbids political subdivisions within the 
state of Colorado from making laws that would give 
protected class status on the basis of homosexual, lesbian, or 
bisexual orientation. It in effect constitutionalizes the 
debated question of whether this should be civil rights type 
protections that are based on sexual conduct or sexual 

sementt 


Q. And in your opinion, Professor George, is that a 
legitimate approach to civil liberties in our system of 
government? 


A. Yes. It seems to me it’s an appropriate approach. 
It would not be inappropriate to take a different approach, 
but it’s not inappropriate to take the approach that Colorado 
has taken either by constitutionalizing the issue. I would say 
it’s appropriate to not constitutionalize it. It’s appropriate to 
constitutionalize it. The people of Colorado have to decide. 


Q. On this issue of regulation of sexual conduct, what 
does society care why do we draw lines in this area, 
Professor George? 


Our understanding of ourselves as people who 
We are not just things, but we are persons. Our 

aren’t just things or instn_nents. They are part of our 
personal reality. If understandings emerge that treat us, treat 
people as instruments, those will have profound impacts on 
institutions like marriage in the family that we value. Now, 
of course, it might be that some people’s best considered 


modified or more hedonist approach, but that has to be 
argued for if someone thinks a value would be something 
that protected sexual pleasure, that has to be argued for. I, 
myself, would reject it, but I think it has to be argued for. 


235 


(CROSS-EXAMINATION) 


[v. 18, p. 1325] 


Q. And you have not studied the political debate about 
homosexuality in Colorado, correct? 


A. I have not studied it. That’s true. 
Q. So to the extent you told us earlier that the quality 
of that debate will depend on whether there’s lying or 


manipulation or any of that sort of thing, you don’t know 
whether that occurred or not? 


*_s ee & 


AFFIDAVIT OF JAMES HUNTER 


James Hunter, being duly sworn, states as follows: 


1. Iam a professor in the Departments of Sociology 
and Religious Studies at the University of Virginia. I have 
held this position since 1989. I was initially appointed as an 
assistant professor in 1983. 


2. I received my doctorate at Rutgers University in 
1981. My fields of concentration are in the history and 
sociology of American culture, religion and politics and in 
sociological theory. I have published 6 books and over 2 
dozen essays in these area. My book, Culture Wars: The 
Struggle to Define America (Basic Books, 1991), is currently 
in its sixth printing. It was a finalist for the 1992 L.A. 
Times Book Award. My book, Evangelicalism: The Coming 
Generation (University of Chicago Press, 1987), was winner 
of the 1988 Distinguished Book Award of the Society for the 
Scientific Study of Religion and also selected by Choice as 
one of the outstanding scholarly books of 1987. My edited 
book, Articles of Faith; Articles of Peace: The First 
Amendment Religion Clause and the American Public 
Philosophy (Brookings Institution, 1990), was winner of the 
1991, Gustavus Myers Award for the Study of Human 


Rights). 


3. The purpose of this affidavit is a) to place the 
dispute over Amendment 2 in a larger cultural and political 
context; b) to outline and criticize a theory of power used to 
claim that gays and lesbians are politically powerless; c) to 
offer an alternative conceptualization of power and to offer 
evidence of the nature and extent of power gays and lesbians 
have acquired; and d) to summarize what is at stake in this 
dispute and why the referendum process is one legitimate 
means for addressing such disputes. 


237 


Amendment 2 and the Culture War 


4. The first point to be made is that the controversy 
over Amendment 2 in Colorado is not an isolated and 
eccentric dispute but one that is national in character and 
rooted in the American public’s most deeply held beliefs and 
values. It is a microcosm of a larger culture war waged in 
America today. To be sure, homosexuality and gay rights 
in particular, comprise one set of conflicts in a larger culture 
war. Other areas of dispute would include abortion, funding 
for the arts, the relationship between church and state, and 
content of public school textbooks, sex education, 
multiculturalism, among many others. Certainly the 
controversy over homosexuality and gay rights is among the 
most divisive of the culture war. 


5. As with most issues of the culture war, there is a 
deeper symbolic struggle underneath the particularities of the 
dispute over Amendment 2. In the case of homosexuality 
and gay rights, the fundamental matters at stake are “what 
constitutes normalcy in regard to human sexuality" and 
“what constitutes legitimate family structure, order and 
relations." This set of issues implicit in Amendment 2, then, 
touches upon what Americans view as good, right and 
proper for aspects of their social life. In a larger context we 
should see the disp ste in Colorado over Amendment 2 as 
part of a deeper symbolic struggle to define the "first 
principles" of how Americans will order their lives together. 


6. The culture war, of which the dispute over 
Amendment 2 is just one instance, is not rooted so much in 
politics or in the older political party divisions. Rather these 
disputes are rooted in different and competing systems of 
these systems of moral understanding are by no means 
trifling but have a character of ultimacy to them. They 


238 


provide a source of collective identity and a basis for 
cohesion in the communities that hold them. This is why 
claims by opposing moral communities seem so incommen- 
surable. 


7. It is because the differences are at root moral in 
character that there is usually dispute over the meaning of 
law itself. In the case of Amendment 2, one side believes 
that the referendum inhibits the protection of basic rights; 
the other side believe that the referendum merely inhibits the 
creation of a new class of special rights. 


8. Precisely because of the “character of ultimacy” 
motivating such groups that it is inaccurate to construe the 
competing moral values and commitments involved in the 
disputes over Amendment 2, gay rights more broadly, or 
over the culture war at large, as between religious values 
and commitments on the one hand, and non-sectarian or 
neutral values on the other hand. The reality of the situation 


is much more interesting and complicated. 


9. For one, formal religion exists on both sides of 
these disputes. Those that morally oppose homosexuality 
and the expansion of gay rights tend to be religiously 
conservative in their orientation. Those that favor the 
expansion of gay rights are not, by contrast, religiously 
neutral. In every major mainline Protestant denomination, 
in the larger Catholic community and in the largest move- 
ments in Judaism, there are gay and lesbian groups and each 
of these draw upon the theological and religious resources of 
their traditions to justify their moral and political claims. 


10. Even those who claim no explicit theistic commit- 
ments are not somehow religiously neutral. In social science 
and philosophy, secularity does not mean moral or religious 
neutrality. As theoretical and empirical work in the 
sociology of knowledge has demonstrated, all knowledge is 


239 


based upon certain “faith” assumptions. There is, then, a 
fiduciary nature to all world views or cultural systems, even 
when they are secular in nature. For this reason one always 
finds a sectarian (and even fundamentalist) moral fervor 
among secularists involved in these disputes. 


11. The competing moral visions at the heart of today’s 
culture war take expression as polarizing tendencies in 
American culture. Most Americans occupy a vast middle 
groups between these polarized rhetoric. This is also true 
when studying the opinions of the citizens of Colorado as 
they reflect upon homosexuality and Amendment 2. Indeed, 
the sociological and cultural make up of average citizens 
supporting Amendment 2 and opposing Amendment 2 is 
remarkably variable. This is to say that voters approach this 
public policy and the issues surrounding it with a variety of 
perspectives and range of interests. 


12. Where the polarizing tendencies in American 
culture tend to be sharpest is in the organizations and 
spokespeople who have an interest in promoting a particular 
position on a social issue. These organizations have 
tremendous power to shape public debate. 


13. In the context of the larger cultural conflict and the 
conflict over homosexuality in particular, the view that gays 
and lesbians are "politically powerless" is simply untenable. 


14. The most obvious flaw of the argument (as 
articulated by plaintiff's witness, Professor Kenneth S. 
Sherrill) is that it is ahistorical; it is, for all practical 
purposes, blind to a movement that is rapidly growing and 
changing. There is no question that gays and lesbians have 
been, even in recent generations, essentially voiceless, and 
thus powerless. But to contend that little or nothing has 
changed in recent decades, that gays and lesbians remain 
relatively "politically powerless” in American public life, is 


240 


silly. This argument would deny or underplay the emergent 
and now dynamic character of the social and political 
movement surrounding the gay and lesbian experience in 
America. 


Conceptualizing Power 


15. Though the most obvious flaw of the argument is 
that it is ahistorical in character, its most serious flaw is that 
it builds upon an understanding of power that is one- 
dimensional and out-dated; an understanding that is no 
longer accepted at face value in mainstream social science. 


16. This older model (and the one employed in 
Professor Sherrill’s perspective) defines power as the 
probability of individuals or groups realizing their will even 
against the resistance of others. As this perspective evolved 
within the discipline of American political science, the term 
gradually acquired a certain behavioral meaning. Power 
came to be understood as what some people do to others. It 
is observable when one group achieves a course of action 
even in the face of opposition. Such a view generally 
presupposes openly conflicting relations among opposing 
parties. Most commonly, this view has been applied to the 
study of the dynamics of the moder state. In this context, 
power emerges out of the resolution of conflicting and 
competing interests (typically measured by policy preferences 
and articulated grievances) through a process of formal 
bureaucratic decision-making. 


17. The two cases offered up by Professor Sherrill as 
illustrations of the political powerlessness of gays and 
lesbians fit his theoretical assumptions perfectly. The first 
illustration of “political powerlessness" is the failure of gay 
people to prevent congressional enactment of legislation 
mandating the Centers for Disease Control to withhold life 


241 


PUBLISHER'S NOTE: 


Page(s) 242 missing in original. 


shape in four analytically-distinct expressions: military, 
political, economic, and ideological. These are overlapping 
networks of social interaction which reflect distinct (but 
goals. 


21. Mann’s work is only an example. One could also 
mention the pathbreaking work of Stephen Lukes, Michel 
Foucault, Jurgen Habermas, Roberto Unger, Pierre Bourdieu 
among others. Part of the problem is Professor Sherrill 
ignores the theoretical developments contained in their work; 
developments that have formed the cutting edge of 
theoretical thinking since the 30s, 40s, and 50s when Robert 
Dahil and Harold Lasswell (scholars upon whom Professor 
Sherrill relies) were pubtishing. 


22. What most of the theorists since Dahl and Lasswell 
have insisted upon and emphasize, in one form or another, 
is that power, in its most thorough and complete expression, 
involves the capacity to define reality in society; an ability 
to set the agenda for society. 


23. In this perspective, power can be understood as the 
Capacity to determine what social and political issues ere 
relevant or irrelevant, what in social life is to be singled out 
for praise or condemnation (e.g. measures of good and evil), 
what standards may be imposed to measure justice or 
fairness. To suggest that power ultimately involves the 
capacity to influence the agenda of social life is to suggest 
that power exists as the capacity to persuade, to convince, to 
even shape the consciousness of people. Thus, power not 
only involves what is done to others; it also involves what is 
authoritatively (if not convincingly) communicated to others. 
This explains why it is that battles over public policy are 
very often battles over language: those controlling the 


243 


of a debate will likely have the upper hand in its 
outcome. 


24. The exercise of power at this level involves 
political/legal/cultural activities oriented toward “the 
production of common sense." nee 
at framing particular positions as superior to others ’ 
also strive to make the reasons for that superiority seem 
“natural”. Ce eS ens cass coal 
make its particular preferences and seem na 
then, is the key to its control. These particularities of - 
preference and practice become standard throughout society 
while shrouded in a cloak of neutrality. Reality, then, is 
redefined so thoroughly and completely that the very 
categories by which disagreement is articulated and 
organized are delegitimated from the outset. The very 
ground by which dissent could be put forward is ruled out of 
bounds. 


25. The reason I emphasized the more recent and more 
nuanced conceptualizations of power is because the conflict 
I have called the culture war -- of which the dispute over 
Amendment 2 is but a case study — is at heart a cultural 
conflict, not a political conflict. Cultural conflict obviously 
has political implications but at the heart of cultural conflict 
are competing definitions of reality ; competing moral visions 
of public life. In short, the only way to analyze this 
situation adequately is to work with a conceptualization of 


Gays and Power: The Evidence 


26. In a multidimensional approach to the conflict at 
hand, one can see that legislative gains or losses is only one 
way of measuring the relative power of a group. The power 
of a group or subculture must also be measured by a) its 
relative legal and political standing vis a vis the state 
(including the standing of claims made against the state for 
the redress of grievances, the representation of positions and 
advocates in political bodies, etc.), b) the relative size, 
coherence and strength of the social movement that forms the 
infrastructure for the various legal and political claims made, 
c) the social location of the group or movement, and d) the 
relative recognition of the group’s existence in the popular 
imagination and in public culture and the relative legitimacy 
of its claims among non-group members. 


27. Legal and Political Standing: Once again, 
legislative victories or losses is a very narrow gauge of 
political power. Given the conflicting nature of social and 
political change, any collective action vis a vis the State is 
an assertion of power. 


28. Consider first the claims for redress of grievances 
made in the judiciary. In the last twenty-five years 
(according to a LEXIS search of homosexual discrimination 
cases), 285 federal and state court cases concerning the 
discrimination of homosexuals are on record. The majority 
of the cases dealt with discrimination in employment. But 
there have also been the full range of cases involving the 
child custody rights of homosexual parents, homosexual 
marriages, application for funding or institutional approval 
of gay organizations, housing or rental discrimination, the 
membership rights of homosexuals in private organizations 
or clubs, the rights of homosexuals to march in public 
parades, the legality of military recruitment on university 
campuses where conflicting stances toward homosexuality 


245 


exist, gays discharged from the military, the rights of 
religious universities to not officially recognize or fund gays 
organizations, the treatment of homosexual prisoners, the 
applicability of Title VII to discrimination matters based 
upon sexual orientation, the obligations of insurance 
companies to cover health benefits of an employee’s 
homosexual partner, and so on. 


29. Such cases have not emerged randomly over these 
years but rather have increased dramatically. In 1968, for 
example, there was one case; in the 1970s there were 35 
cases; in the 1980s there were 170 and already in the 1990s 
there have been 79. Litigation obvicusly requires financial 
and legal resources. At the very least, the growth in the 
number of these cases is a measure of an expanding 
confidence and sense of entitlement among gays and lesbians 


30. The trend in the actual outcome of these cases is 
also quite tolling in this regard. When excluding cases that 
evoked split decisions (affirming in part; denying in part) 
and cases in which homosexuality is referred to only in a 
tangential manner, there is a clear paitern of successful 
litigation over the past 25 years. In the 1970s, 30 percent of 
the court decisions favored gays; in the 1980s, 45 percent of 
the court decisions favored gays; and already in the 1990s, 
50 percent of the court decisions favored gays. 


31. Over the years, the courts have been the most 
sympathetic toward discriminations claims made in the areas 
of private sector employment aad housing. They have been 
the least sympathetic toward discrimination claims made in 
the area of homosexual marriage, child custody, and 
homosexual conduct in the military. Yet even in the cases 
concerning homosexuality in the military, public policy cited 
by the plaintiffs as a demonstrated area of gay political 


246 


powerlessness, the story told through these court cases points 
to a growing leniency toward homosexuals in the military. 


32. In all, the image evoked by all of this litigation is 
that of a battering ram repeatedly hammering against the 
gates of traditional institutionalized restrictions against 
homosexuals and homosexuality. The gates have not been 
pushed open in all ways but the hinges are clearly weakening 
and the wood is noticeably splintering. Such is a measure of 
the power of gay and lesbian collective action. 


33. Beyond the growing power of gays and lesbians to 
press their claims in the judiciary, there is the growing 
ability to mobilize resources in the realm of electoral 
politics. 


34. The Human Rights Campaign Fund (founded in 
1980) with an affiliated political action committee (or PAC) 
has seen an increase in its budget over the past 6 years from 
$846,000 (in 1987), to 1.9 million (in 1989), to 4.5 million 
(in 1991) to 5.5 million (in 1993). Even in 1988 the HRCF 
was the ninth largest independent PAC and 25th on the 
Federal Election Commission’s list of fundraisers. 


35. In 1992 the first PAC to support homosexuals only, 
the Gay/Lesbian Victory Fund, emerged. The group’s 
chairman, David Mixner, observed in the Washington Times 
(January 21, 1992) that "[t}wenty years ago we couldn’t get 
them [politicians] to take our checks." Compared to today, 
"it’s like night and day . . . . Obviously, the next step is to 
run our own candidates." 


36. This process was already well-underway. In 1980 
there were fewer than half a dozen openly gay elected 
officials around the country, but by 1990 that number 
increased to 50. According to the National Gay and Lesbian 


247 


Task Force, there were 52 openly homosexual elected 
officials by 1992. 


37. Even through the conservative Republican, Reagan- 
Bush years, gays and lesbians were asserting their political 
clout. In 1980, the Washingtonian announced that "gays 
were [Washington, D.C.’s] Mayor Marion Barry’s key 
voting bloc.” 


38. As is well-known, in the 1992 Presidential 
campaign, homosexuals were important if not decisive to 
Clinton’s win. Gays and lesbians contributed more than $2 
million dollars into the Clinton campaign fund. As Norman 
Omstein of the American Enterprise Institute said in The 
Advocate (January, 1993), Ban Ap canenp Aamo 
Clinton with tremendous logistical and financial support. It 
is a force to be reckoned with." Tim McFeeley, director of 
the Human Rights Campaign Fund, was even more bold. 
Said he, "[Clinton] was elected president on the strength of 
the gay vote, and he knows it. If you’re a politician and 
know you are elected on the strength of a constituency, you 
have to pay attention to that constituency.” 


39. To suggest that these developments are unimportant 
in assessing the relative power of gays and lesbians in 
American society is to deny the claims of the gay and lesbian 
advocacy groups themselves. 


40. Consider, for example, the assessment of The 
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force of its own power. In 
its own literature, the NGLTF boasts of having “won 
countless victories for lesbians and gay men." Among their 
“accomplishments” they list the following: In 1974, they 
"successfully lobbied the American Psychiatric Association 
to remove homosexuality from its list of mental illnesses"; 
in 1975 they “obtained a U.S. Civil Service Commission 


248 


ruling that gay people can serve as federal employees"; in 
1977, they “organized the first official White House meeting 
with gay activists"; in 1978 they “successfully lobbied the 
U.S. Public Health Service to stop certifying gay immigrants 
as ‘psychopatic personalities.’"; in 1981 they launched a 
successful national campaign to defeat the anti-gay Family 
Protection Act"; in 1985 they “won a Supreme Court 
decision in NGTF v. Oklahoma overturning a law that 
prohibited gay teachers from discussing gay rights"; in 1987 


they “secured House of Representatives passage of the Hate 
Crimes Statistics Act, the first federal law to address sexual 


orientation"; etc. In this light the NGLTF literature speaks 
of its “unparalleled clout." (All of these quotes come from 
a brochure of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force 
“leading the fight for freedom".) 


41. I agree with the National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force’s self-assessment. The other evidence of collective 
action vis a vis the state mentioned here is of a fabric with 
that assessment. 


42. Movement Infrastructure: Even so, to say that 
the power of a group or subculture can only be measured in 
terms of its actions relative to the state is naive. Engage- 
ment in public policy typically emerges from the vitality of 
a social movement. Social movements provide the infra- 
structure for legal and political engagement. The size, 
coherence and strength of that infrastructure, then, is very 
relevant for a proper understanding of a community and its 
power. 


43. According to my calculations from the Encyclope- 
dia of Associations (Washington, D.C.: Gale Research, 
Inc.), there are presently 93 nationally-based gay and lesbian 
organizations in America today. These organizations range 
broadly in concern. As Urvashi Vaid, former executive 


249 


director of the NGLTF described them in the New Republic 
(May 10, 1993), “[t}here are now professional associations 
in every field -- legal student, minority, lesbian groups, 
sports leagues and cultural organizations providing support 
for every identity in the gay and lesbian world." 


44. Moot importantly, the number of such organizations 
has expanded dramatically over the past three decades. Only 
one such organization existed in the 1950s, 6 were founded 
in the 1960s, 40 were founded in the 1970s, and 44 were 
founded in the 1980s. Two more have been founded in the 


opening years of the 1990s. 


45. These organizations have control over increasingly 
large financial resources. The Human Rights Campaign 


Fund, mentioned earlier, has a budget of 5.5 million dollars. 
The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force has a budget 3.3 
million dollars (up from $687,750 in 1987). The Lambda 
Legal Defense and Education Fund has a budget of 1.8 
millica do'lars (up from $677,360 in 1987). Indeed, twenty 
perceni of the organizations listed in the Encyclopedia of 
Associations (N=19) have budgets of over $100,000 
annually and the overwhelming trend among them is one of 
rapid growth. 


46. In terms of cultural production, there are now, 
according to my count from Magazines for Libraries (6th 
edition, New York: R.R. Bowker) and Ulrich’s Interna- 
tional Periodicals Directory (32nd edition, New Providence, 
NJ: R.R. Bowker), 162 lesbians and gay magazines 
published in the United States. The ten largest of these have 

47. Again, there has been remarkable growth over the 


past several decades. Only one existed in the 1950s, 5 more 
were established in the 1960s, 69 more were established in 


250 


Weekly in its April 27, 1990 issue. PW reported that Alyson 
Publications of Boston had announced a new line of books 
written for the children of lesbian and gay parents. Said the 
publisher, “ten years ago it wouldn’t have been feasible to 
start a line like this -- it would have been impossible to find 
the market. Now there are more stores that cater to the gay 
and lesbian market." 


49. An infrastructure of lesbian and gay organization 
and activity has been firmly established on college and 


of the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the Graduate 
Center of the City University of New York, described these 
developments as an “extraordinary flurry of activity." That 
activity has not abated: in 1991 the national Lesbian and Gay 
Studies Association was founded; there are now academic 
journals that focus on homosexuality (such as the Journal of 
Homosexuality); the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force 
lists 46 colleges and universities ("by no means exhaustive") 
with courses devoted to homosexuality or bi-sexuality; at 
many colleges and universities gay and lesbian student 
organizations exist and operate by student fees or from 
institutional funds; Columbia University Press as well as 
NAL Books and St. Martin’s Press all have series devoted 
to gay/lesbian studies; there have been several annual 
national academic conferences devoted to gay studies held at 
major universities including the Ivy League (three at Yale;, 
[sic] one at Harvard); and the major professional associations 


251 


in the social sciences and humanities (including the American 
Political Science Association, the American Sociological 
Association, the American Historical Association, etc.) all 
have gay and lesbian caucuses or subcommittees to press the 
gay and lesbian agenda in their respective professions. 
These developments have quickly become part of mainstream 
academic inquiry. The editors of Feminist Studies note, for 
example, “the extraordinary rapid growth and acceptance of 
queer theory in the humanities." 


50. In the public school system there has also been a 
dramatic opening up to the views, interests and concerns of 
the gay and lesbian community. As early as 1977, San 
Francisco public schools instituted curriculum “designed to 
‘sensitize’ students to accept — or at least tolerate — 
homosexual lifestyles as just another way of living". Since 
then, the presentation of homosexuality has become common 
in sex education and multicultural curricula. Efforts have 
been underway (notably in San Francisco) to lift 
“homosexuality out of the closet and onto the pages of 
history, literature, art, math and science". According to one 
spokesman for the Bay Area Network of Gay and Lesbian 
Educators, “our intent is to raise consciousness that gay, 
lesbian and bi-sexual people are not included in the 
curriculum, and we want to see that that ends. Their 
contributions are an integral part of history.” In New York 
City in 1985, the Harvey Milk School was founded. 
According to Time, it is a fully accredited high school for 
gays, lesbians, crossdressers and transsexuals. It is part of 
the New York City public school matrix. 


51. Social and Economic Location: The size, 
coherence and strength of a social movement or subculture 
is crucial for the establishment of claims, but organization by 
itself is not the only factor to consider. From the time of 
Edward Shils, social scientists have understood the 


252 


PUBLISHER'S NOTE: 


Page(s) 253 missing in original. 


position in the class structure of American society. Though 
gays and lesbians can be found across the spectrum -- from 
rich to poor; well-educated to poorly educated — in general 
the available evidence consistently suggests that on average 
gays and lesbians are better educated and have 


example, the average annual household income of male 
homosexuals was $56,863 and female homosexuals was 
$44,793. This compares to an average annual household 
income of $47,012 for married heterosexuals and $37,602 
for unmarried heterosexuals. (Cited in USA Today, April 12, 
1993) 


56. According to the same census data, 35 percent of 
male homosexuals and 38 percent of the female homosexuals 


had a college degree compared to 18 percent of the married 
heterosexuals and 13 percent of the unmarried heterosexuals. 


57. The patterns represented by these figures comport 
with the patterns found in other surveys. According to a 
1992 survey of 7,500 gay men and lesbians by Overlooked 
Opinions, a polling firm based in Chicago, gay male 
households have average incomes of $51,325 and the average 
lesbian household income is $45,927. This compares to an 
average household income for all Americans of $36,520. 
The median years of education for gays and lesbians is 15.7 
years compared to 12.7 years for the American population 
as a whole. According to the survey, only 10 percent of 
lesbian households and 3 percent of gay male households 
include children. This, of course, would mean that 
homosexuals have considerably more discretionary income 
than heterosexual households. 


254 


61. Let me insert a caveat here, however. No study is 
methodologically perfect. These studies too have particular 


lesbian population, those who would most likely be engaged 
in collective political and social action. 


62. A Note on the Badgett Study: In this context it is 
worth commenting on an analysis of General Social Survey 


255 


(GSS) data from the National Opinion Research Center by 
M.V. Lee Badgett, referred to by Professor Sherrill in his 
testimony. The report is relevant because it seems to 
contradict the patterns described above. Professor Sherrill 
described this study as “extraordinary,” providing “very 
substantial evidence of discrimination," that “as a group in 
society, gay people are economically disadvantaged." In fact 
in his testimony, Professor Sherrill over-interprets the 
findings of the Badgett study: he says that the study 
demonstrates “that lesbians earn slightly less than heterosex- 
ual women, certainly not more." In fact, the Badgett study 
is inconclusive regarding the experience of discrimination 
contention that men who have sex with other men earn less 
than those who have not done so. 


63. To be sure, the Badgett analysis presently is at least 
as flawed methodologically (though for different reasons) as 
those surveys Professor Sherrill rejects. 


64. There are two problems inherent in the data she 
used. a) Since the questions concerning sexual behavior 
were asked of only a subsample of the respondents in each 
year of the GSS, Badgett had to combine the data from three 
separate years of the survey in order to secure a large 
enough sample for statistical analysis. b) The GSS only has 
respondents indicate a broad category within which their 
incomes fall. Badgett’s analysis required more precise 
assessments of yearly earnings, so she had to reconstruct the 
income variable by assigning each respondent an “average” 
income associated with the range he or she actnally reported. 
Both of these practices impact upon the validity of the 
results. 


65. Another problem centers on how she measured 
homosexuality in her analysis. Badgett was forced to come 
up with her own rather innovative approach to identifying 


256 


gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals within sample. The 
GSS does not ask respondents to identify their sexual 
orientations, but it does have them report on the number of 
sexual contacts they have and with members of each sex. 


On the basis of responses given to these questions, Badgett 


The problem is that hers, like the others, is an analysis that 
would not pass the blind review process common in refereed 
social science journals, at least not in the state it is in now. 
How Professor Sherrill can call this study in its present form 
“extraordinary” is beyond me. It is certainly misleading to 


257 


67. Recognition and Legitimacy: The intensity of 
collective action, the strength of the movement infrastructure 
and the social location of the individuals and organizations 
making up the movement are all critically important sources 
and manifestations of power. The relative recognition and 
legitimation of a group and its claims, however, is a measure 
of the group’s indirect influence over culture. 


68. Consider first the growing recognition and 
legitimacy of homosexuality and of gay and lesbian concerns 
are found in the amount of news coverage gays and lesbians 
receive. In the New York Times, for example, gay and 
lesbian concerns were covered 24 times a year during the 
1960s. This grew to an average of 126 stories per year 
during the 1970s; 112 stories per year in the 1980s; and so 
far in the 1990s, 242 times per year on average. 


69. In the Washington Post, gay and lesbian concerns 
were covered 48 times a year during the 1970s. This grew 
to an average 56 stories per year during the 1980s; and so 
far in the 1990s, 127 times per year on average. 


70. So too, in an analysis of Washington Post editorials 
between 1977 and 1993 (N=61), 79 percent were favorable 
toward gay and lesbian concermms, 11 percent were 
unfavorable, and 10 percent were neutral. 


71. Howard Kurtz, writing in the Washington Post 
(May 9, 1993), has characterized media coverage of 
homosexuality this way: “Homosexuals barely existed in the 
establishment press for years, or were portrayed with thinly 
disguised hostility, as perverts. That has changed 
dramatically in the last five years as gay issues have surged 
to the top of the national agenda. Now the unspoken 
pressure is to depict gays and lesbians sympathetically, 
although many Americans remain uncomfortable with open 


258 


caeca) ne ROmoveruality and some of the movement's more 


72. The recognition of homosexuality and the legitima- 
cy of gay rights have been established among various groups 
of elites outside of mainstream journalism as well. At a 
march for homosexual rights in Washington in 1987, 
according to the New York Times (October 11, 1987), "more 
than 1,000 elected officials, including 100 members of 
Congress, and other prominent civic, labor and religious 
leaders signed letters endorsing the march." 


____ 73. Public opinion surveys also demonstrate an increase 
in the legitimacy of claims made by homosexuals. To be 
sure, roughly three-fourths of the American population (as 


practice of , the majority of Americans favor 
certain civil liberties of homosexuals. Two-thirds (66%) in 
1992 favored homosexuals to teach in public 


libertarians like myself will be distressed that the numbers 
liberties has consistently and clearly expanded in the past 
two decades (1973): up from 49 percent in the first case 
(teaching); up from 55 percent in the second case (library 
creerdy 4 UP from 63 pencent in the third case (public 


74. The trends revealed in these data are confirmed by 
other survey data. According to a fall, 1989 Gallup poll, 47 
percent of all adults believe that homosexual relations 
between consenting adults should be legal. This figure 
increased from 33 percent in 1987. In the same poll, 71 


259 


percent of the respondents said that gays should have equal 
rights in job opportunities. Two years before, 59 percent 
opposed to equal job opportunities. Nearly 8 out of 10 
(79%) said it is alright [sic] for homosexuals to be hired as 
salespersons (up from 71 percent in 1985 and 68 percent in 
1977). Just more than half of all surveyed (56%) said that 
homosexuals should be hired as doctors, but again this was 
up from 52 percent in 1985 and 44 percent in 1977. Finally, 
only 42 percent thought that homosexuals should be hired as 
elementary school teachers, but here too this figure had 
increased from 36 percent in 1985 and 27 percent in 1977. 
(Reported in Newsweek, March 12, 1990) 


75. The trend of increasing openness and tolerance 
toward homosexuals is even reinforced in the Michigan 
Election Survey's feeling thermometer. In 1984, the percent 
who rated their feclings toward homosexuals at the coldest 
(0) was 35 percent. In 1988 the number holding those 
feelings toward homosexuals decline to 30.5 and in 1992, the 
number decline yet again to 24 percent. The frozen tundra 
of “cold feelings" toward gays has clearly begun to thaw. 


76. Not only do national public opinion data point to 
growing acceptance of the civil rights of homosexuals, but 
public opinion data from the residents of Colorado show this 
as well. A survey of Colorado citizens conducted in 
December, 1992 by Talmey-Drake found that 6 out of ten 
(59%) agreed that "homosexuals should be allowed to serve 
in the armed forces"; 73 percent disagreed with the statement 
that "homosexuals shouldn’t be allowed to teach in the public 
schools"; 78 percent disagreed with the statement that 
"homosexual behavior should be against the law, even if it 
occurs between consenting adults"; 96 percent disagreed with 
the statement that "homosexuals should be required to wear 
an identification badge, so people who wanted to avoid 
associating with them would know who they are"; 72 percent 
disagreed that “landlords should be allowed to refuse to rent 


260 


to homosexuals"; and 68 percent agreed with the statement 
that the average person is not nearly so prejudiced against 
homosexuals as many gay-rights activists would want people 


77. Given the trends of the last two decades, there is 
every reason to believe that the level of recognition, 
legitimation and tolerance for gays and lesbians and their 


public concerns will continue to expand. 

78. The cultural legitimation of . or 
perhaps the cultural delegitimation of views hostile to 
homosexuality, have indeed changed . Dorothy 


Rooney for critical remarks he made about ; 
she said, “It needs no more than such an accusation to bring 
the capitulation of a large and powerful broadcast network." 


79. Gay leaders themselves acknowledge the changes in 
recognition and legitimacy. As Tom Stoddard, executive 
director of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, 
has observed about these trends, "The world has been 
genuinely transformed in two decades. It is not possible to 
live in the United States and not be aware of gay people. 
That by itself is a revolution. (Quoted in Newsweek, March 
12 1990, pg. 21) (Emphasis added) 


80. Summary: Power is not a unitary or one-dimen- 
sional phenomenon. To measure power only in terms of the 
achievement of certain behavioral ends, or to suggest that 
formal political power is the only real or even relevant kind 


261 


81. Power, in all of these dimensions, is also not static. 
This is why it is essential to understand all of these 
dimensions of power historically; in terms of the way they 
have changed over time. 


social and cultural life changed in recent decades in a 
manner that has at least brought them closer? Dramatically 


mobilization of resources based upon common and 
ideals. All of these developments outlined here, and others 
too, together demonstrate the spectacular in the 


untenable but utterly ridiculous. Such a view can only be 
sustained on the basis of a narrow and out-dated theoretical 
foundation, an ignoring of a wide range and voluminous 
body of empirical evidence, and a complete lack of 


262 


appreciation for the changing nature of power in history. In 
short, such a view is only sustainable on the basis of a weak, 
if not incompetent, social science. 


85. Not to put too fine a point on it, such a view (that 
gay people are politically powerless) runs contrary to the 
convictions of many gay intellectual and political leaders 
themselves. I have quoted several s:urces already to this 
effect (in paragraphs 35, 38, 40, 48, and 79). Others 
concur. 


86. Jonathan Rauch, for example, recently argued in 
Reason, that the victim model simply does not fit very well. 
"It’s not true at the economic or the cultural level," he says. 
"Who enjoys more cultural influence in Hollywood today, 
gay people or fundamentalist Christians?" Else™ here (the 
New Republic in May 1993) he wrote that the usefulness of 
the "standard political modei [which] sees homosexuals as an 
oppressed minority who must fight for their liberation 
through political action”... “is drawing to a close.” 
"[L]ife is not terrible for most gay people,” he writes, "and 
it is becoming less terrible every year." 


87. In a similar way, Andrew Sullivan, editor of the 
New Republic, has described gay people as “already 
prosperous, independent and on the brink of real integra- 
tion”. 


88. Neither Rauch nor Sullivan, nor the gay leaders 
mentioned earlier would say that the integration of gay 
people into mainstream American society has been fully 
accomplished; that discrimination, acts of violence and civic 
intolerance of gays and lesbians have been fully eradicated - 
- not even close. But neither would these intellectuals deny 
the substantial and substantive changes that have occurred in 
the public and political fortunes of gay people. 


263 


Implications 


89. Needless to say, those morally opposed to homo- 
sexuality have organized and mobilized a vast array of 
resources as well. It is because of the highly institutional- 
ized and powerful mobilization of resources on both sides 
that this dispute is controversial and divisive. Each side 
perceives a threat to its own freedoms, and possibly even to 
its existence. Can democracy face up to this challenge? 


91. The question is, how and where can such consent 
be fashioned? The legal and political challenge is to create 
contexts where there is the greatest level of substantive 
debate among opponents so that persuasion may rule. As 
Andrew Sullivan (writing in the New Republic (May 10, 
1993)), has put it, 

“however effective or comprehensive anti- 
discrimination laws are, they cannot reach 
far enough to tackle this issue; it is one 


264 


legitimate recs for generating substantive debate 
among a number of people deeply divided. 
Whatever the specific legal outcome, the challenge before 
the people of Colorado would then be to engage each other 
over their deepest differences as fellow citizens. 


/s/ 


265 


DEPOSITION OF JAMES HUNTER 


[Dep., p. 60] 


Q. Well, didn’t the opponents of Ameudment 2 
succeed in winning the debate at the local level when they 


A. That’s right. 


Q. So you are saying that that shouldn’t have been the 
end of the debate, that then we should take it to the state 
level and amend the constitution? 


A. I would not have supported Amendment 2. I think 
that, my personal view is that the local ordinances were fine 
and that this represents -- at one level it’s an escalation. But 
the tendency again in these kinds of disputes is to push them 
all up, and usually the process is fairly quick, where it goes 
right to the courts and debate is eliminated. And that’s 
what’s going on here. 


~“*** * 


DISTRICT COURT, CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER, 
COLORADO 


Case No. 92 CV 7223, Courtroom 19 


ORDER 


RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA ROMERO, LINDA 
FOWLER, PAUL BROWN, PRISCILLA INKPEN, JOHN 
MILLER, THE BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
RE-2, THE CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER, THE 
CITY OF BOULDER, THE CITY OF ASPEN, and THE 
CITY COUNCIL OF ASPEN, 


Plaintiffs, 

v. 

ROY ROMER as Governor of the State of Colorado, GALE 
NORTON as Attorney General of the State of Colorado, and 
THE STATE OF COLORADO, 


Defendants. 


It has been suggested to this court that a Rule 54(b) 
certification is necessary under the current posture of the 
case. This court wishes to continue with its policy of 
expedition in dealing with the present case and therefore 
that there is no just reason for delay on the 
finding Amendment 2 unconstitutional on the 
previously stated. The ruling by this court may and 


Hie 


267 


a a 


™ m: er arr en rene marie ae ere ae ne a eee gee rye ° qe ere 
AS eR Fe Ieee Re BUST OAT re 2 
oa A ee A lek es i EE AEE rues a 


: : “7 ah os Pp ey’ a Tie: 7? : 
u Sz 2 ide OAs Tee Pn IE Con Sly rte te iste 


ought to be appealed without waiting for ruling on other 
issues raised by plaintiffs. 
SO ORDERED this 9th day of February, 1994. 
BY THE COURT: 
268 


