Predecision party summaries, advocate characterizations; all postdivergence Supreme Court law must be checked against simulated Holdings.

STATE, merits brief printed pp. 9–12:
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 
The question in this case is even more "extraordinary" 
than the one in Washington v. Seattle School Dist. No. 1, 
458 U.S. at 459. Here, local gover: ments and individual 
citizens seek to use the Fourteenth Amendment not to protect 
a racial minority, but to immunize from preemption special 
9 
protections that have been conferred upon homosexuals and 
bisexuals. 
The Colorado Supreme Court has created out of whole 
cloth a new fundamental “group right" not to be "fenced 
out" from unfettered political participation at all levels of 
government. This theory embodies a revolutionary change 
in the structure of state and local political authority, 
subverting the rule this Court has followed for almost 150 
years that “the sovereignty in every State resides in the 
people of the State, and . . . they may alter and change their 
form of government at their own pleasure." Luther v. 
Borden, 48 U.S. (7 How.) 1, 47 (1849). See also Gregory 
v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 462 (1991). The reasoning of the 
court below does profound violence to settled understandings 
of the authority of, and respect for, popular government at 
the state level. It does so without the remotest support in 
any prior decision of this Court. Applying either general 
equal protection analysis or fundamental rights analysis, the 
decision below should be reversed. 
A. 
The intent and effect of Amendment 2 is to withdraw a 
deeply divisive social and political issue from elected 
representatives and place its resolution squarely in the hands 
of the people. Core principles of federalism have led this 
Court to grant States “extraordinarily wide latitude," Holt 
Civic Club v. City of Tuscaloosa, 439 U.S. 60, 71 (1978), 
in such internal allocations of authority among political 
institutions. Rare in any context, heightened scrutiny is 
almost never appropriate where, as here, the challenged state 
action goes to the heart of state sovereignty. Thus, on its 
face, Amendment 2 carries with it a strong presumption of 
constitutionality. 
10 
This Court’s decisions recognize one clear exception to 
the rule that state allocations of decisionmaking power are 
presumed constitutional, wiz., when the state action 
constitutes a "meaningful and unjustified official distinction[] 
based on race." Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385, 391 
(1969); Seattle School Dist., 458 U.S. at 470. However, 
any claim that Respondents should be accorded the same 
“suspect class" treatment as racial minorities has been 
strategically waived by Respondents both in the Colorado 
Supreme Court and in this Court. 
C. 
Because federal judicial interference with sensitive and 
core political choices involves an extraordinary departure 
from the traditional approach demanded by our federalist 
system, this Court has steadfastly refused to extend Hunter 
beyond the context of racial minorities. James v. Valtierra, 
402 U.S. 137, 141 (1971). This Court should follow that 
course in this case. 
The new fundamental "group right" recognized below 
finds no support in any previous decision of this Court, and 
certainly not in the voting cases relied upon by the lower 
court. See Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964); Kramer 
v. Union Free School Dist. , 395 U.S. 621 (1969). Nothing 
in Amendment 2 deprives anyone of a right to vote, or to 
have access to the ballot, or to petition government or to 
exercise any other fundamental right. Amendment 2 merely 
reserves to the people the issue of special protections for 
homosexuals and bisexuals. Thus, the voting cases on which 
the court below relied support the constitutionality of 
11 
Amendment 2, which is itself the product of a popular vote. 
Respondents retain complete freedom to employ the same 
democratic processes that led to Amendment 2, to reallocate 
power in the future in ways that they regard as more 
appropriate. 
Furthermore, it is simply impossible, under this Court’s 
equal protection jurisprudence, to characterize an indepen- 
dently identifiable group’s ability to define the agendas of all 
levels of government as a “fundamental right." In fact, this 
Nation’s history and traditions authoritatively preclude any 
such conclusion. Seattle School Dist., 458 U.S. at 480 n.23. 
Finally, the "identifiable group-political participation" theory 
adopted by the Colorado Supreme Court, if upheld, would 
cast constitutional doubt on a wide range of state and federal 
legislation, because the definition embraces virtually every 
conceivable group. No persuasive rationale has been offered 
by the court below or Respondents to support this proposed 
sea change in the law. 
D. 
Amendment 2 is properly subject to rational basis 
scrutiny and readily satisfies that standard. This Court has 
held that it “will not overturn... a statute unless the 
varying treatment of different groups is so unrelated to the 
achievement of any combination of legitimate purposes that 
we can only conclude that the legislature’s actions were 
irrational." Vance v. Bradley, 440 U.S. 93, 97 (1979). 
Amendment 2 unquestionably is rationally related to a 
number of legitimate state interests, including three which 
the lower courts found so convincing as to be “compelling” 
(albeit, not narrowly tailored). 
12 
The interests advanced by Amendment 2 fall into three 
general categories. First, given limited resources, the people 
of Colorado plainly could conclude that anti-discrimination 
protections should be reserved for those who are particularly 
deserving of special protection. Second, eliminating anti- 
discrimination provisions that compel landowners and 
religious institutions to open their facilities to homosexuals 
and bisexuals is a rational means of protecting the legitimate 
prevailing preferences of the State’s population. Moreover, 
eliminating the regulatory burdens on privacy and associ- 
ational interests embodied in the local laws that Amendment 
2 preempted, furthers the rational basis which has variously 
been described as “that government is best which governs 
least." Finally, a single uniform rule has inherent advan- 
tages for efficient law enforcement. Eliminating divergent 
legal standards is certainly a legitimate choice that also 
eliminates the city-by-city and county-by-county political 
battles that prevailed prior to Amendment 2. In sum, 
Amendment 2 is a rational means of implementing legitimate 
governmental goals and as such it is plainly constitutional. 

INDIVIDUAL RESPONDENTS, merits brief printed pp. 12–15:
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 
Amendment 2 singles out one group of people and 
forbids state or local government from taking any action 
to protect that group from any claim of discrimination 
based on sexual orientation. The amendment forbids such 
protection without qualification or limit, regardless of 
circumstances and regardless of whether a governmental 
actor or private party discriminates. The question before 
this Court is whether such a selective and sweeping 
restriction of access to protection for only one group of 
people denies those people equal protection of the laws. 
Plaintiffs submit that it does for two reasons. 
identical to laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of “sex- 
ual orientation” and is restricted by Amendment 2 for the same 
reason and to the same extent. See n. 11 supra. 
13 
First, Amendment 2 deprives them of a right to par- 
ticipate equally in the political process and, therefore, 
must be subjected to strict scrutiny - a scrutiny the state 
concedes the amendment cannot meet. Second, even 
under this Court’s most lenient level of equal protection 
scrutiny, Amendment 2 lacks the necessary rational rela- 
tionship to a legitimate state purpose.’ 
This Court has held that the Fourteenth Amendment 
prohibits states from restructuring the political process to 
discriminate deliberately and substantially against partic- 
ular groups. By gerrymandering the jurisdiction of all 
political institutions in Colorado to exclude anti-discrimi- 
nation laws and policies only to the extent that they 
protect against anti-gay discrimination, Amendment 2 
denies those people an equal opportunity for political 
participation. Although gay people can still cast a ballot, 
the value of their ballot has been substantially and 
unequally diminished: they alone are barred from even 
an opportunity to seek a type of protection available to all 
other people in Colorado — an opportunity to seek protec- 
tion from discrimination. 
The State contends that it may restructure its political 
process to single out a specific group for such discrimina- 
tory treatment, so long as it does not burden a “suspect 
class.” However, this Court has held that the Fourteenth 
Amendment guarantees a right to equal participation in 
the political process for members of all groups, not just 
suspect classes. This Court has also held that normal 
judicial deference is inappropriate whenever government 
14 In addition to the arguments that follow, the plaintiffs 
refer to and endorse the arguments set forth in the amicus brief 
filed by Laurence H. Tribe, John Hart Ely, Gerald Gunther, 
Philip B. Kurland, and Kathleen M. Sullivan. The amici argue 
that Amendment 2 constitutes a per se deprivation of equal 
protection because it strips only one group of people of all 
eligibility for any protection from an entire category of wrong- 
ful mistreatment — the mistreatment of discrimination. 
14 
bars members of one group from equal participation in 
the political process by influencing elected representa- 
tives. This is because the inequality infects the political 
process itself, and the Court cannot rely on the demo- 
cratic process alone to redress the inequality. 
The State also contends that the decision below will 
have “devastating” consequences by subjecting numerous 
state and federal laws to heightened scrutiny. However, 
the principle identified in the decision below applies only 
where state laws intentionally deprive one group of the 
same opportunity to seek a type of government action 
that everyone else is free to seek, and does so in a way 
that substantially degrades that group’s influence in the 
political process. Amendment 2 is unique in having such 
a discriminatory purpose and effect. Indeed, the State 
cannot cite a single other constitutional provision which, 
like Amendment 2, targets one group of people and 
excludes this group alone from obtaining anti-discrimina- 
tion protection from ordinary legislative, administrative 
and judicial forums to which everyone else may freely 
appeal. 
Even if this Court declines to apply heightened scru- 
tiny to Amendment 2, it should conclude that the amend- 
ment lacks a rational relationship to any legitimate 
purpose and, therefore, is invalid under even the most 
lenient level of judicial scrutiny. Amendment 2 is unprec- 
edented in that it insulates against legal control or review 
all instances of governmental and private discrimination 
based on a particular characteristic, regardless of context 
or circumstances. Such a blanket foreclosure of respon- 
siveness to one group’s interests is rationally related to 
one purpose alone - the expression of antipathy toward 
gay people. That is not a legitimate purpose, and it can- 
not save Amendment 2 from the requirements of the 
Equal Protection Clause. 
The State nevertheless offers several purposes 
allegedly served by Amendment 2. None are rationally 
ee +e renee 
15 
served by Amendment 2 for two reasons. First, none 
explain why Amendment 2 singles out gay people alone 
to be stripped of protection from discrimination. Second, 
none can explain why Amendment 2 authorizes discrimi- 
nation on the basis of gay, lesbian or bisexual orientation 
in every context. Moreover, the legislative history con- 
firms that the State’s asserted purposes are mere pretext 
and that in fact Amendment 2 serves only the purpose of 
expressing hostility toward gay people. 
In the end, the State can provide no plausible reason 
to deprive gay people and only gay people of all oppor- 
tunity to seek protection from discrimination on the basis 
of sexual orientation, while leaving all other people fully 
eligible to seek such protection. The question in this case 
is whether state law may selectively impose such a 
sweeping deprivation of protection from discrimination 
on members of any group consistent with the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s guarantee of equal protection of the laws. 
Whether tested under heightened scrutiny or rational 
basis review, such an unequal deprivation violates the 
Fourteenth Amendment. 
