(1) ini Oo, 
BiIrnrrRn 
No. 94-1039 
1995 
Dees OF BE — | 
Supreme Court oof th the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 
Roy ROMER, as Governor of the State of Colorado, 
and the STATE OF COLORADO, 
r- Petitioners, 
RICHARD G. EVANS, et al., 
Respondents. 
On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
Supreme Court of the State of Colorado 
REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONERS 
GALE A. NoRTON * Rex E. LEE 
Attorney General of Colorado CARTER G. PHILLIPS 
STEPHEN K. ERKENBRACK Special Assistant Attorneys 
Chief Deputy Attorney General General 
TIMOTHY M. TYMKOVICH 2840 Iroquois Drive 
Solicitor General Provo, Utah 84604 
JOHN DANIEL DAILEY (801) 378-3342 
Deputy Attorney General 
PAUL FARLEY 
Deputy Attorney General 
Colorado Department of Law 
1525 Sherman Street, 5th Floor 
Denver, Colorado 80203 . 
(308) 866-4500 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
February 1, 1995 ** Counsel of Record 
WILSon - Epes Printing Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 
ot 
wr 
BEST AVAILABLE COPY 
im? 
“ee 
- 
ra 
Se 7 
: sve 
ate 
yoo 
» a 
> 
~~ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ED Ce A CID eecrnintnincimcniecceccntvcaninatiatinanitiin 
CONCLUSION . 
ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES Page 
Bowers V. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986) ....... = 5, 
Gordon Vv. Lance, 403 U.S. 1 (1971) ......................... 
Gregory V. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991) -.............. 
Holt Civic Club v. Tuscaloosa, 489 U.S. 60 (1978)... 
Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 (1969) ................ ® 
James V. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 187 (1971) ................. 2, 
Kramer v. Union Free Sch. Dist. No. 15, 395 U.S. 
A): On Se eS RO a 
Luther Vv. Borden, 48 U.S. 1 (1849) ......................... 
Maher Vv. Roe, 432 U.S. 464 (1977) ......................-.--- 
Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 583 (1964) ..................... 
San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 
owrn © © 
J to oO 
UB. 1 (RUDD cecccncunsnssttisttiinristiaeane 2, 4, 5,7 
Sugarman V. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634 (1978) -............ 2,8 
U.S. Terms Limits, Inc. v. Thornton, Nos. 93-1456 
and 93-1828 (cert. granted June 20, 1994) ........... 10 
Washington v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 458 U.S. 
GIT CIID a eceeeveecinrcsnsssimaticninitimmnamamaeaiae 2,3 
Williamson v. Lee Optical of Okla. Inc., 348 U.S. 
Yt. | ee 7,10 
REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONERS 
The decision below permanently enjoins the State of 
Colorado from enforcing the decision of its citizens to 
limit the authority of their government in an area left 
open by the Constitution, i.e., whether to grant extra- 
constitutional protections to homosexuals. To justify this 
extraordinary action, the court below created an expansive 
new “fundamental righ?” entitling “any independently iden- 
tifiable group” to irvoke strict federal judicial scrutiny of 
such state decisions. That right goes well beyond anything 
this Court sanctioned in Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 
(1969), Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964), or their 
progeny. 
Respondents do not dispute that those cases—the only 
cases in which this Court has ever refused to accord the 
traditional presumption of constitutionality to a State’s 
fundamental decisions structuring its own government— 
all involved suspect racial classifications or burdens on the 
fundamental right to an equally weighted vote. Respond- 
ents concede that they cannot defend the decision below 
on either of those traditional grounds for heightened scru- 
tiny. Opp. 14-15. And respondents do not deny that in 
recognition of “the extraordinarily wide latitude that States 
have in creating various types of political subdivisions and 
conferring authority upon them,” Holt Civic Club v. 
Tuscaloosa, 439 U.S. 60, 71 (1978), this Court has 
rejected every previous effort to expand the scope of strict 
scrutiny in this context. 
In seeking to avoid certiorari, respondents are thus left 
to argue that the expansion worked below is insignificant. 
Respondents insist that their new “fundamental right to 
equal access to the process of self-government,” Opp. 12, 
will not invite widespread federal intrusioh in state gov- 
ernment operations, because it is available to only a sub- 
set of citizens—members of “independently identifiable 
groups.” Id. at 15-19. The Court need look no further 
than respondents’ strained efforts to define narrowly these 
“independently identifiable groups,” however, to see that 
2 
under the decision below “a State would not be able to 
require referendums on any subject unless referendums 
were required on all, because they would always disad- 
vantage some group.” James v. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 137, 
142 (1971). Respondents’ briefs merely reinforce the 
clear need for this Court’s review of the decision below. 
1. “Questions of federalism are always inherent in the 
process of determining whether a State’s laws are to be 
accorded the traditional presumption of constitutionality, 
or are to be subjected instead to rigorous judicial scru- 
tiny.” San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 
U.S. 1, 44 (1973). That tension is at its zenith where, 
as here, the challenged decision involves a State’s dis- 
charge of its “constitutional responsibility for the estab- 
lishment and operation of its own government,” and this 
Court has consistently recognized that equal protection 
“scrutiny will not be so demanding where we deal with 
matters resting firmly within a State’s constitutional pre- 
rogatives.” Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634, 648 
(1973) (citations omitted) .’ 
In arguing that this Court’s decisions in Hunter and 
Washington v. Seattle School District No. 1, 458 US. 
457 (1982), can be read to sanction strict federal scru- 
tiny of any state decision allocating authority among po- 
litical subdivisions that “burdens” an independently iden- 
tifiable group, respondents completely ignore—as they 
must—this established constitutional respect for state au- 
tonomy. Respondents also ignore that both Hunter and 
Seattle School District repeatedly stress that it was sus- 
pect racial classifications, not fundamental rights, that 
1 See also Gregory V. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 461-63 (1991) 
(acknowledging the “unique nature of state decisions that go to 
the heart of representative government,” and noting that “while the 
Equal Protection Clause provides a check on such state authority, 
our scrutiny will not be so demanding”) (internal quotations and 
citations omitted) ; Luther v. Borden, 48 U.S. 1, 47 (1849) (“[T]he 
sovereignty in every State resides in the people of the State, and 
... they may alter and change their form of government at their 
own pleasure”). 
es 
3 
triggered strict scrutiny.” Indeed, neither case even men- 
tions, much less defines, any such fundamental right.° 
Any doubt on this issue is fully resolved by Valtierra, 
in which, as respondents concede, this Court affirmed an 
otherwise indistinguishable “referendum requirement [that] 
did not target any racial group,” Opp. 7, noting, “[t]he 
present case could be affirmed only by extending Hunter, 
and this we decline to do.” 402 U.S. at 141 (emphasis 
added). The “any particular group” phrase had meaning 
in Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 (1969) only be- 
cause of the suspect class context, and Valtierra clarifies 
that it is limited to that context. Expanding it beyond 
suspect classes gives this “right” a breathtaking sweep 
that warrants review by this Court.* 
2 See, e.g., Washington Vv. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 458 U.S. 457, 
477 n.18 (1982) (“The single narrow question before us is whether 
the State has exercised its power in such a way as to place special, 
and therefore impermissible, burdens on minority interests’) ; id. at 
480 n.23 (“[W]hat we find objectionable about Initiative 350 is 
the comparative burden it imposes on minority participation in the 
political process—that is, the racial nature of the way in which it 
structures the process of decisionmaking’); id. at 485-86 n.29 
(“It is the State’s race-conscious restructuring of its decision- 
making process that is impermissible”); id. at 486 (“Hunter ... 
rested on a principle that has been vital for over a century— 
that ‘the core of the Fourteenth Amendment is the prevention of 
meaningful and unjustified official distinctions based on race’”’); 
Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385, 391-92 (1969) (“Because the core 
of the Fourteenth Amendment is the prevention of meaningful and 
unjustified official distinctions based on race, . . . racial classifica- 
tions are ‘constitutionally suspect’ . . . and subject to the ‘most 
rigid scrutiny’”) (internal citations omitted); id. at 391 (“§ 137 
places special burdens on racial minorities within the govern- 
mental process”). 
3 Respondents place great emphasis on the fact that Hunter twice 
cites Reynolds and another voting rights case. In both instances, 
however, the Court (using cf. citations) merely noted that directly 
burdening a suspect class “is no more permissible than denying 
them the vote, on an equal basis with others.” Hunter, 393 U.S. 
at 391 (emphasis added) ; see also id. at 393. 
* Respondents’ heavy reliance on Gordon v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1 
(1971), is puzzling. The Court there rejected both approaches 
4 
Respondents’ attempt to fit the lower court’s decision 
within this Court’s fundamental “right to vote” cases is 
also unavailing. Although respondents’ exhaustive search 
of the case law produced snippets of expansive dicta con- 
cerning the unquestioned importance of »olitical participa- 
tion, they failed to uncover a single decision recognizing 
a fundamental constitutional right in this context that ex- 
tends beyond the right to have one’s vote counted equally. 
In this regard, respondents’ willingness to embrace the 
“essential principle that the equal protection clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment forbids the exclusion of persons 
from the political process, not the preemption of issues,” 
Opp. 16, is revealing. Amendment 2 preempts the elec- 
torate’s representatives on only a narrow set of issues— 
whether homosexuals will receive extra-constitutional ben- 
efits or protections. No persons are excluded from any- 
thing. Those who favored the substance of respondents’ 
position—the vast majority of whom were not homo- 
sexuals—had an equal vote on Amendment 2. After 
Amendment 2 homosexuals in Colorado have exactly the 
same right to vote in all elections and referendums as 
every other citizen. And after Amendment 2 homosexuals, 
like other citizens, can lobby their representatives on all 
issues not directly resolved by the people in Amend- 
ment 2. 
Amendment 2 is merely a substantive decision by Colo- 
rado citizens on the scope of the laws their government may 
enact. That respondents disagree with that decision does 
not mean that the Constitution grants them a right to 
see it reversed. To the contrary, this Court has been quite 
careful to explain that the Constitution guarantees only 
access to the ballot, not outcome. See, e.g., San Antonio 
Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 n.78 (1973) 
(“Since the right to vote, per se, is not a constitutionally 
that respondents urge here—-extending the Hunter doctrine beyond 
suspect racial classifications, id. at 7, and expanding the ballot 
access cases to state actions that merely make “it more difficult 
for some kinds of governmental actions to be taken,” id. at 5-6—in 
affirming a single issue supermajoritarian vote requirement. 
3 
protected right, we assume that appellees’ references to 
that right are simply shorthand references to the protected 
right, implicit in our constitutional system, to participate 
in state elections on an equal basis with other qualified 
voters whenever the State has adopted an eiective process 
for determining who will represent any segment of the 
State’s population”); Kramer v. Union Free Sch. Dist. No. 
15, 395 U.S. 621, 629 (1969) (“Our exacting examina- 
tion is not necessitated by the subject of the election; 
rather, it is required because some resident citizens are 
permitted to participate and some are not”). 
Rhetoric aside, the fundamental right recognized by the 
Colorado Supreme Court is a new right. That alone war- 
rants immediate review by this Court, since as this Court 
has recognized, “[t]he Court is most vulnerable and comes 
nearest to illegitimacy when it deals with judge-made con- 
stitutional law having little or no cognizable roots in the 
language or design of the Constitution.” Bowers v. Hard- 
wick, 478 U.S. 186, 195 (1986) (“There should be, 
therefore, great resistance to expand the substantive reach 
of [the Fourteenth Amendment], particularly if it requires 
redefining the category of rights deemed to be funda- 
mental”); San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist., 411 U.S. at 
33 (“It is not the province of this Court to create sub- 
stantive constitutional rights in the name of guaranteeing 
equal protection of the laws”). 
2. Any judicial creation of fundamental constitutional 
rights is cause for profound concern by this Court. Ac- 
cordingly, respondents go to great lengths to assure the 
Court that the lower court confined the scope of its new 
fundamental right by limiting access to that right to mem- 
bers of “independently identifiable groups.” In so argu- 
ing, respondents, like the court below, hopelessly conflate 
the narrow—and independent—“fundamental rights” and 
5 Unlike respondents, the lower court candidly conceded as much. 
Pet. App. D-14 (noting that this Court’s voting rights cases “are 
distinguishable from the present controversy,” but discovering a 
“common thread” justifying a broader right against “unequal bur- 
dens on identifiable groups”). 
6 
“suspect classifications” exceptions to the traditional pre- 
sumption of constitutionality that attaches to States’ laws. 
Under existing constitutional theory, any state action bur- 
dening individuals’ fundamental rights triggers heightened 
scrutiny, regardless of the identity of the persons whose 
rights are burdened. By contrast, a state classification 
that burdens a suspect class triggers strict scrutiny regard- 
less of the issues involved. Combining the two concepts 
into a “fundamental right” that triggers heightened scru- 
tiny only for the new “suspect class” of “inéependently 
identifiable groups” is unprecedented. 
As respondents’ briefs make clear, it is also unwork- 
able and can only lead to intrusive federal review of any 
state efforts to restructure political subdivisions or to re- 
allocate authority between the people and their representa- 
tives. Indeed, respondents’ constitutional theory would 
seemingly invalidate all decisions made directly by the 
people precisely and only because such decisions by defi- 
nition prevent representatives—a lower governmental au- 
thority—from making a different decision. 
Respondents’ assurance that limiting strict scrutiny to 
independently identifiable groups will quiet this revolution 
in equal protection jurisprudence is no more than sleight 
of hand. Respondents argue, for example, that Colo- 
rado’s constitutional term limit provision burdens only 
“persons who wish to reelect incumbents,” a group re- 
spondents contend is “not identifiable independent of their 
desire to accomplish what the challenged provision for- 
bids.” Opp. 17. It takes little creativity, however, to note 
that incumbents themselves are burdened by that provi- 
sion (and are indeed its target). As respondents explain 
it, a group is “independently identifiable” and thus en- 
titled to strict scrutiny “whenever its members are united 
by some common characteristic that is not simply created 
by the referendum requirement that the individual mem- 
bers are united in opposing.” Opp. 9-10. The group of 
incumbents is independently defined by its members’ posi- 
tions as political officeholders, and is thus an “independ- 
ently identifiable group.” 
7 
Of course. it may be the case that not all members of 
the group of incumbents favor unlimited political careers. 
That argument proves too much, however, because re- 
spondents have not shown that all homosexuals favor 
quotas, preferences, or other governmental intrusions in 
private decisionmaking. Nor can they even show that a 
majority of the opponents of Amendment 2 were homo- 
sexual, even assuming, arguendo, that homosexuals com- 
prise more than 2-3% of the general population. Thus, 
the only real “group” burdened by Amendment 2 is the 
46.6% of Coloradans that voted against it. See Pet. App. 
B-2. As respondents would be quick to point out, how- 
ever, that group is one of the few that is not “independ- 
ently identifiable.” 
Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a referendum require- 
ment that would not burden some independently iden- 
tifiable group. State referenda outlawing prostitution, 
casino gambling, or drug use would be subject to strict 
scrutiny as burdening the “rights” of the independently 
identifiable groups of prostitutes, gamblers and drug users, 
respectively, to ask their representatives to sanction those 
activities. State licensing of doctors would trigger strict 
scrutiny because it deprived the independently identifiable 
group of doctors of their “right” to seek laxer standards 
from lower political subdivisions... But see Williamson v. 
Lee Optical of Okla. Inc., 348 U.S. 483, 488 (1955). 
A state ban on smoking in public places would be subject 
to strict scrutiny because it “fenced out” smokers from 
the local political process. A state constitutional require- 
ment that school financing be based upon property taxa- 
tion would trigger strict scrutiny because it “targets” the 
independently identifiable group of children in relatively 
poor districts. But see San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. 
Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973). And a State that barred 
legislative consideration of government funding of abor- 
tions would burden the “right” of the independently iden- 
tifiable group of indigent womén to demand such benefits. 
But see Maher v. Roe, 432 U.S. 464 (1977). Viewed 
realistically, the decision below essentially eliminates the 
‘ 
8 
ability of the people of a State to limit the legislative 
goals of their representatives.° 
3. Throughout their briefs in opposition, respondents 
resort to characterizations of the effects of Amendment 2, 
of the “state’s motivations” in enacting Amendment 2, and 
of the scientific evidence relating to the genetic and social 
origins of sexual orientation, that are as erroneous as they 
are irrelevant. Thus, respondents are simply wrong in 
asserting that Amendment 2 would “authorize” discrim- 
ination against homosexuals in “state employment” or that 
it would “immunize” public discrimination “from regu- 
lation or redress at any level of government.” Opp. 2. 
Amendment 2 does not repeal the Equal Protection Clause 
of the Fourteenth Amendment, and homosexuals, like 
everyone else, remain free to challenge government dis- 
crimination. All that Amendment 2 does is reserve to 
the people the decision whether, unlike most individuals, 
homosexuals are deserving of more protections or greater 
benefits than the general populace.’ And the question 
® Cf. Sugarman Vv. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634, 657 (1973) (Rehnquist, 
J., dissenting) (“Our society, consisting of over 200 million individ- 
uals of multitudinous origins, customs, tongues, beliefs, and cul- 
tures is, to say the least, diverse. It would hardly take extraordi- 
nary ingenuity for a lawyer to find ‘insular and discrete’ minorities 
at every turn in the road’’). 
7 Respondents also claim that the “state admits that the purpose 
of Amendment 2 is to . . . express disapproval toward lesbians, 
gays, and bisexuals.” Opp. 13. The State admits no such thing. The 
testimony and affidavit respondents cite in support of their claim 
in fact make clear that the witnesses held exactly the opposite 
view. Record at 15:839, 853 (“Q. What sorts of legal protections 
did you believe existed after Amendment 2 had passed and [was] 
implemented? A. Well, the right to petition, the right to lobby 
politically, the right to conduct business, the right to freely 
associate, every right that has been recognized as fundamental to 
every citizen”); Aff. of John Finnis {15 (“The standard mod- 
ern position is consistent with the view that ... it is unjust 
for A +. impose any kind of disadvantage on B simply because A 
believes (perhaps correctly) that B has sexual inclinations (which 
B may or may not act on) towards persons of the same sex”). In 
any event, Amendment 2 was passed not by the “state,” but by a 
majority of the voters, and there is no evidence that in making it 
9 
whether homosexuals are deserving of special protections 
is simply irrelevant here because, as respondents concede, 
this is not a suspect class case.* 
The decision below must be defended, if at all, on its 
holding that all “independently identifiable groups” have 
a fundamental constitutional right to determine which po- 
litical subdivisions will consider the issues important to 
them. It is unsurprising that respondents prefer to divert 
attention from that issue. At bottom, the decision below 
has transformed an internal state political battle into a 
federal constitutional war. A group with substantial po- 
litical power, see Pet. App. C-18, exercised that power 
in a general election and attracted nearly 47% of the 
State’s voters to its position. It ultimately lost the election, 
but no individual was denied the right to participate fully 
in the political process. The process constitutionally avail- 
able to respondents to alter Amendment 2 is the same as 
that which brought it into existence in the first place— 
the will of the people expressed through the ballot box. 
The decision below, however, grants respondents—and 
every other “group” that loses a political battle—a con- 
stitutional “right” simply to demand that the offending 
decision be undone. Because that new “right” directly 
threatens state autonomy and places into constitutional 
doubt all attempts by state (or federal) governments to 
preempt lower governmental powers, the decision below 
plainly is worthy of review by this Court. 
more difficult for homosexuals to obtain special treatment, these 
voters intended to express “disapproval” of homosexuals. 
8In their zeal to run away from the suspect class inquiry, 
respondents also highlight the absurdity of a constitutional scheme 
that would subject a State’s efforts affirmatively to harm homo- 
sexuals—even to the point of criminalizing homasexual conduct— 
to only rational basis scrutiny, but would subject that State’s 
decision not to grant homosexuals special benefits unavailable to the 
general populace to strict scrutiny. See Opp. 15 (“If the state were 
to enact new laws putting other, Special burdens on lesbians, gay 
men and bisexuals, the standard of review would not be governed 
by Evans”). Compare Bowers Vv. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, 195 
(1986). 
10 
4. Finally, there is no legitimate reason not to review 
this critically important issue now. The decision below— 
affirming the trial court’s entry of a permanent injunction 
barring the enforcement of Amendment 2—is unques- 
tionably final; unless this Court grants review, Amendment 
2 is dead. Nor does the fact that this unprecedented fed- 
eral constitutional ruling was issued from a state supreme 
court, rather than a federal court, see Opp. 22, justify 
delay. Indeed, under respondents’ theory there could be 
no review of state supreme court decisions invalidating 
state constitutional amendments on federal constitutional 
grounds. But see, e.g., U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thorn- 
ton, Nos. 93-1456 and 93-1828 (cert. granted June 20, 
1994).° The issue raised here is simply too important 
and too far-reaching to postpone the inevitable day when 
it must be resolved by this Court.” 
CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
® The fact that the decision below has deterred efforts by other 
States to enact limits on their representatives’ ability to grant extra- 
constitutional protections to homosexuals is a reason to grant, not 
deny, review of the case. In any event, the holding below granting 
new fundamental rights to “any identifiable group” has impor- 
tance well beyond the narrow context of homosexual rights. 
10 As respondents concede, their “other equal protection theory”— 
that Amendment 2 fails rational basis scrutiny—can be addressed 
here. Contrary, to respondents’ claims, however, Amendment 2 
easily passes rational basis scrutiny. See, e.g., Williamson v. Lee 
Optical of Okla. Inc., 348 U.S. 488, 488 (1955) (Courts cannot in 
the name of the Constitution overturn duly enacted state constitu- 
tional provisions simply “because they may be unwise, improvident, 
or out of harmony with a particular school of thought”). 
Respectfully submitted, 
GALE A. NORTON * Rex E. LEE 
Attorney General of Colorado CARTER G. PHILLIPS 
STEPHEN K. ERKENBRACK Special Assistant Attorneys 
Chief Deputy Attorney General General 
TIMOTHY M. TYMKOVICH 2840 Iroquois Drive 
Solicitor General Provo, Utah 84604 
JOHN DANIEL DAILEY (801) 378-3342 
Deputy Attorney General 
PAUL FARLEY 
Deputy Attorney General 
Colorado Department of Law 
1525 Sherman Street, 5th Floor 
Denver, Colorado 80203 
(303) 866-4500 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
February 1, 1995 
* Counsel of Record 
