No. 94-1039 i 
In The 
Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
+ 
ROY ROMER, as Governor of the State of Colorado, and 
the STATE OF COLORADO, 
Petitioners, 
VS. 
RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA ROMERO, LINDA 
FOWLER, PAUL BROWN, PRISCILLA INKPEN, JOHN 
MILLER, the BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
RE-2, the CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER, 
the CITY OF BOULDER, the CITY OF ASPEN 
and the CITY COUNCIL OF ASPEN, 
Respondents. 
° 
On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The Supreme Court Of The State Of Colorado 
+ 
BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 
¢ 
Epwarp M. Caswa.t* 
Special Counsel 
JOHN P. Worcester 
City Attorney 
City of Aspen 
130 South Galena Street 
Aspen, Colorado 81612 
Telephone (303)920-5055 
Attorneys for Respondents 
City of Aspen and 
City Council of Aspen 
*Counsel of Record 
COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO, (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 442-2831 
QUESTION PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 
Did the Colorado Supreme Court err in ruling that 
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment prohibits the implementation of a voter-approved 
amendment to the Colorado Constitution that mandates 
the exclusion of a specifically identified and targeted 
minority from participation in the normal processes of 
government on an equal basis with other citizens 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
QUESTION PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ............ i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS. .. . «0 <00sspsscaceeneseeeeeee ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES . ....0scvcccssseseuwnnean iii 
OPINIONS BELOW. ......:ccssveesssauuaueneunna 1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED...... 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE... ..2.ccseccosssestuan 2 
Proceedings Below... . . . . . sisisumems +. ssewwsseeees 2 
Statement of Facts... ...sccsesesosecuuwseeeneen 4 
REASONS FOR DENYING THE PETITION......... 7 
I. THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO 
SUPREME COURT DOES NOT CONFLICT 
WITH DECISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES 
SUPREME COURT .....ccccccssccccsnassans 7 
Il. THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO 
SUPREME COURT DOES NOT RAISE AN 
IMPORTANT QUESTION OF FEDERAL LAW 
OR CONFLICT WITH DECISIONS OF THE 
UNITED STATES COURTS OF APPEALS... 10 
Ill. THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO 
SUPREME COURT DOES NOT PRESENT 
SPECIAL AND IMPORTANT REASONS 
WARRANTING CERTIORARI REVIEW...... 13 
CONCLUSION... ccccccccsccsenccuunennu sen eumeum 15 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Cases 
Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330 (1971) ............... 7 
Evans v. Romer, 854 P.2d 1270 (Colo. 1993) ...1, 3, 7, 12 
Evans v. Romer, 882 P.2d 1335 (Colo. 1994) ......... 1, 4 
Gordon v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1 (1971)........... 7, 9, 10, 15 
Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections, 383 U.S. 
eee ees cs en cenccccceccccccces 8 
Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 (1969) ........ 9, 10, 15 
James v. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 137 (1971).............. 9, 10 
Kramer v. Union Free School District No. 15, 395 U.S. 
easel ike ccccccccaccesccccecs 7 
Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964) ............... 7,8 
Rice v. Sioux City Memorial Park Cemetery, 349 U.S. 
cs baked wees cdcccciccccescs 13 
Romer v. + vans, No. 93-453, __U.S.___, 114 S.Ct. 
Ee Seah eek asecsccceccesecccces 4 
San Antonio Independent School District v. 
S| RSS) ) 8 
Washington v. Seattle School District No. 1, 458 U.S. 
ee cee sche bbecescccsescecs 9, 10, 15 
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 (1886)............... 8 
Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374 (1978) .............. 12 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
United States Constitution, Amendment XIV ......... 1 
Colorado Constitution, Article II, § 2................ 14 
Colorado Constitution, Article Il, § 30b............ 1, 2 
iV 
TABLE OF AUTHOR'TIES - Continued 
Page 
Statutes / ORDINANCES 
Municipal Code of the City of Aspen, § 13-98........ 2 
RULES 
Supreme Court Rule 10.1 1.6.6.6. e cece eee eee ees 13 
OPINIONS BELOW 
The pertinent opinions of the Colorado Supreme 
Court are reported at 882 P.2d 1335 (Colo. 1994) (on the 
merits) and 854 P.2d 1270 (Colo. 1993) (preliminary 
injunction). (See Pet. App. B and D, respectively.) The 
pertinent opinions of the trial court are not reported, but 
may be found at Pet. App. C (on the merits) and E 
(preliminary injunction), respectively. 
S 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED 
The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States provides in pertinent part: 
No State shall... deny to any person within its 
jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
Article II, § 30b of the Colorado Constitution pro- 
vides: 
NO PROTECTED STATUS BASED ON HOMO- 
SEXUAL, LESBIAN, OR BISEXUAL ORIENTA- 
TION. Neither the State of Colorado, through 
any of its branches or departments, nor any of 
its agencies, political subdivisions, munici- 
palities or school districts, shall enact, adopt or 
enforce any statute, regulation, ordinance or 
policy whereby homosexual, lesbian or bisexual 
orientation, conduct, practices or relationships 
shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of, or 
entitle any person or class of persons to have 
any claim of minority status, quota preferences, 
protected status or claim of discrimination. This 
Section of the Constitution shall be in all 
respects self-executing. 
° 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Proceedings Below 
On November 17, 1977, the City of Aspen adopted a 
comprehensive anti-discrimination ordinance prohibiting 
invidious discrimination in employment, housing, and 
public accommodations within the city, includintiilis 
crimination based upon affectional or sexual orientation. 
Municipal Code of the City of Aspen § 13-98 (1977). On 
November 3, 1992, a majority of the Colorado electorate 
passed a statewide ballot proposal commonly known as 
“Amendment 2”! which was intended to amend the Colo- 
rado Constitution so as to effect an immediate repeal of 
§ 13-98 of the Aspen Municipal Code and all other state 
and local legislative, regulatory and administrative anti- 
discrimination measures protecting homosexual, lesbian, 
or bisexual citizens from invidious discriminatory acts. In 
addition to nullifying existing anti-discrimination protec- 
tions, Amendment 2 also had the objective of stripping all 
elected officials and levels of government of their discre- 
tion and authority to adopt or enforce future legislation 
or regulations prohibiting discrimination against homo- 
sexual, lesbian and bisexual individuals. In furtherance of 
that objective, Amendment 2 mandated a fundamental 
change in the traditional political processes historically 
utilized by citizens to initiate legislative measures in their 
interest so as to foreclose the local or statewide adoption 
of legislation protecting homosexuals and bisexuals from 
discrimination in employment, housing and public 
accommodations absent the consent of a majority of the 
! Article II, § 30b, Colorado Constitution. 
Colorado electorate by way of the passage of an amend- 
ment to the Colorado Constitution. 
On November 12, 1992, Aspen joined with several 
other parties in initiating litigation in state court chal- 
lenging the constitutional validity of Amendment 2. 
Claiming that Amendment 2 violated guarantees to the 
equal protection of the law as provided under the Four- 
teenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States, plaintiffs moved the court for preliminary injunc- 
tive relief enjoining the effectiveness of the measure. 
After a four-day hearing, the trial court entered an order 
on January 15, 1993 preliminarily enjoining the enforce- 
ment of Amendment 2, concluding that the measure 
infringed upon a fundamental constitutional right and 
was likely unconstitutional. On January 19, 1993, the 
petitioners herein appealed the trial court’s order to the 
Colorado Supreme Court, which affirmed on July 19, 
1993. Evans v. Romer, 854 P.2d 1270 (Colo. 1993) (“Evans 
I”) (Pet. App. D). In uphoiding the injunction, the court 
found that the right of citizens to participate in the pro- 
cesses of government is a core democratic value and that 
the opportunity to participate on an equal basis in such 
processes constituted a fundamental constitutional right 
guaranteed by the Equal Protection Clause. Evans | (Pet. 
App. at D-9 and D-10). The court further held that inas- 
much as Amendment 2 mandated a restructuring of the 
political and governmental processes for the purpose of 
imposing singular disadvantages and burdens upon 
homosexuals, lesbians and bisexuals, the amendment, to 
a reasonable probability, infringed upon the right of citi- 
zens to participate equally in the political process and 
must, therefore, be subject to strict judicial scrutiny. Evans 
| (Pet. App. at D-25 to 27). The matter was thereafter 
remanded to the district court for a trial on the merits, 
including a determination on whether Amendment 2 was 
narrowly tailored in support of a legitimate and compel- 
ling governmental interest. Petitioners sought certiorari 
review of the Colorado Supreme Court’s decision before 
this Court, which review was denied on November 1, 
1993. Romer v. Evans, No. 93-453, __U.S.__, 114 S.Ct. 419 
(1993). 
Trial was conducted before th> state district court on 
October 12-22, 1993. The evidence and record as devel- 
oped before the court at the earlier hearing on prelimi- 
nary injunctive relief was incorporated into the trial 
record. On December 13, 1993, the trial court entered a 
written order permanently enjoining the enforcement of 
Amendment 2, ruling that the measure was not narrowly 
tailored in support of a legitimate and compelling state 
interest and that it violated guarantees to the equal pro- 
tection of the law as provided under the Constitution of 
the United States. On February 4, 1994, petitioners sought 
review of the district court’s decision before the Colorado 
Supreme Court which, after a de novo review, affirmed the 
trial court’s analysis and findings and the entry of the 
permanent injunction. Evans v. Romer, 882 P.2d 1335 
(Colo. 1994) (“Evans II”) (Pet. App. B). 
Statement of Facts 
As described in the testimony of the originators and 
promoters of the measure at trial, Amendment 2 was 
initiated to fend off alleged militant gay aggression 
within Colorado and prevent state and local government 
from providing homosexuals “protected class status”. 
(Pet. App. C-7) Pursuant thereto, Amendment 2 was 
designed and specifically intended to dilute and defeat 
the legal and political ability of homosexuals, lesbians 
and bisexuals to protect themselves against invidious 
discrimination. (XV:842-45, 853) 
Petitioners offered six “compelling state interests” in 
support of Amendment 2 at trial: 1) deterring factional- 
ism; 2) preserving the integrity of the State’s political 
functions; 3) preserving the ability of the State to remedy 
discrimination against suspect classes; 4) preventing gov- 
ernmental interference with personal, familial and reli- 
gious privacy; 5) preventing government from 
subsidizing the political objectives of a special interest 
group; and 6) promoting the physical and psychological 
well-being of children. The trial court rejected all of the 
petitioners’ arguments on these points finding that: 1) 
deterring factionalism as defined by the petitioners 
amounted to suppressing political debate and, thus, did 
not constitute a compelling state interest (Pet. App. C-6); 
2) the petitioners failed to demonstrate that the preserva- 
tion of the State’s political functions constituted a com- 
pelling interest and, likewise, failed to present any 
persuasive evidence demonstrating that militant gay 
aggression existed in Colorado or that the State’s politicai 
functions were threatened, or that absent Amendment 2 
homosexuals and bisexuals would be declared a suspect 
class and afforded protections based upon that classifica- 
tion (Pet. App. C-8); 3) the petitioners failed to factually 
support their claim that Amendment 2 would help rem- 
edy discrimination against suspect classes by preserving 
fiscal resources and/or that preserving fiscal resources 
constituted a compelling interest (Pet. App. C-9 to 10); 4) 
the petitioners failed to establish a definition for personal 
privacy and how Amendment 2 would allegedly protect 
such right and, similarly, failed to demonstrate that 
Amendment 2 was narrowly tailored in support of pro- 
tecting religious freedom and familial privacy (Pet. App. 
C-12 to 13); 5) no authority existed or was offered by 
petitioners illustrating that foreclosing government from 
subsidizing the political objectives of a special interest 
group constituted a compelling governmental interest 
(Pet. App. C-13); and 6) that Amendment 2 was not 
logically related to and did not serve the alleged compel- 
ling interest of protecting children (Pet. App. C-13 to 14). 
On appeal before the state supreme court, petitioners 
abandoned their previously argued sixth interest in favor 
of a new and different interest, to wit, that Amendment 2 
promoted the interest of allowing people to establish 
public social and moral norms, including such norms as 
heterosexual marriages and families and the condemna- 
tion of homosexuals and bisexuals as immoral. After a de 
novo review of the several different interests as put for- 
ward by the petitioners, both on an individual and aggre- 
gate bases, the Colorado Supreme Court affirmed the trial 
court’s ruling in all respects. 
Contrary to the assertion as set forth in the petition 
for certiorari (Pet. at 14), the Colorado Supreme Court did 
not rule that legal distinctions or classifications based 
upon sexual orientation trigger heightened scrutiny or 
protection under the Equal Protection Clause. As 
explained by the court in its initial decision affirming the 
issuance of the preliminary injunction, it was not the 
nature of the classification(s) drawn by Amendment 2 
that necessitated the court to review the measure under a 
more stringent level of scrutiny, rather it was the nature 
of the right invaded and diminished by Amendment 2 
that mandated such scrutiny. Evans I (Pet. App. D-21 to 
23). 
REASONS FOR DENYING THE PETITION 
I. THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO SUPREME 
COURT DOES NOT CONFLICT WITH DECISIONS 
OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT. 
The ruling of the Colorado Supreme Court as chal- 
lenged by petitioners herein rests entirely upon the prior 
decisions of this Court which illustrate that the right of 
citizens to participate on an equal basis in the processes 
of government is implicit and fundamental in our consti- 
tutional system and reflects a core democratic value pro- 
tected by the Equal Protection Clause. Reynolds v. Sims, 
377 U.S. 533, 529 (1964) (“each and every citizen has an 
inalienable right to full and effective participation in the 
political processes of his State’s legislative bodies”); 
Kramer v. Union Free School District No. 15, 395 U.S. 621, 
626 (1969) (“unjustified discrimination in determining 
who may participate in political affairs undermines the 
legitimacy of representative government”); Gordon v. 
Lance, 403 U.S. 1, 5-6 (1971) (when the State identifies and 
singles out a discrete and independently identifiable 
group for discriminatory treatment regarding the 
methods for obtaining access to legislative processes, a 
right protected by the Equal Protection Clause is impli- 
cated); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 336 (1971) (“in 
decision after decision, this Court has made clear that a 
citizen has a constitutionally protected right to partici- 
pate in elections on an equal basis with other citi- 
zens... “).2 Consistent with this Court's precedents 
holding that the Equal Protection Clause applies to all 
citizens and not just to those who are members of “sus- 
pect” classes, Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 369 (1886), 
and given the amendment’s threatened impact on the 
rights of the class of citizens targeted therein to partici- 
pate equally in state and local governmental processes, 
the Colorado Supreme Court employed strict judicial 
scrutiny in evaluating the validity of Amendment 2. San 
Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 
31-33 (1973) (test of strict judicial scrutiny required where 
state’s laws interfere with exercise of fundamental rights 
and liberties explicitly or implicitly protected by the Con- 
stitution). 
Having found first that Amendment 2 infringed upon 
a protected fundamental right by “fencing out” an inde- 
pendently identifiable minority from the operations of 
government and, secondly, that the petitioners had failed 
to demonstrate that the measure was narrowly tailored in 
support of a compelling state interest, the Colorado 
2 While the right to vote in state elections is nowhere 
expressly mentioned in the Constitution, Harper v. Virginia State 
Board of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 664 (1966), and is not, per se, a 
constitutionally protected right, San Antonio Independent School 
District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 n.78 (1973), it has, nonethe- 
less, been determined to be a fundamental right given the inher- 
ent participatory nature and design of our system of 
representative self-government. Reynolds v. Sims, supra. 
Supreme Court ruled that the amendment unconstitu- 
tionally imposed unique and special burdens on the 
rights and ability of a singularly targeted minority to 
participate equally in the State’s political and govern- 
mental processes and permanently enjoined its effective- 
ness. Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385, 393 (1969) (“State 
may no more disadvantage any particular group by mak- 
ing it more difficult to enact legislation in its behalf than 
it may dilute any person’s vote or give any group a 
smaller representation than another of comparable size”); 
Washington v. Seattle School District No. 1, 458 U.S. 457, 
469-70 (1982) (political majority may not manipulate gov- 
ernment processes so as to allocate power in nonneutral 
fashion and impose special and unequal structural bur- 
dens upon minority interests); Gordon v. Lance, supra at 7 
(“fencing out” independently identifiable group from 
political process violative of equal protection). 
The petitioners’ request that the Court accept cer- 
tiorari review in this matter on the basis that the decision 
of the Colorado Supreme Court conflicts with the deci- 
sion of this Court in James v. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 137 (1971) 
is both unfounded and inaccurate. Unlike the measure 
before the court below, Valtierra involved a state constitu- 
tional provision which required voter approval prior to 
the expenditure of public funds for low rent housing, a 
provision quite different from Amendment 2 which was 
drafted and intended to cripple the political participatory 
rights of an “independently identifiable group”.* Further- 
more, the Valtierra decision did not address or rely upon 
3 In upholding the state constitutional provision at issue in 
Valtierra, the Court found that it “ensures that all the people of a 
community will have a voice in a decision which may lead to 
10 
the Hunter doctrine requiring the allocation of political 
power according to “neutral principles”. Compare, Hunter, 
supra at 393-95 (Harlan, J., concurring) and Washington, 
supra at 470. Valtierra was decided essentially upon prin- 
ciples relevant to suspect classifications, not fundamental 
rights. Hence, contrary to the petitioners’ assertions of a 
conflict between the holdings in Evans and the prior 
decisions of this Court, a proper reading of the ruling 
shows that it reflects a reasoned implementation and 
enforcement by the Colorado Supreme Court of the con- 
trolling constitutional principles laid down in Hunter, 
Washington and Gordon. This Court need not revisit those 
principles. 
Il. THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO SUPREME 
COURT DOES NOT RAISE AN IMPORTANT 
QUESTION OF FEDERAL LAW OR CONFLICT 
WITH DECISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURTS OF APPEALS. 
Petitioners assert that in the Evans decision, the Colo- 
rado Supreme Court in effect determined that sexual 
orientation defines an “identifiable group” warranting 
special constitutional protections equivalent to those 
afforded suspect and/or quasi-suspect classes, including 
large expenditures of local government funds for increased 
public services and to lower tax revenues. It gives them a voice 
in decisions that will affect the future development of their own 
community.” (footnote omitted) Valtierra, supra at 143. The 
Court further noted that lawmaking procedures that disadvan- 
tage a particular group do not always deny equal protection. 
(emphasis added) /d., at 142. 
11 
the application of strict judicial scrutiny to any govern- 
mental measure that makes distinctions on the basis of 
sexual orientation. According to petitioners, the applica- 
tion of strict judicial scrutiny to classifications drawn on 
the basis of sexual orientation as allegedly called for by 
the Colorado Supreme Court is in conflict with the deci- 
sions of every federal court of appeals that has consid- 
ered the issue. (Pet. at 14-15) Respondents respectfully 
submit that the petitioners have mistakenly characterized 
the Colorado Supreme Court’s ruling and that an objec- 
tive reading of the decision unequivocally shows that the 
level of review employed by the Colorado Supreme Court 
in assessing the validity of Amendment 2 was not only 
proper, but required. 
The Colorado Supreme Court reviewed the legal suf- 
ficiency of Amendment 2 under the test of strict scrutiny. 
Contrary to the petitioners’ assertion, the application of 
strict scrutiny review by the court was not based upon a 
conclusion that sexual orientation defines a protected 
“identifiable group”, or “because it [Amendment 2] bars 
gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals from having an effective 
voice in governmental affairs, insofar as those persons 
deem it beneficial to seek legislation that would protect 
them from discrimination based on their sexual orienta- 
tion.” Rather, the Colorado Supreme Court employed 
strict scrutiny review because by expressly and exclu- 
sively singling out an independently identifiable group in 
a non-neutral fashion for exclusion from the normal 
affairs of government, Amendment 2 directly infringed 
upon the fundamental right as vested in all citizens to 
participate equally in the political processes that make up 
our system of self-government: 
12 
Prior to the passage of this amendment, gay 
men, lesbians, and bisexuals were, of course, 
free to appeal to state and local government for 
protection against discrimination based on their 
sexual orientation. Thus, like any other member 
of the electorate, the political process was open 
to them to seek legislation or other enactments 
deemed beneficial in the same way it was open 
to all others. Were Amendment 2 in force, how- 
ever, the sole political avenue by which this 
class could seek such protection would be 
through the constitutional amendment process. 
In short, Amendment 2, to a reasonable proba- 
bility, infringes on a fundamental right pro- 
tected by the Equal Protection Clause of the 
United States Constitution. Amendment 2 must 
be subject to strict judicial scrutiny in order to 
determine whether it is constitutionally valid 
under the Equal Protection Clause. (footnote 
omitted) Evans | (Pet. App. D-27) 
As demonstrated above, the Colorado Supreme 
Court's ruling in Evans does not recognize or intimate a 
new group or class of citizens for special protection 
under the Fourteenth Amendment, nor does it create or 
extend heightened standards of judicial review in the 
evaluation of government measures that draw distinc- 
tions based upon sexual orientation. Unlike the factual 
and legal circumstances that framed the various federal 
appellate court cases relied upon by the petitioners to 
illustrate an alleged conflict, Amendment 2 presented the 
court below with a measure that directly infringed upon a 
fundamental constitutional right. Because a fundamental 
right was at stake, the Colorado Supreme Court exercised 
strict scrutiny review. Such review was not only proper, it 
was mandatory. Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374, 383 
13 
(1978) (where a threatened right is of fundamental impor: 
tance, a critical examination of the state interest offered in 
support of the challenged classification is required). 
In that the Colorado Supreme Court unambiguously 
applied strict scrutiny review to Amendment 2 on the 
basis that it threatened a fundamental right and not 
because it mandated distinctions in the treatment of per- 
sons based upon sexual orientation, this Court need not 
exercise certiorari review in this matter so as to resolve 
alleged conflicts regarding the standard of judicial review 
to be applied to governmental classifications predicated 
upon sexual orientation. 
Il, THE DECISION OF THE COLORADO SUPREME 
COURT DOES NOT PRESENT SPECIAL AND 
IMPORTANT REASONS WARRANTING CER- 
TIORART REVIEW. 
Review on certiorari is not a matter of right, but of 
discretion, and may only be granted when there are “spe- 
cial and important reasons” therefor. S.Ct.Rule 10.1; Rice 
v. Sioux City Memorial Park Cemetery, 349 U.S. 70, 74 (1955) 
(“special and important reasons” imply problems beyond 
the academic or episodic). In that the Colorado Supreme 
Court's ruling below is founded entirely upon established 
constitutional principles as originally laid down by this 
Court, respondents respectfully submit that there exists 
no special or important reason for the Court to grant the 
petition as sought herein. While the petitioners have set 
out a frightening parade of horribles allegedly put into 
4 
motion by the Colorado Supreme Court's holding, peti- 
tioners’ fears fundamentally arise from a basic mischarac- 
terization of the decision and not from any error or 
weakness in the court's legal reasoning or conclusions. 
Petitioners also overstate the reach of the Colorado 
court's holding, for although it constitutes an important 
and meaningful decision, it is, nonetheless, a state and 
not a federal court decision addressing a state enactment 
and the manner in which the citizens of Colorado may 
amend their state constitution.’ It does not establish con- 
trolling precedent relevant to issues or actions that may 
arise in other parts of the Nation, This Court should not 
accept the petitioners’ invitation to reach out and resolve 
artificial or anticipated “uncertainties” allegedly 
spawned by the ruling below, particularly in the absence 
of any direct conflict between the Colorado Supreme 
Court's decision and the rulings of this Court of a United 
States court of appeals. 
* Article IL, § 2 of the Colorado Constitution proclaims that 
the people of Colorado may “alter and abolish their constitution 
and form of government whenever they may deem it necessary 
to their safety and happiness, provided, such change be not 
repugnant to the constitution of the United States”. 
15 
CONCLUSION 
For the reasons as set forth above, the petition for 
writ of certiorari as sought herein should be denied. 
Alternatively, the Court should summarily affirm the 
decision of the Colorado Supreme Court on the basis of 
Hunter v. Erickson, Gordon v. Lance, and Washington 0. 
Seattle School District No. 1. 
Respectfully submitted this 10th day of January, 1995. 
Eowary M. Caswati* 
Special Counsel 
Joun PO Worcester 
City Attorney 
City of Aspen 
130 South Galena Street 
Aspen, Colorado 81612 
Telephone (303)920-5055 
Attorneys for Respondents 
City of Aspen and 
City Council of Aspen 
*Counsel of Record 
