Predecision Colorado Supreme Court decision, 882 P.2d 1335 (1994), reproduced in petition Appendix B. A collateral Supreme Court procedural citation has been omitted. This is objective lower-court source text, not controlling simulated Supreme Court law. OCR and missing printed pages B-15 and B-19 are retained as source limits.

APPENDIX B 
SUPREME COURT, STATE OF COLORADO 
NOS. 94SA48 & 94SA128 October 11, 1994 
RICHARD G. EVANS, ANGELA ROMERO, 
LINDA FOWLER, PAUL BROWN, PRISCILLA 
INKPEN, JOHN MILLER, THE BOULDER 
VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT RE-2, THE CITY 
AND COUNTY OF DENVER, THE CITY OF 
BOULDER, THE CITY OF ASPEN, AND THE 
CITY COUNCIL OF ASPEN, Plaintiffs-Appellees, 
Vv. 
ROY ROMER, as Governor of the State of Colorado, and 
the STATE OF COLORADO, Defendants-Appellants. 
Appeal from the District Court, City and County of Denver 
Honorable H. Jeffrey Bayless, Judge 
EN BANC JUDGMENT AFFIRMED 
Defendants, Roy Romer, Governor of the State of Colorado, Gale 
A. Norton, Attorney General of the State of Colorado, and the State 
of Colorado (defendants) appeal the trial court’s entry of a permanent 
injunction enjoining them from enforcing a voter-initiated amendment 
to the Colorado Constitution ("Amendment 2"). We affirm. 
I 
In May 1992, petitions which would amend the Colorado 
Constitution by adding a new section 30 to article II were filed with 
B-1 
the secretary of state. The proposed amendment was put to the voters 
as Amendment 2 on November 3, 1992, and passed by a vote of 
813,966 to 710,151 (53.4% to 46.6%). The secretary of state 
certified the results on December 16, 1992, as required by article V, 
section 1, of the state constitution. 
Amendment 2 provides: 
No Protected Status Based on Homosexual, Lesbian, 
or Bisexual Orientation. Neither the State of Colorado, 
through any of its branches or departments, nor any of its 
agencies, political subdivisions, municipalities or school 
districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce any statute, 
regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual, 
lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct, practices or 
relationships shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of 
or entitle any person or class of persons to have or claim 
any minority status quota preferences, protected status or 
claim of discrimination. This Section of the Constitution 
shall be in all respects self-executing. 
On November 12, 1992, Richard G. Evans, along with eight 
other persons, the Boulder Valley School District RE-2, the City and 
County of Denver, the City of Bouider, the City of Aspen, and the 
City Council of Aspen (plaintiffs) filed suit in Denver District Court 
to enjoin the enforcement of Amendment 2 claiming that the 
amendment was unconstitutional. 
The trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing to consider 
plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction. Subsequently, the 
court granted the motion and prohibited the defendants from enforcing 
Amendment 2 pending the outcome of a trial on the merits.’ 
‘The trial court concluded that plaintiffs had met the threshold 
requirement of Rathke v. MacFarlane, 648 P.2d 648 (Colo. 1982), by 
demonstrating that enjoining the enforcement of Amendment 2 was necessary 
to protect their right to equal protection of the laws under the United States 
Constitution. The trial court then determined that because Amendment 2 
may burden a fundamental constitutional right, its constitutionality must be 
assessed by reference to the “strict scrutiny" standard of review. The court 
concluded that under this standard, plaintiffs had shown to a reasonable 
B-2 
The defendants appealed pursuant to C.A.R. 1(a)(3), and we 
granted review. See Evans v. Romer, 854 P.2d 1270 (Colo. 1993) 
(Evans I). In Evans I, we first addressed the question of the legal 
standard to be applied in reviewing the trial court’s entry of the 
preliminary injunction. Following the precedent of the United States 
Supreme Court, we held that "the Equal Protection Clause of the 
United States Constitution protects the fundamental right to participate 
equally in the political process," and “that any legislation or state 
constitutional amendment which infringes on this right by "fencing 
out’ an independently identifiable class of persons must be subject to 
strict judicial scrutiny." Jd. at 1282. 
After recognizing that "[t]he immediate objective of Amendment 
2 is, at a minimum, to repeal existing statutes, regulations, 
ordinances, and policies of state and local entities that barred 
discrimination based on sexual orientation" and that the "’ultimate 
effect’ of Amendment 2 is to prohibit any governmental entity from 
adopting similar, or more protective statutes, regulations, ordinances, 
or policies in the future unless the state constitution is first amended 
to permit such measures,” we held: 
[TJhe right to participate equally in the political process 
is clearly affected by Amendment 2, because it bars gay 
men, lesbians, and bisexuals from having an effective 
voice in governmental affairs insofar as those persons 
deem it beneficial to seek legislation that would proteci 
them from discrimination based on their sexual 
orientation. Amendment 2 alters the pclitical process so 
that a targeted class is prohibited from obtaining 
legislative, executive, and judicial protection or redress 
from discrimination absent the consent of a majority of 
the electorate through the adoption of a constitutional 
amendment. Rather than attempting to withdraw 
antidiscrimination issues as a whole from state and local 
control, Amendment 2 singles out one form of 
discrimination and removes its redress from consideration 
by the normal political processes. 
probability that Amendment 2 would be demonstrated to be uncunstitutional 
beyond a reasonable doubt at a trial on the merits. 
B-3 
Id. at 1285. We concluded that the trial court did not err in granting 
the preliminary injunction enjoining defendants from enforcing 
Amendment 2. 
After our decision in Evans J, the case was remanded to the trial 
court to determine whether Amendment 2 was supported by a 
compelling state interest and narrowly tailored to serve that interest. 
Id. at 1286. At trial the defendants offered six “compelling” state 
interests: (1) deterring factionalism; (2) preserving the integrity of the 
state’s political functions; (3) preserving the ability of the state to 
remedy discrimination against suspect classes; (4) preventing the 
government from interfering with personal, familial, and religious 
privacy; (5) preventing government from subsidizing the political 
objectives of a special interest group; and (6) promoting the physical 
and psychological well-being of Colorado children.’ 
The trial court concluded that the interest in deterring 
"factionalism" was in truth, nothing more than an attempt to impede 
the expression of "a difference of opinion on a controversial political 
question. . . ." It concluded that the first governmental interest was 
not a compelling state interest but rather, that "the opposite of 
defendants’ claimed compelling interest is most probably compelling," 
i.e., encouraging the competition of ideas with uninhibited, robust, 
and wide-open political debate. 
The trial court found that the interest of preserving the State’s 
political functions, premised on the Tenth Amendment right of the 
States to amend state constitutions, was not a compelling interest since 
"[dJefendants’ legal argument is not supported by federal or state case 
law, nor is it supported by the Colorado Constitution.” 
With respect to the interest in preserving the ability of the state 
to remedy discrimination against groups which have been held to be 
suspect classes, the trial court stated its doubt as to whether fiscal 
concerns of the state rise to the level of a compelling state interest. 
The court held that Amendment 2 could not be understood to further 
this interest because, 
?The state has not reasserted the sixth interest on appeal. 
B-4 
[djefendants’ evidence was principally in the form of 
opinion and theory as to what would occur if a Denver 
type ordinance were adopted as a state statute. There is 
no such statute, nor is one proposed. Plaintiffs’ evidence 
was based on what has happened over the course of 
eleven years in Wisconsin, and during the time in which 
the Denver ordinance has included a sexual orientation 
provision. Those actual experiences show that the 
presence of a sexual orientation provision has not 
increased costs or impaired the enforcement of other civil 
rights statutes or ordinances. 
Thus, the trial court concluded that “defendants’ offered evidence of 
lack of fiscal ability [is] unpersuasive in all respects." 
The trial court held that preventing the government from 
interfering with personal, familial, and religious privacy was, in part, 
a compelling state interest. Although the court acknowledged 
promotion of family privacy is a compelling state interest, it held that 
defendants never established what they meant by the term "family." 
Moreover, defendants failed to “tie-in . . . the interest of protecting 
the family and bes si gays and bisexuals the right to political 
participation . 
The trial court also found that preserving religious liberty was a 
compelling state interest. However, it held that Amendment 2 was 
not narrowly tailored to serve this interest. "The narrowly focused 
way of addressing [antidiscrimination protections for gay men, 
lesbians, and bisexuals] is to add to it a religious exemption such as 
is found in the Denver and Aspen ordinances, not to deny gays and 
bisexuals their fundamental right of participation in the political 
process." 
The trial court rejected the personal privacy component of the 
argument on the grounds that "[t]he general issue of whether personal 
privacy is a compelling state interest was not adequately established. 
The court can only speculate as to what defendants mean by personal 
privacy and how Amendment 2 protects such a right." 
The interest in preventing government from subsidizing the 
political objectives of a special interest group was rejected on the 
grounds that "[tJhis claimed compelling interest was not supported by 
B-5 
any credible evidence or any cogent argument, and the court 
concludes that it is not a compelling state interest." 
Similarly, the trial court rejected the argument that the protection 
of children is a compelling state interest served by Amendment 2 
because "[djefendants have failed to present sufficient evidence to 
support this claimed compelling interest." 
Accordingly, because the trial court concluded that Amendment 
2 was not necessary to support any compelling state interest and 
narrowly tailored to meet that interest, it permanently enjoined the 
enforcement of Amendment 2.’ 
*The court rejected plaintiffs’ argument that gay men, lesbians, and 
bisexuals should be found to be either a “suspect class" or a “quasi-suspect 
class." The trial court rejected this argument because it concluded that 
"[hjomosexuals fail to meet the element of political powerlessness and 
therefore fail to meet the elements [necessary] to be found a suspect class." 
This ruling has not been appealed and thus, we do not address it. 
The trial court also declined plaintiffs’ request to analyze the 
constitutionality of Amendment 2 under the "rational basis test." In so 
doing, it stated: 
The Colorado Supreme Court has ruled that Amendment 2 
invades a fundamental right of an identifiable group and that the 
test to be applied is the strict scrutiny test. The rational basis 
test is to be used when there is no fundamental right or suspect 
class involved. Therefore this court declines to apply a legally 
inappropriate test to this case. 
Plaintiffs have again argued to this court that Amendment 2 does not 
argue that each of the state’s purported compelling interests are not rationally 
related to the enactment of Amendment 2. Because we decline to revisit our 
holding in Evans |, see infra Part Il, and again conclude that Amendment 2 
affects a fundamental right, its constitutionality must be analyzed under the 
strict scrutiny standard of review. See Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 217 
(1982) (“laws that impinge upon the exercise of a ‘fundamental right’ 
[require] the State to demonstrate that its classification has been precisely 
tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest"). 
B-6 
On appeal the defendants argue that: (1) the legal standard set 
forth by this Court in Evans / for assessing the constitutionality of 
Amendment 2 should be reconsidered; (2) Amendment 2 is supported 
by several compelling state interests and is narrowly tailored to meet 
those interests; (3) that the unconstitutional provisions of Amendment 
2 are severable from the remainder; and (4) Amendment 2 is a valid 
exercise of state power under the Tenth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. 
I 
Defendants first ask that we reconsider the constitutional 
principles articulated in Evans J, but they offer no arguments that 
were not then considered and rejected by this court. We see no 
reason to revisit that decision. We reaffirm our holding that the 
constitutionality of Amendment 2 must be determined with reference 
to the strict scrutiny standard of review.* 
*After this court decided Evans |, a Federal District Court enjoined the 
enforcement of a voter enacted amendment to the Cincinnati, Ohio city 
charter almost identical to Amendment 2, which prohibited the city from 
enacting any ordinance, regulation, rule or policy which entitled gay men, 
lesbian or bisexual individuals to minority or protected status. Equality 
Foundation of Greater Cincinnati, Inc. v. City of Cincinnati, 838 F. Supp. 
1235 (S.D. Ohio 1993) (Equality I). The court found it highly likely that the 
right to participate equally in the political process is a fundamental right, 
protected by the Equal Protection Clause and requires strict judicial scrutiny 
on review. The court concluded relevant Supreme Court precedent 
supported the proposition that "[s]tates may not disadvantage any identifiable 
group, whether a suspect category or not, by making it more difficult to 
enact legislation on its behalf." Jd. at 1241 (citing Evans J, 854 P.2d 1270, 
1281, 1283 (Colo. 1993); Gordon v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1, 7 (1971); Hunter 
v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385, 393 (1969)). After a trial on the merits, the court 
made the injunction permanent holding inter alia that the amendment violated 
the plaintiffs’ fundamental right to equal access to the political process. 
Equality Foundation of Greater Cincinnati, Inc. v. City of Cincinnati, Slip 
op. at 26, 1994 WL 442746 at *11 (S.D. Ohio 1994). The court explained 
“any legislation that disadvantages an independently identifiable group of 
people by making it more difficult for that group to enact legislation in its 
behalf, *fences’ that group out of the political process, and thereby violates 
B-7 
Ill 
A legislative enactment which infringes on a fundamental right or 
which burdens a suspect class is constitutionally permissible only if 
it is "necessary to promote a compelling state interest," Dunn v. 
Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 342 (1972), and does so in the least 
restrictive manner possible. Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 217 
(1982). The question of what constitutes a compelling state interest 
is one of law and thus, we review the trial court’s ruling de novo. 
League of United Latin Am. Citizens, Council No. 4434 v. Clements, 
986 F.2d 728, 772 n.30 (Sth Cir. 1993); Scott v. Rosenberg, 702 
F.2d 1263, 1274 (9th Cir. 1983). Defendants argue that Amendment 
2 is supported by a number of compelling state interests and is 
narrowly tailored to serve those interests.° 
A 
Defendants’ first asserted governmental interest is in protecting 
the sanctity of religious, familial, and personal privacy. Freedom of 
religion is expressly guaranteed by both the First Amendment to the 
United States Constitution and article II, section 4 of the Colorado 
Constitution and stands at the core of our Nation’s history and 
tradition. It is among the highest values of our society. See Murdock 
v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 115-17 (1943). There can be little 
doubt that ensuring religious freedom is a compelling governmental 
interest. 
their fundamental rights." Jd. (citing Equality ], 838 F. Supp. at 1238-42; 
Evans I, 854 P.2d at 1282.). 
*We note at the outset that defendants argue that all of the asserted 
compelling interests which support Amendment 2 are narrowly tailored on 
the grounds that “there is absolutely no other way that the people could 
further the common elements of the various compelling interests but through 
the enactment of Amendment 2." We do not specifically address this 
argument for two reasons. First, as will be made clear below, none of the 
interests identified by defendants are compelling. Second, defendants never 
articulate what the "common elements of the various compelling interests" 
are, and we are simply unable to ascertain any specific “common elements" 
which all of those interests share. 
B-8 
Defendants argue that Amendment 2 is necessary to serve this 
interest because "[uJnder the ordinances preempted by Amendment 2, 
individual landlords or employers who have deep-seated and profound 
religious objections to homosexuality would nonetheless be compelled 
to compromise those convictions, under threat of government 
sanctions.” In support of this proposition, defendants rely on Smith 
v. Commission of Fair Employment & Hous., 30 Cal. Rptr.2d 395 
(Cal. App. 3 Dist. 1994), pet. for reveiw granted and opinion 
superseded by Smith v. Fair Employment & Hous. Comm’n, 33 Cal. 
Rptr.2d 567, 880 P.2d 111 (Cal. Sept. 8, 1994). (See Cal. Ct. Rules 
976(d) opinion withdrawn from publication pending review). 
In Smith, the plaintiff challenged the ruling of the California 
Commission of Fair Employment and Housing which found that she 
had impermissibly discriminated, based on their marital status, against 
a couple who sought to rent housing. The couple was unmarried and 
the plaintiff refused to rent to them on the grounds that doing so 
would violate her deeply-held religious beliefs. Plaintiff was ordered 
to cease and desist marital discrimination; post a notice announcing 
her violation of California law for ninety days; permanently post a 
notice to rental applicants of their rights and remedies under 
California antidiscrimination laws; and sign both notices and provide 
copies to each person who subsequently expressed an interest in 
renting her property. Id. at 397-98. 
The California court of appeals concluded that the commission’s 
order substantially burdened plaintiff's free exercise rights because 
she “cannot remain faithful to her religious convictions and beliefs 
and yet rent to unmarried couples." Id. at 399.° 
*Nevertheless, the court held, "it is clear that free exercise of religion as 
protected by the First Amendment is not actionably infringed by applying to 
plaintiff a facially neutral statute which merely proscribes marital status 
discrimination, notwithstanding plaintiff's religious scruples against renting 
to unmarried couples." Jd. at 401. This conclusion was reached based on 
the fact that "if prohibiting the exercise of religion . . . is not the object of 
the [law] but merely the incidental effect of a generally applicable and 
otherwise valid provision, the First Amendment has not been offended.” /d. 
at 400 (quoting Employment Div., Ore. Dept. of Human Res. v. Smith, 494 
U.S. at 878 (1990)). 
B-9 
Assuming arguendo that ordinances such as that in effect in 
Boulder, which prohibit discrimination against gay men, lesbians, and 
bisexuals in housing and employment but which contain no exception 
for religiously-based objections, substantially burden the religious 
liberty of those who object to renting or employing gay men, 
lesbians, or bisexuals on religious grounds, the enactment of 
Amendment 2 clearly is not narrowly tailored to serve the interest of 
ensuring religious liberty. To the contrary, an equally effective, and 
substantially less onerous way of accomplishing that purpose simply 
would be to require that antidiscrimination laws which include 
provisions for sexual orientation also include exceptions for 
religiously-based objections. This is precisely what the Denver 
antidiscrimination !aws provide. Denver, Colo., Rev. Mun. Code 
art. IV, §§ 28-92, 28-93, 28-95 to 28-97 (1992 Supp.). Similar 
exemptions for religious organizations are found in federal 
antidiscrimination statutes. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-1 (1994 
Supp.) (exempting religious organizations from the prohibition against 
employment discrimination); 42 U.S.C. § 3607 (1994 Supp.) 
(exemption for religious organizations in housing and public 
accommodation).’ Defendants do not, and . ‘e doubt that they could, 
argue that the Denver ordinance impairs religious freedom. Indeed, 
Joseph Broadus, who testified as an expert witness on behalf of the 
defendants, testified that imposing a religiously-based exemption on 
antidiscrimination laws intended to protect gay mer, lesbians, and 
bisexuals would be less restrictive than Amendment 2 and would 
adequately address any concerns about religious liberty. 
7We do not rule today on the adequacy of any religious exemptions 
contained in existing antidiscrimination laws. The question whether 
antidiscrimination laws violate the free exercise clause of the First 
Amendment by prohibiting discrimination based on marital status has 
recently been addressed by two state supreme courts with mixed results. See 
Attorney General v. Desilets, 636 N.E.2d 233 (Mass. 1994) (Statutory 
couples substantially burdened landlords’ sincerely held religious belief 
protected by the Massachusetts state constitution. Case remanded to decide 
whether a compelling governmental interest in climinating such 
discrimination justified the infringement); Swanner v. Anchorage Equal 
Rights Comm'n, 874 P.2d 274 (Alaska 1994) (enforcement of facially neutral 
fair housing laws did not violate a landlord’s right to free exercise of religion 
under either the state or federal constitution). 
B-10 
It is clear that Amendment 2, which affects the fundamental right 
of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals to participate equally in the 
political process, is not the least restrictive means of ensuring 
religious liberty, and is not narrowly tailored to serve the compelling 
governmental interest in ensuring the free exercise of religion. 
Defendants also argue that Amendment 2 serves the compelling 
interest of preserving “familial privacy." Family privacy is 
characterized by defendants as the right “of some parents to teach 
traditional moral values" to their children. As support, defendants 
cite authority recognizing the sanctity of the family and the central 
role the family plays in society. See, e.g., Moore v. City of East 
Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 503-04 (1977) ("the Constitution protects 
the sanctity of the family precisely because the institution of the 
family is deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition"); 
Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629, 639 (1968) (parental role is 
“basic in the structure of our society"). 
Defendants contend that the “right of familial privacy" is 
"severely undermine[d]" by the enactment of antidiscrimination laws 
protecting gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals because "[i]f a child hears 
one thing from his parents and the exact opposite message from the 
government, parental authority will inevitably be undermined." This 
argument fails because it rests on the assumption that the right of 
familial privacy engenders an interest in having government endorse 
certain values as moral or immoral. While it is true that parents have 
a constitutionally protected interest in inculcating their children with 
their own values, see Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 166 
(1944), defendants point to no authority, and we are aware of none, 
holding that parents have the corresponding right of insuring that 
government endorse those values. 
The United States Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the 
individual’s right to profess or practice certain moral or religious 
beliefs does not entail a right to have government itself reinforce or 
follow those beliefs or practices. See, e.g., Bowen v. Roy, 476 U.S. 
693, 699 (1986) ("Never to our knowledge has the Court... 
require[d] the Government itself to behave in ways that the individual 
believes will further his or her spiritual development or that of his or 
her family."). Furthermore, it is clear that the government does not 
burden an individual’s constitutional rights merely because it endorses 
views with which that individual may disagree. See Block v. Meese, 
B-11 
793 F.2d 1303, 1312-14 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (then Judge Scalia 
concluding that "[a] rule excluding official praise or criticism of ideas 
would lead to the strange conclusion that it is permissible for the 
government to prohibit racial discrimination, but not to criticize racial 
bias; to criminalize polygamy, but not to praise the monogamous 
family ... ."). Jd. at 1313. 
Consequently, fully recognizing that parents have a "privacy" 
right to instruct their children that homosexuality is immoral, we find 
that nothing in the laws or policies which Amendment 2 is intended 
to prohibit interferes with that right. With or without Amendment 2, 
parents retain full authority to express their views about 
homosexuality to their children. We believe that Amendment 2 is 
neither necessary nor narrowly tailored to preserve familial privacy 
because that right is not implicated by the laws and policies which 
Amendment 2 proscribes. 
Defendants also argue that Amendment 2 serves the compelling 
State interest in preserving “personal privacy." While it is not 
entirely clear what is meant by the phrase, it appears that the 
defendants are referring to the right of "associational privacy" which 
will be impaired in the absence of Amendment 2 because individuals 
may be forced to associate with gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals in 
the rental of housing.‘ 
*The defendants’ entire argument addressing the issue of personal privacy 
constitutes a single paragraph. It reads: 
The court below found that both religious liberty and 
familial privacy are indeed compelling interests. However, the 
court rejected the notion that personal privacy could be a 
it only “tangentially.” This finding ignores testimony such as 
that offered by Ann Ready of Madison, Wisconsin, who shared 
a house with four other women, but refused to share it with a 
lesbian. She stated that she “had rejected several heterosexual 
males for the same reason, namely the potential for [unwanted] 
physical, sexual attraction." Ms. Ready was subsequently 
found to have violated both municipal and state sexual 
orientation laws. That preventing this sort of intrusion into 
personal matters of the utmost privacy is a compelling interest, 
B-12 
As the Supreme Court has explained, the right of associational 
privacy protects associations involving, 
deep attachments and commitments to the necessarily few 
other individuals with whom one shares not only a special 
community of thoughts, experiences, and beliefs but also 
distinctively personal aspects of one’s life... . [TJhey 
are distinguished by such attributes as relative smallness, 
a high degree of selectivity in the decisions to begin and 
maintain the affiliation, and seclusion from others in 
critical aspects of the relationship. As a general matter, 
only relationships with these sorts of qualities are likely 
to réfect the considerations that have led to an 
understanding of freedom of association as an intrinsic 
element of personal liberty. 
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 620 (1984). 
While preserving associational privacy may rise to the level of a 
compelling state interest, Amendment 2 is not narrowly tailored to 
serve that interest. Amendment 2 would forbid governmental entities 
from prohibiting discrimination against gay men, lesbians, and 
bisexuals (because they are gay, lesbian, or bisexual) in all aspects of 
commercial and public life, no matter how impersonal. Amendment 
2 affects a vast array of affiliations which in no way implicate 
associational privacy. None of the criteria needed to precipitate 
associational privacy rights exists: there is no “special community" 
distinguished by "selectivity," "relative smallness," or any concern 
with "distinctively personal aspects of one’s life." Id. 
[A]n association lacking these qualities—such as a large 
business enterprise-seems remote from the concerns 
giving rise to this constitutional protection. Accordingly, 
the Constitution undoubtedly imposes constraints on the 
State’s power to control the selection of one’s spouse that 
would not apply to regulations affecting the choice of 
one’s fellow employees. 
should be obvious. 
(citations to the record omitted). 
B-13 
Id. (citing Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 12 (1967) and Railway 
Mail Ass’n v. Corsi, 326 U.S. 88, 93-94 (1945)). 
To the extent that antidiscrimination laws protecting gay men, 
lesbians, and bisexuals have the potential to implicate associational 
privacy rights, a narrower way of avoiding this conflict would be to 
exempt the sort of intimate associations identified in Roberts from the 
scope of such laws. For instance, landlords could be allowed to 
discriminate against homosexuals in the rental of owner-occupied 
housing -- the so-called "Mrs. Murphy’s Boarding House" exception. 
See, e.g., Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3603(b) (1988 & 1994 
Supp.) (exempting certain owner-occupied housing from the Fair 
Housing Act); Statutory History of the United States: Civil Rights, 
Part II 1741-52, 1805-06 (B. Schwartz ed. 1970) (detailing legislative 
history and policies underlying "Mrs. Murphy’s Boarding House” 
exemption in Fair Housing Act). Similar exemptions already exist 
under Colorado law. For iastance, Denver’s antidiscrimination 
ordinance exempts from its housing and public accommodation 
provisions multiple unit dwellings of not more than two units where. 
one of the units is owner occupied. Denver, Colo., Rev. Mun. Code 
art. TV, §§ 28-95(>)(2) & 28-96(b)(2) (1991). Similarly, the 
Colorado Civil Rights statute exempts from the definition of 
"housing" any room offered for rent or lease in a single-family PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
dwelling occupied in part by the owner. § 24-34-501(2), 1OA C.R.S. 
(1988). THE FOLLOWING PAGE IS UNAVAILABLE 
FOR FILMING 
Amendment 2, however, does no such thing. Rather, it prohibits B-) 
governmental entities from enacting laws barring discrimination 
against gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals in ai! contexts, regardless of 
the natere Of the seletionship tavolved and the extent of intimacy 
inherent in those reiationships. Amendment 2 sweeps more broadly 
than necessary and is not narrowly tailored to serve the governmental 
interest in preserving associational privacy. 
Defendants next assert that because “laws and policies designed 
to benefit homosexuals and bisexuals have an adverse effect on the 
ability of state and local governments to combat discrimination against 
suspect classes. . . . Amendment 2 is an appropriate means whereby 
the people sought to focus government’s limited resources upon those 
B-14 
officer for Denver’s antidiscrimination ordinance testified that 
Denver’s protection of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals has not 
prevented Denver from protecting other groups or had any significant 
fiscal impact on Denver. The chief of Wisconsin’s Civil Rights 
Bureau testified, based on twelve years experience with Wisconsin’s 
enforcement of its antidiscrimination laws, that protection of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual persons has not limited enforcement of other 
parts of the Wisconsin statutes. The trial court found that protecting 
gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals from discrimination “has not 
increased costs or impaired the enforcement of other civil rights 
statutes or ordinances.""° This finding is supported by the record 
and substantiates the conclusion that Amendment 2 is not necessary 
to serve the governmental interest asserted. 
Even if protecting gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals from 
discrimination has some fiscal impact on the state, Amendment 2 is 
not narrowly tailored to serve that interest. Ensuring that certain 
racial, gender, or ethnic groups receive undiminished funds for civil 
‘yghts enforcement could easily be accomplished by ear-marking fun is 
to cover the costs of such enforcement. Under such an arrangement, 
any protection for gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals would have to be 
funded from sources other than funds reserved for the protection of 
the specified suspect classes. The governmental interest in insuring 
adequate resources for the enforcement of civil rights laws designed 
to protect suspect classes from discrimination need not be 
accomplished by denying the right of gay men, lesbians, and 
bisexuals from participating equally in the political process. Rather, 
this interest can be served in such way that no persons’ fundamental 
rights need be denied. 
legislation, but seeks only to prevent the adoption of anti-discrimination laws 
intended to protect gays, lesbians, and bisexuals. 
The trial court rejected the testimony of the defendants’ witnesses who, 
while having no experience in the enforcement of civil rights laws intended 
to protect gays, lesbians, and bisexuals, speculated that doing so would 
create increased costs and limit the ability to enforce laws intended to protect 
suspect classes. 
B-16 
The defendants’ second asserted governmental interest in support 
of Amendment 2 is neither necessary nor narrowly tailored to serve 
that interest. 
Cc 
Defendants next argue that Amendment 2 “promotes the 
compelling governmental interest of allowing the people themselves 
to establish public social and moral norms."" In support of this 
proposition, defendants define two related norms which are promoted 
by Amendment 2: Amendment 2 preserves heterosexual families and 
heterosexual marriage and, more generally, it sends the societal 
message condemning gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals as immoral. 
The = authority relied on to support the view that the 
protection of morality constitutes a compelling governmental interest 
is Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). Defendants 
cite the plurality opinion in Barnes for the proposition that “the 
State’s interest in protecting order and morality is compelling; 
substantial; subordinating; paramount; cogent; strong." Barnes does 
not support defendants’ contention that protecting public morality 
constitutes a compelling governmental interest. 
In Barnes, four Justices held that “the public indecency 
Statute . . . furthers a substantial government interest in protecting 
"There is some dispute as to whether consideration of this asserted 
interest is properly before this court. Plaintiffs point out that in contrast to 
the six governmental interests addressed by the trial court, morality was not 
listed in the state’s disclosure certificate or the state’s opening statement at 
trial as a separate interest supporting Amendment 2. 
Defendants argue that it presented the interest in public morality to the 
district court and as support, cites an introductory paragraph contained in its 
brief to that court which stated that "the issue of public morality .. . 
permeates the discussion of compelling interests and indeed, can be regarded 
as a compelling interest in its own right." In our judgment, this is sufficient 
to conclude that the interest of public morality was presented to the trial 
court as a rationale for Amendment 2 and thus, this asserted interest is 
properly before this court. 
B-17 
order and morality." Barnes, 501 U.S. at 567 (emphasis added). 
Justice Souter provided the fifth vote in Barnes, however he did not 
rely “on the possible sufficiency of society’s moral views to justify 
the limitations at issue." Jd. at 582 (Souter, J., concurring). Rather, 
he was of the opinion that the Indiana law at issue (which prohibited 
completely nude dancing) was permissible due to the “State's 
substantial interest in combating the secondary effects of adult 
entertainment establishments ...." Jd. None of the justices in 
Barnes concluded that furthering public morality constitutes a 
compelling state interest. 
Consequently, defendants have cited no authority to support the 
proposition that the promotion of public morality constitutes a 
compelling governmental interest, and we are aware of none. At the 
most, this interest is substantial. However, a _ substantial 
governmental interest is not sufficient to render constitutional a law 
which infringes on a fundamental right -— the interest must be 
compelling. See Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S 202, 217 (1982). 
Furthermore, even recognizing the legitimacy of promoting public 
morals as a governmental interest, it is clear to us that Amendment 
2 is not necessary to preserve heterosexual families, marriage, or to 
express disapproval of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals. First, we 
reject defendants’ suggestion that laws prohibiting discrimination 
against gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals will undermine marriages 
and heterosexual families because married heterosexuals will "choose" 
to "become homosexual" if discrimination against homosexuals is 
prohibited. This assertion flies in the face of the empirical evidence 
presented at trial on marriage and divorce rates. For example, 
Wisconsin, the state with the oldest “gay rights" law in the nation, 
enacted in 1982, reports that the divorce rate in Wisconsin declined 
after the enactment of its antidiscrimination statute. See Center for 
Health Statistics, Division of Health, Wisconsin Dep’t of Health & 
Social Services, 1990 Wisconsin Vital Statistics Report, at p. 93, 
Figure 13 (divorce rates in Wisconsin peak at 3.9 divorces per 1,000 
population in 1981 and decline thereafter to 3.6 divorces per 1,000 
population in 1990). 
antidiscrimination laws implicitly endorse that conduct which is 
deemed an improper basis for discrimination. We are of the opinion, 
B-18 
LISHER'S NOTE 
FOLLOWING PAGE 
FILMING 
a Ji = 
' Cc 
7 
IS 
UNAVAILABLE 
a 
| ome ea Ta Ragin ie 
a — - 
above, however, we do not believe that antidiscrimination laws 
constitute an endorsement of the characteristics that are deemed an 
unlawful basis upon which to discriminate against individuals. See 
infra pp. 25-26. 
More significantly, defendants offer no authority to support the 
rather remarkable proposition that the government has a compelling 
interest in seeing that the state does not support the political objectives 
of a "special interest group." The state exists for the very purpose of 
implementing the political objectives of the governed so long as that 
can be done consistently with the constitution. The fact that some 
political objectives are promoted by "special interest groups” is utterly 
inconsequential. Indeed, virtually any law could be regarded as a 
benefit to a "special interest group." If defendants’ argument had any 
merit at all, the compelling state interest defined would justify striking 
down almost any legislative enactment imaginable. This is clearly not 
the law. No citation of authority is needed to make the point. 
We reject defendants’ assertion that Amendment 2 is justified by 
the compelling governmental interest in not having the state endorse 
the political objectives of a special interest group. 
E 
Defendants claim that Amendment 2 "serves to deter factionalism 
through ensuring that decisions regarding special protections for 
homosexuals and bisexuals are made at the highest level of 
government." More specifically, they argue that “Amendment 2 is 
intended, not to restrain the competition of ideas," but "seeks to 
ensure that the deeply divisive issue of homosexuality’s place in our 
society does not serve to fragment Colorado’s body politic." 
Amendment 2 accomplishes this end by eliminating "city-by-city and 
county-by-county battles over this issue." 
We reject the argument that the ir. erest in deterring factionalism, 
as defined by defendants, is compelling. Political debate, even if 
characterized as “factionalism," is not an evil which the state has a 
legitimate interest in deterring but rather, constitutes the foundation 
of democracy. “[T]here is no significant state or public interest in 
curtailing debate or discussion of a ballot measure." Citizens Against 
Rent Control v. City of Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290, 299 (1981). See also 
B-20 
Williams v. Rhodes, 393 U.S. 23, 32 (1968). We fail to see how the 
state, which is charged with serving the will of the people, can have 
any legitimate interest in preventing one side of a controversial debate 
from pressing its case before governmental bodies simply because it 
would prefer to avoid political controversy or “factionalism." See 
Police Dep’t of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 96 (1972) 
("government may not grant the use of a forum to people whose 
views it finds acceptable, but deny use to those wishing to express 
less favored or more controversial views"). 
In support of the asserted compelling interest in deterring 
factionalism, defendants rely on Storer v. Brown, 415 U.S. 724 
(1974). Storer involved a state requirement that proponents of any 
viewpoint resign from political parties and not run in those parties 
primaries if the proponents intend to run as independent candidates. 
The purpose of this neutral election procedure was to insure that 
independent candidates were more than merely sore losers who, 
having lost one primary, ran as “independents” to satisfy “short-range 
political goals, pique, or personal quarrel." Jd. at 735. 
Neither Storer, nor any other case we are aware of supports the 
proposition that there is a compelling governmental interest in 
preventing divisive issues from being debated at all levels of 
government by prohibiting one side of the debate from seeking 
desirable legislation in those fora. We conclude that the interest in 
deterring “factionalism" is not a compelling state interest. 
F 
Defendants argue that each of the governmental interests, while 
individually adequate to validate Amendment 2, "are especially so 
when considered in the aggregate." None of the interests identified 
by the state is a necessary, compelling governmental interest which 
Amendment 2 is narrowly tailored to advance. Lumping them 
together as one grandiose (and rather ill-defined) interest makes them 
no more necessary, compelling, or narrowly tailored. In this context, 
the whole is equal, and is as equally deficient as the sum of its parts. 
B-21 
IV 
Defendants next argue that the provisions of Amendment 2 are 
severable and that only those provisions pertaining to “sexual 
orientation" should be stricken as unconstitutional: “Plaintiffs have 
only challenged . . . the question of sexual orientation. They have 
not claimed or made any suggestion that Amendment 2’s restrictions 
concerning homosexual or bisexual conduct, practices, and 
relationships are in any way constitutionally suspect." 
In so arguing, defendants not only mischaracterize plaintiffs’ 
position, but fundamentally misconstrue the intent of Amendment 2. 
In Evans I, we held that Amendment 2 had been shown to a 
reasonable probability to be unconstitutional on the grounds that it 
affected "the fundamental right to participate equally in the political 
process .. . . by "fencing out’ an independently identifiable class of 
persons GD eet ie 1282. The constitutional infirmity of 
Amendment 2 recognized in Evans I was not limited to sexual 
Orientation as opposed to restrictions concerning homosexual or 
bisexual conduct, practices, and relationships. To the contrary, it was 
based on the fact that Amendment 2 sought to deny an independently 
identifiable group’s right to participate equally in the political process. 
“Whether unconstitutional provisions are excised from an 
otherwise sound law depends on two factors: (1) the autonomy of the 
portions remaining after the defective provisions have been deleted 
and (2) the intent of the enacting legislative body." Robertson v. City 
and County of Denver, 874 P.2d 325, 335 (Colo. 1994) (quoting City 
o — v. Colfax Unlimited Ass’n, Inc., 634 P.2d 52, 70 (Colo. 
1)). 
We hold that the portions of Amendment 2 that would remain if 
only the provision concerning sexual orientation were stricken are not 
autonomous and thus, not severable. In addition to denying the right 
of equal participation in the political process to a group based on 
sexual orientation, Amendment 2 also is intended to deny that same 
right to persons based on “homosexual, lesbian or bisexual. . 
conduct, practices or relationships... .“ 
Amendment 2 targets this class of persons based on four 
characteristics: sexual orientation; conduct; practices, and 
relationships. Each characteristic provides a potentially different way 
B-22 
of identifying that class of persons who are gay, lesbian, or bisexual. 
These four characteristics are not truly severable from one another 
because each provides nothing more than a different way of 
identifying the same class of persons. 
The fact that there is no constitutionally recognized right to 
engage in homosexual sodomy, see Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 
186 (1986), is irrelevant. Amendment 2 by no stretch of the 
imagination seeks to criminalize homosexual sodomy. While it is true 
that such a law could be passed and found constitutional under the 
United States’ constitution, it does not follow from that fact that 
denying the right of an identifiable group (who may or may not 
engage in homosexual sodomy) to participate equally in the political 
process is also constitutionally permissible. The government’s ability 
to criminalize certain conduct does not justify a corresponding 
abatement of an independent fundamental right. 
Vv 
Last, defendants argue that even if Amendment 2 is in conflict 
with the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, it 
is nevertheless a constitutionally valid exercise of the people’s 
reserved powers under the Tenth Amendment.’ In short, the 
argument is that the power to amend the state constitution is reserved 
to Colorado’s voters under the Tenth Amendment, and even if the 
voters amend the state constitution in such a way as to violate the 
federal constitution, such an amendment is per se valid. 
In support of this argument, defendants rely on Gregory v. 
Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991). In Gregory, the Supreme Court held 
that the Age Discrimination in Employment Act does not apply to 
state court judges. In reaching this conclusion, the Court noted that 
decisions concerning the necessary qualification of state court judges 
"is a decision of the most fundamental sort for a sovereign entity. 
Through the structure of its government and the character of those 
who exercise government authority, a state defines itself as a 
'?The Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: “The 
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited 
by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.” 
B-23 
sovereign." Jd. at 460. The court concluded that “Congressional 
interference with this decision of the people of Missouri, defining 
their constitutional officers, would upset the usual constitutional 
balance of federal and state powers." Jd. (emphasis added). 
Gregory applies only to cases involving federal interference with 
the qualification of constitutional officers. See, ¢.g., Equal 
Employment Opportunity Comm’n v. Massachusetts, 987 F.2d 64, 
68-69 (Ist Cir. 1993) (Gregory applies only when federal law 
interferes with state’s definition of policy-making officials’ 
qualifications); Tranello v. Frey, 962 F.2d 244, 249 (2d Cir. 1992) 
(same); May v. Arkansas Forestry Comm’n, 993 F.2d 632, 635-36 
(8th Cir. 1993) (same); Associated Builders & Contractors v. Perry, 
817 F. Supp. 49, 53 n.3 (E.D. Mich. 1992) (same). 
States have no compelling interest in amending their constitution 
in ways that violate fundamental federal rights. Reitman v. Mulkey, 
387 U.S. 369 (1967) (no reserved power to make right to 
discriminate a part of the state’s basic charter); Lucas v. Colorado 
Gen. Assembly, 377 U.S. 713, 736-37 (1964) ("A citizen’s 
constitutional rights can hardly be infringed simply because a majority 
of the people choose that it be."). 
We reject defendants’ argument that Amendment 2 is a 
constitutionally valid exercise of state power under the Tenth 
Amendment. 
VI 
The state has failed to establish that Amendment 2 is necessary 
to serve any compelling governmental interest in a narrowly tailored 
way. Amendment 2 is not severable and not a valid exercise of state 
power under the Tenth Amendment. Accordingly, we affirm the trial 
court’s entry of a permanent injunction barring its enforcement. 
JUSTICE SCOTT concurs. 
JUSTICE ERICKSON dissents. 
B-24 
Evans v. Romer, Nos. 94SA48 and 94SA128 
JUSTICE SCOTT concurring: 
I agree with the majority and join in its opinion and judgment. 
Amendment 2 is unconstitutional because it offends the Equal 
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States 
Constitution. I write y, nevertheless, to suggest that 
Amendment 2 impermissibly burdens the right “peaceably to assemble 
and petition the government for redress of grievances,” a right 
guaranteed to every citizen. Hence, the district court’s permanent 
injunction should be upheld under the Privileges or Immunities Clause 
of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
I 
Citizenship, not the good graces of the electorate, is the currency 
of our republican form of government. Over 130 years ago, this 
nation was engaged in a great Civil War which tested our 
constitutional form of government as has no other time in our history. 
That great battle, joined to address issues of slavery and race, actually 
resolved much more. History teaches us that, in fact, our nation 
addressed a question of paramount importance: whether any state 
may, by legislative enactment or popular referendum, deny or refute 
the Union of the several states and render asunder the bonds of our 
constitutional form of government. Although answered at 
Appomatox, today we are called upon to answer, if not resolve, that 
question once more. 
The federal Constitution, as submitted to the various states, 
created certain rights which the states cannot diminish. By joining the 
Union, Colorado "cannot be viewed as a single, unconnected, 
sovereign power, on [which] . . . no other restrictions are imposed 
than may be found in its own Constitution.” Fletcher v. Peck, 10 
U.S. (6 Cranch) 85, 135 (1810). Writing for the court in Fletcher, 
Chief Justice Marshall opined that each state "is a part of a large 
empire, . . . is a member of the American Union; and that Union has 
a constitution, the supremacy of which all acknowledge, and which 
imposes limits to . . the several states, which none claim a right to 
pass.” Id. Thus, within the limits of state sovreignty, most important 
questions are decided by the electorate. However, those matters in 
B-25 
which the result intrudes upon a protected liberty or fundamental right 
cannot be determined in the voting booth. 
The framers originally recognized this potential for harm and 
understood that not every issue can be resolved by the vote of a 
majority. In The Federalist Papers, James Madison identified the 
covenant of “a well constructed Union" as its promise to protect and 
preserve inviolate certain rights of all citizens. The Federalist No. 
10, at 42 (J. Madison) (Wills 1982). Madison noted that under other 
forms of government, “measures are too often decided, not according 
to the os of ao and the rights of the minor party; but by the 
superior force of an interested and over-bearing majority." , 
Madison further stated: eer ae 
The interest of the man must be connected with the 
constitutional rights of the place .... If men were 
angels, no government would be necessary. If angels 
were tO govern men, neither external nor internal 
controuls on government would be necessary. In framing 
@ government which is to be administered by men over 
men, the great difficulty lies in this: You must first 
enable the government to control the governed: and in the 
next place, oblige it to controul itself. 
It is of great importance in a republic, not only to 
guard the society against the oppression of its rulers; but 
to guard one part of the society against the injustice of the 
other part. 
Id., No. 51, at 262 & 264. Appropriately, Madison suggested, the 
“cure” rests in a republican form of government -- a Union in which 
there is a “tendency to break and control the violence of faction." 
Id., No. 10 at 42. The obligation to "guard one part of the society 
against the injustice of the other part" exists whether the oppressive 
act is the result of referendum or other state action. Hence, every 
individual is promised full citizenship under a written Constitution 
which, as Justice Harlan opined, “neither knows nor tolerates classes 
among c'tizens." Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559 (1895) 
(Harlan, J., dissenting). 
B-26 
Judge Robert Bork, addressing the same covenant, wrote of what 
he referred to as the "Madisonian dilemma," stating: 
The United States was founded as a Madisonian system, 
which that it contains two opposing principles that 
must be continually reconciled. The first principle is 
self-government, which means that in wide areas of life 
majorities are entitled to rule, if they wish, simply 
because they are majorities. The second is that there are 
nonetheless some things majorities must not do to 
minorities, some areas of life in which the individual 
must be free of majority rule. The dilemma is that 
neither majorities nor minorities can be trusted to define 
the proper spheres of democratic authority and individual 
liberty. To place that power in one or the other would 
risk either tyranny by the majority or tyranny by the 
Robert H. Bork, The Tempting of America: The Political Seduction 
of the Law 139 (1990) (hereinafter "Bork"). Such a dilemma can 
only be resolved by resort to a neutral written principal, the 
Constitution. We should look first to the text and to the 
understanding manifested in the words used by the framers. 
McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316, 421 (1819) (let the 
end be "within the scope of the constitution, and all means which are 
appropriate . . . which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter 
and spirit of the constitution, are constitutional"); Colorado Ass’n of 
Public Employees v. Lamm, 677 P.2d 1350, 1353 (Colo. 1984) 
("Where the language of the constitution is plain and its meaning 
clear, that language must be declared and enforced as written."); see 
also Bork at 145 (“If the Constitution is law, then presumably, like 
all other law, the meaning the lawmakers intended is as binding upon 
judges as it is upon legislatures and executives."). Where the words 
of the Constitution are unambiguous, we need not look further. 
Il 
A 
Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States 
Constitution declares: “All persons born or naturalized in the United 
B-27 
States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United 
States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or 
enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of 
citizens of the United States. . . ." U.S. Const. amend XIV, section 
1.' The Fourteenth Amendment, in section 1, made state citizenship 
derivative of national citizenship and transferred to the federal 
government a portion of each state’s control over civil and political 
rights.’ 
By the force of an unfortunate history and a refusal to rely upon 
the plain text of the constitution, our Fourteenth Amendment 
jurisprudence has resulted in a Privileges or Immunities Clause that 
has been eclipsed by the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses. 
As a consequence, no important line of decision rests solely on the 
Privileges or Immunities Clause. Early on, in fact, the original 
understanding was virtually written out of the Constitution by the 
United States Supreme Court in the Slaughter-House Cases, 83 U.S. 
(16 Wall.) 36 (1873). 
‘The words "privileges" and "immunities" first appear in the Constitution 
in article IV, § 2 ("The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all 
Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States."). By virtue of 
Article IV, state citizenship carries with it the right to nondiscriminatory 
treatment within each state of citizens of all the states. 
Consistent with the text and for purposes of distinction, the Article IV 
clause will be referred to as the "Privileges and Immunities Clause,” and the 
Fourteenth Amendment clause will be referred to as the "Privileges or 
Immunities Clause." 
“It is widely agreed that section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment was 
intended at least to empower Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1866, 
ch. 31, 14 Stat. 27. William Nelson, The Fourteenth Amendment: From 
Political Principle to Judicial Doctrine 104 (1988) ("Section one was added 
to the amendment at least in part to remove doubts about the constitutionality 
of the 1866 act."); John Harrison, Reconstructing the Privileges or 
Immunities Clause, 101 Yale L.J. 1385, 1389 (1992). Many commentators 
have suggested that the amendment actually writes the substance of the 1866 
Act into the Constitution. See id. 
B-28 
In the Slaughter-House Cases, decided in 1873, a majority of the 
Court acknowledged the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment, but limited its effects to those rights earlier 
existing under Article IV, without recognizing the creation of a new 
national citizenship. In his opinion for the Court in Slaughter-House 
Cases, Justice Miller declared that the rights conferred by national 
citizenship were those “which owe their existence to the Federal 
government, its National character, its Constitution, or its laws."? 
83 U.S. (16 Wall.) at 79. A review of the legislative history, 
however, will not permit such an ambivalent view.* The statements 
of the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment, Senator Howard and 
Representative Bingham, confirm that the Privileges or Immunities 
Clause was originally intended to confer and make inviolate certain 
minimal rights embodied in national citizenship.* 
*Subsequent cases suggested an even narrower definition of the rights of 
national citizenship, but in Twining v. New Jersey, 211 U.S. 78 (1908), the 
Court in dictum finally settled on the Slaughter-House definition as correct. 
“As Justice Field observed in dissent, and it is not really possible to 
deny: 
If this inhibition . . . only refers, as held by the majority of the 
court in their opinion, to such privileges and immunities as were 
before its adoption specially designated in the Constitution or 
necessarily implied as belonging to citizens of the United States, it 
was a vain and idle enactment, which accomplished nothing, and 
most unnecessarily excited Congress and the people on its passage. 
Slaughter-House Cases, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) at 96 (Field, J., dissenting). 
*As Senator Howard stated: “it is certain the clause was inserted in the 
Constitution for some good purpose." Cong. Globe. 39th Cong., Ist Sess., 
part 3, p. 2765 (1866); see generally John H. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 
22 (1980). 
B-29 
B and possess property of every kind, and to pursue and 
obtain happiness and safety; subject nevertheless to such 
The Fourteenth Amendment Privileges or Immunities Clause was restraints as the government may justly prescribe for the 
patterned after a similar clause in Article IV, Section 2. The general good of the whole. 
Fourteenth Amendment Clause was thought by its framers to be one | 
of the central elements of section 1. Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., ist Id. at 551-52. 
Sess., part 3, p. 2765 (1866) ("This is the first clause, and I regard 
it as very important.") (statement of Senator Howard); see generally It was this opinion which became the pole star for Representative 
John H. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 22 (1980) (hereinafter "Ely"); Bingham and Senator Howard, the framers of the Fourteenth 
John Harrison, Reconstructing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, Amendment. Presenting the Fourteenth Amendment to the Senate, 
101 Yale L.J. 1385 (1992). Senator Howard disclosed “the views and the motives which 
influenced that committee," stating: 
The Article IV Privileges and Immunities Clause imposes 
substantive limits upon the states. Corfield y. Coryell, 6 F. Cas. 546 
(No. 3230) (C.C.E.D.Pa. 1825). In Corfield, Justice Washington 
held that this clause protected against state action the privileges 
“which are, in their very nature, fundamental; which belong, of right, 
to the citizens of all free governments.’ Corfield, 6 F. Cas. at 551. 
Washington went on to state: 
What these fundamental privileges are, it would perhaps 
be more tedious than difficult to enumerate. They may, 
or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, pointed to the 
Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV as his model. Cong. Globe, 
3%h Cong., ist Sess., part 2, pp. 1033-34 (1866). 
To [the privileges and immunities listed in Corfield], 
whatever they may be - for they are not and cannot be 
fully defined in their entire extent and precise nature -- to 
these should be added the personal rights guarantied and 
secured by the first eight amendments of the Constitution; 
such as the freedom of speech and of the press; the right 
of the people peaceably to assemble and petition the 
Government for a redress of grievances, a right 
appertaining to each and all the people; the right to keep 
and to bear arms; the right to be exempted from the 
quartering of soldiers in a house without the consent of 
them at all times to respect these great fundamental 
guarantees. 
Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., Ist Sess., part 3, pp. 2765-66 (1866) 
(emphasis added). 
_ Senator Howard’s list of privileges or immunities, which 
incorporated Corfield, was representative rather than exhaustive. No 
case has ever attempted to identify the totality of implied federal 
rights guaranteed by the Privileges or Immunities clause. However, 
in Twining v. New Jersey, 211 U.S. 78 (1908), the Supreme Court 
did provide a list of privileges or immunities which it recognized: (1) 
the right to pass freely from state to state; * (2) the right to petition 
Congress for redress of grievances; (3) the right to vote for national 
Officers; (4) the right to enter the public lands; (5) the right to be 
protected against violence while in the lawful custody of a United 
States Marshal; and (6) the right to inform United States authorities 
of violation of its laws. Twining, 211 U.S. at 97. These rights of 
national citizensh pear: dampetdrsewed sins n in the sense that the 
States never ave a legitimate interest in terminating complete! 
any of these rights. Rotunda & Nowak, Treatise on Coatiinaionss 
Law 351 (2d ed. 1992). 
I 
; The United States Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the 
right to vote is fundamental to the rights of citizenship and to a free 
and democratic society. Burson v. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. 1846, 1859 
(1992); Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 561-62 (1963); Yick Wo vy. 
Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 371 (1886). In Evans I, we held the right to 
participate equally in the political process to be a fundamental right. 
Evans v. Romer, 854 P.2d 1270, 1282 (Colo. 1993).° By 
"See Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160, 178 (1941), (the right of 
interstate travel is an essential “uncident of national citizenship protected by 
the privileges and immunities clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . ims | 
*See also Illinois State Board of Elections v. Socialist Workers Party, 
440 U.S. 173, 184 (1979); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 336 (1972); 
Gordon v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1, 5 (1971); Frank I. Michelman, Conceptions 
B-32 
“participate equally," although not assuring any political result, we 
did contemplate the right of the people peaceably to assemble and 
petition the government for a redress of grievances. This right to 
participate, an attribute of the new national citizenship, was meant by 
the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment to be a personal right 
guaranteed and secured by the Privileges or Immunities Clause. See 
Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., Ist Sess., part 3, pp. 2765-66 (1866). 
It should be axiomatic that the right peaceably to assemble and 
petition government implies the ability of the duly elected 
representatives to respond, if so persuaded or predisposed. Yet, if 
enforced, Amendment 2 provides that the state, acting “through any 
of its branches or departments, or any of its agencies, political 
subdivisions, municipalities or school districts," shall not “enact, 
adopt or enforce any statute, regulation, ordinance or policy" granting 
to citizens a "claim of discrimination" based on homosexual or lesbian 
status or sexual orientation. Because it would prevent the General 
Assembly or other legislative bodies from enacting or adopting certain 
new laws and bar the executive department and its agencies from 
enforcing existing laws, Amendment 2 effectively denies the right to 
L. Rev. 443, 459 n. 63 (1989). 
provisions for securing the right to participate equally in the political 
process and yet it is the primary mode of analysis relied upon by the 
majority in this case." 
Certainly all must now agree that the Fourteenth Amendment 
sought to protect citizens from oppression by state government. The 
Equal Protection Clause of that amendment mandates that rights 
afforded to some are granted equally to all. See Steven J. Heyman, 
The First Duty of Government: Protection, Liberty and the Fourteenth 
Amendment, 41 Duke L.J. 507 (1991). From time to time the acts of 
government intervene in the lives of its citizens. ** Under the Equal 
Protection Doctrine, such government intervention is subjected to 
review, applying at least one of three standards: strict scrutiny, 
intermediate review, or rational basis analysis. The applicable 
standard of review to be applied depends upon the characteristics or 
origin. However, the record is uncertain as to whether, as a general matter, 
victims of discrimination based on sexual orientation share the same history 
or are subjected to a similar experience or condition as victims of racial or 
ate Gitaiineitiens 
"The defendants argue that the participation in the political process 
plaintiffs seek is a particular end or the successful adoption of plaintiffs’ 
views. I note, however, that the right to participate in the political process 
does not guarantee plaintiffs or any other qualified electors the success of 
any candidate or cause nor the state’s embracement of particular ideas. This 
right simply guarantees access to the political process. Citizens may vote, 
petition or amend as a matter of right, but they cannot necessarily win as a 
matter of right. 
Moreover, I am not unmindful that the state may deny the right to vote 
or participate in the political process as an operation of due process. See, 
e.g., Moran v. Carlstrom, 775 P.2d 1176, 1179 (Colo. 1989) (the General 
Assembly may place reasonable restrictions on the right to vote); see also 
People v. Russo, 713 P.2d 356, 360 (Colo. 1986) (jurors disqualified if they 
do not have the right to vote by reason of criminal conviction). 
"Government intervention may take the form of agency action, 
legislation, constitutional amendment, or other conduct which has the effect 
of law. 
B-34 
attributes of the citizens involved. Under the Equal Protection 
Doctrine, when such governmental intervention occurs, such as with 
the enactment of Amendment 2 in this case, regardless of the standard 
applied, it is contemplated that certain abridgements of even 
fundamental rights are acceptable. For example, under the strict 
scrutiny test, the most exacting standard and that applied by the 
majority, state action is “constitutionally permissible [] if it is 
"necessary to promote a compelling state interest,’ and [the state] does 
so in the least restrictive manner possible." Maj. op. at 10 (citations 
omitted) (emphasis in original). 
Unlike the Equal Protection Clause, the Privileges or Immunities 
Clause guarantees citizens that certain fundamental rights of national 
citizenship are inviolate, absent due process."* The syntax of the 
Fourteenth Amendment Clause seems inescapably that of substantive 
entitlement. According to Ely, “the slightest attention to language 
will indicate that it is the Equal Protection Clause that follows the 
command of equality strategy, while the Privileges or Immunities 
Clause proceeds by purporting to extend to everyone a set of 
entitlements." Ely at 24. The importance of the Privileges or 
Immunities Clause is that it does not require varying standards of 
review and that its protections are exte.ided to every citizen. 
Vv 
Under Amendment 2, the rights of citizens “peaceably to 
assemble and petition the government for a redress of grievances" so 
as to participate freely and equally in the political process are 
compromised in a manner prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment. 
Because these political rights are fundamental and inherent in national 
citizenship they are protected by the Privileges or Immunities Clause. 
Accordingly, I concur. 
"See supra, n.11. 
B-35 
_ 
Evans v. Romer, No. 94SA48 
JUSTICE ERICKSON dissenting: 
I respectfully dissent. In Evans v. Romer, 854 P.2d 1270 (Colo.) 
(Evans I), the majority crafted 
a new fundamental right that had never been recognized by the United 
States Supreme Court or by any court other than a federal district 
court in Ohio that relied on Evans I. Ironically, judicial review of 
Amendment 2 has accomplished exactly what the voters who passed 
Amendment 2 sought to prevent—the majority has effectively created 
a heightened protection for homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals. 
In establishing what is essentially a new substantive due process 
right disguised as a previously unrecognized "fundamental right," the 
majority disregarded the warnings of Chief Justice Burger, who stated 
in his dissent to Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 244 (1982): "If ever 
a court was guilty of an unabashedly result-oriented approach, this 
case is a prime example.” Chief Justice Burger stated: 
Were it our business to set the Nation"s social policy, I 
would agree without hesitation that it is senseless for an 
enlightened society to deprive any children—including 
illegal aliens—of an elementary education. . . . However, 
the Constitution does not constitute us as "Platonic 
Guardians" nor does it vest in this Court the authority to 
strike down laws because they do not meet our standards 
of desirable social policy, “wisdom,” or “common sense." 
We trespass on the assigned function of the political 
branches under our structure of limited and separated 
powers when we assume a policymaking role as the Court 
does today. 
Id. at 242 (citations omitted). 
The majority opinion has overlooked a crucial aspect of the case 
before us: we are not evaluating an act of the legislature or 
pronouncement of the executive--we are reviewing a constitutional 
amendment adopted by the people of the State of Colorado. While 
there are certainly some initiated constitutional amendments that a 
majority of the electorate may attempt to visit on a minority that will 
not pass constitutional scrutiny, we must not ignore the fact that we 
are reviewing the expressed will of the citizens of this state. 
S 
B-36 
In Evans I, we remanded the case to the district court to 
determine whether the preliminary injunction sustained by a majority 
of this court should be made permanent. The district court, following 
Evans I witl: great precision, made extensive findings and made the 
preliminary injunction permanent. Nevertheless, people of 
homosexual, lesbian, or bisexual orientation have never been 
adjudicated to be a protected class and the right to participate equally 
in the political process has never been deter:2incd, apart from Evans 
I, to be a fundamental right. Accordingly, I would employ a rational 
relation standard to Amendment 2 and vacate the permanent 
injunction. For the reasons set forth in my dissent to Evans J, and 
for the reasons set forth below, I respectfully dissent. 
The majority relies on Evans | and applies the strict scrutiny 
standard of review to Amendment 2 because it holds that the Equal 
‘Protection Clause of the United States Constitution guarantees the 
fundamental right to participate equally in the political process. Maj- 
op. at 4; Evans I; 854 P.2d at 1276. Evans I established this standard 
of review by assembling several United States Supreme Court 
decisions and interpreting their collective teachings as implying a new 
fundamental right. See Evans i, 854 P.2d at 1276 (citing voting cases, 
ballot access cases, and “cases involving attempts to limit the ability 
of certain groups to have desired legislation implemented through the 
normal political processes"). In my view, no fundamental right or 
suspect class is implicated by Amendment 2, and therefore the 
standard of judicial scrutiny applied by the majority is erroneous. 
A 
The majority in Evans / extensively reviewed many United States 
Supreme Court decisions to reach its conclusion, and emphasized a 
line of cases relating to citizen participation in the political process. 
See Washington v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 458 U.S. 457 (1982); 
Gordon v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1 (1971); Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 
385 (1969). The majority in Evans / interpreted these cases to create 
the fundamental right to participate equally in the political process. 
Properly understood, however, these cases involve suspect 
B-37 
classifications and not the alleged fundamental right to participate 
equally in the political process. 
In Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 (1969), the United States 
Supreme Court addressed a violation of the Equal Protection Clause 
of the federal constitution. Hunter involved a city charter amendment 
that repealed a racial anti-discrimination ordinance and required voter 
action before such an ordinance could be enacted. Jd. at 387. 
Although Hunter involved the political process, the Court invalidated 
the amendment because it created an unjustified distinction based on 
race. The Court held: 
Because the core of the Fourteenth Amendment is the 
prevention of meaningful and unjustified official 
distinctions based on race, racial classifications are 
~ “constitutionally suspect," and subject to the "most rigid 
scrutiny." They “bear a far heavier burden of 
justification" than other classifications. 
Id. at 391-92 (citations omitted). Courts and scholars reviewing 
Hunter have recognized that the holding was predicated on an 
unconstitutional racial classification. See Tyler v. Vickery, 517 F.2d 
1089, 1099 (Sth Cir. 1975) (stating that Hunter struck down an 
amendment that was based on a racial classification), cert. denied, 
426 U.S. 940 (1976); Lee v. Nyquist, 318 F. Supp. 710, 718 
(W.D.N.Y. 1970) ("The principle of Hunter is that the state creates 
an ‘explicitly racial classification’ whenever it differentiates between 
the treatment of problems involving racial matters and that afforded 
other problems in the same area."), aff'd, 402 U.S. 935 (1971); 
Citizens for Responsible Behavior v. Superior Court, 2 Cal. Rptr. 2d 
648, 655 (Cal. App. 4 Dist. 1991) (stating that "Hunter was a ’strict 
scrutiny” case in which the law invalidly classified the affected parties 
on the basis of traditionally suspect characteristics"); Michael 
Klarman, An Interpretative History of Modern Equal Protection, 90 
Mich. L. Rev. 213, 314 (1991) (noting that in place of a political 
process theory of equal protection review, racial classifications are 
and should be considered presumptively unconstitutional because they 
should be irrelevant to decisi ; Robert H. Beinfield, Note, 
The Hunter Doctrine: An Equal Protection Theory that Threatens 
Democracy, 38 Vand. L. Rev. 397, 405 (1985) (suggesting that the 
decision in Hunter is based on racial classifications). 
B-38 
In Washington v. Seattle School District No. 1, 458 U.S. 457 
(1982), the Court applied Hunter and struck down a state-wide 
initiative to terminate the use of busing to achieve racial integration 
in the public schools. In finding that the initiative violated the Equal 
Protection Clause, the Supreme Court held: 
[T]he political majority may generally restructure the 
political process to place obstacles in the path of everyone 
seeking to secure the benefits of governmental action. 
But a different analysis is required when the State 
allocates governmental power nonneutrally, by explicitly 
_using the racial nature of a decision to determine the 
decisionmaking process. State action of this kind, the 
Court said, "places special burdens on racial minorities 
within the governmental process," thereby “making it 
more difficult for certain racial and religious minorities 
than for other members of the community to achieve 
legislation that is in their interest." 
Id. at 470 (emphasis in original) (citations omitted). The Court thus 
did not approve of "distinctions based on race" and struck down the 
initiative because it would have created additional burdens for a class 
of citizens who have had historical difficulty in changing the political 
process. Id. at 486. See Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal 
Communications Comm’n, 497 U.S. 547, 563-65 (1990) (holding that 
members of a traditionally suspect class merit special protection); City 
of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 490-91 (1989) 
(same); United States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144, 
152-53 n.4 (1938) (noting that special protection may be offered for 
"discrete and insular" minority groups). 
A similar issue was addressed in Crawford v. Board of Education, 
458 U.S. 527 (1982), which was announced on the same day as 
Washington. \n Crawford, the Court upheld a state constitutional 
amendment that prohibited state courts from ordering mandatory 
student assignment or transportation. The Court stated that if the 
constitutional amendment employed a racial classification such as the 
classification in Hunter, the Court would apply the strict scrutiny 
standard of review, but found Hunter inapplicable because the 
amendment at issue did not “embody a racial classification." 
Crawford, 458 U.S. at 536-37. 
B-39 
The fact that the fundamental right created by the majority in 
Evans I has never been recognized by the Supreme Court is evident 
in two cases, James v. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 137 (1971), and Gordon 
v. Lance, 403 U.S. 1 (1971). In James and Gordon, the Court could 
have used the fundamental right found in Evans / and applied strict 
scrutiny review to strike down constitutional measures. Instead, in 
both cases, the Court upheld the provisions and refused to apply the 
strict scrutiny standard enunciated in Hunter. 
In James, the Supreme Court upheld the validity of a California 
constitutional measure that prohibited state public bodies from 
developing, constructing, or acquiring low-income housing projects 
until voters approved of the project in a referendum. Thus, the 
citizens singled out in James were low-income people who would 
qualify for low-rent housing and therefore the Court did not apply 
Strict scrutiny. The Supreme Court said: 
Unlike the case before us, Hunter rested on the 
conclusion that Akron"s referendum law denied equal 
protection by placing “special burdens on racial minorities 
within the governmental process." . . . Unlike the Akron 
referendum provision, it cannot be said that California’s 
Article XXXIV rests on "distinctions based on race." . . . 
The present case could be affirmed only by extending 
Hunter, and this we decline to do. 
James, 402 U.S. at 140-41. 
Similarly, in Gordon, the plaintiffs challenged West Virginia’s 
constitutional provision that required a sixty-percent approval for any 
bonded indebtedness incurred by the political subdivisions of the 
state. As in James, the Supreme Court did not apply the strict 
scrutiny standard of review because: 
Unlike the restrictions in our previous cases, the West 
Virginia Constitution singles out no "discrete and insular 
minority" for special treatment.... We are not, 
therefore, presented with a case like Hunter,... in 
which fair housing legislation alone was subject to an 
automatic referendum requirement. The class singled out 
in Hunter was clear—"those who would benefit from laws 
barring racial, religious, or ancestral discriminations." 
B-40 
Gordon, 403 U.S. at 5. James and Gordon demonstrate that strict 
scrutiny should not be applied to review a restriction on the political 
process unless the restriction singles out a discrete and insular 
minority.’ The Supreme Court of the United States has never held, 
however, that the right to participate equally in the political process 
is a fundamental right. 
B 
The development of fundamental rights in our jurisprudence has 
never been a matter for ad hoc determination. See Palko v. 
Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325 (1937) (stating that fundamental 
rights are those that are "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty," 
such that “neither liberty nor justice would exist if [they] were 
sacrificed"); Moore v. East Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 503 (1977) 
(noting that fundamental rights are liberties that are "deeply rooted in 
this Nation’s history and tradition"); see also Bowers v. Hardwick, 
478 U.S 186, 191-92 (1986); Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 
481-86 (1965). Fundamental rights must be explicitly or implicitly 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution. San Antonio Indep. 
Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 33-34 (1973). Among the 
fundamental rights delineated by the Supreme Court are the right to 
vote, the right to interstate travel, the right to privacy, and the 
guarantees contained in the First Amendment. See Police Dep’t of 
Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 101 (1972) (First Amendment); 
Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 634 (1969) (interstate travel); 
Harper v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 670 (1966) 
(voting); Griswold, 381 U.S. at 484 (privacy). 
The Court has been reluctant to recognize new rights as 
fundamental. See Bowers, 478 U.S. at 195 ("There should be, 
therefore, great resistance to expand the substantive reach of [the Due 
Process Clauses], particularly if it requires redefining the category of 
rights deemed to be fundamental."); Geoffrey Stone, et al., 
‘Homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals have never been adjudicated to be 
a discrete and insular minority by the Supreme Court. See High Tech Gays 
v. Defense Indus. Sec. Clearance Office, 895 F.2d 563, 571 (9th Cir. 1990); 
Dahl v. Secretary of the United States Navy, 830 F. Supp 1319, 1323-25 
(E.D. Cal. 1993). 
B-41 
Constitutional Law, at 831 (1986) (stating that the Court "has 
essentially frozen the list of fundamental’ interests"). The Court has 
refused to declare education, housing, the right to refuse medical 
treatment, welfare payments, or governmental employment to be 
fundamental rights worthy of heightened constitutional protection. 
See Cruzan by Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dep’t of Health, 497 
U.S. 261, 280 (1990) (right to refuse medical treatment); 
Massachusetts Bd. of Retirement v. Murgia, 427 U.S. 307, 312 
(1976) (employment); Rodriguez, 411 U.S. at 35 (education); 
Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 485 (1970) (welfare). Never 
before has any court recognized the right to participate equally in the 
political process as a fundamental right, the curtailing of which 
warrants strict judicial scrutiny.” “It is not the province of this Court 
to create substantive constitutional rights in the name of guaranteeing 
equal protection of the laws." Rodriguez, 397 U.S. at 33. 
It is crucial to note, however, that even though equal participation 
in the political process does not merit strict scrutiny analysis, the 
United States Constitution offers protection for those who may be 
adversely affected by legislation. When individuals or groups are 
_ singled out, as they have been here, they may still be protected by the 
Due Process Clauses or the Equal Protection Clause.’ In this case, 
the class of citizens is protected by the Equal Protection Clause. 
Accordingly, Amendment 2 must be struck down only if its 
challengers can demonstrate that the legislation is not rationally 
related to a legitimate state interest. 
"Recently, however, a federal district judge, relying on Evans /, struck 
down an anti-gay-rights measure approved by Cincinnati voters. In Equality 
Foundation of Greater Cincinnati, Inc. v. City of Cincinnati, slip op. at 26 
(S.D. Ohio Aug. 9, 1994), the federal district court declared that a City 
Charter Amendment was unconstitutionally vague and violated the First 
Amendment right of homosexuals to participate in the political process. See 
also Equality Found. v. City of Cincinnati, 838 F. Supp. 1235 (S.D. Ohio 
1993). 
*When fundamental rights are denied to everyone, it raises due process 
concerns. When fundamental rights are denied to some individuals only, it 
raises equal protection concerns. The applicable standard in either case, 
however, is strict scrutiny. 
B-42 
I 
During oral argument before this court, counsel for the 
plaintiffs- appellees asserted that even if strict scrutiny review were 
inappropriate, we should analyze Amendment 2 under a rational basis 
standard of review. Counsel noted that in Heller v. Doe by Doe, 113 
S. Ct. 2637, 2642 (1993), the Supreme Court did not engage in strict 
scrutiny review because it was not properly preserved at the lower 
levels and therefore urged this court not to preclude rational basis 
review by ruling merely under strict scrutiny standards. I find 
counsel’s contention persuasive and therefore address Amendment 2 
under a rational relation standard. 
A 
In reviewing an act of the legislature or a voter-mandated 
constitutional amendment that creates a classification involving neither 
a fundamental right nor suspect classes, a court will review the 
classification under the "rational basis" standard of review. See 
Heller, 113 S. Ct. at 2642; Kadrmas v. Dickinson Public Sch., 487 
U.S. 450, 462 (1988). Under the rational basis standard of review, 
the classification will be "upheld against equal protection challenge if 
there is any reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide 
a rational basis for the classification." Federal Communications 
Comm’n v. Beach Communication, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2096, 2101 
(1993); see also Sullivan v. Stroop, 496 U.S. 478, 485 (1990); Vance 
v. Bradley, 440 U.S. 93, 111 (1979); Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 484-85. 
"Such a classification cannot run afoul of the Equal Protection Clause 
if there is a rational relationship between the disparity of treatment 
and some legitimate governmental purpose." Heller, 113 S. Ct. at 
2642; see also Nordlinger v. Hahn, 112 S. Ct. 2326, 2331-32 (1992). 
The inquiry into whether there is a rational basis for the 
classification, however, does not authorize "the judiciary [to] sit as a 
superlegislature to judge the wisdom or desirability of legislative 
policy determinations." New Orleans v. Dukes, 427 U.S. 297, 303 
(1976) (per curiam). Instead, a classification that involves neither 
suspect classes nor fundamental rights is accorded a strong 
presumption of validity. Beach Communication, 113 S. Ct. at 2098; 
Hodel v. Indiana, 452 U.S. 314, 331-332 (1981); Murgia, 427 U.S. 
at 314. 
B-43 
Because of the strong presumption of validity, the purpose or 
rationale behind the legislation need not be articulated at any time. 
Heller, 113 S. Ct. at 2642; Nordlinger, 112 S. Ct. at 2334; Allied 
Stores of Ohio, Inc. v. Bowers, 358 U.S. 522, 528 (1959). 
Additionally, the party challenging the classification bears the burden 
of “negat[ing] every conceivable basis which might support it" 
whether or not it is supported by the record. Lehnhausen v. Lake 
Shore Auto Parts Co., 410 U.S. 356, 364 (1973); see also Heller, 
113 S. Ct. at 2643. 
In an effort to ensure that rational basis review does not become 
a “license for courts to judge the wisdom, fairness, or logic of 
legislative choices," Beach Communication, 113 S. Ct. at 2101, the 
reasons articulated are given great deference. See Jd. at 2098 ("[A] 
legislative choice is not subject to courtroom factfinding and may be 
based on rational speculation unsupported by evidence or empirical 
data."); Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 470-71 (1991) ("In cases 
where a classification burdens neither a suspect group nor a 
fundamental interest, ‘courts are quite reluctant to overturn 
governmental action on the ground that it denies equal protection of 
the laws.’") (citation omitted); Paris Adult Theater I v. Slaton, 413 
U.S. 49, 62 (1973) ("The fact that a congressional directive reflects 
unprovable assumptions about what is good for the people, including 
imponderable aesthetic assumptions, is not a sufficient reason to find 
that statute unconstitutional."); Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 485 (noting 
that a classification does not fail because "in practice it results in 
some inequality") (citation omitted); Metropolis Theatre Co. v. City 
of Chicago, 228 U.S. 61, 69-70 (1913) ("The problems of 
government are practical ones and may justify, if they do not require, 
rough accommodations--illogical, it may be, and unscientific."); see 
also Laurence Tribe, American Constitutional Law 1440 (2d ed. 
1988) ("Within very broad limits, courts have traditionally exhibited 
extreme deference to the legislative definition of ’the general good,’ 
either out of judicial sympathy for the difficulties of the legislative 
process, or out of a belief in judicial restraint generally."); John 
Nowak, Ronald Rotunda, Nelson Young, Constitutional Law 596 (2d 
ed. 1983) ("A majority of the justices today will uphold governmental 
classifications under this standard unless no reasonably conceivable 
set of facts could establish a rational relationship between the 
classification and an arguably legitimate end of government."); Mark 
Strasser, Suspect Classes and Suspect Classifications: On 
Discriminating, Unwittingly or Otherwise, 64 Temp. L. Rev. 937, 
B-44 
941 (1991) ("The rational basis test is notoriously weak. When 
applied, there is ‘little doubt about the outcome; the challenged 
legislation is always upheld.’") (quoting Murgia, 427 U.S. at 319 
(Marshall, J. dissenting)); but see City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living 
Center, 473 U.S. 432, 447 (1985) (striking down on rational basis 
review a zoning law that prohibited mentally retarded individuals 
from residing in certain areas of town because the law was based on 
the "bare . . . desire to harm a politically unpopular group") (citation 
omitted). This is so because: 
The Constitution presumes that, absent some reason to 
infer antipathy, even improvident decisions will 
eventually be rectified by the democratic process and that 
judicial intervention is generally unwarranted no matter 
how unwisely we may think a political branch has acted. 
Thus, we will not overturn such a statute unless the 
varying treatment of different groups or persons is so 
unrelated to the achievement of any combination of 
legitimate purposes that we can only conclude that the 
legislature’s actions were irrativnal. 
Vance, 440 U.S. at 97 (footnote omitted). Although the purposes and 
rationale of a voter initiative are even more difficult to assess than 
legislative pronouncements, initiatives passed by the citizens of the 
state which contain classifications not related to fundamental rights or 
suspect classes are also given deference. See Gregory, 501 U.S. at 
470 (applying the rational basis standard to a constitutional restriction 
enacted by the people); MSM Farms, Inc. v. Spire, 927 F.2d 330, 
333 (8th Cir. 1991) (applying a rational basis test to measures 
adopted through a referendum). 
It is the prerogative of the people of the State of Colorado, and 
not this or any other court, to weigh the evidence and determine the 
wisdom and utility of the purposes behind a measure adopted through 
the initiative process. See Minnesota v. Clover Leaf Creamery Co., 
449 U.S. 456, 469 (1981) (stating that the Minnesota Supreme Court 
erred in substituting its judgment for that of the legislature). Thus, 
whether in fact Amendment 2 will meet its objectives is not the 
relevant question: the Equal Protection Clause is satisfied if the 
people of Colorado could have rationally decided that prohibiting 
homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals from enacting certain legislation 
B-45 
might further a legitimate interest. Hawaii Housing Auth. v. Midkiff, 
467 U.S. 229, 242 (1984); Clover Leaf Creamery, 449 U.S. at 466. 
Amendment 2 was put to a plebiscite by initiative petitions and 
eventually won voter approval by 813,966 votes to 710,151 votes. 
Because Amendment 2 was a product of a vote of the citizens of 
Colorado, no purpose or rationale for Amendment 2 was explicitly set 
forth. See MSM Farms, 927 F.2d at 332 ("Because the law was 
adopted through the initiative and referendum process, there is little 
traditional legislative history regarding its purpose."). However, the 
state has articulated several rationale in this court and in the district 
court to establish that the interest behind Amendment 2 is not only a 
rational interest but also a compelling state interest.‘ 
Ii] 
Although only one legitimate state interest rationally related to the 
state’s goals for a constitutional amendment is necessary, the state has 
set forth several. The district court found that two rationale--the 
promotion of religious freedom and the promotion of family 
privacy—demonstrated compelling state interests, although it found 
that the means for achieving the interests were not narrowly tailored 
to achieve the objectives.° In my view, there are at least three 
“The district court found that the state alleged six compelling state 
interests: (1) deterring factionalism; (2) preserving the integrity of the 
state’s political functions; (3) preserving the ability of the state to remedy 
discrimination against suspect classes; (4) preventing the government from 
interfering with personal, familial and religious privacy; (5) preventing the 
government from subsidizing the political objectives of a special interest 
group; and (6) promoting the physical and psychological well-being of 
children. 
*The district court applied the strict scrutiny standard of review which 
requires the state to prove that classifications affecting fundamental rights 
were necessary to promote a compelling or overriding interest which is 
narrowly tailored. See Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 217 (1982) (noting that 
the classification must be “precisely tailored"); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 
330, 342 (1972) (stating a classification involving a fundamental right must 
be a compelling state interest); Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 634 
B-46 
interests that satisfy the constitutional standard and those asserting the 
invalidity. of Amendment 2 have not met their burden of 
demonstrating that there is no rational basis for the constitutional 
amendment. 
A 
The state asserts that the rational basis of Amendment 2 is that it 
prevents the government from interferinz with religious privacy. The 
root of the state’s contention is that under ordinances preempted by 
Amendment 2, individual landlords or employers, including churches, 
who have profound religious objections to homosexuality, would 
nonetheless be compelled to compromise those convictions under 
threat of government sanctions. Thus, Amendment 2 prevents any 
political body from enacting legislation that would hinder the right of 
individuals to choose who to rent to or who to employ cu religious 
grounds. The district court found that “[p}reserving religious freedom 
is a compelling state interest" but that Amendment 2 was “not 
narrowly drawn to achieve that purpose in the least restrictive manner 
possible." 
Freedom of individuals to practice and hold particular religious 
beliefs is among the highest values in our society. See Murdock v. 
Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 115-17 (1943); Jones v. Opelika, 319 
U.S. 103, 104 (1943); see also Martin v Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 
149-50 (1943) (Murphy, J., concurring). It is not within the 
discretion of this or any court to determine which beliefs are valid 
because “courts are not the arbiters of scriptural interpretation." 
United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 257 (1982). In fact, “religious 
beliefs need not be acceptable, logical, consistent, or comprehensible 
to others in order to merit [free exercise] protection." Thomas v. 
Review Bd., 450 U.S. 707, 714 (1981). Not only is it impermissible 
for courts to determine the validity of religious practices and beliefs, 
but no government official or body may delineate what is a "proper" 
form of faith and require citizens to act in accordance with 
government-mandated religious standards. See West Virginia State 
Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 642 (1943) ("If there is any 
(1969) (moting that there needed to be a compelling reason for the 
government to restrict interstate travel). 
B-47 
fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high 
or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism, 
religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens to confess by 
work or act their faith therein."). 
Nevertheless, not all burdens on religion are unconstitutional. 
Lee, 455 U.S. at 257; Thomas, 450 U.S. at 718 (stating that "only 
those interests of the highest order . . . can overbalance legitimate 
claims to the free exercise of religion"). Even the highest values, 
including religious freedom, must sometimes give way to the greater 
public good. See Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 403 (1963). 
Thus, governmental actions that substantially burden a religious 
practice must be justified by a compelling governmental interest. 
Employment Div. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 883 (1990). 
In this case, the state asserts that Amendment 2 is an attempt to 
protect religious freedom by precluding legislation that would threaten 
sanctions against those who would refuse to employ or rent to 
homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals. The state indicates several 
examples of instances in which individuals or groups were forced to 
set aside their religious beliefs based on legislative enactments 
protecting homosexuals. In Aspen, for example, section 13-98 of the 
sexual orientation ordinance required churches to open their facilities 
to homosexual organizations if the facilities were opened to any 
community organization. Churches apparently could not refuse to 
hire employees, including pastors or priests, on the basis o/ their 
sexual orientation. Similarly, Title 12 of the Boulder Municipal Code 
did not allow a church or religious organization with deeply held 
moral and religious views on the subject of homosexuality to refuse 
to hire someone based on his or her sexual orientation. 
In my view, the state has a legitimate interest in protecting 
religious freedoms and Amendment 2 bears a rational relationship to 
that interest. 
B 
Although the district court found that the state did not have a 
compelling interest in deterring ‘“factionalism," or "political 
fragmentation,” the state does have a legitimate interest in promoting 
B-48 
state-wide uniformity and Amendment 2 is rationally related to that 
interest. 
Prohibiting local action on matters affecting the entire state is 
advantageous inasmuch as the state has an interest in uniformity of 
regulation: 
The central inquiry implicit in the concepi of pre-emption 
is whether there should be statewide uniformity in the 
regulation of specific conduct. If there is no need for 
statewide uniformity, there is no need for state law to 
preempt local power to regulate... This is the core of 
the preemption question--to consider, on the one hand, 
the need for statewide uniformity of regulation of a 
specific type of conduct, and, on the other hand, the need 
of local governments to be able to respond to local, as 
distinguished from statewide problems. 
Daniel R. Mandelker & Dawn C. Netsch, State and Local 
Government in a Federal System 237 (1977); see also Osborne M. 
Reynolds, Local Government Law 120 (1982) (stating that the critical 
inquiry in the context of state preemption of local law is: "{I]s this 
an area where it is desirable to have a single, all-encompassing 
scheme of regulation, so that local laws—not just local laws that 
conflict with the state’s, but any local laws--would unduly complicate 
the picture?"); Charles $. Rhyne, The Law of Local Government 
Operations § 19.11 (recognizing that preemption is rooted in the 
necessity of statewide uniformity of regulation). 
In determining what is a matter of statewide concern, this court 
has not set forth a strict legal standard. Instead, we have determined 
the nature of the concern on an ad hoc basis. See Denver & Rio 
Grande Western R.R. Co. v. City & County of Denver, 673 P.2d 354, 
358 (Colo. 1983). In City & County of Denver v. State, 788 P.2d 
764, 767 (Colo. 1990), we stated: 
Although we have found it useful to employ the "local," 
"mixed," and "state-wide" categories in resolving 
conflicts between local and state legislation, these legal 
categories should not be mistaken for mutually exclusive 
or factually perfect descriptions of the relevant interests 
of the state and local governments. Those affairs which 
B-49 
are municipal, mixed or of statewide concern often 
imperceptibly merge. 
State regulation is a matter of statewide concern in a broad 
variety of contexts. See Robertson v. City & County of [ ‘ver, 874 
P.2d 325, 350 (Colo. 1994) (Erickson, J., dissenting). 
In this case, the state has a legitimate interest in promoting 
Amendment 2 because it is a matter of statewide concern. 
Amendment 2 involves a matter of statewide concern because the 
public is deeply divided over the issue of homosexuality.* In fact, 
civil rights has never been the type of concern reserved exclusively 
for local governments.’ By adopting Amendment 2, the people of 
the state have sought to ensure that the government will act on a 
uniform basis. Several local governments, such as Denver, Aspen, 
and Boulder enacted sexual orientation laws, while others did not. By 
voting to approve Amendment 2, the voters of Colorado indicated that 
they wanted a statewide resolution of the issue that had formerly only 
been locally regulated and subject to great debate. The citizens of the 
state have a right to the initiative process which resolves conflicts 
between municipal and local governments when the issue is a matter 
of statewide concern and the process is not repugnant to the 
constitution." The Supreme Court has noted that "referendums 
*The issue of homosexuality and bisexuality is deeply controversial and 
divisive. Unlike race and sex, there is no national consensus that sexual 
orientation is an inappropriate basis for governmental, much less private, 
decisionmaking. A series of constitutional amendments and acts of Congress 
have authoritatively settled the place of race and sex in American life. The 
same simply cannot be said of non-traditional sexual orientation. 
"For example, in 1989, the General Assembly passed a law prohibiting 
insurance companies from inquiring about or making coverage decisions on 
the basis of sexual orientation. See § 10-3-1104(1)(f), 4A C.R.S. (1993 
Supp.). In 1992, the Colorado Civil Rights Commission went on record 
recommending legislation adding sexual orientation to the list of protected 
classes. 
*Testimony of Harvard Government Professor Harvey Mansfield 
indicated that the use of the initiative process to enact Amendment 2 
supported stability and respect for the political process, by giving "the people 
B-50 
demonstrate devotion to democracy, not to bias, discrimination, or 
prejudice."*® James, 402 U.S. at 141. 
In my view, the state has a legitimate interest in promoting 
statewide uniformity in matters of statewide concern and Amendment 
2 bears a rational relationship to that interest. 
C 
The state also contends that it has a legitimate interest in 
allocating its resources. Specifically, the state suggests that laws 
prohibited by Amendment 2 would drain the state’s financial and 
labor resources set aside and budgeted for the protection of 
traditionally suspect classes and diminish respect for traditional civil 
rights categories. 
In this case, the testimony reflected that, although there was no 
current statute that required the state to enforce civil rights legislation 
on behalf of homosexuals, lesbians, and bisexuals, any such statute 
would decrease the funding available to enforce existing laws 
a sense that... government is not alien to them, and that they can get 
together by their own initiative . . . to produce a result that gives them a 
sense of satisfaction and accomplishment." 
*The Court in James went on to cogently state: 
But of course a lawmaking procedure that “disadvantages” a 
particular group does not always deny equal protection. Under 
any such holding, presumably a State would not be able to 
require referendums on any subject unless referendums were 
required on all, because they would always disadvantage some 
group. And this Court would be required to analyze 
governmental structures to determine whether a gubernatorial 
veto provision or a filibuster rule is likely to "disadvantage" 
any of the diverse and shifting groups that make up the 
American people. 
James v. Valtierra, 402 U.S. 137, 142 (1971). 
B-51 
protecting traditionally suspect classes.“ | For example, the 
investigative arm of the Civil Rights Commission has i 
steadily increasing demands upon a shrinking budget. Two out of the 
last three years, the Division has been unable to fulfill its part of a 
federally funded work-share agreement."' The Division received 
complaints from the black community that claims were not being 
thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. The state, therefore, 
reasonably postulates that a law requiring the protection of an 
additional group would further stretch scarce resources, and 
Amendment 2 protects the civil rights enforcement for traditions!ly 
suspect groups.’? Thus, the decision of the people of the State of 
Colorado io allocate government resources in a particular manner is 
‘In United States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152 (1938), 
the Supreme Court announced iis standard for reviewing legislative 
enactments in the economic sphere: 
[T]he existence of facts supporting the legislative judgment is 
to be presumed, for regulatory legislation affecting ordinary 
commercial transactions is not to be pronounced unconstitution- 
al unless in light of the facts made known or generally assumed 
it is of such a character as to preclude the assumption that it 
rests upon some rational basis within the knowledge and experi- 
ence of the legislators. 
‘Under the agreement, the Division works on a certain number of cases 
involving only federally-protected classes which, of course, does not include 
sexual orientation. The Division only met the goals last year because the 
Equal Employment Opportunities Commission reduced the number of cases 
necessary to satisfy the agreement. 
"The United States Supreme Court has addressed the issue of fiscal 
concerns impacting certain rights. In Plyler, 457 U.S. at 222-24, the Court 
held that whatever savings might be achieved by the state by denying public 
education to undocumented aliens were insubstantial compared to the costs 
to the children, the state, and the nation of not educating them. In Shapiro, 
394 U.S. at 618, and in Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365 (1971), the 
Court found fiscal integrity not to be a compelling interest balanced against 
the right to interstate travel and the right to welfare assistance to aliens. 
These cases are distinguishable as either fundamental rights cases or cases 
in which the object was saving money not a basic allocation of funds. 
B-52 
a legitimate state interest in this case. See Dukes, 427 U.S. at 303 
(upholding a New Orleans ordinance noting that states have wide 
latitude in regulating their local economies); James, 402 U.S. at 143 
(noting that a referendum procedure “ensures that all the people of a 
community will have a voice in a decision which may lead to large 
expenditures of local governmental funds" and therefore found that a 
referendum measure did not violate the Equal Protection Clause). 
Additionally, the state has a legitimate interest in ensuring that the 
traditionally suspect classes remain respected. See Crawford, 458 
U.S. at 539 ("And certainly the purposes of the Fourteenth 
Amendment would not be advanced by an interpretation that 
discouraged the States from providing greater protection to racial 
minorities."). Professor Joseph Broadus testified that the addition of 
homosexuals to civil rights statutes or ordinances would lessen the 
public’s respect for historic civil rights categories. Testimony also 
indicated that, unlike the traditionally suspect classes, homosexuals, 
lesbians, and bisexuals are a relatively politically powerful and 
privileged special interest group. Indeed, former Civil Rights 
Commission Chairman Ignacio Rodriguez testified that the inclusion 
of homosexuals as a suspect class would represent a “drastic 
departure" from the historical aims of the civil rights laws. 
The State of Colorado, through entities such as the Colorado Civil 
Rights Division, has attempted to further the interest in remedying 
specific instances of sexual and racial discrimination through existing 
civil rights laws and enforcement programs. However, owing to the 
fiscal constraints which are inevitably a part of public administration, 
unlimited funds are not available for this purpose. Therefore, it is 
incumbent upon the state to set priorities for its enforcement efforts. 
In this case, the setting of priorities is a legitimate state interest and 
Amendment 2 is rationally related to that interest. 
IV 
In my view, the correct standard of judicial review of 
Amendment 2 is a rational basis standard of review. Additionally, the 
plaintiffs have not shown that Amendment 2 is not rationally related 
to the state’s legitimate interest in protecting religious freedom, 
encouraging statewide uniformity in the law, and allocating resources. 
B-53 
Accordingly, I would reverse the decision of the district court and 
vacate the injunction. Therefore, I dissent. 
