ay Court, U.S. 
FILED 


95157 JuL27 1995 


In the Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, ET AL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


DREw S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


JO ANN HARRIS 
Assistant Attorney General 
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN 
Deputy Solicitor General 


IRVING L. GORNSTEIN 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


KATHLEEN A. FELTON 
Attorney 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


~ BEST AVAILABLE COPY,” 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the court of appeals erred in holding that 
evidence that members of a particular race have been 
prosecuted for a particular offense is sufficient to 
justify an order requiring discovery from the govern- 
ment on a claim of selective prosecution, absent 
evidence that similarly situated persons of a different 
race have not been prosecuted for that offense. 


II 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


The petitioner is the United States of America. 
The respondents are Christopher Lee Armstrong, 
Robert Rozelle, Aaron Hampton, Freddie Mack, and 
Shelton Auntwan Martin. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
REESE ee ee l 
ENS EAE, AS ae a l 
EEE ea eee 2 
Reasons for granting the petition ..........0.00cccccccccccccccccceceeees 10 
EERE EAE a ee ae 26 
SII I senitscinitis dda ahacusittiaictieanteanlidleenctdetnncnnenandemenéauansonesnsne la 
IIIT TIT’ tiie ietiienasin ence asintnaciedsneeiannmceiiediniindadmeaseneeianes 68a 
EE nn a a 1050 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Attorneu General vy. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 

928 (D.C, Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1172 

EE SEE Et Eee een a aD 16, 19, 20 
Basic Ine. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988)... soils 17 
Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 857 (1978) ............... 12 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) ....................... demi 12 
Cobbledick v. United States, 309 U.S. 323 (1940)... 14 
Department of Labor ¥. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715 (1990) 18 
Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985) 12 
Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409 (1976)... 13 
MeCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987) 18 
Miller v. Johnson, No. 94-631 (June 29, 1995) 18 
Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448 (1962) 000. 12 
Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398 (1970) . , 17 
United States v. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 935 (9th Cir.), 

cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 290 (1992) oo... 7, 17, 21, 22 
United States v. Chemical Foundation, Inc. 

SPREE Ms IED ‘nicccccccccccceccciuncercecsecentececosecencesnsenc | 16 
United States v. Cooks, 52 F.3d 101 (Sth Cir. 1995) __. 19 
United States v. Fares, 978 F.2d 52 (2d Cir. 1992) ___. 20 
United States v. Greenwood, 796 F 2d 49 (4th Cir. 

SIT eieitisdsdinteredasinadienerignasdotsnaniantendemesensenenteneneansensasesmases. 20 
United States v. Henry, No. CR 94-628-CBM (C.D. Cal. 

June 26, 1995) ...........0c, Se ita, 22 23 


(IIT) 


IV 


Cases—Continued: 


United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974) .............. 
United States v. Parham, 16 F.3d 844 (8th Cir. 1994) 
United States v. Peete, 919 F.2d 1168 (6th Cir. 19990) ... 
United States v. Rendon-Abundez, No. 94-50352 

(Dth Cir. July 13, 1995) ......ccccccccccccereerreeeeeseeeseseeeeeeenes 
Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing 

Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252 (1977) .........ccccccceceeeeeeeeneneneeenes 
Wade v. United States, 504 U.S. 181 (1992) ............... 


Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598 (1985) .......... 11, 


Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 (1886) .......... uanketants 
Constitution and statutes: 


RPM Chammat, Bad. BE. © B nccocccccsccctccsecssenccscevcccsscccsocscsscssseces 
BE ee eee eee 
OR UE TEe GIO... coiccccncsccnctssdsdessindaueedesannscocnsnsemanscnnnenees 
Oe GRR? Oe... sonia eenieeeenmnaenenmanseninial 
DE aaa ene ne 
Cf 8 ee a siaiuieaiinds al ae a 


Miscellaneous: 


United States Sentencing Comm'n, Annual Report 
BEBE,  ccccccscccoscccsocsonccesccccosencsccnscssocveosersocssoocoscoooocoseoeooess 


12, 13 
13, 18 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
v. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, ETAL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


The Solicitor General, on behalf of the United 


States of America, petitions for a writ of certiorari to 
review the judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in this case. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the en bane court of appeals (App., 
infra, la-67a) is reported at 48 F.3d 1508. The panel 
opinion of the court of appeals (App., infra, 68a-104a) 
is reported at 21 F.3d 1431. 

JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the en bane cow. of appeals was 
entered on March 2, 1995. By order dated June 21, 
1995, Justice O’Connor extended the time within 
which to file a petition for a writ of certiorari to and 


(1) 


2 


including July 28, 1995. The jurisdiction of this Court 
is invoked under 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


STATEMENT 


In 1992, respondents Christopher Lee Armstrong, 
Robert Rozelle, Aaron Hampton, Freddie Mack, and 
Shelton Auntwan Martin were indicted in the United 
States District Court for the Central District of 
California on charges of conspiring to possess with 
intent to distribute, and conspiring to distribute, 
more than 50 grams of cocaine base (crack), in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. 846. Respondents were also 
variously charged in four counts with distributing 
erack, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1), in one count 
with possessing crack with intent to distribute it, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1), and in three counts 
with using or carrying a firearm during and in 
relation to a drug trafficking crime, in violation of 
18 U.S.C. 924(c). App., infra, 4a. 

Respondents, each of whom is black, alleged that 
the United States Attorney's Office had determined 
to prosecute them because of their race. They sought 
discovery from the government to obtain information 
that they asserted would support that claim. The dis- 
trict court granted the motion for discovery. It also 
adhered to that ruling in denying the government's 
motion for reconsideration. When the government 
indicated that it would not comply with the discovery 
order, the district court dismissed the indictment. A 
divided panel of the court of appeals reversed, 
concluding that the district court had abused its 
discretion in ordering discovery. On rehearing en 
banc, the court of appeals, by a 7-4 vote, held that the 
district court had permissibly ordered discovery. It 


3 


therefore affirmed the district court’s dismissal of 
the indictment. 

1. In support of their motion for discovery, 
respondents offered only one item of evidentiary 
support for their claim of selective prosecution: an 
affidavit from a paralegal employed by the Fed- 
eral Public Defender for the Central District of 
California. App, infra, 5a, 7la. The affidavit stated 
that, based on a review of all cases closed by the 
Federal Public Defender’s Office during 1991 that 
involved substantive drug offenses or drug conspiracy 
offenses in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841 and 846, all of the 
24 defendants charged with a crack offense were 
black. App. infra, 5a. The government opposed 
respondents’ motion for discovery, arguing that 
respondents had failed to establish a_ sufficient 
threshold showing of selective prosecution to justify 
an order compelling discovery. /d. at 71a. 

The district court found that respondents’ showing 
was sufficient to justify discovery. The court stated 
that the number of cases and the time period covered 
by the affidavit, the comparable charges involved in 
each case, and the fact that all the defendants were 
of the same race required an explanation. The court 
ordered the government: (1) to provide a list of all 
cases from the prior three years in which the govern- 
ment charged both crack and firearms offenses; (2) to 
identify the race of the defendant in each case; (3) to 
state whether each case was investigated by federal 
or state law enforcement authorities or by a joint 
federal and state effort; and (4) to explain the criteria 
used by the United States Attorney’s Office in decid- 
ing whether to bring crack charges in federal court. 
App., infra, 5a. 


The government moved for reconsideration of the 
court’s discovery order. In support of its motion, the 
government provided evidence, based on an informal 
survey of Assistant United States Attorneys in the 
Central District of California, that at least 11 non- 
black defendants had been indicted on crack charges 
during the period covered by respondents’ affidavit. 
C.A. Excerpts of Record (E.R.) 32-33, 123-124. Four of 
those 11 were represented by the Federal Public 
Defender. /d. at 32-33. The government also 
submitted computerized records showing that from 
1989 to 1992 approximately 2,400 defendants had been 
charged with drug offenses under 21 U.S.C. 841 and 
approximately 1,700 defendants had been charged with 
drug conspiracy offenses under 21 U.S.C, 846. E.R. 
75-85. 

In addition, the government submitted affidavits 
from the two officers who had investigated this case. 
Those affidavits stated that race had played no role in 
the investigation and that the case had been referred 
for federal prosecution because it involved provable 
crack and firearms offenses that met the United 
States Attorney’s guidelines for federal prosecution. 
E.R. 24-28. The government also submitted the 
affidavit of the then-Chief of the Criminal Complaints 
Section of the United States Attorney’s Office, who 
explained that “[{ajll charging decisions are made on 
the basis of whether a federal offense that meets this 
Office’s guidelines has occurred, the overall strength 
of the evidence, the deterrence value and federal 
interest associated with the particular case, the 
criminal history of the suspects, and other race- 
neutral criteria.” /d. at 29. He further stated that 
this case met the general criteria because: it involved 
more than 100 grams of crack, which was in excess of 


twice the amount necessary for a ten-year mandatory 
minimum sentence; the case involved multiple sales 
and multiple defendants, indicating a fairly sub- 
stantial crack ring; the case was jointly investigated 
by federal and state agencies; firearms were used in 
connection with the drug trafficking; the evidence 
against respondents was strong, including audio and 
video tapes of the respondents’ illegal activities; 
respondent Armstrong had made threats against the 
arresting officers; and several of the respondents had 
committed prior narcotics and firearms violations. 
Id. at 30. 

Finally, the government submitted an affidavit from 
the Public Information Officer for the Los Angeles 
Division of the Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA) and a DEA report on crack. The affidavit 
stated that, for cultural and historical reasons, 
particular racial and ethnic groups tend to dominate 
the distribution of particular drugs. In the officer's 
experience, black street gangs dominate the distri- 
bution of crack in the Los Angeles area. E.R. 20-23. 
The DEA report, “Crack Cocaine Overview 1989,” 
detailed the sociological patterns of crack use and 
distribution in this country. /d. at 35-62. It concluded 
that Jamaicans, Haitians, and black street gangs 
dominate the large-scale manufacture and distribu- 
tion of crack nationwide. /d. at 50. 

In response, respondents offered an affidavit from 
one of respondents’ defense attorneys stating that she 
had spoken to an intake coordinator at a drug treat- 
ment center in Pasadena, California, who told her 
that, based on his experience, there are “an equal 
number of caucasian users and dealers to minority 
users and dealers.” E.R. 85B. A second defense at- 
torney asserted in a declaration that, based on his 


discussions with judges, prosecutors, and defense 
attorneys, many non-blacks are prosecuted in state 
court for crack offenses. /d. at 85D-85E. Finally, 
respondents offered a newspaper article that stated 
that the federal penalty for crack offenses is higher 
than the penalty for powder cocaine offenses and that 
most federal defendants in crack cases nationwide are 
black. App., infra, 6a-7a, 33a. 

The district court denied the government’s motion 
for reconsideration, stating: 


The statistical data provided by [respondents] 
raises a question about the motivation of the 
Government which could be satisfied by the 
government disclosing its criteria, if there is any 
criteria, for bringing this case and others like 
it in Federal court. Without this criteria the 
Statistical data is evidence and does suggest that 
the decisions to prosecute in Federal court could 
be motivated by race. 


App., (nfra, 7a. After the government indicated that 
it would not comply with the court’s discovery order, 
the district court dismissed the indictment. /bid. 

2. A divided panel of the court of appeals reversed. 
App., infra, 68a-104a. The panel held that, to justify 
discovery on a claim of selective prosecution, a 
criminal defendant must demonstrate a “colorable 
basis for believing that ‘others similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted.’” Jd. at 80a. The panel 
determined that respondents’ affidavit failed to satisfy 
that test because it showed only that “others have 
been prosecuted, not that others similarly situated 
have not.” Jbid. Without a colorable basis for be- 
lieving that others similarly situated have not been 
prosecuted, the panel stated, “the most reasonable 


conclusion is that the defendant was selected for 
prosecution because the government believed the 
defendant committed the offense; the fact that the 
defendant is a member of a _ protected class is 
coincidental.” /d. at 80a. 

Judge Reinhardt dissented. In his view, a court 
“must assume * * * that people of a// races commit 
all types of crimes.” App., infra, 96a. For that 
reason, Judge Reinhardt concluded that, “{[wljhere a 
defendant shows a reasonable statistical basis for the 
inference that all defendants charged with a parti- 
cular federal crime over a significant period of time 
were members of a single race, such a showing 
creates, ipso facto, a colorable basis for believing that 
similarly situated members of other races were not 
prosecuted.” /d. at 96a-97a. 

3. The court of appeals granted rehearing en banc 
to resolve a conflict in its cases over the standards 
governing discovery when a defendant claims selec- 
tive prosecution. By a 7-4 vote, the court held that 
the district court had not abused its discretion in 
ordering discovery in this case. App., infra, la-67a. 

The majority first held that a district court has 
discretion to order discovery on a claim of selective 
prosecution when “the evidence provides a colorable 
basis for believing that discriminatory prosecutorial 
selections have occurred.” App., infra, 8a. Rejecting 
the view expressed in United States v. Bourgeois, 964 
F.2d 935, 940 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 290 
(1992), that discovery should be ordered only in the 
rare case, the en banc court held that the applicable 
standard does not establish a “high threshold.” App., 
infra, 9a. Instead, it requires defendants to produce 
“some evidence tending to show the essential ele- 
ments of the claim,” a standard that is met when the 


evidence is “more than frivolous and based on more 
than conclusory allegations,” and when defendants 
“make good faith efforts to obtain whatever evidence 
is readily available, as well as to provide whatever 
evidence is already in their possession.” /d. at 8a, 12a. 
Because the court believed that proving a case of 
selective prosecution is difficult and that the 
information necessary to support such a claim may be 
in the government’s exclusive possession, the court 
concluded that a more substantial threshold showing 
should not be required. /d. at lla-12a. The court also 
held that statistical disparities alone can establish a 
prima facie case of race-based selective prosecution. 
Id. at 10a & n.1. Because the standard for obtaining 
discovery should be lower than that required for a 
prima facie case, the court concluded that 
“inadequately explained evidence of a significant 
statistical disparity in the race of those prosecuted 
suffices to show the colorable basis of discriminatory 
intent and effect that warrants discovery on a 
selective prosecution claim.” /d. at lla. 

Applying those standards, the court held that 
respondents’ identification of 24 black crack de- 
fendants was sufficient to warrant discovery. The 
court stated that, although “such a small number of 
cases does not conclusively establish either of the 
elements of selective prosecution * * *, the fact that 
every single crack defendant represented by the 
Federal Public Defender in all cases that terminated 
during 1991 was black provides a colorable basis for 
believing that the challenged prosecutorial policies 
are driven by discriminatory motives and yield dis- 
criminatory effects.” App., infra, 16a. The govern- 
ment argued that respondents’ affidavit failed to 
establish a disparity and was inadequate to justify 


discovery because it “shows only that blacks have 
been prosecuted, not that others of different races and 
similarly situated have not.” /d. at 18a. The court 
concluded, however, that “[wJe must start with the 
presumption that people of all races commit all types 
of crimes.” /d. at 19a. Otherwise, the court said, “we 
would be accepting unwarranted racial stereotypes.” 
Id. at 19a n.6. The court therefore inferred a showing 
of racial disparity sufficient to warrant discovery. 
The court also rejected the government’s contention 
that no evidence of discriminatory purpose had been 
presented, expressing the view that an unexplained 
race-based disparity is sufficient evidence of dis- 
criminatory intent to justify discovery. /d. at 25a. 

Chief Judge Wallace concurred in the judgment. 
App., infra, 28a-3la. He rejected the majority’s 
holding that the discovery threshold in a selective 
prosecution case should not be “high.” In his view, 
“a high threshold ‘is appropriate because courts are 
ill equipped to assess a prosecutor’s charging deci- 
sions, and oversight of prosecutorial decisions could 
undermine effective law enforcement.’” /d. at 29a. 
Nevertheless, he concurred in the result in this case 
because of his view that an appellate court should not 
overturn a district court’s discovery order absent a 
clear error in judgment. /d. at 29a, 31a. 

Judge Rymer, joined by Judges Leavy, T.G. Nelson, 
and Kleinfeld, dissented. App., infra, 32a-67a. Judge 
Rymer summarized her disagreement with the ma- 
jority as follows: 


For the first time in this circuit or any other, the 
en bane court has held that a raw number of 
prosecutions, without reference to a comparison 
group and without evidence that others, similarly 


10 


situated except for their race, have not been 
prosecuted, provides a colorable basis for the 
existence of both discriminatory effect and dis- 
criminatory intent sufficient to order discov- 
ery from the government in connection with a 
criminal defendant’s selective prosecution de- 
fense. Also, though both the Supreme Court and 
this circuit have made clear that discriminatory 
effect and discriminatory intent are two different 
elements, each of which must exist, the majority’s 
opinion effectively collapses intent into effect by 
holding that both may be shown by the same, 
insubstantial statistic. Additionally the opinion 
has formally removed the “high threshold” that, 
until now, we explicitly (and other circuits 
implicitly) have required to be met before 
discovery relating to a selective prosecution claim 
can be ordered. In so doing, the majority opinion 
radically, and unnecessarily, rewrites the law of 
selective prosecution. 


Id. at 32a. Judge Rymer concluded that, in view of the 
majority’s relaxed standard for ordering discovery, 
government resources that would better be spent on 
prosecuting crime will instead be devoted to “chasing 
statistics.” Jd. at 67a. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


The court of appeals has held that trial courts may 
order discovery on a claim of selective prosecution 
based solely on evidence that persons of a particular 
race have been prosecuted for a particular offense, 
without any evidence that similarly situated persons 
of a different race have not been prosecuted. The 
court has further held that the same showing can 
establish a prima facie case of selective prosecution. 


1] 


Those holdings fundamentally change the legal 
principles that have governed selective prosecution 
claims until now and threaten to have a substantial 
impact on the prompt and effective enforcement of the 
criminal law. In particular, by eliminating the re- 
quirement that criminal defendants show that others 
who are similarly situated have not been prosecuted 
in order to obtain discovery on a claim of selective 
prosecution, the decision below will cause the di- 
version of government resources from prosecuting 
criminal cases to responding to motions, with the 
necessary effect of impeding prosecutions and de- 
laying trials on the merits. 

The court of appeals’ decision violates principles 
established in this Court’s cases that sharply lim- 
it judicial inquiry into exercises of prosecutorial 
discretion. It conflicts with decisions from numerous 
courts of appeals that have required defendants to 
make a threshold showing that similarly situated 
persons have not been prosecuted before discovery 
may be ordered on a claim of selective prosecution. It 
invites federal district courts to subject routine 
exercises of prosecutorial discretion to intrusive 
inquiries in a wide range of cases. And it threatens 
to impose serious costs on the administration of 
criminal justice. Review by this Court is therefore 
warranted. 

1. In Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598, 608 
(1985), this Court held that claims of selective 
prosecution must be evaluated according to “ordinary 
equal protection standards.” Accordingly, to prevail 
on a claim of selective prosecution, a criminal 
defendant must show that the enforcement of a 
criminal statute “had a discriminatory effect and that 
it was motivated by a discriminatory purpose.” /bid. 


12 


To establish a discriminatory effect, a criminal 
defendant must show that others who are similarly 
situated, except for the protected characteristic, have 
not been prosecuted. See id. at 609-610. 

In view of the Court’s recognition of the limited 
role of judicial review over exercises of prosecutorial 
discretion, the court of appeals seriously erred in 
permitting discovery to proceed based solely on 
evidence that persons of a particular race had been 
prosecuted, without requiring any evidence that 
similarly situated persons of a different race had not 
been prosecuted. Except in a case involving direct 
admissions by officials of a discriminatory purpose, 
a showing by the defendant that similarly situated 
persons of another race were not prosecuted is 
essential to justify a discovery order on a claim of 
selective prosecution. 

The exercise of prosecutorial discretion is a core 
element of the Executive’s power to “take Care that 
the Laws be faithfully executed.” U.S. Const. Art. II, 
§ 3. See Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 8382 (1985); 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 138 (1976) (per curiam); 
United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 693 (1974). “[Sjo 
long as the prosecutor has probable cause to believe 
that the accused committed an offense defined by 
statute, the decision whether or not to prosecute, and 
what charge to file or bring before a grand jury, 
generally rests entirely in his discretion.” Borden- 
kircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357, 364 (1978). A pros- 
ecutor may not bring charges based on unconsti- 
tutional criteria. Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448, 456 
(1962). “Though the law itself be fair on its face and 
impartial in appearance, yet, if it is appliec and 
administered by public authority with an evil eye and 
an unequal hand, * * * the denial of equal justice is 


13 


still within the prohibition of the Constitution.” Yick 
Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 373-374 (1886). Judicial 
inquiry into the prosecutor’s motive must be re- 
served, however, for the rare case in which there is a 
substantial and concrete basis for suspecting un- 
constitutional action in order to avoid encroachment 
into an area that the Constitution reserves to the 
Executive Branch. 

Exceptional caution in this regard is also ap 
propriate because “the decision to prosecute is 
particularly ill-suited to judicial review.” Wayte, 470 
U.S. at 607. The factors that the government must 
consider in deciding to prosecute, such as the 
strength of the case, the general deterrence value, 
and the government’s enforcement priorities, “are not 
readily susceptible to the kind of analysis the courts 
are competent to undertake.” /bid. And judicial re- 
view of prosecutorial decisionmaking “threatens to 
chill law enforcement by subjecting the prosecutor's 
motives and decisionmaking to outside inquiry, and 
may undermine prosecutorial effectiveness by re- 
vealing the Government's enforcement policy.” /bid. 

Finally, to subject a prosecutor’s motives to ju- 
dicial scrutiny at the behest of a defendant imposes 
high costs on the criminal justice system. Criminal 
defendants “often will transform [their] resentment 
at being prosecuted into the ascription of improper 
and malicious actions to the [government's] advo- 
cate.” JImbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409, 425 (1976). 
Absent threshold screening to prevent abuses, de- 
fendants would be able to employ claims of selective 
prosecution and associated discovery demands as 
powerful tools to delay the resolution of the charges 
against them. The purpose of a criminal proceeding is 
to determine a defendant's guilt or innocence, and 


14 


“encouragement of delay” in resolving that central 
issue “is fatal to the vindication of the criminal law.” 
Cobbledick v. United States, 309 U.S. 323, 325 (1940). 

In light of those principles, it is essential that 
a defendant make a subst,rtial threshold showing 
before obtaining discovery «a a claim that a pros- 
ecutor has abused his broad discretion by relying on 
discriminatory criteria. In Wade vy. United States, 
504 U.S. 181 (1992), for example, the Court considered 
whether a court may review a claim that the govern- 
ment unconstitutionally refused to file a motion for a 
departure from a mandatory minimum (or Guidelines) 
sentence based on the defendant's substantial as- 
sistance, and, if so, what showing a criminal defendant 
must make to obtain discovery to support his claim. 
The Court noted the defendant's concession that, in 
order to obtain discovery, the defendant was required 
to make a “substantial threshold showing” of an 
unconstitutional motive. /d. at 186. The Court then 
held that, because the defendant had failed to make 
such a showing, discovery was properly denied. /d. at 
186-187. In Wade, as here, the requirement of a 
substantial threshold showing properly balances the 
interest of courts in protecting the equal protection 
rights of individuals with the necessary judicial 
hesitance to explore the motives of prosecutors in 
bringing a criminal case. 

2. The court of appeals in this case departed from 
the established legal standards for evaluating claims 
of selective prosecution and thereby adopted an 
incorrect legal test for granting discovery on such a 
claim. Respondents produced evidence that all of the 
24 crack prosecutions closed by the Federal Public 
Defender in 1991 involved black defendants. The en 
bane court held that such evidence was sufficient to 


15 


support a discovery order. But as the panel in this 
case explained, respondents’ evidence “demonstrates 
only that others have been prosecuted, not that 
others similarly situated have not.” App. infra, 
80a. The showing therefore contains “a total lack 
of evidence” (ibid.) on one essential element of a 
selective prosecution claim: the disparate treatment 
of offenders who are similarly situated but for their 
race, 

The court of appeals recognized that there was no 
factual showing in this case that the government had 
failed to prosecute similarly situated persons of a 
different race. The court held, however, that such 
evidence is unnecessary because of a legal pre- 
sumption “that people of all races commit all types 
of crimes.” App., infra, 19a & n.6. According to the 
court, a criminal defendant can rely on that pre- 
sumption, unless thé government introduces 
“compelling contrary evidence.” /d. at 19a. Thus, 
under the court of appeals’ analysis, evidence that 
members of a particular race have been prosecuted is 
in itself sufficient to warrant substantial discovery, 
or a significant factual response from the government 
analyzing the pool of persons who have committed the 
crimes at issue. 

None of the reasons suggested by the court of 
appeals justifies its new rule dispensing with an 
essential element of a claim of selective prosecution. 
The court stated that “(t]he fact that evidence of 
similarly situated persons who were not prosecuted 
was submitted in other kinds of selective prosecution 
claims is of no significance in the context of a 
selective prosecution case based on race” because, in 
the court’s view, imposing such a requirement in 
relation to race-based claims “would be accepting 


16 


unwarranted racial stereotypes.” App., infra, 19a n.6. 
As the dissent in this case stated, however, the 
“need to identify similarly situated persons who have 
not been prosecuted does not evaporate when race 
is advanced as the constitutionally impermissible 
factor.” Id. at 68a. 

Reliance on a presumption, rather than concrete 
evidence, to permit the defendant to make a threshold 
showing of a discriminatory effect runs counter to 
the settled rule that, “iu the context of a criminal 
prosecution, the Government enjoys a presumption 
of having undertaken [the action] in good faith and 
in nondiscriminatory fashion.” Attorney General v. 
Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928, 947 (D.C. Cir. 1982) 
(internal quotation marks omitted), cert. denied, 459 
U.S. 1172 (1983). “[{I)n the absence of clear evidence to 
the contrary, courts presume that [prosecutors] have 
properly discharged their official duties.” United 
States v. Chemical Foundation, Inc., 272 U.S. 1, 14-15 
(1926). To overcome that presumption of prosecu- 
torial good faith, the defendant must adduce facts, not 
assumptions. 

Nothing in a claim of race-based selective prose- 
cution requires a different result. Insisting upon 
evidence that other similarly situated offenders of 
another racial group have not been prosecuted does 
not accept racial stereotypes. Rather, it recognizes 
the empirical possibility that, for socio-economic and 
historical reasons, members of particular racial and 
ethnic groups may predominate in the commission of 
certain crimes. Indeed, the government presented 
affirmative evidence in this case supporting the 
conclusion that black individuals dominate large-scale 
dealing in crack. See App., infra, 22a; see id. at 72a- 
73a (panel opinion). The court of appeals, in the 


17 


interest of avoiding what it characterized as racial 
stereotypes, was not free to adopt an evidentiary pre- 
sumption that has neither a rational nor a factual 
foundation. Cf. Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224, 
245-246 (1988); Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398, 
404-405 (1970). 

The requirement that defendants produce evidence 
of similarly situated persons who have not been 
prosecuted is necessary to “discourage fishing 
expeditions, protect legitimate prosecutorial discre- 
tion, [and] safeguard government investigative 
records.” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 940. At the same 
time, however. that requirement “still allow(s] 
meritorious claims to proceed.” J/bid. In those rare 
instances in which a claim of selective prosecution 
has merit, it should not be difficult for a criminal 
defendant to make the necessary threshold showing. 
As the cases that have authorized discovery demon- 
strate, evidence concerning similarly situated of- 
fenders is not in the government’s exclusive pos- 
session. See App., infra, 61a n.16 (discussing cases in 
which defendants introduced evidence that similar- 
ly situated persons had not been prosecuted). The 
present case illustrates that as well. If there were 
any substance to respondents’ claim, they would have 
had no difficulty producing concrete evidence that 
similarly situated persons of a different race were 
being prosecuted by the State of California. Respon- 
dents, however, failed to introduce such evidence.’ 


' In ordering discovery in this case, the district court did not 
rely on the affidavits submitted by counsel for respondents in 
response to the government's motion for reconsideration, E.R. 
184, and the court of appeals made clear that respondents’ 24- 
defendant showing alone was sufficient to support its discovery 


18 


The court of appeals did not confine its reformu- 
lation of legal principles to the discovery stage. it 
also held that a prima facie case of selective 
prosecution could be established without evidence 
that similarly situated persons of a different race 
have not been prosecuted. App., infra, 10a & nl. 
That holding profoundly unsettles the law. Where, as 
here, “the discretion that is fundamental to our 
criminal process is involved,” McCleskey v. Kemp, 
481 U.S. 279, 313 (1987), statistical evidence is ac- 
cepted as proof of intentional discrimination only 
when there is a disparity between the racial 
composition of the group selected and the racial 
composition of the group eligible for selection that is 
so “stark” as to be “unexplainable” on any ground 
other than race. Village of Arlington Heights v. 
Metropolitan Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 266 
(1977); MeCleskey, 481 U.S. at 293-294 & n.12; Yick 
Wo, 118 U.S. at 373; see Miller v. Johnson, No. 94-631 
(June 29, 1995), slip op. 12. Such proof necessarily 
entails a showing that similarly situated persons of 
a different race have not been prosecuted, Absent 
such a showing, the evidence fails to cast any doubt 
on the most obvious race-neutral explanation for the 
prosecutions brought: that the pool of persons 
prosecuted mirrors the pool of similarly situated 
offenders. 


order, without regard to the affidavits. App., infra, 17a. Even 
if those supplemental affidavits were considered, however, 
they contain only vague, conclusory, and impressionistic 
hearsay. Not only do they fail to provide solid and credible 
evidence, ef. Department of Labor v. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715, 
724-725 (1990), but they do not show that similarly situated 
persons of a different race had not been prosecuted. 


19 


3. The court of appeals’ decision conflicts with 
decisions from numerous other circuits. Although 
the courts of appeals have phrased the standard for 
obtaining discovery in different ways, the circuits 
that have squarely addressed the issue have all held 
that, before obtaining discovery, a defendant must 
make a threshold showing that others similarly 
situated have not been prosecuted. 

For example, in L/nited States vy. Cooks, 52 F.3d 101, 
105 (5th Cir. 1995), a defendant prosecuted for con- 
spiring to distribute more than 50 grams of crack 
sought discovery on a claim that blacks were 
selectively prosecuted in federal rather than state 
court. In support of that request, the defendant in- 
troduced statistical evidence that the overwhelming 
majority of those arrested for possession of crack are 
black and that such arrests have increased tenfold in 
recent years. /bid. The Fifth Circuit held that dis- 
covery was properly denied because the statistical 
evidence “failled| to satisfy the first prong of the 
selective prosecution inquiry; it [did] not establish 
that white defendants committing this offense were 
prosecuted in state rather than federal court.” /bid. 

In Attorney General vy. Irish People, Inc., the D.C. 
Circuit similarly held that, in order to obtain dis- 
covery from the government on a claim of selective 
prosecution, a defendant must not only introduce 
evidence of improper motive, but must also “make a 
colorable showing that he has been especially singled 
out, that there exist persons similarly situated who 
have not been prosecuted.” 684 F.2d at 946. As the 
court explained, “[djiscrimination cannot exist in a 
vacuum; it can be found only in the unequal treatment 
of people in similar circumstances.” /d. at 945. The 
court expressly held that evidence that there are 


20) 


unprosecuted similarly situated offenders is essential 
not only to prove a claim of selective prosecution, but 
also to obtain discovery on such a claim. The court 
stated that “we can see no reason for throwing out 
half the standard on the discovery issue. If either 
part of the test is failed, the defense fails; thus it 
makes sense to require a colorable claim of both 
before subjecting the Government to discovery.” Id. 

947. ~* 4 
” The Second, Fourth, Sixth, and Eighth Circuits 
have also held that, in order to obtain discovery, a 
defendant must make a threshold showing that others 
similarly situated have not been prosecuted. United 
States v. Fares, 978 F.2d 52, 59-60 (2d Cir. 1992) 
(discovery properly denied because defendant did not 
introduce evidence that there were “large numbers of 
similarly situated persons known to the government 
who had not been prosecuted”); United States v. 
Greenwood, 796 F.2d 49, 52-53 (4th Cir. 1986) (dis- 
covery properly denied because defendant failed to 
make non-frivolous showing that others who were 
similarly situated had not been prosecuted); United 
States v. Peete, 919 F.2d 1168, 1176 (6th Cir. 1990) 
(discovery properly denied because defendant, “aside 
from his own self-serving affidavit and an affidavit 
from his counsel, did not point to any evidence that 
others similarly situated were not prosecuted”); 
United States v. Parham, 16 F.3d 844, 847 (Sth Cir. 
1994) (discovery properly denied because, “(wJhere a 
defendant cannot show anyone in a similar situation 
who was not prosecuted, he has not met the threshold 
point of showing that there has been selectivity in 
prosecution”). 

Indeed, even the Ninth Circuit had, before the 
decision in this case, correctly required defendants 


21 


seeking discovery from the government to introduce 
“solid, credible” evidence that other similarly situ- 
ated offenders had not been prosecuted in order to 
obtain discovery on a claim of selective prosecution. 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939. In light of the Ninth 
Circuit’s abandonment of that principle, review is 
warranted to resolve the conflict in the circuits 
created by the decision in this case. 

4. The holding in this case has a substantial 
adverse impact on the administration of criminal 
cases in the Ninth Circuit. Because defendants have 
a large incentive to put up threshold procedural 
roadblocks that postpone a ci ninal trial, the decision 
in this case has spawned, and will continue to spawn, 
numerous motions arguing that particular exercises 
of prosecutorial discretion are tainted by dis- 
criminatory motives, and that significant discovery 
into the prosecutors’ files is warranted. Responding 
to those motions entails disruption, delay, and burden, 
all of which come at the expense of the investigation 
and prosecution of crime. Racial discrimination in 
the administration of the law is intolerable and 
unconstitutional, and the United States’ policy is that 
the enforcement of the criminal law must be free 
from invidious discrimination. Although courts have 
a duty to enforce equal protection guarantees in the 
face of a properly supported claim of selective prose- 
cution, the Ninth Circuit’s novel approach goes far 
beyond what is necessary or appropriate for that 
purpose. 

Until now, there have been only a handful of circuit 
court decisions authorizing discovery on a claim of 
selective prosecution. App., infra, 6la n.16 (discus- 
sing cases). As a prior Ninth Circuit decision ex- 
plained, because of the high threshold showing re- 


22 


quired by the courts, it was the “rare defendant” who 
was able to present a “sufficiently strong case of 
selective prosecution to merit discovery of govern- 
ment documents.” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939. The 
decision below establishes a new regime In which 
intrusive judicial inquiries into exercises of prose- 
eutorial discretion and substantial delays in deter- 
mining a defendant’s innocence or guilt could easily 
become routine in a wide range of cases. 

For example, the showing that was made below 
could be made by every single black criminal 
defendant charged with dealing in crack in the 
Central District of California. The decision below 
thus immediately places the entire erack enforce- 
ment program for that District under a cloud. As a 
practical matter, the Central District United States 
Attorney’s Office must be prepared to justify its 
exercise of prosecutorial discretion to a federal 
district judge each time it prosecutes a black 
defendant for dealing in crack. Numerous discov- 
ery motions have been filed in the Central District 
of California” and the effort to respond to those 


2 Selective prosecution discovery motions have been filed in 
the following crack cases. United States v. Henry, No. CR 94- 
628-CBM (C.D. Cal.); United States v. Turner, No. CR 94-649- 
JSL (C.D. Cal.); United States v. Jones, No. CR 94-820-JSL 
(C.D. Cal.); United States v. Brown, No. CR 94-821-DWW 
(C.D. Cal.); United States v. Featherstone, No. CR 94-822-SVW 
(C.D. Cal.); United States v. Tyree, No. CR 94-823-DT (C.D. 


Cal.); United States v. Banks, No. CR 94-906-JSL (C.l Cal.); 
United States v. Brown, No. CR 95-431-HLH (C.D. Cal.); 


United States v. Sanders, No. CR 95-433-HLH (C.D. Cal.). 


23 


motions has required the expenditure of significant 
resources.” 

Moreover, the decision below is likely to have a 
similar effect on United States Attorney’s Offices 
throughout the Ninth Circuit. According to the most 
recent figures compiled by the United States 
Sentencing Commission, for the year beginning 
October 1, 1993, and ending September 30, 1994, more 
than 90% of those sentenced for dealing in crack 
nationwide were black. United States Sentencing 
Comm’n, Annual Report 1994, at 107 (Table 45). It 
is therefore reasonable to expect that the Public 
Defender in almost every Ninth Circuit district could 
make a showing that would justify discovery under 
the decision below. 

Nor are the effects of the decision limited to crack 
prosecutions. Because of the proximity of California 
to Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries, . 
Hispanic defendants prosecuted in California for 
illegal reentry following deportation, in violation of 8 
U.S.C. 1326, have been able to show that most such 
de“endants are Hispanic—a showing that may well, 
uncer the court’s en bane decision, support discovery 


* In one case, more than 1,000 hours of work by attorneys, 
support personnel, and law enforcement officers were required 
to collect data and prepare affidavits to respond to a discovery 
motion. The prosecution of the case was delayed by more than 
four months by consideration of the discovery motion, before it 
was ultimately denied. See United States v. Henry, No. CR 94- 
628-CBM (C.D. Cal. June 26, 1995) (Order). The opposition 
filed in Henry formed the basis for equally substantial responses 
filed in several other crack cases. United States v. Turner, 
No. CR 94-649-JSL (C.D. Cal.); United States v. Jones, et al., 
No. CR 94-820-JSL (C.D. Cal.); United States v. Banks, No. 
CR 94-906-JSL (C.D. Cal.). 


24 


on claims that the government has engaged in 
selective prosecution in enforcing United States 
immigration laws. Indeed, based on such slender 
showings, discovery has been ordered in numerous 
illegal reentry cases, requiring the government to 
produce the criminal history record, prior deporta- 
tion status, and place of origin for all defendants 
prosecuted for illegal reentry since 1991 in the entire 
Ninth Circuit.’ The decision in this case will exacer- 
bate the burdens imposed by such motions. 


4 United States v. Fernandez-Pardo, No. CR 94-146-DT 
(C.D. Cal.), remanded for reconsideration in light of 
Armstrong, No. 94-50401 (July 19, 1995); United States v. 
Zapeda-Castro, No. CR 94-399-DT (C.D. Cal.), remanded for 
reconsideration in light of Armstrong, No. 94-50402 (July 19, 
1995); United States v. Gomez-Lopez, No. CR 94-639-RMT 
(C.D. Cal.), appeal pending, No. 94-50548; United States v. 
Cortez-Lopez, No. CR 94-531-DT (C.D. Cal.), appeal pending, 
No. 94-50553: United States v. Hernandez-Rosas, No. CR 94- 
674-DT (C.D. Cal.), appeal pending, No. 94-50592; United 
States v. Flores-Huizar, No. CR 95-101-1JH (C.D. Cal.), 
appeal pending, No. 95-50299; United States v. Arenas- 
Tosquento, CR 95-380-DT (C.D. Cal.); United States v. 
Contreras-Juarez, CR 95-383-RMT (C.D. Cal.). 

Moreover, in a published order, the Ninth Circuit recently 
remanded for reconsideration in light of Armstrong a Section 
1326 case in which discovery was denied by the district court. 
United States v. Rendon-Abundez, No. 94-50352 (July 18, 1995), 
slip op. 8319, 8320 (application for stay of mandate pending). 
Since then, the Ninth Circuit, in unpublished orders, has 
remanded 17 other cases for reconsideration in light of 
Armstrong. United States v. Gutierrez-Salas, No. 94-50411 
(July 18, 1995); United States v. Altamirano, No. 94-50469 
(July 18, 1995); United States v. Ibarra-Madero, No. 94-50598 
(July 18, 1995); United States v. Mendoza-Villalobos, No. 94- 
50566 (July 18, 1995); United States v. Campos-Oropeza, No. 
94-50595 (July 18, 1995); United States v. Chavez-Flores, No. 


25 


Discovery requests in other classes of cases are 
not far behind. According to the Sentencing Com- 
mission, for the year beginning October 1, 1993, and 
ending September 30, 1994, 93.4% of the defendants 
sentenced for trafficking in LSD, 100% of those 
sentenced for antitrust violations, and 91.4% of those 
sentenced for pornography and prostitution offenses 
were white. Annual Report, supra, at 41, 107 (Tables 
13, 45). In many offense categories, more than 90% of 
those sentenced were men. /d. at 41 (Table 13). In all 
of those cases, the defendants will be able to show that 
members of a group to which they belong have been 


34-506 12 (July 20, 1995); United States v. Fernandez-Par 
No. 94-50401 (July 19, 1995); United States v. rn tt 
No. 94-50408 (July 20, 1995); United States v. Guerra-Ramos, 
No. 94-50237 (July 19, 1995); United States v. Gutierves- 
Hernandez, No. 94-50555 (July 19, 1995); United States v 
Hermosillo-Rodriguez, No. 94-50501 (July 20, 1995); United 
States v. Hernanez-Azamar, No. 94-50605 (July 20 1995); 
United States v. Lua-Chavez, No. 94-50528 (July 19. 1995): 
United States v. Martinez-Sanchez, No. 94-50466 (July 19, 
1995); United States v. Sanchez-Portillo, No. 94-50257 (July 19. 
1995); United States v. Torres-Herrera, No. 94-50233 uly 19, 
1995); United States v. Zapeda-Castro, No. 94-50402 (July 19, 
1995). In view of those latter dispositions, it seems likely that 
the Ninth Circuit will eventually remand for reconsideration 
all Section 1326 cases in which district courts ruled on 
discovery motions before the issuance of the en banc opinion in 
Armstrong. There are at least eight such cases pending in the 
Ninth Circuit from the Central District of California alone 
United States v. Pedraza-Murillo, No. 94-50560; United States 
v. Lemus-Garcia, No. 95-50064; United States v. Melgar-Galvez 
No. 95-50087; United States v. Valenzuela-Cervantes. No 95- 
50117; United States v. Gomez-Lopez, No. 94-5054: United 
at be ar No. 94-50553; United States Vv 
ernandez-Rosas, No. -50592; Uni . 
uae ope 94-50592; United States v. Flores- 


26 


prosecuted. Even without a showing that similarly 
situated members of another group were .ot 
prosecuted, the Ninth Circuit’s ruling may well 
authorize the provision of substantial discovery. 

The danger in allowing discovery based on the kind 
of insubstantial showing made here is evident. “If 
more than this quantum of evidence is not required, 
district courts too often and unnecessarily could 
become immersed in the workings of a coordinate 
branch of government, to the benefit of neither.” 
App., infra, 84a (panel opinion). And as the dissent in 
this case added, if the decision below remains the law, 
“Irjesources intended for controlling crime, one of 
the nation’s most pressing concerns, will be chasing 
statistics instead.” /d. at 67a. Because those serious 
harms to the criminal justice system are unjustified 
by any legitimate interest, this Court’s intervention 
is warranted. 


CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be 
granted. 


Respectfully submitted. 


DREW'S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


JO ANN HARRIS 
Assistant Attorney General 


MICHAEL R. DREEBEN 
Deputy Solicitor General 


IRVING L. GORNSTEIN 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


KATHLEEN A. FELTON 
Attorney 


JULY 1995 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEA 
LS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-5003 1, 93-50057 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT 
w. 


CHRISTOPHER LEF ARMSTRONG, 
AKA: CHRIS ARMSTRONG, DEFENDANT 
and 
ROBERT ROZELLE, AARON HAMPTON: 
FREDDIE MACK: SHELTON AUNTWAN MARTIN 
DEFENDANTS-APPELLEEFS - 


+ haehatatas 


UNITED STATES oF AMERICA, PLAINTIFF-APPELLA NT 
v. 


| . CHRISTOPHER LEF ARMSTRONG, 
AKA: CHRIS ARMSTRONG, DEFENDANT-APPELLEF 


#Bahastasta 


Appeal from the United States District Court for the 
Central District of California 


— 


[Filed Mar. 2, 1995 | 


(la) 


2a 


Before: Wa.iace, Chief Judge, BROWNING, 
SCHROEDER, FLETCHER, D.W. NELSON, re 
REINHARDT, LEAVY, RYMER, T.G. NELSON, a 
KLEINFELD, Circuit Judges. 

Opinion by Judge REINHARDT; Concurrence by 
Judge WALLACE; Dissent by Judge RYMER. 

REINHARDT, CIRCUIT JUDGE: 


We review this case en banc to resolve a conflict in 
our circuit over the proper standard for eae 
whether an adequate showing has been made y a 
defendant seeking discovery in connection wit! - 
selective prosecution charge. The geen am 
from two cases filed within days of each ot 4 co 
adopted different approaches to this question. In ae 
States v. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d 1296, 1302 ( 
Cir.1992), held that the government could be ao 
to provide discovery only upon a “prima nee s oo ing 
that wrongful discrimination is probably ta ry 
place.” By contrast, United States v. a 
F.2d 935, 939 (9th Cir.1992), stated that a prima facie 
showing was not necessary. Instead, ar —_ 
adopted a “colorable basis” test. Id. We conclu . “ 
the colorable basis standard better accommodates the 
competing concerns implicated by discovery in 

selectiv osecution cases. ; 

we ae jurisdiction to hear the _ aggre 
appeal only because the district judge yr 

dismissal of the defendants’ indictments. 18 U. A. 
§ 3731. Under 18 U.S.C. § 3731, the government is —m 
permitted to appeal the discovery ruling itself. The 
statute does, however, permit the government = 
appeal the dismissal of indictments. ge _ 
district judge imposed dismissal as a sanction | wll : 
government's failure to comply with her discovery 


3a 


order. That action resulted in an appealable order 
under § 3731. 

The government does not question the reason- 
ableness of the particular sanction imposed. In fact, it 
was the government itself that suggested dismissal of 
the indictments to the district court so that an appeal 
might lie. On appeal, the government argues only 
that no sanction at all should have been ordered, 
contending that the district judge abused her 
discretion in requiring discovery. As a result, the 
appeal allows us to reach the merits of the underlying 
discovery issue. 

The district judge stayed execution of the 
dismissal order pending the outcome of this appeal. It 
appears from the record that she issued the stay so 
that the defendants would not be released prior to our 
ruling on the validity of that order. Thus, while our 
opinion is devoted to a discussion of the discovery 
order, ultimately we rule on the validity of the order 
dismissing the indictments. 

In sum, the appeal is properly before us only 
because the government knowingly accepted the 
consequence of opting for an immediate appeal rather 
than complying with the discovery order. That 
consequence is that, if we affirm, the dismissal of the 
indictments must now be implemented unless the 
order dismissing them is further stayed pending 
review by the S. preme Court. It is too late for the 
government to change its mind and comply with the 
discovery order. Were that not the rule, we would 
simply be permitting appeals of discovery orders 
under the guise of reviewing dismissal orders that 

were either only tentative or were never intended to 
take effect. In either case, we would not have 
jurisdiction over the appeals under § 3731. 


4a 


Because we hold that the defendants here satisfied 
the colorable basis requirement, we affirm the 
district court’s dismissal of the indictments. 


April of 1992, defendants Christopher 
ae Aaron Hampton, Freddie Mack, Shelton 
Martin, and Robert Rozelle were charged with federal 
offenses for their alleged involvement in the 
distribution of cocaine base, known colloquially as 
“erack” or “rock”. The charges stemmed from an 
investigation conducted under the direction of a joint 
state and federal task force comprised of detectives 
from the Inglewood Narcotics Division and agents 
from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and k irearms. 

All five defendants were charged with conspiracy 
to distribute cocaine base under 21 U.S.C. S 846. 
Some of the defendants were also charged with selling 
cocaine base under 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1) and using fire- 
arms in connection with drug trafficking in violation 
of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). The decision to charge the 
defendants with federal rather than California state 
offenses was significant. Federal law imposes a mini- 
mum sentence of 10 years and a maximum of life for 
those convicted of selling more than 50 grams of 
cocaine base. 21 U.S.C. § 841(b). By contrast, under 
California law, the minimum sentence for that offense 
is three years and the maximum is five. Cal.Health & 
Safety Code § 11351.5 (Deering 1993). All five defend- 

black. . 

aOn July 20, 1992, defendant Martin filed a Motion 
for Discovery and/or Dismissal of Indictment for 
Selective Prosecution. He claimed that the decision 
to prosecute him on federal charges was based on his 
race. The other four defendants timely joined the 
motion which was heard on September 8, 1992. 


Sa 


To support the motion for discovery, the 
defendants offered into evidence a study of every case 
involving a charge under 21 U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846 that 
the Federal Public Defender’s Office for the Central 
District of California had closed in 1991. The study 
showed that in all 24 such cases the defendants had 
been black. At the hearing, counsel for the govern- 
ment responded to the judge’s request for an 
explanation of these numbers by Stating: “I would 
have no explanation for that. But certainly I can say 
that there is no racial motivation of any sort that I am 
aware of as to why we brought this case versus any 
others.” 

The district court granted the motion for 
discovery. Specifically, the district judge ordered the 
government to: (1) provide a list of all cases from the 
prior three years in which the government charged 
both cocaine base offenses and firearms offenses; (2) 
identify the race of the defendants in those cases; (3) 
identify whether state, federal, or joint law 
enforcement authorities investigated each case: and 
(4) explain the criteria used by the U.S. Attorney's 
Office for deciding whether to bring cocaine base 
cases to the federal court. 

The government chose not to comply with the 
discovery order and instead filed a motion for recon- 
sideration. In support of its motion, the government 
provided a list of all defendants charged with 
violations of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846 over a three- 
year period (without any racial breakdown) as well as 
declarations by three law enforcement officers and 
two Assistant United States Attorneys. The declara- 
tions collectively provided four explanations for the 
study’s implication that the overwhelming bulk of 

federal prosecutions for cocaine base offenses 
targeted black defendants. 


6a 


First, the declarations asserted that socio- 
economic factors led certain ethnic and racial groups 
to be particularly involved with the distribution of 
certain drugs and that blacks were particularly 
involved in the Los Angeles-area erack trade. Second, 
the declarations contended that during the three-year 
period, seven non-black defendants had been prose- 
cuted on federal cocaine base charges, although it 
appears that all of them were members of racial or 
ethnic minority groups. (Later, the government 
identified four more non-black defendants who had 
been prosecuted during that three-year period, all of 
whom were also persons of color.) Third, the declara- 
tions asserted that many blacks had been tried in 
state court for cocaine base offenses. Fourth, the dec- 
larations contained a description of some of the 
general factors on which federal prosecutors based 
their charging decisions for crack-related offenses. 
The factors specifically referred to were the strength 
of the evidence, the deterrent value of bringing the 
charge, the federal interest in the prosecution, and 
the suspect’s criminal history. The declarations also 
referred to other unidentified “race-neutral” criteria. 

In response, the defendants bolstered the 
statistical study they had submitted at the initial 
hearing with additional declarations. First, one of the 
defendant’s counsel stated that she had spoken with a 
halfway house intake coordinator who told her that in 
his experience treating cocaine base addicts, whites 
and blacks dealt and used the drug in equal numbers. 
Second, another defense attorney asserted that his 
experience and conversations with judges, lawyers, 
and defendants led him to conclude that many non- 
blacks were prosecuted for cocaine base offenses in 
state court. Finally, the defendants submitted an 
article from the Los Angeles Times discussing the 


7a 


disparate federal sentences imposed for cocaine base 
and regular cocaine offenses. 

District Judge Consuelo Marshall denied the 
motion for reconsideration. She stated her reasons 
for the denial at the hearing: “The statistical data 
provided by the Defendant raises a question about the 
motivation of the Government which could be satisfied 
by the government disclosing its criteria, if there is 
any criteria, for bringing this case and others like it 
in Federal court. Without this criteria the statistical 
data is evidence and does suggest that the decisions to 
prosecute in Federal court could be motivated by race. 
Without expert testimony, this Court cannot con- 
clude that the defendants’ evidence is explained by 
social phenomena.” 

The government again chose not to comply with 
the discovery order. After some discussion among 
the parties and the court, the defendants moved to 
dismiss the indictments as a sanction. The district 
judge dismissed the indictments, but stayed the order 
pending appeal. The government timely appealed. 


II. 


We review for abuse of aiscretion a district 
court’s decision to order discovery. United States v. 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 935, 937 (9th Cir.1992). We have 
previously stated that, “(the task of safeguarding the 
rights of criminal defendants ultimately rests with 
the experienced men and women who preside in our 
district courts.” United States v. Balough, 820 F.2d 
1485, 1491 (9th Cir.1987). District judges are well 
situated to observe possible discrimination in the 
government'’s charging decisions. They have direct 
experience with the policies and practices of the 
United States Attorneys in their districts and have 
the opportunity to discern patterns of discrimination. 


8a 


See United States v. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d 1296, 
2 302 (9th Cir.1992). 

we preggo that it is only a discovery order 
that we are reviewing. To obtain: discovery, the 
defendants need not prove impermissible discrimina- 
tion. To order discovery, the district court need wee 
decide that the defendants have in fact demonstrate 
the existence of selective prosecution. If such con- 
clusive determinations could be made —— 
discovery, there would be no need for discovery in the 
first place. Thus, the evidence necessary to obtain a 
discovery order when a charge of selective prosecu- 
tion has been made is obviously substantially less 
than that needed to prove the charge itself. 

We conclude that discovery may be ordered when 
the evidence provides a colorable basis for believing 
that discriminatory prosecutorial selections have 
occurred. The existence of a colorable basis must be 
judged in light of all the evidence presented to the 
district court and not simply that offered by the 
defendant. “The United States Attorney must be 
given the chance to make whatever showing [he] 
deems appropriate to dispel the district judge's 
concerns.” Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1302; see also 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 941 (considering government s 
response). However, if the government fails to make a 
showing sufficient to dispel those concerns, then a 
colorable basis remains even though the government 
has provided some evidence in response. ; 

The colorable basis standard is met by “some 
evidence tending to show the essential elements of 
the claim.” United States v. Heidecke, 900 F.2d 1155, 
1159 (7th Cir.1990). Of course, “some evidence 
means the showing must be more than frivolous and 
based on more than conclusory allegations. As we 
stated in Bourgeois, 


9a 


to obtain discovery on a selective prosecution 
claim, a defendant must present specific facts, not 
mere allegations, which establish a colorable basis 
for the existence of both discriminatory 
application of a law and discriminatory intent on 
the part of government actors. 


964 F.2d at 939. 


Because the meaning of “colorable basis” first 
articulated in Bourgeois has proved elusive, we 
believe it necessary to explain the standard more 
fully. In particular, we address here three aspects of 
the showing needed for discovery in a selective 
prosecution claim that may be unclear after 
Bourgeois and concerning which the parties strongly 
disagree. 

First, Bourgeois stated that the colorable basis 
standard sets a “high threshold” that should rarely 
justify discovery. Jd. at 940. This characterization of 
the standard appears to conflict with the opinion’s 
earlier conclusion that the showing needed for 
discovery is less than that needed for a prima facie 
case. /d. at 939. In describing the colorable basis test 
as setting a “high threshold” that would be met only 
infrequently, our opinion resulted in more confusion 
than clarification. The “high threshold” language in 
Bourgeois appeared to set an artificially onerous 
burden in such claims. The inclusion of that language 
in our opinion was in error. 

Second, Bourgeois did not adequately explicate 
what showing is necessary to create a colorable basis 
for believing that particular prosecutorial conduct 
has discriminatory effects and is motivated by a 
discriminatory purpose. To succeed on a claim of 
selective prosecution the defendant must show both 
that the prosecutorial selection “had a discriminatory 


10a 


effect and that it was motivated by a wr 
purpose.” Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598, 608, 
105 S.Ct. 1524, 1531, 84 L.Ed.2d 547 (1985). — 
Wayte made clear that “ijt is appropriate wt ge 
selective ——. ss + emai to ordinary 
ion standaras. ‘ . 
— Te denied of discriminatory intent is not 
always necessary to make out an equal —" 
claim; under ordinary equal protection standards, a 
claimant may prove discriminatory purpose 
circumstantially. See Arlington Heights v. — 
politan Housing Development Corp., 429 US. ? 
266, 97 S.Ct. 555, 563-64, 50 L.Ed.2d 450 (1977). 
circumstantial showing of intent may be based “a 
evidence of discriminatory effects. “Evidence of t : 
discriminatory impact of decisions is one sort 0 
circumstantial evidence supporting an inference of . s. 
intent.” Diaz v. San Jose Unified School gore 
723 F 2d 660, 662 (9th Cir.1984) (en banc), cert. Conte 
471 US. 1065, 105 S.Ct. 2140, 85 L.Ed.2d 497 (1985); see 
also Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 93, 106 aera 
1712, 1721, 90 L.Ed.2d 69 (1986) Pasco eggoeom ge 
evidence of invidious intent may include proof o 
ijonate impact.”). 
aps oy we yt previously stated that 
statistical disparities alone may suffice to provide 
evidence of discriminatory effect and intent that wi 
establish a prima facie case of selective prosecution. 
See Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1301-02. Because 


1 To the extent that United States v. Gutierrez conflicts 
with bind proposition by holding that a statistical ——s ap 
not satisfy the effect prong of a prima facie — ; 
selective prosecution, we overrule it. See Unite : Bs 
Gutierrez, 990 F.2d 472, 476 (9th Cir.1993) (implicitly a ms 
that a significant statistical disparity will not alone satisfy 


“ 


PO BLD Veet il A PO DI ca OE le ee 


lla 


the standard for a discovery showing is lower than 
that for a prima facie case, Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939, 
we hold that inadequately explained evidence of a 
significant statistical disparity in the race of those 
prosecuted suffices to show the colorable basis of 
discriminatory intent and effect that warrants 
discovery on a selective prosecution claim. 

Finally, Bourgeois did not sufficiently emphasize 
that judges considering discovery requests on 
selective prosecution charges should bear in mind the 
evidentiary obstacles defendants face. The notorious 
difficulty of proving a race discrimination claim is 
particularly acute in the context of selective 
prosecution claims. Cf. Wayte, 470 U.S. at 624, 105 
S.Ct. at 1539 (Marshall, J., dissenting). The broad 
discretion that prosecutors possess over charging 


discriminatory effect prong of the prima facie case in selective 
prosecution claims). Accordingly, we reject the suggestion in 
the concurrence that while a defendant need not show that 
“others similarly situated’ have not been prosecuted” under a 
colorable basis test, he must do so in order to establish a prima 
facie case. [P. 30a, infra] (Wallace, C.J., concurring). Finally, 
the suggestion in the dissent that this en bane court has no 
authority to overrule Gutierrez is simply wrong. Aside from 
the fact that there is no legal basis for questioning an en banc 
court’s authority to overrule a case in order to “secure or 
maintain the uniformity of [our] decisions,” Fed.R.App.P. 
35(a)(1), and the fact that our conclusion that it is necessary to 
do so in this case is binding on future panels whether or not 
they agree with that determination, here the reason we over- 
rule Gutierrez is clear. There is a direct and interdependent 
relationship between what is needed to establish a colorable 
basis and what is needed to establish a prima facie case. As the 
dissent acknowledges, “[djiscovery cannot be unhinged from 
the merits.” [P. 49a, infra] n. 10 (Rymer, J., dissenting). Our 
examination of the prima facie standard is a necessary step, 


therefore, in our determination of what constitutes a colorable 
basis. 


12a 


decisions means that they alone will often possess the 
only information that would demonstrate such 
discrimination. Jd. As a result, the data necessary to 
a showing of selective prosecution are far less 
accessible to the defendants than to the government. 

Defendants attempting to show a colorable basis 
that warrants discovery can only be expected to make 
good faith efforts to obtain whatever evidence is 
readily available, as well as to provide whatever 
evidence is already in their possession. Cf. Arling- 
ton Heights, 429 U.S. at 266, 97 S.Ct. at 563-64 (a court 
assessing an equal protection claim based on race 
discrimination must engage in “a sensitive inquiry 
into such circumstantial and direct evidence of intent 
as may be available.” (emphasis added)). Defendants 
are not required to present sophisticated regression 
analyses closely following the dictates of the 
scientific method nor a “smoking gun” that irrefu- 
tably demonstrates the existence of prosecutorial 
bias. Nor are defendants required to compile facts 
which are not easily obtainable by them, such as the 
racial breakdown and offense characteristics of 
defendants represented by other counsel. 

The colorable basis standard we enunciate today 
brings our approach to discovery in_ selective 
prosecution claims more in line with that of the other 
circuits. While all the circuits have considered the 
issue, only four apply a stricter test. Moreover, each 
of those four requires a prima facie showing, a 


2 See United States v. Penagaricano-Soler, 911 F.2d 833, 838 
(Ist Cir.1990); St. German of Alaska Eastern Orthodox 
Catholic Church v. United States, 840 F.2d 1087, 1095 (2d 
Cir.1988); United States v. Johnson, 577 F.2d 1304, 1308 (Sth 
Cir.1978); United States v. Parham, 16 F.3d 844, 847 (8th 
Cir.1994) (stating that the “burden is a heavy one”). 


wetbst i toe Dien: «eRe VER 


A Rete wale Ce AD ee eal lt a Nm 


ne We! Se 


~s 


Le My: be le a wh wes El 


met ce. Sr 


13a 


standard which even the dissent rejects as being too 
high. See Post at 1526-27. By contrast, the “colorable 
basis” test we set forth mirrors the approach taken 
by the Third, Sixth, Seventh, Tenth, and D.C 
Circuits. Each of those circuits permits discovery 
when the defendants introduce some evidence tending 
to show the essential elements of selective pro- 
secution and the government fails to explain it 
adequately.” Finally, our approach is certainly more 
akin to that favored by the two circuits that have 
adopted a version of the non-frivolousness standard 
advocated by the dissenters in Wayte.' 

The colorable basis standard not only best reflects 
the prevailing view of the law, but it also effectively 


. See In Re Grand Jury, 619 F.2d 1022, 1030 (3d Cir.1980) 
(holding that “some credible evidence must be adduced” 
(citation omitted)); United States v. Adams, 870 F.2d 1140 
1146 (6th Cir.1989) (adopting “some evidence” test): Heidecke, 
900 F.2d at 1158 (7th Cir.) (same); United States v. PHB. 
Inc., 965 F.2d 848, 860 (10th Cir.1992) (approving approach 
adopted by the Sixth Circuit in Adams ); Attorney General of 
United States v. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928 94g 
(D.C.Cir.1982) (explaining that “some evidence tending to show 
the essential elements of [the selective prosecution claim)” is 
consistent with a “colorable showing” (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted)); see also United States »p. Washington. 
705 F.2d 489, 494-95 (D.C.Cir.1983) (noting that the district 
court permitted discovery under the “colorable showin ” test 
but affirming the denial of the selective prosecution claim) | 


= See United States v. Gordon, 817 F.2d 1538, 1540 (11th 
Cir.), rev'd and vacated in part on other grounds 836 F.2d 1312 
( 1988) (“colorable entitlement” met by evidence that ts non- 
frivolous and raises a reasonable doubt); United States v 
Greenwood, 796 F.2d 49, 52 (4th Cir.1986) (holding that 
allegations that raise “at least a legitimate issue” of selective 
prosecution merit discovery unless the “governme t’s 
explanation” is convincing). . sii 


ida 


accommodates the twin but conflicting concerns that 
discovery in selective prosecution claims implicates. 
On the one hand, selective prosecution claims call 
into question the very integrity of our system of 
criminal justice by suggesting that prosecutorial 
decisions have been “ ‘deliberately based upon an 
unjustifiable standard such as race, religion, or other 
arbitrary classification.’ “Wayte v. United States, 
470 U.S. at 608, 105 S.Ct. at 1531 (quoting Borden- 
kircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357, 364, 98 S.Ct. 663, 668- 
69, 54 L.Ed.2d 604 (1978)) (further quotation omitted). 
This concern compels district courts to be vigilant in 
ensuring that impermissible prosecutorial biases do 
not remain hidden in files kept from public view. 

On the other hand, selective prosecution claims 
invite the courts to investigate the discretionary 
charging decisions of executive branch officials that 
traditionally have not been subject to. strict 
oversight. Separation of powers concerns and the 
systemic costs that such judicial intrusions entail 
caution against setting the threshold showing for 
discovery so low that even frivolous assertions of 
prosecutorial bias may require the government to lay 
bare its files. See Wayte, 470 U.S. at 607, 105 S.Ct. at 
1530. 

The colorable basis standard ensures that the 
government will not be called to answer for its 
charging decisions as a result of frivolous and 
unwarranted allegations. At the same time, the 
standard ensures that defendants will not face 
unjustified hurdles at the discovery stage that will 
preclude them from demonstrating the existence of 


lSa 


actual discrimination in the selection of defendants 
for criminal prosecution. 


Il. 


Here, the defendants have presented sufficient 
evidence to provide a colorable basis for believing that 
the government has engaged in discriminatory prose- 
cution. They have provided statistical evidence sug- 
gesting that blacks are disproportionately charged 
with federal crack offenses. The government has not 
offered evidence in response that is sufficiently 
persuasive to refute the inference that may reason- 
ably be drawn from the statistics. Thus, the district 
Judge is not precluded from determining in her 
discretion that a colorable basis for selective 
prosecution has been shown. 


A. 


The study conducted b 
y the Office of the Federal 
Public Defender provides a colorable basis for 
concluding that invidious discrimination may have 
occurred. The study found that, of all cocaine base 


5 . 
We do not consider here the question of whether or under 


cg agen a judge may rely on facts within his own 
eterna in satisfying the colorable basis standard. See 
a _ 955 F.2d at 1300-03. That question is not 
ain , e io. only that whatever the form of the 
- ren w tever the source, the colorable basis standard 
-- fe ew . We disapprove any contrary statement in 
-Lemos. 
oui 0g aD peg certain types of rulings 
ion or clearly erroneous stand; 

a eagen de novo because of the trial court's “ hc en 
pe A ‘’“"g7e of human conduct.’ ” United States v. 

mney, Pd 1195, 1202 (9th Cir.1984) (en banc) 
(quoting Commissioner v. Duberstein, 363 U.S. 278. 289 3% 
S.Ct. 1190, 1198-99, 4 L.Ed.2d 1218 (1960), = == = 


16a 


cases closed by the Office in 1991, 24 out of 24 involved 
black defendants. To be sure, such a small number of 
cases does not conclusively establish either of the 
elements of selective prosecution. However, the fact 
that every single crack defendant represented by the 
Federal Public Defender in all cases that terminated 
during 1991 was black provides a colorable basis for 
believing that the challenged prosecutorial policies 
are driven by discriminatory motives and yield 
discriminatory effects. As a result, the study raises 
enough of a question to justify further inquiry. 

The evidence of discriminatory prosecution in this 
case is much stronger than the evidence we held 
insufficient in Bourgeois. In that case, the defend- 
ants argued that they were entitled to discovery 
based on a showing that all prosecutions for firearms 
violations stemming from a two-day police operation 
involved black defendants. The district court rejected 
the defendants’ claims, holding in part that two days 
was far too short a period to serve as a basis for 
analyzing the overall conduct of a prosecutorial 
agency. Instead of focusing on the single operation 
that resulted in the arrests of Bourgeois and his 
associates, the district court looked instead to all 
firearms prosecutions over a two-year span. The 
court found that the government had prosecuted over 
140 people during that period for the same crimes as 
those for which Bourgeois was prosecuted. Because 
Bourgeois “did not allege that all or most of these 
cases involved blacks,” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 940, the 
district court concluded that he had not established a 
colorable basis to justify discovery. We held that the 
district court did not abuse its discretion in refusing 
to order discovery in these circumstances. See id. at 


941. 


17a 


The evidence offered in Bourgeois involved only 
one operation, over a single two-da riod. 
Federal Public Defender study, by pF se A se 
an agency that represents a significant percentage of 
all federal criminal defendants, and it involved all 
cases closed over a significant period of time. 
Common sense indicates that such a study provides a 
much stronger basis for reasonably inferring 
invidious discrimination than does an analysis of only 
a single, short police operation. See id. (“{T}he 
relevant inquiry is the history of prosecutions over a 
reasonable period of time.”), 

The Federal Public Defender study showed that 
the largest single provider of legal services to federal 
criminal defendants in the Central District of 
California did not close a single case involving a crack 
charge against a non-black defendant in all of 1991. 
Although the number of cases is too small to resolve 
port rn Pacer a certainly constitutes “some 

idence tending to show t ssenti * 
rag cakeczo _— he essential elements” of 

The district judge based the discovery order on 
precisely this reasoning. “I think the number is ade- 
quate that would at least require the Government to 
provide some explanation. The time period is such 
that would require some explanation. The charges 

are the same or similar, and the race is the same in 
each case.” A district judge’s decision to permit 
further inquiry into the issue based on such an 


analysis cannot fairly be considered to be an abuse of 
discretion. 


. In determining whether a colorable basis for 
discovery exists, the district judge cannot discount 
the government's attempts to explain the evidence 


18a 


introduced by the defendant. A colorable basis must 
still exist after all the evidence presented by both 
sides has been considered. However, in evaluating the 
adequacy of the government’s response, the judge 
may exercise considerable discretion. We, in turn, 
give broad deference to the district court’s 
determinations. See Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 937. 

Here, the government proffers three responses to 
the defendants’ showing. First, the government 
challenges the defendant’s study and contends that its 
limited scope could not reasonably suggest any race- 
based disparity in the treatment of crack offenders by 
federal prosecutors. Second, the government con- 
tends that even if the defendants’ showing did suggest 
such a racial disparity, socioeconomic forces and 
race-neutral charging criteria rather than prose- 
eutorial discrimination explain that disparity. 
Finally, the government contends that the defendants 
made no showing of discriminatory purpose. The 
district judge did not abuse her discretion in con- 
cluding that these responses do not effectively dispel 
the colorable basis for discrimination that the 
defendants’ showing created. 

The government contends that the study does not 
demonstrate any discriminatory effect because it 
shows only that blacks have been prosecuted, not that 
others of different races and similarly situated have 
not. But a defendant is not required to demonstrate 
that the government has failed to prosecute others 
who are similarly situated. He need only provide a 
colorable basis for believing that other similarly 
situated persons have not been prosecuted. The study 
introduced by defendants clearly satisfies this 
requirement. “At a threshold level, whether or not 
there is a significant disparity in the treatment of 
classes of defendants can normally be determined on 


AO oe bt he hee Reet Me. le 6 eee, ere 


Sw er 


i 
. 
| 


19a 


the basis of statistical evidence, without reference to 
the underlying facts of individual cases.” Redondo- 
Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1301. 

Given the prevalence of all kinds of drugs 
throughout our community, at least some crack 
distributors are likely to be non-blacks. We must 
start with the presumption that people of all races 
commit all types of crimes—not with the premise that 
any type of crime is the exclusive province of any 
particular racial or ethnic group. These presump- 
tions and premises are, of course, not conclusive. 
Still, absent some compelling contrary evidence, we 
must assume that crime knows no exclusive race or 
creed.° 
. Here, the government’s own showing in and of 
itself provides evidence that similarly — situated 
potential defendants of other races do exist—in other 
words that non-blacks also commit violations of 21 
U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846. Thus, here the government 
does not take the unsupportable position that only 


blacks commit the crimes with which the defendants 
are charged. 


6 . . 
Accordingly, the dissent’s repeated calls for a 


“comparison pool” simply miss the point. The fact that 
evidence of similarly situated persons who were not prosecuted 
was submitted in other kinds of selective prosecution claims is 
of no significance in the context of a selective prosecution case 
based on race. Certainly, no “comparison pool” is necessary 
when the record contains statistical evidence tending to show 
that only members of racial or ethnic minority groups have 
been prosecuted. Were we to conclude otherwise, we would be 
accepting unwarranted racial stereotypes. Of course as we 
explain, the government is free either to show that the record 
is incomplete or that a reasonable explanation exists for the 


£ 


20a 


The fact that the government has identified some 
non-black crack offenders who have been charged with 
federal crimes, however, does not undermine the 
accuracy or the force of the study. The government 
has not identified a single non-black cocaine base case 
closed by the Federal Public Defender’s Office (or 
anyone else) during the study’s one-year time period. 
Instead, the government introduced evidence to show 
that over a three-year period some federal cocaine 
base prosecutions of members of other minorities did 
occur. None of the cases, however, fell within the 
parameters of the study. As a result, the govern- 
ment’s identification of these cases fails to undermine 
the accuracy of the study in any respect.’ 

In the absence of a response undermining the 
study’s accuracy, the district judge appropriately 
gave credence to the defendants’ showing that a study 
of federal cocaine base cases closed by the federal 
public defender over a particular period of time 
showed that only black defendants were involved. 
These results are highly suggestive of the fact that 
blacks constitute at the very least a disproportionate 
number of those charged with federal crack offenses. 

Of course, the government could have demonstrat- 
ed that the study’s results were a mere statistical 
fluke and that pure chance explains the fact that the 
only cases closed during the relevant period were 


The dissent complains that the study looks at all cases 
closed and suggests that it would have been preferable to look 
at all cases opened. We fail to see the difference. While there 
may be better ways to conduct a statistical study, we think that 
examining closed cases is not an unreasonable one. In this 
regard, we note that the factor used to choose the cases 
examined in the study—whether the case had been closed—was 
a factor independent of and not correlated with race. 


2la 


those involving black defendants. But the govern- 
ment failed to do that as well, Instead, the govern- 
ment’s evidence showed only that during a three-year 
period in which several thousand people were charged 
with Violations of §§ 841(a)(1) and 846, it was only able 
to identify 11 mn-black defendants charged with 
crack cocaine offenses under these statutes, all of 
whom were members of racial or ethnic minority 
groups. The identification of a handful of non-black 
crack offenders (all of whom also happened to be 
persons of color) does nothing to suggest that the 
study’s inference of race-based disparity is untenable. 
Indeed, the fact that the government could identify so 
few non-blacks charged with federal crack offenses is 
entirely consistent with the study’s inference that 
those charged federally with cocaine base offenses 
belong virtually exclusively to one racial group. 
Of course, in finding that the Federal Public 
Defender study provides a colorable basis for 
concluding that discriminatory prosecution may have 
occurred, we do not determine that the study 
establishes that the United States Attorney od 
engaged in such invidious conduct. Rather, it serves 
only as some evidence that tends to show that the 
United States Attorney may be engaging in 
discrimination and suggests that further inquiry on 
the subject is warranted. That is precisely the 
course the district court took here by permittin 
discovery, and it did not abuse its discretion in ine 
SO, . 
The government argues in the alternative that 
even if the defendants’ evidence does Suggest a 
disparity in the treatment of crack offenders on the 
basis of race, that disparity can be explained b 
reasons apart from the existence of discriminatory 
prosecution. Explanations for apparent racial dis. 


22a 


parities can in some circumstances effectively 
explain evidence that on its own would provide a basis 
for ordering discovery. For example, in Bourgeois, 
discovery was denied largely because the government 
had offered a compelling explanation of why all those 
arrested in the two-day sweep were black. The 
government there explained that the sweep had 
focused on a particularly dangerous criminal gang of 
which all members were black. The defendants had 
made no showing that an overwhelming majority of 
gang prosecutions focused on black defendants or that 
the two-day action was in any way representative of 
what occurred over a longer period. Thus, the 
government’s response provided the court with a 
compelling explanation of why all those prosecuted 
during the sweep were black. See Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 
at 941. 

In its attempt to explain the alleged disparity 
here, the government offers essentially two 
responses. Neither response is of a kind that we can 
hold adequate to dispel the defendants’ showing of a 
colorable basis. First, the government asserts that 
blacks in fact commit crack related offenses in 
disproportionate numbers. As the district judge 
noted, this assertion is based only on the generalized 
statements of DEA agents and not expert sociological 
testimony. Moreover, the response does not speak to 
the inference that blacks are more frequently 
prosecuted for federal crack offenses than even their 
allegedly disproportionate involvement with the drug 
would justify. 

The defendants additional submissions addressed 
the latter point. On the government’s motion for 
reconsideration, the defendants introduced two 
declarations from defense attorneys that provided 
additional support for the conclusion that the 


_" a a. 


23a 


charging decisions may have been discriminatory 
One declaration set forth a statement made by an 
intake coordinator at a Pasadena halfway house who 
said that, in his experience, there were an equal 
number of white and non-white users and dealers of 
crack. The other declaration was from David R. 
Reed, an experienced criminal defense attorney in the 
Central District. Reed stated that, in his experience 
as a federal criminal defense lawyer and as a director 
of the state court indigent defense panel, he had never 
handled, known of, or heard of a single federal crack 
cocaine case involving non-black defendants, but that 
he knew of many crack cocaine prosecutions against 
non-blacks in state court.* 

. The government's response that blacks are 
disproportionately involved in the crack trade is 
simply a non-sequitur. Even if it were true that 
blacks commit crack offenses in greater numbers 
‘han others, that fact would not explain why black 
violators are more likely than their non-black 
counterparts in the crack trade to be charged with a 
federal than a state offense. In short, the response 
simply does not undermine the inference from the 
evidence, including the Reed declaration, that a crack 
offender's race is a factor that prosecutors rely on in 
deciding whether to charge him with a federal 
offense. — Precisely this gap in the government’s 
explanation caused the district judge to believe 
discovery was needed. “{Wlhat the court wants to 


. , 
me The government did not object to the admissibility of these 
eclarations. As a result, the declarations constitute probative 
evidence. N.L.R.B. v. International Union of Operatin 
E ngineers, Local Union No. 12, 413 F.2d 705 707-08 (9th 
Cir.1969) (holding that “[uJnobjected to hearsay ‘is admissible 
and is of probative value in the district courts”). - 


24a 


know is whether or not there is any criteria in 
deciding which of these cases will be filed in state 
eourt versus Federal court and if so, what is that 
criteria. That is the problem I think that needs to be 
addressed, because we do see a lot of the cases and one 
does ask why some are in state court and some ri 
being prosecuted in Federal court, and if it’s not base 
on race, what’s it based on?” 

Second, the government attempted to assure the 
court that its charging decisions had nothing to do 
with race. To dispel the inference that race plays a 
part in the charging decisions of federal prosecutors, 
the government provided the district court with a 
general description of some of the criteria it relies on 
in making such judgments. The government sub- 
mitted a declaration from David C. Scheper, Assistant 
United States Attorney and Chief of the Major 
Crimes unit in the United States Attorney's Office 
for the Central District of California, in which he 
purported to delineate the criteria. “All charging 
decisions are made on the basis of whether a federal 
offense that meets this Office’s guidelines has 
occurred, the overall strength of the evidence, the 
deterrence value and federal interest associated with 
the particular case, the criminal history of the 
suspects, and other race-neutral criteria. (emphasis 
added). It was well within the district court’s 
discretion to conclude that the recitation by Mr. 
Scheper of these vague, generalized, and even 
unspecified criteria was insufficient to rebut the 
evidence submitted by the defendants. Just as 
defendants may not rely on conclusory assertions to 
meet the colorable basis test, the government may not 


' 


25a 


rely on its alleged use of amorphous criteria to 
explain a showing that satisfies the standard.’ 

Given the circumstantial evidence of discrimina- 
tion that the statistical evidence provides, the 
government’s simple assertion that it relies on 
unspecified race-neutral criteria cannot suffice to 
foreclose further inquiry. More in the way of 
concrete facts is necessary. Blanket denials of 
discrimination, though often (but not always) made in 
good faith, are to be expected in cases such as these. 
The availability of discovery must not turn on the 
unlikely event that a federal prosecutor will confess 
to private biases. As the district judge noted in 
assessing the government’s denial of racist 
motivations, “I’m not sure we'd find anybody that 
would say [otherwise ].” 

Finally, we note that the government’s contention 
that no evidence of discriminatory purpose has been 
shown is unavailing. As our earlier discussion makes 
clear, an unexplained race-based statistical disparity 
can itself be sufficient circumstantial evidence of 
discriminatory intent to justify discovery. Cf. 
Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1301 (finding that such 


* The dissent misleadingly characterizes this declaration. 


See Post at 1522-23. The specific factors listed by the dissent 
and said to be applicable to the defendants in this case were 
never shown to be part of any federal charging criteria. As the 
district court ruled, the government failed to disclose the 
eriteria used by the United States Attorney in deciding 
whether to prosecute drug offenses. Thus, the declaration did 
not “explain” why the decisions to prosecute the Armstrong 
defendants were “consistent with the guidelines.” Post at 
1522. Rather, the declaration merely asserted that they were. 
In short, the district court was provided with wholly 
inadequate information concerning the criteria set forth in the 
guidelines. 


26a 


evidence may establish a prima facie case); United 
States v. Gordon, 817 F.2d 1538, 1541 (11th Cir.), rev'd 
and vacated in part on other grounds, 836 F.2d 1312 
(1988) (finding that circumstantial evidence of intent 
establishes a prima facie case). We conclude that the 
Federal Defender Study, analyzing as it did the cases 
closed over a full year period, provided such 
circumstantial evidence of intent as is required to be 
shown at the discovery stage. 


C. 


When all of the evidence is taken together, the 
defendants have established several “specific facts, 
not mere allegations, which establish a colorable 
basis” to believe that the government has engaged in 
selective prosecution. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939. 
Moreover, the government has not explained the 
evidence of a colorable basis in a manner that would 
justify our holding that the district judge abused her 
discretion in concluding that further statistical 
inquiry and elaboration of governmental charging 
criteria was justified. A district judge observes 
countless prosecutions in the course of even a brief 
stay on the bench. There is no reason to believe that 
such judges are easily convinced that the prosecutors 
who appear before them on a daily basis may be 
carrying out discriminatory policies. When a district 
judge does find that there is evidence that reasonably 
permits one to find a colorable basis for concluding 
that race-based prosecutorial selection may have 
occurred, and when the government does not provide 
an explanation that persuasively undermines such a 
conclusion, a reviewing court should be reluctant to 


discount that judgment. 


—— 


27a 


IV. 


There are few claims as serious as the charge put 
forth by the defendants here—that the government 
has selected them for prosecution because of their 
race. Such claims deserve the most careful examina- 
tion by the courts so that the prosecutorial power 
does not become a license to discriminate based on 
race. Discovery is the crucial means by which 
defendants may provide a trial judge with the 
information needed in order to determine whether a 
claim of selective prosecution is meritorious. There 
is no basis for concluding that Judge Marshall abused 
her discretion in trying to conduct a careful 
examination of the defendants’ charges or in 
determining that the defendants made a colorable 
showing of discriminatory enforcement of the law. 
Judge Marshall acted properly by authorizing the 
defendants to inquire further into this issue. Her 
discovery order was clearly within her discretion 
We affirm the sanction she imposed for the 
government's failure to comply. As a consequence 
the dismissals of the indictments are 


AFFIRMED. 


28a 


WALLACE, Chief Judge, concurring: 


This case requires us to set forth the appropriate 
test for determining whether a sufficient showing 
has been made to allow discovery in a selective prose- 
cution claim. I thought we could all agree that this 
test should be the one that our court developed in 
United States v. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 935 (9th Cir.) 
(Bourgeois, ), cert. denied, — U.S. —, 118 S.Ct. 
29), 121 L.Ed.2d 215 (1992). There, we held that “to 
obtain discovery on a selective prosecution ¢laim, a 
defendant must present specific facts, not mere alle- 
gations, which establish a colorable basis for the 
existence of both discriminatory application of a law 
and discriminatory intent on the part of government 
actors.” Id. at 939. What divides us is whether that 
standard should be rewritten and its application to 
this case. I believe that the result the majority 
reaches is correct, and to that extent I concur. I 
write separately, however, to discuss why I do so. 


The majority correctly points out that the 
dismissal of the indictment as a sanction for non- 
compliance with the discovery order creates the 
appealable order that gives us jurisdiction over this 
appeal. However, this does not mean that the dismis- 
sal must be interpreted to be with prejudice. For a 
dismissal to be with prejudice, “the prosecution must 
be forewarned” of that fact. United States v. Loud 
Hawk, 628 F.2d 1139, 1151 (9th Cir.1979) (en banc), 
cert. denied, 445 U.S. 917, 100 S.Ct. 1279, 63 L.Ed.2d 
602 (1980). While the government agreed to the sane- 
tion in this case in order to effectuate the appeal, it 
does not appear in the record before us that the gov- 
ernment was forewarned of any sanction that would 
forbid further proceedings against the defendants. 


29%a 


Il 
Turning to the merits, the majority, in an attempt 
to “clarify” the Bourgeois standard, goes too far 
Bourgeois held that “the discovery threshold should 
not be so high as to require establishment of a prima 
facie case.” -Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939. Thus, accord- 
ing to Bourgeois, even though the defendant must 
make some showing that the elements of a selective 
prosecution claim can be met, that showing is less 
than what is ultimately required to prove selective 
prosecution. Bourgeois, as written, is sufficient for 
us to decide the case before us. 
: Undeterred, however, the majority attempts to 
clarify” this test by stating that the “‘high 
threshold’ language in Bourgeois appeared to set an 
artificially onerous burden” on discovery. While the 
formulation of the colorable basis test shows that the 
test is certainly not as “high” as that required to 
prove a prima facie case, neither is it as “low” as a 
nonfrivolous showing. The dissent’s discussion to 
the effect that a high threshold “is appropriate 
because courts are ill equipped to assess a prose- 
cutor’s charging decisions, and oversight of prosecu- 
torial decisions could undermine effective law en- 
forcement” seems to me correct. To the extent that 
the majority opinion undermines this idea, I disagree 
and align myself with the analysis of the dissent. ) 
. On the other hand, my agreement with the major- 
ity’s result is supported by a very similar observation 
about our role as a federal appellate court. Just as the 
district court should be careful not to undermine 
effective law enforcement by constantly evaluating 
the prosecutor’s charging decisions, so too should we 
as an appellate court, not second-guess the ruling of a 
district court in a close case. We are able to carry 


30a 


out this function by adhering to our standards of 
review. 

When reviewing the district court’s discovery 
ruling on a selective prosecution claim, we ask 
whether the district court abused its discretion. /d. 
at 937; see also United States v. Bryan, 868 F.2d 1082, 
1035 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 858, 110 S.Ct. 
167, 107 L.Ed.2d 124 (1989). What this means is that 
“albsent a definite and firm conviction that the 
district court committed a clear error of judgment, 
we will not disturb the district court’s decision.” 
Allen v. City of Beverly Hills, 911 F.2d 367, 373 (9th 
Cir.1990). 

In this case, the defendant provided: (1) evidence 
that all 24 cocaine base cases closed in 1991 by the 
Federal Public Defender involved black defendants; 
(2) two additional affidavits stating that there are 
Caucasian cocaine base users and that the number of 
such users prosecuted in state court is greater than 
the number prosecuted in federal court; and (3) a Los 
Angeles Times article stating that federal cocaine 
base laws carry tougher sentences. The district 
court, applying the Bourgeois standard, found that a 
colorable basis had been met, and ordered limited 
discovery. Because the abuse of discretion standard 
permits the district court flexibility, I conclude we 
should not overturn that order in this case. 

The dissent argues that, as a matter of law, the 
colorable basis test has not been met. This con- 
clusion is driven largely by the fact that there has 
been no showing here that “others similarly situat- 
ed” have not been prosecuted. I agree with the dis- 
sent that to establish a prima facie case, hard data 
about others similarly situated is necessary. Prov- 
ing a prima facie case of selective prosecution re- 
quires proof: (1) that others similarly situated have 


3la 


not been prosecuted, and (2) that the prosecution is 
en on an bos gee motive (discriminatory 
rpose or intent). Uni States v. Gutie 

F.2d 472, 475 (9th Cir.1993). To the extent the 
jority disagrees with this formulation, and discusses 
how the statistical evidence here might be sufficient 
to prove both effect and intent, I do not concur. But 
this is all beside the point at the discovery stage 
where only some evidence, tending to show selective 
prosecution, is required. Where there is evidence of a 
red — number P prosecutions directed at a 
‘ ce over a sufficiently lon riod of ti 
eventually there becomes a point we dageen tA sa 
is sufficient to establish a colorable basis of selective 
prosecution. 

The language of the colorable basis standard does 
indicate that specific facts must exist to establish the 
basis for believing that “discriminatory application of 
law and “discriminatory intent” are present. But 
without discovery, the contention that “others simi- 
larly situated” have not been prosecuted (a claim 
essential to the prima facie case) may be impossible to 
show. The evidence produced by the defense in this 
case presents a close question, and, had I been the 
district judge, I might well have concluded that it was 
insufficient to make out a colorable basis. Indeed 
this en bane case might have resulted in a different 
outcome were we to review the district judge’s 
eae oI oe however, to conclude 

» distri abus ion i y 
m Sent a . 4 used her discretion in allow- 
therefore concur i r 

A in the result reached by the 


32a 


RyMeER, Circuit Judge, with whom Circuit Judges 
Leavy, T.G. NELSON, and KLEINFELD, join, 
ting: 
“re me first time in this circuit or any other, the 
en bane court has held that a raw number of prosecu- 
tions, without reference to a comparison group and 
without evidence that others, similarly situated (ex: 
cept for their race, have not been prosecuted, provides 
a colorable basis for the existence of both discrim- 
inatory effect and discriminatory intent sufficient to 
order discovery from the government in connection 
with a criminal defendant’s selective prosecution 
defense. Also, though both the Supreme Court and 
this circuit have made clear that discriminatory ef- 
fect and discriminatory intent are two different ele- 
ments. each of which must exist, the majority's 
opinion effectively collapses intent into effect by 
holding that both may be shown by the same, insub- 
stantial statistic. Additionally the opinion has for- 
mally removed the “high threshold” that, until now, 
we explicitly (and other circuits implicitly) have re- 
quired to be met before discovery relating to a 
selective prosecution claim can be ordered. In so 
doing, the majority opinion radically, and unneces- 
sarily, rewrites the law of selective prosecution. I 
therefore dissent. 


The government’s appeal requires us to decide 
whether five defendants indicted in — rd = 

iring to distribute cocaine base (in pa roug 
ae a armed guard) in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 846 
and 841(a)(1), four of whom are also charged with 
using a firearm in connection with the drug offenses 
under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c), are entitled to discovery on 
their claimed defense of selective prosecution on 


=x 


33a 


account of race.’ I would hold that they are not 
because Armstrong has failed to show a colorable 
basis for the existence of either of the elements 
required for selective prosecution, discriminatory 
effect and discriminatory intent. 

Armstrong seeks to show that this prosecution was 
undertaken not because of the crimes committed, but 
rather because the United States Attorney's Office 
prosecuted these defendants as part of a systematic 
policy intentionally to discriminate against blacks in 
its prosecutorial decisions. The discovery request 
was based on evidence that of the 24 defendants 
represented by the Federal Public Defender’s Office 
(FPD) in § 846 and § 841(a)(1) cocaine base cases 
closed by the FPD in 1991, all were black. The filing 
stamp numbers on the closed cases in this study 
range from “88” to “91,” indicating that the defend- 
ants whose cases were closed by the FPD in 1991 
were prosecuted over a four-year period. 

After the district court ordered discovery, the 
government moved for reconsideration and presented 
evidence that at least four non-black defendants were 
prosecuted on crack charges during the period when 
the cases in the FPD’s study were opened, two of 
whom were represented by the FPD, and at least 
seven were charged in 1992, the year the Armstrong 
defendants were indicted. In addition, the govern- 
ment submitted declarations indicating that in total, 
without breakdown by type of drug, approximately 
2400 persons were charged with violations of § 841, 
and 1700 with violations of § 846, in the past three 
years; that race played no part in the investigation 
which resulted in the Armstrong defendants’ arrests: 


' I refer to all of the defendants collectively as 
“Armstrong.” 


34a 


that the county district attorney's offices prosecute 
many black cocaine base offenders; that socio- 
economic factors account for the prevalence of drugs 
and trafficking patterns in different communities; and 
that all charging decisions made by the United States 
Attorney’s Office, including in this case, are made on 
the basis of whether a federal offense meeting the 
Office’s guidelines has occurred, the overall strength 
of the evidence, the deterrence value and federal 
interest associated with the particular case, the 
criminal history of the suspects, and other race- 
neutral criteria. Specifically as to this case, the 
declaration of the then-Chief of the Criminal 
Complaints Section explained why the Armstrong 
defendants were prosecuted and stated that the 
decision to charge them was consistent with the 
guidelines: there were over 100 grams of cocaine base 
involved—more than twice the quantity necessary to 
trigger a ten year mandatory minimum sentence, 
there were multiple sales involving multiple defend- 
ants, thereby indicating a substantial crack cocaine 
ring; the case was jointly investigated with a federal 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agent; 
there were multiple federal firearms violations 
intertwined with the narcotics trafficking; the over- 
all evidence was extremely strong, including audio 
and videotapes of the defendants, threats had been 
made to arresting officers by Armstrong, and several 
of the defendants had criminal histories including 
narcotics and firearms violations. 

Armstrong countered with a declaration by de- 
fense counsel stating that she had spoken with a 
halfway house intake coordinator who told her that in 
his experience in treating cocaine base addiction, the 
number of caucasian and minority users and dealers 
is the same. Armstrong also offered a declaration by 


3Sa 


another defense attorney averring that of the defen- 
dants facing crack charges whom he has represented 
in federal court, all were black, and that he has never 
heard of non-blacks being prosecuted in federal court 
whereas based on what he has heard, he believes that 
the state -prosecutes many non-black cocaine base 
offenders in state court. Finally, Armstrong prof- 
aoe = year ete the Los Angeles Times, which 
cates that blacks di 

per caite—Aberg disproportionately commit co- 

The district court found that Armstrong had made 


a sufficient showing to requi 
: quire the governm 
provide to the defense: cos 


. (1) A list of all cases from the prior three years 
in which the government charged both cocaine 
base offenses and firearms offenses; 


(2) The race of the defendant(s) in each of those 
cases; 


(3) Whether each case was investigated by 


federal, state or joint law enforcement author- 
ities; and 


(4) An explanation of the criteria used b 
the 
United States Attorney’s Office for rhe. Ess 
whether to bring cocaine base cases federally. 


The court’s initial ruling concluded: 


In this case we have a fairly general charge— 
one that we see regularly in this courthouse—and 
whether it’s coincidental or not, that out of the 
group that the public defender—that Ms 
©’Connor provides us information on—all of them 
happen to be of the same racial group. 


) } think the number is adequate that would at 
east require the Government to provide some 
explanation. The time period is such that would 


36a 


require some explanation. The charges are the 
same or similar, and the race is the same in each 
case. | 
In denying the motion to reconsider, the court 
further concluded: 

The statistical data provided by the Defendant 
raises a question about the motivation of the 
Government which could be satisfied by the 
Government disclosing its criteria, if there is any 
criteria, for bringing this case and others like it 
in Federal court. 


Without the criteria, the statistical data is 
evidence and does suggest that the decision to 
prosecute in Federal court could be motivated by 


race. 


Without expert testimony, this Court cannot 
conclude that the Defendants’ evidence is ex- 
plained by social phenomena. 


The executive branch has a responsibility to 
dissuade public opinion that its decisions to 
prosecute or where to prosecute are not motivated 
by improper reasons such as race, and the 
evidence of who was prosecuted and why those 
persons were prosecuted and where those persons 
were prosecuted is within the peculiar knowledge 
of the Government and therefore, as the Court 
indicated at the previous hearing, it would be this 
Court’s position that it is the Government that 
would have to provide that evidence so that 
Defendants could analyze it and decide if there is 
any basis for filing a motion to dismiss. 

The government declined to comply with the order, 
and the court granted Armstrong’s motion to dismiss. 
This appeal followed. 


| 
; 
) 


37a 


The panel, relying on United States v. Bourgeois, 
964 F.2d 935 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, — U.S. , 113 
S. Ct. 290, 121 L.Ed.2d 215 (1992), reversed on the 
ground that a defendant must supply a colorable basis 
for believing that others similar to him—except that 
they are not in his protected class—were not pros- 
ecuted, and that other evidence adduced by 
Armstrong was too flimsy to be accorded any weight. 
United States v. Armstrong, 21 F.3d 1431 (9th Cir. 
1994).* 

We went en banc in part to resolve the tension 
between Bourgeois (“colorable basis” founded on 
specific facts required for discovery of whether 
prosecution is discriminatory) and United States v. 
Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d 1296 (9th Cir.1992) (“prima 
facie showing” required to make prosecution answer 
for a particular charging or plea bargaining decision 
satisfied by district court’s sua sponte suspicion of 
unconstitutional conduct or a defendant’s evidence 
demonstrating reasonable inference of invidious 
discrimination), which the panel construed as being 
limited to discovery orders based on the judge’s own 
experience. Without commenting one way or the 
other on a court’s sua sponte powers to initiate a 
selective prosecution inquiry because that issue is 
not before us,’ I agree with the majority that dis- 

covery should be governed by a single standard. 


» 


“ Hon. Harlington Wood, Jr., Senior United States Circuit 
Judge, Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, sitting by designa- 
tion, wrote for the court. I joined that opinion, and Judge 
Reinhardt dissented. 

* The district judge in this case ruled on the basis of the 
defendants’ motion for discovery. 

Although the majority opinion indicates that it does not 
consider the question of whether or under what circumstances 
a judge may rely on facts within her own experience, [pp. 7a- 


38a 


However, I disagree with the majority’s opinion. 
Although it appears to embrace the “colorable basis” 
standard we adopted in Bourgeois, the opinion ac- 
tually guts it by holding that when a selective 
prosecution claim is based on race, evidence “tending 
to show that only members of racial or ethnic 
minority groups have been prosecuted” will suffice. 
[P. 19a, supra], n. 6. Instead, I would reaffirm the 
Bourgeois standard, and hold that the district court 
erred as a matter of law in finding that Armstrong 
made an adequate showing in the absence of any 
evidence that others, similarly situated except for 
being non-black, were not prosecuted. By the same 
token, the court should not have ordered discovery 
based on its conclusion that “the statistical data 
provided by the Defendant raises a question about the 
motivation of the Government”; the proper legal 
standard is not whether the defendant’s evidence 
“raises a question,” but whether it provides a 
colorable basis for the existence of discriminatory 
effect and discriminatory intent. In the absence of 
any evidence that the government purposefully 
selected these defendants for prosecution on account 
of their race, there is no colorable basis for the 
existence of discriminatory intent as a matter of law. 
The district court also went astray in founding its 
order on a “fairly general charge” instead of on 
specific facts as to these defendants. Further, at the 


8a, supra], it cites Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1298, 1302, with 
approval on the point that district judges are well situated to 
discern “patierns of discrimination.” [Pp. 7A-8a, supra). To 
the extent this simply means that when exercising discretion 
within the law, reviewing courts should be deferential to the 
district judge, I could not agree more. However, to the extent 
that the opinion means to endorse discovery based on some- 
thing outside the record, it is dicta and I disagree. 


| 
? 
| 
. 
: 
| 


ee es 


39a 


discovery Stage, it is the defendant’s burden to 
provide facts that, if fleshed out by the discovery 
sought, would tend to prove both elements of selective 
prosecution. Thus, the district court’s order fails in 
two additional respects: first, it shifts to the govern- 
ment the “responsibility to dissuade public opinion,” 
but ignores the government’s submissions; and 
second, the discovery ordered does not advance the 
ball game because racial identity and criteria for 
federally charging crack and firearms violations wil] 
still only show who was prosecuted, not who wasn’t. 
In any event, the FPD’s study relates to crack cases 
closed by that office and says nothing about any pool 
of crack and firearms offenders. As the discovery 
that was ordered targets prosecutions for both crack 
and firearms violations, it lacks any basis at all. | 
would, therefore, reverse. ; 


II 


Armstrong contends that the en bane court should 
adopt the “reasonable inference” test articulated in 
Redondo-Lemos instead of the “colorable basis” 
standard set out in Bourgeois. Short of this, he 
suggests that Bourgeois and Redondo-Lemos could 
be reconciled by defining “colorable basis” as the 
Seventh Circuit did in United States v. Heidecke, 900 
F.2d 1155 (7th Cir.1990), to mean that a defendant 
need only produce “soiue evidence to show the 
essential elements of the claim.” Jd. at 1159. 

I do not believe that it is necessary to do more than 
resolve the conflict between Bou rgeois and Redondo- 
Lemos, because the evidence in this case does not 
pass muster under either the Bourgeois or Heidecke 
standard. See United States v. Kerley, 787 F.2d 1147 
1150 (7th Cir. 1986) (applying Heidecke test sug- 
gested by Armstrong but reversing discovery order 


40a 


because the defendant presented no evidence that he 
was singled out for prosecution while others were + 
prosecuted, though they similarly were in violation Oo 

the law). Nevertheless, the majority opinion uses 
this en banc opportunity to look afresh at what the 
standard for discovery on a selective prosecution 

se should be. . 

“Tore is no question that selective prosecution 
claims of the sort we address today are deeply 
troubling. Such claims bring powerful interests “pe 
conflict: the nation’s commitment to rid itself ) 

drugs, on the one hand, and the individual’s right not 
to be singled out for prosecution on account of race, 
on the other. They reflect concerns which are 
legitimate and widespread—and which I pee Pees 
mandatory minimum sentences In general, and those 
for crack offenses in particular, fall heavily on young 
black males.’ Such things are, however, up to the 
Congress and the United States Sentencing Com- 
mission. Our task is far more discrete, having to do 
only with the specific showing made _ by the 
defendants in this particular case, and being 
constrained by the difference between our role as 
judges and the role of the government as prosecutor, 
which the Supreme Court has admonished us to 
remember in the context of selective prosecution 


claims: 
In our criminal justice system, the Government 


retains “broad discretion” as to whom to pros- 
ecute. “{S]lo long as the prosecutor has probable 


+ Data from the United States Sentencing Commission, for 
example, indicate that 87.9 percent of all those convicted for 
cocaine base offenses nationwide are Aivieas- American. 
United States Sentencing Commission Annual Report 1993, 
table 62. 


4la 


cause to believe that the accused committed an 
offense defined by statute, the decision whether or 
not to prosecute, and what charge to file or bring 
before a grand jury, generally rests entirely in 
his discretion.” This broad discretion rests 
largely on the recognition that the decision to 
prosecute is particularly ill-suited to judicial 
review. Such factors as the strength of the case, 
the prosecution’s general deterrence value, the 
Government’s enforcement priorities, and the 
case’s relationship to the Government’s overall 
enforcement plan are not readily susceptible to 
the kind of analysis the courts are competent to 
undertake. Judicial supervision in this area, 
moreover, entails systemic costs of particular 
concern. Examining the basis of a prosecution 
delays the criminal proceeding, threatens to chil] 
law enforcement by subjecting the prosecutor's 
motives and decisionmaking to outside inquiry, 
and may undermine prosecutorial effectiveness by 
revealing the Government’s enforcement policy. 
All these are substantial concerns that make the 


courts properly hesitant to examine the decision 
whether to prosecute. 


United States v. Wayte, 470 U.S. 598, 607, 105 S.Ct. 
1524, 1530, 84 L.Ed.2d 547 (1985) (citations omitted ). 
In that light, I disagree with the majority that 


there is any call to revisit Bourgeois. There we held 
that 


to obtain discovery on a selective prosecution 
claim, a defendant must present specific facts, not 
mere allegations, which establish a colorable 
basis for the existence of both discriminatory 
application of a law and discriminatory intent on 
the part of government actors. This is a high 


42a 


threshold. As has been true historically, it will be 
the rare defendant who presents a sufficiently 
strong case of selective prosecution to merit 
discovery of government documents. 


964 F.2d at 939. Bourgeois is in the mainstream of 
the law,’ and appropriately balances the interests of 


5 The First Circuit test for an evidentiary hearing is 
sufficient facts tending to show that the defendant has been 
selectively prosecuted and raising a reasonable doubt about the 
propriety of the prosecutor's purpose. United States v. 
Penagaricano-Soler, 911 F.2d 833, 838 (Ist Cir.1990). The 
Third Circuit’s test is “colorable entitlement to the defense of 
discriminatory prosecution. ...” United States v. Berrigan, 
482 F.2d 171, 181 (3rd Cir.1973). The Fifth Cireuit’s is 
“eolorable claim of selective prosecution,” United States v. 
Kahl, 583 F.2d 1351, 1355 (5th Cir.1978). The Sixth Cireuit 
allows discovery where there is “some evidence tending to 
show the existence of the essential elements of the defense.” 
United States v. Adams, 870 F.2d 1140, 1146 (6th Cir. 1989). 
The Seventh Circuit's standard is a “colorable basis for the 
claim,” which it defines as “some evidence tending to show the 
essential elements.” United States v. Heidecke, 900 F.2d 11565, 
1158-59 (7th Cir.1990). The D.C. Circuit requires a “colorable 
showing” of both elements. Attorney General of the United 
States v. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928, 983 (D.C.Cir.1982), 
cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1172, 103 S.Ct. 817, 74 L.Ed2d 1015 


(1983). 

The Fourth Circuit requires a nonfrivolous showing of both 
elements to merit discovery. At least a legitimate issue of 
improper governmental conduct must be raised, and in 
determining whether one has been, the district court may 
consider the government's explanation for its conduct. United 
States v. Greenwood, 796 F.2d 49, 52 (4th Cir.1986) (relying on 
Wayte dissent). The Eleventh Circuit's standard is “colorable 
entitlement” which will be met by evidence that is “past the 
frivolous state and raise{s} a reasonable doubt as to the 
prosecutor's purpose.” United States v. Gordon, 817 F.2d 
1538, 1540 (11th Cir.1987), vacated on other grounds, 836 F.2d 


43a 


een discretion and freedom from invidious 
sere apeage’ It correctly acknowledges that the 
convoy ny age is a because the showing 
merits 

ilaoe > bien, of a selective prosecution 

yo threshold” is appropriate because courts 
yack equipped to assess a prosecutor’s charging 
ecisions, and oversight of prosecutorial decisions 
— unde rmine_ effective law enforcement. 

urgeois, 964 F.2d at 939-40; Wayte, 470 U.S. at 607- 


08, 105 S.Ct. at 1530-31. ’ ; 
Bourgeois: As we explained in 


We believe that this high threshold will 
discourage fishing expeditions, protect legitimate 
prosecutorial discretion, safeguard government 
investigative records, and yet still allow meri- 
torious claims to proceed. This threshold also 
draws on the effectively high hurdle all the 
circuits have adopted, regardless of the phras- 
eology of their standards. Our research of circuit 
court opinions uncovered only a handful of 
instances in the past few decades in which a 
defendant obtained discovery or dismissal of 
charges based on a selective prosecution claim. In 
those cases, the defendants presented solid 
credible evidence in support of their claims. . 


964 F.2d at 940. 


1312 (1988) (quoting United Stat ; rel, 696 Fs 73, 475 
a Civ.19680. x ares ?v. Hazel, 606 fk 2d 473. 475 
The Second and Eighth Circuits require that a defendant 
ay e a prima facie showing before discovery can be ordered. 
: t. German of Alaska Eastern Orthodox Catholic Church » 
nited States, 840 F.2d 1087, 1095 (24 Cir.1988); United States 


v. Parham, 16 F.3d 844, 846 (8th Cir.1994 ; 
, . =o ) (st 
defendant's burden is a “heavy one”). mating Gat the 


44a 


The majority opinion nevertheless —— that 
the meaning of the Bourgeois standard is a 
and uses that excuse to rewrite the law. - er, 
“eglorable basis” as a standard is no more € usive 
than any other threshold standard. It is the — _ 
most other circuits apply. Although there may ne har 
way precisely to define it, I doubt that many j nen 
would disagree that “colorable basis” is a lower = 
of specificity than a prima facie showing, but grea - 
than an allegation. As Bourgeors indicates, It pasar 
requires some specific facts—not allegations, — 
lation, conclusions, or questions—that are so Z 
credible enough to ee that _ elemen 

ive prosecution defense exist. . 
while the majority opinion purports to clarify what 
“eolorable basis” means, it actually crafts a *" 
standard which is far more elusive than Bou — . 
is variously described as “some evidence ten a 
show the essential elements of the claim, ag 
supra|, “more than frivolous and pesmi “er 
conclusory allegations,” id., more than “frivo ous ~ 
unwarranted allegations,” [p. I4a, supra l, a : 
evidence that tends to show that the United r “1 
Attorney may be engaging in discrimination, [p. om 
supra], and “evidence that reasonably permits one 
find a colorable basis for concluding that “yo 
prosecutorial selection may have occurred. - _ 

supra). To permit discovery on a showing me i“ 

crimination “may” have occurred in the a rs 

any facts tending to show that the defendant nega 

singled out for prosecution on account of race bu a 

out of line with all other circuits. To the exten 

the new threshold is “more than frix cous = 
unwarranted allegations,” it may well be “more akin 


— 


—$—$—— 


6 Seen. 16, infra at (61a-62a). 


45a 


to that favored by two circuits and the dissent in 
Wayte, but is out of step with the others.’ Bourgeois 
is in line with the majority view, is faithful to the 
Supreme Court’s admonitions in Wayte, and appro- 
priately balances the interests at stake. We should, 
therefore, stick with it.” 


We previously held in Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 937, 
and the majority continues to hold, that a district 
court’s decision to order or not order discovery is 
reviewed for abuse of discretion. While we should not 
substitute our judgment for that of the district court, 
we do reverse even under this deferential standard 


_ 


See n. 5, supra at [42a-43a). 

The majority opinion also appears to make the showing 
required—whatever its threshold—contingent on whether the 
facts that would establish a colorable basis are “easily 
obtainable” by defendants. ([P. 12a, supra). It does so by 
relying on the dissent in Wayte. 470 U.S. at 624, 105 S.Ct. at 
1539. However, all that Justice Marshall said on this point was 
that a standard which requires a defendant to present “some 
evidence tending to show the existence of the essential 
elements of the defense” “recognizes that most of the relevant 
proof in selective prosecution cases will normally be in the 
Government's hands.” /d. In no way did he suggest a moving 
target depending on “what evidence is readily available,” as 
the majority opinion holds. [P. 12a, supra). In any event, we 
have previously held that the fact that information might be 
helpful does not get defendants over the discovery hurdle. See 
eg., United States v. Ness, 652 F.2d 890, 892 (9th Cir.), cert. 
denied, 454 U.S. 1126, 102 S.Ct. 976, 71 L.Ed.2d 113 (1981). The 
showing required should be a colorable basis that discrimina- 
tory effect and intent exist; it should not vacillate depending 
upon whether counsel has access to more or less information, or 
how readily available the evidence is. See, e.g., United States 
v. Steele, 461 F.2d 1148, 1151 (9th Cir.1972) (Steele himself 


located six other similarly situated persons who had not been 
prosecuted). 


- 


46a 


when the court either does not apply the correct law, 
or rests its decision on a clearly erroneous finding of 
material fact. Marchand v. Mercy Medical Center, 
22 F.3d 933, 926 (9th Cir.1994). 


IV 


I would hold that the district court erred as a 
matter of law in concluding that Armstrong made a 
sufficient showing in the absence of any evidence that 
similarly situated non-black offenders were not 
prosecuted, and in the absence of any finding that the 
statistical pattern presented could be so stark, if 
fleshed out by discovery, as to be inexplicable on 
grounds other than intentional discrimination on the 
basis of race. The Supreme Court has made clear 
that unless there is an overtly discriminatory 
classification, which Armstrong does not claim in 
this case, a defendant is required to show both 
discriminatory effect and discriminatory intent in 
order to make out a defense of selection prosecution. 
Wayte, 470 U.S. at 608, 105 S.Ct. at 1531. Without any 
evidence of similarly situated offenders who share 
everything in common with the defendant except for 
the constitutionally impermissible factor, there can 
be no colorable basis for the existence of dis- 
criminatory selection or effect. Nor is there a color- 
able basis for*the existence of discriminatory intent 
because intent to discriminate against black defend- 
ants cannot possibly be inferred from only a statistic 
that has no comparison pool, is statistically 
insufficient to suggest a pattern inexplicable save for 
race, and is in fact explained on grounds having 
nothing to do with race: that these defendants dealt in 
substantial quantities of crack, many times, using 
firearms; made threats; had prior drug and firearms 
convictions; and were caught in the act on tape. 


~~ Ke be eee ©» eee Ue ee Ee ee re eee A ee ee 


47a 


While acknowledging that both discriminatory 
effect and discriminatory intent must be shown, the 
majority opinion effectively collapses the two by 
holding that “inadequately explained evidence of a 
significant statistical disparity in the race of those 
prosecuted suffices to show the colorable basis of 
discriminatory intent and effect that warrants 
discovery on a selective prosecution claim.” [ Pp. 10a- 
Ila, supra]. In this it is incorrect: from the statistic 
in evidence, “statistical disparity” cannot be inferred 
Even if it could be, the statistical disparity which 
could be inferred from 24 closed prosecutions against 
black defendants in one year and 11 opened cases 
involving non-black defendants over a four year period 
has no possibility of being “stark” enough to show 
discriminatory purpose when the government has 
offered legitimate, race-neutral reasons for prose- 


cuting crack cases in general and the Armstrong 
defendants in particular. 


A 


We have held a number of times in a number of 
different cases that the first thing a defendant must 
show is that “others similarly situated have not been 
prosecuted. ...” United States v, Wayte, 710 F.2d 
1385, 1387 (9th Cir.1983), aff'd, 470 U.S. 598, 105 S.Ct 
1524, 84 L.Ed.2d 547 (1985), quoted in Bourgeois, 964 
F.2d at 938. Bourgeois failed to establish a colorable 
basis for the first element of his claim because he 
made “no attempt to show that, in any span of time 
the government has declined to prosecute similarly 
situated, non-black felons illegally in possession of 
firearms.” Ad. at 941. The majority opinion mis- 
takenly distinguishes Bourgeois by emphasizing that 
it involved only one operation, over a single two-day 
period; in fact, Bourgeois’ focus was on both the span 


48a 


of time and scope necessary to have probative — 
and the lack of similarly situated ee aes 
United States v. Wilson, 639 F.2d 500 (9th oe — , 
the defendants claimed that they were singl he a y 
the government because they were tax protes oe 
The evidence showed that out of 425 pear 
filed an “exempt” W-4 form the only two who 7 
prosecuted were tax protesters; that an a 
investigator was unaware of any tax perpen — 
were not prosecuted for non-payment 0 taxe a 
that others whose W-4 forms might bear od 
gation had not been prosecuted. We held tha = 
evidence did not suffice for a selective prosecu 


claim as the defendants 


have not shown, as the Oaks|"] test requires, eo 
other|s] similarly situated who have not ager 
their rights have not been prosecuted. bi es * : 
tics listed above show that there were 0 vai 
prosecutions and the Wilsons have not shown : - 
those defendants were also tax protestors. TI . 
being so, we cannot find that the Wilsons — 
their burden of proving that the serie 
prosecute was made because they exercised their 
constitutional rights. 


Id. at 504. In United States v. Aguilar, 883 fag my 
(9th Cir.1989), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 1046, 111 5.Ct. 


% The reference is to United States v. Oaks, 527 fon e 
(9th Cir.1975), cert. denied, 426 U.S. 952, 96 SAA. etal . 
L.Ed.2d 1191 (1976). Oaks held that “(tlo sustain — Se 
selective or discriminatory atenage 36 suger enaiae 
| ‘i at * ilarly s 
burden of proving first that others sim —- 

P duct, and secon a 
av t been prosecuted’ for similar conduct, * 
aaa a based on an impermissible _ sts om - 

a i i i ‘ ment ri 

; ligion or his exercise of his first amen mt a 
ragintins " Id. at 940, quoting [ nited States v. Scott, 521 
F.2d 1188 (9th Cir.1975). 


ee 


ee eee 


49a 


751, 112 L.Ed2d 771 (1991), we upheld the district 
court’s denial of defendants’ request for discovery and 
an evidentiary hearing on their motion for dismissal 

upon selective prosecution because the 
defendants’ suggested definition of those similarly 
situated excluded the most relevant analogous class. 
Stating that “{albsent a similarly situated contro] 
group, the government’s prosecution of a defendant 
exercising his constitutional rights proves nothing,” 
id. at 706, we joined the D.C. Circuit in the 
understanding that “ {discrimination cannot exist in 
a vacuum; it can be found only in the unequal 
treatment of people in similar circumstances.’ ” Id., 
quoting Attorney General of the United States v. 
Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928, 946 (D.C.Cir.1982), 
cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1172, 103 S.Ct. 817, 74 L.Ed.2d 
1015 (1983). Accordingly, we held that “if similarly 
situated persons are being prosecuted then appellants 
fail to make the required showing.” Jd. Likewise in 
United States v. Gutierrez, 990 F.2d 472 (9th 
Cir.1993),” we affirmed the district court’s failure to 


” Although the majority purports to overrule Gutierrez to 
the extent that it is inconsistent with the opinion’s view that 
“statistical disparities alone may suffice to provide the 
evidence of discriminatory effect and intent that will establish 
a prima facie case of selective prosecution,” [p. 10a, supra}, 
n. 1, I believe Gutierrez remains good law in part because | 
wrote it, and in part because I question the license of an en 
bane court considering a discovery issue to overrule the 
standard for prevailing on the merits. Discovery cannot be 
unhinged from the merits; retroactively to change the merits 
standard to facilitate discovery is to put the cart before the 
horse. It is all the more remarkable to do so with respect to a 
decision that was not taken en bane, and that is consistent with 
all prior authority in this circuit, as well as others, see, e.g., 
Irish People, 684 F.2d 928; United States v. Huff, 959 F.2d 731, 
735 (8th Cir.) (statistics showing 87% of people arrested are 


50a 


grant a motion to dismiss for selective prosecution on 
charges of distributing cocaine base within 1000 feet 
of a school because “[s]tatistics showing a high 
percentage of certain groups being prosecuted, alone, 
are insufficient to establish that similarly situated 
persons are not being prosecuted.” /d. at 476. And in 
Ness, we considered a showing quite similar to 
Armstrong’s and held with respect to Ness’s 
showing: 

While he showed that similarly — situated 
members of his tax protest group had also been 
prosecuted, Ness did not show a single instance of 
a similarly situated but nonprotesting violator 
who had not been prosecuted. The fact that access 
to the Government’s files might be helpful to a 
defendant seeking to prove discriminatory pro- 
secution does not relieve him of the burden of 
making an initial showing, nor does that fact, in 
itself, entitle every defendant raising such a claim 
to discovery. 

652 F.2d at 892. | 

Thus it is well settled: to succeed on a claim of 
selective prosecution, a defendant has the burden of 
establishing that others similarly situated have not 
been prosecuted. The burden for purposes of dis- 
covery is substantively the same, only it is met by 
showing a colorable basis that others similarly 
situated have not been prosecuted." As the panel 
explained: 


African-Americans insufficient to establish prima facie case), 
cert. denied, —- U.S. ——, 118 S.Ct. 162, 121 L.Ed.2d 110 
(1992). 

|! This view is in accord with all other circuits to have 
considered the question. See, e¢.g., /rish People, 684 F.2d at 946 
(reversing discovery order; no evidence others werent 


ll a ee 


Sla 


Requiring defendants to provide a colorable 
basis for believing that others similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted is a reasonable require- 
ment. “Selective prosecution” implies that a 
selection has taken place. If a defendant is part of 
a protected class, that alone does not provide a 
colorable basis for believing that a selection has 
taken place; nor does evidence demonstrating that 
other members of the protected class were 
prosecuted provide a colorable basis for so believ- 
ing. Rather, a defendant must supply a colorable 
basis for believing that others similar to him 
except that they are not in his protected class 
were not prosecuted. Without a colorable basis to 
believe that others similarly situated were not 
prosecuted, the most reasonable conclusion is 
that the defendant was selected for prosecution 
because the government believed the defendant 
committed the offense; the fact that the defendant 
is a member of a protected class is coincidental. 


Armstrong, 21 F.3d at 1436-37" 


prosecuted); Kahl, 583 F.2d at 1353 (discovery denied; no 
showing that the government didn’t prosecute others similarly 
situated); Parham, 16 F.3d at 847 (no threshold showing 
because of absence of evidence that other’s acts of ballot fraud 
were tolerated without prosecution); United States v. Larson. 
612 F.2d 1301, 1305 (8th Cir.) (no prima facie case; no showing 
that others similarly situated have not been prosecuted for 
conduct similar to that for which he was prosecuted), cert. 
denied, 446 U.S. 936, 100 S.Ct. 2154, 64 L.Ed.2d 789 (1980): ef. 
Hazel, 696 F.2d at 475 (arguably asserting that 34 other 
members of tax revolt group had not been prosecuted suffices 
for first prong); Greenwood, 796 F.2d at 52 (discovery denied; 
contention that five similarly situated white agents were not 
prosecuted groundless). 


® In Irish People, the D.C. Circuit similarly concluded that 
“it makes sense to require a colorable claim of both [ parts of the 


§2a 


Armstrong’s showing lacks any specific evidence 
that the government has failed to prosecute similarly 
situated non-blacks, or that any similarly situated 
non-black cocaine base offender was not chosen for 
federal prosecution but was left to be prosecuted in 
state court. Evidence that all 24 crack cases closed 
by the Federal Public Defender in 1991 involved black 
defendants is a meaningless number without some 
pool against which to measure it. It shows only that 
blacks have been prosecuted, not that others 
similarly situated who are not black have not been 
prosecuted. The study says nothing about cases that 
were opened by the FPD during the period its closed 


two-element test for selective prosecution | before subjecting 
the Government to discovery,” explaining: 


Defendant must make a colorable showing that he has been 
especially singled out, that there exist persons similarly 
situated who have not been prosecuted. Without such a 
showing, it is irrelevant that the British or Irish may also 
have wanted the suit brought. 


-_ It is clear . . . that a demonstration of selection is 
indispensable for the defense and that the burden of so 
demonstrating lies squarely on the defendant. 


-_ Where defendant cannot show anyone in a similar 
situation who was not prosecuted, it has been held that he 
has not “met even the threshold point of the Yick Wo 
doctrine—'official discrimination . . . between persons in 
similar circumstances, material to their rights. . . . 

684 F.2d at 946-47. See also Kerley, 787 F.2d at 1150 (to 
discover government documents defendant must introduce 
some evidence tending to show the existence of the essential 
elements of the defense, including that he was singled out for 
prosecution while others similarly situated haven't been). 


————— 


ee ieee 


S3a 


cases were active.” (Although that would come 
closer to a valid sample, there is no basis in the 
record for extrapolating from the Federal Public 
Defender’s study a figure representative of all 
relevant defendants prosecuted in the Central 
District.) Nor does the statistic speak to whether 
the Federal Public Defender had other cases 
involving non-black defendants that were opened 
during the same period that cases closed in 1991 were 
opened (1988-1991). Indeed, the government’s evi- 
dence that during this period at least two non-black 
defendants were prosecuted who were represented by 
the FPD, and two others were prosecuted who were 
not represented by the FPD, is uncontradicted. It is 
no answer to suggest, as Armstrong and the majority 
do, that the government’s evidence is irrelevant 
because it is outside the defendant’s study: the court 
must identify an appropriate comparison group, 
Aguilar, 883 F.2d at 706, and by definition, the 
appropriate population. In any event, the FPD study 
is only relevant to the extent that it accurately 
represents the universe of prosecutions." There can 


The majority opinion’s statement that “the factor used to 
choose the cases examined in the study—whether the case had 
been closed—was a factor independent of and not correlated 
with race,” [p. 20a, supra], n. 7, is without any support in the 
record. It could as well be said—equally without any support 
in the record—that the reason closed cases instead of opened 
cases was chosen was because (as the government's evidence 
shows) non-blacks were prosecuted in cases that were opened 
during 1988-1991 but were closed in some year other than 1991. 

4 The majority opinion “fail[s] to see the difference” 
between cases closed and cases opened. [p. 20a, supra, n. 7. 
They are, of course, opposite sides of the same coin. Whether 
looked at through the lens of “opened” or “closed,” the number 
of black defendants prosecuted on crack charges, standing 
alone as it does here without reference to whether non-black 


S4a 


be no serious question that evidence of prosecutions 
which were actually brought is more on target than ; 
study of a small sample of closed cases that - vt 
random and is biased by the composition (in igen 
defendants only) of the FPD’s clients. Among = 
things, the government’s evidence “eeipel ; . 
charges were filed against seven non-black . en 
ants in 1992—the same year that the a 
defendants were indicted. That is the only evidence 
in the record about what went on In the specific — 
of the prosecution in this case. Without — - 
fine a point on it, that fact cannot be discounte 

ial. 

in addition, there is no indication that any of on 
defendants in the 24 cases encompassed by the Ff 


crack dealers who sold —_ — mages gem pore 
had priors and were caug t in the ac gp P oa 
; 1d. has no tendency to prove the elements of select! 

pine However, on the theory adopted by parse 

opinion—that the number prosecuted is alone su moat “ 
does make a difference whether ~ a ke oa ean wd 
ases closed. The opinion fixes only on : I - 
ae in ins FPD study, whereas the popped ; 
evidence focuses, correctly, on the opened aspect of the ra — 
cases as well as others which were prosecuted oe ape 
defendants who were either not represented by ae bh 
or at least not in cases that were closed in 1991. _ . : os 
ean’t have any tendency to prove discrimination excep go 
extent that they show what cases were brought, or opene Aa 
thus what was motivating the U nited States —s ; ma 
when it decided to file charges against ey aa = 
closed in 1991 were indicted in 1988, 1989, 1990, “ge ; Soe 
evidence shows that non-black defendants ware also : ct 
during that period. Thus, contrary to the “yy ——- 
the govern-ment’s showing directly rebuts both the “a } 


of the study (to the extent that accuracy Is in issue, porsche 
really isn’t) and its probative value on the elements of selec 


prosecution (which is in issue). 


on ml. 


5Sa 


study were similarly situated to the defendants in 
this case. All of the Armstrong defendants are 
charged with conspiring to distribute cocaine base 
using an armed guard, and four of the five are charged 
with a firearms violation. The population in the FPD 
study is crack offenders—not crack offenders who 
committed cocaine base offenses while possessing 
firearms. As the discovery ordered is of prosecutions 
for both crack and firearms offenses, there is no basis 
in the statistical evidence for finding that the 
discovery ordered is relevant. In addition, the study 
concerns only those defendants who were prosecuted 
in 1991 or before. Thus, the study population does not 
include Armstrong and cannot mean anything so far 
as these defendants are concerned. An inference of 
discrimination against these defendants can there- 
fore not arise even if the statistic could imply 
discrimination against crack defendants whose cases 
were closed by the FPD in 1991. 

For these reasons, the only statistic in evidence 
affords no basis for inferring the existence of 
discriminatory selection, or effect. The mere fact 
that all the offenders share the same trait (/.e., are 
black) cannot prove that this trait was the motivation 
for selecting them for prosecution unless other 
similar offenders who do not possess that trait were 
not selected. The FPD study shows nothing more 
than the fact that all persons it represented in cases 
closed in 1991 shared the common trait of being black; 
it sheds no light on whether the government 
discriminated as there is no showing that those 
without the trait were, or would be, treated 
differently. 

Armstrong also relies on the Los Angeles Times 
article and two declarations presented in connection 
with the government’s motion for reconsideration. 


S6a 


One is counsel’s declaration that an Impact House 
employee told her that in his experience dealing with 
crack addiction, there are an equal number of 
caucasian and black users and dealers; the other is 
another counsel’s declaration that he had never heard 
of non-blacks being prosecuted in federal court 
whereas they were in state court. It is unclear that 
the district court relied on anything other than the 
FPD study, as it made no reference to the 
declarations and said it found nothing of value in the 
newspaper article. Regardless, assuming that it was 
proper for the court to consider the declarations in 
connection with a discovery request even though both 
were hearsay, neither declaration sets out any 
specific fact or credible evidence of the existence of 
discriminatory effect or intent. Counsel’s declara- 
tion about not having heard of non-blacks being 
prosecuted in federal court is entitled to no weight in 
light of the government’s evidence that non-blacks 
were in fact prosecuted; his further statement that 
“many” crack cocaine sales cases prosecuted in state 
court involve racial groups other than blacks lacks 
any relevant force because it can’t be determined 
whether they are similarly situated in any respect to 
the Armstrong defendants. By the same token, 
Impact House is a residential drug treatment center; 
it houses addicts, not dealers unless they are also 
addicts, and nothing in the declaration suggests that 
the intake coordinator’s experience is with offenders 
who are similarly situated to the Armstrong 
defendants. 

In sum, there is no indication that the government 
has not prosecuted similarly situated non-black 
offenders. However, even if an inference of dispro- 
portionate impact for purposes of selective pros- 
ecution could be drawn, Armstrong’s evidence does 


57a 


not establish a colorable basis that he was prosecuted 
because of his race. | 


“2 ‘Discriminatory purpose’... implies more than 
. Intent as awareness of consequences. It implies 
that the decisionmaker ... selected or reaffirmed a 
particular course of action at least in part ‘because 
of, not merely ‘in spite of,’ its adverse effects upon an 
identifiable group.” Wayte, 470 U.S. at 619, 105 S.Ct 
i = ss Personnel Administrator of 
ssachusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 99 S.Ct. 
60 L.Ed.2d 870 (1979)). Nothing in che record ina 
cates that the government impermissibly targeted 
blacks for prosecution or acted improperly in 
bringing the Armstrong indictment; to the contrary 
there is evidence that the government made its 
charging decision in Armstrong based on the 
quantity of drugs involved, the number of sales and 
defendants, involvement of a federal agency concerned 
with firearms in the investigation, multiple firearms 
violations intertwined with the narcotics trafficking 
strength of the evidence (including tapes), the making 
uf threats, and criminal] histories having to do with 
both drugs and firearms. These are the very factors 
identified by the Supreme Court in Wa yte that courts 
—_ — — because they are intrinsic 
rosecutorial di | ; j .C 
r = scretion. 470 U.S. at 607, 105 S.Ct. 
Armstrong argues, however, that a prima facie case 
of purposeful discrimination may be made by showing 
that the totality of the relevant facts gives rise to an 
inference of discriminatory purpose. He submits that 
intent may be found even though there is no evidence 
that the government is hostile to the group, and the 
government gives a race-neutral explanation for its 


S8a 


action, Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 106 S.Ct. 
1712, 90 L.Ed.2d 69 (1986); that intent may be proved 
circumstantially, Village of Arlington Heights v. 
Metropolitan Housing Development Corp., 429 U.S. 
252, 266, 97 S.Ct. 555, 563-64, 50 L.Ed.2d 450 (1977); and 
that circumstantial evidence of discriminatory intent 
may include proof of disparate impact, Washington v. 
Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 242, 96 S.Ct. 2040, 2048-49, 45 
L.Ed.2d 597 (1976). I agree, in the abstract. In limited 
circumstances “a clear pattern, unexplainable on 
grounds other than race” may be “stark” enough to 
infer intent, but such cases are “rare.” Arlington 
Heights, 429 U.S. at 266, 97 S.Ct. at 563-64, 
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 293 n. 12, 107 S.Ct. 
1756, 1767 n. 12, 95 L.Ed.2d 262 (1987).” Here, the 
record consists of the FPD study, which shows that 
in 24 cases prosecuted from 1988-1991 and closed by 
the Federal Public Defender in 1991 the defendant 
was black; the government’s proffer that 11 non-black 
defendants were prosecuted during the period these 
cases were opened and Armstrong was indicted; and 
evidence that the Armstrong defendants were 
charged because of the severity of their criminal 
activity. In no way is this a “stark” statistical 
pattern, unexplainable or unexplained on grounds 
other than race. The statistic alone cannot, 
therefore, support any inference of intent. 


6 Jury-selection cases, see, ¢.g., Castaneda v. Partida, 430 
U.S. 482, 97 S.Ct. 1272, 51 L.Ed.2d 498 (1977), are somewhat of 
an exception because of the nature of the task, McCleskey, 451 
U.S. at 293 n. 13, 107 S.Ct. at 1768 n. 13, but they are inapposite 
for the additional reason that the statistics in those cases show a 
disparity between the population and those summoned for 
duty. As there is no comparison group here, no disparity can 
be shown. 


59a 


This is clear from comparing the two cases where 
the Supreme Court has seen impact alone as 
determinative, Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 
81 S.Ct. 125, 5 L.Ed2d 110 (1960), and Yiek Wo v. 
Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 6 S.Ct. 1064, 30 L.Ed. 220 
(1886). In each, the pattern was “stark,” Arlington 
Heights, 429 U.S. at 266, 97 S.Ct. at 563-64, and in 
each, the complaining parties demonstrated the 
existence of similarly situated persons who were 
treated differently. In Gomillion, when the state 
legislature redrew the boundaries of the City of 
Tuskegee from a square into a 28-sided figure, the 
effect was “to remove from the city all save for only 
four or five of its 400 Negro voters while not 
removing a single white voter or resident.” 
Gomillion, 364 U.S. at 341, 81 S.Ct. at 127. In Vick 
Wo, San Francisco had enacted an ordinance banning 
the use of wood buildings for laundries in the absence 
of consent by the Board of Supervisors. There were 
about 320 laundries in the city of which 310 were 
wood, 240 were owned by Chinese, and 80 were owned 
by non-Chinese. One hundred fifty Chinese operators 
were arrested for operating a laundry in violation of 
the ordinance, while no non-Chinese operators were 
arrested. Two hundred Chinese owners petitioned for 
consent from the Board, and all their petitions were 
denied; of the non-Chinese owners, all but one was 
granted. Thus, unlike this case, in Gomillion and 
Yick Wo there was an identifiable pool against which 
comparisons could be made, and that comparison 
showed such dramatic disparities in how the groups 
were treated that the “conclusion was irresistible 
tantamount for all practical purposes to a mathe- 
matical demonstration,” Gomillion, 364 U.S. at 341 
81 S.Ct. at 127, that the state acted with discrimina. 
tory intent. 


60a 


Given the absence of any evidence about any 
comparison group in this case, and thus of any 
possible statistical disparity in how different classes 
are treated, there is no way under existing law that 
the evidence in this case establishes a colorable basis 
for the existence of discriminatory intent. 


C 


The majority opinion’s logic flows from its 
assumption that “statistical disparities alone may 
suffice to provide the evidence of discriminatory 
effect and intent that will establish a prima facie case 
of selective prosecution.” [P. 10a, supra]. For this it 
relies on Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1301-02. 
However, what Judge Kozinski actually wrote is that, 
in connection with the discriminatory effect prong, 
“(alt a threshold level, whether or not there is a 
significant disparity in the treatment of classes of 
defendants can normally be determined on the basis of 
statistical evidence.” Jd. at 1301. Redondo-Lemos 
does not say that any statistic is a statistical 
disparity, or that a statistical disparity, if it does 
ekist, proves intent no matter what its significance. 
Nevertheless, the majority’s opinion makes a 
statistic—which is all there is in this case—into a 
“statistical disparity”; then makes a “statistical 
disparity”—no matter how significant—into a prima 
facie showing; then asserts that the standard for 
discovery is lower than a prima facie showing; then 
holds that “inadequately explained evidence of a 
significant statistical disparity” suffices to show a 
colorable basis of discriminatory intent and effect. 
(Pp. 10a, lla, supra]. This syllogism simply is not 
the law. Statistics have to be measured against 
something, otherwise there can be no “disparity’ 


6la 


because there is nothing from which to deduce a 
difference. 

Of the need to show that others similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted, the opinion first says the 
obvious: “a defendant is not required to demonstrate 
that the government has failed to prosecute others 
who are similarly situated. He need only provide a 
colorable basis for believing that other similarly 
situated persons have not been prosecuted.” /d. at 
1516. Then the opinion comes full circle by con- 
cluding that the FPD study “clearly satisfies this 
requirement” because “[a]t a threshold level, whether 
or not there is a significant disparity in the treat- 
ment of classes of defendants can normally be deter- 
mined on the basis of statistical evidence, without 
reference to the underlying facts of individual cases.” 
Id. This doesn’t follow as a matter of fact, or as a 
matter of law." 


* There has been evidence of disparity (not just a study of 
numbers prosecuted) in each of the few cases in which a 
finding of selective prosecution or an order for discovery has 
been upheld on appeal. See, e.g., Steele, 461 F.2d at 1151 
(conviction reversed; defendant located and presented 
evidence of six other persons who, like him, had refused on 
principle .o complete census forms but who, unlike him, had 
not taken a public stand against the census and had not been 
prosecuted); Adams, 870 F.2d at 1146 (discovery ordered; 
record suggests that taxpayers who underreport income and 
voluntarily amend returns and pay deficiency, as defendants 
did, have not been prosecuted, though defendants were); 
Gordon, 817 F.2d at 1540 (colorable entitlement shown and 
discovery and evidentiary hearing affirmed; magistrate judge 
found that defendants presented some evidence of similar 
violations by other persons who have not been prosecuted); cf. 
United States v. Berrios, 501 F.2d 1207, 1211-12 (2d Cir.1974) 
(declining to reverse order for hearing and production of 
government memorandum in camera based on counsel's 
affidavit that hundreds of other union officials had prison 


62a 


Perhaps recognizing this, the majority opinion 
reveals in a footnote what its real holding is: “no 
‘comparison pool’ is necessary when the record 
contains statistical evidence tending to show that 
only members of racial or ethnic minority groups 
have been prosecuted. Were we to conclude other- 
wise, we would be accepting unwarranted racial 
stereotypes.” [P. 19a, supra], n. 6. For this there is 


records and only three had been prosecuted, but indicating 
that, to show a “colorable basis” for discovery “we would first 
require some evidence tending to show the existence of the 
essential elements of the defense” and characterizing existence 
of unprosecuted violations of statute defendant was prosecuted 
under as an “essential element”); United States v. Cammisano, 
413 F.Supp. 886 (W.D.Mo.1976), vacated on other grounds, 546 
F.2d 288 (defendants demonstrated many persons in 
apparently similar circumstances who violated Federal Meat 
Inspection Act, but who have not been prosecuted). In 
addition, in all but Berrios, there was direct evidence that the 
prosecution was brought for an impermissible reason. In Steele, 
the government admitted that it was concerned about census 
protestors and provided no non-discriminatory explanation for 
prosecuting Steele; in Gordon, a Department of Justice official 
said that the voting fraud investigation was brought about by 
“arrogance on the part of the blacks”; in Adams, a govern- 
ment official acknowledged that the defendant was prosecuted 
as “revenge” for her filing an EEOC claim; and in 
Cammisano, an FBI agent threatened defendant. By the same 
token. district court orders for discovery which have not been 
based on a finding that others similarly situated have not been 
prosecuted have been reversed. See, e.g., Wayte, 710 F.2d at 
1387 (reversing discovery order on the footing that Wayte had 
not shown he was selected from the larger group because of his 
exercise of constitutional rights, but noting that the first 
element had been established because the district court had 
found that over 500,000 eligible men had not registered for the 
draft whereas only 12 others in addition to Wayte had been 
indicted for failure to register, all of whom were vocal 
nonregistrants); Kerley, 787 F.2d at 1150; Irish People, 684 


F.2d at 946. 


63a 


absolutely no authority. The need to identify simi- 
larly situated persons who have not been prosecuted 
does not evaporate when race is advanced as the 
constitutionally impermissible factor; rather, some 
evidence of those who are similarly situated except 
for the constitutionally impermissible factor but 
were not prosecuted is necessary in order to show 
that the defendant, who has that trait, has been 
prosecuted selectively. The issue is not prosecution 
but selective prosecution, and there can be no 
selective prosecution without selection of the 
particular defendant for prosecution because of the 
constitutionally impermissible factor. 

The majority opinion then holds that the 
government must explain “evidence of a significant 
statistical disparity.” [P. lla, supra]. There are two 
problems with this step. First, the FPD study does 
not show “significant” statistical “disparity.” It is 
not a random sample in which every case has the 
same chance of being selected, nor is a sample of 24 
cases indicted over four years but closed in a single 
year large enough, or representative enough, to say 
(or surmise) anything meaningful about the history 
of crack prosecutions in the Central District. The 
second, and more important problem lies in the fact 
that the opinion regards the government’s explana- 
tion in this case as unpersuasive, and in so doing 
essentially holds that the defendant’s statistical 
showing cannot be explained without the full 
disclosure that the discovery requested would 
entail." While the government may offer an 


"In this connection, the majority opinion asserts that the 
government's response “does not speak to the inference that 
blacks are more frequently prosecuted for federal crack 
offenses than even their allegedly disproportionate involve- 


ment with the drug would justify.” [P. 22a, supra]. The 


64a 


explanation and if it does, that explanation should be 
considered, there is no precedent that it must make 
any explanation or carry any burden at the discovery 
stage. In any event, imposing such a burden on the 
government provides the next building block for the 
opinion, which then says: “In the absence of a 
response undermining the study’s accuracy, the 
district judge appropriately gave credence to the 
defendants’ showing that a study of federal cocaine 
base cases closed by the federal public defender over a 
particular period of time showed that only black 


assertion implies that the response somehow wenegy og 
spoken to the issue of state and federal prosecutions and is 
deficient because it didn’t. This is incorrect because oe 
defendants’ showing says nothing about state and federa 
prosecutions of similarly situated offenders so there is —. 
to respond to. More important, it slides into nce thcny io : 
whether discovery should be ordered a consideration fe oral 
courts of appeal—including ours—have uniformly gee . 
implicating equal protection: the fact that higher rages 
sentences for cocaine base offenses fall disproportionately on 
blacks. United States v. Singleterry, 29 F.3d 733 (st Cir.), 


‘Ss 5 S.C 30 L.Ed.2d 552 
cert. denied, —- U.S. ——, 115 S.Ct. 647, 1 ; 
(1994); United States v. Frazier, 981 F.2d 92 (3rd igen 
cert. denied, — U.S. ——, 118 S.Ct. 1661, 123 L.Ed.2d 279 
(1993); United States v. D’Anjou, 16 F.3d 604 (4th Cir.), cert. 
denied, — U.S. ——, 114 S.Ct. 2754, 129 L.Ed.2d 871 (1994); 


United States v. Galloway, 951 F.2d 64 (5th Cir.1992); l atten 
States v. Reece, 994 F.2d 277 (6th Cir.1993); l nited States i 

Chandler, 996 F.2d 917 (7th Cir.1993); L nited States v. 
Lattimore, 974 F.2d 971 (8th Cir.1992), cert. denied, —_ US. — 
—, 113 S.Ct. 1819, 123 L.Ed.2d 449 (1993); L nited States v. 
Coleman, 24 F.3d 37 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, — L S. : oe 
S.Ct. 261, 180 L.Ed.2d 181 (1994); United States v. Easter, id 
F.2d 1549 (10th Cir.1992); United States v. King, 972 F.2d 1259 


(11th Cir.1992), cert. denied, — U.S. —-, 118 S.Ct. 2448, 124 
L.Ed.2d 665 (1993); United States v. Thompson, 27 F.3d pe 
(D.C.Cir.), cert. denied, — US. ——, 115 S.Ct. 650, 13 


L.Ed.2d 554 (1994). 


6Sa 


defendants were involved.” [P. 20a. supra|. Yet the 
study’s accuracy is not at issue; its significance is. If 
a district court may credit a showing that cases 
closed by the FPD over a “particular” period of time 
involved only black defendants despite contrary 
evidence with respect to cases opened during the 
Same period, there is no reason that a showing that 
cases closed in any “particular period of time”—one 
month, one week, or the two-days we rejected in 
Bourgeois—should not suffice, regardless of how 
many cases the attorney handles or how many others, 
similarly situated to the defendant but for race, were 
actually prosecuted during a reasonable period of 
time. 

The majority opinion shifts the burden to the 
government in another respect that is unprecedented 
as well. It first assumes that “[gliven the prevalence 
of all kinds of drugs throughout our community, at 
least some crack distributors are likely to be non- 
blacks.” [P. 19a, supra]. This is probably correct, but 
is speculation nonetheless which has no basis in the 
record. From this premise, however, the opinion 
creates a presumption: “We must start with the 
presumption that people of all races commit a// types 
of crimes—not with the premise that any type of 
crime is the exclusive province of any particular 
racial or ethnic group.” Jd. Although “|t]hese pre- 
sumptions and premises are, of course, not con- 
clusive,” id., the opinion gives no clue as to what they 
are to prove, or how they are to be disproved. Because 
the opinion finds that the government’s identification 
of some non-black crack offenders who have been 
charged does not undermine the force of the FPD 
study, [pp. 18a-19a, supra], apparently the pre- 
sumption cannot be overcome by a showing that of 
“some crack distributors [who] are likely to be non- 


66a 


blacks,” some have been prosecuted. If that is so, it is 
unclear to me that the “presumption” is rebuttable at 
all. Nor does the opinion suggest why such a 
“presumption” is needed; the party who seeks to use 
statistics must show what the comparison pool looks 
like. Moreover, to the extent that this “presumption” 
is intended to suggest that the government has some 
obligation to charge equal numbers, or proportionate 
numbers, of black and non-black offenders—or explain 
why not, it turns the law of selective prosecution on 
its head. The government has the right to be selective 
about whom it prosecutes, so long as it does not select 
this defendant because of a constitutionally 
impermissible factor. Wayte, 470 U.S. at 610, 105 
S.Ct. at 1532. Indeed, instead of flipping the burden as 
the opinion appears to do, we have previously 
recognized that the defendant’s showing has to be 
considered “in light of the presumption of 
prosecutorial propriety.” United States v. One 1985 
Mercedes, 917 F.2d 415, 421 (9th Cir.1990) (denying 
discovery because defendant had failed to produce 
evidence of improper government motivation 
sufficient to justify discovery in light of the 
presumption of prosecutorial propriety and the two- 
prong requirement of vindictive prosecution, the 
same as for selective prosecution). 

If the majority opinion remains the law, it will be at 
no small cost. In this case alone, locating more than 
3000 files and figuring out which were crack and 
firearms prosecutions, the racial identity of each 
defendant (presumably from the Presentence Report, 
because the United States Attorney’s Office has no 
records of race), and the investigating authorities 
will be a time-consuming and expensive process. The 
opinion is, of course, license for the same fishing 
expedition in legions of other cases. If a raw 


67a 


number—the number of cases prosecuted—suffices 
for discovery, I would suppose that discovery could be 
called for in virtually every case. For example, 100% 
of antitrust convictions are of white males. United 
States Sentencing Commission, Annual Report 
1991, tables 16 and 17. Of pornographers, 92.6% are 
caucasian. /d., table 16. Men comprise 83.3% of all 
those convicted of all federal crimes. J/d., table 17 
And so on. | 
Resources intended for controlling crime, one of 

the nation’s most pressing concerns, will be chasing 
statistics instead. With the prospect of having to 
fight discovery and justify every charging decision, it 
will not be surprising for crack prosecutions to wane 

That will disserve those who suffer from what the Los 
Angeles Times has just called “the plague [that] 
destroyed dreams, lives and families.” Los Angeles 
Times, Dec. 21, 1994, at Al (headline). The opinion 
will also force the government to keep statistics on 
race, turning the focus from race-neutral to race- 
numbered prosecutions. That is a step backwards 
toward race-conscious decisions. 1 

This Is not what we, or any other circuit, have 

permitted until now. If there are specific facts which 

afford a colorable basis for finding that discrimina- 

tory effect and discriminatory intent exist, the costs 

are worth it. Race cannot determine whether one is 

prosecuted or not. But, sound policy as well as 

separation of powers constraints demand that there 

be a meaningful threshold before the courts may 
authorize an intrusion into the discretionary work- 
ings of our co-equal branch. For these reasons. | 
cannot join the majority opinion. ) 


68a 
APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-50031, 9383-50057 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT 
Ps 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, 
AKA: CHRIS ARMSTRONG, DEFENDANT 
and 
ROBERT ROZELLE, AARON HAMPTON; 
FREDDIE MACK; SHELTON AUNTWAN MARTIN, 
DEFENDANTS-APPELLEES 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT 
?. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, 
AKA: CHRIS ARMSTRONG, DEFENDANT-APPELLEE 


Appeal from the United States District Court for the 
Central District of California 


Before: HARLINGTON Woop, Jr.,* REINHARDT, 
and RyMER, Circuit Judges. 


* Honorable Harlington Wood, Jr., Senior United States 
Cireuit Judge, Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, sitting by 
designation. 


OE eee Peer 


= h 


69a 
ORDER 


The opinion and dissent filed January 21, 1994, slip 
op. 599, and appearing at 14 F.3d 1387 (9th Cir.1994), 
are withdrawn. A new opinion and dissent are filed in 
their place, and the petitions for rehearing and sug- 
gestions for rehearing en banc are dismissed as moot 
without prejudice. 

OPINION 


HARLINGTON Woop, Jr., Senior Circuit Judge: 


A federal grand jury indicted defendants Chris- 
topher Armstrong, Aaron Hampton, Freddie Mack, 
Shelton Martin, and Robert Rozelle for conspiring to 
distribute cocaine base in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846 
(1988). Some of the defendants also were indicted on 
substantive cocaine base charges under 21 U.S.C. 
§ 841(a)(1) (1988), and using a firearm in connection 
with drug trafficking under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) (1988 & 
Supp. II] 1991). The defendants moved for discovery 
on whether the government selected the defendants 
for prosecution because of their race, and the district 
court granted the motion. After denying the govern- 
ment’s motion to reconsider, the district court 
dismissed the indictments as a sanction for failure to 
comply with the discovery order, but stayed the 
execution of the dismissals pending appeal by the 
government. 

We have jurisdiction to hear the government’s 
appeal from the final judgment of the district court 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291 (1988) and 18 U.S.C. 
§ 3731 (1988). For the reasons stated, we reverse. 


I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 


A task force composed of Inglewood Narcotics 
Division detectives and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
and Firearms (ATF) agents used three confidential] 


70a 


informants from February through April of 1992 to 
infiltrate a cocaine base’ distribution ring. On seven 
occasions from February 13, 1992, to April 6, 1992, the 
informants purchased cocaine base totalling approxi- 
mately 124.3 grams from the defendants. The in- 
formants also reported the use of multiple firearms 
by the defendants during the sales. 

On April 8, 1992, task force police executed search 
warrants on the hotel room in which the informants 
made their purchases, as well as on residences 
belonging to some of the defendants. The officers 
arrested defendants Armstrong and Hampton in the 
hotel room, discovering 9.29 additional grams of 
cocaine base and a loaded gun. The officers sub- 
sequently arrested defendants Mack, Martin, and 
Rozelle pursuant to bench warrants the district 
court issued. Ultimately, the task force police seized 
multiple firearms and approximately 135 grams of 
cocaine base as a result of the investigation. All of 
the defendants are black. 

The government sought indictments against all 
defendants in federal court. On April 21, a grand jury 
indicted all defendants for conspiracy to distribute 
cocaine base under 21 U.S.C. § 846. The indictment 
also charged some defendants with substantive 
cocaine base violations of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), and 
usage of a firearm in connection with drug trafficking 
in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). The federal statutes 
at issue provide for more stringent penalties than 
their California counterparts.” 


‘ Cocaine base is known more commonly as “crack” cocaine. 
* Under 21 U.S.C. § 841(b) (1988 & Supp. III 1991), persons 
selling 50 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing 
cocaine base in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a) must be 
imprisoned for at least 10 years and no more than life. 
Conspiracy, governed by 21 U.S.C. § 846, imposes the same 


Tila 


On July 20, 1992, defendant Martin filed a Motion 
for Discovery and/or Dismissal of Indictment for 
Selective Prosecution, claiming that the government 
was prosecuting him because of his race. Defendants 
Armstrong, Mack, Hampton, and Rozelle al! timely 
joined defendant Martin’s motion. The district court 
held a hearing on the motion on September 8, 1992. 

At the hearing, the defendants offered as evidence 
of selective enforcement an affidavit from a paralegal 
employed by the Office of the Federal Public 
Defender. The affidavit, which included a statement 
and a chart, asserts that in the 24 cases closed by the 
Federal Public Defender’s Office in 199] involving 
cocaine base violations of 21 U.S.C. § 841 and/or 2] 
U.S.C. § 846, the defendant in each case was black. 
The defendants for some reason did not offer an 
affidavit from the Federal Public Defender or any 
supervising attorney, or for that matter any other 
evidence at all, but instead relied solely on the 
affidavit from the paralegal employee. As a result, 
the government contended that the defendants failed 
to meet the showing required to compel discovery. 

Nevertheless, on September 8, 1992, the district 
court disagreed with the government and granted the 
motion for discovery on the issue of selective pros- 
ecution. The district court ordered the government 


penalty range as the § 841(a) violation. 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) 
imposes an additional, consecutive 5-year sentence without 
parole for the usage or carrying of a firearm during and in 
relation to any drug trafficking crime, as well as mandating 
longer sentences for repeat violations and more dangerous 
weaponry. California law, on the other hand. provides for a 3, 
4, or 5-year sentence for cocaine base offenders, Cal.Health & 
Safety Code § 11351.5 (Deering 1993), and if firearms are 
involved, also provides for a 2, 3. or 4-year sentence, id. 
§ 11370.1. 


72a 


to: (1) provide a list of all cases from the prior three 
years in which the government charged both cocaine 
base offenses and firearms offenses; (2) identify the 
race of the defendants in those cases; (3) identify 
whether state, federal, or joint law enforcement 
authorities investigated each case; and (4) explain the 
criteria used by the U.S. Attorney’s Office for 
deciding whether to bring cocaine base cases 
federally. 

On September 16, 1992, the government filed a 
motion for reconsideration of the discovery order. In 
support of its motion for reconsideration, the govern- 
ment submitted sworn declarations of a Special Agent 
of the Drug Enforcement Administration with 21 
years experience, a Special Agent of the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms with three years 
experience at the ATF and another three years as a 
narcotics officer, a narcotics detective from the 
Inglewood Police Department with 10 years on the 
force and three years experience in the narcotics 
unit, and two experienced Assistant United States 
Attorneys stating that: (1) the Office of the Federal 
Public Defender represented at least five non-black 
cocaine base defendants during the relevant time 
period; (2) the government prosecuted many non-black 
cocaine base defendants during 1991, the period at 
issue in the report prepared by the paralegal 
employed by the Office of the Federal Public 
Defender; (3) the county district attorney's offices 
prosecute many black cocaine base offenders; (4) the 
government based its decision to charge on the 
existence of federal firearms and narcotics violations 
that met the guidelines of the United States 
Attorney's Office, the strength of the evidence, the 


deterrence value, the federal interest, the suspects’ 


criminal history, and other race-neutral criteria: and 


73a 


(5) socio-economic factors account for the prevalence 
of drugs in certain communities, as illustrated by 
black gangs in the south-central Los Angeles area 
predominantly controlling the supply of cocaine base. 

In response to the government’s motion for 
reconsideration, the defendants offered two additional 
declarations. The first, made by one of the defense 
attorneys, states that she had spoken with a halfway 
house intake coordinator who told her that in his 
experience in treating cocaine base addiction, the 
number of Caucasian and minority users and dealers 
is equal. The other declaration, made by another 
defense attorney, asserts that (1) he has represented 
only blacks in federal court on cocaine base charges; 
(2) he has never heard of non-blacks being prosecuted 
in federal court on cocaine base charges; and (3) in his 
conversations with unnamed state court judges, 
prosecutors, and defense attorneys, he has come to 
believe that the state prosecutes many non-black 
cocaine base offenders in state court. The defendants 
also submitted an article from the Los Angeles 
Times, which contends that blacks disproportionately 
commit cocaine base offenses. See Jim Newton, 
Harsher Crack Sentences Criticized as Racial 
Inequality, Los Angeles Times, Nov. 23, 1992. at Al, 
A20. 

After a hearing on the motion for reconsideration, 
on December 29, 1992, the district court denied the 
motion. The government notified the district court 
on January 5, 1993 of its intention to challenge the 
discovery order and the denial of the reconsideration 
motion. As a sanction for failure to comply with the 
order, the district court dismissed the indictments of 
all defendants. The district court Stayed the exe- 
cution of the dismissals pending this appeal. 


74a 
II. DISCUSSION 


The parties did not discuss the relationship 
between two decisions of this court published within 
davs of each other, United States v. Redondo-Lemos, 
955 F.2d 1296 (9th Cir.1992), which was finalized on 
May 11, 1992, and United States v. Bourgeois, 964 
F.2d 935 (9th Cir.1992), decided on May 19, 1992. 
Bourgeois and Redondo-Lemos, both thoughtful 
opinions, examined somewhat differently the process 
by which defendants can obtain discovery on a claim 
for selective prosecution. 

In Redondo-Lemos, the defendant was caught 
transporting 695 pounds of marijuana into the United 
States from Mexico. The defendant pled guilty to a 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1) in exchange for the 
government's promise to recommend that the district 
court impose only the mandatory minimum sentence 
of five years imprisonment. The district court, 
without any motion by the defendant, held that the 
United States Attorney’s Office was selectively 
enforcing the drug laws against male defendants, and 
sentenced Redondo-Lemos to 18 months imprison- 
ment instead of the 5-year mandatory minimum 
sentence. 

On appeal, this court set forth the process for 
resolving a selective prosecution claim. First, 
Redondo-Lemos states that “[njo one is entitled to 
call the prosecution to answer for a_ particular 
charging or plea bargaining decision without making 
a prima facie showing that wrongful discrimination is 
taking place.” Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1302. 
Redondo-Lemos states that a prima facie showing 
can be satisfied in one of two ways: (1) if “the district 
court develops a suspicion of unconstitutional 
conduct on the basis of its own day-to-day 
observations,” or (2) if the defendant, rather than the 


7Sa 


district court, is the one to raise the claim of 
selective prosecution, “he must present enough 
evidence to demonstrate a reasonable inference of 
invidious discrimination.” /d. Only the suspicion of 
the district court, however, was at issue or applied in 
Redondo-Lemos. 

Second, Redondo-Lemos states that once the prima 
facie case is established, the Office of the United 
States Attorney must have an opportunity to rebut 
the prima facie case. At this stage, the showing that 
the United States Attorney must make “would not 
involve file information about specific cases, but 
[rather would] consist only of overall case statistics.” 
Id. Those overall statistics would be available to both 
the district court and defense attorneys. /d. 

Third, if after the district court has seen the 
rebuttal evidence, the court finds discriminatory 
impact by a preponderance of the evidence, it then 
must determine if the prosecutor’s charging decision 
was based on a discriminatory motive. Jd. That 
decision “may, in rare instances, extend to in camera 
examination of certain prosecution case files and to 
limited discovery by opposing counsel.” Jd. In this 
third stage Redondo-Lemos for the first time raises 
the possibility of discovery by the defense. If, once 
the district court examines discriminatory motive 
and listens to government rebuttal evidence, the 
court finds by preponderance of the evidence 
intentional discrimination based on a suspect classifi- 
cation, it may fashion an appropriate remedy. /d. 

Unlike Redondo-Lemos, Bourgeois confines itself 
to the question of when a defendant may obtain 
discovery based on a claim of selective prosecution. 
At issue in Bourgeois was a 2-day series of firearms 
arrests known as “Operation Streetsweep.” 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 936. Bourgeois, a felon, was 


76a 


caught in Operation Streetsweep and indicted for 
possession of a firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
§ 922(g¢)(1). Jd. at 937. Bourgeois moved to dismiss 
the indictment based on_ selective prosecution, 
arguing that he was selected for prosecution because 
he is black. Jd. Bourgeois also filed a discovery 
request for information regarding the sting operation 
in which he was arrested. Jd. The district court 
denied the discovery request, and Bourgeois entered 
a conditional guilty plea. /d. . 

On appeal, this court examined the question of 
when defendants are entitled to discovery on selective 
prosecution claims. Bourgeois noted that to be 
ultimately successful on a selective prosecution 
claim, a defendant would have to prove “that others 
similarly situated have not been prosecuted and also 
that the prosecution is based on an impermissible 
motive.” United States v. Wayte, 710 F.2d 1385, 1387 
(9th Cir.1983), quoted in Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 938. 
Bourgeois then explained that it was an open 
question as to whether the standard for obtaining 
discovery was different from the standard for 
ultimate success on a selective prosecution claim, and 
to what degree. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 938. 

The Bourgeois court decided that defendants must 
satisfy a high threshold to obtain discovery. /d. at 
939. The court adopted a high threshold first because 
“courts are ill equipped to assess a prosecutor's 
charging decisions,” and second because “court 
oversight of prosecutorial decisions could undermine 
effective law enforcement.” Jd. The court sought to 
“discourage fishing expeditions, protect legitimate 
prosecutorial discretion, safeguard government 
investigative records, and yet still allow meritorious 
claims to proceed.” Jd. at 940. The standard the court 
adopted to accomplish these ends was that “to obtain 


77a 


discovery on a _ selective prosecution claim, a 
defendant must present specific facts, not mere 
allegations, which establish a colorable basis for the 
existence of both discriminatory application of a law 
and discriminatory intent on the part of the 
government.” Jd. at 939. Bourgeois noted that the 
“colorable basis” standard was meant to continue the 
trend of the past few decades, during which time only 
a handful of defendants obtained discovery on a 
selective prosecution claim. Jd. at 940. 

Thus, the question for us here is whether to apply 
the Redondo-Lemos “suspicion” test, the Redondo- 
Lemos “reasonable inference” test, or the Bourgeois 
“colorable basis” test. In our view, the record does 
not support the proposition that the district court 
based its discovery order on its day-to-day 
observations, and therefore the Redondo-Lemos 
“suspicion” test is inapplicable. That conclusion is 
grounded in the district court’s reasoning for 
granting the defendants’ request for discovery. 

The district court, in explaining its decision to 
order discovery, stated: “The court sees it different 
than Bourgeois, in that in this case we do have 
something more than mere allegations.” The court 
thus relied on the reasoning of Bourgeois in 
analyzing the defendants’ evidence, not on its own 
day-to-day observations. Additionally, the district 
court noted that at issue is “a fairly general charge— 
one that we see regularly in this courthouse—and 
whether it is coincidental or not, that out of the 
group that the public defender [proffered] all of them 
happen to be of the same racial group.” (Emphasis 
added.) This further illustrates the district court’s 
reliance on the evidence, not its own suspicions. The 
fact that the district court specifically expressed no 
opinion as to whether the racial composition of 


78a 


defendants represented by the Federal Public 
Defender was a coincidence indicates not suspicion, 
but rather a lack thereof. 

The district court concluded that “the number [of 
black defendants shown by the public defender} is 
adequate that [it] would at least require the 
government to provide some explanation. The time 
period is such that would require some explanation. 
The charges are the same or similar, and the race is 
the same in each case.” Those comments immedi- 
ately precede the district court granting the motion 
for discovery, and are the basis for doing so. The 
record demonstrates that the district court based its 
decision on the evidence presented by the defendants, 
not on its own day-to-day observations. As a result, 
the Redondo-Lemos “suspicion” test is inapplicable, 
and we must choose between the Redondo-Lemos 
“reasonable inference” test and the Bourgeois 
“ceolorable basis” test. 

Although neither phrase is easily susceptible to 
further definition, we believe that it would be more 
appropriate to apply the Bourgeois “eolorable basis” 
test in this particular case than the Redondo-Lemos 
“reasonable inference” test. As previously noted, 
Redondo-Lemos did not apply the “reasonable 
inference” test, as the district court initiated the 
selective prosecution inquiry sua sponte. Addition- 
ally, in Redondo-Lemos the defendant was not 
seeking discovery. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d at 1297. 
The court simply was attempting to explain the 
entire process for pursuing a selective prosecution 
claim, of which discovery is one part. See id. at 1297, 

1302. We doubt that the court in Redondo-Lemos 
intended its discussion to be the final expression of 


law in discovery cases. 


79a 


| Bou rgeois, on the other hand, addressed a situation 
similar to the one here. Bourgeois alleged that he 
was selected for prosecution based on his race, and 
filed a discovery request in an attempt to prove his 
claim. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 987. The court 
squarely confronted the issue of when a defendant is 
entitled to discovery, and devoted approximately 
three pages of analysis to that issue alone. See id. at 
937-40. The court in Bourgeois analyzed a split in the 
circuits and supported its decision to apply the 
colorable basis” test with policy analysis. Jd. When 
a district court bases its decision on evidence 
supplied by the parties rather than on its own day-to- 
day observations, Bourgeois is the law of this circuit 
oe “<4 test for determining whether to grant 
a defendant’s moti iscove 
saat ee for discovery on a selective 
Having decided that the Bourgeois colorable basis 
test governs here, we must now apply that test to the 
facts of this case. The defendants submitted three 
affidavits and a newspaper article in support of their 
motion for discovery. The first affidavit. the 
statement and chart by the paralegal that was the 
only evidence the defendants initially offered, was 
rst 24 poo base cases closed by the Office of 
eral Publi 
sradhirrw seercloeg ¢ Defender in 1991, all 24 involved 
; Taken alone, that evidence does not establish 
specific facts, not mere allegations, which establish 
a colorable basis for the existence of both discrimina- 
tory application of a law and discriminatory intent on 


3 ; 
pee For the reasons discussed infra, we believe that the 
ni a proffered by the defendants would fail to meet any 
easona le formulation of the test for obtaining discovery as 
enunciated in either case. | uli 


80a 


the part of the government.” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 
939. To demonstrate discriminatory application, a 
defendant must provide a colorable basis for believing 
that “others similarly situated have not been 
prosecuted.” Wayte, 710 F.2d at 1387, quoted in 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 941. The first affidavit demon- 
strates only that others have been prosecuted, not 
that others similarly situated have not—obviously, a 
total lack of evidence cannot constitute a colorable 
basis for believing that discriminatory application of 
the law exists. 

Requiring defendants to provide a colorable basis 
for believing that others similarly situated have not 
been prosecuted is a reasonable requirement. 
“Selective prosecution” implies that a selection has 
taken place. If a defendant is part of a protected class, 
that alone does not provide a colorable basis for 
believing that a selection has taken place; nor does 
evidence demonstrating that other members of the 
protected class were prosecuted provide a colorable 
basis for so believing. Rather, a defendant must 
supply a colorable basis for believing that others 
similar to him except that they are not in his 
protected class were not prosecuted. Without a 
colorable basis to believe that others similarly 
situated were not prosecuted, the most reasonable 
conclusion is that the defendant was selected for 
prosecution because the government believed the 
defendant committed the offense; the fact that the 
defendant is a member of a _ protected class is 
coincidental. 

The evidence that all 24 cocaine base cases closed 
in 1991 by the Federal Public Defender involved black 
defendants is insufficient to provide a colorable basis 
to believe selection took place. The statistic in 
question does not speak to whether the Federal 


8la 


Public Defender had other cases involving white 
defendants that did not close during that period 
Additionally, there is no information on whether any 
of the defendants in the 24 cases were similarly 
situated to the defendants in this case. The govern- 
ment claims it selected the defendants for pros- 
ecution in this case because they committed cocaine 
base offenses while possessing firearms. If none of 
the 24 cases handled by the public defender involved 
firearms, the statistic is of little meaning, particu- 
larly in light of the government’s explanation. As a 
final criticism, the statistic tells us nothing of the 
racial composition of defendants charged with drug 
trafficking who may have had sufficient resources to 
retain their own attorneys. 
; The defendants contend, however, that the Statistic 
Is meaningful in light of the newspaper article and 
two affidavits supplied in opposition to the govern- 
ment’s motion for reconsideration. The article, from 
the Los Angeles Times, states that white cocaine 
offenders are being punished less severely because 
whites predominantly violate powder cocaine laws 
while blacks predominantly violate crack cocaine 
laws, the latter of which carry longer sentences than 
the former. See Jim Newton, Harsher Crack 
Sentences Criticized as Racial Inequality Los 
Angeles Times, Nov. 23, 1992, at Al, A20. We ‘agree 
with the district court’s determination that nothing 
in the article supports the defendants’ position: 
indeed, the article arguable cuts the other way. 
Perhaps the defendants were alluding to an argument 
that the federal sentencing scheme violates equal 
protection because of this disparity, but because they 
did not actually make the argument, we express no 
opinion on that matter here. Any fault in this regard 
if fault indeed exists, does not lie with the United 


82a 


States Attorney, for the United States Attorney 
plays no role in drafting the United States Sentenc- 
ing Guidelines. 

The two additional affidavits, although not harmful 
to the defendants’ position like the newspaper article 
arguably is, are not helpful either. One of the 
affidavits, made by an attorney for one of the 
defendants, states merely that an intake coordinator 
at a Pasadena halfway house had told the defense 
attorney that “it was his experience in dealing with 
the treatment of cocaine base addiction, that there 
are an equal number of Caucasian users and dealers 
to minority users and dealers.” This statement is: 
(1) hearsay—the defendants certainly could have 
gotten an affidavit from the intake coordinator 
himself; (2) unsubstantiated; (3) without any indi- 
cation of sample size, duration, or methodology of any 
kind; (4) without an jndication of whether the 
magnitude of the sales is similar to those of the 
defendants in this case; (5) based on “users and 
dealers” rather than dealers who possess firearms; 
and (6) based on users and dealers being treated for 
addiction, without any evidence that such a sample is 
representative of dealers as a whole. The district 
court erred in placing any weight on such flimsy 
evidence. 

The other affidavit, made by another attorney for 
the defense, states that “I talk to many state court 
judges, prosecutors, and defense attorneys .. . [and] 
[t]here are many crack cocaine’ sales cases 
prosecuted in state court that do involve racial 
groups other than blacks. A major percentage of 
sales of crack cocaine cases are prosecuted against 
Latinos in the state courts.” This statement: (1) is 
hearsay—there are no affidavits from any of the 
unnamed purported sources of this information; 


83a 


(2) fails to indicate whether the magnitude of the 
sales is similar to those of the defendants in this case; 
(3) does not include any information about cocaine 
base offenses involving the possession of firearms: 
and (4) gives no statistics, but rather merely reports 
the defense attorney’s personal conclusions that 
there are “many” cases and that there is a “major” 
percentage. These are hardly the “specific facts, not 
mere allegations, which establish a colorable basis for 
the existence of . . . discriminatory application of a 
law” envisioned by Bourgeois. Bourgeois, 964 F 2d 
at 939. 

Given that the ineffective affidavits and arguably 
damaging article, even taken together, did not contra- 
dict the government’s explanation for its decision to 
prosecute, we must conclude that the district court 
abused its discretion — in concluding that the 
defendants’ evidence provided a colorable basis to 
believe that discriminatory application of a law 
existed. Bourgeois, as previously explained, set a 
high threshold for obtaining discovery, and expressed 
very sound policy rationales for doing so. See id. at 
939-40. Had the district court viewed the defendants’ 
evidence in light of the reasoning of Bourgeois, it 
should have concluded that the evidence failed to 
establish a colorable basis for believing that the 
government was engaging in selective prosecution. 

As a final matter, one could argue that Bourgeois 
should be distinguished based on the duration of the 
government operations involved in each case. In 
Bourgeois, a 2-day operation was at issue, id. at 936, 
and in the instant case the defendants proffered a 
2-month “study” by the Office of the Federal Public 
Defender. That distinction, by the very language of 
Bourgeois, is unimportant in this case. 


84a 


The court in Bourgeois found that Bourgeois had 
failed to establish a colorable basis that others 
similarly situated had not been prosecuted. Id. at 941. 
It did this because “Bourgeois [made] no attempt to 
show that, in any span of time, the government has 
declined to prosecute similarly situated, non-black 
felons illegally in possession of firearms.” /d. (em- 
phasis added). Thus, the court explained that regard- 
less of the duration of the operation in question, 
defendants attempting to obtain discovery on a claim 
of selective enforcement must provide a colorable 
basis for believing that similarly situated felons not 
in their protected class were passed over for 
prosecution. The evidence in this case was unsatis- 
factory for the very same reason, and the duration of 
the operations in each case therefore is irrelevant. 


III. CONCLUSION 


The district court erred in finding that the 
evidence the defendants presented in this case 
established a colorable basis for believing that the 
government engaged in selective prosecution. The 
defendants’ evidence, which likely would be inad- 
missible in other contexts, was tenuous at best, and 
in one case even arguably was counterproductive. If 
more than this quantum of evidence is not required, 
district courts too often and unnecessarily could 
become immersed in the workings of a coordinate 
branch of government, to the benefit of neither. 
Accepting the defendants’ weak evidence and 
disregarding the sworn declarations of experienced 
federal agents and two Assistant United States 
Attorneys that explained and refuted the defendants’ 
statistics was error, and for that reason the decision 
of the district court dismissing the indictments is 


REVERSED. 


8Sa 


REINHARDT, Circuit Judge, dissenting: 


Rozelle and Armstrong, two black criminal 
defendants, present one of the most serious claims 
any person can raise—that the government has 
engaged in racial discrimination in selecting which 
offenders to prosecute. Such a claim deserves the 
most careful examination, for the ability to decide 
whether to bring charges gives prosecutors an 
awesome power to affect people’s lives. When prose- 
cutors use this power in a racially discriminatory 
manner, courts must step in to protect the objects of 
that conduct. Moreover, when one of our experienced 
district judges finds credible evidence that federal 
prosecutors are engaging in such impermissible 
discrimination, we should be most hesitant to prevent 
her from gathering further information that will 
permit a full examination of the claim. Yet the ma- 
jority here abruptly cuts off exploration of the 
explosive charge made by these two defendants, 
concluding, surprisingly, that Judge Marshall abused 
her discretion in ordering further discovery. I dis- 
agree strongly with my colleagues’ decision. The 
defendants have shown far more than a “colorable 
basis” for a belief that the practice of racially 
discriminatory prosecution exists. Moreover, the 
district judge’s ow. observations and experience with 
the United States Attorney's office provide sub- 
stantial additional support for the discovery order. 
For these reasons, and because recent studies 
indicate that further discovery might conclusively 
prove that prosecutors have engaged in unconsti- 
tutional conduct, I dissent. 


86a 


At the outset, it is important to make plain the 
narrow scope of our review, a scope which the 
majority clearly exceeds. First, we are reviewing 
only the district court’s discovery order. The 
district court has not decided that the defendants 
have shown unconstitutional selective prosecution, 
and the defendants do not have to prove impermissible 
discrimination to obtain discovery. If they could 
make such a showing without any discovery, there 
would be no need for discovery in the first place. 
Because we review only the district court’s decision 
to allow the defendants to gather more evidence, it is 
not our job to decide whether the defendants have 
made an ultimate showing of unconstitutional dis- 
crimination. Their burden in cases of this nature is 
far less. 

Second, we review the district court’s decision to 
order discovery for abuse of discretion. United 
States v. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 935, 937 (9th Cir.1992). 
“The task of safeguarding the rights of criminal 
defendants ultimately rests with the experienced men 
and women who preside in our district courts.” 
United States v. Balough, 820 F.2d 1485, 1491 (9th 
Cir.1987). District judges are uniquely situated to 
observe possible discrimination in the government's 
charging decisions. They have much more ex- 
perience with the policies and practices of the United 
States Attorney in their district than do we, and they 
are obviously in a better position to observe a pattern 
of discrimination than are individual defendants. See 
United States v. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F.2d 1296, 1298, 
1302 (9th Cir.1992). Accordingly, when a district 
court, knowledgeable of the practices and _per- 
formance of a particular United States Attorney's 


87a 


office, finds a defendant's showing of selective 
prosecution sufficiently persuasive to warrant 
further inquiry, we should only overturn its decision 

on a very clear showing of error. Were my 
colleagues to afford the district court’s determination 
the deference to which it is entitled, they would have 
no choice but to affirm. 


II. 
A. 


The effect of the majority’s decision is to create 
three highly artificial categories of cases. At one 
extreme are the cases in which a district judge 
completely ignores his or her own experience and 
observations and makes clear on the record that the 
discovery order is based solely on the submissions of 
the parties. Under the majority’s opinion, this 
category of cases is governed by the Bourgeois 
standard, and the evidence submitted by the parties 
must create a “colorable basis” for the discovery 
order.’ At the other extreme are those cases in 


Unlike the majority, I see no practical difference between 
Bourgeois's “colorable basis” test and the “reasonable 
inference” test which Redondo-Lemos requires be used when a 
party offers evidence tending to establish selective prosecution. 
There is nothing in these phrases or in the courts’ analysis in 
Bourgeois and Redondo-Lemos to Suggest any difference 
between these standards. (Nor, incidentally, does the majority 
explain how they differ). 

I note that the majority's recitation of the framework set 
forth in Redondo-Lemos is somewhat misleading. The majority 
states that Redondo-Lemos does not “raise[} the possibility of 
discovery by the defense” until after the defendant has 
presented evidence creating a “reasonable inference” of dis- 
crimination and the prosecution has had an opportunity to 
rebut this showing. [P. 75a, supra]. The majority ignores 
footnote 12 of Redondo-Lemos, which clearly contemplates 


Sa 


which, as in Redondo-Lemos, a district judge 
develops a suspicion of discriminatory conduct a 
purely on his own day-to-day observations and orders 
discovery or a hearing without any prompting by the 
parties. In this category of cases, the ‘suspicion 
rule set forth in Redondo-Lemos requires a re- 
viewing court to defer to the district judge’s deter- 
ons. . 

oo these extremes lie the cases which 
surely arise most frequently—those in which a 
district judge’s decision to order discovery is based in 
part on the evidence submitted by the parties and in 
part on his own personal experience, observations, 
and suspicions. Although in its opinion the majority, 
remarkably, does not acknowledge the existence of 
this category and thus does not discuss the standard 
to be applied in mixed-basis cases, it is clear that, 
whether these cases are viewed through the 
framework provided by Redondo-Lemos or that 
provided by Bourgeois, an appellate court should over- 
turn a district court’s order permitting discovery in 
such cases in only the rarest of circumstances. When 
the evidence presented by a defendant, combined with 
a district judge’s own observations, convinces the 
judge that further inquiry is warranted, it should 
ordinarily be enough to satisfy any of the standards 
we have enunciated. 


The majority’s decision to reverse the district 
judge is based on its conclusion that this case falls 
into the first of the three categories—that the record 
makes clear that Judge Marshall deliberately put 


; : — 
“limited discovery in appropriate circumstances prior 
prosecutor's evidentiary presentation.” Redondo-Lemos, 955 
F.2d at 1302 n. 12. 


89a 


aside her day-to-day observations and experience with 
the United States Attorney’s office and based her 
decision solely on the parties’ submissions. My 
colleagues conclude that in this case the district 
judge relied in no part on her own observations: “The 
record demonstrates that the district court based its 
decision on the evidence presented by the defendants, 
not on its own day to day observations.” Ante at 1435- 
36. My colleagues appear to concede that when “the 
district court develops a suspicion of unconstitutional 
conduct on the basis of its own day-to-day ob- 
servations, this will be deemed a sufficient prima 
facie showing” to support a further inquiry by the 
district court, including limited discovery. Redondo- 
Lemos, 955 F 2d at 130z. However, instead of treating 
this as a mixed-basis case, in which a district court’s 
review of the evidence, augmented by its experience 
with the particular prosecutor’s office, is entitled to 
substantial deference, the majority looks only at the 
evidence presented by the defendants. My colleagues 
then hold that the defendants’ submissions fail to 
meet the Bourgeois standards for discovery. 


C, 


I have three objections to the majority’s decision. 
First, as I have suggested, I believe that its creation 
of three arbitrary categories unnecessarily and im- 
properly complicates this area of the law. Discovery 
orders in discriminatory prosecution cases should be 
judged by a single standard, one that draws on the 
principles enunciated in both Redondo-Lemos and 
Bourgeois. This standard should be appropriate for 
use in the vast majority of cases—those in which the 
district judge makes a decision to order discovery 
based in part on the evidence submitted by the parties 
and in part on his own observations and experience. 


90a 


It should apply uniformly, regardless of whether the 
district court relies only slightly on the evidence 
presented by the parties and most substantially on 
his own experience, or vice versa, or even if the 
district court disclaims any knowledge of the general 
subject. In any event, the standard should require 
reversal of an order permitting discovery only when, 
giving substantial weight to the district court's own 
observations, the court could not rationally have 
reached the judgment it did. 

Even assuming the majority’s three-tiered ap- 
proach is coherent or sensible, I disagree strongly 
with its decision to place this case in the first 
category—to classify it as a case in which the 
district court ignored its own experience and relied 
solely on the evidence presented by the parties. A 
fair view of the record demonstrates to me that Judge 
Marshall’s decision to order discovery was based at 
least in part on her own observations of and 
experience with the United States Attorney's office. 
If my colleagues were to consider that factor in 
combination with the evidentiary showing they 
reject, they would surely be required to uphold the 
district court’s order. Thus, on remand Judge 
Marshall will be free to issue a new discovery order if 
she bases that new order in part upon her own day-to- 
day experience. 


2 For example, in ordering discovery, the district judge 
stated: 
That is the problem I think that needs to be addressed, 
because we do see a lot of the cases and one does ask why 
some are in state court and some are being prosecuted in 
Federal court, and if it’s not based on race what's it based 
on? 


9la 


Finally, I believe that the defendants have made a 
sufficient evidentiary showing, wholly apart from the 
district judge’s observations, to support the discovery 
order previously issued. Thus, even if I agreed with 
the majority that the district court entirely ignored 
its day-to-day observations and focused solely on the 
parties’ evidentiary submissions, I would still affirm 
under the Bourgeois standard. I explain why below. 


The Bourgeois standard is not as difficult to meet 
as the majority’s conclusion in this case might lead 
one to believe. Because we thought that a “non- 
frivolousness” standard would allow a defendant too 
easily to delay a prosecution and initiate intrusive 
discovery, and that a “prima facie case” standard 
would often make it impossible for defendants with 
legitimate claims to obtain the evidence necessary to 
support them, we sought a middle ground in 
Bourgeois. See Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 938-39. We 
settled on a “colorable basis” standard: 


(TJo obtain discovery on a selective prosecution 
claim, a defendant must present specific facts, not 
mere allegations, which establish a colorable 
basis of both discriminatory application of a law 
and discriminatory intent on the part of govern- 
ment actors. 


Id. at 939. 

Although we described the Bourgeois standard as 
establishing a “high threshold,” id., it is clear that 
under that test a defendant need not come anywhere 
close to proving a claim of selective prosecution in 
order to obtain discovery. Indeed, the defendant need 
not even present a prima facie case. The defendant 
instead need only present “some evidence tending to 
show the essential elements of the claim.” United 


92a 


States v. Heidecke, 900 F.2d 1155, 1159 (7th Cir.1990) 
(discussing “colorable basis” standard). While a 
defendant will not satisfy his burden by merely pre- 
senting unsubstantiated or generalized allegations, 
he is entitled to discovery if he can show some 
specific facts which raise an inference of im- 
issible discrimination. 
ype the Bourgeois standard, the defendants have 
presented more than enough evidence to raise a 
sufficient inference of discrimination to warrant 
discovery. In particular, the study conducted by the 
Office of the Federal Public Defender raises a strong 
inference of invidious discrimination. This study 
found that, of all cocaine base cases closed by the 
Office in 1991, 24 out of 24 involved black defendants. 
To be sure, such a smal] sample does not conclusively 
establish either of the elements of selective pros- 
ecution. However, the fact that every single crack 
defendant represented by the Federal Public 
Defender in a case that terminated during 1991 was 
black certainly raises enough of a question to justify 
further inquiry by the court. 
The evidence supporting an inference of dis- 
criminatory prosecution in this case is much 
stronger than the evidence we held insufficient to 
justify discovery in Bourgeois. In that case, the 
defendants argued that they were entitled to 
discovery based on a showing that all prosecutions for 
firearms violations stemming from a two-day police 
operation involved black defendants. The district 


’ Thus, the Bourgeois court’s prediction that only a small 
number of defendants would be able to make a sufficient 
showing to obtain discovery was just that—a er eas rn 
provides no basis for artificially raising the standard whic 
defendants must meet in order to gather more information on 
their discriminatory prosecution claims. 


93a 


court rejected the defendants’ claims, holding that 
two days was far too short a period to serve as a basis 
for analyzing the overall conduct of a prosecutorial 
agency. Instead of focusing on the single operation 
which resulted in the arrests of Bourgeois and his 
associates, the district court looked instead to all 
firearms prosecutions over a two-year span. The 
court found that the government had prosecuted over 
140 people during that period for the same crimes as 
those for which Bourgeois was prosecuted. Because 
Bourgeois “did not allege that all or most of these 
cases involved blacks,” Bourgeois, 964 F.2" at 940, the 
district court concluded that he had not established a 
colorable basis to justify discovery. We held that the 
district court did not abuse its discretion in refusing 


to order discovery in these circumstances. See id. at 
941.' 


* By lifting a sentence out of context and then misreading 
it, the majority unintentionally distorts our decision in 
Bourgeois. The majority states: 


The court in Bourgeois found that Bourgeois had failed 
to establish a colorable basis that others similarly situated 
had not been prosecuted. It did this because “Bourgeois 
{made} no attempt to show that, in any span of time, the 
government has declined to prosecute similarly situated, 
non-black felons illegally in possession of firearms.” Thus, 
the court explained that regardless of the duration of the 
operation in question, defendants attempting to obtain 
discovery on a claim of selective enforcement must 
provide a colorable basis for believing that similarly 
situated felons not in their protected class were passed 
over for prosecution. The evidence in this case was 
unsatisfactory for the very same reason, and the duration 
of the operation in each case therefore irrelevant. 


[P. 84a, supra] (citations omitted) (emphasis in majority 
opinion). 


94a 


The evidence offered in Bourgeois involved only one 
operation, over a single two-day period. The Federal 
Public Defender study, by contrast, involved an 
agency that represents a significant percentage of all 
federal criminal defendants, and it involved all cases 
closed over a significant period of time. Common 
sense indicates that the inference of discrimination 
one can reasonably draw from such a study is much 
stronger than the inference one can draw from 
evidence involving only a_ single, short police 
operation. See id. at 941 (“[T]he relevant inquiry 1s 
the history of prosecutions over a reasonable period 
of time.”). The study showed that the largest single 
provider of legal services to federal criminal 
defendants in the Central District of California did 
not conclude a single crack defense of a non-black 
defendant in all of 1991. Although the sample size is 
too small to resolve the issue either way, this 
evidence certainly raises a serious question whether 


Contrary to the majority’s understanding, the issue in 
Bourgeois was precisely whether the defendants had shown 
discrimination over a sufficient period of time. The Bourgeois 
court assumed that, during the two-day period in question, the 
government had prosecuted only blacks and had failed to 
prosecute similarly situated non-blacks. However, It held that 
a two-day focus was too narrow: “The government need not 
provide discovery on a selective prosecution claim simply 
because law enforcement officials focused for a short time on a 
racially homogeneous criminal group.” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 
940-41. The sentence immediately preceding the one the 
majority selectively quotes states that “[a]s discussed above, the 
relevant inquiry is the history of prosecutions over a 
reasonable period of time.” Jd. at 941. In this context, the 
Bourgeois court’s statement that “Bourgeois makes no attempt 
to show that, in any span of time, the government has failed to 
prosecute similarly situated, non-black felons illegally in 
possession of firearms” simply refers to the defendants’ failure 
to make a showing of discrimination across a “span of time. 


95a 


the government is intentionally discriminating 
against blacks. I do not see how the majority can 
conclude that it was an abuse of discretion for the 
district court to allow the defendants to inquire 
further into the issue. 

The majority concludes that the Federal Public 
Defender study is insufficient to warrant discovery 
because it “demonstrates only that others have been 
prosecuted, not that others similarly situated have 
not.” [P. 80a, supra]. Yet even by the majority’s own 
standard a defendant is not required to demonstrate 
that the government has failed to prosecute others 
who are similarly situated. He need only “provide a 
colorable basis for believing that others similarly 
situated have not been prosecuted.” [P. 80a, supra]. 
(emphasis added). The study introduced by the 
defendants clearly satisfies this requirement. Given 
the prevalence of all kinds of drugs throughout our 
community, at least some crack distributors must be 
non-blacks. The fact that the Office of the Federal 
Public Defender had not closed a case involving a 
single non-black defendant in an entire year provides 
at least a colorable basis to believe that some non- 
black offenders existed whom the United States 
Attorney failed to prosecute. 

When a defendant presents statistics tending to 
show that all prosecutions over a significant period of 
time are directed at members of a single race, such a 
presentation alone should raise sufficient suspicion 
to warrant a further inquiry. On closer scrutiny, we 
may discover that the statistics can be explained by 
methodological defects, such as an inadequate sample 
size or an insufficient time-frame. However, one fact 
we most assuredly will never find. If our method of 
analysis is at all fair or rational, we will not discover 


96a 


that it is only members of the defendant’s race who 
mit the crime in question. 
Cane to the majority’s view, we must seg 
what is unquestionably the case, that people of a 
races commit all types of crimes. Under no 
circumstances can we base our analysis on the 
premise that any type of crime may be the exclusive 
province of any particular racial or ethnic group. Yet 
that is precisely what the majority does. Even if the 
defendants made a conclusive showing that the 
government had only prosecuted members of a single 
race for a particular class of crime, the majority 
would apparently conclude that they had failed to 
meet their burden. My colleagues would apparently 
require the defendants to present affirmative 
evidence showing that similarly situated potential 
defendants of other races existed—in other words 
that whites and browns also commit violations of 21 
U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846. See ante at 1436 (“The first 
affidavit demonstrates only that others have been 
prosecuted, not that others similarly situated have 
not—obviously, a total lack of evidence cannot 
constitute a colorable basis for believing that 
discriminatory application of the law exists. ). 
Unless we make the unsupportable assumption that 
there is a reasonable possibility that only blacks 
commit the crimes with which the defendants are 
charged, the majority's analysis 1s manifestly 
erroneous. If the United States Attorney's office 
prosecutes only members of a particular race, simple 
logic and common sense tell us that it is failing te 
prosecute at least some similarly-situated members 
of other races. Where a defendant shows a reasonable 
statistical basis for the inference that all defendants 
charged with a particular federal crime over a 
significant period of time were members of a single 


97a 


race, such a showing creates, ipso facto, a colorable 
basis for believing that similarly situated members of 
other races were not prosecuted. Therefore, there is 
no Jegal basis whatsoever for requiring the defendant 
to point to particular cases in which the government 
failed to prosecute similarly-situated members of 
other races. 

The majority rightly notes that the Federal Public 
Defender study does not in itself establish that the 
United States Attorney has engaged in selective 
prosecution. It is true that the study refers only to 
cases closed in 1991 and that it fails to provide more 
detailed information regarding the specifics of the 
offenses the other defendants allegedly committed. It 
is also true that the study does not disclose whether 
any non-black defendants existed who could afford to 
hire their own attorneys. See [p. 80a, supra]. While 
these aspects of the study render it insufficient to 
support an ultimate showing of unconstitutional 
selective prosecution, the facts set forth are 
nonetheless more than enough to support a finding of 
a colorable basis for the claim that discrimination 
exists. Despite the limitations in the study’s 
methodology, it is sufficient to lead a reasonable 
person to believe that the United States Attorney 
might be engaging in discrimination and that further 
inquiry on the subject is warranted. That is pre- 
cisely the course the district court took here, and I do 
not believe that it abused its discretion in doing so. 

Although the Federal Public Defender study 
should have been enough to create a colorable basis, 
the defendants here did provide additional evidence 
that the federal government failed to prosecute 
similarly-situated non-black defendants. On the gov- 
ernment’s motion for reconsideration, the defendants 
introduced two affidavits from different defense 


98a 


attorneys. One related a statement made by an intake 
coordinator at a Pasadena halfway house who said 
that, in his experience, there were an equal number of 
white and non-white users and dealers of crack. The 
other affidavit came from David R. Reed, an 
experienced criminal defense attorney in the Central 
District. Reed stated that, in his experience as a 
federal criminal defense lawyer and as a director of 
the state court indigent defense panel, he had never 
handled, known of, or heard of a single federal crack 
cocaine case involving non-black defendants, but that 
he knew of many crack cocaine cases prosecuted 
against non-blacks in state court. 
My colleagues wholly discount these affidavits. 
Their analysis is flawed in two separate respects, 
however. First, they seem to believe that the 
affidavits must be considered in isolation, rather than 
in light of the Federal Public Defender Study. They 
criticize the district court for “placing any weight” 
on the first affidavit, [pp. 79a-80a, supra], and they 
state that the second affidavit failed to contain “the 
‘specific facts, not mere allegations, which establish a 
colorable basis for the existence of .. . discriminatory 
application of a law.’”  [Pp. 79a-80a] (quoting 
Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 939). Whether or not it would 
have been appropriate for the district court to place 
any weight on the declarations if they stood alone, 
they surely satisfy the defendants’ burden when 
considered in light of the study’s finding that al/ 
federal crack defendants were black. When all of this 
evidence is taken together, the defendants have 
established several “specific facts, not mere 
allegations, which establish a colorable basis” to 
believe that the government has engaged in selective 
prosecution: (1) in all crack cocaine cases closed by 
the Federal Public Defender’s Office in 1991, not a 


994 


single case involved a non-black defendant: (2) an 
individual with professional experience in treating 
cocaine base addicts was of the opinion that 
minorities and non-minorities used and dealt crack in 
roughly equal numbers; (3) a criminal defense lawyer 
experienced in defending individuals in federal court 
and overseeing indigent defense in state court, had 
knowledge of many non-black crack offenders who 
were prosecuted in state court, but none who were 
prosecuted in federal court. 

Second, the majority appears to ignore the fact that 
the defendants are only seeking discovery on their 
selective prosecution claim. The defendant’s burden 
in seeking discovery is obviously significantly less 
than the defendant's ultimate burden of proving that 
the government engaged in discriminatory prose- 
cution. Under Bourgeois, a defendant need not even 
present a prima facie case in order to obtain 
discovery, only a colorable basis. See Bou rgeois, 964 
F.2d at 939. There is no reason to require the 
defendant to produce admissible evidence in making 
such a showing.’ In other contexts in which a party 
bears a lighter burden of proof than a preponderance 
of the evidence, the law has held that the lesser 
quantum of evidence required also entails looser 
requirements regarding the admissibility of that 
evidence. See, e.g., Costello v. United States. 350 U.S 
359, 76 S.Ct. 406, 100 L.Ed. 397 (1956) (grand jury): 
United States v. One 56-Foot Motor Yacht Na med 


” I should emphasize that the Federal Public Defender 
study was clearly admissible, and, in my view, it was sufficient 
in itself to create a colorable basis. The majority only chal 
lenges the admissibility of the two declarations in this 
es I should note that any objection as to admissibility 
ss sos wo ” the district court and that no such objection 


100a 


the Tahuna, 702 F.2d 1276, 1283 (9th Cir.1983) 
(probable cause for forfeiture); Fed.R.Crim.P. 5.1(a) 
(preliminary probable cause hearing). That rule is 
applicable here as well. The majority thus errs in 
dismissing the declarations as hearsay. 

The majority also errs by appearing to require the 
defendants to substantiate their claims more fully at 
this stage of the proceedings than is necessary under 
Bourgeois. In order to obtain discovery, defendants 
should not be required to present sophisticated 
regression analyses closely following the dictates of 
the scientific method. Nor should they be required to 
compile facts which are not readily available to them, 
such as the racial breakdown and offense character- 
istics of defendants represented by other counsel. 
Instead, they should only be required to show that 
specific facts raise a strong inference of im- 
permissible discrimination, and they should only be 
expected to use whatever evidence is within their 
possession or reasonably obtainable. The defendants 
here have satisfied that burden.” 


* J] should note that nearly all of the data necessary to a 
showing of selective prosecution are far less accessible to the 
defendants than to the federal government. Federal and 
county law enforcement authorities cooperate closely in these 
cases, and both levels of government are involved in the 
decision whether to bring charges in federal or state court. 
The Assistant United States Attorney admitted as much before 
the district court. He stated that many cocaine base cases were 
investigated as part of a joint federal/state task force involving 
local police departments and the federal Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Firearms. Given that the federal and local 
authorities work so closely in investigating these crimes, the 
federal government probably already has records of the cases 
in which it declined to initiate a federal prosecution. In any 
event, it is surely much easier for the United States Attorney’s 
office to get this information from state officials, from the 


1l0la 
IV. 


As I explained above, the majority’s opini 
Judge Marshall free on patho ry em Age 
discovery order as she had before, so long as she 
explains that she is basing her order in part on her 
personal observations of and experience with the 
United States Attorney’s office. In addition, even 
disregarding that factor, it appears that a sufficient 
factual basis now exists to satisfy even the majority’s 
overly restrictive application of our standards. A 
study by Richard Berk of the Center for the Study of 
the Environment and Society of the University of 
California at Los Angeles demonstrates that the 
United States Attorney has failed to prosecute 
similarly situated white offenders. See Richard Berk 
and Alec Campbell, Preliminary Data on Race and 
Crack Charging Practices in Los Angeles, 6 Fed. 
Sentencing Rep. 36 (1993). Although this study was 
not before the district court, and thus is not part of 
the record we review, it provides further indication 
that the majority has erred in disregarding the 
evidence that is before it and in overturning the 
district court’s order.’ If the defendants renew their 


county prosecutor’s offices, and from local poli s 
than it is for criminal defense lawyers. aes oe 
local law enforcement authorities ave a cooperative relation- 
ship; prosecutors and defense lawyers have an adversarial 
relationship. Especially since the pertinent records relating to 
cases in the geographical area covered by the Central District 
may well be scattered across seven different county district 
attorney's offices, seven separate sheriff 's departments, and a 
large number of independent local police departments, the 


defendants would have an almost . rs - e.. 
data on their own. impossible time compiling 


* We may take judicial notice of this 
s published study 
appeal. See Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, 494 7 


102a 


motion on remand and introduce this study “ 
evidence, the district court would clearly 
justified—even without considering its own 
experience—in reinstating the discovery 4 er 
The Berk study analyzed both state and e 90 
data concerning crack cocaine offenses in the = 
Angeles area. Specifically, it analyzed all — “ 
sale of cocaine base within Los Angeles Coun y 
between January 1, 1990 and October 10, 1992, 2 
cases referred to the Los Angeles County —s 
Attorney for sale of cocaine base between ——- 1, 
1990 and August 11, 1992, and all sale of cocaine = 
cases prosecuted by the United States Attorney we 
the Central District of California between 1988 an 
2. See id. at 36. 
gprs these data, the Berk study reached — 
alarming conclusions, which are consistent with 
defendants’ position here.” Like the Federal Public 
Defender study, the Berk study found that, over : 
nearly two-year period, the United — 
did not charge even a single white person with sale o 
crack cocaine. By analyzing state data, however, the 
Berk study also refuted the majority's pint 
assumption that non-blacks simply do not comm 
these crimes. Indeed, the data showed that the Los 
Angeles County District Attorney charged over two 
hundred whites with sale of cocaine base during this 
"7 Berk study’s conclusions strongly suggest 
that the United States Attorney’s office has engaged 
in discriminatory prosecution. Although only 58 per 


11. 74 S.Ct. 686, 692 n. 11, 98 L.Ed. 873 (1954); Swan v. 
Peterson, 6 F.3d 1373 n. 9 (9th Cir.1993). _ 

* The statistical conclusions of the Berk study are 
summarized on page 37. 


103a 


cent of the arrests in Los Angeles County for sale of 
crack during the study’s time period involved blacks, 
and only 53 per cent of crack sale charges by the Los 
Angeles County District Attorney involved black 
defendants, the United States Attorney targeted 
black defendants a full 83 per cent of the time. The 
disparity between the state and federal figures would 
seem to necessitate a further investigation of the 
reasons for the differing actions by the two 
prosecutorial agencies. In conducting his study, 
Professor Berk performed chi-squared tests to 
determine whether the results of his statistical 
survey could be attributed to chance rather than 
discrimination. He found that “{flor the federal data, 
the chances are less than 1 in 100 (p-value = .0088) 
that they are just a ‘luck of the draw’ sample for the 
population of people arrested.” Jd. at 38. 

The Berk study, as well as the data proffered by the 
defendants in this case, is sufficient to raise a serious 
question about whether the United States Attorney’s 
office is treating all of the people it serves equally. In 
particular, it raises the question of whether the 
United States Attorney reserves the ten-year federal 
mandatory minimum sentences for black defendants, 
while allowing non-black defendants to receive three, 
four, or five year sentences in state court. We cannot 
tolerate basing the length of a sentence on the color 
of a defendant’s skin. Where there is a colorable 
showing that this may be occurring, an inquiry is 
required. 


V. 


As a practical matter, as I have pointed out, the 
majority’s opinion will have little or no effect on the 
further proceedings in the district court. The Berk 
study, which was not before the court when it made 


104a 


its discovery order here, will certainly provide 
enough of an additional “colorable basis” to support 
discovery if and when the defendants file a renewed or 
amended motion following remand. So, too, will the 
personal knowledge and experience that the majority 
finds Judge Marshall failed to avail herself of the first 
time. 

Nonetheless, it is most unfortunate that the 
majority overrules Judge Marshall's considered 
attempt to gain more information about the United 
States Attorney’s charging practices. The five to 
seven year difference between state and federal 
sentences for crack sale offenses is not merely 
academic—five years is a long time to spend in prison. 
As long as this disparity exists, federal courts have 
an obligation to make sure that the United States 
Attorney is treating all members of the community 
fairly and equally. 

Judge Marshall's actions showed the judiciary at 
its best. Unlike the majority, I would not be so quick 
to overrule her attempt to explore this critical issue 
and to get more objective information before the 
court. Certainly, there is no basis whatsoever for 
concluding that Judge Marshall abused her 
discretion in trying to do so and in determining that 
the defendants made a colorable showing of dis- 
criminatory enforcement of the law. 

Judge Marshall acted properly by ordering dis- 
covery with respect to this issue. I would affirm. 


10Sa 
APPENDIX C 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
CENTRAL DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 
CRIMINAL MINUTES — GENERAL 


Case No. CR92-336 CBM Date 12/29/92 


ss 


DOCKET ENTRY: The Government's motion for recon- 
sideration of Court’s Ruling is denied (CMB) 


—aV3s—seS=s=aucSSSSSSSSS 
Present: HON. CONSUELO B. MARSHALL, JUDGE 


Joseph M. Levario _wWa_ n/a __ 
Deputy Clerk Court Reporter Asst. U.S. Attorney 


e—Neenaheeoo——eeee 


U.S.A. v. (DEFENDANTS LISTED BELOW) ATTORNEYS FOR DEFENDANTS 


present _custody _bond _O/R _present__appointed _retained 


(2) 


present _custody _bond _O/R _present__appointed _ retained 


(3) 
present _custody _bond _O/R _present__appointed _ retained 


(4) 


present _custody _bond _O/R _present__appointed _retained 


[Certificate of Service Omitted] 


MINUTES FORM 6 
CRIM-- GEN D-M Initials of Deputy Clerk J | 


