(4/ 
No. 95-157 


OCT 16 1999 


In the Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
*. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


DREW S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-157 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
v. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, ET AL. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


1. Respondents contend that the Ninth Circuit’s 
en banc holding amounts to “nothing more than a 
recitation of the truism that great deference is given 
to the district court’s rulings on discovery.” Martin 
Br. in Opp. 11; see Rozelle Br. in Opp. 5-8; Hampton 
Br. in Opp. 8, 16. The court of appeals did far more, 
however, than reaffirm that district court discovery 
orders are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. 
Rather, the court reformulated the legal standards 
that govern a district court’s exercise of discretion in 
granting discovery on claims of selective prosecution, 
and in doing so significantly departed from the 
established law in this area. 


(1) 


The court of appeals squarely held that a district 
court may order discovery on a claim of selective 
prosecution based solely on evidence that persons of 
a particular race have been prosecuted, without any 
evidence that similarly situated persons of a different 
race have not been prosecuted. Pet. App. 18a-19a & 
n.6. The court specifically stated that “no ‘compar- 
ison pool’ is necessary when the record contains 
statistical evidence tending to show that only mem- 
bers of racial or ethnic minority groups have been 
prosecuted.” Id. at 19a n.6. Our petition seeks review 
of that unprecedented legal ruling. 

Contrary to respondents’ view, the importance of 
that issue is not diminished by the fact that district 
courts generally have considerable discretion to issue 
discovery orders. [D liseretionary choices are not 
left to a court’s ‘inclination, but to its judgment; 
and its judgment is to be guided by sound legal 
principles.“ Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 
U.S. 405, 416 (1975), quoting United States v. Burr, 25 
F. Cas. 30, 35 (C.C. Va. 1807) (No. 14,692d) (Marshall, 
C.J.). Indeed, as respondent Martin acknowledges, 
whether discretion has been abused depends, of 
course, on the bounds of that discretion and the 
principles that guide its exercise.” Br. in Opp. 15, 
quoting United States v. Taylor, 487 U.S. 326, 336 
(1988). It is especially important that those legal 
principles be clear in the discovery context because 
the absence of standards permits the entry of highly 
intrusive orders that delay prosecutions. 

2. Respondents contend that the court of appeals’ 
ruling correctly recognizes that defendants should 
not have to prove their claim in order to obtain 
discovery. Martin Br. in Opp. 16-17; Hampton Br. 


3 


in Opp. 10, 14. In challenging the court of appeals’ 
ruling, however, we do not argue that criminal 
defendants must conclusively prove that others 
similarly situated have not been prosecuted in or- 
der to obtain discovery. Rather, we argue (Pet. 14) 
that criminal defendants must make a substantial 
threshold showing on each element of a selective 
prosecution claim. That showing need not be of the 
same force as would be required to establish a prima 
facie case, but it must at a minimum address each 
element of the claim. The court of appeals has dis- 
pensed with the requirement of such a threshold 
showing on each element by adopting a novel legal 
presumption that the government’s prosecution of 
members of one race means that it has failed to 
prosecute similarly situated members of a different 
race, unless the government introduces compelling 
evidence to the contrary. Pet. App. 18a-19a & n.6. 

3. As we explain in our petition (Pet. 19-21), the 
court of appeals’ decision in this case conflicts with 
decisions from numerous circuits that have held that 
discovery on a claim of selective prosecution may 
not be ordered absent a threshold showing that simi- 
larly situated persons have not been prosecuted. 
Respondents assert that there is no such conflict. 
Martin Br. in Opp. 21-28; Rozelle Br. in Opp. 7. 
According to respondent Martin (Br. in Opp. 23), the 
court’s decision is consistent with that of other 
circuits because the court in this case found a 
colorable basis for believing that similarly situated 
persons had not been prosecuted. As we have ex- 
plained, however, the court in this case in fact 
eliminated the requirement that defendants must 
make a threshold showing that others similarly 
situated have not been prosecuted in order to obtain 


1 


discovery, and relied on a presumption that such per- 
sons exist. No other circuit has dispensed with the 
required showing of a disparity in a discovery case, as 
did the court in this case. 

Respondent Martin contends (Br. in Opp. 24-27) 
that the decisions from the other circuits upon which 
we rely are distinguishable either because the defen- 
dants in those cases introduced even less evidence 
than respondents did or because the court of appeals 
was affirming a district court’s exercise of discretion. 
The key point, however, which Martin does not ad- 
dress, is that all of those decisions squarely held 
that discovery on a claim of selective prosecution 
may not be ordered absent concrete evidence that 
similarly situated persons of a different race have 
not been prosecuted. See Pet. 19-20. The court of 
appeals in this case is the first to dispense with 
that requirement. 

4. Finally, respondents argue (Martin Br. in Opp. 
17-21; Rozelle Br. in Opp. 17 n.6; Hampton Br. in Opp. 
12) that the decision below has no significant impact. 


' Contrary to respondent Hampton's contention (Br. in Opp. 
9), the court of appeals did not base its legal ruling on the 
affidavits submitted by defense counsel, which, respondent 
asserts, show that numerous whites have been prosecuted in 
state court for crack offenses. While the court referred to 
those affidavits, it held that the evidence that the government 
had prosecuted members of a particular race was itself suf- 
ficient to trigger a discovery obligation. Pet. App. 17a. The 
court’s limited discussion of the defense counsel affidavits is 
understandable. The district court did not rely on them to 
exercise its discretion. C.A. E.R. 184. The affidavits consist of 
vague and conclusory hearsay. And they do not contain any 
evidence that the white defendants prosecuted in state court 
for crack offenses are in any way similarly situated to those 
who have been prosecuted in federal court. 


5 


But the burden to respond to discovery motions under 
the court of appeals’ extraordinarily lenient legal 
standard is significant, as is the potential for in- 
trusion on prosecutorial discretion (Pet. 13). As we 
explain in our petition, numerous motions have been 
filed in the wake of the court’s decision, and many 
more can be expected in the future. Pet. 22-25.’ 


E „ „ „ * 


For the foregoing reasons, as well as those stated 
in the petition, the petition for a writ of certiorari 
should be granted. 

Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


OCTOBER 1995 


2 Contrary to respondent Martin's contention (Br. in Opp. 
18-19 & n.6), the government’s successful defense against a 
discovery motion in United States v. Henry, No. CR 94-628- 
CBM (C.D. Cal. June 26, 1995), does not show that the court’s 
decision in this case has a limited impact. Nothing in the 
Henry decision precludes district court judges from ordering 
discovery in other cases. In fact, based on a showing similar to 
the one made in this case, one district court judge has just 
ordered discovery on a claim of selective prosecution. United 
States v. Turner, No. CR 94-649 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 12, 1995). 
Martin also relies (Br. in Opp. 11, 19 n.6) on United States v. 
Marshall, 56 F.3d 1210 (9th Cir. 1995), where the court of 
appeals affirmed a district court’s refusal to order discovery. 
But nothing in that decision purports to disturb the holding in 
this case that district courts have broad discretion to order 
discovery on a claim of selective prosecution, without any 
evidence on an essential element of that claim. 


