DATE-ELIGIBLE SOURCE EXCERPTS ONLY. NOT A NEUTRAL MODELING PACKET.
Verbatim archive OCR; printed pagination controls; OCR errors retained.
Source: armstrong_08._Petitioners_Brief_djvu.txt


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 746-1855 ---

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The court of appeals erred in holding that discovery 
on a claim of selective prosecution may be ordered 
based solely on evidence that members of a particular 
race have been prosecuted, without any evidence that 
similarly situated persons of a different race have not 
been prosecuted. 

A. The government has broad prosecutorial 
discretion, and courts are properly reluctant to 
subject particular exercises of that discretion to 
scrutiny. The reasons are that prosecutorial dis- 
cretion is a core element of the Executive’s power 
under Article II; courts are ill-equipped to evaluate 
the many factors that affect the decision to prosecute; 
judicial inquiry into a prosecutor’s decisions can chill 
law enforcement; and judicial scrutiny of charging 
decisions diverts a criminal proceeding from its cen- 
tral purpose: determining whether the defendant is 


12 


guilty of the charges against him. Wayte v. United 
States, 470 U.S. 598, 607 (1985). 

Prosecutorial discretion is nonetheless subject to 
equal protection limits. The Constitution is violat- 
ed when a defendant establishes that (1) similarly 
situated persons of a different race have not been 
prosecuted and (2) the difference in treatment is 
motivated by race. Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 
373-374 (1886). Because of the unique considerations 
implicated by judicial inquiry into an exercise of 
prosecutorial discretion, however, a defendant must 
show both elements of a selective prosecution claim 
through exceptionally clear proof. 

The special considerations involved when courts 
review a substantive claim of selective prosecution 
also bear on the standard for obtaining discovery from 
the government on a claim of selective prosecution. 
In order to avoid encroachment into an area that the 
Constitution reserves to the Executive Branch, and 
unwarranted litigation on an issue that is collateral 
to the defendant’s guilt, judicial inquiry should not 
even begin until there is a substantial and concrete 
basis for suspecting unconstitutional conduct. Ac- 
cordingly, discovery on a claim of race-based selective 
prosecution may not be ordered unless a criminal 
defendant makes a “substantial threshold showing” 
both that similarly situated persons of a different 
race have not been prosecuted and that the difference 
in treatment is motivated by a racially discriminatory 
intent. 

B. Because proof of improper selection is an indis- 
pensable element of a selective prosecution claim, a 
criminal defendant must introduce solid and cred- 
ible evidence on it at the discovery stage. Accord- 
ingly, the courts of appeals have uniformly held that 


13 


discovery on a claim of selective prosecution is un- 
warranted unless a defendant makes a threshold 
showing of “selection,” i.e., that similarly situated 
persons were not prosecuted. 

The requirement that a defendant make a showing 
that similarly situated persons have not been prose- 
cuted is easily administered by courts. It is therefore 
a particularly practical way to identify those few 
cases worthy of further judicial inquiry. At the same 
time, because evidence concerning similarly situated 
offenders is not in the government’s exclusive pos- 
session, requiring criminal defendants to introduce 
such evidence will not cut off meritorious claims pre- 
maturely. 

Under the correct legal standard, respondents’ 
evidence that all of the 24 crack prosecutions closed 
by the Federal Public Defender in 1991 involved black 
defendants was insufficient to justify a discovery 
order. It demonstrates only that blacks have been 
prosecuted, not that others similarly situated have 
not. The district court therefore acted on the basis of 
an incorrect understanding of law and consequently 
abused its discretion in ordering discovery. 

C. In upholding the discovery order in this case, 
the Ninth Circuit dispensed with any requirement 
to show that similarly situated of nders were not 
prosecuted. Its reasons for diluting the required 
showing, however, are unsound. 

The court of appeals concluded that race-based se- 
lective prosecution claims differ from other selective 
prosecution claims: according to the court, defendants 
alleging selection based on race may rely on a legal 
presumption that people of all races commit all types 
of crimes. But a showing that similarly situated of- 
fenders have not been prosecuted is an indispensable 


14 


element of a selective prosecution claim, and that is 
no less true when the ground of selection is alleged to 
be race. The court of appeals’ presumption also runs 
counter to the settled rule that the government is 
presumed to act in good faith; that presumption can 
only be overcome by proof of specific facts. And the 
requirement that a defendant show that similarly 
situated persons have not been prosecuted does not 
accept racial stereotypes. Requiring such proof 
instead recognizes the possibility that, for socio- 
economic and historical reasons, members of particu- 
lar groups may predominate in the commission of 
certain crimes. 

The court of appeals also erred in relying on cases 
holding that statistical disparities can establish a 
prima facie case of discriminatory effect and intent. 
Under those cases, a disparity does not exist simply 
because those prosecuted are predominantly of one 
race. Rather, a disparity exists only when there is a 
significant difference between the composition of the 
group prosecuted and the composition of the group 
eligible for prosecution, a showing that necessarily 
requires proof that others who are similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted. The Court’s decisions in 
Yick Wo and Ah Sin v. Wittman, 198 U.S. 500 (1905), 
confirm the importance of evidence that similarly 
situated persons of a different race have not been 
prosecuted in cases that rely on statistics. In Yick 
Wo, evidence concerning similarly situated offenders 
was presented, and a violation was found. In Ah Sin, 
no allegation concerning similarly situated offenders 
was made, and the Court found the claim insufficient 
as a matter of law. 

The court of appeals’ concern that defendants who 
have potentially meritorious claims may be unable 


15 


to prove them without discovery is insufficient to 
change the discovery standard. If there were any 
substance to respondents’ assertion of selective pros- 
ecution, they should have had no difficulty producing 
concrete evidence that similarly situated non-blacks 
were being prosecuted in the state criminal justice 
system. 

Finally, the principle that a district court’s dis- 
covery orders are reviewed under an abuse of discre- 
tion standard does not affect the analysis in this case. 
A district court must exercise its discretion in ac- 
cordance with a correct understanding of the law. 
Because the district court ordered discovery under an 
incorrect legal approach, its decision constituted an 
abuse of discretion. 


ARGUMENT 


DISCOVERY ON A CLAIM OF SELECTIVE PROS- 
ECUTION ON THE BASIS OF RACE MAY NOT 
BE ORDERED ABSENT EVIDENCE THAT SIMI- 
LARLY SITUATED PERSONS OF A DIFFERENT 
RACE HAVE NOT BEEN PROSECUTED 


The court of appeals held that trial courts may 
order discovery on a claim of selective prosecution 
based solely on evidence that persons of a particular 
race have been prosecuted for a particular offense, 
without any evidence that similarly situated persons 
of a different race have not been prosecuted. For 
reasons that follow, that holding is incorrect. Except 
in cases involving direct admissions by officials of 
discriminatory purpose, a defendant seeking dis- 
covery on a claim of selective prosecution based on 
race must present evidence establishing that simi- 
larly situated persons of a different race have not 
been prosecuted. Because no such showing was made 


16 


in this case, the district court’s exercise of its discre- 
tion in ordering discovery rested on an erroneous 
understanding of the law. 


A. A Defendant Seeking Discovery On A Claim Of 
Selective Prosecution Must Make A Substantial 
Threshold Showing 


1. A prosecutor has broad discretion in the 
enforcement of the criminal laws. [Slo long as the 
prosecutor has probable cause to believe that the 
accused committed an offense defined by statute, the 
decision whether or not to prosecute, and what charge 
to file or bring before a grand jury, generally rests 
entirely in his discretion.” Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 
434 U.S. 357, 364 (1978); Wayte v. United States, 470 
U.S. 598, 607 (1985) (quoting Bordenkircher); see also 
Town of Newton v. Rumery, 480 U.S. 386, 396 (1987) 
(opinion of Powell, J.); United States v. Goodwin, 457 
U.S. 368, 380 n.11 (1982); Marshall v. Jerrico, Inc., 446 
U.S. 238, 248 (1980); United States v. Batchelder, 442 
U.S. 114, 124 (1979). That principle is founded on 
several important considerations. First, prosecuto- 
rial discretion is a core element of the Executive’s 
power to “take Care that the Laws be faithfully 
executed.” U.S. Const. Art. II, § 3. See Heckler v. 
Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 832 (1985); United States v. 
Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 694 (1974); Ponzi v. Fessenden, 
258 U.S. 254, 262 (1922). Separation-of-powers princi- 
ples therefore constrain judicial review of prosecuto- 
rial decisions. Second, “the decision to prosecute is 
particularly ill-suited to judicial review.” Wayte, 470 
U.S. at 607. The factors that the government must 
consider in deciding to prosecute, such as the 
strength of the case, the general deterrence value, 
and the government’s enforcement priorities, “are not 


a — 


17 


readily susceptible to the kind of analysis the courts 
are competent to undertake.” Jbid. Third, judicial 
review of prosecutorial decisionmaking “threatens to 
chill law enforcement by subjecting the prosecutor’s 
motives and decisionmaking to outside inquiry, and 
may undermine prosecutorial effectiveness by re- 
vealing the Government’s enforcement policy.” Ibid. 
See also Town of Newton, 480 U.S. at 396 (opinion of 
Powell, J); United States v. Lovasco, 431 U.S. 783, 793- 
794 (1977). Finally, judicial scrutiny of a prosecutor’s 
charging decisions imposes high costs on the crimi- 
nal justice system. The purpose of a criminal pro- 
ceeding is to determine a defendant’s guilt or inno- 
cence, and examination of the prosecutor’s reasons 
for bringing a prosecution diverts the proceeding 
from that central issue, resulting in delay that can be 
“fatal to the vindication of the criminal law.” Cobble- 
dick v. United States, 309 U.S. 323, 325 (1940). See 
also DiBella v. United States, 369 U.S. 121, 126 (1962). 
Those factors “make the courts properly hesitant to 
examine the decision whether to prosecute.” Wayte, 
470 U.S. at 608. 

Although prosecutorial discretion is broad, it is 
subject to constitutional constraints. In particular, 
the decision to prosecute may not be based on “an 
unjustifiable standard such as race, religion, or other 
arbitrary classification.” Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448, 
456 (1962); accord Wayte, 470 U.S. at 608; Batchelder, 
442 U.S. at 125. “Though the law itself be fair on its 
face and impartial in appearance, yet, if it is applied 
and administered by public authority with an evil eye 
and an unequal hand, * * * the denial of equal justice 
is still within the prohibition of the Constitution.” 
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 373-374 (1886). 


18 


Claims of selective prosecution are governed by 
“ordinary equal protection standards.” Wayte, 470 
U.S. at 608. Absent proof of an explicit discrimi- 
natory classification, a criminal defendant alleging 
selective prosecution based on race must therefore 
show that (1) persons of a difference race in “similar 
circumstances” have not been prosecuted and (2) the 
difference in treatment is motivated by an intent to 
discriminate against members of the defendant’s race. 
Yick Wo, 118 U.S. at 374. As the Court stated in 
Wayte, 470 U.S. at 608, a criminal defendant must 
demonstrate both a “discriminatory effect” and a “dis- 
criminatory purpose.” See Personnel Administrator 
of Massachusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 272 (1979); 
Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan 
Housing Development Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 264-265 
(1977); Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239-241 
(1976). Because of the special considerations im- 
plicated by judicial inquiry into an exercise of 
prosecutorial discretion, those two elements of the 
claim must be satisfied by “exceptionally clear proof.” 
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 297 (1987). In the 
absence of such proof, courts must presume that a 
prosecution for violation of a criminal law has been 
undertaken in good faith for the purpose of bringing 
offenders to justice. United States v. Mezzanatto, 115 
S. Ct. 797, 806 (1995); United States v. Chemical 
Foundation, Inc., 272 U.S. 1, 14-15 (1926); United 
States v. Parham, 16 F.3d 844, 846 (8th Cir. 1994); 
United States v. Penagaricano-Soler, 911 F.2d 833, 
837 (1st Cir. 1990); United States v. Bassford, 812 F.2d 
16, 19 (Ist Cir.), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1022 (1987); 
Attorney General v. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 928, 
947 (D.C. Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1172 (1983); 


19 


United States v. Falk, 479 F. 2d 616, 620 (7th Cir. 1973) 
(en banc). 

2. The same considerations that make courts re- 
luctant to examine exercises of prosecutorial discre- 
tion and that require exceptionally clear proof to 
establish a claim of unconstitutional selective prose- 
cution also determine the standard that should govern 
discovery on such a claim. In order to avoid judicial 
encroachment into an area that the Constitution re- 
serves to the Executive Branch, judicial inquiry into 
a prosecutor’s reasons for bringing a prosecution 
should not even begin unless there is a substantial 
and concrete basis for suspecting unconstitutional 
action. That prerequisite to judicial inquiry is espe- 
cially important because criminal defendants often 
“transform [their] resentment at being prosecuted 
into the ascription of improper and malicious actions 
to the [government’s] advocate.” Imbler v. Pachtman, 
424 U.S. 409, 425 (1976). Absent threshold screening 
to prevent abuses, defendants would be able to em- 
ploy claims of selective prosecution and associated 
discovery demands as powerful tools to divert a 
prosecutor’s “energy and attention * * * from 
the pressing duty of enforcing the criminal law,” 
ibid., and to delay the resolution of criminal charges 
against them. See United States v. Moon, 718 F.2d 
1210, 1230 (2d Cir. 1983) (“Unwarranted judicial in- 
quiries” into prosecutorial motive “undermine the 
strong public policy that resolution of criminal cases 
not be unduly delayed by litigation over collateral 
matters.”), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 971 (1984).' 


The Sixth Amendment guarantee of a speedy trial, the 
federal Speedy Trial Act of 1974, 18 U.S.C. 3161 et seq., Rules 2 
and 50 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, and Rule 


20 


Accordingly, before obtaining discovery on a claim 
of selective prosecution, a criminal defendant is re- 
quired to make a substantial threshold showing on 
each element of the claim. By requiring a significant 
threshold showing, courts may avoid unwarranted and 
highly intrusive inquiries into a »rosecutor’s judg- 
ment about why it was important to bring a case. At 
the same time, that standard will serve to prevent the 
needless diversion of government and judicial re- 
sources from the adjudication of a criminal case to the 
disposition of a selective prosecution motion. 


45(b) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure all provide 
for the prompt disposition of criminal cases. Because of the 
important public policy of expediting the resolution of criminal 
charges, the right to discovery in criminal cases is sharply 
limited. “There is no general constitutional right to discovery 
in a criminal case.” Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 559 
(1977). Due process requires the government to disclose ex- 
culpatory evidence that is material to guilt or punishment 
(Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963)), but the Federal Rules 
of Criminal Procedure, primarily Rule 16, otherwise govern 
the extent of discovery in criminal cases. Rule 16 contains 
specified categories of information subject to disclosure by the 
prosecution and defense, requiring in general that those items 
subject to discovery must be relevant and material to the 
defense of the criminal charges. Permitting discovery on 
claims of selective prosecution where there has not been a 
substantial threshold showing would undermine that policy and 
allow criminal defendants to circumvent the limitations on 
discovery built into the Federal Rules. See United States v. 
Murdock, 548 F.2d 599, 600 (5th Cir. 1977) (a threshold 
showing of selective prosecution is required because it jo hold 
otherwise would encourage the assertion of such defense, no 
matter how spurious, as a means of burdening criminal trials 
with massive discovery of material completely irrelevant and 
immaterial to the defendant’s case”). 


21 


The Court’s decision in Wade v. United States, 504 
U.S. 181 (1992), supports that approach. In Wade, the 
Court considered whether a court may review a claim 
that the government unconstitutionally refused to 
file a motion for a departure from a mandatory mini- 
mum sentence based on the defendant’s substantial 
assistance to the prosecution, and, if so, what showing 
a criminal defendant must make to obtain discovery 
on that claim. The Court held that such a discre- 
tionary decision should be treated no differently from 
a prosecutor’s other decisions and that district courts 
therefore have authority “to review a prosecutor's 
refusal to file a substantial-assistance motion and to 
grant a remedy if they find that the refusal was based 
on an unconstitutional motive.” Jd. at 185-186. The 
Court then noted the defendant’s concession that, in 
order to obtain discovery on such a claim, the defen- 
dant was required to make a “substantial threshold 
showing” of an unconstitutional motive. Id. at 186. 
Because the defendant had failed to make such a 
showing, the Court held that discovery was properly 
denied. Id. at 186-187. In Wade, as here, the require- 
ment of a substantial threshold showing properly 
balances the interest of courts in protecting the equal 
protection rights of individuals with the necessary 
judicial hesitance to explore the motives of prosecu- 
tors in bringing a criminal case. 


B. The Showing To Obtain Discovery Must Include 
Some Evidence That Similarly Situated Per- 
sons Have Not Been Prosecuted 


A key threshold requirement that a defendant must 
meet in the selective prosecution context is the 
presentation of concrete evidence on both elements of 
a selective prosecution claim, including a threshold 


22 


showing of “selection,” i.e., that others who are 
similarly situated have not been prosecuted. That 
principle has been uniformly recognized and applied in 
the courts of appeals. 

In Attorney General v. Irish People, Inc., 684 F.2d 
928, 932 (1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1172 (1983), the 
D.C. Circuit articulated the governing principles 
with particular clarity. There, the court held that, in 
order to obtain discovery from the government on a 
claim of selective prosecution, a defendant must not 
only introduce evidence of improper motive, but must 
also “make a colorable showing that he has been 
especially singled out, that there exist persons simi- 
larly situated who have not been prosecuted.” 684 
F.2d at 946. The court reasoned that “a demonstra- 
tion of selection is indispensable for the defense and 
* * * the burden of so demonstrating lies squarely 
on the defendant.” Ibid. It explained that “[i]f, as the 
district court found, there was no one to whom 
defendant could be compared in order to resolve the 
question of selection, then it follows that defendant 
has failed to make out one of the elements of its case. 
Discrimination cannot exist in a vacuum; it can be 
found only in the unequal treatment of people in 
similar circumstances.” Ibid. The court made clear 
that evidence that there are similarly situated offend- 
ers is essential not only to prove a claim of selective 
prosecution, but also to obtain discovery on such a 
claim (id. at 947-948 (footnote omitted)): 


[Wie can see no reason for throwing out half the 
standard on the discovery issue. If either part of 
the test is failed, the defense fails; thus it makes 
sense to require a colorable claim of both before 
subjecting the Government to discovery. Since it 


23 


is well established that, even in the context of a 
criminal prosecution, the Government enjoys a 
presumption of having “undertaken [the action] in 
good faith and in nondiscriminatory fashion,” it 
also makes sense that the burden be generally on 
the defendant to show the necessary elements at 
each procedural stage. 


The court’s analysis in United States v. Cooks, 52 
F.3d 101, 105 (5th Cir. 1995), a case similar to the 
present one, also illustrates the correct approach. 
There, a defendant prosecuted for conspiring to dis- 
tribute more than 50 grams of crack sought discovery 
on a claim that blacks were selectively prosecuted in 
federal rather than state court. In support of that 
request, the defendant introduced statistical evidence 
that the overwhelming majority of those arrested for 
possession of crack are black and that such arrests 
have increased tenfold in recent years. Ibid. The 
Fifth Circuit held that discovery was properly denied 
because the statistical evidence “fail{ed] to satisfy the 
first prong of the selective prosecution inquiry; it 
dlid] not establish that white defendants committing 
this offense were prosecuted in state rather than 
federal court.” Ibid. 

The Second, Fourth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and 
Tenth Circuits have all similarly held that discovery 
may not be ordered against the government on a claim 
of selective prosecution absent a threshold showing 
on both elements of the claim. Those circuits have 
therefore affirmed district court decisions denying 
discovery where the defendant failed to make a 
threshold showing that similarly situated persons 
were not prosecuted. See United States v. Fares, 978 
F. 2d 52, 59-60 (2d Cir. 1992) (no abuse of discretion in 


24 


refusing to order discovery where defendant did not 
offer “evidence as to large numbers of similarly situ- 
ated persons known to the government who had not 
been prosecuted”); United States v. Greenwood, 796 
F.2d 49, 52-53 (4th Cir. 1986) (discovery properly 
denied because defendant failed to make nonfrivolous 
showing that he had been singled out while others 
who were similarly situated had not been prosecuted); 
United States v. Peete, 919 F.2d 1168, 1176 (6th Cir. 
1990) (discovery properly denied because defendant, 
“aside from his own self-serving affidavit and an affi- 
davit from his counsel, did not point to any evidence 
that others similarly situated were not prosecuted”); 
United States v. Schmucker, 815 F.2d 413, 418-419 
(6th Cir. 1987) (without any evidence of others 
similarly situated who were not prosecuted, defendant 
not entitled to discovery); United States v. Mitcheil, 
778 F.2d 1271, 1277 (7th Cir. 1985) (to compel dis- 
covery, defendant must show colorable basis for selec- 
tive prosecution claim, which must include some evi- 
dence that defendant was singled out for prosecution 
while others were not); Parham, 16 F.3d at 846- 
847 (8th Cir.) (discovery properly denied because, 
“(where a defendant cannot show anyone in a similar 
situation who was not prosecuted, he has not met the 
threshold point of showing that there has been 
selectivity in prosecution”); C. E. Carlson, Inc. v. 
SEC, 859 F.2d 1429, 1437-1438 (10th Cir. 1988) (dis- 
covery properly denied because securities dealers 
sanctioned by SEC “were unable to show that others 
similarly situated were not subjected to enforcement 
proceedings”). Even the Ninth Circuit had, before the 
decision in this case, correctly required defendants 
seeking discovery from the government to introduce 
“solid, credible” evidence that other similarly situ- 


25 


ated offenders had not been prosecuted in order to 
obtain discovery on a claim of selective prosecution. 
United States v. Bourgeois, 964 F.2d 935, 939 (9th 
Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 290 (1992). 

The substantial threshold showing necessary to 
permit a court to order discovery on a selective 
prosecution claim does not require proof of a prima 
facie case of selective prosecution. The evidence need 
not be so forceful or comprehensive as would be 
required to establish a prima facie case. But a mere 
nonfrivolous assertion of selective prosecution is not 
enough to justify an order requiring discovery. If 
defendants were not required to come forward with 
more than a nonfrivolous assertion, they could too 
easily provoke unwarranted inquiries and needless 
delay. A substantial threshold showing lies between 
those two poles. It requires concrete evidence on 
both elements of a selective prosecution claim suffi- 
cient to show a reasonable likelihood that unconsti- 
tutional selective prosection has taken place. The 
standard will “discourage fishing expeditions, protect 
legitimate prosecutorial discretion, [and] safeguard 
government investigative records. Bourgeois, 964 
F. Ad at 940. 

Requiring defendants to make a significant thresh- 
old showing that others who are similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted is a particularly practical! 
device for courts to use in determining whether 
or not further judicial inquiry may be warranted. 
The question whether similarly situated offend- 
ers have been prosecuted is readily susceptible 
to objective proof. At the same time, the require- 
ment that a defendant make a significant thresh- 
old showing that others who are similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted “still allowis] meritorious 


26 


claims to proceed.” Bourgeois, 964 F.2d at 940. In 
those rare instances in which there are reasonable 
grounds to credit and explore a claim of selective 
prosecution, it should not be difficult for a criminal 
defendant to make an objective showing of disparity of 
treatment. 

Experience in the courts of appeals demonstrates 
that evidence concerning similarly situated offenders 
is not in the government’s exclusive possession. See 
United States v. Adams, 870 F.2d 1140, 1145-1146 (6th 
Cir. 1989) (discovery ordered where record suggested 
that taxpayers who underreported income and volun- 
tarily amended returns and paid deficiencies, as defen- 
dants did, were not prosecuted); United States v. 
Gordon, 817 F.2d 1538, 1540 (1987) (discovery affirmed; 
colorable entitlement shown where defendants pre- 
sented some evidence of similar violations by other 
persons who were not prosecuted, as well as evidence 
of invidious intent), vacated in part on rehearing on 
other grounds, 836 F.2d 1312 (11th Cir.), cert. dis- 
missed, 487 U.S. 1265 (1988); United States v. Holmes, 
794 F.2d 345, 348 & n.3 (8th Cir. 1986) (defendant 
submitted names of 30 white farmers not prosecuted 
for same conduct; court’s review of prosecution rec- 
ords in camera showed adequate explanation for 
defendant’s allegations); United States v. Hoover, 727 
F.2d 387, 389 (5th Cir. 1984) (defendant met first part 
of test for selective prosecution by showing that only 
three of the 300 striking air traffic controllers in the 
Houston area were prosecuted); United States v. 
Hazel, 696 F.2d 473, 475 (6th Cir. 1983) (showing that 
34 other members of Michigan tax revolt group com- 
mitted same offense but were not prosecuted probably 
enough to demand evidentiary hearing on first prong 
of selective prosecution test, but defendants failed to 


27 


show evidence of intent to discriminate); United 
States v. Diggs, 613 F.2d 988, 1003-1004 (D.C. Cir. 
1979) (congressman offered evidence that two other 
congressmen who had engaged in similar conduct 
were not prosecuted; court assumed that first prong 
of discovery standard was met, but denied discovery 
on the ground that there was no evidence of discrimi- 
natory intent), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 982 (1980); 
United States v. Steele, 461 F.2d 1148, 1151 (9th Cir. 
1972) (conviction reversed based on defendant’s 
showing that six others who had also refused to com- 
plete census form were not prosecuted). A require- 
ment that a defendant produce some evidence of 
similarly situated offenders to obtain discovery is 
therefore a fair burden to place on a defendant who 
seeks to inquire into the prosecutor’s motives for 
bringing a criminal case. 

Respondents did not meet that burden. In support 
of their claim of selective prosecution, respondents 
produced evidence that all of the 24 crack prosecu- 
tions closed by the Federal Public Defender in 1991 
involved black defendants. Under the correct legal 
standard, that evidence was legally insufficient to 
justify a discovery order. As the original panel in 
this case explained, that evidence “demonstrates only 
that others have been prosecuted, not that others 
similarly situated have not.” Pet. App. 80a. The 
showing therefore contains “a total lack of evidence” 
(ibid.) on an essential element of a selective prosecu- 
tion claim: the disparate treatment of offenders who 
are similarly situated but for their race. Thus, as the 


28 


original panel concluded, the district court’s discov- 
ery order was unwarranted.” 


C. The Court Of Appeals’ Reasons For Eliminating 
The Similarly Situated Offender Requirement 
Are Unsound 


The court of appeals recognized that there was no 
factual showing in this case that the government had 
failed to prosecute similarly situated persons of a 
different race. The court held, however, that such 
evidence was unnecessary. The court of appeals gave 
several reasons for dispensing with the similarly 
situated offender requirement universally recognized 
by other circuits. Those reasons are unsound. 

1. The court first held that evidence of similarly 
situated offenders is unnecessary because of a legal 
presumption “that people of all races commit all types 
of crimes.” Pet. App. 19a & n.6. According to the 
court, a criminal defendant can rely on that pre- 
sumption, unless the government introduces “com- 
pelling contrary evidence.” Id. at 19a. The court 
stated that At he fact that evidence of similarly 
situated persons who were not prosecuted was 
submitted in other kinds of selective prosecution 
claims is of no significance in the context of a selec- 
tive prosecution case based on race” because, in the 
court’s view, imposing such a requirement in relation 
to race-based claims “would be accepting unwarranted 
racial stereotypes.” Id. at 19a n.6. 


2 The district court did not rely on respondents’ affida- 
vits in exercising its discretion to order discovery in this case. 
J.A. 217. They are therefore irrelevant here. In any event, 
those affidavits are also legally insufficient to support a dis- 


covery order. See note 4, infra. 


29 


The need to identify similarly situated persons who 
have not been prosecuted, however, does not diminish 
simply because the claim is one of race-based selec- 
tive prosecution. As the panel in this case explained, 
“‘[slelective prosecution’ implies that a selection has 
taken place,” Pet. App. 80a, and that principle is 
applicable to claims of selective prosecution based on 
race. Evidence that members of a particular racial 
group have been prosecuted fails to provide any basis 
for believing that a selection has taken place, unless 
there is evidence that similarly situated persons of a 
different race have not been prosecuted. Ibid. Absent 
concrete evidence to that effect, “the most reason- 
able conclusion is that the defendant was selected for 
prosecution because the government believed the de- 
fendant committed the offense; the fact that the defen- 
dant is a member of a protected class is coincidental.” 
Ibid. 

In addition, as noted above, “in the context of a 
criminal prosecution, the Government enjoys a 
presumption of having ‘undertaken [the action] in 
good faith and in nondiscriminatory fashion.’” Jrish 
People, Inc., 684 F.2d at 947. This Court has made 
clear that “tradition and experience justify our belief 
that the great majority of prosecutors will be faithful 
to their duty.” Mezzanatto, 115 S. Ct. at 806, quoting 
Town of Newton, 480 U.S. at 397. Accordingly, “in 
the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, courts 
presume that [prosecutors] have properly discharged 
their official duties.” Chemical Foundation, Inc., 272 
U.S. at 14-15; see McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 297. Reli- 
ance on a presumption, rather than actual proof, to 
permit the defendant to make a threshold showing of 
a discriminatory effect runs counter to that settled 
rule. To overcome that presumption of prosecutorial 


30 


good faith, the defendant must adduce facts, not 
assumptions. 

Nor does insisting on evidence that other similarly 
situated offenders of another racial group have not 
been prosecuted accept racial stereotypes. Rather, it 
recognizes the empirical possibility that, for socio- 
economic and historical reasons, members of particu- 
lar racial and ethnic groups may predominate in the 
commission of certain crimes. The government in 
fact presented affirmative evidence in this case 
supporting the conclusion that black individuals 
dominate large-scale dealing in crack, while members 
of other racial groups dominate the sales of other 
drugs. See Pet. App. 22a; see id. at 72a-73a (panel 
opinion). Information from the Sentencing Commis- 
sion confirms that particular crimes can be asso- 
ciated with particular racial groups. According to 
the Commission’s most recent nationwide statistics, 
more than 90% of those persons sentenced for traf- 
ficking in crack cocaine were black. United States 
Sentencing Comm’n, Annual Report 1994, at 107 
(Table 45). In contrast, 93.4% of those sentenced for 
trafficking in LSD, 100% of those sentenced for 
antitrust violations, and 91.4% of those sentenced for 
pornography and prostitution offenses were white. 
Id. at 41, 107 (Tables 13, 45). In addition, of those sen- 
tenced for trafficking in methamphetamine, 72.9% 
were white, while only 1.6% were black. /d. at 107 
(Table 45). The court of appeals, in the interest of 
avoiding what it characterized as racial stereotypes, 
was not free to adopt an evidentiary presumption that 
has neither a rational nor a factual foundation. Cf. 
Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224, 245-246 (1988); 
Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398, 404-405 (1970). 


31 


2. In dispensing with the similarly situated of- 
fender requirement, the court of appeals also relied on 
cases indicating that statistical disparities alone can 
constitute sufficient evidence of discriminatory effect 
and intent to establish a prime facie case of selective 
prosecution. The court stated that the standard for 
obtaining discovery is lower than that for establish- 
ing a prima facie case. It then reasoned that because 
a showing of a statistical disparity in the race of 
those persons prosecuted would establish a prima 
facie case, it is also sufficient to warrant discovery. 
Pet. App. 10a-lla. But the court’s application of its 
analysis reveals its misunderstanding of the concept 
of a “disparity.” The court held that respondents’ 
evidence that all 24 crack prosecutions closed by the 
Federal Public Defender in 1991 involved black defen- 
dants established a statistical disparity, and that 
respondents were therefore relieved of the necessity 
of showing that others who are similarly situated 
have not been prosecuted. Id. at 15a-16a; see id. at 10a 
n. (evidence of similarly situated offenders is not 
required when there is statistical evidence of a dis- 
parity in the race of those prosecuted). 

The court’s chain of reasoning is seriously flawed. 
This Court has held that, in some circumstances, 
statistical disparities can establish a prima facie case 
of discriminatory effect and intent. McCleskey, 481 
U.S. at 293-294 & nn.12, 13 (discussing cases); Village 
of Arlington Heights, 429 U.S. at 266; Yick Wo, 118 
U.S. at 373-374. Under this Court’s decisions, how- 
ever, a disparity does not exist just because the 
persons prosecuted are predominantly of one race. 
Rather, a disparity exists when there is a substantial 
difference between the racial composition of the group 
prosecuted and the racial composition of the group 


32 


eligible for prosecution. See Hazelwood School Dis- 
trict v. United States, 433 U.S. 299, 307-308 & n.13 
(1977); Yick Wo, 118 U.S. at 373-374. Demonstrating 
such a disparity necessarily entails proof that others 
who are similarly situated have not been prosecuted. 
Absent such a showing, the evidence fails to cast any 
doubt on the most obvious race-neutral explanation 
for the prosecutions brought: that the pool of persons 
prosecuted mirrors the pool of persons eligible for 
prosecution.“ 

Yick Wo and the Court's subsequent decision in Ah 
Sin v. Wittman, 198 U.S. 500 (1905), demonstrate that 
statistical evidence is capable of showing discrimina- 
tory effect and intent only when it involves proof that 
similarly situated persons have not been prosecuted. 
In Yick Wo, an ordinance prohibited the operation of 
laundries constructed of wood except by persons who 
obtained permission from the Board of Supervisors. 
The evidence showed that 200 laundry owners of 
Chinese ancestry petitioned the Board for permission 
to continue their businesses in wooden buildings, and 
every one of those petitions was denied. 118 U.S. at 
359 (Statement of Facts). In contrast, of the petitions 


In addition, where, as here, “the discretion that is 
fundamental to our criminal process is involved,” McCleskey, 
481 U.S. at 313, statistical evidence would be capable of proving 
a violation of the Equal Protection Clause only if the disparity 
between the racial composition of those selected and the racial 
composition of those eligible for selection is so “stark” as to be 
“unexplainable” on any ground other than race. Id. at 293-294 
& n.12; Village of Arlington Heights, 429 U.S. at 266; Yick Wo, 
118 U.S. at 373. Because there was no showing of any disparity 
in this case, the question of how extreme such a disparity must 
be to prove unconstitutional selective prosecution is not at issue 
here. 


33 


filed by the 80 laundry owners of non-Chinese an- 
cestry, all but one was granted. Ibid. As a result, 
150 laundry owners of Chinese ancestry were ar- 
rested for violating the ordinance, while no laundry 
owners of non-Chinese ancestry were arrested. Ibid. 
The Court held that those facts established a viola- 
tion of the Equal Protection Clause. Jd. at 373-374. 
The Court explained that the Board had engaged in 
disparate treatment of persons of Chinese ancestry 
and non-Chinese ancestry who were in “similar 
circumstances” and that no reason for the disparate 
treatment was possible except for “hostility” to 
persons of Chinese ancestry. Id. at 374. The finding 
of a violation in Yick Wo therefore depended on 
evidence that similarly situated persons had not been 
prosecuted. 

In Ah Sin, an ordinance prohibited the display of 
gambling implements in a barred or barricaded room. 
The defendant alleged that the ordinance was en- 
forced only against persons of Chinese ancestry. Be- 
cause the defendant failed to allege that there were 
persons of non-Chinese ancestry who had violated the 
ordinance, however, the Court held that the defendant 
had failed to allege the facts necessary to establish a 
violation of the equal protection principle established 
in Yick Wo. The Court reasoned that 


lim the Fick Wo case there was not a mere allega- 
tion that the ordinance attacked was enforced 
against the Chinese only, but it was shown that 
not only the petitioner in that case, but two 
hundred of his countrymen, applied for licenses, 
and were refused, and that all the petitions of 
those not Chinese, with one exception, were 
granted. The averment in the case at bar is that 


34 


the ordinance is enforced “solely and exclusively 
against persons of the Chinese race and not 
otherwise.” There is no averment that the con- 
ditions and practices to which the ordinance was 
directed did not exist exclusively among the 
Chinese, or that there were other offenders 
against the ordinance than the Chinese as to 
whom it was not enforced. 


198 U.S. at 507-508. 

Respondents’ statistical evidence contains the 
same flaw identified in Ah Sin:-the absence of any 
evidence that similarly situated persons of a different 
race were not prosecuted. The court of appeals’ view 
that statistical evidence need not include such in- 
formation in order to prove a violation of the Equal 
Protection Clause is incorrect. See United States v. 
Cooks, 52 F.3d at 105 (statistics reflecting that the 
overwhelming majority of those arrested for pos- 
session of crack are African-American failed to 
satisfy first prong of selective prosecution inquiry 
because it did not establish that white defendants 
committing this offense were prosecuted in state 
rather than federal court); United States v. Gutier- 
rez, 990 F.2d 472, 476 (1993) (statistics showing a high 
percentage of certain groups being prosecuted in- 
sufficient to establish that similarly situated per- 
sons are not being prosecuted), overruled by United 
States v. Armstrong, 48 F.3d 1508, 1513 n.1 (9th Cir. 
1995) (en banc); United States v. Huff, 959 F.2d 731, 
735 (8th Cir.) (evidence from newspaper article stat- 
ing that 87% of arrests in reverse sting cases in 
Minneapolis were African-Americans insufficient to 
establish prima facie case of selective prosecution 
because there was no evidence that similarly situated 


35 


non-African-Americans were not being prosecuted for 
similar conduct), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 162 (1992). 

3. The court of appeals’ elimination of the simi- 
larly situated offender requirement also appears to 
have been animated by its concern that defendants 
who have potentially meritorious claims may be 
unable to prove their cases without obtaining dis- 
covery from the government. Pet. App. IIa-12a. 
Courts have long required defendants to offer at least 
some evidence on both prongs of the selective pros- 
ecution defense before ordering discovery, however, 
and there is no basis for assuming that defendants 
with valid claims cannot meet those standards. As 
previously discussed, evidence concerning similarly 
situated offenders is not in the government’s exclu- 
sive possession. See pages 26-27, supra. 

The present case is illustrative. If there were any 
substance to respondents’ claim that the United 
States Attorney improperly selects only blacks in 
prosecutions for dealing in crack, respondents should 
have had no difficulty producing concrete evidence 
that similarly situated persons of other races were 
being prosecuted by the State of California. Although 
information concerning persons prosecuted by the 
State is readily accessible to the public, respondents 
failed to produce such evidence.* 


The affidavits submitted by respondents concerning non- 
black crack dealers contain only vague, conclusory, and impres- 
sionistic hearsay. They do not provide the kind of solid and 
credible evidence necessary to support a discovery order. Cf. 
United States Dep't of Labor v. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715, 724-725 
(1990). Those affidavits also fail to include any information 
that would suggest that crack dealers prosecuted in the state 
courts were similarly situated to respondents. Respondents 
were indicted for conspiring to distribute more than 50 grams 


36 


4. Finally, the court of appeals relied on the 
principle that a district court’s discovery orders must 
be reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard. 
Pet. App. 7a; id. at 29a-3la (Wallace, J., concurring). 
A district court must exercise its discretion, how- 
ever, on the basis of correct legal principles. As this 
Court has stated, “discretionary choices are not left 
to a court’s ‘inclination, but to its judgment; and its 
judgment is to be guided by sound legal principles.’” 
Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 416 
(1975), quoting United States v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 
35 (C. C. Va. 1807) (No. 14,692d) (Marshall, C. J.). When 
a district court exercises its discretion on the basis 
of an erroneous view of the law, it necessarily abuses 
its discretion. Cooter & Gell v. Hurtmaræ Corp., 496 
U.S. 384, 402, 405 (1990). That is the situation here. 
As we have discussed, the district court’s order is 
premised on the incorrect understanding that dis- 
covery may be ordered based solely on evidence that 
persons of a particular race have been prosecuted for 
a particular offense, without evidence that similarly 
situated persons of a different race have not been 
prosecuted for that offense. In view of that legal 


of cocaine and that conspiracy involved the use of firearms. 
The affidavits do not assert that there are any non-black crack 
dealers prosecuted in state court who have trafficked in 
comparable quantities of crack and who have used firearms in 
connection with that trafficking. For those reasons, the panel 
correctly concluded that the affidavits did not assist respon- 
dents in making the threshold showing necessary to obtain 
discovery. Pet. App. 82a-83a (describing the affidavits as 
containing unsubstantiated hearsay, noting that they do not 
include any information on the quantity of drugs involved or 
the presence of firearms, and concluding that they constitute 
“flimsy” and “ineffective” evidence). 


37 


error, the district court abused its discretion in 
ordering discovery in this case. 

The court’s error is particularly evident on the 
facts of this case. Respondents introduced evidence 
concerning an extremely small, unrepresentative 
sample of defendants who were prosecuted. That 
evidence proves little, if anything, about the actual 
pool of persons prosecuted, and nothing about the pool 
of persons eligible for prosecution. In contrast, the 
government offered specific information on the rea- 
sons it brought the charges in this case: the decision 
to prosecute was based on the large quantity of drugs 
involved, the number of sales and defendants, the 
presence of firearms violations intertwined with the 
drug offenses, the involvement of a federal agency in 
the investigation, the criminal histories of the 
defendants, and the strength of the evidence. J.A. 81. 
As the pane! concluded, if discovery can be ordered on 
that kind of record, “district courts too often and un- 
necessarily could become immersed in the workings 
of a coordinate branch of government, to the benefit of 
neither.” Pet. App. 84a. Under the controlling legal 
standards, the order of discovery in this case was an 
abuse of discretion. 


38 


