DATE-ELIGIBLE SOURCE EXCERPTS ONLY. NOT A NEUTRAL MODELING PACKET.
Verbatim archive OCR; printed pagination controls; OCR errors retained.
Source: armstrong_07._Joint_Appendix_djvu.txt


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 5091-5141 ---

DECLARATION OF MARLA BELLER 
1, Marla Beller, hereby state and declare as follows: 


1. | am employed as a Paralegal Specialist by the 
Federal Public Defender in the Central District of 
California. 


69 


2. Paralegal Specialists Damone Schraier, James Sim- 
mons, and myself have reviewed all cases closed by the 
Office of the Federal Public defender during the year 1991, 
which alleged violations of 21 U.S.C. § 846 and/or 21 
U.S.C. § 841. Of those cases, I have prepared a list of all 
those involving cocaine base, excluding only out-of-district 
cases and those in which counsel was retained prior to 
post-indictment arraignment (based on whether or not there 
was a copy of the indictment in our file). 

3. Attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein 
is a copy of a chart evidencing the reuslts of the study of 
attorney assigned to the case, whether cocaine base alone 
or both cocaine base and cocaine powder were involved, 
and the race of the defendant. The information regarding 
the type of cocaine was obtained either from the 
indictment or through an interview of the Deputy Federal 
Public Defender assigned to represent the defendant. The 
information regarding the race of the: defendant was 
obtained either from the presentence report or through an 
interview of the Deputy Federal Public Defender assigned 
to represent the defendant. 

4. Of 24 defendants charged with cocaine base offensed, 
all—or 100%—were black. 

I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 


MARLA BELLER 
Paralegal Specialist 


DATED: July 17, 1992 


SELECTIVE PROSECUTION TAB 


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 5250-5718 ---

DECLARATION OF RALPH LOCHRIDGE 
I, Ralph Lochridge, hereby declare as follows: 


1. 1 am a Special Agent of the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) and have been so employed for the 


72 


past 21 years. | was a field agent in enforcement 
operations for.17 years, and have been serving as the 
Public Information Officer for the DEA Los Angeles 
Division for the past four years. 

2. I have received training in and investigated over 500 
cases involving almost all controlled substances and money 
laundering. With respect to cocaine base, in 1987 I was the 
case agent for the first DEA investigation launched in the 
Los Angeles area concerning a major crack cocaine 
trafficking organization. 

3. As a Public Information Officer, it is my duty and 
responsibility to be knowledgeable about the investigations 
and various law enforcement efforts of the DEA world- 
wide. My knowledge is based upon numerous reports and 
publications issued by DEA, as weil as my personal 
experience in investigating cases, speaking with active 
DEA enforcement agents, and attending various seminars, 
meetings, lectures, and conventions concerning narcotics 
enforcement efforts. 

4. As a Public Information Officer, I am in a unique 
position within DEA which allows me access to all 
investigations throughout the Los Angeles division. All 
significant cases and major investigations are forwarded to 
my office for review and possible dissemination to the 
public. 

5. It has been my experience and the experience of 
other agents that narcotics offenders as a whole cover an 
entire spectrum of different races, sexes, and religions. 
However, if one were to focus in on various types of 
narcotic substances, there is a distinct pattern indicating 
that various ethnic groups play a larger role in certain 
types of narcotics offenses. For example: 


a. A large proportion of large scale marijuana growers 
are white. | 

b. Traditionally, a large proportion of methamphetamine 
labs were operated by white males that belonged to outlaw 


73 


Motorcycle gangs. However, recently there has been an 
upsurge of Hispanic operators from Mexico. 

c. A large proportion of crystal methamphetamine (or 
‘‘ice’’) users and distributors are of polynesian descent. 

d. A large proportion of Southeast Asian heroin 
traffickers emanate from that region and are therefore of 
Asian descent. 

e. A large proportion of black tar heroin traffickers and 
users are of Hispanic descent, while a large proportion of 
Chinese white heroin (“‘China White’’) traffickers are of 
Chinese descent. 

f. A large proportion of opium offenders are of 
Southeast Asian descent, with a large subsection of that 
group originating from Laos, Thailand, and Burma. 

g. A major proportion of large scale powder cocaine 
traffickers are of Hispanic or South American descent. 

h. With respect to cocaine base (or ‘‘crack’’), virtually 
all major crack traffickers uncovered in the Los Angeles 
area have been black and operate primarily in black 
neighborhoods. 

6. It has been my training and experience that there are 
various reasons for some of these racial patterns, including 
cultural, geographical origination, and other reasons. For 
example, the proportionately high percentage of Chinese 
traffickers in “‘China White’’ heroin cases is obviously 
because the narcotic substance originates from that locale. 
Similarly, the reason so many Laotians and other Southeast 
Asians are involved in opium trafficking is because opium 
has been accepted and utilized in many of the cultures in 
that geographic location. The recent influx of Hispanic 
operators in methamphetamine cases can be traced back to 
the recent laws making it much more difficult to obtain the 
chemicals necessary to produce that substance in the 
United States, but is still easily obtained in Mexico. A 
prime example of a narcotic substance that is endemic to a 
specific ethnic community is black tar heroin. Black tar 


74 


heroin is manufactured in Mexico by Mexican chemists, 
commonly smuggled by Mexican organizations, and 
generally distributed by Mexican nationals and Mexican- 
Americans, and used almost exclusively by abusers of 
Mexican descent. 

7. With respect to cocaine base, or crack, trafficking in 
the Southern California area is primarily centered in the 
poorer, inner-city areas of South Central Los Angeles, 
which has a very large black community. Moreover, a 
great deal of the cocaine base trade is controlled by gangs 
in the South Central area, such as the Crips and Bloods, 
whose membership is almost exclusively black. These 
gangs operate primarily in those areas, recruiting from and 
employing other members in the neighborhoods to sell to 
crack abusers that live in that community. 

I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 


RALPH LOCHRIDGE 
Special Agent, 
Drug Enforcement Administration 


DATED: September 15, 1992 


75 


DECLARATION OF MARK CAMPBELL 
I, Mark Campbell, hereby declare and state as follows: 


|. | am currently employed as a narcotics detective with 
the Inglewood Police Department. The majority of the 
population of Inglewood is black. | have been employed as 
a police officer there for over ten years and have been 
assigned to the narcotics unit for approximately three 
years. 

2. In my experience as a narcotics detective, I have 
investigated easily over five hundred narcotics cases; 
approximately 70% have involved crack cocaine. I have 
participated in the investigation and arrests of over one 
thousand narcotics suspects, all of whom were of various 
races incl ding white, black, and hispanic, of either sex, of 
varying ages from juveniles to senior citizens, and of 
varying socioeconomic backgrounds. 

3. It has never been the policy of the Inglewood Police 
Department to arrest or investigate cases based on race. 
We conduct investigations according to the crimes 
committed regardless of race, sex, or other physical or 
sociological factors. 

4. With respect to crack cocaine offenders, I have 
participated in the arrests of over five hundred suspects, 
the overwhelming majority of which were black. These 
offenders often live in primarily black neighborhoods, and 
prey upon and sell to others who live in that community. 

5. Of the several hundred crack cocaine investigations | 
have participated in, only four cases were brought 
federally; the remaining cases were referred to and 
prosecuted by the Inglewood District Attorney's Office. 
The overwhelming majority of crack cocaine defendants 
arrested by the Inglewood Police Department and pros- 
ecuted by the District Attorney's Office were black. 

6. All four of the cases that were brought federally were 
jointly investigated with a Special Agent of the Bureau of 


76 


Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms who was participating in a 
joint task force operation to target major narcotics 
traffickers that utilize firearms in violation of federal law. 
Three out of the four cases resulted in the recovery of 
illegally utilized firearms and the indictment of federal 
firearms violations. Such was the case with the defendants 
in this case. 

7. As in all of my investigations, | was unaware of the 
race of the defendants in this case. When defendant 
Armstrong's crack ring first came to my attention, I did 
not know that he or any members of his organization were 
black, nor did I care. I began the investigation because | 
was informed that he was a major distributor of cocaine 
base in the Inglewood area, that he utilized firearms for 
protection of the narcotics trafficking, and that he often 
supplied dangerous and violent gang members in the area. 

8. | requested the assistance of Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco and Firearms Specia! Agent Jeffrey Cochran in 
the investigation due to the number of firearms the 
Armstrong ring utilized in connection with their narcotics 
trafficking. 

9. When I initiated the investigation into the Armstrong 
crack ring, | knew neither the identities, nor the races of 
any of the other co-defendants. They became known to me 
only after they appeared at the crack sales and participated 
in the narcotics transactions. 

10. I did not select defendants for investigation or 
prosecution; in essence, they selected themselves by 
appearing and playing various active roles in the crack 
trafficking ring. For example, defendants Rozelle, Mack, 
and Hampton were targeted because they delivered and/or 
sold crack cocaine to purchasers who had negotiated the 
transactions with defendant Armstrong. Defendant Martin 
was targeted after being identified as an armed guard 
inside the hotel room which Armstrong operated as a crack 
house. 


77 


I declare that the foregoing is true and correct to the 
best of my knowledge. 


DATED: September 15, 1992 
MARK CAMPBELL 


Detective, Narcotics Division 
Inglewood Police Department 


78 


DECLARATION OF JEFFREY COCHRAN 
1, Jeffrey Cochran, declare and state as follows: 


1. | am employed as a Special Agent with the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). I have been so 
employed for over three years. Prior to that | was a police 
officer in Orange, Texas for over three years, and 
investigated narcotics cases in conjunction with a federal 
and state joint task force. | am currently assigned to a joint 
task force with Inglewood Police Department to investigate 
federal narcotics and firearms violations. 

2. It has never been the policy of ATF to base any 
investigative decisions on the basis of a defendant's race. 
Investigations are based solely on information regarding 
the nature of the federal criminal violations regardless of 
race, sex, religious affiliation, or any other sociological 
factors. 

3. I was assigned to the City of Inglewood to investigate 
federal firearms violations in violation of 18 U.S.C. 
§§ 922, 924. I have worked closely with the Inglewood 
Police Department Narcotics Unit because of the great 
number of firearms recovered in narcotics investigations. 

4. With respect to this case, I became involved in 
February 1992, after being informed that these defendants 
may by using firearms in the protection of a narcotics 
trafficking ring led by defendant Christopher Armstrong. 
During the investigation, we obtained evidence that 
firearms were being illegally utilized in such a manner, and 
| decided to recommend this case for federal prosecution. 

5. Defendants were not chosen because of their race; in 
fact, at the initiation of the investigation | was unaware of 
unaware of the race of any of the potential suspects. The 
investigation and subsequent recommendation for federal 
prosecution were based solely on the fact that there were 
provable federal firearms violations and federal narcotics 


79 


violations, which were sufficient to meet the guidelines of 
the United States Attorney's Office. 

6. Since my assignment to the joint task force in 
Inglewood, I have participated in over 40-50 arrests of 
narcotics and/or firearms offenders of various ethnic 
origins, of which only three cases were referred for federal 
prosecution because they met the requisite quantity of 
narcotics and number of firearms involved. The remaining 
majority of narcotics and firearms offenders, many of 
whom were black, were referred to the State District 
Attorney's Office for prosecution. 


JEFFREY COCHRAN 
Special Agent 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms 


DATED: September 15, 1992 


80 
DECLARATION OF DAVID C. SCHEPER 


1, DAVID C. SCHEPER, hereby declare as follows: 


|. | am an Assistant United States Attorney and Chief 
of the Major Crimes unit in the United States Attorney's 
Office for the Central District of California. | have been 
employed with the United States Attorney's Office for over 
five years and have served in a supervisory capacity for 
two years. From September 1990 to June 1992, I served as 
Chief of the Criminal Complaints Section—the Section in 
charge of directing and supervising most charging deci- 
sions for the Criminal Division of the United States 
Attorney's Office. 

2. In all of my years at the United States Attorney's 
Office, including my tenure as Chief of the Criminal 
Complaints Section, a particular defendant's race has never 
played any role in a decision whether to charge him or her 
with a crime. In fact, the race of suspects brought for 
consideration for federal prosecution is hardly ever 
mentioned, and is in most cases unknown at the time a 
charging decision is rendered. In a relatively low 
proportion of cases, the race of a suspect is made known 
for the specific purpose of ensuring that arrests and 
prosecutions are not based upon unconstitutional 
motivations. 

3. All charging decisions are made on the basis of 
whether a federal offense that meets this Office's 
guidelines has occurred, the overall strength of the 
evidence, the deterrence value and federal interest associ- 
ated with the particular case, the criminal history of the 
suspects, and other race-neutral criteria. 

4. In of 1992, while serving as the Chief of the Criminal 
Complaints Section, | supervised all charging decisions at 
that time, including the indictment decision of United 
States v. Armstrong, et al, CR No. 92-336-CBM. 


5. The decision to charge this case was consistent with, 
and met the general criteria applied to all cases brought for 
consideration. In particular, in the Armstrong case there 
was over 100 grams of cocaine base involved, over twice 
the threshold necessary for a ten year mandatory minimum 
sentence, there were multiple sales involving multiple 
defendants, thereby indicating a fairly substantial crack 
cocaine ring; the case was jointly investigated with a 
federal agent from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and 
Fissarms: there were multiple federal firearms violations 
intertwined with the narcotics trafficking; the overall 
evidenes in the case was extremely strong, including audio 
and videotapes of defendants; threats had been made to 
See eee Cy aden Acmeveng: and several of 

ndants had criminal histories including narcotics 
and ra violations. Defendants’ race played absolutely 
no role in the decision whether to charge them. | have no 
recollection of the race of the defendants ever being 
discussed. 

6. During my tenure as Chief of the Criminal Com- 
plaints Section, there were many instances where the 
Office declined prosecution in narcotics cases, including 
crack cocaine cases. Decisions to decline prosecution, like 
decisions to accept cases for prosecution, were made on 
the basis of the criteria outlined above. No one is 
prosecuted because of his or her race, and no case was 
declined because of the race of the suspect. 

I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 


DAVID C. SCHEPER 


DATED: September 15, 1992 


82 
DECLARATION OF LAWRENCE H. CHO 


1, LAWRENCE H. CHO hereby declare and state: 


1. | am the Assistant United States Attorney assigned to 
prosecute the case of United States v. Armstrong, et al, 
92-336-CBM. 

2. Pursuant to this Court's Order of September 8, 1992, 
I contacted the Systems Manager with the Office of the 
United States Attorney, Gordon Gibson, who generated a 
listing of all defendants charged with narcotics violations 
under 21 U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846 for the past three years. 

3. According to the printout, which is attached as 
Exhibit |, there have been approximately 2,400 defendants 
charged with violations of 21 U.S.C. § 841, and approx- 
imately 1,700 defendants charged with violations of 21 
U.S.C. § 846 in the past three years. According to Gordon 
Gibson, an accurate tally of the actual number of 
defendants charged is not yet attainable due to the fact that 
there are multiple entries in the system for certain 
defendants. However, it is safely estimated that over 2,000 
have been charged under § 841, and over 1,700 have been 
charged under § 846. 

4. On or about September I4th and [Sth, 1992, an 
informal survey was conducted amongst members of the 
Major Narcotics Unit of the United States Attorney's 
Office concerning the race of various cocaine base 
defendants that have been brought by this Office. The 
survey yielded seven different non-black defendants that 
have been prosecuted for cocaine base violations; four of 
whom either were or are currently being represented by the 
Public Defender’s Office: 

(i) United States v. Morales, et al, CR 89-544-RJG, two 
non-black defendants, with defendant Tony Morales 
represented by Deputy Federal Public Defender Denise 
Meyer: 


83 


(i) United States v. Edwin Quintana Garcia, CR 
89-919-Kn; 

(ii) United States v. Carlos Cortez, CR 89-520-R, 
defendant Cortez was represented by Deputy Federal 
Public Defender Karen Woods; 

(iv) United States v. Derrick Bines, et ail, CR 92-613- 
LEW, two out of eight defendants are non-black, with 
defendant Abraham Bernard Guttierez is represented by 
Deputy Federal Public Defender Derek Li. 

(v) United States v. Moises Escamilla, CR 92-620-Kn, 
with defendant Escamilla being represented by Deputy 
Federal Public Defender Myra Sun. 

5. I have also ascertained from other members of my 
office the fact that the same selective prosecution request 
and supporting Declaration has been unsuccessfully sub- 
mitted by the Public Defender before the Honorable J. 
Spencer Letts in United States v. Thomas Arlington Pratt, 
CR 91-953-JSL, and the Honorable Chief Judge Manuel L. 
Real in United States v. Albert Jordan, CR 91-1062(A)-R. 
A copy of the transcript of the hearing on the request 

--- SOURCE OCR LINES 8425-8580 ---

DECLARATION OF BARBARA E. O’CONNOR 


|, BARBARA E. O'CONNOR. hereby state and declare 


as follows: 


|. | am a Deputy Federal Public Defender in the Central 
District of California appointed to represent SHELTON 
AUNTWAN MARTIN in the above-entitled action. 

2. On September 30, 1992, | spoke with Chris 
Fenandez, an intake coordinator at Impact House, Pas- 
adena, California. 

3. Mr. Fernandez advised me that it was his experience 
in dealing with the treatment of cocaine base addiction, 
that there are an equal number of caucasion users and 
dealers to minority users and dealers. 


| declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 


DATED: October 5, 1992 
BARBARA E. O'CONNOR 


Deputy Federal Public 
Defender 


139 


Unrrep States District Court 
CENTRAL District oF CALIFORNIA 


Case No. CR-92- 
Unirep States or America, Plaintiff, 
Vv. 
CHRISTOPHER ARMSTRONG, Defendant. 


JOINDER IN SELECTIVE ENFORCEMENT 
DISCOVERY MOTION; SUPPLEMENTAL 
DECLARATION BY DAVID R. REED 


TO ASSISTANT UNITED STATES ATTORNEY, 
LAWRENCE CHO, AND TO THE CLERK OF THE 
ABOVE-ENTITLED COURT: 


\ 


‘CHRISTOPHER ARMSTRONG hereby joins in all 
selective enforcement discovery motions previously filed 
by co-counsel in the above-entitled matter 


Dated: 11/9/91 


David R. Reed 
for Mr. ARMSTRONG 


140 
DECLARATION OF DAVID R. REED 


|, DAVID R. REED, DECLARE AS FOLLOWS: 


1) | an the court-appointed counsel for the defendant 
CHRISTOPHER ARMSTRONG, in the above-entitled 
matter. 

2) I am one of the most active court-appointed attorneys 
on the Federal Indigent Bar Panel. Most of my practice for 
the past five years has been devoted to representing 
indigent defendants in our U.S. District Court, Central 
District of California (Central District.) 

3) As a result of devoting most of my professional 
career to representing indigent defendants in the Central 
District, | have handled approximately fifty court appointed 
cases per year over the past five years (most of these are 
negotiated cases, not trials.) 

4) As a result of spending most of my waking hours in 
and about the U.S. Courthouse and MDC, I have had many 
opportunities to not only handle many felony drug cases 
within the Central District, but, to speak to many other 
criminal defense lawyers and Assistant United States 
Attorneys on a daily basis about the nature of their 
criminal cases within our Central District. 

5) As I search my memory, I do not recall ever handling 
a rock cocaine case involving non-black defendants. 
Further, on information and belief, | have never even heard 
of a rock cocaine case prosecuted within our Central 
District that did not involve black defendants. 

8) I have personally handled the following cases, USA 
vs: (a) ANTONIO JOHNSON CR-92-105-HLH, (b) 
PATRICK JOHNSON CR-90-497-WDK, (c) ERIC BOB- 
BITT, CR-90-582-RG, (d) ANDRE MANNING, 
CR-90-624 WMB and CR-90-512 DT, (ec) NORVELL 
SPREWELL, CR-89-519-LEW, and (f) EDGAR ALLEN 
POPE CR-90-574-CBM (a case the court may remember.) 


141 


These prosecutions were all rock cocaine cases and all 
involved black defendants. _ 

7) 1 am on the Board of Directors of the Criminal 
Courts Bar Association Indigent Defense Panel, the 
association of criminal defense lawyers devoted to 
representing indigent defendants charged with state crimes 
within the Criminal Courts Building, 210 W Temple St, 
L.A. This association handles more state court criminal 
cases than any other association within Los Angeles 
County and is composed of over two hundred defense 
lawyers. As a result of being on this state panel, I do 
handle a few state criminal matters (not more than 10 
cases/year however), but, I talk to many state court judges, 
prosecutors, and defense attorneys in carrying out my 
duties as a Director of the Organization. There are many 
crack cocaine sales cases prosecuted in state court that do 
involve racial groups other than blacks. A major percent- 
age of sales of crack cocaine cases are prosecuted against 
Latinos in the state courts. Yet, in my many discussions 
with judges and lawyers in the state court, I have never 
seen any Latinos prosecuted for sales of crack cocaine in 
our federal court, even when many of these Latino 
defendants caught selling rock cocaine have already had 
numerous recent ‘‘priors’’ for selling narcotics and are still 
on probation. These state cases involving other racial 
groups are simply not brought over to our federal court. 

I declare under penalty of perjury that the above is true 
and correct. Executed this 8th day of November, 1922, in 


L.A. 


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 8761-9674 ---

or in the alternative to dismiss for selective prosecution 
and also there is a bail review for Mr. Armstrong, and we 
do have a representative from pretrial present. Can | have 
you state your name for the record, please? 

MS. REEDER: Good morning, your Honor, Jill Reeder 
for pretrial services. 

THE COURT: Thank you. I think we will go with the 
motion first, but let me inquire—the last filing that I have 
on this motion is the Government's opposition that was 
filed on August the 11th—anything filed since that time? 
There are joinders, but I’m not referring to those, 
actually— 

MS. O'CONNOR: Nothing beyond the joinders, your 
Honor. 

THE COURT: No reply. 

Now, in the Government's opposition they cite—I guess 
at the time—the most recent Ninth Circuit case in this area 
that talks both about the burden or showing that the 
defendant must make in order to even get the discovery 
that’s requested, as well as the standard to be used for 
purposes of the dismissal. And I—maybe Defense could 
just respond to that case, and does this case meet that 
standard, et cetera. And whether or not there is—has been 
another case decided—or other cases decided since that 
one. Defense? 

MS. O’CONNOR: Your Honor, not that I am aware of, 
but as far as the Bourgeois case, our position is that it’s 
certainly a different factual scenario. Where the police in 
Bourgeois were focused on a specific gang for a short 
period of time, and I think in the quotation that the 
Government includes, the court holds the Government need 
not provide discovery on selective prosecution simply 
because law enforcement focuses for a short time on a 
racially homogeneous group—namely the targeting of one 
gang to the exclusion of other equally culpable gangs. 


146 


In this case, what we would argue is that the focus is on 
one race, it is not on one specific gang for a short period 
of time, and I think the evidence that we did present in 
terms of the Federal Public Defender’s office’s experience, 
over the course of 1991, indicates that the Defendants 
brought over here for prosecution in Federal Court are 
exclusively black— 

THE COURT: These cases were filed between the time 
period of 1989 and I think through 1991, and of course 
this case was indicted in 1992, is that Counsel’s position? 

MS. O’CONNOR: That’s correct, your Honor, and | do 
not have the information over the course of 1992 that I had 
opened to present to the Court, and I had also hoped to 
have some state information which we have had difficulty 
obtaining—which actually impacts our request for discov- 
ery, because it is considerably more difficult for us to 
obtain information from law enforcement, and statistics 
that we believe must be available simply by the nature of 
the U.S. attorney’s office prosecution. There must be 
Statistics, there must be policies—Officer Campbell worked 
in the neighborhood that is concerned here and obviously 
all of these defendants are black. 

THE COURT: And the Defendant is focusing on those 
that have been charged with drug offenses? 

MS. O'CONNOR: That’s correct, your Honor, and 
specifically as to Mr. Martin, we would—what we're 
seeking is to know the policy that results in an individual 
like Mr. Martin being brought over from the state for 
Federal prosecution, namely an individual who does not 
have a prior drug sale arrest, which I think—it has been 
my experiences the typical justification that the U.S. 
attorney's office offers for bringing people over—these are 
repeat offenders, et cetera—it doesn’t have anything to do 
with race. 

Well, Mr. Martin does not fall into that category and it 
seems no reason to bring him here from state court other 


147 


than this sweep of black males in their twenties coming 
over here. 

THE COURT: Anything else that you wish to place on 
the record concerning the motion? 

MS. O'CONNOR: No, your Honor. 

THE COURT: Okay. 

MR. JOHNSON: Your Honor, may I be heard for a 
moment? 

THE COURT: Certainly. 

MR. JOHNSON: I concur with everything that Ms. 
O’Connor stated—I would just like to draw the Court's 
attention perhaps to the distinguishing facts between 
Bourgeois and the instant prosecution. 

In Bourgeois the court found that the applicant’s claim 
was too narrowly focused. He was the victim of a two-day 
gang sweep in that particular area. 

The court reviewed the entire prosecution of the specific 
charge—with which the defendant was charged at that 
time—for a two-year period, and noted that the defendant 
in that case did not cite that the other 140 cases that he 
was similarly charged—that they were similarly charged 
with were in fact selective prosecution because he didn’t 
even cite that any of those were black—black defendants 
versus white defendants. The court noted that he was only 
the object of a two-day sweep which apparently picked up 
everybody of one race in that particular time period. 

On the facts—I think—this case could be distinguished 
because the court—I think—recognizes here that we have a 
range of data that goes over an entire period of a year, all 
involving the same kind of charge, and all— 

THE COURT: You are referring to that information 
that’s—or exhibit—that’s attached to the—Ms. O’Connor’s 
papers? 

MR. JOHNSON: Yes—yes, your Honor. 

And I think that Bourgeois would be easily distinguish- 
able on that basis alone. In other words, the court went on 


148 


to say that the relevant inquiries, the history of 
prosecutions over a reasonable period of time—and what 
Bourgeois is talking about is a two-day sweep. The court 
by—I think—it said that this isn’t long enough, and that 
perhaps on that basis alone the court’s focus would be just 
on that and Bourgeois would not be heard to say that this 
present case would fall under that ambit. I just wanted to 
suggest that for the Court. 

THE COURT: All right. Mr. Lannen? 

MR. LANNEN: Yes, your Honor. I think that in 
addition—the question that comes up—that Bourgeois asks 
for is a showing—-what we're missing—that is—is a 
showing of similarly situated non-black felons, and I think 
the point is—or the question is at what point does the 
burden switch to the Government to show that there is no 
policy. I think it’s common knowledge—we all know as 
attorneys—that literally dozens of these cases everyday are 
filed in state court for street corner or even mid-level 
cocaine or crack selling. 

And why is Mr. Hampton, for instance my client, who 
the Government even alleges in the indictment is a runner 
quotes—puts in quotes—that he is a runner, meaning a low 
level individual in a—in drug trafficking and who if were 
filed in state court could get a maximum of approximately 
ten years, of which he would serve five, why is he brought 
over to Federal court and the Government seeks a life term 
without possibility of early release. 

That’s the real question here—as to why some are 
brought over for the same offense—literally the same 
offense, this is a common trafficking offense, and brought 
into state court with—where the sentencing is so obviously 
unequal for the same conduct, and I think that by—and 
again, the question is—Ms. O’Connor in the public 
defender’s office in showing that literally every case that 
they have handled, in the course of a year or more, is 
black, then what more can we do—or at what point should 


149 


the burden be put on the Government to answer the 
question of why individuals are being selected to be 
brought over to Federal prosecution for the same offense. 

MR. WALSH: And your Honor, Robert Rozelle joins in 
the motion and just adopts the arguments that have been 
previously set forth. Thank you. 

THE COURT: All right. Government’s Counsel may 
respond. 

MR. CHO: Your Honor, I don’t have much more to add 
to the papers that I—that have been filed—unless the 
Court has any questions. I just want to respond very briefly 
that Bourgeois—the Court has read the opinion—the 
opinion is sweeping. The language is sweeping. It is 
certainly not a case that—I think it should be limited to the 
facts presented before it. In addition, I think that the facts 
before it are quite similar to the facts in this case and the 
language that was used, I think, is highly applicable. Other 
than that, your Honor, if the Court has any questions I'll 
be happy to answer them. 

THE COURT: My impression in reading Bourgeois is 
that in that case the Government did offer some evidence 
to support or to—in contradiction to the allegations that 
were being made by the defendant. In this case now the 
Government hasn’t offered any explanation at all as to 
why, based upon the statistical data that’s been provided 
by Ms. O’Connor, that it does appear from looking—we 
have over 20 persons ranging from 1989 through 1992 if 
we include this case—being brought from state court to 
Federal court for these drug offenses, all of whom are 
black. 

It’s—as I said, my reading of Bourgeois would indicate 
that—in that case the Government did offer some 
explanation for why—in this case the Government offers 
no explanation. That’s one difference that I see. 

MR. CHO: With regards to an explanation, your Honor, 
I think in Bourgeois the elements are still—were still not— 


150 


quite lacking—I don’t think Bourgeois was the situation 
where the defendants made—or the movants made even a 
prima facie showing or any kind of showing—the 
Government successfully rebutted that by introducing any 
sort of evidence or explanation. 

Certainly the explanation in Bourgeois was noted and in 
this case, your Honor, there is no real explanation—I can’t 
explain why the public defender’s office has only 
encountered black defendants and crack cocaine cases—I 
would have no explanation for that. But certainly I can say 
that there is no racial motivation of any sort that I am 
aware of as to why we brought this case versus any others. 
Certainly I can also say, your Honor, that there is 
absolutely—I have absolutely no knowledge whatsoever 
concerning the Government’s use or discriminatory intent 
in bringing those crack cocaine cases—or for that matter in 
bringing this one. Certainly I also haven’t seen any 
evidence or any allegation even that the Government has 
acted unfairly or has prosecuted non-black defendants or 
failed to prosecute them—that is—declined to prosecute in 
the language of Bourgeois—prosecute—failed to prosecute 
similarly situated non-black defendants. 

There is just no situation or no showing of that 
whatsoever and that has been the necessary element and 
requisite long before Bourgeois was established, that is— 
that’s been case law and Ninth Circuit law for many, many 
years prior to the decision of Bourgeois. 

Any other questions, your Honor? 

THE COURT: No other questions. 

MR. CHO: Thank you. 

THE COURT: The Court would grant the motion—the 
discovery part of the motion—I think that the Defense has 
made adequate showing in this case that would require the 
Government to at least turn over policy statements and 
Statistical data that’s requested in the motion itself. 

The Court sees it different than Bourgeois, in that in this 
case we do have something more than mere allegations. 


1S] 


Bourgeois was a mere allegation case. Also we have a time 
period that is quite a lot longer than in Bourgeois and as 
one Counsel said, Bourgeois focused on a particular gang 
without any statistics. I don’t know this for a fact, but | 
assume that most of the members of that particular gang 
would have been of that same ethnic group, so therefore 
those who were arrested as a result of the investigation 
probably would have been the group. 

In this case, we have a fairly general charge—one that 
we see regularly in this courthouse—and whether it’s 
coincidental or not, that out of the group that the public 
defender—that Ms. O'Connor provides us information 
on—all of them happen to be of the same racial group. 

I think the number is adequate that would at least 
require the Government to provide some explanation. The 
time period is such that would require some explanation. 
The charges are the same or similar, and the race is the 
same in each case. 

The Court grants the discovery part of the motion, and 
does not rule at this point on the motion to dismiss. | 
assum * what will happen is once the Government provides 
the statistical data then the Defense—if it deems 
appropriate—will then supplement the motion by providing 
the Court with more information. 

Now, the question is i..w much time it’s going to take 
the Government to collect the data. I'm not sure if the data 
has already been collected in this regard or if it's 
something that you have to start from the beginning. 

MR. CHO: Your Honor, as | indicated at the last 
hearing there is no data collected or retained by the U.S. 
attorney's office with regards to the race of defendants or 
the types of offenses that certain races have been 
prosecuted for, versus having not been prosecuted for, and 
so | can make some inquiries—some additional inquiries 
and I will, of course, but to my knowledge at this point— 
in previous motions that have been filed of this nature in 


152 


other cases, we simply don’t have that sort of data or 
collection of information with respect to certain prosecu- 
tion of certain races and people. 

THE COURT: I assume that one approach might be— 
and the Court can certainly give some guidance and make 
additional rulings if Government's Counsel requests—is 
that we could take a certain time period—there must be 
information, whether it's compiled or not, on how many 
people have been charged, how many cases have been 
transferred from state court to this court for a particular 
charge during a certain time period, and then the racial 
identity of those persons and any other background 
information that the Government would have that you 
might want to argue that it’s clear that this isn’t race- 
related, but it is based upon some other criteria, such prior 
convictions of a certain type, prior criminal records of a 
certain type. Age might be a factor. There might be other 
factors that are considered—and then on the other hand, 
maybe it’s the Government's position that none of these 
factors are considered in making this determination—! 
don’t know. But what | was indicating is that to the extent 
that we need to limit it to a certain time period, to certain 
charges, to cases that have been commenced in state court 
and then brought to this Court—we might only be talking 
about cases that were actually filed in state court and 
those—state charges were dismissed and then new 
charges—and then charges filed in the Federal court. So 
the Court can give some guidance in terms of what group 
we're talking about to give the Government a starting 
place and then you would probably be in a better position 
to indicate to the Court how long it would take just to 
compile the information. 

I'm sure that their—that racial identity is disclosed 
somewhere in some of this information, so while you 
might not keep a record of race—broken down by race—I 
would assume that race is noted somewhere in the police 


153 


report or in some of the other information that’s available 
to the Government. 

But I would like to hear from the Defense now as to the 
group that we're talking about, so that the Government will 
know where to go in terms of looking for this data. What 
time period do we want to focus on—is it the period from 
1989 through 1922? “89 was the earliest cases filed, in the 
information that was provided. Are they all cases that were 
actually filed in state court, charges then dismissed and 
refilings in Federal court, and the charges that we want to 
focus on. Are they just generally narcotics cases, or are 
they just cocaine base cases, some specifics. 

MS. O'CONNOR: Your Honor, we would be par- 
ticularly interested in the cocaine base cases which seem to 
engender what we perceive as this racial selectivity. |—in 
my motion—laid out the information that I thought would 
be helpful—useful to us and useful to the Court in 
determining if there was in fact a pattern of discrimination, 
and that would include—I think the most—perhaps the 
easiest way to analyze it would be to use the same time 
period that we have provided information for from the U.S. 
attorney's office, and I can indicate to the Court that what 
we did was use the paralegals to go through the case files 
and obtain this information on the racial identity of the 
defendants, the charges—the state charges and there 
seemed to be no other pattern than race in indicating why 
these people were brought over here instead of remaining 
in the state. 

THE COURT: So the time period is 1989 to °92. The 
charge is cocaine based and the—they are all cases that 
were originally filed in state court and then subsequently 
refiled in Federal court? 

MS. O'CONNOR: Yes, your Honor. And that would 
include also cases where individuals—and I have myself 
experienced this with clients—are arrested and kept in state 
court on a parole violation—done their period of time in 


154 


State court and then are brought over here for further 
prosecution. 

THE COURT: Are you suggesting that no state charges 
were filed against those persons— 

MS. O’CONNOR: No, your Honor, | am suggesting 
state charges were filed, but they were in the nature of 
parole revocation based on the arrest. 

THE COURT: In other words, there were those cases 
where the charge that was filed here was not the same 
charge filed in state court— 

MS. O'CONNOR: Correct, your Honor— 

THE COURT:—some different charge was filed in state 
court and then the cases were charged as a drug violation. 

MS. O'CONNOR: That's correct, your Honor. I believe 
that is not uncommon. It is the same transaction as the— 
provides the basis for the parole revocation but then is 
charged here as the drug offense. 

THE COURT: Do any of the other Defense Counsel 
wish to be heard on what group we're talking about, so 
that the Government will know what to look for in trying 
to get this information? 

MR. LANNEN: Well, I would agree with Ms. O'Connor 
on all of the criteria except maybe—thinking out loud—a 
lot of these cases—I would like it to include all arrests for 
that offense, not just filings in state court, because often— 

THE COURT: When you say all arrests for that offense, 
what do you mean? 

MR. LANNEN: Offense for cocaine and crack—for 
crack— 

THE COURT: You mean where one is arrested by local 
police agencies—not charged in state court, but— 

MR. LANNEN: See, in other words, your Honor, the— 
in this case I don’t—I'm not even sure there was ever a 
filing in state court. I think that could become deceptive. 
They were just filed on over here in lieu of state court. 


155 


Now, I may be incorrect there. There may have first 
been a state filing—I'm not aware of one on my client, 
but— 

THE COURT: So again, are you talking about persons 
who are arrested by the local police and then charged in 
Federal court for narcotics violations? 

MR. LANNEN: Yes, your Honor, so— 

THE COURT: Is that the group you're talking about? 

MR. LANNEN:—that—because I don’t believe that 
there’s—I think in most cases when a case is filed in 
Federal court there is not first a filing in state court. In 
other words, they just file it over here. Do you understand? 
I don’t know if 'm— 

THE COURT: I understand what you're saying. That 
they are arrested by the local police— 

MR. LANNEN: In this case, for instance—yeah— 

THE COURT—for some narcotic violation— 

MR. LANNEN: Right. 

THE COURT:—and instead of being charged in state 
court are charged in Federal court, but the only charge 
being a narcotic violation. Is that the group that you're 
talking about? 

Because if there were some other Federal violation, then 
it would seem to me that the answer would be that there 
was a Federal violation, and that’s why it’s being filed in 
Federal court. If it’s a situation though where there is— 

MR. LANNEN: Well, other than narcotics—no, | agree 
with the Court on that. In other words, right. 

THE COURT: And then the group that | think we're 
talking about is not just any narcotics, but cocaine base? 

MR. LANNEN: Cocaine base, yes, your Honor. I would 
agree with that. | 

THE COURT: So what you want to add to the group ts 
that— 

MR. LANNEN: That is not be— 


156 


THE COURT:—they are persons that were arrested by 
the local authorities on—for cocaine base and charges were 
filed in Federal court? 

MR. LANNEN: Yes, your Honor. As the Court says— 
that I note—that in this case the Defendants were arrested 
both by Inglewood Police Department and the Alcohol 
Tobacco—which is a Federal agency—so I’m wondering if 
we should include cases in which they were both 
involved—both state and federal agencies were involved. 

THE COURT: Anything further? 

MS. O'CONNOR: I just wanted to add, your Honor, 
that in terms of ease of retrieving the data we began with 
the charge—cocaine base charges and went backwards 
from that. I know for example in this case that Officer 
Campbell and the AT—of the Inglewood Police Depart- 
ment and the ATF agent, Jeffrey Cochran have been 
involved in at least three other cases defendant—black 
defendants that were brought here to Federal court on 
cocaine base, so it seems to me the agencies certainly 
are—have access to one another's data, and in terms— 
starting from the cocaine base would be easy to track what 
the defendants are in terms of their race. 

THE COURT: Could you comment on whether or not in 
this case it’s your belief, based upon the information that 
you have obtained—as to whether or not charges were first 
filed in state court and then charges subsequently filed 
here. Mr. Lannen thinks that maybe that did not occur—at 
least as far as his client. 

MS. O’CONNOR: I believe he’s correct, your Honor. 

THE COURT: How about for your client? Were 
charges— 

MS. O’CONNOR: I believe that was also the case. 

THE COURT: Charges were not filed in state court 
first? 

MS. O'CONNOR: That’s correct, your Honor, although 
that could have been the case because Officer Campbell 


157 


was inolved—it could easily have stayed in Inglewood, 
rather than coming here—and the other cases that I’m 
mentioning, all of the defendants were brought into 
Inglewood police—one was kept then in County Jail for 
two weeks, and then brought over here, and seemingly for 
no reason. 

THE COURT: When you say ‘‘for no reason’’ you 
mean— 

MS. O'CONNOR: Well, certainly there is jurisdiction, 
your Honor, but what we are wondering is why these 
individuals and not others. 

THE COURT: Anybody—and of the other Defense 
Counsel wish to comment now on the group that we're 
talking about? 

MR. WALSH: Just as to Robert Rozelle—I don't 
believe state charges were filed in his case either. I think 
he was arrested and brought directly to Federal court. 

THE COURT: Government’s Counsel maybe can re- 
spond. Were state charges filed against any of these 
defendants? 

MR. CHO: Your Honor, state charges were never filed 
in these defendants. As in a lot of these other cocaine base 
cases that the Court has carved out, oftentimes state 
charges are never brought—a lot of these cases 
involving——specifically involving Inspector—Detective 
Campbell and Inglewood—are part of a joint task force 
that is a federal and state task force between local police 
departments and the alcohol—Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco 
and Firearms. These are Federal violations—they are part 
of the investigations into Federal narcotics violations, as 
well as Federal firearms violations, and that has been the 
case in this—in the case at bar there have been violations 
of 924(c) as well as Title 21, § 841(a)(1). With respect— 

THE COURT: Were each of these defendants charged 
with the narcotics violation—I mean narcotics violations, 
yes. 


158 


MR. CHO: Yes. Each of the defendants was charged at 
least with the conspiracy and with the—with substantive 
counts and I believe with respect to Defendants Armstrong, 
Rozelle, Hampton and—actually, all of the Defendants 
present in this Court are all charged with the Federal gun 
counts as well. The 924(c) counts—that’s the use of a 
firearm in connection with a narcotics trafficking offense, 
as was in—well, Bourgeois was an ATF case also, local— 
joint case in which they were going after felons in 
possession of firearms—it was still a Federal firearms 
violation. 

THE COURT: Anything else that you wish to place on 
the record in terms of trying to identify the group? 

MR. CHO: I do need a bit more clarification, your 
Honor, so—we have ascertained that the group is cocaine 
base offenders between the periods of 1989 to 1992, and 
I'm not quite sure—the Court wants the Government to 
turn over whether or not the defendants in those cases—or 
the cases that we've brought federally were black? Is 
that—that’s about al! I can get out of it. 

THE COURT: No, I think the question was—the 
question is what was the racial identity or what is the 
racial identity of all of those persons. 

What we are really interested in finding out here—are 
they all black? The Defendants believe that they are. The 
Government might produce evidence to show that they’re 
not—that they are a mixed group. So it’s not just if they’re 
black, but what is the racial identification of people that 
fall into the category—and I'm going to define the 
category a little bit more before we complete the hearing 
this morning. 

But first, if there is anything else—any other question 
that you’re concerned about, or anything else that you want 
to place on the record, just concerning the group 
identification—because we started this when I inquired as 
to how much time you would need to collect the data. I 


159 


would assume the larger the group the more time that you 
need, so once we narrow it to a specific group of people— 
and you might not be able to tell me today how much 
time, but within a couple of days I would expect you to be 
able to tell me how much time it’s going to take to collect 
the information. 

MR. CHO: Well, at this point it’s certainly just the 
racial identities of defendants in which the Government has 
charged cocaine base violations? 

THE COURT: I'm going to identify the group— 

MR. CHO: Okay. 

THE COURT:—a little bit more specifically than : did 
earlier. 

Let me ask Ms. O'Connor. Apparently your office is 
actually keeping records on the racial identity, is that 
correct? 

MS. O’CONNOR: That’s correct, your Honor. 

THE COURT: How long did it take to do the initial 
research—to develop the information that you provided to 
the Court? 

MS. O'CONNOR: I don’t believe— 

THE COURT: You indicated that you used paralegals 
and you think what they did was to look through all of the 
files that you had in your office, identified the charge, the 
racial group, the time period, et cetera. 

MS. O’CONNOR: I believe it took a period of several 
weeks to do the initial calculation, and there were three 
paralegals working on it, although they were not working 
full-time on it. 

THE COURT: Now, I raised the question about how 
long it’s going to take because we—our present trial date 
is October 6th? 

MS. O'CONNOR: That’s right, your Honor. 

THE COURT: And at least one of the Defendants—I 
think it’s Mr. Armstrong who has a bail motion in his 
papers suggests to the Court—well, this case has been 
continued and he’s been detained for a number of months. 


160 


I don’t recall specifically now at whose request the case 
each time was continued and one of you can probably 
refresh my recollection about that—but this certainly is a 
request being made by the Defendants—Mr. Armstrong has 
joined in this motion—obviously it’s going to take some 
time for the Government to obtain the information and 
then once the information is provided to you then you're 
going to have to supplement the motions that are before 
the Court. You have to put it on for hearing—it probably 
means that we will not be able to keep the October 6th 
date. I'm not going to continue the trial at this point 
because, you know, maybe the data won't indicate 
anything to us but certainly there is a possibility that this 
case might be continued again and if so this is at the 
request of the Defense. Each of you having joined in this 
motion. 

And as I said, it’s going to take ume to collect the data 
and time to—for you to supplement the motion, for the 
Court to hear the motion and issue a ruling and that 
probably means a new trial date. So I just want you to 
keep that in mind—it’s something to think about in terms 
of—for your individual clients whether or not you feel that 
this type of information is going to be beneficial or aid 
you in supplementing the motion that has been made. 

Ms. O'Connor, maybe you can tell me if you recall or 
Government’s Counsel can address it as well. How many 
continuances have there been in this case, and have there— 
all of them been at the request of the Government or have 
some been at the request of the Defendants? 

MS. O'CONNOR: My recollection—and unfortunately | 
don’t have the initial date here, was that we had initially 
asked for a continuance but the later continuance was 
asked for by the Government due to the illness of the 
informant. 

THE COURT: How about Government’s Counsel? Do 
you recall how many continuances there have been, and 


161 


whether or not those were joint continuance—stipulated 
continuances or requested by one or the other side? 

MR. CHO: All of the continuances have been by 
stipulation, your Honor. Certainly I think some of the 
requests—lI think it’s fairly evenly split up. If I recall one 
of them was because Defendant—I think it was Rozelle— 
had been arrested. It was either Rozelle or Martin was 
arrested and there was a continuance based on that for 
additional time. The last continuance was because of 
Government's confidential informant—but also another 
reason was because Defendant Rozelle had just been 
arrested and he would need additional time because trial 
was set, I believe, three weeks from the date of his arrest 
at that time. 

The first continuance may have been because of the 
arrest of Defendant Martin. If the Court will recall, initially 
the Government indicted the case—two arrests were made. 
Defendant Armstrong and Hampton were arrested at ‘he 
scene and subsequently Defendant Martin was arrested 
which he needed a continuance for, and then just—the last 
Defendant was Defendant Rozelle who was arrested and of 
course a continuance was necessitated by that. 

There were also motions—if I recall—motions to compel 
discovery which were filed beforehand—oh, I just now 
remembered also—there was a change of counsel for 
Defendant Armstrong, which also necessitated additional 
time for their new counsel. 

THE COURT: All right, anything else that you wish to 
place on the record concerning this motion? 

MS. O’CONNOR: Nothing—nothing further, your 
Honor, other than to ask that the Court clarify what items 
that we had asked for in the motion will be granted. 

THE COURT: I was granting the motion as to all of the 
items that were requested. It’s all just statistical data. But 
as far as the group is concerned, the Court would order 
Government’s Counsel to supply this information as to 


162 


those persons who have been indicted by the Government 
on cocaine base and a Federal firearms violation, and it's 
their racial identity that the Court is ordering be disclosed. 

The time period—1989 through 1992, and specifically 
cases in which both state and federal law enforcement 
officers have been involved, whether it be a case where 
just state law enforcement was involved with no federal 
officers being involved or there being a joint state and 
tederal. 

If the—it isn’t clear from the request—what the Court 
wants to know is whether or not there is any criteria in 
deciding which of these cases will be filed in state court 
versus Federal court and if so, what is that criteria. 

That is the problem I think that needs to be addressed, 
because we do see a lot of the cases and one does ask why 
some are in state court and some are being prosecuted in 
Federal court, and if it’s not based on race what's it based 
on? What is the criteria. It could be based on things like 
prior convictions. It could he because there are federal 
firearms charges involved—there could be various reasons 
for it, but I think ultimately that is the question that needs 
to be answered is what is the criteria—is there any criteria 
and if there is, what is that criteria? 

MR. CHO: Your Honor, when you say the group 
consists of cocaine base and firearms violations cases—do 
you mean cases where we brought both counts—both of 
those charges against those defendants, right? 

THE COURT: Yes 

MR. CHO: Okay. 

THE COURT: And I would—since I don’t know how 
long it's going to take the Government to obtain the 
information—if you have those statistics, Ms. O'Connor 
has indicated for their office they had three paralegals 
working on it, although not on a full-time basis. She says 
over a period of several weeks. 

I think what I would do is place it back on for a status 
conference within a week or so and ask at that point that 


163 


the Government be able to advise the Court as to how long 
it's going to take to obtain the information. 

Ms. O'Connor. 

MS. O’CONNOR: Your Honor, could I just also clarify 
that we’re looking for not only the cases involving cocaine 
base and firearms, but if they are solely cocaine base as 
well. 

THE COURT: Yes, you—the record reflects your 
statement. Yes? 

MR. CHO: Nothing. 

THE COURT: Okay. Anything else? 

MR. CHO: One additional matter, your Honor. 

THE CURT: Yes. | 

MR. CHO: The Government requests an opportunity to 
brief the appropriateness and the case law involving the 
inquiry into the criteria for the prosecution to be brought. | 
understand—if I recall, there are certain cases—Ninth’ 
Circuit decisions out there that have touched on the issue 
of whether or not an inquiry into the purposes behind 
whether certain cases are brought or not is appropriate. 

The Government would like to have an opportunity to 
look up those cases and supply those to the Court. 

THE COURT: I'll permit you to provide the Court with 
some information on it. What I'm going to do is continue 
it for a status conference, but even though you might file 
additional briefing on whether it’s appropriate for the 
Court to order the Government to supply the Court with 
the criteria or not—I still want you to be able to advise the 
Court as to how long it would take to collect the data. 

MR. CHO: Very well, your Honor. 

THE COURT: I'll ask Mr. Levario for some assistance 
in terms of—I'd like to return it to the calendar in about a 
week for a status conference. 


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 12140-12237 ---

then issue a ruling. 

So that’s what I intend to do today. It is a proceeding. 
Defendants have a right to be present. Mr. Armstrong does 
not have a waiver on file. His appearance probably 
requires a personal waiver rather than having one by 
counsel, but I think we're in a situation where some 
decisions have to be made with the case. 

Even if the Court were to not issue its rulings on the 
motion for reconsideration, the case would still have to be 
continued, and I assume it would be Mr. Armstrong’s 


217 


client that would make that request, so having said that | 
think that we'll proceed in the manner in which the Court 
has indicated. 

As far as the motion for reconsideration is concerned, 
the Court did communicate through the clerk that the 
motion is denied. 

The previous findings made by the Court remain in full 
force and effect, and I won't go over those again, but will 
specifically find that the Defendants have made a sufficient 
showing to require the Government to produce the 
evidence that the Court ordered be produced. 

The statistical data provided by the Defendant raises a 
question about the motivation of the Government which 
could be satisfied by the Government disclosing its criteria, 
if there is any criteria, for bringing this case and others 
like it in Federal court. 

Without the criteria, the statistical data is evidence and 
does suggest that the decision to prosecute in Federal court 
could be motivated by race. 

Without expert testimony, this Court cannot conclude 
that the Defendants’ evidence is explained by social 
phenomena. 

The executive branch has a responsibility to dissuade 
public opinion that its decisions to prosecute or where to 
prosecute are not motivated by improper reasons such as 
race, and the evidence of who was prosecuted and why 
those persons were prosecuted and where those persons 
were prosecuted is within the peculiar knowledge of the 
Government and therefore, as the Court indicated at the 
previous hearing, it would be this Court’s position that it is 
the Government that would have to provide that evidence 
so that Defendants could analyze it and decide if there is 
any basis for filing a motion to dismiss. 

Therefore, the Court’s previous ruling remains in full 
force and effect. The Court still requires that the 
Government produce that information that the Court had 
previously ordered. 


218 


If there are any questions or additional findings that 
either side would request the Court to make for purposes 
of review, the you may make that request. 

I should say, if I didn’t, on the record that I have now 
reviewed all of the evidence offered by all parties in the 
case. 

At the last hearing, if you'll recall, there were—there 
was some evidence. One piece of evidence was the 
newspaper article that had been offered both by—by two 
of the Defendants, and the Court had not reviewed that 
article at the time of the hearing; however, I didn’t find 
anything in the article to really be persuasive, but I did 
read it since it was offered to the Court. 

[ have now read all of the evidence offered by all parties 
in the case. 

Does the Government require—request that the Court 
say anything specific other than what I’ve said on the 
record? 

MR. CHO: No, your Honor. 

THE COURT: Okay. How about the Defense? 

MR. REED: Your Honor, could we just have a second? 

THE COURT: Yes. 

(Pause to confer.) 

--- SOURCE OCR LINES 12543-12656 ---

THE COURT: All right, I think our procedure has 
changed—procedural posture has changed a little bit. 

At first | think Government's counsel clearly said it was 
the Government's request that the Court dismiss the 
indictment. Now I think Counsel has made it clear it’s not 
their request that the indictment be dismissed. Their 


225 


position is that they will not comply with the Court's 
order, and now it’s on—incumbent upon the Defendants 
now to decide whether you will make a motion to dismiss 
as a sanction or ask that some other type of sanction be 
imposed. 

Now, if Defense Counsel feel that you need some time 
in order to be clear as to what your position should be, 
then I'd be inclined just to put the case over, to actually 
trial it until Friday when Mr. Armstrong could be present. 
Defense Counsel could consult whatever sources need to 
be consulted and be prepared to advise the Court as to 
what your position would be. 

But as I understand, that’s the posture now. The 
Government is simply indicating it will not comply with 
the Court’s order to provide the discovery that the Court 
previously ordered. 

MR. BORTMAN: Your Honor, we have concurred and 
decided that, in view of the— 

MR. REED: Speak for yourself. 

MR. BORTMAN: Oh, I'm sorry—I thought we had 
agreed here. 

(Pause to confer.) 

MR. BORTMAN: I believe we have, your Honor, to— 
in view ot the Government's position, to move for a 
dismissal at this time. 

MR. REED: And I would move for a dismissal under 
circumstances where I believe sincerely that | can obtain a 
waiver of personal appearance from Mr. Armstrong at a 
later point and file it; for purposes of my having the power 
to make that motion on behalf of Mr. Armstrong this 
morning, | vehemently believe that the case should be 
dismissed. The Government is clearly refusing to comply 
with what appears to be very simple statistics that they can 
obtain. 

So we sincerely ask the Court to dismiss the indictment 
at this time. 


226 


MR. LANNEN: On behalf of Mr. Hampton, your 
Honor, based on the Court’s order and the Government's 
refusal to comply with the order, we would move that the 
Court dismiss the indictment against Mr. Hampton. 

MS. O’CONNOR: Your Honor, on behalf of Mr. 
Martin, we would also move for a dismissal of the 
indictment based on the Government's failure to comply. 

THE COURT: All right. I'm not going to rule on Mr. 
Armstrong's. I do feel that Mr. Armstrong either needs to 
be present or we need to have a waiver prior to the Court 
issuing its ruling. 

I don’t see any reason why the Court cannot go—rule on 
the motion made by the other Defendants and then go on 
to discuss the question of whether the Defendants should 
be detained pending appeal or whether they should be 
released or whether bail motions need to be made, and if 
the Government sees any reason why the Court should not 
proceed as to the other Defendants today, you might so 
indicate. 

In other words, | won't proceed with Mr. Armstrong's 
today, but I see no reason why the Court could not proceed 
relative to the motions made by the other Defendants. 

MR. CHO: The motion for dismissal—I think that'd be 
fine, your Honor. 

THE COURT: All right, then the Court does grant the 
Defendants’ motion to dismiss. The basis for the Court's 
granting the motion to dismiss—the Court believes that 
there is no other sanction that could be imposed. The Court 
believes that the discovery requested should be turned over 
by the Government. It’s clear that Government's counsel 
will not produce the discovery. 

The Court cannot see any other sanction that could be 
imposed against the Government other than a dismissal of 
the case, and for that reason the Court will grant the 
motions made by the other three Defense Counsel—or the 
other counsel representing those Defendants who are 
present today. 


227 


Now, the next question is the question of—the 
Government has indicated that it would ask for a stay of 
execution for appeal purposes, at least for the 48-hour 
