No. 95-157 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Petitioner, 
v. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, e7 ai., 
Respondents. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF AND 
BRIEF OF WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION, 
MARYLAND COALITION AGAINST CRIME, INC., 

PARENTS ASSOCIATION TO NEUTRALIZE 

DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE, INC., AND 

ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION AS 

AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


DANIEL J. POPEO 
RICHARD A. SAMP 
(Counsel of Record) 
Washington Legal Foundation 
2009 Massachusetts Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 588-0302 


Date: December 14, 1995 


CR i Sa | SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


- 
. 
« : No. 95-157 
7 . Sag . 
7 . ae! 
4 , : * ‘a 
‘ - ’ 
. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Petitioner, 


: R 
pion ee | 
+ a ol “= 7 - , 
" eraas : ; a 


¥ Se es 
o db im my 
arate a 
a a by ae bay A : be : . ¢ el 
We? nd ta 2 y : : - 433 ( HRIS TC Y)PHER I EE ARMS I R( ING al 
Sag athe An ws te f & , a 
s}> ms hod é * ‘ 4 R, s 
| Y ° . a 
24> ret i . . : 4 } a 
: s 7 :| at ae 
A os he " +": - 
| eee an n me " : ? a 
b P. <t wy ;. _ 
4 * 4 
" asker, Ano 


Aan si et ee peas ae | q ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
ate te Meh lh Pores giveth a THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
has Ss ac Baha alan oe | i * . FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Se anhedee | : ne “aa MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF OF 
SE Ot See eat 7 WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION, 
hd Rabe ae | COR a MARYLAND COALITION AGAINST CRIME, INC., 
ocho teatata ta 4a age ama i ee PARENTS ASSOCIATION TO NEUTRALIZE 
Pare at Oe ae DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE, INC., AND 
Pi Pea Tee tie ee ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION AS 
TAG Oe eae ae | ag AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


ib. 


Sop ck Vy q Pursuant to Rule 37.3 of the Rules of this Court, the 

Shino 4 Washington Legal Foundation, the Maryland Coalition 
Against Crime, Inc., the Parents Association to Neutralize 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, Inc., and the Allied Educational 
| % Foundation respectfully move for leave to file the attached 
Be ) 7 brief as amici curiae in support of Petitioner. Counsel for 


2 


Petitioner has consented to the filing of this brief, as have 
counsel for Respondents Robert Rozelle, Aaron Hampton, 
Freddie Mack, and Shelton Auntwan Martin. Amici have 
been unable to obtain the written consent of counsel for 
Respondent Christopher Lee Armstrong (albeit counsel for 
Mr. Armstrong did provide oral consent), thereby 
necessitating the filing of this motion. 


The Washington Legal Foundation (WLF) is a non- 
profit public interest law and policy center with more than 
100,000 supporters nationwide. While WLF engages in 
litigation and the administrative process in a variety of 
areas, WLF devotes a substantial portion of its resources to 
reform of the criminal justice system and the cause of 
victims’ rights. To that end, WLF has appeared before this 
Court as well as other federal and state courts in cases 
addressing criminal law issues (see, e.g., Davis v. United 
States, 114 U.S. 2350 (1994); Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 
U.S. 957 (1991); Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808 
(1991)), as well as in cases addressing efforts to control the 
sale and use of illegal drugs. See, e.g., Vernonia School 
District 47J v. Acton, 115 §. Ct. 2386 (1995). 


The Maryland Coalition Against Crime (MCAC) is 
based in Baltimore, Maryland and works for enactment of 
legislation that promotes tougher law enforcement measures 
and the rights of crime victims. It has devoted consider- 
able resources toward adoption of the "Victims’ Rights 
Amendment" to the Maryland Constitution. 


The Parents Association to Neutralize Drug and 
Alcohol Abuse, Inc. (PANDAA) is a national organization 
devoted to eliminating drug use among young people. 
PANDAA works toward this end by sponsoring anti-drug 
classes and seminars, by distributing informational 


3 


materials, and by helping families with drug abuse 
problems in finding effective treatment. 


The Allied Educational Foundation (AEF) is a non- 
profit charitable and educational foundation based in 
Englewood, New Jersey. Founded in 1964, AEF is dedi- 
cated to promoting education in diverse areas of study such 
as history, law, and public policy, and has appeared as 
amicus before this Court in a number of cases involving 
criminal law issues. 


Amici are deeply concerned by the crack cocaine 
epidemic that has spread throughout the nation during the 
past decade. They support strong law enforcement efforts 
as a principal means of bringing that epidemic under con- 
trol. They are concerned that the Ninth Circuit's decision, 
if allowed to stand, will undermine those efforts and will 
force prosecutors to bring charges in accordance with racial 
quotas in order to avoid selective prosecution claims. 


Amici seek to file the attached brief because of their 
interest in promoting the safety and welfare of all segments 
of our society; they have no direct interest in the outcome 
of this case or of other cases raising similar issues and 
believe that they can assist the Court by providing a per- 
spective that is distinct from that of any party. 


For the foregoing reasons, amici curiae WLF, MCAC, 
PANDAA, and AEF respectfully request that they be 
allowed to participate in this case by filing the attached 


brief. 


December 14, 1995 


4 


Respectfully submitted, 


Daniel J. Popeo 

Richard A. Samp 

(Counsel of Record) 
WASHINGTON LEGAL 
FOUNDATION 

2009 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036 

(202) 588-0302 


Counsel for Amici Curiae 


i 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the court of appeals erred in holding that 
evidence that members of a particular race have been 
prosecuted for a particular offense is sufficient to justify an 
order requiring discovery from the government on a claim 
of selective prosecution, absent some evidence that 
prosecutors brought charges on the basis of race -- such as 
evidence that similarly situated persons of a different race 
have not been prosecuted for that offense. 


il 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ................ ill 
INTERESTS OF THE AMICI CURIAE ......... I 
STATEMENT OF THECASE .............. l 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .............. 4 
POPUP TT TTT Tr TTT ee 5 


I. RESPONDENTS FAILED TO PRODUCE ANY 
EVIDENCE FROM WHICH ONE COULD 
INFER THAT THEY WERE SELECTIVELY 
PROSECUTED ON THE BASIS OF RACE ... 5 


A. The FPD Affidavit Points to No Valid 
Comparison Pool or Evidence that Those 
Similarly Situated Were Not Charged .... . 7 


B. Statistical Evidence of Racial Disparities 
Is Insufficient as a Matter of Law to 
Demonstrate Selective Prosecution ...... 13 


Il. THE DISTRICT COURT ERRED AS A 
MATTER OF LAW IN ORDERING 
PEE bc ch cece eee re eheeees« 16 


GEE ccoeeccececesecucssedines 20 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Cases: 
Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 

ee os tat oe ee emEs 6 
Imbler v. Pachtman, 

ED . « 4 «(49's @ 6 > a0. p\0 ae 18 
McCleskey v. Kemp, 

Dr PD. 5 os pce 6 60 8 13-15, 17, 18 
Oyler v. Boles, 

CN Ee ee ae ee 6 
United States v. Goodwin, 

= +k oto sok ge a 6 680 8:4 5-6 
United States v. Turner, No. CR 94-820 JSL, 

____ F. Supp. ___, 64 U.S.L.W. 2276 

ee eo et eb bb ee & O08 18 
Wade v. United States, 

CR ee ere ee ee 19 
Wayte v. United States, 

CD coe eee beeees 5-7, 9, 12 
Whitus v. Georgia, 

CC ee eae a ee 7 
Constitutional Provisions and Statutes: 
ee a aera de idle eh a 6 
14th Am., U.S. Const., 

Equal Protection Clause .............. 13, 14 
i a. os ae eh 86 beeen ee 8 2 
eco. ok ys bane 6 eb ene 3, 11 
ee 2,3 


Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII, 
42 U.S.C. $§ 2000e, ef seg. .. 1.2.2. eee 14 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-157 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Petitioner, 
v. 


CHRISTOPHER LEE ARMSTRONG, et ai., 
Respondents. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF OF WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION, 
MARYLAND COALITION AGAINST CRIME, INC., 
PARENTS ASSOCIATION TO NEUTRALIZE 
DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE, INC., AND 
ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION AS 
AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


INTERESTS OF THE AMICI CURIAE 


The interests of the amici curiae are set out fully in the 
Motion for Leave to File accompanying this brief. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In the interests of judicial economy, amici hereby 
adopt by reference the Statement contained in Petitioner’s 
brief. 


In brief, Respondents Christopher Lee Armstrong, 
Robert Rozelle, Aaron Hampton, Freddie Mack, and Shel- 
ton Auntwan Martin were indicted in 1992 in the United 
States District Court for the Central District of California 
on charges of conspiring to possess with intent to distrib- 
ute, and conspiring to distribute, more than 50 grams of 
cocaine base (crack), in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846. 
Four of the five Respondents were also charged with using 
or carrying a firearm during and in relation to a drug 
trafficking crime, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). 
Petition Appendix (Pet. App.) at 4a, 55a. According to the 
indictment, Respondents sold a total of 124.3 grams of 
cocaine base to confidential informants on seven occasions 
between February and April 1992; the informants reported 
that Respondents used multipie firearms during the sales. 
Id., at 70a. 


All of the Respondents are African American. They 
allege that the government has selected them for prose- 
cution in federal court precisely because of their race.' In 
September 1992, the district court ordered the government 
to provide discovery to Respondents with respect to that 
allegation. Jd., at Sa. When the government informed the 
district court that it would not comply with the discovery 
order, the court in January 1993 dismissed the indictments 
as a sanction. /d., at 7a. In 1994, a three-judge panel of 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
reversed the dismissal of the indictment, finding that 
Respondents had failed to make a sufficient showing of 


' If convicted, Respondents face ten-year minimum sentences on 
the drug charges and five-year minimum sentences on the firearms 
charges. Their potential sentences would have been considerably 
shorter had they been charged in state court. 


3 


selective prosecution to warrant a discovery order. /d., at 
68a-104a. The Ninth Circuit subsequently voted to rehear 
the case en banc; and in March 1995, the appeals court 
voted 7-4 to affirm the district court’s dismissal of the 
indictment. Jd., at la-67a. 


Respondents based their initial motion for discovery 
solely on an affidavit prepared by a paralegal employed by 
the Federal Public Defender for the Central District of 
California ("FPD"). The affidavit asserted that in all 24 
cases closed by the FPD’s office during 1991 involving 
cocaine base violations of 21 U.S.C. § 841 and/or 21 
U.S.C. § 846, the defendants were black. /d., at 7la. On 
the basis of that affidavit, the district ordered the 
government to: (1) provide a list of all cases from the 
prior three years in which the government charged both 
cocaine base offenses and firearm offenses; (2) identify the 
race of the defendants in those cases; (3) identify whether 
state, federal, or joint law enforcement authorities 
investigated each case; and (4) explain the criteria used by 
the office of the U.S. Attorney for the Central District of 
California for deciding whether to bring cocaine base 
charges federally. Jd., at 7la-72a. 


On September 16, 1992, the government moved to 
reconsider the discovery order and attached to its motion 
several affidavits that attempted to explain its drug-charging 
policy. In responding to the motion to reconsider, Respon- 
dents attempted to bolster their selective prosecution 
argument with two additional declarations. The first 
declaration, made by one of the defense attorneys, stated 
that she had been told by a halfway house intake 
coordinator that in his experience treating cocaine base 
addicts, whites and blacks dealt and used the drug in equal 
numbers. /d., at 6a. The second declaration, made by 


4 


another defense counsel, asserted: (1) he had represented 
only blacks in federal court on cocaine base charges; (2) he 
had never heard of nonblacks being prosecuted in f>deral 
court on cocaine base charges; and (3) in his conversations 
with unnamed state court judges, prosecutors, and defense 
attorneys, he had come to believe that California prosecutes 
many nonblack cocaine base offenders in state court. /d., 
at 6a, 73a. The defendants also submitted a Los Angeles 
Times article which contended that blacks disproportion- 
ately commit cocaine base offenses. Id. 


It is not clear from the district court’s order whether 
she considered Respondents’ additional declarations in 
denying the government’s motion for reconsideration of the 
court’s discovery order. The Ninth Circuit, however, did 
rely on those declarations to a considerable extent in 
affirming dismissal of the indictments. See, e.g., id., at 
22a-23a. 


The Court granted the government's petition for a writ 
of certiorari on October 30, 1995, to consider whether the 
evidence submitted by Respondents was sufficient. as a 
matter of law, to justify a discovery order regarding 
Respondents’ selective prosecution allegation. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Respondents contend that their indictments were 
improper because the indictments were the product of a 
racially discriminatory charging decision. However, the 
evidence of racially discriminatory intent submitted by 
Respondents to the district court does not begin to meet the 
heavy evidentiary burden that must be met before discovery 
is permissible. While Respondents have demonstrated that 
the overwhelming majority of those charged with cocaine 


5 


base offenses in the Central District of California are 
African American, there is no basis for inferring that racial 
discrimination is at work in the absence of a “comparison 
pool" to which the pool of federal cocaine base defendants 
can be compared. There is no reason to assume that 
cocaine base offenses will be equally prevalent among all 
racial groups in this country -- or even that there will be a 
rough equivalence. 


Moreover, even if Respondents could demonstrate that 
the current system by which offenders are assigned to state 
and federal court is racially discriminatory, Respondents 
would still not be entitled to relief in the absence of 
evidence that they personally were victims of racial 
discrimination. This Court has made clear that -- except in 
limited contexts not applicable to this case -- courts should 
not infer that a litigant has been the victim of racial 
discrimination based on evidence that others similarly 
situated have been discriminated against. 


In the absence of evidence from which racial discrimi- 
nation can be inferred, the district court’s discovery order 
must be reversed; that is true regardless what standard of 
review one applies to the district court decision. 


ARGUMENT 


I. RESPONDENTS FAILED TO PRODUCE ANY 
EVIDENCE FROM WHICH ‘ NE COULD INFER 
THAT THEY WERE SELECTIVELY PROSE- 
CUTED ON THE BASIS OF RACE 


In our criminal justice system, the government "retains 
‘broad discretion’ as to whom to prosecute." Wayte v. 
United States, 470 U.S. 598, 607 (1985)(quoting United 


6 


States v. Goodwin, 457 U.S. 368, 380 n.11 (1982)). "[S]o 
long as the prosecutor has probable cause to believe that 
the accused committed an offense defined by statute, the 
decision whether or not to prosecute, and what charge to 
file or bring before a grand jury, generally rests entirely in 
his discretion." Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357, 
364 (1978). 


This Court’s reluctance to impinge on the executive 
branch’s prosecutorial discretion rests on sound public 
policy principles. As the Court recognized in Wayte: 


[T]he decision to prosecute is particularly ill-suited to 
judicial review. Such factors as the strength of the 
case, the prosecution’s general deterrence value, the 
Government’s enforcement priorities, and the case’s 
relationship to the Government’s overall enforcement 
pian are not readily susceptible to the kind of analysis 
the courts are competent to undertake. Judicial 
supervision in this area, moreover, entails systemic 
costs of particular concern. Examining the basis of a 
prosecution delays the criminal proceeding, threatens 
to chill law enforcement by subjecting the prosecutor’ s 
motives and decisionmaking to outside inquiry, and 
may undermine prosecutorial effectiveness by revealing 
the Government’s enforcement policy. 


Wayte, 470 U.S. at 607. 


One narrow limitation on the government's prosecu- 
torial discretion is that, under the equal protection 
component of the Fifth Amendment, the government may 
not select whom to prosecute “based upon an unjustifiable 
standard such as race, religion, or other arbitrary classi- 
fication." Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448, 456 (1962). A 


7 


defendant alleging that he is the victim of unconstitutional 
selective prosecution must, however, meet the exacting 
evidentiary standards imposed on anyone asserting an equal 
protection claim. Wayte, 470 U.S. at 608. In particular, 
anyone asserting that he has been selected for prosecution 
on the basis of race must demonstrate that the prosecutor 
acted with a racially discriminatory purpose and would not 
have brought charges but for the defendant’s race. /d. at 
608-09. 


A. The FPD Affidavit Points to No Valid Compar- 
ison Pool or Evidence that Those Similarly 
Situated Were Not Charged 


None of the evidence submitted by Respondents to the 
district court comes close to raising even a colorable basis 
for believing that they were selected for federal court 
prosecution because they are African American. The piece 
of evidence upon which Respondents most strongly rely 
(and which was the sole basis for the district court’s initial 
discovery order) was the affidavit indicating that all 24 
cocaine base cases closed by the FPD’s office in 1991 
involved black defendants. As the Ninth Circuit dissenters 
cogently explained, that statistic provides absolutely no 
grounds for an inference that the U.S. Attorney’s office 
was making racially discriminatory charging decisions. 


First, while the Court has on occasion permitted an 
inference of racially discriminatory intent based on 
Statistical evidence, such an inference is permissible only 
when the proponent can demonstrate a disparity of some 
sort in the racial composition of the observed group versus 
the racial composition one would expect in the absence of 
intentional discrimination. See, e.g., Whitus v. Georgia, 
385 U.S. 545, 552 (1967)(racially discriminatory intent 


8 


may be inferred where there were only 1/3 as mauy blacks 
on grand jury venire as one would expect if veniremen had 
been chosen randomly from among county residents). 
Here, Respondents have introduced no evidence regarding 
the percentage of blacks one would expect to find among 
FPD clients facing federal cocaine base charges in the 
absence of racially motivated charging decisions. In the 
absence of such evidence, there is no basis for concluding 
that 24-out-of-24 black FPD defendants is evidence of 
racially discriminatory intent. 


The Ninth Circuit tried to sidestep that obvious 
evidentiary deficiency by asserting: 


Given the prevalence of all kinds of drugs throughout 
our community, at least some crack distributors are 
likely to be non-blacks. We must start with the pre- 
sumption that people of all races commit all types of 
crime. . . absent some compelling contrary evidence, 
we must assume that crime knows no exclusive race or 
creed. 6/ 


6/ Accordingly, the dissent’s repeated calls for a 
“comparison pool" misses the point. . . Certainly, 
no “comparison pool” is necessary when the 
record contains statistical evidence tending to 
show that only members of racial or ethnic 
minority groups have been prosecuted. Were we 
to conclude otherwise, we would be accepting 
unwarranted racial stereotypes. Of course, as we 
explain, the government is free either to show that 
the record is incomplete or that a reasonable 
explanation exists for the statistical evidence. 
That is what the government has failed to do here. 


9 


Pet. App. 19a & n.6. In other words, in order to avoid 
what it viewed as “unwarranted racial stereotypes,” the 
appeals court reversed the evidentiary burden and imposed 
on the government the burden of establishing the proper 
comparison pool. That burden-shifting maneuver was in 
direct conflict with Wayte and other decisions of this Court 
that have made plain that the evidentiary burden at all times 
remains with a defendant claiming unconstitutional selective 
prosecution. 


Second, the Ninth Circuit (in the passage quoted 
above) seemed to make much of the “inexorable zero" -- 
the absence of any non-blacks among those federal cocaine 
base defendants whose cases were being handled by the 
FPD’s office. However, the government's unrebutted 
evidence demonstrated that the alleged “inexorable zero" 
was a Statistical mirage: the FPD’s office was handling 
several federal cocaine base cases involving nonblacks 
during 1991 (those cases just did not happen to close 
during 1991), and seven federal cocaine base cases 
involving nonblacks defendants were initiated by the U.S. 
Attorney's office in 1992 (the year in which charges were 
first brought against Respondents). See Pet. App. 53a-54a. 
Viewed in conjunction with the statistical evidence intro- 
duced by the government, the FPD affidavit is stripped of 
all probative value that might otherwise have been derived 
from a showing that 100% of a “random” cross-section of 
federal cocaine base defendants were black. 


Moreover, Respondents have introduced absolutely no 
evidence that the 24 cases examined in the FPD affidavit 
were randomly selected. The Ninth Circuit attempted to 
bolster the FPD affidavit by asserting that the criterion 
used to select cases -- cases closed during 1991 -- was “a 
factor independent of and not correlated with race"; but 


10 


that assertion is totally unsupported by the record and is yet 
another example of the Ninth Circuit's effort to shift the 
evidentiary burden away from Resperx‘ents. Indeed, amici 
would be quite surprised if there was any measure of ran- 
domness whatsoever in the FPD’s choice of selection 
criteria. The FPD had an obvious interest in presenting the 
district court with the starkest racial picture possible, and 
that interest would be served by examining several groups 
of cases selected using varied selection criteria and then 
presenting to the district court the group of cases containing 
the fewest number of nonblack defendants.’ 


While Respondents’ evidence indicates that the over- 
whelming number of those facing cocaine base charges in 
federal court in Los Angeles are black, it does not 


2 Amici do not mean to suggest that FPD personnel acted in any 
way improperly. It would be well within the bounds of zealous 
advocacy t. utilize whatever case-selection criteria would support 
Respondents’ selective prosecution claim most strongly. Amici do 
suggest, however, that in the absence of evidentiary support, it would 
be naive to assume that the 24 cases examined in the FPD affidavit 
were randomly selected. 


The use of “cases closed” as a selection criterion seems on its face 
to be highly unusual -- thereby suggesting a nonrandom explanation for 
based on when they are filed, not when they are closed; thus, if one 
were seeking an easy way to retrieve a group of cases from a given 
time period, one would be much more likely to employ a “cases 
opened" selection criterion. Moreover, if one were really seeking to 
discover whether there existed a racial pattern in prosecutorial decision- 
making in a given time-frame (in this case, 1992 -- the year 
Respondents were charged), “cases closed" would be a strange case- 
reflect prosecutorial decisions made over the course of a lengthy time 
period (in this case, 1988 through 1991). 


constitute acceptance of “unwarranted racial stereotypes" to 
among members of one racial group than among members 
of other groups. The record evidence strongly supports 
that hypothesis. For example, Respondents introduced into 
evidence a Los Angeles Times article indicating that blacks 
disproportionately commit cocaine base offenses, and that 
the racial composition of powder cocaine offenders much 
more closely mirrors the racial composition of the overall 
population. Pet. App. 73a. The Ninth Circuit dissenters 
noted numerous other examples: in 1991, whites consti- 
tuted 100% of those convicted of antitrust law violations 
nationwide (Pet. App. 67a); while in 1993, black consti- 
tuted 87.9% of those convicted of federal cocaine base 
offenses nationwide. Pet. App. 40a n.4. One must con- 
clude either that all U.S. Attorney offices across the 
country are selectively prosecuting blacks for cocaine base 
offenses, or that cocaine base offenses are significantly 
more prevalent in the African American community than 
among members of other racial groups. Amici submit that 


California are represented by the FPD’s office; indeed, 
approximately 2,400 defendants were charged with drug 
offenses under 21 U.S.C. § 841 in the Central District 
during the period 1989 to 1992. C.A. Excerpts of Record 


12 


75-85. A defendant claiming selective prosecution cannot 
begin to meet the heavy evidentiary burden imposed upon 
him by Wayre if he relies solely on statistics derived from 
such a small percentage of the overall pool of cases. 


The two declarations submitted by Respondents in con- 
nection with the government’s motion for reconsideration 
add nothing to their case. The hearsay statements of the 
halfway house employee give no indication that the dealers 
and users with whom he was familiar were at all similarly 
situated to Respundents (who are alleged to be violent, 
major distributors of cocaine base). Similarly, the hearsay 
statements of the unidentified court personnel regarding the 
racial characteristics of state-court cocaine base defendants 
makes no effort to compare the conduct of those defendants 
to Respondents’ alleged conduct. In the absence of such 
comparisons, the declarations provide no evidentiary 
support for a claim of racial discrimination. 


Amici admit that it is theoretically possible for a 
defendant to prevail on a selective prosecution claim with- 
out demonstrating that other, similarly situated individuals 
were not prosecuted. For example, even if a defendant 
were the only person known by federal prosecutors to have 
violated a particular crime, the Fifth Amendment would 
prohibit prosecutors from deciding to press charges based 
on prejudice against members of the defendant’s racial 
group. As a practical matter, however, very few defen- 
dants in those circumstances would ever be privy to 
evidence directly demonstrating the prosecutors’ discrimi- 
natory thought processes. Thus, virtually the only way that 
a defendant can begin to demonstrate discriminatory intent 
is to introduce evidence that others similarly situated 
(similar, that is, but for some irrelevant characteristic such 
as race) were not charged. Neither the FPD affidavit nor 


13 


the two declarations subsequently proffered by defense 
counsel include any such evidence. 


B. Statistical Evidence of Racial Disparities Is 
Insufficient as a Matter of Law to Demonstrate 
Selective Prosecution 


The deficiencies in Respondents’ evidence is much 
more fundamental than those outlined in the preceding 
section. Even if Respondent could establish racial 
disparities in _ \caine base prosecutions in the Los Angeles 
area (i.e., that blacks who have committed cocaine base 
offenses are more likely than similarly situated whites to be 
charged in federal court), such evidence would be insuf- 
ficient to create an inference of selective prosecution in 
their particular cases. In the absence of more direct 
evidence that Respondents were themselves the victims of 
racial discrimination, they cannot make out a case of 
selective prosecution. 


McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987), is highly 
instructive on this point. MeCleskey involved a black 
defendant who had been convicted of first degree murder 
and sentenced to death in the State of Georgia. Mr. 
McCleskey argued that his sentence violated, inter alia, the 
Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause because 
Georgia’s criminal justice system was much more likely to 
impose death sentences on those (such as McCleskey) who 
had killed whites than on those who had killed blacks. Mr. 
McCleskey supported that argument with an extensive study 
of Georgia capital cases (the "Baldus Study") that purported 
to show a strong correlation between the race of the victim 
and the imposition of a death sentence. 


14 


The Court assumed that the Baldus Study was statis- 
tically valid (McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 29 n.7) but none- 
theless rejected Mr. McCleskey’s equal protection claim. 
Id. at 291-97. The Court held that evidence that race may 
improperly have played a role in other death penalty cases 
did not create an inference that race had played a role in 
Mr. McCleskey’s case. Jd. at 293. Rather, the Court 
stated that Mr. McCleskey could succeed on his Equal 
Protection claim only by offering "evidence specific to his 
own case that would support an inference that racial consid- 
erations played a part in his sentence." Id. at 292-93. 


The Court acknowledged that in some “limited 
contexts" it has accepted statistical disparities as proof of 
intent to discriminate against an individual litigant. Jd. at 
293. The Court cited two such “limited” examples: statis- 
tical disparities as proof of intentional racial discrimination 
in the selection of the jury venire in a particular district, 
and of discriminatory employment decisions in violation of 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 
2000e, et seq. Id. at 293-94. But the Court refused to 
extend its acceptance of statistical disparities to capital 
sentencing proceedings, because such proceedings are 
"fundamentally different" from venire-selection and Title 
VII cases. The Court made clear that one cannot infer 
from racial statistical disparities an intent to discriminate 
against an individual litigant except in those cases in which 
only a “few{] variables are relevant to the challenged 
decision.” Jd. at 295. The Court expressed particular 
reluctance to permit attacks on individual death sentences 
based on state-wide statistical disparities because 
prosecutors play a large role in capital sentencing 
proceedings and there are valid “policy considerations” 
supporting the “traditionally wide discretion” afforded 
prosecutors in their decisions regarding whether to seek the 


Ra. ae ere eae oe) Se 


—/ 


li nm 


15 


death penalty. /d. at 296. The Court noted that 
prosecutors’ “decisions whether to prosecute and what to 
charge necessarily are individualized and involve infinite 
factual variations,” thereby making it impossible to infer 
what motivated Mr. McCleskey’s prosecutor based on what 
may have motivated other prosecutors throughout the state. 
Id. at 295 n.15. 


McCleskey is on all fours with the instant case and 
forecloses Respondents’ efforts to demonstrate racial 
motivation based on statistical disparities in the U.S. 
Attorney’s overall charging policies. Even if Respondents 
could demonstrate that white cocaine base offenders are 
more likely to be charged in state court than are blacks, 
McCleskey dictates that Respondents would still not be 
entitled to an inference that prosecutors engaged in racial 
discrimination in this case. There are simply too many 
variables involved in the charging process to permit an 
inference that an overall pattern of racial discrimination 
infected every individual charging decision. 


The charges brought against Respondents are not 
simply run-of-the-mill cocaine base charges. Rather, they 
are charged with selling more than 124 grams of cocaine 
base (2 1/2 times the quantity necessary to qualify them for 
10-year minimum sentences) on seven occasions over a two 
month period. They allegedly used guns during the course 
of those sales. Thus, even if Respondents could 
demonstrate that the U.S. Attorney’s office engages in 
racial discrimination in deciding whether marginal cases 
should be sent to federal or state court, such evidence 
would not suggest that armed, major African American 
drug dealers (as Defendants are alleged to be) are also the 
victims of racial discrimination. In the absence of direct 
evidence that prosecutors in their case are racially 


16 


motivated (or, at a minimum, evidence that armed, major 
dealers of cocaine base who happen to be nonblack are not 
being charged in federal court), Respondents cannot begin 
to make out a selective prosecution claim. The FPD 
affidavit is woefully inadequate in that regard: in addition 
to failing to address the issue of which offenders are not 
being charged in federal court, it simply lumps together all 
cocaine base offenders whose cases were closed by the 
FPD’s office in 1991 without regard to the severity of the 
offenses involved. 


In sum, Respondents have failed to produce any 
evidence from which one could infer that they were 
selectively prosecuted on the basis of race -- and thus 
Respondents cannot be said to have established a colorable 
basis for their selective prosecution claims. 


Il. THE DISTRICT COURT ERRED AS A MATTER 
OF LAW IN ORDERING DISCOVERY 


In their briefs opposing Petitioner’s certiorari petition, 
Respondents repeatedly noted that the lower courts had not 
ruled in the their favor on the selective prosecution claims 
but rather had simply ordered discovery on that issue. 
Petitioners assert that nothing more than a discovery 
dispute is at issue and that the district court was acting well 
within its discretion in ordering discovery. See, e.g., Brief 
of Defendant Martin at 11-16. 


Regardless what standard of review one applies to the 
district court’s discovery order, that order cannot stand. 
There simply is no evidence in the record from which one 
could infer that Respondents were the victims of intentional 
racial discrimination. In the absence of such evidence, the 
discovery order (and the subsequent sanction of dismissal) 


17 


must be reversed under any conceivable standard of 
review. 


Amici do not agree, however, with Respondents’ con- 
tention that the district court’s decision is subject to review 
under a lenient abuse-of-discretion standard. As the Ninth 
Circuit dissent noted (Pet. App. 45a-46a), reversal of a 
district court discovery order is appropriate where (as here) 
the district court "does not apply «— correct law." In 
granting discovery, the district court was operating under 
an erroneous view of the law regarding when an inference 
of discrimination can be drawn from statistical evidence. 
The district court concluded that the FPD affidavit created 
inferences of racial discrimination that were sufficient to 
create a colorable basis for a selective prosecution claim, 
a conclusion that runs directly counter to McCleskey. It is 
entirely appropriate for this Court to correct that error of 
law notwithstanding the deference normally accorded a 
district court discovery order. 


While the certiorari petition did not directly :aise the 
issue of what legal standard a defendant must meet before 
he is entitled to discovery into the issue of selective 
prosecution, amici suggest that it may be appropriate for 
the Court to reach that question in light of the confusion it 
evidently has engendered in the lower federal courts. 
Amici believe that the precise verbal formulation employed 
(e.g., a "prima facie case" standard, a “colorable basis" in 
the evidence standard) is of less importance than it is to 
reemphasize that it is not easy to meet the standard. As the 
Court recognized in McCleskey, it would unduly drain the 
resources of prosecutors if they are forced to respond to 
run-of-the-mill selective prosecution claims. McCleskey, 
481 U.S. at 296 n. 18 ("[I]f the prosecutor could be made 
to answer in court each time . . . a person charged him 


18 


with wrongdoing, his energy and attention would be 
diverted from the pressing duty of enforcing the criminal 
law")(quoting Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409, 425 
(1976)). 


While nominally adhering to a “colorable basis" test 
for permitting discovery in selective prosecution cases, the 
Ninth Circuit directly repudiated earlier circuit precedent 
which had stated that "the colorable basis standard sets a 
‘high threshold’ that should rarely justify discovery." Pet. 
App. 9a. The appeals court indicated that it viewed 
racially-motivated prosecutions as sufficiently condemnable 
sO as to permit discovery whenever racial discrimination is 
suspected. The difficulty with that lenient standard is that 
it invites repeated selective prosecutivn challenges. The 
delay that is attendant to any discovery order would 
virtually always be to the defendant’s benefit; the Ninth 
Circuit’s lenient standard thus could quickly bog down 
prosecutors’ offices in “chasing statistics." Pet. App. 67a. 
Petitioner’s brief amply demonstrates that such a chase is 
already underway in the Ninth Circuit. Indeed, in United 
States v. Turner, No. CR 94-820 ISL, __ F. Supp. ___, 
64 U.S.L.W. 2276 (C.D.Cal. Oct, 12, 1995), a district 
judge in the Central District of California not only ordered 
extensive discovery into selective prosecution in a cocaine 
base prosecution but even suggested that the U.S. 
Attorney's focus on prosecution of violent street gangs was 
constitutionally suspect because of the "imbalance" in 
prosecutions caused by that focus. 


This Court appeared to have a much tougher discovery 
standard in mind when it wrote in McCleskey that “a 
prosecutor need not explain his decisions unless the 
criminal defendant presents a prima facie case of unconsti- 
tutional conduct with respect to his case." McCleskey, 481 


19 


U.S. at 296 n.18. See also, Wade v. United States, 504 
U.S. 181, 186-87 (1992)(no discovery permissible into 
prosecutor's motivation in absence of “substantial threshold 
showing" that prosecutor acted for impermissible reasons). 
Amici respectfully suggest that the Court take this 
Opportunity to make clear that a prosecutor’s normally 
broad discretion to make charging decisions without being 
subject to judicial review should not be overcome by 
anything less than a strong showing that the prosecutor has 
made racially motivated decisions. 


The Ninth Circuit complained that unless a somewhat 
relaxed standard for granting discovery were adopted, 
defendants would be unable to gather sufficient information 
to prove their selective prosecution claims. See, e.g., Pet. 
App. at 14a. While amici concur in that assessment, they 
see no reason why the threshold for discovery should be 
lowered simply so that more defendants will escape 
punishment for their misdeeds. Prosecutors are not 
engaged in a game in which all participants should be 
afforded a “sporting chance" of winning. Rather, they are 
attempting to punish lawbreakers and thereby protect the 
public from future crimes. Their ability to do so is 
hampered when they are forced to devote considerable 
resources to fighting off selective prosecution claims. 
Racial discrimination among prosecutor should not be 
countenanced, but defendants who cannot on their own 
develop strong evidence of such discrimination should not 
be permitted to rummage through prosecutors’ files in 
hopes of escaping punishment. 


20 
CONCLUSION 


Amici curiae respectfully request that the Court reverse 
the decision of the Court of Appeals and direct that 


Respondents are not entitled to discovery in this case. 
Respectfully submitted, 


Daniel J. Popeo 
Richard A. Samp 
Washington Legal Foundation 
2009 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 588-0302 


Counsel for amici 


Dated: December 14, 1995 


