DATE-ELIGIBLE SOURCE EXCERPTS ONLY. NOT A NEUTRAL MODELING PACKET.
Verbatim archive OCR; printed pagination controls; OCR errors retained.
Source: armstrong_11._Reply_Brief_djvu.txt


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 170-931 ---


Our position is that, absent direct evidence of a 
discriminatory purpose, a criminal defendant must 
make a substantial threshold showing that similarly 
situated person. of a different race have not been 
prosecuted in order to obtain discovery from the 
government on a selective prosecution claim. Re- 
spondents offer no adequate reason for eliminating 
the similarly situated offender requirement. 

1. The Martin respondents contend, for the first 
time in this litigation, that requiring a substantial 
threshold showing of selective prosecution as a 
condition to obtaining discovery conflicts with Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 16(a)1(C). Martin Br. 26-38. According 


(1) 


2 


to respondents, Rule 16 requires the government to 
provide discovery to a defendant so long as “the 
information already available to a defense attorney is 
‘sufficient to lead a reasonable person to believe . . . 
that further inquiry on the subject is warranted.’” 
Martin Br. 22, quoting Pet. App. 97a (Reinhardt, J., 
dissenting from the panel opinion in this case). As a 
general matter, discovery is not available in a 
criminal case on that slender basis, and respondents’ 
suggestion is particularly unwarranted with respect 
to discovery incursions into the exercise of pros- 
ecutorial discretion. 

a. On its face, Rule 16(a)(1)(C) does not give a 
defendant unrestricted access to the government’s 
files in order to search for a defense to the charges 
against him. Rather, in authorizing limited discovery 
in a criminal case, the portion of Rule 16 invoked by 
respondents specifically requires a defendant to make 
a threshold showing of materiality: 


Upon request of the defendant the govern- 
ment shall permit the defendant to inspect 
and copy or photograph books, papers, docu- 
ments, photographs, tangible objects, build- 
ings or places, or copies or portions thereof, 
which are within the possession, custody, or 
control of the government, and which are 
material to the preparation of the defen- 
dant’s defense * * *. 


Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(a)(1)(C) (emphasis added). 

The Rule’s restriction on discovery of documents 
and tangible items to those that are “material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s defense” is a signifi- 
cant limitation. As one commentator has stated, “[i)f 
defendant requests discovery because he thinks the 


3 


documents sought are material to the preparation of 
his defense, he must make a prima facie showing of 
materiality.” Charles A. Wright, Federal Practice 
And Procedure § 254, at 66-67 (2d ed. 1982) (footnote 
omitted). That requirement means that, before 
discovery may be ordered, the defendant must estab- 
lish that he has a factual basis for asserting the 
defense on which discovery is sought, and that the 
requested documents or tangible items are relevant 
and helpful to that defense. See United States v. 
Murdock, 548 F.2d 599, 600 (5th Cir. 1977). The 
factual showing of “materiality” is to be demon- 
strated by the defendant “before discovery is 
allowed.” Jbid. (emphasis added); cf. United States v. 
Berrios, 501 F.2d 1207, 1211-1212 (2d Cir. 1974) 
(requiring evidentiary showing of “the essential ele- 
ments of the defense and that the documents in the 
government’s possession would indeed be probative of 
these elements” to obtain enforcement of a subpoena 
under Fed. R. Crim. P. 17(c) issued in connection with 
a hearing on a selective prosecution claim). 

Because the test under Rule 16 is “materiality,” 
the threshold showing that must be made depends on 
the defense that is asserted. When information is 
sought to support a defense of selective prosecution 
based on race, the defendant must make a threshold 
showing of race-based selection, i.e., that he was 
selected for prosecution, while similarly situated 
persons of a different race were not. Murdock, 548 
F.2d at 600; United States v. Johnson, 577 F.2d 1304, 
1309 (5th Cir. 1978) (where the defendant “did not 
make a prima facie showing that he was singled out 
for prosecution, he did not establish the materiality of 
the evidence sought” and consequently was not 
entitled to discovery under Rule 16); see also United 


4 


States v. One 1985 Mercedes, 917 F.2d 415, 421 (9th 
Cir. 1990) (in order to obtain discovery on a claim of 
vindictive prosecution, defendant must introduce 
evidence tending to establish the essential elements 
of the claim). It is not sufficient for defense counsel 
to assert that the information at hand affords what he 
claims is a reasonable basis for further inquiry. 

The structure of Rule 16 confirms that the 
“materiality” requirement was intended as a signifi- 
cant limitation on a defendant’s right to discovery 
under that portion of the Rule. Rule 16 specifically 
permits the defendant to obtain discovery of several 
other categories of information without requiring the 
defendant to show that they are material to the 
defense. The government must disclose the defen- 
dant’s relevant oral or written statements, Rule 
16(a)1A); the defendant’s criminal record, Rule 
16(a)1)(B); the results of scientific tests that “are 
intended for use by the government as evidence in 
chief at the trial,” Rule 16(a)(1)D); summaries of 
expert witness testimony that the government 
intends to use “during its case in chief at trial,” Rule 
16(a)(1)(E); and, most important, all documents and 
physical objects that “are intended for use by the 
government as evidence in chief at the trial” or that 
“were obtained from or belong to the defendant,” Rule 
16(aX1XC). To the extent, however, that a defendant 
seeks other documents, tangible objects, or scientific 
reports in the government’s possession, he must show 
that the documents sought are “material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s defense.” Rule 16(a)(1) 
(C) and (D).' 


' The history of Rule 16 also supports that analysis. As 
adopted in 1966, Rule 16 did not specifically address whether a 


5 


The Martin respondents contend that, because Rule 
16 specifically precludes discovery of three categories 
of information (internal government documents, 
witness statements, and grand jury proceedings), 
interpreting the Rule to require a defendant to 
establish a threshold showing to obtain information 
outside those categories would violate the principle of 
“expressio[{[] unius est exclusio alterius.” Martin 
Br. 27-28. The requirement of a threshold showing, 
however, does not create a fourth category of 
information that is categorically shielded from dis- 
closure. Rather it imposes a condition upon obtaining 
information that may be subject to disclosure, and 
that condition is drawn directly from the text of Rule 
16. The principle of expressio unius est exclusio 
alterius is therefore inapplicable here. 

b. The relaxation of discovery standards proposed 
by respondents is particularly inapt in the present 
context. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 
were framed against the backdrop of well-established 
principles that sharply limit judicial inquiries into 


defendant could obtain evidence that the government would 
introduce at trial or had obtained from the defendant. Instead, 
those two categories of information were discoverable only 
“upon a showing of materiality to the preparation of [the 
defendant's} defense.” Fed. R. Crim. P. 16(b) (1970). In 1975, 
however, Rule 16(a)(1)(C) was amended for the express 
purpose of relieving a defendant of having to demonstrate 
materiality in order to obtain those two categories of informa- 
tion. The Advisory Committee reasoned that evidence in- 
troduced by the government in its case in chief or obtained 
from the defendant could be assumed to be “material” without 
requiring the defendant affirmatively to establish that fact. 
Fed. R. Crim. P. 16 advisory committee note (1974 Amend- 
ment). For other documents, however, the materiality 
requirement was left intact. 


6 


exercises of prosecutorial discretion, and the “ma- 
teriality” requirement in Rule 16, as applied to such 
inquiries, necessarily draws its meaning from those 
principles. Cf. United States v. Mezzanatto, 115 S. 
Ct. 797 (1995) (interpreting Fed. R. Evid. 410 and Fed. 
R. Crim. P. 11(e)(6) against the background principle 
that evidentiary privileges may be waived). Just as 
those principles require a substantial threshold 
showing of unconstitutional motive before a defendant 
may obtain discovery on a claim that the government 
has unconstitutionally withheld a substantial assis- 
tance motion, Wade v. United States, 504 U.S. 181, 
186-187 (1992), so they require a substantial threshold 
showing of selective prosecution here. See also 
Franks vy. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 155-156 (1978) 
(requiring “substantial preliminary showing” as a 
precondition to a hearing on a claim that a facially 
valid warrant is invalid because the affiant lied to the 
magistrate); Roviaro v. United States, 353 U.S. 53, 
60-61 (1957) (requiring a substantial showing of 
materiality as a precondition to obtaining discovery of 
information that would disclose the identity of a 
confidential informant). 

The exercise of discretion in enforcing the criminal 
law is a core element of the constitutional authority 
of the Executive Branch, and judicial inquiry into 
such prosecutorial decisionmaking “entails systemic 
costs of particular concern.” Wayte v. United States, 
470 U.S. 598, 607-608 (1985). While respondents’ 
stated “central purpose” is “to obtain from the gov- 
ernment an official articulation of its prosecution 
criteria,” Martin Br. 59, this Court recognized the 
general inappropriateness of forcing precisely that 
form of disclosure in Wayte: 


7 


Examining the basis of a prosecution delays 
the criminal proceeding, threatens to chill 
law enforcement by subjecting the pros- 
ecutor’s motives and decisionmaking to 
outside inquiry, and may undermine prose- 
cutorial effectiveness by revealing the 
Government’s enforcement policy. 


470 U.S. at 607. Those concerns “make the courts 
properly hesitant to examine the decision whether to 
prosecute.” Jd. at 608. See also McCleskey v. Kemp, 
481 U.S. 279, 296-297 & n.18 (1987) (“the policy 
considerations behind a prosecutor’s traditionally 
‘wide discretion’” suggest the general “impropriety 
of our requiring prosecutors to defend their deci- 
sions”). 

Nothing in Rule 16 suggests that the Rule was 
intended to abrogate those well-established principles 
and to make judicial inquiries into prosecutorial 
decisionmaking a routine part of a criminal pro- 
ceeding. Accordingly, when a defendant invokes Rule 
16 to seek discovery to support a claim of selective 
prosecution, he must make a substantial threshold 
showing that unconstitutional selective prosecution 
has occurred. 

ec. The Martin respondents concede that some 
threshold showing as to the merits of a proposed 
defense must be made before discovery under Rule 
16(a)(1)(C) may be ordered. They acknowledge that, in 
the absence of an “objective standard” to determine 
the “genuineness” of a defense, their construction of 
Rule 16(a)(1)(C) would result in “the sort of fishing 
expedition prohibited by criminal and civil discovery 
principles alike.” Martin Br. 21-22. And respondents 
do not suggest that the text of Rule 16 provides any 


8 


further guidance about the kind of threshold showing 
required. Rather than interpreting the materiality 
requirement in light of settled limitations on judicial 
review of exercises of prosecutorial discretion, how- 
ever, respondents contend that the test for whether 
the documents relate to a “genuine defense” should be 
“gauged by the standard of Rule 11” of the Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure. Martin Br. 14-15, 22-23. 
Respondents would find that test to be satisfied when 
“the information available to defense counsel is suffi- 
cient to lead a reasonable attorney to conclude that 
further inquiry on the subject is warranted.” /d. at 
23. 

For three reasons, Rule 11 provides no source of 
guidance for the interpretation of Rule 16 of the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. First, the set 
of rules to which Rule 11 belongs is expressly limited 
to “suits of a civil nature.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 1. There is 
therefore no textual basis for applying Rule 11 in the 
context of a criminal case. Second, Rule 11 applies to 
pleadings or motions filed with the court, and is 
expressly made “[liJnapplicab[le] to [d]iscovery,” see 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 11(d). It thus provides a particularly 
unsuitable frame of reference for measuring entitle- 
ment to discovery in a criminal case. Third, it is 
unlikely that any standard included in the Federal 
Rules of Civil Precedure would be properly suited to 
measure whether a criminal defendant may compel 
discovery from the government on a claim of selective 
prosecution. The Civil Rules establish a very 
permissive discovery regime. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 26 
(requiring voluntary disclosure of much information 
regarding the case and permitting additional dis- 
covery where reasonably calculated to lead to the dis- 
covery of admissible evidence). In contrast, because 


9 


of the important public policy of expediting the reso- 
lution of criminal cases, the Criminal Rules tightly 
limit the scope of discovery. See U.S. Br. 19 n.1. 
Given the very significant differences between the 
purposes and scope of civil and criminal discovery 
rules, it would be inappropriate to borrow any civil 
discovery standard to give content to a criminal 
discovery rule. 

Even more significantly, the Martin respondents’ 
proposed standard does not provide any meaningful 
protection against intrusive and unnecessary in- 
quiries into prosecutorial decisionmaking. The 
inevitable consequence of adopting a standard that 
depends on whether a “reasonable ttorney [would] 
conclude that further inquiry on the subject is 
warranted” would be to make judicial inquiries into 
prosecutorial decisions routine in a wide range of 
cases. As we point out in our petition (Pet. 22 & n.2, 
24 & n.4), the standard adopted by the court of appeals 
in this case has already led to repeated judicial 
inquiries into claims of selective prosecution in crack 
and illegal reentry cases. Adoption of respondents’ 
standard, which appears to afford even less protection 
for prosecutorial decisionmaking, could only acceler- 
ate that trend. This Court’s cases do not counte- 
nance that kind of routine encroachment on pros- 
ecutorial authority.” 


* Respondent Rozelle contends that, in order to obtain dis- 
covery on a claim of selective prosecution, a criminal defendant 
must establish a “colorable basis” for believing that selective 
prosecution has occurred. Rozelle Br. 16-17. While courts have 
often used the phrase “colorable basis” in describing the 
standard for obtaining discovery on a selective prosecution 
claim, they have also uniformly held that a defendant must 
make a threshold showing that similarly situated offenders 


10 


2. Respondents next assert (Martin Br. 38-50) that 
it is unnecessary to make a showing regarding 
similarly situated offenders who were not prosecuted 
as a prerequisite to discovery because, in re- 
spondents’ view, such a showing is not an essential 
element of a selective prosecution claim at all. 
Respondents’ approach to proving selective pros- 
ecution is incorrect. Absent direct evidence of dis- 
criminatory motive, evidence that similarly situated 
offenders have not been prosecuted is essential to 
establish unconstitutional selective prosecution, see 
U.S. Br. 21-25, 32-35, and evidence of the same 
character is thus an essential element of a selective 
prosecution discovery request. 

a. The contrast between this Court’s decisions in 
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 (1886), and Ah Sin 
v. Wittman, 198 U.S. 500 (1905), reveals the impor- 
tance to a selective prosecution claim of establishing 
that similarly situated offenders have not been 
prosecuted. In Yick Wo, the habeas petitioner’s 


have not been prosecuted in order to establish a “colorable 
basis.” See U.S. Br. 22-25. The court below is the first to find 
a “colorable basis” for discovery without imposing a similarly 
situated offender requirement. While the label for the test is of 
limited importance, in our view a clearer description of the 
proper standard would be to characterize it as a “substantial 
threshold showing.” See Wade, 504 U.S. at 186 (noting 
defendant’s concession that a “substantial threshold showing” is 
required to obtain discovery on a claim that the government 
has acted unconstitutionally in refusing to file a substantial 
assistance motion). The critical point, however, is that there 
must be an evidentiary showing to support the claim of 
improper prosecutorial conduct, and, in this context, that 
credible evidence must be produced that similarly situated 
offenders have not been prosecuted before discovery may be 
ordered. 


% 


11 


showing that similarly situated offenders had not 
been prosecuted led to a finding of an equal protection 
violation, while in Ah Sin, the habeas petitioner’s 
failure to allege that similarly situated persons had 
not been prosecuted led to a dismissal of the 
complaint. See U.S. Br. 32-34. Respondents contend 
that Ah Sin merely reflects an application of “strin- 
gent pleading requirement(s].” Martin Br. 43-44. 
Under modern pleading requirements, the habeas 
petitioner in Ah Sin might not have been required to 
allege that similarly situated offenders had not been 
prosecuted in order to survive a motion to dismiss. 
But under the holding of that decision, he still would 
have been required to prove that similarly situated 
offenders had not been prosecuted in order to prevail 
on the merits. Ah Sin, 198 U.S. at 506-508. 

Nothing in Wayte rejects the view that a selective 
prosecution claim depends on a showing that similar- 
ly situated offenders were not prosecuted. Martin Br. 
42-43. The defendant in Wayte was a vocal opponent of 
the draft who reported his nonregistration to the 
government. He alleged that the government had 
impermissibly selected him for prosecution on the 
basis of his vocal opposition to the draft. The evidence 
established, however, that the government had a 
neutral policy of prosecuting those who reported 
their nonregistration to the government, including 
those who were not vocal opponents of the draft. In 
light of that evidence, the Court held that the 
defendant had failed to establish that he had been 
selected for prosecution based on his vocal opposition 
to the draft because “[the] facts demonstrate that the 
Government treated all reported nonregistrants 
similarly. It did not subject vocal nonregistrants to 
any special burden.” 470 U.S. at.610. 


12 


The Martin respondents’ contention (Br. 42-43) that 
Wayte rejected a similarly situated offender require- 
ment is therefore incorrect. The Court ruled against 
the defendant in that case precisely because he was 
unable to show that similarly situated offenders were 
treated any differently from him.’ Wayte therefore 
provides no support for dispensing at the discovery 
stage with the threshold showing of discriminatory 
selection. 

b. In support of their contention that a selective 
prosecution claim does not require proof that 
similarly situated offenders have not been prosecuted, 
the Martin respondents rely (Br. 41-42) on cases 
arising under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e, and this Court’s decision in 
Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986). Selective 
prosecution claims, however, raise unique concerns 
that are not implicated by Title VII or Batson claims. 
An employer may be required to defend a hiring or 
promotion decision, or a litigant to defend a pre- 
emptory challenge, without imposing any of the 
“systemic costs” (Wayte, 470 U.S. at 607) associated 
with requiring the government to justify to a federal 
judge the charging decisions it has made in the case 
at hand and potentially in many other cases. The 
standards of proof applicable in those settings, there- 
fore, cannot readily be applied to the selective 
prosecution setting. 


% The dissent in Wayte understood the majority to have 
imposed a similarly situated offender requirement. The dis- 
sent stated that “the Court errs in the manner in which it 
analyzes the merits of the equal protection claim. It simply 
focuses on the wrong problem when it states that the ‘Govern- 
ment treated all reported nonregistrants similarly.” 470 U.S. 
at 629-630 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 


13 


This Court’s decision in McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 
U.S. 279 (1987), makes clear the special proof 
requirements applicable here. In that case, the Court 
held that claims that prosecutors have exercised 
their discretion on the basis of race must be 
supported by “exceptionally clear proof.” Jd. at 297. 
For that reason, the Court held that the kind of 
statistical evidence used to prove discrimination in 
Title VII and jury venire cases could not be used as a 
basis for shifting the burden of proof to a prosecutor 
to justify his discretionary decisions. /d. at 293-297. 
The Court explained that “the policy considerations 
behind a prosecutor’s traditionally wide discretion 
suggest the impropriety of our requiring prosecutors 
to defend their decisions * * * often years after they 
were made.” /d. at 296 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). And it noted that “[rJequiring a prosecutor 
to rebut a study that analyzes the past conduct of 
scores of prosecutors is quite different from requir- 
ing a prosecutor to rebut a contemporaneous chal- 
lenge to his own acts.” Jd. at 296 n.17 (citing Batson). 
In light of McCleskey, respondents’ reliance on the 
procedural framework for proving Title VII and 
Batson claims is misplaced.* 

In any event, where, as here, a party seeks to raise 
an inference of discrimination based on a statistic or a 
pattern, Title VII and Batson both require a proper 


* Respondents attempt to distinguish McCleskey on the 
ground that it involved a challenge to decisions made by juries. 
Martin Br. 52-53. The claim in McCleskey, however, was that 
both juries and prosecutors had exercised their discretion on 
the basis of race. And the Court’s holding that such a claim 
must be supported by “exceptionally clear proof” (481 U.S. at 
297) applied to both the discretionary decisions of juries and the 
discretionary decisions of prosecutors. /d. at 294-297. 


14 


comparison pool. In the Title VII context, the Court 
has made clear that a plaintiff cannot establish a 
prima facie case of a discriminatory effect or a dis- 
criminatory purpose merely by showing that there is 
a low percentage of minority employees in a partic- 
ular job. Rather, there must be a comparison “be- 
tween the racial composition of the qualified persons 
in the labor market and the persons holding at-issue 
jobs.” Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 490 U.S. 
642, 650 (1989) (discriminatory effect); Hazelwood 
School Dist. v. United States, 433 U.S. 299, 306-308 
(1977) (discriminatory intent). Similarly, in the 
Batson context, a prima facie case may not be estab- 
lished based solely on evidence that a litigant exer- 
cised preemptory challenges to exclude potential 
jurors of a particular race. For example, a party who 
strikes ten black jurors in a row has not committed a 
prima facie Batson violation if all of the prospective 
jurors on the venire are black. A pattern of striking 
jurors of a particular race is significant only if the 
litigant has declined to strike jurors of a different 
race. 

c. The Martin respondents argue that, in a variety 
of settings, a prosecutor’s improper selection of a 
person for prosecution based solely on his race would 
be immunized from scrutiny by a requirement that a 
defendant must identify similarly situated offenders 
who were not prosecuted. Br. 39-40. They claim, for 
example, that that result would follow when the 
defendants are charged with an offense that is 
committed exclusively by members of one race. [bid. 
That claim is incorrect. If the defendant in such a 
hypothetical could produce direct evidence of dis- 
criminatory intent, or show that he is similarly 
situated in all relevant respects to persons who 


15 


commit a different offense but are not prosecuted, an 
Equal Protection violation could be sufficiently 
indicated (at the discovery stage) or established (on 
the merits). There is no reason to think that if such 
unconstitutional action were taking place, defendants 
would be unable to obtain some credible evidence of it 
—and if no such evidence were available, it would 
plainly be inappropriate to license a “fishing ex- 
pedition” for it. Martin Br. 22. 

In any event, respondents’ claim in this case is not 
that prosecutors have chosen to prosecute crack 
offenses because they are committed exclusively by 
members of one race. Rather, their claim is that 
federal prosecutors have selected black crack offend- 
ers for federal prosecution, while leaving white crack 
offenders to be prosecuted by the State of California. 
Respondents virtually concede that proof of similarly 
situated offenders who have not been prosecuted is 
essential to that claim by stating that, “[t]o the 
extent that a defendant argues that improper invid- 
ious distinctions were made within a particular group 
of offenders, such as crack dealers, the com-parative 
treatment of other members of that group would of 
course be important evidence.” Martin Br. 44-45. 

3. The Martin respondents contend that requiring 
a showing that similarly situated offenders have not 
been prosecuted at the discovery stage would impose a 
“crippling burden of proof” that will allow racial 
discrimination to escape undetected. Martin Br. 45-50 
& n.66. As we note in our opening brief, however, 
defendants in other cases have satisfied the similarly 
situated offender requirement at the discovery stage, 
U.S. Br. 26-27, and if there were any merit to re- 
spondents’ claim in this case, they should have been 
able to satisfy that requirement as well. 


16 


One of respondents’ counsel submitted a conclusory 
affidavit below asserting that, in his capacity as a 
member of the Board of Directors of the Los Angeles 
County Criminal Courts Bar Association Indigent 
Defense Panel, he regularly conversed with “many 
state court judges, prosecutors, and defense attor- 
neys.” J.A. 141. There is no reason that respondents 
could not have obtained concrete information from 
those sources concerning whether persons who were 
similarly situated to them were prosecuted by the 
State of California. The Federal Public Defender’s 
Office in this case searched its own records for 
information concerning cases closed by its office; 
there is no reason that it could not have conducted a 
comparable study of cases closed by local public 
defenders during the same period. Finally, California 
law generally makes court records available to the 
public. Copley Press, Inc. v. Superior Court, 7 Cal. 
Rptr.2d 841, 843-844 (1992). Respondents were free to 
review those files for evidence that similarly situated 
persons were prosecuted in state court.’ Thus, while 
the similarly situated offender requirement serves as 


5 Respondents themselves indicate the feasibility of such an 
inquiry, by referring to the “Berk study,” which was not 
introduced in this case and is not a part of the record here. 
That study purported to compare the rates at which blacks are 
prosecuted for crack offenses in state and federal court. 
Martin Br. 12-13. While Judge Reinhardt relied on that study 
in his panel dissent, Pet. App. 101a-102a, in our en banc brief, 
we objected to the propriety of taking judicial notice of such 
matters, noting that the study had been extensively attacked 
for its failure, inter alia, to compare similarly situated 
defendants and could not be described as “not subject to 
reasonable dispute.” U.S. En Banc Br. 8 & n.6 (quoting Fed. 
R. Evid. 201(a) and (b)). The en bane majoriy opinion did not 
refer to the Berk study. 


17 


an effective threshold screening device, it does not 
block meritorious claims.° 

The Martin respondents assert that it would have 
been easier for the government to produce informa- 
tion concerning similarly situated offenders than for 
the respondents to obtain such information them- 
selves. Martin Br. 46-47. The relative ease of 
acquiring information bears on the propriety of 
discovery, however, only after a defendant makes the 
requisite threshold showing of the defense in 
question. Because it is generally easier for the 
government than for criminal defendants to obtain 
information, any other view would lead to the 


® It is not our view that “the district judge in this case 
could properly have issued a subpoena to California officials 
directing them to produce information about cocaine base 
dealers prosecuted in state court.” Martin Br. 18. A subpoena 
duces tecum under Fed. R. Crim. P. 17 is “not intended to 
provide a means of discovery for criminal cases.” United 
States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 698 (1974), citing Bowman Dairy 
Co. v. United States, 341 U.S. 214, 220 (1951). And if respond- 
ents were seeking evidence under Rule 17 for use at a hearing 
relating to a selective prosecution defense, they would be 
required to make the same threshold showing that similarly 
situated offenders have not been prosecuted that is required by 
Rule 16. United States v. Berrios, 501 F.2d 1207, 1211 (2d Cir. 
1974); see also United S* tes v. Nixon, 418 U.S. at 698-670 (a 
party seeking to enforce a Rule 17 subpoena must make a 
preliminary showing that the materials sought are relevant and 
admissible); 2 Charles A. Wright, Federal Practice and 
Procedure § 275, at 160 n.8 (2d ed. 1982). The government's 
statement below that respondents could have pursued sub- 
poenas to obtain state law enforcement records (see Martin Br. 
18 n.47) was intended to underscore that respondents had made 
no independent efforts to obtain the information they sought— 
not to suggest that such subpoenas could have been enforced 
over the state’s objection. 


18 


unacceptable conclusion that a defendant need only 
allege unconstitutional selective prosecution in order 
to obtain discovery on that claim. 

4. Finally, the Martin respondents argue that the 
meaning of a similarly situated comparison pool is 
elusive and that absent discovery, they had no basis 
for determining the offenders who were “similarly 
situated” to them. Martin Br. 59. That argument is 
without merit. Respondents were required to show, 
at a minimum, that there were offenders not pros- 
ecuted who engaged in conduct comparable to the 
conduct that they were charged with committing. 
See U.S. Br. 35 n.4. A prosecutor is presumed to act 
in good faith. See U.S. Br. 18-19, 29-30. Accordingly, 
when persons not prosecuted have engaged in conduct 
that is significantly different from those who were 
prosecuted, the presumption is that the difference in 
treatment is based on the difference in conduct and 
not on impermissible considerations such as race. To 
overcome that presumption, the defendant must make 
a threshold showing that at least some persons known 
to the prosecutor have not been prosecuted for 
engaging in conduct that is sufficiently similar to the 
conduct that the defendant is charged with com- 
mitting. 

Accordingly, the starting point for respondents was 
the criminal conduct with which they were charged in 
the indictment against them. In this case, the 
indictment against respondents charged them with 
conspiring to distribute more than 50 grams of 
cocaine base, and with using guns in furtherance of 
that conspiracy. J.A. 60-65. Under federal law, both 
the quantity of drugs and the use of a gun signifi- 
cantly affect the seriousness of a drug trafficking 
offense. See 21 U.S.C. 841(b)(1) (1988 & Supp. V 1993) 


19 


(setting a ten-year minimum for sale of more than 50 
grams of cocaine base, and a five-year minimum for 
sale of more than five grams of cocaine base); 18 
U.S.C. 924(c) (1988 & Supp. V 1993) (setting an 
additional five-year penalty for use of a gun in 
relation to a drug trafficking offense). To satisfy the 
similarly situated offender requirement, respondents 
were therefore required to show that others who 
were not prosecuted conspired to distribute a 
comparable amount of cocaine base and used guns in 
furtherance of that conspiracy. As the panel below 
correctly concluded (Pet. App 82a-83a), because 
respondents failed to make that showing, the district 
