DATE-ELIGIBLE SOURCE EXCERPTS ONLY. NOT A NEUTRAL MODELING PACKET.
Verbatim archive OCR; printed pagination controls; OCR errors retained.
Source: armstrong_10._Respondents_Brief_djvu.txt


--- SOURCE OCR LINES 285-317 ---

policy statements are entirely neutral as to the race . . . of 
offenders.” 


Rule 16(a)(1)(C) of the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure provides in pertinent part: 


Documents and Tangible Objects. Upon request of 
the defendant the government shall permit the 
defendant to inspect and copy or photograph 
books, papers, documents, . . . or copies or 
portions thereof, which are within the posses- 
sion, custody or control of the government, and 
which are material to the preparation of the 
defendant's defense. . . . 


Criminal Rule 17(c) provides in pertinent part: 


For Production of Documentary Evidence and of 
Objects. A subpoena may also command the per- 
son to whom it is directed to produce the books, 


papers, documents, or other objects designated 
therein. The court on motion made promptly 
may quash or modify the subpoena if compli- 
ance would be unreasonable or oppressive. 


S 

--- SOURCE OCR LINES 984-2766 ---

ARGUMENT 


Certain basic principles bearing on the instant appeal 
are not in dispute. “The decision to prosecute may not be 
based on ‘an unjustifiable standard such as race, religion, 
or other arbitrary classification.’ ” (U.S.Br. 17). The Solici- 
tor General does not, of course, argue that discovery can 
never be ordered with regard to a claim of selective 
prosecution, and has not chosen to raise in this Court any 
question about the scope of the particular discovery 
ordered by the district court. The government appears to 
acknowledge that any limitations on discovery should 
“still allo[w] meritorious claims to proceed.” (U.S.Br. 
25-26) The parties are in agreement that here, as in any 
civil or criminal case, the decision of a district judge to 
order discovery may be overturned on appeal only if 


4 J.App. 150. 


18 


there has been a demonstrable abuse of discretion. 
(U.S.Br. 36-37). 


The government, although opposing a discovery order 
directed to the United States, consistently maintained in the 
courts below that the district judge in this case could properly 
have issued a subpoena to California officials directing them 
to produce information about cocaine base dealers pros- 
ecuted in state court.47 The United States also agrees that 
discovery may be ordered, either on a sufficient showing of 
dissimilar treatment of “similarly situated” individuals or 
where there are “direct admissions by officials of discrimina- 
tory purpose.” (U.S.Br. 15). The question presented is 
whether these uncontroverted areas of judicial authority 
mark a rigid boundary beyond which district judges are 
powerless to inquire whether an investigation or prosecution 
was animated in whole or part by an unconstitutional pur- 


pose. 


I. DEFENDANTS ARE ENTITLED TO DISCOVER 
EVIDENCE MATERIAL TO A DEFENSE OF SELEC- 
TIVE PROSECUTION 


(1) This case concerns the scope of and procedure 
applicable to Rule 16(a)(1)(C) of the Federal Rules of 


47 Government Motion for. Reconsideration of Order for 
Discovery, p. 14 (“information is . . . accessible to defendants by 
subpoena to local authorities”); J.App. 201 (“Defense Counsel- 
... have as much opportunity as the Government possibly could 
to subpoena information from the state system”); Government 
Response to Petition for Reheartmg and Suggestion for Rehear- 
ing En Banc, p.6 n. 4 (“defendants in this case could have pur- 
sued subpoenas to obtain state law enforcement records.”) 


19 


Criminal Procedure. In terms modeled after Civil Rule 
34(a), Rule 16 provides that a criminal defendant may 
inspect and copy any papers or documents “which are 
material to the preparation of the defendant's defense.” 
Rule 16(a)(1)(C) does not require a defendant to obtain a 
court order in order to discover such material, but 
imposes on the government an obligation to “permit the 
defendant to inspect and copy” any documents within 
the scope of the Rule. The discovery request at issue in 
this case was expressly for “documentary evidence or 
information.”4 


Provision for discovery of documents in criminal 
cases has existed since the initial promulgation of the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. The judicial practice 
of providing a defendant with access to documents prior 
to trial dates back to United States v. Burr, 25 Fed. Cas. 30 
(1807) (Marshall, C.J.). The scope of Rule 16 has been 
repeatedly broadened because of the Advisory Commit- 
tee’s “view that an independent right of discovery for 
both the defendant and the government is likely to con- 
tribute to both effective and fair administration.” (Notes 
of Advisory Committee to 1974 Amendments). 


#* A number of documents in the government's possession 
were obviously within the scope of the request. The actual 
indictments in federal crack cases would have identified the 
defendants in those cases; the race of a defendant is indicated in 
FBI arrest reports, Bureau of Prisons forms, and his or her NCIC 
Record of Arrests and Convictions, a normal component of the 
discovery provided by the government in any criminal case. The 
criteria utilized by the United States Attorney in selecting cases 
for federal prosecution are set out in a written guideline. See 
p.13, supra. 


20 


[A] system of liberal discovery which gives both 
parties the maximum possible amount of infor- 
mation with which to prepare their cases... . is a 
salutary development which, by increasing the 
evidence available to both parties, enhances the 
fairness of the adversary system. 


Wardius v. Oregon, 412 U.S. 470, 473-74 (1973). Rule 16 
does not constrict the inherent authority of federal judges 
to order prosecutors to provide discovery or otherwise 
disclose information which justice requires be made 
available to a defendant. Jencks v. United States, 353 U.S. 
657 (1957). 


Rule 16(a)(1)(C) complements Rule 17(c), which 
authorizes a defendant to subpoena for presentation at 
either trial or a Rule 12(b) hearing books, papers or 
documents. Although the scope of the two rules is in 
some respects different, Rule 16 permits a defendant to 
examine and evaluate documents which he may then 
choose to subpoena. At a hearing on, for example, a claim 
of selective prosecution, a Rule 17 subpoena is available 
to obtain appropriate documents. Although Rule 17(c) 
contains no express requirement that documents be 
“material”, the Rule’s prohibition against “unreasonable” 
subpoenas is understood to encompass a requirement 
that the materials sought be “relevant”. United States v. 
Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 699-700 (1974). 


The discovery authorized by Rule 16 would in certain 
instances be constitutionally required. Brady v. Maryland, 
373 U.S. 83 (1963), mandates disclosure by the prosecu- 
tion of “evidence favorable to an accused .. . that, if 
disclosed and used effectively, . .. may make the differ- 
ence between conviction and acquittal.” United States v. 


21 


Bagley, 473 U.S. 687, 676 (1985). Evidence which would 
lead a court to sustain a selective prosecution defense, 
thus preventing not only conviction but the risks of trial, 
obviously is exculpatory in nature. The government's 
disclosure obligation under Brady is greater when a 
defendant has made an express request for material. Id. at 
681-82. The Compulsory Process Clause of the Sixth 
Amendment is generally available to provide “production 
of evidence needed . . . by the defense.” Taylor v. Illinois, 
484 U.S. 400, 409 (1988)4%. The inherent obligation of the 
federal courts to ensure that their actions and orders do 
not violate the Constitution encompasses the authority 
and at times an obligation to conduct a factual inquiry 
necessary to assure, for example, that a defendant has not 
been selected for prosecution or for imposition of a heav- 
ier punishment because of his race. 


(2) Rule 16(a)(1)(C) is not, of course, a blanket 
authorization to defense counsel to browse through the 
files of the Department of Justice. The only documents 
which can be obtained are those “which are material to 
the preparation of the defendant's defense.” Where 
defense counsel has reason to believe that a particular 
defense may be available to his or her client, Rule 
16(a)(1)(C) is available to obtain relevant information in 
the hands of the government. But Rule 16 cannot be 


4 “This court would certainly be very unwilling to say that 
upon fair construction the constitutional . . . right to obtain its 
process, to compel the attendance of witnesses, does not extend 
to their bringing with them such papers as may be material in 
the defence.” United States v. Burr, 25 Fed. Cas. 30, 35 (1807) 
(Marshall, C.J.). 


22 


utilized by defense counsel to rummage through govern- 
ment files on the off chance that some additional defense 
may turn up; such an inquiry would be the sort of fishing 
expedition prohibited by criminal and civil discovery 
principles alike. Discovery under Rule 16 is not permis- 
sible with regard to a defense which a defendant “has 
never alleged, much less claimed to have evidence tend- 
ing to show” exists. Wade v. United States, 504 U.S. 181, 
186 (1992). 


The genuineness of a defense for which discovery is 
sought in a criminal proceeding can be assessed by the 
same objective standard utilized to determine the genu- 
ineness of other defenses or claims. The factual allega- 
tions underlying an asserted defense must “have 
evidentiary support or, if specifically so identified, [be] 
likely to have evidentiary support after a reasonable 
opportunity for . . . discovery.” Rule 11(b)(2), Fed. Rules 
of Civ. Pro. Where the information already available to a 
defense attorney is “sufficient to lead a reasonable person 
to believe . . . that further inquiry on the subject is 
warranted” (Pet. App. 97a), discovery under Rule 
16(a)(1)(C) is among the tools which, where otherwise 
appropriate, may be utilized to pursue that inquiry. 


The government may resist any discovery request 
which it can show is no more than a fishing expedition. 
Where the United States declines on this basis to produce 
a document sought under Rule 16(a)(1)(C), a court called 
upon to resolve the ensuing discovery dispute can and 
should inquire whether the purported defense to which 
the document relates is a genuine one. In making that 
determination, a number of lower courts, and all mem- 
bers of the court below, have suggested with regard to a 


23 


selective prosecution defense that there must be a “color- 
able basis” for asserting that defense before discovery 
will be allowed. (Pet. App. 7, 19-21). The underlying 
question with regard to discovery regarding a selective 
prosecution defense is the same as for any other defense - 
whether the information available to defense counsel is 
sufficient to lead a reasonable attorney to conclude that 
further inquiry on the subject is warranted. 


Even where a genuine defense is at issue, significant 
constraints may limit the scope, and even the availability 
of discovery. Any document sought must be “material” to 
the asserted defense. Under Rule 16, as with any discov- 
ery request, a court may consider whether the party 
seeking discovery already has reasonable access to the 
material at issue; the comparative accessibility of a docu- 
ment to the respective parties is of palpable importance. 
Rule 2 requires a federal judge to implement any discov- 
ery in a way that minimizes cost and delay, focusing 
discovery on those items most readily available and likely 


to lead most quickly to a resolution of the underlying 
defense. 


In any case in which discovery is sought under Rule 
16(a)(1)(C), the government may have a legitimate inter- 
est in protecting from disclosure some or all of the infor- 
mation in the documents in question. Even where that 
interest falls short of a legal privilege, see Hickman v. 
Taylor, 329 U.S. 495 (1947), this is a consideration which a 
court can and should consider in responding to discovery 
requests. In some instances, it may be appropriate to 
subject documents to a protective order, to provide only 
redacted copies of the documents, or for the district judge 
to review the materials in camera to ascertain what, if 


24 


anything, in them actually bears on the defense for which 
they are sought. Where a party seeking such sensitive 
discovery has not exhausted other sources of information, 
a district judge has discretion to deny discovery until the 
defendant has done so. In addressing such discovery 
issues, a district court should balance the importance of 
the government's legitimate need for confidentiality with 
the defendant's right to prepare and present a defense. 
See Herbert v. Lando, 441 U.S. 153, 179 (1979) (Powell, J., 
concurring); Kerr v. United States District Court, 426 U.S. 
394, 405 (1976); United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 711 
(1974). One useful method of doing so may be by control- 
ling the order in which discovery is permitted, initially 
allowing the form of discovery that is least burdensome, 
and evaluating the propriety of further discovery when 
the result of that first inquiry is known. 


(3) Requests for discovery must ordinarily be 
addressed in the first instance by the district court. 
Where, after affording the parties a full and fair oppor- 
tunity to be heard, the district judge fashions a practical 
solution to the discovery issues presented by a selective 
prosecution defense, several distinct considerations war- 
rant considerable deference to that decision. 


First, resolution of discovery issues “must necessarily 
be committed to the sound discretion of the trial court 
since the necessity for the [discovery] most often turns 
upon a determination of factual issues.” United States v. 
Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 702 (1974). 

The trial judge’s major role is the determination 

of fact, and with experience in fulfilling that role 

comes expertise. Duplication of the trial judge’s 

efforts in the court of appeals would very likely 


25 


contribute only negligibly to the accuracy of fact 
determination at a huge cost in diversion of 
judicial resources. 


Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564, 574 (1985). To the 
extent that a district court’s decision turns on an assess- 
ment of the credibility of the prosecutor’s explanation of 
his actions, its findings are entitled to particular defer- 
ence. Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 98 n. 21 (1986); see 
Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 364-66 (1991). 


Second, the resolution of discovery issues often goes 
to the heart of a trial judge’s responsibility under Rule 2 
to manage the pretrial process with a minimum of cost 
and delay. “Discovery questicns are ordinarily reviewed 
for abuse of discretion.” United States v. Bourgeois, 964 F. 
2d 935, 937 (9th Cir. 1992). These determinations often 
turn on intensely practical considerations, the interrela- 
tion of known and sought after information, the compara- 
tive accessibility of information to the various parties, 
and possible alternative methods of resolving a particular 
factual dispute. “The exact line between reasonableness 
and unreasonableness in each case must be drawn by the 
trial court, based on its knowledge of the case and of the 
claims and interests of the parties.” Société Nat. Ind. Aéro. 
v. United States District Court, 482 U.S. 522, 546 (1987). 


Third, the issues raised by a claim of selective pros- 
ecution by a particular prosecutor's office will often be 
within the particular experience and expertise of a federal 
district judge who sits in the district at issue, and can 
draw on his or her “own day-to-day observations.” 
United States v. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F. 2d 1296, 1302 (9th 
Cir. 1992). 


26 


District judges are uniquely situated to observe 
possible discrimination in the government's 
charging decisions. They have much more expe- 
rience with the policies and practices of the 
United States Attorney in their district than do 
|appellate judges], and they are obviously in a 
better position to observe a pattern of discrimi- 
nation than are individual defendants. 


(Pet. App. 86a). 


Fourth, a district judge will bring to a selective pros- 
ecution dispute an understanding of local circumstances 
that will at times be important to an evaluation of the 
competing arguments and evidence. In this Court, the 
government advances a necessarily generalized argument 
about whether it would be reasonable to assume that 
crack is sold in Los Angeles by non-blacks. (U.S.Br. 13-14, 
29-30). A district judge who actually lives in Los Angeles, 
and is familiar with the patterns of drug use in that area, 
is far better situated to engage in an assessment of such 
arguments, involving as they do “a blend of history and 
an intensely local appraisal” of the issues. White v. Reges- 
ter, 412 U.S. 755, 769 (1973). 


Il. NO SPECIAL STANDARDS ARE NECESSARY OR 
APPROPRIATE IN RESOLVING DISCOVERY 
REQUESTS RELATED TO, OR THE MERITS OF, A 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION DEFENSE 


A. General Discovery Principles Adequately Pro- 
tect the Government from Improper Discovery 


Not content with these general safeguards on the use 
of discovery in a criminal proceeding, the United States 
asks this Court to adopt a special, more stringent rule 


27 


applicable only to discovery related to selective prosecu- 
tion issues. The sole practical effect of such a special rule 
would be to bar discovery in circumstances which other- 
wise satisfy the normal standards of materiality and rea- 
sonableness of scope. 


The government's suggestion that this Court fashion 
such a special rule cannot be squared with the language 
of Rule 16. The arguments that the government advances 
for such a rule — delay, risk of abuse, potential intrusive- 
ness — could be made to some degree with regard to any 
material sought by a criminal defendant. Rule 16 does 
impose special discovery limitations with regard to three 
specific types of evidence. First, Rule 16(a)(2) exempts 
from disclosure “reports, memoranda, or other internal 
government documents made by the attorney for the 
government or other government agents in connection 
with the investigation or prosecution of the case.” Sec- 
ond, Rule 16(a)(2) sharply limits the availability of “state- 
ments made by government witnesses or prospective 
government witnesses”; the timing and availability of 
that material is regulated with specificity by the Jencks 
Act. 18 U.S.C. § 3500. Third, Rule 16(a)(3) precludes dis- 
covery of grand jury records save in certain specified 
circumstances. Thus here, as in Leatherman v. Tarrant 
County Narcotics Unit, 507 U.S. 163, __, 113 S. Ct. 1160 
(1993), “the Federal rules do address in Rule [16] the need 
for” limiting discovery of certain government materials, 
“but do not include among the enumerated [limitations] 
any reference to” evidence related to selective prosecu- 
tion claims. 507 U.S. at __, 113 S. Ct. at 1161. The lower 
courts have repeatedly and correctly rejected similar 


28 


efforts to engraft onto Rule 16 exceptions not explicitly 
contained in the language of that Rule.® 


The government urges this Court to hold that discov- 
ery in selective prosecution cases should be limited to 
“rare” circumstances. (U.S.Br. 26). The framers of the 
Rules of Criminal Procedure, however, knew how to craft 
such a discovery rule where they wished to do so; Rule 
15(a) utilizes just such a standard in limiting depositions 
to “exceptional circumstances.” No such restriction, how- 
ever, is contained in Rule 16. “Expression unius est exclusio 
alterius.” Leatherman, 507 U.S. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 1161. 
However persuasive the government's arguments might 
be if advanced in support of proposals to amend Rule 16, 
they are insufficient to explain why this Court should 
simply read into that Rule exceptions not found in its 
very specific language. 


- 


Although the substance of the government's pro- 
posed special standard is quite obscure, the United States 
clearly contemplates that, prior to any discovery regard- 
ing selective prosecution, there would in each case be an 
evidentiary hearing before the district court; at that hear- 
ing the defendant would put on evidence which the 
government would have an opportunity to rebut, and the 
court would then determine whether and what discovery 


50 United States v. Scafe, 822 F. 2d 928, 935 (10th Cir. 1987) 
(“The language of the rule reflects no intention that it be 
restricted to statements to be used in the government's case in 
chief and we reject that restrictive interpretation of the rule.”); 
United States v. Caldwell, 543 F. 2d 1333, 1352-53 (D.C.Cir. 1974) 
(“we are unable to detect in this language [of Rule 16] the 
limitation the government suggests.”) 


29 


should occur. Only if the defendant prevailed at this 
mini-trial of his selective prosecution claim would dis- 
covery be ordered by the district court. Cf. Eisen v. Carlisle 
& Jacquelin, 417 U.S. 156, 177-78 (1974). Precisely because 
Ninth Circuit caselaw embodies just such a rule, discov- 
ery regarding selective prosecution must in practice be 
initiated by motion; in the Central District of California it 
is only in civil cases that parties are required by the local 
rules to request and negotiate discovery issues before 
referring the matter to the district court.5! But this prac- 
tice recreates the very process which the Rules were 
amended in 1974 to abolish, resort to the court in the first 
instance.*? 


Although the United States is emphatic in arguing for 
a special discovery standard in selective prosecution 
cases, it is far from clear what that standard is, or in what 
cases the government intends its standard to lead to a 
result different than that which would ordinarily apply 


5! Local Rules, C.D.Cal., Civ. Rule 7.15. 


52 Prior to 1974 a defendant was required to obtain a court 
order in order to obtain discovery in a criminal case. !n recom- 
mending a change in this awkward practice, the Advisory Com- 
mittee explained: “The language of the rule is recast from the 
‘court may order’ or ‘the court shall order’ to ‘the government 
shall permit’ or ‘the defendant shall permit.’ This is to make 
clear that discovery should be accomplished by the parties 
themselves, without the necessity of a court order unless there is 
dispute as to whether the matter is discoverable. ...” The 
language of Rule 16 is in contrast with Civil Rule 35(a), which 
permits discovery of the physical or mental condition of an 
individual only by court order. Schlagenhauf v. Holder, 379 U.S. 
104 (1965). 


30 


under Rule 16. The Solicitor General describes his pro- 
posal, variously, as a “substantial and concrete basis” 
(U.S.Br. 12, 19, 21, 25), “solid credible evidence” (id. at 12, 
24), “reasonable likelihood” (id. at 25), “substantial 
threshold showing” (id. at 12, 20, 20 n. 1), “concrete” (id. 
at 21, 25, 29), “reasonable grounds” (id. at 26), and less 
than a prima facie case. Id. at 25. None of these alterna- 
tive formulations seems likely to provide useful guidance 
to district judges faced with the eminently practical prob- 
lems of supervising discovery, or to appellate courts 
asked to decide whether a district court abused its discre- 
tion. Rather, adoption by this Court of any of these vague 
admonitions would inevitably engender increased uncer- 
tainty and litigation regarding when discovery should 
and should not be permitted. 


The government argues that without some special 
per se rule defendants raising selective prosecution 
claims would be able to “circumvent” the materiality 
requirement of Rule 16 (U.S.Br. 20 n.'), and would suc- 
ceed in embarking on “needless” and “unwarranted” 
“fishing expedition|s]” leading to discovery of “irrelevant 
and immaterial” information. (U.S.Br. 12, 20, 25). But 
there is no reason to believe that district judges, who 
every day deal competently with discovery issues in civil 
as well as criminal cases, would somehow be incapable in 
selective prosecution claims of separating frivolous from 
legitimate discovery requests. Federal district courts have 
tor decades been alert to the inappropriateness of unwar- 
ranted fishing expeditions; surely litigious anglers will 
not run amok merely by asserting a claim of selective 
prosecution. Doubtless there have been and will continue 
to be disputes under Rule 16 raising difficult factual and 


31 


practical issues, but the Rules clearly contemplate that 
those problems be addressed on a case by case basis.”' 
The proposed per se prophylactic rule advocated by the 
government for an entire category of cases is inconsistent 
with the case specific determinations contemplated by 
Rule 16. 


The government also argues that without a special! 
discovery limitation there may be “abuses” (U.S.Br. 19), 
including “highly intrusive” (id. at 20) or “massive” (id. at 
20 n. 1) discovery or discovery resulting in, or even 
intended to produce, unwarranted “delay”. (U.S.Br. 17, 
19, 20, 20 n.1, 25). Again, however, all of these are con- 
cerns that routinely arise with regard to any civil and 
criminal discovery; the government does not claim that 
such issues are more common or intractable when the 
evidence sought relates to selective prosecution. Here, as 
with any other claim or defense, the Court can ordinarily 
“be confident that the district court will not let discovery 
get out of hand.” United States v. Adams, 870 F. 2d 1140, 
1146 (6th Cir. 1989). In at least some circumstances, more- 
over, the discovery limitation proposed by the United 
States would increase rather than reduce delay. The 
United States, for example, maintains a computer list of 
all narcotics prosecutions in the Central District of Cali- 
fornia; the same information could be obtained by 
defense counsel by manually reviewing every criminal 


** Rule 16(d)(1) provides in part: “Upon a sufficient show- 
ing the court may at any time order that the discovery . . . be 
denied, restricted, or deferred, or make such other order as is 
appropriate. Upon motion by a party, the court may permit the 
party to make such showing, in whole or in part, in the form of a 
written statement to be inspected by the judge alone.” 


32 


file in the office of the District Court Clerk. To deny 
discovery of that computer list would obviously increase 
greatly the delay involved in resolving a selective pros- 
ecution claim. 


The government offers no reason, moreover, why 
these concerns should result in the denial of discovery in 
this case. The Solicitor General has not challenged the 
scope of the particular discovery order in this case; he 
does not object that the particular information sought is 
excessive, irrelevant, unduly intrusive, or requested for 
purpose of delay. In the absence of any claim that the 
scope of the discovery ordered in this case is inappropri- 
ate, it makes little sense to suggest that that discovery 
order should nonetheless be overturned because of the 
possibility that discovery orders in some other case may 
be unduly burdensome or intrusive. 


The Solicitor General urges this Court to forbid a 
federal judge, absent special circumstances, from raising 
on his or her own any questions, or seeking any informa- 
tion, about whether a criminal prosecution in his or her 
court has been undertaken for racial or other unconstitu- 
tional reasons. “[J]udicial inquiry into a prosecutor's rea- 
sons for bringing a prosecution should not even begin 
unless there is a substantial and concrete basis for sus- 
pecting unconstitutional action.” (U.S.Br. 19). On the gov- 
ernment’s view, it would have been impermissible for the 
district judge in this case even to inquire of the attorney 
for the United States why the instant prosecution had 
been filed in federal rather than state court, or why there 
appeared to be few if any non-black defendants in federal 
cocaine base prosecutions. If the Solicitor General is cor- 
rect, a United States Attorney could and perhaps should 


33 


flatly refuse to answer such a question, instead admon- 
ishing the judge that the government would respond only 
if the judge could first produce “substantial and con- 
crete” evidence of prosecutorial misconduct. Such a rule 
could all too easily require a federal judge to be a witting 
participant in a serious constitutional violation. 


Where, as here, the discretionary decision of a single 
government official may well result in defendants in their 
early 20's with minimal records and involvement spend- 
ing 35 years to life in jail, such a bar to judicial scrutiny 
would confer on an Assistant United States Attorney a 
power not unlike the infamous lettres de cachet of eigh- 
teenth century France. The breader interest of the 
United States, we urge, lies instead in ensuring compli- 
ance with the commands of the Constitution, even at the 
cost of some occasional inconvenience. Where a district 
judge entertains suspicion of invidious racial discrimina- 
tion by the government, strict, not non-existent, judicial 
scrutiny is required. As Judge Kozinski observed: 


Where a district judge detects what he suspects 
may be an error seriously affecting the rights of 
a criminal defendant, he must address the prob- 
lem. 


United States v. Redondo-Lemos, 955 F. 2d 1296, 1298 (9th 
Cir. 1992). The original panel decision below, on which 
the government otherwise relies, properly insisted that a 
federal judge could initiate an appropriate inquiry when- 
ever “the district court develops a suspicion of uncon- 
stitutional conduct.” (Pet. App. 74a). 


4 See J.App. 179, 182-83, 193 


34 


The government suggests that discovery regarding 
selective prosecution claims should be severely limited 
because there is a presumption that federal officials do 
not violate the Constitution. (U.S.Br. 18-19). But “i]t is 
appropriate to judge selective prosection claims accord- 
ing to ordinary equal protection standards.” Wayte v. 
United States, 470 U.S. 598, 608 (1985). No such constraint 
on discovery exists where a capital defendant asserts that 
a federal prosecutor exercised peremptories on the basis 
of race in a particular case. Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 
(1986)°° Batson expressly rejected the reasoning of Swain 
that a prosecutor might defend an equal protection claim 
merely by “relying on a presumption that he properly 
exercised the State’s challenges.” 476 U.S. at 91. It is 
undeniable that the government enjoys broad discretion 
in determining which prosecutions to bring, but the Solic- 
itor General properly concedes that that discretion cannot 
be exercised on the basis of race. Judicial solicitude for 
legitimate exercises of that discretion cannot provide a 
basis for limiting inquiry into whether the exercise in a 
particular case was in fact an impermissible one. 


In framing a particular discovery order, a district 
court can and should consider the degree to which its 
terms might inappropriately chill legitimate prosecutorial 
activity, just as a court would consider whether a grand 
jury subpoena might chill, for example, constitutionally 
protected free speech. Herbert v. Lando, 441 U.S. 153, 179 


55 See U.S.Br. 21 (claim of unconstitutional discrimination 
in refusal of prosecutor to file motion for reduced sentence 
“should be treated no differently from a prosecutor’s other 
decisions.”) 


35 


(1979) (Powell, J., concurring). But in this case the gov- 
ernment did not argue below, and does not insist here, 
that the particular discovery order at issue presents such 
a threat. Indeed, the government insisted below that most 
of the information sought was already a matter of public 
record. Only evidence that a particular request is likely to 
have a chilling effect, not a “generalized claim of confi- 
dentiality”, is sufficient to raise questions about the 
appropriateness of a particular discovery order. United 
States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 711, 713 (1974). The govern- 
ment represented to the court below that it would proba- 
bly open a criminal investigation if there were “the 
slightest indication that a[n Assistant U.S. Attorney] in 
our office, or an agent or officer with whom we were 
dealing, had charged a case, or prosecuted a ease, or 
arrested an individual for racial reasons.” In cases in 
which government officials already face a threat of crimi- 
nal prosecution, the possibility of disclosure of informa- 
tion in a collateral criminal case is unlikely to have even a 


* marginal add.tional chilling effect. 


The Solicitor General suggests that special limitations 
on discovery related to selective prosecution is needed to 
avoid, save in “rare” cases, disclosure of evidence in the 
possession of the government which may bear on such 
claims. (U.S.Br. 26) In the lower courts, however, it is the 
frequent practice of the United States to oppose discovery 
motions by selectively disclosing to the court, on its own 
initiative, government evidence which the United States 
Attorney believes likely to persuade the court to deny the 


56 J.App. 197 


36 


motion’. In the instant case, for example, the govern- 
ment proffered declarations about the charging decision 
in this case, a documentary analysis of narcotics use and 
sales, and a lengthy list of federal narcotics prosecutions, 
in a candid effort to “short circui[t] the discovery 
issue.’ The United States offered similarly selected evi- 
dence in Wayte v. United States, 470 U.S. 598, 504 (1985). 
Thus the practical question raised by these cases is not 
whether the government can shield all its information 
from discovery, but whether it can defeat a discovery 
request by selectively disclosing to the court only the 
evidence which tends to show that discovery is not 
appropriate. In some cases, of course, the court may find 
that showing persuasive, but in other instances a court 
might sensibly be induced to order discovery because of 
the nature of the information the government had chosen 
to withhold, or because of the unpersuasiveness of what 
may well have been the government's best evidence. In 
general, “more accurate results will be obtained by plac- 
ing all, rather than part, of the evidence before the deci- 
sion maker.” Herbert v. Lando, 441 U.S. 153, 173 (1979). 


We do not question the earnestness of the govern- 
ment’s concern that excessive and unwarranted discovery 
could impose “high costs on the criminal justice system”. 


*” E.g., United States v. Gomez-Lopez, 62 F. 3d 304, 305 (9th 
Cir. 1995); United States v. Fares, 978 F. 2d 52, 58 (2d Cir. 1992), 
United States v. Bourgeois, 964 F. 2d 935, 940 (9th Cir 1992), 
United States v. Penagaricano-Soler, 911 F. 2d 833, 8%6-37 (ist Cir 
1990); United States v. Aguilar, 883 F. 2d 662, 708 (9th Cir 1989), 
United States v. Greenwood, 796 F. 2d 49, 52 44th Cir. 1986); United 
States v. Holmes, 794 F. 2d 345, 348 and m. 3 (8th Cir 1986) 


%* J.App. 172. 


37 


(U.S.Br. 17) But “[t}he very integrity of the judicial system 
and public confidence in the system depend on full dis- 
closure of all the facts... . ” United States v. Nixon, 418 
U.S. 683, 709 (1974). The Solicitor General properly recog- 
nized a decade ago that 


[nJothing can corrode respect for a rule of law 
more than the knowledge that the government 


looks beyond the law itself to arbitrary consid- 
erations, such as race, religion, or control over 
the defendant's exercise of his constitutional 
rights, as the basis for determining its appli- 
cability.” 


“In view of the heterogeneous population of our Nation, 
public respect for our criminal justice system and the rule 
of law”, Batson v. Kentucky, 476 US. at 99, are imperiled 
by the appearance of racial discrimination in that Sys- 
tem.’ In the United States today public confidence in the 
racial fairness of the criminal justice system is already 
badly shaken; in Los Angeles that confidence has vir- 
tually collapsed. When a large portion of the population 
believes that system is seriously tainted by racial discrim- 
ination, the public cooperation on which the system 
depends - from witnesses as well as jurors — is at risk. 
The facts which prompted the instant discovery request - 


® Brief for United States, Wayte v. United States, No 
83-1292, p. 22 (quoting United States v. Berrios, 501 F. 2d 1207, 
1209 (2d Cir. 1974)). 


™ “Everyone concerned with the legitimacy of the criminal 
justice system ~ and with the willingness of all citizens to accept 
its judgment as fair and final — must be troubled by allegations 
of unfairness, particularly racial discrimination.” US. Sentenc- 


ing Commission, Materials Concerning Sentencing for Crack 
Cocaine Offenses, 57 Crim. Law Rep. 2127, 2131 (May 31, 1995) 


38 


that all or virtually all defendants prosecuted for cocaine 
base sales by federal authorities are black — is not some 
state secret; a randomly selected pedestrian at the corner 
of Florence and Normandie in South Central Los Angeles 
could have accurately predicted the result of the Federal 
Public Defender’s study. The continued resistance of the 
Department of Justice to full and fair discovery and pub- 
lic hearing on such issues will in the long term impose on 
the criminal justice system a cost immeasurably greater 
than the passing inconvenience of responding to a dis- 
covery request. 


B. Proof of the Existence of “Similarly Situated” 
Non-Minorities Is Not a Necessary Element of a 
Selective Prosecution Defense 


(1) The criminal justice system, necessarily and 
properly, is permeated by circumstances affording, and 
often requiring, law enforcement officials to make 
choices. The police officer walking a beat decides daily 
what infractions to pursue, and which in prudence 
should be overlooked. Federal or state task forces select 
particular geographic neighborhoods to target for investi- 
gation. Authorities may focus on particularly visible 
criminal activity, or pursue covert but possibly more far 
reaching conspiracies. Officials who come across a drug 
dealer may opt for an immediate arrest, or try to arrange 
for larger sales which will lead to far increased penalties. 
Where, as is often the case, the same criminal act violates 
both federal and state laws, federal officials must select 
those defendants against whom federal charges will be 
filed, and which suspects should be left to state authori- 
ties. All of these selections, if properly made, may 


ee 


9 


enhance the overall effectiveness of law enforcement; but 
any of these decisions, if made on the basis of race, would 
be unconstitutional. 


One manner in which law enforcement officials could 


discriminate would be by making improper distinctions 


among defendants with identical criminal histories who 
had committed the very same crime. Thus Equal Protec- 
tion would clearly be violated if the government were, for 
racial reasons, to target or prosecute blacks who sold 
more than 50 grams of crack, while ignoring whites who 
sold the same quantity of the same drug. E.g., United 
States v. Gutierrez, 990 F. 2d 472, 477 (9th Cir. 1993) (claim 
that government intentionally “targeted predominantly 
black and hispanic neighborhoods.”)*' But clearly that 1s 
not the only method in which invidious discrimination 
can occur. If in a particular locality cocaine base were 
actually used and sold only by blacks, while cocaine 
powder were used and sold only by whites, the Constitu- 
tion would certainly be violated if the government, for 
racial reasons, prosecuted even low level crack dealers 
but only major powder distributors, chose to target its 
investigations at crack violations, or made a greater effort 
to induce crack dealers to sell large quantities to federal 
agents. Equal protection principles preclude the govern- 
ment from targeting a particular type of criminal act for 
greater scrutiny, harsher penalties, or more vigorovs 
prosecution because most or all of the individuals who 


*! See United States v. Bishop, 959 F 2d 820, 825-26 (9th Cir 
1992) (equal protection violated by peremptory challenge based 


on ethnic composition of neighborhood in which prospective 
juror resides). 


40 


commit that offense are racial minorities. See Hunter v. 
Linderwood, 471 U.S. 222, 226-32 (1985). 


As these examples illustrate, unconstitutional dis- 
crimination can certainly occur even though all the indi- 
viduals who violate a particular statute, or who do so ina 
particular manner, may belong to a single racial or ethnic 
group. Even if Christopher Lee Armstrong were the only 
person ever suspected of selling crack in the Central 
District of California, federal officials would undeniably 
violate the Constitution if they targeted, investigated, 
arrested, or selected him for prosecution because he was 
black or Catholic or a Republican. 


(2) The government suggests that the existence of 
“similarly situated” whites is a necessary element of a 
selective prosecution claim. This argument erroneously 
confuses one possible method of proving intentional dis- 
crimination with the nature of intentional discrimination 
itself. 


As this Court has repeatedly held, what equal protec- 
tion prohibits, absent a compelling governmental interest, 
is governmental action taken on the basis of race. Wash 
ington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976). The pivotal issue in 
such a discrimination case is the motive of government 
official or officials involved. Often, of course, one of the 
most useful evidentiary tools for discerning motive ts a 
comparison of the treatment of similarly situated minor- 
ity and non-minority individuals. Thus, where voting 
officials apply a literacy test with draconian harshness to 
black citizens, rejecting even those with college degrees, 
while happily registering comparable or even less edu- 
cated whites, the invidious motive at work will be 


41 


entirely obvious. Louisiana v. United States, 380 U.S. 145, 
153 (1965). But that assuredly is not the only type or 
method of proving discrimination. The Constitution for- 
bids a state registrar from rejecting even a single black 
registrant on the basis of race, even if his or her particular 
background be totally unique, or from adopting a partic- 
ular racially neutral practice because, even though 
applied equally to “similarly situated” blacks and whites, 
it would fall more harshly on racial minorities. Hunter v. 
Linderwood; Harman v. Forssenius, 380 U.S. 528, 543-44 
(1965). 


This distinction is a familiar one in employment dis- 
crimination litigation. Federal anti-discrimination laws 
forbid employers to discharge an employee because of his 
or her race. Where a discharged employee contends that 
he or she was the victim of unlawful discrimination, one 
method of establishing that claim would be to show that 
another employee, of a different race, was treated more 
leniently despite having committed the identical offense. 
See, e.g., McDonald v. Santa Fe Trail Transportation Co., 427 
U.S. 273, 275, 278 (1976). But federal law also protects 
from race-based dismissals workers whose positions, cir- 
cumstances or alleged transgressions happen to be 
unique. See, e.g., St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 113 S.Ct. 
2742 (1993). Similarly, under Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 
79 (1986), a defendant need not show that a prospective 
juror allegedly removed on the basis of race was “sim- 
ilarly situated” to some white juror; the background and 
circumstances of individual jurors is almost always to 
some extent unique. 


It would, of course, be possible to frame a law which 
expressly permitted intentional discrimination in the 


42 


absence of “similarly situated” comparators. The Equal 
Pay Act is just such a statute, prohibiting gender based 
wage discrimination against women only where there are 
men performing for higher wages “equal work on jobs the 
performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and 
responsibility, and which are performed under similar 
working conditions.” 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1) (Emphasis 
added). Thus where only women work in “a unique 
position”, the Equal Pay Act does not prohibit an 
employer from setting a low wage for that position 
because it harbors animus towards female workers. 
County of Washington v. Gunther, 452 U.S. 161, 179 (1981). 
Even in the absence of any similarly situated men, how- 
ever, that same act would violate Title VII, whose prohibi- 
tion against intentional discrimination, like the 
Constitution, contains no such limitation. Id. 


Adoption of the government's proposed rule would 
lead at times to incongruous results. If, for example, a 
prosecutor adopted a racially motivated practice of pros- 
ecuting even small time non-white drug dealers, while 
charging only those whites who were major dealers, 
whether the conviction of a particular small time non- 
white dealer was unconstitutional would depend on what 
types of drugs happened to be sold by whites in the area. 
Thus, the convictions of minority powder cocaine or 
methamphetamine dealers might be invalid, while the 
convictions of minority crack or black tar heroin dealers 
would be perfectly constitutional. See County of Washing- 
ton v. Gunther, 452 U.S. at 179. 


This Court has previously rejected the United States’ 
suggestion that the selective prosecution defense be lim- 


ited to cases in which there were “similarly situated” 


43 


individuals receiving more lenient treatment. In Wayte v. 
United States, 470 U.S. 598 (1985), the lower courts had 
imposed on selective prosecution defenses a two-part 
standard, requiring both proof of an unconstitutional 
animus and proof that there were others “similarly situ- 
ated” who had not been prosecuted. 470 U.S. at 605-606. 
The Solicitor General urged this Court in Wayte to adopt 
that same special standard®?. This Court refused to do so, 
instead utilizing the requirement of “ordinary equal pro- 
tection standards” which require a defendant to show “a 
discriminatory effect and . . . a discriminatory purpose.” 
470 U.S. at 608. This Court’s rejection of the proposed 
requirement of differing treatment of “others similarly 
situated,” in favor of a broader standard of “discrimina- 
tory effect,” reflected an understanding that discrimina- 
tion might occur against an individual or group of 
individuals whose particular situations were not similar 
to anyone else’s. 


This Court's decision in Af Sin v. Wittman, 198 U.S. 
500 (1905), does not support the government's position. 
The petition for writ of habeas corpus in that case con- 
tained no allegation of any invidious motive on the part 
of local officials, nor any claim that the statute at issue 


*2 Brief for the United States, No. 83-1292, pp. 23-29. 
The government urged this Court to hold that proof of similarly 
situated unprosecuted individuals was an essential “prong” of a 
selective prosecution claim, id. at 26, and that absent proof of 
that prong it would be improper for a court even to inquire 
whether a particular prosecution was the product of an 
invidious motivation. Id. at 26. 


44 


was adopted®, enforced, or enforced with particular 
vigor because those likely to violate the law were primar- 
ily Chinese. The sole allegation of the petition - that 
Chinese persons alone had been prosecuted under the 
ordinance — asserted neither the existence of a discrimina- 
tory purpose nor the existence of a discriminatory effect. 
Applying a stringent pleading requirement quite unlike 
the standards subsequently adopted by the Federal Rules, 
this Court in 1905 held that that single allegation was 
insufficient. 198 U.S. at 507-08. Although Ah Sin indicated 
the petition would have been sufficient if it had also 
contained an allegation that there were non-Chinese 
offenders who went unprosecuted, the Court did not 
suggest that this was the only additional allegation which 
would have remedied the defect in that pleading.” 


(3) To the extent that a defendant argues that 
improper invidious distinctions were made within a par- 
ticular group of offenders, such as crack dealers, the 
comparative treatment of other members of that group 


63 At the time Ah Sin was decided, the decisions of this 
Court precluded Ah Sin from advancing any challenge to the 
purpose of the law at issue. See Palmer v. Thompson, 403 U.S. 217 
(1971); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 383 (1968); McCray 
v. United States, 195 U.S. 27, 56 (1904). 


4 The ordinance in Ah Sin in essence forbade the posses- 
sion of cards, dice or dominoes behind locked doors. It is 
entirely inconceivable that no white persons engaged in such 
behavior in the rambunctious society of turn of the century San 
Francisco. Were the government today to attack the sufficiency 
of a pleading by hypothesizing the possibility of such white 
fastidiousness in the aptly labeled Wild West, that argument 
would be dismissed as an “ingenious academic exercise in the 
conceivable.” Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 509 (1975). 


45 


would of course be important evidence. A district court 
clearly should consider that element in resolving this 
type of selective prosecution defense on the merits, and 
undeniably could do so in deciding whether to order 
discovery. The government urges this Court to go further 
and announce a rigid rule that discovery cannot be 
ordered in such a case unless there is either substantial 
evidence as to the composition of the group of violators 
not prosecuted, or a confession by the United States 
Attorney that the prosecution decision was the result of 
invidious discrimination. (U.S.Br. 15). In the latter case, of 
course, there would be no need for discovery; such a 
confession alone would require dismissal of the improp- 
erly motivated charges. No basis exists for imposing the 
former requirement as a per se condition of discovery in 
every case, regardless of its circumstances. 


The Solicitor General insists that this requirement 
imposes no significant barrier to any meritorious claim 
because detailed data about offenders not prosecuted by 
the United States is always “readily accessible to the 
public.” (U.S.Br. 35; see also id. at 15, 25-26)®°. In any 


6 In 1985 the Solicitor General made a similar argument in 
urging this Court to adhere to the harsh rule of Swain v. Alabama. 
“We are unpersuaded that Swain imposes an unduly difficult 
burden on defendants seeking to prove systemic exclusion. If 
the pernicious practice of racially-motivated exclusion in fact 
prevails . . . defense counsel could relatively easily keep the 
records necessary to make the required proof. . . . There are 
cases in which such statistics have been collected and pro- 
duced . . . [Defense attorneys] are well situated to collect the 
requisite statistics.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae, 
Batson v. Kentucky, No. 84-6263, pp. 6, 26-27. In Batson, this 
Court concluded, to the contrary, that Swain had established a 


46 


individual case in which such information was actually 
readily available to a defendant, the United States would 
have no need for the proposed per se rule, since the 
government could on that basis urge the district court to 
defer discovery in that particular case until the informa- 
tion had been brought forward by the defendant. The 
Solicitor General asks this Court to adopt a priori an 
irrebuttable presumption that such information will be 
available in every case; the primary impact of such a rule, 
of course, will be in precisely those cases in which the 
presumption is incorrect, and in which the presumption 
would operate to preclude a defendant with a possibly 
meritorious case from showing that in his or her case, 
contrary to the Solicitor General’s somewhat breezy 
assumption, the information in question was in fact diffi- 
cult or impossible to obtain®. 


The instant case presents just such a situation. In the 
district court respondents made a persuasive showing 
that information about state prosecutions, or about the 


crippling standard of proof, and Swain had as a consequence 
been understood in practice to sanction intentional discrimina- 
tion on the basis of race. 


6 Requiring defendants in such cases to adduce, without 
the aid of discovery, statistically persuasive evidence that sim- 
ilarly situated whites had not been prosecuted would create the 
sort of “crippling burden of proof” established under Swain v. 
Alabama, 380 U.S. 202 (1965), and rejected by this Court in 
Batson. Batson noted that, despite the availability of discovery 
under Swain, requiring a defendant to investigate the circum- 
stances of a substantial number of other cases could create very 
real “practical difficulties”, and that “the burden would be 
insurmountable” if available government files did not contain 
racial identifications. 479 U.S. at 92 n.17. 


47 


race of federal or state defendants, could not readily be 
obtained.*? Respondents’ discovery requests were there- 
fore expressly framed to obtain from the United States 
whatever information or documents it had regarding the 
race of state defendants or crack distributors in general. 
The United States did not seriously dispute that factual 
contention in the district court, and does not address here 
the fact-specific arguments made below. Instead, the 
Solicitor General urges this Court to hold that it is some- 
how impossible that comparative information would ever 
be difficult to obtain in the Central District of California 
or anywhere else in the nation, and that it therefore 
would be unnecessary and improper for a district judge 
ever to consider evidence intended to demonstrate the 
existence of a problem which, the government urges, 
could not possibly arise. 


If, of course, comparative information were in fact 
always readily available, it would be of little consequence 
if the courts were to adopt such a conclusive presumption 
of availability, and then place on the United States, rather 
than on the defendant, the nominal burden of bringing 
that evidence into court. That is precisely the result of the 
holding of the en banc court below that all races will be 
presumed to commit any particular offense unless the 
government adduces evidence to the contrary. (Pet. App. 


67 “[S]ince the pertinent records relating to cases in the 
geographical area covered by the Central District may well be 
scattered across seven different county district attorney's 
offices, seven separate sheriff's departments, and a large 
number of independent local police departments, the defen- 
dants would have an almost impossible time compiling data on 
their own.” Pet. App. 101a n. 6. 


48 


19a). If such information were readily obtainable, the 
Department of Justice would presumably welcome an 
invitation to bring forward evidence which might 
strongly support its position. Instead of blithely accepting 
a requirement that if produce this allegedly “readily 
available” information, however, the government warns 
that the burden — nominal when imposed on an indigent 
individual defendant - would cause horrific problems 
when imposed on the Department of Justice. See U.S. Br. 
19-20, 35, Pet. App. 17, 23 n.3, 24, 26. 


In reality, of course, the availability of data on the 
group of non-prosecuted offenders will vary from case to 
case; more importantly, so will the comparative ability of 
the United States Attorney and defense counsel to obtain 
the information. The direction of Rule 2 that Rules of 
Criminal Procedure be construed to avoid “unjustifiable 
expense and delay” admonishes trial judges to place the 
burden of producing such relevant information on the 
party able to do so with the least cost and delay. That 
admonition is particularly important where, as the dis- 
trict judge noted, the federal government will foot the bill 
either way, paying for the time of either the United States 
Attorney, the Federal Public Defender, or, at a far higher 
hourly rate, private counsel appointed to represent indi- 
gent defendants.®* Where, for example, the United States 
has computer data available at the touch of a keyboard, 
no district judge would require - as would the govern- 
ment’s proposed rule - that defense counsel recompile 
the same data by hand.®? The government conceded in 


68 J.App. 189-90. 


6? “INjearly all of the data necessary to a showing of selec- 
tive prosecution are far less accessible to the defendants than to 


49 


the court of appeals that “certain law enforcement data is 
undoubtedly more accessible to the government””?; 
“most of the relevant proof in selective prosecution cases 
will normally be in the Government's hands.” United 
States v. Heidecke, 900 F. 2d 1155, 1158 (7th Cir. 1990).7! 


The absence of comparative data is, of course, one of the 
factors which a court could consider in determining whether 
to permit discovery. The government concedes that discov- 
ery could in at least some circumstances be ordered without 
such evidence — whenever the United States Attorney confes- 
sed in court that he had sought a harsher penalty on account 
of race, a confession that might entail potential criminal 


the federal government. Federal and county law enforcement 
authorities cooperate closely in these cases, and both levels of 
government are involved in the decision whether to bring 
charges in federal or state court... . Given that the federal and 
local authorities work so closely investigating these crimes, the 
federal government probably already has records of the cases in 
which it declined to initiate federal prosecution. In any event, it 
is surely much easier for the United States Attorney's office to 
get this information from state officials, from the county pros- 
ecutor’s offices, and from local police departments, than it is for 
criminal defense lawyers.” J.App. 100a-101a, n. 6. 


70 Government's Response to Petition for Rehearing and 
Suggestion for Rehearing En Banc, p. 6 n.4. 


71 That defendants will often face difficulty in proving sys- 
temic discrimination by a prosecutor was explained by Justice 
Goldberg. “(The prosecution is] in the better position to develop 
the facts. The defendant is a party to one proceeding only, and 
his access to relevant evidence is obviously limited. The State is 
a party to all criminal cases and has greater access to the evi- 
dence. ...” Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202, 240 (1965) (dissent- 
ing Opinion). 


50 


liability. There is, however, no reason to insist that a color- 
able showing of materiality be made in this or any other 
particular manner. On the government's view, where a writ- 
ten confession of just such an unconstitutional purpose was 
in the United States Attorney’s files, but no comparative data 
could be obtained by the defendant, a district court would be 
powerless to order disclosure of that very confession. 


In the intensely practical task of managing discovery, 
district judges must be accorded considerable discretion 
to decide in what direction discovery would most effec- 
tively proceed. The government proposes that in every 
selective prosecution case a defendant must first address 
any relevant issue about similarly situated offenders, and 
in doing so may resort to subpoenas of state information, 
but not to discovery of federal information. Surely, how- 
ever, where the United States has the same information as 
state authorities, a district judge could and ordinarily 
should direct the United States to produce it, if only 
because the United States, and not the state, is a party to 
the proceeding. Regardless of the location of such com- 
parative data, a district judge might sensibly choose to 
focus discovery on other issues where the information 
was more accessible or more likely to be dispositive. 


C. No Special Heightened Standard of Proof 
Should Be Applied to a Defense Based on 
Racial Discrimination by Prosecutors or Other 
Law Enforcement Officials 


The government urges this Court to hold that where 
a defendant asserts that he was selected for prosecution 
on account of his race, or for some other constitutionally 


51 


impermissible reason, the defendant can only prevail by 
establishing that factual assertion with “exceptionally 
clear proof.” (U.S.Br. 18). At this point in the instant case, 
of course, consideration of that issue would be prema- 
ture. The district court has not reached the merits of 
respondents’ claims, or even scheduled a hearing on 
them. Questions regarding the quantum of proof neces- 
sary to establish a selective prosecution claim cannot 
fairly be said to be encompassed by the Question Pre- 
sented regarding discovery. 


This Court’s decision in Wayte v. United States, 470 
U.S. 598 (1985) is dispositive of the government's conten- 
tion. Wayte makes clear that “[i]t is appropriate to judge 
selective prosecution claims according to ordinary equal 
protection standards.” 470 U.S. at 608. In an ordinary 
equal protection case a plaintift alleging intentional racial 
discrimination need only demonstrate that fact by a pre- 
ponderance of the evidence. In assessing the selective 
prosecution claim in Wayte, the Court applied equal pro- 
tection decisions concerning employment discrimination, 
470 U.S. at 608-09 (citing Personnel Administrator of Massa- 
chusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256 (1979) and Washington v. 
Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976)), housing discrimination, 470 
U.S. at 609 (citing Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Hous- 
ing Development Corp., 429 U.S. 252 (1977)), and jury dis- 
crimination. 470 U.S. at 608-09 (citing Castaneda v. Partida, 
430 U.S. 482 (1977).) 


The exercise of peremptory challenges by a prosecu- 
tor, like decisions to initiate a prosecution, involves a 
substantial degree of discretion, yet this Court has 
applied ordinary standards of proof in evaluating claims 
that a prosecutor utilized a peremptory challenge to 


52 


exclude a prospective juror on the basis of race. In Batson 
v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986), this Court overturned 
Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202 (1965), because the special 
stringent evidentiary requirements of Swain were “incon- 
sistent with standards that have been developed since 
Swain for assessing a prima facie case under the Equal 
Protection Clause.” 476 U.S. at 93. In delineating the 
standard of proof applicable to a prosecutor’s use of 
peremptory challenges, Batson, like Wayte, relied on Equal 
Protection decisions related to discrimination in employ- 
ment, housing, and jury selection, as well as Title VII case 
law. 476 U.S. at 93-95 and n. 18. Similarly, no special 
standard of proof is applied in evaluating a claim that a 
prosecutor vindictively increased the charges against a 
defendant in retaliation for the exercise of some constitu- 
tional right. United States v. Goodwin, 457 U.S. 368, 380 n. 
i2 (1982). 


The reference in McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 297 
(1987), to a need for “exceptionally clear proof” is easily 
distinguishable from the instant case. First, many of the 
decisions at issue in McCleskey had been made by jurors, 
whom it was impracticable to questior about their 
motives, and the questioning of whom has traditionally 
been presumed inappropriate absent quite extraordinary 
circumstances. Prosecutors, on the other hand, are rou- 
tinely asked by courts to explain their actions, e.g. Batson, 
and here, as in other cases, the government has volun- 
teered explanations for its actions, resisting only discov- 
ery which might tend to undermine those explanations. 
Second, the patterns evident in McCleskey involved liter- 
ally thousands of jurors over a period of years scattered 


53 


across an entire state, individuals who could not conceiv- 
ably have acted with in consultation or with a conscious 
common plan. A claim of selective prosecution, on the 
other hand, like a claim of systematic discrimination 
under Swain v. Alabama, involves at most a far more 
limited number of prosecutors, all working for the same 
agency and presumably responsive to similar pressures 
and incentives. 


Ill. THE DISTRICT JUDGE DID NOT ABUSE HER 
DISCRETION IN ORDERING THE LIMITED 
DISCOVERY IN THIS CASE 


This case palpably presents the type of circumstances 
in which a district judge has the discretion to order an 
appropriate form of discovery. 


The government did not contend below, and does not 
argue here, that the discovery request initiated by the 
Federal Public Defender was a mere fishing expedition. 
The fact that all crack cases closed by that office for an 
entire year involved black defendants provided counsel 
for respondents with a colorable basis for believing that a 
selective prosecution defense would be available, and 
assuredly warranted further inquiry. It is difficult to see 
how a responsible defense attorney would have failed to 
do so. While subsequent discovery and litigation will 
undoubtedly throw more light on this singular circum- 
stance, the United States does not contend that there was 
some innocent explanation so obvious to all that counsel 
for respondents could not seriously have believed that 
discrimination might be at work. On the contrary, almost 
two months after respondents presented this study along 


54 


with their motion for discovery, the Assistant United 
States Attorney responding to the motion confessed that 
he still had “no explanation” for the facts which it 
revealed. (J.App. 150). 


Neither does the Solicitor General suggest that, once 
counsel for respondents had seen the material offered by 
the government in its motion for reconsideration, the 
only reasonable conclusion they could have drawn was 
that there was no longer any colorable basis for pursuing 
a selective prosecution defense. To the extent that the 
government was arguing that virtually all crack dealers 
in the area were black, the personal experience of one of 
respondents’ attorneys was to the contrary. Although the 
government proffered declarations from two law enforce- 
ment officials denying any racial motive, prior filings in 
this case raised serious questions about the reliability of 
both officials. 


The United States does not suggest that the type of 
discovery sought below was not material to respondents’ 
selective prosecution claim. On the contrary, both in the 
courts below and in this Court the government's argu- 
ments have focused on the very type of information 
which respondents sought to obtain through discovery. In 
this Court the Solicitor General stresses the importance of 
evidence concerning non-blacks prosecuted in state 
courts in the Central District of California; that was one 
of the very items of information sought by the discovery 
request. The government relies on its own undeniably 
anecdotal information about the race of federal crack 
defendants, and suggests the scope of the Federal Public 
Defender’s presentation was too limited (U.S.Br. 27, 32 


55 


n.3); production of documents providing more compre- 
hensive information about these very issues was one of 
the central purposes of the requested discovery. The 
United States obviously does not dispute the relevance of 
its own purported selection criteria to a determination of 
whether the decision to prosecute respondents had a non- 
racial basis. 


The district judge properly considered the compara- 
tive ability of the parties to obtain information of obvious 
relevance, and assessed the relative costs involved. 
(J.App. 189-90). In this Court, the Solicitor General argues 
repeatedly, albeit without explanation, that respondents 
had ready access to information about the number and 
racial distribution of crack defendants in state court. 
(U.S.Br. 26, 35). But that is the very factual argument 
which three years ago was made by the United States 
Attorney and rejected by the district court. The govern- 
ment makes no assertion that the lower court's finding on 
this issue was clear error. 


The trial judge’s familiarity with local circumstances, 
and her 12 years on the federal bench, were of obvious 
importance in evaluating the material submitted by the 
United States Attorney and relied on in this Court by the 
government. The lead police and ATF investigators, for 
example, insisted that they had no idea of the race of the 
individuals involved when they began their investigation 
of a suspected crack ring in Inglewood; any judge in Los 
Angeles, however, would understand that law enforce- 
ment officials would know full well that an investigation 
targeted at Inglewood, rather, for example, than at the 
hispanic community in Van Nuys, or the white suburb of 
Simi Valley, would lead to the arrest of black suspects. 


56 


The government suggests that the pattern of federal pros- 
ecutions could be explained by considering the weight of 
the narcotics which a suspect was charged with distribut- 
ing. (U.S.Br. 35-36 n.4). But a federal judge sitting in the 
Central District of California has substantial first hand 
experience, which appellate judges would not, with 
which to evaluate such a claim, drawing, for example, on 
her knowledge of the comparative size of the sales with 
which black crack dealers and white powder cocaine 
dealers were being charged in that federal court. 


The primary thrust of the government's argument in 
this Court is that respondents did not properly compare 
the pattern of federal prosecutions with the treatment of 
“similarly situated” non-blacks. But over the course of 
this litigation the government has had a series of quite 
different positions as to which other offenders should be 
regarded as “similarly situated.” In August, 1992, the 
government filed a memorandum insisting the proper 
comparison group was non-black cocaine base dealers.7? 
A month later, the government filed a second memoran- 
dum insisting, to the contrary, that “the proper universe 
of similarly situated defendants in this case is all nar- 
cotics offenders indicted under 21 U.S.C. § 841 and 
846.”75 In the Ninth Circuit, the government suggested to 


72 Government's Opposition to Defendants’ Motions for 
Discovery, p. 6. 


7% Government's Motion for Reconsideration of Order for 
Discovery, p. 10. The government also argued, “In contrast, 
defendants have asked this Court to adopt an overly narrow 
definition of similarly situated law breakers to be crack cocaine 
offenders, rather than the appropriate universe of all federal 
narcotics offenders in that same time period.” Id. 


——— 


57 


the original panel that “the proper universe of similarly 
situated defendants” was “[g]enerally all those offenders 
that have violated the same criminal statute . . . all federal 
narcotics offenders indicted under 21 U.S.C. §§ 841 and 
846.”74 In its brief to the en banc court, however, the 
government asserted that a “similarly situated individ- 
ual” would be one “with a similar criminal background 
and similar offense conduct.”75 In this Court, the govern- 
ment advances three alternative definitions of “similarly 
situated”: (a) individuals “eligible for prosecution” 
(U.S.Br. 14, 32, 37) (b) persons guilty of “dealing in crack” 
(U.S.Br. 30) and (c) persons who distribute “more than 50 
grams of cocaine and... use. . . firearms.” (U.S.Br. 35-36 
n.4). The district court cannot fairly be faulted for declin- 
ing to address, as a precondition of any discovery, a fact- 
bound issue regarding which the government's own posi- 
tion continues to evolve, or for failing to require respon- 
dents to present in 1992 a study that took into 
consideration “criteria” yet to be delineated. 


The record, of course, does contain declarations indi- 
cating that there are indeed a substantial number of non- 
black crack dealers. The government asserts without 
explanation that the district court did not rely on this 
information. (U.S.Br. 28 n.2). The government, however, 
made no such assertion in the court of appeals, and the 
panel decision held that the district judge had relied on 
this evidence. (Pet. App. 82a-83a). In her January 5, 1993, 
bench opinion, the district judge stressed that she had 


74 Brief for Plaintiff-Appellant, p. 16 n. 7. 
75 Appellant’s En Banc Brief, p. 6. 


58 


“reviewed all of the evidence offered by all parties”7®, 
and singled out only another item of evidence offered by 
respondents as not persuasive.””7 The government also 
contends that the court of appeals did not base its ruling 
on this evidence (Reply Brief for the United States, 4 n. 1); 
in fact the en banc court expressly relied on that evi- 
dence. (Pet. App. 22a-23a, 30a).78 


76 J.App. 218. 
7 OB. 


*® The government also argues that this evidence is insuffi- 
cient to provide a basis for the discovery order, criticizing it as 
“vague, conclusory, and impressionistic hearsay.” (U.S.Br. 35 n. 
4). This fact-bound evidentiary issue is not fairly encompassed 
by the Question Presented. 

The government advanced no objection to the form or suffi- 
ciency of this evidence when it was offered in the district court, 
and it is thus precluded from raising such objections on appeal. 
(Pet. App. 98a-99a and n.5). The Reed declaration was based in 
part on personal experience on the bar referral panel which 
provided counsel for indigent state defendants. (J.App. 140-41). 
In this Court, on the other hand, the government invokes an 
affidavit of the DEA Public Information Officer that is to a 
substantial degree hearsay. (J.App. 71-74) (“My knowledge is 
based upon numerous reports and publications . . . and attend- 
ing various seminars, meetings, lectures, and conventions.”) 

United States Dep't of Labor v. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715 (1990), 
does not limit the type of evidence on which a district court can 
rely in exercising its discretion to order discovery. Triplett con- 
cerned the quantum of evidence necessary to warrant a deter- 
mination that a nation-wide administrative system mandated 
by Congress is unconstitutional. Far from attacking the constitu- 
tionality of any federal statute, respondents seek to enforce the 
prohibitions against discrimination in punishment embodied in 
18 U.S.C. § 242 and 28 U.S.C. § 994(d). The instant appeal 
concerns only the practices of a particular United States Attor- 
ney’s office, and will resolve, not the merits of a constitutional 


59 


The government suggests, in the alternative, that 
respondents should have introduced a study that took 
into consideration whether non-black narcotics defen- 
dants had distributed more than 50 grams of crack or had 
used guns. But a central purpose of the discovery request 
and order in this case was to obtain from the government 
an official articulation of its prosecution criteria, against 
which the government's actions could be assessed. It 
makes no sense to require respondents, as a condition of 
obtaining that discovery, to guess in advance what crite- 
ria the government would announce years later on 
appeal, or to conduct a study based on the very sort of 
information which respondents needed discovery to 
obtain. The government does not even suggest that the 
information necessary to prepare this sort of proposed 
study, such as data on the quantity of narcotics distrib- 
uted by state and federal defendants, was in any way 
available to respondents. 


