i” ORIGINAL 


No. 94-9247 


Supreme Court, U.S, 
FILED 


AUG 7 1995 
QFHCE OF THE CLERK 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


CHARLES CARLISLE, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES IN OPPOSITION 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solicitor General 


JO ANN HARRIS 


Assistant Attorney General 


DAVID S. KRIS 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
Whether the district court lacked authority to grant a post- 
verdict motion for judgment of acquittal filed outside the time 


limits prescribed by Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c). 


(I) 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-9247 
CHARLES CARLISLE, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES IN OPPOSITION 


OPINION BELOW 
The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. B1-B4) is 
reported at 48 F.3d 190. 
JURISDICTION 
The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on February 
21, 1995. The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on May 
12, 1995. The jurisdiction of this ourt is invoked under 28 
U.S.C. 1254(1). 
STATEMENT 
A grand jury sitting in the United States District Court for 
the Western District of Michigan indicted petitioner for 


conspiring to possess marijuana with intent to distribute it, in 


2 

violation of 21 U.S.C. 846. Following a jury trial, petitioner 
was found guilty. He filed an untimely post-verdict motion for 
judgment of acquittal under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 
29(c), which the district court initially denied, and then sua 
sponte reconsidered and granted. Pet. App. Al-A5. The court of 
appeals reversed on the ground that the district court lacked 
authority to consider the untimely motion. Pet. App. B1-B4. 

1. Petitioner’s jury trial began on June 30, 1993. He did 
not move for a judgment of acquittal under Fed. R. Crim. P. 29(a) 
at any time during the trial. After the jury returned a verdict 
of guilty, it was discharged on July 13, 1993. Petitioner filed 
a post-verdict motion for judgment of acquittal on July 23, 1993, 
one day after the seven-day period allowed for such motions under 
Fed. R. Crim. P. 29(c).* He asserted that the evidence was 
insufficient to demonstrate that he participated in the 
conspiracy. In a written opinion dated August 24, 1993, the 
district court did not address the lateness of the motion, but 
denied it on the ground that the evidence was "sufficient for a 
rational trier of fact to find that [petitioner] knowingly and 
voluntarily joined the conspiracy." United States v. Carlisle, 
No. 1:93:CR:66-02 (W.D. Mich. Aug. 24, 1993), slip c.. 7 


(attached). 


. Rule 29(c) provides that "a motion for judgment of 
acquittal may be made or renewed within 7 days after the jury is 
discharged or within such further time as the court may fix during 
the 7-day period." Fed. R. Crim. P. 45(a) provides that 
"Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded" from the 
seven-day period. Excluding the weekend of July 17-18, 1993, 
petitioner’s motion was one day late. 


3 

When petitioner appeared for sentencing on October 14, 1993, 
the district court on its own motion reversed its earlier 
decision and granted a judgment of acquittal. Pet. App. Al-A5; 
id. at B2. Noting that the motion was filed after the filing 
deadline, the court nonetheless treated it as timely, stating: 

I can conceive of no prejudice to the United States which 

will result from consideration of a motion that is one day 

late in this case. Because I believe that refusal to hear 

this motion would result in grave injustice, and because the 

Rule permits the Court to extend the deadline, I will 

consider this motion as if it were filed in a timely manner. 
Id. at Bln.1. Reviewing the same evidence that it had 
considered in its initial opinion, the district court concluded 
that the evidence was “insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that [petitioner] knowingly and voluntarily joined the 
conspiracy." Jd. at AS. 

2. The court of appeals reversed. Pet. App. B1-B4. 
Relying on its earlier decision in United States v. Davis, 992 
F.2d 635 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 265 (1993), the 
court held that the district court lacked jurisdiction to grant 
an untimely motion for acquittal under Fed. R. Crim. P. 29(c), or 
to enter a judgment of acquittal sua sponte after the case has 
been submitted to the jury. Pet. App. B3-B4. Although both 
parties briefed the question whether the evidence was sufficient, 
Gov't C.A. Br. at 9-11; Pet. C.A. Br. at 9-15, the court of 
appeals did not address whether the evidence was sufficient to 


support the conviction. See Pet. App. B3-B4. 


4 
ARGUMENT 

Petitioner contends (Pet. 3-6) that a district court has 
authority to grant an untimely post-verdict motion for judgment 
of acquittal, and that the contrary decision below conflicts with 
the decisions of other courts of appeals. The decision of the 
court of appeals is correct, there is no circuit conflict, and 
the issue presented warrants no further review. 

1. The decision of the court of appeals is in accord with 
the text of Rule 29(c), which provides that a motion for judgment 
of acquittal after verdict "may be made or renewed within 7 days 
after the jury is discharged or within such further time as the 
court may fix during the 7-day period." Rule 45(b) in turn 
provides that the district court "may not extend the time for 
taking any action under Rules 29, 33, 34 and 35, except to the 
extent and under the conditions stated in them." These two 
Rules, read together, show that the seven-day time limit in Rule 
29(c) is mandatory, and that the court cannot retroactively 
extend it. 

Rule 29 also prohibits the district court of appeals from 
achieving the same result by sua sponte granting an acquittal 
afte. the seven-day time limit has elapsed. In United States v. 
Smith, 331 U.S. 469 (1947), this Court held that a district court 
may not grant a new trial on its own motion under Fed. R. Crim. 
P. 33 beyond the Rule’s time limit for making new trial motions. 
In language that parallels that of Rule 29(c), Rule 33 authorized 
a motion for a new trial “within 5 days after verdict or finding 


5 

of guilty or within such further time as the court may fix during 
the 5-day period."* Although Rule 33, like Rule 29(c), does not 
expressly address sua sponte action by the court, this Court in 
Smith concluded that the a the time within which 
relief can openly be asked of the judge, terminates the time 
within which it can properly be granted on the court’s own 
initiative." 331 U.S. at 475. The Court explained that "(t]he 
trial judge is given power by the Rules to entertain motions for 
new trial within five days after verdict and may extend that time 
for so long as he thinks necessary for proper consideration of 
the course of the trial," but emphasized that “extension of that 
time indefinitely is no insurance of justice." Jd. at 475-476. 
Rather, "(i]t is in the interest of justice that a decision on 
the propriety of a trial be reached as soon after it has ended as 
is possible, and that decision be not deferred until the trial’s 
story has taken on the uncertainty and dimness of things long 
past.” Jd. at 476.’ The same reasoning applies to the time 
limits established in Rule 29(c). 

2. The decision of the court of appeals accords with the 


holdings of other circuits that a district court lacks authority 


° The 1966 amendments to Fed. R. Civ. P. 29(c) and 33 
extended the time limits in both Rules from five days to seven. 


. Contrary to petitioner’s contention (Pet. 4-5), Smith 
does not contemplate a case-by-case evaluation of whether “a 
considerable period of time" has passed creating a risk of 
uncertainty regarding the strength of the evidence in the 
individual case. Rather, Smith made clear that "(t]he time 
limitations of Rule 33 are jurisdictional." 3 Charles Alan Wright, 

§ 558, at 360 (2d ed. 
1982); id. at 361 n.1 (collecting cases). 


6 
to grant an untimely motion under Rule 29(c). See, e.g., United 
States v. Stevens, 978 F.2d 565, 569 (10th Cir. 1992); United 
States v. Hocking, 841 F.2d 735, 736-737 (7th Cir. 1988); United 
States v. Johnson, 487 F.2d 1318, 132i (Sth Cir.), cert. denied, 
419 U.S. 825 (1974). See also United States v. Davis, 992 F.2d 
635, 636-640 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 265 (1993). 

Petitioner claims (Pet. 4) that several circuits have 
adopted a contrary rule. While some decisions contain language 
suggesting that a district court has inherent authority to enter 
a judgment of acquittal even when the defendant fails to file a 
motion within time limits imposed by Rule 29, no other decision 
has reached a result that squarely conflicts with the decision 
below. Rather, the allegedly conflicting decisions have all 
involved action by the court or the defendant within the time 
limits of Rule 29. 

In Arizona v. Manypenny, 672 F.2d 761, 764-765 (9th Cir.) 
(Kennedy, J.), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 850 (1982), the defendant 
filed his Rule 29(c) motion within seven days of the jury’s 
verdict. The district court initially denied the motion, but 
then sua sponte granted it in connection with its consideration 
of a motion for an arrest of judgmer under Fed. R. Crim. P. 34. 
The court of appeals held only that the district court had 
authority to revisit its earlier denial of the timely filed Rule 
29 motion in those circumstances; it expressly declined to 
“address the scope of inherent power in other contexts." 672 
F.2d at 766. The Ninth Circuit has not applied the theory of 


4 
“inherent power" voiced in Manypenny outside of the circumstance 
in which defendant the timely filed a motion. See United States 
v. Godoy, 678 F.2d 84, 88 (9th Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 
959 (1983) (stating that sua sponte district court action under 
Rule 29(c) more than seven days after the verdict would have been 
untimely where "(n]othing had been done during [the time allowed 
by Rule 29(c)) by either the parties or the court to preserve the 
matter for such late action"). 

In United States v. Coleman, 811 F.2d 804, 807 (3d Cir. 
1987), the defendant sought an extension of time for filing a 
motion for judgment of acquittal within the seven-day period. 
The court, however, granted the requested extension after that 
period had elapsed. The court of appeals concluded that the 
failure of the defendant to file his Rule 29 motion in a timely 
fashion did not prevent the district court from acting on it, 
because the court believed that "a district court may enter a 
judgment of acquittal ‘sua sponte under its inherent power,’ 
without regard to the seven-day requirement of Rule 29." 811 


F.2d at 807, citing United States v. Giampa, 758 F.2d 928, 936 
n.1 (3d Cir. 1985).* In Coleman, unlike here, the defendant had 


* Giampa is inapposite here. In that case, the district 
court discharged the jury citing a violation of Brady v. Maryland, 
373 U.S. 83 (1963), but eight days later entered a judgment of 
acquittal based on insufficient evidence. The court of appeals 
concluded that Rule 29 did not prohibit the court’s action eight 
days after trial because of the court’s "inherent power." 758 F.2d 
at 936 n.1. The court of appeals had previously determined, 
however, that the district court’s statements during trial revealed 
that the basis for his termination of the case and dismissal of the 
jury was his belief that the government’s evidence was insuffi- 
cient. Jd. at 934-935. 


8 

taken action to preserve his rights within the time limits 
prescribed by Rule 29, and his later motion was untimely because 
of error by the court. The Third Circuit has not had occasion to 
revisit the issue in a concrete context since Coleman.’ 

The other cases ciced by petitioner discuss the time limits 
in Rule 29(c) only in dictum. United States v. DiBernardo, 880 
F.2d 1216, 1225 n.4 (llth Cir. 1989), did not involve a Rule 
29(c) motion, but referred to Coleman and Manypenny in ruling on 
the timeliness of a motion for a new trial under Fed. R. Crim. P. 
33. United States v. Mendoza, 565 F.2d 1285 (Sth Cir. 1978), 
also did not involve Rule 29(c), but addressed the timeliness of 
a Rule 35 motion for reduction of sentence; moreover, since 
Mendoza, the Fifth Circuit has also noted "the conceded lack of 
jurisdiction of a district court to consider an untimely motion 
for judgment of acquittal." United States v. Brown, 587 F.2d 
187, 190 n.6 (Sth Cir. 1979) (dictum). 

3. In any event, the question presented here is of limited 
practical importance. Rule 29(a) authorizes motions for judgment 
of acquittal before a case is submitted to the jury but after the 


evidence on either side is closed. Although petitioner failed to 


* See United States v. Wright-Barker, 784 F.2d 161, 170 n.8 
(34 Cir. 1986) (noting in dictum Giampa’s apparent tolerance of a 


district court’s sua sponte grant of a judgment of acquittal in the 
absence of a timely motion, but observing that the district court 
in the case before it had not sought to exercise any such authori- 
ty); United States v. Knox, 977 F.2d 815, 8619 (3d Cir. 1992) 
(noting that district court had discretion under Coleman but that 
it acted within its discretion in declining to reach merits of Rule 
29 motion filed three months after verdict), vacated on other 
grounds, 114 S. Ct. 375 (1993). 


9 
do so here, defendants typically file such motions and thereby 
preserve their right to appellate review of evidentiary 
sufficiency even in the absence of a Rule 29(c) post~-verdict 
motion. See, e.g,., United States v. Sharif, 817 F.2d 1375, 1377 
(9th Cir. 1987). The same standard governs an appeal from the 
denial of the Rule 29(a) motion as applies to a Rule 29 motion 
made at any stage in the district court -- j,e,, whether the 
evidence, taken in the light most favorable to the government, is 
sufficient for a reasonable jury to find the defendant guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt. See Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 
307, 319 (1979); United States v. Qvermyer, 867 F.2d 937, 938 
(6th Cir.), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 813 (1989). Thus, in the 
typical case, failure to file a timely Rule 29(c) motion merely 
changes the forum in which a defendant presents his post-verdict 
sufficiency claim. And even a defendant who does not file any 
timely motion under Rule 29 may seek appellate review of his 
claim of evidentiary insufficiency under a plain error standard, 
see Fed. R. Crim. P. 52. See, e,g., United States v. Fagan, 821 
F.2d 1002, 1009 n.2 (Sth Cir. 1987). The holding of the court of 
appeals thus does not completely foreclose judicial review of the 


suf’. ciency of the evidence. 


10 


CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied. 


Respectfully submitted. 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solicitor Genera] 


JO ANN HARRIS 
Assistant Attorney General 


DAVID S. KRIS 
Attorney 


AUGUST 1995 


CMwey (it) 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 53 KG 24 PM 4: 5} 


FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN CLERK.U.S. DIST. COUR 
YESTERN DIST UF MACH, 


sy_ Aa 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, 
Vv 
CHARLES CARLISLE, File No. 1:93:CR:66-02 
Defendant. HON. RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
/ 
OPINION 


The matter before the Court is defendant Carlisle’s motion for 
a judgment of acquittal pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 29(c). 
Defendant was charged in a single count Indictment with conspiracy 
to possess marijuana with intent to distribute. On July 13, 1993, 
a jury found defendant guilty. Defendant’s motion does not claim 
that there was not an agreement to possess and distribute marijua-~- 
na. Instead, his motion argues that the evidence was insufficient 
to prove that he joined the conspiracy. 

The standard of review for claims of insufficient evidence is 
“whether after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the 


essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt." 


Jackson vy. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979) (emphasis in 


original); United States v. Boling, 869 F.2d 965 (6th Cir. 1989). 
Reviewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the govern- 


ment means that I must make all credibility choices and inferences 


i= 


in a manner that supports the jury’s verdict. Further, circumstan- 
tial evidence alone is sufficient to sustain a conviction and such 
evidence need not remove every reasonable hypothesis except that of 
guilt. United States v. Stone, 748 F.2d 361, 363 (6th Cir. 1984). 

The evidence presented against Carlisle at trial was as 
follows. On the evening of April 10, 1993, defendant Rupert 
(Carlisle’s common-law wife), defendant Ramon (Ms. Rupert’s 
mother), and Thomas Crawford arrived at the residence on Yale 
Street that Carlisle and Rupert shared. Ramon travelled in a car 
driven by Rupert, and they were followed by a truck full of 
marijuana. That truck was driven by Crawford, the government’s 
primary witness, who was wearing a tape-recording device at the 
time. 

In his opening statement, defendant’s counsel stated that 
Rupert told Carlisle that the truck contained marijuana, and that 
she was scared. The inference that Carlisle knew that the truck 
contained marijuana could also be drawn from a hearsay statement by 
Rupert I admitted. As soon as Ramon, Rupert and Crawford arrived 
at the Yale Street residence, Crawford recorded the following 
statement of Rupert: “Okay, just pull out and Chuck [Carlisle] says 
to go down the street and just park for awhile because he said he’s 
heard over the scanner, there’s some cops around hr~e." Exhibit 
48-A, Transcript of Nagra Tape #2, Cassette #1A, p. 5. Crawford 
parked the truck down the street. 

When Crawford returned from parking the truck, he was 
introduced to Carlisle. Crawford testified that Carlisle was quiet 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


and did not appear nervous. At this point, the parties appear to 
be discussing where to park the truck for the evening, and the 
following conversation ensued: 
Ramon: We can park it behind the house. 
Crawford: All right mighty good. 
Carlisle: Figure right down the drive. 
Ramon: Yeah, because my son called, my 
grandson called and said there was 
cops around here. 
Rupert: around this area 


Ramon: unintelligible 


Rupert: and we don’t want to take a chance 
right now 


Carlisle: We don’t want to take no chances. 

Crawford: No, un wh, that’s why I was going, 
I, the speed limit was thirty and so 
I stayed right on it. 

Ramon: Yeah? Oh and before I forget, on 
the key, the combination. I took 
the thing off and I put it on there 
so >. . >. 

Carlisle: Okay .. . is that for the back? 

*** (one page later) *** 

Ramon: We’re going (unintelligible) 

Crawford: Oh yeah it’s best not take any... 

Carlisle: No I won’t take no chances... 

Crawford: Okay. 

Id. at 5-7. 
At Rupert’s request, Carlisle then drove Amelia Ramon to her 


home shortly after Rupert, Ramon and Crawford arrived at the Yale 


Street residence. The truck full of marijuana, driven by Crawford, 
followed. The truck was left at Ramon’s home, and Crawford joined 
Carlisle and Ramon in the car. Carlisle then drove Crawford and 
Ramon to the Stouffer Hotel. During this trip, tape recordings 
indicated that there was nothing but casual banter about topics 


*" such as cars and the city of Battle Creek. Carlisle dropped them 


off and left. There was no evidence that Carlisle had any further 
contact with any member of the conspiracy. 

Upon review under the foregoing standards, I find that the 
evidence in this case is sufficient to sustain defendant’s 
conviction. Viewed in the light most favorable to the government, 
I believe that a rational trier of fact could find beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Carlisle knew about the conspiracy, and that 
Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 

Instruction 10C explained that in order to establish knowing 
and voluntary joinder, 


the government must prove that [the defendant) 
knew the conspiracy’s main purpose, and that 
he voluntarily joined it intending to help 
advance or achieve his goals. . . . But proof 
that a defendant simply knew about a conspira- 
cy, or was present at the time, or associated 
with members of the group, is not enough, even 
if he approved of what was happening or did 
not object to it. Similarly, just because a 
defendant may have done something that hap- 
pened to help a conspiracy does not necessari- 
ly make him a conspirator. These are all 
things that you may consider in deciding 
whether the government has proved that a 
defendant joined a conspiracy. But without 
more they are not enough. 


Sixth Circuit Pattern Criminal Instruction No. 3.03 (1991).' 
Review of two cases in which the Sixth Circuit found that the 
government did not carry the burden described above is instructive. 
In the unpublished decision of United States y. Burgess, 1992 U.S. 
App. LEXIS 34740 (6th Cir.), the court acknowledged that "[c)on- 
spiracy cases often present difficult questions about the extent to 
which seemingly passive participants are nonetheless culpable 
members of the conspiracy." Jd. at *21. The appellate panel went 
on to hold that there was insufficient evidence to support 
defendant Burgess’ conviction for conspiracy to possess marijuana 
with intent to distribute. In Burgess, a defendant named Muncy 
planned to buy marijuana from a DEA agent and informant. Muncy 
drove to the scheduled rendezvous point with Burgess and a third 
defendant, Rose. When they arrived, Muncy walked to the agents’ 
car and discussed the purchase. Muncy then went back to his own 
car and brought Rose to the agents’ car with him. After the 
transaction began, all three were arrested. A search of the car 
revealed a loaded revolver and $15,000 in cash in the front seat, 
and scales in the trunk. 

Upon review of these facts, the Sixth Circuit concluded that 
the jury could have inferred Burgess’ knowledge of the purpose of 


the trip, White’s | »ssession of money to purchase marijuana, and 


' The Committee Notes cite many cases in support of this 
instruction. E.g., United States v. Richardson, 596 F.2d 157, 162 
(6th Cir. 1979) (there must be proof of an intention an agreement 
to cooperate in the crime); United States v. Bostic, 480 F.2d 965, 
968 (6th Cir. 1973) (there must be intentional participation in the 
transaction with a view to the furtherance of the common design and 


purpose). 


even the presence of a weapon in the car. However, because Burgess 
did not participate in the discussions with the agents, he was not 
mentioned in those conversations, he did not drive the car, and he 
never left the middle of the front seat, the court held that a 
rational trier of fact could not find that Burgess knowingly and 
voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 

United States v. Pearce, 912 F.2d 159 (6th Cir. 1990), cert, 


denied sub nom Thorpe _v. United States, 111 S.Ct. 978 (1991), 
provides another example of evidence which the Sixth Circuit found 


to be insufficient to sustain a conspiracy conviction. Defendants 
Thorpe and Pearce were convicted of conspiring to possess and 
distribute crack in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846 on the following 
evidence. A SWAT team entered what they suspected was a crack 
house after an informant purchased crack at the house with 
registered bills. When they entered, Thorpe ran into the basement 
yelling "it’s a bust." The SWAT team found Thorpe nearby two doses 
of crack and a loaded revolver. Thorpe had a live round in his 
pocket that matched those found in the gun. The police found 
Pearce sitting on a couch in the living room. Next to him was a 
bag of crack and the registered bills the informant used in his 
purchase. 

The Sixth Circuit reversed bot’ conspiracy convictions. It 
found that the record was devoid of any evidence that Thorpe and 
Pearce had entered into an agreement. Although the defendants’ 
presence at the house was unexplained, the court concluded that no 
rational trier of fact could have found that even tacit coordina- 


coordination between Thorpe, Pearce, or any third party, to 
maintain a crack house or to distribute crack. 

The evidence against Mr. Carlisle surpasses that presented in 
Burgess and Pearce. Unlike the Burgess defendant, he was more than 
just present during the conspiracy. He took actions to help hide 
the contraband from the police. He stated his intention to not 
“take chances.“ He inquired whether a key unlocked the back of the 
truck which contained the marijuana. And finally, in contrast to 
the Pearce defendants, Mr. Carlisle’s use of the word “we" in a 
statement made to other conspirators during a conversation about 
where to put the truck full of marijuana to avoid the place, “we 
don’t want to take no chances," could indicate joinder with the 
conspiracy to a rational trier of fact. I find that Carlisle’s 
hearsay statement concerning the scanners, his statements evincing 
a desire to avoid the police, and the fact that he drove a 
conspirator (his common law mother-in-law) to her home, and then 
drove two conspirators to a hotel and dropped them off, is 
sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find that he knowingly 
and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 

Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
government, I find that the government’s case against Charles 
Carlisle is sufficient to prove beyond a reason-Sle doubt that 
Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. As a 
result, defendant’s motion will be denied. 


deals tease. Ardy § ule 


United States District Judge 
Chu 19,1753 


FED Ky 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT $3 AUG 26 PM 4: 5) 


FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN CLER U.S. DIS} ’ 
WESTERN DIST OF sick 


bY AG 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, 
Vv 
CHARLES CARLISLE, File No. 1:93:CR:66-02 
Defendant. HON. RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
/ 
ORDER 


In accordance with the Opinion entered on this date; 
IT I8 HEREBY ORDERED that defendant Carlisle’s motion for a 
judgment of acquittal pursuant to Rule 29(c), filed July 23, 1993, 


is DENIED. 
Dated in Kalamazoo, MI: A. , A bch 
Cn 17,1993 United States District Judge 


l(V 


