Supreme Court, U.S. 
Je 5 2 


No. 94-9247 DEC 28 p95 


In The — 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 


7 


CHARLES CARLISLE, 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Sixth Circuit 


¢ 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONER 


6 


James A. CHRISTOPHERSON* 

Joe: R. Myer 

BLAKESLEE, CHAMBERS, PETERSON, 
DatryMpLe & CHRISTOPHERSON, P.C. 

900 East Front Street, Suite 200 

Traverse City, Michigan 49684 

(616) 941-8900 

*Counsel of Record 


OOOO 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a motion for judgment of acquittal brought 
under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(C) that is 
granted by the United States District Court should be 
overturned because it was filed eight (8) days after the 
jury’s verdict? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED. ........ 066-000 e eee eeeeees 
TABLE OF CONTENTS..........000eeeeeeeeereeees 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ..........-- 00sec eeeeees 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE...........00ceeeeeeees 


Il. 


Il. 


THE EVIDENCE AT TRIAL WAS INSUFFi- 
CIENT TO CONVICT THE PETITIONER .... 


THE DISTRICT COURT DID NOT GRANT 
THE PETITIONER’S MOTION FOR JUDG- 
MENT OF ACQUITTAL BECAUSE THE PETI- 
TIONER HAD RECEIVED THE BRONZE 
STAR FOR HIS MILITARY SERVICE IN THE 
VIETNAM WAR .....cccrccccccccccsecsscves 


ARGUMENT ....cccccccccscccvccscsccsessceseseces 


5. 


Il. 


THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE THE 
AUTHORITY TO ENTER AN ORDER OF 
ACQUITTAL SUA SPONTE UNDER FED- 
ERAL RULE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 


THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE INHERENT 
SUPERVISORY POWER TO ACT OUTSIDE 
THE FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PRO- 
CEDURE TO MAKE SURE THAT INNOCENT 
DEFENDANTS RECEIVE FAIR TRIALS...... 


—- 


iii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 


Page 


THE RATIONALE BEHIND THE TIME LIMIT 
ESTABLISHED IN FEDERAL RULE OF CRIM- 
INAL PROCEDURE 29%C), TO PREVENT 
HAVING A TRIAL JUDGE DECIDE A 
MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL 
AFTER A CONSIDERABLE PERIOD OF TIME 
HAS PASSED AND THE TRIAL JUDGE MAY 
NOT REMEMBER THE PARTICULAR FACTS 
OF THE TRIAL, DOES NOT APPLY TO THE 
FACTS OF THIS CASE WHERE THE 
MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL 
bad ‘ccm EIGHT (8) DAYS AFTER THE 


THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE THE POWER 
TO GRANT AN UNTIMELY MOTION FOR 
JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL UNDER 28 
IN 150, BUiec sive voback cds. 


EE re 


13 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 
Adams v United States, 317 U.S. 269 (1942)....17, 18, 19 


Bank of Nova Scotia v United States, 487 U.S. 250 


CRGEED . a ccccnccecapcocesencesesececepescocacces 11, 12 
Bartone v United States, 375 U.S. 52 (1964)........... 10 
Fallen v United States, 378 U.S. 139 (1964) ............ 6 
Harris Truck Lines, Inc. v Cherry Meat Packers, Inc., 

S72 UG. 21S (19GZ) .. 0 cccccccccccccccsces 8, 9, 10, 12 
Harris v Nelson, 394 U.S. 286 (1969).......... 14, 16, 19 
Hensley v Municipal Court, 411 U.S. 345 (1973)....... 19 
Houston v Lack, 487 U.S. 266 (1988) ............-555- 14 
Mercer v Theriot, 377 U.S. 152 (1964) ...........645- 13 
Oscar Meyer & Co. v Evans, 441 U.S. 750 (1979)...... 11 
Price v Johnston, 334 U.S. 266 (1948).............. 16, 17 
Thompson v Immigration and Naturalization Service, 

STS US. SB46 (ISG)... ccccccccscssesscccecs 9, 10, 12 
United States v Frady, 456 U.S. 152 (1982)............ 15 
United States v Gaca, 411 U.S. 618 (1973) ............ 12 
United States v Hastings, 461 U.S. 499 (1983)...... 11, 12 


United States v Jenkins, 4 F.3d 1338 (6th Cir. 1993) ...3, 4 


United States v New York Telephone Company, 434 
ee Be Cree Pec cocecccctcccescnccesccucccecccncs 16 


United States v Robinson, 361 U.S. 220 (1960)....7, 8, 11 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
United States v Smith, 331 U.S. 469 (1947) ..... 6, 13, 14 
Urie v Thompson, 337 U.S. 163 (1950)................ 12 
STATUTES 
i ae 16, 17 
Pe eS nsbb CiGede dustictecs 11, 15, 16, 17, 19 
OrHer AUTHORITIES 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 4............... 15 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29.......... passim 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 37............... 7 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 45............... 8 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52.............. 11 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 73............... 9 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONER 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The government has attempted to advance two argu- 
ments in its statement of the case. First, the government is 
trying to convince this Court that there was sufficient 
evidence to convict the Petitioner. Second, the govern- 
ment is trying to argue that the district court granted the 
motion for judgment of acquittal because of sympathy it 
had for the Petitioner as a veteran of the Vietnam War. 
Both of these arguments are wrong for two reasons. First, 
the government is factually incorrect. The evidence at 
trial was insufficient to convict the Petitioner. The district 
court granted the motion for judgment of acquittal 
because of the insufficiency of the evidence. Second, 
these arguments should have no bearing on the issue 
before this Court, which is whether or not the district 
court can grant a motion for a judgment of acquittal 
which is filed eight (8) days after a jury’s verdict. 


I. THE EVIDENCE AT TRIAL WAS INSUFFICIENT 
TO CONVICT PETITIONER. 


The district court found that there was insufficient 
factual evidence to convict the Petitioner. The United 
States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit did not 
reverse the district court’s finding that the evidence was 
insufficient. The issue of the insufficiency of the evidence 
was raised in the briefs filed by both parties in the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. The United 
States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ignored the 
issue of the insufficiency of the evidence and only found 
that the motion for judgment of acquittal should not have 
been granted by the district court because it was filed 
eight (8) days after the jury’s verdict. As this case is 
presented to this Court, Petitioner Charles Carlisle is 


1 


2 


factually innocent. The district court has found that the 
Petitioner is factually innocent. No court has reversed 
that finding. 

The district court found the following: 

1. At trial the government did not produce 
any evidence that the Petitioner had entered 
into an agreement with any member of the 
conspiracy. (J.A. 43) 

2. During the course of hours of tape 
recorded conversations no conspirators sug- 
gested that the Petitioner was involved in 
the conspiracy. (J.A. 43) 

3. There was no evidence that the Peti- 
tioner was involved in arranging the trans- 
port of the marijuana to Michigan. (J.A. 43) 
4. Prior to actually coming to Michigan the 
government's chief witness, Thomas Craw- 
ford, testified he had never heard of the 
Petitioner. (J.A. 44) 

5. There was no evidence to indicate that 
the Petitioner was to benefit monetarily, or 
in any other way, from the alleged conspir- 
acy. (J.A. 44) 

The district court specifically held that “the govern- 
ment’s case against Charles Carlisle is insufficient to 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Carlisle knowingly 
and voluntarily joined the conspiracy.” (J.A. 44) There has 
been no finding by any court that the district court's 
decision on this matter was wrong. 


3 


Il. THE DISTRICT COURT DID NOT GRANT THE 
PETITIONER’S MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF 
ACQUITTAL BECAUSE THE PETITIONER HAD 
RECEIVED THE BRONZE STAR FOR HIS MILI- 
TARY SERVICE IN THE VIETNAM WAR. 


Petitioner Charles Carlisle received the Bronze Star 
for his service during the Vietnam War. (J.A. 35) The 
government, in its brief, attempts to use this award 
against th. Petitioner. The government implies in its brief 
that the district court had improper sympathy for the 
Petitioner because of his status as a veteran of the Viet- 
nam War. This is incorrect. On August 19, 1993 the dis- 
trict court initially denied the motion for judgment of 
acquittal filed by the Petitioner. One day later, on August 
20, 1993, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth 
Circuit decided the case of United States v Jenkins, 4 F.3d 
1338 (6th Cir. 1993). The district court specifically relied 
upon this new case, decided after the Petitioner’s motion 
for judgment of acquittal had been initially denied, in 
granting the motion for judgment of acquittal on October 
14, 1993. The district court followed Jenkins for the propo- 
sition that the district court’s inquiry should consist of 
two questions. First, the district court should analyze 
what the co-conspirator could reasonably foresee. Sec- 
ond, even if the co-conspirator could reasonably foresee 
the quantity of drugs, the district court should determine 
if the co-conspirator joined the conspiracy for the entire 
quantity of the drugs. (J.A. 28) Although it is certainly 
true that the Petitioner was honorably discharged from 
the United States Army after serving nearly 12 months in 
the Vietnam War and receiving the Bronze Star, the dis- 
trict court decided this case based upon the evidence and 
based upon the subsequent case of Jenkins. 


The issue before this Court is not, as implied in the 
government's brief, whether or not there was sufficient 
evidence to convict the Petitioner or whether the district 
court had sympathy for the Petitioner because he was 


4 


awarded the Bronze Star for his service during the Viet- 
nam War. The issue before this Court is whether or not 
the district court had the authority to consider and grant 
a motion for judgment of acquittal filed eight (8) days 
after the jury’s verdict. 


¢ 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE THE AUTHORITY 
TO ENTER AN ORDER OF ACQUITTAL SUA 
SPONTE UNDER FEDERAL RULE OF CRIMINAL 
PROCEDURE 29%a). 


The district court initially denied the Petitioner's 
untimely motion for judgment of acquittal. That motion 
for judgment of acquittal was not renewed by the Peti- 
tioner. The district court subsequently, on its own. 
granted the motion for judgment of acquittal based upon 
new judicial authority, the case of United States v Jenkins. 
Jenkins was not cited in the Petitioner’s motion. The dis- 
trict court’s action, in granting the motion for judgment 
of acquittal prior to sentencing and without a renewed 
motion by the Petitioner, was similar to a sua sponte 
entry of a judgment of acquittal. This Court should deter- 
mine whether a district court has the authority to enter a 
judgment of acquittal after the seven (7) day period for 
filing a motion has expired. 

The government, in its brief, takes the position that 
the district court lacks the jurisdiction to grant a judg- 
— of acquittal to an actually innocent criminal defen- 

ant based solely on the expiration of the defendant's 
deadline for filing a motion for judgment of acquittal. If 
there is new legal authority, which is discovered by the 
district court more than eight (8) days after the jury's 
verdict is entered, but before the district court sentences a 
defendant, the district court should be able to utilize that 
authority to determine whether or not the defendant is 
actually innocent. The government's argument, followed 


5 


to its logical conclusion, means that if a controlling case is 
decided eight (8) days after a jury’s verdict which com- 
pletely changes the state of the law and would require the 
district court to find the defendani innocent, the district 
court would have no authority, either on a motion or sua 
sponte, to utilize the new authority and to make an 
appropriate decision. The district court would have to go 
through the futile exercise of sentencing the defendant. 
The defendant would then have to file an appeal. This 
absurd result unnecessarily burdens the criminal justice 
system. 


Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c) constrains 
the defendant. Rule 29(c) does not constrain the district 
court. Rule 29(c) states that the defendant’s motion must 
be made or renewed within seven (7) days. It does not 
say anything about when the district court may grant a 
judgment of acquittal. Nothing in Rule 29%c) limits the 
district court’s inherent authority to take action sua 
sponte. The district court has jurisdiction until after a 
defendant is sentenced. There is no reason why the dis- 
trict court should be limited to granting a judgment of 
acquittal sua sponte more than seven (7) days after the 
jury s verdict just because that is the amount of time a 
defendant has to file a motion. Rule 29(c) does not limit 
the district court’s ability to act on a defendant's motion 
after seven (7) days. It is not logical to contend that Rule 
29(c) prevents the district court, if it is acting sua sponte, 
from entering an order of acquittal more than seven (7) 
days after the jury’s verdict. 


Rule 29(a) provides that a court on “its own motion 
shall order the entry of judgment of acquittal of one or 
more offenses charged in the indictment or information 
after the evidence on either side is closed if the evidence 
is insufficient to sustain a conviction of such offense or 
offenses.” The government attempts to claim that Rule 
29a) is strictly limited to the period prior to submitting 
the case to the jury. Nothing in Rule 29(a), except for the 
heading of the subsection, supports the government's 


6 


position. Under Rule 29%(a) the district court has the 
power, even beyond seven (7) days after the jury’s ver- 
dict, to sua sponte grant a judgment of acquittal to make 
certain that a factually innocent individual is not con- 
victed. 


The government attempts to argue that under United 
States v Smith, 331 U.S. 469 (1947), the district court 
cannot sua sponte act outside the time limits set forth in 
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Smith is easily 
distinguishable from this case. First, in Smith the motion 
for a new trial had been granted after sentencing and 
after appeal. In this case, the motion for judgment of 
acquittal was granted prior to sentencing. In Smith, the 
district court, by granting the defendant a new trial, 
attempted to reverse the affirmance of the conviction by 
the United States Court of Appeals. Second, in Smith 
there was no claim that the defendant was actually inno- 
cent of the crime charged. In this case the district court 
has found that the Petitioner is factually innocent. 


The argument that under Rule 29(a) the district court 
retains authority to sua sponte grant an innocent defen- 
dant a judgment of acquittal, at least until sentencing, is 
consistent with the language of Rule 29(a), and the poli- 
cies and rationale behind the rule. “(T)he Rules are not, 
and were not intended to be, a rigid code to have an 
inflexible meaning irrespective of the circumstances.” 
Fallen v United States, 378 U.S. 139, 142 (1964). Even 
though the Petitioner’s motion in this case was filed one 
(1) day late, the district court granted the motion largely 
based upon Jenkins which was decided one (1) day after 
the district court initially denied the motion for judgment 
of acquittal. The district court had the authority to do 
this, sua sponte, under Rule 29(a) even if a motion had 
not been filed by the Petitioner. Even if this Court accepts 
the position of the government that the time limits under 
Rule 29(c) are mandatory for motions filed by a defen- 
dant, the district court has the residual authority to grant 
a judgment of acquittal sua sponte prior to sentencing. 


7 


Therefore, this Court should hold, based upon the facts of 
this case, that even if the district court does not have the 
jurisdiction to entertain a motion for a judgment of 
acquittal filed eight (8) days after a jury’s verdict, the 
district court does have the power under Federal Rule of 
Criminal Procedure 29a) to grant a judgment of acquittal 
sua sponte prior to sentencing. 


Il. THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE INHERENT 
SUPERVISORY POWER TO ACT OUTSIDE THE 
FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
TO MAKE SURE THAT INNOCENT DEFEN- 
DANTS RECEIVE FAIR TRIALS. 


The government, in its Brief, has principally relied on 
United States v Robinson, 361 U.S. 220 (1960). In Robinson, 
this Court held that the timely filing of a notice of appeal 
is mandatory and jurisdictional. In this case, unlike Rob- 
inson, the district court had jurisdiction at the time it 
decided the motion for judgment of acquittal. The Peti- 
tioner had not yet been sentenced. There should be no 
question that the district court in this case had jurisdic- 
tion at the time it granted the motion for judgment of 
acquittal. Unlike Robinson, the issue now before this 
Court is whether or not the motion for judgment of 
acquittal, filed one day late, should have been considered 
by the district court. 


In Robinson, the defendants had filed a notice of 
appeal twenty-one (21) days after the judgment. The gov- 
ernment filed a motion to dismiss because the notice of 
appeal was not filed within ten (10) days after the entry 
of the judgment as required by Federal Rule of Criminal 
Procedure 37(a). This Court limited its inquiry to the 
following question: 

The single question presented is whether the 

filing of a notice of appeal in a criminal case 

after expiration of the time prescribed in Rule 

37(a)(2) confers jurisdiction of the appeal upon 


the Court of Appeals if the District Court, pro- 
ceeding under Rule 45(b), has found that the 
late filing of the notice of appeal was the result 
of excusable neglect. 361 U.S. at page at 284. 


Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 45 provides that 
the court cannot enlarge the period for taking an appeal. 
In Robinson, this Court looked at the legislative history of 
Rule 45(b) and found that nothing within the history of 
that rule would support the position that the court of 
appeals has jurisdiction of an appeal when there is a late 
filing of a notice of appeal as a result of excusable 
neglect. Rule 45(b) provides that when an act is required 
to be done within a specified period of time the district 
court has discretion to enlarge that period of time if the 
request is made before the expiration of the period origi- 
nally prescribed or if the request is made upon motion 
after the expiration of the specified period if the failure to 
act was the result of excusable neglect. Under Rule 45(b) 
the district court may not extend the time for taking any 
action under Rule 29. 


Robinson was decided in 1960. This Court has limited 
the applicability of Robinson in several cases decided 
since then. In Harris Truck Lines, Inc. v Cherry Meat 
Packers, Inc., 371 U.S. 215 (1962), the petitioner’s motion 
for a new trial had been denied on June 28, 1961. Local 
trial counsel was present at the motion for new trial. The 
petitioner’s general counsel had been vacationing in 
Mexico at the time of the motion for new trial. The 
petitioner’s general counsel returned to the country on 
July 20, 1961. On July 13, the petitioner’s local counsel 
asked the district court for an extension of time to appeal 
beyond the thirty (30) day limit then set forth in Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure 73(a). The district court granted 
an extension to August 11, 1961. The notice of appeal was 
filed on August 11, 1961. The court of appeals dismissed 
the appeal holding that there was not basis to waive the 
thirty (30) day limit because a showing of excusable 
neglect based upon the failure of a party to learn about 


9 


the entry of the judgment had not been made out. This 
Court, while recognizing that the standard was that the 
moving party had to show “excusable neglect based on 
the failure of a party to learn of the entry of the judg- 
ment”, reinstated the appeal and held as follows: 


In view of the obvious great hardship to a party 
who relies upon the trial judge’s finding of 
“excusable neglect” prior to the expiration of 
the 30-day period and then suffers reversal of 
the finding, it should be given great deference 
by the reviewing court. Whatever the proper 
result as an initial matter on the facts here, the 
record contains a showing of unique circum- 
stances sufficient that the Court of Appeals 
ought not to have disturbed the motion judge’s 
ruling. The judgment is vacated and the case is 
remanded to the Court of Appeals so that peti- 
tioner’s appeal may be heard on its merits. 371 
U.S. at page 285. 


In Harris Truck Lines, the petitioner knew of the entry 
of the judgment. On June 28, 1961, the petitioner’s local 
counsel was present when the motion for a new trial was 
denied. Despite the fact that the strict language of the 
rule was not complied with, this Court found that under 
a “showing of unique circumstances” the court of appeals 
should not have disturbed the district court’s ruling. 


In Thompson v Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
375 U.S. 384 (1964), the final order in the district court 
had been entered on April 18, 1962. Twelve (12) days later 
the petitioner served notice that he would be filing post- 
trial motions including a motion for new trial. The 
motions were denied. The petitioner filed a notice of 
appeal within sixty (60) days of the denial of the post- 
trial motions but not within sixty (60) days of the original 
entry of the final judgment by the district court. The post- 
trial trial motions were not timely filed because they were 
not served within ten (10) days of the entry of the final 
judgment. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 73(a) provides 


10 


that an appeal can only be taken within sixty (60) days 
from the entry of a final judgment or an order entered 
after a timely motion for new trial. This Court looked 
beyond the specific language of the rule and held that 
under the unique circumstances of the case the peti- 
tioner’s appeal should be heard on the merits. 


The facts of this case present unique circumstances 
similar to those in Thompson and Harris Truck Lines. The 
Petitioner’s motion was filed one day late. The Peti- 
tioner’s motion was filed when the district court retained 
jurisdiction. The Petitioner’s motion was filed prior to 
sentencing. The district court heard and decided the 
motion prior to sentencing. The district court found that 
the Petitioner was legally innocent. New case law was 
available to the district court after the seven (7) days had 
expired. The motion was untimely because of a court 
appointed attorney's error. Under these unique circum- 
stances, this Court should find that the district court did 
have the authority to hear and decide the Petitioner’s 
motion for judgment of acquittal. 


If this Court were to adopt the government's argu- 
ment and apply the rationale of Robinson to the facts of 
this case, the Petitioner would only be left with a collat- 
eral attack on the jury’s verdict. It is preferable that the 
district court directly decide the issue of the s 
of the evidence as opposed to having the matter decided 
on appeal or by collateral attack. In Bartone v United 
States, 375 U.S. 52 (1964), this Court stated: 


Where state procedural snarls or obstacles pre- 
clude an effective state remedy against uncon- 
stitutional convictions, federal courts have no 
other choice but to grant relief in the collateral 
proceeding. See Fay v Noia, 372 U.S. 391, 83 S.Ct. 
822, 9 L.Ed.2d 837. But the situation is different 
in federal proceedings, over which both the 
Courts of Appeals and this Court (McNabb v 
United States, 318 U.S. 332, 63 S.Ct. 608, 87 L.Ed. 


819) have broad powers of supervision. It is 


11 


more appropriate, whenever possible, to correct 
errors reachable by the appeal rather than remit 
the parties to a new collateral proceeding. 375 
U.S. at page 54. 


The government is asking this Court to strictly apply 
Robinson to the facts of this case. The government argues 
that the Petitioner should be required to file a motion 
under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 or to file an appeal. Under either 
alternative, there is an increased burden on the criminal 
justice system. It would be preferable to have the issue of 
the sufficiency of the evidence decided by the district 
court, rather than have the further burden of an addi- 
tional appeal, or an additional hearing on a motion filed 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255. In Oscar Meyer & Co. v 
Evans, 441 U.S. 750, 765 (1979), this Court stated that “to 
require a second ‘filing’ by the aggrieved party after 
termination of state proceedings would serve no purpose 
other than the creation of an additional procedural tech- 
nicality.” In this case, the second filing, whether an 
appeal or a motion under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 serves no 
purpose. It would be an additional procedural techni- 
cality. An additional filing creates a greater burden on the 
system. 


The government also relies upon the cases of United 
States v Hastings, 461 U.S. 499 (1983) and Bank of Nova 
Scotia v United States, 487 U.S. 250 (1988), for its argument 
that a district court may not exercise its supervisory 
power if the exercise of that power would conflict with 
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Neither of these 
cases deals with a circumstance where a rule of procedure 
directly impairs an important value like avoiding the 
wrongful conviction of an innocent man. Both of these 
cases involve harmless error principles under Federal 
Rule of Criminal Procedure 52. In Hastings and Bank of 
Nova Scotia the use of the supervisory power to correct a 
mistake did not have substantial prejudicial impact on 
the defendant. The supervisory power of the federal 
courts is most important where, as here, the supervisory 


12 


power is used to prevent a clear miscarriage of justice. 
There is much less reason to invoke the supervisory 
power of the federal courts where the power is used only 
to correct errors that do not have substantial effect on the 


outcome of the proceedings. 

In Hastings, this Court held that one of the 
underlying the supervisory power of the federal courts is 
“to preserve judicial integrity by ensuring that a convic- 
tion rests on appropriate considerations validly before 
the jury”. 461 U.S. at page 505. In this case, the district 
court has found the evidence insufficient to convict the 
Petitioners, yet, as the Petitioner comes before this Court, 
he has been determined guilty. The supervisory power of 
the federal courts should be invoked under these facts to 
avoid this result. 


The government in its brief does not address the case 
of United States v Gaca, 411 U.S. 618 (1973). In Gaca, unlike 
Hastings and Bank of Nova Scotia, a mistake was made 
which had a substantial prejudicial impact on the defen- 
dant. The defendant's appeal was dismissed because of 
his failure to pay a twenty-five ($25) dollar filing fee. The 
government agreed that it was appropriate “to reinstate 
the appeal in the exercise of this Court's supervisory 
power”. Id. 

In footnote 21 of its brief, the government suggests 
that the supervisory power of the federal courts derives 
from Article III of the Constitution. If the federal court's 
supervisory power derives from Article III of the Consti- 
tution then it cannot be limited by the Federal Rules of 
Criminal Procedure. Where the supervisory power is 
used to protect an innocent person from a wrongful con- 
viction it cannot be limited by procedural rules. The 
supervisory power of the district courts, inherent in Arti- 
cle Ill of the Constitution, should relieve an actually 
innocent defendant from procedural rules that would 
otherwise restrict the district court's ability to hear and 
decide his or her claim. 


13 


This Court has held that once a reviewing court 
obtains jurisdiction of one issue in a case it may consider 
questions arising in other stages of the case. Mercer v 
Theriot, 377 U.S. 152 (1964); Urie v Thompson, 337 U.S. 163 
(1950). In this case the district court retained jurisdiction 
over the defendant because he had not yet been sen- 
tenced. The district court should have had the authority 
to decide the motion for judgment of acquittal. This Court 
should hold that the mistake of an attorney in filing a 
motion for a judgment of acquittal one (1) day late, when 
the defendant is legally innocent, constitutes unique cir- 
cumstances within the meaning of Thompson and Harris 
Truck Lines. 


Ill. THE RATIONALE BEHIND THE TIME LIMIT 
ESTABLISHED IN FEDERAL RULE OF CRIMI- 
NAL PROCEDURE 2%C), TO PREVENT HAVING 
A TRIAL JUDGE DECIDE A MOTION FOR 
JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL AFTER A CONSID- 
ERABLE PERIOD OF TIME HAS PASSED AND 
THE TRIAL JUDGE MAY NOT REMEMBER THE 
PARTICULAR FACTS OF THE TRIAL, DOES 
NOT APPLY TO THE FACTS OF THIS CASE 
WHERE THE MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF 
ACQUITTAL WAS FILED EIGHT (8) DAYS 
AFTER THE TRIAL. 


In its brief the government argues for a strict inter- 
pretation of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. In 
support of its position that an actually innocent defen- 
dant, whose court-appointed attorney files a motion for 
judgment of acquittal one day late, should be denied an 
opportunity to have the trial judge decide the motion, the 
government relies on the following quote from United 
States v Smith, 331 U.S. 469, 476 (1947): 

On the contrary, as time passes, the peculiar 

ability which the trial judge has to pass on the 

fairness of the trial is dissipated as the incidents 
and nuances of the trial leave his mind to give 


14 


way to immediate business. It is in the interest 

of justice that a decision on the propriety of a 

trial be reached as soon after it has ended as is 

possible, and that decision not be deferred until 
the trial’s story has taken on the uncertainty and 
dimness of things long past. 

The trial’s story had not taken on the “uncertainty 
and dimness of things long past” in this case. The motion 
for judgment of acquittal was filed eight (8) days after the 
jury's verdict. In Smith, the motion for new trial was 
granted after appeal. In this case, the motion for a judg- 
ment of acquittal was granted prior to sentencing. In 
Harris v Nelson, 394 U.S. 286, 300 (1969), this Court stated: 

We do not assume that courts in the exercise of 

their discretion will pursue or authorize pursuit 

of all allegations presented to them. We are 

aware that confinement sometimes induces fan- 

tasy which has its basis in the paranoia of prison 
rather than in fact. But where specific allega- 
tions before the court show reason to believe 
that the petitioner may, if the facts are fully 
developed, be able to demonstrate that he is 
confined illegally and is therefore entitled to 
relief, it is the duty of the court to provide the 
necessary facilities and procedures for an ade- 
quate inquiry. Obviously, in exercising this 
power, the court may utilize familiar pro- 
cedures, as appropriate, whether these are 
found in the civil or criminal rules or elsewhere 

in the “usages and principles of law.” 

This is a case where the Petitioner's confinement was 
illegal because he was found innocent by the district 
court. supervisory power of the district courts should 
be u to allow the motion, filed eight (8) days after 
the jury’s verdict, to be heard by the district judge. This is 
consistent with the rationale behind Smith. 

This Court applied the Federal Rules of Appellate 
Procedure flexibly in the case of Houston v Lack, 487 U.S. 


15 


266 (1988). A state prisoner had filed a petition for habeas 
corpus relief. Twenty-seven (27) days after the judgment 
was entered in district court dismissing the habeas 
corpus petition, the petitioner deposited a notice of 
appeal with prison authorities before mailing it to the 
district court. The district court s the notice indi- 
cating it was filed thirty-one (31) days after the judgment 
was entered. This was one (1) day after the expiration of 
the thirty (30) day filing period for taking appeals under 
Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1). This Court 
held that the notice of appeal was filed at the moment of 
delivery to prison authorities even though the clear lan- 
guage of Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1) 
provides that the notice of appeal “shall be filed with the 
district court within thirty days”. Although the language 
of Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1) is clear, 
this Court looked beyond the strict requirements of the 
Rule to the rationale behind the Rule. This Court found 
that the rationale behind the Rule would not be carried 
out by applying the Rule to the facts of that particular 
case. That same reasoning should be applied to this case. 
The rationale behind the time limit established in Federal 
Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c), as set forth in Smith, is 
to prevent a trial judge from deciding a motion for judg- 
ment of acquittal after a considerable period of time has 
passed and the trial judge may not remember the particu- 
lar facts of the trial. The rationale behind the rule does 
not apply to the facts of this case where the motion for 
judgment of acquittal was filed eight (8) days after the 
jury trial. 

The government contends that a strict interpretation — 
of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c) will not work 
an injustice because the Petitioner can appeal, under a 
plain error standard, or the Petitioner can file a motion 
under 28 U.S.C. § 2255. It will be difficult for the Peti- 
tioner to obtain relief under either one of those avenues. 
If the Petitioner appeals, a plain error standard would be 
applied. In United States v Frady, 456 U.S. 152, 166 (1982), 


16 


this Court reaffirmed “the well-settled principle that to 
obtain collateral relief a prisoner must clear a signifi- 
cantly higher hurdle than would exist on direct appeal.” 
There is a significant risk that no relief can be obtained by 
the Petitioner once this case leaves the hands of the 
district court judge. 


Even if the government was correct in its assertion 
that there are other avenues of review available, requir- 
ing the Petitioner to appeal or file a motion under 28 
U.S.C. § 2255 is incredibly wasteful and inefficient. The 
district judge is in the best institutional position to evalu- 
ate the sufficiency of the evidence claim. The United 
States Court of Appeals should not be deprived of the 
district court’s decision and review of the evidence. 


IV. THE DISTRICT COURTS HAVE THE POWER TO 
GRANT AN UNTIMELY MOTION FOR JUDG- 
MENT OF ACQUITTAL UNDER 28 U.S.C. § 1651. 


The government contends in its brief that the All 
Writs Act does not apply to the facts of this case. The All 
Writs Act “has served since its inclusion, in substance, in 
the original Judiciary Act as a ‘legislatively approved 
source of procedural instruments designed to achieve the 
rational ends of the law’ ”. Harris v Nelson, 394 U.S. 286, 
299, (1969), quoting Price v Johnston, 334 U.S. 266, 282 
(1948). “A federal court may avail itself of all auxiliary 
writs as aids in the performance of its duties, when the 
use of such historic aids is calculated in its sound judg- 
ment to achieve the ends of justice entrusted to it.” Adams 
v United States ex rel. McCann, 317 U.S. 269, 273 (1942). 


The All Writs Act should be flexibly applied. In 
United States v New York Telephone Company, 434 U.S. 159, 
172 (1977), this Court stated: 


The Court has consistently applied the Act flexi- 
bly in conformity with these principles. 
Although § 262 of the Judicial Code, the prede- 
cessor to § 1651, did not expressly authorize 


17 


courts, as does § 1651, to issue writs “appropri- 
ate” to the proper exercise of their jurisdiction 
but only “necessary” writs, Adams held that 
these supplemental powers are not limited to 
those situations where it is “necessary” to issue 
the writ or order “in the sense that the court 
could not otherwise physically discharge its 
appellate duties.” 317 U.S., at 273, 63 S.Ct., at 
239. In Price v Johnston, supra, § 262 supplied the 
authority for a United States Court of Appeals 
to issue an order commanding that a prisoner be 
brought before the court for the purpose of 
arguing his own appeal. Similarly, in order to 
avoid frustrating the “very purpose” of 28 
U.S.C. § 2255, § 1651 furnished the District 
Court with authority to order that a federal 
prisoner be produced in court for purposes of a 
hearing. United States v Hayman, 342 U.S. 205, 
220-222 (1952). The question in Harris v Nelson, 
supra, was whether, despite the absence of speci- 
fic statutory authority, the District Court could 
issue a discovery order in connection with a 
habeas corpus proceeding pending before it. 
Eight Justices agreed that the district courts 
have power to require discovery when essential 
to render a habeas corpus proceeding effective. 


This Court should hold that under the All Writs Act 
the district court had the authority to go outside the 
seven (7) day requirement of Federal Rule of Criminal 
Procedure 29%c). The rational ends of the law will be 
achieved if the Petitioner’s motion for judgment of 
acquittal can be considered by the district court under the 
authority of the All Writs Act. The use of the All Writs 
Act to allow the district court to decide a motion for 
judgment of acquittal filed eight (8) days after a jury's 
verdict and before sentencing will achieve the ends of 
justice. One of the goals of the Federal Rules of Criminal 


18 


Procedure is to have a rational and efficient justice sys- 
tem. It would not be rational or efficient to hold that a 
district court, prior to seritencing, cannot decide a motion 
for judgment of acquittal on the basis that a defendant is 
actually innocent. There was no prejudice to the United 
States of America in this case. To require a defendant to 
appeal his conviction, even though the district court has 
found that he is actually innocent, is not efficient or 
rational. The defendant, because of his or her court- 
appointed attorney’s error, would be denied a hearing on 
the motion in front of the district judge who heard all of 
the evidence. Even if the court of appeals does find in the 
defendant's favor, the system will have been unduly bur- 
dened by an additional appeal that should not have been 
required, In addition, the defendant faces the burden of 
convincing three judges on the court of appeals that the 
jury’s decision was against the great weight of the evi- 
dence, without the benefit of having the decision of the 
district court who heard all of the testimony in the case. 


In Adams v United States, 317 U.S. 269 (1942), this 
Court recognized that the federal courts have the power 
to issue a writ under the All Writs Act “where it may be 
necessary for the exercise of a jurisdiction already exist- 
ing.” 317 U.S. at page 273. In this case, the district court 
had jurisdiction because it granted the motion for judg- 
ment of acquittal prior to sentencing. After sentencing, 
the district court would no longer have jurisdiction and, 
therefore, it could not have exercised its power to grant a 
motion for judgment of acquittal under the All Writs Act. 


This Court should rule that district courts, prior to 
sentencing, have the power to consider a motion for a 
judgment of acquittal where there is a claim that the 
defendant was actually innocent and the motion was not 
timely filed because of an attorney's error. In Adams, this 
Court stated that “procedural instruments are means for 
achieving the rational ends of law.” 317 U.S. at page 273. 
Rule 29(c) must be viewed in this light. Where, as in this 
case, a strict reading of the rule may result in an irrational 


19 


result, the All Writs Act should be invoked by the district 
court “in its sound judgment to achieve the ends of 
justice entrusted to it.” 317 U.S. at page 273. The most 
rational result in this case, which achieves the ends of 
justice, is to allow the district court to decide the motion 
for judgment of acquittal filed prior to sentencing, rather 
than having the matter appealed or be the subject of a 
motion under 28 U.S.C. § 2255. 


An analogy can be made to the importance that this 
Court has placed upon providing access to the courts in 
the context of habeas corpus petitions. In Harris v Nelson, 
394 U.S. 286, 291 (1969), this Court stated “the very 
nature of the Writ [of habeas corpus] demands that it be 
administered with the initiative and flexibility essential 
to insure that miscarriages of justice . . . are surfaced and 
corrected.” In Hensley v Municipal Court, 411 U.S. 345, 350 
(1973), this Court stated “we have consistently rejected 
interpretations of the habeas corpus statute that would 
suffocate the Writ in stifling formalism or effectiveness 
with the manacles of arcane and scholastic procedural 
requirements”. 

Petitioner Charles Carlisle should be allowed to have 
the district court decide his motion for a judgment of 
acquittal. The only reason the district court has been 
prevented from deciding his motion for judgment of 
acquittal is because his court-appointed attorney made a 
mistake and filed the motion for judgment of acquittal 
one day late. This Court should fashion a remedy so that 
Petitioner Charles Carlisle is not punished for his attor- 
ney’s error. It is fair, rational and just that the district 
court should be allowed to hear and decide the motion 
for judgment of acquittal. 


20 
CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Sixth Circuit should be reversed and the judgment 
of the United States District Court for the Western Dis- 
trict of Michigan dated October 28, 1993 should be rein- 
stated. 


Respectfully submitted, 


BLAKESLEE, CHAMBERS, PETERSON, 
Da.rympLe & CHRISTOPHERSON, P.C. 
James A. CHRISTOPHERSON 

Counsel of Record for Petitioner 
900 East Front Street, Suite 200 
Traverse City, Michigan 49686 ~~ 


