i f 
f 5 Supreme Court, U. 8. 
FILED 


NOV 7 1995 


No. 94-9247 


In The Bic 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 
° 


CHARLES CARLISLE, 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The United States 
Court Of Appeals For The Sixth Circuit 


+ 


JOINT APPENDIX 


> 
James A. CHRISTOPHERSON Drew S. Days, III 
BLAKESLEE, CHAMBERS, Solicitor General 
Pererson, DALRYMPLE & Department of Justice 
CHRISTOPHERSON, P.C. Washington, D.C. 20530 
900 East Front Street, Department of Justice 
Suite 200 (202) 514-2217 
Traverse City, Michigan 49684 Counsel for Respondent 
(616) 941-8900 United States of America 


Counsel for Petitioner 
Charles Carlisle 


Petition For Certiorari Filed May 12, 1995 
Certiorari Granted September 27, 1995 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


n 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Petitioner's Motion for a Judgment of Acquittal Pur- 
suant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c) 
and Brief in Support of Motion, 07/23/93 


Government's to Petitioner’s Motion for 
Acquittal and Brief in Support of Response, 
07/30/93 


District Court’s Opinion Denying Motion for Acquit- 
tal, 08/24/93 te 


District Court’s Order Denying Motion for Acquittal, 
e 


Transcript of Sentencing / Discharge held on October 


14, 1993, 10/14/93 
District Court’s Opinion, 10/28/93 


District Court’s Judgment Withdrawing Court's 
08/24/93 Opinion and Order and Granting Peti- 
tioner’s Motion for Acquittal, 10/28/93 


Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the 


Sixth Circuit, 02/21/95 
Judgment, 07/07/95 


DATE 

04/21/93 
07/13/93 
07/23/93 


07/30/93 


08/24/93 


08/24/93 


10/14/93 


10/28/93 
10/28/93 


02/21/95 


07/07/95 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DESCRIPTION OF ENTRY 
Indictment 
Verdict as to Petitioner Charles Carlisle 


Petitioner's Motion for a Judgment of 
Acquittal Pursuant to Federal Rule of 
Criminal Procedure 29(c) and Brief in 
Support of Motion 


Government's Response to Petitioner's 
Motion for Acquittal and Brief in Support 
of Response 

District Court’s Opinion Denying Motion 
for Acquittal 

District Court's Order Denying Motion 
for Acquittal 

Transcript of Sentencing / Discharge held 
on October 14, 1993 

District Court’s Opinion 

District Court’s Judgment Withdrawing 
Court's 08/24/93 Opinion and Order and 
Granting Petitioner's Motion for Acquit- 
tal 


Opinion of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit 


Judgment 


2 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN, 
SOUTHERN DIVISION 


UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA, No. 1:93:CR:66 


Plaintiff, 
vs. Hon. Richard A. Enslen 


IGNACIO AMBRIZ, 
CHARLES CARLISLE, 
DOLORES RUPERT, 
TIMOTHY SMITH, 
MICHAEL HALL, 
AMELIA RAMON, and 
ISREAL ALMEDIA, 


Defendants. 


INDICTMENT 


The Grand Jury charges: 
COUNT ONE 
(MARIJUANA CONSPIRACY) 


From on or about April 1, 1993, until on or about 
April 11, 1993, in Calhoun County, in the Western District 
of Michigan, Southern Division, and elsewhere, 


IGNACIO AMBRIZ, 


3 


MICHAEL HALL, 
AMELIA RAMON, and 
ISREAL ALMEDIA, 


did knowingly, willfully, and unlawfully combine, con- 
spire, confederate and agree with Thomas Crawford and 
persons known and unknown to the grand jury to know- 
ingly and intentionally possess with intent to distribute 
marijuana, a schedule I controlled substance, in violation 
of 21 United States Code, Sections 841 and 846. 


OVERVIEW OF THE CONSPIRACY 


On April 8, 1993, the Missouri State Police inter- 
cepted a U-Haul van driven by Thomas Crawford. The 
van contained approximately 240 pounds of marijuana 
and some household goods. Crawford said he was en 
route from Texas to the Battle Creek, Michigan, area 
where he was to deliver the marijuana. On April 9, 1993, 
Crawford arrived in Battle Creek and called the person to 
whom he was to deliver the marijuana. During April 10 
and 11 the marijuana was moved several times in the 
Battle Creek area, finally settling in a locker rented by 
Amelia Ramon in a storage facility on the outskirts of 
Battle Creek. To effect the objects of the conspiracy, at 


least one co-conspirator did at least one of the following 
overt acts: 


OVERT ACTS 


1. On or about April 9, 1993, AMELIA RAMON 
instructed Thomas Crawford to remain in his hotel with 
the 240 pounds of marijuana he had driven to Battle 


Creek from Texas until a co-conspirator arrived from 
Texas. 


2. On or about April 10, 1993, Thomas Crawford 
met with AMELIA RAMON and DOLORES RUPERT, 
a/k/a Lolita to discuss the movement of the 240 pounds 
of marijuana he had transported from Texas. Crawford 
was informed by AMELIA RAMON that they would 
move the marijuana as soon as IGNACIO AMBRIZ, 
a/k/a Bobby Ambriz, arrived from Texas. 


3. On or about April 10, 1993, DOLORES RUPERT 
led Thomas Crawford, driving the van with 240 pounds 
of marijuana, to her residence at 218 Yale Street, Battle 
Creek, Michigan, with the intent to conceal the marijuana 
there. 


4. On or about April 10, 1993, DOLORES RUPERT 
and CHUCK CARLISLE led Thomas Crawford, driving 
the van with 240 pounds of marijuana, to 315 Elm Street, 
Battle Creek, Michigan, with the intent to conceal the 


marijuana there. 


5. On or About April 10, 1993, CHUCK CARLISLE 
drove Thomas Crawford and AMELIA RAMON to a hotel 
in Battle Creek where they met with IGNACIO AMBRIZ 
and ISREAL ALMEDIA. The quartet discussed the off- 
loading and distribution of marijuana and the distribu- 


tion of the proceeds. 


6. On or about April 11, 1993, Thomas Crawford, 
ISREAL ALMEDIA, AMELIA RAMON and a female 
named Lupe (LNU) met at a hotel and discussed moving 
the 240 pounds of marijuana in the U-Haul van. 


5 


7. On or about April 11, 1993, TIMOTHY SMITH 
drove the U-Haul van, containing 240 pounds of mari- 
juana, from 315 Elm Street, Battle Creek, Michigan, to a 
storage facility, with the intent to conceal the marijuana 
there. 


8. On or about April 11, 1993, MICHAEL HALL and 
AMELIA RAMON used an automobile to conduct sur- 
veillance of the U-Haul van containing 240 pounds of 
marijuana on its way to the storage facility. 


9. On or about April 11, 1993, AMELIA RAMON 
and Lupe (LNU) rented a locker at a storage facility with 
the intent to store the 240 pounds of marijuana brought to 
Battle Creek by Thomas Crawford there. 


21 US.C. § 841 
21 U.S.C. § 846 
18 US.C. § 2 


A TRUE BILL 


/s/ Barbara Novak 
Y FOREPERSON 


JOHN A. SMIETANKA 
United States Attorney 


RD (38462) 


Assistant United States Attorney 
United States Attorney’s Office 
399 Federal Building 

Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503 


6 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 


(Caption Omitted In Printing) 
DEFENDANT CARLISLE’S MOTION FOR A 
JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL PURSUANT TO 
FEDERAL RULE OF CRIMINAL PR URE 29(c) 
Defendant, through his attorneys, GEMRICH, 
MOSER, BOWSER, FETTE & LOHRMANN, moves this 
Court for the entry of Judgment of Acquittal, pursuant to 


Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c). A brief in sup- 
port of this Motion is attached. 


Dated: GEMRICH, MOSER, BOWSER, 
July 23, 1993 FETTE & LOHRMANN 
By: /s/ Scott Graham 
Scott Graham 


Attorney for Defendant 
BUSINESS ADDRESS: 
222 South Westnedge 
Avenue 

Kalamazoo, MI 49007 
(616) 382-1030 


7 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 


(Caption Omitted In Printing) 


BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF DEFENDANT CARLISLE’S 
MOTION FOR MENT OF ACQUITTAL 
PURSU TO L RULE OF 
CRIMINAL PR DURE 29%c) 


Defendant was charged in a single count Indictment 
with conspiracy to possess marijuana with intent to dis- 
tribute. On July 14, 1993, following jury trial, Defendant 
was found guilty. This Court discharged the jury follow- 
ing the verdict. Defendant requests this Court to enter a 
Judgement of Acquittal in this matter pursuant to Federal 
Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c). Petitioner contends that 
such a Judgment is appropriate where no rational trier of 
fact could have determined that Defendant was guilty of 
the charge contained in the Indictment. 


This Court is well aware of the standard of review for 
evaluation of a motion pursuant to Rule 29(c). The Court 
must determine whether viewing the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the government, a rational trier of 
fact could have found the elements of the crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt. Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 
(1979). Here, Defendant contends that no rational trier of 
fact could have found that he intended to joint [sic] the 


conspiracy. 
The evidence at trial demonstrated that, prior to com- 
ing to Michigan, Thomas Crawford had not heard of 


Defendant Carlisle. On the evening of April 10, Delores 
Rupert told Crawford that Rupert would lead Crawford 


to her house and that she would then take Crawford to 
the Stouffers Hotel in Battle Creek. 


Rupert then drove a car to her residence at 218 Yale 
Street, followed by Crawford. Amelia Ramon traveled 
with Rupert. 


Crawford tried to pull the U-Haul truck into the 
driveway at 218 Yale. Rupert approached him and told 
him to move the truck down the street. Defendant Carl- 
isle then drove Ramon to the Elm Street address, where 
Crawford left the truck. Carlisle then drove Ramon and 
Crawford to the Stouffers Hotel. During this trip, there 
was no discussion or drug activity. There is no evidence 
that Carlisle had any further contact with any member of 
the alleged conspiracy. 


Based upon these facts, it is impossible to conclude 
Carlisle “joined” the conspiracy. There is no indication 
that Carlisle did anything more than assist Ramon and 
Crawford in traveling to the Stouffers in an effort to 
cause Crawford to move the truck away from the 218 Yale 
Street address. This alone does not prove the elements of 
the offense. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, Defendant requests this Court to 


enter a Judgment of acquittal in this matter pursuant to 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c). 


Dated: GEMRICH, MOSER, BOWSER, 
July 23, 1993 FETTE & LOHRMANN 
By: /s/ Scott Graham 
Scott Graham 


Attorney for Defendant 
BUSINESS ADDRESS: 
222 South Westnedge 
Avenue 

Kalamazoo, MI 49007 
(616) 382-1030 


10 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN, 
SOUTHERN DIVISION 


UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA, No. 1:93:CR:66 


Plaintiff, Hon. Richard A. Enslen 
vs. 
CHARLES CARLISLE, 
Defendant. 


/ 


GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO DEFENDANT 
CARLISLE’S MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF 


ACQUITTAL PURSUANT TO FEDERAL RULE 
OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 29(c) 

Now comes the United States of America, by and 
through its attorneys, John A. Smietanka, United States 
Attorney for the Western District of Michigan, and James 
R. Redford, Assistant United States Attorney, and in its 


response to Defendant’s Motion for Judgment of Acquit- 
tal after the discharge of the jury states as follows: 


The Motion for a Judgment of Acquittal should be 
denied based on the motion being untimely and 


11 


unsupported by an analysis of the case as further set 
forth in the brief in support of this response. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JOHN A. SMIETANKA 
United States Attorney 


Dated: July 28, 1993 /s/ James R. Redford 
JAMES R. REDFORD 
(P38462) 
Assistant United States 
Attorney 
399 Federal Building 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 
49503 
(616) 456-2404 


12 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN, 
SOUTHERN DIVISION 


(CAPTION OMITTED IN PRINTING) 


BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF GOVERNMENT'S 
RESPONSE TO DEFENDANT CARLISLE’S MOTION 
FOR JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL PURSUANT TO 
FEDERAL RULE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 29(c) 


Now comes the United States of America, by and 
through its attorneys, John A. Smietanka, United States 
Attorney for the Western District of Michigan, and James 
R. Redford, Assistant United States Attorney, and in its 
Brief in Support of its Response to Defendant’s Motion 
for Judgment of Acquittal states as follows: 


Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(c) provides 
that a Defendant may, after the jury returns a verdict of 
guilty, bring a motion for judgment of acquittal within 
seven days after the jury is discharged. The jury in the 
instant case was discharged on July 13, 1993. The motion 
of Defendant Carlisle was made on July 23, 1993. Federal 
Rule of Criminal Procedure 45(a) provides that “when a 
period of time prescribed or allowed [for filing] is less 
than 11 days, intermediate Saturdays and holidays shall 
be excluded in the computation.” Excluding Saturday, 
July 17 and Sunday, July 18, 1993 from the computation 
period, the seven day period within which Defendant 
Carlisle had to file his motion under Rule 29(c) ended on 
July 22, 1993. The filing of the motion on July 23 is 


13 


outside of the time period allowed by the rule and there- 
fore denies this Court jurisdiction to review the motion. 
See, United States v. Henshaw, 687 F. Supp. 183 (E.D. Pa. 
1988), aff'd without op., 862 F.2d 311 (3rd Cir. 1988) (defen- 
dant’s motion for a judgment of acquittal being filed 
eight court business days after jury’s verdict was 
recorded and jury was discharged was untimely.) 


Should the Court examine the merits of the motion of 
the Defendant, the standard of review is whether taking 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the Govern- 
ment, a rational trier of fact could have found the ele- 
ments of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. Jackson v. 
Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979). See also, United States v. 
Montgomery, 980 F.2d 388 (6th Cir. 1992); United States v. 
Ingruo, 844 F.2d 314, 315 (6th Cir. 1988); and Kowalchuk v. 
United States, 176 F.2d 873 (6th Cir. 1949). 


In the instant case, Defendant Carlisle was shown 
through his actions and his statements to be a member of 
the conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute mari- 
juana in the Western District of Michigan. His actions 
regarding the leading of the vehicle containing the mari- 
juana as well as his failing to object to the presence of the 
marijuana clearly indicated to the trier of fact that he was 
a member of the agreement and that the purpose of the 
agreement was to possess with intent to distribute mari- 
juana. 


The Government respectfully submits that the motion 
is unsupported by the analysis of the facts as presented at 
trial and respectfully prays the motion be denied as 


14 


untimely and, in the alternative, that it be denied as 
unfounded in fact and law. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JOHN A. SMIETANKA 
United States Attorney 


Dated: July 28, 1993 /s/ James R. Redford 
JAMES R. REDFORD 


(P38462) 

Assistant United States 
Attorney 

399 Federal Building 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 
49503 

(616) 456-2404 


15 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 


UNITED STATES 
OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff, File No. 1:93:CR:66-02 


7 HON. RICHARD A. ENSLEN 


CHARLES CARLISLE, 
Defendant. 


OPINION 


_ The matter before the Court is defendant Carlisle's 
motion for a judgment of acquittal pursuant to Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 29(c). Defendant was charged in a single count 
Indictment with conspiracy to possess marijuana with 
intent to distribute. On July 13, 1993, a jury found defen- 
dant guilty. Defendant’s motion does not claim that there 
was not an agreement to possess and distribute mari- 
juana. Instead, his motion argues that the evidence was 
insufficient to prove that he joined the conspiracy. 


The standard of review for claims of insufficient evi- 
dence is “whether after viewing the evidence in the light 
most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of 
fact cold have found the essential elements of the crime 
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 
307, 319 (1979) (emphasis in original); United States v. 
Boling, 869 F.2d 965 (6th Cir. 1989). Reviewing the evi- 
dence in the light most favorable to the government 


16 


means that I must make all credibility choices and infer- 
ences in a manner that supports the jury’s verdict. Fur- 
ther, circumstantial evidence alone is sufficient to sustain 
a conviction and such evidence need not remove every 
reasonable hypothesis except that of guilt. United States v. 
Stone, 748 F.2d 361, 363 (6th Cir. 1984). 


The evidence presented against Carlisle at trial was 
as follows. On the evening of April 10, 1993, defendant 
Rupert (Carlisle's common-law wife), defendant Ramon 
(Ms. Rupert’s mother), and Thomas Crawford arrived at 
the residence on Yale Street that Carlisle and Rupert 
shared. Ramon travelled in a car driven by Rupert, and 
they were followed by a truck full of marijuana. That 
truck was driven by Crawford, the government's primary 
witness, who was wearing a tape-recording device at the 
time. 


In his opening statement defendant's counsel stated 
that Rupert told Carlisle that the truck contained mari- 
juana, and that she was scared. The inference that Carlisle 
knew that the truck contained marijuana could also be 
drawn from a hearsay statement by Rupert I admitted. As 
soon as Ramon, Rupert and Crawford arrived at the Yale 
Street residence, Crawford recorded the following state- 
ment of Rupert: “Okay, just pull out and Chuck [Carlisle] 
says to go down the street and just park for awhile 
because he said he’s heard over the scanner, there’s some 
cops around here.” Exhibit 48-A, Transcript of Nagra 
Tape #2, Cassette #1A, p. 5. Crawford parked the truck 
down the street. 


17 


When Crawford returned from parking the truck, he 
was introduced to Carlisle. Crawford testified that Car- 
lisle was quiet and did not appear nervous. At this point, 
the parties appear to be discussing where to park the 
truck for the evening, and the following conversation 
ensued: 


Ramon: We can park it behind the house. 
Crawford: All right mighty good. 
Carlisle: Figure right down the drive. 


Ramon: Yeah, because my son called, my 
grandson called and said there was 
cops around here. 


Rupert: around this area 
Ramon: unintelligible 


Rupert: and we don’t want to take a chance 
right now 


Carlisle: We don’t want to take no chances. 


Crawford: No, un uh, that’s why I was going, I. 
the speed limit was thirty and so I 
stayed right on it. 


Ramon: Yeah? Oh and before I forget, on the 
key, the combination. I took the 
thing off and I put it on there so... 


Carlisle: Okay is that for the back? 

* * * (one page later) 
Ramon: Were going (unintelligible) 
Crawford: Oh yeah it’s best not take any... 


18 


Carlisle: No I won't take no chances... 
Crawford: Okay. 


Id. at 5-7. 


At Rupert’s request, Carlisle then drove Amelia 
Ramon to her home shortly after Rupert, Ramon and 
Crawford arrived at the Yale Street residence. The truck 
full of marijuana, driven by Crawford, followed. The 
truck was left at Ramon’s home, and Crawford joined 
Carlisle and Ramon in the car. Carlisle then drove Craw- 
ford and Ramon to the Stouffer Hotel. During this trip, 
tape recordings indicated that there was nothing but 
casual banter about topics such as cars and the city of 
Battle Creek. Carlisle dropped them off and left. There 
was no evidence that Carlisle had any further contact 
with any member of the conspiracy. 


Upon review under the foregoing standards, I find 
that the evidence in this case is sufficient to sustain 
defendant's conviction. Viewed in the light most favor- 
able to the government, I believe that a rational trier of 
fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt that Carlisle 
knew about the conspiracy, and that Carlisle knowingly 
and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 


Instruction 10C explained that in order to establish 
knowing and voluntary joinder, 


the government must prove that [the defendant] 
knew the conspiracy’s main purpose, and that 
he voluntarily joined it intending to help 
advance or achieve his goals. . . . But proof that 
a defendant simply knew about a conspiracy, or 
was present at the time, or associated with 
members of the group, is not enough, even if he 


19 


approved of what was happening or did not 
object to it. Similarly, just because a defendant 
may have done something that happened to 
help a conspiracy does not necessarily make him 
a conspirator. These are all things that you may 
consider in deciding whether the government 
has proved that a defendant joined a conspiracy. 
But without more they are not enough. 


Sixth Circuit Pattern Criminal Instruction No. 3.03 
(1991). Review of two cases in which the Sixth Circuit 
found that the government did not carry the burden 
described above is instructive. In the unpublished deci- 
sion of United States v. Burgess, 1992 U.S. App. LEXIS 
34740 (6th Cir.), the court acknowledged that 
“[clonspiracy cases often present difficult questions about 
the extent to which seemingly passive participants are 
nonetheless culpable members of the conspiracy.” Id. at 
*21. The appellate panel went on to hold that there was 
insufficient evidence to support defendant Burgess’ con- 
viction for conspiracy to possess marijuana with intent to 
distribute. In Burgess, a defendant named Muncy planned 
to buy marijuana from a DEA agent and informant. 
Muncy drove to the scheduled rendezvous point with 
Burgess and a third defendant, Rose. When they arrived, 
Muncy walked to the agents’ car and discussed the pur- 
chase. Muncy then went back to his own car and brought 


! The Committee Notes cite many cases in support of this 
instruction. E.g., United States v. Richardson, 596 F.2d 157, 162 
(6th Cir. 1979) (there must be proof of an intention an [sic] 
agreement to cooperate in the crime); Untied States v. Bostic, 480 
F.2d 965, 968 (6th Cir. 1973) (there must be intentional participa- 
tion in the transaction with a view to the furtherance of the 
common design and purpose). 


20 


Rose to the agents’ car with him. After the transaction 
began, all three were arrested. A search of the car 
revealed a loaded revolver and $15,000 in cash in the 
front seat, and scales in the trunk. 


Upon review of these facts, the Sixth Circuit con- 
cluded that the jury could have inferred Burgess’ knowl- 
edge of the purpose of the trip, White’s possession of 
money to purchase marijuana, and even the presence of a 
weapon in the car. However, because Burgess did not 
participate in the discussions with the agents, he was not 
mentioned in those conversations, he did not drive the 
car, and he never left the middle of the front seat, the 
court held that a rational trier of fact could aot find that 
Burgess knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 


United States v. Pearce, 912 F.2d 159 (6th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied sub nom Thorpe v. United States, 111 S.Ct. 978 
(1991), provides another example of evidence which the 
Sixth Circuit found to be insufficient to sustain a conspir- 
acy conviction. Defendants Thorpe and Pearce were con- 
victed of conspiring to possess and distribute crack in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846 on the following evidence. A 
SWAT team entered what they suspected was a crack 
house after an informant purchased crack at the house 
with registered bills. When they entered, Thorpe ran into 
the basement yelling “it’s a bust.” The SWAT team found 
Thorpe nearby two doses of crack and a loaded revolver. 
Thorpe had a live round in his pocket that matched those 
found in the gun. The police found Pearce sitting on a 
couch in the living room. Next to him was a bag of crack 
and the registered bills the informant used in his pur- 
chase. 


21 


The Sixth Circuit reversed both conspiracy convic- 
tions. It found that the record was devoid of any evidence 
that Thorpe and Pearce had entered into an agreement. 
Although the defendants’ presence at the house was 
unexplained, the court concluded that no rational trier of 
fact could have found that even tacit coordination 
between Thorpe, Pearce, or any third party, to maintain a 
crack house or to distribute crack. 


The evidence against Mr. Carlisle surpasses that pre- 
sented in Burgess and Pearce. Unlike the Burgess defen- 
dant, he was more than just present during the 
conspiracy. He took actions to help hide the contraband 
from the police. He stated his intention to not “take 
chances.” He inquired whether a key unlocked the back 
of the truck which contained the marijuana. And finally, 
in contrast to the Pearce defendants, Mr. Carlisle’s use of 
the word “we” in a statement made to other conspirators 
during a conversation about where to put the truck full of 
marijuana to avoid the place, “we don’t want to take no 
chances,” could indicate joinder with the conspiracy to a 
rational trier of fact. I find that Carlisle’s hearsay state- 
ment concerning the scanners, his statements evincing a 
desire to avoid the police, and the fact that he drove a 
conspirator (his common law mother-in-law) to her 
home, and then drove two conspirators to a hotel and 
dropped them off, is sufficient for a rational trier of fact 
to find that he knowingly and voluntarily joined the 
conspiracy. 


Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the government, I find that the government's case against 
Charles Carlisle is sufficient to prove beyond a reason- 
able doubt that Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily joined 


22 


the conspiracy. As a result, defendant's motion will be 
denied. 


Dated in Kalamazoo, MI: /s/ Richard A. Enslen 
RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
Aug 19, 1993 United States 
District Judge 


— 


23 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 
UNITED STATES 
OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, File No. 1:93:CR:66-02 


7 HON. RICHARD A. ENSLEN 


CHARLES CARLISLE, 
Defendant. 


ORDER 


In accordance with the Opinion entered on this date; 


IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that defendant Carlisle’s 
motion for a judgment of acquittal pursuant to Rule 29(c), 
filed July 23, 1993, is DENIED. 


Dated in Kalamazoo, MI: /s/ Richard A. Enslen 
RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
Aug 19, 1993 United States 
District Judge 


24 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 
SOUTHERN DIVISION 


UNITED STATES OF DOCKET NO. 1:93:CR:66 


AMERICA 
of OCTOBER 14, 1993. 
Plaintiff, 
ve Federal Building, 
' ’ KALAMAZOO, 
CHARLES CARLISLE, N MICHIGAN. 
Defendant. 


TRANSCRIPT OF SENTENCING 
PROCEEDING / DISCHARGE 


BEFORE: HONORABLE RICHARD A ENSLEN, UNITED 
STATES DISTRICT COURT JUDGE. 


[2] OCTOBER 14, 1993 KALAMAZOO, MICHIGAN. 


THE COURT: The first comment that I have to 
make is one of decorum. I know that there are a lot of 
people here that I am sure are here for more than one of 
the defendants. I insist on absolute silence in the court- 
room at all times, and I expect the Marshals and the court 
officers to carry that forward. 


The Court first turns to the case of United States 
versus Charles Carlisle. It is the Court’s file number 
1:93:CR:66:2. 


25 


In this case on the 12th of April a complaint was filed 
which later led to an indictment. The indictment was 
filed I think later in April of 1993, charging six defen- 
dants with conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute 
marijuana in violation of Title 21 United States Code, 
sections 846 and 841(a)(1). 


The case was tried in July with some of the defen- 
dants, and on July 13, a jury returned a guilty verdict 
against Charles Carlisle, Dolores Rupert, Michael Hall, 
and Amelia Ramon for their part in the one-count indict- 
ment charging the marijuana conspiracy. One defendant, 
Timothy Smith, received a directed verdict of acquittal. 


Following the conviction of Mr. Carlisle, his bond 
was revoked as required, and the Court ordered a presen- 
tence report to be prepared, and it was prepared. Mark 
[3] Restum from the United States Probation Office pre- 
pared the report. There were, are a number of unresolved 
objections to the presentence report today. 


Mr. Redford, who prosecuted the case, appears for 
the government; and the defendant, Mr. Carlisle, appears 
as does his lawyer, Mr. Graham, Scott Graham. 


This morning the Court talked to Mr. Redford, who 
was here on another trial, and Mr. Graham by telephone, 
and the lawyer for Ms. Rupert, whose name momentarily 
escapes me, and the lawyer for Mr. Hall, whose name also 
escapes me for the moment; and I told them that I had 
read a case from the Fourth Circuit involving the manda- 
tory minimum guidelines and the responsibility assigned 
to an individual defendant relating to quantity; and I told 
them that they should be aware of this and prepared to 
do two things this afternoon: 


26 


One, to argue how the law applies; and secondly, to 
offer evidence as to the quantity attributable to the defen- 
dant under consideration. 


That is what I told everybody, I hope. I actually 
talked to Mr. Redford myself, and I talked to Mr. Graham 
myself. I did not talk to the two lawyers. I assigned that 
job to one of my law clerks I believe. 


That is the basic setting. The record may not show 
what I am talking about; so I am going to say a couple of 
things and only a couple. I don’t have that. This will [4] 
take a few moments. 


While she is looking for it, I think I told both Mr. 
Graham and Mr. Redford that my attention was called to 
a case in a publication called Sentencing Guidelines, that 
publication I believe to be produced by the Federal Judi- 
cial Center, and I believe to be directed to district and 
circuit judges, and Supreme Court Justices. It is possibly a 
once-a-month publication. It may come out more often. It 
highlights sentences around the country on the Sentenc- 
ing Guidelines. It started about 1987 and continues to 
come. It used to come more frequently than it does now 
because the decisions were newer. 


And in it I found the Fourth Circuit case which was 
highlighted this month, United States versus Irvin. Its offi- 
cial cite is 2 Fed. 3rd 72. Its LEXIS cite is 1993 21460. And 
in essence, the Fourth Circuit held the district courts 
must determine the quantity of narcotics reasonably fore- 
seeable to each individual co-conspirator prior to a deter- 
mination of the applicability of the mandatory minimum 
sentencing provisions of section 841. 


27 


In accord with Irvin is U. S. vs. Martinez, 987 Fed. 2nd 
920, a Second Circuit decision in 1993; United States vs. 
Conkins, 987 Fed. 2nd 564 at 570, from the Ninth Circuit in 
1993; United States vs. Young, 997 Fed. 2nd 1204 at 1210 
from the Seventh Circuit in 1993; and [5] United States vs. 
Rogers, 982 Fed. 2nd 1241 at 1246 from the Eighth Circuit 
in 1993. 


The Court indicated to both lawyers, I believe, that I 
had already looked at a Sixth Circuit case or two that 
were recent. I don’t believe I gave either lawyer the cite 
for the Sixth Circuit case. Now I am going to give the 
lawyers the cite of the I think most important case in the 
Sixth Circuit. It is called United States vs. Jenkins. It is not 
reported yet. It is 1993 U. S. Appeals LEXIS 20967. It was 
decided on August 20th of this year. I think that it will be 
published. It is not yet published. 


The Sixth Circuit endorsed the use of the so-called 
reasonably foreseeable standard to measure a co-conspir- 
ator’s personal responsibility for an amount of drugs. It 
squarely addressed the question, I am now quoting from 
the Sixth Circuit, quote, “Whether a conspirator is prop- 
erly found accountable for the full amount of drugs 
involved in the conspiracy based solely on the finding 
that the amount involved was foreseeable to him.” End 
quote. 


MR. REDFORD: What page is that, Your 
Honor? 


_ THE COURT: I don’t have a page cite for that 
quote. Yes, I do, too. 4. Star 4. See Start 4. And the 
“reasonably foreseeable” I have underlined myself. If you 
have it in front of you, both of you ought to [sic] able to 


28 


find it. It doesn’t make any difference. You don’t need to 
find [6] it. But I am still on the same case, and I am going 
to make another comment about it, because this comment 
goes farther than the Fourth Circuit goes. I am again 
quoting, and I hope that I know what page I am quoting 
from. It is 24 and 31. Star 24 to 31, actually through, from 
24 through 31. There are ellipses here, Mr. Redford. You 
aren't going to be able to follow me that closely. So don’t 
worry about it. I am now quoting between those pages. 


“A co-conspirator is not necessarily responsible for 
the total amount of cocaine involved in the conspiracy for 
the process of establishing his Base Offense Level. Rather, 
a participant is responsible for other conspirator’s con- 
duct only if that conduct was reasonably foreseeable to 
him and in furtherance of the execution of the jointly 
undertaken criminal activity.” | am going to skip some. 


“However, foreseeability is only one of the limita- 
tions on the ability of a trial court to charge one partici- 
pant in a conspiracy with the conduct of the other 
participants.” Leaving out some more. 


In this case, the district court did not address, 
implicitly or explicitly, the scope of the criminal activity 
Vincent Sample agreed to jointly undertake.” 


Now that tells me in the Sixth Circuit as recently as 
August that there were two inquires [sic] the trial court 
would have to make: first, the reasonable foreseeability 
analysis; and even if the individual defendant reasonably 
foresaw the quantity, the Court had to move to the second 
issue did he agree to join the conspiracy or the scope of 
the conspiracy for that amount. That is what I understand 
and believe that Jenkins stands for. 


29 


Of course, it would be the government's respon- 
sibility on a preponderance of the burden standard to 
show the Court, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
the defendant reasonably foresaw the quantity involved 
in this conspiracy, and if he did, that he reasonably, that 
he, quote, the quote to the Court, “that he implicitly or 
explicitly joined the scope of the criminal activity.” 


It is doubtful to me that the prosecutor can do that. I 
have read the presentence report. There is nothing in the 
presentence report to suggest anything more than what | 
heard at trial, and I heard everything in trial. 


However, the Court isn’t even going to reach that 
issue. And I now put aside as redundant that issue. 
Because the Court, instead, is about to do something else; 
and to do something else, I have to let the lawyers enter 
my chambers. This is the first time that I have ever done 
that. So welcome in. 


I wrote two opinions, Mr. Graham and Mr. Redford, 
in August of 1993. The opinion that you saw [8] denied 
your motion for a judgment of acquittal. The other 
granted it. I am now reversing myself and granting it. | 
am going to read you precisely my written opinion as | 
pulled it off the LEXIS 25 minutes ago, and I would ask 
you to turn to the August 24th opinion of the Court on 
the Carlisle motion for a directed verdict, for a judgment 
of acquittal, excuse me. 


And I am going to read the things that are different 
about it. 


That is to say, if I can find it. I have it. 
Do either one of you nave that? 


30 


MR. REDFORD: I have got it, Your Honor. 
MR. GRAHAM: I don't. 
MR. REDFORD: | will share it with him. 


THE COURT: Share it. He will be glad to share 
this with you. 


MR. REDFORD: I am not sure that he should. 
THE COURT: The first paragraph is the same. 
MR. REDFORD: I am sorry? 


THE COURT: By the way, this is available for 
both of you up here. 


The first paragraph is the same. 
The “The standard of review” paragraph is the same. 


The sentence starting with, rather, the [9] paragraph 
starting with “the evidence presented” is the same. 


The next one beginning “In his opening statement” is 
the same. 


“When Crawford returned” is the same. 


The quotes thereafter from Ramon, Carlisle, and 
Crawford are all the same. 


The paragraph beginning “At Rupert's request” is the 
same. 


Starting with, “Upon review of the foregoing stan- 
dards” do you see that? 


MR. REDFORD: No. Yes, Your Honor. 


31 


THE COURT: I now read to you from my first 
prepared opinion and hereby reverse myself, and return 
to the first opinion. 


Upon review of the foregoing standards. I am sorry. 


“Upon review of the evidence in this case under the 
foregoing standards, I find that it is not sufficient to 
sustain defendant's conviction. Viewed in the light most 
favorable to the government, I believe that a rational trier 
of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt that” - 
excuse me. 


“Viewed in the light most favorable to the govern- 
ment, I believe that a rational trier of fact could not (sic) 
find beyond a reasonable doubt that Carlisle knew [10] 
about the conspiracy. However” — strike it again. Let me 
try it a third time. 

“Viewed in the light most favorable to the govern- 
ment, I believe that a rational trier of fact could find 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Carlisle knew about the 
conspiracy. However, I do not believe that a rational trier 
of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt, as the jury 
was instructed in Instruction 10B that it must, that Car- 
lisle knowingly and volutu.arily joined the conspiracy. 
Instruction 10C explained that in order to establish know- 
ing and voluntary joinder, quote, “the government must 
prove that the defendant knew the conspiracy’s main 
purpose, and that he voluntarily joined it intending to 
help advance or achieve its goals.” 


Ellipsis. 


“But proof that a defendant simply knew about a 
conspiracy, or was present at the time, or associated with 


32 


members of the group, is not enough, even if he approved 
of what was happening or did not object to it. Similarly, 
just because a defendant may have done something that 
happened to help a conspiracy does not necessarily make 
him a conspirator. These are all things that you may 
consider in deciding whether the government has proved 
that a defendant joined a conspiracy. But without more 
they are not enough.” 


End quote, citing Sixth Circuit Pattern [11] Criminal 
Instruction, 3.03, 1991. I added emphasis in my written 
opinion to “But without more they are not enough.” 


I continued. 


“The Committee notes cite many cases in support of 
this instruction. E.g., United States vs. Richardson, 596 Fed. 
2nd 157, at 162, Sixth Circuit in 1979.” Parenthesis. 
“(‘There must be proof of an intention or an agreement to 
cooperate in the crime.’); United States vs. Bostic, 480 Fed. 
2nd 965, at 968, in 1963. (‘There must be intentional 
participation in the transaction with a view to the fur- 
therance of the common design and purpose.’)” 

. I then go back to the written opinion that you both 
have, I believe, that starts with a sentence that starts: “In 
the unpublished decision of United States vs. Burgess,” 
and so on, and you will find that at the top of page 5. 


MR. REDFORD: Got it, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: I have that identically, and every- 
thing identically until I get to the facts of this case which 
is on the page where your page 7 begins with the para- 
graph: “The evidence against Mr. Carlisle.” 


Do you see that? 


33 


MR. REDFORD: I do, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Instead of that - and the sentence 
[12] below it and the paragraph above it are the same. In 
that paragraph, instead of what you see, this is what I 
have first written: 


“The facts of this case require the same result as 
those in Burgess and Pearce. The government produced no 
evidence that Charles Carlisle entered into an agreement 
with any member of the conspiracy. Like the Burgess/ 
defendant, he was clearly present during the conspiracy, 
and the jury certainly could have found that he knew 
about it. However, in the course of hours of tape recorded 
conversations, no conspirators suggest that Carlisle is 
involved in this conspiracy. There was no evidence that 
he was involved in arranging the transport of the mari- 
juana to Michigan. In fact, Crawford testified that prior to 
coming to Michigan he had never heard of Carlisle. Car- 
lisle had never handled the drugs or the truck which 
contained them, and there was no evidence that Carlisle 
was to benefit from the conspiracy. | find that Carlisle’s 
hearsay statement concerning scanners, and the fact that 
he drove a conspirator” — parenthesis - “(his common law 
mother-in-law) to her home, and then drove two conspir- 
ators to a hotel and dropped them off, is insufficient to 
establish that he knowingly and voluntarily joined the 
conspiracy.” 

Paragraph. 

“Viewing the evidence in the light most [13] favor- 
able to the government, I find that the government's case 


against Charles Carlisle is insufficient to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily 


34 


joined the conspiracy. As a result, the defendant's motion 
will be granted.” 


The Court even prepared an order which it never 
signed, which reads: “In accordance with the opinion 
entered on this date, it is hereby ordered that the defen- 
dant Carlisle’s motion for a judgment of acquittal pur- 
suant to rule 290), filed July 23, 1993, is GRANTED. It is 
further ordered that the defendant Carlisle is to be dis- 
charged from custody.” 


Now I not only prepared that, but I have it in its 
original form and I never signed it. I went through a 
process of thinking. I have changed my mind when I 
wrote the opinion that you all see. I don’t know that I 
have ever in my life written two opinions like this. But | 
did. I now say that I was wrong; and I was right the first 
time, and Mr. Carlisle is discharged. It is as simple as 
that. No, no, no noise, no demonstrations. Thank you. 


MR. REDFORD: May we have a side bar? 
(Unrecorded side bar conference.) 


THE COURT: Let’s take a recess out here for a 
minute. 


(Recess.) 


[14] THE COURT: There was a brief recess in 
this proceeding while I talked with the two lawyers about 
a number of things, one or two of which I am going to 
put on the record, and also, to allow Mr. Redford to make 
a phone call that he wanted to make. 


Part of the discussion in chambers had to do with a 
letter that the Court received from the defendant a few 
days ago. And the record should show that I have made 


35 


that letter available for the defense lawyer to see and the 
government lawyer to see, with the approval of the 
defense lawyer, and that it may be a sealed document 
following this appeal in the event that the government 


appeals. 


Secondly, I discussed with the lawyers briefly that I 
had read the presentence report, which I guess ought to 
be obvious to everybody, and I note for the first time 
when I read the presentence report that Mr. Carlisle 
served his country in Vietnam in 1967 or 1968, and that 
while he was there he received the Bronze Star. The 
specific mention in the presentence report is just labeled 
paragraph 42. 


It reads as follows. “On January 24, 1967, Charles 
Carlisle enlisted in the United States Army. The defen- 
dant was honorably discharged from service on January 
24, 1969. While in the army, Mr. Carlisle served 11 months 
and 27 days in foreign service, participating in the Viet- 
nam campaign. He received the Army Commendations 
Medal [15] and the Bronze Star. The defendant had a E-5 
rank at separation. Mr. Carlisle stated he was proud to 
serve his country although he did not like what he saw 
regarding the injuries and casualties, and the feeling that 
he was, quote, losing family, end quote during his cam- 
paign. Mr. Carlisle served as a combat medic during his 
tour in Vietnam.” 


The Court doesn’t meet too many Bronze Star recip- 
ients. Mr. Carlisle, on behalf of my country I thank you 
for your service in Vietnam. This is the end of this 


36 


proceeding. We will recess briefly and take up the matter 
of Ms. Rupert. 


(Conclusion of Proceeding.) 


37 


United States District Court 
For the Western District of Michigan 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, File No. 
Plaintiff, 1:93:CR:66-02 
HON. RICHARD 
N A. ENSLEN 
CHARLES CARLISLE, 
Defendant. 
OPINION 


In accordance with the oral opinion delivered from 
the bench on October 14, 1993, and for the reasons given 
therein, this Court’s Opinion and Order of August 19, 
1993, is withdrawn. In its place, the Court enters the 
following Opinion and Judgment: 


The matter before the Court is defendant Carlisle’s 
motion for a judgment of acquittal pursuant to Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 29(c). Defendant was charged in a single count 
Indictment with conspiracy to possess marijuana with 
intent to distribute. On July 13, 1993, a jury found defen- 
dant guilty. Defendant’s motion does not claim that there 


Rule 29(c) allows defendants seven days after the jury is 
discharged, “or within such further time as the court may fix 
during the 7-day period,” to bring a motion for judgment of 
acquittal. The government correctly points out that this dead- 
line occurred on July 22 in this case, but defendant’s motion was 
filed on July 23. However, I can conceive of no prejudice to the 
United States which will result from consideration of a motion 
that is one day later in this case. Because I believe that refusal to 
hear this motion would result in grave injustice, and because the 
Rule permits the Court to extend the deadline, I will consider 
this motion as if it were filed in a timely manner. 


38 


was not an agreement to possess and distribute mari- 
juana. Instead, his motion argues that the evidence was 
insufficient to prove that he joined the conspiracy. 


The standard of review for claims of insufficient evi- 
dence is “whether after viewing the evidence in the light 
most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of 
fact could have found the essential elements of the crime 
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 
307, 319 (1979) (emphasis in original); United States v. 
Boling, 869 F.2d 965 (6th Cir. 1989). Reviewing the evi- 
dence in the light most favorable to the government 
means that I must make all credibility choices and infer- 
ences in a manner that supports the jury’s verdict. Fur- 
ther, circumstantial evidence alone is sufficient to sustain 
a conviction and such evidence need not remove every 
reasonable hypothesis except that of guilt. United States v. 
Stone, 748 F.2d 361, 363 (6th Cir. 1984). 


The evidence presented against Carlisle at trial was 
as follows. On the evening of April 10, 1993, defendant 
Rupert, Carlisle’s common-law wife, defendant Ramon, 
Ms. Rupert’s mother, and Thomas Crawford arrived at 
the residence on Yale Street that Carlisle and Rupert 
Shared. Ramon travelled in a car driven by Rupert, and 
they were followed by a truck full of marijuana. That 
truck was driven by Crawford, the government's primary 
witness, who was wearing a tape-recording device at the 
time. 


In his opening statement, defendant's counsel stated 
that Rupert told Carlisle that the truck contained mari- 
juana, and that she was scared. The inference that Carlisle 
knew that the truck contained marijuana could also be 


39 


drawn from a hearsay statement by Rupert I admitted. As 
soon as Ramon, Rupert and Crawford arrived at the Yale 
Street residence, Crawford recorded the following state- 
ment of Rupert: “Okay, just pull out and Chuck [Carlisle] 
says to go down the street and just park for awhile 
because he said he’s heard over the scanner, there’s some 
cops around here.”? Cassette #1A, p. 5. Crawford parked 
the truck down the street. 


When Crawford returned from parking the truck he 
was introduced to Carlisle. Crawford testified that Car- 
lisle was quiet and did not appear nervous. At this point, 
the parties appear to be discussing where to park the 
truck for the evening, and the following conversation 
ensued: 


Ramon: We can park it behind the house. 
Crawford: All right might good. 
Carlisle: Figure right down the drive. 


Ramon: Leah, because my son called, my 
grandson called and said there was 
cops around here. 


Rupert: around this area 
Ramon: unintelligible 


2 This hearsay statement was the only evidence that there 
was a scanner in the Carlisle / Rupert home. A neighbor testified 
that she had been in the home on a daily basis during the time 
period in question, and never saw a scanner. Further, Agent 
Munson testified that he had been in the house and the back 
bedrooms, and never saw a scanner. 

Amelia Ramon made reference to her grandson picking up 


signals on scanners. That person does not reside in the Carlisle / 
Rupert residence. 


40 


Rupert: and we don’t want to take a chance 
right now 


Carlisle: We don’t want to take no chances. 


Crawford: No, uh uh, that’s why I was going, I, 
the speed limit was thirty and so I 
stayed right on it. 


Ramon: Yeah? Oh and before I forget, on the 
key, the combination. I took the 
thing off and I put it on there so... 


Carlisle: Okay is that for the back? 
(One page later) * * * 

Ramon: We're going (unintelligible) 

Crawford: Oh yeah its best not take any... 

Carlisle: No I won't take no chances 

Crawford: Okay. 


Id. at 5-7. 


At Rupert’s request, Carlisle then drove Amelia 
Ramon to her home shortly after Rupert, Ramon and 
Crawford arrived at the Yale Street residence. The truck 
full of marijuana, driven by Crawford, followed. The 
truck was left at Ramon’s home, and Crawford joined 
Carlisle and Ramon in the car. Carlisle then drove Craw- 
ford and Ramon to the Stouffer Hotel. During this trip, 
tape recordings indicated that there was nothing but 
casual banter about topics such as cars and the city of 
Battle Creek. Carlisle dropped them off and left. There 
was no evidence that Carlisle had any further contact 
with any member of the conspiracy. 


Upon review of the evidence in this case under the 
foregoing standards, I find that it is not sufficient to 


41 


sustain defendant's conviction. Viewed in the light most 
favorable to the government, I believe that a rational trier 
of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt that Carlisle 
knew about the conspiracy. However, I do not believe 
that a rational trier of fact could find beyond a reasonable 
doubt, as the jury was instructed in Instruction 10B it 
must, that Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily joined the 
conspiracy. Instruction 10C explained that in order to 
establish knowing and voluntary joinder, 


the government must prove that [the defendant] 
knew the conspiracy’s main purpose, and that 
he voluntarily joined it intending to help 
advance or achieve his goals. . . . But proof that 
a defendant simply knew about a conspiracy, or 
was present at the time, or associated with 
members of the group, is not enough, even if he 
approved of what was happening or did not 
object to it. Similarly, just because a defendant 
may have done something that happened to 
help a conspiracy does not necessarily make him 
a conspirator. These are all things that you may 
consider in deciding whether the government 
has proved that a defendant joined a conspiracy. 
But without more they are not enough. 


Sixth Circuit Pattern Criminal Instruction No. 3.03 
(1991) (emphasis added). The Committee Notes cite many 
cases in support of this instruction. E.g., United States v. 
Richardson, 596 F.2d 157, 162 (6th Cir. 1979) (there must be 
proof of an intention an [sic] agreement to cooperate in 
the crime); United States v. Bostic, 480 F.2d 965, 968 (6th 
Cir. 1973) (there must be intentional participation in the 
transaction with a view to the furtherance of the common 


design and purpose). 


42 


In the unpublished decision of United States v. Bur- 
gess, 1992 U.S. App. LEXIS 34740 (6th Cir.), the court 
acknowledged that “[clonspiracy cases often present dif- 
ficult questions about the extent to which seemingly pas- 
sive participants are nonetheless culpable members of the 
conspiracy.” Id. at *21. The appellate panel went on to 
hold that there was insufficient evidence to support 
defendant Burgess, conviction for conspiracy to possess 
marijuana with intent to distribute. In Burgess, a defen- 
dant named Muncy planned to buy marijuana from DEA 
agent and informant. Muncy drove to the scheduled ren- 
dezvous point with Burgess and a third defendant, Rose. 
When they arrived, Muncy walked to the agents’ car and 
discussed the purchase. Muncy then went back to his 
own car and brought Rose to the agents’ car with him. 
After the transaction began, all three were arrested. A 
search of the car revealed a loaded revolver and $15,000 
in cash in the front seat, and scales in the trunk. 


Upon review of these facts, the Sixth Circuit con- 
cluded that the jury could have inferred Burgess’ knowl- 
edge of the purpose of the trip. White’s possession of 
money to purchase marijuana, and even the presence of a 
weapon ir the car. However, because Burgess did not 
participate in the discussions with the agents, he was not 
mentioned in those conversations, he did not drive the 
car, and he never left the middle of the front seat, the 
court held that a rational trier of fact could not find that 
Burgess knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 


United States v. Pearce, 912 F.2d 159 (6th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied sub nom Thorpe v. United States, 111 S.Ct. 978 
(1991), provides another example of evidence which the 
Sixth Circuit found to be sufficient to sustain a conspiracy 


43 


conviction. Defendants Thorpe and Pearce were con- 
victed of conspiring to possess and distribute crack in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846 on the following evidence. A 
SWAT team entered what they suspected was a crack 
house after an informant purchased crack at the house 
with registered bills. When they entered, Thorpe ran into 
the basement yelling “it’s a bust.” The SWAT team found 
Thorpe nearby two doses of crack and a loaded revolver. 
Thorpe had a live round in his pocket that matched those 
found in the gun. The police found Pearce sitting on a 
couch in the living room. Next to him was a bag of crack 
and the registered bills the informant used in his pur- 
chase. 


The Sixth Circuit reversed both conspiracy convic- 
tions. It found that the record was devoid of any evidence 
that Thorpe and Pearce had entered into an agreement. 
Although the defendants’ presence at the house was 
unexplained, the court concluded that the no rational 
trier of fact could have found that even tacit coordination 
between Thorpe, Pearce, or any third party, to maintain a 
crack house or to distribute crack. 


The facts of this case require the same result as those 
in Burgess and Pearce. The gove..iment produced no evi- 
dence that Charles Carlisle entered into an agreement 
with any member of the conspiracy. Like the Burgess 
defendant, he was clearly present during the conspiracy, 
and the jury could have found that he knew about it. 
However, in the course of hours of tape recorded conver- 
sations, no conspirators suggest that Carlisle is involved 
in the conspiracy. There was no evidence that he was 
involved in arranging the transport of the marijuana to 
Michigan. In fact, Crawford testified that prior to coming 


44 


to Michigan, he had not heard of Carlisle. Carlisle never 
handled the drugs or the truck which contained them, 
and there was no evidence that Carlisle was to benefit 
from the conspiracy. I find that Carlisle’s hearsay state- 
ment concerning the scanners, and the fact that he drive 
a conspirator (his common law mother-in-law) to her 
home, and then drove two conspirators to a hotel and 
dropped them off, is insufficient to establish that he 
knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy. 

Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the government, I find that the government's case against 
Charles Carlisle is insufficient to prove beyond a reason- 
able doubt that Carlisle knowingly and voluntarily joined 
the conspiracy. As a result, defendant's motion will be 
granted. 


Dated in Kalamazoo, MI: “s/Richard A. Enslen“ 


October 27, 1993 RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
United States District Judge 


45 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Plaintiff, 
File No. 
1 1:93:CR:66-02 
CHARLES CARLISLE, HON. RICHARD 
Defendant. A. ENSLEN 
/ 
JUDGMENT 


(Filed Oct 28, 1993) 
In accordance with the Opinion entered on this date; 


IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, in accord with the oral 
opinion delivered from the bench on October 14, 1993, 
and for the reasons given therein, this Court’s Opinion 
and Order of August 19, 1993, is WITHDRAWN. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that defendant Carlisle’s 
motion for a judgment of acquittal pursuant to Rule 29%c), 
filed July 23, 1993, is GRANTED. 


Dated in Kalamazoo, MI: /s/ Richard A. Enslen 

Oct. 27, 1993 RICHARD A. ENSLEN 
United States District 
Judge 


46 


Nos. 93-2373/2380/2470; 94-1105 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


Unrrep States or AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 


Devores Rupert (93-2373); 
Micnuaet Hart (93-2380); 
and Ame.ia RAMON 
(94-1105), 


Defendants-Appellants. 


On Appear from the 
United States District 
Court for the Western 
District of Michigan 


Unrrep States OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
CuHaries Carusie (93-2470), 


Defendant-Appellee. 


Decided and Filed February 21, 1995 


Before: BROWN, RYAN, and BOGGS, Circuit Judges. 


BOGGS, Circuit Judge. Rupert, Ramon, and Hall 
appeal their convictions for conspiracy to possess mari- 
juana with the intent to distribute, in violation of 21 
U.S.C. §§ 841 and 846. The government appeals the 
court’s granting of Carlisle’s motion for acquittal. We 
affirm the convictions of Rupert, Ramon, and Hall, and 
reverse Carlisle’s acquittal. Our discussion of the issues 


47 


presented by Rupert, Ramon, and Hall is contained in an 
unpublished appendix to this decision. 


The government argues on appeal that the district 
court lacked jurisdiction to acquit Carlisle. 


On July 13, the jury convicted Carlisle, along with the 
other defendants before us, of one count of conspiracy to 
possess marijuana with intent to distribute. On July 23, 
Carlisle filed a motion for judgment of acquittal. The 
seven-day period in which Carlisle could move for 
acquittal under Fed. R. Crim. P. 29 does not include 
weekends, so it lapsed on July 22. The district court 
denied Carlisle's motion on August 24, 1994. 


When Carlisle appeared for sentencing on October 
14, however, the court on its own motion reversed its 
earlier decision and granted Cerlisle’s motion for acquit- 
tal. The court wrote: “I do not believe that a rational trier 
of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt, as the jury 
was instructed in Instruction 10B it must, that Carlisle 
knowingly and voluntarily joined the conspiracy.” The 


The court noted in footnote 1 of its Opinion: 

The government correctly points out that de- 
fendant’s motion was filed on July 23. However, I can 
conceive of no prejudice to the United States which 
will result from consideration of a motion that is one 
day late in this case. Because I believe that refusal to 
hear this motion would result in grave injustice, and 
because the Rule [29] permits the court to extend the 
deadline, I will consider this motion as if it were filed 
in a timely manner. 


48 


district court held that the evidence was insufficient to 
convict under Jackson v. Virginia. Following the Sixth Cir- 
cuit’s decision in United States v. Burgess, 931 F.2d 893 (6th 
Cir. 1991) (Table), 1991 WL 66056, and United States v. 
Pearce, 912 F.2d 159 (6th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 111 S. Ct. 
978 (1991), the district court found that the government 
failed to prove that Carlisle entered into an agreement. 


Under Rule 29, it is beyond the court's jurisdiction to 
grant an untimely motion for acquittal. Furthermore, it is 
beyond a court’s jurisdiction to enter a judgment of 
acquittal sua sponte after the case has been submitted to 
the jury. Fed. R. Crim. P. 29; United States v. Davis, 992 
F.2d 635, 640 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 265 (1993); 
see also United States v. Dennard, 7 F.3d 235 (6th Cir. 1993) 
(Table), 1993 WL 351742. 


In Davis, as here, the district court initially denied 
defendant’s motion for acquittal. At sentencing, however, 
the court, as here, reversed its previous decision, assert- 
ing that it had the inherent authority to consider a judg- 
ment of acquittal after the discharge of the jury “if 
necessary to correct manifest injustice.” Id. at 637. On 
appeal, we ruled that a district court does not have such 
inherent authority. Id. at 638. We noted that there is no 
provision in Rule 29 that allows a court to act on its own 
initiative after the case is submitted to the jury. Id. at 639. 
However, under Rule 29(c), if Carlisle had moved for 
acquittal within seven days of the discharge of the jury 
(or later, if the court so allowed during that seven-day 
period), it would have been within the court's jurisdiction 
to grant Carlisle’s motion for acquittal. 


49 


The district court lacked the jurisdiction to acquit 
Carlisle. We therefore must reverse the judgment of 
acquittal. 


II 


In conclusion, we affirm the convictions of Ramon, 
Rupert, and Hall. However, we reverse Carlisle’s judg- 
ment of acquittal and remand for the district court to 
reinstate the jury’s verdict and for sentencing. 


50 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
Western District of Michigan 


UNITED STATES OF AMENDED JUDGMENT 


AMERICA IN A CRIMINAL CASE 
v (For Offenses Committed 
On or After 
CHARLES ALLAN November 1, 1987) 
CARLES (Filed July 7, 1995) 
Case Number: 
1:93 CR 66-02 


James Christopherson 
Defendant's Attorney 


IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that pursuant to Rule 35(c) of 
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the judgment 
entered on June 27, 1995 is VACATED. 


THE DEFENDANT was found guilty on count one after a 
plea of not guilty. 


Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such 
count(s), which involve the following offenses: 


Title & Section Nature of Offense 
18:841(a)(1) Conspiracy to possess 
18:846 & 2 with intent to distribute 


and possession with 
intent to distribute 


marijuana. 
Date Offense Count 
Concluded Number(s) 
4-11-93 1 


The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 
through 5 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed 
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 


51 


It is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special assess- 
ment of $50.00 which shall be due immediately. 


IT Is FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall notify 
the United States attorney for this district within 30 days 
of any change of name, residence, or mailing address 
until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments 
imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 


Date of Imposition Sentence: June 27, 1995 

Defendant’s Soc. Sec. No.: 374-50-0463 

Defendant's Date of Birth: 6-19-48 

Defendant’s Address: 218 Yale, Battle Creek, MI 49017 
DATED: July 7, 1995 


/s/ Richard A. Enslen 
Richard A. Enslan 
United States District Judge 


