Source: IA Joint Appendix. ONLY printed JA 46–48 (stipulation), 67–85 (trial argument and Saffer/Smart/Pittman deposition excerpts). Record reproductions, not court findings except stipulated facts. Cover and dockets excluded.

46 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


C.A. No. 92-0115/P 
44 Liquor Mart, INc. and PEOPLE’S SUPER 
Liquor STORES, INC. 
Vv. 


KaTE F. RACINE, in her capacity as Rhode Island Liquor 
Control Administrator 


STIPULATION 


Now come counsel for all parties, and hereby agree 
that the following facts may be agreed upon as true and 
established as such in the trial of this matter: 


1. Defendant Kate Racine currently holds the position 
of Liquor Control Administrator for the State of Rhode 
Island and has held that position since August of 1991. 


2. The plaintiffs are 44 Liquor Mart, Inc., and People’s 
Super Liquor Stores, Inc., businesses engaged in retail 
sales of alcoholic beverages. 44 Liquor Mart is located in 
Johnston, Rhode Island. People’s Super Liquor Stores, 
Inc., is located in New Bedford and Fairhaven, Massa- 
chusetts. 


3. The Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association, a trade 
group of small retail liquor stores, has intervened as a 
party defendant seeking to uphold the price advertising 
ban. 


4. On December 17, 1991, Plaintiff 44 Liquor Mart, 
Inc. was found to be in violation of R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 3- 
8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and Regulation 32 of the Liquor Control 


ee 


— ee 


47 


Administration regarding the advertising of alcohol prices 
or referring to price in any way with regard to alcohol. 
44 Liquor Mart, Inc. was fined for that violation and paid 
the fine. 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. did not take advantage of 
the appeal process provided by State statute. The at- 
tached newspaper advertisement is submitted by all parties 
as a full exhibit. The transcript of the hearing before the 
Liquor Control Administrator is submitted by all parties 
as a full exhibit. 


5. Other liquor licensees, as well as newspapers within 
the State, have been warned and fined for a violation of 
this regulation. 


6. Plaintiffs believe that they will each realize an 
economic benefit of more than $100,000 per year if 
the price advertising ban is lifted. 


7. Racine vigorously enforces the price advertising ban. 


8. Peoples has made extensive use of price advertising 
in Massachusetts where it is permitted. 


9. Peoples has attempted to place its advertisements, 
which include price information, in Rhode Island com- 
munications media, but has been refused. 


10. Rhode Island communications media reach both 
Rhode Island and Massachusetts citizens. 


11. The proposed speech does not concern an illegal 
activity and presumably would not be false or misleading. 


12. The State of Rhode Island has a substantial in- 
terest in regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages. 


48 


Respectfully submitted, 
FOR THE PLAINTIFFS: 
/s/ Evan T. Lawson /s/ Barry J. Kusinitz, Esq. 
EVAN T. LAWSON, Esq. BARRY J. KUSINITZ, Esq. 
425 Summer Street 20 Westminster Street 
Boston, MA 02210 Providence, RI 02903 


FOR THE RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION: 


/s/ Robert M. Brady /s/ William P. Gasbarro 
ROBERT M. Brapy, Esq. WILLIAM P. GASBARRO, Esq. 
One Grove Avenue 685 Warren Avenue 
East Providence, RI 02914 East Providence, RI 02914 


FOR DEFENDANT KATE F. RACINE 


/s/ Rebecca Tedford Partington 
REBECCA TEDFORD PARTINGTON 


Special Assistant Attorney General 
72 Pine Street 
Providence, RI 02903 


Date: 11/16/92 


(Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing) 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY ps 



67 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


C.A. No. 92-0115/P 


44 Liguor MArrT, INC. and PEOPLE’sS SUPER 
Liquor STORES, INC. 


VS. 


KATE F. RACINE, in her capacity as R.I. Liquor 
Control Administrator 


INTERVENORS: R.I. Liquor STORE ASSOCIATION 


EXCERPT FROM TRIAL TRANSCRIPT 


[112] MS. PARTINGTON: When there is no adver- 
tising. If you want to find the best deal, you have to 
hunt for it. You have to spend sometime and time is 
money and your time is worth something in finding the 
best priced commodity. So there are two ways that the 
price is increased. Also another way that the statute 
directly advances temperance, and it has nothing to do 
[113] with price. 

The state wants to ensure that the only people that go 
into a liquor store are people that are so inclined in the 
first place. People that were going to purchase before- 
hand and not people that open the newspaper, saw a 
blow-out sale going on at giant liquor stores and went in 
and bought several cases and, quite frankly, Judge, the 
Liquor Control Administrator’s emphasis here is not on 
responsible drinkers. Of course it’s not. It’s on people 
that have a very limited income such as young people. 
people that don’t have a lot of people, college students 


68 


who would pool their money, go through the newspaper, 
find out who’s having the case sales, the keg sales, drive 
down to the liquor store and buy as much beer as they 
can. That’s what this particular statute is designed for. 


THE COURT: In other words, you're saying that 
this argument, which has been put forth by counsel, it’s 
sort of—I don’t know just how to term it. It’s just cre- 
ated without any real substance to it in the sense that 
it’s by preventing price wars that you directly foster 
temperance? 


MS. PARTINGTON: He feels that’s an indirect ef- 
fect; the state feels— 


THE COURT: I know but I’m saying that you 
[114] are arguing that that’s just not so. It’s not—that 
indirect argument is just unreal. It’s unrealistic; it’s not 
true; it’s a figment because you feel that banning price 
wars is the direct way of fostering temperance. 


MS. PARTINGTON: Correct, Judge. I think he 
terms what’s going to happen as an indirect effect; the 
state terms it as a direct effect. I have, if your Honor 
would like to consider it, both parties have discussed a 
case in all the briefs that have been submitted, Adolph 
Coors v. Brady case. That was in the 10th Circuit. The 
10th Circuit sent it back down to Colorado concerning 
the strength wars. I have a transcript of the judge’s 
bench decision that says preventing strength wars, for 
instance, 3.2 beer. 3.5 beer is a valid concern to the 
state and upheld some advertising restrictions. In that 
jurisdiction you cannot advertise the strength of an alco- 
holic beverage as an inducement to buy. 

THE COURT: All right. Let’s go onto something 
else. 

MS. PARTINGTON: Okay. 


* * * * 


_ 


ss 


SR RRM te PO aks Cam IO SERS 2 eer LE OO rb ot 6? IE owe Gr 


ee i ee 


ee es 


ee ee or. eee 


69 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


C.A. No. 92-0115/P 
44 Liquor Mart, INC. and PEOPLE’s SUPER 
LIQUOR STORES, INC. 
Vs. 
KATE F. RACINE, in her capacity as R.I. Liquor 


Control Administrator 


INTERVENORS: R.I. Liquor STORE ASSOCIATION 


DEPOSITION EXCERPTS OF HENRY SAFFER, Ph.D. 


* * ok 


Q. Now, Doctor, based upon—let me make sure I 
get everything here—based upon your experience, the 
materials that you’ve reviewed, that we just marked, all 
these documents, on the fact that both plaintiff liquor 
stores expect to make a profit of upwards of $100,000 
per year if this ban is repealed, and based upon gen- 
erally accepted economic principles, do you have an 
opinion, to a reasonable degree of scientific and eco- 
nomic certainty, as to whether the Rhode Island ban of 
price advertising promotes temperance? 

A. Yes, I do. 

Q. Can you tell me what that opinion is? 

A. In my opinion, the ban on price advertising in 
Rhode Island promotes temperance. 

Q. Can you explain to us how? 

A. Yes, I can do that. The economists look at the 
price of alcohol in having two parts; one, is the search 


70 


time involved in purchasing the product, in this case, 
alcohol, and the second part would be the money price, 
and I think that the price information that’s contained 
in price advertising allows consumers to find lower prod- 
ucts, lower product prices, in this case, alcohol, more 
easily, and so the average price for alcohol would be 
lower if people could more easily find lower prices. They 
have the information where they can get alcohol at a 
cheaper price, then it will be easier for them to find it. 
The second part of it is the ban on price advertising 
would not only lowers the money price, but lowers the 
search time. People don’t have to look around as much 
in order to find lower prices, and then there is really a 
third part of it, too, the ban of the price advertising 
results in a greater variance of prices in the state than 
you'd have without a ban, and that essentially means 
that people have an incentive to look around more be- 
cause there’s a greater dispersion of prices. Prices can 
vary more from one place to another than they would in 
the absence of a price advertising ban, so people would 
figure that they could perhaps gain something by addi- 
tional shopping, search time. If there were no ban on 
price advertising, the variance of prices would probably 
go down and there would be lesser, lesser search time. 
All of these factors contribute to linking a price adver- 
tising ban to higher prices, and we have pretty good 
evidence that higher prices results in lower alcohol con- 
sumption. That’s essentially the link. 

Q. Doctor, again, I’m going to ask you a very lengthy 
question. Based on your experience, on the materials you 
reviewed, on the fact that both plaintiff liquor stores ex- 
pect to make a profit upward of $100,000 per year if the 
ban is repealed, and based upon generally accepted eco- 
nomic principles, do you have an opinion, based upon a 
reasonable degree of scientific and economic certainty, of 
the effect of abolishing the Rhode Island ban on adver- 
tising of alcoholic beverages? 

A. Yes, I do. 


ae eR we 


wee Vs BS Ow wm | WSS OT 


me OT RE OO 6 ee 


0 PD Ee 


71 


Q. Can you tell us what that opinion is? 

A. I think if the ban were abolished that it would 
lower average prices and increase consumption. 

Q. And could you, again, tell us, explain to us why? 

A. It’s the same sort of argument. Same argument 
that if the ban on price advertising were removed than 
the average price would go down, and the reason the 
average price goes down is people can more easily find 
lower prices. 

Q. Is there any one of these documents that you 
relied upon that explains the theory about search cost? 

A. The article by Stigler and Becker, it goes into 
some detail about it, and also the article by Ornstein and 
Hanssens specifically relates this theory to the case of 
price advertising ban. 

Q. Okay; since you’ve mentioned the Ornstein and 
Hanssens report, Doctor, can you briefly tell us how that 
article relates to the issue we’re discussing here today? 

A. The Ornstein and Hanssens study, they include a 
variable measuring price advertising, and they find that 
places that allow price advertising have a higher con- 
sumption, and they explain the reasoning is basically the 
search process, and they also explain that—they also 
report that places that have bans in price advertising 
have higher mean prices for alcohol and a greater vari- 
ance in prices. So they both provide a theortical reason 
aid they provide empirical information showing that a 
ban in price advertising, when price advertising is banned. 
it reduces consumption. 


oa 


Q. Now, Dr. Saffer, you personally have done re- 
search in this area, it did not involve price advertising 
bans, is that correct? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. But it did involve general advertising bans, your 
international study, can you tell us about that, please? 

A. Yes, I did a study of 17 countries over 14 years 
and found—well, these countries have different advertis- 


72 


ing ban policies. Some places ban all alcohol advertis- 
ing, and some places ban just beer and wine advertising. 
I found looking at these different countries, that places 
that had bans on alcohol advertising had lower alcohol 
consumption, lower liver cirrhosis, mortality rates, and 
lower highway fatalities rates. 

Q. How many countries were involved in this study? 

A. Seventeen countries. 

Q. Over what period of time? 

A. 1970 to 1983. 

Q. And they involved an entire country, not just a 
section of a country, is that correct? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. And why is that important? 


A. I think that—what a spill over can have, one, 
you could have people get publications or media from 
other parts of the country, so it’s probably more im- 
portant to have an entire country to look at an entire 
country rather than a small jurisdiction. 


Q. Your study focused on advertising bans, is that 
correct? 


A. That’s correct. 


Q. Can you explain to us the differences between a 
study regarding expenditures on advertising and adver- 
tising bans? 

A. When you look at the effect of an advertising ban, 
looking at really a much bigger variation in the exposure 
to alcohol advertising. It may be looking at smaller 
changes in alcohol advertising, it’s hard to detect any kind 
of effect of the small changes, but looking at a ban and 
analyzing the effect of a ban, you're really looking at, for 
many people of the country, a lifetime of exposure to 
alcohol advertising, and I think that greater variation in 
the level of exposure results—is more likely to result in 
a finding in the effect of alcohol advertising. I thought 
it was important in doing the study to look at bans rather 
than variations in advertising expenditures. 


a eee Oe ee a eel 


m " 


73 


Q. Because in a ban, you're basically starting at 
ground zero and measuring changes from there? 

A. In a ban we’re looking at the difference between 
no advertising and some level of advertising, which is a 
much bigger difference, in the level of advertising, the 
variation of advertising than it is in the studies that simply 
look at variations and expenditures. It’s also, it’s prob- 
ably also important in a ban study that the ban have 
been in effect for a long period of time. Just turning it 
off doesn’t negate the exposure that people have had for 
many, many years, so like until another generation goes 
by. The stock of exposure is still there. So it’s important 
also not only to look at a ban, but to also look at the 
effects of ban over a very long period of time. The best 
way to do that then is to compare countries. 

Q. Just one final lengthy question, Doctor; so to a 
reasonable degree of scientific certainty based upon your 
experience, the literature that you read, the fact that each 
of the plaintiffs in this case expect to gain at least 
$100,000 per year, and based upon general accepted 
economic principles, do you have an opinion as to what 
will happen to consumption of alcoholic beverages in the 
State of Rhode Island, if the price advertising ban is 
lifted? 

A. Yes, I do. 

Q. What is that opinion? 


A. I believe if they lifted the price of advertising ban, 
that it would lower prices and increase alcohol consump- 
tion in Rhodc island. 

MS. PARTINGTON: Thank you, Doctor; that’s all 
I’ve got. 

* 3 * a 

MR. BRADY: That’s how the statute reads. 

THE WITNESS: Total sales? 

MR. LAWSON: _I object to that on the grounds that 
the state has not heretofore attempted to justify this ban 
in terms of trafficking, but has justified it in terms of 


74 


promoting temperance and in both of your pretrial memos 
that was the focus of the justification. 

MR. BRADY: You can answer the question, if you 
can, Doctor? 

A. Right. I think that, again, the ban on price ad- 
vertising would result in lower average prices and a 
higher level of sales in the state, more alcohol consump- 
tion, and a higher level of sales, if that is what’s meant 
by trafficking, yes. 

Q. Unfortunately we have no legislative official to tell 
us what the legislative meant. In any event, over how 
long a period of time did the study, that international 
study span, the one that you conducted? 

A. A 14-year time period. 


75 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


C.A. No. 92-0115-P 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and PEOPLE’S SUPER 
LIQUOR STORES, INC., 
Plaintiff 
VS. 
KATE F. RACINE, in her capacity as Rhode Island 
Liquor Control Administrator, et al., 
Defendant 


INTERVENORS: RILSA 


DEPOSITION EXCERPTS OF 
DR. REGINALD GEORGE SMART 


* 


MS. PARTINGTON: Okay, I am focusing very spe- 
cifically on this one article now for the next—for the 
time being. 

THE WITNESS: Okay. 


Q. On Page | of this article that we are discussing, 
you acknowledge that some citizens groups, politicians, 
some professionals and research experts sometimes assert 
that alcohol advertising leads to increased overall con- 
sumption, is that correct? 


A. Um, probably. Can you locate me where that is 
exactly? 


MS. PARTINGTON: _ It’s the second sentence. 
A. Qh, second sentence. Yes, certainly. 


76 


Q. So, there are some research experts who believe 
that alcohol advertising leads to increased overall con- 
sumption? 

A. Yes, I think that’s true. 

Q. And is that a fair statement today? I know this 
is an ’88 study. 

A. I think it’s a fair statement, today, yes. 

Q. All right. Now, you go on, however, just beneath 
that to state that advertising and alcohol beverage in- 
dustry statements claim that there is no evidence for the 
assertion and that their position is that advertising affects 
only brand shares of the market, is that correct? 

A. Yes, that’s correct. 

Q. So, you set out there are two camps on this issue 
basically? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. And on one side we have consumer’s 
groups, government, some research experts who say there’s 
no affect? 

A. Well, I think you have some governments think- 
ing that there is no affect and some that probably think 
there is an affect. 

Q. And on the other side you have the advertisers 
and the alcohol industry saying there’s no affect on total 
overall consumption? 

A. Yes, that would be true, but I think that if you 
look at—if you look at, you know, people in government, 
there’s a big variation like that. 

a K ok a 

Q. Okay. You disagree with that position? 

A. I do disagree with it, and I think that in doing 
the review of the literature they have only paid attention 
to one of the papers that’s relevant, and it’s not the most 
—it’s not the strongest or most convincing paper. It’s 
a paper by Atkin and Block. 

Q. Okay. So, you disagree with the AMA, but you 
realize that that position is out there? 

A. Yes, I do. 


— 


rie | 


Q. And that the physicians who are members of the 
American Medical Association have a different position 
than you do? 

A. Perhaps that’s true. 

Q. Okay, and that—well, the Board of Trustees re- 
port, the Board of Trustees certainly have a different 
position than you do? 

A. I know they would, but I am not sure what the 
individual physician might think. 

Q. Okay. So, you’re saying that the Board of Trustees 
of the AMA is incorrect in their position as far as 
advertising of alcoholic beverages? 

A. Based on this review of the literature that they 
have, I would say that they have not done a very good 
job. 

Q. Okay. And these are, the membership of the 
AMA or the members of the Board of Trustees, you 
don’t know who that is or who that was when this was 
formed? 

A. Idon’t know. 

Q. Okay. However, you found that their position was 
significant enough to note it in your article? 

A. Yes. I was trying to give all points of view. 

Q. Correct, and you found it significant and note- 
worthy, so, therefore, you put it in your article? 

A. That’s right, yes. 

Q. Okay. And, also, just one more point that the 
AMA made, I think, Doctor, I am going to ask you: 
Do you acknowledge that they take the position that 
alcohol advertising does to a limited degree appear to 
influence excessive hazardous and problem drinking? 

A. That’s certainly what their position says. 

A. And you just disagree with that? 

A. I think that they have not provided sufficient evi- 
dence that that’s the case, and they have not really 
reviewed the literature. 

Q. And that the Board of Trustees’ position differs 
from yours? 

A. It does. 


78 


Q. Okay. And, also, I’m still on the first page of 
your article, Doctor, you acknowledge and you cite J.K. 
Galbraith, is that J.K., is that John Kenneth Galbraith? 

A. Yes, that’s the famous Galbraith. 

Q. Okay. And it’s his position, and going back to 
1958, that advertising affects both brand preference and 
the aggregate level of consumption, is that correct? 

A. Yes, that’s true. 

Q. And you found that conclusion significant enough 
to warrant a note in your article? 


A. That’s right. 

Q. On Page 1 of your article, as a matter of fact? 
A. That’s true. 

Q. And you just simply disagree with that finding? 
A. Yes, I do— 

MS. PARTINGTON: Okay. 

A. .. . with regard to alcoholic beverages. 


MS. PARTINGTON. Okay. 

A. I think Galbraith was talking in general and not 
focusing on alcoholic beverages. 

Q. Okay, but you didn’t mention that in your article? 

A. Perhaps not. 

Q. Okay. Now, Doctor, I’ve made it to the second 
page of your article at this point, where you note that 
a lot of the marketing of alcoholic beverages is aimed 
at specific segments of the market, such as youth, women 
and blacks, is that correct? 

A. I think that’s true, yes. 

Q. Is that still true today? 

A. I believe it is. 

Q. Okay. And that leaders in the alcohol industry 
have stated that, and you quote, “Without growth we 
cannot survive,” (closed quote), is that correct? 

A. That’s true. 

Q. And do you feel that that’s a fair statement today? 

A. Probably it would be, yes. 

Q. Okay. And then immediately after that, you, and 
I believe this is attributable to you, the following state- 


ee ee ee 


Ce eee ed 


Pees ee 0 ne 


79 


ment, it’s not in quotes, “That although beverage manu- 
facturers claim that they wish only to increase their 
share of the market, total profits will increase if the 
market expands and the shares remain the same”? 


That’s correct. 

Is that an accurate statement? 

Yes, it is. 

And is that still accurate today? 

I think it is, yes. 

Okay. And, also, in that article, just continuing, 


you indicate that price is a potent influence on the level 
of alcohol consumption? 


A. I think real price. 


Q. Okay. Can you explain it to us what you mean 
by that? 

A. Well, by real price we usually mean price which 
takes into account disposable income. 


Q. Okay. Are you factoring into your definition of 
real price the search costs for the consumer to obtain a 
good? 

A. No. I think disposable income usually means your 
income after you have paid for food and lodging. 

Q. Okay. Do you think that—are you aware of the 
notion that the cost of a good should include the search 
cost in obtaining that good? 

A. Yes, I’ve certainly heard that. 


Q. Okay, do you agree with that notion? 
A. Probably, yes. 


Q. Okay. Doctor, also in your article you mention, 
and you mention it more than one place, I believe, that 
advertising has cumulative effects that are difficult to 
detect in studies of that nature? 


A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. And that’s because the influence of one 


advertisement is likely to be insignificant, but that the 
impact of thousands, hundreds of thousands of advertise- 


O>O>O> 


80 


ments over the course of years and over the course of 
someone’s life, is difficult to assess, is that correct? 

A. I think it’s very difficult, yes. 

Q. And that’s one of the problems with the studies in 
this subject area, is that correct? 

A. I think it’s a problem, but I don’t think it’s an 
insurmountable problem. 

Q. Okay. And, basically, to sum up what I just said, 
because advertising effects might not be apparent for 
probably years? 

A. For an individual? 

MS. PARTINGTON: Correct. 

A. Yes, we don’t have any research showing what is 
the affect of advertising on people over a whole lifetime, 
but we have lots of research that shows us what’s the 
affect of advertising over a whole population at a point 
in time. 

Q. Correct. Can you turn to Page 211 of that study. 

(WITNESS COMPLIED) 


A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. Now, there is on paragraph that begins 
at the bottom of the first column and continues into the 
top of the second that talks about the affect of price on 
alcoholic beverages. Doctor, | think can we establish 
you agree that price has an affect on consumption, price 
of alcoholic beverages has an affect on consumption? 

A. I would say so, particularly if you relate price to 
disposable income. 

Q. Okay. And the last—the last sentence in that 
paragraph that I had just cited to you by Ornstein and 
Hanssens does indicate a finding that the way the adver- 
tising ban works is that “A ban on price advertising 
raises the mean and variance of price by increasing search 
costs, and this results in lower consumption”? 

A. I think that’s a speculation on their part because 
they don’t have any data on search costs, but I think it’s 
a reasonable expectation. 


ce * * 


Ee 9 


81 


Q. So, we're up to 11 different conclusions concern- 
ing the affect of advertising on consumption at this point, 
is that correct? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And all of these you fund significant enough to 
put in your article? 

A. Oh, yes, um-hum. 

Q. And the Ornstein and Hanssens study, yet another 
conclusion, we’re up to 12 at this point. 

A. Okay. 

Q. Okay. Now, again, reading some of the documents 
you brought here with you today, there was an article 
about banning happy hours where you note a negative 
relationship between alcohol consumption and price, is 
that a fair statement? 

A. A negative relationship. Could you show me that 
article? 


(DOCUMENT SHOWN TO WITNESS) 


A. Qh, yes, okay. 

Q. Can you explain to me, Doctor, what a negative 
relationship is? 

A. Well, it would mean that as real prices go up, 
alcohol consumption comes down. 

Q. And, inversely, as prices go down, consumption 
increases? 

A. It should, yes. 

Q. Okay. And this—many of the studies that you 
discuss in your various writings factor in adjacent state 
price, what the price is in a nearby state— 

A. Yes. 

Q. ... for alcoholic beverages. And this is because a 
consumer will travel if they think they will save some 
money to purchase alcohol, is that correct? 

A. Yes, that’s true. 

Q. And this would strengthen what we've talked 
about, that price does have a direct influence on con- 
sumption, is that correct? 

A. Yes, um-hum. 


82 


Q. And of the advertising studies that you review, for 
the most, part involve lifestyle advertising of alcoholic 
beverages, is that correct? 

A. I think there’s a mixture. I think there are life- 
style ads and there are what are called tombstone or 
product ads. 


* * 7% * 


ee 


Pe ee eet 


+ el aceite senthnaith 


83 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


C.A. No. 92-0115-P 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and PEOPLES SUPER 
Liquor STorFs, INC., 
Plaintiff 
Vs. 
KATE F. RACINE, in her capacity as Rhode Island 
Liquor Control Administrator, Et Al, 
Defendant 


INTERVENORS: RILSA 


DEPOSITION EXCERPTS OF DAVID J. PITTMAN, Ph.D. 


* 


Q. All right. Are you aware of empirical evidence 
that would refute the conclusion that banning alcohol 
price advertising promotes temperance? 


A. Would you repeat the question, please. 
(PENDING QUESTION READ) 


A. No, I’m not aware of any. 

MR. LAWSON: You may inquire. 

MS. PARTINGTON: Just as to the qualifications at 
this point? 

MR. LAWSON: No, as to anything. 


MR. BRADY: May we go off the record for one 
second. 


MR. LAWSON: Sure. 


MR. BRADY: —relative to what Judge Boudewyns 
had ruled on earlier. 
MR. LAWSON: | Sure. 


* * * * 


84 


Q. When did you prepare this affidavit and report? 

A. I prepared it this summer, basically, I forget 
whether it was July or August, but in that time frame. 

Q. But it was prepared following a request from the 
plaintiffs or their attorneys? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. Okay, ard this was something that you were paid 
to prepare by the plaintiff? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. This wasn’t something that’s been published? 

A. No, that is correct. 

Q. Do you have any plans to submit it for publication? 

A. Perhaps after the case has been resolved I might 
want to write about the case, but at this particular time 
I have no plans to publish it. 

Q. So it’s fair to say it’s prepared solely for this liti- 
gation? 

A. At this time it surely is. 

Q. In that report and I’m referring there’s an affidavit 
and then there’s a lengthier part at the end that you 
title a report, I’m talking the second part, the report, you 
indicate that price advertising leads to lower costs for the 
consumer for the product being advertised? 

A. Uh-huh. 

Q. Is that still your position today? 

A. Oh, yes. I think that seems to be the whole—what 
they teach in economics, what we were taught in eco- 
nomics, what most economists believe; that if you have 
advertising, it leads to lower prices. 

Q. Okay, and you agree with that position? 

A. Oh, yes, I surely do. 

Q. So it’s your opinion then that if the Rhode Island 
alcohol price advertising ban were to be repealed, lower 
alcohol price would be a direct effect? 

A. That should be a direct effect, theoretically speak- 
ing. 

Q. Okay. Now, Doctor, I think I’ve read in a couple 
of studies you performed you take into account, one of 


—e* eam 


85 


your variables is adjacent state price; am I correct in 
remembering that? 

A. I don’t think I’ve talked about adjacent state price. 
I've talked about per capita consumption and also price 
advertising, but not the price in adjacent states. That’s 


not I. It might be somebody else’s submitted materials 
on that. 

