Source: IA petition appendix, printed App. 17–50; district opinion dated August 10, 1993 and reproduced constitutional/statutory addendum. OCR transcription, no Supreme Court action included.


44 LIQUOR MART, INC. and People’s 
Super Liquor Stores, Inc., 
Plaintiffs, 


Vv. 


Kate F. RACINE, in her capacity 
as Rhode Island Liquor Control 
Administrator, Defendant, 


and 


Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association, 
Intervenor-Defendant. 


Civ. A. No. 92-0115 P. 


United States District Court, 
D. Rhode Island. 


Aug. 10, 1993. 


Liquor retailers brought action challenging state stat- 
utes prohibiting off-premises advertising of prices at 
which liquor stores sold alcoholic beverages. The District 
Court, Pettine, Senior District Judge, held that: (1) 
Twenty-first Amendment did not require modification of 
either level or allocation of burden of proof in commercial 
speech case involving regulation of sale of alcoholic bev- 
erages, and (2) state failed to establish that advertising 
ban directly advanced its interest in reducing alcohol 
consumption or that ban was not more extensive than 
necessary to serve such interest. 


Ordered accordingly. 


Barry J. Kusinitz, Corrente, Brill & Kusinitz, Providence 
RI, Evan T. Lawson, Lawson & Veitzen, Boston, MA, for 


App. 18 


Rebecca Tedford Partington, RI Atty. General’s 
Office, Providence, RI, for defendant Racine. 


William Gasbarro, Robert M. Brady, E. Providence, 
RI, for intervenor-defendant RI Liquor Stores. 


MEMORANDUM AND ORDER 
PETTINE, Senior District Judge. 


The case presents the question whether R.I.G.L. 


§§ 3-8-7! and 3-8-8.1,2 and Regulation 32 of the Rhode 


1 R.LG.L. § 3-8-7 controls price advertising by licensees. It 
provides: 


No manufacturer, wholesaler, or shipper from with- 
out this state and no holder of a license issued under the 
provisions of this title and chapter shall cause or permit the 
advertising in any manner whatsoever of the price of any 
malt beverage, cordials, wine or distilled liquor offered for 
sale in this state; provided, however, that the provi- 
sions of this section shall not apply to price signs or 
tags attached to or placed on merchandise for sale 
within the licensed premises in accordance with rules 
and regulations of the department. (emphasis added). 


2 R.ILG.L. § 3-8-8.1 controls the acceptance of price advertis- 


ing by Rhode Island communications media and provides as 


follows: 


No newspaper, periodical, radio or television broadcaster 
or broadcasting company or any other person, firm or 
corporation with a principal place of business in the state 
of Rhode Island which is engaged in the business of adver- 
tising or selling advertising time or space shall accept, 
publish, or broadcast any advertisement in this state of the 
price or make reference to the price of any alcoholic bever- 
ages. Any person who shall violate any of the provi- 
sions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor 
and shall be punished for the first offense by a fine in 


App. 19 


Island Liquor Control Administration,? which collectively 
prohibit off-premises advertising of the prices at which 
liquor stores sell alcoholic beverages, violate the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution. Jurisdic- 
tion is premised on 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 


For the reasons stated below, I hold these provisions 
invalid as an unconstitutional burden upon protected 
commercial speech. 


I. BACKGROUND 


Plaintiff 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. (“44 Liquor Mart”), a 
Rhode Island corporation located in Johnston, Rhode 
Island, is a licensed retail alcohol dealer. Plaintiff People’s 


the sum of fifty dollars ($50) and for each additional 
offense thereafter by a fine not exceeding the sum of 
one hundred dollars ($100). Publication or broadcast 
by any person in violation of the provisions of this 
section shall also be subject to injunctive proceedings 
in a court of competent jurisdiction on a complaint 
brought by a retail licensee, or an association of retail 
licensees. 

The provisions of this section shall not apply to 
any trade journal which is duly recognized and 
authorized to be exempt from the provisions of this 
section by the liquor control administrator. (emphasis 
added). 


3 Regulation 32 of the Rules and Regulations of the Liquor 
Control Administrator was enacted te “enforce” the provisions 
of § 3-8-7. It provides, in pertinent part: 

No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from 
the exterior of any Class A [package store] premises 
licensed to sell at retail shall make reference to the 
price of any alcoholic beverage or mixture of alcoholic 
beverages. 


App. 20 


Super Liquor Stores, Inc. (“People’s”), a Massachusetts 
corporation, is a retail dealer of alcoholic beverages oper- 
ating retail stores in New Bedford and Fairhaven, Massa- 
chusetts. 


Defendant Kate F. Racine held the position of Liquor 
Control Administrator for the State of Rhode Island at the 
time this action was commenced. Anthony Arico cur- 
rently holds the title of Acting Liquor Control Adminis- 
trator. Intervenor-Defendant Rhode Island Liquor Stores 
Association is a trade group of small retail liquor stores in 
Rhode Island. 


On December 17, 1991, Racine held a hearing to 
determine whether 44 Liquor Mart had violated R.I.G.L. 
§ 3-8-7 and Liquor Control Administration Regulation 32, 
which prohibit off-premises advertising of alcohol bever- 
age prices, by placing an advertisement headed “Thanks- 
giving Harvest” (Plaintiffs’ Ex. 4) in a December 1991 
edition of the Providence Journal-Bulletin, a daily news- 
paper in Rhode Island. The advertisement displayed bot- 
tles of named brand liquors. It also advertised: “State 
Line Chips” at $1.79, with the price highlighted in a burst 
form; “Peanuts” at 89 cents a pound with the exclamation 
“WOW” highlighted in a burst form; “Cigarettes: Cartons 
and Packs” at various prices for different sizes; and 
“Schweppes Mixers” at $1.29 a bottle. None of the alco- 
holic beverages showed any prices, but several of the 
“WOW” exclamations — highlighted in burst form - 
appeared next to the displayed bottles. 


At the conclusion of the hearing, Racine determined 
that a violation had occurred. She fined 44 Liquor Mart 
$400.00, and ordered that the advertisement, as printed, 


App. 21 


cease to run. 44 Liquor Mart paid the fine on December 
17, 1991. No appeal was taken to the Liquor Control 
Hearing Board as provided by R.I.G.L. § 3-3-5. 


People’s, which extensively uses price advertising in 
Massachusetts, where it is permitted, attempted on sev- 
eral occasions in 1991 and 1992 to place its advertise- 
ments, which include price information, in Rhode Island 
newspapers and other media outlets. It has been refused 
because of R.I.G.L. § 3-8-8.1, which expressly prohibits 
the Rhode Island media from advertising retail alcoholic 
beverage price information. 


In addition to the above stated facts, the parties have 
stipulated to the following: 


(1) other liquor licensees, as well as news- 
papers within the State, have been warned 
or fined for violations of the Rhode Island 
regulations; 


(2) plaintiffs believe they will each realize an 
economic benefit of more than $100,000 per 
year if the price advertising ban is lifted; 


(3) defendant Racine vigorously enforces the 
price advertising ban; 


(4) Rhode Island permits all advertising of 
alcoholic beverages excepting references to 
price outside the licensed premises; 


(5) the State prohibits communications media 
from accepting any advertisements that 
refer to prices at which alcoholic beverages 
are being sold in other states; 


(6) Rhode Island communications media reach 
both Rhode Island and Massachusetts citi- 


zens; 


App. 22 


(7) the proposed speech does not concern an 
illegal activity and presumably would not 
be false or misleading; and 


(8) the state of Rhode Island has a substantial 
interest in regulating the sale of alcoholic 
beverages. 


Defendant Racine defends the constitutionality of the 
State’s ban on price advertising as a measure designed to 
promote temperance by directly reducing the consump- 
tion of alcohol by the citizens of Rhode Island. 


Il. FINDINGS OF FACT 


The following findings of fact are drawn from the 
transcript of the March 11, 1993 hearing in this case and 
from my evaluation of two video-iaped depositions sub- 
mitted by agreement of the parties. 


At the outset, I note a pronounced lack of unanimity 
among researchers who have stu:‘ied the effects of alco- 
hol advertising. No less than twelve different conclusions 
have been reached regarding the impact of advertising on 
the general consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Tr. 
3/11/93, at 50-51). Numerous studies have attempted to 
correlate the consumption of alcohol by the general pub- 
lic and certain discreet groups to permitted or proscribed 
advertising of various alcoholic beverages. Only three 
that were called to the Court’s attention, however, 
directly. deal with price advertising: Jon P. Nelson, State 
Monopolies and Alcoholic Beverage Consumption, 2 
J.Reg.Econ. 83 (1990); Gary P. Wilcox, The Effect of Price 
Advertising on Alcoholic Beverage Sales, 25 J. Advertising 
Res. 33 (1985); and Stanley I. Ornstein and Dominique M. 


App. 23 


Hanssens, Alcohol Control Laws and the Consumption of 
Listilled Spirits and Beer, 12 |. Consumer Res. 200 (Septem- 
ber 1985). In this setting, experts for the respective parties 
testified. 


Plaintiffs presented two expert witnesses: Dr. 
Reginald Smart, a Ph.D. in psychology and scientist with 
the Addiction Research Foundation in Toronto, Canada, 
and Dr. David J. Pittman, a Ph.D. in human development 
and professor of psychology at the Washington Univer- 
sity in St. Louis. Both experts agreed that some studies 
have shown that overall alcohol advertising has a slight 
effect on alcohol consumption. (Ir. 3/11/93, at 50-51, 72; 
Pittman Dep., 11/10/92, at 12}. They each maintained, 
however, that there is no empirical evidence that the 
presence or absence of alcohol price advertising signifi- 
cantly affects levels of alcohol consumption. 


Dr. Smart focused his opinion on price advertising. 
He agreed with the three studies by Nelson, Wilson, and 
Ornstein and Hanssens, supra, which concluded that bans 
on price advertising have no effect on alcohol consump- 
tion. Dr. Smart used Rhode Island as a classic example of 
the fallacy of conclusions to the contrary. Rhode Island, a 
license state, which has a ban on alcohol price advertis- 
ing, has “a fairly high level of alcohol consumption, 
about 2.86 gallons of absolute alcohol per person.” (Tr. at 
27). It ranks in the upper 30 percent of the states in per 
capita consumption. (Tr. at 64). In other license states that 
allow price advertising, alcohol consumption is lower. (Tr. 
at 65-66). 


Dr. Smart also noted that on a national scale, over the 
past fifteen years, consumption levels generally have 


App. 24 


decreased even though overall advertising levels have 
increased. (Tr. at 64). True, the decline has been fairly 
small. Nevertheless, it has been consistent year after year. 
(Tr. at 64). According to Dr. Smart, the mere fact that price 
advertising may lower sales prices does not mean that 
per capita consumption will be influenced. It is his con- 
clusion that consumption is influenced by the disposable 
income available to the individual buyer, that is, the 
available money remaining after payment of living 
expenses. (Tr. at 45, 73). 


As noted above, Dr. Smart conceded that some 
researchers have concluded that overall alcohol advertis- 
ing may have some effect on levels of consumption. (Tr. at 
50-51, 72). He based his own opinion, however, on 
research that shows that overall alcohol advertising does 
not appear to have much effect on alcohol consumption 
or problems. (Tr. at 24, 72). In addition, he explained, 
because price advertising is only one part of the total 
advertising phenomenon, there is no reason to believe 
that a change in that factor alone would have much of an 
impact on levels of consumption. (Tr. at 24). 


Dr. Smart bolstered his opinion by referring to a 1985 
Federal Trade Commission study that found, after 
reviewing various research, no evidence to believe alco- 
hol advertising significantly affects alcohol abuse. (Tr. at 
28). In addition, Dr. Smart supported his testimony with a 
critique of studies on general alcohol advertising that he 
believed were inapposite and, at any rate, flawed. (Tr. at 
69-71). 


App. 25 


In concluding this recitation of the pertinent aspects 
of Dr. Smart’s testimony, I record verbatim particularly 
persuasive passages: 


A. Well, that study [by Dr. Nelson] was impor- 
tant, I think, in that it established quite clearly 
that for all states there was no relationship 
between a price ad ban and no price ad ban 
when it came to alcohol consumption. States 
with price ad bans didn’t have lower consump- 
tion than those who had no such ban and with 
regard to prices, it’s also interesting that Nelson 
has shown that overall prices are the same in 
control and license states and here I think we 
have to remember that license states, almost all 
license states in the U.S. except for three have no 
ban on - on prices.[*4] Now, one might expect 
that the prices in license states should be higher 
than in control states or lower but what we see 
is essentially no difference. That too suggests to 
me that probably the price ad ban has no 
impact. 


* * > 


Also [Atkin and Block] asked people to 
recall their television advertising or their televi- 
sion viewing but in the Strickland study, respon- 
dents reported the number of times they 
watched various television programs and then 
investigators determined from records how 
much total advertising and how much total 
advertising each person saw and I think they 
should reduce the problems. They also 
improved the sampling of students. They had a 


4 There are certain states that do not license retailers but 
rather operate state controlled retail stores. (Tr. at 67-68). 


App. 26 


stratified sampling procedure. Generally I think 
the Strickland results are based on a stronger 
study and they reach conclusions which were 
quite different than Atkin and Block. 


QO. And what were Strickland’s conclusions? 


A. Strickland’s conclusion was that there was 
no overall correlation between alcohol con- 
sumption or problems and alcohol advertising. 


Q. Now, when you were being cross examined, 
you were asked about a number of different 
studies and statements that you had reported in 
your paper. Now, were those statements and 
studies relating to price advertising or to adver- 
tising in general? 


A. The great majority of them were about 
advertising in general and not about price 
advertising at all. 


©. When you were cross-examined, you indi- 
cated that you agreed that consumers would 
travel to obtain lower prices for alcoholic bever- 
ages. Do you recall that? 


A. Yes, I do. 


Q. Now, do you equate the fact that consumers 
would travel to obtain lower prices for alcoholic 
beverages with consumers consuming more 
alcoholic beverages? 


A. I don’t know of any empirical study that’s 
really shown that, that because people will 
travel to get alcoholic beverages at a lower price 
that means they’ll necessarily drink more. What 
— What I’m aware of are studies that show that 
people generally decide how much money they 
have to spend on alcoholic beverages per week 


App. 27 


or per month. Then they tend to spend that 
amount and if they can spend it in one way, 
they'll do it and in another way they’ll do that 
as well. 


(Tr. at 68-71). 


Dr. Pittman’s testimony concurred with Dr. Smart's 
as to the insignificance of price advertising on alcohol 
consumption. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 20). Dr. Pittman 
further testified that many other factors besides price 
influence alcohol consumption levels, including religion, 
cultural patterns, peer pressure, family make-up, and 
ethnic background. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 21-22, Pitt- 
man Dep. 11/10/92, at 13-14). Ultimately, he stated that 
he was unaware of any empirical evidence that would 
support the conclusion that banning alcohol price adver- 
tising promotes temperance. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 
25). 


In rebuttal, the defendant presented evidence - 
although not directly focused on price advertising — that 
some research groups believe that alcohol advertising 
leads to increased overall consumption. In her cross- 
examination of Dr. Smart, counsel for the defendant elic- 
ited testimony that the distinguished economist John 
Kenneth Galbraith and the American Medical Association 
(“AMA”) agree with such a conclusion. (Tr. at 33-37). In 
1986, Dr. Smart conceded, the AMA advocated a ban on 
alcohol advertising with the statement that such advertis- 
ing affects youthful consumption and influences both 
brand preferences and the total volume of alcoholic bev- 
erages consumed by the public. (Tr. at 33-34). In addition, 
Dr. Smart acknowledged that advertising has cumulative 
effects that are difficult to detect in studies, and that 


App. 28 


research studies have been varied and equivocal because 
it is a difficult topic to research. (Tr. at 39-40). 


Defendant's expert, Dr. Henry Saffer, a Ph.D. in eco- 
nomics and professor of economics at Kean College in 
New Jersey, testified that alcohol advertising bans affect 
alcohol abuse. He stated that in a study he conducted of 
17 countries over 14 years,5 those countries that banned 
all broadcast advertisements of alcohol had the lowest 
values for alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis, mortality 
rates and motor vehicle fatality rates. (Saffer Deposition, 
11/16/92, at 19). Dr. Saffer’s testimony, and the conclu- 
sions of his international study, are accurately recited by 
the defendant in her post-trial memorandum: 


Countries with more restrictive advertising poli- 
cies had the lowest increases in consumption. 
Countries with bans of spirits advertising have 
about 16% lower alcohol consumption than 
countries with no bans. Countries with ban» on 
beer and wine advertising have about 11% 
lower alcohol consumption than countries with 
bans only on spirits advertising. Countries with 
bans on spirits advertising have about 10% 
lower motor vehicle fatality rates than countries 
with no bans. Countries with bans on beer and 
wine advertising have about 23% lower motor 
vehicle fatality rates than countries with bans 
only on spirits advertising. The data show that 
alcohol consumption is related to advertising 
bans and alcohol price. Liver cirrhosis mortality 
rates are less consistently related to alcohol 


5 Henry Saffer, Alcohol advertising bans and alcohol abuse: An 
international perspective, 10 J. Health Econ. 65 (1991) (Saffer Dep. 
Ex. J). 


App. 29 


advertising bans, but are clearly related to alco- 
hol price. 


The ban on price advertising promotes tem- 
perance in two ways, by increasing the “search 
time” involved in finding the best price on alco- 
holic beverages, and by keeping the actual price 
of alcoholic beverages higher than they would 
be if price were allowed to be advertised. Dr. 
Saffer explained the “search cost” theory as fol-— 
lows: The average price for alcohol would be 
lower if people could more easily find lower 
prices. The price advertising ban creates a 
greater variance of prices in the state than you 
would have without a ban, which gives people 
an incentive to shop around, increasing the 
search costs. If there were no ban on price 
advertising, the variance of prices would proba- 
bly decrease and there would be less search 
time. Dr. Saffer testified that higher prices result 
in lower alcohol consumption. If the price 
advertising ban were abolished, it would lower 
average prices and increase consumption. 


Defendant’s Post Trial Memorandum at 5-6. 


I do not find Dr. Saffer’s testimony persuasive. After 
reviewing his deposition, I conclude that he did not, in 
any meaningful way, consider a number of variables that 
influence the public’s consumption of alcohol. He did not 
use any data recognizing ethnic background, income and 
education levels, or the difference of attitudes and drink- 
ing habits that exist in different countries. (Saffer Dep. at 
35-42). His complicated studies, in part, correlated more 
banning of alcoholic beverage advertising with lower 
levels of consumption, liver cirrhosis and highway fatal- 
ities. (Saffer Dep. at 40-41). Yet, the information he had 


App. 30 


did not deal only with liver cirrhosis caused by alcohol. 
He admitted that “environmental factors” can have an 
effect on this ailment but did not control his study for this 
factor. (Saffer Dep. at 41). He also acknowledged that he 
had no information in his foreign country study as to 
which traffic fatalities were caused by non-alcohol related 
factors. (Saffer Dep. at 41-42). 


I also conclude that while Dr. Saffer knew that the 
national alcoholic beverage consumption trend for the 
past ten years has declined, he had no idea of what the 
trend has been in Rhode Island. (Saffer Dep. at 44). Nor 
had he made any determination as to how much lower 
prices might be expected to go if the price advertising 
ban were lifted. (Saffer Dep. at 45-46). He conceded that 
many other factors would have to be considered. (Saffer 
Dep. at 46). 


Significantly, Dr. Saffer conceded that the objective of 
lowering consumption of alcohol by banning price adver- 
tising could be accomplished by establishing minimum 
prices and/or by increasing sales taxes on alcoholic bev- 
erages. (Saffer Dep. at 31-32). And while he obviously 
considered both empirical and theoretical works that 
mowe “towards the question of what a socially optimal 
ovine is,” he was unable to say what that price would be 
for Rhode Island. (Saffer Dep. at 32). 


In addition, Dr. Saffer agreed that banning advertis- 
ing would not necessarily result in optimal liquor prices. 
(Saffer Dep. at 34). He further acknowledged that if a 
company could increase its market share by advertising 
prices, it could increase its own profits without affecting 


App. 31 


overall consumption. (Saffer Dep. at 50-51). Thus, plain- 
tiffs’ expectation of realizing additional profits through 
price advertising has no necessary relationship to 
increased overall consumption. Finally, Dr. Saffer’s 
studies did not deal with the precise issues presented in 
this litigation. 


Based on the record presented, I find as a fact that 
Rhode Island’s off-premises liquor price advertising ban 
has no significant impact on levels of alcohol consump- 
tion in Rhode Island.® 


III. RHODE ISLAND PRECEDENT 


As a threshold matter, I must note that in S & S Liquor 
Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.1.1985) and Rhode 
Island Liquor Stores Ass'n v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 
331 (R.1.1985}, the Rhode Island Supreme Court 
addressed the constitutionality of precisely the same stat- 
utes that are challenged here. In both of these cases, the 
Supreme Court held that the price advertising ban was a 
valid exercise of the State’s powers under the Twenty- 
first Amendment’ and did not violate liquor retailers’ 


6 With respect to the narrow issue in this case regarding 
price advertising of alcoholic beverages, I agree with the var- 
ious conclusions of Dr. Smart, I wish to emphasize, however, 
that I make no findings as to the effect that a total or partial ban 
on general alcohol advertising would have on consumption 
levels in Rhode Isiand. 

7 Section 1 of the Twenty-first Amendment repealed the 
Eighteenth Amendment's prohibition of the manufacture, sale, 
or transportation of liquor. Section 2 provides: 

The transportation or importation into any State, Ter- 
ritory, or possession of the United States for delivery 


App. 32 


First Amendment rights. The defendant argues that this 
Court should defer to the reasoning and opinion of the 
Rhode Island Supreme Court and uphold the price adver- 
tising ban. 


The specter of a direct conflict between the decision 
of a federal court and the previous decisions of the high- 
est state court in the jurisdiction in which the federal 
court sits raises delicate «sues of comity. Nevertheless, 
the decisions of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, while 
persuasive, do not bind this federal court as to issues of 
federal constitutional law. See Grantham v. Avondale Indus., 
964 F.2d 471, 473 (5th Cir.1992) (“It is beyond cavil that 
we are not bound by a state court’s interpretation of 
federal law regardless of whether our jurisdiction is 
based on diversity of citizenship or a federal question.”); 
In re Asbestos Litigation, 829 F.2d 1233, 1237 (3rd Cir.1987), 
cert. denied, 485 U.S. 1029, 108 S.Ct. 1586, 99 L.Ed.2d 901 
(1988) (“The federal district court . . . takes as its author- 
ity on federal constitutional issues, decisions of the 
United States Courts of Appeals and the United States 
Supreme Court, rather than those of the state supreme 
court.”). 


Circuit Judge Selya, as a trial judge, enunciated this 
principle when he stated: “[I]n construing a state statute, 
a federal court must defer to the highest court of a state 
as the best arbiter of state law.” Donahue v. Rhode Island 
Dept. of Mental Health, Retardation & Hospitals, 632 F.Supp. 
1456, 1478 (D.R.1.1986) (citing Commissioner v. Estate of 


or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of 
the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited. 


App. 33 


Bosch, 387 U.S. 456, 462, 87 S.Ct. 1776, 1781, 18 L.Ed.2d 
886 (1967) and Ragan v. Merchants Transfer & Warehouse 
Co., 337 U.S. 530, 534, 69 S.Ct. 1233, 1235, 93 L.Ed. 1520 
(1949)). Such deference, however, “involves the meaning 
of the enactment; once the meaning is established, the 
question of whether or not the ordinance passes constitu- 
tional muster is one within the primacy of the federal 
courts.” Donahue, 632 F.Supp. at 1478. 


I also note that plaintiffs’ challenge in this case is 
readily distinguishable from S & S Liquor and Evening 
Call due to the extensive expert testimony and factual 
record presented. The Rhode Island Supreme Court did 
not have the benefit of a fully developed factual record 
and conceded that “[i]Jt may be that some day, in some 
litigated case, evidence will be adduced that will support 
the proposition that these advertising restrictions do not 
further temperance objectives.” S & S Liquor Mart, 497 
A.2d at 734. 


However desirable comity may be, it cannot trump 
where a federal court is confronted with an issue involv- 
ing the United States Constitution, “raised by persons 
who were not parties in the state litigation.” Joseph v. 
Blair, 482 F.2d 575, 579 n. 4 (4th Cir.1973), cert. denied, 416 
U.S. 955, 94 S.Ct. 1968, 40 L.Ed.2d 305 (1974). Thus, it is 
manifest that I must decide for myself the constitu- 
tionality of the statutes at issue. 


IV. DISCUSSION 


The parties agree that Rhode Island's alcohol price 
advertising ban implicates plaintiffs’ constitutional inter- 
ests in commercial speech. In order to place my factual 


App. 34 


findings in the proper context, it is necessary to review 
the United States Supreme Court’s pronouncements as to 
the level of protection afforded such speech by the First 
Amendment. 


A. The Central Hudson Test 


Commercial speech now has a definite niche in the 
pantheon of rights protected by the First Amendment.® In 
a recent opinion, the Supreme Court summarized the 
general principles underlying the protection of commer- 
cial speech: 


The commercial market place, like other spheres 
of our social and cultural life, provides a forum 
where ideas and information flourish. Some of 
the ideas and information are vital, some of 
slight worth. But the general rule is that the 
speaker and the audience, not the government, 
assess the value of the information presented. 
Thus, even a communication that does no more 
than propose a commercial transaction is enti- 
tled to the coverage of the First Amendment. 


Edenfield v. Fane, __ U.S. _ __ 113 S.Ct. 1792, 1798, 
123 L.Ed.2d 543 (1993). 


Even while acknowledging this constitutional protec- 
tion, the Supreme Court’s decisions have recognized the 
“ ‘common sense’ distinction between speech proposing a 


8 Purely commercial advertisements were once considered 
to be outside the protection of the First Amendment. See Valen- 
tine v. Christensen, 316 U.S. 52, 54, 62 S.Ct. 920, 921, 86 L.Ed. 1262 
(1942) (Constitution imposes no restraint upon the government 
with respect to the regulation of “purely commercial advertis- 
ing”). 


App. 35 


commercial transaction, which occurs in an area tradi- 
tionally subject to government regulation, and other vari- 
eties of speech.” Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 
447, 455-56, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 1918, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978) 
(citing Virginia Pharmacy Bd. v. Citizens Consumer Council, 
425 U.S. 748, 771 n. 24. 96 S.Ct. 1817, 1830 n. 24, 48 
L.Ed.2d 346 (1976)). These distinctions have led the Court 
to conclude that “[t]he Constitution . . . affords a lesser 
protection to commercial speech than to other constitu- 
tionally guaranteed expression.” U.S. v. Edge Broadcasting 
Co.,_ _ U.S. ___, __, 113 S.Ct. 2696, 2703, 125 L.Ed.2d 345 
(1993) (citing Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 477, 109 
S.Ct. 3028, 3033, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1989), Central Hudson 
Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Com., 447 U.S. 557, 
563, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 2350, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980), and 
Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456, 98 S.Ct. at 1918)). 


In Central Hudson, supra, the Supreme Court set out a 
four-part test for assessing government restrictions on 
commercial speech: 


[First] . . . [the commercial speech] at least must 
concern lawful activity and not be misleading. 
Next, we ask whether the asserted govern- 
mental interest is substantial. If both inquiries 
yield positive answers, we must determine 
whether the regulation directly advances the 
governmental interest asserted, and whether it 
is not more extensive than is necessary to serve 


that interest. 


447 US. at 566, 100 §.Ct. at 2351. This four-part analysis 
has endured as the constitutional benchmark in commer- 


cial speech cases. 


App. 36 


With respect to the burden of proof, the Supreme 
Court recently reaffirmed that: 


It is well established that “[t]he party seeking to 
uphold a restriction on commercial speech car- 
ries the burden of justifying it.” Bolger v. Youngs 
Drug Products Corp., 463 U.S. 60, 71, n. 20 [103 
S.Ct. 2875, 2883, n. 20], 77 L.Ed.2d 469 (1983); 
Fox, 492 US., at 480, 109 S.Ct., at 3035. This 
burden is not satisfied by mere speculation or 
conjecture; rather, a governmental body seeking 
to sustain a restriction on commercial speech 
must demonstrate that the harms it recites are 
real and that its restriction will in fact alleviate 
them to a material degree. 


Edenfield, __ U.S. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 1800. Thus, state 
legislatures must take their constitutional obligations 
seriously by demonstrating that regulatory measures 
which burden commercial speakers directly serve con- 
crete and substantial state interests. 


B. Central Hudson and the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment 


In the case at hand, the parties do not dispute that 
the price advertising at issue constitutes commercial 
speech within the protection of the First Amendment. The 
parties also stipulate that plaintiffs’ proposed price 
advertising concerns lawful activity and will not be mis- 
leading. Further, they agree that Rhode Island has a sub- 
stantial interest in fostering temperance and that under 
the Twenty-first Amendment the State has the right to 
regulate “ ‘the sale, and the incidents thereof, of alcoholic 


App. 37 


beverages, and to protect its citizens from the evils inci- 
dent to alcohol.’ ” S & S Liquor, 497 A.2d at 732 (quoting 
Oklahoma Telecasters Ass'n v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490, 500 (10th 
Cir.1983), rev'd on other grounds sub nom. Capital Cities 
Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 104 S.Ct. 2694, 81 L.Ed.2d 
580 (1984)). I accept the parties’ conclusions and find that 
the first two prongs of the Central Hudson test have been 
satisfied. 


The parties vigorously debate the third and fourth 
elements of the Central Hudson analysis. Specifically, they 
dispute whether the Twenty-first Amendment requires a 
shift in both the level and allocation of the traditional 
burden of proof. 


Relying on the State’s considerable authority in the 
area of alcohol regulation (and, indeed, its ability to ban 
the sale of alcohol altogether) under the Twenty-first 
Amendment, the defendant contends that the legisla- 
ture’s chosen scheme need only be “reasonably related 
to,” rather than “directly advance,” its stated ends in 
order to withstand constitutional scrutiny. Defendant also 
contends that, because of the Twenty-first Amendment, 
the price advertising regulation is entitled to an “added 
presumption” in favor of its validity. New York State 
Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714, 718, 101 S.Ct. 
2599, 2602, 69 L.Ed.2d 357 (1981) (quoting California v. 
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 118, 93 S.Ct. 390, 397, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 
(1972)). Foliowing the reasoning of the Rhode Island 
Supreme Court in S & S Liquor and Evening Call, the 
defendant suggests that this “added presumption” works 
to shift the burden of proof to the plaintiffs to show that 
“these statutes are unconstitutional beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” Defendant's Post-Trial Memorandum at 7. 


App. 38 


Respectfully, I find that defendant’s reasoning overs- 
tates the law in this area, abrogating too broadly other 
constitutional provisions. The Twenty-first Amendment 
cannot be read in isolation as a supreme provision 
impinging all other constitutional rights. 


The Twenty-first Amendment is an exception to the 
Commerce Clause and gives the states broad regulatory 
authority over interstate commerce of liquor. Hostetter v. 
Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp., 377 U.S. 324, 330, 84 S.Ct. 
1293, 1296, 12 L.Ed.2d 350 (1964). This regulatory author- 
ity, however, is not absolute and can be limited by the 
federal commerce power in appropriate situations. Id. at 
332, 84 S.Ct. at 1298. See also California Retail Liquor 
Dealers Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97, 110, 
100 S.Ct. 937, 945, 63 L.Ed.2d 233 (1980) (the states’ power 
to regulate alcoholic beverages advertising is subject to 
federal anti-trust laws); Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 
U.S. 263, 275, 104 S.Ct. 3049, 3057, 82 L.Ed.2d 200 (1984) 
(“economic protectionism” of local alcoholic beverages 
violates the Commerce Clause); Healy v. Beer Inst., 491 
U.S. 324, 334, 109 S.Ct. 2491, 2498, 105 L.Ed.2d 275 (1989) 
(state regulation of alcoholic beverage prices is invalid 
under the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in 
other states). 


Nor does the Twenty-first Amendment necessarily 
override constitutional guaranties found in the Bill of 
Rights. In Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 97 S.Ct. 451, 50 
L.Ed.2d 397 (1976), Justice Brennan, writing for the major- 
ity, stated: 

Once passing beyond consideration of the Com- 


merce Clause, the relevance of the Twenty-first 
Amendment to other constitutional provisions 


App. 39 


becomes increasingly doubtful. As one commen- 
tator has remarked: “Neither the text nor the 
history of the Twenty-first Amendment suggests 
that it qualifies individual rights protected by 
the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment where the sale or use of liquor is con- 
cerned.” 


Id. at 206, 97 S.Ct. at 461 (quoting P. Brest, Processes of 
Constitutional Decisionmaking, Cases and Materials 258 
(1975)). See also Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116, 
122 n. 5, 103 S.Ct. 505, 510 n. 5, 74 L.Ed.2d 297 (1982) 
(state’s power under Twenty-first Amendment could not 
impinge upon Establishment Clause of the First Amend- 
ment); Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433, 436, 91 
S.Ct. 507, 509, 27 L.Ed.2d 515 (1971) (posting the names of 
excessive drinkers in retail liquor outlets violated due 
process).? 


The strongest authority for the proposition that the 
Twenty-first Amendment may alter the balance in the 
Central Hudson analysis can be found in California v. 
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 (1972) 
and New York State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 
714, 101 S.Ct. 2599, 69 L.Ed.2d 357 (1981), the cases 
chiefly relied upon by the Rhode Island Supreme Court in 
S & S Liquor and Evening Call. 


In LaRue, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a state 
liquor regulation prohibiting simulated sex acts and the 


9 Fora skillful summary of the historical interplay between 
the First and Twenty-first Amendments, see Richard S. Mandel, 
Note, Liquor Advertising: Resolving the Clash Between The First and 
Twenty-First Amendments, 57 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 157 (1984). 


App. 40 


showing of films and pictures depicting such acts in 
licensed clubs. In Bellanca, the Court relied heavily upon 
LaRue in upholding a state liquor regulation prohibiting 
topless dancing in licensed establishments. In both cases, 
however, expression was only incidentally burdened. The 
LaRue Court was concerned with the conduct rather than 
the communication: 


[A]s the mode of expression moves from the 
printed page to the commission of public acts 
that may themselves violate valid penal statutes, 
the scope of permissible state regulations signif- 
icantly increases. States may sometimes pro- 
scribe expression that is directed to the 
accomplishment of an end that the State has 
declared to be iliegal when such expression con- 
sists, in part, of “conduct” or “action.” 


409 U.S. at 117, 93 S.Ct. at 396 (citations omitted). 


In the present action, we are not concerned with 
conduct or “public acts” that violate “valid penal stat- 
utes,” but rather with pure speech that occurs off the 
licensed premises. LaRue and Bellanca do not mandate the 
application of a deferential standard of review in every 
case wherein a state, in the exercise of its Twenty-first 
Amendment powers, impinges on the First Amendment. 


Nor do I believe that Queensgate Invest. Co. v. Liquor 
Control Com., 459 U.S. 807, 103 S.Ct. 31, 74 L.Ed.2d 45 
(1982), the only decision of the U.S. Supreme Court to 
address the relationship between the Twenty-first 
Amendment and commercial speech doctrine, compels a 
different result. In Queensgate, the Supreme Court sum- 
marily dismissed for want of a substantial federal ques- 
tion an appeal of an Ohio Supreme Court decision 


App. 41 


upholding the constitutionality of a statute imposing a 
partial ban on liquor price advertising. Since Queensgate 
relied upon a different factual predicate and, as a sum- 
mary dismissal lacks a reasoned opinion, I cannot accept 
it as any stronger authority for the defendant than LaRue 
or Bellanca. See Mandel v. Bradley, 432 U.S. 173, 176, 97 
S.Ct. 2238, 2240, 53 L.Ed.2d 199 (1977) (summary disposi- 
tions are binding precedent only on “the precise issues 
presented and necessarily decided”).!° 


10 | note that the Supreme Court cited Queensgate in its most 
recent commercial speech opinion, U.S. v. Edge Broadcasting, 
supra. In that case, the Supreme Court cited Queensgate in sup- 
port of the narrow proposition that a legislative body is entitled 
to determine that promotional advertising of a product (lottery 
gambling) prohibited in one state, but available in a neighbor- 
ing state, undermines the prohibiting state’s policy against gam- 
bling, even if the prohibiting state’s advertising audience is not 
“wholly unaware of the lottery’s existence” in the neighboring 
state. _ U.S. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 2696. Importantly, the Court 
went on to note that “[i]f there is an immediate connection 
between advertising and demand, and the . . . regulation 
decreases advertising, it stands to reason that the policy of 
decreasing demand for [the product] is correspondingly 
advanced.” Id. 

In the liquor advertising context, the above reasoning sup- 
ports the notion that it “stands to reason” that a state regulation 
decreasing the amount of alcohol advertising, would directly 
advance the state’s interest in decreasing demand for alcohol. 
As noted above, however, the regulations at issue in this case 
make no attempt to reduce the amount of alcohol advertising, 
but merely proscribe the dissemination of truthful price infor- 
mation. Again, I make no determination here as to the potential 
constitutionality of a total or partial ban on alcohol advertising 


in Rhode Island. 


App. 42 


Other circuits, relying on LaRue, Bellanca and Queens- 
gate, have applied a deferential Central Hudson standard 
and upheld statutes prohibiting liquor advertising 
against First Amendment challenges. See Oklahoma Tele- 
casters Ass'n v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490 (10th Cir.1983), rev’d on 
other grounds sub nom. Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 
U.S. 691, 104 S.Ct. 2694, 81 L.Ed.2d 580 (1984)! and 
Dunagin v. Oxford, 718 F.2d 738 (5th Cir.1983) (en banc), 
cert. denied, 467 U.S. 1259, 104 S.Ct. 3553, 82 L.Ed.2d 855 
(1984). I do not find these cases persuasive in the present 
context. In addition to their reliance on LaRue and 
Bellanca to give an “added presumption” of constitu- 
tionality to state regulation of pure commercial speech 
pursuant to the Twenty-first Amendment, these cases 
concerned total bans on liquor advertising. They simply 
do not deal with price advertising in the present factual 
setting. 


In sum, I find that the Twenty-first Amendment does 
not require a modification of either the level or allocation 
of the burden of proof in commercial speech cases involv- 
ing the regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages. See 


11 The Tenth Circuit upheld Oklahoma’s ban on alcohol 
advertising in Oklahoma Telecasters Association, supra. The 
Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider the petitioner’s 
claim that the ban was not a valid restriction on commercial 
speech. Ultimately, however, the Court decided the case on a 
ground raised by the Federal Communications Commission as 
Amicus Curiae, holding that the Oklahoma ban on the 
retransmission of liquor advertisements in out-of-state signals 
by cable operators was preempted by federal regulation of cable 
broadcasting. See Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. at 
697, 104 S.Ct. at 2699. The Supreme Court never reached the 
First Amendment commercial speech issues. 


App. 43 


Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Ass’n v. Attorney General, 
142 Mich.App. 294, 370 N.W.2d 328, 335 (1985), cert. 
denied, 479 U.S. 939, 107 S.Ct. 420, 93 L.Ed.2d 371 (1986) 
(Twenty-first Amendment does not require court to treat 
restraints on speech any differently than if alcoholic bev- 
erages were not involved).!2 Consequently, the State 
bears the burden of justifying the alcohol price advertis- 
ing ban by demonstrating that it “directly advances” its 
interest in promoting temperance and “is not more exten- 
sive than is necessary to serve that interest.” Central 
Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566, 100 S.Ct. at 2351. 


C. Applying the Central Hudson Test 


As noted above, the parties agree that plaintiffs’ pro- 
posed speech concerns lawful activity and would not be 
misleading. They also agree that the State has a substan- 
tial interest in promoting temperance. Thus, I need only 
consider the last two prongs of the Central Hudson anal- 
ysis. The Supreme Court has described these steps as 
“*basically involv[ing] a consideration of the ‘fit’ 
between the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends.’” Edge Broadcasting, __ U.S. at 
__, 113 S.Ct. at 2704 (quoting Posodas de Puerto Rico 
Associates v. Tourism Co. of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328, 341, 
106 S.Ct. 2968, 2977, 92 L.Ed.2d 266 (1986)). There must be 


12 The Michigan intermediate state court, faced with a sub- 
stantially similar prohibition on alcohol price advertising, 
applied Central Hudson and concluded that the prohibition was 
an unconstitutional restriction on commercial speech. 


App. 44 


an “immediate connection,” however, between the prohi- 
bition and the government’s asserted end. Central Hud- 
son, 447 U.S. at 569, 100 S.Ct. at 2353; Edge Broadcasting, 
___ US. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. And if the means-end 
connection is “tenuous” or “highly speculative,” the reg- 
ulation cannot survive constitutional scrutiny. Central 
Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569, 100 S.Ct. at 2353. 


Unlike a number of cases in the commercial speech 
area, the link between alcohol price advertising and 
increased per-capita consumption is not self-evidence. 
See, e.g., Posadas, 478 U.S. at 341-42. 106 S.Ct. at 2976-77 
(link between ban on gambling advertising and level of 
gambling self-evident); Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569, 
100 S.Ct. at 2353 (link between advertising ban and sales 
self-evident); Dunagin v. Oxford, 718 F.2d at 747-49 & n. 8 
(link between overall advertising and increased alcohol 
use deemed self-evident). Nor do I believe this is a case 
where this Court should defer to the legislature on the 
basis of precedent which has already established that the 
legislature’s chosen means directly advances the asserted 
ends. See, e.g., Metromedia, Inc. v. San Diego, 453 U.S. 490, 
509 & n. 14, 101 S.Ct. 2882, 2893 & n. 14, 69 L.Ed.2d 800 
(1981) (plurality relied on established line of cases to 
ratify legislature’s judgment that banning commercial 
billboards would improve traffic safety).'° 


In this case, the State has failed to carry its burden of 
proof to show a direct correlation between the price 
advertising ban and reduced consumption of alcohol. As 


13 For the reasons discussed supra Part III, I do not rely on 
the Rhode Island Supreme Court’s deference to the —e 
in S & S Liquor Mart and Evening Call. 


App. 45 


discussed supra Part II, the plaintiffs’ expert testimony 
demonstrates that the alcohol price advertising ban has 
no appreciable impact on levels of consumption in Rhode 
Island. At best, price advertising is one factor among 
many that influence alcohol consumption patterns. 


Even if defendant’s burden of proof on this issue 
were tempered somewhat by the State’s substantial 
Twenty-first Amendment interest in regulating the evils 
incident to the sale and transportation of alcohol, the 
evidence presented does not satisfy the Central Hudson 
test. The State has simply not shown an “immediate 
connection” between the price advertising ban and 
reduced consumption. 


I also find that the price advertising ban is more 
extensive than necessary to serve the State’s asserted 
interest. The defendant claims that the ban increases the 
“search costs” of consumers and reduces the incidence of 
“price wars” between retailers, thus providing an “artifi- 
cial floor” for liquor prices. Common sense tells us that a 
lifting of the ban on price advertising will lead to a more 
competitive market. But any concern that such competi- 
tion will result in unacceptably low liquor price levels 
can be controlled by the imposition of higher sales taxes 
or minimum consumer prices. Such measures would 
directly serve the State’s asserted ends without burden- 


ing commercial speech. 


In his concurring opinion in Central Hudson, Justice 
Blackmun emphasized the critical role of an informed 
public in scrutinizing governmental policy choices: 


I seriously doubt whether suppression of infor- 
mation concerning the availability and price of a 


App. 46 


legally offered product is ever a permissible 
way for the State to “dampen” demand for or 
use of the product. Even though “commercial” 
speech is involved, such a regulatory measure 
strikes at the heart of the First Amendment. This 
is because it is a covert attempt by the State to 
manipulate the choices of its citizens, not by 
persuasion or direct regulation, but by depriv- 
ing the public of the information needed to 
make a free choice. 


447 U.S. at 574-75, 100 S.Ct. at 2356. 


In this case, the State has failed to demonstrate the 
necessary reasonable ‘fit’ between its policy objectives 
and its chosen means. While it may have been “reason- 
able” or “rational,” as defendant argues, for the legisla- 
ture to assume a correlation between the price 
advertising ban and reduced consumption, the Supreme 
Court has recently explained that such “rational basis” 
scrutiny is not to be applied when deciding the constitu- 
tionality of restrictions on commercial speech: 


[W]hile we have rejected the “least-restrictive- 
means” test for judging restrictions on commer- 
cial speech, so too have we rejected mere ratio- 
nal basis review. A regulation need not be 
“absolutely the least severe that will achieve the 
desired end,” Fox, supra, 492 U.S., at 480, 109 
S.Ct., at 3035, but if there are numerous and 
obvious less-burdensome alternatives to the 
restriction on commercial speech, that is cer- 
tainly a relevant consideration in determining 
whether the “fit” between ends and means is 
reasonable. 


Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., __ U.S. __, __ n. 
13, 113 S.Ct. 1505, 1510 n. 13, 123 L.Ed.2d 99 (1993). Here, 


App. 47 


it is evident that the State’s ends may be easily accom- 
plished by direct regulations controlling the retail prices 
of alcoholic beverages. 


Vv. CONCLUSION 


Commercial speech enjoys somewhat less First 
Amendment protection from governmental encroachment 
than other forms of speech. Nevertheless, under Central 
Hudson, a state must justify restrictions on truthful, non- 
misleading commercial speech by demonstrating that its 
actions “directly advance” a substantial state interest and 
are no more extensive than necessary to serve that inter- 
est. 


For the reasons stated above, I hold that §§ 3-8-7 and 
3-8-8.1 of the Rhode Island General Laws and Regulation 
32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control Administration do 
not directly advance the State’s interest in reducing over- 
all consumption of alcohol in Rhode Island and are more 
extensive than necessary to serve the State’s interest. | 
find that the statutes impermissibly restrict commercial 
speech and are unconstitutional. 


SO ORDERED. 


App. 48 


Constitutional Addendum 
AMENDMENT I 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establish- 
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; 
or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the 
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition 
the Government for a redress of grievances. 


AMENDMENT XxI 


§ 2. The transportation or importation into any State, 
Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery 
or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the 
laws thereof, is hereby prohibited. 


Statutory Addendum 


R.I.G.L. §3-8-7 controls price advertising by licensees. 


No manufacturer, wholesaler, or shipper from 
without this state and no holder of a license issued 
under the provisions of this title and chapter shall 
cause or permit the advertising in any manner what- 
soever of the price of any malt beverage, cordials, 
wine or distilled liquor offered for sale in this state; 
provided, however, that the provisions of this 
section shall not apply to price signs or tags 
attached to or placed on merchandise for sale 
within the licensed premises in accordance with 
rules and regulations of the department 
[emphasis added]. 


R.1.G.L. §3-8-8.1 controls the acceptance of price 
advertising by the communications media. 


TT, *o *a is “, ad ft heats Of hr Sina ee 
se Se: Le Me SO, Ta aD 
om . 2 ¢ ¢ . 


App. 49 


No newspaper, periodical, radio or television broad- 
caster or broadcasting company or any other person, 
firm or corporation with a principal place of business 
in the state of Rhode Island which is engaged in the 
business of advertising or selling advertisiug time or 
space shall accept, publish, or broadcast any adver- 
tisement in this state of the price or make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic bevereges. Any person 
who shall violate any of the provisions of this 
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and 
shall be punished for the first offense by a fine 
in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.06) and for each 
additional offense thereafter by a fine not 
exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars 
($100). Publication or broadcast by any person 
in violation of the provisions of this section shall 
also be subject to injunctive proceedings in a 
court of competent jurisdiction on a complaint 
brought by a retail licensee, or an association of 
retail licensees. 


The provisions of this section shall not 
apply to anv trade journal which is duly recog- 
nized and authorized to be exempt from the 
provisions of this section by the liquor control 
administrator [emphasis added]. 


R.1.G.L. §3-8-8 is the statutory basis for the authority 
of the liquor control administrator to promulgate regula- 


tions. 


The liquor control administrator is hereby 
authorized to promulgate rules which will 
enforce the provisions of §3-8-7 and he shall 
have the power to suspend the license of any 
license-holder in violation thereof. 


App. 50 


Regulation 32 of the Liquor Control Administrator 
was enacted to “enforce” the provisions of §3-8-7. 


No placard or sign of any kind which is visible 
from the exterior of any Class A premises 
licensed to sell at retail shall make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic beverage or mixture of 
alcoholic beverages. 

