Ee ; a, 
; Supreme Court, u.B ‘ 
FILED 


@) 9411 4:0 DEC 27 19% 


NO. ___gg5iog OF THE CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


+ 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and PEOPLES 
SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Petitioners, 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, and RHODE ISLAND 
LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Respondents. 


oa 


Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 


+ 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


+ 


Evan T. LAWSON 
LAwsON & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Does the Twenty-first Amendment weaken the pro- 
tection the First Amendment affords truthful, non-mis- 
leading price advertising by relieving the state of the 
burden to prove that its restriction on speech “directly 
and materially advances a substantial state interest in a 
manner no more extensive than necessary to serve that 
interest?” 


2. May the burden of proving the invalidity of a restric- 
tion on commercial speech be shifted to the party chal- 
lenging the restriction by according presumptive validity 
to the state’s unproved hypothesis? 


il 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Ouestions Presetted ...<.isecscccessneasee eee i 

Table of Authorities .....ssssicvsecedinseveunsenenn iv 

Opinions Below .......ccccssccsccsccnccctscsesseen 1 

Basie For Jusiedietiom ....ossccucscenseuneneueeeeee 1 

Statutes Involved .....ccccscccesessseuneseueeeenee 2 

Statement of the Cage ....cscicccesescssusevenenane 2 

Summary Of Reasons For Granting The Writ ....... 2 

Procedural History. .....0:ssccccssssehiesseneneeee 3 
. PPP 5 | 
Reasons For Granting The Writ.................+.. 7 | 


A. The Twenty-first Amendment Does Not Give An 
Added Presumption Of Validity To A Ban On 
Advertising The Price At Which A Retailer Sells 
Alcoholic Bewerages ......ccccccsesesescosucees 7 


B. The Court Of Appeals Improperly Reversed The 
Allocation Of The Burden Of Proof Mandated By 
This Court ....cccscccseusdenscesnhaenaenae 15 


C. Rhode Island’s Ban On Advertising The Price At 
Which Retailers Sell Alcoholic Beverages Does Not 
Directly Advance Its Interest In Promoting Tem- 
perance To A Material Degree Thereby Failing The 
Third Part Of The Central Hudson Test ........ 17 


> 
: Ve 
i akt 
—_ Th. De 4 
D mm On Advertising The Pri ii 
i) | ) Lew « _—— . i iA 
mae Aiconol DHeverages is Mor 
f . -_ > y . . 
Nec essa a’ i 4 » ri c i fT > ia 
‘ T ec 
"lt Y.. : one Poe : 
Orin, reTIPpErTaice 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987)..... 12, 22 
44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Racine, a 543 
GRRE GO cdedndccccsndauscceuhennseeeen passim 
44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State Of Rl, F.3d ___ (ist 
Ge Ge eedecctcudiakdenaneny jcaaeekeebavckeiaans i 
Anderson v. City of Bessemer City, 470 US. 564 
SOD v cdcecducnccasccensequnsanausueseaaeel 16, 24 
Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984). .12, 29 
Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1975) .............. 28 
Board of Trustees of State Univ. of New York v. Fox, 
ae Gs Ge Ge enannccousscnsncucdeesunaeu 21, 25 
Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. New York 
State Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986)...... 12, 27 
California Retail Liquor Dealer's Ass'n v. Midcal Alu- 
minum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980). ................... 12 
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972) .......... passim 
Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. — 467 U.S. 691 
GOED onecnceccusncesncénnennaunnnaene 9, 12, 13, 19 
Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service 
Commission of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980)... passim 
Cy of Contain «tiie ae 
US. 0 283 D Ce. BBGB CHBGED « ccecccccdisees .20, 26 
City of Newport, Kentucky v. lacobucci, oy eae 
CASED « wc ccncccconncncescuvuensebans din aseenneaeal ll 
Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) ............... 11,2 


—— eee ee ee 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


Dep't of Revenue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 
SD cnc cecusnendwevibeatesensccesees ‘san 


Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922 (1975)... -— 


Dunagin v. City of Oxford, Mississippi, 718 F.2d 738 
(Sth Cir. 1983)... ..... 0... eee eeeeeeeeeeenees dy 8 10 


Edenfield v. Fane, __._ ~US. 113 S. Ct. 1792 
RP ei , 


Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 


' 


(1989)... .13, 27 


ez 0 Dept. of Business and Professional 
peccese @ a ED @ 


Irons v. Federal Bureau of Investigation, 811 F.2d 681 


Lamar Outdoor Advertising v. Mississippi State Tax 
Commission, 701 F.2d 314 (5th Cir. 1983)............8 


Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982)..... 13 
Lee v. Weisman, __ US. , 112 S. Ct. 2649 (1992) .... 13 


Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Association v. 
Attorney General, 142 Mich. App. 294, 370 
N.W.2d 328 = Ct. ——* 1985), cert. den., 479 
U.S. 939 (1986) . Sa T 


New York State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 
PE cn ctkaadkletcténcdddboncecancececoce: 8, 14 


Oklahoma Telecasters Association v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 
aa dine dedekbenbebeee ee < 9, 10 


Pennsylvania State Police v. Hospitality Investments 
of Philadelphia, Inc., __ A.2d __, No. 77 E.D. 
1992, 1994 WL 606543 (Pa. November 3, 1994) ..... 9 


vi 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor Control Commis- 
ota, GED Ty Gr Gi vnnduncecndcinGebacesd<ccts 


Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association v. Evening 
Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 331 (1985)................. 


Rice v. Alcoholi : ' 
Cal. 3d 431 OSU a cocosesennnsesccoensescecnnsens | 


S & S Liquor Mart, Inc. v. roam, Gy Ase oe 
[Nc cushaindnidessé-acisialcdanaaean aan 18, 22 


Seagram & Sons v. Hostetter, 16 N.Y.2d 47 (1965)..... 22 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) ............ 12 


OD CE BI, in cn cdectccninnseccnnesttetieemiia 1 
OD WR iiss anica iain dcdadiendens canes 3 
I Er Ce wee Lee 3 
Regulation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control 
FE on cndvcccencsdesonnstadiSncensenanas 6 
Rhode Island General Laws §3-8-7 .............. 2, 3, 5 
Rhode Island General Laws §3-8-8.1......... ai i® 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Bentsen v. Coors Brewing Company, No. 93-1631, 
Petiabonr's GRE occ ccccsccapestikeesentiadive cat 10 


ae 2 ee ee No. 93-1631, 
re Argument, November 30, 


aC hc eee ee 


— 


Vil 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


: age 
M. |. Waterson, Apvertisinc Branos AND MARKE! 
(Advertising Ass’n Monograph, 2nd ed. 1985 24 


New York State Moreland Commission on the 
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, Report and Re 
] 


: * °2>o | ‘oo 2 f ” \ >7 
ommendations No. 3. lanuaryv 2! 964 ?] 


No. 


¢ 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
+ 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and PEOPLES 
SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Petitioners, 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, and RHODE ISLAND 
LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Respondents 


+ 
Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 


To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 


+ 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
+ 
OPINIONS BELOW 
1. 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F. Supp. 543 (D.R.L. 
1993). 


2. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of R.I., _. F.3d. ____ (1st Cir. 
1994). 


BASIS FOR JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the First Circuit was entered on October 24, 1994. 
Jurisdiction is conferred by 28 U.S.C. §1254. 


1 


2 
STATUTES INVOLVED 


Rhode Island General Laws §§3-8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and 
Regulation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control Admin- 
istration.! 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Summary Of Reasons For 
Granting The Writ 


The petitioners, 44 Liquormart, Inc., a Rhode Island 
liquor store operator (44 Liquormart), and Peoples Super 
Liquors, Inc., a Massachusetts liquor store operator (Peo- 
ples) request that the Court issue a Writ of Certiorari to 
correct the decision of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the First Circuit, and resolve a conflict between the 
First and Fifth Circuits, on the question of whether the 
Twenty-first Amendment gives an added presumption of 
validity to a state’s ban on advertising the price at which 
a retailer sells alcoholic beverages. The Court of Appeals 
effectively heid that the Twenty-first Amendment over- 
came the First Amendment's protection for commercial 
speech by eliminating the government’s burden to prove 
that “the restriction directly and materially advances a 
substantial state interest in a manner no more extensive 
than necessary to serve that interest.” Ibanez v. Florida 
Dept. of Business and Professional Regulation, __ U.S. __, 
114 S. Ct. 2084, 2088 (1994). That decision was contrary to 
the decisions of this Court and in conflict with that of a 
majority of the judges of the Fifth Circuit in Dunagin v. 
City of Oxford Mississippi, 718 F.2d 738, 746 (5th Cir. 1983). 


1 The text of the statutes and regulation is set forth in the 
Statutory Addendum. 


eee TT Se ee ee eo ee ee ae Pe 


a 


oh ee 


ao FOLDS htt. » ees 


3 


There is also a split on the point in state court decisions. 
In addition, the Court of Appeals erroneously held that 
the restriction on speech was valid, despite findings by 
the District Court that the restriction did not materially 
advance the state’s interest, and was more burdensome 
than necessary when the state’s interest could be fully 
served without restricting speech at all. 


Procedural History 


This is an action by 44 Liquormart and Peoples origi- 
nally brought against the Rhode Island Liquor Control 
Administrator (the Liquor Control Administrator), for a 
determination that R.I.G.L. §§3-8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and Regu- 
lation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control Administra- 
tion, which ban advertising the price of alcoholic 
beverages within the State of Rhode Island, deny the 
petitioners their constitutional right to freedom of speech 
and deny the citizens of Rhode Island their constitutional 
right to obtain accurate price information about lawful 
products. Jurisdiction in the United States District Court 
is based upon 28 U.S.C. §1331 (federal question) and 42 
U.S.C. §1983 (deprivation of federal constitutional rights 
under color of state law). The Rhode Island Liquor Stores 
Association (RILSA) was permitted to intervene over the 
plaintiffs’ objection to protect its members’ interest in 
restricting competition.* Later the State of Rhode Island 
was substituted as the party defendant. 


2 See pages 8-9, below. 


3 In its memorandum in support of its motion to intervene, 
at page 2, the Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association stated its 
interest: “[t]he overwhelming majority of the Class A Retailers 
in the State of Rhode Island operate at a marginal profit. The 
elimination of the prohibition on advertising of liquor sales 


4 


After trial on the merits, including taking testimony 
of expert witnesses for both sides, the District Court in a 
well-reasoned opinion applied the standard set forth in 
Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Com- 
mission of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980) to the facts found, 
and entered a judgment that the price advertising ban 
was unconstitutional. 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F. 
Supp. 543 (D.R.I. 1993). The State and _RILSA appealed to 
the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 


On May 2, 1994, the Court of Appeals affirmed the 
District Court’s ruling as to out of state retailers, but 
reversed as to Rhode Island retailers. Both sides filed 
petitions for rehearing with suggestions for rehearing en 
banc. On July 22, 1994, the panel ordered the May 2 
opinion withdrawn and issued a “not for publication” 
amended opinion that reached the same result as the 
earlier opinion. The court “ordered that either party may 
file a petition for rehearing with a suggestion for rehear- 
ing en banc by July 22, 1994.” Both sides did so. On July 
29, 1994, the Court of Appeals denied 44 Liquormart’s 
petition for rehearing, but took no action on those of 
Rhode Island and RILSA. 44 Liquormart obtained an 
order from this Court extending the time for filing its 
petition for a writ of certiorari to and including December 
26, 1994. On October 24, 1994, the Court of Appeals 
entered a judgment reversing the decision of the District 
Court in its entirety. 


would, of necessity, add an additional finaricial burden to each 
of the Class A Retailers who would be obliged to participate in 
the advertising arena and would be at a definite disadvantage 
when matched up against retailers who hold multiple licenses”. 


So a as > soe iy Rw 4 _- J 
ee eat ne ee ee Sl eee 


5 
Facts 


44 Liquormart operates a retail store for the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in 
Johnston, Rhode Island. Peoples operates retail stores for 
the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the 
premises in New Bedford and Fairhaven, Massachusetts. 
The Liquor Control Administrator is charged with enforc- 
ing Rhode Island’s laws and regulations governing the 
sale of alcoholic beverages. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 
supra, (App. 20). 


Rhode Island permits all advertising relating to alco- 
holic beverages, except that it forbids any reference to 
price outside licensed retail premises and prohibits 
Rhode Island communications media from accepting any 
advertisements that contain any reference to price in 
other states as well as Rhode Island. Ibid. 


The Liquor Control Administrator vigorously 
enforces the price advertising ban. The ban on price 
advertising has been interpreted to go beyond stating the 
price at which a product is offered for sale. The Liquor 
Control Administrator has found that the price advertis- 
ing ban prohibits use of the word “sale” in alcoholic 
beverages advertisements and that use of the word 
“wow” when juxtaposed with a reference to a particular 
item of alcoholic beverages in an advertisement also vio- 
lates the statute and regulation. On December 17, 1991, 
the Liquor Control Administrator found 44 Liquormart in 
violation of R.I.G.L. §§3-8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and Regulation 
32. She imposed a fine for publishing advertisements 
containing the words “wow” and “sale” in a newspaper 
even though the advertisements did not state the price at 


6 


which any product was offered for sale. Other liquor 
licensees, as well as newspapers within Rhode Island, 
have been warned and fined for violation of the price 
advertising ban. Ibid. 


Peoples, a Massachusetts retailer, has made extensive 
use of price advertising in Massachusetts where it is 
permitted. Peoples has attempted to place its advertise- 
ments, which include price information, in Rhode Island 
communications media, but has been refused because of 
the Rhode Island statute. Rhode Island communications 
media reach both Rhode Island and Massachusetts citi- 
zens. Ibid. 


Both 44 Liquormart and Peoples desire to advertise 
the prices at which they offer alcoholic beverages for sale 
in Rhode Island communications media. Their proposed 
price advertising does not concern an illegal activity and 
presumably would not be false or misleading. Ibid. 


Rhode Island justifies its ban on price advertising 
solely as promoting temperance, which it equates with 
reducing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Ibid. 
There are no scientific studies that show banning price 
advertising has any direct effect upon consumption. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra (App. 22). In 1985 the 
Federal Trade Commission found that there is no reliable 
basis on which to conclude that alcohol advertising sig- 
nificantly affects alcohol abuse and that there is no basis 
for concluding that banning or otherwise limitixg adver- 
tising would offer significant protection to the public. 
Ibid. 


* Since newspaper advertisements would not seem to con- 
stitute a “placard or sign” as used in Regulation 32, it is difficult 
to understand the basis for finding a violation of the Regulation. 


— 


| _— ‘al 


ee tec San ein 


—_—" aie es 


7 


Per capita consumption is affected by factors such as 
religion, ethnic background, family makeup and peer 
pressure that are more important in determining the 
amount of alcohol consumed than the presence or 
absence of price advertising. Indeed, per capita consump- 
tion in Rhode Island is higher than in some states that 
permit price advertising. According to the latest statistics, 
Rhode Island ranked in the upper 30 percent of the states 
in total per capita consumption. Ibid. 

The state’s expert attempted to justify the ban on 
price advertising with the theory that it would maintain 
higher prices by preventing price wars among Rhode 
Island retailers and increase the “search cost” that Rhode 
Island consumers would be subject to in attempting to 
find lower priced retailers. However, the District Court 
found that the state’s theory had not been proved because 
Rhode Island’s off-premises price advertising ban has 
had no significant impact on levels of alcohol consump- 
tion in Rhode Island. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, 


(App. 31). 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


A. The Twenty-first Amendment Does Not Give An 
Added Presumption Of Validity To A Ban On 
Advertising The Price At Which A Retailer Sells 
Alcoholic Beverages. 


The Court of Appeals thought it “precisely in order” 
to give Rhode Island’s restriction on speech an “added 
presumption of validity” because of the use of that 
phrase in California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 118-119 (1972) 
(App. 8). The effect of the added presumption was to 
eliminate the state’s burden to prove the validity of the 
price advertising ban under Central Hudson and to put the 


8 


burden of proving invalidity on the petitioners. That 
attenuation of the First Amendment is contrary to the 
decisions of this Court and in conflict with the decision of 
the Fifth Circuit when it considered the issue. 


In Lamar Outdoor Advertising v. Mississippi State Tax 
Commission, 701 F.2d 314 (5th Cir. 1983), a panel of the 
Fifth Circuit upheld a decision of the District Court find- 
ing a ban on alcoholic beverages advertising unconstitu- 
tional. The panel considered and rejected the state’s 
argument that the Twenty-first Amendment, as applied in 
LaRue, made it “not an ordinary commercial speech case.” 
701 F.2d at 325-330. Hearing the matter en banc, the Fifth 
Circuit divided eight to five in finding the law constitu- 
tional, but said “[w]Je base our decision, ultimately, upon 
the application of the Supreme Court's analysis in” Cen- 
tral Hudson. Dunagin v. City of Oxford Mississippi, 718 F.2d 
738, 746 (5th Cir. 1983). Two members of the majority 
joined in a concurring opinion to emphasize their view 
that “[a] conclusion that the Twenty-first Amendment 
justifies greater intrusions upon the constitutional liber- 
ties of individual citizens than would otherwise be the 
case is an insidious doctrine. ...” 718 F.2d at 754 
[emphasis added]. Thus, seven of the 13 judges concurred 
in rejecting giving any weight to the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, or the dictum in La Rue. 


The state courts are also divided on the question. In 
Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Association v. Attorney 
General, 142 Mich. App. 294, 370 N.W.2d 328 at 336 (Mich. 
Ct. App. 1985), cert. den., 479 U.S. 939 (1986), the court 
considered the effect of LaRue and New York State Liquor 
Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981), and concluded 
that “the Twenty-first Amendment does not require us to 
deal with restraints on freedom of speech any differently 
than we would if alcoholic beverages were not involved” 


9 


in striking down a restriction on price advertising for 
alcoholic beverages. 370 N.W.2d at 335. But the Pennsyl- 
vania Supreme Court (over vigorous dissent) recently 
held that its price advertising ban was supported by the 
added “presumption of validity” afforded by the Amend- 
ment. Pennsylvania State Police v. Hospitality Investments of 
Philadelphia, Inc.. _. A.2d __, No. 77 E.D. 1992, 1994 WL 
606543 (Pa. November 3. 1994) 


Oklahoma Telecasters Association v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490 
(10th Cir. 1983), which was relied upon by the state and 
the Court of Appeals, applied the Central Hudson analysis 
to an Oklahoma ban on alcoholic beverages advertising. 
However, its analysis may have been skewed by its con- 
clusion that the Twenty-first Amendment permitted “reg- 
ulation of commercial speech that might not otherwise be 
permissible.” 699 F.2d 502.5 


In Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor Control Commis- 
sion, 459 U.S. 807 (1982), the Court dismissed, “for want 
of a substantial federal question,” an appeal from a deci- 
sion of the Ohio Supreme Court upholding a partial ban 
on price advertising for alcoholic beverages. While the 
Ohio court did not rely on LaRue, it did rely on the 
Twenty-first Amendment to fortify the substantiality of 
Ohio's interest in discouraging “excessive consumption 
of alcoholic beverages.” Queensgate Investment Co. v. 


$ The Tenth Circuit upheld the ban. This Court granted 
certiorari to consider the petitioner's claim that the ban was not 
a valid restriction on commercial speech, but ultimately decided 
the case on a ground raised by the Federal Communications 
Commission amicus curiae, holding that the Oklahoma ban on 
the retransmission of liquor advertisements in out-of-state sig- 
nals by cable operators was preempted by federal regulation of 
cable broadcasting. Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 
697 (1984). 


10 


Liquor Control Commission, 433 N&. ‘d 138, 141-142 (Oh. 
1982). While recognition that the Iwenty-first Amendment 

in establishing substantially its interest under 
the second part of the Central Hudson test is arguably appro- 
priate, using the Amendment to modify or shift the burden 
of proof under the third and fourth parts of the test is not. In 
any event, most courts, including the Court of Appeals 
below, have not relied upon Queensgate as blanket authority 
for a price advertisis., ban, but have conducted an indepen- 
dent evaluation under Central Hudson. Dunagin v. City of 
Oxford, Mississippi, supra, 718 F.2d at 746. In Oklahoma Telecas- 
ters Association v. Crisp, supra, at 497-498 the court conducted 
an independent evaluation, but also was of the opinion that 
Queensgate “manifestly presented an issue concerning the 
tension between the First and Twenty-first Amendments.” 699 
F.2d at 497 [emphasis added]. Rhode Island urged below that 
Queensgate was dispositive. The Court of Appeals, acknowl- 
edged Queensgate and speculated as to its applicability with- 
out resolving the question. (App. 9). The apparent ambiguity 
or the effect to be given to this Court’s dismissal of the 
appeal in Queengate could be helpfully addressed by the 
Court in this case. 

Suggesting that the Twenty-first Amendment authorizes 
curtailment of First Amendment protection for those who 
lawfully deal in alcoholic beverages is both persistent and 
pernicious. In Bentsen v. Coors Brewing Company, presently 
pending in this Court, the United States argued that its 
“labeling restriction” was ee 
of validity” because of the Twenty-first Amendm 
93-1631, Petitioner's Brief, 41. 

Justice Stevens’ apprehension that LaRue would become 
authority for the proposition that “the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment repealed not only the Eighteenth Amendment, but 
some undefined portion of the First Amendment as well,” 


11 


City of Newport, Kentucky v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92, 103 (1986) 
[dissenting opinion], has been manifested. There is a conflict 
on this point between the First Circuit and the Fifth Circuits, 
with the Tenth Circuit taking a middle road, but leaning 
toward the First Circuit’s view, and the state courts are 
similarly divided, demonstrating the need for a resolution by 
this Court. 


The Court of Appeals below and the recent decision of 
the Pennsylvania Supreme Court have read far too much 
into LaRue at the cost of the First Amendmeni. The Twenty- 
first Amendment was intended to create an exception to the 
normal operation of the Commerce Clause by permitting 
states to impose burdens on interstate commerce that other- 
wise would be invalid. “Neither the text nor the history of 
the Twenty-first Amendment suggests that it qualifies indi- 
vidual rights protected by the Bill of Rights and the Four- 
teenth Amendment where the sale or use of liquor is 
concerned.” Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 205-206 (1976). 

The States enjoy broad power under §2 of the 

Twenty-first Amendment to regulate the importa- 

tion and use of intoxicating liquor within their 

borders. . . . At the same time, our prior cases have 

made clear that the Amendment does not license 

the States to ignore their obligations under other 

provisions of the Constitution. . . . Indeed, “[t]his 

Court's decisions . . . have confirmed that the 

Amendment primarily created an exception to the 

normal operation of the Commerce 

Clause.” . . . Thus, as the Court explained in Hostet- 

ter v. Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp., 377 U.S. 324, 

84 S. Ct. 1293, 12 L.Ed.2d 350 (1964), §2 reserves to 

the States power to impose burdens on interstate 

commerce in intoxicating liquor that, absent the 


12 


Amendment, would clearly be invalid under the 
Commerce Clause. Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. 
Crisp, supra, 467 U.S. at 712 [citations omitted]. 

The Court has consistently rejected states’ attempts 
to rely upon the Twenty-first Amendment as a justifica- 
tion for abrogating other constitutional provisions. See 
Dept. of Revenue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 U.S. 
341 (1964) [states may not tax alcoholic beverages in 
violation of the Import-Export Clause]; Wisconsin v. Con- 
stantineau, 400 U.S. 433, 436 (1971) [a statute that required 
the posting of names of excessive drinkers in retail liquor 
outlets violated due process]; Craig v. Boren, supra [a 
statute that prohibited the sale of beer to men under 
twenty-one and women under eighteen violated equal 
protection]; South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) [fed- 
eral statute conditioning receipt of highway funds on 
adoption of minimum drinking age is a valid exercise of 
Congress’ spending power]. 


Significantly, the Court has found many circum- 
stances under which the Twenty-first Amendment does 
not even supplant the Commerce Clause. California Retail 
Liquor Dealer's Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97 
(1980) [the states’ power to regulate alcoholic beverages 
traffic is subject to federal anti-trust laws]; Bacchus 
Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984) [“economic pro- 
tectionism” of local alcoholic beverages violates the Com- 
merce Clause]; Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. New 
York State Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986) [state 
regulation of alcoholic beverages prices is invalid under 
the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in other 
states}; 324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987) [a 
mandatory 112 percent minimum markup on alcoholic 
beverages based on the wholesale price violates antitrust 


13 


laws]; Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 (1989) [state 
regulation of alcoholic beverages prices is invalid under 
the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in other 
states]. In Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, supra, the 
Court held that a state’s ban on alcoholic beverages 
advertising was preempted under the Commerce Clause 
by a federal regulation, without any discussion of 
whether the Twenty-first Amendment might provide an 
added presumption of validity. 

Finally, in Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 
(1982), the Court decided that the First Amendment 
Establishment Clause prevented a state from giving 
churches a veto over the issuance of liquor licenses 
within 500 feet of them. No added presumption of consti- 
tutionality was accorded the state because of the Twenty- 
first Amendment. “The State may not exercise its power 
under the 21st Amendment in a way which impinges 
upon the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.” 
459 U.S. at 122 n.5. There is no basis to afford greater 
protection to the interests safeguarded by the Establish- 
ment Clause than the Free Speech Clause.* Thus, the 
Court of Appeals’ use of an “added presumption” of 
constitutionality to shift the burden to the petitioners to 
prove the invalidity of the price advertising ban under 
the First Amendment can not be squared with the fact 
that no such exception appears in the application to 
regulation of alcoholic beverages of other constitutional 
provisions, including the Commerce Clause and the 
Establishment Clause. 


* This is not to say that the Free Speech Clause and the 
Establishment Clause operate in an identical fashion. See, Lee v. 
Weisman, __ U.S. __, 112 S. Ct. 2649, 2647 (1992). However, the 
Court has not recognized a hierarchy in the clauses whereby one 
is entitled to more weight than the other. 


14 


California v. LaRue and the later cases of Doran v. 
Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922, (1975) and New York State 
Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, supra, should be limited to 
their particular peculiar circumstances. In those cases, the 
Court upheld under the Twenty-first Amendment the 
states’ power to ban nude dancing on licensed premises 
because it was upholding a licensing provision rather 
than a regulation of communication. 

In LaRue . . . we concluded that the broad 

powers of the States to regulate the sale of 

liquor, conferred by the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, outweighed any First Amendment interest 

in nude dancing and that a Sta*e could therefore 

ban such dancing as a part of its liquor license 


program. Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., supra, 422 US. 
at 932-933. 


While nude dancing has some communicative aspect, 
it is also conduct with a concomitant risk of provoking or 
facilitating illegal activity on the licensed premises. The 
Court’s opinion graphically described “numerous inci- 
dents of legitimate concern:” 


Customers were found engaging in oral copula- 
tion with women entertainers; customers 
engaged in public masturbation; and customers 
placed rolled currency either directly into the 
vagina of a female entertainer, or on the bar in 
order that she might pick it up herself. 
Numerous other forms of contact between the 
mouths of male customers and the vaginal areas 
of female performers were reported to have 
occurred. Prostitution occurred in and around 
such licensed premises, and involved some of 
the female dancers. Indecent exposure to young 
girls, attempted rape, rape itself, and ome on 
adjacent to such premises. 409 US. at 111. 


15 


This Court has never held that the Twenty-first 
Amendment would justify a ban on pure speech on 
licensed premises.” Instead, the Court minimized the 
communicative aspect of the performances by describing 
them as “gross sexuality.” 409 U.S. at 118. Plainly, the 
Court was concerned with the conduct rather than com- 
munication in LaRue. 

[A]s the mode of expression moves from the 

printed page to the commission of public acts 

that may themselves violate valid penal statutes, 

the scope of permissible state regulations signif- 

icantly increases. States may sometimes pro- 

scribe expression that is directed to the 
accomplishment of an end that the State has 
declared to be illegal when such expression con- 

sists, in part, of “conduct” or “action.” 409 U.S. 

at 117. 

In contrast here, Rhode Island is attempting to ban 
speech that occurs off the licensed premises, and does no 
more than convey helpful, accurate information about a 
lawful product. 


B. The Court Of Appeals Improperly Reversed The 
Allocation Of The Burden Of Proof Mandated By 
This Court. 


Shortly before the decision of the Court of Appeals 
was announced, this Court reemphasized that “[c]ommer- 
cial speech that is not false, deceptive, or misleading can 
be restricted, but only if the State shows that the restric- 
tion directly and materially advances a substantial state 


7? Ironically, considering the Appeals Court's reliance upon 
LaRue, the speech Rhode Island seeks to ban off the licensed 
premises, c>mmunication about prices, is permitted on the 
licensed premises. 


16 


interest in a manner no more extensive than necessary to 
serve that interest.” Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and 
Professional Regulation, supra, __ U.S. __, 114 S. Ct. at 
2088 (1994). The Court of Appeals, probably influenced 
by “the presumption based upon the Twenty-first 
Amendment” (App. 9), not only failed to follow that 
decision and the earlier decisions upon which it was 
based, it disregarded the District Court's findings of fact. 
In improperly making its own “election among conflict- 
ing facts,” and choosing “which competing inferences to 
draw from undisputed basic facts,” Irons v. Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, 811 F.2d 681, 684 (1st Cir. 1987), the Court 
of Appeals did not give the District Court’s findings of 
fact the deference to which they were entitled under the 
proper standard of review, Anderson v. City of Bessemer 
City, 470 U.S. 564, 573-574 (1955), and affectively reversed 
the allocation of the burden of proof mandated by this 
Court. 

The Court of Appeals did recite that the “burden is 
on the party seeking suppression, here the State” to prove 
that the regulation of commercial speech “directly 
advances” the asserted governmental interest. (App. 5); 
Edenfield v. Fane, __ U.S. __, 113 S. Ct. 1792, 1803 (1993). 
However, in deciding that the District Court was not 
“free to choose” between competing factual contentions, 
(App. 6), the Court of Appeals gave the restriction on 
commercial speech presumptive validity, put the burden 
of proving invalidity on the petitioners and took a giant 
step back from the strictures imposed by this Court on 


the regulation of commercial speech. 
The State’s burden is not slight; the “free flow of 
commercial information is valuable enough to 
justify imposing on would-be regulators the 
costs of distinguishing the truthful from the 


17 


false, the helpful from the misleading, and the 
harmless from the harmful.” Zauderer, supra, 471 
U.S., at 646, 105 S. Ct., at 2279. “[M]ere specula- 
tion or conjecture” will not suffice; rather the 
State “must demonstrate that the harms it 
recites are real and that its restriction will in fact 
alleviate them to a material degree.” Edenfield, 
supra, at __, 113 S. Ct., at 1800; see also 
Zauderer, supra, 471 U.S., at 648-649, 105 S. Ct., at 
2280-2281 (State’s “unsupported assertions” 
insufficient to justify prohibition on attorney 
advertising; “broad prophylactic rules may not 
be so lightly justified if the protections afforded 
commercial speech are to retain their force”). 
Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional 
Regulation, supra, 114 S. Ct. at 2089. 


Despite the freshness of that declaration and the clear 
pronouncements of this Court that preceded it, by accept- 
ing the state’s rationale without requiring affirmative 
proof, the Court of Appeals required the petitioners to 
show affirmativeiy that the state’s regulation did not 
advance its interest in reducing consumption of alcoholic 
beverages to a material degree, thereby effectively revers- 
ing the state’s burden of proof under Central Hudson. 


C. Rhode Island’s Ban On Advertising The Price At 
Which Retailers Sell Alcoholic Beverages Does Not 
Directly Advance Its Interest In Promoting Tem- 
perance To A Material Degree Thereby Failing The 
Third Part Of The Central Hudson Test. 


Under Central Hudson there must be an “immediate 
connection” between the government's interest and the 
prohibition on speech. If the connection is “tenuous” or 
“highly speculative” the prohibition is invalid. 447 U.S. at 
569. A prohibition on commercial speech is not valid if it 


OG ah. De ey 


18 


provides only “ineffective or remote support for the gov- 
ernment’s purpose.” 447 U.S. at 564. Last year the Court 
saw fit to reemphasize the point. “[A] governmental body 
seeking to sustain a restriction on commercial speech 
must demonstrate that the harms it recites are real and 
that its restriction will in fact alleviate them to a material 
degree.” Edenfield v. Fane, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 1800. It did 
so again in Ibanez, supra, emphasizing that “[t]he State’s 
burden is not slight.” 114 S. Ct. at 2089. 


The only governmental interest offered in support of 
Rhode Island’s price advertising ban is the promotion of 
temperance, which the Rhode Island Supreme Court has 
defined as “reducing the consumption of liquor.” S & S 
Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, supra, 497 A.2d at 734 (1985). 
The only connection posited between the price advertis- 
ing ban and the state’s interest is the prevention of “price 
wars,” which would produce lower prices that would, in 
the state’s unsupported view, stimulate consumption. 


The essence of the Court of Appeals’ reason for per- 
mitting Rhode Island to stifle “the free flow of commer- 
cial information,” and the essence of its misapprehension 
of the law, is in its holding that the District Court could 
not find the statute unconstitutional “in the absence of 
any affirmative contradiction [to the State’s hypothesis] 
to rely on.” (App. 7). To the contrary, not only did the 
state fail to carry its burden to prove that the restriction 
promoted its interest in temperance “to a material degree,” 
Edenfield v. Fane, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 1803 quoted in Ibanez, 
supra, 114 S. Ct. at 2089 [emphasis added], the petitioners’ 
evidence convinced the District Court that “Rhode 
Island’s off-premises liquor price advertising ban has no 
significant impact on levels of alcohol consumption in 
Rhode Island.” 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, (App. 


19 


31). Indeed, there is no empirical evidence in the record 
to support the conclusion that Rhode Island’s price 
advertising ban has had a material effect on its asserted 
goal. Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional 
Regulation, supra, 114 S. Ct. at 2089. That proposition is 
refuted by the fact that Rhode Island was in the top 30 
percent of states in per capita consumption with the ban 
in place!®8 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supru, (App. 23). 


One way of measuring the “immediate connection” 
between the government's interest and its prohibition of 
speech, which was ignored by the Court of Appeals, is to 
examine the degree to which the state attempts to further 
its asserted goal through regulation. Rhode Island does 
not regulate all, or even any, advertising of alcoholic 
beverages other than price advertising. This underinclu- 
sion emphasizes the lack of connection between the regu- 
lation and the proffered governmental interest. 

By their own terms, therefore, the State’s regula- 

tory aims in this area are narrow. Although a 

state regulatory scheme obviously need not 

amount to a comprehensive attack on the prob- 

lems of alcohol consumption to constitute a 

valid exercise of state power under the Twenty- 

first Amendment, the selective approach Okla- 
homa has taken toward liquor advertising sug- 
gests limits on the substantiality of the interests 

it asserts here. Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 

supra, at 715. 


That Rhode Island leaves the alcoholic beverages 
industry free to employ a wide variety of advertising 
techniques underscores the tenuous connection between 


8 The Court of Appeals did not acknowledge this salient 
fact. 


20 


its asserted interest and the prohibition on price advertis- 
ing. In City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., __ 
U.S. __, 113 S. Ct. 1505 (1993) the Court stressed that 
underinclusion vis-a-vis the asserted interest supports 
finding a restriction of commercial speech to be invalid. 
The fact that the regulation “provide[d] only the 
most limited incremental support for the inter- 
est asserted” .. . — that it achieved only a “mar- 
ginal degree of protection” . . . for that interest — 
supported our holding that the prohibition was 
invalid. 113 S. Ct. at 1515 [citations omitted]. 


Edenfield v. Fane, supra, strengthens the argument that 
the fact that Rhode Island permits virtually all advertis- 
ing, while restricting only advertising of prices, shows 
that the price advertising ban is not substantially related 
to the asserted interest in temperance. 

The State has identified certain interests in regu- 

lating solicitation in the accounting profession 

that are important and within its legitimate 
power, but the prohibitions here do not serve 
these purposes in a direct and material manner. 

Where a restriction on speech lacks this close and 

substantial relation to the governmental interests 

asserted, it cannot be, by definition, a reasonable 


time, place, or manner restriction. 113 S. Ct. 
1801-1802 [Emphasis added]. 


The Court of Appeals disregarded the district judge’s 
findings of fact because it thought the state’s position had 
“inherent merit.” (App. 7). But given the fact that Rhode 
Island, with its price advertising ban in effect for thirty- 
four years, was indisputably in the top thirty percent of 
states in per capita alcohol consumption, the effect on 
consumption could be no more than marginal. The Court 
of Appeals’ logic is no more than a hypothesis that does 


21 


not fit the facts. The price advertising ban does not mate- 
rially advance the asserted interest of Rhode Island, and 
the state has failed to demonstrate a “reasonable ‘fit’ 
between the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends.” Board of Trustees of State Univ. of 
New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 480 (1989). 


It is superficially appealing to speculate, as did the 
Court of Appeals, that consumption may be promoted by 
lower prices that could result from price advertising. 
(App. 7). However, without some evidence to show a real 
and material effect, the Central Hudson test is not satis- 
fied. Moreover, common sense dictates that if the state’s 
theory is correct, there should be empirical evidence to 
support it. Our experts showed that there are many inter- 
vening variables between price advertising and consump- 
tion, such as differences in drinking attitudes and 
customs, which are the most important determinants of 
drinking behavior, so a direct link can not be made. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra (App. 27). 


The fact that Rhode Island is in the top 30 percent of 
states in per capita aicohol consumption, with its price 
advertising ban in place for thirty-four years, is fully 
consistent with the findings of several governmental 
agencies that have looked at the relationship between 
price or advertising and consumption. In 1964, the More- 
land Commission was appointed by the governor of New 
York to study that State’s minimum price requirement for 
liquor. The Commission found that “[t]he argument that 
high prices promote temperance in that they keep liquor 
out of the hands of those who should not have it is 
unfounded.” New York State Moreland Commission on 
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, Report and Recom- 
mendations No. 3, 17, January 21, 1964. The Commission 


22 


compared states in which prices were high with states in 
which prices were low. Annual arrests for drunkenness, 
drunk driving, rates of alcoholism, and rates of alcohol- 
related first mental hospital admissions were examined to 
find no relationship between consumption patterns in the 
“low” and “high” price states. Id. at 18-19. The Commis- 
sion concluded “artificially high prices for liquor have no 
substantial relationship to temperance. They serve merely 
to insure the profit margins of the various segments of 
the industry.”? Id. at 19.1° In 1985, the Federal Trade 
Commission found “no evidence to believe alcohol adver- 
tising significantly affects alcohol abuse.” 44 Liquormart v. 
Racine, supra (App. 24). 

Despite its proffered concern with promoting tem- 
perance, Rhode Island permits all forms of advertising 
which tries to directly stimulate the desire to consume a 
particular brand of alcoholic beverage. Consumers are 
denied only price information. As the Rhode Island 
Supreme Court humorously put it: “Rhode Islanders’ 
thirst for alcoholic-beverage advertising will have to be 
quenched through the electronic and print media con- 
stantly reminding them of such thoughts as ‘This Bud’s 
for you’ or ‘It’s Miller Time.’ ” S & S Liquor Mart, Inc. v. 


° Thus is manifested the interest of the Rhode Island Liquor 
Stores Association in preserving high profit margins at the 
expense of consumers under the guise of promoting tem- 
perance. 


10 The Moreland Commission Report has been noticed by 
several courts in ruling on alcoholic beverages related issues. 
324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335, 348, 351 fn.13 (1987), 
Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Association v. Attorney General, 
supra, 370 N.W.2d at 336; Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Control 
Appeals Bd., 21 Cal. 3d 431, 457 (1978); Seagram & Sons v. Hostet- 
ter, 16 N.Y.2d 47 (1965). 


23 


Pastore, 497 A.2d 729, 734 (1985). A consumer who has 
thereby been persuaded that it is “Miller time” and sets 
out to buy a six-pack will be able to check the advertise- 
ments and find many places where Miller beer is sold, 
but not know which one offers the best price. Common 
sense says that this will not dissuade the purchase, but 
only enable retailers to maintain high margins at the 
consumer’s expense. Rhode Island’s expert presented no 
empirical data to the contrary. 


In asserting that “advertising must be generally pro- 
ductive or so much money would not be spent on it” the 
Court of Appeals did not consider two salient facts: 
expenditures on alcoholic beverages advertising have 
been steadily increasing, while consumption has been 
steadily decreasing; and, Rhode Island, with its price 
advertising ban in place for many years, is in the top 30 
percent of states in per capita consumption. 44 Liquormart 
v. Racine, supra, (App. 23). The state just did not present 
any evidence that its ban on price advertising had any 
material influence on the level of consumption. Moreover, 
“so much money” is spent on the kind of advertising 
campaigns, such as “this Buds for you” and “it’s Miller 
time,” that are permitted in Rhode Island. Those cam- 
paigns are directed toward increasing sales of the adver- 
tiser’s brands at the expense of competitor’s brands.!! 


11 The assumption that the alcoholic beverages industry 
would not spend money on advertising unless it generated 
increased consumption underlies all the cases upholding adver- 
tising bans. Those courts do not appreciate the fact that adver- 
tising influences a person who has already decided to buy an 
alcoholic beverage in choosing which brand to buy. In a “mature 
market,” such as the market for alcoholic beverages, the pur- 
pose and effect of a particular company’s advertising is to 


24 


Retailers like the petitioners want to advertise their prices 
to increase their share of the market of those who have 
already decided to consume, but not selected where they 
will acquire the product. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, supra, 
(App. 30). Consequently, Rhode Island turns the logic of 
its position upside down by banning only that advertis- 
ing least likely to increase sales, while permitting adver- 
tising most likely directed at increasing sales. Surely, it 
cannot be said that the District Court’s finding that the 
price advertising ban has no material effect on consump- 
tion is clearly erroneous. Anderson v. City of Bessemer City, 
supra. 


Beyond the fact that the findings of the District Court 
are not clearly erroneous, so that no connection has been 
shown between price advertising and consumption, the 
price advertising ban is, at best, theoretically only indi- 
rectly related to the promotion of temperance, and thus 
does not satisfy the third part of the Central Hudson test. 
A direct relationship is manifested when there is some- 
thing about the content or particular adverse effect of the 
commercial speech that is a harm to the public interest 
legitimately to be avoided. As the Court noted in Central 
Hudson, “in recent years this Court has not approved a 
blanket ban on commercial speech unless the expression 
itself was flawed in some way, either because it was deceptive 
or related to unlawful activity” 447 U.S. at 566, n. 9 
[emphasis added]. 


encourage consumers to choose that brand, not to increase gen- 
eral consumption of the generic product. M. J. Waterson, ADver- 
TISING BRANDS AND Markets, 19 (Advertising Ass’n Monograph, 
2nd ed. 1985). If advertising takes a customer away from a 
competitor’s product it is money well spent, although it does 
not increase overall consumption by so much as one bottle. 


25 


In this case, the state’s argument manifests the indi- 
rect nature of the price advertising ban’s purported effect 
on temperance. Rhode Island does not argue, and cer- 
tainly has not proven, that price advertising itself stimu- 
lates consumption. Price advertising inherently only 
informs the public of the price at which the advertiser is 
offering alcoholic beverages for sale. As such, it has no 
particular adverse effect that causes harm. Under the 
state’s attenuated reasoning, price advertising itself is not 
harmful, it is merely a means of facilitating the “price 
wars” which the state believes might occur and might 
have the effect of lowering an “artificial price floor” that 
might result from the public’s ignorance of retail prices 
might increase consumption. Therefore, the regulation is 
not “aimed at either the content of the speech or the 
particular adverse effects stemming from that content.” 


D. Rhode Island’s Ban On Advertising The Price At 
Which Retailers Sell Alcoholic Beverages Is More 
Extensive Than Necessary To Serve The State Inter- 
est In Promoting Temperance. 


The final part of the Central Hudson test requires the 
state to demonstrate that its restriction on commercial 
speech is “not more extensive than is necessary to serve” 
the state’s interest. 447 U.S. at 566. The test has been 
articulated as requiring the proponent of a restriction on 
commercial speech to prove a “reasonable ‘fit’ between 
the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to accom- 
plish those ends.” Board of Trustees of State Univ. of New 
York v. Fox, supra, 492 U.S. at 480. The Court has most 
recently explained that a rational basis test, advanced by 
the state and adopted by the Court of Appeals, is not to 


26 


be applied when deciding the constitutionality of restric- 

tions on commercial speech.!? 
[W]hile we have rejected the “least-restrictive- 
means” test for judging restrictions on commer- 
cial speech, so too have we rejected mere rational 
basis review. A regulation need not be “abso- 
lutely the least severe that will achieve the 
desired end,” Fox, supra, 492 U.S., at 480, 109 S. 
Ct., at 3035, but if there are numerous and 
obvious less-burdensome alternatives to the 
restriction on commercial speech, that is cer- 
tainly a relevant consideration in determining 
whether the “fit” between ends and means is 
reasonable. City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Net- 
work, Inc., supra, 113 S. Ct. 1510, fn.13 [emphasis 
added]. 


Because there is nothing inherently bad about truth- 
fully informing the public of the price at which lawful 
commodities are offered for sale, the only justification for 
the advertising ban is to keep prices above “an artificial 
price floor,” a result Rhode Island could directly accom- 
plish without any restriction on speech by mandating 
minimum consumer prices or increasing its tax on alco- 
holic beverages. Since, if this were really its goal, the state 
could fully accomplish it without restricting speech at all, 
i.e., in a manner obviously less-burdensome to free 
expression, it is self evident that its ban on price advertis- 
ing is more extensive than is necessary. The Court of 
Appeals’ decision authorizes government to make a “rea- 
sonable choice” to covertly manipulate citizens’ con- 
sumption patterns by withholding relevant, truthful, 


12 The Appeals Court held that the state need not prove the 
“correctness” of its position, only its “reasonableness.” Slip Op. 
at 6. 


27 


product information when it could fully accomplish its 
objective of preventing price wars without any restriction 
on speech. However, this Court “demand[s] a higher 
level of rationality when you're prohibiting the convey- 
ing of information.” Bentsen v. Coors Brewing Company, 
No. 93-1631, Transcript of Oral Argument, November 30, 
1994, p.10 (Scalia, J.). 


E. The Court Of Appeals Conflicted With The Deci- 
sions Of This Court In Ruling That Rhode Island 
May Ban Advertisement By Out Of State Retailers 
Of Alcoholic Beverages. 


In the case of its prohibition against newspapers and 
other communications media accepting out of state price 
advertisements, Rhode Island bans accurate speech 
related to lawful activity that not only occurs off licensed 
premises, but concerns the sale of products outside its 
jurisdiction. The Twenty-first Amendment does not 
empower the states to regulate economic activity beyond 


their borders. 

New York has a valid constitutional interest in 
regulating sales of liquor within the territory of 
New York. Section 2 of the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, however, speaks only to state regulation 
of the “transportation or importation into any 
State .. . for delivery or use therein” of alcoholic 
beverages. That Amendment, therefore, gives 
New York only the authority to control sales of 
liquor in New York, and confers no authority to 
control sales in other States. Brown-Forman Dis- 
tillers Corporation v. New York State Liquor 
Authority, supra, 476 U.S. at 585. 


See, also, Healy v. The Beer Institute, supra. 
Contrary to the decision of the Court of Appeals, 
(App. 10-12), Rhode Island may not justify its out of state 


28 


price advertising ban on the ground that it 1s attempting 
to protect its citizens from the intemperant influence of 


lower liquor prices in other states. 

A State does not acquire power or supervision 
over the internal affairs of another State merely 
because the welfare and health of its own citi- 
zens may be affected when they travel to that 
State. It may seek to disseminate information so 
as to enable its citizens to make better informed 
decisions when they leave but it may not, under 
the guise of exercising internal police powers, bar a 
citizen of another State from disseminating informa- 
tion about an activity that is legal in that State. 
Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809, 824-825 (1975) 
[emphasis added]. 


Incredibly, the Court of Appeals justified Rhode 
Island’s ban on price advertising by out of state retailers 
with the non sequitur “if a party wishes to come into a 
state and do business, to some extent at least, it should be 
subject to the same regulations as are its local counter- 
parts.” (App. 10-11). Not only does this pronouncement 
sanction “economic protectionism” as a legitimate reason 
for banning out of state business solicitation, the Court of 
Appeals erred by not measuring the price advertising ban 
against the reason offered by the state to justify it: pre- 
venting price wars among Rhode Island retailers. 

Despite the suggestion of the Court of Appeals, 
(App. 10-12), our argument is based upon the application 
of the First Amendment and not upon application of the 
Commerce Clause. Under the Central Hudson analysis, the 
state must justify regulating commercial speech by show- 
ing how its regulation will alleviate real harms in that 
state to a material degree. The justification for the price 
advertising ban advanced by the state simply disappears 
when applied to the ban on communications media 


29 


accepting advertisements for out of state retailers. Adver- 
tisements of out of state prices cannot promote price wars 
within Rhode Island. While Rhode Island’s hidden 
agenda is likely to be to protect its retailers from competi- 
tion in other states, such “economic protectionism” is 
impermissible.!* Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, supra. 
Although the Court of Appeals made an issue of finding 
petitioners’ claims under the Commerce Clause waived, 
(App. 11-12), it missed the point that the Commerce 
Clause made Rhode Island’s objective of regulating out of 
state conduct by its citizens illegitimate, thereby 
invalidating its regulation of price advertising under the 
First Amendment. 


CONCLUSION 


The United States Court of Appeals for the First 
Circuit improperly held, in conflict with the Fifth Circuit, 
that the Twenty-first Amendment gives an added pre- 
sumption of validity to a state’s ban on advertising the 
price at which a retailer sells alcoholic beverages. It per- 
mitted a restriction on speech to stand in the face of 
substantial evidence of, and findings by the District 
Court that, the restriction did not materially advance the 
state’s interest and was more burdensome than necessary 
when the state’s interest could be fully served without 
restricting speech at all. The petitioners respectfully sub- 
mit that their petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the United 


| 13 The Rhode Island Supreme Court would go only so far as 

to find “some doubt concerning the nexus between §3-8-8.1 and 
the asserted state interests” in promoting temperance. Rhode 
Island Liquor Stores Association v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 
331, 338 (1985). 


States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit should be 


granted. 


30 


By their attorney, 


Evan T. LAWSON 
Lawson & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


App. 1 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
For the First Circuit 


No. 93-1893 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. AND 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Plaintiffs, Appellees, 
v. 
STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, 
Defendant, Appellee, 
RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Intervenor, Appellant. 


No. 93-1927 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. AND 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Plaintiffs, Appellees, 
v. 
STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, 
Defendant, Appellant. 


APPEALS FROM THE 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 


{Hon. Raymond J. Pettine, 
Senior U.S. District Judge] 


App. 2 


Before 


Cyr, Circuit Judge, 
Aldrich, Senior Circuit Judge, 
and Stahl, Circuit Judge. 


Lauren E. Jones with whom Caroline C. Cornwell, Jones 
Associates, William P. Gasbarro and Robert M. Brady were 
on brief for Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association. 


Rebecca Tedford Partington, Special Assistant Attorney 
General, with whom jeffrey B. Pine, Attorney General, was 
on brief for State of Rhode Island. 


Evan T. Lawson with whom Lawson & Weitzen was on 
brief for plaintiffs-appellees. 


October 24, 1994 


ALDRICH, Senior Circuit Judge. The State of Rhode 
Island, that did not ratify the Eighteenth Amendment, 
and was among the earliest to ratify the Twenty-First that 
repealed it, in 1956 adopted two statutes, assertedly 
aimed at promoting temperance, forbidding advertising 
the price of intoxicating liquor, except at the place of sale 
if sold within the state. The “declared purpose is the 
promotion of temperance and for the reasonable control 


of the traffic in alcoholic beverages.” R.I. Gen. Laws 
§ 3-1-5. 


R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-8-7 provides, 


3-8-7. Advertising price of malt beverages, 
cordials, wine or distilled liquor. - No manu- 
facturer, wholesaler, or shipper from without 


“¥ te care 
iF er eh 


ee 


App. 3 


this state and no holder of a license issued 
under the provisions of this title and chapter 
shall cause or permit the advertising in any 
manner whatsoever of the price of any malt 
beverage, cordials, wine or distilled liquor 
offered for sale in this state; provided, however, 
that the provisions of this section shall not 
apply to price signs or tags attached to or placed 
on merchandise for sale within the licensed 
premises in accordance with rules and regula- 
tions of the department. 


Section 3-8-8.1, post, enlarges this language to forbid- 
ding making “reference to the price of any alcoholic 
beverage,”! that defendant Rhode Island Liquor Contro! 
Administrator, a strict enforcer, construes as including 
remote references such as “WOW!” 


In this action plaintiffs, 44 Liquormart, Inc. and Peo- 
ples Super Liquor Stores, Inc., having sufficient standing 
to attack these statutes in every particular, seek a declara- 
tion against the Administrator (hereinafter the State) of 
unconstitutionality as contravening the First Amend- 
ment. Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association (Associa- 
tion) has intervened as a party defendant. After a bench 
trial, in an extensive opinion the court found for plain- 
tiffs. Defendants appeal. They succeed with respect to 
limiting advertising by Rhode Island vendors. 


The stage it set below is described by the State. 


[T]he advertising ban directly advanced the 
governmental interest by increasing the cost of 
alcohclic beverages, thereby lowering the 


1 See aiso Liquor Control Adm. Reg. 32. 


App. 4 


amount of alcohol consumption by residents of 
the State of Rhode Island. . . . [T]he State’s 
power to totally ban any advertising about alco- 
holic beverages necessarily included the lesser 
power to restrict price advertising. 


Further, the State contended that plaintiffs, in order to 
rely on the First Amendment, must “prove that the four 
part Central Hudson test could not be met.” 


Association, a group of small liquor stores, whose 
intervention as a co-defendant was not opposed by the 
State, alleged as its ground for intervening that if adver- 
tising of prices were to be allowed, its members “would 
be obliged to participate in the advertising arena and 
would be at a definite disadvantage when matched up 
against retailers who hold multiple licenses.” This com- 
plaint was later bolstered by adding that competitive 
price advertising would tend to lower prices, and that “a 
more competitive market for alcohol might be considered 
an undesirable goal.” 


We start with the four issues that Central Hudson 
raises when a state’s interest conflicts with the rights of a 
would-be commercial speaker. 


At the outset, we must determine whether the 
expression is protected by the First Amendment. 
[I] For commercial speech to come within that 
provision, it at least must concern lawful activ- 
ity and not be misleading. [II] Next, we ask 
whether the asserted governmental interest is 
substantial. If both inquiries yield positive 
answers, we must determine [III] whether the 
regulation directly advances the governmental 
interest asserted, and [IV] whether it is not more 
extensive than is necessary to serve that interest. 


App. 5 


Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Com- 
mission of New York, 447 U.S. 557, 566 (1980). The ultimate 
purpose is to weigh “the expression [and] the govern- 
mental interests served by its regulation.” Id. at 563. 


I. In the present case the first test raises no ques- 
tion. Il. For the second it was stipulated, “The State of 
Rhode Island has a substantial interest in regulating the 
sale of alcoholic beverages.” Plaintiffs concede that pro- 
moting temperance is such an interest. The dispute, 
accordingly, is whether forbidding price advertising 
“directly advances” temperance, and “is not more exten- 
sive than is necessary.” There is a further question with 
regard to local advertising by an out-of-state vendor. 


Ill. “Directly advances.” We start with the burden 
of proof. The burden is on the party seeking suppression, 
here the State. Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792, 1800 
(1993). But to what extent? The district court held that it 
was an issue for it to decide, unfettered, between compet- 
ing witnesses, and since, on its weighing the evidence, 
the court was not persuaded that the State was correct, it 
failed. We do not think the burden that strict. It is not 
correctness, it is reasonableness. 


In the first place, the term “directly advances” is not 
absolute. Edenfield, 113 S. Ct. at 1800 (“alleviate to a 
material degree”); Trustees of the State University of New 
York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 480 (1989) (“reasonable fit”). See 
also Posadas de Puerto Rico Assoc. v. Tourism Co., 478 U.S. 
328, 342 (1986) (“reasonable”). And while the state has 
the burden, in California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 118-19 
(1972), the Court spoke of “the added presumption in 
favor of the validity of the state regulation in this area 


App. 6 


that the Twenty-First Amendment requires.” Historically 
the state has failed where the evidence was “at most, 
tenuous,” Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569; “unsupported 
assertions: nowhere does the State cite any evidence or 
authority of any kind,” Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary 
Counsel, 471 U.S. 626, 648 (1985): lack of studies or “anec- 
dotal evidence,” Edenfield, 113 S. Ct. at 1800. Warrantable 
inferences, however, may be sufficient. Posadas, 478 U.S. 
at 341-42 (advertising). What should a court do when 
there is no empirical? evidence either way, and expert 
opinions go both ways? Even plaintiffs’ expert, whom the 
court credited, admitted that “advertising has cumulative 
effects that are difficult to detect in studies, and that 
research studies have been varied and equivocal because 
it is a difficult topic to research.” Should the court be free 
to choose? 


IV. Before answering these questions we observe 
that the “not more extensive than is necessary” inquiry is 
subject to the same considerations. Re R.M.J., 455 U.S. 
191, 207 (1982) (“reasonably necessary”). The district 
court did not deal with this directly, except to note the 
concession of the State’s expert that “the objective of 
lowering consumption of alcohol by banning price adver- 
tising could be accomplished by establishing minimum 
prices and/or by increasing sales taxes on alcoholic bev- 
erages.” This is not an answer; the State is entitled to a 
reasonable choice. This includes choice of method - it is 
not obliged to prove that some other method, e.g., taxa- 
tion, would be less effective. Cf. Fox, 492 U.S. at 478. 


2 This word is a summary of the court’s findings that such 
studies as were offered were too inconclusive to be relied on. 


spas Ne” go ,aee e e 


App. 7 


Returning to our questions, there would seem inher- 
ent merit in the State’s contention that competitive price 
advertising would lower pricesy and that with lower 
prices there would be more sales. We would enlarge on 
this. There are doubtless many buyers whose consump- 
tion is sometimes measured by their free money. If a 
buyer learns that plaintiffs charge less, is he not likely to 
go there, and then buy more? Correspondingly, if igno- 
rant of lower prices elsewhere, will he not tend to buy 
locally, at the higher price, and thus buy less? See Stanley 
I. Ornstein and Dominique M. Hanssens, Alcohol Control 
Laws and the Consumption of Distilled Spirits and Beer, 12 J. 
Consumer Res. 200 (September 1985). Further, if Associa- 
tion members would fight plaintiffs’ advertised prices, as 
they presage, by lowering their own, then, again, might 
there not be more buys? 


Even plaintiffs’ witness Smart conceded that some 
believed this inference reasonable. 


What I’m aware of are studies that show that 
people generally decide how much money they 
have to spend on alcoholic beverages per week 
or per month. Then they tend to spend that 
amount, and if they can spend it in one way, 
they’ll do it and in another way they’ll do that 
as well. 


Advertising must be generally productive, or so much 
money would not be spent on it. Posadas, 478 U.S. at 
341-42; Oklahoma Telecasters Ass'n v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490, 
501 (10th Cir. 1983), rev'd on other grounds sub nom Capital 
Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691 (1984). We do not 
consider, in the absence of any affirmative contradiction 
to rely on, that the district court was free to hold it 


App. 8 


unreasonable. In addition, the presumption based upon 
the Twenty-First Amendment, LaRue, supra, seems pre- 
cisely in order. 


Parenthetically, the State contends this discussion to 
be unnecessary in view of the Court's action, 459 U.S. 807 
(1982), dismissing an appeal, “for want of substantial 
federal question,” from the decision in Queensgate Invest- 
ment Co. v. Liquor Control Commission, 69 Ohio St.2d 361 
(1982), a price advertising limitation case. The district 
court rejected this contention because of a “different fac- 
tual predicate,” and because “a summary dismissal lacks 
a reasoned opinion.” As to the latter, it is settled that such 
action has precedental [sic] effect, although not neces- 
sarily on the identical reasoning of the court. Mandel v. 
Bradley, 432 U.S. 173, 176 (1977). As to facts, the Ohio case 
involved a statute similar to the one at bar. Defendant 
restaurant advertised, in a circular, 50 cent drinks - a 
markdown - with meals. We see no relevant factual dis- 
tinction. 


The Ohio court, recognizing that commercial speech 
was entitled to some protection, pursued the four Central 
Hudson tests and found that the statute was “not unrea- 
sonable” in light of the Twenty-First Amendment's autho- 
rization to curb the evils of alcoholic beverages. 690 Ohio 
St.2d at 366. It concluded as follows. 


The regulation is directed toward regulation of 
the intoxicants themselves, rather than speech. 
This is unlike the case, e.g., in (Virginia State 
Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer 
Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748 (1976),] where the 
speech was the actual focus of the regulation, 


App. 9 


sinc:: the aim of the restriction was the preven- 
tion of competition in pharmaceutical sales, not 
the discouragement of pharmaceutical pur- 
chases. 


Ibid. 


Reliance on Queensgate as conclusive, however, might 
raise possible questions. The first is whether the Court 
would have said there was no federal question if free 
speech had been curtailed by a regulation clearly unre- 
lated to liquor. We need not answer this because we have 
found that the State’s action was reasonable as a control. 
But suppose the primary purpose was that eliminated by 
the Queensgate court? On the issue of purpose the State is 
not helped by its friends. Association’s given reason for 
wanting to intervene as a defendant, that the statute 
protects the small vendor from the giants, could make 
logical sense, but might not be a lawful use of the 
Twenty-First Amendment. Cf. California Retail Liquor 
Dealers Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980); 
Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984). We need 
not resolve this question either, however. There is a bur- 
den to rebut the statutes’ declared purpose, and plaintiffs 
have made no attempt. We conclude therefore that, with 
Queensgate or without, plaintiff 44 Liquormart must lose. 


Finally, we observe that our conclusion coincides 
with the Rhode Island court’s. Rhode Island Liquor Stores 
Ass’n v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 331 (R.I. 1985); S & 
S Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.I. 1985). We 
have not mentioned its decisions hitherto because our 
obligation is to decide for ourselves. See Watson v. Estelle, 
886 F.2d 1093, 1095 and n.3 (9th Cir. 1989). 


App. 10 


People Super Liquor Stores, a Massachusetts vendor 
that wishes to advertise its Massachusetts prices in Rhode 
Island, has a different case. Because of R.I. Gen. Laws 
§ 3-8-8.1 no Rhode Islarid publisher will accept advertise- 
ments. 


3-8-8.1. Price advertising by media or 
advertising companies unlawful. - No news- 
paper, periodical, radio or television bre adcaster 
or broadcasting company or any other person, 
firm or corporation with a principal place of 
business in the state of Rhode [sland which is 
engaged in the business of advertising or selling 
advertising time or space shall accept, publish, 
or broadcast any advertisement in this state of 
the price or make reference to the price of any 
alcoholic beverages... . 


By the hypothesis under which we are justifying 
forbidding price advertising by local vendors, State resi- 
dents, whose shopping opportunity is thus curtailed, will 
be more likely to purchase at higher-priced neighborhood 
outlets and less at lower-priced, viz., discount sellers 
elsewhere. Insofar as this construction is aimed at foreign 
sellers, it is a deliberate, and, by hypothesis effective, 
discrimination and restraint on interstate commerce. Thus 
we have two questions. One, is the State’s interest in 
health and welfare sufficient to overcome the foreign 
vendors’ right of free speech? Two, if so, are the rights 
given the State by the Twenty First Amendment sufficient 
to meet the foreign vendors’ further objections under the 
Commerce Clause? 


Viewed simply as free speech, if a party wishes to 
come into a state and do business, to some extent, at least, 
it should be subject to the same regulations as are its local 


App. 11 


counterparts. While the question may be close, where we 
are dealing simply with commercial speech, whose rights 
are limited, Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809, 818 et seq. 
(1975), we believe the State health interest, as reinforced 
by the Twenty First Amendment, should empower the 
State to restrict foreigners as well. Nor do we find sup- 
port for the contrary in the Bigelow opinion. We read the 
language relied on by Peoples Super Liquor Stores in the 
light of the fact that the advertisement contained more 
than commercial speech. See 421 U.S. at 822; Friedman v. 
Rogers, 440 U.S. 1, 11, n.10 (1979). Here we have no more 
than commercial. 


The serious question is whether the Twenty First 
Amendment can prevail against the Commerce Clause 
when the State is deliberately favoring local vendors 
against foreign enterprise. The full meaning and effect of 
this Amendment has been much debated. At a minimum 
it does not do away altogether with the Commerce 
Clause. Cf. Hostetter v. Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp., 
377 U.S. 324, 331-332 (1964). But, as a matter of dictum, 
the Court in Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263, at 
276 (1984), has recognized the possibility that a state 
might discriminate “to promote temperance or to carry 
out any other purpose of the Twenty First Amendment.” 
We have tentatively explored this question in some depth, 
and find it difficult. 


This raises a problem. The record shows that, ini- 
tially, Peoples included the Commerce Clause in its con- 
tentions. On appeal, it dropped it. While at first we 
thought that the two principles were so tied together that 
we should nevertheless consider it, we have concluded 
that fairness to the State, and, indeed to us, requires that 


App. 12 


we do not do so without full briefing and argument. 
Accordingly, we apply the general principle and hold the 
Commerce Clause waived. Interface Group, Inc. v. Mass. 
Port Authority, 816 F.2d 9, 16 (1st Cir. 1987). Since without 
it Peoples must fail, the decision below is reversed, with 
judgment for defendants. 


~ . . eas ee 
- ‘ ioe j62 Bik Nae 
seal! Oe evi 5 Oe ee eee POT EON te ve 


App. 13 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


No. 93-1893 


44 LIQUORMART, INC., AND 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 
Plaintiffs, Appellees. 


V. 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, 
Defendant, Appellee, 


RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 
Intervenor, Defendant, Appellant. 


No. 93-1927 


44 LIQUORMART, INC., AND 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 
Plaintiffs, Appellees, 


V. 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, 
Defendant, Appellant. 


OS Fo 


App. 14 


JUDGMENT 
Entered: October 24, 1994 


These causes came on to be submitted on petitions 
for rehearing. 


Upon consideration whereof, it is now here ordered, 
adjudged and decreed as follows: The decision of the 
district court is reversed with judgment for the defen- 
dants. 


Costs to defendants. 


By the Court: 
/s/ FRANCIS P. SCIGLIANO 
Clerk. 


App. 15 


ORDER OF COURT 
Entered: October 24, 1994 


The petitior. for rehearing filed by Rhode fsland 
Liquor Stores Association and the petition for rehearing 
by the State of Rhode Island are granted. 


The opinion of this court of July 8, 1994 is withdrawn 
and this court’s judgment of July 8, 1994 is vacated. 


A new opinion and judgment will issue this date. 


By the Court: 
/s/ FRANCIS P. SCIGLIANO 
Clerk. 


App. 16 


ORDER OF THE COURT* 
Entered: July 29, 1994 


The panel of judges that rendered the decision in this 
case having voted to deny the petition for rehearing 
submitted by 44 Liquormart, Inc. and its suggestion for 
the holding of a rehearing en banc having been carefully 
considered by the judges of the Court in regular, active 
service and a majority of said judges not having voted to 
order that the suggestion for rehearing en banc submitted 
by 44 Liquormart, Inc., be granted, 


It is ordered that the petition for rehearing and the 
suggestion for rehearing en banc submitted by 44 Liquor- 
mart, Inc., be denied. 


By the Court: 
/s/ FRANCIS P. SCIGLIANO 
Clerk. 


“Chief Judge Stephen Breyer did not participate. 


App. 17 


44 LIQUOR MART, INC. and People’s 
Super Liquor Stores, Inc., 
Plaintiffs, 


Vv. 


Kate F. RACINE, in her capacity 
as Rhode Island Liquor Control 
Administrator, Defendant, 


and 


Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association, 
Intervenor-Defendant. 


Civ. A. No. 92-0115 P. 


United States District Court, 
D. Rhode Island. 


Aug. 10, 1993. 


Liquor retailers brought action challenging state stat- 
utes prohibiting off-premises advertising of prices at 
which liquor stores sold alcoholic beverages. The District 
Court, Pettine, Senior District Judge, held that: (1) 
Twenty-first Amendment did not require modification of 
either level or allocation of burden of proof in commercial 
speech case involving regulation of sale of alcoholic bev- 
erages, and (2) state failed to establish that advertising 
ban directly advanced its interest in reducing alcohol 
consumption or that ban was not more extensive than 
necessary to serve such interest. 


Ordered accordingly. 


Barry J. Kusinitz, Corrente, Brill & Kusinitz, Providence 
RI, Evan T. Lawson, Lawson & Veitzen, Boston, MA, for 


App. 18 


Rebecca Tedford Partington, RI Atty. General’s 
Office, Providence, RI, for defendant Racine. 


William Gasbarro, Robert M. Brady, E. Providence, 
RI, for intervenor-defendant RI Liquor Stores. 


MEMORANDUM AND ORDER 
PETTINE, Senior District Judge. 


The case presents the question whether R.I.G.L. 


§§ 3-8-7! and 3-8-8.1,2 and Regulation 32 of the Rhode 


1 R.LG.L. § 3-8-7 controls price advertising by licensees. It 
provides: 


No manufacturer, wholesaler, or shipper from with- 
out this state and no holder of a license issued under the 
provisions of this title and chapter shall cause or permit the 
advertising in any manner whatsoever of the price of any 
malt beverage, cordials, wine or distilled liquor offered for 
sale in this state; provided, however, that the provi- 
sions of this section shall not apply to price signs or 
tags attached to or placed on merchandise for sale 
within the licensed premises in accordance with rules 
and regulations of the department. (emphasis added). 


2 R.ILG.L. § 3-8-8.1 controls the acceptance of price advertis- 


ing by Rhode Island communications media and provides as 


follows: 


No newspaper, periodical, radio or television broadcaster 
or broadcasting company or any other person, firm or 
corporation with a principal place of business in the state 
of Rhode Island which is engaged in the business of adver- 
tising or selling advertising time or space shall accept, 
publish, or broadcast any advertisement in this state of the 
price or make reference to the price of any alcoholic bever- 
ages. Any person who shall violate any of the provi- 
sions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor 
and shall be punished for the first offense by a fine in 


App. 19 


Island Liquor Control Administration,? which collectively 
prohibit off-premises advertising of the prices at which 
liquor stores sell alcoholic beverages, violate the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution. Jurisdic- 
tion is premised on 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 


For the reasons stated below, I hold these provisions 
invalid as an unconstitutional burden upon protected 
commercial speech. 


I. BACKGROUND 


Plaintiff 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. (“44 Liquor Mart”), a 
Rhode Island corporation located in Johnston, Rhode 
Island, is a licensed retail alcohol dealer. Plaintiff People’s 


the sum of fifty dollars ($50) and for each additional 
offense thereafter by a fine not exceeding the sum of 
one hundred dollars ($100). Publication or broadcast 
by any person in violation of the provisions of this 
section shall also be subject to injunctive proceedings 
in a court of competent jurisdiction on a complaint 
brought by a retail licensee, or an association of retail 
licensees. 

The provisions of this section shall not apply to 
any trade journal which is duly recognized and 
authorized to be exempt from the provisions of this 
section by the liquor control administrator. (emphasis 
added). 


3 Regulation 32 of the Rules and Regulations of the Liquor 
Control Administrator was enacted te “enforce” the provisions 
of § 3-8-7. It provides, in pertinent part: 

No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from 
the exterior of any Class A [package store] premises 
licensed to sell at retail shall make reference to the 
price of any alcoholic beverage or mixture of alcoholic 
beverages. 


App. 20 


Super Liquor Stores, Inc. (“People’s”), a Massachusetts 
corporation, is a retail dealer of alcoholic beverages oper- 
ating retail stores in New Bedford and Fairhaven, Massa- 
chusetts. 


Defendant Kate F. Racine held the position of Liquor 
Control Administrator for the State of Rhode Island at the 
time this action was commenced. Anthony Arico cur- 
rently holds the title of Acting Liquor Control Adminis- 
trator. Intervenor-Defendant Rhode Island Liquor Stores 
Association is a trade group of small retail liquor stores in 
Rhode Island. 


On December 17, 1991, Racine held a hearing to 
determine whether 44 Liquor Mart had violated R.I.G.L. 
§ 3-8-7 and Liquor Control Administration Regulation 32, 
which prohibit off-premises advertising of alcohol bever- 
age prices, by placing an advertisement headed “Thanks- 
giving Harvest” (Plaintiffs’ Ex. 4) in a December 1991 
edition of the Providence Journal-Bulletin, a daily news- 
paper in Rhode Island. The advertisement displayed bot- 
tles of named brand liquors. It also advertised: “State 
Line Chips” at $1.79, with the price highlighted in a burst 
form; “Peanuts” at 89 cents a pound with the exclamation 
“WOW” highlighted in a burst form; “Cigarettes: Cartons 
and Packs” at various prices for different sizes; and 
“Schweppes Mixers” at $1.29 a bottle. None of the alco- 
holic beverages showed any prices, but several of the 
“WOW” exclamations — highlighted in burst form - 
appeared next to the displayed bottles. 


At the conclusion of the hearing, Racine determined 
that a violation had occurred. She fined 44 Liquor Mart 
$400.00, and ordered that the advertisement, as printed, 


App. 21 


cease to run. 44 Liquor Mart paid the fine on December 
17, 1991. No appeal was taken to the Liquor Control 
Hearing Board as provided by R.I.G.L. § 3-3-5. 


People’s, which extensively uses price advertising in 
Massachusetts, where it is permitted, attempted on sev- 
eral occasions in 1991 and 1992 to place its advertise- 
ments, which include price information, in Rhode Island 
newspapers and other media outlets. It has been refused 
because of R.I.G.L. § 3-8-8.1, which expressly prohibits 
the Rhode Island media from advertising retail alcoholic 
beverage price information. 


In addition to the above stated facts, the parties have 
stipulated to the following: 


(1) other liquor licensees, as well as news- 
papers within the State, have been warned 
or fined for violations of the Rhode Island 
regulations; 


(2) plaintiffs believe they will each realize an 
economic benefit of more than $100,000 per 
year if the price advertising ban is lifted; 


(3) defendant Racine vigorously enforces the 
price advertising ban; 


(4) Rhode Island permits all advertising of 
alcoholic beverages excepting references to 
price outside the licensed premises; 


(5) the State prohibits communications media 
from accepting any advertisements that 
refer to prices at which alcoholic beverages 
are being sold in other states; 


(6) Rhode Island communications media reach 
both Rhode Island and Massachusetts citi- 


zens; 


App. 22 


(7) the proposed speech does not concern an 
illegal activity and presumably would not 
be false or misleading; and 


(8) the state of Rhode Island has a substantial 
interest in regulating the sale of alcoholic 
beverages. 


Defendant Racine defends the constitutionality of the 
State’s ban on price advertising as a measure designed to 
promote temperance by directly reducing the consump- 
tion of alcohol by the citizens of Rhode Island. 


Il. FINDINGS OF FACT 


The following findings of fact are drawn from the 
transcript of the March 11, 1993 hearing in this case and 
from my evaluation of two video-iaped depositions sub- 
mitted by agreement of the parties. 


At the outset, I note a pronounced lack of unanimity 
among researchers who have stu:‘ied the effects of alco- 
hol advertising. No less than twelve different conclusions 
have been reached regarding the impact of advertising on 
the general consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Tr. 
3/11/93, at 50-51). Numerous studies have attempted to 
correlate the consumption of alcohol by the general pub- 
lic and certain discreet groups to permitted or proscribed 
advertising of various alcoholic beverages. Only three 
that were called to the Court’s attention, however, 
directly. deal with price advertising: Jon P. Nelson, State 
Monopolies and Alcoholic Beverage Consumption, 2 
J.Reg.Econ. 83 (1990); Gary P. Wilcox, The Effect of Price 
Advertising on Alcoholic Beverage Sales, 25 J. Advertising 
Res. 33 (1985); and Stanley I. Ornstein and Dominique M. 


App. 23 


Hanssens, Alcohol Control Laws and the Consumption of 
Listilled Spirits and Beer, 12 |. Consumer Res. 200 (Septem- 
ber 1985). In this setting, experts for the respective parties 
testified. 


Plaintiffs presented two expert witnesses: Dr. 
Reginald Smart, a Ph.D. in psychology and scientist with 
the Addiction Research Foundation in Toronto, Canada, 
and Dr. David J. Pittman, a Ph.D. in human development 
and professor of psychology at the Washington Univer- 
sity in St. Louis. Both experts agreed that some studies 
have shown that overall alcohol advertising has a slight 
effect on alcohol consumption. (Ir. 3/11/93, at 50-51, 72; 
Pittman Dep., 11/10/92, at 12}. They each maintained, 
however, that there is no empirical evidence that the 
presence or absence of alcohol price advertising signifi- 
cantly affects levels of alcohol consumption. 


Dr. Smart focused his opinion on price advertising. 
He agreed with the three studies by Nelson, Wilson, and 
Ornstein and Hanssens, supra, which concluded that bans 
on price advertising have no effect on alcohol consump- 
tion. Dr. Smart used Rhode Island as a classic example of 
the fallacy of conclusions to the contrary. Rhode Island, a 
license state, which has a ban on alcohol price advertis- 
ing, has “a fairly high level of alcohol consumption, 
about 2.86 gallons of absolute alcohol per person.” (Tr. at 
27). It ranks in the upper 30 percent of the states in per 
capita consumption. (Tr. at 64). In other license states that 
allow price advertising, alcohol consumption is lower. (Tr. 
at 65-66). 


Dr. Smart also noted that on a national scale, over the 
past fifteen years, consumption levels generally have 


App. 24 


decreased even though overall advertising levels have 
increased. (Tr. at 64). True, the decline has been fairly 
small. Nevertheless, it has been consistent year after year. 
(Tr. at 64). According to Dr. Smart, the mere fact that price 
advertising may lower sales prices does not mean that 
per capita consumption will be influenced. It is his con- 
clusion that consumption is influenced by the disposable 
income available to the individual buyer, that is, the 
available money remaining after payment of living 
expenses. (Tr. at 45, 73). 


As noted above, Dr. Smart conceded that some 
researchers have concluded that overall alcohol advertis- 
ing may have some effect on levels of consumption. (Tr. at 
50-51, 72). He based his own opinion, however, on 
research that shows that overall alcohol advertising does 
not appear to have much effect on alcohol consumption 
or problems. (Tr. at 24, 72). In addition, he explained, 
because price advertising is only one part of the total 
advertising phenomenon, there is no reason to believe 
that a change in that factor alone would have much of an 
impact on levels of consumption. (Tr. at 24). 


Dr. Smart bolstered his opinion by referring to a 1985 
Federal Trade Commission study that found, after 
reviewing various research, no evidence to believe alco- 
hol advertising significantly affects alcohol abuse. (Tr. at 
28). In addition, Dr. Smart supported his testimony with a 
critique of studies on general alcohol advertising that he 
believed were inapposite and, at any rate, flawed. (Tr. at 
69-71). 


App. 25 


In concluding this recitation of the pertinent aspects 
of Dr. Smart’s testimony, I record verbatim particularly 
persuasive passages: 


A. Well, that study [by Dr. Nelson] was impor- 
tant, I think, in that it established quite clearly 
that for all states there was no relationship 
between a price ad ban and no price ad ban 
when it came to alcohol consumption. States 
with price ad bans didn’t have lower consump- 
tion than those who had no such ban and with 
regard to prices, it’s also interesting that Nelson 
has shown that overall prices are the same in 
control and license states and here I think we 
have to remember that license states, almost all 
license states in the U.S. except for three have no 
ban on - on prices.[*4] Now, one might expect 
that the prices in license states should be higher 
than in control states or lower but what we see 
is essentially no difference. That too suggests to 
me that probably the price ad ban has no 
impact. 


* * > 


Also [Atkin and Block] asked people to 
recall their television advertising or their televi- 
sion viewing but in the Strickland study, respon- 
dents reported the number of times they 
watched various television programs and then 
investigators determined from records how 
much total advertising and how much total 
advertising each person saw and I think they 
should reduce the problems. They also 
improved the sampling of students. They had a 


4 There are certain states that do not license retailers but 
rather operate state controlled retail stores. (Tr. at 67-68). 


App. 26 


stratified sampling procedure. Generally I think 
the Strickland results are based on a stronger 
study and they reach conclusions which were 
quite different than Atkin and Block. 


QO. And what were Strickland’s conclusions? 


A. Strickland’s conclusion was that there was 
no overall correlation between alcohol con- 
sumption or problems and alcohol advertising. 


Q. Now, when you were being cross examined, 
you were asked about a number of different 
studies and statements that you had reported in 
your paper. Now, were those statements and 
studies relating to price advertising or to adver- 
tising in general? 


A. The great majority of them were about 
advertising in general and not about price 
advertising at all. 


©. When you were cross-examined, you indi- 
cated that you agreed that consumers would 
travel to obtain lower prices for alcoholic bever- 
ages. Do you recall that? 


A. Yes, I do. 


Q. Now, do you equate the fact that consumers 
would travel to obtain lower prices for alcoholic 
beverages with consumers consuming more 
alcoholic beverages? 


A. I don’t know of any empirical study that’s 
really shown that, that because people will 
travel to get alcoholic beverages at a lower price 
that means they’ll necessarily drink more. What 
— What I’m aware of are studies that show that 
people generally decide how much money they 
have to spend on alcoholic beverages per week 


App. 27 


or per month. Then they tend to spend that 
amount and if they can spend it in one way, 
they'll do it and in another way they’ll do that 
as well. 


(Tr. at 68-71). 


Dr. Pittman’s testimony concurred with Dr. Smart's 
as to the insignificance of price advertising on alcohol 
consumption. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 20). Dr. Pittman 
further testified that many other factors besides price 
influence alcohol consumption levels, including religion, 
cultural patterns, peer pressure, family make-up, and 
ethnic background. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 21-22, Pitt- 
man Dep. 11/10/92, at 13-14). Ultimately, he stated that 
he was unaware of any empirical evidence that would 
support the conclusion that banning alcohol price adver- 
tising promotes temperance. (Pittman Dep., 11/5/92, at 
25). 


In rebuttal, the defendant presented evidence - 
although not directly focused on price advertising — that 
some research groups believe that alcohol advertising 
leads to increased overall consumption. In her cross- 
examination of Dr. Smart, counsel for the defendant elic- 
ited testimony that the distinguished economist John 
Kenneth Galbraith and the American Medical Association 
(“AMA”) agree with such a conclusion. (Tr. at 33-37). In 
1986, Dr. Smart conceded, the AMA advocated a ban on 
alcohol advertising with the statement that such advertis- 
ing affects youthful consumption and influences both 
brand preferences and the total volume of alcoholic bev- 
erages consumed by the public. (Tr. at 33-34). In addition, 
Dr. Smart acknowledged that advertising has cumulative 
effects that are difficult to detect in studies, and that 


App. 28 


research studies have been varied and equivocal because 
it is a difficult topic to research. (Tr. at 39-40). 


Defendant's expert, Dr. Henry Saffer, a Ph.D. in eco- 
nomics and professor of economics at Kean College in 
New Jersey, testified that alcohol advertising bans affect 
alcohol abuse. He stated that in a study he conducted of 
17 countries over 14 years,5 those countries that banned 
all broadcast advertisements of alcohol had the lowest 
values for alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis, mortality 
rates and motor vehicle fatality rates. (Saffer Deposition, 
11/16/92, at 19). Dr. Saffer’s testimony, and the conclu- 
sions of his international study, are accurately recited by 
the defendant in her post-trial memorandum: 


Countries with more restrictive advertising poli- 
cies had the lowest increases in consumption. 
Countries with bans of spirits advertising have 
about 16% lower alcohol consumption than 
countries with no bans. Countries with ban» on 
beer and wine advertising have about 11% 
lower alcohol consumption than countries with 
bans only on spirits advertising. Countries with 
bans on spirits advertising have about 10% 
lower motor vehicle fatality rates than countries 
with no bans. Countries with bans on beer and 
wine advertising have about 23% lower motor 
vehicle fatality rates than countries with bans 
only on spirits advertising. The data show that 
alcohol consumption is related to advertising 
bans and alcohol price. Liver cirrhosis mortality 
rates are less consistently related to alcohol 


5 Henry Saffer, Alcohol advertising bans and alcohol abuse: An 
international perspective, 10 J. Health Econ. 65 (1991) (Saffer Dep. 
Ex. J). 


App. 29 


advertising bans, but are clearly related to alco- 
hol price. 


The ban on price advertising promotes tem- 
perance in two ways, by increasing the “search 
time” involved in finding the best price on alco- 
holic beverages, and by keeping the actual price 
of alcoholic beverages higher than they would 
be if price were allowed to be advertised. Dr. 
Saffer explained the “search cost” theory as fol-— 
lows: The average price for alcohol would be 
lower if people could more easily find lower 
prices. The price advertising ban creates a 
greater variance of prices in the state than you 
would have without a ban, which gives people 
an incentive to shop around, increasing the 
search costs. If there were no ban on price 
advertising, the variance of prices would proba- 
bly decrease and there would be less search 
time. Dr. Saffer testified that higher prices result 
in lower alcohol consumption. If the price 
advertising ban were abolished, it would lower 
average prices and increase consumption. 


Defendant’s Post Trial Memorandum at 5-6. 


I do not find Dr. Saffer’s testimony persuasive. After 
reviewing his deposition, I conclude that he did not, in 
any meaningful way, consider a number of variables that 
influence the public’s consumption of alcohol. He did not 
use any data recognizing ethnic background, income and 
education levels, or the difference of attitudes and drink- 
ing habits that exist in different countries. (Saffer Dep. at 
35-42). His complicated studies, in part, correlated more 
banning of alcoholic beverage advertising with lower 
levels of consumption, liver cirrhosis and highway fatal- 
ities. (Saffer Dep. at 40-41). Yet, the information he had 


App. 30 


did not deal only with liver cirrhosis caused by alcohol. 
He admitted that “environmental factors” can have an 
effect on this ailment but did not control his study for this 
factor. (Saffer Dep. at 41). He also acknowledged that he 
had no information in his foreign country study as to 
which traffic fatalities were caused by non-alcohol related 
factors. (Saffer Dep. at 41-42). 


I also conclude that while Dr. Saffer knew that the 
national alcoholic beverage consumption trend for the 
past ten years has declined, he had no idea of what the 
trend has been in Rhode Island. (Saffer Dep. at 44). Nor 
had he made any determination as to how much lower 
prices might be expected to go if the price advertising 
ban were lifted. (Saffer Dep. at 45-46). He conceded that 
many other factors would have to be considered. (Saffer 
Dep. at 46). 


Significantly, Dr. Saffer conceded that the objective of 
lowering consumption of alcohol by banning price adver- 
tising could be accomplished by establishing minimum 
prices and/or by increasing sales taxes on alcoholic bev- 
erages. (Saffer Dep. at 31-32). And while he obviously 
considered both empirical and theoretical works that 
mowe “towards the question of what a socially optimal 
ovine is,” he was unable to say what that price would be 
for Rhode Island. (Saffer Dep. at 32). 


In addition, Dr. Saffer agreed that banning advertis- 
ing would not necessarily result in optimal liquor prices. 
(Saffer Dep. at 34). He further acknowledged that if a 
company could increase its market share by advertising 
prices, it could increase its own profits without affecting 


App. 31 


overall consumption. (Saffer Dep. at 50-51). Thus, plain- 
tiffs’ expectation of realizing additional profits through 
price advertising has no necessary relationship to 
increased overall consumption. Finally, Dr. Saffer’s 
studies did not deal with the precise issues presented in 
this litigation. 


Based on the record presented, I find as a fact that 
Rhode Island’s off-premises liquor price advertising ban 
has no significant impact on levels of alcohol consump- 
tion in Rhode Island.® 


III. RHODE ISLAND PRECEDENT 


As a threshold matter, I must note that in S & S Liquor 
Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.1.1985) and Rhode 
Island Liquor Stores Ass'n v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 
331 (R.1.1985}, the Rhode Island Supreme Court 
addressed the constitutionality of precisely the same stat- 
utes that are challenged here. In both of these cases, the 
Supreme Court held that the price advertising ban was a 
valid exercise of the State’s powers under the Twenty- 
first Amendment’ and did not violate liquor retailers’ 


6 With respect to the narrow issue in this case regarding 
price advertising of alcoholic beverages, I agree with the var- 
ious conclusions of Dr. Smart, I wish to emphasize, however, 
that I make no findings as to the effect that a total or partial ban 
on general alcohol advertising would have on consumption 
levels in Rhode Isiand. 

7 Section 1 of the Twenty-first Amendment repealed the 
Eighteenth Amendment's prohibition of the manufacture, sale, 
or transportation of liquor. Section 2 provides: 

The transportation or importation into any State, Ter- 
ritory, or possession of the United States for delivery 


App. 32 


First Amendment rights. The defendant argues that this 
Court should defer to the reasoning and opinion of the 
Rhode Island Supreme Court and uphold the price adver- 
tising ban. 


The specter of a direct conflict between the decision 
of a federal court and the previous decisions of the high- 
est state court in the jurisdiction in which the federal 
court sits raises delicate «sues of comity. Nevertheless, 
the decisions of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, while 
persuasive, do not bind this federal court as to issues of 
federal constitutional law. See Grantham v. Avondale Indus., 
964 F.2d 471, 473 (5th Cir.1992) (“It is beyond cavil that 
we are not bound by a state court’s interpretation of 
federal law regardless of whether our jurisdiction is 
based on diversity of citizenship or a federal question.”); 
In re Asbestos Litigation, 829 F.2d 1233, 1237 (3rd Cir.1987), 
cert. denied, 485 U.S. 1029, 108 S.Ct. 1586, 99 L.Ed.2d 901 
(1988) (“The federal district court . . . takes as its author- 
ity on federal constitutional issues, decisions of the 
United States Courts of Appeals and the United States 
Supreme Court, rather than those of the state supreme 
court.”). 


Circuit Judge Selya, as a trial judge, enunciated this 
principle when he stated: “[I]n construing a state statute, 
a federal court must defer to the highest court of a state 
as the best arbiter of state law.” Donahue v. Rhode Island 
Dept. of Mental Health, Retardation & Hospitals, 632 F.Supp. 
1456, 1478 (D.R.1.1986) (citing Commissioner v. Estate of 


or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of 
the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited. 


App. 33 


Bosch, 387 U.S. 456, 462, 87 S.Ct. 1776, 1781, 18 L.Ed.2d 
886 (1967) and Ragan v. Merchants Transfer & Warehouse 
Co., 337 U.S. 530, 534, 69 S.Ct. 1233, 1235, 93 L.Ed. 1520 
(1949)). Such deference, however, “involves the meaning 
of the enactment; once the meaning is established, the 
question of whether or not the ordinance passes constitu- 
tional muster is one within the primacy of the federal 
courts.” Donahue, 632 F.Supp. at 1478. 


I also note that plaintiffs’ challenge in this case is 
readily distinguishable from S & S Liquor and Evening 
Call due to the extensive expert testimony and factual 
record presented. The Rhode Island Supreme Court did 
not have the benefit of a fully developed factual record 
and conceded that “[i]Jt may be that some day, in some 
litigated case, evidence will be adduced that will support 
the proposition that these advertising restrictions do not 
further temperance objectives.” S & S Liquor Mart, 497 
A.2d at 734. 


However desirable comity may be, it cannot trump 
where a federal court is confronted with an issue involv- 
ing the United States Constitution, “raised by persons 
who were not parties in the state litigation.” Joseph v. 
Blair, 482 F.2d 575, 579 n. 4 (4th Cir.1973), cert. denied, 416 
U.S. 955, 94 S.Ct. 1968, 40 L.Ed.2d 305 (1974). Thus, it is 
manifest that I must decide for myself the constitu- 
tionality of the statutes at issue. 


IV. DISCUSSION 


The parties agree that Rhode Island's alcohol price 
advertising ban implicates plaintiffs’ constitutional inter- 
ests in commercial speech. In order to place my factual 


App. 34 


findings in the proper context, it is necessary to review 
the United States Supreme Court’s pronouncements as to 
the level of protection afforded such speech by the First 
Amendment. 


A. The Central Hudson Test 


Commercial speech now has a definite niche in the 
pantheon of rights protected by the First Amendment.® In 
a recent opinion, the Supreme Court summarized the 
general principles underlying the protection of commer- 
cial speech: 


The commercial market place, like other spheres 
of our social and cultural life, provides a forum 
where ideas and information flourish. Some of 
the ideas and information are vital, some of 
slight worth. But the general rule is that the 
speaker and the audience, not the government, 
assess the value of the information presented. 
Thus, even a communication that does no more 
than propose a commercial transaction is enti- 
tled to the coverage of the First Amendment. 


Edenfield v. Fane, __ U.S. _ __ 113 S.Ct. 1792, 1798, 
123 L.Ed.2d 543 (1993). 


Even while acknowledging this constitutional protec- 
tion, the Supreme Court’s decisions have recognized the 
“ ‘common sense’ distinction between speech proposing a 


8 Purely commercial advertisements were once considered 
to be outside the protection of the First Amendment. See Valen- 
tine v. Christensen, 316 U.S. 52, 54, 62 S.Ct. 920, 921, 86 L.Ed. 1262 
(1942) (Constitution imposes no restraint upon the government 
with respect to the regulation of “purely commercial advertis- 
ing”). 


App. 35 


commercial transaction, which occurs in an area tradi- 
tionally subject to government regulation, and other vari- 
eties of speech.” Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 
447, 455-56, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 1918, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978) 
(citing Virginia Pharmacy Bd. v. Citizens Consumer Council, 
425 U.S. 748, 771 n. 24. 96 S.Ct. 1817, 1830 n. 24, 48 
L.Ed.2d 346 (1976)). These distinctions have led the Court 
to conclude that “[t]he Constitution . . . affords a lesser 
protection to commercial speech than to other constitu- 
tionally guaranteed expression.” U.S. v. Edge Broadcasting 
Co.,_ _ U.S. ___, __, 113 S.Ct. 2696, 2703, 125 L.Ed.2d 345 
(1993) (citing Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 477, 109 
S.Ct. 3028, 3033, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1989), Central Hudson 
Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Com., 447 U.S. 557, 
563, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 2350, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980), and 
Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456, 98 S.Ct. at 1918)). 


In Central Hudson, supra, the Supreme Court set out a 
four-part test for assessing government restrictions on 
commercial speech: 


[First] . . . [the commercial speech] at least must 
concern lawful activity and not be misleading. 
Next, we ask whether the asserted govern- 
mental interest is substantial. If both inquiries 
yield positive answers, we must determine 
whether the regulation directly advances the 
governmental interest asserted, and whether it 
is not more extensive than is necessary to serve 


that interest. 


447 US. at 566, 100 §.Ct. at 2351. This four-part analysis 
has endured as the constitutional benchmark in commer- 


cial speech cases. 


App. 36 


With respect to the burden of proof, the Supreme 
Court recently reaffirmed that: 


It is well established that “[t]he party seeking to 
uphold a restriction on commercial speech car- 
ries the burden of justifying it.” Bolger v. Youngs 
Drug Products Corp., 463 U.S. 60, 71, n. 20 [103 
S.Ct. 2875, 2883, n. 20], 77 L.Ed.2d 469 (1983); 
Fox, 492 US., at 480, 109 S.Ct., at 3035. This 
burden is not satisfied by mere speculation or 
conjecture; rather, a governmental body seeking 
to sustain a restriction on commercial speech 
must demonstrate that the harms it recites are 
real and that its restriction will in fact alleviate 
them to a material degree. 


Edenfield, __ U.S. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 1800. Thus, state 
legislatures must take their constitutional obligations 
seriously by demonstrating that regulatory measures 
which burden commercial speakers directly serve con- 
crete and substantial state interests. 


B. Central Hudson and the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment 


In the case at hand, the parties do not dispute that 
the price advertising at issue constitutes commercial 
speech within the protection of the First Amendment. The 
parties also stipulate that plaintiffs’ proposed price 
advertising concerns lawful activity and will not be mis- 
leading. Further, they agree that Rhode Island has a sub- 
stantial interest in fostering temperance and that under 
the Twenty-first Amendment the State has the right to 
regulate “ ‘the sale, and the incidents thereof, of alcoholic 


App. 37 


beverages, and to protect its citizens from the evils inci- 
dent to alcohol.’ ” S & S Liquor, 497 A.2d at 732 (quoting 
Oklahoma Telecasters Ass'n v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490, 500 (10th 
Cir.1983), rev'd on other grounds sub nom. Capital Cities 
Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 104 S.Ct. 2694, 81 L.Ed.2d 
580 (1984)). I accept the parties’ conclusions and find that 
the first two prongs of the Central Hudson test have been 
satisfied. 


The parties vigorously debate the third and fourth 
elements of the Central Hudson analysis. Specifically, they 
dispute whether the Twenty-first Amendment requires a 
shift in both the level and allocation of the traditional 
burden of proof. 


Relying on the State’s considerable authority in the 
area of alcohol regulation (and, indeed, its ability to ban 
the sale of alcohol altogether) under the Twenty-first 
Amendment, the defendant contends that the legisla- 
ture’s chosen scheme need only be “reasonably related 
to,” rather than “directly advance,” its stated ends in 
order to withstand constitutional scrutiny. Defendant also 
contends that, because of the Twenty-first Amendment, 
the price advertising regulation is entitled to an “added 
presumption” in favor of its validity. New York State 
Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714, 718, 101 S.Ct. 
2599, 2602, 69 L.Ed.2d 357 (1981) (quoting California v. 
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 118, 93 S.Ct. 390, 397, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 
(1972)). Foliowing the reasoning of the Rhode Island 
Supreme Court in S & S Liquor and Evening Call, the 
defendant suggests that this “added presumption” works 
to shift the burden of proof to the plaintiffs to show that 
“these statutes are unconstitutional beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” Defendant's Post-Trial Memorandum at 7. 


App. 38 


Respectfully, I find that defendant’s reasoning overs- 
tates the law in this area, abrogating too broadly other 
constitutional provisions. The Twenty-first Amendment 
cannot be read in isolation as a supreme provision 
impinging all other constitutional rights. 


The Twenty-first Amendment is an exception to the 
Commerce Clause and gives the states broad regulatory 
authority over interstate commerce of liquor. Hostetter v. 
Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp., 377 U.S. 324, 330, 84 S.Ct. 
1293, 1296, 12 L.Ed.2d 350 (1964). This regulatory author- 
ity, however, is not absolute and can be limited by the 
federal commerce power in appropriate situations. Id. at 
332, 84 S.Ct. at 1298. See also California Retail Liquor 
Dealers Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97, 110, 
100 S.Ct. 937, 945, 63 L.Ed.2d 233 (1980) (the states’ power 
to regulate alcoholic beverages advertising is subject to 
federal anti-trust laws); Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 
U.S. 263, 275, 104 S.Ct. 3049, 3057, 82 L.Ed.2d 200 (1984) 
(“economic protectionism” of local alcoholic beverages 
violates the Commerce Clause); Healy v. Beer Inst., 491 
U.S. 324, 334, 109 S.Ct. 2491, 2498, 105 L.Ed.2d 275 (1989) 
(state regulation of alcoholic beverage prices is invalid 
under the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in 
other states). 


Nor does the Twenty-first Amendment necessarily 
override constitutional guaranties found in the Bill of 
Rights. In Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 97 S.Ct. 451, 50 
L.Ed.2d 397 (1976), Justice Brennan, writing for the major- 
ity, stated: 

Once passing beyond consideration of the Com- 


merce Clause, the relevance of the Twenty-first 
Amendment to other constitutional provisions 


App. 39 


becomes increasingly doubtful. As one commen- 
tator has remarked: “Neither the text nor the 
history of the Twenty-first Amendment suggests 
that it qualifies individual rights protected by 
the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment where the sale or use of liquor is con- 
cerned.” 


Id. at 206, 97 S.Ct. at 461 (quoting P. Brest, Processes of 
Constitutional Decisionmaking, Cases and Materials 258 
(1975)). See also Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116, 
122 n. 5, 103 S.Ct. 505, 510 n. 5, 74 L.Ed.2d 297 (1982) 
(state’s power under Twenty-first Amendment could not 
impinge upon Establishment Clause of the First Amend- 
ment); Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433, 436, 91 
S.Ct. 507, 509, 27 L.Ed.2d 515 (1971) (posting the names of 
excessive drinkers in retail liquor outlets violated due 
process).? 


The strongest authority for the proposition that the 
Twenty-first Amendment may alter the balance in the 
Central Hudson analysis can be found in California v. 
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 (1972) 
and New York State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 
714, 101 S.Ct. 2599, 69 L.Ed.2d 357 (1981), the cases 
chiefly relied upon by the Rhode Island Supreme Court in 
S & S Liquor and Evening Call. 


In LaRue, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a state 
liquor regulation prohibiting simulated sex acts and the 


9 Fora skillful summary of the historical interplay between 
the First and Twenty-first Amendments, see Richard S. Mandel, 
Note, Liquor Advertising: Resolving the Clash Between The First and 
Twenty-First Amendments, 57 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 157 (1984). 


App. 40 


showing of films and pictures depicting such acts in 
licensed clubs. In Bellanca, the Court relied heavily upon 
LaRue in upholding a state liquor regulation prohibiting 
topless dancing in licensed establishments. In both cases, 
however, expression was only incidentally burdened. The 
LaRue Court was concerned with the conduct rather than 
the communication: 


[A]s the mode of expression moves from the 
printed page to the commission of public acts 
that may themselves violate valid penal statutes, 
the scope of permissible state regulations signif- 
icantly increases. States may sometimes pro- 
scribe expression that is directed to the 
accomplishment of an end that the State has 
declared to be iliegal when such expression con- 
sists, in part, of “conduct” or “action.” 


409 U.S. at 117, 93 S.Ct. at 396 (citations omitted). 


In the present action, we are not concerned with 
conduct or “public acts” that violate “valid penal stat- 
utes,” but rather with pure speech that occurs off the 
licensed premises. LaRue and Bellanca do not mandate the 
application of a deferential standard of review in every 
case wherein a state, in the exercise of its Twenty-first 
Amendment powers, impinges on the First Amendment. 


Nor do I believe that Queensgate Invest. Co. v. Liquor 
Control Com., 459 U.S. 807, 103 S.Ct. 31, 74 L.Ed.2d 45 
(1982), the only decision of the U.S. Supreme Court to 
address the relationship between the Twenty-first 
Amendment and commercial speech doctrine, compels a 
different result. In Queensgate, the Supreme Court sum- 
marily dismissed for want of a substantial federal ques- 
tion an appeal of an Ohio Supreme Court decision 


App. 41 


upholding the constitutionality of a statute imposing a 
partial ban on liquor price advertising. Since Queensgate 
relied upon a different factual predicate and, as a sum- 
mary dismissal lacks a reasoned opinion, I cannot accept 
it as any stronger authority for the defendant than LaRue 
or Bellanca. See Mandel v. Bradley, 432 U.S. 173, 176, 97 
S.Ct. 2238, 2240, 53 L.Ed.2d 199 (1977) (summary disposi- 
tions are binding precedent only on “the precise issues 
presented and necessarily decided”).!° 


10 | note that the Supreme Court cited Queensgate in its most 
recent commercial speech opinion, U.S. v. Edge Broadcasting, 
supra. In that case, the Supreme Court cited Queensgate in sup- 
port of the narrow proposition that a legislative body is entitled 
to determine that promotional advertising of a product (lottery 
gambling) prohibited in one state, but available in a neighbor- 
ing state, undermines the prohibiting state’s policy against gam- 
bling, even if the prohibiting state’s advertising audience is not 
“wholly unaware of the lottery’s existence” in the neighboring 
state. _ U.S. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 2696. Importantly, the Court 
went on to note that “[i]f there is an immediate connection 
between advertising and demand, and the . . . regulation 
decreases advertising, it stands to reason that the policy of 
decreasing demand for [the product] is correspondingly 
advanced.” Id. 

In the liquor advertising context, the above reasoning sup- 
ports the notion that it “stands to reason” that a state regulation 
decreasing the amount of alcohol advertising, would directly 
advance the state’s interest in decreasing demand for alcohol. 
As noted above, however, the regulations at issue in this case 
make no attempt to reduce the amount of alcohol advertising, 
but merely proscribe the dissemination of truthful price infor- 
mation. Again, I make no determination here as to the potential 
constitutionality of a total or partial ban on alcohol advertising 


in Rhode Island. 


App. 42 


Other circuits, relying on LaRue, Bellanca and Queens- 
gate, have applied a deferential Central Hudson standard 
and upheld statutes prohibiting liquor advertising 
against First Amendment challenges. See Oklahoma Tele- 
casters Ass'n v. Crisp, 699 F.2d 490 (10th Cir.1983), rev’d on 
other grounds sub nom. Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 
U.S. 691, 104 S.Ct. 2694, 81 L.Ed.2d 580 (1984)! and 
Dunagin v. Oxford, 718 F.2d 738 (5th Cir.1983) (en banc), 
cert. denied, 467 U.S. 1259, 104 S.Ct. 3553, 82 L.Ed.2d 855 
(1984). I do not find these cases persuasive in the present 
context. In addition to their reliance on LaRue and 
Bellanca to give an “added presumption” of constitu- 
tionality to state regulation of pure commercial speech 
pursuant to the Twenty-first Amendment, these cases 
concerned total bans on liquor advertising. They simply 
do not deal with price advertising in the present factual 
setting. 


In sum, I find that the Twenty-first Amendment does 
not require a modification of either the level or allocation 
of the burden of proof in commercial speech cases involv- 
ing the regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages. See 


11 The Tenth Circuit upheld Oklahoma’s ban on alcohol 
advertising in Oklahoma Telecasters Association, supra. The 
Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider the petitioner’s 
claim that the ban was not a valid restriction on commercial 
speech. Ultimately, however, the Court decided the case on a 
ground raised by the Federal Communications Commission as 
Amicus Curiae, holding that the Oklahoma ban on the 
retransmission of liquor advertisements in out-of-state signals 
by cable operators was preempted by federal regulation of cable 
broadcasting. See Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. at 
697, 104 S.Ct. at 2699. The Supreme Court never reached the 
First Amendment commercial speech issues. 


App. 43 


Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Ass’n v. Attorney General, 
142 Mich.App. 294, 370 N.W.2d 328, 335 (1985), cert. 
denied, 479 U.S. 939, 107 S.Ct. 420, 93 L.Ed.2d 371 (1986) 
(Twenty-first Amendment does not require court to treat 
restraints on speech any differently than if alcoholic bev- 
erages were not involved).!2 Consequently, the State 
bears the burden of justifying the alcohol price advertis- 
ing ban by demonstrating that it “directly advances” its 
interest in promoting temperance and “is not more exten- 
sive than is necessary to serve that interest.” Central 
Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566, 100 S.Ct. at 2351. 


C. Applying the Central Hudson Test 


As noted above, the parties agree that plaintiffs’ pro- 
posed speech concerns lawful activity and would not be 
misleading. They also agree that the State has a substan- 
tial interest in promoting temperance. Thus, I need only 
consider the last two prongs of the Central Hudson anal- 
ysis. The Supreme Court has described these steps as 
“*basically involv[ing] a consideration of the ‘fit’ 
between the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends.’” Edge Broadcasting, __ U.S. at 
__, 113 S.Ct. at 2704 (quoting Posodas de Puerto Rico 
Associates v. Tourism Co. of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328, 341, 
106 S.Ct. 2968, 2977, 92 L.Ed.2d 266 (1986)). There must be 


12 The Michigan intermediate state court, faced with a sub- 
stantially similar prohibition on alcohol price advertising, 
applied Central Hudson and concluded that the prohibition was 
an unconstitutional restriction on commercial speech. 


App. 44 


an “immediate connection,” however, between the prohi- 
bition and the government’s asserted end. Central Hud- 
son, 447 U.S. at 569, 100 S.Ct. at 2353; Edge Broadcasting, 
___ US. at __, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. And if the means-end 
connection is “tenuous” or “highly speculative,” the reg- 
ulation cannot survive constitutional scrutiny. Central 
Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569, 100 S.Ct. at 2353. 


Unlike a number of cases in the commercial speech 
area, the link between alcohol price advertising and 
increased per-capita consumption is not self-evidence. 
See, e.g., Posadas, 478 U.S. at 341-42. 106 S.Ct. at 2976-77 
(link between ban on gambling advertising and level of 
gambling self-evident); Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569, 
100 S.Ct. at 2353 (link between advertising ban and sales 
self-evident); Dunagin v. Oxford, 718 F.2d at 747-49 & n. 8 
(link between overall advertising and increased alcohol 
use deemed self-evident). Nor do I believe this is a case 
where this Court should defer to the legislature on the 
basis of precedent which has already established that the 
legislature’s chosen means directly advances the asserted 
ends. See, e.g., Metromedia, Inc. v. San Diego, 453 U.S. 490, 
509 & n. 14, 101 S.Ct. 2882, 2893 & n. 14, 69 L.Ed.2d 800 
(1981) (plurality relied on established line of cases to 
ratify legislature’s judgment that banning commercial 
billboards would improve traffic safety).'° 


In this case, the State has failed to carry its burden of 
proof to show a direct correlation between the price 
advertising ban and reduced consumption of alcohol. As 


13 For the reasons discussed supra Part III, I do not rely on 
the Rhode Island Supreme Court’s deference to the —e 
in S & S Liquor Mart and Evening Call. 


App. 45 


discussed supra Part II, the plaintiffs’ expert testimony 
demonstrates that the alcohol price advertising ban has 
no appreciable impact on levels of consumption in Rhode 
Island. At best, price advertising is one factor among 
many that influence alcohol consumption patterns. 


Even if defendant’s burden of proof on this issue 
were tempered somewhat by the State’s substantial 
Twenty-first Amendment interest in regulating the evils 
incident to the sale and transportation of alcohol, the 
evidence presented does not satisfy the Central Hudson 
test. The State has simply not shown an “immediate 
connection” between the price advertising ban and 
reduced consumption. 


I also find that the price advertising ban is more 
extensive than necessary to serve the State’s asserted 
interest. The defendant claims that the ban increases the 
“search costs” of consumers and reduces the incidence of 
“price wars” between retailers, thus providing an “artifi- 
cial floor” for liquor prices. Common sense tells us that a 
lifting of the ban on price advertising will lead to a more 
competitive market. But any concern that such competi- 
tion will result in unacceptably low liquor price levels 
can be controlled by the imposition of higher sales taxes 
or minimum consumer prices. Such measures would 
directly serve the State’s asserted ends without burden- 


ing commercial speech. 


In his concurring opinion in Central Hudson, Justice 
Blackmun emphasized the critical role of an informed 
public in scrutinizing governmental policy choices: 


I seriously doubt whether suppression of infor- 
mation concerning the availability and price of a 


App. 46 


legally offered product is ever a permissible 
way for the State to “dampen” demand for or 
use of the product. Even though “commercial” 
speech is involved, such a regulatory measure 
strikes at the heart of the First Amendment. This 
is because it is a covert attempt by the State to 
manipulate the choices of its citizens, not by 
persuasion or direct regulation, but by depriv- 
ing the public of the information needed to 
make a free choice. 


447 U.S. at 574-75, 100 S.Ct. at 2356. 


In this case, the State has failed to demonstrate the 
necessary reasonable ‘fit’ between its policy objectives 
and its chosen means. While it may have been “reason- 
able” or “rational,” as defendant argues, for the legisla- 
ture to assume a correlation between the price 
advertising ban and reduced consumption, the Supreme 
Court has recently explained that such “rational basis” 
scrutiny is not to be applied when deciding the constitu- 
tionality of restrictions on commercial speech: 


[W]hile we have rejected the “least-restrictive- 
means” test for judging restrictions on commer- 
cial speech, so too have we rejected mere ratio- 
nal basis review. A regulation need not be 
“absolutely the least severe that will achieve the 
desired end,” Fox, supra, 492 U.S., at 480, 109 
S.Ct., at 3035, but if there are numerous and 
obvious less-burdensome alternatives to the 
restriction on commercial speech, that is cer- 
tainly a relevant consideration in determining 
whether the “fit” between ends and means is 
reasonable. 


Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., __ U.S. __, __ n. 
13, 113 S.Ct. 1505, 1510 n. 13, 123 L.Ed.2d 99 (1993). Here, 


App. 47 


it is evident that the State’s ends may be easily accom- 
plished by direct regulations controlling the retail prices 
of alcoholic beverages. 


Vv. CONCLUSION 


Commercial speech enjoys somewhat less First 
Amendment protection from governmental encroachment 
than other forms of speech. Nevertheless, under Central 
Hudson, a state must justify restrictions on truthful, non- 
misleading commercial speech by demonstrating that its 
actions “directly advance” a substantial state interest and 
are no more extensive than necessary to serve that inter- 
est. 


For the reasons stated above, I hold that §§ 3-8-7 and 
3-8-8.1 of the Rhode Island General Laws and Regulation 
32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control Administration do 
not directly advance the State’s interest in reducing over- 
all consumption of alcohol in Rhode Island and are more 
extensive than necessary to serve the State’s interest. | 
find that the statutes impermissibly restrict commercial 
speech and are unconstitutional. 


SO ORDERED. 


App. 48 


Constitutional Addendum 
AMENDMENT I 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establish- 
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; 
or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the 
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition 
the Government for a redress of grievances. 


AMENDMENT XxI 


§ 2. The transportation or importation into any State, 
Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery 
or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the 
laws thereof, is hereby prohibited. 


Statutory Addendum 


R.I.G.L. §3-8-7 controls price advertising by licensees. 


No manufacturer, wholesaler, or shipper from 
without this state and no holder of a license issued 
under the provisions of this title and chapter shall 
cause or permit the advertising in any manner what- 
soever of the price of any malt beverage, cordials, 
wine or distilled liquor offered for sale in this state; 
provided, however, that the provisions of this 
section shall not apply to price signs or tags 
attached to or placed on merchandise for sale 
within the licensed premises in accordance with 
rules and regulations of the department 
[emphasis added]. 


R.1.G.L. §3-8-8.1 controls the acceptance of price 
advertising by the communications media. 


TT, *o *a is “, ad ft heats Of hr Sina ee 
se Se: Le Me SO, Ta aD 
om . 2 ¢ ¢ . 


App. 49 


No newspaper, periodical, radio or television broad- 
caster or broadcasting company or any other person, 
firm or corporation with a principal place of business 
in the state of Rhode Island which is engaged in the 
business of advertising or selling advertisiug time or 
space shall accept, publish, or broadcast any adver- 
tisement in this state of the price or make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic bevereges. Any person 
who shall violate any of the provisions of this 
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and 
shall be punished for the first offense by a fine 
in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.06) and for each 
additional offense thereafter by a fine not 
exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars 
($100). Publication or broadcast by any person 
in violation of the provisions of this section shall 
also be subject to injunctive proceedings in a 
court of competent jurisdiction on a complaint 
brought by a retail licensee, or an association of 
retail licensees. 


The provisions of this section shall not 
apply to anv trade journal which is duly recog- 
nized and authorized to be exempt from the 
provisions of this section by the liquor control 
administrator [emphasis added]. 


R.1.G.L. §3-8-8 is the statutory basis for the authority 
of the liquor control administrator to promulgate regula- 


tions. 


The liquor control administrator is hereby 
authorized to promulgate rules which will 
enforce the provisions of §3-8-7 and he shall 
have the power to suspend the license of any 
license-holder in violation thereof. 


App. 50 


Regulation 32 of the Liquor Control Administrator 
was enacted to “enforce” the provisions of §3-8-7. 


No placard or sign of any kind which is visible 
from the exterior of any Class A premises 
licensed to sell at retail shall make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic beverage or mixture of 
alcoholic beverages. 


