In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


¢ 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Petitioners, 
Vv. 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, and 
RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Respondents. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 


¢ 


BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


e 


Evan T. LAwson 
Lawson & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, Ma. 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


‘BEST AVAILABLE COPY ia 


att 
8 


> S S 
aD. je te ye 


Fy, Mae 
pre > 
ai .* v4 
i as 


be tn ar 
spaces 
“e Hesit ve : *; i 3 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


1. Whether Rhode Island may, consistent with the 
First Amendment, prohibit truthful, non-misleading price 
advertising regarding alcoholic beverages? 


ii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Cusstion Possamted ....sssscecostecceuesdaneseee i 
oe Oe iv 
CORES occ cccccccsshanaenseceueede nen iv 
Statutes and Rakes. .. ...0ssececcesssuekeee vi 
Pe vi 
OK Pe 1 
Basie Fer jusiodictiom ....sssccoccccesdesnaeeeel 2 
Pe 2 
Statement of Ghe Case . «soo 0cc06c0s8ees eee 3 
ProceGural PRls0Ggy .....sccacecesseaneseneeeeee 3 
. . PPPPETTTrTTTT Tree rr 5 
sumanaty Of ACeueORe ... oo 6cccessctecdeeneeenneee 9 
A ee 11 


A. Truthful, Non-misleading Price Advertising Is 
Protected By The First Amendment. The Court 
Of Appeals Erred In Upholding Rhode Island’s 
Prohibition On Price Advertising Without 
Proof By The State That The Ban Directly And 
Materially Advances The State’s Asserted 
Interest In Reducing Abuse Of Alcoholic Bev- 
PP Trrrrrrrrrrrrrrr rr: rir) yl) 11 


B. Rhode Island’s Ban On Truthful, Non-mislead- 
ing Price Advertising Does Not Directly 
Advance Its Professed Interest In Reducing 
Abuse Of Alcoholic Beverages To A Material 
Degree, Thereby Failing The Third Part Of The 
Conmtral Padeom Fast. ...ccccscecssccsncevaseuse 14 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 


C. Rhode Island’s Ban On Advertising The Price 
At Which Retailers Sell Alcoholic Beverages Is 
More Extensive Than Necessary To Serve The 
State’s Asserted Interest In Reducing Abuse of 
PRBS THOWOTOIIED 6 oon cc ccc ccc cccccccccess 22 


D. Rhode Island May Not Ban Truthful, Non-Mis- 
leading Price Advertising By Out-Of-State 
Retailers Of Alcoholic Beverages............. 24 


E. The Twenty-first Amendment Does Not Give 
An Added Presumption Of Validity To Rhode 
Island’s Ban On Truthful, Non-Misleading 
Price Advertising Of Alcoholic Beverages.... 26 


EE SS 32 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 


CASES 
324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987)..... 18, 28 
44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F. Supp. 543 


GEAR BPO ccc ccccvenscceneDacsciebecebeoewn passim 
44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, 39 F.3d 5 
Ce Gk GUE cb cn vnnnctecuseds ¥en tibeeouaueel passim 


Bacchus Importer Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984) .... 28 
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977)..... 11 


Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1975) .............. 26 
Board of Trustees of State Univ. of New York v. Fox, 

Ge Was. Ge Ga 60 0c pc ceassinkccsccieasieess 22 
Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. New York 

State Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986)......... 28 
California Retail Liquor Dealer's Ass'n v. Midcal Alu- 

selene, Gne., G65 UD. GF (RIDE « cccccescccecescans 28 
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972)........... 26, 30 
Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691 

i Mere Tri ee eee 29 


Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service 
Commission of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980)... passim 


City of Newport, Kentucky v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92 


CRED 60 on.osansnenaepsenedscauanesechuasekuceseens 27 
Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) ............... 27, 28 
Dept. of Revenue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 

CED. BOG CHOBE on cccccaccoccnsansecenessoneenseces 28 
Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922 (1975)......... 30 


Edenfield v. Fane, __ U.S. __, 113 S. Ct. 1792 
SE do dicdh deca cnocdbenenaeegeneus 11, 14, 16, 22, 24 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES —- Continued 


Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 (1989)....... 28 


Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional 
Regulation, __ U.S. __, 114 S. Ct. 2084 (1994) 
phsnneds RaeedEes pea eNahe ibe ebnedes aches hayes 12, 14, 16 


Joseph E. Seagram & Sons v. Hostetter, 16 N.Y.2d 47 
EB garage anise cn rn) Duras in ep yt Se 19 


Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982)..... 29 
Lee v. Weisman, 505 U.S. 577, 112 S. Ct. 2649 (1992) .... 29 


Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Association v. 
Attorney General, 142 Mich. App. 294, 370 
N.W.2d 328 (Mich. Ct. App. 1985), cert. den. 479 


ee SE NG Ud + Cachan dad Sdeedescunedecescs 18 
New York State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 

Pi ho 640 4605-4 scnceveedre det niavnedsuseness 30 
Pennsylvania R. Co. v. Chamberlain, 288 U.S. 333 

SONA o 96d ncHdt ers ERebeeeenenenkescctnensascess 14 
Rhode Island Liquor Stores Ass‘n v. Evening Call Pub. 

Cain Se Bie Ge Gree BOG s vc cccsccccivcecescs: 5, 8 
Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Bd., 579 

PE oc nnonabsb'eeenénaedenesden ee 18 
Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., ___ U.S. __, 115 S. Ct. 

Ap idchensvnnecasepeachesksaeasncen passim 
S & S Liquormart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.L. 

Peee Reese. ‘eb Ke a CSN 08 ENEe FSSUESTAREEN SC UOEKO eden ews 5 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) ............ 28 


Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens 
Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748 (1976) .... passim 


Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433 (1971)....... 28 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Page 
STATUTES AND RULES 
ee Ce Oe Re ia cee donee natecedabasvebesantenaecs 2 
ee Cs OP A 6 860s odccenedetuscvedesacesunécswte? 3 
Se ee Oe I sk cr occoncecckscuéeseicnebencnkande 3 
Regulation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control 
PED dv ncxcdedscdcbeudsecensotesnsceneses 3 
Rhode Island General Laws § 3-8-7 ............. 2, 3, 6 
Rhode Island General Laws § 3-8-8.1............ 2, 3, 6 
United States Constitution, Amendment |....... passim 


United States Constitution, Amendment XXI, § 2 . . . passim 


MISCELLANEOUS 


M. J. Waterson, ApvertisinG BraNnps AND Markets 
(Advertising Ass’n Monograph, 2nd ed. 1985)..... 20 


New York State Moreland Commission on the 
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, Report AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS No. 3, January 21, 1964 ......... 18 


No. 94-1140 
° 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Petitioners, 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, and 
RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Respondents. 


+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 
. 


BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 
¢ 


Opinions Below 


1. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F. Supp. 543 
(D.R.I. 1993).! 


2. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, 39 F.3d 
5 (Ist Cir. 1994).? 


' The decision is reproduced in the Appendix to the peti- 
tion for a writ of certiorari (App.) at 17-47. 


? The decision is reproduced at App. 1-12. 


Basis For Jurisdiction 


The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the First Circuit was entered on October 24, 1994. This 
Court granted the petition for a writ of certiorari on May 
1, 1995. Jurisdiction is conferred by 28 U.S.C. § 1254. 


e 


Statutes Involved 


United States Constitution, Amendment I: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press; or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Gov- 
ernment for a redress of grievances. 


United States Constitution, Amendment XXI, § 2: 


The transportation or importation into any 
State, Territory, or possession of the United 
States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating 
liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is 
hereby prohibited. 


Rhode Island General Laws §§ 3-8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and 
Regulation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor Control Admin- 
istration.* 


3 The text of the statutes and regulation is set forth in the 
Statutory Addendum. 


Statement of the Case 
Procedural History 


This is an action by 44 Liquormart, Inc., a Rhode 
Island liquor store operator (44 Liquormart), and Peoples 
Super Liquors, Inc., a Massachusetts liquor store operator 
(Peoples), originally brought against the Rhode Island 
Liquor Control Administrator (the Liquor Control 
Administrator), for a determination that R.I.G.L. §§ 3-8-7 
and 3-8-8.1 and Regulation 32 of the Rhode Island Liquor 
Contro] Administration, which ban advertising the price 
of alcoholic beverages within the State of Rhode Island, 
deny the petitioners their constitutional right to freedom 
of speech and deny the citizens of Rhode Island their 
constitutional right to obtain accurate price information 
about lawful products (J.A. 28-37). Jurisdiction in the 
United States District Court is based upon 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1331 (federal question) and 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (depriva- 
tion of federal constitutional rights under color of state 
law). The Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association 
(RILSA) was permitted to intervene over the plaintiffs’ 
objection to protect its members’ interest in restricting 


competition (J.A. 3).4 Later the State of Rhode Island was 
substituted for the Liquor Control Administrator as a 
party defendant (J.A. 11). 


After trial on the merits, including taking testimony 
of expert witnesses for both sides, the District Court 
applied the standard set forth in Central Hudson Gas & 
Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission of New York, 447 
U.S. 557 (1980) to the facts found, and entered a judgment 
that the price advertising ban was unconstitutional. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra. The State and RILSA 
appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit (J.A. 10, 11). 


On May 2, 1994, the Court of Appeals affirmed the 
District Court’s ruling as to out-of-state retailers, but 
reversed as to Rhode Island retailers (J.A. 16). Both sides 
filed petitions for rehearing with suggestions for rehear- 
ing en banc (J.A. 16). On July 8, 1994, the panel ordered 
the May 2 opinion withdrawn and issued a “not for 
publication” amended opinion that reached the same 
result as the earlier opinion (J.A. 17). The court “ordered 
that either party may file a petition for rehearing with a 
suggestion for rehearing en banc by July 22, 1994” (J.A. 


4 In its memorandum in support of its motion to intervene, 
at page 2, the Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association stated its 
interest: “The overwhelming majority of the Class A Retailers in 
the State of Rhode Island operate at a marginal profit. The 
elimination of the prohibition on advertising of liquor sales 
would, of necessity, add an additional financial burden to each 
of the Class A Retailers who would be obliged to participate in 
the advertising arena and would be at a definite disadvantage 
when matched up against retailers who hold multiple licenses” 
(J.A. 43). 


17). Both sides did so. (J.A. 25-26). On July 29, 1994, the 
Court of Appeals denied 44 Liquormart’s petition for 
rehearing, but took no action on those of Rhode Island 
and RILSA (J.A. 18). On October 24, 1994, the Court of 
Appeals entered a judgment reversing the decision of the 
District Court in its entirety. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of 
R.1., supra. 


Facts 


44 Liquormart operates a retail store for the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in 
Johnston, Rhode Island. Peoples operates retail stores for 
the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the 
premises in New Bedford and Fairhaven, Massachusetts. 
The Liquor Control Administrator is charged with enforc- 
ing Rhode Island’s laws and regulations governing the 
sale of alcoholic beverages. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 
supra, 829 F. Supp. at 544 (App. 20). 


Rhode Island permits all advertising relating to alco- 
holic beverages, except that it forbids any reference to 
price outside licensed retail premises and prohibits 
Rhode Island communications media from accepting any 
advertisements that contain any reference to price in 
other states as well as Rhode Island. Ibid. The Rhode 
Island Supreme Court has upheld the ban against First 
Amendment challenges by a Rhode Island retailer seek- 
ing a declaratory judgement that it could advertise prices, 
S & S Liquormart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.I. 1985), 
and a Rhode Island newspaper that was enjoined from 
publishing out-of-state price advertisements. Rhode Island 
Liquor Stores Ass'n v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 331 


(R.I. 1985).5 The Liquor Control Administrator vigorously 
enforces the price advertising ban. The ban on price 
advertising has been interpreted to go beyond stating the 
price at which a product is offered for sale. The Liquor 
Control Administrator has found that the price advertis- 
ing ban prohibits use of the word “sale” in alcoholic 
beverages advertisements and that use of the word 
“wow” when juxtaposed with a reference to a particular 
item of alcoholic beverages in an advertisement also vio- 
lates the statute and regulation. On December 17, 1991, 
the Liquor Control Administrator found 44 Liquormart in 
violation cf R.I.G.L. §§ 3-8-7 and 3-8-8.1 and Regulation 
32. She imposed a fine for publishing advertisements 
containing the words “wow” and “sale” in a newspaper 
even though the advertisements did not state the price at 
which any product was offered for sale.® 


Other liquor licensees, as well as newspapers within 
Rhode Island, have been warned and fined for violation 
of the price advertising ban. Ibid. 


Peoples, a Massachusetts retailer, has made extensive 
use of price advertising in Massachusetts where it is 


5 In both of those cases, over dissent, the Rhode Island 
Supreme Court relied upon the Twenty-first Amendment to 
shift the burden of proof to the party challenging the price 
advertising ban. 5 


6 44 Liquormart’s advertisement appears at J.A. 49. The 
hearing before the Liquor Control Administrator is set forth at 
J.A. 51-66. At the hearing the Administrator suggested that she 
did not think it would be permissible for “a license holder to 
publish ads requesting that people join a movement to change 
the law” (J.A. 57). 


permitted. Peoples has attempted to place its advertise- 
ments, which include price information, in Rhode Island 
communications media, but has been refused because of 
the Rhode Island statute. Rhode Island communications 
media reach both Rhode Island and Massachusetts citi- 
zens. Ibid. 


Both 44 Liquormart and Peoples desire to advertise 
the prices at which they offer alcoholic beverages for sale 
in Rhode Island communications media. Their proposed 
price advertising does not concern an illegal activity and 
presumably would not be false or misleading. Ibid. 


Rhode Island justifies its ban on price advertising 
solely as “promoting temperance.” The Attorney General 
explained on the record below that the State was not 
concerned with “responsible drinkers,” but with reducing 
the availability of alcoholic beverages to persons of lim- 
ited incomes who might abuse them (J.A. 67). The State’s 
theory is that price advertising may stimulate “price 
wars” which the State believes might lower a theoretical 
“artificial price floor” that may result from the public’s 
ignorance of retail prices. The State conjectures that lower 
prices will lead to more abusive consumption, but it was 
unable to prove any such connection. Its only witness 
could not say how much lower prices might go if the 
advertising ban was not in place, or even what an optimal 
price might be. He did not know Rhode Island’s current 
price structure or the prices in neighboring states. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 549 (R., 
Saffer Tr. 43-49). 


There are no scientific studies that show banning 
price advertising has any direct effect upon consumption. 


44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 546 
(App. 22). In 1985 the Federal Trade Commission found 
that there is no reliable basis on which to conclude that 
any alcohol advertising significantly affects alcohol 
abuse, and that there is no basis for concluding that 
banning or otherwise limiting advertising would offer 
significant protection to the public. Ibid. 


Even if the State’s purpose was reducing consump- 
tion vel non,” consumption of alcoholic beverages is 
affected by factors such as religion, ethnic background, 
family makeup and peer pressure that are more impor- 
tant in determining the amount of alcohol consumed than 
the presence or absence of price advertising. Indeed, per 
capita consumption in Rhode Island is higher than in 
some states that permit price advertising. According to 
the latest statistics, Rhode Island ranked in the upper 30 
percent of the states in total per capita consumption. Ibid. 
No evidence was presented as to where Rhode Island 
ranked in abusive consumption. 


After hearing all the evidence, the District Court 
found that Rhode Island’s off-premises price advertising 
ban has had no material impact on levels of alcohol 


7 At various points in its decisions upholding the price 
advertising ban the Rhode Island Supreme Court referred to the 
State’s temperance interest as “reducing the consumption of 
liquor,” “alcoholic moderation or abstinence,” S & S Liquor 
Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, supra, 497 A.2d at 734, reducing “excessive 
drinking,” Id. at 737-738, and discouraging “tipplers from tip- 
pling more intoxicants.” Rhode Island Liquor Stores Ass'n v. Eve- 
ning Call Pub. Co., supra, 497 A.2d at 336. It seems clear that 
according to both the State’s highest court and its Attorney 
General, its interest is in preventing abusive consumption. 


consumption in Rhode Island. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. 
Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 549 (App. 31). 


¢ 


Summary of Argument 


Truthful, non-misleading price advertising has been 
specifically entitled to First Amendment protection since 
1976 when the Court held that it was “indispensable” to 
the preservation of our free enterprise economy. Virginia 
State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 
Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 765 (1976). If truthful, non-misleading 
price advertising may be restricted at all, the state must 
prove that its restriction satisfies the four part test estab- 
lished by Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public 
Service Commission of New York, supra. 


The primary focus of this case is on the last two parts 
of the Central Hudson analysis. Rhode Island is required 
to prove that its ban on truthful, non-misleading price 
advertising directly advances its asserted interest in dis- 
couraging abusive consumption of alcoholic beverages 
and is not a more extensive restriction on speech than 
necessary to serve that interest. The State’s theory was 
that denying consumers truthful price information, 
would inhibit its retailers from engaging in price wars 
and thereby make alcoholic beverages more expensive for 
all consumers, discouraging abusive consumption by 
some consumers. The State failed the third part of the 
Central Hudson test because it could not produce any 
evidence that its ban on speech had any effect on abusive 
consumption. Indeed, the District Court found that the 


10 


ban “has no significant impact on levels of alcohol con- 
sumption in Rhode Island.” 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 
supra, 829 F. Supp. at 549 (App. 31). Furthermore, the 
State failed the final part of the Central Hudson test since 
it could have accomplished its purpose without restrict- 
ing speech at all, by setting minimum prices or raising 
alcohol taxes. In the case of Rhode Island’s ban on news- 
papers accepting truthful, non-misleading price adver- 
tisements from out-of-state retailers, the State’s asserted 
interest disappears and its failure of proof is even more 
obvious. 


In reversing the District Court’s judgment, the Court 
of Appeals jettisoned the requirement that the burden of 
proof under Central Hudson rests on the State. It did not 
find that the State had carried the burden of proof. 
Instead the Court of Appeals found the evidence went 
“both ways,” improperly shifted the burden to the peti- 
tioners and concluded that the petitioners had failed to 
show that Rhode Island’s price advertising ban did not 
satisfy Central Hudson. 


In addition to erroneously reading the allocation of 
the burden of proof under Central Hudson, the Court of 
Appeals gave the State the benefit of an “added presump- 
tion of validity” because of the Twenty-first Amendment. 
In so doing, the Court of Appeals again improperly 
shifted the burden of proof to the petitioners. This Court 
disaffirmed any implication that the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment gives the State any added weight in the Central 
Hudson analysis in Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., __ U.S. 
__, 115 S. Ct. 1585, 1589-1590, n.2 (1995). This case is a 
logical extension of Rubin. The Court should clearly 


11 


establish that the Twenty-first Amendment does not 
diminish the force of the First Amendment. 


S 


Argument 


A. Truthful, Non-misleading Price Advertising Is Pro- 
tected By The First Amendment. The Court Of 
Appeals Erred In Upholding Rhode Island’s Prohi- 
bition On Price Advertising Without Proof By The 
State That The Ban Directly And Materially 
Advances The State’s Asserted Interest In Reducing 
Abuse Of Alcoholic Beverages. 


For almost twenty years the Court has required that 
governmental attempts to regulate advertising be 
weighed against “the right of the speaker and the audi- 
ence, not the government, to assess the value of the 
information presented.” Edenfield v. Fane, _. U.S. __, 113 
S. Ct. 1792, 1798 (1993). In 1976, the Court declared that 
First Amendment protection for truthful, non-misleading 
price advertising was required because “the free flow of 
commercial information is indispensable” to the multitude 
of “private economic decisions” which are essential to the 
preservation of a “predominantly free enterprise econ- 
omy.” Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens 
Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 765 (1976) [emphasis 
added]. 


The Court has never strayed from the holding that 
truthful, non-misleading price advertising is protected 
under the First Amendment. See, ¢.g., Bates v. State Bar of 
Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977). Nor has the Court retreated 
from the requirement that the government must prove 


12 


the validity of its restrictions on commercial speech. 
Indeed, before the final decision of the Court of Appeals 
below was announced, this Court reemphasized that 
“only commercial speech that is false, deceptive or mis- 
leading can be banned,” while “[c]lommercial speech that 
is not false, deceptive, or misleading can be restricted, 
but only if the state shows that the restriction directly and 
materially advances a substantial state interest in a man- 
ner no more extensive than necessary to serve that inter- 
est.” Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional 
Regulation, __ U.S. __, 114 S. Ct. 2084, 2088 (1994). The 
Court pointedly cautioned against deferring to the state's 
regulatory process by highlighting the state’s substantial 
burden of justifying its restrictions on commercial speech. 


The State’s burden is not slight; the “free flow of 
commercial information is valuable enough to 
justify imposing on would-be regulators the 
costs of distinguishing the truthful from the 
false, the helpful from the misleading, and the 
harmless from the harmful.” Zauderer, supra, 471 
US., at 646, 105 S. Ct., at 2279. “[M]ere specula- 
tion or conjecture” will not suffice; rather the 
State “must demonstrate that the harms it 
recites are real and that its restriction will in fact 
alleviate them to a material degree.” Edenfield, 
supra, at __, 113 S. Ct., at 1800; see also 
Zauderer, supra, 471 US., at 648-649, 105 S. Ct., at 
2280-2281 (State’s “unsupported assertions” 
insufficient to justify prohibition on attorney 
advertising; “broad prophylactic rules may not 
be so lightly justified if the protections afforded 
commercial speech are to retain their force”). 
114 S. Ct. at 2089. 


13 


Just last term, the Court returned to Virginia State 
Board of Pharmacy in striking down a federal prohibition 
on truthfully stating the alcoholic content of beer on its 
labels. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., __ U.S. __, 115 S. Ct. 
1585, 1589 (1995). Sweeping aside the government's con- 
tention that restrictions on commercial speech concerning 
alcoholic beverages should be accorded especially defer- 
ential treatment, the Court prescribed that, just like all 
other categories of advertising, alcoholic beverage adver- 
tising may only be constitutionally regulated according to 
the four part test for determining the constitutionality of 
governmental restrictions on commercial speech enunci- 
ated in Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service 
Commission of New York, supra. Id. 


The Court of Appeals below disregarded the stan- 
dard established by Central Hudson and steadfastly main- 
tained by this Court's subsequent rulings on commercial 
speech. It reversed because it found the evidence went 
“both ways,” the District Court was, in its view, not “free 
to choose” and so the legislative judgment of Rhode 
Island must prevail.* 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. State of Rhode 
Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 7 (App. 6). But, since Rhode Island 
had the burden of proof, even if the Court of Appeals 
believed the evidence went “both ways” the District 
Court correctly found that the State failed to carry its 
burden. 


We, therefore, have a case belonging to that 
class of cases where proven facts give equal 


* While the meaning the Court of Appeals intended to con- 
vey by saying the evidence went “both ways” is somewhat 
obscure, it surely cannot mean that the State had proved its case. 


14 


support to each of two inconsistent inferences; 
in which event, neither of them being estab- 
lished, judgment, as a matter of law, must go 
against the party upon whom rests the necessity 
of sustaining one of these inferences as against 
the other, before he is entitled to recover. Penn- 
sylvania R. Co. v. Chamberlain, 288 U.S. 333, 339 
(1933). 


Therefore, the Court of Appeals erred by deferring to 
the State’s asserted justification. It yielded to the State's 
goal to keep its citizens ignorant of truthful price infor- 
mation to covertly manipulate consumer choice instead of 
requiring the State to prove that the regulation would 
materially and directly advance the asserted state interest 
in temperance. The Court of Appeals’ failure to hold the 
State to its burden of proof is particularly egregious in 
this First Amendment case because of the clarity with 
which this Court's recent cases have described it. See, e.g., 
Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional Regula- 
tion, supra; Edenfield v. Fane, supra; Rubin v. Coors Brewing 
Co., supra. 


B. Rhode Island’s Ban On Truthful, Non-misleading 
Price Advertising Does Not Directly Advance Its 
Professed Interest In Reducing Abuse Of Alcoholic 
Beverages To A Material Degree, Thereby Failing 
The Third Part Of The Central Hudson Test. 


Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service 
Commission of New York, supra, establishes a four part test 
for determining the constitutionality of governmenta’ 
restrictions on commercial speech: 


15 


[First] it at least must concern lawful activity 
and not be misleading. Next, we ask whether 
the asserted governmental interest is substan- 
tial. If both inquiries yield positive answers, we 
must determine whether the regulation directly 
advances the governmental interest asserted, 
and whether it is not more extensive than is 
necessary to serve that interest. 447 U.S. at 566. 


It is stipulated that advertising the price at which 44 
Liquormart and Peoples sell their products relates to a 
lawful activity and is not false or misleading (J.A. 47). 
Accordingly, such information is generally protected 
under the first part of the Central Hudson test and speci- 
fically protected by Virginia State Board of Pharmacy and 
its progeny. The parties agree that Rhode Island has a 
substantial interest in regulating the sale of alcoholic 
beverages (J.A. 47), but that generalization can not sup- 
port its restriction on commercial speech. Thus, the out- 
come of this case turns upon whether the State's asserted 
interest in “temperance,” defined by the Attorney Gen- 
eral in the District Court as an interest in discouraging 
irresponsible consumption by people of limited means 
(J.A. 67), produces a result at odds with Virginia State 
Board of Pharmacy when evaluated under the last two 
parts of the Central Hudson test. 


Under Central Hudson the government must prove an 
“immediate connection” between the government's 
asserted interest and the prohibition on speech. If the 
connection is “tenuous” or “highly speculative” the pro- 
hibition is invalid. 447 U.S. at 569. A prohibition on 
commercial speech is not valid if it provides only “inef- 
fective or remote support for the government's purpose.” 


16 


447 US. at 564. The Court has strongly reiterated the 
government's burden of proof in Edenfield v. Fane, supra, 
Ibanez, supra, and, most recently, in Rubin v. Coors Brewing 
Co., supra, stressing that “this requirement was critical.” 
115 S. Ct. at 1592. 


The essence of the Court of Appeals’ reason for per- 
mitting Rhode Island to stifle “the free flow of commer- 
cial information,” to all its citizens, temperate and 
intemperate, and the essence of its misapprehension of 
the decisions of this Court, is in its holding that the 
District Court could not find the statute unconstitutional 
“in the absence of any affirmative contradiction [to the 
State’s hypothesis] to rely on.” 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State 
of Rhode Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 8 (App. 7-8). Conse- 
quently, the Court of Appeals only required the State to 
articulate a theory which the petitioners were made to 
refute. Not only did the State fail to carry its burden to 
prove that the restriction promoted its interest in prevent- 
ing abusive consumption “to a material degree,” Edenfield v. 
Fane, supra, 113 S. Ct. at 1803, quoted in Ibanez, supra, 114 
S. Ct. at 2089 [emphasis added], the petitioners’ evidence 
convinced the District Court in its role as fact finder, that 
“Rhode Island's off-premises liquor price advertising ban 
has no significant impact on levels of alcohol consump- 
tion in Rhode Island.” 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, 
at 549, (App. 31). 


The Court of Appeals acknowledged that there is no 
record evidence to support the conclusion that Rhode 
Island's price advertising ban has materially advanced its 
asserted goal. 44 Liquormart v. Rhode Island, supra, 39 F.3rd 
at 7 (App. 6). Moreover, the hypothesis that the price 
advertising ban might have such an effect is refuted by 


17 


the fact that Rhode Island was in the top 30 percent of 
states in per capita consumption with the ban in place. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, supra, at 546 (App. 23). The State 
presented no evidence of where Rhode Island might 
stand in abusive drinking. Both the State and RILSA 
respond to Rhode Island’s high ranking in per capita 
consumption by lamely questioning “where Rhode Island 
would be without the advertising ban.” Rhode Island’s 
Brief In Opposition To Petition For Certiorari, 19; RILSA’s 
Brief In Opposition To Petition For Certiorari, 18. Signifi- 
cantly, they posed the question without answering it, 
thereby displaying the State’s failure of proof.’ 


The Court of Appeals disregarded the district judge's 
finding of fact that the price advertising ban has had no 
significant impact on levels of alcohol consumption in 
Rhode Island because it thought the State’s position had 
“inherent merit.” 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. State of Rhode 
Island, supra, 39 F.3rd at 7 (App. 7). It thereby relieved the 
State of its constitutional burden with no more than a 
hypothesis that does not fit the facts. Rhode Island's 
standing in per capita alcohol consumption shows that 
whatever merit there might be in the theory was not 
manifested in practice." The hypothesis embraced by the 


* RILSA posited: “For all we know, without the ban Rhode 
Island might rank #1.” Thus RILSA offers only rank speculation 
as a substitute for the obligation to prove that the restriction 
promoted the State’s asserted interest in temperance “to a mate- 
rial degree.” Rhode Island wouid not even speculate, it accused 
the petitioners of begging the question, as if the burden of proof 
was on the petitioners instead of the State. 

10 The petitioners are in complete agreement with the posi- 
tion of Amicus Curiae Washington Legal Foundation that 


18 


Court of Appeals in lieu of the proof required by Central 
Hudson is also disproved by the findings of governmental 
agencies that have looked at the relationship between 
price or advertising and consumption. For example, in 
1985, the Federal Trade Commission found “no evidence 
to believe alcohol advertising significantly affects alcohol 
abuse.” 44 Liquormart v. Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 546 
(App. 24).!! Not only did the State not have evidence of 


banning or restricting truthful, non-misleading commercial 
speech as an indirect means of regulating consumer behavior is 
incompatible with the First Amendment. Accordingly, for the 
reasons discussed in that brief, the petitioners believe Rhode 
Island’s price advertising ban violates the second prong of the 
Central Hudson test. 


11 In 1964, the Moreland Commission was appointed by the 
governor of New York to study that State’s minimum price 
requirement for liquor. The Commission flatly concluded that 
“(t]he argument that high prices promote temperance in that 
they keep liquor out of the hands of those who should not have 
it is unfounded.” New York State Moreland Commission on the 
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, Report AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
No.3, 17, January 21, 1964. The Commission compared states in 
which prices were high with states in which prices were low. 
Annual arrests for drunkenness, drunk driving, rates of alcohol- 
ism, and rates of alcohol-related first mental hospital admis- 
sions were examined to find no relationship between 
consumption patterns in the “low” and “high” price states. Id. at 
18-19. The Commission concluded “artificially high prices for 
liquor have no substantial relationship to temperance. They 
serve merely to insure the profit margins of the various seg- 
ments of the industry.” Id. at 19. The Moreland Commission 
Report has been noticed by several courts in ruling on alcoholic 
beverages related issues. 324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335, 
348, 351 fn.13 (1987), Michigan Beer & Wine Wholesalers Associa- 
tion v. Attorney General, 142 Mich. App. 294, 370 N.W.2d 328, 336 
(Mich. Ct. App. 1985), cert. den. 479 U.S. 939 (1986); Rice v. 


19 


any material effect on consumption, the petitioners’ experts 
showed that, because there are many intervening variables 
between price advertising and consumption, such as differ- 
ences in drinking attitudes and customs, which are the most 
important determinants of drinking behavior, a direct causal 
connection cannot be made. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 
supra, 829 F. Supp. at 547 (App. 27). Since the State failed to 
prove that its ban on truthful, non-misleading price advertis- 
ing had any effect on abusive drinking, the ban does not 
pass the Central Hudson test. 


In asserting that “advertising must be generally pro- 
ductive or so much money would not be spent on it” 44 
Liquormart v. Rhode Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 7 (App. 7), the 
Court of Appeals did not consider two salient facts: 
expenditures on alcoholic beverage advertising have been 
steadily increasing, while consumption has been steadily 
decreasing; and Rhode Island, with its price advertising 
ban in place for many years, is in the top 30 percent of 
states in per capita consumption, ahead of some states 
that do not ban price advertising. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 
supra, 829 F. Supp. at 546 (App. 23). Furthermore, any 
presumed effect of advertising in general on consumption 
is not relevant to the effect of a price ban, because Rhode 
Island permits all other forms of advertising. Thus, the 
State does not seek to reduce whatever effect advertising 
in general might have on consumption. 


The fallacious assumption that advertisers would not 
spend money on advertising unless it generated 
increased consumption underlies several of the few cases 


Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Bd., 21 Cal. 3d 431, 457 (1978); 
Joseph E. Seagram & Sons v. Hostetter, 16 N.Y.2d 47, 209 N.E.2d 
701 (1965). 


20 


upholding advertising bans. Those courts did not appre- 
ciate the fact that advertising influences a person who has 
already decided to buy an alcoholic beverage in choosing 
which brand to buy. In a “mature market,” such as the 
market for alcoholic beverages, the purpose and effect of 
a particular company’s advertising is to encourage con- 
sumers to choose that brand, or in the case of price 
advertising, which store to buy it in, not to increase 
general consumption of the generic product. M. J. Water- 
son, ADVERTISING BRANDS AND Markets, 19 (Advertising 
Ass’n Monograph, 2nd ed. 1985). If advertising takes a 
customer away from a competitor’s product it is money 
well spent, although it does not increase overall con- 
sumption by so much as one bottle. Retailers like the 
petitioners want to advertise their prices to increase their 
share of the market of those who have already decided to 
consume, but not selected where they will acquire the 
product. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 549 
(App. 30). 


Beyond the fact that the State could not prove a 
substantial relationship between its price advertising ban 
and its asserted goal of preventing alcohol abuse, the 
price advertising ban is, at best, only theoretically, indi- 
rectly, related to its goal, another reason why it does not 
satisfy the third part of the Central Hudson test. As the 
Court noted in Central Hudson, “in recent years this Court 
has not approved a blanket ban on commercial speech 
unless the expression itself was flawed in some way, either 
because it was deceptive or related to unlawful activity” 447 
U.S. at 566, n.9 [emphasis added]. 


In this case, the State’s argument manifests the indi- 
rect nature of the price advertising ban’s purported effect 


21 


on abusive consumption. Rhode Island does not argue, 
and certainly has not proven, that truthful, non-mislead- 
ing price advertising stimulates consumption. Price 
advertising inherently only informs the public of the 
price at which the advertiser is offering a particular alco- 
holic beverages item for sale. This Court has identified 
truthful, non-misleading price advertising as a form of 
speech protected by the First Amendment because it is 
“indispensable” to the proper functioning of our free 
enterprise system. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., supra, 115 S. 
Ct. at 1589, quoting Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Vir- 
ginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., supra. 


Under the State’s attenuated reasoning, price adver- 
tising may stimulate “price wars” which the State 
believes might lower a theoretical “artificial price floor” 
that may result from the public’s ignorance of retail 
prices. In fact, Rhode Island’s regulation is not aimed at 
alcohol abuse at all. It is aimed at eliminating a retailer’s 
need to protect its market share by meeting a competi- 
tor’s lower prices.12 That process is the essence of the 
“numerous private decisions that drive the [free enter- 
prise] system.” Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia 
Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., supra. It is manifestly in 
the public interest that our economic system function in 
precisely that way. Therefore, it is highly unlikely that the 
Rhode Island legislature would have the political will to 
mount a frontal assault on the free enterprise system by 


2 Accordingly, Rhode Island must admit that an objective 
of its price advertising ban is to reduce competition among 
retailers, a goal that has never been found to justify banning 
truthful, non-misleading price advertising. 


22 


fixing minimum prices. Instead, Rhode Island has cover- 
tly resorted to an unproven,!> indirect method of price 
control, with no demonstrable effect on consumption (but 
a clear effect on the profit margin of RILSA members), 
that violates the protection accorded truthful, non-mis- 
leading price advertising by the First Amendment, 
announced by this Court in Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy 
v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., supra. 


C. Rhode Island’s Ban On Advertising The Price At 
Which Retailers Sell Alcoholic Beverages Is More 
Extensive Than Necessary To Serve The State’s 
Asserted Interest In Reducing Abuse Of Alcoholic 
Beverages. 


The final part of the Central Hudson test requires the 
State to demonstrate that its restriction on commercial 
speech is “not more extensive than is necessary to serve” 
the State’s asserted interest. 447 U.S. at 566; Edenfield v. 
Fane, supra.; Ibanez, supra; Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 
supra. The test is articulated as requiring the proponent of 
a restriction on commercial speech to prove a reasonable 
“ ‘fit’ between the legislature’s ends and the means cho- 
sen to accomplish those ends.” Board of Trustees of State 
Univ. of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 480 (1989). 
Although the opinion in Fox was clear that the “reason- 
able fit” test was “far different, of course, from the ‘ration- 
al basis’ test,”Id. [emphasis added], the Court has been 


13 The State’s expert was not familiar with consumption 
figures for Rhode Island (R. Saffer Tr. 43), did not know what 
effect the price advertising ban had on Rhode Island prices (R. 
Saffer Tr. 45-46), and was unaware if there was a price differen- 
tial between Rhode Island and Massachusetts (R. Saffer Tr. 49). 


23 


required to reiterate that a rational basis test, as advanced 
by the State, 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 829 F. Supp. at 
553-554 (App. 43), and adopted by the Court of Appeals 
below, is not to be applied when deciding the constitu- 
tionality of restrictions on commercial speech.'4 


[WJhile we have rejected the “least-restrictive- 
means” test for judging restrictions on commer- 
cial speech, so too have we rejected mere rational 
basis review. A regulation need not be “abso- 
lutely the least severe that will achieve the 
desired end,” Fox, supra, 492 U.S., at 480, 109 S. 
Ct., at 3035, but if there are numerous and 
obvious less-burdensome alternatives to the 
restriction on commercial speech, that is cer- 
tainly a relevant consideration in determining 
whether the “fit” between ends and means is 
reasonable. City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Net- 
work, Inc., supra, 113 S. Ct. 1510, fn.13 [emphasis 
- added]. 


Thus, as made clear in Discovery Network, and 
recently reiterated in Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., supra, the 
availability of obvious alternatives to restricting commer- 
cial speech demonstrates that the state has not met its 
burden under the fourth part of the Central Hudson anal- 
ysis. As was conceded by the State’s expert, creating an 
artificial price floor is a result Rhode Island could directly 
accomplish without banning constitutionally protected 
speech by mandating minimum consumer prices or 
increasing its tax on alcoholic beverages. 44 Liquormart v. 


14 The Appeals Court echoed the rational basis test when it 
held that the State need not prove the “correctness” of its posi- 
tion, only its “reasonableness.” 44 Liquormart v. State of Rhode 
Island, 39 F.3d at 7 (App. 6). 


24 


Racine, supra, 829 F. Supp. at 549 (App. 30). Since the State 
could fully accomplish its asserted goal without restrict- 
ing protected speech at all, i.e., in a manner obviously 
less-burdensome to free expression, it is self-evident that 
its ban on price advertising is more extensive than is 
necessary. 


The Court of Appeals’ decision characterizes covert 
manipulation of the free enterprise system as a “reason- 
abie choice” when Rhode Island could fully accomplish 
its true objective of maintaining an artificial price floor 
for alcoholic beverages without any restriction on speech 
at all. However, this Court demands that a state seeking 
to prohibit the conveying of information do so only in 
furtherance of a substantial goal, only after the cost has 
been “carefully calculated” and only after the state meets 
its burden to “affirmatively establish the reasonable fit” 
between its means and its goal. Edenfield v. Fane, supra; 
Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., supra. The State has not done 
so in this case. 


D. Rhode Island May Not Ban Truthful, Non-Mislead- 
ing Price Advertising By Out-Of-State Retailers Of 
Alcoholic Beverages. 


In the case of its prohibition against newspapers and 
other communications media accepting out-of-state price 
advertisements, Rhode Island bans constitutionally-pro- 
tected speech that not only occurs off licensed premises, 
but concerns the sale of products outside its jurisdiction. 
Contrary to the decision of the Court of Appeals, 44 
Liquor Mart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 9 
(App. 10-12), this Court has flatly held that a state may 


25 


not justify its out-of-state advertising ban on the alleged 
ground that it is attempting to protect its citizens from 
exposure to truthful information about legal products or 
services in another state. 
A State does not acquire power or supervision 
over the internal affairs of another State merely 
because the welfare and health of its own citi- 
zens may be affected when they travel to that 
State. It may seek to disseminate information so 
as to enable its citizens to make better informed 
decisions when they leave but it may not, under 


* + 


the guise of exercising internal police powers, bar a 
citizen of another State from disseminating informa- 
tion about an activity that is legal in that State. 
Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809, 824-825 (1975) 
[emphasis added]. 


The Court of Appeals attempted to justify Rhode 
Island’s ban on price advertising by out-of-state retailers 
with the non sequitur “if a party wishes to come into a 
state and do business, to some extent at least, it should be 
subject to the same regulations as are its local counter- 
parts.” 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, supra, 39 
F.3d at 9 (App. 10-11). In the context of speech regulation, 
however, this aphorism not only sanctions “economic 
protectionism” as a legitimate reason for banning out-of- 
state price information, but also fails the Central Hudson 
test. 


Despite the suggestion of the Court of Appeals that 
the petitioners relied upon the Commerce Clause, 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 9 
(App. 10-12), the Court of Appeals misperceived our 
argument, which was and is squarely based upon the 
First Amendment. Under Central Hudson, a state must 


26 


justify regulating commercial speech by proving how its 
regulation will alleviate real harms in that state to a 
material degree. 


Although the Court of Appeals made an issue of 
finding petitioners’ claims under the Commerce Clause 
waived, it missed the point that Bigelow v. Virginia, supra, 
determined that a state’s interest in “shielding its citizens 
from information about activities outside [its] borders” is 
ordinarily “entitled to little, if any, weight” in deciding 
whether an out-of-state advertisement is to be divested of 
its First Amendment protection. 421 U.S. at 828. Because 
Rhode Island’s only plausible objective in regulating out- 
of-state price advertising is illegitimate, its ban on truth- 
ful, non-misleading price advertising is forbidden by the 
First Amendment. 


E. The Twenty-first Amendment Does Not Give An 
Added Presumption Of Validity To A Ban On 
Truthful, Non-Misleading Price Advertising Of 
Alcoholic Beverages. 


The Court of Appeals thought it “precisely in order” 
to give Rhode Island’s ban on truthful, non-misleading 
price advertising an “added presumption of validity” 
because of the Twenty-first Amendment, based upon the 
Court's use of that phrase in California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 
109, 118-119 (1972). 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode 
Island, supra, 39 F.3d at 8 (App. 8). The effect of the 
“added presumption” was to eliminate the State’s burden 
under Central Hudson to prove the validity of its price 
advertising ban, and to put a requirement on the peti- 
tioners of overcoming the presumption by proving the 


27 


ban invalid. The “added presumption” rationale for dis- 
regarding the requirements of the Central Hudson test was 
expressly rejected by the Court in Rubin v. Coors Brewing 
Co., supra, 115 S. Ct. at 1590, n.2, on the ground that 
“LaRue did not involve commercial speech about alcohol, 
but instead concerned the regulation of nude dancing in 
places where alcohol was served.”'5 This case should be 
the occasion where the Court makes it plain that the 
Twenty-first Amendment repealed only the Eighteenth 
Amendment and no part of the First Amendment. 


The Twenty-first Amendment was intended to create 
an exception to the normal operation of the Commerce 
Clause by permitting states to impose burdens on inter- 
state commerce that otherwise would be invalid.'* “Nei- 
ther the text nor the history of the Twenty-first 
Amendment suggests that it qualifies individual rights 
protected by the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth 
Amendment where the sale or use of liquor is con- 
cerned.” Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 205-206 (1976). The 


'S Thus Justice Stevens’ apprehension that LaRue would 
become authority for the proposition that “the Twenty-first 
Amendment repealed not only the Eighteenth Amendment, but 
some undefined portion of the First Amendment as well,” City 
of Newport, Kentucky v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92, 103 (1986) [dissent- 
ing opinion], has been, at last, allayed. 

‘© The Brief of Amici Curiae, The Beer Institute, the Dis- 
tilled Spirits Council of the United States and the Wine Institute 
In Support of Petitioners reviews the language and legislative 
history of the Twenty-first Amendment and its relationship to 
state exercise of police power over alcoholic beverages. The 
Amici conclude that the Twenty-first Amendment provides no 
support for any diminution of the protection accorded commer- 
cial speech by the First Amendment. 


28 


Court has consistently rejected states’ attempts to rely 
upon the Twenty-first Amendment as a justification for 
abrogating other constitutional provisions. See, Dept. of 
Revenue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 U.S. 341 (1964) 
[states may not tax alcoholic beverages in violation of the 
Import-Export Clause]; Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 
U.S. 433, 436 (1971) [a statute that required the posting of 
names of excessive drinkers in retail liquor outlets vio- 
lated due process]; Craig v. Boren, supra [a statute that 
prohibited the sale of beer to men under twenty-one nd 
women under eighteen violated equal protection]; South 
Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) [federal statute condi- 
tioning receipt of highway funds on adoption of mini- 
mum drinking age is a valid exercise of Congress’ 
spending power]. 


Significantly, the Court has found many circum- 
stances under which the Twenty-first Amendment does 
not supplant even its core concern, the Commerce Clause. 
California Retail Liquor Dealer's Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, 
Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980) [the states’ power to regulate 
alcoholic beverages traffic is subject to federal anti-trust 
laws]; Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, supra, [“economic 
protectionism” of local alcoholic beverages violates the 
Commerce Clause]; Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. 
New York State Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986) [state 
regulation of alcoholic beverages prices is invalid under 
the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in other 
states]; 324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987) [a 
mandatory 112 percent minimum markup on alcoholic 
beverages based on the wholesale price violates antitrust 
laws]; Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 (1989) [state 
regulation of alcoholic beverages prices is invalid under 


29 


the Commerce Clause when it affects prices in other 
states]. 


In Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 715 
(1984), the Court ruled that notwithstanding the Twenty- 
first Amendment, the states’ power to regulate alcoholic 
beverages advertising could be preempted solely by a 
federal statute passed under the Commerce Clause. The 
Court did not give state law any added presumption of 
validity because of the Twenty-first Amendment. 


The Court did not have to decide whether the 
Twenty-first Amendment had any effect on First Amend- 
ment rights in Crisp. However, in Larkin v. Grendel's Den, 
Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982), the Court decided that the First 
Amendment prevented a state from giving churches a 
veto over the issuance of liquor licenses within 500 feet of 
them. No added presumption of constitutionality was 
accorded the state because of the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment. “The State may not exercise its power under the 
21st Amendment in a way which impinges upon the 
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.” 459 U.S. 
at 122 n.5. 


There is no principled basis to afford greater protec- 
tion to the interests safeguarded by the Establishment 
Clause than the Free Speech Clause.'? Thus, the Court of 
Appeals’ use of an “added presumption” of constitu- 
tionality to shift the burden to the petitioners to prove the 


'? This is not to say that the Free Speech Clause and the 
Establishment Clause operate in an identical fashion. See, Lee v. 
Weisman, 505 U.S. 577, 112 S. Ct. 2649, 2647 (1992), however, the 
Court has not recognized a hierarchy in the clauses whereby one 
is entitled to more weight than the other. 


30 


invalidity of the price advertising ban under the First 
Amendment cannot be reconciled with the fact that no 
such exception appears in the application of other consti- 
tutional provisions, including the Commerce Clause and 
the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, to the 
regulation of alcoholic beverages. 


California v. LaRue and the later cases of Doran v. 
Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922, (1975) and New York State 
Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981), should 
remain limited to their peculiar circumstances. In those 
cases, the Court upheld under the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment the states’ power to ban nude dancing on licensed 
premises because it was upholding a licensing provision 
rather than a regulation of communication. Rubin v. Coors 
Brewing Co., supra. 


In LaRue . . . we concluded that the broad 
powers of the States to regulate the sale of 
liquor, conferred by the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, outweighed any First Amendment interest 
in nude dancing and that a State could therefore 
ban such dancing as a part of its liquor license 
program. Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., supra, 422 U.S. 
at 932-933. 


While certain nude dancing may have some commu- 
nicative aspect, the nude dancing in LaRue had a proven 
risk of provoking or facilitating illegal activity on the 
licensed premises. The Court’s opinion graphically 
described “numerous incidents of legitimate concern:” 


Customers were found engaging in oral copula- 
tion with women entertainers; customers 
engaged in public masturbation; and customers 
placed rolled currency either directly into the 


31 


vagina of a female entertainer, or on the bar in 
order that she might pick it up herself. 
Numerous other forms of contact between the 
mouths of male customers and the vaginal areas 
of female performers were reported to have 
occurred. Prostitution occurred in and around 
such licensed premises, and involved some of 
the female dancers. Indecent exposure to young 
girls, attempted rape, rape itself, and assaults on 
police officers took place on or immediately 
adjacent to such premises. 409 U.S. at 111. 


This Court has never held that the Twenty-first 
Amendment would justify a state ban on pure speech. To 
the contrary, the Court minimized the communicative 
aspect of the performances by describing them as “gross 
sexuality.” 409 U.S. at 118. Plainly, the Court was con- 
cerned with the conduct rather than communication in 
LaRue. 


[A]s the mode of expression moves from the 
printed page to the commission of public acts 
that may themselves violate valid penal statutes, 
the scope of permissible state regulations signif- 
icantly increases. States may sometimes pro- 
scribe expression that is directed to the 
accomplishment of an end that the State has 
declared to be illegal when such expression con- 
sists, in part, of “conduct” or “action.” 409 U.S. 
at 117. 


In contrast here, Rhode Island is attempting to ban 
speech that occurs off the licensed premises, which is 
entitled to First Amendment protection under the Central 


32 


Hudson test.'8 The Twenty-first Amendment does not 
alter the equation. The states’ power to regulate commer- 
cial speech is subject to “the same First Amendment 
Restrictions that apply to the Federal Government,” not 
less. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., supra, 115 S. Ct. at 1591. 


S 


Conclusion 


For the foregoing reasons, the petitioners respectfully 
submit that the judgment of the Court of Appeals should 
be reversed. 


By their attorney, 


Evan T. LAwson 
Lawson & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, Ma. 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


8 In the case of Peoples’ advertisements, it is truthful, non- 
misleading speech about activity in another state and therefore 
plainly beyond the scope of the Twenty-first Amendment. 


App. 1 


Statutory Addendum 


R.I.G.L. § 3-8-7 controls price advertising by 
licensees. 


No manufacturer, wholesaler, or shipper from 
without this state and no holder of a license issued 
under the provisions of this title and chapter shall 
cause or permit the advertising in any manner what- 
soever of the price of any malt beverage, cordials, 
wine or distilled liquor offered for sale in this state; 
provided, however, that the provisions of this 
section shall not apply to price signs or tags 
attached to or placed on merchandise for sale 
within the licensed premises in accordance with 
rules and regulations of the department 
[emphasis added]. 


R.LG.L. § 3-8-8.1 controls the acceptance of price 
advertising by the communications media. 


No newspaper, periodical, radio or television broad- 
caster or broadcasting company or any other person, 
firm or corporation with a principal place of business 
in the state of Rhode Island which is engaged in the 
business of advertising or selling advertising time or 
space shall accept, publish, or broadcast any adver- 
tisement in this state of the price or make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic beverages. Any person 
who shall violate any of the provisions of this 
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and 
shall be punished for the first offense by a fine 
in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and for each 
additional offense thereafter by a fine not 
exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars 
($100). Publication or broadcast by any person 
in violation of the provisions of this section shall 
also be subject to injunctive proceedings in a 
court of competent jurisdiction on a complaint 


App. 2 


brought by a retail licensee, or an association of 
retail licensees. 


The provisions of this section shall not 
apply to any trade journal which is duly recog- 
nized and authorized to be exempt from the 
provisions of this section by the liquor control 
administrator [emphasis added]. 


R.L.G.L. § 3-8-8 is the statutory basis for the authority 
of the liquor control administrator to promulgate regula- 
tions. 


The liquor control administrator is hereby 
authorized to promulgate rules which will 
enforce the provisions of § 3-8-7 and he shall 
have the power to suspend the license of any 
license-holder in violation thereof. 


Regulation 32 of the Liquor Control Administrator 
was enacted to “enforce” the provisions of § 3-8-7. 


No placard or sign of any kind which is 
visible from the exterior of any Class A premises 
licensed to sell at retail shall make reference to 
the price of any alcoholic beverage or mixture of 
alcoholic beverages. 


© 


ate 


ahs 


——-- > - ' 
—— , oe 
— 
ae 
” ~ Lr ag 
7s 
r- 
; 
. 
+ 
’ 
‘ 
~ 
i 
‘ 
~ 
| _ 


