"s.. 
* 


< 


‘BEST AVAILABLE COPY, 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
ee et Ns UC a deine nbs’ aebees ii 
ee ae sa ibeeeecas 1 
TTT ee eee 5 
ICRI Obs Dare eccahdesicccbep seven naspsrisncs 6 


I. The Twenty-first Amendment vests broad 
authority in the individual states to regulate 
EE HPI beer o ke decssncdccicosecs: 6 


II. The Central Hudson test was properly applied by 
the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit..... 16 


A. The statutes under review directly advance the 
state’s interest in promoting temperance... . . 17 


B. The statutes under review are no more 
extensive than necessary to serve the state’s 
interest in promoting temperance ......... 25 


III. Rhode Island’s ban on alcohol price advertising 
is constitutionally applicable to out-of-state 
_ i “cs EPP TIT TET TTT TTT TTTTTT TTT Tree 28 


IV. A finding that Rhode Island’s statutes are 
unconstitutional will have reverberating results 
for federal, state, and local governments ...... 30 


EEE ER aR me Ny ae 34 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 


Cases 


44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F.Supp. 543 
(D.R.I. 1993), rev'd sub nom. 44 Liquormart Inc. v. 
Rhode Island, 39 F.3d 5 (1st Cir. 1994)...... 21, 24, 27 


44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode Island, 39 F.3d 5 
Cae | Pe”: eee passim 


324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987)...... 9, 27 
Anheuser-Busch v. Mayor and City Council, 855 


so eS Pee 33 
Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984)...... 9 
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991)...... 20 
Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1975) ........... 28, 29 
Board of Trustees of State Univ. of New York v. Fox, 

GR UD. GP Ceres oss aoccde epee 12, 19, 24, 25, 26 
Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. New York 

State Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986).......... 9 
Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992)............... 20 
Cal-Almond, Inc. v. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

36 FOS GD GU Gie, TGP) ooo cranccippensenneuans 13 
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972)....... 13, 14, 15 


California Retail Liquor Dealer’s Ass'n v. Midcal Alu- 
minum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980)........... 2060055 9, 27 


Capital Broadcasting Co. v. Acting Attorney General, 
GS UH. WEED Gerad) oc cpospetnnnndeteccccdedesonntee 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


Capital Broadcastin +3 Company v. Mitchell, 333 


. 582 (D.D.C. 1971) aft'd sub 
nom. tal Broadcasting Cae Acting Attorney 
General, 405 U.S. 1000 (1972)... ... 2... 0.00000. 32 


Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. + Crap, 467 U.S. 691 
MET RGE Geen Seoubacacececcceccs 7, 15, 16, 27 


Central Hudson Gas and Electric Corp. v. Public Ser- 
vice Comm'n of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980). . passim 


City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 507 
Pee cep BOW OAR BOOS (EDIE)... cc cc ccc ccc cccnss 27 


City of Newport, Ky. v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92 (1986) .... 14 
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 


ee eee ee Shs occ echesccacdeccccece 20 
— v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) ....... 2.666.668. u 
. of Revenue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 

Ss. Tee re nehs ne cetecctasaccceceacececs uu 
v. dae 507 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1792 
(1993). ie chhGneenéeeeeeeetecccscecs 18, 20, 31 
Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., _.§ US. __, 115 
0 A 
Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 (1989)........ “ 


Ibanez v. Florida Dept. 7 Pe at peed 
Regulation, ___ U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 2084 (1994) ..... 31 


Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982) ...9 


New York State Liquor cuenta v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 
ENED ERGESEGROSRESESEse08.06000eees cease: 14 


Pen ia R. = 0 Cem, 2 US. 0 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Com- 
pany of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328 (1986) ....... passim 
Princess Sea Industries v. State, Clark County, 635 
P2d 281 (Nev. 1981)... .. <2... cece eeeeeeeeeeeeees 32 
Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor Control Commis- 
sion, 69 Ohio St.2d 361, 433 N.E.2d 138 (1982), 
appeal dismissed for want of a substantial federal 
question, 459 U.S. 807 (1982) .......---++sse5ss0e 12 
Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 514 US. __L 115 S.Ct. 
1585 (1995)... ... 0... ceeeeeeee: 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 27 
South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) ......-.-+++> 9 


United States v. Edge Broadcasting Company, 509 
U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 2696 (1993) .....-- 6 eee ees passim 


Virginia State Board [a v. Virginia Citizens 
Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748 (1976) ... 15, 20, 30 


Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433 (1971)........ “ 


1S U.S.C. § 1338... 6... cece cece cece ene e eee eeeeeeees 31 
GB UBL: © WEB... ncccivcscvecccvccccccnessesvoveses 4 
Rhode Island General Laws § 3-8-7 ....... 6... . 50055 1 
Rhode Island General Laws § 3-8-8.1.........-.... 2, 28 
Nevada Revised Statutes § 201.430. ............50055 32 
Nevada Revised Statutes § 201.440. .............0555 32 


Nevada Revised Statutes § 244.345... 2... 6.6.6.5 5055 32 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8)..................... 22 
Federal Rule of Evidence 803(18).................... 22 
Orner AuTHormies 
Nicotine Attack, Ay sy Regulation Is Formally Pro- 
posed; Industry Sues to Halt It, Wait Sr. J., Aug. 
ee SI I 33 
Steve Younger, Alcoholic Beverage Advertising on the 
Airwaves: Alternatives to a Ban or Counteradvertis- 
ing, 34 UCLA L. Rev. 1139 (1987)................. 32 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Petitioners 44 Liquormart, Inc. and Peoples Super 
Liquor Stores, Inc. (Liquormart, Peoples, petitioners) 
have been granted this Court's writ of certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. They 
ask that the decision in 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. State of Rhode 
Island, 39 F.3d 5 (ist Cir. 1994), be reversed. The Court 
limited its review to the question: “Whether Rhode Island 
may, consistent with the First Amendment, prohibit 
truthful, non-misleading price advertising regarding alco- 
holic beverages?” Relying primarily on the four-prong 
balancing test set forth in Central Hudson Gas and Electric 
Corp. v. Public Service Comm'n of New York, 447 U.S. 557 
(1980), petitioners assert that two Rhode Island statutes 
violate their First Amendment right to free commercial 
speech. Respondent Rhode Island Liquor Stores Associa- 
tion (RILSA), on the other hand, maintains that the court 
of appeals correctly held that there was no violation of 
petitioners’ constitutional rights particularly when the 
Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion is added to the balance. 


After a hearing on December 17, 1991, the Rhode 
Island liquor control administrator found that Liquormart 
had violated the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-8-7. 
Appendix (A.)' 48. She imposed a $400 fine which 
Liquormart paid; Liquormart did not take an administva- 
tive appeal. A. 20-21. 


! Citations to the appendix “A.” refer to the appendix to the 
petition for a writ of certiorari. 


“hn 


Peoples owns several liquor stores in Massachusetts. 
It was interested in advertising liquor prices in Rhode 
Island media outlets to attract Rhode Island purchasers to 
its Massachusetts stores but was prevented from doing so 
by the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-8-8.1. A. 49. 


On February 28, 1992, Liquormart and Peoples filed 
this action against the Rhode Island liquor control admin- 
istrator.? RILSA’s motion to intervene as a defendant was 
granted. The trial was conducted on March 11, 1993. The 
parties stipulated to a number of facts, including that 
“[t}he proposed speech does not concern an illegal activ- 
ity and presumably would not be false or misleading” 
and that “[t]he State of Rhode Island has a substantial 
interest in regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages.” 
J.A 47. The record of the trial consists of the transcript 
of the deposition testimony of one expert and the presen- 
tations of the parties, augmented by the depositions of 
two additional experts. Id. 


In his Memorandum and Order, first noting the “pro- 
nounced lack of unanimity among researchers who have 
studied the effects of alcohol advertising,” A. 22, the 
district court judge reviewed the testimony presented. He 
observed that the experts presented by the plaintiffs 
“maintained * * * that there is no empirical evidence that 
the presence or absence of alcohol price advertising sig- 
nificantly affects levels of alcohol consumption.” A. 23. 


? The State of Rhode Island was subsequently substituted 
in lieu of the liquor control administrator. 

* Citations to the appendix “J.A.” refer to the joint appen- 
dix to the briefs on the merits. 


3 


The judge required the state to bear the burden of 
justifying the alcohol price advertising ban. He rejected 
the argument that the Twenty-first Amendment adds a 
presumption of validity to the state statutes and, thus, 
shifts the burden of proof to the party challenging its 
constitutionality. A. 42-43. The court held: “I find as a fact 
that Rhode Island’s off-premises liquor price advertising 
ban has no significant impact on levels of alcohol con- 
sumption in Rhode Island.” A. 31. Based on that factual 
conclusion, the judge found that the statutes are uncon- 
stitutional because they impermissibly restrict commer- 
cial speech. A. 47. 


RILSA and Rhode Island each appealed that decision 
to the court of appeals. The appeal was argued on Febru- 
ary 10, 1994. On May 2, 1994, the court issued the first of 
its three opinions. J.A. 16, 24. The trial court’s decision 
was reversed in part and sustained in part: the statutes 
were held to be constitutional insofar as Rhode Island 
merchants are affected but unconstitutional as applied to 
Massachusetts merchants. In reaching its decision the 
court applied the Central Hudson test: 

At the outset, we must determine whether the 
expression is protected by the First Amendment. 
For commercial speech to come within that pro- 
vision, it at least must concern lawful activity 
and not be misleading. Next, we ask whether 
the asserted governmental interest is substan- 
tial. If both inquiries yield positive answers, we 
must determine whether the regulation directly 
advances the governmental interest asserted, 
and whether it is not more extensive than is 
necessary to serve that interest. 


Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566. 


All parties petitioned for a rehearing and suggested a 
rehearing en banc. J.A. 16, 24. Those petitions were denied 
on July 8, 1994. On that same date, the court’s May 2 
judgment was vacated, the opinion withdrawn, and a second 
opinion was substituted.4 J.A. 16-17, 24-25. The result 
reached in the second opinion was the same as that of the 
first decision although the reasoning regarding Massa- 
chusetts merchants differed. The court specifically provided 
that the parties could file petitions for rehearings with sug- 
gestions for rehearing en banc by July 22, 1994. All parties 
took advantage of that opportunity. J.A. 17-18, 25-26. 


Liquormart and Peoples’ petition was denied on July 
29, 1994. A. 16. On October 24, the petitions filed by 
RILSA and the state were granted, the July 8 opinion was 
withdrawn, and the judgment of that date was vacated. 
A. 15. In its place a third opinion was issued and judg- 
ment was entered for RILSA and the state. On recon- 
sideration, the court found that petitioners had waived 
the issue of the relationship between the Commerce 
Clause and the Twenty-first Amendment by failing to 
brief it on appeal. A. 11-12. Thus, the court held that, 
without the Commerce Clause, Peoples could not prevail 
on its claim. Therefore, the district court’s decision was 
reversed. A. 14. Petitioners subsequently filed their peti- 
tion to this Court on December 27, 1994.5 J.A. 18, 27. The 
petition was granted on May 1, 1995. J.A. 1%, 27. 


S 


4 This second opinion was designated “not for publica- 
tion.” J.A. 17. 


5 In their statement of the case, petitioners assert that juris- 
diction in the district court was based in part on 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1983. RILSA suggests that the § 1983 claim was waived by the 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The bedrock issue presented in this case is whether 
the Twenty-first Amendment enables a state to meet the 
requirements of the Central Hudson test when that state 
regulates truthful, non-misleading advertising of alco- 
holic beverages. Contrary to petitioners’ contentions, this 
Court has recognized a presumption of validity for gov- 
ernmental regulation of alcoholic beverages. The Court 
has also recognized the connection between advertising 
and demand. Furthermore, where advertising seeks to 
increase the demand for products and activities deemed 
harmful to the public - “vices” — this Court affords defer- 
ence to legislative judgments. 


In its application of the Central Hudson test, the court 
of appeals found that the presumption of validity drawn 
from the Twenty-first Amendment provided the state 
assistance in meeting its burden of proof for the third and 
fourth prongs. Not only did the state derive the benefit of 
the presumption, but it was also benefited in meeting its 
burden from the deference given to legislative judgments 
where vices are at issue. Furthermore, the state was 
assisted by the lesser protection afforded to commercial 
speech about vice than to any other form of protected 
speech. 


petitioners’ complete failure to pursue it in the district court and 
before the court of appeals. To be sure, the claim was raised by 
the complaint, but was not mentioned again until the petition 
for writ of certiorari was filed in this Court. Furthermore, peti- 
tioners specifically assert that their argument “was and is 
squarely based upon the First Amendment.” Petitioners’ brief at 
25. 


When assessing whether a regulation on speech is 
not more extensive than necessary, a court may consider 
whether there are numerous and obvious alternatives. In 
this case reasonable alternatives are neither numerous 
nor obvious. In any event, the Rhode Island legislature’s 
judgment that the alcohol price advertising ban advances 
the state’s interest in temperance is reasonable and that is 
enough to meet the last two prongs of Central Hudson. 


Rhode Island’s policy prohibiting alcohol price 
advertising applies to foreign merchants when doing 
business in Rhode Island. Massachusetts has established 
a different policy which cannot legitimately overwhelm 
that of its neighbor. Rhode Island does not control liquor 
merchandising in Massachusetts; Massachusetts must not 
control liquor merchandising in Rhode Island. 


The implications of the decision in this case reach far 
beyond the two statutes at issue. At stake is government's 
ability to continue to protect the public health, safety, 
morals, and welfare. Without the ability to restrict certain 
advertising, the government will lose one of its most 
effective tools against overreaching by those who would 
promote legal but harmful products and activities. 


S 


ARGUMENT 


I. The Twenty-first Amendment vests broad authority 
in the individual states to regulate alcoholic bever- 
ages. 


This case questions whether the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment allows a state to impose limitations on commercial 


speech regarding alcoholic beverages or whether First 
Amendment protections override government's interest 
in protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare. The 
closest the Court has come to exploring the exact ques- 
tion raised in this case was in Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. 
Crisp, 467 U.S. 691 (1984). At issue there was Oklahoma’s 
provision banning alcohol advertising. The Court decided 
the case on preémption grounds finding that the state ban 
“interfered with a regulatory area that the [Federal Com- 
munication] Commission has explicitly pre-empted.” 467 
U.S. at 705. Having reached that conclusion, the Court 
did not examine the relationship between the Twenty- 
first Amendment and the First Amendment. It did, how- 
ever, touch upon the effect of the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment on a state’s authority to regulate advertising of 
alcoholic beverages. Justice Brennan, writing for a unani- 
mous court, observed: 


Although the District Court found that “con- 
sumption of alcoholic beverages in Oklahoma 
has increased substantially in the last 20 years 
despite the ban on advertising of such bever- 
ages,” * * * we may nevertheless accept Oklahoma's 
judgment that restrictions on liquor advertising rep- 
resent at least a reasonable, albeit limited, means of 
furthering the goal of promoting temperance in the 
State. The modest nature of Oklahoma’s inter- 
ests may be further illustrated by noting that 
Oklahoma has chosen not to press its campaign 
against alcoholic beverage advertising on all 
fronts. * * * [A] state regulatory scheme obvi- 
ously need not amount to a comprehensive 
attack on the problems of alcohol consumption 
in order to constitute a valid exercise of state 
power under the Twenty-first Amendment * ** . 


467 U.S. at 715 (emphasis added). Likewise, and quite 
recently, the Court approached the question in Rubin v. 
Coors Brewing Co., 514 U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 1585 (1995). 
There a federal statute restricting commercial speech on 
beer labels was reviewed. The government invoked the 
Twenty-first Amendment in aid of its argument that its 
statutory scheme “ ‘facilitate[d]’ state efforts to regulate 
alcohol * * * .” 115 S.Ct. at 1591. The Court rejected that 
notion: 


Even if the Federal Government possessed the 
broad authority to facilitate state powers, in this 
case the Government has offered nothing that 
suggests that States are in need of federal assis- 
tance. States clearly possess ample authority to ban 
the disclosure of alcohol content — subject, of 
course, to the same First Amendment restric- 
tions that apply to the Federal Government. 


Id. (emphasis added). Thus, the Court continues to recog- 
nize that the Twenty-first Amendment confers heightened 
regulatory authority to the states where alcoholic bever- 
ages are concerned. Ultimately the Court concluded that 
the label ban at issue in Coors Brewing failed the Central 
Hudson test “because of the overall irrationality of the 
Government's regulatory scheme.” 115 S.Ct. at 1592. 


Citing to a number of this Court’s decisions, peti- 
tioners assert that: “(t]he Court has consistently rejected 
states’ attempts to rely upon the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment as a justification for abrogating other constitutional 
provisions.” Petitioners’ brief at 27-28. Each of those deci- 
sions was made on its own merits in the light of its own 
facts and is' not dispositive of the commercial speech 


issue in this case. The litany is protracted: Dept. of Reve- 
nue v. James B. Beam Distilling Co., 377 U.S. 341 (1964) 
(import-export clause); Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 
U.S. 433 (1971) (due process clause); Craig v. Boren, 429 
U.S. 190 (1976) (equal protection clause); South Dakota v. 
Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987) (Congress’ spending power); 
California Retail Liquor Dealer’s Ass’n v. Midcal Aluminum, 
Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980) (antitrust laws); Bacchus Imports, 
Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263 (1984) (economic protectionism); 
Brown-Forman Distillers Corporation v. New York State 
Liquor Authority, 476 U.S. 573 (1986) (commerce clause); 
324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy, 479 U.S. 335 (1987) (antitrust 
laws); Healy v. The Beer Institute, 491 U.S. 324 (1989) 
(commerce clause); Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 
116 (1982) (establishment clause). Petitioners’ brief at 
28-29. It is also unavailing. 


Petitioners do not acknowledge the decisions in Pos- 
adas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto 
Rico, 478 U.S. 328 (1986), and United States v. Edge Broad- 
casting Company, 509 U.S. ___, 113 S.Ct. 2696 (1993), much 
less appreciate their applicability. Their impact was rec- 
ognized in Coors Brewing where the Court observed that 
in Posadas de Puerto Rico, “we found that the Puerto Rico 
Legislature’s interest in promoting the health, safety, and 
welfare of its citizens by reducing their demand for gam- 
bling provided a sufficiently ‘substantial’ government 
interest to justify the regulation of gambling advertising.” 
115 S.Ct. at 1591. Furthermore, Coors Brewing distin- 
guished its facts from Edge Broadcasting: “Unlike the situ- 
ation in Edge Broadcasting, the policies of some States do 
not prevent neighboring States from pursuing their own 
alcohol-related policies within their respective borders.” 


10 


Id. Both of those propositions appear in the instant case: 
1) Rhode Island, like Puerto Rico, has an interest in 
promoting the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens 
and seeks to do so by reducing their demand for alcoholic 
beverages; 2) petitioners’ insistence that Massachusetts 
retailers must be allowed to advertise in Rhode Island 
media would prevent Rhode Island from pursuing its 
own alcohol related policy. 


Posadas de Puerto Rico examined the constitutionality 
of a Puerto Rico statute and regulations which prevented 
the advertising of casino gambling to Puerto Ricans 
although advertising to tourists was allowed. The appel- 
lants, operators of a hotel and casino, claimed that the 
statute was violative of the First Amendment's protection 
of commercial speech, both facially and as applied. The 
Court applied the Central Hudson test. Easily finding that 
the first two prongs of the test were satisfied, the Court 
turned to an analysis of the “ ‘fit’ between the legisla- 
ture’s ends and the means chosen to accomplish those 
ends”: 


The Puerto Rico Legislature obviously believed, 
when it enacted the advertising restrictions at 
issue here, that advertising of casino gambling 
aimed at the residents of Puerto Rico would 
serve to increase the demand for the product 
advertised. We think the legislature’s belief is a 
reasonable one, and the fact that appellant has 
chosen to litigate this case all the way to this 
Court indicates that appellant shares the legisla- 
ture’s view. 


11 


478 U.S. 341-42. In the same manner, the Rhode Island 
legislature presumably believed® that eliminating price 
advertising would decrease the overall advertising of 
liquor and, thus, lessen the demand. 


In Edge Broadcasting the federal statutory ban on 
broadcast lottery advertisements in non-lottery states was 
upheld in the face of a First Amendment challenge. Ini- 
tially the Court observed: 


[T]he activity underlying the relevant advertis- 
ing — gambling - implicates no constitutionally 
protected right; rather, it falls into a category of 
“vice” activity that could be, and frequently has 
been, banned altogether. 


113 S.Ct. at 2703. Applying the Central Hudson test, the fit 
between the restriction and the government interest was 
found to be reasonable. Although the government could 
have protected its interests in other ways, the regulation 
was found not to be more extensive than necessary. 113 
S.Ct. at 2704-2705. Importantly, the Court stated: “Within 
the bounds of the general protection provided by the 
Constitution to commercial speech, we allow room for 
legislative judgments.” 113 S.Ct. at 2707. Edge Broadcast- 
ing is the clearest exposition of the current standard to be 
applied in the context of commercial speech advertising 
of various vices. The Court considered the balancing of 
interests between lottery and non-lottery states as “the 
substantial governmental interest that satisfies Central 


© The reasoning of the Rhode Island General Assembly 
must remain a matter of conjecture for all parties. The statutes at 
issue were enacted 39 years ago in 1956, 44 Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 
6, and Rhode Island has no recorded legislative history. 


12 


Hudson.” 113 S.Ct. at 2704. “We made clear in [Board of 
Trustees of State Univ. of New York v.] Fox, [492 U.S. 469 
(1989)] that our commercial speech cases require a fit 
between the restriction and the government interest that 
is not necessarily perfect, but reasonable. * * * This was 
also the approach in Posadas * * * .” 113 S.Ct. at 2705 
(citations omitted). 


The Court observed that Congress has banned the 
broadcast advertising of cigarettes.?7 From that fact it 
extrapolated: 


If there is an immediate connection between 
advertising and demand, and the federal regula- 
. tion decreases advertising, it stands to reason 
that the policy of decreasing demand for gam- 
bling is correspondingly advanced. Accordingly, 
the Government may be said to advance its pur- 
pose by substantially reducing lottery advertis- 
ing, even where it is not wholly eradicated. 


Edge Broadcasting, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. So, too, in Central 
Hudson itself the Court observed: “There is an immediate 
connection between advertising and demand for electric- 
ity.” 447 U.S. at 569. Thus, as the Court of Appeals for the 
Ninth Circuit has recognized: “[t]he Supreme Court 
assumes as a matter of law that advertising increases 


7 The Court also cited Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor 
Control Comm'n, 69 Ohio St.2d 361, 366, 433 N.E.2d 138, 142, app. 
dism’d for want of a substantial federal question, 459 U.S. 807, 
103 S.Ct. 31, 74 L.Ed.2d 45 (1982), where the Ohio court 
remarked: “an advertising prohibition aids the interest in pre- 
venting [alcoholic beverage] consumption.” The speculation in 
the lower courts regarding the authority of Queensgate should 
lapse following the decision in the instant case. 


13 


consumption of the product or service being advertised.” 
Cal-Almond, Inc. v. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 14 F.3d 
429, 439 (9th Cir. 1993), citing Posadas de Puerto Rico and 
Central Hudson. The state’s interest in promoting tem- 
perance by decreasing consumption is logically advanced 
by the ban on alcohol price advertising. 


In decrying the power of the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, petitioners are particularly reliant on Larkin v. 
Grendel’s Den, Inc. and the nude-dancing line of cases 
commencing with California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972). 
Larkin is of doubtful precedential value to the case at bar 
in spite of the statement: “The State may not exercise its 
power under the Twenty-first Amendment in a way 
which impinges upon the Establishment Clause of the 
First Amendment.” 459 U.S. at 123 n.5. Thus, while it is 


true, as petitioners point out in their brief at 29, that 


Larkin did not recognize an added presumption of consti- 
tutionality provided by the Twenty-first Amendment, the 
Court nonetheless commented: 


Given the broad powers of states under the 
Twenty-first Amendment, judicial deference to 
the legislative exercise of zoning powers by a 
city council or other legislative zoning body is 
especially appropriate in the area of liquor regu- 
lation. 


459 U.S. at 122-23. The statute under review was not, 
however, a legislative exercise of zoning power, but 
rather a delegation of a veto power to private entities. 459 
U.S. at 123. In a footnote the observation is made: “The 
Twenty-first Amendment reserves power to states, yet 
here the State has delegated to churches a power relating 
to liquor sales.” Id. at n.5. 


14 


The behavior regulated in LaRue is admittedly a far 
cry from the price advertising of alcoholic beverages 
banned by Rhode Island’s statutes. The nude-dancing 
cases are not important to this case for their subject 
matter. Rather, their significance lies in the broad lan- 
guage utilized by the Court to explain the scope of the 
Twenty-first Amendment. “The reach of the Twenty-first 
Amendment is certainly not without limit, but previous 
decisions of this Court have established that, in the con- 
text of liquor licensing, the Amendment confers broad 
regulatory powers on the States.” City of Newport, Ky. v. 
lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92, 95-6 (1986) (footnote omitted). “[A] 
State has broad power under the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment to regulate the times, places and circumstances 
under which liquor may be sold.” N.Y. State Liquor 
Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714, 716 (1981). The stron- 
gest endorsement of the Twenty-first Amendment is 
found in LaRue: 


While the States, vested as they are with 
general police power, require no specific grant 
of authority in the Federal Constitution to legis- 
late with respect to matters traditionally within 
the scope of the police power, the broad sweep of 
the Twenty-first Amendment has been recognized as 
conferring something more than the normal state 
authority over public health, welfare, and morals. 


409 U.S. at 114 (emphasis added). LaRue has been ques- 
tioned and criticized but its authority has not been over- 
ruled. The Twenty-first Amendment still retains its force 
where regulation of alcohol is concerned. 


Petitioners claim that in Coors Brewing, 115 S.Ct. at 
1589-90 n.2, the Court “disaffirmed any implication that 


15 


the Twenty-first Amendment gives the State any added 
weight in the Central Hudson analysis.” They also assert 
that: “This case is a logical extension of Rubin.” Peti- 
tioners’ brief at 10. They indulge in a very broad reading 
of footnote 2 in Coors Brewing which addresses whether 
Edge Broadcasting, Posadas de Puerto Rico, and LaRue affect 
the quantum of proof required by the Central Hudson test. 
Only LaRue is an alcohol case and, as the Court pointed 
out, it is not a commercial speech case. Edge Broadcasting 
and Posadas de Puerto Rico are commercial speech cases 
which explore the advertising of gambling. The Twenty- 
first Amendment is not even mentioned in the footnote. 
Furthermore, rebutting petitioners’ position, Coors Brew- 
ing specifically acknowledges: “Still, Virginia Board of 
Pharmacy |v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 
U.S. 748 (1976)] suggested that certain types of restric- 
tions might be tolerated in the commercial speech area 
because of the nature of such speech.” 115 S.Ct. at 1589. 


Many cases have explored the reach of the Twenty- 
first Amendment. Eacl. case cited by petitioners has bal- 
anced various constitutional interests against the Twenty- 
first Amendment. Each has recognized that the Twenty- 
first Amendment must be taken into account when the 
subject of the case is regulation of alcohol. In just two 
cases, Capital Cities Cable and Coors Brewing, has the Court 
considered commercial speech in conjunction with the 
Twenty-first Amendment. Not all of the advertising ban 
was struck down in Capital Cities Cable - only that pre- 
émpted by comprehensive federal regulations. The Court 
accepted Oklahoma’s judgment to ban advertising. 467 
U.S. at 715. In Coors Brewing the Twenty-first Amendment 


16 


was found to confer no augmented authority on the fed- 
eral government's regulation of alcoholic beverages but 
the court noted the states’ ample authority to ban dis- 
closure of alcohol content. 115 S.Ct. at 1591. If the states 
have the authority to ban content labelling, it would 
follow that they have authority to ban price advertisings’””” 
In fact, the Court when enumerating the alternatives to 
the alcohol content label ban in Coors Brewing, mentioned 
“prohibiting marketing efforts emphasizing high alcohol 
strength.” 115 S.Ct. at 1593. Capital Cities Cable and Coors 
Brewing both support the premise that, by virtue of the 
Twenty-first Amendment, the individual states possess 
broad authority to regulate commercial speech about 
alcoholic beverages. 


II. The Central Hudson test was properly applied by 
the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 


The court in 44 Liquormart did not find that the 
Twenty-first Amendment overrides the First Amendment. 
Rather, it found that the Twenty-first Amendment assists 
the state in sustaining its burden of proof when applying 
the Central Hudson test in an alcohol regulation frame- 
work. Thus, when applying the last two prongs of that 
test, the court of appeals found that the “ ‘intermediate’ 
scrutiny of restrictions on commercial speech,” Florida Bar 
v. West For It, Inc., __ U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 2371, 2375 (1995), 
is augmented by the Twenty-first Amendment. Peti- 
tioners argue that Coors Brewing expressly rejected the 
added presumption which the court of appeals applied in 
this case. Petitioners’ brief at 27. Even if that were so, 
however, the context is quite different. The Twenty-first 


ciel emia 


i7 


Amendment was not directly involved in Coors Brewing. 
In 44 Liquormart the court of appeals appropriately held 
that there is an added presumption of validity to a state’s 
statutes regulating alcohol because of the Twenty-first 
Amendment. 44 Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 8, A. 7-8. 


In upholding the validity of the Rhode Island statvtes 
pertaining to alcohol price advertising, the appeals court 
panel applied the Central Hudson test to the facts before it. 
Finding no need to consider the first two prongs, since 
there was no question presented by the first and the 
state’s interest was stipulated,® the court focused on the 
last two issues: whether the regulation directly advances 
the governmental interest asserted, and whether it is not 
more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest. 
Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566. Petitioners assert that the 
court incorrectly resolved those questions. However, 
when the issues are viewed in the light of a spectrum of 
this Court’s commercial speech decisions, the court of 
appeals’ opinion is clearly right. 


A. The statutes under review directly advance the 
state’s interest in promoting temperance. 


The court of appeals, first noting that the burden of 
proof is on the party seeking suppression, determined 
that the district court had applied too strict a test. In 
deciding whether a statute directly advances the state’s 


8 Several amici focus arguments on whether the state sus- 
tained its burden of proof of the second prong of the Central 
Hudson test. That fixation is highly inappropriate since the inter- 
est was stipulated and neither the district court nor the court of 
appeals considered the question at all. 


18 


interest, “[i]t is not correctness, it is reasonableness.” 44 
Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 7, A. 5. The court looked to a wider 
range of this Court’s cases than do petitioners. Thus, it 
recognized that the Central Hudson phrase “directly 
advances” is not absolute. Id. 


In support of that recognition, the court cited Eden- 
field v. Fane, 507 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1792 (1993), which 
addressed whether a certified public accountant has a 
protected First Amendment right to solicit business per- 
sonally. Florida law prevented that practice. This Court 
observed: 


[L]aws restricting commercial speech, unlike 
laws burdening other forms of protected expres- 
sion, need only be tailored in a reasonable man- 
ner in order to survive First Amendment 
scrutiny. 


113 S.Ct. at 1798. Applying “this intermediate standard of 
review,” the Court found that the regulation of Certified 
Public Accountants by the State of Florida was unduly 
burdensome on First Amendment rights. Basically, in 
Edenfield the fit between the stated interests and the regu- 
lation was found to be missing even under a “reasonable 
manner” standard. 


There is a difference in that standard when the Court 
speaks of advertising of professional services and when it 
considers advertising of vices. Two lines of cases have 
emerged in commercial speech cases: one concerning an 
individual's right to market his or her profession and the 
other addressing the state’s rig>t to protect the health, 
safety and welfare of its citizens from various vices. Edge 
Broadcasting characterized vice activities as those that 


on Se ee 


19 


“[can] be, and frequently [have] been, banned alto- 
gether.” 113 S.Ct. at 2703. Adopting that characterization, 
the control of alcohol qualifies as the regulation of a vice. 
In fact, this Court has specifically categorized alcohol 
with cigarettes, gambling and prostitution as “products 
or activities deemed harmful.” Posadas de Puerto Rico, 478 
U.S. at 346. Posadas de Puerto Rico and Edge Broadcasting 
typify the approach taken by this Court when govern- 
ment regulates advertising of vice activities. 


Central Hudson established the test by which regula- 
tion of commercial speech is to be measured. However, 
developments since Central Hudson have not altered the 
secondary status afforded commercial speech in the pan- 
theon of First Amendment's rights. Furthermore, as the 
most recent cases show, particularly Edge Broadcasting, 
even within the commercial speech category there is a 
hierarchy of more and less protected areas of speech. 
Where vice is concerned, more leeway is allowed and this 
Court defers to the legislative judgment. Just as there are 
two levels of First Amendment speech protection, com- 
mercial speech being subordinate to noncommercial 
speech, there are two levels of commercial speech protec- 
tion — vice regulation and professional regulation are 
afforded different levels of First Amendment protection. 


After the decisions in Posadas de Puerto Rico and Edge 
Broadcasting, there can be no doubt that the Central Hud- 
son test is currently considerably less exacting than origi- 
nally formulated. In fact, this Court has explicitly 
recognized that “other formulations in our commercial 
speech cases support a more flexible meaning for the 
Central Hudson test.” Fox, 492 U.S. at 477. After all, 
“[t]here are common sense differences between speech 


20 


that does ‘no more than propose a commercial transac- 
tion,’ * * * and other varieties.” Virginia State Board of 
Pharmacy, 425 U.S. at 771 n.24. Petitioners’ failure to 
acknowledge this second line of cases considerably 
weakens their claims before this Court. 


The most recent case applying the Central Hudson test 
is Florida Bar. There, the Court denied a First Amendment 
challenge to a court rule forbidding lawyers’ solicitations 
of victims or their families within 30 days of an accident 
or a disaster. The Court emphasized the breadth of the 
record developed by the Florida Bar prior to presenting 
its recommendations to the court. It went on to say, 
however: 


[I]n other First Amendment contexts, we have 
permitted litigants to justify speech restrictions 
by reference to studies and anecdotes pertaining 
to different locales altogether, see City of Renton 
v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 50-51 
(1986); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 
584-585 (1991) (Souter, J., Concurring in the 
judgment), or even, in a case applying strict 
scrutiny, to justify restrictions based solely on 
history, consensus, and “simple common sense,” 
Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191, 211 (1992). Noth- 
ing in Edenfield, supra, a case in which the State 
offered no evidence or anecdotes in support of 
its restriction, requires more. 


115 S.Ct. at 2378 (emphasis in original). In the instant case 
both the district court and the court of appeals agreed 
that there was “no empirical evidence either way.” 44 
Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 7, A. 6. Although both plaintiffs and 
defendants presented their experts, the district court 
noted “a pronounced lack of unanimity among 


21 


researchers who have studied the effects of alcohol adver- 
tising.” 44 Liquor Mart, 829 F.Supp. 543, 546 (1993), rev’d 
sub nom. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 39 F.3d. 5 (1st 
Cir. 1994). Lacking proof positive that the price ban 
advanced the state’s asserted interest and unpersuaded 
that the Twenty-first Amendment altered the equation, 
the district court found that the state had not carried its 
burden of proof. 829 F.Supp. at 554. The court of appeals 
disagreed. 


The court of appeals observed that: “there would 
seem inherent merit in the State’s contention that compet- 
itive price advertising would lower prices, and that with 
lower prices there would be more sales.” 44 Liquormart, 
39 F.3d at 7, A. 7. It commented that: “the State is entitled 
to a reasonable choice.” 44 Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 7, A. 6. 
The court of appeals properly accepted Rhode Island’s 
determination. This Court does not require empirical evi- 
dence to rebut the policy determinations of state legisla- 
tures. Room is allowed for legislative judgment. Edge 
Broadcasting, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. Furthermore, the court of 
appeals recognized that the Twenty-first Amendment 
adds weight to the state’s regulation of intoxicating 
liquors when applying the Central Hudson test. 


Petitioners assert that: “Under Central Hudson the 
government must prove an ‘immediate connection’ 
between the government's asserted interest and the pro- 
hibition on speech.” Petitioners’ brief at 15. That is sim- 
ply not what Central Hudson holds. The immediate 
connection that the Court there found was between 
advertising and demand. The Court further pointed out 
that: “Central Hudson would not contest the advertising 
ban unless it believed that promotion would increase its 


22 


sales.” 447 U.S. at 569. That is exactly the point at issue in 
this case with the addition of the question whether 
increasing alcoholic beverage sales is a worthy First 
Amendment goal. 


Petitioners are chagrined by the court of appeals’ 
finding that “[a]dvertising must be generally productive 
or so much money would not be spent on it.” 44 Liquor- 
mart, 39 F.3d at 8, A. 7; petitioners’ brief at 19. This Court, 
of course, agrees with the court of appeals’ proposition. 
See Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569; Posadas de Puerto Rico, 
478 U.S. at 341-42; Edge Broadcasting, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. 
Further, petitioners charge that the court of appeals failed 
to consider that advertising expenditures have been ris- 
ing while consumption has been decreasing. Petitioners’ 
brief at 19. The court of appeals was not presented with 
that “salient fact,” id., so it should come as no surprise to 
petitioners that it was not considered.’ 


® Petitioners’ respect for the record below contains some 
holes. At trial the petitioners attempted to have the vintage New 
York State Moreland Commission on the Alcoholic Beverage 
Control Law, Report and Recommendations No. 3, January 21, 
1964, introduced as a full exhibit. Respondents objected arguing 
that the report was hearsay and had not been relied on by 
petitioners’ experts. Petitioners contended that the report was 
admissible under either Federal Rules of Evidence 803(8) or 
803(18). The trial judge sustained the state’s objection. The 
report was, thus, not before the trial justice. Nevertheless, peti- 
tioners relied on the report in their brief to the court of appeals. 
Respondents again objected, arguing that the report was not a 
part of the record. Tenaciously, petitioners again relied on the 
Moreland Report in their petition to this court and in their brief 
on the merits. Petitioners’ brief at 18, n.11. They observe that the 
report “has been noticed by several courts in ruling on alcoholic 
beverages related issues.” In those cases the report was on the 


23 


Citing Central Hudson, petitioners appear to argue 
that Rhode Island’s price advertising ban is a “bianket 
ban on commercial speech.” Petitioners’ brief at 20, quot- 
ing Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 566, n.9. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. The ban only extends to advertise- 
ment of the prices at which alcoholic beverages are 
offered for sale. All other advertising of alcoholic bever- 
ages is permitted in Rhode Island. National advertising is 
omnipresent. The Rhode Island legislature may well have 
believed that the ban on price advertising would lower 
the overall incidence of alcohol promotions. Generally 
speaking the available beverages do not vary substan- 
tially from retailer to retailer. Thus, the only major differ- 
ence between one liquor store and another may be the 
prices at which the alcohol is sold. Without being able to 
advertise lower prices, merchants may well decide not to 
advertise at all. To the extent that the ban reduces overall 
advertising by retailers who believe it is not cost effec- 
tive, the state’s interest in promoting temperance is fur- 
thered. 


Because the state had the burden of proof under 
Central Hudson, petitioners fault the court of appeals for 
finding that the district court was not “free to choose.” 
Petitioners’ brief at 13-14. In support of their view that, 


record. That report is not a part of the record in this case and 
petitioners’ reliance on it is entirely misplaced. Petitioners at 
least tried to introduce the Moreland report, which is more than 
they did with M. J. Waterson, Apvertisinc BRANDS AND MARKETS, 
(Advertising Ass’n Monograph, 2nd ed. 1985) on which they 
relied in their petition 23-24 n.11, and on which they continue to 
rely in their brief at p. 20. That report is directed to any court's 
attention for the first time in their petition and brief. 


24 


when insufficient proof is presented by both parties the 
party bearing the burden must lose, they rely on Pennsyl- 
vania R. Co. v. Chamberlain, 228 U.S. 333 (1933). Chamber- 
lain is a tort case dating from 1932. There a train 
brakeman was killed in the railroad yard, an event to 
which there were no direct eyewitnesses. The opinion 
explores the inferences to be drawn from what was 
observed and the angle of the vantage spot. The language 
quoted indeed appears. 228 U.S. at 339. Otherwise the 
case is unpersuasive in a First Amendment context. The 
court of appeals in effect found that the district court had 
exceeded its authority in finding: “Rhode Island’s off- 
premises liquor price advertising ban has no significant 
impact on levels of alcohol consumption in Rhode 
Island.” 44 Liquor Mart, 829 F.Supp. at 549, A. 31. There 
was “no empirical evidence either way.” 39 F.3d at 7, A. 6. 
Thus, “the State is entitled to a reasonable choice. This 
includes choice of method - it is not obliged to prove that 
some other method, e.g., taxation, would be less effec- 
tive.” Id. The court of appeals cited Fox, 492 U.S. at 478: 


[W]e have not insisted that there be no conceiv- 
able alternative, but only that the regulation not 
“burden substantially more speech than is nec- 
essary to further the government’s legitimate 
interest,” * * * . And we have been loath to second- 
guess the Government's judgment to that effect. 


(Citations omitted; emphasis added.) Thus, the court was 
following the dictates of this Court. 


The court of appeals’ opinion follows this Court’s 
precedents in the commercial speech arena. Petitioners’ 
reliance on cases analyzing commercial speech in the 
advertising of professional services is unavailing. This is 


25 


not a case where “what is at stake is the suppression of 
information and knowledge that transcends the financial 
self-interests of the speaker.” Florida Bar, 115 S.Ct. at 2382 
(Kennedy, J., dissenting). At issue in this case is advertis- 
ing that does no more than propose a commercial transac- 
tion. Petitioners want to sell more liquor and would like 
to advertise low prices to do so. The state has an interest 
in promoting temperance and, thus, does not want to 
encourage more liquor sales. The price advertising ban 
directly advances the state’s interest and the court of 
appeals correctly so found. 


B. The statutes under review are no more exten- 
sive than necessary to serve the state’s interest 
in promoting temperance. 


In Fox the Court clarified the application of “neces- 
sary” in the last element of the Central Hudson test, “not 
more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest.” 
The standard is not one of least-restrictive-means but is 
instead similar to the test for time, place, and manner 
restrictions on protected speech: “[T]he reason of the 
matter requires something short of a least-restrictive 
means standard.” 492 U.S. at 477. Rather: 


What our decisions require is a “ ‘fit’ between 
the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends,” * * * — a fit that is not 
necessarily perfect, but reasonable; that repre- 
sents not necessarily the single best disposition 
but one whose scope is “in proportion to the 
interest served;” * * * that employs not neces- 
sarily the least restrictive means but, * * * a 
means tailored to achieve the desired objective. 


26 


Within those bounds we leave it to govern- 
mental decisionmakers to judge what manner of 
regulation may best be employed. 


492 U.S. at 480 (citations omitted; emphasis added). 


Without citing to any specific language so holding, 
petitioners maintain that the court of appeals adopted a 
rational-basis test for determining whether the statutes 
are more extensive than necessary. Petitioners’ brief at 23. 
Reference to the opinion demonstrates that petitioners 
are just plain wrong: the test applied by the court of 
appeals was that of “reasonableness.” 39 F.3d at 7, A. 5. 
That is precisely the standard applied by the decisions of 
this Court. Fox, 492 U.S. at 480; Edge Broadcasting, 113 
S.Ct. at 2705. The standard applied by the district court 
and rejected by the court of appeals approached a least- 
restrictive-means test. That more stringent test was speci- 
fically rejected in Fox. 492 U.S. at 480-81. 


Certainly the ban on price advertising is narrowly 
drawn and encroaches minimally on plaintiffs’ First 
Amendment rights to commercial free speech. In Rhode 
Island they are welcome to advertise any truthful facts 
regarding the products which they offer to sell except the 
price at which they sell them. The challenged statutes 
represent a legislative judgment that the ban advances 
the state’s interest in temperance among its citizens. The 
state is allowed to make that choice. 44 Liquormart, 39 
F.2d at 7, A. 6; Edge Broadcasting, 113 S.Ct. at 2707. The 
Rhode Island price advertising ban decreases alcohol 
advertising within the state, even though it does not 
entirely eradicate it. Under Edge Broadcasting, that is a 
constitutionally sound legislative policy. 


27 


The trial judge referred to alternatives which the 
legislature might have chosen: “higher sales taxes or min- 
imum consumer prices.” 44 Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 
F.Supp. at 554, A. 45. The petitioners have adopted those 
alternatives as their own. Petitioners’ brief at 23. They 
rely on City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 507 
U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1505 (1993), and Coors Brewing to make 
their point that the availability of alternatives indicates 
that the statutes are not sufficiently narrowly drawn to 
satisfy the Central Hudson test. City of Cincinnati refers to 
“numerous and obvious less-burdensome alternatives.” 
113 S.Ct. at 1510 n.13. Coors Brewing points out several 
alternatives to the alcohol content label ban. 115 S.Ct. at 
1593. The alternatives to the price advertising ban are 
certainly not numerous and have obvious problems. Rais- 
ing taxes on liquor would likely kill the industry in 
Rhode Island where staying in-state requires more inge- 
nuity than getting out of it. Creating a state minimum 
price would raise antitrust and constitutional problems of 
its own. 324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy; California Retail Liquor 
Dealer’s Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc. The decision in 
Edge Broadcasting validated the Fox approach: “not neces- 
sarily perfect, but reasonable.” Edge Broadcasting, 113 
S.Ct. at 2705. That is the test appropriately applied by the 
court of appeals. 


Reasonably viewed the Rhode Island statutes prohib- 
iting alcohol price advertising, albeit limited, are consti- 
tutionally acceptable means of furthering the goal of 
promoting temperance in the state. Capital Cities Cable, 
467 U.S. at 715. The court of appeals was entirely in 
concert with the decisions of this Court in that regard. 
The statutes under review pass constitutional muster. 


28 


III. Rhode Island’s ban on alcohol price advertising is 
constitutionally applicable to out-of-state retailers. 


Although it is not entirely clear that the issue is 
included within the question propounded by this Court, 
petitioners maintain that the price-advertising ban cannot 
apply to an out-of-state entity. Petitioners’ brief at 24. The 
point petitioners fail to grasp is that the applicable Rhode 
Island statute, R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-8-8.1, A. 49, applies only 
to activity taking place within the circumscribed borders 
of that state. Quoting Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809, 
824-25 (1975), petitioners take issue with the court of 
appeals’ statement: “if a party wishes to come into a state 
and do business, to some extent at least, it should be 
subject to the same regulations as are its local counter- 
parts.” 44 Liquormart, 39 F.3d at 9, A. 10-11. Bigelow, 
however, does not require that Rhode Island must allow 
alcohol price advertising by out-of-state retailers. Selling 
alcoholic beverages is legal in Massachusetts; Rhode 
Island does not attempt to bar retailers from disseminat- 
ing information regarding that activity. Nevertheless, Big- 
elow does not go so far as to permit Massachusetts law 
allowing price advertising to dictate to Rhode Island 
what its laws must provide. “Advertising, like all public 
expression may be subject to reasonable regulation that 
serves a legitimate public interest.” 421 U.S. at 826. Rhode 
Island has determined that its temperance interest is 
served by prohibiting alcohol-price advertising. Massa- 
chusetts has made a different decision regarding price 
advertising, but its policies cannot be imposed upon a 
sister state pursuant to any authority derived from Big- 
elow. The majority decision in Edge Broadcasting implicitly 
recognized that fact when it refused to acknowledge the 


29 


dissent’s interpretation of Bigelow’s sway. See Edge Broad- 
casting, 113 S.Ct. at 2708-09 (Stevens, J., dissenting). 


Plaintiffs claim that the alcohol-price advertising ban 
“concerns the sale of products outside [Rhode Island’s] 
jurisdiction.” Petitioners’ brief at 24. They further imply 
that Rhode Island is regulating economic activity in Mas- 
sachusetts. The Rhode Island measures regarding price 
advertising have absolutely no impact on what Massa- 
chusetts retailers may or may not do in Massachusetts. 
The statutes do control what a Massachusetts retailer may 
do in Rhode Island. However, it is entirely within the 
scope of Rhode Island’s police power, even without resort 
to the Twenty-first Amendment, to regulate within its 
borders retailers’ commercial activities whether those 
retailers be from Rhode Island, Massachusetts, or any 
other jurisdiction. As the court of appeals observed, “if a 
party wishes to come into a state and do business, to 
some extent, at least, it should be subject to the same 
regulations as are its local counterparts.” 44 Liquormart, 
39 F.3d at 9, A. 10-11. 


Rhode Island’s ban on the advertising of liquor prices 
in Rhode Island media outlets is a reasonable exercise of 
its power to regulate alcohol under the Twenty-first 
Amendment. All other advertising of liquor is allowed. 
Thus, information regarding brand availability, assort- 
ment, and quality may be readily advertised in Rhode 
Island media sources by both Rhode Island merchants 
and those from Massachusetts. Rhode Island does not 
exert any control over what its citizens may buy in Mas- 
sachusetts. Furthermore, of course, the Rhode Island reg- 
ulations make no effort to curb Massachusetts price 
advertising in Massachusetts media outlets. A dealer in 


30 


Massachusetts may advertise his prices in Massachusetts 
without regard to any Rhode Island regulation. Indeed, 
he may advertise his wares in Rhode Island without 
offending any law or regulation. What he cannot do is to 
advertise the price of his wares in Rhode Island news- 
papers, through Rhode Island radio station advertise- 
ments or Rhode Island television station commercials. 
Rhode Island retailers are subject to the exact same stric- 
tures. The relationship between Massachusetts and Rhode 
Island advertisers is the same as that at issue in Edge 
Broadcasting between North Carolina and Virginia adver- 
tisers. On the issue of out-of-state advertisers, the deci- 
sion in Edge Broadcasting is controlling. 


IV. A finding that Rhode Island’s statutes are uncon- 
stitutional will have reverberating results for fed- 
eral, state, and local governments. 


There is a larger issue than Rhode Island’s two stat- 
utes lurking in the wings of this case. The broader ques- 
tion is to what extent government, federal, state, or local, 
is able to legislate to protect the health, safety, and wel- 
fare of gts citizens from rampant advertising of harmful 
products or activities. In Virginia State Board of Pharmacy 
the court deprecated the “highly paternalistic approach” 
represented by a ban on advertising the price of prescrip- 
tion drugs. 425 U.S. at 770. On the other hand, in Posadas 
de Puerto Rico and Edge Broadcasting advertising bans on 
gambling activities were sustained. Of course, prescrip- 
tion drugs are a necessity and gambling, for the unad- 
dicted, is most certainly not. The same holds for 
cigarettes, alcohol, and prost'tution, which are not neces- 
sary to maintain a quality of life except for those whose 


31 


lives revolve around them. Does government have the 
duty to take steps designed to minimize the incidents of 
addiction to such “vices” among its constituents? Does it 
have the right to do so? If there is an immediate connec- 
tion between advertising and demand, Centra! Hudson, 
447 U.S. at 569, may advertising of vices be regulated 
consistent with the First Amendment? Central Hudson 
stands for the proposition that under certain circum- 
stances the First Amendment must give way to other 
governmental interests. Decreasing incidences of addic- 
tion is just such a governmental interest. To the extent 
that advertising increases the demand for vices, advertis- 
ing should continue to be subject to governmental regula- 
tion. 


In both Edge Broadcasting and Posadas de Puerto Rico 
deference was paid to the legislative judgment which 
restricted the advertising of gambling. Edge Broadcasting, 
115 S.Ct. at 2707; Posadas de Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. at 344. 
Such deference has not been accorded to regulation of 
professionals marketing their careers. Thus, in Edenfield v. 
Fane, although the state’s interest was found to be sub- 
stantial, there was no deference paid to the Florida legis- 
lature’s scheme. 113 S.Ct. at 1798. The result was similar 
in Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional Regula- 
tion, __ U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 2084 (1994). RILSA urges the 
Court to apply its approach to the gambling advertising 
cases, rather than that to the career advertising cases, to 
the other areas of vice as they arrive in this forum. 


A finding that Rhode Island’s statutes are constitu- 
tionally infirm could seriously implicate the validity of 
the ban on broadcast advertising of cigarettes. 15 U.S.C. 


32 


§ 1335. The constitutionality of that provision was chal- 
lenged in Capital Broadcasting Company v. Mitchell, 333 
F.Supp. 582 (D.D.C. 1971) summarily aff’d sub nom. Capi- 
tal Broadcasting Co. v. Acting Attorney General, 405 U.S. 
1000 (1972). Presumably if Rhode Island may not ban 
alcohol price advertising, it is equally unconstitutional 
for the federal government to ban cigarette broadcast 
advertising. 


In like manner, Nevada has legalized prostitution 
under certain restrictions. Nev.Rev.Stat. § 244.345. It bal- 
ances that legalization with restrictions on advertising the 
availability of the activity. Nev.Rev.Stat. §§ 201.430, 
201.440. If Rhode Island may not restrict some form of 
alcohol advertising then it seems likely that The Chicken 
Ranch brothel in Nye County, Nevada, can erect bill- 
boards throughout the state and beyond. Princess Sea 
Industries v. State, Clark County, 635 P.2d 281, 284 (Nev. 
1981) (Manoukian, J. concurring). 


Currently, the Distilled Spirits Council of the United 
States (DISCUS) voluntarily refrains from broadcast 
advertising. That is apparently because it is convinced 
that, were its members to initiate radio and television 
advertising, Congress would immediately enact a ban. 
Steve Younger, Alcoholic Beverage Advertising on the Air- 
waves: Alternatives to a Ban or Counteradvertising, 34 UCLA 
L. Rev. 1139, 1145 (1987). Should Rhode Island’s statutes 
fall, the threat would be empty and DISCUS would be 
free to take to the airways. The likelihood of that scenario 
coming to pass is strengthened by the fact that DISCUS is 
an amicus in support of petitioners in this case. 


33 


Maryland has delegated to the City of Baltimore the 
authority to restrict certain advertising of alcoholic bever- 
ages “necessary for the promotion of the welfare and 
temperance of minors.” Anheuser-Busch v. Mayor and City 
Council, 855 F.Supp. 811, 812-13 (D.Md. 1994). Baltimore 
responded by enacting a ban on billboards advertising 
spirituous beverages. The constitutionality of the ordi- 
nance was challenged. Applying the Central Hudson test, 
the district court rejected the First Amendment claim 
relying on this Court’s “deference to a legislative judg- 
ment that advertising increases consumption.” 855 
F.Supp. at 818. That determination is pending decision in 
the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. There are no 
doubt a myriad of state and local laws guarding public 
health, safety, morals, and welfare that would become 
suspect if Rhode Island’s legislative judgment is dis- 
carded. 


President Clinton has proposed sweeping measures 
to attack the problem of teen-age smoking. He was 
answered with an immediate suit by the tobacco industry 
and a promised complaint by the advertising industry. 
Nicotine Attack, Cigarette Regulation Is Formally Proposed; 
Industry Sues to Halt It, Watt St. J., Aug. 11, 1995, at Al, 
A10. While the announcement is only the opening salvo 
in a new government initiative, should the Court hold 
that commercial advertising of harmful activities cannot 
be regulated, a large portion of the proposal will be left 
twisting in the wind. 


There will be far-reaching ramifications to the deci- 
sion in this case. RILSA urges the Court to consider not 
just the discrete measures directly before it, but also the 
many areas where restrictions on advertising may be 


34 


government’s only weapon in an uphill battle against 
various vices. 


CONCLUSION 


For all of the foregoing reasons, respondent Rhode 
Island Liquor Stores Association respectfully urges that 
the decision of the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 
be sustained. 


By its attorneys, 


LAUREN E. JONES 

Counsel of Record 
CAROLINE COLE CORNWELL 
Jones AssociaATEs 
72 South Main Street 
Providence, RI 02903 
(401) 274-4446 


WiturAM P. GaAsBARRO 

685 Warren Avenue 

East Providence, RI 02914 
(401) 434-5887 


Rosert M. Brapy 

One Grove Avenue 

East Providence, RI 02914 
(401) 434 2800 


