~ - 
(\8) fe 


No. 94-1140 


Supreme Court, vy. S. 


E D 


SEP 25 1995 


 Geaarte 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


* 


44 LIQUORMART, INC. and 
PEOPLES SUPER LIQUOR STORES, INC., 


Petitioners, 


STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, and 
RHODE ISLAND LIQUOR STORES ASSOCIATION, 


Respondents. 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The First Circuit 


+ 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


S 


Evan T. LAWSON 
Lawson & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, Ma. 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


Ren 


i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


A. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., Establishes That The 


State May Only Regulate Commercial Speech 
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages By Satisfying 
RO COMET: FEO TIE iis inde tain ene eecasi 


Rhode Island’s Ban On Truthful, Non-Misleading 
Price Advertising Is An Unconstitutional Restric- 
tion Of, Commercial S Because It Does Not 
Meet The Central H 5 ete Tee eee 


The State Distorts The Testimony Of Petitioners’ 
Experts To Support A Vain Attempt To Overturn 
The District Court’s Finding That Rhode Island’s 
Off-Premises Advertising Ban Has Had No Mate- 
rial Impact On The Level Of Alcohol Consump- 
ODay bh 5 oe a van FA9 99'S 910 0 09d 046.8 ove BR gee ome. 


The Court Does Not Condone A “Rational Basis” 
Standard To Decide The Constitutionality Of 
Governmental Restrictions On Truthful, Non- 
Misleading Price Advertising .................. 


Comets Sire oe ESOC ON EEE cbc FURR ESR ee See 


13 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Cases 
44 Liquormart v. State of Rhode island, 39 F.3d 5 (1st 

eB |) PTT ba. 7, 13, 19 
44 Liquormart v. Racine, 829 F.Supp. 543 (D.R.I. 

1993S). cvccccvcdscovdsewecuvevesvertwas 7, 10, 13, 16, 19 
Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Schmoke, __ F.3d __, 1995 

U.S. App. LEXIS 24515 (4th Cir. 1995) ..... 11, 18, 19 
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 365 (1977)...... 5 
Board of Trustees of State Univ. of New York v. Fox, 

492 U.S. 469 C969) oe o.s.06crnscsnmcaverennezetnes 17, 18 
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972)............--. 3 
Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691 

(19GE) ....0 0 o.us'v.éd? oh cos epowpdonuls cent atten tenkses 11 


Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service 
Commission of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980)... passim 


City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, 507 U.S. 


aww 219 SCR. 1505 CI90S).. cccastascauen 3, 12, 17, 18 
Edenfield v. Fane, 507 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1792 (1993) 

5 0000 ebbues ebeeckke ib oben badeu eee 3, 8, 10, 18 
Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., _. U.S. __, 115 

S.Ct. Z57E CAST ovina aves écnsdktsk ete 3, 4 


Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional 
Regulation, __ U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 2084 (1994) 


Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Co. of 
Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328 (1986)............00005- 1,3 


iii 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 

Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor Control Commis- 

sion, 69 Ohio St. 2d 361, 433 N.E.2d 138 (1982), 
appeal dismissed, 459 U.S. 807 (1982)................ 5 

Rhode Island Liquor Stores As ‘n v. Evening Call 
Publishing Co., 497 A.2d 231 (R.I. 1985) ............ 9 

Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., __ U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 
es oe Se gid eb aew selec ee passim 

S & S Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (R.L 
DEPTS GHaSTRUn ed bc bueeenccedecoetepesoerecece 10 

Turner Broadcasting System v FCC, 114 S.Ct. 2445 
ee Slee na, dba s bipees ON eocseeveseees.s 19 

United States v. Edge Froadcasting Co., 509 U.S. __, 
Ce Mn Coes che th ebdedersetscceccee 1, 3 

Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens 
onsumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748 (1976)......... 4 

Zauderer v. ang of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme 
Court of Ohio, 471 U.S. 626 (1985).......... cece eens 3 

MISCELLANEOUS 

1981-1982 Op. Atty. Gen. Mich. 561, 1982 Mich. 
ih cite ARE p dis SVs 0d pods oss ve rece ees 6 

George A. Hacker and Laura Anne Stuart, Dousie 

Dip, THE SIMULTANEOUS DECLINE OF ALCOHOL 

ADVERTISING AND ALCOHOL PROBLEMS IN THE UNITED 

States, Center for Science in the Public Interest 
Cem BOOGD o's dic cts Ktieiee bees voccenanecaccovccceces 11 


John Jung, UNpver THE INFLUENCE (ALCOHOL AND 
Human Benavior), (Brooks/Cole Pub. Co. 1994 ..... 6 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Opinion No. 77-134, 1977 Ark. AG LEXIS 118........ 5 
Tenn. Op. Atty. Gen. No. 80-207, 1980 WL 104092..... 5 
Tenn. Op. Atty. Gen. No. 77-57, 1977 WL 28690...... 5 


ARGUMENT 


A. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., Establishes That the 
State May Only Regulate Commercial Speech Con- 
cerning Alcoholic Beverages By Satisfying the Cen- 
tral Hudson Test. 


The respondents and their supporting amici curiae 
urge the Court to abandon this year’s holding in Rubin v. 
Coors Brewing Co.,___ U.S. __, 115 S.Ct. 1585 (1995), that 
restrictions on commercial speech concerning alcoholic 
beverages are subject to the same First Amendment stan- 
dard as commercial speech concerning any other product. 
Their argument is based upon two premises: (1) con- 
sumption of alcoholic beverages is a “socially harmful” 
activity; (2) the Twenty-First Amendment reduces the 
protection accorded commercial speech by the First 
Amendment. Both points were raised and decided adver- 
sely to the respondents’ position in Rubin. 


Just as the respondents do here, the Government in 
Rubin, relying on United States v. Edge Broadcasting Co. 509 
US. __, 113 S.Ct. 2696 (1993), and Posadas de Puerto Rico 
Associates v. Tourism Co. of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328 (1986), 
argued that Central Hudson “imposes too strict a stan- 
dard” for reviewing restrictions on commercial speech 
about alcoholic beverages because consumption of alco- 
hol is a “socially harmful” activity. 115 U.S. at 1589-1590, 
fn 2. The Court declined to adopt a lesser standard, 
finding neither Edge Broadcasting nor Posadas supported 
the argument because both cases “applied the Central 
Hudson analysis.” Id. Despite the clarity of the Court’s 
pronouncement only six months ago, the respondents 
predicate most of their argument upon avowal of the 
same unprecedented hierarchy for protecting commercial 
speech based upon its subject matter that was flatly 
rejected in Rubin.! 


1 RILSA maintains that this contention is the “bedrock 
issue presented in this case.” RILSA Brief, 5. 


1 


2 


Discarding the Central Hudson test in favor of afford- 
ing a lower level of protection for speech about activities 
deemed by regulators to be “socially harmful” » ould 
effectively wipe away all the decisions of this  ourt 
establishing and defining the First Amendment's protec- 
tion for commercial speech. Virtually all products result 
from, or, in some instances, may lead to, a “socially 
harmful” outcome in someone’s view. Thus, commercial 
speech about almost any product could be held subject to 
lesser protection if the attributes of the product, instead 
of the attributes of the speech, were the determinative 
factor. For example, motor vehicles, both in their manu- 
facture and use, pose risks of a variety of social harms, 
including accidental deaths and injuries, traffic conges- 
tion, depletion of natural resources and air pollution. 
Government has ample power, if not always the political 
will, to regulate production and operation to strike a 
balance between the automobile’s benefits and harms. 
According to the respondents’ argument, despite the 
strictures of the First Amendment, government may also 
prohibit truthful, non-misleading price advertising of 
automobiles (or any product deemed “socially harmful”) 
to reduce competition among retailers and thus create an 
“artificial price floor” that would inhibit sales. From the 
time it fully recognized that the First Amendment pro- 
tected commercial speech, the Court has never upheld a 
restriction solely because the subject matter was a prod- 
uct deemed “socially harmful.” In Rubin, the Court 
emphasized that “certain types of restrictions might be 
tolerated in the commercial speech area because of the 
nature of such speech.” 115 S.Ct. at 1589 [emphasis added]. 
The Court requires that would-be regulators satisfy the 
Central Hudson test, which focuses on “distinguishing the 
truthful from the false, the helpful from the misleading, 
and the harmless from the harmful” in the speech itself. 
Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional Regula- 
tion, __ US. __, 114 S.Ct. 2084, 2089 (1994), quoting 


3 


Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court 
of Ohio, 471 U.S. 626, 646 (1985). 


Rubin also unambiguously negates the respondents’ 
other “bedrock” argument that the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment affords Rhode Island’s ban on truthful, non-mis- 
leading price advertising an “added presumption of 
validity.” RILSA Brief, 6-16,2 State Brief, 37-42. The Court 
distinguished California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972), the 
case relied upon by the respondents and the Court of 
Appeals, because it “did not involve commercial speech 
about alcohol, but instead concerned the regulation of 
nude dancing in places where alcohol was served.” Rubin, 
115 S.Ct. at 1590, n.2. More pointedly, the Court was 
explicit that the states’ authority to regulate commercial 
speech about alcoholic beverages is “subject to the same 
First Amendment restrictions that apply to the Federal Gov- 
ernment.” Id. at 1591 [emphasis added]. Since the Twenty- 
first Amendment does not lessen the First Amendment's 
restrictions on the Federal Government, it cannot be 
argued consistently with Rubin that the Twenty-first 
Amendment depreciates the First Amendment’s restric- 
tions on the states. The respondents’ attempts to evade 
Central Hudson, as it has been applied in Edenfield v. Fane, 
507 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1792 (1993), City of Cincinnati v. 
Discovery Network, 507 U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 1505 (1993), 
Ibanez, and Rubin, must fail.* 


2 RILSA’s brief offers a confused intermingling of the 
Twenty-first Amendment argument and the “socially harmful” 
argument. Although purportedly discussing the effect of the 
Twenty-first Amendment on beverage vendors’ First Amend- 
ment rights, RILSA Brief, 6-9, the brief relies heavily on Posadas 
and Edge Broadcasting, cases that have nothing to do with the 
Twenty-first Amendment, while ignoring Rubin's straightfor- 
ward rejection of the government's argument that they support 
a more lenient standard. RILSA Brief, 9-13. 


3 The respondents cite the Court’s most recent commercial 
speech decision, Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., __ U.S. __, 115 


4 


B. Rhode Island’s Ban On Truthful, Non-misleading 
Price Advertising Is an Unconstitutional Restriction 
of Commercial Speech Because It Does Not Meet 
the Central Hudson Test. 


By starting out with strenuous arguments for a lower 
standard of review, respondents virtually concede that 
Rhode Island’s ban on truthful, non-misleading price 
advertising is an unconstitutional restriction of commer: 
cial speech under the Central Hudson test as the Court has 
refined it. Central Hudson requires that the State’s 
asserted interest in banning commercial speech be 
weighed against the substantial interest of Rhode Island 
consumers and vendors in the “free flow of commercial 
information.” The respondents and their supporting amici 
never acknowledge that truthful, non-misleading price 
information has been uniformly accorded constitutional 
protection by the Court because it is “indispensable” to 
the preservation of our free enterprise economy. Virginia 
State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 
Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 765 (1976). For that reason, the con- 
sumer’s interest in obtaining price information through 
advertising is protected by the First Amendment, as well 
as the vendor’s interest in providing the information. Id., 


S. Ct. 2371 (1995), as support for several of their arguments in 
favor of reducing their burden. RILSA Brief, 20, State Brief, 16, 
34-35. The citations do not support the respondents. Florida Bar 
concerns the application of the Central H:dson test to “ambu- 
lance chasing” by attorneys. The decision is predicated on a 
record, “noted for its breadth and detail,” in support of the 
regulation, that was “at no time refuted, save by the conclusory 
assertion that the rule lacked ‘any factual basis.’” 115 S.Ct. 
2377-2378. The harm the restriction in Florida Bar sought to 
avoid was inherent in the speech itself. The Court did not depart 
from the rigors of the Central Hudson test. 


re ee ee eee 


5 


Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 365, 353-354 (1977).4 
The State predicates its argument on trivializing the 
importance of price information as the “least informative 
speech concerning a product,” State Brief, 17, and “only 
: one tidbit of information.” State Brief, 29.5 It goes so far 
| as to advocate that “price advertising should be afforded the 
| least amount of protection in the entire spectrum of First 
| Amendment values.” State Brief, 17 [emphasis added]. Rhode 
Island’s disdain for the interest of all its citizens, con- 
sumers and vendors, in obtaining truthful, non-mislead- 
ing price information about a lawful product is 
unsupportable in light of the Court’s price advertising 
decisions.® 


* Queensgate Investment Co. v. Liquor Contrel Commission, 69 
Ohio St. 2d 361, 433 N.E.2d 138 (1982), appeal dismissed, 459 U.S. 
807 (1982), is not to the contrary, despite the State’s distorted 
presentation of it as a precedent that would “mandate affir- 
mance of the First Circuit.” State Brief, 21. See the reasons set 
forth in the Brief of the Beer Institute, et al. amici curiae at 18, n.9. 


5 In ironic contrast, RILSA speculates that price advertising 
is so important that without it, “merchants may well decide not 
to advertise at all.” RILSA Brief, 23. Of course RILSA’s “specula- 
tion or conjecture will not suffice” to meet the State’s burden 
under the Central Hudson test. Ibanez, 114 S.Ct. at 2089. 


6 Some states have taken the Court’s declaration of the 
importance of truthful, non-misleading price information seri- 
| ously. In 1977, the Attorney General of Arkansas issued an 

opinion that Arkansas’ statute banning price advertising vio- 
| lated the First Amendment. His reasoning was based upon the 
importance of price information to “any economic selection.” 
“A prohibition on publication of price, then, is a material 
abridgement of freedom of speech.” Opinion No. 77-134, 1977 
Ark. AG LEXIS 118. Also in 1977, and again in 1980, the Attor- 
ney General of Tennessee issued opinions that regulations of the 
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission banning price 
advertising were unconstitutional. His reasoning was similarly 
based on the importance of price information to the consumer. 
Tenn. Op. Atty. Gen. No. 77-57, 1977 WL 28690; Tenn. Op. Atty. 


6 


In the District Court, the State’s Attorney General 
conceded that Rhode Island was not concerned with 
responsible consumers, but that its interest was limited to 
reducing abusive consumption by reducing the availabil- 
ity of alcoholic beverages to persons of limited means 
(J.A. 67). Of course, suppression of truthful, non-mislead- 
ing price information “hits the hardest” at the poor. Vir- 
ginia State Bd. of Pharmacy, 425 U.S. at 763. The State’s 
unsupported theory of the “artificial price floor” is not 
even relevant to abusers above some undefined income 
level.” The State, therefore, has not met its burden under 
the third part of the Central Hudson test to prove that its 
ban on truthful, non-misleading price advertising has had 
any deterrent effect on abusive consumption, even by the 
impecunious. To the contrary, sadly, it is commonly 
known that alcoholics will consume shaving lotion, 
Sterno, or any other substance containing alcohol, when 
beverage alcohol is not available.* Nor has the State 
shown that its price advertising ban, which surely affects 
mostly advertisements for popular brands,? has caused 
retailers not to carry less expensive off-brand or house 


Gen. No. 80-207, 1980 WL 104092. See, also, 1981-1982 Op. Atty. 
Gen. Mich. 561, 1982 Mich. AG LEXIS 76. 


7 Indeed, another defect in the theory is shown because the 
State’s expert had no idea what effect the ban actually had on 
prices. The State’s expert did not know what an optimum price 
would be, what effect the price advertising ban had on Rhode 
Island prices, or how much prices would change without the 
ban (R. Saffer Tr. 43-49). It is therefore impossible to know what 
socioeconomic group could be affected. Without that informa- 
tion it is impossible to determine if the ban has any material 
effect on consumption. 


8 “[T}he highly addicted drinker . . . will forego other needs 
to spend economic resources on alcohol.” Joha Jung, UNper THE 
INFLUENCE (ALCOHOL AND HuMAN Benavior), (Brooks/Cole Pub. 
Co.1994 ) p. 302. 


9 See, €.g., J.A. 49. 


7 


brand beverages to satisfy the demand of their low 
income customers. Finally, the State offered nothing to 
show what price differential could be expected between a 
regime banning price advertising and one that does not. 
Without such information it is impossible to demonstrate 
how banning price advertising could affect prices of the 
cheapest off-brand products enough to affect abusive 
consumption. What has been proved is that with its price 
advertising ban in place, Rhode Island is in the top 30% 
of states in per capita consumption, evidence of the inef- 
ficacy of its policy. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 829 F.Supp. 
543, 546 (D.R.I. 1993) (App. 23). It is also known that a 
study of total sales before, during and after the imposi- 
tion of price advertising restrictions for beer showed that 
“the presence of price advertising has no significant effect 
on beer consumption” (J.A. 92) [emphasis added]. 


Unable to prove any harm that fiows directly from 
providing consumers with accurate price information, 
and unable to show that the price advertising ban has 
had any effect on the State’s asserted interest in reducing 
intemperate consumption by Rhode Island’s poorer citi- 
zens, the respondents shift ground in their arguments to 
this Court. They attempt to justify the statute by postulat- 
ing a State interest in suppressing all consumption of 
alcoholic beverages as “socially harmful.” RILSA Brief, 
18-19, State Brief, 32. They, along with the Court of 
Appeals, would regulate speech as if the social conse- 
quences of one drink with dinner, or consuming a beer 
while playing cards with friends, was the equivalent of 
alcoholism.!© They argue that any consumption is 
“socially harmful” so that any reduction in consumption 


10 The Court of Appeals only concerned itself with the 
hypothesis that lower prices would bring “more sales” without 
relating that hypothesis to the State’s much more limited 
asserted interest. 44 Liquormart v. Rhode Island, 39 F.3d at 7 (App. 


7). 


is in furtherance of the State’s interest. RILSA Brief, 25, 
State Brief, 22-23. 


This belated change in the identified state interest 
should be rejected because to do otherwise would enable 
regulators to hide their real purpose behind an ever- 
changing array of suppositions. The first task of the 
Court in undertaking the Central Hudson analysis is to 
carefully ascertain the genuineness of the precise inter- 
ests the State claims to be advancing by restricting 
speech. 

In undertaking the first inquiry, we must iden- 

tify with care the interests the State itself 

asserts. Unlike rational basis review, the Central 

Hudson standard does not permit us to supplant 

the precise interests put forward by the State 

with other suppositions. Neither will we turn 

away if it appears that the stated interests are 

not the actual interests served by the restriction. 

Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 1798 [citations omitted]. 


If the required inquiry is to have any meaning, when the 
“important interest” asserted in the trial court is found 
unavailing, the State should not be permitted to conjure 
up others. 


However, by abandoning the interest, conceded 
below, in discouraging abusive consumption by the poor 
in favor of the interest in discouraging any consumption 
asserted here, the respondents not only fail to satisfy the 
requirement that the precise interests put forward by the 
State may not be supplanted, they fail to assert an impor- 
tant interest at all.!! Indeed, the newly asserted interest in 


11 Central Hudson suggests that restricting advertising to 
suppress demand for electricity from a monopoly vendor may 
further a substantial governmental interest where there is an 
“energy crisis.” 447 U.S. at 568-569. Under such circumstances 
any demand for the product is detrimental to the important 
governmental interest in conservation. Here, only demand for 


ee Ee 


9 


reducing consumption vel non proves the insubstantiality 
of the respondents’ case. In the State’s view, it would be a 
legitimate goal, justifying suppression of truthful, non- 
misleading price information, to cause a consumer who 
drinks one beer a week, or a glass of wine with dinner, to 
consume less. Even if that were the case, the State has not 
met its burden of proving that such an interest has been 
directly and materially advanced by its ban on speech. 


One way of determining if the State has proved the 
requisite “immediate connection” between the govern- 
ment’s asserted interest and its prohibition of speech, 
which was ignored by the Court of Appeals, is to examine 
the degree to which the State attempts to further its 
asserted goal through regulation. The substantiality of 
the relationship between the restriction on speech and the 
asserted goal is tested by the seriousness and consistency 


with which the goal is pursued. Rubin, 115 S.Ct. at © 


1592-1593. At the heart of this analysis is the question of 
whether the State has proved that its asserted goal is its 
true objective.!2 “Without this requirement, a State could 


the product by the small percentage of consumers who abuse it 
is harmful. They are unlikely to be deterred by the State’s hypo- 
thetical “artificial price floor”-for brand name advertised prod- 
ucts and will satisfy their demand with inexpensive products. 


12 In his dissent to the opinion of the Rhode Island Supreme 
Court that upheld the price advertising ban for newspapers, 
Justice Weinberger persuasively writes that the true motivation 
for enforcement of the price advertising ban has “nothing to do 
with the ‘promotion of temperance’ among Rhode Island citi- 
zens, but rather with the promotion of price ignorance” to pro- 
tect the market share of RILSA’s members. Rhode Island Liquor 
Stores Ass‘n. v. Evening Call Publishing Co., 497 A.2d 331, 342 n.10 
(R.I. 1985). Confirming his view, in this case RILSA urges that 
virtually all its members’ constitutional rights be eliminated in 
order to maintain the price advertising ban and thus restrict 
competition among retailers. RILSA’s members obviously find it 
more important to be free from competition than to be protected 
from unbridled governmental regulation. 


10 


with ease restrict commercial speech in the service of 
other objectives that could not themselves justify a bur- 
den on commercial expression.” Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 
1800. 


Despite its newly proffered concern with reducing 
consumption in general, Rhode Island permits all forms 
of advertising which, according to the State, directly try 
to stimulate the desire to consume alcoholic beverages. !° 
Consumers are denied only price information. As the 
Rhode Island Supreme Court humorously put it: “Rhode 
Islanders’ thirst for alcoholic-beverage advertising will 
have to be quenched through the electronic and print 
media constantly reminding them of such thoughts as ‘This 
Bud’s for you’ or ‘It’s Miller Time.’” S & S Liquor Mart, 
Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729, 734 (R.I. 1985) [emphasis 
added|. A consumer who has thereby been persuaded that 
it is “Miller time” and sets out to buy a six-pack will be 
able to check the advertisements and find many places 
where Miller beer is sold, but not know which one offers 
the best price. Common sense says that this will not 
dissuade the purchase, but only enable retailers to main- 
tain high margins at the consumer’s expense. Rhode 
Island presented no empirical data to the contrary.'* 


13 But see the discussion of advertising directed at obtaining 
increased market share in a “mature market.” Petitioner’s Brief, 
19-20. 


14 In its Brief at 28, Rhode Island offers a 1995 “study” by 
the “Center for Science in the Public Interest” to refute the 
District Court's finding, based upon the testimony of Dr. Smart, 
that “on a national scale, over the past fifteen years, consump- 
tion levels generally have decreased even though overall adver- 
tising levels have increased.” 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 828 F. 
Supp. 543, 546 (D.R.I. 1993) (App. 23-24). Without verifying the 
scientific qualifications of the authors, it is impossible to give 
the study any credence. Unlike Dr. Smart, they did not testify 
under oath and subject themselves and their theories to cross 
examination. The public record shows that one of the two 


11 


Courts are rightly loath to guess at hidden motiva- 
tion for legislation. Consequently, the second part of Cen- 
tral Hudson focuses on the interest the State claims it is 
trying to advance, rather than divining what is the real 
interest. However, proper application of the third and 
fourth parts of the test (that is holding the State to its 
burden of proof and requiring more than a rational basis 
to support the restriction), will often find the restriction 
lacking if the real objective is other than that stated. Here, 
the fact that Rhode Island has not even attempted to 
regulate any advertising of alcoholic beverages other 
than truthful, non-misleading price advertising, is per- 
suasive evidence of the lack of connection between the 
price advertising regulation and the proffered govern- 
mental interest in reducing overall consumption. 


In Capital Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp, 467 U.S. 691 
(1984), the State of Oklahoma asserted that it banned 
wine commercials that appeared on out-of-state signals 
carried by cable operators in order to “promote tem- 
perance.” However, since Oklahoma permitted “print and 
broadcast commercials for beer, as well as advertisements 


authors, George Hacker, is an attorney employed by the “Cen- 
ter” who submitted an amicus brief to the Fourth Circuit in 
support of a ban on billboard advertising of alcoholic beverages. 
Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Schmoke, __ F.3d __, 1995 U.S. App. 
LEXIS 24515 (4th Cir. 1995). The “Center” is not an academic 
institution or think tank. It is an advocacy group whose agenda, 
according to the statement of interest in its amicus brief, is to 
suppress alcohol advertising. Despite this bias, the findings of 
the “study” are inconclusive. The authors state that “it is impos- 
sible to know the extent to which reductions in alcohol advertis- 
ing helped lower drinking rates.” More significantly, the 
Hacker-Stuart “study” avers that “the reduction of highly visible, 
repetitive, seductive appeals to drink is almost certainly part of the 
equation.” Hacker and Stuart, p. 14 [emphasis added]. Thus, the 
type of advertising thought by the authors of the study to affect 
consumption is not price advertising, but precisely the kind of 
advertising that is permitted in Rhode Island. 


12 


for all alcoholic beverages contained in newspapers, mag- 
azines and other publications printed outside the State” 
the Court found Oklahoma’s “selective approach” under- 
mined its claim to be furthering a substantial interest. 

By their own terms, therefore, the State’s regula- 

tory aims in this area are narrow. Although a 

state regulatory scheme obviously need not 

amount to a comprehensive attack on the prob- 

lems of alcohol consumption to constitute a 

valid exercise of state power under the Twenty- 

first Amendment, the selective approach Oklahoma 

has taken toward liquor advertising suggests limits 

on the substantiality of the interests it asserts here. 

467 U.S. at 715 [emphasis added]. 

In Discovery Network, the Court again stressed that 
underregulation vis-a-vis the asserted State interest sup- 
ports finding a restriction of commercial speech invalid. 

The fact that the regulation “provide[d] only the 

most limited incremental support for the inter- 

est asserted” ... - that it achieved only a 

“marginal degree of protection” . . . for that 

interest - supported our holding that the prohi- 

bition was invalid. 113 S. Ct. at 1515 [citations 
omitted}. 

Most recently, in striking down a ban on labeling the 
alcoholic content of beer that the government sought to 
justify as preventing “strength wars,” the Court noted the 
illogic of the government's position based upon the lim- 
ited scope of its prohibition. The Court pointed to the 
“irrationality” of the regulatory framework in light of its 
asserted goal in concluding that “[t]here is little chance 
that [the regulation] can directly and materially advance 
its aim, while other provisions of the same act directly 
undermine and counteract its effects.” Rubin, 115 S.Ct. at 
1593. So, too, in this case, it makes no sense for the State 
to claim that it has a real interest in withholding truthful, 
non-misleading price information to reduce consumption, 
while it permits the public to be “constantly” exposed to 
all other alcoholic beverages advertising. 


13 


C. The State Distorts the Testimony of Petitioners’ 
Experts to Support A Vain Attempt to Overturn the 
District Court’s Finding That Rhode Island’s Off- 
premises Advertising Ban Has Had No Material 
Impact On the Level of Alcohol Consumption. 


Based upon careful and reasoned evaluation of the 
testimony presented, the District Court found that Rhode 
Island’s off-premises price advertising ban has had no 
material impact on the level of alcohol consumption. 44 
Liquormart, Inc. v. Racine, 829 F.Supp. at 549 (App. 31). 
The Court of Appeals based its decision on its conclusion 
that the evidence went “both ways,” erroneously permit- 
ting the State to meet its burden under Central Hudson, 
merely by offering some, but not preponderant, evidence. 
44 Liquormart v. State of Rhode Island, 39 F.3d 5, 7 (1st Cir. 
1994) (App. 6). The State would have this Court go even 
further than the Court of Appeals, by supplanting the 
District Court’s finding with a determination that the 
price advertising ban has had a material impact on the 
level of consumption. State Brief, 23-28. However, in 
arguing that the District Court’s careful analysis is wrong 
because the petitioners’ experts support its position, the 
State relies upon distortion and omission of key parts of 
the experts’ testimony to conceal its lack of proof. 


The State selects snippits of testimony by Drs. Smart 
and Pittman to suggest that they contributed “substantial 
evidence” that the “price advertising ban increases the 
price of alcoholic beverages, thus resulting in decreased 
consumption.” State Brief, 28. For example, the State 
claims that Dr. Smart “acknowledged” that there are two 
“camps” of opinion on the relation between advertising 
in general and alcohol consumption in general, one of 
which finds a connection. State Brief, 24. Of course, the 
issue here is the relationship between Rhode Island’s 
price advertising ban and consumption by Rhode 


14 


Islanders. That aside, the State distorts Dr. Smart’s testi- 
mony. All Dr. Smart acknowledged was that “some citi- 
zens groups, politicians, some professionals and research 
experts sometimes assert that alcohol advertising leads to 
increased overall consumption.” J.A. 75 [emphasis added]. 


The State again engages in distortion when it argues 
“[o]f most importance to the case is Dr. Smart’s testimony 
that price is a potent influence on the level of alcohol 
consumption.” State Brief, 25 [emphasis added]. 

Q. _ ...Now, there is one paragraph that begins 

at the bottom of the first column and con- 
tinues into the top of the second that talks 
about the affect (sic) of price on alcoholic 
beverages. Doctor, I think can we establish 
you agree that price has an affect (sic) on 
consumption, price of alcoholic beverages 
has an affect (sic) on consumption? 

A. I would say so, particularly if you relate 
price to disposable income. J.A. 80 [emphasis 
added}. 

The State’s question to Dr. Smart was obviously 
made in reference to a particular publication. Dr. Smart 
did agree with the conclusions of the authors!5 and did 
agree that the price of alcoholic beverages has an effect 
on consumption “if you relate price to disposable 
income.” The State fails, however, to include Dr. Smart’s 
earlier comments regarding the study at issue. Dr. Smart 
agreed that there is an expectation that advertising 
reduced prices will increase alcohol consumption and 
that the authors of the study included that expectation. (R. 
Smart Tr. 44). Regarding the findings of the study, which 
- according to Dr. Smart - were mere expectations, Dr. 
Smart testified that he agreed with the findings as far as 
they went but qualified his agreement: “I think that what 
their findings are is a little confusing in that what we see 


15 The subject is the work by Ornstein and Hanssens (J.A. 
94). 


15 


in the article is an affect (sic) of price advertising for print 
and billboards for all states considered together but not 
when we consider only license states.” Id. 


At no point did Dr. Smart testify that the supposed 
link between advertised price and consumption tran- 
scends the theoretical bonds of mere expectation to 
become reality in Rhode Island. 


Another example of the State’s creative use of 
excerpts is its claim that “Dr. Smart finds the statement 
that ‘a ban on price advertising raises the means and 
variance of price by increasing search costs and this 
results in lower consumption’ to be a reasonable expecta- 
tion.” State Brief, 25. The State failed to report the entire 
sentence: “I think that’s a speculation on their part because 
they don’t have any data on search costs, but I think it’s a 
reasonable expectation.” J.A. 80 [emphasis added]. 


Dr. Smart did not, as the State suggests, adopt the 
State’s view. Instead, he simply found that a certain 
expectation was theorectically reasonable. Dr. Smart's 
insistence on the speculative nature of that expectation 
underscores the fact that he did not abandon his opinion 
in favor of that expressed by the State’s expert. 


Dr. Pittman did not escape the State’s use of mislead- 
ing excerpts. The State cites testimony by Dr. Pittman in 
which he stated that if the Rhode Island advertising ban 
were to be lifted, lower alcohol price would be a direct 
effect. State Brief, 26. The State attaches considerable 
importance to the testimony it cites, arguing that Dr. 
Pittman “made the State’s case.” Id. While the State did 
succeed in causing Dr. Pittman to agree that a “direct 
effect” on alcohol consumption would result from a 
repeal of the advertising ban, the State failed to report 
that Dr. Pittman believes that the “direct effect” would be 
“small and insignificant” (R. Pittman Tr. 12). The State’s 
expert had no opinion on the magnitude of the effect of 
the price advertising ban on prices (R. Saffer Tr. 45-46). 
Thus, the State’s case was, as found by the District Court, 
refuted by the petitioners’ experts and not substantiated 


16 


by the State’s expert. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 829 F.Supp. 
at 546-549 (App. 22-31). Rhode Island utterly failed to 
meet its burden under Central Hudson to prove that its 
theory was realized. It did not prove that the price adver- 
tising ban had “directly and materially” advanced the 
asserted goal of promoting temperance, whether that goal 
is defined as reducing abusive consumption by the poor, 
or reducing consumption in general. 


D. The Court Does Not Condone a “Rational Basis” 
Standard To Decide the Constitutionality of Gov- 
ernmental Restrictions On Truthful, Non-mislead- 
ing Price Advertising. 


In asserting that Rhode Island’s ban on truthful, non- 
misleading price advertising is sustainable under the Cen- 
tral Hudson test, the respondents and their supporting 
amici curiae argue for a lesser standard of review than the 
Court has set for the protection of commercial s 
The Council of State Governments, et al. (Council), devote 
most of their amicus brief to arguing that the Court 
should defer to the legislative judgment, both as to 
whether the ban on speech directly and materially 
advances the asserted interest and the propriety of the 
“fit” between the suppression of speech and the result to 
be accomplished. 


The Council misrepresents the petitioners’ argument 
in order to create an easy target for its own. For example, 
it suggests that the petitioners argue that: Rhode Island 
must “demonstrate that a particular measure is guaran- 
teed to work perfectly or that it is unanimously endorsed 
by experts in the field,” Council Brief, 4; a legislature 
must consider “every imaginable alternative or prove 
that the one it selected is the least restrictive of speech,” 
Id.; a State must “produce uncontroverted, conclusive 
empirical evidence that its asserted interest will be 
directly and materially advanced,” Council Brief, 9; a 
State must present “exhaustive empirical data,” Id. Of 
course the petitioners never made such arguments, which 


17 


are straw men set up by the Council to mask the fact that 
despite its lip service to Central Hudson, it is really argu- 
ing for the application of a “rational basis” test that 
would be the end of any meaningful protection for com- 
mercial s ; 

While the test “is not satisfied by mere specula- 

tion or conjecture,” Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 1800, 

neither does it require production of evidence of 

a quality and quantity that might be necessary 

to convince a trier of fact of the truth of a 

particular matter. It requires only a basis suffi- 

cient to support a reasonable belief on the part 

of the legislature as to the measure’s efficacy. 

Council Brief, 9. 

Thus, the Council and respondents would have the 
Court reverse its recent holding in Ibanez that the “State’s 
burden is not slight” as well as its holding in Rubin that it 
was “critical” to the Central Hudson analysis that the State 
“must demonstrate that the harms it recites are real and 
that its restriction will in fact alleviate them to a material 
degree,” 115 S.Ct. at 1592 [emphasis added}, in favor of 
asking only if the legislature could have reasonably 
believed in “the measure’s efficacy.” No amount of verbal 
camouflage can disguise the fact that the respondents and 
their amici are arguing for the very rational basis test that 
the Court has repeatedly said is “far different” from the 
level of scrutiny required by Central Hudson. Board of 
Trustees of State Univ. of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 480 
(1989) [emphasis added]; Discovery Network, 113 S.Ct. at 
1510, n.13. 

Contrary to the Council’s hyperbole, enforcement of 
Central Hudson does not paralyze regulators from 
addressing social problems. Council Brief, 13. Govern- 
ment has broad authority to regulate commerce, typically 
subject only to “rational basis” review by the courts. But 
if the government attempts instead to censor speech in 
the hope of manipulating consumer behavior, it must 
then confront the strong constitutional presumption in 
favor of the “free flow of commercial information” and 


18 


has assumed the substantial burden of proof required by 
Central Hudson and its descendants. 


We are informed that the respondents will submit the 
recent decision of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in 
Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Schmoke, __ F.3d __, 1995 U.S. 
App. LEXIS 24515 (4th Cir. 1995), as supplemental author- 
ity. In that case, the Court of Appeals affirmed the Dis- 
trict Court’s judgment upholding a Baltimore ordinance 
banning outdoor advertising of alcoholic beverages in 
certain locations based on the city’s assertion that the ban 
was necessary to promote the “welfare and temperance” 
of minors. In so doing, the Court of Appeals adopted a 
method of review that completely avoided this Court’s 
formulation of the burden of proof on the government: it 
deferred to the legislative judgment. 

On this facial challenge, the City bears the bur- 

den not of establishing that at every coordinate 

the regulation advances a governmental pur- 

pose and does no more, but rather that it had an 

objectively reasonable belief that the means which 

it selected constituted a reasonable “fit” with 

the regulation’s purpose. 1995 U.S. App. LEXIS 

24515 at 14 [emphasis added]. 


The decision of the Fourth Circuit is a misapplication 
of the “rational basis” test for economic regulation to a 
ban on commercial speech. See Board of Trustees of State 
Univ. of New York v. Fox, supra. It is written as if Edenfield, 
Discovery Network, Ibanez and Rubin did not pertain.'© 
Nonetheless, the Fourth Circuit did make one reference to 
Rubin, in a footnote that questions the validity of the 
decision of the Court of Appeals below. 

The rationale for the more general restriction 

prohibiting the advertising of alcoholic bever- 

ages, upheld in Dunagin and Crisp, may, how- 

ever, be insufficient to support a general 


16 Edenfield is cited two times, but not as a controlling 
authority. Discovery Network and Ibanez are not cited at all. 


19 


rohibition against price advertising of alcoholic 

verages, even though such a restriction was 
upheld in 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 39 
F.3d 5 (1st Cir. 1994), cert. granted, 115 S. Ct. 1821 
(1995). Cf. Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 131 L. Ed. 
2d 532, 115 S. Ct. 1585 (1995) ware uncon- 
stitutional a labeling ban on the disclosure of 
alcohol content to combat “strength wars”). 1995 
U.S. App. LEXIS 24515 at 27, n.5. 


While the footnote in Anheuser-Busch marginalizes 
Rubin as precedent for general restrictions on alcoholic 
beverages advertising, at least the Fourth Circuit recog- 
nized the distinction between a general advertising ban 
and a ban on truthful, non-misleading price advertising 
that the respondents and the Court of Appeals below do 
not address.!7 


The Council relies upon language in Turner Broadcast- 
ing System v. FCC, 114 S.Ct. 2445 (1994), in support of its 
plea that the Court defer to the “legislative findings” of 
the Rhode Island legislature. Council Brief, 9-11. It misses 
the central point of Turner. The Court concluded that 
summary judgment in favor of the governmental regula- 
tion should not have been granted despite a broad legis- 
lative record. Therefore, under First Amendment 
intermediate scrutiny, issues of fact must be resolved on 
the basis of evidence presented in a trial, not by deferring 
to legislative judgment.'§ 


¢ 


17 The District Court below did appreciate the difference 
and was careful to limit its decision. 44 Liquormart v. Racine, 829 
F. Supp. at 549, n.6, (App. 31). RILSA, by invoking a “battle 
against various vices,” is attempting to have the Court decide 
cases that are not before it. RILSA Brief, 30-34. 


18 To make this argument in this case is odd as well as 
misdirected. As RILSA admits, “the reasoning of the Rhode 
Island General Assembly must remain a matter of conjecture for 
all parties” because “Rhode Island has no recorded legislative 
history” for the statutes in issue. RILSA Brief, 11, n.6. 


20 
CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, and for the reasons set 
forth in the Brief for Petitioners, the petitioners respect- 
fully submit that the judgment of the Court of Appeals 
should be reversed. 


By their attorney, 


Evan T. LAWSON 
Lawson & WEITZEN 
425 Summer Street 
Boston, Ma. 02210 
(617) 439-4990 


