Source: liquormart_10._Respondents_Brief_djvu.txt; OCR lines 538–2027; selected argument only. Dated party advocacy, not findings or controlling simulated law.

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Rhode Island may, consistent with the First Amend- 
ment, prohibit truthful, non-misleading price advertising 
regarding alcoholic beverages, if it is shown that the 
regulation directly advances the governmental interest 
asserted, and if it is not more extensive than is necessary 
to serve that interest. The record clearly establishes that 
the price advertising ban has a direct effect on the State’s 
asserted interest of promoting temperance and that there 
is a “reasonable fit” between the promotion of tem- 
perance and the ban.5 


> The determination of this issue will impact on a variety of 
restrictions on alcoholic beverage advertising. See, e.g., Ark. 
Alco. Bev. Cont. Div. Reg. § 3.17 (1991) reprinted in Liquor Cont. 
L. Rep. (CCH) [Ark.] 94217 at 7247 (1994) (prohibiting advertis- 
ing of discount sales); Conn. Dep’t of Liquor Const. Regs § 30-6- 
A40 (1976) reprinted in Liquor Cont. L. Rep. (CCH) [Ga.] 74158 
at 13,244 (prohibiting price advertising by “off-premise” 
licensees except within the establishment); Kan. Stat. Ann. 
941-714(2) (1991) reprinted in Liquor Cont. L. Rep. (CCH) 
[Minn.] %4038(2) at 25,222 (banning price advertising except in 
windows and premises of licensed establishments); Mo. Div. of 
Liquor Cont. Regs. § 11 CSR 7 — 2.240(18) (1986) reprinted in 
Liquor Cont. L. Rep. (CCH) [Mo.] ¥4142G(18) at 27,232 (prohib- 
iting manufacturers and wholesalers from price advertising); 
N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 179:51 (1992) reprinted in Liquor Cont. L. 
Rep. (CCH) [N.H.] 97251 at 31,429-30 (prohibiting listing of 
retail prices by a wholesaler on behalf of a distributor); N.C. 
Admin. Code tit. 4, r. 2R1008(c)(2) (1984) reprinted in Liquor 
Cont. L. Rep. (CCH) [N.C.] 94448(c)(2) at 35,254 (prohibiting 
“on-premise” licensees from advertising the brand name of any 
alcohol beverage); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 4301.211 (Anderson 
1989) reprinted in Liquor Cont. L. Rep. (CCH) [Ohio] ¥7172A at 
37, 419 (prohibiting price advertising for malt beverages except 
within the licensed establishment); Section 4-4-498(a) of the 


10 


The testimony and evidence outlined above clearly 
supports the State’s argument that the price advertising 
ban directly and materially promotes temperance. Testi- 
mony from both sides indicated that the price of alcoholic 
beverages in the State of Rhode Island would go down if 
the price ban were lifted. (J.A. 70-71, 73-74, 84). Further, 
the restriction could be no more narrowly tailored. As 
discussed infra, perfection is not the requirement, only 
reasonableness. Further, recent decisions of this Court 
lead to the conclusion that as long as a sufficient record 
has been established and the restrictions are not confus- 
ing or irrational, they will be upheld. Rubin v. Coors, 115 
S.Ct. 1585 (1995); Florida Bar v. Went-For-It, Inc. and John T. 
Blakely, No. 94-226, June 21, 1995. 


Finally, the State believes and argues herein that both 
the intent behind the Twenty-first Amendment, its appli- 
cation and decisions of this Court mandate that it be 
considered in weighing the interests of the parties herein. 


S 


Pennsylvania Liquor Code, Pa. Stat. Ann. tit. 47, § 4-498(a) (1969 
and Supp. 1994) (prohibition on price advertising) S.C. Alco. 
Bev. Cont. Comm'n § 7-34 (1991) reprinted in Liquor Cont. L. 
Rep. (CCH) [S.C.] $4034 at 42,212 (prohibiting retailers from 
price advertising). This list is by no means exhaustive. Nearly 
every state restricts alcoholic beverages in one form or another. 


11 


ARGUMENT 


A. A Decision Upholding Rhode Island’s Alcohol 
Advertising Ban Would Be Consistent With 
Recent Decisions of This Court. 


The case of Rubin v. Coors, 115 S.Ct. 1585 (1995), must 
be distinguished at this point. In that case, a section of 
the Federal Alcohol Administration Act (hereinafter 
“FAAA”) which prohibited beer labels from displaying 
alcohol content was held to violate the First Amend- 
ment’s limited protection of commercial speech.® This 
Court held that the labeling ban failed the Central Hudson 
four part test since it was not shown that it advanced the 
government’s interest in a direct and material way. At the 
outset, the State of Rhode Island proffers that Rubin can 
be distinguished from the instant matter in four impor- 
tant respects: (1) Rubin involved federal regulation and 
did not implicate powers reserved to the states under the 
Twenty-first Amendment; (2) the State of Rhode Island 
does not have a confusing statutory scheme as was 
involved in Rubin; (3) the information in the case sub 
judice is not about a quality of the product itself; and (4) 


© It is interesting to note that initially, not only was the 
labeling ban of the FAAA attacked as unconstitutional, but also 
the ban on advertising the strength of alcoholic beverages. That 
advertising restriction was upheld by the District Court and 
was not appealed. See, Adolph Coors Company v. Bentsen, 2 F.3d 
355, 357 (10th Cir. 1993) and Rubin, supra. Apparently, the tenth 
circuit was satisfied that the continuing threat of strength wars 
justified a prohibition on statements of alcohol content in adver- 
tising, but regarded labeling as different because it believed 
statements of alcohol content on labels would be used by con- 
sumers primarily to limit their intake of alcohol. 


12 


there is abundant record evidence to support Rhode 
Island’s advertising ban. 


Rubin involved a First Amendment attack on 
§ 205(e)(2) of the FAAA which prohibited the selling, 
shipping or delivering in interstate or foreign commerce 
any malt beverages, distilled spirits, or wines in bottles 


unless such products are bottled, packaged and 
labeled in conformity with such regulations, to 
be prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, 
with respect to packaging, marking, branding, 
and labeling and size and fill of container . . . as 
will provide the consumer with adequate infor- 
mation as to the identity and quality of the 
products, the alcoholic content thereof (except 
that statements of, or statements likely to be 
considered as statements of, alcoholic content of 
malt beverages are prohibited unless required 
by State law and except that, in case of wines, 
statements of alcoholic content shall be required 
only for wines containing more than 14 per cen- 
tum of alcohol by volume), the net contents of 
the package and the manufacturer or bottler or 
importer of the product. 


27 U.S.C § 205(e)(2). At the outset, it must be noted that 
the FAAA provisions mandated both disclosure and cen- 
sorship, creating a confusing and irrational framework. In 
addition, also involved were certain implementing regu- 
lations promulgated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & 
Firearms (hereinafter “BATF”) under delegation of 
authority from the Secretary of the Treasury which pro- 
hibited the disclosure of alcohol content on beer labels. 27 
CFR § 7.26(a) (1994). Supplementing the prohibition on 
numerical indications of alcohol content, the BATF 


13 


adopted labeling regulations proscribing descriptive 
terms suggesting high alcohol content. The BATF regula- 
tions did not prohibit labels from identifying beer as 
having reduced or no alcohol. Thus, another confusing 
discrepancy was created by the regulations. Further, by 
statute and by regulation, the labeling ban involved in 
Rubin was required to give way if a state law required 
disclosure of alcohol content. In contrast to the “overall 
irrationality” of the FAAA’s labeling ban/requirement, 
Rubin, 115 S.Ct. at 1592, the Rhode Island ban is clear, 
precise and applicable in all instances in the same man- 
ner. Neither the media, nor a wholesaler, retailer or 
licensee may advertise the price of an alcoholic beverage 
or refer in any way to price. R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-8-7, 3-8-8.1, 
Regulation 32. 


In Rubin, the government's asserted interest was the 
prevention of “strength wars”. This Court agreed that the 
government had a significant interest in protecting the 
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens by preventing 
brewers from competing on the basis of alcohol strength, 
which could lead to greater alcoholism and its attendant 
social costs. 115 S.Ct. at 1591. “[W]Je have no reason to 
think that strength wars, if they were to occur, would not 
produce the type of social harm that the government 
hopes to prevent”. 115 S.Ct. at 1591. 


The government attempted to bolster its position by 
using the power of the Twenty-first Amendment to boot- 
strap the strength war argument onto an asserted govern- 
mental interest of preserving state authority and state 
power pursuant to the Twenty-first Amendment. The fed- 
eral government obviously knew that it did not have the 
benefit of the Twenty-first Amendment and attempted to 


14 


take advantage of its powers in this roundabout manner. 
In rejecting this argument, this Court held that the gov- 
ernment had offered nothing that suggests the states are 
in need of federal assistance. “States clearly possess 
ample authority to ban the disclosure of alcohol content- 
subject, of course, to the same First Amendment restric- 
tions that apply to the federal government.” 115 S.Ct. at 
1591. This Court impliedly affirmed the State’s power 
under the Twenty-first Amendment when it stated “One 
State’s decision to permit brewers to disclose alcohol 
content on beer labels will not preclude neighboring 
states from effectively banning such disclosure of that 
information within their borders”.” Id. 


Another problem the respondents had in Rubin was 
the fact that the information sought to be disclosed on the 
label was information concerning the product itself, i.e., 
the alcohol content of the beverage. Id. at 1589. In this 
case, the information banned from distribution by Rhode 
Island’s statutory scheme is not information concerning 
the product itself, rather, it concerns only the price at 
which such commodity is offered for sale. This is a critical 
distinction and, standing alone, would be enough of a 
distinction from Rubin to dilute its applicability in the 
present case. Further, the justification in Rubin i.e., that 
strength wars would have the frightening results pre- 
dicted, was undermined by the fact that during the pas- 
sage of time between the enactment of the FAAA and the 
present, technology has made distillers better able to 


” This holding would appear to foreclose Petitioner’s argu- 
ment that Rhode Island may not ban ads from Massachusetts 
retailers. (Petitioner’s Brief 24-26). 


15 


place a more accurate description of the alcohol content 
on their labels. When the FAAA was passed, false, mis- 
leading and deceptive alcohol percentages abounded, 
because of the inability of the industry to accurately 
gauge the amount of alcohol in a given beverage. Today, 
modern scientific technology makes it possible for dis- 
tillers to place more accurate information on the label. 
This distinction is lacking in the present case. 


In Florida Bar v. Went-For-It, Inc. and John T. Blakely, 
No. 94-226, June 21, 1995, this Court upheld against a 
First Amendment challenge certain advertising restric- 
tions upon attorneys in the State of Florida, noting that 
First Amendment protection of commercial speech is of 
recent vintage and is not absolute. 


We have always been careful to distinguish com- 
mercial speech from speech at the First Amend- 
ment’s core. ‘[C]lommercial speech [enjoys] a 
limited measure of protection, commensurate 
with its subordinate position in the scale of First 
Amendment values’ and is subject to ‘modes of 
regulation that might be impermissible in the 
realm of noncommercial expression’. 


Id., quoting Board of Trustees of State University of New York 
v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 477 (1989), quoting Ohralik v. Ohio 
State Bar Association, 436 U.S. 447, 456 (1978). In applying 
the four part Central Hudson test, this Court found that 
protecting the image of the bar and the justice system 
generally, was a substantial governmental interest and 
that a restriction on direct solicitation of accident victims 
and their families for 30 days following an accident 
advanced that interest in a direct and material way and 
was not more restrictive than necessary. The Florida case 


16 


had an extensive record to support the solicitation ban. 
The Florida Bar submitted a 106 page summary of a two 
year study of lawyer advertising and solicitation to the 
Federal District Court. This Court noted that the record 
as presented by the Bar was noteworthy for its breadth 
and detail. Florida Bar, No. 94-226, slip op. at 9. In discuss- 
ing how extensive a record must be to support a First 
Amendment restriction, this Court stated: 


In any event, we do not read our case law to 
require that empirical data come to us accom- 
panied by a surfeit of background information. 
Indeed, in other First Amendment contexts, we 
have permitted litigants to justify speech restric- 
tions by reference to studies and anecdotes per- 
taining to different locales altogether, or even, in 
a case applying strict scrutiny, to justify restric- 
tions based solely on history, consensus and 
‘simple common sense’. Nothing in Edenfield, 
supra, a case in which the State offered no evi- 
dence or anecdotes in support of its restriction, 
requires more. 


(Citations omitted). Id., slip op. at 10. 


Moving on to the fourth prong of Central Hudson, this 
Court discarded the notion that the “least restrictive 
means” test is applicable in a commercial speech context. 
This Court reiterated instead that the test as set forth in 
Fox, 492 U.S. at 480, is a “fit” between the legislature's 
ends and the means chosen to accomplish those ends. In 
upholding the Florida Bar’s restriction, this Court found 
that it was “reasonably well tailored to its stated objec- 
tive....” Id., slip op. at 15. This Court noted that there 
were other means that Floridians could utilize to obtain 
an attorney within 30 days of an accident. Likewise, in 


17 


the State of Rhode Island, a potential purchaser of alco- 
holic beverages might decide to purchase before they 
enter a store and there obtain their price information. 
Rhode Islander consumers are likewise free to conduct 
their own comparison shopping by telephoning retail 
outlets for price information. 


The State of Rhode Island submits that the following 
commentary is equally applicable to the case at bar: 


This case, however, concerns pure commercial 
advertising, for which we have always reserved 
a lesser degree of protection under the First 
Amendment. Particularly because [the object of 
regulation has] traditionally been subject to 
extensive regulation by the States, it is all the 
more appropriate that we limit our scrutiny of 
state regulations to a level commensurate with 
the ‘subordinate position’ of commercial speech 
in the scale of First Amendment values. 


Florida Bar, slip op. at 17, quoting Fox, 492 U.S. at 477, 
quoting Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456. Because price advertising 
is the most commercial and least informative speech con- 
cerning a product, price advertising should be afforded 
the least amount of protection in the entire spectrum of 
First Amendment values. Since the protection available 
for a particular commercial expression turns on the 
nature of both of the expression and of the governmental 
interest served by its regulation, Bolger v. Youngs Drug 
Products Corp., 463 U.S. 60 (1983), therefore, a decision 
upholding Rhode Island’s advertising ban is a logical 
extension of Rubin and Florida Bar. 


18 


B. With or Without the Twenty-first Amendment, 
the State Proved That The Price Advertising 
Ban Directly and Materially Advanced Its 
Asserted Interest and That It Was No More 
Extensive Than Necessary. 


Speech proposing a commercial transaction is entitled to 
lesser protection than other constitutionally guaranteed 
expression. Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 455-456. This lesser degree of 
protection is appropriate for expression related solely to the 
economic interests of the speaker and its audience. Central 
Hudson, 447 U.S. at 561. The commercial aspect of a message 
may provide a justification for regulation that is not present 
when the communication has no commercial character. 
Ohralik, 366 U.S. at 455-456. This is because commercial 
speech, unlike other varieties of speech, occurs in an area 
traditionally subject to governmental regulation. Id. In Florida 
Bar, this Court articulated an intermediate scrutiny test for 
commercial speech. “Unlike rational basis review, the Central 
Hudson standard does not permit [this Court] to supplant the 
precise interests put forward by the State with other supposi- 
tions,” Id. slip op. at 5, citing Edenfield v. Fain, 113 S.Ct. 1792 
(1993). 


A lot has been said about the supposed secret agenda 
of the State in protecting small retailers from competition. 
(Petitioner’s brief p. 24). The purpose of the price adver- 
tising ban and of the entire alcoholic beverage regulatory 
scheme in Rhode Island is set out in R.I. Gen. Laws 
§ 3-1-5. The stated purpose is “the promotion of tem- 
perance and for the reasonable control of the traffic in 
alcoholic beverages”. Petitioners presented no evidence 
to support their hypothesis. Therefore, the promotion of 
temperance is the stated purpose, and the only purpose, 


19 


which this Court should consider in determining whether 
the price advertising ban is constitutional.® 


It is permissible, even necessary, to consider the type 
of commercial transaction and the commodity involved 
when determining whether a restraint on commercial 
speech is valid under the Central Hudson test. Commercial 
speech is “linked inextricably” with the commercial 
transaction it proposes, so the State’s interest in regulat- 
ing the underlying transaction may give it a concomitant 
interest in the expression itself. Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 
1798. It is therefore permissible for the State and for this 
Court to distinguish between transactions involving alco- 
holic beverages and transactions involving any other 
commodity. The State is not required to put blinders on 
when regulating an industry and the State is free to 
consider the harmful societal effects of a commodity in its 
regulation. 


This is not the first time the constitutionality of 
restrictions on price advertising for alcoholic beverages 
has come before this Court. In Queensgate Investment Com- 
pany v. Liquor Control Comm’n, 69 Ohio St. 361, 433 N.E. 
2d 138 (1982), appeal dismissed, 459 U.S. 807, Ohio's 
price advertising ban was attacked on First Amendment 
grounds. In that case, Queensgate Investment Company 
(hereinafter “Queensgate”) was the holder of an Ohio 


8 Petitioners would have this Court believe that an insid- 
ious plot has been developed by the State of Rhode Island to 
protect small liquor stores from competition by big giant retail 
outlets. The intervenor obviously did not share Petitioner's 
belief that the State was protecting their interests. Why else 
would they have intervened? 


20 


liquor permit and was prosecuted for violating regula- 
tions of the Ohio Liquor Control Commission which pro- 
hibited off-premises price advertising of alcoholic 
beverages, the exact prohibition found in Rhode Island’s 
challenged laws. After being found in violation of the 
above regulations, Queensgate appealed to the Ohio 
Supreme Court, and argued that the price advertising ban 
violated its First Amendment guarantee of freedom of 
speech. 


In determining that the price ban did not violate the 
First Amendment, the Ohio Supreme Court applied the 
four part Central Hudson test. The Queensgate court came 
to the logical conclusion that the advertising of drink 
prices and price advantages would encourage and stimu- 
late excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages. It 
determined that no less extensive a regulation would 
achieve the same purpose. “Rather, in order to serve the 
same governmental interest, virtually any other regula- 
tion would be more extensive; e.g., increased prices, 
shorter hours or reduced number of permits, would all 
place a greater burden on the permit holder.” Queensgate, 
433 N.E.2d at 141-142. 


Queensgate then appealed to this Court. The Ohio 
Liquor Control Commission filed a Motion to Dismiss the 
appeal for want of substantial federal question. This 
Court agreed with the Liquor Control Commission, and 
dismissed the case on that ground. 


The First Circuit in the case sub judice discussed the 
effect of Queensgate, noting that there was no relevant 
factual distinction, and held that “with Queensgate or 
without, plaintiff 44 Liquormart must lose”. 39 F.3d at 8 


21 


(Pet.App. 9). Recognition of the precedential effect of 
Queensgate would mandate affirmance of the First Circuit. 


The issue in Queensgate and in the present dispute is 
identical, i.e., whether a ban on advertising the price of 
alcoholic beverages violates the First Amendment's guar- 
antee of free speech. The Ohio court used the four-part 
Central Hudson test, and when this decision and its rea- 
soning were before this Court on appeal, it was held that 
no federal question was involved. This decision, while 
short, is nonetheless a decision on the merits, affirming a 
finding that no First Amendment rights were implicated 
by the price advertising ban. 


1. Rhode Island’s Price Advertising Ban 
Directly Advances Its Asserted Interest of 
Promoting Temperance and Controlling The 
Traffic in Alcoholic Beverages. 


Pursuant to Central Hudson, the State must demon- 
strate that the challenged regulation “advances the gov- 
ernment’s interest ‘in a direct and material way’ ”. Rubin, 
115 S.Ct. at 1588; quoting Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 1798. 
Courts have recognized as a matter of common sense that 
a restriction on the advertising of a product decreases 
demand for that product. See United States v. Edge Broad- 
casting, 113 S.Ct. at 2696, 2707 (1993); Posadas de Puerto 
Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 
328, 342 (1986); Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569; Cal- 
Almond, Inc. v. U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 14 F.2d 429 (9th 
Cir. 1993). 


In Edge Broadcasting, this Court cautioned that the 
question of whether the regulation directly advances the 


22 


governmental interest asserted cannot be answered by 
limiting the inquiry to whether the governmental interest 
is directly advanced as applied to a single person or 
entity. Rather, there must be a consideration of the “fit” 
between the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends. 113 S.Ct. at 2705. In Edge Broad- 
casting, this Court found that the interest was served as 
applied to all radio and television stations, even though 
if, as applied only to Edge, there was only marginal 
advancement of that interest. Id. Since in this case it is 
undisputed that — even as to Petitioners — the effect of the 
ban is substantial (upwards of $100,000 per store per year) 
(J.A. 47), the total effect when all licensed liquor retailers 
are considered is staggering. 


In both Edenfield and Rubin, advertising restrictions 
were struck down in large part because there was not an 
adequate factual record presented to support the adver- 
tising ban. Edenfield, 113 S.Ct. at 1800; Rubin, 115 S.Ct. at 
1591. The State submits that, in this case, the record 
below supports the Rhode Island’s advertising ban. The 
direct effect that Rhode Island‘s ban has on the promotion 
of temperance is as follows - the advertising ban 
increases the cost of alcoholic beverages and therefore 
decreases their consumption in two ways: (1) increasing 
“search time” to obtain the best price of alcoholic bever- 
ages;? and (2) without competition, the real price of the 
beverage will remain higher than without advertising. 


9 The gravamen of the testimony and evidence presented 
on the issue of “search time” was that a consumer’s time spent 
searching for the best deal is worth something. This cost should 
be included in determining the cost of the item to the consumer. 


23 


Therefore the State submits not one, but two ways that 
the advertising ban directly and materially affects the 
price of alcoholic beverages and therefore promotes tem- 
perance. 


At this juncture, it must be noted that the area of 
alcohol consumption and the effect of advertising thereon 
is a difficult topic to research. This point was conceded by 
all experts below. This is in large part due to the fact that 
the cumulative effects of advertising are difficult to 
assess. (Testimony of Dr. Smart J.A. 79, 80). Further, no 
state may determine with absolute certainty the amount 
of alcohol its citizens consume within their homes, in 
restaurants, bars and nightclubs. The level of consump- 
tion may only be gauged by the amount of alcohol pur- 
chased. Simply because the topic is a difficult one to 
research should not, however, mean that alcoholic bever- 
ages may not be regulated. 


In support of its case, the State offered the testimony 
of Dr. Henry Saffer, an economist. Dr. Saffer testified that 
economists look at the price of alcoholic beverages as 
having two parts. One, the search time; and two, the 
actual money price. Price information allows a consumer 
to find lower product prices more easily, thus lowering 
the average price for alcohol. He also set forth a third 
direct effect advertising has on the price of alcohol in that 
there would be a greater variance when price advertising 
is not allowed than when it is allowed. This gives the 
consumer an incentive to look around, thus increasing the 
search time and creating a more knowledgeable group of 
consumers. (J.A. 69, 70). Dr. Saffer testified that if the ban 
were abolished, the result would be lower prices and 
increased consumption. This opinion was based upon the 


24 


fact that if the ban on price advertising were removed, 
then the average price would go down and people could 
more easily find lower prices. (J.A. 71). 


Dr. Reginald Smart, a registered psychologist and 
scientist, testified on behalf of the Petitioners. Dr. Smart 
admitted that although he believed alcohol advertising 
and consumption were not linked, that there were some 
research experts who believed - based upon studies - 
that alcohol advertising led to overall increased con- 
sumption. (J.A. 76). He acknowledged that there were 
generally two camps on the issue of the effect of alcohol 
advertising upon consumption - those in the advertising 
and alcohol beverage industry who refuse to see a link 
and those in consumer groups, government and some 
research experts who believe that there is a connection 
(J.A. 76).1° Dr. Smart was the author of an article that was 
discussed during his testimony. His article acknowledged 
no less than twelve differing opinions on the effect of 
advertising on the sale and consumption of alcoholic 
beverages (J.A. 81). One of those positions is that of the 
Board of Trustees of the American Medical Association, 
which takes the position that alcohol advertising does 
appear to influence excessive, hazardous and problem 
drinking. (J.A. 77). Also in his article, Dr. Smart discusses 
the opinion of the noted economist, John Kenneth Gal- 
braith, who in 1958, wrote that advertising affects both 


10 This division is present in this case. Amici in support of 
the Petitioners represent three distinct groups: advertisers, the 
media and the liquor industry, who share one common denomi- 
nator — financial gain through the advertising of alcoholic bev- 
erages. The State of Rhode Island stands to realize no economic 
gain from this case. 


25 


brand preference and the aggregate level of consumption. 
(J.A. 78). Dr. Smart himself has noted that a lot of the 
marketing of alcoholic beverages is aimed at specific 
segments of the market, such as youth, women and 
blacks. (J.A. 78). He also notes that leaders in the alcohol 
industry take the position that “without growth we can- 
not survive”. (J.A. 78). He also, from his own research, 
acknowledges that although beverage manufacturers 
claim that they wish only to increase their share of the 
market, total profits will increase if the market expands 
and the shares remain the same. (J.A. 79). 


Of most importance to the case is Dr. Smart's testi- 
mony that price is a potent influence on the level of 
alcohol consumption. (J.A. 79, 80, 81). He agrees with Dr. 
Saffer, the State’s expert, that the cost of a commodity 
should include the search cost in obtaining that good. 
(J.A. 79). He also agrees that advertising has cumulative 
effects that are difficult to detect because the influence of 
one advertisement is likely to be insignificant, but. that 
the impact of thousands or hundreds of thousands of 
advertisements over the course of years and over the 
course of someone’s life is difficult to assess. (J.A. 79, 80). 
Dr. Smart finds the statement that “a ban on price adver- 
tising raises the mean and variance of price by increasing 
search costs and this results in lower consumption” to be 
a reasonable expectation. (J.A. 80). 


In discussing the phenomenon known as “happy 
hour”, where a restaurant or bar serves reduced price 
drinks for a short period, Dr. Smart acknowledges that 
there is a “negative relationship” between alcohol con- 
sumption and price. He defined that term as follows: as 
prices go up, alcohol consumption comes down and, 


ys 


26 


inversely, as prices go down, consumption increases. (J.A. 
81). Dr. Smart also acknowledged that consumers will 
travel to purchase alcohol if they think they will save 
some money. (J.A. 81). 


Petitioner’s other expert, Dr. David J. Pittman, a Pro- 
fessor of Psychology, also bolstered the State’s argument 
that price advertising has a direct effect on consumption. 
He stated that he was aware of no empirical evidence that 
would refute the conclusion that banning alcohol price 
advertising promotes temperance. (J.A. 83). He testified 
that price advertising leads to lower costs for the con- 
sumer for the product being advertised. (J.A. 84).'! It was 
his opinion that if Rhode Island alcohol price advertising 
ban were to be repealed, lower alcohol price would be a 
direct effect. (J.A. 84). Therefore, Petitioner’s own experts 
have made the State’s case by testifying that the advertis- 
ing ban has a direct effect on the price of alcoholic bever- 
ages. They also provided testimony that price is an 
important determinant in consumption. 


At trial, the State submitted research results which 
concluded that price advertising does have a direct result 
on alcohol consumption. Stanley I. Ornstein and Domini- 
que M. Hanssens, Alcohol Control Laws and the Consump- 
tion of Distilled Spirits and Beer, 12 J. Consumer Res. 200 
(Sept. 1985). (J.A. 94-121). Ornstein and Hanssens found 


11 This Court has recognized the connection between 
advertising and price: “ ... where consumers have the benefit of 
price advertising, retail prices often are dramatically lower than 
they would be without price advertising. Bates v. State Bar of 
Arizona, 433 U.S. 350;377 (1977) (citations omitted). 


27 


that the absence of price advertising will increase con- 
sumer search costs, raising the mean and variance of 
prices and reducing consumption. Conversely, in states 
where price advertising is allowed, price should be lower 
and consumption greater. This indicates a positive rela- 
tionship between price advertising and per capita con- 
sumption. (J.A. 108-109). This finding that price 
advertising leads to lower price and higher consumption 
(J-A. 114) was deemed to be reasonable even by Petitioners’ 
experts. (J.A. 80, 84). In discussing the many regulatory 
options available, Ornstein and Hanssens found that 


Price intervention through tax increases, resale 
price maintenance, or bans on price advertising 
will have a much larger effect on Spirits con- 
sumption than on beer consumption. The his- 
tory of state excise taxes shows that they are 
rarely changed, except at times of budgetary 
crises. Resale price maintenance in alcohol has 
been on the decline for years and is fast disap- 
pearing in light of recent legal rulings. (Citing 
California Retail Liquor Dealers Assn. v. MidCal 
Aluminum Inc., et al., 445 U.S. 97 (1980)). But 
advertising bans are increasingly being called 
for. Ten states proposed legislation to ban adver- 
tising in 1983, and a variety of public interest 
groups called on the Federal Trade Commission 
to restrict the advertising of alcoholic beverages. 
A ban on price advertising raises the mean and 
variance of price by increasing search costs, 
and this results in lower consumption (Orns- 
tein and Hanssens 1984). 


J.-A. 120). (Emphasis supplied). 


While the Petitioners would have this Court believe 
that “expenditures on alcoholic beverage advertising 


28 


have been steadily increasing, while consumption has 
been steadily decreasing .. . ” (Petitioners’ Brief, p. 19), a 
recent study has found quite the opposite — that since the 
mid-1980’s, alcohol advertising has decreased, accom- 
panied by dramatic reductions in alcohol consumption 
and alcohol-related problems. George A. Hacker and 
Laura Anne Stuart, DOUBLE DIP, The Simultaneous 
Decline of Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Problems in the 
United States, Center for Science in the Public Interest 
(June 1995). 


Among the findings of Hacker and Stuart are that 
cutbacks in alcohol advertising expenses between 1986 
and 1993 have been matched by substantial reductions in 
alcohol-related vehicle crash deaths. Id. at 13. These 
improvements have accompanied steady decreases in the 
rate of binge and daily drinking among high school 
seniors. Id. at 13. While the authors acknowledge that 
many factors play a part in the decline in alcohol-related 
problems, they state: “It is impossible to know the extent 
to which reductions in alcohol advertising helped lower 
drinking rates and foster health and safety benefits. How- 
ever, the reduction of highly visible, repetitive, seductive 
appeals to drink is almost certainly part of the equation.” 
Id. at 14. 


Therefore, it is clear the District Court had before it 
substantial evidence - some of it from the Petitioner's 
own experts that the price advertising ban increases the 
price of alcoholic beverages, thus resulting in decreased 
consumption. The link has been forged and the record 
below amply demonstrates that the price advertising ban 
directly and materially affects the State's asserted inter- 
est, i.e., the promotion of temperance. 


29 


2. Rhode Island’s Price Advertising Ban Is No 
More Extensive Than Necessary. 


Petitioners would have this Court find that the stat- 
utes at issue go further than necessary to accomplish the 
stated purpose.!2 This Court has ruled that a prohibition 
of commercial speech requires a “ ‘fit’ between the legis- 
lature’s ends and the means chosen to accomplish those 
ends ~ a fit that is not necessarily perfect, but reasonable; 
that represents not necessarily the single best disposition, 
but one whose scope is ‘in proportion to the interests 
served’ ”. Fox, 492 U.S. at 480. The Central Hudson test is 
not so rigid as Petitioners would lead this Court to 
believe, rather, it is “flexible”. Fox, 492 U.S. at 477. The 
interest to be served by the statutes under attack is the 
promotion of temperance and the reasonable control of 
the traffic in alcoholic beverages. R.I. Gen. Laws § 3-1-5. 
Prohibiting disclosure of the price of an alcoholic bever- 
age or price advantage is certainly a reasonable and 
narrowly tailored means to that end. The restriction does 
not prohibit all alcoholic beverage advertising. Rather, 
only one tidbit of information is prohibited - price. Price 
advertising is allowed inside the licensed premises, to 
assist those who have already decided to purchase. The 
mere fact that Petitioners believe that there are other 
alternatives is not determinative. 


In applying the standard enunciated in Fox, supra, to 
the case at bar, it is undeniable that Rhode Island’s ban 
on price advertising is not more extensive than necessary. 


'? This, despite the observation of this Court that almost all 
restrictions disallowed under Central Hudson’s fourth prong 
have been “substantially excessive.” Fox, 492 U.S. at 479. 


30 


This Court in Fox refused to adopt a “least restrictive 
means” test. 492 U.S. at 476. Since, in a commercial 
speech case, modes of regulation that might be impermis- 
sible in the realm of noncommercial expression are 
allowed, the least restrictive means requirement cannot 
be justified. Fox, 492 U.S. at 477. Even in core political 
speech cases, this Court has declined to impose a least 
restrictive means test, instead upholding restrictions on 
such speech so long as the restrictions are narrowly tai- 
lored to serve a significant governmental interest. Fox, 
492 U.S. at 477, 478. This standard for commercial speech 
does not require elimination of all less restrictive alterna- 
tives, as argued by Petitioners. Id. This Court has never 
required a showing that there is no conceivable alterna- 
tive, but only that the regulation not burden substantially 
more speech than is necessary to further the govern- 
ment’s legitimate interests. This Court is “loath to sec- 
ondguess” the legislature’s judgment to that effect. Id. It 
is up to the legislature to decide as long as its judgment is 
reasonable. Id. at 479. 


In sum, while we have insisted that ‘the free 
flow of commercial information is valuable 
enough to justify imposing on would-be regula- 
tors the costs of distinguishing . . . the harmless 
from the harmful,’ we have not gone so far as to 
impose upon them the burden of demonstrating 
that the distinguishment is 100% complete, or 
that the manner of restriction is absolutely the 
least severe that will achieve the desired end. 
What our decisions require is a ‘ “fit” between 
the legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends,’ - a fit that is not neces- 
sarily perfect, but reasonable; that represents 
not necessarily the single best disposition but 


31 


one whose scope is ‘in proportion to the interest 
served,’ that employs not necessarily the least 
restrictive means but, as we have put it in the 
other contexts discussed above, a means nar- 
rowly tailored to achieve the desired objective. 
Within those bounds we leave it to govern- 
mental decisionmakers to judge what manner of 
regulation may best be employed. (citations 
omitted). 


Fox, 492 U.S. at 480. 


In Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781 (1989), 
this Court upheld a time, place, and manner restriction 
that required a city to control the sound level of musical 
concerts in a city park — a regulation of fully protected 
speech. In rejecting the least restrictive means argument, 
this Court stated 


The Court of Appeals erred in sifting through all 
the available or imagined alternative means of 
regulating sound volume in order to determine 
whether the city’s solution was “the least intru- 
sive means” of achieving the desired end. This 
“less-restrictive-alternative analysis . . . has 
never been a part of the inquiry into the validity 
of a time, place, and manner regula- 
tion.” * * * Instead, our cases quite clearly hold 
that restrictions on the time, place, or manner of 
protected speech are not invalid “simply 
because there is some imaginable alternative 
that might be less burdensome on speech.” 


491 U.S. at 797 (citations omitted). 


This Court and other courts have repeatedly upheld 
reasonable restrictions on the advertising of activities that 
society deems harmful but has chosen for various reasons 


32 


to tolerate. See Edge Broadcasting (1993) (lotteries); Posadas 
(casino gambling); Queensgate Investment Co. (liquor price 
advertising); Capital Broadcasting Co. v. Mitchell, 333 
F.Supp. 582 (D.D.C. 1971) (broadcast cigarette advertising); 
Dunagin v. City of Oxford, 718 F.2d 738 (Sth Cir. 1983) 
(liquor advertising); Oklahoma Telecasters (prohibition of all 
alcohol advertising except for one storefront sign); S & S 
Liquor Mart Inc. (alcohol price advertising); Rhode Island 
Liquor Stores Ass’n (alcohol price advertising); Princess Sea 
Indus., Inc. v. State of Nevada, 635 P.2d 281 (Nev. 1981) 
(brothel advertising). These decisions indicate that legisla- 
tures are entitled to especially broad latitude in regulating 
speech that promotes activities that the legislatures reason- 
ably determine give rise to especially great social harms. 


Greater deference to legislative judgment with regard 
to socially harmful activities is justified by the rationale 
underlying this Court’s commercial speech doctrine. As a 
general matter, commercial speech enjoys only “a limited 
measure of protection, commensurate with its subordi- 
nate position in the scale of First Amendment values.” 
Fox, 492 U.S. at 477 (quoting Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456); see 
Edge Broadcasting, 113 S. Ct. at 2703; Central Hudson, 447 
U.S. at 563. That is because commercial speech “is ‘linked 
inextricably’ with the commercial arrangement that it 
proposes,” Edenfield, 113 S. Ct. at 1798 (quoting Friedman 
v. Rogers, 440 U.S. 1, 10 n9 (1979)), and commercial 
activity is “an area traditionally subject to government 
regulation,” Edge Broadcasting, 113 S.Ct. at 2703 (quoting 
Ohralik, 436 U.S. at 456). The government's greater inter- 
est in, and authority over, regulation of commercial activ- 
ity gives it greater interest in, and authority over, 
regulation of “the expression itself”, than it has with 


33 


respect to other forms of expression. Edenfield, 113 S. Ct. 
at 1798. 


In Edge Broadcasting, this Court noted that the activity 
which was being touted by the advertising (gambling) 
did not involve any constitutionally protected right. 
Rather, it was a “vice” which could be banned altogether. 
113 S.Ct. at 2703. In deferring to the legislature, this 
Court found that although the government could have 
protected its interests in other ways, the regulation was 
not more extensive than necessary. 113 S.Ct. at 2704-2705. 
“Within the bounds of the general protection provided by 
the Constitution to commercial speech, we allow room for 
legislative judgments.” 113 S.Ct. at 2707. This Court does 
not require that a State “make progress on every front 
before it can make progress on any front”. Id. The anai- 
ogy was made between advertising for gambling and 
advertising for cigarettes, this Court noting that Congress 
has altogether banned the broadcast advertising of ciga- 
rettes, even though it could hardly have believed that this 
regulation would keep the public wholly ignorant of the 
availability of cigarettes. Id. 


In order to determine whether Rhode Island’s statu- 
tory ban comports with Central Hudson’s fourth prong, 
we must examine the relationship between the State's 
interests and the means chosen to serve them. Fox, 492 
U.S. at 480. This Court has previously held: 


with respect to this prong, the differences 
between commercial speech and noncommercial 
speech are manifest. In Fox, we made clear that 
the ‘least restrictive means’ test has no role in 
the commercial speech contest. ‘What our deci- 
sions require’ instead, ‘is a “fit” between the 


34 


legislature’s ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends’ a fit that is not neces- 
sarily perfect, but reasonable; that represents 
not necessarily the single best disposition but 
one whose scope is ‘in proportion to the interest 
served,’ that employs not necessarily the least 
restrictive means but ‘. . . a means narrowly 
tailored to achieve the desired objective.’ Of 
course, we do not equate this test with the less 
rigorous obstacles of rational basis review; 
_. . the existence of ‘numerous and obvious less- 
burdensome alternatives to the restriction on 
commercial speech . . . is certainly a relevant 
consideration in determining whether the “fit” 
between ends and means is reasonable.’ 


Florida Bar, 115 S.Ct. 2371. In examining the restriction in 
Florida Bar, this Court found that the rule prohibiting 
solicitation of clients within 30 days of an accident was 
reasonably well tailored to its stated objective. This Court 
noted that there were many other ways for injured Flor- 
idians to learn about the availability of legal representa- 
tion during those 30 days. 


Likewise, here, consumers who are so inclined may 
go to their favorite liquor store and peruse the shelves to 
determine which brand of the alcoholic beverage of their 
choice they wish to buy, based upon brand preference 
and price. As in the Florida Bar case, nothing prohibits a 
Rhode Island consumer from telephoning various retail 
outlets or talking with their neighbors to determine 
which store has the best prices. Further, all information 
other than price is available to consumers via radio, 
television, newspaper, magazines, etc. Purchasers may 
learn from advertisements the location of a liquor store, 
its size, the brands sold, its inventory, any other items 


35 


they may sell, simply not price of alcoholic beverages. It 
is hard to imagine how the ban could be less restrictive. 


Finally, in determining that the Florida Bar restriction 
was no more extensive than necessary, this Court recog- 
nized that the direct solicitation restriction and the attack 
thereon concerned pure commercial advertising for 
which a lesser degree of protection under the First 
Amendment has always been reserved. Particularly 
because the standards and conduct of state licensed law- 
yers had traditionally been subject to extensive regulation 
by the State of Florida, this Court felt that it was all the 
more appropriate that the level of scrutiny be commensu- 
rate with the subordinate position of commercial speech 
in the scale of First Amendment values. Florida Bar, slip 
op. at 17, citing Fox, 492 U.S. at 477, quoting Ohralik, supra, 
436 'J.S. at 456. Comparing the restriction in this case to 
that upheld in the Florida Bar, it is clear that the State of 
Rhode Island is entitled to and does regulate the alcoholic 
beverage industry extensively, just as the Florida Bar 
regulated the legal profession. Therefore, since in both 
cases the commercial speech restriction concerned an area 
traditionally subjected to intense state regulation, a 
restriction on advertising should be deemed allowable. 


This Court’s decision in Posadas de Puerto Rico, clearly 
states that the power to totally prohibit includes the 
power to regulate to a lesser degree. 


It would * * * surely be a strange constitutional 
doctrine which would concede to the legislature 
the authority to totally ban a product or activity, 
but deny to the legislature the authority to for- 
bid the stimulation of demand for the product 
or activity through advertising on behalf of 


36 


those who would profit from such increased 
demand. Legislative regulation of products or 
activities deemed harmful, such as cigarettes, 
alcoholic beverages, and prostitution, has varied 
from outright prohibition on the one 
hand * * * to legalization of the product or 
activity with restrictions on stimulation of its 
demand on the other hand * * * . To rule out the 
latter, intermediate kind of response would 
require more than we find in the First Amend- 
ment. 


Posadas, 478 U.S. at 347-348 (citations omitted). 


Petitioners would have this Court believe that all 
alternative forms of liquor control must be exhausted 
before the advertising restrictions could be utilized. This 
is simply contrary to all teachings of this Court, and the 
lower federal courts. As the First Circuit noted “[t]he 
State is entitled to a reasonable choice. This includes 
choice of method - it is not obliged to prove that some 
other method, e.g., taxation, would be less effective.” 44 
Liquor Mart v. State, 39 F.3d at 7 (J.A. 6). The restriction 
cannot be challenged on the ground that price wars could 
be combatted just as effectively by increasing the State’s 
sales tax. As this Court explained in a similar context, “it 
is up to the legislature to decide whether or not such a 
counterspeech policy would be as effective” as the adver- 
tising restriction. Posadas, 478 U.S. at 344. The fourth part 
of the Central Hudson test does not force the State to 
choose between differing methods of regulation. Rather, 
there is room for legislative judgment. See Dunagin v. City 
of Oxford, Mississippi, 718 F.2d 738 (Sth Cir. 1983) (en 
banc), cert. denied, 467 U.S. 1259 (1984); Fox, 492 U.S. at 


37 


480; Edge, 113 S.Ct. at 2707; Posadas, 478 U.S. at 344; 
Central Hudson, 447 U.S. at 569. 


C. The Twenty-first Amendment Should Be Con- 
sidered in a Commercial Speech Case Involving 
the Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages. 


Since its passage in 1933, the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment has been deemed to confer broad powers on the 
states in the area of liquor regulation. California Retail 
Liquor Dealers Association v. MidCal Aluminum, Inc., 445 
U.S. 97 (1980). However, as this Court has opined in South 
Dakota v. Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987), “its bounds have 
escaped precise definition”. Id. at 206. A brief review of 
the history of the Twenty-first Amendment confirms the 
State’s argument that states retain broad powers in the 
area of liquor regulation. As originally proposed, the 
Twenty-first Amendment had four articles. Section 1 
repealed the Eighteenth Amendment, Section 2 mirrors 
that in place in the Amendment today, Section 3 gave 
Congress concurrent power to regulate or prohibit the 
sale of intoxicating liquors to be drunk on the premises 
where sold, and Section 4 provided the mechanism for 
adoption. 76 Cong. Rec. 4138-4139 (1933). Much of the 
argument surrounding the adoption of the Twenty-first 
Amendment concerned the method by which it should be 
ratified, i.e., by legislatures or by convention. However, 
when considering whether Sections 2 and 3 should both 
be included, Congress debated how much power should 
be retained by the states. During the debates, Senator 
Wagner from New York eloquently argued that the 
national government should: 


38 


have confidence in your state governments. We 
have confidence in our state governments to 
deal with other and much more important sub- 
jects. We have confidence in our state govern- 
ments to administer justice, to provide for the 
national defense, to provide for the education of 
their children, to protect their people against 
crime and criminals. All of these matters are 
now dealt with effectively and successfully by 
the state governments; and I say this matter of 
controlling the habits of people and regulating 
them is a local affair and in the province of state 
government, and the only way to deal with it 
successfully is to leave it to the conscience of the 
people of each state instead of attempting to set 
up a uniform standard for all of the people of 
the United States. Then, in my judgment, we 
will get laws which are in harmony with the 
conscience of the people, and which will on that 
account be supported and enforced. 


76 Cong. Rec. 4146 (1933). In continuing this appeal for : 
the removal of Section 3 from the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment, Senator Wagner argued: 


... 1 am fully satisfied that if we permit our 
government to function as it was intended to 
function, through the states, we shall find that 
the people of each of the 48 states will adopt 
those methods which will in accordance with 
local need and conditions, most effectively bring 
the liquor traffic under control and actually pro- 
mote temperance. 


76 Cong. Rec. 4147 (1933) (emphasis added). 


This Court has a long history of recognizing the 
States’ role in liquor regulation. This Court has stated 


39 


that the Twenty-first Amendment has given broad power 
to the states and generally they may delegate this power 
as they see fit. City of Newport, Kentucky v. Iacobucci, 479 
U.S. 92 (1986). In Larkin v. Grendels Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 
(1982), a case dealing with the Establishment Clause, this 
Court stated: “Given the broad powers of the states under 
the Twenty-first Amendment, judicial deference . . . is 
especially appropriate in the area of liquor regulation.” 
459 U.S. 121, 122. Likewise, the Circuits have deferred to 
the States and recognized their broad power to regulate 
alcohol pursuant to the Twenty-first Amendment. See, 
Actmedia, Inc. v. Stroh, 830 F.2d 957 (9th Cir. 1986) 
(upholding “tied-house” statute in the face of a First 
Amendment challenge); Dunagin v. City of Oxford, Missis- 
sippi, 718 F.2d 738 (5th Cir. 1983) (holding that if there is 
any instance where a state can escape First Amendment 
constraint while prohibiting truthful advertising promot- 
ing lawful sales, it would be where the product being 
sold is intoxicating liquor); Olitsky v. O’Malley, 597 F.2d 
295 (1st Cir. 1979) (consideration of any State law regulat- 
ing intoxicating beverages must begin with the Twenty- 
first Amendment). 


In Dunagin, the Fifth Circuit had the opportunity to 
review the constitutionality of Mississippi's near total 
ban on alcoholic beverage advertising. The challengers to 
the ban argued that it violated the First Amendment. In 
disagreeing, the Fifth Circuit articulated what has come 
to be known as the “vice” argument. The Dunagin Court 
Stated “[i]f there is any instance where a state can escape 
First Amendment constraint while prohibiting truthful 
advertising promoting lawful sales, it would be where the 
product being sold is intoxicating liquor”. 718 F.2d at 743. 


40 


The Fifth Circuit noted that Section 2 of the Twenty-first 
Amendment: 


is unique in the constitutional scheme in that it 
represents the only express grant of power to 
the states, thereby creating a fundamental 
restructuring of the constitutional scheme as it 
relates to one product-intoxicating liquors. (cita- 
tion omitted). 


718 F.2d at 744. 


In delineating the test to be used when considering 
alcohol advertising restrictions, the Fifth Circuit asserted 
that any analysis of the validity of a state statute regulat- 
ing liquor does not proceed via the traditional route for 
testing the constitutionality of state statutes. The Court 
determined that it should proceed from a vantage point 
of “presumed state power and then ask whether there are 
any limitations to that power, always keeping in mind 
that where intoxicating liquors are concerned, great def- 
erence must be accorded a comprehensive state regula- 
tory scheme”. 718 F.2d at 744. 


This long line of cases granting the states near abso- 
lute power to regulate the liquor industry is based upon 
society’s knowledge of alcohol and its effects. The Eigh- 
teenth Amendment was passed in response to problems 
dealing with alcoholic beverages. When debating 
whether to repeal that amendment, it was suggested that 
“liquor has never known how to obey the law”. 76 Cong. 
Rec. 4167 (1933). The position of the Petitioners herein 
continue the evolution of a consistent attempt by the 
alcoholic beverage industry to chip away the area of 
states’ rights when dealing with alcoholic beverages. 


41 


Before adoption of the Twenty-first Amendment, one Sen- 
ator argued: “I want to recall how in every conceivable 
way some of those engaged in the manufacture and sale 
of intoxicating liquors sought to break down and destroy 
these principles and to rob the people in their respects to 
states of their protection.” 76 Cong. Rec. 4170 (1933). In 
questioning the motives of the alcoholic beverage indus- 
try and its lobbying groups to return power to the states 
it was argued that “all the time those who are now asking 
us to turn back to the states the control of the liquor 
traffic were seeking to break down the power of the states 
to control the liquor traffic”. 76 Cong. Rec. 4171 (1933). 
Immediately prior to voting on the exclusion of Section 3, 
Senator Borah of Idaho made the following statement: 


I venture the opinion, and it is my belief, that 
the Eighteenth Amendment would never have 
been adopted had it not been for the open, 
brazen, corrupt, persistent defiance of the laws 
of the dry states by the liquor interests outside 
those states. At the time the Eighteenth Amend- 
ment was adopted, 33 states had prohibition in 
some form. The people had declared they 
wanted to be rid of this evil, or at least to 
control it in their own way. These states were 
invaded, their laws broken, their officials cor- 
rupted, by the same influences which now plead 
for states’ rights and local control. They did not 
at that time respect that right at all. They tram- 
pled upon it and scoffed at it. Therefore, if we 
are to have what we are now promised, local 
self government, state rights, the right of the 
people of the respective states to adopt and 
enjoy their own policies, we must have some 


42 


other method, some other provisions of the con- 
stitution, than those which existed prior to the 
adoption of the Eighteenth Amendment. 


76 Cong. Rec. 4172 (1933). 


Therefore, the State urges this Court to carefully con- 
sider the wealth of case law and jurisprudence which has 
afforded the States wide latitude in the area of alcohol 
regulation and the regulation of alcohol advertising 
based upon the Twenty-first Amendment. Consistent 
with the specific language of the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment and with the plainly expressed congressional intent, 
this Court should affirm Rhode Island’s right to regulate 
price advertising of alcoholic beverages, and affirm the 
decision of the First Circuit. 


S 


CONCLUSION 


The State of Rhode Island has met the four-part Cen- 
tral Hudson test, regardless of whether the Twenty-first 
Amendment is considered. However, the State urges this 
Court to reaffirm State’s power under the Twenty-first 
Amendment, and find the following commentary instruc- 
tive. 


Beverage alcohol, America’s drug of choice, 
imposes enormous economic, health and social 
costs on the nation each year. Excessive drinking 
results in deaths on the highway; broken homes; 
abused spouses and children; increased spread 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV; 
violent crime and rape; alcohol dependence; and 


43 


an elevated risk of heart disease, cancer, hyper- 
tension, and liver cirrhosis. Although quantify- 
ing the effects of this drug epidemic 
inadequately accounts for the enormous human 
suffering related to alcohol problems, the official 
toll is staggering: 100,000 lives lost each year 
and $100 billion in economic damage. 


Efforts to reduce the level of problems have 
included government-sponsored prevention, 
treatment, and education programs; new laws 
against drunken driving and their stricter 
enforcement; the 21-year old minimum legal 
drinking age; and a wide variety of community 
interventions and media messages. Among the 
initiatives to reduce the demand for alcohol 
have been nationwide campaigns combating 
the aggressive advertising of alcoholic bever- 
ages. 


Hacker and Stuart, p. 1. (Emphasis in original). 


There is a wealth of case law in this country granting 
states the right to regulate the alcoholic beverage indus- 
try. This regulation included restrictions on advertising in 
almost all 50 states. See supra, fn. 5. If the narrowly- 
tailored, precise and amply justified regulation at issue 
here cannot survive constitutional scrutiny, it is difficult 
to conceive of a state advertising regulation that could 
stand. Indeed, to abolish the State’s power under the 
Twenty-first Amendment as it relates to alcoholic bever- 
age advertising would probably undermine the alcoholic 
beverage regulations of all of these states. The State of 


44 


Rhode Island therefore respectfully requests that the deci- 
sion of the First Circuit be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


RespeccA TEDFORD PARTINGTON 
Special Assistant 
Attorney General 
Department of the 
Attorney General 
72 Pine Street 
Providence, RI 02903 
(401) 274-4400 Ext. 2303 


