i 


i 


E 
ree 


3 


Sencis ge 


a5 se 
PRR Ay 
a eee 


la 
APPENDIX A 
[Filed Jan. 10, 1995] 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
TENTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-4128 
93-4134 


J. GARY SHEETS, 
Plaintiff-A ppellee, 
VS. 


SALT LAKE CoUuNTY, a governmental subdivision of the 
State of Utah; and MICHAEL GeorGE, individually and 
as Salt Lake County Investigator, 

Defendants-A ppellants. 


Appeals from the United States District Court 
for the District of Utah 
(D.C. No. 89-C-676-J) 


Before KELLY, and HENRY, Circuit Judges, and VAN 
BEBBER, District Judge.* 


KELLY, Circuit Judge. 


* The Honorable G.T. Van Bebber, United States District Judge 
for the District of Kansas, sitting by designation. 


2a 


In No. 93-4134, Defendants-Appellants, Salt Lake 
County and Michael George, appeal a $650,000 judg- 
ment on a jury verdict and in No. 93-4128, they appeal 
a $77,896.93 judgment for attorney’s fees entered against 
them. They contend that the district court erred by (1) 
refusing to hold Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. § 1983 action time- 
barred under Utah Code Ann. § 78-12-28(3), (2) deny- 
ing Defendants’ motion to dismiss and motion for judg- 
ment as a matter of law, (3) refusing to admit into evi- 
dence two books and newspaper articles, (4) denying 
Defendants’ motion for remittitur, (5) denying Defend- 
ants’ motion for new trial, and (6) granting the Plaintiff 
unreasonable attorney’s fees. Our jurisdiction arises un- 
der 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We affirm. 


Background 


On October 15, 1985, two bombs exploded in Salt 
Lake City. One killed Steve Christensen, a former em- 
ployee and executive of Coordinated Financial Services 
(“CFS”). The other killed Kathy Sheets, the wife of 
Gary Sheets, chairman of the board and president of 
CFS. These events generated a great deal of media in- 
terest. 


A few weeks after Kathy Sheets’ death, the police 
asked Gary Sheets for a copy of his wife’s diary. Ac- 
cording to Salt Lake City Detective Jim Bell, this was 
a common practice. Aplee. App. at 144. Gary Sheets 
read his wife’s diary. Believing that the diary would re- 
main confidential, Gary Sheets voluntarily turned the 
diary over to Detective Bell. Detective Bell testified that 
he could not recall whether he had assured Mr. Sheets 
the contents of the diary would remain confidential. 
Aplt. App. at 115. Salt Lake City Detective Ken Farns- 
worth testified, however, that he had told Mr. Sheets that 
the diary would remain confidential and communicated 
this message orally to those working on the case. Aplt. 
App. at 187; 193. 


3a 


Copies of the diary were distributed to the investigators 
and detectives assigned to the case, one of whom was the 
Defendant, Salt Lake County Investigator Michael George. 
At trial, Mr. George testified that he reviewed the diary, 
photocopied certain excerpts, and made thorough notes 
of the diary’s entries for his files. 


In January 1987, Mark Hoffman pleaded guilty to 
the murders of Steve Christensen and Kathy Sheets. Once 
Mr. Hoffman was sentenced to prison, the criminal in- 
vestigation of the bombings ended. The investigative file, 
including the diary, was then archived, making it avail- 
able for public inspection. 


At that time, the Salt Lake County Attorney’s Office 
had an unwritten policy that permitted its employees to 
speak to members of the press about their cases once an 
investigation closed, as long as the officers treated mem- 
bers of the press in an evenhanded fashion. Aplt. App. 
at 131. Pursuant to this policy, Mr. George met with 
three people who were writing books about the Hoffman 
murders, including his good friend Robert Lindsey. When 
ke met with Mr. Lindsey, he allowed him to examine his 
file box of notes. Mr. George testified that this box may 
well have contained the photocopies and handwritten 
notes he had taken from the diary. By contrast, Mr. 
George did not provide the other authors with access 
to his files. Instead, those authors asked him questions 
and he responded, often referring to his notes. Mr. 
George destroyed his note files before the publication of 
Mr. Lindsey’s book. 


All three authors published books about the Hoffman 
murders. Mr. Lindsey’s book was the only one, however, 
to contain direct quotations from Kathy Sheet’s diary. 
On June 2, 1989, Mr. Sheets filed suit against Salt Lake 
County and various prosecutors and police officers as- 
serting state and federal violations, including a claim 
for constitutional invasion of privacy. On December 4, 
1990, Mr. Sheets amended his complaint to add a § 1983 


4a 


claim against the County, Mr. George, and Salt Lake 
County Attorney Theodore Cannon. Only Mr. George 
and the County remained as Defendants throughout the 
trial. At the close of the Plaintiffs case, Defendants 
moved to dismiss, in reality a motion for judgment as 
a matter of law, Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(a), which the dis- 
trict court denied. 


Defendants then put on their case, and sought to offer 
into evidence excerpts from the other authors’ books as 
well as newspaper articles about Kathy and Gary Sheets. 
The Plaintiff objected to admissions of these exhibits on 
grounds that they were irrelevant. The district court sus- 
tained the objection, but excluded the evidence on grounds 
of lack of foundation. At the close of all the evidence, 
Defendants moved for judgment as a matter of law. /d.; 
Aplt. App. at 341. 


The jury returned a verdict of $650,000 in favor of 
Mr. Sheets. Defendants then filed motions for judgment 
as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(b), new trial, and 
remittitur. Aplt. App. at 81-82. The district court de- 
nied each of these post-trial motions. 


Plaintiff subsequently filed a motion for attorney’s fees 
and other costs. Defendants filed objections, and the dis- 
rict court entered an order awarding Mr. Sheets 
$77,896.93 in attorney’s fees. 


Discussion 


I. Statute of Limitations 


Defendants initially contend that the district court 
erred by refusing to bar Mr. Sheets’ § 1983 action under 
the two-year statute of limitations contained in Utah Code 
Ann. § 78-12-28(3), which purports to apply specifically 
to $ 1983 actions. We have previously held, however, 
that in enacting Utah Code Ann. § 78-12-28(3), the 
Utah legislature exceeded its authority and as such this 
section is invalid. Arnold v. Duchesne County, 26 F.3d 


5a 


982, 989 (10th Cir. 1994), petition for cert. filed, 63 
U.S.L.W. 3161 (Aug. 25, 1994) (No. 94-358). In- 
stead, a four-year statute of limitations under Utah Code 
Ann. § 78-12-35(3) governs § 1983 actions. See id. at 
985. Since Mr. Lindsey’s book was published in August 
1988, and Mr. Sheets filed suit within four years of this 
date, Mr. Sheets’ § 1983 claim was not barred under the 
applicable statute of limitations. 


Il. Denial of Motions for Judgment as a Matter of Law 


Defendants claim that the district court erred by deny- 
ing their motions for judgment as a matter of law. We 
review de novo the district court’s denial of Defendants’ 
motions for judgment as a matter of law. See F.D.I.C. 
v. United Pacific Ins. Co., 20 F.3d 1070, 1079 (10th 
Cir. 1994). To overturn the denial, “we must conclude 
that ‘viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving 
party, the evidence and all reasonable inferences to be 
drawn therefrom point but one way, in favor of the 
moving party.’” Jd. (quoting Mitchell v. Mobil Oil 
Corp., 896 F.2d 463, 467 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 
U.S. 898 (1990) ). 


Defendants first argue that Mr. Sheets had no legiti- 
mate expectation of privacy in his wife’s diary, claiming 
that he gave it to the authorities without any restrictions 
on its use. They further argue that the Plaintiff pro- 
duced insuffiicent evidence of proximate cause to war- 
rant submission of the issue to the jury and insufficient 
evidence for the jury to conclude that Mr. George inten- 
tionally violated Mr. Sheets’ right of privacy. We dis- 
agree. 

A. Expectation of Privacy 


Cases involving the constitutional right of privacy ad- 
dress two distinct interests: “[o]ne is the individual in- 
terest in avoiding disclosure of personal matters, and an- 
other is the interest in independence in making certain 
kinds of important decisions.” Whalen v. Roe, 429 U.S. 


5, ARAN iii ini in NN 


6a 


589, 599-600 (1977). Here, we are concerned only with 
the former of these interests. We have held that “[d]jue 
process . . . implies an assurance of confidentiality with 
respect to certain forms of personal information possessed 
by the state.” Mangels v. Pena, 789 F.2d 836, 839 
(10th Cir. 1986). 


Information falls within the ambit of constitutional pro- 
tection when an individual has a “legtimiate expectation 
. that it will remain confidential while in the state’s 
possession.” Jd. The legitimacy of this exception de- 
pends, “at least in part, upon the intimate or otherwise 
personal nature of the material which the state possesses.” 
Id. If an individual has a legitimate expectation of con- 
fidentiality, then “[d]Jisclosure of such information must 
advance a compelling state interest which, in addition, 
must be accomplished in the least intrusive manner.” /d. 
(citing Denver Policemen’s Protective Assoc. v. Lichten- 
stein, 660 F.2d 432, 435 (10th Cir. 1981)). Defendants 
do not contend that there was any compelling state in- 
terest in warranting disclosure and we believe that 
whether the diary was to be kept confidential as well as 
whether the material is sufficiently personal to be subject 
to protection were questions for the jury to resolve based 
upon the evidence. 


Defendants have mischaracterized the issue. Plaintiff 
does not claim an interest in avoiding disclosure of his 
deceased wife’s general feelings and thoughts, rather he 
claims an interest in avoiding disclosure of things per- 
sonal to him, such as his wife’s written perceptions of 
their marriage. Upon review of Mrs. Sheets’ diary and 
the record, a jury could easily find that the diary con- 
tained information about Mr. Sheets that only a spouse 
would know and that such information was both inti- 
mate and personal to Mr. Sheets. Moreover, Mr. Sheets’ 
and Detective Farnsworth’s testimony that both parties 
considered the diary to be confidential, leads us to con- 
clude that there was ample evidence for a jury to con- 


Ta 


clude that Mr. Sheets legitimately expected his wife’s 
diary to remain confidential while in the hands of the 
police. See Aplt. App. at 187-88; 229. 


The fact that Mr. Sheets did not author the informa- 
tion does not prohibit him from having a distinct privacy 
interest in the dissemination of information written about 
the personal aspects of his life. See Nixon v. Adminis- 
trator of General Services, 433 U.S. 425, 458 (1977) 
(“This expectation is independent of the question of 
ownership of the materials . . . .”). Our analysis of 
one’s expectation of privacy in this area focuses upon the 
nature of the material opened to public view, see Nilson 
v. Layton City, No. 94-4077, 1995 WL 3759, slip op. 
at 5-6 (10th Cir. January 6, 1995), not on the individ- 
ual who penned the pages on which this information 


appears. 


Arguably, the information is not extremely sensitive 


in nature, in other words, the facts revealed in the diary 
about Mr. Sheets are not particularly controversial or em- 
barrassing. However, information need not be embarras- 
ing to be personal and whether it is sufficiently personal 
to be protected is, in this case, a legitimate question for 
the jury. We find that information conveyed to one’s 
spouse or that one’s spouse has observed about one’s 
character, marriage, finances, and business to be personal 
in nature and subject to a reasonable expectation of 
privacy.’ Mrs. Sheets’ diary entries about her husband 
and their marital relationship are certainly as personal 
as medical and certain financial records, which courts 
have placed within the ambit of constitutional protec- 


1 Though the common law tort of invasion of privacy does not 
control the federal constitutional claim, we find that the tort, as 
defined by § 652D of the Restatement, provides some guidance as 
to what constitutes a reasonable expectation of privacy. Accord- 
ingly, we note that the information revealed from Kathy Sheets’ 
diary did not involve a matter of public concern, and its public 
disclosure could be considered highly offensive to the reasonable 
person. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652D (1977). 


8a 


tion. See United States v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 638 
F.2d 570, 577 (3d Cir. 1980) (medical records); Fra- 
ternal Order of Police, Lodge 5 v. Philadelphia, 812 
F.2d 105, 115 (3d Cir. 1987) (financial records). 


The fact that Detective Bell could not recall whether 
he had initially assured Mr. Sheets of the diary’s con- 
fidentiality does not negate both Mr. Sheets and Detec- 
tive Farnsworth’s testimony that an understanding of con- 
fidentiality did exist. In addition, the very nature of the 
item—a diary, a place traditionally reserved for the re- 
cording of private thoughts—which was given to the 
police for the specific purpose of aiding their investiga- 
tion, bolsters Mr. Sheets’ claim that he expected the 
item to remain confidential. 


Defendants contend that Mr. Sheets could not have 
expected the diary to remain confidential, considering the 
many investigators who had access to the diary. Defend- 
ants gloss over a crucial point. To turn a diary over 
to a limited group for what one perceives to be a limited 
and proper purpose is quite different than inviting pub- 
lication of the material. 


Finally, although this point is conceded by Defend- 
ants, we find no compelling state interest in Mr. George’s 
disclosure of the diary excerpts to Mr. Lindsey. We have 
found, for example, “compelling state interest” in the 
disclosure of confidential statements police officers made 
for investigative files. See Lichtenstein, 660 F.2d at 436. 
The files in Lichtenstein were discoverable because the 
state’s interest in ascertaining the truth in a criminal 
proceeding in addition to defendants’ rights to exculpa- 
tory evidence outweighed the officers’ legitimate expecta- 
tion of privacy in the files. 7d. In this case, Defendants 
have supplied no such compelling interest in the dissemi- 
nation of Mrs. Sheets’ diary to Mr. Lindsey. 


9a 


B. Proximate Cause 


Defendants also claim that Mr. Sheets failed to estab- 
lish Mr. George as the proximate cause of Mr. Sheets’ 
injury. We again must disagree. After hearing the evi- 
dence at trial, the jury concluded that Mr. George was 
responsible for disseminating the diary excerpts to Mr. 
Lindsey. Nonetheless, Defendants claim that there was 
insufficient evidence adduced at trial to hold Mr. George 
accountable as the proximate cause of Mr. Sheets’ privacy 
violation. 


We have held if “competent evidence [is] introduced, 
even though conflicting, the question[] of . . . proximate 
cause must be left to the jury.” Key v. Liquid Energy 
Corp., 906 F.2d 500, 505 (10th Cir. 1990). Mr. Lind- 
sey testified that there were three possible sources of the 
diary information: Detectives Farnsworth, Cannon, and 
George. Mr. Farnsworth denied giving the information 
to Mr. Lindsey. Mr. Cannon testified that he did not 
have a copy of the diary nor did he keep meticulous 
notes based on the diary. Mr. George, on the other hand, 
testified that he made photocopies and took exact notes 
from the diary, that he kept these excerpts in his files, 
that he was very good friends with Robert Lindsey, and 
that he let Mr. Lindsey look through his files. We deem 
this to be ample evidence for a jury to conclude that 
Mr. George proximately caused the invasion of Mr. 
Sheets’ privacy. 


Defendants additionally claim that Mr. George can- 
not be considered the proximate cause of Mr. Sheets’ 
§ 1983 violation because he did not intentionally cause 
Mr. Lindsey to use the diary excerpts in the book. De- 
fendants misconstrue the meaning of proximate cause. 
A defendant is the proximate cause of a plaintiff's injury 
if the injury a natural consequence of defendant’s ac- 
tions. Id. Since the jury surmised that Mr. George was 
responsible for disseminating the informattoion to Mr. 


10a 


Lindsey, Mr. George was indeed the proximate cause of 
Mr. Sheets’ injury. 


C. Insufficient Evidence of Intentional Conduct 


Defendants contend that the Plaintiff failed to prove 
that Mr. George intentionally violated his constitutional 
right, as required by the court’s instruction to the jury. 
According to Defendants, Plaintiff established mere negli- 
gence. We disagree. 


The district court instructed the jury to find that De- 
fendants violated Plaintiffs constitutional right to privacy 
only if Mr. George “intentionally committed the acts 
which violated Plaintiff's constitutional right.” See Aplee. 
Supp. App. at 172. The court further instructed that 
“specific intent to deprive Plaintiff of a constitutional 
right” is not necessary; instead, “it is sufficient if Plain- 
tiff can prove that a Defendant intentionally committed 
the acts which resulted in the violation of Plaintiff's con- 
stitutional right.” /d. Defendants did not object to these 
jury instructions, and they are not at issue. Viewing 
the evidence and all reasonable inferences in favor of the 
verdict, as we must, see Brown v. McGraw-Edison Co., 
736 F.2d 609, 612-13 (10th Cir. 1984), we find that 
sufficient evidence was proffered at trial for the jury to 
conclude that Mr. George intentionally, as opposed to 
negligently, disclosed the diary information to Mr. 
Lindsey. 


Defendants advanced several additional arguments to 
the district court in support of their motion to dismiss, 
including that Mr. Sheets was a public figure both as a 
result of his position in the Mormon Church as well as 
a result of a federal prosecution for which he was acquit- 
ted. In this appeal, however, Defendants only briefed 
and argued that the lower court erred “because plaintiff 
had no reasonable expectation of privacy in his murdered 
wife’s diary which he gave to the Salt Lake City Police 
Department without any restrictions . . . and because 


lla 


plaintiff had insufficient evidence of proximate cause to 
warrant submission to the jury.” Aplt. Br. at 22. Al- 
though we are not persuaded by any of the points pre- 
sented to the district court, a party who chooses not to 
brief a particular point, ordinarily is deemed to have 
waived the contention on appeal. McKinsey v. Sentry 
Inc., 986 F.2d 401, 407 (10th Cir. 1993); Bledsoe y. 
Garcia, 742 F.2d 1237, 1244 (10th Cir. 1984); White- 
head v. Silver, 346 F.2d 207, 209 n.2 (10th Cir. 1965). 


For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district court’s 
denial of Defendants’ motions for judgment as a matter 
of law. 


III. Admission of Evidence 


Defendants claim that the trial court erred by exclud- 
ing the books and newspaper articles Defendants tried to 
introduce into evidence. “A district court possesses con- 
siderable discretion in governing the presentation of evi- 
dence, and its decisions will not be disturbed absent 
manifest injustice to the parties” and clear abuse of dis- 
cretion. Comcoa, Inc. v. NEC Tels., Inc., 931 F.2d 
655, 663 (10th Cir. 1991); Orth v. Emerson Elec. Co., 
980 F.2d 632, 639 (10th Cir. 1992). 


When Defendants sought to introduce excerpts from 
the other authors’ books and various newspaper articles 
into evidence, the Plaintiff objected on the grounds of 
relevance. The court sustained the objection, but based 
the exclusion on lack of foundation. Establishing foun- 
dation is the process whereby a proponent of a piece of 
evidence identifies or authenticates the evidence, usually 
with the testimony of a witness. See Edward W. Cleary, 
McCormick on Evidence § 51, at 123 (3d ed. 1984). 
Here, the authenticity of the books and articles had been 
stipulated in the pretrial order. The evidentiary founda- 
tion for these documents was thus established. Conse- 
quently, the district court erred by excluding the evidence 
for lack of foundation. 


12a 


The district court was correct, however, in sustaining 
the Plaintiff's objection. Defendants failed to connect 
the books and the newspaper articles to Mrs. Sheets 
diary. See Fed. R. Evid. 402. Hence, they did not estab- 
lish the evidence’s relevance nor a basis for its admission. 
Therefore, the court’s only error was basing the exclusion 
on lack of foundation, instead of relevance. We may 
affirm the district court’s evidentiary ruling, despite the 
fact its conclusion was based on incorrect grounds. See 
In re Slack-Horner Foundries Co., 971 F.2d 577, 579- 
80 (10th Cir. 1992) (“‘[T]rial court’s decision will be 
affirmed if the record reveals another ground which sup- 
ports the decision.’”) (quoting Scivally v. Time Ins. Co., 
724 F.2d 101, 103 (10th Cir. 1983)). Because we find 
grounds to support the district court’s exclusion of this 
evidence, we affirm its evidentiary ruling. 


IV. Remittitur 


Defendants claim that the trial court erred by failing 
to grant their motion for remittitur. The trial court’s 
denial of a motion for remittitur is entitled to consider- 
able deference on appeal. We will not disturb this deter- 
mination absent a gross abuse of discretion. Karns vy. 
Emerson Elec. Co., 817 F.2d 1452, 1460 (10th Cir. 
1987). We will only find an abuse of discretion if the 
jury award is “ ‘so excessive . . . as to shock the judicial 
conscience and to raise an irresistible inference that pas- 
sion, prejudice, corruption or another improper cause 
invaded the trial... .” J/d. (quoting Barnes v. Smith, 
305 F.2d 226, 228 (10th Cir. 1962)). Because deter- 
mination of damages is traditionally a jury function, 
Whitley v. OKC Corp., 719 F.2d 1051, 1058 (10th 
Cir. 1983), and the jury’s award of $650,000 does not 
shock our conscience, we affirm the trial court’s denial of 
remittitur. 

V. New Trial 


Defendants claim that the district court erred by deny- 
ing their motion for new trial. We review the district 


| | 


13a 


court’s denial of defendants’ motion for new trial for 
abuse of discretion. Hinds v. General Motors Corp., 988 
F.2d 1039, 1046 (10th Cir. 1993). We will reverse the 
denial of a motion for a new trial only if the trial court 
“made a clear error of judgment or exceeded the bounds 
of permissible choice in the circumstances.” Jd. De- 
fendants have wholly failed to establish any bases for a 
new trial. Hence, we affirm the district court’s denial of 
defendants’ motion for new trial. 


VI. Attorney’s Fees 


Defendants claim that the district court’s award of 
attorney’s fees was unreasonable. We review the district 
court’s award of attorney’s fees to the plaintiff for abuse 
of discretion. Post Office v. Portec, Inc., 913 F.2d 802, 
811 (10th Cir. 1990). We will find the underlying fac- 
tual findings reversible only if they are clearly erroneous. 
See Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a); Supre v. Ricketts, 792 F.2d 
958, 961 (10th Cir. 1986). 


Plaintiff has the burden of proving in the first instance 
the extent and reasonableness of requested attoriicy s fees 
with meticulous and contemporaneous time records. See 
Mares v. Credit Bureau of Raton, 801 F.2d 1197, 1210 
(10th Cir. 1986). This was done, and the district court 
made the adjustments it deemed appropriate. Indeed, 
having seen the work of these attorneys, the district court 
is in a unique position to determine an appropriate fee. 
This is especially true in the absence of any evidence to 
the contrary. Defendants failed to proffer any evidence 
that the rates or hours claimed by Mr. Sheets’ attorneys 
or the court’s adjustments were unreasonable. Defend- 
ants simply argue that the fees were duplicative and 
exorbitant in nature. Because Defendants have failed to 
substantiate these allegations with evidence or otherwise, 
they waived their right to an evidentiary hearing and 
consequently may not now challenge the district court’s 
determination that the number of hours expended were 


l4a 


reasonable. See Blum v. Stenson, 465 U.S. 886, 892 
n.5 (1984). 


Defendants also claim that the district court abused 
its discretion by halving the amount Plaintiff's counsel 
charged, since this total included time spent on the case 
not directly involving Mr. George and Salt Lake County. 
We find, however, the court’s determination to be reason- 
able. See, e.g., Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 435 
(1983). Hence, we affirm the district court’s award of 
$77,896.33 in attorney’s fees. 


AFFIRMED. 


15a 


APPENDIX B 
[Filed May 10, 1991] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF UTAH 
CENTRAL DIVISION 


Civil No. 89-C-676]J 


GARY SHEETS, 
Plaintiff, 
Vs. 


ROBERT LINDSEY, SIMON & SCHUSTER, INC., a corpora- 
tion, SALT LAKE COUNTY, a governmental subdivision 
of the State of Utah, THEoporRE L. CANNON, individ- 
ually and as Salt Lake County Attorney, and MICHAEL 
GEORGE, individually and as a Salt Lake County In- 
vestigator, 

Defendants. 


OPINION AND ORDER 


I. INTRODUCTION 


On January 29, 1991, the court heard argument on 
a Motion to Dismiss filed by defendant Salt Lake County 
(the “County”). The County argued that plaintiff's 42 
U.S.C. § 1983 (1981) claims were barred by the ap- 
plicable statute of limitations. On May 2, the court 
heard argument on a second Motion to Dismiss filed by 
defendant Michael George (“George”). George joined 
the County’s Motion to Dismiss, similarly arguing that 
plaintiff's § 1983 claims were time barred. The court 
took the Motions under advisement. Having since care- 


16a 


fully considered the memoranda and arguments of coun- 
sel, and for the reasons set forth below, the court hereby 
DENIES defendants’ Motion to Dismiss. 


Ii. FACTS 


In August of 1988, defendant Simon and Schuster pub- 
lished a book entitled “A Gathering of Saints” (the 
“book”). The book, which was written by defendant 
Robert Lindsey (“Lindsey”), contained portions of a 
diary written by plaintiff's deceased wife. On July 31, 
1989, plaintiff filed the above captioned case claiming de- 
fendants Simon and Schuster and Lindsey had unreason- 
ably invaded plaintiff's privacy by publishing portions of 
the diary. On December 5, 1990, over two years after 
the book was published, plaintiff filed an Amended Com- 
plaint naming the County and George (collectively “de- 
fendants”) as additional defendants to this action. Plain- 
tiffs claims against defendants likewise arise out of the 
August, 1988, publication of the book. 


This case is currently before the court on defendants’ 
Motions to Dismiss plaintiff's § 1983 claims against them. 
Defendants argue that such claims are barred by the two- 
year statute of limitations found in Utah Code Ann. 
(“U.C.A.”) § 78-12-28(3) (1987).* In contrast, plaintiff 
contends that the four-year residual statute of limitations 
found in U.C.A. § 78-12-25(2) (1987) applies to § 1983 
actions filed in the State of Utah, and therefore his civil 
rights claims against defendants were timely.® 


1Utah Code Ann. § 78-12-28(3) provides that an action “for 
injury to the personal rights of another as a civil rights suit 
under 42 U.S.C. 1983” must be filed within two years. 


2Some states have a “general” statute of limitations provision 
which applies to all personal injury actions with certain specific 
exceptions. Other states have a “residual” provision which applies 
to all actions not otherwise provided for, including personal in- 
jury actions. See e.g., U.C.A. § 78-12-25(2) (An action for relief 
not otherwise provided for by law must be brought within four 
years.) 


17a 
Ill. DISCUSSION 


This court must select which state statute of limitations 
provision governs § 1983 actions filed in federal court in 
the State of Utah.* Section 1983 itself does not contain 
a specific statute of limitations. Therefore, because Con- 
gress has not established a time period in which a cause 
of action may be brought under § 1983, the settled prac- 
tice is to adopt a local provision as federal law. See 
Board of Regents v. Tomanio, 446 U.S. 478, 483 (1980). 


In 42 U.S.C. § 1988 (1981), Congress specifically en- 
dorsed the borrowing of state-law limitations for purposes 
of civil rights actions when federal law is deficient. A 
State statute will only be adopted, however, if it “is not 
inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United 
States.” 42 U.S.C. § 1988.‘ Because § 1988 does not 


% Section 1983 provides in pertinent part: 


Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the 
District of Columbia, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any 
citizen of the United States or other person within the juris- 
diction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, 
or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be 
liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, 
or other proper proceeding for redress. 


42 U.S.C. § 1983. 
* Section 1988 provides in pertinent part: 


The jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters conferred on 
the district courts by the provisions of this Title, and of Title 
“CIVIL RIGHTS,” and of Title “CRIMES,” for the protection 
of all persons in the United States in their civil rights, and 
for their vindication, shall be exercised and enforced in con- 
formity with the laws of the United States, so far as such laws 
are suitable to carry the same into effect; but in all cases 
where they are not adapted to the object, or are deficient in 
the provisions necessary to furnish suitable remedies and 
punish offenses against law, the common law, as modified and 
changed by the constitution and statutes of the State wherein 
the court having jurisdiction of such civil or criminal cause 


18a 


offer any guidance as to which state provision to borrow, 
the U.S. Supreme Court has directed courts to select the 
state statute of limitations “most analogous”, Board of 
Regents, 446 U.S. at 488, and “most appropriate”, John- 
son v. Railway Express Agency, Inc., 421 U.S. 454, 462 
(1975), to the particular § 1983 action. Federal courts 
are bound by a state’s construction of its own statute of 
limitations, but it is a question of federal law whether a 
particular state statute is applicable to a federal claim. 
See Wilson v. Garcia, 471 U.S. 261, 269-71 (1985). 


The first step in selecting a state statute of limitations 
for purposes of a federal claim, is to characterize the 
essential nature of the federal action. See Wilson, 471 
U.S. at 268. Once a federal action has been character- 
ized, an appropriate state-law analogy may be drawn. The 
practice of seeking state-law analogies for particular 
§ 1983 claims has bred confusion and inconsistency in 
the lower courts, and generated time-consuming litigation. 
See Owens v. Okure, 488 U.S. 235, 240 (1989). Some 
courts have found state-law analogies to § 1983 claims 
in common-law tort, others in contract law, and still 
others in statutory law.® Jd. at 241. Because the choice 
of the statute of limitations depended upon the characteri- 
zation of the § 1983 action, two or more state limitation 
provisions could arguably apply to a given claim. 


is held, so far as the same is not inconsistent with the Consti- 
tution and laws of the United States .... 


42 U.S.C. § 1988 (1981). 


5 Almost every § 1983 claim can be favorably analogize to more 
than one common-law form of action. To name a few, § 1983 has 
been allege to encompass: “discrimination in public employment 
on the basis of race or the exercise of First Amendment rights, 
discharge or demotion without procedural due process, mistreat- 
ment of schoolchildren, deliberate indifference to the medical needs 
of prison inmates, the seizure of chattels without advance notice 
or sufficient opportunity to heard ....” Wilson, 471 U.S. at 273 
(Footnotes omitted.) 


19a 


In Wilson, 471 U.S. at 261, the Supreme Court sought 
to end the confusion over which state-law analogy most 
appropriately characterized the essential nature of a 
§ 1983 claim. The Court held that the legislative history 
of § 1983 and the wide array of claims embraced by that 
provision confers a general remedy for “injuries to per- 
sonal rights”. Wilson, 471 U.S. at 280. Therefore, be- 
cause § 1983 claims are best characterized as personal 
injury actions, the Court held that a state’s personal injury 
statute of limitations should be applied to all § 1983 
actions. /d. 


In states with a single statute of limitations for per- 
sonal injury claims, Wilson eliminated the confusion over 
which limitations provision a court should borrow for 
purposes of § 1983. Questions continued to arise, how- 
ever, in states with multiple personal injury limitations 
provisions. Accordingly, in Owens v. Okure, 488 US. 
235, 249-50, the Court supplemented Wilson,* and held 
that in states with multiple limitations periods for personal 
injury actions, federal courts should borrow a state’s gen- 
eral or residual statute of limitations. 7d. Because a gen- 
eral or residual statute of limitations is easily identifiable 
by language or application, the Court noted that a party 
to a § 1983 action could readily ascertain the applicable 
limitations period. Id. 248-49. 


The Utah legislature has enacted multiple statutes of 
limitations governing personal injury actions. See e.g., 
U.C.A. § 78-12-28(2) (1987) (two years for death 
caused by wrongful action or neglect); U.C.A. § 78-112- 
29(4) (Supp. 1988) (one year for libel, slander, assault, 
battery, false imprisonment, or seduction). Plaintiffs 


® The Court’s decision in Owens was intended to eliminate any 
confusion unaddressed by Wilson. “Our decision in Wilson promised 
an end to the confusion over what statute of limitations to apply 
to § 1983 actions; with today’s decision, we hope to fulfill Wilson’s 
promise.” Owens, 488 U.S. at 251. 


RMR iii 


20a 


therefore assert that, because Utah has more than one 
limitations provisions governing personal injury claims, 
the court should apply the state’s residual statute of limi- 
tations. The court agrees. To avoid confusion as to 
which personal injury statutes of limitations applies to a 
§ 1983 action filed in Utah, the four-year limitations pro- 
vision found in U.C.A. § 78-12-25(2) should govern ail 
§ 1983 actions. Accordingly, the court finds that plain- 
tiffs Amended Complaint, filed on December 5, 1990, 
naming the County and George as defendants to an action 
which arose in August of 1988, came well within the four- 
year statute of limitations found in U.C.A. § 78-12-25(2). 


While Owens would seem dispositive of the question as 
to which state statute of limitations applies to § 1983 
actions, the Utah legislature has created additional con- 
fusion by enacting a statute of limitations provision which 
specifically addresses civil rights claims. Utah Code Ann. 
§ 78-12-28(3) provides that an action “for injury to the 
personal rights of another as a civil rights suit under 42 
U.S.C. 1983” must be filed within two years. Defendants 
contend that because U.C.A. § 78-12-28(3) specifically 
addresses § 1983 claims, Owens is inapposite to the case 
at bar. They argue that because U.C.A. § 78-12-28(3) 
eliminates the confusion over which of Utah’s personal 
injury limitations provisions applies to § 1983 actions, 
this court need not content itself with Utah’s residual 
statute of limitations. 


The court begins its analysis of U.C.A. § 78-12-28(3) 
by first noting that the applicability of this provision to 
§ 1983 actions filed in federal court in the State of Utah 
is one of first impression. As discussed above, Congress 
failed to provide a statute of limitations for suits brought 
under § 1983. Therefore, the court must borrow the Utah 
State statute of limitations provision most analogous and 
most appropriate to plaintiff's § 1983 action, so long as 
the chosen limitations period is not inconsistent with fed- 
eral law and policy. 42 U.S.C. § 1988. 


21a 


The requirement that a state statute be both analogous 
and appropriate, as well as consistent with federal law 
and policy, emphasizes the predominance of the federal 
interest in the borrowing process, taken as a whole.’ See 
Wilson, 471 U.S. at 269. In Occidental Life Ins. Co. of 
California, 432 U.S. 355 (1977), the Court stated the 
reasons for carefully scrutinizing the borrowed state stat- 
ute. Because “State legislatures do not devise their limi- 
tations periods with national interests in mind,” the Court 
noted that “it is the duty of the federal courts to assure 
that the importance of state law will not frustrate or 
interfere with the implementation of national policies.” 
Occidental Life, 432 U.S. at 367. 


Section 1983 provides a federal remedy against incur- 
sions under the claimed authority of state law upon rights 
secured by the Constitution and laws of the Nation. See 
Wilson, 471 U.S. at 271-72. The purposes of § 1983 are 
several fold: to override certain kinds of state laws; to 
provide a remedy where state law is inadequate; to pro- 
vide a federal remedy where the state remedy, though 
adequate in theory, was not available in practice; and to 
provide a remedy in the federal courts supplementary to 
any remedy any state might have.* See McNeese v. Board 


7In Wilson, the Court noted that: 


The importance of the policies and purposes of the States on 
matters of civil rights is not the primary office of the borrow- 
ing provision in § 1988; rather, the statute is designed to 
assure that neutral rules of decision will be available to en- 
force the civil right actions, among them § 1983. Congress 
surely did not intend to assign to state courts and legislatures 
a conclusive role in the formative function of defining and 
characterizing the essential elements of a federal cause of 
action. 


Wilson, 471 U.S. at 269. 


8 The genesis of the Civil Rights Act of 1871 was the cam- 
paign of violence and deception in the South fueled by the Ku 
Klux Klan. The debates on the Act chronicle the insecurity of 
life, liberty, and property in the Southern States: “Immunity is 


| 22a 


of Education, 373 U.S. 668, 672 (1963). In sum, § 1983 
provides the means to preserve and enforce the Constitu- 
tional rights, privileges and immunities granted to each 
citizen. The high purposes of this unique remedy make it 
appropriate to accord the statute a sweep as broad as its 
language. See Wilson, 471 U.S. at 272. 


Utah Code Ann. § 78-12-28(3) purports to impose a 
specific time limitation on all § 1983 claims. In other 
words, the State of Utah has specifically dictated the time 
frame in which a federal claimant may vindicate a Con- 
stitutional deprivation by persons acting under color of 
state law. For the reasons set forth below, the court finds 
that U.C.A. is neither consistent with, nor analogous to, 
federal law and policy. 


Although the federal courts are bound by a state’s 
construction of its own statute of limitations, it is a ques- 
tion of federal law whether a particular state statute is 
applicable to a federal claim. The power of selecting the 
most analogous statute of repose from existing state stat- 
utes is a federal choice; not a state choice. State statutes 
of repose relate to state created or state recognized causes 
of action. A state is within its sphere of power in our 
federal system of government, as a matter of state policy, 
when it limits the time within which a state cause of 
action may be vindicated in state court. In contrast, a 
federally recognized or federally created cause of action 
cannot be foreshortened by specific state legislation.’ 


given to crime, and the records of public tribunals are searched 
in vain for any evidence of effective redress.” Wilson, 471 U.S. 
at 276. 


® The court is particularly mindful of the policies underlying 
federalism in the context of § 1983. When the fundamental goal 
of a federal remedy is to deter future abuses of those acting under 
color of state law, it is hardly appropriate to permit a state itself 
to limit the time period in which a claim may be brought against 
a@ person acting under color of state law. 


: - 


23a 


The concept is simple. The issue before the court con- 
cerns the fundamental principle of federalism; namely the 
geographic division of power. A state lacks the power to 
truncate federally created or federally recognized rights. 
The principles of federalism is the perennial message of 
both the Constitution and the Civil Rights Act. Whether 
to diminish a federal created right is simply not a choice 
for a state to make. By passing U.C.A. § 78-12-28(3), 
the State of Utah seeks to make a choice that is clearly 
outside the realm of their Constitutionally created powers. 
Determining the statute of limitations for a federally cre- 
acted cause of action, the court emphasizes, is exclusively 
a federal choice. 


Confusion arises because Congress has not itself made 
a specific and express choice as to a statute of repose with 
respect to § 1983. Both the higher courts and Congress 
mandate that this court choose the most analogous state 
Statute to the federal action. Accordingly, the court finds 
that U.C.A. § 78-12-28(3) not only impermissible in- 
trudes into the federal sphere, it is not the most analogous 
State statute with respect to a § 1983 action. The Utah 
statute does not even purport to deal with similar state 
created or recognized state causes of action. By its ex- 
Press language, the provision deals solely with § 1983 
civil rights actions. 


As set forth in Owens, the court finds that the most 
analogous statute of limitations with respect to § 1983, is 
the residual statute of limitations found in U.C.A. § 78- 
12-25(2). The residual statute of lim‘tations is broad, not 
selective, and thus may legitimately be used as a guide for 
a federal choice.’ Therefore, for the reasons set forth 


1 The court is further troubled by a state law enacted for the 
sole purpose of limiting the time period in which a § 1988 claim 
may be brought. Such a statute may well be motivated by a 
legislative desire to limit the liability of persons acting under 
color of state law. In contrast, the court believes that the enact- 
ment of a state general or residual statute of limitations is not 


24a 
herein, to apply U.C.A. § 78-12-25(2) to plaintiff's 
§ 1983 claims is the federal choice this court makes. 


Defendants’ Motions to Dismiss must therefore be 
DENIED. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 
Dated this 10 day of May, 1991. 


By THE CouRT: 


‘s/ Bruce S. Jenkins 
BRUCE S. JENKINS 
Chief Judge 
United States District Court 


likely to be motivated by a legislative desire to limit the liability 
of its officers or employees. 


hs 


25a 
APPENDIX C 
[Filed Jul 15, 1993] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF UTAH 
CENTRAL DIVISION 


Civil No. 89-C-676J 


Gary SHEETS, 


a Plaintiff, 


SALT LAKE County, a governmental subdivision of the 
State of Utah, and MICHAEL GEORGE, individually and 
as Salt Lake County Investigator, 

Defendants. 


ORDER 


The above-captioned action came on for hearing before 
this Court on June 21, 1993, on defendants’ Motion for 
Judgment as a Matter of Law, Motion for New Trial and 
Motion for Remittitur. Having reviewed the memoranda 
filed herein, and having heard and considered the argu- 
ments of counsel, and for the reasons more particularly 
explicated on the record in open court, 


IT IS ORDERED that defendants’ Motion for Judgment 
as a Matter of Law pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(a) is 
DENIED, the defendants having failed to show that “the 
evidence points but one way and is susceptible to no rea- 
sonable inferences which may sustain the position of the 
party against whom the motion is made.” Anderson y. 
Phillips Petroleum Co., 861 F.2d 631, 634 (10th Cir. 
1988). 


26a 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that defendants’ Motion 
for New Trial pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 59(a) is DE- 
NIED, the defendants having failed to establish grounds 
sufficient to warrant a new trial, e.g., that the verdict “is 
clearly, decidedly, or overwhelmingly against the weight 
of the evidence,” Black v. Heib’s Enterprises, Inc., 805 
F.2d 360, 363 (10th Cir. 1986); Prebble v. Brodrick, 
535 F.2d 605, 617 (10th Cir. 1976), that the record is 
tainted by prejudicial error, Rasmussen Drilling, Inc. v. 
Kerr-McGee Nuclear Corp., 571 F.2d 1144, 1148-49 
(10th Cir. 1978), that jury passion and prejudice resulted 
in an excessive damages award, Mason v. Texaco, Inc., 
948 F.2d 1546, 1561 (10th Cir. 1991), or that substan- 
tial justice has not been done. See Holmes v. Wack, 464 
F.2d 86, 88-89 (10th Cir. 1972). 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that defendants’ Motion 
for Remittitur is DENIED by reason of defendants’ fail- 
ure to show that the amount of damages awarded by the 
jury is “so excessive as to shock the judicial conscience 
and raise an irresistible inference that passion, prejudice, 
corruption or other improper cause invaded the trial,” 
Karns v. Emerson Electric Co., 817 F.2d 1452, 1460 
(10th Cir. 1987) (quoting Barnes v. Smith, 305 F.2d 
226, 228 (10th Cir. 1962); accord, Wulf v. City of 
Wichita, 883 F.2d 842, 874 (10th Cir. 1989). 


DATED this 15 day of July, 1993. 


BY THE COURT: 


/s/ Bruce S. Jenkins 
BruceE J. JENKINS 
United States District Judge 


27a 
APPENDIX D 


IN THE UNITED STATES DIST RICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF UTAH 
CENTRAL DIVISION 


Civil No. 89-C-676J 


GARY SHEETS, 


Plaintiff, 
vs. 


ROBERT LINDSEY, SIMON & SCHUSTER, INC., a corpora- 
tion SALT LAKE COUNTY, a governmental subdivision 
of the State of Utah, THEODORE L. CANNON, individ- 
ually and as Salt Lake County Attorney, and MICHAEL 
GEORGE, individually and as a Salt Lake County 
Investigator, 


Defendants. 


TRIAL TRANSCRIPT 
* * * * 


[272] THE COURT: Okay. You have a motion? 

MS. MARLOWE: Yes, Your Honor. The defendants 
move to dismiss for the reason that plaintiff has failed to 
establish a prima facie case of a violation of a constitu- 
tional right to privacy. 

It would be our Position that plaintiff Sheets had no 
reasonable expectation of privacy in his wife’s diary, that 
when Kathy Sheets died, she was the victim of a horrible 
crime, that her life and everything about her went into 
the public domain, and that thereafter, by reason of Mr. 
Sheets Indictment and Prosecution on the Federal fraud 


28a 


charges, that he and anything about him, continued to 
be in the public domain. 

| So, there is, in 1988, at the time the book was [273] 
published, that Mr. Sheets and his dead wife were still! in 
the public eye, and that everything—and whatever was 
| published was of legitimate public concern, and it didn’t 
invade the privacy of Mr. Sheets. 

Specifically, Your Honor, most of the statements that 
he objects to, the quotes from the books, deal with the 
feelings and—of Kathy Sheets. While he may have some 
copyright interest in the diary, itself, that’s separate and 
distinct from any right of privacy that he might be trying 
to allege in this lawsuit. 

I think the law is clear, that he absolutely has no stand- 
ing to complain about the invasion of any feelings of fear 
or feelings—complaints about money or fear of loss of 
money by Kathy Sheets. The only thing he can complain 
about is if his right of privacy is interfered with, and in 
order for there to be some interference, he has to have 
been held up to public ridicule or have been somehow, 
you know, defamed in the public eye, and there is just 
absolutely nothing contained in those diary excerpts that 
holds Mr. Sheets up to, you know, to public defamation 
or to—I mean, he is not at all hurt in the public eye. 

The second part of our motion is that the fact that 
plaintiffs have absolutely no evidence that my clients were 
the proximate cause of this leak to Mr. Lindsey, that all 
they have been able to adduce is that Mr. Lindsey says, 
“{ [274] don’t know what the source is. It was some 
detective, according to what I told my attorney for the 
publisher. It was some detectives.” 

He doesn’t know which detectives it might have been. 
He says its could have been any one of seven. At a later 
time, he says its could have been one of three, but in 
order to prevail or move forward on this 1983 case, plain- 
tiff must have proximate cause of injury to his privacy 
interests by reason of the actions of my clients, and he 
has none. 


29a 


You know, the issue of—the preponderance of evidence 
is separate and distinct from whether or not plaintiff has 
proximate cause to have the jury determine if he should 
prevail in this lawsuit, and based upon his preponderance 
of the evidence, we think the Court ought to rule, as a 
matter of law, there is not sufficient evidence of proximate 
cause. And the Court also ought to rule, as a matter of 
law, that based upon the diary excerpts that appeared in 
Mr. Lindsey’s book, that Mr. Sheets’ constitutional right 
to privacy was not invaded by that publication, and that’s 
the basis of our motion, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Okay. Are you relying on any par- 
ticular case? 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, when I first looked at this 
lawsuit, I was trying to figure out if it was in the nature 
of some vague privacy case or if it was in the nature 
of a [275] Fourth Amendment violation. And, let’s see. 
I think there is law out of the Tenth Circuit. There is 
Layton versus Willingham. It’s a complaint by a plaintiff 
about police who obtained photos of him of a highly 
Sensitive and personal nature. And they disseminated 
those photographs. 

And the Court talks about the constitutional right of 
privacy and talks—or says that there is no violation of 
the constitutional right of privacy unless there is a legiti- 
mate expectation of privacy in whatever is complained 
about and the privacy interests outweigh the public need 
for disclosure. And that’s just within the context of this, 
I think, a criminal investigation. 

There is also a case out of the Tenth Circuit. It’s 
Mangel, M-a-n-g-e-l, versus Pena, P-e-n-a, cited in 1986, 
where the Court, while it involves the public release of a 
report that talks about drug use by fire fighters, and while 
it’s a due process type of privacy violation alleged in that 
case, and I believe that, you know, that was probably the 
State of the law relative to the Privacy, you know, right. 

But, in any event, the Tenth Circuit said that any lim- 
ited assurances of confidentiality from officials do not 


30a 


make a difference in this case. It says because the rights 
of the substantive due process rights of privacy are not 
founded upon state provisions but upon deeply rooted 
notions [276] of fundamental personal interests derived 
from the constitution, so allegations of the failure of offi- 
cials to keep confidential do not suffice to state a claim 
under 1983. 

See, the material itself has to warrant constitutional 
protection, and, of course, you know, in our case we 
allege that the diary of Kathy Sheets was not entitled to 
constitutional protection at the time it was turned over to 
the County Attorney’s Office or at the time that—or at 
any other time. 

THE COURT: Why not? 

MS. MARLOWE: Let’s see. I think there is a recent 
cases. There is the Sodahl versus Cook County. It’s a 92 
case that talks about Fourth Amendment protections for 
unreasonable searches and procedures. It says, if this is a 
protectable property right that arises from this Fourth 
Amendment protection. 

We don’t believe, in this case, there has been a seizure. 
Mr. Sheets turned the diary over voluntarily, and there 
was not a search, an unreasonable search. So, if the 
Court were to look at whether or not it was unreasonable 
under some Fourth Amendment privacy right, we would 
say that, you know, that you have to find there was no 
Fourth Amendment violation. 

THE COURT: Okay. Do you want to talk about 

the Utah statutes? 
[277] MS. MARLOWE: Yes, Your Honor. We filed 
a Motion in Limine for the reason that we believe that 
any violation of Mr. Sheets’ constitutional rights has to 
stem-—well, has to stem from a violation of some funda- 
mental constitutional right, that he can’t sue us based 
upon a claim that we somehow violated Utah statute, 
that the Utah statutes do not determine what the Federal 
constitutional rights of an individual are. 


3la 


THE COURT: No. Just sitting with the Utah statute 
alone, just looking at the Utah statute and confining your 
examination to that, do you want to respond to the allega- 
tion that there is a private cause of action for the violation 
of the, then, Utah statute? 

MS. MARLOWE: I am not aware of any state law, 
you know, decisions that say that a person can base a 
civil case on a—or a state civil cause of action on a 
criminal case, and when I—the issue has arisen— 

THE COURT: There was a statute, was there not, at 
6716-4 of the Utah Public Officers and Employees Ethics 
Act? 

MS. MARLOWE: There is that. 

THE COURT: And doesn’t it say that no public offi- 
cer or public employee shall disclose confidential infor- 
mation acquired by reason of his official position nor use 
such information for his or another private gain or 
benefit? 

[278] MS. MARLOWE: Well, yes. 

THE COURT: Doesn’t it say that? 

MS. MARLOWE: It does. And our position is, 
again, the diary was not confidential information. No 
one communicated any confidentiality request to us, I 
mean, all Mr. Sheets does, is—or all the evidence is that 
Farnsworth says that he had some discussion. He’s unable 
to say he told anyone anything or this is what he did. 
My clients deny that anyone said anything. It was never 
stamped “confidential.” There was no notation on it. 
There was nothing that said that anyone wanted us to 
protect it from public view. 

And all public records, or all prosecutors’ files, at some 
point in time, are open to the public, that after we archive 
something, after we are doing with the prosecution, that 
anyone is entitled to our files. 

The Court will remember, from Wilcox, that he sued 
us—or the women sued Wilcox for molesting them when 
he was on duty as a highway patrol officer. And, I mean, 


32a 


in a case like that, we could protect our files during the 
prosecution, but once it was over, the law is clear that 
someone is entitled to them. And this is the same type of 
case. 

I mean, once the Hoffman murder was over, and we 
archived all our files and records—or ones that were not 
sensitive, and no personal notes, I guess, were stored— 
then any person had access. So, you know, whether some- 
one in [279] the office inadvertently gave Mr. Lindsey 
access, you know, to diary information, or whether Mr. 
Lindsey went and looked at the copy in archives. I mean, 
we don’t know whether or not he got it from some other 
source. And we don’t know. 

But the problem here is whether or not it was confiden- 
tial. We believe that, you know, if anyone had a right of 
privacy, it was Kathy Sheets, and she died. It died with 
her. That diary belonged to her estate. It didn’t belong 
to Gary Sheets. It wasn’t personal to him. It had nothing 

—to do with his privacy rights. 

And the fact that, you know, the Court’s concerned 
what alleged violation of state law, then, you know, plain- 
tiff should have sued us for a violation of state law, as 
opposed to a violation of a Federal constitutional right, 
but the problem with that case, Your Honor, is the same 
as this one. Plaintiff has no evidence that my clients, you 
know, intentionally, deliberately, directly, you know, gave 
that diary information to Mr. Lindsey. 

They want a jury to try and determine, from many pos- 
sibilities, who most likely did it, and that’s not sufficient 
evidence of probable cause. They have to show that 
someone was the legal cause of the publication in that 
book, and plaintiff is unable to make that showing of 
probable cause. 

That, coupled with the fact, that whatever is [280] 
published in the book, does not invade any constitutional 
rights of privacy possessed by Gary Sheets. 

THE COURT: Mr. Linebaugh? 


pee 


33a 


MR. LINEBAUGH: Thank you, Your Honor. Coun- 
sel makes the point, first, that Mr. Sheets had no reason- 
able expectation of privacy, and she Says that’s because 
they were in the public eye. There is absolutely no evi- 
dence that this diary was in the public eye, absolutely 
none. And with respect to his expectation of privacy, I 
defy anyone to read that diary, as this jury is going to be 
Permitted to do, and even begin to conclude, as Mr. 
George did on the stand, that he saw nothing in there, 
after studying it, that would indicate it ought to be kept 
confidential. 

That diary is full of material that Ought to be kept 
confidential. And I defy anybody to read it and conclude 
otherwise. That is a jury question, for the jury to decide 
whether he had a reasonable expectation. 

Counsel states the law correctly, from the Tenth Cir- 
cuit. In the Slaton case the law is very, very clear, accord- 
ing to Slaton, that as long as he has a reasonable expecta- 
tion of privacy and that expectation outweighs any gov- 
ernment reason for turning it loose—of which there is 
none—then he has a cause of action. And it’s up to the 
jury to decide, then, whether his privacy was violated. 

So, we have, clearly, a jury question on whether he 
[281] had a reasonable expectation of privacy and 
whether it outweighed any government purpose for turn- 
ing the diary loose. And that is clearly a jury question. 

She also, then, retreats from that position and resorts 
to the wrong standard, entirely, as to whether he has a 
constitutional right. and where she Says that there is no 
public ridicule or defamation; and, therefore, his privacy 
is not invaded. 

This is not a defamation case. It wouldn't matter if he 
is publicly riduculed or not. This is a case of whether his 
privacy and his sensibilities have been violated by virtue 
of what was done; regardless of whether he’s a public 
figure, regardless of whether the whole world thinks he’s 
a great guy or a Charles Manson or whatever. It doesn’t 
make any difference. The point is whether his privacy 


34a 


was violated, regardless of whether or not there is any 
public disclaimer or acrimony or criticism of him. 

And as I say, she does state the law correctly in Slaton, 
but Slaton doesn’t talk in terms of whether or not he’s 
publicly ridiculed or not. Its a question of whether or 
not he had an expectation, from that material, that it be 
kept private, and that’s the issue. 

There is the further, very strong case in point, Your 
Honor, in addition to the Slaton case the Fajo, F-a-j-o, 
versus Coon, C-o-o-n, which is a Fifth Circuit case in 
1981, [282] wherein it was held that there were consti- 
tutional rights to privacy and freedom of speech, and 
violation of these basic constitutional rights, in a case 
where the plaintiff had adequately alleged deprivation of 
constitutional right to privacy in view of allegations that, 
although subject to subpoena, plaintiff revealed private 
details of his life to State’s Attorney on assurance’s that 
such was absolutely privileged and would be revealed to 
no one. 

And contrary to such promises, the state revealed infor- 
mation for credit investigators, who, in turn, revealed it 
to the insureds. Here we have the affirmative promise 
Mr. Farnsworth testified about. We have the reasonable 
expectation that the plaintiff testified about. We have the 
testimony of Mr. Bell, that he certainly didn’t tell them 
that they would be papering the town with pages of his 
wife’s diary. 

All of this, we think, creates a jury question of whether 
Mr. Sheets had a reasonable expectation of privacy, when 
he turned that over to Mr. Bell; albeit, whether it was a 
privacy to be protected by the city or a privacy to be 
protected by the county. 

The next point she made is that there is no proximate 
cause. Clearly, this is a circumstantial evidence case. We 
don’t have Mr. Lindsey coming to the fore and saying, 
“Yeah, by golly, I remember how this happened. And 
[283] Mike George gave it to me.” 


ow eC a 


35a 


What we have Mr. Lindsey saying a hundred times—in 
spite of the fact we kept after him and kept after him— 
he says, “I can’t remember. I can’t remember, finally, 
when pressed, and finally when confronted with docu- 
ments he, in turn, had personally written, he finally had to 
confess, “Well, yeah, my memeory is refreshed now, and 
at least I gave it to detectives.” 

Now, having gone that far, let’s eliminate all these 
other peopule they are thinking may have been possibili- 
ties. And counsel has suggested everybody in the world 
that may have had a chance to reveal the diary. It really 
boils down to three people, and it boils down to one of 
them being Ted Cannon, who counsel’s own client says, 
“I didn’t do it.” 

It boils down to Ken Farnsworth, who categorically 
denies he did it. But you’ve then got Mr. George with 
what's known as a soft confession. Instead of saying, “I 
don’t remember,” Mr. George says, “I don’t know, but I 
might have.” 

Now, that is circumstantial evidence, but let’s not kid 
ourselves. Those circumstances combine to indicate that 
Mr. George was the one that let out the diary information, 
because there is no one else possible, given all the testi- 
mony we have. It all points to Mr. George. 

And they are good friends. Mr. Lindsey doesn’t [284] 
want to dump on Mr. George, and Mr. George surely 
didn’t want to dumb on Mr. Lindsey. He wants Mr. 
Lindsey to say, “I don’t know.” They are good enough 
friends. They would have protected each other. 

I don’t know whether they are lying or not. I don’t 
have to prove they are lying. I have to create a jury 
question that, given all the circumstances of this case, the 
evidence points to the fact: Yes, Mike George did it. 
And not only did he do it, he did it pursuant to a policy 
that was adopted by the county which was contrary to 
state law. 

Now, on that matter of state law, Your Honor, that 
only comes into play in this case—and the reason we 


36a 


haven’t put on anything about it in our case-in-chief is, 
it only comes into play if in fact they are going to put 
on some sort of defense that these people had some sort 
of good faith immunity, because even though what they 
did was wrong, they did it in good faith. 

And that only comes into play there, and that’s why it 
has not been introduced in the case yet, because we have 
not sued that they violated that law, at least we certainly 
don’t represent that to you today. 

We are here on constitutional violations of the United 
States Constitution, even though what they did viclated 
that very state provision that Your Honor last alluded to. 
But we, in a Section 1983 claim, are not [285] relying, 
and we can’t rely on that state statute as evidence of a 
violation of the 1983 claim, unless they want to raise 
the good faith defense, which I think they are going to 
have a very difficult time doing. 

She has also kind of commented, during the course of 
her argument, with words like it was “inadvertently” done 
or “without intention.” Absolutely irrelevant. It’s got 
nothing to do with anything here. We don’t have to prove 
that they intended to hurt Mr. Sheets. 

We simply have to prove that they did it; that they in 
fact gave out the diary information, they in fact adopted 
the policy that allowed it to be disseminated, and, there- 
fore, both individual defendants and the county are liable, 
and there are jury questions on those issues. Thank you, 


Your Honor. 
a * * * 


so ARDS ita MEE Line 5 POE! Loe 


_— CESARE te WO on Thy 


37a 
[299] 
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 1993 


* * * 


THE COURT: Note that counsel is present. Parties 
are present. 

Prior to dealing with pending motions, I wanted to 
clarify a couple things. Obviously in dealing with 1983, 
we're talking about people acting under color of state 
law. It seems pretty obvious. There’s no genuine con- 
test on that, is there? 

MS. MARLOWE: No, your Honor. 

THE COURT: Secondly, in dealing with the con- 
cept of privacy as enunciated in Slayton and, indeed, in 
the Nicks on case, there’s Suggestion as to the applica- 
cation of a balancing test where theoretically the privacy 
interest is balanced against some so-called public inter- 
est capable of articulation. I’m interested in having the 
defendants through counsel tell me if they’ve identified 
any public interest that they put as a counterweight to 
the so-called private interest. — 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, it’s public interest in the 
dissemination of information gathered for prosecution 
that all persons within the community are interested in 
how a crime was solved and what type of evidence was 
in possession of authority. And the problem in this Case, 
your Honor, is not so much we think a balancing test, 
it’s a fact that this [300] diary which plaintiffs claimed 
released and quoted from or at least excerpts were re- 
leased and quoted from do not involve private sensitive 
matters that are talked about in Slayton. So you never 
get to balancing Ms. Sheets— 

THE COURT: I want to be clear, because I’m in 
the process of dealing, one, with your motion initially, 
and if need be thereafter. Are you telling me that you’re 
not asserting any kind of a counter balance for the so- 
called privacy interest as far as the public is concerned? 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, no. We believe the public 
had a right to know. 


38a 


THE COURT: Tell me what your public interest is 
that you say is the counter balance to the so-called 
privacy interest. Why don’t you tell me as simply as 
you can. 

MS. MARLOWE: Okay. Mrs. Sheets was a victim 
of a horrible crime. She was a victim in place of Mr. 
Sheets. There was great public empathy and sympathy 
I think about her death, okay. And that concern about 
her death and her murder, her unfortunate murder con- 
tinued. And it arose again in conjunction with Mr. 
Sheets’, you know, fraud problems, the ongoing investiga- 
tion and all the other stuff. She and her husband re- 
mained in the public eye. And there was lots of interest 
generated by the press and by the public in what Mark 
Hoffman did and who he defrauded and why he killed 
these two people. And that’s why we think there [301] 
was some interest on behalf of the public to know. 

THE COURT: Well, does the public have the right 
to know confidential matters? 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, we assert they’re not con- 
fidential. But if they are, they belong to Kathy Sheets. 

THE COURT: Well, we’re not concerned with the 
proprietorship question. We’re not concerned with that. 
We’re concerned with information that purportedly is 
disclosed in reference to the party plaintiff. You have to 
distinguish, it seems to me, between proprietorship and 
information which is if private, private. 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, okay. Okay. Yesterday 
Mr. Sheets says that what he objects to is not what 
authors may have said about him and his deceased wife 
and he doesn’t care what Lindsey may have written. He 
objects to the quotes from the diary. And he doesn’t 
care about the substance of the quotes. So all he’s say- 
ing is that we allowed Lindsey to misuse or to quote from 
the diary. He doesn’t say that what’s quoted is offensive 
to him or invades his privacy. He complains about a 
violation of some possessory interest in this diary. 


39a 


THE COURT: As I understand your argument, 
then, you say that there’s some kind of a public need to 
know confidential material. 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, no. I’m Saying it’s not 
[302] confidential. Just it came— 

THE COURT: Assuming it’s confidential, assuming 
that it’s confidential, then your argument is the public 
needs to know confidential material. And the query then 
becomes why? 

MS. MARLOWE: Because of the notoriety of the 
crime, public’s continuing interest in Mr. Sheets and 
everything about Mr. Sheets. He never left public—He 
never left the public’s eye. There’s a newspaper— 

THE COURT: The mere fact that somebody is in the 
public eye, to use your words, in and of itself doesn’t 
justify the disclosure of confidential information. The 
mere fact that somebody has some degree of public rec- 
ognition doesn’t mean that an officer who may have con- 
fidential material for use in a public function has any 
basis found in the so-called need to know to disclose it. 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, if Mr. Sheets is in a position 
of public notoriety, okay, then the public has an interest 
in knowing about him and all things connected with him. 
I mean, his wife’s murdered in his place. There’s continu- 
ing public interest in Kathy Sheets and her life. 

THE COURT: The fact that people have had hor- 
tible experience doesn’t mean that their life from the 
beginning of conception until death is to be laid out on 
the public platform. That’s an argument that seems to 
me flies in the [303] face of Slayton and the privacy in- 
terest that Slayton says people have assuming the existence 
of privacy interest. And the question as to the nature of 
the interest is it seems to me a factual question in matters 
of this kind. 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, if he says the substance of 
the quotes don’t bother him, and they don’t offend him— 

THE COURT: That's something you can argue, I 


40a 


suppose, to the jury. But that doesn’t deal with the legal 
proposition. 

Okay. Well, I think that I understand what you’re sug- 
gesting by way of a counter weight. It isn’t much of a 
counter weight at this point. Secondly, we cleared up the 
under color of state law routine. 

MS. MARLOWE: I have a question for the Court. 
I mean, we think we’re entitled to show as part of our 
defense in this case the fact that all the information or all 
the quotes that Mr. Lindsey used were already in the 
public forum. 

THE COURT: Well, I'll deal with questions of evi- 
dence when we get to that point— 

MS. MARLOWE: Well— 

THE COURT: -—TI think in reference to your motion. 

MS. MARLOWE: Well, at the same time, you know, 
if you want to allow the proffer we can save time. 

THE COURT: Let’s deal with the motions at this 
point. [304] And in reference to the motions that you 
made, I’m going to deny your motion. * * * 


* * * * 


[213] Q. Did Mr. Farnsworth ever tell you, during the 
course of any meetings, that he promised Mr. Sheets that 
Kathleen Sheet’s diary would be kept confidential? 

A. [Mr. George] No, he did not. 

Q: Did anyone say anything to you at any time about 
keeping that diary confidential? 

A. No, they did not. 


* * * * 


