178               OCTOBER TERM, 1962.
                               Syllabus.                      371 U.S.


            FOMAN v. DAVIS, EXECUTRIX.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                 THE FIRST CIRCUIT.

No. 41.   Argued November 14, 1962.-Decided December 3, 1962.

A Federal District Court dismissed petitioner's complaint in a civil
  action for failure to state a claim upon which relief' might be
  granted. Petitioner promptly moved to vacate the judgment and
  amend the complaint so as to state an alternative theory for
  recovery. Before the Court ruled on those motions, petitioner filed
  notice of appeal from the judgment of dismissal. Subsequently, the
  District Court denied the motions to vacate the judgment and
  to amend the complaint, and petitioner filed notice of appeal from
  that denial. On appeal, the parties briefed and argued the merits
  of both the dismissal of the complaint and the denial of petitioner's
  motions. The Court of Appeals treated the first notice of appeal
  as premature, because of the then pending motion to vacate, and
  it dismissed that appeal. It held that the second notice of appeal
  was ineffective to review the judgment of dismissal, because it
  failed to specify that the appeal was from that judgment, and it
  affirmed denial of petitioner's motions, on the ground that there
  was nothing in the record to support a finding that the District
  Court had abused its discretion in refusing to allow amendment
  of the complaint. Held:
     1. On the record in this case, the Court of Appeals erred in
  narrowly reading the second notice of appeal as applying only to
  the denial of petitioner's motions, since petitioner's intention to
  seek review of both the dismissal of the complaint and the denial of
  her motions was manifest from the record as a whole. Pp. 181-182.
     2. The Court of Appeals also erred in affirming the District
  Court's denial of petitioner's motion to vacate the judgment of
  dismissal in order to allow amendment of the complaint, since it
  appears from the record that the amendment would have done no
  more than state an alternative theory of recovery, Federal Rule
  of Civil Procedure 15 (a) declares that leave to amend "shall be
  freely given when justice so requires," and denial of the motion
  without any apparent justifying reason was an abuse of discretion.
  P. 182.
292 F. 2d 85, reversed.
                   FOMAN v. DAVIS.                      179
178                 Opinion of the Court.

  Milton Bordwin argued the cause and filed briefs for
petitioner.
 Roland E. Shaine argued the cause for respondent.
With him on the briefs was Richard R. Caples.

  MR. JusTICE GOLDBERG delivered the opinion of the
Court.
   Petitioner filed a complaint in the District Court alleg-
ing that, in exchange for petitioner's promise to care for
and support her mother, petitioner's father had agreed
not to make a will, thereby assuring petitioner of an intes-
tate share of the father's estate; it was further alleged
that petitioner had fully performed her obligations under
the oral agreement, but that contrary thereto the father
had devised his property to respondent, his second wife
and executrix. Petitioner sought recovery of what would
have been her ~ntestate share of the father's estate. Re-
spondent moved to dismiss the complaint on the ground
that the oral agreement was unenforceable under the
applicable state statute of frauds. Accepting respondent's
contention, the District Court entered judgment on De-
cember 19, 1960, dismissing petitioner's complaint for
failure to state a claim upon which relief might be granted.
On December 20, 1960, petitioner filed motions to vacate
the judgment and to amend the complaint to assert a
right of recovery in quantum meruit for performance
of the obligations which were the consideration for the
assertedly unenforceable oral contract. On January 17,
1961, petitioner filed a notice of appeal from the judgment
of December 19, 1960. On January 23, 1961, the District
Court denied petitioner's motions to vacate the judgment
and to amend the complaint. On January 26, 1961, peti-
tioner filed a notice of appeal from denial of the motions.
   On appeal, the parties briefed and argued the merits
of dismissal of the complaint and denial of petitioner's
180               OCTOBER TERM, 1962.
                       Opinion of the Court.                 371 U.S.

motions by the District Court. Notwithstanding, the
Court of Appeals of its own accord dismissed the appeal
insofar as taken from the District Court judgment of
December 19, 1960, and affirmed the orders of the District
Court entered January 23, 1961. 292 F. 2d 85. This
Court granted certiorari. 368 U. S. 951.
   The Court of Appeals reasoned that in the absence of
a specific designation of the provision of the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure under which the December 20, 1960,
motion to vacate was filed, the motion would be treated
as filed pursuant to Rule 59 ( e), rather than under Rule
60 (b); 1 since, under Rule 73 (a),2 a motion under Rule
59 suspends the running of time within which an appeal
may be perfected, the first notice of appeal was treated
as premature in view of the then pending motion to vacate
and of no effect. The Court of Appeals held the second
notice of appeal, filed January 26, 1961, ineffective to
review the December 19, 1960, judgment dismissing the
complaint because the notice failed to specify that the
appeal was being taken from that judgment as well as
   1
     Rule 59 (e) provides:
"A motion to alter or amend the judgment shall be served not later
than 10 days after entry of the judgment."
   Rule 60 (b) provides in relevant part:
"On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve
a party or his legal representative from a final judgment, order, or
proceeding for the following reasqns: ( 1) mistake, inadvertence, sur-
prise, or excusable neglect . . . or ( 6) any other reason justifying
relief from the operation of the judgment. . . . A motion under this
subdivision (b) does not affect the finality of a judgment or suspend
its operation . . . ."
   2 Rule 73 (a) provides in relevant part:

"The running of the time for appeal is terminated by a timely motion
made pursuant to any of the rules hereinafter enumerated, and the
full time for appeal fixed in this subdivision commences to run and is
to be computed from the entry of any of the following orders made
upon a timely motion under such rules . . . granting or denying a
motion under Rule 59 to alter or amend the judgment . . . ."
                  FOMAN v. DAVIS.                      181

178                Opinion of the Court.

from the orders denying the motions. Considering the
second notice of appeal, therefore, only as an appeal from
the denial by the District Court of the motions to vacate
and amend, the Court of Appeals held that there was
nothing in the record to show the circumstances which
were before the District Court for consideration in ruling
on those motions; consequently it regarded itself as pre-
cluded from finding any abuse of discretion in the refusal
of the court below to allow amendment.
   The Court of Appeals' treatment of the motion to va-
cate as one under Rule 59 ( e) was permissible, at least as
an original matter, and we will accept that characteriza-
tion here. Even if this made the first notice of appeal
premature, we must nonetheless reverse for we believe the
Court of Appeals to have been in error in so narrowly
reading the second notice.
   The defect in the second notice of appeal did not mis-
lead or prejudice the respondent. With both notices of
appeal before it ( even granting the asserted ineffective-
ness of the first), the Court of Appeals should have
treated the appeal from the denial of the motions as an
effective, although inept, attempt to appeal from the judg-
ment sought to be vacated. Taking the two notices and
the appeal papers together, petitioner's intention to seek
review of both the dismissal and the denial of the motions
was manifest. Not only did both parties brief and argue
the merits of the earlier judgment on appeal, but peti-
tioner's statement of points on which she intended to
rely on appeal, submitted to both respondent and the
court pursuant to rule, similarly demonstrated the intent
to challenge the dismissal.
   It is too late in the day and entirely contrary to the
spirit of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for deci-
sions on the merits to be avoided on the basis of such mere
technicalities. "The Federal Rules reject the approach
that pleading is a game of skill in which one misstep by
182            OCTOBER TERM, 1962.
                    Opinion of the Court.           371 U.S.

counsel may be decisive to the outcome and accept the
principle that the purpose of pleading is to facilitate a
proper decision on the merits." Conley v. Gibson, 355
U.S. 41, 48. The Rules themselves provide that they are
to be construed "to secure the just, speedy, and inexpen-
sive determination of every action." Rule 1.
   The Court of Appeals also erred in affirming the District
Court's denial of petitioner's motion to vacate the judg-
ment in order to allow amendment of the complaint. As
appears from the record, the amendment would have done
no more than state an alternative theory for recovery.
   Rule 15 (a) declares that leave to amend "shall be
freely given when justice so requires"; this mandate is
to be heeded. See generally, 3 Moore, Federal Practice
(2d ed. 1948),     15.08, 15.10. If the underlying facts or
circumstances relied upon by a plaintiff may be a proper
subject of relief, he ought to be afforded an opportunity
to test his claim on the merits. In the absence of any
apparent or declared reason-such as undue delay, bad
faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant, re-
peated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments pre-
viously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party
by virtue of allowance of the amendment, futility of
amendment, etc.-the leave sought should, as the rules
require, be "freely given." Of course, the grant or denial
of an opportunity to amend is within the discretion of
the District Court, but outright refusal to grant the leave
without any justifying reason appearing for the denial is
not an exercise of discretion; it is merely abuse of that
discretion and inconsistent with the spirit of the Federal
Rules.
   The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded
to the Court of Appeals for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
                                           It is so ordered.
                   FOM AN v. DAVIS.                        183

178              Mem oran dum of HARL AN, J.

                                                 HARLAN, in
  Sep arat e mem oran dum of MR. JusT ICE
which MR. JusT ICE WH ITE joins.
                                               of peti tion er's
  I agree with the Cou rt as to the dismissal
                                            ever, as to her
app eal by the Cou rt of Appeals. How
                                               Cou rt and for
motion to vaca te the order of the Dist rict
                                        ve such   mat ters are
leave to ame nd the complaint, I belie
                                             I wou ld dismiss
best left with the Cou rts of Appeals, and
                                           as imp rovi den tly
the writ of certiorari, in that respect,
granted.
