Lewis  v. Casey, 516 U.S. 804 (1996)
LII
Supreme Court
Lewis  v. Casey (94-1511), 516 U.S. 804 (1996)
Concurrence
[ Thomas ]Syllabus
Dissent
[ Stevens ]Opinion
[ Scalia ]Other
[ Souter ]HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
U.S. 321, 337.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus
LEWIS, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA DEPARTMENT
OF CORRECTIONS, et al. v. CASEY et al.
certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit
No. 94-1511.
Argued November 29, 1995 -- Decided
June 24, 1996
Respondents, who are inmates of various prisons operated by the Arizona
Department of Corrections (ADOC), brought a class action against petitioners,
ADOC officials, alleging that petitioners were furnishing them with inadequate
legal research facilities and thereby depriving them of their right of
access to the courts, in violation of Bounds v. Smith, 430
U.S. 817. The District Court found petitioners to be in violation of
Bounds and issued an injunction mandating detailed, systemwide changes
in ADOC's prison law libraries and in its legal assistance programs. The
Ninth Circuit affirmed both the finding of a Bounds violation and
the injunction's major terms.
Held: The success of
respondents' systemic challenge was dependent on their ability to show
widespread actual injury, and the District Court's failure to identify
anything more than isolated instances of actual injury renders its finding
of a systemic Bounds violation invalid. Pp. 3-20.
(a) Bounds did not create
an abstract, free standing right to a law library or legal assistance;
rather, the right that Bounds acknowledged was the right of access
to the courts. E.g., 430 U. S., at 817, 821, 828. Thus, to establish
a Bounds violation, the "actual injury" that an inmate must demonstrate
is that the alleged shortcomings in the prison library or legal assistance
program have hindered, or are presently hindering, his efforts to pursue
a nonfrivolous legal claim. This requirement derives ultimately from the
doctrine of standing. Although Bounds made no mention of an actual
injury requirement, it can hardly be thought to have eliminated that constitutional
prerequisite. Pp. 4-9.
(b) Statements in Bounds suggesting that prison authorities
must also enable the prisoner to discover grievances, and to litigate
effectively once in court, id., at 825-826, and n. 14, have
no antecedent in this Court's pre-Bounds cases, and are now disclaimed.
Moreover, Bounds does not guarantee inmates the wherewithal to file
any and every type of legal claim, but requires only that they be provided
with the tools to attack their sentences, directly or collaterally, and
to challenge the conditions of their confinement. Pp. 9-11.
(c) The District Court identified only two instances of actual
injury: It found that ADOC's failures with respect to illiterate prisoners
had resulted in the dismissal with prejudice of inmate Bartholic's lawsuit
and the inability of inmate Harris to file a legal action. Pp. 11-12.
(d) These findings as to injury do not support the systemwide
injunction ordered by the District Court. The remedy must be limited to
the inadequacy that produced the injury in fact that the plaintiff has
established; that this is a class action changes nothing, for even named
plaintiffs in a class action must show that they personally have been injured,
see, e.g., Simon v. Eastern Ky. Welfare Tights Organization,
426
U.S. 26, 40, n. 20. Only one named plaintiff, Bartholic, was found
to have suffered actual injury--as a result of ADOC's failure to provide
the special services he would have needed, in light of his particular disability
(illiteracy), to avoid dismissal of his case. Eliminated from the proper
scope of the injunction, therefore, are provisions directed at special
services or facilities required by non English speakers, by prisoners in
lockdown, and by the inmate population at large. Furthermore, the inadequacy
that caused actual injury to illiterate inmates Bartholic and Harris was
not sufficiently widespread to justify systemwide relief. There is no finding,
and no evidence discernible from the record, that in ADOC prisons other
than those occupied by Bartholic and Harris illiterate inmates cannot obtain
the minimal help necessary to file legal claims. Pp. 12-16.
(e) There are further reasons why the order here cannot stand.
In concluding that ADOC's restrictions on lockdown inmates were unjustified,
the District Court failed to accord the judgment of prison authorities
the substantial deference required by cases such as Turner v. Safley,
482
U.S. 78, 89. The court also failed to leave with prison officials the
primary responsibility for devising a remedy. Compare Preiser v.
Rodriguez, 411
U.S. 475, 492. The result of this improper procedure was an inordinately
intrusive order. Pp. 17-20.
43 F. 3d 1261,
reversed and remanded.
Scalia, J., delivered the opinion
of the Court, in which Rehnquist, C. J., and O'Connor, Kennedy, and Thomas,
JJ., joined, and in Parts I and III of which Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer,
JJ., joined. Thomas, J., filed a concurring opinion. Souter, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part, dissenting in part, and concurring in the
judgment, in which Ginsburg and Breyer, JJ., joined. Stevens, J., filed
a dissenting opinion.