Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-1996-title21-vol8/pdf/CFR-1996-title21-vol8.pdf
Official Title21 volume8, April1,1996 edition. Page headers/footers and adjacent provisions remain; each actual section heading controls scope. No same-case judicial material is included.

PDF PAGE 30
20
21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–96 Edition)§ 801.109
practice or by unavoidable deviations
in good manufacturing practice will be
recognized. Variations from stated
quantity of contents shall not be un-
reasonably large.
Subpart D—Exemptions From
Adequate Directions for Use
§ 801.109 Prescription devices.
A device which, because of any poten-
tiality for harmful effect, or the meth-
od of its use, or the collateral measures
necessary to its use is not safe except
under the supervision of a practitioner
licensed by law to direct the use of
such device, and hence for which ‘‘ade-
quate directions for use’’ cannot be
prepared, shall be exempt from section
502(f)(1) of the act if all the following
conditions are met:
(a) The device is:
(1)(i) In the possession of a person, or
his agents or employees, regularly and
lawfully engaged in the manufacture,
transportation, storage, or wholesale
or retail distribution of such device; or
(ii) In the possession of a practi-
tioner, such as physicians, dentists,
and veterinarians, licensed by law to
use or order the use of such device; and
(2) Is to be sold only to or on the pre-
scription or other order of such practi-
tioner for use in the course of his pro-
fessional practice.
(b) The label of the device, other than
surgical instruments, bears:
(1) The statement ‘‘Caution: Federal
law restricts this device to sale by or
on the order of a ———’’, the blank to
be filled with the word ‘‘physician’’,
‘‘dentist’’, ‘‘veterinarian’’, or with the
descriptive designation of any other
practitioner licensed by the law of the
State in which he practices to use or
order the use of the device; and
(2) The method of its application or
use.
(c) Labeling on or within the package
from which the device is to be dis-
pensed bears information for use, in-
cluding indications, effects, routes,
methods, and frequency and duration
of administration, and any relevant
hazards, contraindications, side effects,
and precautions under which practi-
tioners licensed by law to administer
the device can use the device safely
and for the purpose for which it is in-
tended, including all purposes for
which it is advertised or represented:
Provided, however, That such informa-
tion may be omitted from the dispens-
ing package if, but only if, the article
is a device for which directions, haz-
ards, warnings, and other information
are commonly known to practitioners
licensed by law to use the device. Upon
written request, stating reasonable
grounds therefor, the Commissioner
will offer an opinion on a proposal to
omit such information from the dis-
pensing package under this proviso.
(d) Any labeling, as defined in section
201(m) of the act, whether or not it is
on or within a package from which the
device is to be dispensed, distributed by
or on behalf of the manufacturer, pack-
er, or distributor of the device, that
furnishes or purports to furnish infor-
mation for use of the device contains
adequate information for such use, in-
cluding indications, effects, routes,
methods, and frequency and duration
of administration and any relevant
hazards, contraindications, side effects,
and precautions, under which practi-
tioners licensed by law to employ the
device can use the device safely and for
the purposes for which it is intended,
including all purposes for which it is
advertised or represented. This infor-
mation will not be required on so-
called reminder—piece labeling which
calls attention to the name of the de-
vice but does not include indications or
other use information.
(e) All labeling, except labels and
cartons, bearing information for use of
the device also bears the date of the is-
suance or the date of the latest revi-
sion of such labeling.
§ 801.110 Retail exemption for pre-
scription devices.
A device subject to § 801.109 shall be
exempt at the time of delivery to the
ultimate purchaser or user from sec-
tion 502(f)(1) of the act if it is delivered
by a licensed practitioner in the course
of his professional practice or upon a
prescription or other order lawfully is-
sued in the course of his professional
practice, with labeling bearing the
name and address of such licensed prac-
titioner and the directions for use and
cautionary statements, if any, con-
tained in such order.
VerDate 23-AUG-96 10:11 Aug 30, 1996 Jkt 167072 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 C:\CFR\167072.004 pfrm13

