SOURCE: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/95-6465.ZD.html

 

 Lewis v. United States, 518 U.S 322 (1996). 

 LII 

 Supreme Court 

 Lewis v. United States (95-6465), 518 U.S 322 (1996). 

 Opinion 
 [ O'Connor ] Concurrence 
 [ Kennedy ] Syllabus 
 Dissent 
 [ Stevens ] 
 HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version 

No. 95-6465 

 RAY A. LEWIS, PETITIONER v. UNITED
 STATES 

on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the
 second circuit

[ June 24, 1996 ]

 Justice Stevens 
 , with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, dissenting.

Unlike Justice Kennedy, however, I believe that the right to a jury
 trial attaches when the prosecution begins. I do not quarrel with the established
 view that only defendants whose alleged misconduct is deemed serious by
 the legislature are entitled to be judged by a jury. But in my opinion,
 the legislature's determination of the severity of the charges against
 a defendant is properly measured by the maximum sentence authorized for
 the prosecution as a whole. The text of the Sixth Amendment supports this
 interpretation by referring expressly to "criminal prosecutions ."

Nothing in our prior precedents conflicts with this view. True, some
 of our past cases (the ones on which the majority relies) have referred
 to an "offense" rather than a "prosecution." See, e.g. , Blanton 
 v. North Las Vegas , 489
 U.S. 538 , 541 (1989); Frank v. United States , 395
 U.S. 147 , 148 (1969). But the words were effectively interchangeable
 in those cases because the prosecutions at issue concerned only one offense.
 The contempt cases, which do involve multiple offenses, demonstrate that
 aggregation--that is, deciding whether the defendant has a right to a jury
 trial on the basis of the prosecution rather than the individual offenses--is
 appropriate.

The majority attempts to distinguish Codispoti v. Pennsylvania ,
 418
 U.S. 506 (1974), by suggesting that the Court's decision in that case
 turned on the absence of any statutory measure of severity. Ante ,
 at 6. That observation is certainly correct to a point: The contempt cases
 are special because the sentence actually imposed provides the only available
 yardstick by which to judge compliance with the command of the Sixth
 Amendment . But that unique aspect of the cases does not speak to the
 aggregation question. Having determined that the defendants in Codispoti 
 were sentenced to no more than six months for any individual contempt,
 it would follow from the rule the Court announces today that a jury trial
 was unnecessary. Yet we reversed and remanded, holding that "each contemnor
 was tried for what was equivalent to a serious offense and was [therefore]
 entitled to a jury trial." 418 U. S., at 517 (emphasis added). [n.*] 

Justice Kennedy reads a second contempt case, Taylor v. Hayes ,
 418
 U.S. 488 (1974), as standing for the proposition that a judge may defeat
 the jury trial right by promising a short sentence. He is mistaken. The
 dispositive fact in Taylor was not that the prison term imposed
 was only six months but rather that the actual sentence, acting as a proxy
 for the legislative judgment, demonstrated that "the State itself has determined
 that the contempt is not so serious as to warrant more than a six month
 sentence." 418 U. S., at 496. In this case, by contrast, we have an explicit
 statutory expression of the legislative judgment that this prosecution
 is serious--the two offenses charged are punishable by a maximum prison
 sentence of 12 months.

All agree that a judge may not strip a defendant of the right
 to a jury trial for a serious crime by promising a sentence of six months
 or less. This is so because "[o]pprobrium attaches to conviction of those
 crimes regardless of the length of the actual sentence imposed," ante ,
 at 5 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment). In my view, the same rule must
 apply to prosecutions involving multiple offenses which are serious by
 virtue of their aggregate possible sentence. I see no basis for assuming
 that the dishonor associated with multiple convictions for petty offenses
 is less than the dishonor associated with conviction of a single serious
 crime. Because the right attaches at the moment of prosecution, a judge
 may not deprive a defendant of a jury trial by making a pretrial determination
 that the crimes charged will not warrant a sentence exceeding six months.

Petitioner is entitled to a jury trial because he was charged with offenses
 carrying a statutory maximum prison sentence of more than six months. I
 therefore would reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and, for that
 reason, I respectfully dissent.

Notes 
 * The
 majority's speculation that the Court's holding in Codispoti was
 limited to criminal contempt cases, ante , at 6-7, is persuasively
 answered by Justice Kennedy. See ante , at 4 (opinion concurring
 in judgment).

