SOURCE: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-1994-title21/html/USCODE-1994-title21.htm
Extracted section from official full-title text, laws through January4 1995.
 §360k. State and local requirements respecting devices 
 
 
 (a) General rule 
 Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no State or political subdivision of a State may establish or continue in effect with respect to a device intended for human use any requirement— 
 (1) which is different from, or in addition to, any requirement applicable under this chapter to the device, and 
 (2) which relates to the safety or effectiveness of the device or to any other matter included in a requirement applicable to the device under this chapter. 
 (b) Exempt requirements 
 Upon application of a State or a political subdivision thereof, the Secretary may, by regulation promulgated after notice and opportunity for an oral hearing, exempt from subsection (a) of this section, under such conditions as may be prescribed in such regulation, a requirement of such State or political subdivision applicable to a device intended for human use if— 
  (1) the requirement is more stringent than a requirement under this chapter which would be applicable to the device if an exemption were not in effect under this subsection; or 
 (2) the requirement— 
 (A) is required by compelling local conditions, and 
 (B) compliance with the requirement would not cause the device to be in violation of any applicable requirement under this chapter. 
 
 
 (June 25, 1938, ch. 675, §521, as added May 28, 1976, Pub. L. 94–295, §2, 90 Stat. 574.) 
 
 
 Section Referred to in Other Sections 
 
 
 This section is referred to in section 360g of this title. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 §360 l . Postmarket surveillance 
 
 
 (a) In general 
 (1) Required surveillance 
 The Secretary shall require a manufacturer to conduct postmarket surveillance for any device of the manufacturer first introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce after January 1, 1991, that— 
 (A) is a permanent implant the failure of which may cause serious, adverse health consequences or death, 
 (B) is intended for a use in supporting or sustaining human life, or 
 (C) potentially presents a serious risk to human health. 
 (2) Discretionary surveillance 
 The Secretary may require a manufacturer to conduct postmarket surveillance for a device of the manufacturer if the Secretary determines that postmarket surveillance of the device is necessary to protect the public health or to provide safety or effectiveness data for the device. 
 (b) Surveillance approval 
 Each manufacturer required to conduct a surveillance of a device under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall, within 30 days of the first introduction or delivery for introduction of such device into interstate commerce, submit, for the approval of the Secretary, a protocol for the required surveillance. Each manufacturer required to conduct a surveillance of a device under subsection (a)(2) of this section shall, within 30 days after receiving notice that the manufacturer is required to conduct such surveillance, submit, for the approval of the Secretary, a protocol for the required surveillance. The Secretary, within 60 days of the receipt of such protocol, shall determine if the principal investigator proposed to be used in the surveillance has sufficient qualifications and experience to conduct such surveillance and if such protocol will result in collection of useful data or other information necessary to protect the public health and to provide safety and effectiveness information for the device. The Secretary may not approve such a protocol until it has been reviewed by an appropriately qualified scientific and technical review committee established by the Secretary. 
 
 
 (June 25, 1938, ch. 675, §522, as added Nov. 28, 1990, Pub. L. 101–629, §10, 104 Stat. 4521; amended June 16, 1992, Pub. L. 102–300, §3(b), 106 Stat. 239.) 
 
 
 
 Amendments 
 1992—Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 102–300 substituted “(a)(1)” for “(a)”, inserted comma after “commerce”, and inserted after first sentence “Each manufacturer required to conduct a surveillance of a device under subsection (a)(2) of this section shall, within 30 days after receiving notice that the manufacturer is required to conduct such surveillance, submit, for the approval of the Secretary, a protocol for the required surveillance.” 
 
 
 
 Section Referred to in Other Sections 
 
 
 This section is referred to in sections 331, 352 of this title. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  Part B—Drugs for Rare Diseases or Conditions  
 
 
 Part Referred to in Other Sections 
 
 
 This part is referred to in title 42 section 236. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
