SOURCE: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-1994-title21/html/USCODE-1994-title21.htm
Extracted section from official full-title text, laws through January4 1995.
 §360. Registration of producers of drugs or devices 
 
 
 (a) Definitions 
 As used in this section— 
 (1) the term “manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing” shall include repackaging or otherwise changing the container, wrapper, or labeling of any drug package or device package in furtherance of the distribution of the drug or device from the original place of manufacture to the person who makes final delivery or sale to the ultimate consumer or user; and 
 (2) the term “name” shall include in the case of a partnership the name of each partner and, in the case of a corporation, the name of each corporate officer and director, and the State of incorporation. 
 (b) Annual registration 
 On or before December 31 of each year every person who owns or operates any establishment in any State engaged in the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or a device or devices shall register with the Secretary his name, places of business, and all such establishments. 
 (c) New producers 
 Every person upon first engaging in the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or a device or devices in any establishment which he owns or operates in any State shall immediately register with the Secretary his name, place of business, and such establishment. 
 (d) Additional establishments 
 Every person duly registered in accordance with the foregoing subsections of this section shall immediately register with the Secretary any additional establishment which he owns or operates in any State and in which he begins the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or a device or devices. 
 (e) Registration number; uniform system for identification of devices intended for human use 
 The Secretary may assign a registration number to any person or any establishment registered in accordance with this section. The Secretary may also assign a listing number to each drug or class of drugs listed under subsection (j) of this section. Any number assigned pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be the same as that assigned pursuant to the National Drug Code. The Secretary may by regulation prescribe a uniform system for the identification of devices intended for human use and may require that persons who are required to list such devices pursuant to subsection (j) of this section shall list such devices in accordance with such system. 
 (f) Availability of registrations for inspection 
 The Secretary shall make available for inspection, to any person so requesting, any registration filed pursuant to this section; except that any list submitted pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection (j) of this section and the information accompanying any list or notice filed under paragraph (1) or (2) of that subsection shall be exempt from such inspection unless the Secretary finds that such an exemption would be inconsistent with protection of the public health. 
 (g) Exclusions from application of section 
 The foregoing subsections of this section shall not apply to— 
  (1) pharmacies which maintain establishments in conformance with any applicable local laws regulating the practice of pharmacy and medicine and which are regularly engaged in dispensing prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of practitioners licensed to administer such drugs or devices to patients under the care of such practitioners in the course of their professional practice, and which do not manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or devices for sale other than in the regular course of their business of dispensing or selling drugs or devices at retail; 
 (2) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer drugs or devices and who manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in the course of their professional practice; 
 (3) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; 
 (4) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by regulation exempt from the application of this section upon a finding that registration by such classes of persons in accordance with this section is not necessary for the protection of the public health. 
 (h) Inspection of premises 
 Every establishment in any State registered with the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be subject to inspection pursuant to section 374 of this title and every such establishment engaged in the manufacture, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or of a device or devices classified in class II or III shall be so inspected by one or more officers or employees duly designated by the Secretary at least once in the two-year period beginning with the date of registration of such establishment pursuant to this section and at least once in every successive two-year period thereafter. 
 (i) Foreign establishments 
 Any establishment within any foreign country engaged in the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs, or a device or devices, shall be permitted to register under this section pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary. Such regulations shall require such establishment to provide the information required by subsection (j) of this section and shall require such establishment to provide the information required by subsection (j) of this section in the case of a device or devices and shall include provisions for registration of any such establishment upon condition that adequate and effective means are available, by arrangement with the government of such foreign country or otherwise, to enable the Secretary to determine from time to time whether drugs or devices manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or processed in such establishment, if imported or offered for import into the United States, shall be refused admission on any of the grounds set forth in section 381(a) of this title. 
 (j) Filing of lists of drugs and devices manufactured, prepared, propagated and compounded by registrants; statements; accompanying disclosures 
 (1) Every person who registers with the Secretary under subsection (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall, at the time of registration under any such subsection, file with the Secretary a list of all drugs and a list of all devices and a brief statement of the basis for believing that each device included in the list is a device rather than a drug (with each drug and device in each list listed by its established name (as defined in section 352(e) of this title) and by any proprietary name) which are being manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or processed by him for commercial distribution and which he has not included in any list of drugs or devices filed by him with the Secretary under this paragraph or paragraph (2) before such time of registration. Such list shall be prepared in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe and shall be accompanied by— 
 (A) in the case of a drug contained in the applicable list and subject to sections 355, 356, 357, or 360b of this title, or a device intended for human use contained in the applicable list with respect to which a performance standard has been established under section 360d of this title or which is subject to section 360e of this title, a reference to the authority for the marketing of such drug or device and a copy of all labeling for such drug or device; 
 (B) in the case of any other drug or device contained in an applicable list— 
 (i) which drug is subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title, or which device is a restricted device, a copy of all labeling for such drug or device, a representative sampling of advertisements for such drug or device, and, upon request made by the Secretary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for a particular drug product or device, or 
 (ii) which drug is not subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title or which device is not a restricted device, the label and package insert for such drug or device and a representative sampling of any other labeling for such drug or device; 
 
 (C) in the case of any drug contained in an applicable list which is described in subparagraph (B), a quantitative listing of its active ingredient or ingredients, except that with respect to a particular drug product the Secretary may require the submission of a quantitative listing of all ingredients if he finds that such submission is necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
 (D) if the registrant filing a list has determined that a particular drug product or device contained in such list is not subject to section 355, 356, 357, or 360b of this title, or the particular device contained in such list is not subject to a performance standard established under section 360d of this title or to section 360e of this title or is not a restricted device a brief statement of the basis upon which the registrant made such determination if the Secretary requests such a statement with respect to that particular drug product or device. 
 
  (2) Each person who registers with the Secretary under this section shall report to the Secretary once during the month of June of each year and once during the month of December of each year the following information: 
 (A) A list of each drug or device introduced by the registrant for commercial distribution which has not been included in any list previously filed by him with the Secretary under this subparagraph or paragraph (1) of this subsection. A list under this subparagraph shall list a drug or device by its established name (as defined in section 352(e) of this title), and by any proprietary name it may have and shall be accompanied by the other information required by paragraph (1). 
 (B) If since the date the registrant last made a report under this paragraph (or if he has not made a report under this paragraph, since February 1, 1973) he has discontinued the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing for commercial distribution of a drug or device included in a list filed by him under subparagraph (A) or paragraph (1); notice of such discontinuance, the date of such discontinuance, and the identity (by established name (as defined in section 352(e) of this title) and by any proprietary name) of such drug or device. 
 (C) If since the date the registrant reported pursuant to subparagraph (B) a notice of discontinuance he has resumed the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing for commercial distribution of the drug or device with respect to which such notice of discontinuance was reported; notice of such resumption, the date of such resumption, the identity of such drug or device (each by established name (as defined in section 352(e) of this title) and by any proprietary name), and the other information required by paragraph (1), unless the registrant has previously reported such resumption to the Secretary pursuant to this subparagraph. 
 (D) Any material change in any information previously submitted pursuant to this paragraph or paragraph (1). 
 
 (3) The Secretary may also require each registrant under this section to submit a list of each drug product which (A) the registrant is manufacturing, preparing, propagating, compounding, or processing for commercial distribution, and (B) contains a particular ingredient. The Secretary may not require the submission of such a list unless he has made a finding that the submission of such a list is necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
 (k) Report preceding introduction of devices into interstate commerce 
 Each person who is required to register under this section and who proposes to begin the introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce for commercial distribution of a device intended for human use shall, at least ninety days before making such introduction or delivery, report to the Secretary (in such form and manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe)— 
 (1) the class in which the device is classified under section 360c of this title or if such person determines that the device is not classified under such section, a statement of that determination and the basis for such person's determination that the device is or is not so classified, and 
 (2) action taken by such person to comply with requirements under section 360d or 360e of this title which are applicable to the device. 
 
 
 (June 25, 1938, ch. 675, §510, as added Oct. 10, 1962, Pub. L. 87–781, title III, §302, 76 Stat. 794; amended July 15, 1965, Pub. L. 89–74, §4, 79 Stat. 231; Oct. 27, 1970, Pub. L. 91–513, title II, §701(e), 84 Stat. 1282; Aug. 16, 1972, Pub. L. 92–387, §§3, 4(a)–(c), 86 Stat. 560–562; May 28, 1976, Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a), 90 Stat. 579.) 
 
 
 
 Amendments 
 1976—Subsec. (a)(1). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(2), substituted “drug package or device package” for “drug package”, “distribution of the drug or device” for “distribution of the drug”, and “ultimate consumer or user” for “ultimate consumer”. 
 Subsecs. (b) to (d). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(3), inserted “or a device or devices” after “drug or drugs”. 
 Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(4), authorized the Secretary to prescribe by regulation a uniform system for the identification of devices intended for human use and authorized him, in addition, to require that persons who are required to list devices pursuant to subsec. (j) also list such devices in accordance with the system. 
 Subsec. (g)(1) to (3). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(5), substituted “drugs or devices” for “drugs”. 
 Subsec. (h). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(6), inserted reference to establishments engaged in the manufacture, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or of a device or devices classified in class II or III. 
 Subsec. (i). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(7), inserted reference to devices and inserted requirement that regulations require establishments to provide the information required by subsection (j) of this section in the case of a device or devices. 
 Subsec. (j)(1). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(A), in introductory provisions substituted “a list of all drugs and a list of all devices and a brief statement of the basis for believing that each device included in the list is a device rather than a drug (with each drug and device in each list listed by its established name” for “a list of all drugs (by established name” and “drugs or devices filed” for “drugs filed”. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(A). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(B), substituted “the applicable list” for “such list”, inserted “or a device intended for human use contained in the applicable list with respect to which a performance standard has been established under section 360d of this title or which is subject to section 360e of this title,” after “360b of this title,”, and substituted “such drug or device” for “such drug” wherever appearing. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(B). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(C), in introductory provisions substituted “drug or device contained in an applicable list” for “drug contained in such list”. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(B)(i). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(D), substituted “which drug is subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title, or which device is a restricted device, a copy of all labeling for such drug or device, a representative sampling of advertisements for such drug or device, and, upon request made by the Secretary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for a particular drug product or device, or” for “which is subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title, a copy of all labeling for such drug, a representative sampling of advertisements for such drug, and, upon request made by the Secretary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for a particular drug product, or”. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(B)(ii). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(E), substituted “which drug is not subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title or which device is not a restricted device,  the label and package insert for such drug or device and a representative sampling of any other labeling for such drug or device” for “which is not subject to section 353(b)(1) of this title, the label and package insert for such drug and a representative sampling of any other labeling for such drug”. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(C). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(F), substituted “an applicable list” for “such list”. 
 Subsec. (j)(1)(D). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(G), substituted “a list” for “the list”, inserted “or the particular device contained in such list is not subject to a performance standard established under section 360d of this title or to section 360e of this title or is not a restricted device” after “or 360b of this title,”, and substituted “particular drug product or device” for “particular drug product” wherever appearing. 
 Subsec. (j)(2). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(8)(H), substituted “drug or “device” for “drug” in subpars. (A), (B), and (C), and substituted “(each by established name” for “(by established name” in subpar. (C). 
 Subsec. (k). Pub. L. 94–295, §4(a)(9), added subsec. (k). 
 1972—Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 92–387, §4(a), inserted provision that the Secretary may assign a listing number to each drug or class of drugs listed under subsec. (j). 
 Subsec. (f). Pub. L. 92–387, §4(b), inserted exception that the list submitted under subsec. (j)(3) and information submitted under subsec. (j)(1), (2) shall be exempt from inspection unless the Secretary determines otherwise. 
 Subsec. (i). Pub. L. 92–387, §4(c), inserted provision that the regulations shall require such establishment to provide the information required by subsec. (j). 
 Subsec. (j). Pub. L. 92–387, §3, added subsec. (j). 
 1970—Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 91–513 struck out provisions defining the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of depressant or stimulant drugs. 
 Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 91–513 struck out provisions covering establishments engaged in the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of depressant or stimulant drugs and the inclusion of the fact of such activity in the annual registration. 
 Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 91–513 struck out provisions covering new registrations of persons first engaging in the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of depressant or stimulant drugs and the inclusion of the fact of such activity in the registration. 
 Subsec. (d). Pub. L. 91–513 struck out number designation “(1)” preceding first sentence, struck out portion of such redesignated provisions covering the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of depressant or stimulant drugs, and struck out par. (2) covering the filing of supplemental registration whenever a person not previously engaged or involved with depressant or stimulant drugs goes into the manufacturing, preparation, or processing thereof. 
 1965—Pub. L. 89–74, §4(e), included certain wholesalers in section catchline. 
 Subsec. (a)(2), (3). Pub. L. 89–74, §4(a), added par. (2) and redesignated former par. (2) as (3). 
 Subsecs. (b), (c). Pub. L. 89–74, §4(b), (c), inserted “or in the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of any depressant or stimulant drug” after “drug or drugs” and inserted requirement that establishment indicate activity in depressant or stimulant drugs at time of registration. 
 Subsec. (d). Pub. L. 89–74 §4(d), designated existing provisions as par. (1), inserted “or the wholesaling, jobbing, or distributing of any depressant or stimulant drug” and the requirement that the additional establishment indicate activity in depressant or stimulant drugs at time of registration, and added par. (2). 
 
 
 Effective Date of 1972 Amendment 
 Section 5 of Pub. L. 92–387 provided that: “The amendments made by this Act [amending this section and sections 331 and 335 of this title and enacting provisions set out below] shall take effect on the first day of the sixth month beginning after the date of enactment of this Act [Aug. 16, 1972].” 
 Effective Date of 1970 Amendment 
 Amendment by Pub. L. 91–513 effective on first day of seventh calendar month that begins after Oct. 26, 1970, see section 704 of Pub. L. 91–513, set out as an Effective Date note under section 801 of this title. 
 Effective Date of 1965 Amendment 
 Amendment by Pub. L. 89–74 effective Feb. 1, 1966, subject to registration with Secretary of names, places of business, establishments, and other prescribed information prior to Feb. 1, 1966, see section 11 of Pub. L. 89–74, set out as a note under section 321 of this title. 
 
 
 Savings Provision 
 Amendment by Pub. L. 91–513 not to affect or abate any prosecutions for any violation of law or any civil seizures or forfeitures and injunctive proceedings commenced prior to the effective date of such amendment, and all administrative proceedings pending before the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs [now the Drug Enforcement Administration] on Oct. 27, 1970, to be continued and brought to final determination in accord with laws and regulations in effect prior to Oct. 27, 1970, see section 702 of Pub. L. 91–513, set out as a note under section 321 of this title. 
 
 
 Congressional Declaration of Need for Registration and Inspection of Drug Establishments 
 Section 301 of Pub. L. 87–781 provided that: “The Congress hereby finds and declares that in order to make regulation of interstate commerce in drugs effective, it is necessary to provide for registration and inspection of all establishments in which drugs are manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or processed; that the products of all such establishments are likely to enter the channels of interstate commerce and directly affect such commerce; and that the regulation of interstate commerce in drugs without provision for registration and inspection of establishments that may be engaged only in intrastate commerce in such drugs would discriminate against and depress interstate commerce in such drugs, and adversely burden, obstruct, and affect such interstate commerce.” 
 Declaration of Policy of Drug Listing Act of 1972 
 Section 2 of Pub. L. 92–387 provided that: “The Federal Government which is responsible for regulating drugs has no ready means of determining what drugs are actually being manufactured or packed by establishments registered under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act [this chapter] except by periodic inspection of such registered establishments. Knowledge of which particular drugs are being manufactured or packed by each registered establishment would substantially assist in the enforcement of Federal laws requiring that such drugs be pure, safe, effective, and properly labeled. Information on the discontinuance of a particular drug could serve to alleviate the burden of reviewing and implementing enforcement actions against drugs which, although commercially discontinued, remain active for regulatory purposes. Information on the type and number of different drugs being manufactured or packed by drug establishments could permit more effective and timely regulation by the agencies of the Federal Government responsible for regulating drugs, including identification of which drugs in interstate commerce are subject to section 505 or 507 [section 355 or 357 of this title], or to other provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.” 
 Registration of Certain Persons Owning or Operating Drug Establishments Prior to Oct. 10, 1962 
 Section 303 of Pub. L. 87–781 provided that any person who, on the day immediately preceding Oct. 10, 1962, owned or operated an establishment which manufactured or processed drugs, registered before the first day of the seventh month following October, 1962, would be deemed to be registered in accordance with subsec. (b)  of this section for the calendar year 1962 and if registered within this period and effected in 1963, be deemed in compliance for that calendar year. 
 
 
 
 Section Referred to in Other Sections 
 
 
 This section is referred to in sections 331, 352, 355, 360c, 360e, 360i, 360j, 379h, 381 of this title. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
