te 


Supreme Court, U.S. 


‘aan ~ 
MAY 2 6 1995 
No. 


c 


DE oe THE CLERK 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1994 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
V. 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


Drew S. Days, IIT 
Solicitor General 


DEVAL L. PATRICK 
Assistant Attorney General 


PAUL BENDER 
Deputy Solicitor General 


CORNELIA T.L. PTLLARD 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


JESSICA DUNSAY SILVER 
THOMAS E. CHANDLER 
Attorneys 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether a State that provides a rigorous military- 
style public educational prograr: for men can remedy the 
unconstitutional denial of the same opportunity to women 
by offering them a different type of single-sex educational 
program deemed more suited to the average woman. 


2. Whether coeducation is the required remedy in the 
context of this case. 


(1) 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


In addition to the parties listed in the caption, the 
following were parties to the proceedings in the courts 
below: George F. Allen, Governor of the Commonwealth 
of Virginia; Virginia Military Institute; Joseph M. Spivey, 
III, President of the Virginia Military Institute Board of 
Visitors; John Williams Knapp, Superintendent of Vir- 
ginia Military Institute; The Board of Visitors of Virginia 
Military Institute; WMI Foundation, Incorporated; VMI 
Alumni Association; The Virginia State Council of Higher 
Education and its Members and Officers; Thomas N. 
Downing; Elizabeth P. Hoisington, Brig. Gen.; Robert Q. 
Marston; A. Courtland Spotts, III; Daniel F. Flowers; 
B. Powell Harrison, Jr.; Robert H. Spilman; Samuel E. 
Woolwine; James W. Enochs, Jr.; William A. Hazel; 
Harvey S. Sadow; Douglas K. Baumgartner; Daniel D. 
Cameron; Glen N. Jones; John W. Roberts; and Gordon 
K. Davies. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
I csieusoonecions 1 
Jurisdiction .. oa ll ea 1 
Constitutional | pi pevtsion tavetend - =o SR ED 2 
Reasons for granting the petition 0... 15 
Conclusion ....... 29 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 

Bradwell v. Illinois, 88 U.S. (16 Wall.) 130 
I a 21, 24 

Bray Vv. Alexandria Women’s ‘Health ‘Clinic, 113 
S. Ct. 753 (1998) ......... . 21 
Califane Vv. Goldfarb, 430 US. 199 (1977) . 21,24 
Craig Vv. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) 19, 21, 22, 24, 25 
Freeman V. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430 (1992). 16 
Frontiero Vv. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973) 24, 25 
Hills v. Gautreaux, 425 U.S. 284 (1976) = 15 

J.EB. vy. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419 
(1994) | = 66. Re 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 
Louisiana V. ‘United States, 380 U.S. 145 (1965). 16 
Milliken Vv. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) 16 

Mississippi Univ. for Women Vv. Hogan, 458 U.S. 
718 (1982)... ee 5, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24 
Orr Vv. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (1979) ' 21, 24, 26 
Reed Vv. Reed, 404 U.S. 71 (1971) 0000000 24 

Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 
(1984) . 23, 24 
Schlesinger V. Ballard, 419 US. 498 (1975) es 21 
Stanton Vv. Stanton, 421 U.S. 7 (1975) ....... 21, 22, 24 
Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303 (1880). 23 

Swann Vv. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 
402 U.S. 1 (1971) ............ sexeseceee 20°96 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629. (1950) - 13, 16, 17, 18, 27 
VMI Vv. United States, 118 S. Ct. 2431 (1993). 7 


(111) 


IV 
Cases—Continued: Page 


Vorchheimer Vv. School Dist., 532 F.2d 880 (3d 

Cir. 1976), aff'd by an equally divided court, 

430 U.S. 703 (1977) . ae 17 
Weinberger V. Wiesenfeld, 420 US. 636 (1975). 24, 25 
Wenygler Vv. Druggists Mutual Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 


(1980) .. an. 19,24 
Williams V. ” MeNair, 316 F. “Supp. 134 (D. S.C. 

1970), aff'd mem., 401 U.S. 951 (1971) ........ +A 17 

Constitution, statutes and rule: 
U.S. Const.: 

ps TTS EE Pos LI ee 2,4 

Equal Protection Clause SAR DE TE 

Te TN =n. rusia, niaiinssiemmcretiiainedamiaaiiianes 4 

OE (GS yy, Sa ities i4 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
Vv. 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


The Solicitor General, on behalf of the United States 
of America, respectfully petitions for a writ of certiorari 
to review the judgment of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in this case. 

OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the court of appeals regarding remedy 
(App. la-52a) is reported at 44 F.3d 1229. The opinion 
of the district court regarding remedy (App. 53a-131la) 
is reported at 852 F. Supp. 471. The opinion of the 
court of appeals regarding liability (App. 134a-157a) is 
reported at 976 F.2d 890. The opinion of the district 
court regarding liability (App. 158a-245a) is reported at 
766 F. Supp. 1407. 

JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on 
January 26, 1995. The court of appeals voted sua sponte 
not to rehear the case en banc, and entered an order to 
that effect on April 28, 1995 (App. 246a-257a). On 
April 18, 1995, the Chief Justice extended the time within 
which to file a petition for a writ of certiorari to and 
including May 26, 1995. The jurisdiction of this Court 
is invoked pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


(1) 


: 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 


The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment to the United States Constitution provides that “[n]jo 
State shall * * * deny to any person within its jurisdic- 
tion the equal protection of the laws.” 


STATEMENT 


1. The Virginia Military Institute (VMI) is a public, 
state-supported military college in Lexington, Virginia. 
Since its feunding in 1839, VMI has maintained a policy 
of admitting only men to its four-year undergraduate 
degree program. All of the fourteen other public colleges 
in Virginia are coeducational. Approximately 1300 male 
students are enrolled at VMI. VMI has a strong reputa- 
tion for producing leaders, and has an exceptionally loyal 
and powerful alumni network that includes men who have 
distinguished themselves in military and civilian life. App. 
137a-138a. “VMI alumni overwhelmingly perceive that 
their VMI educational experience contributed to their ob- 
taining personal goals,” id. at 205a, and VMI enjoys the 
largest endowment on a per-student basis of any under- 
graduate institution in the United States, id. at 130a. 

VMI's mission is to produce “citizen-soldiers,” described 
as “educated and honorable men who are suited for 
leadership in civilian life and who can provide military 
leadership when necessary.” App. 6a, 139a. VMI uses 
an “adversative” method of character development and 
leadership training not used by any other college. The 
adversative method is based on “English public schools” 
and “earlier military training.” although it is no longer 
in use at the United States military academies. /d. at 
i39a, 192a. The method “emphasizes physical rigor, 
mental stress, absolute equality of treatment, absence of 
privacy. minute regulation of behavior, and indoctrination 
of values.” Jd. at 139a; see id. at 191a-192a. “As a con- 
sequence of completing the rigorous tasks [required by 
the adversative method]. succeeding, and actually gradu- 
ating from VMI, VMI cadets have a sense of having 
overcome almost impossible physical and psychological 


3 


odds. They have been put through great physical pres- 
sures and hazards, and just to have made it yields a feel- 
ing of tremendous accomplishment.” /d. at 20Sa. 

VMI's adversative method is implemented through a 
pervasive military-style system. App. 140a-l4la, 191]a- 
200a. At VMI, the method includes the “rat line,” which 
is a seven-month regimen, comparable to Marine boot 
camp, during which first-year cadets, or “rats,” are 
“treated miserably,” like “the lowest animal on earth.” 
Id. at 194a-195a. “Rats” are subjected to a strict system 
of punishments and rewards that creates “a sense of ac- 
complishment and a bonding to their fellow sufferers and 
former tormentors.” /d. at 194a. The “class system” 
assigns roles to each class of cadets within a rigid hier- 
archy in order to “cultivat[e] leadership.” /d. at 196a. 
“After the rat line strips away cadets’ old values and 
behaviors, the class system teaches and reinforces through 
peer pressure the values and behaviors that VMI exists 
to promote.” /hid. VMI'’s program also includes the 
“dyke system,” an arrangement by which each rat is 
assigned a senior as a mentor to give him some “relief 
from the extreme stress of the rat line.” Jd. at 196a- 
197a. VMI requires cadets to “live within a military 
framework; they wear the cadet uniform at the Institute, 
eat most meals in the mess hail, live in a barracks, and 
regularly take part in parades and drills.” 91-1690 (VMI 
1) C.A. App. 52, © 35 (Stipulations of Fact). “{T]he 
most important aspects of the VMI educational experi- 
ence occur in the barracks.” App. 197a-198a.' There, 
cadets jive at close quarters with one another, three to 
five together in stark and unattractive rooms, with poor 
ventilation, unappealing furniture, windowed doors with 
no locks and no coverings on the windows. /d. at 199a. 
In the barracks, “a cadet is totally removed from his 
social background,” and placed in an environment the 


"An expert called by VMI testified that “{p|jroducing a VMI 
graduate without the barracks experience would be equivalent to 
dressing someone up in the uniform of a Marine without first 
sending them to boot camp.” App. 198a. 


4 


principal object of which is “to induce stress.” /bid. 
The educational program at VMI includes liberal arts, 
science and engineering courses, and VMI confers both 
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science degrees. /d. 
at 200a. 

Although VMI has always restricted admission to mefi, 
some women “would want to attend [VMI] if they had 
the opportunity.” App. 174a; see also id. at 231a, 232a 
(recruitment of women would likely yield a 10% female 
student body at VMI). Despite its male-only admissions 
policy, between the fall of 1988 and the summer of 1990 
VMI received 347 letters from women inquiring about 
admission, or otherwise indicating interest in attending 
VMI. /d. at 229a. It is not disputed that some women 
can succeed within the VMI-type methodology and are 
capable of doing all of the individual activities required 
of VMI cadets, including the physical training and mili- 
tary drills. Jd. at 76a, 223a, 234a. Thus, the VMI 
methodology “could be used to educate women.” /d. at 
76a; see id. at 155a. 

2. On March |, 1990, the United States sued the 
Commonwealth of Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, 
VMI, its Superintendent and Board of Visitors, and oth- 
ers responsible for the operation of VMI and for co- 
ordination of Virginia’s system of higher education in 
the United States District Court for the Western District 
of Virginia.” The suit was filed pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
2000c-6 in response to a complaint filed with the Attor- 
ney General by a female high school student seeking 
admission at VMI. The United States alleged that VMI’s 
male-only admissions policy violated the Equal Protection 
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and sought an 


2 As a result of the then-Governor’s position that no person 
should be denied admission to a state-supported college on account 
of sex, neither he nor the Commonwealth of Virginia participated 
at the liability phase in defending VMI's male-only admissions 
policy. App. 142a. The VMI Foundation and the VMI Alumni 
Asgzociation, both private organizations, intervened as defendants. 
Id. at 160a. 


5 


order enjoining the respondents from excluding women 
and from otherwise discriminating on the basis of sex in 
the operation of VMI. App. 141la. 

On June 14, 1991, the district court entered judgment 
in favor of respondents. App. 158a-245a. It concluded 
that VMI's male-only admissions policy met the test for 
permissible gender classifications set forth in Mississippi 
Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982). Under 
that test, the Commonwealth was required to show that 
the exclusion of women from VMI was supported by an 
“exceedingly persuasive justification.” /d. at 724. “Th{at] 
burden is met only by showing at least that the classifi- 
cation serves important governmental objectives and that 
the discriminatory means employed are substantially re- 
lated to the achievement of those objectives.” /bid. (inter- 
nal quotation marks omitted). 

The district court held that the male-only admissions 
policy was substantially related to the important state 
objective of promoting a diversity of educational offerings, 
including “single-gender diversity,” within Virginia’s sys- 
tem of higher education. App. 167a. The court found 
that “institutions of higher education that admit only 
males contribute greatly to diversity in higher education, 
and should be preserved.” /d. at 188a. The validity of 
VMI's exclusionary admissions policy was further rein- 
forced for the district court because “some aspects of the 
distinctive [VMI] method would be altered if it were to 
admit women.” /d. at 173a; see id. at 170a. The court 
credited testimony of one of VMI’s expert witnesses that 
“the adversative model of education is simply inappro- 
priate for the vast majority of women.” /d. at 171a. Thus, 
aithough “some women will thrive in the adversative en- 
vironment,” such exceptional women need not be admit- 
ted because “educational systems are not designed for 
the exception, but for the mean.” /d. at 172a. In sum, 
although the court found that “[wlomen are denied a 
unique educational opportunity that is available only at 
VMI,” id. at 218a, “[t}he VMI Board has decided that 


6 


providing a distinctive, single-sex educational opportunity 
is more important than providing an education equally 
available to all,” id. at 170a. 

3. The court of appeals vacated and remanded. App. 
134a-156a (VMI /). It held that respondents “failed to 
articulate an important policy that substantially supports 
offering the unique benefits of a VMI-type education *> 
men and not to women.” /d. at 155a.* The court spe- 
cifically rejected the district court’s conclusion that Vir- 
ginia has a policy of providing single-gender education 
to promote a diverse array of options. /d. at 152a-153a.* 
In addition, Virginia’s delegation of authority to individ- 
ual institutions to set educational policy undermined the 
stated goal of system-wide diversity, because “no explana- 
tion is apparent as to how one institution with autonomy, 
but with no authority over any other state institution, can 
give effect to a state policy of diversity among institutions.” 
Id. at 154a. Therefores “[a]s the record stands, * * * 
evidence of a legitimate and substantial state purpose is 
lacking.” 7d. at 155a. 

The court of appeals nonetheless concluded that VMI’s 
institutional mission of “developing citizen soldiers” could 
justify its male-only admissions policy, App. 145a-15la, 


*See App. 137a (Virginia had not “advanced any state policy by 
which it can justify its determination under an announced policy 
of diversity, to afford VMI’s unique type of program to men and 
not to women”); id. at 152a (“the Commonwealth of Virginia has 
not revealed a policy that explains why it offers the unique benefit 
of VMI's type of education and training to men and not to 
women”); id. at 153a-154a (“If VMI's male-only admissions policy 
is in furtherance of a state policy of ‘diversity,’ the explanation of 
how the policy is furthered by affording a unique educational bene- 
fit only to males is lacking. A policy of diversity which aims to 
provide an array of educational opportunities, including single- 
gender institutions, must do more than favor one gender.”). 


* The court noted that the only policy statement in the record 
“in which the Commonwealth has expressed itself with respect 
to gender distinctions” required that its colleges and universities 
treat students “without regard to ser, race, or ethnic origin.” 
App. 153a. 


7 


as long as women would also have an opportunity to ob- 
tain “the unique benefits of a YMl-type of education,” 
id. at 155a-156a. The court agreed with the district court 
that “single-sex education is pedagogically justifiable,” id. 
at 1Sla, and that “changes necessary to accommodate co- 
education would tear at the fabric of VMI’s unique meth- 
odology,” id. at 148a. Those changes, the court believed, 
would stem not from the presence of women, but from the 
shift to coeducation: “It is not the maleness, as distin- 
guished from femaleness, that provides justification for 
[VMI’s] program. It is the homogeneity of gender in 
the process, regardless of which sex is considered, that 
has been shown to be related to the essence of the edu- 
cation and training at VMI.” /bid. In its view, how- 
ever, “[t]he problems that could be anticipated by co- 
education at VMI, which are suggested by VMI gen- 
erally to arise from physiological differences between men 
and women, needs for privacy, and cross-sexual confronta- 
tions, would not be anticipated in an all-female program 
with the same mission and methodology as that of VMI.” 
Id. at 150a. The court added that “neither the goal of 
producing citizen soldiers nor VMI’s implementing meth- 
odology is inherently unsuitable to women.” /d. at 155Sa. 

Although the court of appeals thus found a violation 
of the Equal Protection Clause, the court declined, “[i]n 
light of * * * the generally recognized benefit that VMI 
provides,” to “order that women be admitted to VMI 
if alternatives are available.” App. 155a. The court in- 
stead “remand[ed] the case to the district court to give 
to the Commonwealth the responsibility to select a course 
it chooses, so long as the guarantees of the Fourteenth 
Amendment are satisfied.” /d. at 156a. The court stated 
that, consistently with its opinion, 


the Commonwealth might properly decide to admit 
women to VMI and adjust the program to implement 
that choice, or it might establish parallel institutions 
or parallel programs, or it might abandon state sup- 
port of VMI, leaving VMI the option to pursue its 


8 


own policies as a private institution. While it is not 
ours to determine, there might be other more creative 
options or combinations. 


ibid. 

The respondents sought review in this Court, which 
denied certiorari. VMI v. United States, 113 S. Ct. 2431 
(1993). App. 132a-133a. 

4. On remand, respondents proposed a remedial plan 
developed by a task force chaired by the Dean of Mary 
Baldwin College (MBC), a private women’s liberal arts 
college in Staunton, Virginia. App. 8a. Although the 
task force observed that “some women would be suited to 
and interested in experiencing a ‘women’s VMI,’”™ it con- 
cluded that “aspects of VMI’s military model, especially 
the adversative method, would not be effective for women 
as a group.” /bid. The task force proposed the creation 
of an all-female Virginia Women’s Institute for Leader- 
ship (VWIL) offering a minor in leadership at Mary 
Baldwin College. See generally id. at 7a-1la, 101a-129a. 
It anticipated that VWIL would have about 25-30 stu- 
dents in its first year. /d. at 10a. 

The proposed VWIL at Mary Baldwin College would 
have a mission similar to VMI’s of producing “citizen 
soldiers,” and the Commonwealth would provide VWIL 
the same amount of financial support per student as it 
provides to VMI. App. 8a, 10a. VWIL, however, would 
“not rely on the pervasive military life and adversative 
methods to achieve its goals,” but would be addressed 
to “the different educational needs of most women.” /d. 
at 10a. Whereas “the VMI model is based on the premise 
that young men come with [an] inflated sense of self- 
efficacy that must [be] knocked down and rebuilt.” 
“[w]hat [women] need is a system that builds their sense 
of self-efficacy through meeting challenges, developing 
self-discipline, meeting rigor and dealing with it, and 
having successes.” Jd. at 10a-1 la. 

Instead of the “rat line,” VWIL would thus have 
“training in self-defense and self-assertiveness through a 


9 


Cooperative Confidence Building program.” App. I1la- 
112a. Residential life for VWIL students would also 
“vary significantly” from VMI. /d. at 66a. There would 
be no barracks at VWIL. VWIL students would instead 
live in Mary Baldwin student housing, in which privacy 
would be respected. Jd. at 127a-128a.° VWIL freshman 
students would room together in separate sections of the 
Mary Baldwin residence halls “to facilitate the develop- 
ment of group identity while also encouraging good re- 
lationships and friendships with other freshmen.” /d. at 
114a. “VWIL participants will be encouraged to partici- 
pate in MBC activities and class functions.” /d. at 114a- 
115a. Unlike students at VMI, VWIL students would 
not be required to eat meals together. /d. at 11la. 
Military training for VWIL students would be provided 
by the standard, pre-existing ROTC program at Mary 
Baldwin College. App. 109a-111a. WWIL students would 
also participate in a newly established, largely ceremonial 
Virginia Corps of Cadets. /d. at 9a, 110a. VWIL stu- 
dents would not wear uniforms except when participating 
in ROTC or Virginia Corps of Cadets activities. Jd. at 
Illa. VWIL students would be required to participate 
in eight semesters of physical and health education. /d. 
at 10a, 111a.° Unlike VMI, Mary Baldwin College does 
not have a math and science focus and does not offer a 
Bachelor of Science degree. /d. at 131a. VWIL students 
would thus be offered a substantially different curriculum 
from that at VMI and, for example, would be able to 
obtain a Bachelor’s degree in engineering only by partici- 


5 MBC student dorms include a “wide range of living arrange- 
ments,” such as “[rljesidence halls * * * elegantly equipped with 
brass chandeliers, plush carpeting and mahogany furniture.” App. 
127a. Many are converted single-family homes, furnished by the 
college, and each with “its own distinct character.” Jbid. Some 
have “televisions, cable hook-ups and microwave ovens.” IJbid. 


* VWIL students would also participate in a leadership externship, 
participate in organizing a speaker series, and organize and carry 
out community projects. App. 9a. 


10 


pating in a joint program requiring three years of course 
work at MBC and two years at Washington University 
in St. Louis, Missouri. /bid.’ The athletic and physical 
training facilities at VMI are far more extensive and 
sophisticated than those at MBC. /d. at 130a-I3la. In 
addition, MBC “maintains a faculty holding significantly 
fewer Ph.D.’s than the faculty at VMI.” /d. at 129a. 

5. The district court approved VMI's proposed re- 
medial plan. App. 53a-I13la. The court acknowledged 
that the proposed VWIL “differs substantially from the 
VMI program,” id. at 55a; see id. at 12a, 67a-68a, but 
found the differences to be justified. The court concluded 
that expert witness testimony regarding “developmental 
and emotional differences between the sexes” supported 
the different educational methodologies reflected in the 
VWIL and the VMI programs. /d. at 72a; see id. at 62a, 
76a." The court accepted the conclusions of the Task 
Force that “a military model and, especially VMI’s adver- 
sative method, would be wholly inappropriate for educat- 
ing and training most women for leadership roles,” and 


7While at Washington University, VWIL students would not 
receive any tuition discount, and would thus be “denied the oppor- 
tunity to receive an engineering degree on a publicly-supported 
basis like VMI students.” App. 131a. 


*The court credited research showing that “an adversative 
method of teaching in an all-female school would be not only 
inappropriate for most women, but counter-productive,” because 
“most women reaching college generally have less confidence than 
men.” App. 64a. Young women “do not need to have uppityness 
and aggression beaten out of them.” /d. at 73a-74a. Women thus 
“do not need the leveling experience of a rat line and adversative 
methods.” /d. at 74a n.10. Because VWIL “is planned for women 
who do not necessarily expect to pursue military careers,” the 
Plan “incorporates the element of public service” instead of “the 
entirely militaristic experience of VMI.” /d. at 68a. See also id. 
at 224a (because of sex-based “developmental differences,” “{ males 
tend to need an atmosphere of adversativeness or ritual combat 
in which the teacher is a disciplinarian and a worthy competitor,” 
while “[flemales tend to thrive in a cooperative atmosphere in 
which the teacher is emotionally connected with the students”). 


- LS A TE 


1] 


found VWIL’s cooperative method to be more appro- 
priate for most women. /d. at 63a. The court predicted 
that the cooperative method “will produce the same or 
similar outcome for women that VMI produces for men.” 
Id. at 64a; see id. at 75a-76a. The court acknowledged 
curricular differences between VMI and VWIL, but found 
those differences to be justified because “[t]he very con- 
cept of diversity precludes the Commonwealth from offer- 
ing an identical curriculum at each of its colleges.” /d. 
at 66a. 

6. The court of appeals affirmed. App. la-52a. For 
purposes of this case, it created and applied a “special 
intermediate scrutiny test” with which to evaluate VMI's 
proposed remedy. /d. at 17a-18a. The court thus took 
a “cautious approach” to Hogan's requirement that sex- 
based classifications be justified by exceedingly persuasive 
and important state objectives, id. at 15a, calling instead 
for “deference” to a State’s policy “so long as the purpose 
is not pernicious and does not violate traditional notions 
of the role of government,” id. at 18a. The court stated 
that respondents’ purpose at the remedial stage of this case 
was “providing the option of a single-gender college edu- 
cation”; single-sex education provides “the assumed bene- 
fit that [the] students are not distracted by the presence 
of the other sex.” /d. at 20a, 22a. Exclusion of women 
from VMI is also “directly related to achieving the results 
of an adversative method in a military environment.” /d. 
at 23a. The adversative method “has never been tolerated 
in a sexually heterogeneous environment,” because “[i|f 
we were to place men and women into the adversative 
relationship inherent in the VMI program, we would 
destroy, at least for that period of the adversative training. 
any sense of decency that still permeates the relationship 
between the sexes.” /hid. The court acknowledged that 
the pedagogical value of single-sex education is disputed, 
but cautioned that “we should defer to a state’s selection 
of educational techniques when we conclude, as we do 
here, that the purpose of providing a single-gender educa- 


12 


tion is not pernicious and falls within the range of the 
traditional governmental objective of providing citizens 
higher education.” /d. at 2la-22a. 

The court recognized that its deferential approach to 
Hogan’s first prong “effectively redirects the court’s focus” 
to the second prong, which requires the Court to “eval- 
uat(e] the state’s means for obtaining its objective.” App. 
1Sa. The court further recognized that, if the State’s 
goal is single-sex education, the second prong of the 
Hogan analysis effectively drops out, providing “little or 
no scrutiny,” id. at 16a-17a, because exclusion of one sex 
is “by definition necessary for accomplishing the objec- 
tive” of single-sex education, id. at | 6a. 

The court accordingly added a “third step” to the 
Hogan test, applicable only to cases in which the State’s 
objective is to achieve “homogeneity of gender” in sep- 
arate, parallel programs. App. 17a-18a. Under that 
third step, the court held that the benefits provided to 
each sex through separate programs must merely be “sub- 
Stantively comparable.” /d. at 17a. The court empha- 
sized that it was not requiring “separate but equal,” id. 
at 18a n.*, or that the programs be “the same,” id. at 
17a, because “equal methods and equal results” are not 
required for “different classes of people,” and any sug- 
gestion to the contrary “is justified only by a needless, 
and indeed baseless, demand for conformity,” id. at 25a. 

Applying its test, the court held that VWIL would be 
substantively comparable to VMI, because 


both VMI and VWIL are focused on results beyond 
simply awarding an undergraduate degree. Both 
seek to teach discipline and prepare students for 
leadership. The missions are similar and the goals 
are the same. The mechanism for achieving the goals 
differ-—VMI utilizing an adversative and pervasive 
military regimen and VWIL proposing to utilize a 
structured environment reinforced by some military 
training and a concentration on leadership develop- 
ment—but the difference is attributable to a profes- 


13 


sional judgment of how best to produce the same 

opportunity. 
App. 26a. The court conceded that the VWIL degree 
will lack the historical benefit and prestige of a VMI 
degree, but stated that those intangible benefits “must 
be the byproduct of a longer-term effort.” /d. at 27a. 
The court affirmed and remanded with instructions that 
the district court take additional steps to assure that “a 
high level of state support continues” for the implemen- 
tation of VWIL as planned. /d. at 30a. 

7. Judge Phillips dissented. App. 3la-S2a. He be- 
lieved that under Hogan and Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 
629 (1950), no arrangement of separate single-sex 
schools “could be found substantially related to any 
conceivable governmental objective unless the benefits to 
be separately distributed by the arrangement were sub- 
stantially equal across the board of the relevant criteria 
for evaluating educational institutions.” App. 48a.’ 
Here, “the contrast between the two [schools] on all the 
relevant tangible and intangible criteria is so palpable as 
not to require detailed recitation. If every good thing 
projected for the VWIL program is realized in reasonably 
foreseeable time, it will necessarily be then but a pale 
shadow of VMI in terms of the great bulk, if not all of 
those criteria.” /d. at 50a." 


ing women from VM\ “unquestionably has been driven unchanged 
since its origins by a stereotyped view of the proper role and 
capabilities of women in society.” App. 44a-45a. He thus doubted 
whether respondents’ asserted objectives, see id. at 40a-4la, were 
their actual purposes. 


™ Judge Phillips criticized the majority for evaluating the pro- 
posed remedy from the perspective of the narrow category of 
women who would select VWIL primarily for its single-sex envi- 
ronment. App. 5la. He believed that “|t\he proper perspective 
from which to measure substantial equality of available benefits is 
that of the potential student who could be admitted to either 
school and has a choice.” /bid. From that perspective, it is difficult 
to believe that anyone “would consider the question close.” /hid. 
(quoting Sweett, 339 U.S. at 634). 


14 


8. The Fourth Circuit, sua sponte, voted not to re- 
consider the case en banc. App. 246a-250a."" Judge 
Motz wrote a dissent from that decision, in which Judges 
Murnaghan and Michael joined. /d. at 25la-257a. She 
pointed out that, under Hogan, a state-supported single- 
gender program cannot be constitutionaiy) justified “sim- 
ply because it is a single-gender program, id. at 253a, 
but must be substantially related to furthering some sep- 
arate goal, and the asserted goal of pro lucing citizen- 
soldiers does not require a male-only admissions policy, 
id. at 253a-254a. Assuming that adversative training is 
desirable and essential to the VMI program, Judge Motz 
stated that without such training VWIL cannot be “sub- 
stantively comparable” to VMI. /d. at 254a-255a. Con- 
versely, if VWIL is truly “substantively comparable,” the 
“ ‘adversative’ training must not be critical to the VMI 
program, and so there is nothing to prevent the abolition 
of ‘adversative’ training and admission of women to 
VMI.” /d. at 255a. 

Judge Motz also viewed “VMI's reputation, the oppor- 
tunity to know and learn from other students, faculty, and 
graduates, and the ability to rely on those connections 
and friendships in later life” as at least as important as 
the course work or citizenship and military training to 
the opportunity denied to women. App. 255a. Finally, 
while many women would not want to attend VMI, it 
is “equally probable that many men would not want to 
be educated in such an environment.” /d. at 256a-257a. 
The issue is not whether anyone should be forced to 
attend VMI, but whether women should be given the 
same opportunity as men to do so. /d. at 257a. 


"Six judges voted in favor of rehearing, four voted against, 
and three judges disqualified themselves. Under Fourth Circuit 
Lecal Rule 35(b), a case may be reheard en banc only when a 
majority of the active judges, including those who are disqualified, 
vote to rehear the case. See App. 25la n.1. A judge’s disqualifica- 
tion thus counts as a vote against rehearing. 


15 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


The Commonwealth of Virginia has closed the Virginia 
Military Institute to women for more than 150 years. 
In its initial decision in this case, the court of appeals 
correctly found that that policy violates equal protection. 
In its decision affirming the district court’s remedial 
order, however, the court of appeals fashioned a new 
equal protection standard in direct conflict with this 
Court's sex discrimination cases, and applied that stan- 
dard to approve a remedy that does not provide for equal 
treatment. Indeed, the court’s remedial decision actually 
compounds the original constitutional violation by invok- 
ing harmful gender stereotypes to justify offering vastly 
different state-supported leadership programs io women 
and men. 

In holding that VMI's male-only admissions policy vio- 
lates equal protection, the court of appeals made clear 
that the constitutional violation lay in denying women 
“the unique benefit of VMI's type of education and train- 
ing.” including its “unique” educational “methodology.” 
E.g., App. 152a, 155a. The court also specifically found 
that the VMI methodology is not “inherently unsuitable 
to women.” id. at 155a. The plan that the court has 
now approved, however, fails to make available to 
women the very opportunity to benefit from VMI's 
educational methodology that Virginia has unconstitu- 
tionally denied them. /bid. In addition, the court of 
appeals’ invocation of sex stereotypes to perpetuate an 
equal protection violation conflicts with this Court's 
modern sex discrimination cases. That decision thus 
raises questions of exceptional importance to the meaning 
of the Constitution’s protection against discrimination on 
the basis of sex.” 


"The remedy approved by the court of appeals also conflicts 
with decisions in which this Court has repeatediy made clear that 
a district court is “required to tailor the scope of the remedy to 
fit the nature and extent of the * * * violation.” Hills v. Gautreaur, 
425 U.S. 284, 293 294 (1976) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
In other words, “{a)s with any equity case, the nature of the 


16 


1. The court of appeals assumed that state main- 
tenance of separate single-sex schools for men and women 
constitutionally may be justified in appropriate circum- 
stances. Even accepting that assumption, however, either 
such schools must provide educational programs that are 
genuinely equal or the State must justify any inequality 
under a standard of heightened constitutional scrutiny. 
The court of appeals instead used a constitutional stan- 
dard that requires no heightened justification for separate 
and unequal treatment. Its decision thus conflicts with 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950), and with this 
Court's line of equal protection sex discrimination cases 
culminating in Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 
458 U.S. 718 (1962), and J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. 


T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994). = 
a. The VWIL program is not equal to the military- 
style leadership program respondents have reserved for 


violation determines the scope of the remedy.” Swann v. Charlotte- 
Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 402 U.S. 1, 16 (1971) ; see also Freeman 
v. Pitts, 112 S. Ct. 1430, 1445 (1992) (judicial power is invoked 
“to remedy particular constitutional violations”). The remedy 
must be “related to the condition alleged to offend the Constitu- 
tion” and “must be designed as nearly as possible to restore the 
victims of discriminatory conduct to the Position they would have 
occupied in the absence of such conduct.” Milliken V. Bradley, 
483 U.S. 267, 280 (1977) ‘internal quotation marks omitted). That 
is so because, under the Equal Protection Clause, “the court has 
not merely the power but the duty to render a decree which will 
so far as possible eliminate the discriminatory effects of the past 
as well as bar like discrimination in the future.” Louisiana V. 
United States, 380 U.S. 145, 154 (1965). The remedy approved 
below plainly does not cure the constitutional violation that gave 
rise to this case—the complete exclusion of women from VMI's 
unique and celebrated program. 


18 This case does not require the Court to address the validity 
of public single-sex education generally. The remedy adopted here 
is not invalid merely because VMI and VWIL are single-sex 
schools, but because VMI has been found to be unique, because 
VWIL falls far short of replicating for women the 7 
opportunity VMI provides to men, and because the bases for - 
ing different schools are gender-stereotyped views of the roles and 
capacities of women and men. 


17 


men at VMI. In Sweatt v. Painter, supra, this Court 
invalidated an assertedly “separate but equal” remedy for 
black students denied entry to the University of Texas 
Law School because the opportunities extended exclu- 
sively to whites at that school were superior to those the 
State afforded to blacks “{i]n terms of the number of the 
faculty, variety of courses and opportunity for specializa- 
tion, size of the student body, scope of the library, avail- 
ability of law review and similar activities.” 339 U.S. at 
633-634. Where segregation is by sex, the presumptive 
requirement of equal treatment is no less applicable. See 
Hogan, 458 U.S. at 720 n.1."" 

The court below found that VWIL will fail in many 
tangible ways to offer to women what VMI provides for 
men. See App. 7a-12a; see generally pp. 2-4, 8-10, 
supra. VWIL will, for example, lack adversative train- 
ing, although that is the feature of VMI that the court 
and respondents repeatedly pointed to as making VMI 
“unique.” WWIL will have no barracks life, despite the 
court’s view that the barracks are fundamental to VMI. 


' The Court in Hogan invalidated the policy of excluding men 
from the Mississippi University for Women’s School of Nursing. 
Although plaintiff there admittedly had opportunities elsewhere in 
the State for nursing education of the same quality as that which 
he was denied at MUW, 458 U.S. at 723 .8: see id. at 734 
(Blackmun, J., dissenting) ; id. at 735 (Powell, J., dissenting), the 
inconvenience to him of traveling to one of those locations made 
his opportunity materially unequal! to those of a similarly situated 
woman. 

This Court has not discussed the circumstances (if any) in 
which parallel single-sex programs for men and women might be 
constitutional. But in the two cases in which this Court affirmed 
such dual systems without opinion, the lower courts had required 
that the separate programs involved be essentially equal. See 
Vorchheimer v¥. School Dist., 532 F.2d 880, 881-882, 886 (2d Cir. 
1976) (plaintiff “d{id| not allege a deprivation of an education 
equal to that which the school board makes available to boys”), 
aff'd by an equally divided court, 430 U.S. 703 (1977); Williams 
v. McNair, 316 F. Supp. 134 (D.S.C. 1970) (finding that no special 


features made the women’s college better than the men’s college), 
aff'd mem., 401 U.S. 961 (1971). 


18 


The military culture of VMI will be lacking at VWIL. 
The Mary Baldwin campus, where the VWIL program 
will be situated, has only a fraction of the athletic and 
physical training facilities present at VMI. VWIL women 
would, in addition, be denied the opportunity to major 
in engineering at Mary Baldwin or to obtain a Bachelor 
of Science degree there. /hbid. The court of appeals thus 
freely acknowledged that VWIL would not offer women 
an educational program equal to that offered to men by 
VMI. App. 18a n.*; see id. at 24a-28a. 

Perhaps even more important, VWIL would also be 
unequal because VMI “possesses to a far greater degree 
those qualities which are incapable of objective measure- 
ment but which make for greatness in a * e * school, 
including “reputation of the faculty, experience of the 
administration, position and influence of the alumni, stand- 
ing in the community. traditions and prestige.” Sweatt, 
339 U.S. at 634. The district court in this case correctly 
found that, “even if all else were equal between VMI 
and [VWIL], the VWIL program cannot supply those 
intangible qualities of history, reputation, tradition, and 
prestige that VMI has amassed over the years. App. 60a 
(footnote omitted). WMI is the nation’s oldest military 
college, and its alumni occupy distinguished positions in 
private professions and public life. The program offered 
to women at VWIL is therefore patentiy unequal to the 
program offered to men at VMI. . 

b. The court of appeals’ conclusion that the establish- 
ment of VWIL at Mary Baldwin would satisfy equal pro- 
tection requirements, despite the substantially different 
programs offered by Virginia to men and to women, 
rests on a clearly incorrect equal protection analysis, in 
conflict with this Court’s precedents. Expressly declining 
to follow Sweatt, the court of appeals first disavowed any 
requirement that the sex-segregated VWIL and VMI 
programs in fact be “equal,” and instead demanded only 
that they be “substantively comparable.” App. 17a-18a 
& n.*. That separate-but-substantively-comparable stan- 
dard is satisfied, in the court’s view, by unequal sex- 


19 


segregated programs that are merely “aimed at achieving 
similar results.” /d. at 26a. The court then held that the 
requirement of substantive comparability was met by 
VMI and VWIL in this case because “{t]he missions are 
similar and the goals are the same,” even though “[t}he 
mechanism|[s| for achieving the goals differ.” /bid. 

The separate-but-substantively-comparable standard that 
the court created incorrectly affirmatively incorporates 
and authorizes sex discrimination, rather than requiring, 
as it must to be consistent with this Court’s decisions, an 
important and closely tailored justification for it. The 
new standard disavows the constitutional requirement of 
equality of treatment and instead presumes, without any 
constitutionally established justification whatsoever, that 
there are differences between men and women that a 
priori permit substantial differences in the programs and 
opportunities offered by the State to each sex. Such a 
standard squarely conflicts with this Court’s requirement 
that any difference in treatment based on sex be sup- 
ported by an “exceedingly persuasive justification” that 
exists only if the diflerence in treatment serves impor- 
tant governmental objectives and is substantially related 
to the achievement of those objectives. Hogan, 458 U.S. 
at 724; see also, e.g., Wengler v. Druggists Mutual Ins. 
Co., 446 U.S. 142, 150 (1980); Craig v. Boren, 429 
U.S. 190, 197 (1976). Respondents failed to provide 
an exceedingly persuasive justification for the inequality 
in the treatment afforded to women. In fact, they failed 
to provide any acceptable justification at all. 

i. The decision below instead relies on stereotypes that 
reflect and reinforce archaic notions about women in con- 
flict with this Court’s cases. The court of appeals ap- 
proved providing women with an admittedly unequal 
program at VWIL on the ground that personality and 
preference differences between men and women justify the 
differences between the VMI and VWIL programs. App. 
67a-76a. As a basis for its decision, the court relied on 
sex-based generalizations that women are more psychologi- 
cally and sociologically suited than men to a confidence- 


20 


building, public-service-oriented program, while VMI's 
rigorous military-style training is more suitable to men. 
See pp. 10-11 & n.8, supra. The court thus embraced, 
among other things, the stereotyped view that women are 
less confident and less aggressive than men, App. 64a, 
73a, and that many women “do not necessarily expect to 
pursue military careers,” id. at 68a.” 

The court of appeals’ acceptance of those sex-based 
characterizations conflicts with Hogan."’ The Court in 
Hogan invalidated a nursing school’s women-only admis- 
sions policy in part because that policy “tend[ed] to 
perpetuate the stereotyped view of nursing as an exclu- 
sively woman's job.” 458 U.S. at 729. It rejected the 
State’s putative compensatory rationale because the ad- 
missions policy “len[t] credibility to the old view that 
women. not men, should become nurses, and ma[de] 
the assumption that nursing is a field for women a self- 
fulfilling prophecy.” Jd. at 730. Hogan thus opened to 
men the opportunity to enter a traditionally women’s in- 
stitution to train for an overwhelmingly female-dominated 
field. Id. at 723 & n.8. Just as nursing has historically 
been associated with women, the military has been asso- 
ciated with men. J.E.B., 114 S. Ct. at 1429 n.16. Ex- 
cluding women from VMI and providing to them an 
all-female alternative that is not a military school perpetu- 


1 The court’s reliance on this rationale for approving a program 
at VWIL that is not pervasively military is particularly unjustified 
given the fact that most men who attend VMI similarly do not plan 
to pursue military careers. App. 206a, 219a. 


16 This Court in Hogan held that the determination whether a 
challenged sex-based classification is substantially related to an 
important governmental objective “must be applied free of fixed 
notions concerning the roles and abilities of males and females.” 
458 U.S. at 724-725. The Court there recognized that “[h|istory 
provides numerous examples of legislative attempts to exclude 
women from particular areas simply because legislators believed 
women were less able than men to perform a particular function.” 
Id. at 725 n.10. Thus, “fclare must be taken in ascertaining 
whether the [government’s] objective itself reflects archaic and 
stereotypic notions.” Jd. at 725. 


a ae A 


ee 


en Oe 


Se eee ED ee - 


Pee emerges WON as 1X - 


21 


ates exactly the same kind of archaic, exclusive associa- 
tion of each sex with particular professions—here the 
premise that men, and not women, are fit to be military 
leaders. 
The decision below also conflicts directly with J.E.B. 
Vv. Alabama ex rel. T.B., supra. There, this Court refused 
to accept, as a defense of the State’s use of sex-based 
peremptory challenges, “the very stereotype the law con- 
demns.” 114 S. Ct. at 1426. The J.E.B. Court reasoned 
that government must not “ratify and reinforce prejudicial 
views of the rejative abilities of men and women” nor 
perpetuate “stereotypes [that] have wreaked injustice in 
so many other spheres of our country’s public life.” id. 
at 1427; see also id. at 1424-1425 (quoting Schlesinger 
v. Ballard, 419 US. 498, 508 (1975) (disapproving 
archaic and overbroad” generalizations) )."" The particu- 
lar stereotypes upon which the court below relied are, in 
fact, distressingly similar to Justice Bradley’s discredited 
conclusion in Bradwell v. Illinois, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 
130, 141 (1873) (Bradley, J., concurring in the judg- 
ment), that “[t}he natural and proper timidity and 
delicacy which belongs to the female sex” supported the 
exclusion of women from the practice of law in favor of 


“the domestic sphere as that which properly be 
the domain and functions of wear a ae 


. 'T See also Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268, 2883 (197 i 

ing payment of alimony to women but not cairo 
baggage of sexual stereotypes”) ; Califano Vv. Goldfarb, 480 U.S 
199, 217 & n.18 (1977) (statutory distinction between widows’ and 
widowers’ social security survivors’ benefits was based on “archai 
and overbroad” generalizations) ; Craig, 429 U.S. at 198-199 ( die 
tinction between ages at which males and females can saudione 
3.2% beer reflected “outdated misconceptions”) ; Stanton v. Stanton 
421 USS. 7, 15 (1975) (statute setting different ages of majority 
for girls and boys relied on “role-typing society has long mien: 
see also Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic, 113 8. Ct 753. 
759 (1993) (describing as “objectively invidious” under 42 U S C. 
1985(3) the purpose of “ ‘saving’ women because they are women 


from a combati i 
law”). ative, aggressive profession such as the practice of 


22 


Even where stereotypes may in part reflect current 
realities, the Court has condemned them both because 
present practices may themselves result from historical 
sex-based bias, and because the law must not operate to 
freeze men and women into socially assigned roles. The 
gender stereotypes upon which the court of appeals relied, 
like those this Court has repeatedly rejected, impermissi- 
bly “reflect and reinforce patterns of historical discrimina- 
tion.” J.E.B., 114 S. Ct. at 1428; see also Craig, 429 
U.S. at 202 n.14."* The lower court’s finding that, for 
example, women are less aggressive than men may well 
reflect the effects of long-standing sex-based limitations 
on social roles that have often discouraged aggressive 
behavior in women while encouraging it in men. And, 
as the Court explained in Hogan, sex-based treatment can 
make the generalizations upon which it is based “self- 
fulfilling prophecf[ies].” 458 U.S. at 730. Barring women 
from VMI'’s adversative and pervasively military-style 
training deprives them of any opportunity to learn to 
adapt to it; it thus makes women’s presumed unfitness 
for such training, and for the leadership opportunities it 


18 The Court in Craig recognized that stereotypes themselves may 
have played a role in creating the observed statistical differences 
between women’s and men’s conduct through which the State sought 
to justify a law imposing different minimum ages at which men 
and women could purchase 3.2% beer. “The very social stereotypes 
that find reflection in age differential laws are likely substantially 
to distort the accuracy of these comparative statistics. Hence, 
‘reckless’ young men who drink and drive are transformed into 
arrest statistics, whereas their female counterparts are chivalrously 
escorted home.” 429 U.S. at 202 n.14 (citation omitted). 

Similarly, in rejecting the argument in Stanton that a statute 
establishing a lower age of majority for girls than for boys was 
justified because boys often stay in school and require parental 
support for longer than girls, the Court observed that “|t]jo dis- 
tinguish between the two on educational grounds is to be self- 
serving: if the fémale is not to be supported so long as the male, 
she hardly can be expected to attend school as long as he does, 
and bringing her education to an end earlier coincides with the 
role-typing society has long imposed.” 421 U.S. at 15. 


23 


creates, as much a “self-fulfilling prophecy” as the pre- 
sumption about natural sex roles rejected in Hogan.” 
ii. The decision below also conflicts sharply with nu- 
merous holdings of this Court that reliance on overbroad 
sex-based generalizations about women and men cannot 
support sex-based classifications that are applied to fore- 
close individual opportunity. In employing generalizations 
about the preferences and personalities of women and 
men as a basis for its decision, the court of appeals did 
not purport to find—nor could it possibly have found— 
that all women are less aggressive or less confident than 
all men, or that VMI’s program was educationally in- 
appropriate for all women. It acknowledged instead that 
VMI’s adversative methodology is not “inherently unsuit- 
able to women,” App. 155a, and that some women would 
indeed be qualified for, would prefer, and would benefit 
from that methodology, id. at 76a, 155a; see id. at 74a, 
223a, 234a. The court nonetheless acted on the premise 
that psychological and sociological differences between the 
sexes justify denying all women admission to VMI’s 
“masculine” program as long as the VWIL “feminine” 
alternative program is available to them. That decision 
conflicts with this Court’s cases prohibiting reliance on 
overbroad sex-based generalizations. The fact that many 
—perhaps most—men are not suited to VMI’s educational 


' For the reasons the Court offered in J.E.B., the assumption 
that women have a pirt’cular psvchological or sociological orien- 
tation—like the assumption that they hold particular views—also 
causes stigmatic harms. Women’s exclusion from VMI can 
accurately be characterized as “practically a brand upon them, 
affixed by law, an assertion of their inferiority” that “denigrates 
the dignity” of the excluded women, and “reinvokes a history of 
exclusion.” 114 S. Ct. at 1428 (quoting Strauder v. West Virginia, 
100 U.S. 303, 308 (1880)); see also Roberts v. United States 
Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 625 (1984) (referring to “stigmatizing in- 
jury” caused by private club’s exclusion of women). The fact that 
VMI is a celebrated institution with historic standing in the com- 
munity thus makes its male-only admissions policy particularly 
problematic because it intensifies the stigma sessociated with 
women’s exclusion. 


24 


methodology does not foreclose VMI to men who would 
benefit from it. There is no reason why the fact that not 
all women are so suited should foreclose that opportunity 
to women who would also benefit.” 

This Court “has frequently noted that discrimination 
based on archaic and overbroad assumptions about the 
relative needs and capacities of the sexes forces individ- 
uals to labor under stereotypical notions that often bear 
no relationship to their actual abilities.” Roberts v. 
United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 625 (1984). Thus, 
even where there are statistically significant differences 
between the behavior or attitudes of men and women, the 
Court has consistently invalidated absolute legal gen- 
eralizations based on those differences as wholly incom- 
patible with equal protection values. In J.E.B., for ex- 
ample, the Court rejected the argument that, because 
sex might be an accurate predictor of jurors’ attitudes, 
sex-based peremptory challenges were permissible. “[A] 
shred of truth may be contained in some stereotypes,” but 
this Court has “made abundantly clear in past cases that 
gender classifications that rest on impermissible stereo- 
types violate the Equal Protection Clause, even when 
some statistical support can be conjured up for the gen- 


» See, e.g., J.E.B., 114 S. Ct. at 1429 (“gender simply may not 
be used as a proxy for bias”); id. at 1432 (O’Connor, J., con- 
curring); id. at 1433-1434 (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judg- 
ment); Hogan, 458 U.S. at 726 ‘rejecting “outdated assumption 
that gender could be used as a ‘proxy for other, more germane 
bases of classification’) (quoting Craig, 429 U.S. at 198) ; Wengler, 
446 U.S. at 151; Orr, 440 U.S. at 280-281, 283; Goldfarb, 430 
U.S. at 204-207 (plurality opinion); id. at 219-220 (Stevens, J., 
concurring in the judgment); Stanton, 421 U.S. at 14-15; 
Weinberger Vv. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 645 (1975); Frontiero v. 
Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 686-687 (1973) (p'urality opinion) ; 
Reed v. Reed, 404 U.S. 71, 76-77 (1971); but see Bradirell, 83 U.S. 
(16 Wall.) at 141-142 (Bradley, J., concuring in the judgment) 
(uphoiding sex-based exclusion of women from law practice even 
though the rationale for disqualifying women does not apply to 
all women, because “the rules of civil society must be adapted to 
the general constitution of things, and cannot be based upon ex- 
ceptional cases”). 


25 


eralization.” 114 S. Ct. at 1427 n.11 (citing Weinberger 
v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 645 (1975))." As Justice 
O’Connor stated in her concurring opinion in J.E.B., sex 
may as a factual matter correlate with certain attitudes, 
but the Equal Protection Clause deems sex, like race, 
“irrelevant as a matter of constitutional law” to the gov- 
ernment’s assessment of a person’s attitude. 114 S. Ct. 
at 1432. The constitutional determination that sex does 
not determine attitude or personality is thus “a statement 
about what this Nation stands for,” even where it may not 
be “a statement of fact.” /bid. 

The Equal Protection Clause condemns the use of sex- 
based generalizations both because they deny to women 
who do not fit those generalizations opportunities afforded 
to all men (whether they fit them or not), and because 
it offends the most basic equal protection principles to 
treat women not as individuals, but only as members of a 
group that is conclusively presumed to lack certain capaci- 


21See also Craig v. Boren, supra; Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 
supra; Frontiero Vv. Richardson, supra. Despite statistics in Craig 
showing that young men in the relevant age group presented 
greater safety risks as a result of drunk driving than did young 
women, 429 U.S. at 200-201, the Court struck down a law setting 
sex-based differential ages for beer purchase because it was not 
satisfied “that sex represents a legitimate, accurate proxy for the 
regulation of drinking and driving,” id. at 204. 

Similarly, the Court in Weinberger struck down a statute grant- 
ing widows but not widowers social security survivors’ benefits 
even though there was “empirical support” for the government’s 
assertion that men are more likely than women to be the primary 
supporters of their spouses and children. 420 U.S. at 645. 

A plurality of the Court in Frontiero likewise invalidated a 
statute presuming that spouses of male service members are de- 
pendents for purposes of benefits determinatio..s but that spouses 
of female service members are not, notwithstanding that, “as an 
empirical matter, wives in our society frequently are dependent 
upon their husbands, while husbands rarely are dependent upon 
their wives.” 411 U.S. at 688-689. Justice Brennan observed that 
“statutory distinctions between the sexes often have the effect of 
invidiously relegating the entire class of females to inferior legal 
status without regard to the actual capabilities of its individual 
members.” Jd. at 686-687. 


26 


ties. As Justice Kennedy stated in his opinion concurring 
in the judgment in J.E.B., 


[t]he neutral phrasing of the Equal Protection 
Clause, extending its guarantee to “any person,” re- 
veals its concern with rights of individuals, not 
groups (though group disabilities are sometimes the 
mechanism by which the State violates the individ- 
ual rights in question). At the heart of the Consti- 
tution’s guarantee of equal protection lies the simple 
command that the Government must treat citizens as 
individuals, not as simply components of a racial 
[or] sexual .. . class. 


114 S. Ct. at 1433-1434 (internal quotation marks omit- 
ted). Insofar as they are valid, respondents’ concerns 
that many women may lack the aggressiveness and self- 
confidence needed to benefit from the rigors of the adver- 
sative method are appropriately addressed by making in- 
dividualized determinations regarding which women are 
suited to that method, just as individual determinations 
currently are made to determine which men to admit 
to VMI.* ; 

2. In the circumstances of this case, the only remedy 
consistent with equal protection principles is to admit 
women to VMI. The VMI program has been in place 
for a century and a half, and VMI’s students and grad- 
uates accordingly enjoy the benefits of association with 
an established and renowned institution with great pres- 
tige, rich traditions and exceptionally strong alumni sup- 
port. Those benefits cannot now be replicated for women 
in a newly established program at a separate, all-female 


22 See Orr, 440 U.S. at 281-283 (invalidating statute under 
which husbands, but not wives, may be required to pay alimony 
because “individualized hearings at which the parties’ relative 
financial circumstances are considered already occur,” so that there 
is no reason “to use sex as a proxy for need’’). 


*3 From the inception of this litigation, the United States has 
consistently sought admission of women to VMI as the appropriate 
remedy. See App. 54a n.2. 


27 


institution. See pp. 16-18, supra; App. 60a-6la. Since 
a new program for women cannot match VMI in those 
enormously important respects, the remedy this Court 
ordered in Sweatt v. Painter, supra, is also required here: 
admission of qualified members of the excluded class to 
the established school from which the State has histori- 
cally excluded them. 339 U.S. at 636. 

Moreover, sex segregation, which may be appropriate 
in some educational settings, is inappropriate here be- 
cause, in the context of VMI's historical exclusion of 
women, the continued segregation of men and women 
in connection with the VMI program has powerful stig- 
matizing effects. Continuation of an all-male VMI must 
inevitably send a message that. insofar as VMI and the 
Commonwealth are concerned, women are incapable of 
coping with, or succeeding in, its program. Continued 
segregation also suggests that there is something inappro- 
priate or unworkable about women and men commingling 
in a military or leadership setting—an implication that is 
particularly harmful because military service, as well as 
many other leadership positions, have traditionally been, 
but are no longer, the exclusive province of men. The 
history of sex discrimination in the United States has been 
replete with official assumptions that women and men 
properly belong in restrictive separate spheres and play 
different societal roles according to sex. This Court's 
equal protection jurisprudence correctly and emphatically 
rejects such assumptions. The exclusion of women from 
VMI impermissibly recognizes one such assumption— 
that where military-style education can be preserved in 
its “true” and most rigorous form, women simply do not 
belong. 

The court of appeals concluded not only that VWIL 
would be better for women, but also that coeducation at 
VMI would be an impossibility—and thus that single-sex 
leadership education was required. The latter conclusion 


28 


was based on the court’s determination that coeducation 
would 
deny those women [interested in attending VMI] 
the very opportunity they sought because the unique 
characteristics of VMI’s program would be destroyed 
by coeducation. The Catch-22 is that women are 
denied the opportunity when excluded from VMI 
and cannot be given the opportunity by admitting 
them, because the change caused by their admission 
would destroy the opportunity. 
App. 6a-7a (quoting VMI /, id. at 148a). That determi- 
nation, in turn, was based in large part on the court's 
belief that coeducational adversative training would de- 
stroy “any sense of decency that still permeates the rela- 
tionship between the sexes.” /d. at 23a. This chain of 
reasoning is based entirely on a use of sex-based generalli- 
zations that is plainly prohibited under the Equal Pro- 
tection Clause.“ The valid aspects of the adversative 
method can be maintained and privacy and sex-specific 
physical differences accommodated,” consistent with ex- 


24 To the extent that respondents and the court view an adversa- 
tive method as incompatible with coeducation because they believe it 
is unseemly for men to behave in a harsh and disciplining way tc- 
ward women, or for women to do so toward men, App. 22a, that view 
itself appears to reflect notions of gender relations that cannot 
constitute an important state interest under this Court's equal 
protection jurisprudence. See, e.g., J.F.B., 114 8S. Ct. at 1423 
(criticizing decisions that affirmed sex-based classifications based 
on state interests in protecting women from “ugliness and 
denravity” and experiences that would “prove humiliating, em- 
barrassing and degrading to a lady,” or because “[rjeverence for 
all womanhood would suffer in the public spectacle of women .. . 
so engaged”). 

* As it stands, not all VMI men meet VMI’s demanding physical 
fitness requirements. The roughly 50° of new cadets, and smaller 
percentages of upperclassmen, who cannot pass the fitness test 
administered each semester do not automatically fai! out, but may 
participate in VMI's remedial fitness program. Thus, some male 
students graduate from VMI stili unable to pass the ftness test. See 
91-1690 (VMI 1) C.A. App. 564-566; 91-1690 (VMI 1) Gov't C.A. 
Br. 11-12; App. 233a. 


29 


tending to women who wish to attend VMI the benefits of 
that educational program. The marginal extent, if any, 
to which coeducation at VMI might alter the benefits 
that VMI now offers exclusively to men cannot outweigh 
the importance of providing women access to a unique 
program from which they have unconstitutionally been 
excluded. 
CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


DEVAL L. PATRICK 

Assistant Attorney General 
PAUL BENDER 

Deputy Solicitor General — 
CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 

Assistant to the Solicitor General 


JESSICA DUNSAY SILVER 
THOMAS E. CHANDLER 


Attorneys 
May 1995 


w ©. & Goveenwevr rarerine crrice, t905 387147 20076 


