EST AVAILABLE COPY 


PRESS OF BYRON 8. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the Equal Protection Clause permits a State to 
offer a pedagogically beneficial single-sex college program 
as a complement to a large and diverse statewide system of 
public and private higher education that provides extensive 
and varied educational opportunities for both men and 
women. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED............ccccesseeseecseceeeeees i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS............esceeceesceeseesceseeeses i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ...............cceessesseesees iv 
OTIC TIONG, ca csocsccceceseuciee nena 1 
CU MUIOGS BIE oc iacsssstcnnsececctsmiscseassinceue 4 
FUREIDOC TION os ccciccsicmicocsimnisiia anes 4 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED ....... 5 
STATED isecicscccscscsssicssuininaadia adie ae 5 
NEE EM aE oe OF 5 
1. Virginia's System of Higher Education ........ 5 

2. Virginia Military Institute ...................... 10 

B. Initial Proceedings Below............c...-essescees 14 

1. The District Court's Liability Decision....... 14 

2. The Court of Appeals’ Liability Decision.... 18 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .........ccccccceesseecese 20 
ADIT seccesisesitrritsinsitibibicha encase 23 


I. PUBLICLY SPONSORED SINGLE-SEX 
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS ARE CON- 
STITUTIONALLY PERMISSIBLE IF THEY 
ARE SUBSTANTIALLY RELATED TO THE 


MENTAL OBJECTIVES OF PROVIDING 
THE BENEFITS OF A SINGLE-SEX COL- 
LEGE EDUCATION AND THE VMI METH- 
OD AND ENHANCING DIVERSITY IN 


PARALLEL SINGLE-SEX EDUCATIONAL 
OPPORTUNITIES TO MEMBERS OF EACH 
GENDER WITHOUT REGARD TO STU- 
DENT INTEREST OR THE EXISTENCE OF 
OTHER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE EDUCA- 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 
Ambach v. Norwick, 441 U.S. 68 (1979) ............... 24 
City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 

EE eT 32 
Committee for Public Educ. v. Nyquist, 

SP ie Ce ei ictiicdecdstbnectbsesacéeccsesecese 25 
Garrett v. Board of Educ., 775 F. Supp. 1004 

8 5 NES i 40 
Hogan v. Mississippi Univ. for Women, 646 

F.2d 1116 (Sth Cir. 1981), aff'd, 458 U.S. 

ERE ET ES Sect SS a A. 17 
Jenness v. Fortson, 403 U.S. 431 (1971)............... 25 
Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589 

ee iniiibeintibdhtbibteninnclbkbedicrchindsseesencast 25 
Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma 

County, 450 U.S. 464 (1981) ...........ccccccceceees 46 
Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974) .............. 25 
Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 

I passim 
Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U.S. 455 (1973) ....... 24, 41 
Regents of the Univ. of Calif. v. Bakke, 

I I 32 
Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981) .............. 44 
San Antonio Independent School District v. 

Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973)..... poeececsococcsccces 25 
Sweezy v. New Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234 


Some Wibesecnreunpsecnenenrenencneteseticnsececsceenescees 25 


Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267 


CIB vccctecsectashrenatsvesiinsisttbihccnctmpmenesences 32 
Other Authorities: 

BD Ts Bh Bi ticcectcccctaseasncntncscccceccecqenevets 5 
ee 8. eae 20, 41 
ee a ae 30 
Va. Code §§ 23-30.39 - 23-30.58 ..........cccceececeeeees 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-38.11 - 23-38.18 .............cccceeee eens 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-38.30 - 23-38.44:3 .00.. cc. cce eee ee ee 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-38-45 - 23-38.50 2.0.0... ccccceceeseeeees 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-38.53:1 - 23-38.53.3.........c.cccceceeee 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-38.70 - 23-38.71 2.0.2.2 ..ccccecceeeeeeees 8 
Va. Code §§ 23-92 - 23-106 ......ccccccccrccccccccseseees 30 
Va, Gamat. a8. VEER, © BBccsceccseociccntsddascccsecctinsiid 8 


Richard Hawley, A Case For Boys’ Schools, in 
SINGLE-SEX SCHOOLING: PRCPONENTS 
SPEAK, A SPECIAL REPORT FROM THE 
OFFICE OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH & 
IMPROVEMENT, U.S. Dep*T oF EDUC. 
“Lee 
GER) BS GHSSeD ccneccccccccenenencennnasasenescoscsenes 39 


Valerie E. Lee & Anthony S. Bryk, Bifects of 


Single-Sex Secondary Schools on Student 
Achievement and Attitudes, 78 J. Epuc. 


a 


Tim Poor, Schools Try Same-Sex Classrooms, 
ST. LOuIs PosT-DIsPATCH, Aug. 7, 1994, 


CB icensccecpecccccntsesncestsosacpasscscecssecces 


RESEARCH & IMPROVEMEPT, U.S. Dep't 
OF EDUC. (DEBRA HOLLINGER & REBEC—A 


ADAMSON, EDS.) 47 (1992) ............0ccceeeee 


Ron Russell & John Wilson, 32 Girls + 
Science = Success, DET. NEWS, July 18, 


SUE ENED cinsdenedetdsacbtpndsriancestsecdheense 


U.S. DEPT oF Epuc., NATIONAL CENTER FOR 
EDUCATION STATISTICS, DIGEST OF 


EDUCATION STATISTICS 195 (1994)............ 


Note, Inner-City Single-Sex Schools: 
Educational Reform or Invidious 
Discrimination?, 105 Harv. L. Rev. 1741 


Single-Sex Math Class Gaining In Popularity, 


No. 94-1941 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Petitioner, 


Vv. 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, et al. . 
Respondents. 


No. 94-2107 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, et al. . 
Cross- . 


v. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Cross-Respondent. 


On Writs Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE CROSS-PETITIONERS 


Cross-petitioners the Commonwealth of Virginia, 
Governor George F. Allen, the State Council of Higher 


This case involves the circumstances, if any, under which 


the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment 
permits a State to support single-sex education at one or 
more of its institutions of higher education. 

Virginia maintains a higher education system that is over- 
whelmingly coeducational, but which includes an option for 
a small number of students to attend a single-gender public 
college. Virginia also provides financial support for num- 
erous private colleges, most of which are coeducational, but 
five of which have single-sex admissions policies. 

This litigation was initiated by the United States to 
challenge the male-only single-sex admissions policy of the 
Virginia Military Institute (VMI) at a time when all of 
Virginia's other 14 public colleges were coeducational. 
The court below held that Virginia had established ample 
justification for a single-sex component in its diverse 
educational spectrum, but had not justified its determination 
to afford that opportunity to men and not women. 


After that decision, Virginia created a single-sex college 
program for women, known as the Virginia Women's Insti- 
tute for Leadership (VWIL), at Mary Baldwin College 
(MBC), a women-only private college. The courts below 
have now approved the constitutionality of Virginia's 
higher education system as presently constituted, with its 
predominantly coeducational emphasis and limited and 
comparable single-sex components for men and women. 

In United States v. Commonwealth of Virginia, No. 94- 
1941, this Court granted the Government's petition for a 
writ of certiorari challenging the decision below. Cross- 
petitioners will defend that decision in their brief as 
respondents in No. 94-1941. The Court also granted cross- 
petitioners’ conditional cross-petition for a writ of certiorari 
(No. 94-2107) challenging the initial determination by the 
court below that Virginia could not continue VMI as a 
male-only public college without establishing a comparable 


facility for women. That issue will be addressed in this 
brief. ! 

Cross-petitioners maintain that the initial decis‘on below 
concerning liability is not requirec by this Court's equai 
protection jurisprudence and will unduly and unnecessarily 
inhibit States in the development of programs tc meet the 
special and demonstrated needs of their ciazens. The 
liability ruling has the effect of precluding government- 
sponsored single-sex education for students of one gender 
absent a parallel program for students of the other gender. 
That standard does not permit States to take into account 
the pedagogical value of single-sex education for some 
students, the differing educational needs and interests of 
students, the judgment of educators in developing 
programs, the overall mix of educational options made 
available to students in the public and private sectors, or the 
importance of state and local discretion in devising 
beneficial and effective means of education for students of 
both genders within the financial constraints imposed on 
funding for education. For the reasons set forth in this 
brief, the court of appeals erred in restricting the ability of 
government to use single-sex educational programs as one 
part of a broad spectrum of educational approaches 
professionally designed to respond to the varied needs and 
preferences of students of al! ages. 


lCross-petitioners are committed by legislation to single-sex 
education as a beneficial pedagogical option for both men and 
women and intend to continue offering this option through 
VMI and VWIL even if this Court holds that parallel programs 
are not a prerequisite to a State's ability to offer the benefits of 
single-sex education to its citizens. Cross-petitioners merely 
seek to preserve the discretion of state and local governments 
to improve and diversify all levels of their educational systems 
through innovative and successful programs similar to those at 
VMI and VWIL. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals regarding liability is 
reported at 976 F.2d 890, and is reproduced at pages 134a- 
157a of the appendix to the petition for a writ of certiorari 
in United States v. Virginia, No. 94-1941 (filed May 26, 
pontine way aay oy The opinion of the district 

court regarding liability (Pet. App. 158a-245a) is reported 
at 766 F. Supp. 1407. The opinion of the court of appeals 
regarding remedy (Pet. App. la-52a) is reported at 44 F.3d 
1229. The opinion of the district court regarding remedy 


(Pet. App. 53a-131a) is reported at 852 F. Supp. 471. 
_ JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals regarding liability 
was entered on October 5, 1992. That judgment vacated 
and remanded the case to the district court for further 
proceedings. Pet. App. 156a. This Court denied a petition 
for a writ of certiorari filed by cross-petitioners seeking 
interlocutory review of that judgment. VMI v. United 
States, 113 S. Ct. 2431 (1993) (No. 92-1213). 


After remedial proceedings in the district court on 
remand, cross-respondent filed a notice of appeal, and 
cross-petitioners filed a timely notice of cross-appeal chal- 
lenging the original finding of liability. The judgment of 
the court of appeals affirming and remanding the case for 
further proceedings (Pet. App. 30a) was entered on January 
26, 1995. 


On April 18, 1995, the Chief Justice extended the time 
within which to file a petition for a writ of certiorari to and 
including May 26, 1995. Cross-respondent the United 
States filed a petition on the latter seeking review of the 
judgment below. See United States v. Virginia, No. 94- 
1941. Cross-petitioners received that petition on May 26, 
1995, and filed a timely cross-petition for a writ of 
certiorari on June 26, 1995, pursuant to this Court's Rules 


12.3 and 13.5. This Court granted both the petition and the 
cross-petition on October 5, 1995. The jurisdiction of this 
Court is founded upon 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION 
INVOLVED 


This case involves the Equal Protection Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, 
which provides in pertinent part that “[nJo State shall .. . 
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal 
protection of the laws." 

STATEMENT 


A. Background 
1. Virginia's System of Higher Education 


The Commonwealth of Virginia provides financial 
support for a “diverse array” of public and private colleges 
and universities. Pet. App. 187a. The State Council of , 
Higher Education for Virginia (SCHEV) has declared that 
"*Virginia has always recognized that there are many kinds 
of excellence and has supported a diversity of missions 
among its institutions of higher education.'" Jd. Indeed, 
“[o]ne special characteristic of the Virginia system is its 
_ diversity," and Virginia's colleges and universities “col- 
lectively form one of the most diverse -- and increasingly 
excellent -- systems of higher education in the nation." I 
DX 23 at 11 (1 JA 1707). In furtherance of this express 


2"I DX" refers to defendants’ (i.e., cross-petitioners’) exhibits 

at the liability trial. “II DX" refers to cross-petitioners' 
exhibits at the remedy trial. “I Tr." and “II Tr.” refer to the 
transcripts of the liability and remedy trials, respectively. “I 
JA" and “II JA” refer to the joint appendices filed in the court 
o Se re ee respectively. 
"L." refers to the parties’ joint lodging in this Court of 
materials from the record. 


policy of providing a wide spectrum of educational 
opportunities and experiences, the Boards of Visitors of the 
various public colleges and universities in Virginia “have 
traditionally enjoyed, and now enjoy, broad autonomy in 
the determination of such issues as the institution's mission 
... and the composition of its student body.” Pet. App. 
187a; see also id. at 138a-39a. In short, “the hallmarks of 
Virginia's educational policy are ‘diversity and auton- 
omy.'" Jd. at 187a. 


There are more than a dozen public four-year under- 
graduate institutions in Virginia, including the University of 
Virginia (one of the Nation's leading universities) and other 
schools that have been recognized regionally or nationally 
for academic excellence. Pet. App. 185a-86a; Stipulations 
of Fact ("Stips.") 41-42 (1 JA 86-87; L. 68-69).3 These 
four-year institutions enrolled 85,441 women and 72,819 
men in 1989. Pet. App. 187a. 


Although almost all of Virginia's public colleges and 
universities are presently coeducational, Virginia has a 
long-standing tradition of supporting single-sex education. 
Most of Virginia's public colleges and universities original- 
ly offered single-sex education. Four of these public in- 
stitutions -- Longwood College, James Madison University, 
Mary Washington College, and Radford University -- 
originally admitted women only. Pet. App. 175a n.10, 


3Virginia's public four-year undergraduate institutions include: 
Christopher Newport College, Clinch Valley College, College 
of William and Mary, George Mason University, James 
Madison University, Longwood ~®iisye, Mary Washington 
College, Norfolk State University. “id “ominion University, 
Radford University, University —/ Vv 
Commonwealth University, Virginia Military Institute, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and 
Virginia State University. Pet. App. 185a-86a. 


185a-87a. These institutions chose to become coeduca- 
tional only in the late 1960's and early 1970's as a result of 
financial pressures and the growing popularity of co- 
education. II Tr. 642, 660; see also I JA 173-75, 212-13. 

The Commonwealth's sponsorship of public single-sex 
undergraduate programs is only one part of its overall sup- 
port for single-sex education. Virginia has long recognized 
that “'[h)igher education resources should be viewed as a 
whole -- public and private.'" Pet. App. 191la; see Stips. 
26, 28-32 (1 JA 71, 73-77; L. 53, 55-59). The State 
Council is charged with the task of preparing and imple- 
menting a master plan for higher education in Virginia that 
takes into account the missions, programs, and enrollment 
of all institutions of higher education in the Common- 
wealth, both public and private, with the goal of providing 
diverse educational opportunities without unnecessary 
duplication. Stips. 86-87 (1 JA 81-82; L. 113-14). Thus, 
“Virginia relies on its independent [i.e¢., private] institutions 
{of higher education] to offer students choices and meet the 
educational needs of people in the Commonwealth." Pet. 
App. 191a. 


There are approximately 36 private colleges and universi- 
ties authorized to award undergraduate degrees in Virginia. 
II DX 16 at 109-37. Five of these institutions are four-year 
colleges that provide single-sex education. Hampden- 
Sydney College provides undergraduate education for men, 
while Randolph-Macon Women's College, Mary Baldwin 
College, Sweet Briar College, and Hollins College provide 
undexgraduate education for women. In the fall of 1989, 
3850 women and 2256 men were enrolled in public and 


private single-sex colleges in Virginia. Pet. App. 189a. 
The Virginia Constitution itself recognizes the important 
role played by private educational institutions in enhancing 
the diversity of the Commonwealth's overall educational 
system. In the early 1970's, as Virginia's public women's 


colleges were moving to coeducation, the people of 
Virginia twice amended their constitution to make clear that 
public funds could be used to support private higher educa- 
tion. Va. Const. art. VIII, § 11; Stips. 26-27 (1 JA 71-72; 
L. 53-54). This provision has been recognized as “'an im- 
plicit endorsement of the principle of pluralism in higher 
education. Its value judgments are twofold: that if private 
institutions closed their doors, the Commonwealth would 
have to find the money to educate students who would 
otherwise have been in a private institution and Virginia's 
rich tradition of diversity in higher education would be 
notably weakened.'" Stips. 28 (I JA 73; L. 55). 

The Virginia General Assembly has implemented this 
constitutional mandate through the Tuition Assistance Grant 
Program, the College Scholarship Assistance Program, and 
various other state-financed aid programs‘ that provide 
scholarship grants, guaranteed loans, and work-study funds 
for students attending private colleges in Virginia, including 
single-sex colleges. Pet. App. 190a-91a; Stips. 55-59 (I JA 
100-04; L. 82-86). In addition, the Commonwealth 
provides financial support and other assistance to private 
institutions (including single-sex colleges) through low-cost 
building loans, state-funded services contracts, and other 
programs. Stips. 54-55, 59-60, 62-63 (I JA 99-100, 104- 
05, 107-08; L. 81-82, 86-87, 89-90); Va. Code §§ 23- 
30.39 to -30.58. The State Council of Higher Education 
views these programs as a “means by which the 
Commonwealth can provide funding to its independent 


4See, e.g., Va. Code §§ 23-38.11 to -38.18 (Tuition Assistance 
Grant Act); id. §§ 23-38.30 to -38.44:3 (Virginia Student 
Assistance Authorities); id. §§ 23-38.45 to -38.50 (College 
Scholarship Assistance Act): id. §§ 23-38.53:1 to -38.53:3 
(Virginia Scholars Program); id. §§ 23-38.70 to 23-38.71 
(Virginia Work-Study Program). 


institutions, thereby helping to maintain a diverse system of 
higher education.” I DX 21 at 10 (1 JA 1694) (SCHEV 


Budget Initiatives for 1990-1992: A Concept Paper). 


In the aggregate, Virginia's financial support for private 
single-sex education for women is substantial. I DX 74 (1 
JA 1971-80; L. 235-45); II DX 13 & 14. This aid 
"'demonstrates the Commonwealth's commitment to private 
higher education'” and “'is as much of an institutional 
Support program as it is a program to assist students.'” 
Stips. 56 (1 JA 101; L. 83). 

As part of its broad and varied educational s “stem, 
Virginia offers college students the option of military 
training through participation in federally funded Reserve 
Officer Training Corps (ROTC) programs at several public 
colleges and universities in Virginia, including the 
University of Virginia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, VMI, Norfolk State University, Old 
Dominion University, and James Madison University. 
Stips. 46-47 (I JA 91-92; L. 73-74). In addition, students 
at several private colleges in Virginia, including all of the 
private four-year women's colleges, have the option of 
participating in ROTC programs. /d. 

Yet another aspect of Virginia's broad menu of higher 
education choices is the coeducational residential Corps of 
Cadets program at Virginia Poiytechnic Institute and State 
University (VPI). VPI is a large public coeducational uni- 
versity that has been listed among the Nation's finest under- 
graduate institutions. Stips. 42 (I JA 87; L. 69). VPI has 
more academic course offerings and undergraduate degree 
programs than VMI, and offers all of the courses (including 
military instruction) available at VMI. Pet. App. 168a; 
Stips. 42 (I JA 87; L. 69); I DX 62D, 62E, 62M (1 JA 
1780-81, 178° L. 231, 234). 


VPI's Corps of Cadets enrolled approximately 360 stu- 


10 


dents, including 45 women, in 1993. II DX 88 (L. 344). 
The mission of the VPI Corps of Cadets is “to produce men 
for military service to their country and prepared to be ef- 
fective leaders in the varied work of military and civil life.” 
Pet. App. 214a. 

VPI cadets are required to adhere to military-type regula- 
tions and discipline. The Corps of Cadets is organized 
along military lines, with a chain of command based on a 
cadet rank system. Cadets are awakened with reveille each 
morning at 5:30 a.m., march together in formation each 
day to breakfast and dinner, and participate in scheduled 
and unscheduled room inspections, uniform inspections, 
formations, roll calls, and military drills. Pet. App. 217a; 
Stips. 49, 51 (JA 94, 96; L. 76, 78). 


2. Virginia Military Institute 


VMI was founded in 1839 and is a small public four-year 
college with an enrollment of about 1250 students. It offers 
majors in the liberal arts, sciences, and engineering. All of 
its academic offerings are also available at other public col- 
leges and universities in Virginia. Pet. App. 168a; I DX 
62C, 62D, 62E, 62M (1 JA 1779-81, 1789; L. 230-31, 
234). 


VMI's mission is “to produce educated and honorable 
men who are suited for leadership in civilian life and who 
can provide military leadership when necessary.” Pet. 
App. 203a. VMI employs an “adversative” method for 
developing character and leadership in young men. That 
method is intended to cause students to question their past 
convictions, values and experiences and thereby to prepare 
them to accept the values and behavior taught by VMI. /d. 
at 175a n.10, 189a, 191a-92. 


"Physical rigor, mental stress, absolute equality of treat- 
ment, absence of privacy, minute regulation of behavior, 


11 


and indoctrination in desirable values are the salient 
attributes of the VMI educational experience.” Pet. App. 
19la-92a. First-year VMI students are subjected to an 
extreme form of the adversative model, “comparable to 


Marine Corps boot camp in terms of both the physical rigor 
and mental stress of the experience.” Id. at 194a-95a. 


VMI utilizes a “class system" which assigns specific 
privileges and responsibilities to each class of cadets in 
order to develop character and leadership. Thus, the first 
class, or seniors, are responsible for providing overall 
leadership, writing the standard operating procedures for 
aspects of the adversative system, and serving as mentors to 
new cadets. “The class system is a very highly-developed 
system for cultivating leadership,” as it “teaches and rein- 
forces through peer pressure the values and behaviors that 
VMI exists to promote.” Pet. App. 196a. 


Cadets at VMI are subject to an honor code, which pro- 
vides that a cadet “does not lie, cheat, steal nor tolerate 
those who do.” Pet. App. 197a. The honor code “domi- 
nates all facets of institutional life” and is enforced by an 
“honor court" made up of cadets elected by their class- 
mates. Id. 


Students at VMI live in a four-story barracks housing one 
class per floor. “There is a total lack of privacy” in the 
barracks: there are no door locks or window shades, and 
the doors to the students’ rooms contain windows that 
permit “the officer in charge to . . . see every cadet without 
anything being hidden." Pet. App. 198a-99a. The bar- 
racks features group bathrooms® and “close and intimate 


SThere is one bathroom on each floor, serving up to 400 
students. Seth tathstees ten Geep Gvees Gah fon 34 
heads. There are no doors on the partitions separating each 
toilet. Pet. App. 128a, 240a. 


12 


quarters." Jd. In short, “there is literally no place in the 
barracks that physically affords privacy,” and students are 
thus “under constant scrutiny." Jd. at 198a, 199a. This 
total lack of privacy and constant supervision by the entire 
Corps is an integral part of the VMI experience. Jd. at 
199a. 

Strict egalitarianism is a central and essential attribute of 
the VMI method. “The VMI experience is based on 
absolute equality, which is achieved through treating 
everyone in exactly the same way." Pet. App. 237a. The 
spartan and public nature of life in the barracks “is an 
aspect of the egalitarian ethic at VMI," as is the fact that 
VMI imposes the same physical requirements on all 
students, regardless of ability. Jd. at 198a, 233a. Every 
effort is made to subordinate physical or material 
distinctions among cadets by requiring all cadets to wear 
the same uniforms, live in the same spare quarters, attain 
the same level of physical fitness, and undergo the same 
constant scrutiny by the other cadets. 

Unlike the federal military academies, which exist to pre- 
pare their graduates for career service in the armed forces, 
VMI "is directed at preparation for both military and 
civilian life." Pet. App.219a. Thus, VMI's military 
emphasis is primarily a teaching device, designed to serve 
“the function of teaching self-discipline,” and "is a means 
to an end, not an end in itself." Jd. at 206a. Although 
each VMI student must participate in an ROTC program 
that provides the same training for a military career as the 
ROTC programs offered at other undergraduate institutions 
in Virginia, only 15 percent of VMI graduates choose 
military careers, and “VMI has gone to considerable 
lengths to assure the public that it is not simply a military 
college." Id. at 219a. 


VMI “has been successful in accomplishing [its] goals; 
specifically, instilling physical and mental discipline, char- 


13 


acter, and a kind of moral code." Pet. App. 204a. Indeed, 
"[t]he school's success and reputation are uncontroverted." 
Id. at 138a. “[AJll parties . . . acknowledge . . . the posi- 
tive and unique aspects of the program.” Id. at 137a. 

In 1983, VMI's Board of Visitors created a Mission 
Study Committee to reexamine the appropriateness of 
pce oe appre merges ma A majority of the 


three-year study, the Committee issued its final report in 
1986. Id. at 212a. The Committee “found that the 


“in the military and physical demands made upon male 
cadets” that “contribute to the ethos of which the Virginia 
Military Institute is proud and which, it is firmly believed, 
contributes to the unity of the Corps." Jd. at 212a, 213a- 
14; I DX 40 at 2 (JA 1721; L. 196). 


The Committee also examined the reasons given by other 
institutions for changing from single-sex to coeducational 


recommended “that VMI should continue to adhere to its 
mission as an all-male institution.” I DX 40 at 2 (1 JA 


14 


"'thorough'” review of its mission and purpose. Pet. App. 
213a. 


VMI's Board of Visitors ultimately decided to retain 
VMI's single-sex admissions policy. Pet. App. 173a, 
214a. This decision was reached only after “reasoned and 
careful analysis" of the findings of the foregoing studies. 
Id. at 214a. 


B. Initial Proceedings Below 
1. The District Court's Liability Decision 


The United States brought suit against Virginia and VMI 
in 1990, seeking admission of women to VMI. After trial, 
the district court found for cross-petitioners. Applying this 
Court's decision in Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 
458 U.S. 718 (1982), the district court examined whether 
VMI's single-sex admissions policy “'serves important 
governmental objectives and [whether] the discriminatory 
means employed are substantially related to the achieve- 
ment of those objectives.'" Pet. App. 165a. After “a fact- 
intensive examination of the practical considerations under- 
lying the challenged policy," id. at 166a, the district court 
concluded that VMI's policy satisfied the requirements of 
Hogan. 


Based on extensive expert testimony and academic 
studies, the court found that a “substantial body of ‘ex- 
ceedingly persuasive’ evidence supports VMI's contention 
that some students, both male and female, benefit from at- 
tending a single-sex college." Pet. App. 168a; see id. at 
167a-70a, 174a, 176a, 225a-27a. This finding was based 
on the testimony of renowned education experts, including 
Harvard University sociology professor David Riesman and 
Richard C. Richardson, Jr., Professor of Educational 
Leadership and Policy Studies at Arizona State University. 
Pet. App. 180-8la. As the court explained, that expert 
testimony demonstrated conclusively that “[f]or many men, 


15 


a single-sex college is optimal,” because “[a]t an all-male 
college, adolescent males benefit from being able to focus 
exclusively on the work at hand, without the intrusion of 
any sexual tensior." Jd. at 22Sa. 


The district court also found that VMI's adversative 

method in particular is beneficial to some adolescent males. 
Pet. App. 203a-06a, 223a-25a.© As Dr. Riesman testified, 
VMI's emphasis on absolute equality “reduces the inherited 
characteristics of students in terms of wealth, position, 
name, ethnicity, and race to the lowest common 
denominator,” such that “there are no outsiders at VMI. 
Everyone is an insider. Everyone is on the same level." 
Riesman Dep. (I DX 60) at 41, 48 (I JA 177, 184). The 
VMI method infuses cadets with self-discipline and, as a 
consequence, “inculcates the value of orderliness, of 
dedication, . . . of honor, and integrity, of high 
seriousness, in which everything is serious." Riesman Dep. 
at 45 (I JA 181). In sharp contrast to society in general and 
many modern undergraduate institutions, VMI “requires 
that the student discipline himself, to endure pain, physical 
and psychological, to meet timetables," thereby ensuring 
that VMI cadets “emerge as self-disciplined people." 
Riesman Dep. at 50-51 (I JA 186-87). 


The testimony of the other education experts was to the 
same effect. Clifton Conrad, the Government's expert, 
explained that VMI “is an institution that has a very 
powerful ethos, a compelling institutional culture,” and it 
“has nourished and cherished, communicated what it is to 
so many people in a very, very powerful way.” I Tr. 354. 


These findings refer to the developmental characteristics of 
college-age students, and reflect the sensitive and sometimes 
difficult nature of the transition from late adolescence to 
adulthood that such students experience. 


16 


The VMI method envelops VMI cadets in “a kind of life, a 
holistic life, if you will, in which people[] are required to 
answer a number of obligations [and] . . . responsibilities 
almost at the same time. And through that kind of 
immersion in a closed system, they develop over a period 
of time . . . a certain ability to function effectively under 
conditions of stress and demands and challenge later on in 
life." I Tr. 992 (Bunting). 


Based on the testimony of these experts, the district court 
concluded that “VMI has done a very good job of 
conveying its goals and its values, and has been successful 
in accomplishing those goals; specifically, instilling 
physical and mental discipline, character, and a kind of 
moral code." Pet. App. 204a. The district court further 
found that “key elements of the adversative VMI 
educational system ... would be fundamentally altered, 
and the distinctive ends of the system would be thwarted, if 
VMI were ... to make [the] changes necessary to 
accommodate” women students. Jd. at 167a. Making VMI 
coeducational would require substantial changes to crucial 
aspects of VMI's educational method, including the 
rigorous physical training program’ and the constant 
scrutiny and total lack of privacy in the barracks.* The fact 


7See Pet. App. 233a (“If women were admitted to VMI, it 
would be necessary to change certain physical training pro- 
gram courses and to set different standards. ... Either [some 
aspects] would have to be abandoned, or there would have to 
be accommodations that would result in a dual track for 
women."); id. at 234a ("If VMI were coeducational and 
females were subjected to the same physical demands as male 
cadets, females would suffer on the order of 300% more 
injuries than males."); id. at 221a. 


8Pet. App. 233a ("Adaptations would have to made in order to 
provide for individual privacy, for the sake of the men as well 
as for the sake of the women. ... The introduction of privacy 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


The changes that would result if VMI became coeduca- 
tional would necessarily lead to differential treatment of 
distinct groups of VMI students on the basis of gender, 
thereby contradicting VMI's core principle of absolute 
equality of treatment.? Moreover, coeducation “would pro- 
duce cross-sex relationships among cadets that would 
significantly alter the character-building and leadership- 
development aspects of the VMI experience." Pet. App. 
239a. As a result, VMI could not continue to utilize the 
same program if it were to become coeducational: “it would 
be impossible for a female to participate in the 'VMI 
experience,'" because “her introduction into the process 
would change it. Thus, the very experience she sought 
would no longer be available." Jd. at 175a; see also id. at 
176a, 227a. 


On the basis of these findings, the district court con- 
cluded: (1) that the “virtually uncontradicted" evidence sup- 
ports “Virginia's view that substantial educational benefits 


[Footnote continued from previous page] - 


required by admission of women at VMI would contradict the 
principle that everyone is constantly subject to scrutiny by 
everyone else."). 
*Pet. App. 237a ("The VMI experience is based on absolute 
equality, which is achieved through treating everyone in 
exactly the same way.... Given the actual physiological, 
psychological, and sociological differences between males and 
females, it would be impossible to treat everyone fairly by 
continuing to treat them the same if women were admitted to 
VMI. Equal treatment would necessarily give way to fair 
treatment, thus undermining egalitarianism. ”). 


18 


flow from a single-gender environment" and that those 
benefits “cannot be replicated in a coeducational setting," 
Pet. App. 176a; (2) that VMI's admissions policy “adds a 
measure of diversity to Virginia's overall system of educa- 
tion that would be missing if VMI were coeducational,” 
and that this “diversity is further enhanced by VMI's 
unique method of instruction which was applauded by all of 
the educational experts who testified," id. at 176a; and (3) 
that VMI's admissions policy satisfies the requirements of 
Hogan because it is substantially related to the important 
state objectives of increasing educational diversity and pro- 
viding the substantial educational benefits of single-sex 
education and the VMI method, id. at 173a, 176a-77a. 


2. The Court of Appeals’ Liability Decision 

The court of appeals affirmed the district court's findings 
of fact. In particular, the court of appeals upheld the dis- 
trict court's findings that "VMI's unique methodology justi- 
fies a single-gender policy” and that “the record supports 
the conclusion that single-sex education is pedagogically 
justifiable, and VMI's system . .. even more so." Jd. at 
1S5la; see id. at 137a, 150a, 155a. 


The court also affirmed the district court's findings “that 
VMI's mission can be accomplished only in a single-gender 
environment and that changes necessary to accommodate 
coeducation would tear at the jabric of VMI's unique 
methodology." Pet. App. 148a. The court explained that 
coeducation would require creation of “a dual track 
physical training program" which would, in turn, lead to 
perceptions of unequal treatment, jealousy, and resentment. 
Id. at 146a-47a. The total lack of privacy engendered by 
the barracks system would no longer be possible. Jd. at 
147a. And the VMI system would be unable to 
accommodate the cross-sex confrontation and harassment 


19 


that would necessarily occur if VMI attempted to maintain 
its adversative method in a coeducational setting. /d.1° 
The court of appeals accordingly concluded that the ad- 
mission of women to VMI “would deny those women the 
very opportunity they sought because the unique character- 
istics of VMI's program would be destroyed by coeduca- 
tion.” Pet. App. 148a. 


Nonetheless, the court of appeals vacated the judgment of 
the district court, holding that VMI's policy of admitting 
only men was unconstitutional because the Commonwealth 
did not provide a justification for not offering a similar type 
of educational program exclusively to women. Id. at 15la- 
54a. The court remanded the case to permit the Common- 
wealth to formulate an acceptable remedy such as “estab- 
lish{ing] parallel institutions or parallel programs.” Jd. at 
156a. This Court denied a petition for a writ of certiorari 
by cross-petitioners seeking review of the court of appeals' 
— determination. VMI v. United States, No. 92- 
1213.! 


10The court of appeals expressly rejected the Government's 
claim that this finding was based on stereotyping: “the evi- 
dence supported the district court's finding that cross-sexual 
confrontation and interaction introduces additional elements of 
stress and distraction which are not accommodated by VMI's 
methodology." Pet. App. 147a. 


11On remand, after consultation with education experts, the 
Commonwealth reaffirmed its commitment to single-sex 
education and diversity in its higher education system. 
Accordingly, Virginia decided to establish a 

leadership education program for women. After careful study, 
Mary Baldwin College, a private, women-only college, created 
and implemented the VWIL program with funding and support 
from the Commonwealth and the VMI Foundation. Pet. App. 
63a, 103a-04a. The district court found that VWIL is designed 
by professional educators to achieve for women the same 
objectives and outcomes that VMI achieves for men, and 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


20 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Under this Court's decision in Mississippi Univ. for 
Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982), a public school's 
single-sex admissions policy is constitutional if it “serves 
important governmental objectives" and is “substantially 
related to the achievement of those objectives." Jd. at 724. 
This Court has recognized that providing diverse educa- 
tional opportunities is one of the most important objectives 
of state and local governments. The record in this case 
conclusively establishes that, as an alternative to a full 
range of coeducational offerings, single-sex education 
provides important educational benefits to students who 
choose it at the elementary, secondary, and undergraduate 


levels. 


Virginia has a long history of support for single-sex 
education for men and women. Not only does Virginia 
provide the benefits of single-sex education at VMI, but 
through a variety of means, including the state's Tuition 
Assistance Grant Program, Virginia has historically pro- 
vided substantial financial assistance to students (primarily 
women) who attend private single-sex colleges in the Com- 
monwealth. Virginia is likewise committed to single-sex 
education at the elementary and secondary school level. 
Indeed, the Virginia General Assembly recently authorized 
local school boards to offer single-sex classes in the state's 
public schools. See Va. Code § 22.1-212.1:1. The 
existence of single-sex programs necessarily enhances 


[Footnote continued from previous page] 


accordingly concluded that the mandate of the court of 

had been satisfied. Jd. at 53a-13la. The court of appeals 
affirmed. Jd. at la-52a. Cross-petitioners will address the 
remedial issues in their brief as respondents in No. 94-1941. 


21 


educational diversity in the Commonwealth and provides an 
educational option that is exceedingly beneficial to some 
young people. 

The record also establishes beyond dispute that VMI 
provides additional educational benefits to its male students 
by virtue of its adversative method of education. The 
meticulous record and comprehensive findings in both 
courts below establish that the benefits of that method, like 
the benefits of single-sex education generally, can be at- 
tained only in a single-sex environment. In short, requiring 
VMI to become coeducational would deny the benefits of 
single-sex education and the VMI method to VMI's stu- 
dents without extending those benefits to anyone else. 


The court of appeals nonetheless held that a State can 
provide single-sex education to students of one gender only 
in the context of a comparable single-sex program for stu- 
dents of the other gender, regardless of student needs and 
preferences, the professional judgment of educators, or 
available public resources. This formulaic analysis is erro- 
neous as a matter of constitutional law and educational 
policy, and it sets a troublesome precedent that, unless re- 
versed by this Court, will stifle experimentation with 
single-sex education by state and local governments nation- 
wide. 

The court of appeals’ decision misapplies this Court's de- 
cision in Hogan. The Court's opinion in that case conducts 
a detailed factual analysis of the justification for the single- 
sex admissions policy at a state nursing school for women. 
The Court's opinion attached no constitutional significance 
to the absence of an all-male nursing school. Jd. at 720 
n.l. Instead, the Court found the single-sex admission 
policy unconstitutional because, among other things, that 
policy was based on the “mechanical application of tradi- 
tional, often inaccurate, assumptions about the proper roles 
of men and women," and was not “necessary to reach any 


22 


of [the school's] educational goals," since the school al- 
ready permitted men to attend classes and thus could not 
claim to provide the benefits of single-sex education. Jd. at 
726, 731. 

In sharp contrast, VMI's single-sex admissions policy is 
based on sound and well-established pedagogical principles 
and firmly rooted in fact. And it is directly and substan- 
tially related to achieving the important and legitimate 
benefits of educational diversity, including single-sex edu- 
cation and the VMI method, in a context in which ample 
single-sex educational opportunities are available for wom- 
en with public financial assistance, and where a publicly 
financed coeducational military program already exists. 
The court of appeals departed from Hogan by failing to 
recognize that these features of Virginia's policies and 
educational system demonstiate conclusively that Virginia 
readily satisfies the Hogan test. 


Instead, the court of appeals erroneously imposed an 
additional requirement that a State offering a single-sex 
educational program for members of one gender must pro- 
vide a comparable program for the other gender as a matter 
of course. This additional requirement places public 
educational policy in a constitutional straitjacket and will 
inhibit States and their political subdivisions from respond- 
ing to heterogeneous and changing student needs and pre- 
ferences. For example, the court of appeals’ analysis ef- 
fectively precludes school districts from offering single-sex 
programs for inner-city youths even though research shows 
that they are greatly at risk and might benefit from single- 
sex education options. 

Requiring States to offer two single-sex programs in 
order to justify the continued existence of one program of 
proven excellence produces only a superficial and for- 
malistic equality while sacrificing the ability of professional 
educators to respond in the most effective and flexible ways 


The constitutionality of one single-sex program should 


I. PUBLICLY SPONSORED SINGLE-SEX EDU- 
CATIONAL PROGRAMS ARE CONSTITU- 
TIONALLY PERMISSIBLE IF THEY ARE SUB- 
STANTIALLY RELATED TO THE ACHIEVE- 
MENT OF AN IMPORTANT GOVERNMENTAL 
OBJECTIVE 


In Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 
(1982), this Court applied intermediate scrutiny in review- 


12In voicing these concerns, cross-petitioners are looking 
beyond the immediate case involving VMI and VWIL, both of 
which are valuable and desirable. 


the achievement of those objectives.'" 458 U.S. at 724. 


As the Solicitor General has acknowledged (94-1941 Pet. 
19; 94-2107 Br. in Opp. 5 & n.2), the constitutionality of 
Virginia's single-sex educational programs must be judged 
under the Hogan standard. Accordingly, the question for 
decision here is whether VMI's single-sex admissions 
policy is substantially related to the achievement of an 
important government objective. 

Il. VMI'S SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS POLICY 
ADVANCES IMPORTANT GOVERNMENTAL 


There can be no doubt that providing diverse and 

pedagogically beneficial opportunities at all educational 
levels constitutes a legitimate and important governmental 
objective. “Public education, like the police function, 
‘fulfills a most fundamental obligation of government to its 
constituency,’" and “‘education is perhaps the most 
important function of state and local governments.'" 
Ambach v. Norwick, 441 U.S. 68, 76 (1979). As this 
Court explained in Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U.S. 455, 
462-63 (1973), government has a “special interest in 
elevating the quality of education in both public and private 
schools." 


25 


Individuals differ widely in the means by which they may 
be most effectively stimulated and educated. Therefore, 
diversity in educational approaches is a legitimate and 
important goal for government agencies seeking to 
maximize educational benefits for their citizens. Indeed, as 
this Court has recognized, “[njo area of social concern 
stands to profit more from a multipiicity of viewpoints and 
from a diversity of approaches than does public education.” 
San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 
U.S. 1, 50 (1973); accord Committee for Public Educ. v. 
Nyquist, 413 U.S. 756, 773 (1973) ("We do not doubt -- 
indeed, we fully recognize -- the validity of the State's 
interests in promoting pluralism and diversity among its 
public and nonpublic schools."). And, this Court has also 
recognized that “[sJometimes the grossest discrimination 
can lie in treating things that are different as though they 
were actually alike." Jenness v. Fortson, 403 U.S. 431, 
442 (1971). 


It is equally important to vest educators with the freedom 
to choose among educational alternatives and to use flexible 
approaches in responding to student needs. Educators must 
be given latitude to learn from experimentation and to 
evolve programs to meet student needs. In the primary and 
secondary school context, for example, “local autonomy 
has long been thought essential . . . to the quality of the 
educational process," Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717, 
741-42 (1974), and the same is true in higher education. 


See, e.g., Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589, 
603 (1967) ("To impose any strait jacket upon the 
intellectual leaders in our colleges and universities would 
imperil the future of our Nation.""); Sweezy v. New 
Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234, 263 (1957) (Frankfurter, J., 
concurring in the judgment) (a university must be free to 
"'determine for itself on academic grounds who may teach, 
what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may 
be admitted to study'”). 


26 


Single-sex educational programs provide a materially 
more effective learning environment for significant 
numbers of students and complement the diversity and 
educational benefits offered by a State's primarily 
coeducational system of higher education. Thus, the 
governmental objective of providing such programs is 
unquestionably legitimate and important. The record and 
findings in this case conclusively demonstrate that single- 
sex education and the VMI method provide meaningful and 
pedagogically valid educational benefits to the students who 
choose to attend VMI. 

The district court found, based on extensive expert testi- 
mony and empirical studies, that for some students, “the 
opportunity to attend a single-sex college is a valuable one, 
likely to lead to better academic and professional achieve- 
ment." Pet. App. 168a. In particular, “[fjor many men, a 
single-sex college is optimal." Jd. at 225a (citing Riesman 
Dep. 39). The court of appeals agreed that the effects on 
both genders of single-sex education “is almost uniformly 
positive.” Jd. at 149a. This finding was “amply” sup- 
ported by the testimony of the nation's leading experts, as 
well as extensive scholarly research. Id. at 149a. 


In fact, the Government's education expert agreed with 
this proposition as well. Dr. Conrad testified that “I'm a 
believer in single sex education, it has great virtues in lots 
of ways for lots of people, under lots of conditions.” I Tr. 
373 (I JA 621). The court of appeals added that single-sex 
education also had “salutary consequences for sexual equal- 
ity in the job market" and that students in single-sex col- 
leges “were more likely to set aside initial, stereotypical job 
aspirations.” Pet. App. 149a. Thus, single-sex education 
performs a valuable service in uprooting inaccurate stereo- 
types. “The experts for both sides in this case” agreed with 
these conclusions. Jd. at 150a. 

In addition to the conceded benefits of single-sex 


27 


education in general, VMI's methodology has proven to be 
particularly beneficial to the adolescent male students it 
attracts. The district court found that VMI “has been 


discipline, and the belief that you must subordinate your 


The court of appeals twice affirmed the district court's 
extensive factual findings regarding the demonstrable and 


the extensive record, including testimony by the Nation's 


28 


mental objective. 
B. V ~-Ry ~ -— Be 
Carefully Structured 
sae ead En Dndin Te Provide Bis 


zens With The Benefits Of Single-Sex 
Education And The VMI Method 


The Commonwealth of Virginia has thoughtfully and 
reasonably chosen to provide the benefits of single-sex 
education and the VMI method as components of its diverse 
system of higher education. The district court found that 
"[t]he Commonwealth of Virginia has an avowed policy of 
offering a diversity of choices in higher education.” Pet. 
App. 8la. The Virginia General Assembly and the State 
Council of Higher Education for Virginia have consistently _ 
reaffirmed the importance of maintaining that diversity.!3 


13The State Council's biennial plans have repeatedly emphasized 
the importance of diversity in educational methodology, 
curriculum, and techniques in higher education. See, e.g., I 


DX 24 at 23 ("Virginia's special programs to emphasize 
experimentation 


Sue taste So Cam ame Lind af Wier Gia 
program and service, are in place"); I DX 28 at 6 ("There is 
probably no state in the union with independent and state- 
supported colleges and universities as diverse, and as excellent 
as Virginia’s.... The [State] Council urges support of a 
coordinated system of colleges and universities so that the 


planning. 
renewed support of the tradition of college and 
autonomy which is a hallmark of Virginia h education. ”); 
I DX 30 at 12, 17 (including within Virginia's “Goals for 
Higher Education” the intention “to protect and enhance the 
institutional diversity which exists within Virginia's system of 
higher education” and “to guarantee the essential autonomy 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


29 


As the Council has explained, “Virginia has always 
recognized that there are many kinds of excellence and has 
supported a diversity of missions among its institutions of 
higher education." Stips. 38 (1 JA 83; L. 65). Similarly, 
the 1990 Report to the Governor and General Assembly of 
the Commission on the University of the 21st Century 
“urge[s] that the hallmarks of Virginia higher education -- 
autonomy and diversity -- be maintained in the future." I 
DX 7 at 36 (1 JA 1479). The Virginia Constitution itself 
contains “‘an implicit endorsement of the principle of 
pluralism in higher education'* by authorizing public 
financial support for private colleges and universities. 
Stips. 28 (I JA 73; L. 55). 


One of the means by which the Commonwealth has 
pursued its policy of diversity in higher education is 
through the authority granted to the governing boards of the 
several component institutions. The State Council of 
Higher Education believes as a policy matter that “respon- 
sibility to execute general state policy ... should be 
decentralized to the greatest extent possible," II DX 16 at 
12 (1991 Plan), so that individual creativity and experi- 
mentation will be encouraged.'4 In keeping with that 
policy, the Virginia General Assembly has delegated to 
each institution responsibility to determine policies of cen- 
tral importance to its respective mission and programs, 


(Footnote continued from previous page] 
and character of each institution"); id. at 6, 8, 45-46; Stips. 
37-38 (1 JA 82-83; L. 64-65). 


l44ccord 1 DX 30 at 45 (“Institutions will exhibit greater 
aes ae ees SOS Se of aes 


30 


including admissions policies. See Va. Code § 23-9.6:1(2); 
L. 356. As a result, “'[t}he formal system of higher 
education in Virginia includes a great array of institu- 
tions,'" including “'state-supported and independent,'" 
“research and highly specialized,'" and “'single-sex'" 
schools. Stips. 37-38 (I JA 82-83; L. 64-65) (quoting 1990 
Report). 


As explained above, several of Virginia's public colleges 
and universities originally offered single-sex education for 
women. Pet. App. 175a n.10, 185a-87a. In recent years, 
however, these institutions decided to become coeducational 
because of the popular trend in favor of coeducation and the 
financial pressures caused by that trend. II Tr. 642, 660; 
see also Reisman Dep. 37-39, 76-77 (1JA 173-75, 212- 
13). Thus, Virginia was without public single-sex higher 
education for women for the period between 1972 and 
1995, an historical anomaly that has disappeared with the 
creation of VWIL. 


Like the governing boards of the other public institutions 
of higher education in Virginia, VMI's Board of Visitors 
exercises authority to determine its admissions policy, 
subject to the General Assembly's ultimate authority to 
change that policy if it so chooses. Va. Code §§ 23-92, - 
104. After careful consideration of VMI's admissions 
policy during the 1980's, VMI's Board of Visitors decided 
to retain VMI's single-sex admissions policy. As the 
district court explained, this decision was based on the 
absence of significant interest among women for access to 
the VMI method and on the fact that turning VMI into a 
coeducational institution would irrevocably change VMI's 
unique mission and program and end its ability to provide 
students the benefits the VMI system was designed and 
developed to afford. Pet. App. 212a-l4a. Thus, as the 
district court found, VMI's single-sex admissions policy 
“has been continued only after reasoned and careful 


31 


analysis by the Board of Visitors," the body authorized by 
the Commonwealth to determine VMI's admissions policy. 
Id. at 214a. 


In its original ruling on liability, the court of appeals 
concluded that the Commonwealth had failed to point to "a 
stated policy justifying single-sex education in state- 
supported colleges and universities." Pet. App. 153a.!5 In 
so holding, the court of appeals appears to have presumed 
that a governmental objective supporting a gender-based 
classification can be considered by the courts only if it has 
been explicitly articulated by the state legislature itself. Id. 

The court of appeals plainly erred in declining to treat 
VMI's reasoned decision to retain single-sex education as a 
component of a larger state policy. Even in cases involving 
challenges to racial classifications subject to strict scrutiny, 


\SThe court of appeals also pointed to a suggestion by Virginia's 
then-Attorney General to the effect that then-Governor Wilder 
had expressed “personal” reservations about VMI's admissions 
policy. Pet. App. 142a, 153a. Under Virginia law, however, 
neither the Governor nor the Attorney General has any 
authority to determine state policy with respect to the 
composition of VMI's student body. Rather, as the 
Commonwealth explained in its answer to the complaint filed 
by the United States in this case, “[t]he admissions policy of 
VMI is the exclusive province of the VMI Board of Visitors, 
subject only to the Virginia General Assembly as provided by 
law.” Answer, 46 (1 JA 29; L. 2). Moreover, then-Governor 
Wilder later made clear his support for both VMI and VWIL, 
and the current Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney 
General, and General Assembly are fully supportive of VMI's 
(and VWIL's) single-sex admissions policies as part of 
Virginia's broad-based higher education system. See, e.g., Il 
DX 1-3, 5, 6, LIL, 11M, 11R (II JA 113-23, 125-26, 165-68, 
181-84; L. 289-96, 323-26); see also Pet. App. 8la n.20 
(then-Governor Wilder's “position in this Court has always 
been one supporting VMI's all male admissions policy”). 


32 


this Court has consistently given full consideration to the 
justifications proffered by a State's political subaivisions, 
without suggesting that such justifications are per se invalid 
absent explicit endorsement from or articulation by the state 
legislature. See, e.g., City of Richmond vy. J.A. Croson 
Co., 488 U.S. 469, 492 (1989) (opinion of O'Connor, J.); 
id. at 498-505 (opinion of the Court); Wygant v. Jackson 
Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267, 274-78 (1986) (opinion of 
Powell, J.); id. at 287-89 (opinion of O'Connor, J.); 
Regents of the Univ. of Calif. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 311- 
14 (1978) (opinion of Powell, J.). It follows a fortiori that 
a State's political subdivision may, in the exercise of the 
powers delegated to it by the state legislature, and con- 
sistent with established state policies, choose the means by 
which to implement important and legitimate governmental 
objectives. VMI's decision to pursue the benefits of single- 
sex education and the VMI method is therefore entitled to 
consideration as an element of a larger important govern- 
mental objective, and the court of appeals' ruling to the 
contrary is incorrect. 


As the district court correctly observed, "[tJhe record in 
this case shows the Commonwealth's unambiguous and 
unequivocal support of single-sex education," and "the 
Commonwealth's position in this Court has always been 
supportive of VMI's all-male admissions policy because it 
adds to the diversity of choices in Virginia's higher edu- 
cation system." Pet. App. 8la. Thus, the Commonwealth 
(acting through the State Council of Higher Education and 
the governing boards of each of its colleges, including the 
VMI Board of Visitors) has chosen to pursue the legitimate 
governmental goals of providing diverse educational oppor- 
tunities and the benefits of single-sex education and the 
VMI method. The first prong of the Hogan test is 
therefore satisfied, and the only remaining question is 
whether VMI's admissions policy is substantially related to 
the achievement of these important governmental objec- 


33 


tives. 

ll. VMI'S SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS POLICY IS 
SUBSTANTIALLY RELATED TO ACHIEVING 
THE IMPORTANT GOVERNMENTAL OBJEC- 
TIVES OF PROVIDING THE BENEFITS OF A 
SINGLE-SEX COLLEGE EDUCATION AND 
THE VMI METHOD AND ENHANCING DIVER- 
SITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION 


As the district court found, “VMI contributes to the 
diversity of Virginia's higher education in two related 
ways: (1) by providing an opportunity for single-sex 
education, and (2) through the unique VMI method of 
character development and leadership training." Pet. App. 
188a. Both of these contributions to the breadth of 
Virginia's higher education system would be lost if VMI 
were to become coeducational. 

It is self-evident that VMI's policy of limiting admission 
to men is substantially related to achieving the proven, 
positive, factually established benefits of single-sex educa- 
tion and the VMI method. Requiring VMI to become 
coeducational would, by definition, preclude it from 
providing a single-sex education, thus depriving VMI's 
students of the benefits provided by such an education 
without extending those benefits to anyone. As the court of 
appeals observed, “the only way to realize the benefits of 
homogeneity of gender is to limit admission to one 
gender." Pet. App. 22a.'© Changing VMI's admissions 
policy would, therefore, entirely frustrate one of Virginia's 
legitimate and important educational goals by depriving 
students of an opportunity to learn in a single-sex 


16That fact serves to Jistinguish this case from Hogan, in which 
the record was “flatly inconsistent with the claim that 
excluding men from the School of Nursing is necessary to 
reach any of [the State's] educational goals." 458 U.S. at 731. 


environment. 


Moreover, as both courts below found, women could not 
be admitted to VMI without eliminating the very aspects of 
its program that distinguish it from VPI and other insti- 
tutions of higher education in Virginia. Pet. App. 6a-7a, 
24a-25a, 146a-48a, 170a-73a, 227a, 233a-34a, 237a-39a. 
Even the Government concedes that coeducation would 
require substantial changes to VMI's method, including the 
introduction of dual-track physical education activities for 
women so as “to reflect the comparable effort of each 
gender,” the creation of privacy rights on the basis of 
gender, and the elimination of “harassment” deemed in- 
appropriate in a cross-gender context. II JA 99-103, 107- 
08. The Solicitor General disputes the extent and impact of 
those changes, but that factual issue was resolved against 
the Government by both courts below. 


The evidence and findings at trial demonstrate that VMI's 
adversative method would necessarily have to undergo 
drastic modification if VMI were to become coeducational. 
As the district court explained, for example, the Marine 
Corps found that it was unable to maintain the harsh 
regimen of its boot camps -- which are similar in intensity 
to VMI's first-year indoctrination -- in a coeducational 
setting. Pet. App. 195a, 235a. Similarly, West Point 
modified and then abandoned the adversative model 
altogether after women were admitted, and it also rejected 
fixed physical training standards in favor of "comparable" 
training. Pet. App. 235a-24la. However effective the 
West Point system may now be in achieving the goals it 
serves, it cannot accomplish the same results as VMI, 
which uses different methods to stimulate and educate dif- 
ferent types of individuals. 

Thus, both courts below were plainly "justified in finding 
that if women were to be admitted, VMI would have to 
convert to a dual-track physical training program in order 


35 


to subject women to a program equal in effect to that of 
men.” Pet. App. 146a. The result of this departure from 
VMI's core policy of egalitarianism would be to create 
perceptions of unequal treatment among cadets, leading to 
tensions and disparities in treatment that would be incom- 
patible with VMI's educational method. Jd. at 146a-47a. 
In addition, the admission of women to VMI would 
necessarily entail creation of privacy rights for cadets, at 
least on gender grounds. Pet. App. 147a. This change 
would contradict the adversative method's emphasis on 
complete equality, absence of privacy, and close scrutiny 
by all other cadets. 


Moreover, related aspects of the adversative method 
would necessarily undergo substantial modifications with 
the admission of women, because the harassment, scrutiny, 
and pressure that upperclass students impose on their 
juniors would undoubtedly “play out differently” when the 
pressure is imposed by a late adolescent male on a late 
adolescent female or vice versa. Pet. App. 147a. This 
“cross-sexual confrontation and _ interaction” would 
"introduc[e] additional elements of stress and distraction 
which are not accommodated by VMI's methodology” and 
would “significantly alter the character-building and 
leadership-development aspects of the VMI experience." 
Pet. App. 147a, 239a. 


In short, the fundamental characteristics of VMI's 
educational method, including the adversative system, the 
total absence of privacy, and the strict egalitarianism that 
pervades all aspects of the program, would undergo radical 
change or disappear altogether with coeducation. It is 
simply “without a doubt that VMI's present methods of 
training and education would have to be changed as West 
Point's were." Pet. App. 172a n.8. As a consequence, the 
women admitted to VMI would be denied “the very 
opportunity they sought because the unique characteristics 


36 


of VMI's program would be destroyed by coeducation." 
Pet. App. 6a-7a. Indeed, as the district court observed, "if 
VMI were to admit women, it would become more similar 
to the military barracks at VPI, so its uniqueness would be 
lost." ‘Pet. App. 173a. Thus, one of the experts explained 
after studying the educational options available in Virginia, 
"(t]ransforming VMI into a coeducational institution would 
significantly reduce the postsecondary educational choices 
available to men without materially altering the range of 
choices available to women." I DX 58 at 25 (IJA 1757). 


The simple truth is that “VMI's inission can be accom- 
plished only in a single-gender environment,” Pet. App. 
148a, and VMI's students respond most effectively to the 
VMI method. As a result, "[tJhe classification for single- 
gender education at VMI is . . . directly related to achiev- 
ing the results of an adversative method in a military en- 
vironment," because “'the unique characteristics of VMI's 
program would be destroyed by coeducation.'" Pet. App. 
6a-7a, 23a; see also id. at 146a-48a, 167a, 175a-76a. 
Thus, VMI's single-sex admissions policy is precisely 
tailored to the achievement of the Commonwealth's legiti- 
mate objectives, and the second prong of the Hogan test is 
satisfied in this case. 


IV. THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE DOES 
NOT REQUIRE STATES TO OFFER PARAL- 
LEL SINGLE-SEX EDUCATIONAL OPPORTU- 
NITIES TO MEMBERS OF EACH GENDER 
WITHOUT REGARD TO STUDENT INTEREST 
OR THE EXISTENCE OF OTHER PUBLIC AND 
PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 


A. The Hogan Test Is Satisfied By The 
Commonwealth's Sho That VMI's 
Single-Sex Admissions Is Substan- 
tially Related To The Achievement Of 
Important Governmental Objectives 


For the reasons set forth above, VMI's single-sex admis- 


37 


sions policy satisfies the two-pronged test enunciated in this 
Court's decision in Hogan. The court of appeals reached 
its contrary conclusion only by engrafting a third require- 
ment onto the Hogan test, precluding States from offering 
any particular single-sex educational opportunity for mem- 
bers of one gender without proffering a justification for the 
absence of a “parallel” or “substantively comparable" pro- 
gram for members of the opposite gender. Pet. App. 17a, 


155a. That holding goes beyond Hogan, which made clear 
that a State may “confer a benefit only upon one class” as 


long as the “classification is substantially related to achiev- 
ing a legitimate and substantial goal," i.e., as long as the 
two prongs of the Hogan test are satisfied. 458 U.S. at 
724, 731 n.17. 


In Hogan, of course, the State could not meet this 
requirement because, as a factual matter, the State's 


admissions policy was not “necessary to reach any of [the 
university's] educational goals." 458 U.S. at 730, 731. 


Id. at 731. Indeed, as the Court explained, men were 
already permitted to attend and “participate fully in classes" 
at the university, so the singlc »ex admissions policy could 


The invalidity of the court of appeals’ liability determina- 
tion is also evident from the mode of analysis followed by 
the Court in Hogan. The Hogan Court conducted a careful 
and detailed analysis of the proffered state objective and the 


have been wholly superfluous, however, if the absence of 
any state-provided single-sex educational opportunity for 
the excluded gender was itself sufficient to render the chal- 
lenged admissions policy unconstitutional. Under the ap- 
proach followed by the court of appeals in this case, the 
opinion in Hogan could have ended with its first footnote, 
which observed that "Mississippi maintains no other single- 


members of the excluded gender demonstrates the fallacy of 
the court of appeals’ approach to the liability issue here. !7 


'7lt is clear that the Hogan Court's refusal to require dual 
single-sex programs was not a mere oversight. Indeed, the 
court of appeals’ opinion in Hogan had relied on that very 
reasoning, holding that “the fact that the state does not 
maintain a corresponding all-male nursing school deprives it of 


39 


If left uncorrected, the effect of the court of appeals’ new 
test for liability will be to preclude States from offering the 
option of single-sex education to students of one gender 
unless a “substantively comparable” single-sex educational 
opportunity is offered to students of the other gender, re- 
gardless of the need or demand for such a program or the 
other educational opportunities available to that gender. 
Such a blow to single-sex education could well be devasta- 
ting, doubly so because it would come at a time when 
educators and policymakers are turning more and more 
frequently to single-sex education as one solution for some 
of the ills that beset the Nation's public education system. 


In Detroit, for example, the public school system sought 
to create all-male academies to respond to the special needs 
of inner-city boys, who consistently scored lower on 
standardized reading and math tests and had far more 
disciplinary problems than girls. See Note, Inner-City 
Single-Sex Schools: Educational Reform or Invidious 
Discrimination?, 105 Harv. L. Rev. 1741, 1743 (1992). 
That approach was supported by the findings of multiple 
educational researchers who have documented the benefits 
of single-sex education at the primary and secondary school 
levels as well as in college, and offered exciting 
possibilities for improving the dire status of public educa- 
tion in the inner cities.'8 Applying logic similar to that 


[Footnote continued from previous page] 


in the Fifth Circuit's opinion, this Court's refusal to adopt that 
reasoning in Hogan is highly significant. 

18See Mikyong Kim & Rodolfo Alvarez, Women-Only Colleges: 
Some Unanticipated Consequences, 66 J. HIGHER Epuc. 640, 
661-62 (Nov./Dec. 1995); Richard Hawley, A Case For Boys’ 
Schoels, in SINGLE-SEX SCHOOLING: PROPONENTS SPEAK, A 
SPECIAL REPORT FROM THE OFFICE OF EDUCATIONAL 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


40 


used by the court of appeals in this case, however, a federal 
fistrict court judge preliminarily enjoined the academies on 
school district dropped the program rather than expend its 
scarce resources on costly litigation. See Garrett v. Board 
of Educ., 775 F. Supp. 1004 (E.D. Mich. 1991). 


Despite the fate of the Detroit experiment, school districts 
in Maine, California, Maryland, and other locations across 
the nation are seeking to take advantage of the special 
benefits offered by single-sex education for some students 
and in some contexts.'9 Indeed, as part of its commitment 


[Footnote continued from previous page] 


RESEARCH & IMPROVEMENT, U.S. Dep't oF Epuc. (Debra 
Hollinger & Rebecca Adamson, eds.) (hereinafter “DOE 
REPORT") 11, 11 (1992); Cornelius Riordan, The Case For 
Single-Sex Schools, in DOE REPORT 47, 48; Valerie E. Lee & 


19See, e.g., AM. ASS'N OF UNIV. WOMEN EpDuc. FOoUND., 
GROWING SMART: WHAT'S WORKING For GIRLS IN SCHOOL, 


July 18, 1995, at D1 (girls-only ninth grade physical science 
classes in Michigan public school); Single-Sex Math Class 
Gaining In Popularity, PHOENIX GAZETTE, Nov. 5, 1994, at 
Al8 (Portsmouth, New Hampshire, school board initiating 
separate high school classes for boys and girls); Tim Poor, 
Schools Try Same-Sex Classrooms, St. Louis Post- 
DISPATCH, Aug. 7, 1994, at 1A (boys and girls in grades 1-5 
on 


41 


to single-sex education, Virginia's General Assembly 
recently enacted a statute authorizing local school boards to 
offer single-sex classes in the Commonwealth's public 
schools. See Va. Code § 22.1-212.1:1. School districts 
have already responded by seeking to use single-sex classes 
in areas where educators believe they may be most 
beneficial. For example, Virginia's Prince William County 
is experimenting with all-girl math classes in order to 
increase the success rate, skills, confidence, and number of 
female math students.2° These creative and laudable efforts 
to improve public education and respond to individualized 
and varied needs could well be precluded or hindered under 
the court of appeals’ logic, with the result that the benefits 
of single-sex education will be limited to those relatively 
few students whose parents are able and willing to afford a 
private school education. 

Virginia or any other State from offering a program like 
VWIL in the absence of a parallel single-sex program for 
men, even if there were a strong basis in fact for believing 
that the need and demand for a VWIL-like program was far 
greater than that for an analogous program for men. 
Indeed, under this Court's decision in Norwood v. 
Harrison, 413 U.S. 455 (1973), the state and federal 
governments could even be barred from providing financial 
or other assistance to women students attending private 
single-sex institutions, at least in the absence of proof that 
the private single-sex opportunities available to each gender 
were “substantively comparable." Such proof would be 


[Footnote continued from previous page] 


have separate classes in Baltimore, Maryland public school). 
20See Wee, supra note 19, at Al. 


42 


virtually impossible to obtain in most States, given that 
there are only a handful of private men's colleges in the 
entire country.2! 

Finally, the reasoning of the court below will surely in- 
hibit any State program, whether educational or not, that 
focuses on the particular needs of men or women. For 
example, a program designed to address the effects of 
domestic violence or pornography on women would be 
suspect in the absence of a comparable program for men, 
even if the available evidence clearly demonstrated that 
these effects are generally quite different for men and 
women. Battered women's shelters and other programs 
could be rendered unconstitutional in the absence of parallel 
programs for the opposite gender, even in the absence of 
any substantial need for such parallel programs. And even 
if the public resources could be found to fund these parallel 
programs, there would be no way to avoid constant 
litigation and judicial scrutiny regarding the comparability 
of the benefits being afforded to each gender. 

For all these reasons, the court of appeals’ liability deter- 
mination is wrong under Hogan and will yield highly 
unfortunate consequences if it is allowed to stand. This 
Court should therefore reject the ruling on liability below. 


21 At the time of the liability trial, there were five private men's 
colleges in the United States: Morehouse College, Rose- 
Hulman Institute of Technology, Hampden-Sydney College, 
Wabash College, and Deep Spring College (a two-year 
college). Stips. 44 (1 JA 89; L. 71). Rose-Hulman became 
coeducational this year. 


program. Pet. App. 27a, 73a, 75a. This fact, together 
with the extensive and diverse educational opportunities for 
women in Virginia and the prominence of female students 
in both publicly supported colleges and in private single-sex 
colleges in Virginia, satisfies any concern over whether 
educational resources are being deployed fairly and 
equitably in the Commonwealth. 

Based on West Point's experience in recruiting for its 
non-adversative, coeducational program, the district court 
concluded (Pet. App. 174a) that “some women” might want 
to attend a coeducational VMI (with the modifications to 
the educational program entailed by coeducation). The 
court made no such finding, however, with respect to a 
single-sex adversative program for women adhering to the 
VMI model. To the contrary, the district court found that 
the evidence demonstrates little, if any, meaningful demand 
for such a program. See Pet. App. 73a, 75a & n.12.?2 


22For example, Dr. Richard C. Richardson, an expert in higher 
education and the development of educational programs who 
chaired the most recent accreditation team for West Point, 
testified that, based on his interviews with female VPI cadets 
and on West Point's experience with female applicants, the 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


44 


Indeed, although there have been numerous women's 
colleges in the United States, there has never been any type 
of all-female military college in this country, let alone a 
women's military college based on the adversative model. 
Stips. 44 (I JA 89; L. 71). In fact, the record establishes 
that there is relatively little demand among women even for 
non-adversative residential ROTC programs in a military 
setting. In 1990, for example, only 44 women participated 
in VPI's coeducational Corps of Cadets, a tiny fraction of 
the more than 93,000 women college students in Virginia; 
fewer than 250 women were enrolled in residential ROTC 
military programs in the entire Nation. I DX 62L (I JA 
1788; L. 233); see also Il DX 88 (II JA 274; L. 344). 


The court of appeals also concluded that the Government 
did not rebut cross-petitioners' showing that “if the state 
were to estavlish a women's VMI-type program, the 
program would attract an _ insufficient number of 
participants to make the program work." Pet. App. 27a. 
In the absence of meaningful demand, it would be pointless 
to insist that VMI be permitted to exist only if the State 
could show that a virtually identical program existed for 
women. As this Court observed in Rostker v. Goldberg, 
453 U.S. 57, 79 (1981), the Constitution does not require 
government to “engage in gestures of superficial equality." 
Rather, it requires only that government “treat similarly 
situated persons similarly." Women and men -- because of 


[Footnote continued from previous page] 


number of women students interested in a mirror-image VMI 
program “over a three or four-year period ... could not 
possibly exceed 25 to 30 students.” II Tr. 606, 613-15 (IJA 
736, 742-44). With an institution of that size, of course, 
duplication of the VMI experience “was simply not possible.” 
II Tr. 615 (11 JA 745). 


45 


the vastly different extent to which they seek a VMI-like 
educational experience as opposed to other educational 
options -- are simply not “similarly situated" with respect to 
that type of education. 

The Commonwealth's policy of providing single-sex 
college education and the VMI method for VMI's male 
students must also be evaluated in the context of the range 
of educational opportunities and public financial assistance 
afforded to women in Virginia's higher education system. 
A wide array of educational opportunities are available to 
women at Virginia's 14 coeducational public undergraduate 
institutions, including the opportunity to obtain degrees in 
all of the subjects offered at VMI (and more), and to 
participate in a coeducational residential Corps of Cadets 
and ROTC program at VPI. Indeed, substantially more 
women than men enjoy the benefits of the Commonwealth's 
public system of higher education. Pet. App. 187a.23 


Moreover, analysis of the educational opportunities for 
women in Virginia would be incomplete without considera- 
tion of private colleges and universities that receive some . 
form of direct or indirect assistance from Virginia. The 
Commonwealth's policy is that “‘[h]jigher education re- 
sources should be viewed as a whole -- public and pri- 
vate,'" and “Virginia relies on its independent institutions 
{of higher education] to offer students choices and meet the 
educational needs of people in the Commonwealth." Pet. 


23 According to recent data published by the U.S. Department of 
Education, 83,395 women and 74,918 were enrolled as 
full-time students in Virginia's public institutions of higher 
education in the Fall of 1991; the corresponding numbers for 
part-time students were 81,745 women and 58,049 men. See 
U.S. Dep't oF Epuc., NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION 
STATISTICS, DIGEST OF EDUCATION STATISTICS 195 (1994). 
Preliminary data reveal similar results for 1992. Id. 


46 


App. 19la; see Stips. 26, 28-32 (I JA 71, 73-77; L. 53, 
55-59); supra pp. 7-8. 


As noted above, there are four private four-year women's 
colleges (and only one private men's college) in Virginia, 
and students at each of these women's colleges have the 
option of participating in an ROTC program. The Com- 
monwealth provides substantial financial assistance to its 
female residents who choose to attend one of these private 
women's colleges. Supra pp. 8-9; Pet. App. 190a-91a.24 
And women take advantage of these opportunities to a far 
greater extent than men. In the Fail of 1989, for example, 
3850 women, but only 944 men, were enrolled in private 
single-sex institutions in Virginia. Pet. App. 189a. Thus, 
women have a greater range of single-sex educational 
options in Virginia than men, and VMI helps fill a gap 
created by the private sector's failure to provide greater or 
more attractive single-sex opportunities for male college 
students. In effect, VMI's males-only admissions policy 
“serves to roughly ‘equalize’" overall single-sex educational 
opportunities in Virginia for men and women, Michael M. 
v. Superior Court of Sonoma County, 450 U.S. 464, 473 
(1981) (plurality opinion), and it is permissible for that 
reason as well. 


CONCLUSION 


Virginia's higher education system consists of a wide 
array of educational choices. The predominant segment of 
this system is coeducational, including an excellent and de- 
manding coeducational Corps of Cadets program at VPI. A 


24By the same token, VMI derives most of its income from 
sources other than state appropriations. In the 1991-92 school 
year, for example, VMI derived less than 31% of its total 


operating budget from state appropriations, grants, and 
contracts. See II DX 21. 


47 . 


number of single-sex options for women also exist, with 
various forms of public financial assistance, at Virginia's 
several outstanding private women's colleges. VMI, which 
is publicly supported, but which also receives substantial 
private support, offers a valuable and efiective single-sex 
educational option for men. Since its program has been 
proven to be highly effective in educating some young men 
and can only be provided in a single-sex environment, 
VMI's single-sex admissions policy is substantiaily related 
to the achievement of established and important 
governmental objectives. VMI's single-sex admissions 
policy therefore does not violate the Equal Protection 
Clause. Accordingly, the court of appeals’ finding of 
liability should be rejected, and the judgment below should 


be affirmed on that ground. 
Respectfully submitted. 
James S. Gilmore, III Theodore B. Olson 
Attorney General of Virginia (Counsel of Record) 
William H. Hurd Thomas G. Hungar 
Deputy Attorney General Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher 
900 East Main Street 1050 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 955-8500 
Griffin B. Bell Robert H. Patterson, Jr. 
William A. Clineburg, Jr. Anne Marie Whittemore 
King & Spalding William G. Broaddus 
191 Peachtree Street J. William Boland 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303 McGuire, Woods, Battle 
& Boothe 
One James Center 


Richmond, Virginia 23219 


Counsel for Cross-Petitioners 
November 16, 1995 


