1 
i 
es 


No. 94-1941 2 CLERK 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
V. 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


DEVAL L. PATRICK” 
Assistant Attorney General 


PAUL BENDER 
Deputy Solicitor General 


CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 

Assistant to the Solicitor 
General 

JESSICA DUNSAY SILVER 

THOMAS E. CHANDLER 
Attorneys 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


Supreme Couft, U.S. 
F 1 LE 


NG 0 ** e 


— 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether a State that provides a rigorous mili- 
tary-style public educational program for men can 
remedy the unconstitutional denial of the same oppor- 
tunity to women by offering them a different type of 
single-sex educational program deemed more suited 
to the typical woman. 


2. Whether coeducation is the required remedy in 
the context of this case. 


(I) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
a 1 
EEE rt l 
Constitutional provision involve 2. 2 
Statement: 
1. The Virginia Military Institute 2 
2. The liability determination 5 
3. The Virginia Women’s Institute for Leadership 
S r 8 
4. The remedial decisions be!ow .....................00000 11 
Introduetion and summary of argument 15 
4 ae * 18 
I. Invalidating VMI's men-only admissions 
poliey is the only adequate remedy for the 
constitutional violation in this case ................... 20 
A. Allowing qualified women to attend VMI 
is the relief that will most fully remedy the 
constitutional violation 20 
1. Allowing qualified women to attend 
VMI is the only way to assure them 
equal access to VMI's unique 
11111 22 
2. Allowing qualiſied women to attend 
VMI is the only way to cure the state- 
sponsored sex stereotyping and stigma 
resulting from VMI's exclusionary 
— 24 
B. Respondents failed to show that it would 
be impossible to admit women to VM1 I. 25 
1. The admission of women would not 
gh 27 
een 27 
b. Physical training standards 28 
e. The adversative approach and 
“decency between the sexes” ........... 29 


(IIT) 


IV V 
Argument Continued: Page Cases—Continued: Page 
2. The example of the federal military Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic, 
service academiess 30 113 S. Ct. 753 (1998) ......... — 41 
II. The establishment of a women-only leadership eee 347 U.S. 483 1 
training program at Baldwin College ese 1 m1. 

ä— — — Buchanan v. Warley, 245 U.S. 60 (1917) ................. 26 

of women from VMI because the separate, Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977) ............ 40, 43, 47 

different VMI and VWIL programs themselves Califano v. Westcott, 443 U.S. 76 (1979) 47 

violate equal protection 32 City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 

A. Classifications that deny opportunities to T 26-27, 33, 34 
individuals based on their sex should be Cooper v. Aaron, 358 U.S. 1 (1958) 26 
subjected to strict judicial scrutiny ............ 33 Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (197) 41, 43, 44 

B. The VWIL remedy plainly violates equal Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973) 34, 
protection under intermediate scrutiny — 37 35, 36, 43, 44 
1. VWIL is materially different from VMI Goesaert v. Cleary, 335 U.S. 464 (1948) 30 

in ways that impermissibly reflect and Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503 (19886) ........... 34 
reinforce archaic stereotypes about Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365 (1971) ........... 35 
... 87 J.E.B. v. Alabama er rel. T. B., 114 S. Ct. 1419 
2. Generalizations about women and men — ͤ 25, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 41, 43, 44 
cannot support sex-based classifications, Kirstein v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Virginia, 
such as VMI's admissions policy, that 309 F. Supp. 184 (E. D. Va. 197%) 19 
foreclose individual opportunity .......... 42 Louisiana v. United States, 380 U.S. 145 (1965) ..... 21 
3. Respondents have not demonstrated Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977) ................. 20 
an interest in single-sex education, and _ Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 
ouch on interest would Ret, in any aR lh I — 
— ae at 1 Newberg v. Board of Pub. Educ., 478 A. 2d 1362 
tte a — er Sl . — 1 
. ——— C — Oh « Vien, —— — 
Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (19790 21, 40, 43 
123 6 Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 788 (17% 34 
Cases: N Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 587 (1888) 48 
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Petia, 115 S. Ct. ° Reed v. Reed, 404 U.S. 71 (1977 ——————— 43 
REE 5 SE 36 Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982) ............ 45 
Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991 (1982) .................... 45 Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 
Bradwell v. Illinois, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 130 . AA 25, 48 
RES io SOL 30, 40, 43 Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981) .................. 34 


Cases—Continued: 
Stanton v. Stanton, 421 US. 7 (1975) 41, 43 
Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303 (1880) ...... 25 
Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634 (1973) .............. 35 
Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 
1 — 8 2¹ 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950) 23 
VMI v. United States, 113 S. Ct. 2431 (1993).......... — 
Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U S. 636 (1975) ...... 48, 44, 47 
Weiss v. United States, 114 S. Ct. 752 (1994) .......... 24 
Wengler v. Druggists Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 
— . ̃ ˙ — 43 


Yellow Springs Exempted Village School Dist. Bd. 
of Educ. v. Ohio High School Athletic Ass, 


GG Ra 24 

Constitutions, statutes and regulation: 
U.S. Const. Amend. XIV (Equal Protection Clause). 2, 5, 
6, 15, 18, 19, 33, 42, 45 


Pa. Const. Art. I, § 28 (Equal Rights Amendment) ... 18 
Act of Oct. 21, 1976, Pub. L. No. 94-572, § 1, 90 Stat. 

2708 (codified at 14 U.S.C. 18a) 31 
Department of Defense Appropriation Act, 1976, 

Pub. L. No. 94-106, § 803, 89 Stat. 537-638 (1975) 


(codified at 10 U.S.C. 4842 note:: 31 
8 EE Se ae 41 
II K 2 ———— 5 
. . — ———— 31 

Miscellaneous: 


Disparities (19960) — 32 
C. Jencks & D. Reisman, The Academic Revolution 

Kw . 2¹ 
United States Commission on Civil Rights, More 

IKK . 24 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1941 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
. 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals regarding reme- 
dy (Pet. App. la-52a) is reported at 44 F.3d 1229. The 
opinion of the district court regarding remedy (Pet. 
App. 58a-131a) is reported at 852 F. Supp. 471. The 
opinion of the court of appeals regarding liability 
(Pet. App. 134a-157a) is reported at 976 F.2d 890. The 
opinion of the district court regarding liability (Pet. 


— 


(1) 


2 


for a writ of certiorari was filed on May 26, 1995, and 
was granted on October 5, 1995 (116 S. Ct. 281). The 
jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 


The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution pro- 
vides that In jo State shall * * deny to any person 
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the 
laws.” 

STATEMENT 


1. The Virginia Military Institute. The Virginia 
Military Institute (VMI) is a state military college in 
Lexington, Virginia. Since its founding in 1839, VMI 
has maintained a policy of admitting only men to its 
four-year undergraduate degree program. The four- 
teen other public colleges in Virginia are all coedu- 
cational. Approximately 1300 male students are en- 
rolled at VMI. Pet. App. 137a-138a, 141a. 

VMI’s mission statement declares that VMI’s goal 
is to produce “citizen-soldiers,” described as “edu- 
cated and honorable men who are suited for leadership 
in civilian life and who can provide military leadership 
when necessary.” Pet. App. 6a, 139a. The VMI cur- 
riculum includes liberal arts, science and engineering 
courses, and VMI confers both Bachelor of Arts and 
Bachelor of Science degrees. Id. at 200a. 

As the district court found, VMI has a strong repu- 
tation for producing leaders, and has an exceptionally 
loyal and powerful alumni network. Pet. App. 137a- 
18a. That network is “enormously influential,” 94- 
1667 & 94-1717 (VMI II) Tr. 1227, especially in the 
male-dominated fields of engineering, the military, 
business, and public service in which VMI graduates 
tend to pursue careers, id. at 1228. “VMI alumni 


3 


overwhelmingly perceive that their VMI educational 
experience contributed to their obtaining personal 
goals.” Pet. App. 205a. VMI enjoys the largest en- 
dowment on a per-student basis of any undergraduate 
institution in the United States. Id. at 130a. 

VMI employs an “adversative” method of character 
development and leadership training not currently 
used by any other college-level institution. That 
method is based on techniques used in “English public 
schools” and “earlier military training,” although it 
has long been abandoned at the United States mili- 
tary academies. Pet. App. 139a, 192a. The method 
“emphasizes physical rigor, mental stress, absolute 
equality of treatment, absence of privacy, minute 
regulation of behavior, and indoctrination of values.” 
Id. at 139a; see id. at 191a-192a. “As a consequence of 
completing the rigorous tasks, succeeding, and actu- 
. ——ů— ogy te pe ya 

overcome almost impossible physical and psy- 
chological odds. They have been put through — 
physical pressures and hazards, and just to have made 
it yields a feeling of tremendous accomplishment.” 
Id. at 205a. 

VMI's adversative method is implemented through 
a pervasive military-style system. Pet. App. 140a- 
14la, 191a-200a. The system includes the “rat line,” 
which is a seven-month regimen during which first- 
year cadets, or “rats,” are “treated miserably,” like 
“the lowest animal on earth.” Id. at 194a-195a.' 


! The term “rat line“ derives from the prescribed route 
through the barracks that first-year cadets must traverse dur- 
ing most of the year in a position of rigid attention. Gov't 
Exh. 73, at 17, Lodged Materials From The Record (referred 
as L. Y at 268. 


1 


“Rats” are subjected to a strict system of punish- 
ments and rewards that creates “a sense of accomp- 
lishment and a bonding to their fellow sufferers and 
former tormentors.” Id. at 194a. The “rat line” ex- 
perience is accompanied by “rat training,” “a tough 
physical training program” “designed to foster self- 
confidence and physical conditioning in fourth class- 
men [i.e., freshmen] by creating training situations 
which are stressful enough to show them that they 
are capable of doing tasks which surpass their 
previously self-imposed limits.” Jd. at. 195a; 91-1690 
(VMI 1) C. A. App. 1668 (L. 192). 

The “class system” assigns roles to each class of 
cadets within a hierarchy in order to “cultivat(e] 
leadership.” Pet. App. 196a. “After the rat line strips 
away cadets’ old values and behaviors, the class 
system teaches and reinforces through peer pressure 
the values and behaviors that VMI exists to promote.” 
Ibid. VMI’s program also includes the “dyke sys- 
tem,” an arrangement by which each “rat” is assigned 
a senior as a mentor to give some “relief from the 
extreme stress of the rat line.” Jd. at 196a-197a. 
VMI’s honor code—providing that a cadet “does not 
lie, cheat, steal nor tolerate those who do”—provides 
“the single penalty of expulsion for its violation.” Id. 
at 140a. 

VMI requires cadets to “live within a military 
framework; they wear the cadet uniform at the 
Institute, eat most meals in the mess hall, live in a 
barracks, and regularly take part in parades and 
drills.” VMI1C.A. App. 52. “(T]he most important 
aspects of the VMI educational experience occur in 
the barracks.” Pet. App. 197a-198a. There, cadets live 
at close quarters with one another, three to five 
together in stark and unattractive rooms, with poor 


5 


ventilation, unappealing furniture, windowed doors 
with no locks and no window coverings. Id. at 199a. 
JA] cadet is totally removed from his social back- 
ground,” and placed in an environment the principal 
object of which is “to induce stress.” Ibid. 

Although VMI has always restricted admission to 
men, some women “would want to attend [VMI] if they 
had the opportunity.” Pet. App. 174a; see also id. at 
231a, 232a (recruitment of women would likely yield a 
10% female student body at VMI). Between 1988 and 
1990 VMI received 347 letters from women inquiring 
about admission, or indicating interest in attending 
VMI. Id. at 229a; see Gov’t Exhs. 104, 105 (e.g., L. 
156). It is not disputed that some women can succeed 
within the VMI-type methodology and are capable of 
doing all of the individual activities required of VMI 
cadets. Pet. App. 76a, 146a, 223a, 234a. The distvict 
court expressly found that the VMI methodology 
“could be used to educate women.” Id. at 76a; see id. 
at 155a. 

2. The Liability Determination. On March 1, 
1990, the United States sued the Commonwealth of 
Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, VMI, its Super- 
intendent and Board of Visitors, and others responsi- 
ble for the operation of VMI and for coordination of 
Virginia’s system of higher education, in the United 
States District Court for the Western District of 
Virginia. The suit was filed pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
2000c-6 in response to a complaint filed with the 
Attorney General by a female high school student 
seeking admission to VMI. The United States al- 
leged that VMI’s men-only admissions policy violated 
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, and sought an order enjoining respon- 
dents from excluding women and from otherwise 


6 


discriminating on the basis of sex in the operation 
of VMI. Pet. App. 141a. 

Neither the Governor nor the Commonwealth of 
Virginia participated at the liability phase in defend- 
ing VMI’s admissions policy.” The VMI Foundation 
and the VMI Alumni Association, both private organi- 
zations, intervened as defendants. Pet. App. 160a. 
They maintained that VMI’s exclusion of women was 
substantially related to two “important governmental 
objectives”: “educating cadets for lives as ‘citizen- 
soldiers,’” R. 152 (VMI Defendants’ Proposed Find- 
ings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (liability phase) 
(Apr. 26, 1991), at 114 (4 28), and fostering “system- 
wide diversity by providing an opportunity for single- 
sex education and by providing a distinctive program 
of military-style education,” id. at 115 (J 38). 

On June 14, 1991, the district court entered judg- 
ment in favor of respondents. Pet. App. 158a-245a. It 
held that the exclusion of women was substantially 
related to respondents’ asserted important state 
interests because At Ihe single-sex status would be 
lost, and some aspects of the distinctive method would 
be altered if it were to admit women.” Id. at 173a. 

On appeal, a panel of the Fourth Circuit held that 
VMI’s admissions policy violated the Equal Protec- 
tion Clause and remanded to the district court for 
remedial proceedings. Pet. App. 134a-156a (VMI I). 
The court concluded that the Commonwealth “failed 
to articulate an important policy that substantially 
supports offering the unique benefits of a VMI-type 


2 The then-Governor took the position that no person should 
be denied admission to a state college on account of sex. Pet. 
App. 142a; see also Answer at 1 15-16 (L. 7-8); VMI I C.A. 
App. 131-132 (L. 22-23). 


7 


education to men and not to women.” Id. at 155a. 
Noting that the only policy statement in the record 
“in which the Commonwealth has expressed itself 
with respect to gender distinctions” required that its 
colleges and universities treat students “without 
regard to sex, race, or ethnic origin,” id. at 153a 
(emphasis added by court of appeals), the court 
rejected the district court’s conclusion that Virginia 
has a policy of providing single-sex education to 
promote a diverse array of options, id. at 152a-153a. 
Moreover, “[iJf VMI's male-only admissions policy is 
in furtherance of a state policy of ‘diversity,’ the 
explanation of how the policy is furthered by affording 
a unique educational benefit only to males is lacking.” 
Id. at 153a-154a. 

The court of appeals then concluded that neither 
the goal of producing citizen soldiers nor VMI’s im- 
plementing methodology is inherently unsuitable to 
women.” Pet. App. 155a. Admission of women, how- 
ever, would lead to some changes at VMI. The court 
therefore declined, “[iJn light of * the generally 
recognized benefit that VMI provides,” to “order that 
women be admitted to VMI if alternatives are avail- 
able.” Ibid. The case was remanded to the district 
court “to give to the Commonwealth the respon- 
sibility to select a course it chooses, so long as 
the guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment are 
satisfied”: 

(T]he Commonwealth might properly decide to 

admit women to VMI and adjust the program to 

implement that choice, or it might establish 


parallel institutions or parallel programs, or it 
might abandon state support of VMI, leaving VMI 


the option to pursue its own policies as a private 


8 


institution. While it is not ours to determine, 
there might be other more creative options or 
combinations. 


Id. at 156a. 

This Court denied certiorari. VMI v. United States, 
113 S. Ct. 2431 (1993). Pet. App. 132a-133a. 

3. The Virginia Women’s Institute for Leadership 
Remedial Plan. On remand, respondents pro as 
a remedy the reservation of VMI exclusively for men, 
and, for women, the creation of a women-only Virginia 
Women’s Institute for Leadership (VWIL), a separate 
program to be located on the campus of Mary Baldwin 
College, a private women’s liberal arts college located 
35 miles from VMI. Pet. App. 8a. That program, 
reflecting respondents’ views of “the differences and 
the needs of college-age men and women,” id. at 62a, 
would be based on “a cooperative method which rein- 
forces self-esteem rather than the leveling process 
used by VMI,” id. at 68a-64a. The program would 
be “equivalent to a [curricular] minor, that would 
explore various aspects of women’s leadership.” Gov't 
Exh. 52, at 1 (L. 248). 

The program was developed by a Task Force select- 
ed by respondents and composed entirely of faculty 
and administrators at Mary Baldwin. VWIL would be 
consistent with Mary Baldwin’s “historical mission” 
because “we couldn’t insert into Mary Baldwin some- 
thing that would be VMI but would not be Mary 
Baldwin.“ VMI II C.A. App. 436 (testimony of Dean 
of Mary Baldwin College). The Task Force did not 
consult anyone at VMI in planning the curriculum; 
the president of Mary Baldwin stated that Iwle are 
the experts on educating women.” Id. at 418. VWIL 
would be funded by the Commonwealth and the VMI 


9 


Board of Visitors, and would be anticipated to have 
about 25-30 students in its first year. Pet. App. 10a. 

The Task Force adopted for VWIL the VMI mis- 
sion of producing “citizen-soldiers,” Pet. App. 8a, but 
it rejected every component of VMI’s system. Find- 
ing that “[yloung women will be for the foreseeable 
future products of a culture which encourages them 
to find their sense of self in relationships,” VMI II 
C.A. App. 255 (L. 329), the Task Force “determined 
that a military model and, especially VMI’s adver- 
sative method, would be wholly inappropriate for 
educating and training most women for leadership 
roles.” Pet. App. 63a. 

The Task Force rejected VMI’s military lifestyle 
for VWIL. VMI II C.A. App. 471-472.“ VWIL would 


8’ VWIL’s mission statement, however, omits the VMI 
mission statement’s commitment to producing graduates who 
are “advocates of the American democracy and free enterprise 
system, and ready as citizen-soldiers to defend their country in 
time of national peril.” Pet. App. 202a. 

* One Task Force member, the Dean of Students at Mary 
Baldwin, relied on her experience as a sorority advisor to con- 
clude that women would not benefit from VMI training. VAT / 
II C.A. App. 591. She observed that, while young men “will 
paddle their pledges,” “make them consume alcohol” and “eat 
disgusting things,” young women “will give flowers [and] write 
poems.” Jd. at 599. She had “never met a young woman who 
would seek out a program like“ VMI’s. Id. at 598-599. Anoth- 
er Task Force member, the Dean of Mary Baldwin, stated that 
YMI’s adversative training method would have a parallel in a 
different adversary for the women of VWIL: For the young 
woman, “[pjerhaps the adversary is herself and her sense that 
she’s never been expected to do this before.” Id. at 459. 


5 A mailing Mary Baldwin College sent to alumnae and 
friends of the college posed the question “Is Mary Baldwin go- 
ing to turn into a military school?” and answered “No! Mary 


10 


provide no military framework or training other than 
the Mary Baldwin ROTC program, involving two 
hours of training per week for freshman and soph- 
omores and four hours per week for juniors and 
seniors. Pet. App. 109a-llla.° VWIL students would 
also participate in a newly established, largely cere- 
monial Virginia Corps of Cadets. Id. at 9a, 110a. 
VWIL students would not wear uniforms except when 
participating in ROTC or Virginia Corps of Cadets 
activities. Jd. at 1lla. VWIL students would partici- 
pate in a leadership externship, keep a journal, par- 
ticipate in organizing a speaker series, and organize 
and carry out community projects. Jd. at 9a. When 
the President of Mary Baldwin presented the VWIL 
concept to the college faculty, the discussion about 
possibly having military marching and parades on the 
campus “was fraught with humor.” VMI II C. A. App. 
482-483. In contrast with “the ey.tirely militaristic 
experience of VMI,” “VWIL * * * incorporates the 
element of public service.” Pet. App. 68a; see also 
VMI IIC.A. App. 464. 

Instead of the “rat line,” VWIL would have “train- 
ing in self-defense and self-assertiveness through a 
Cooperative Confidence Building program.” Pet. App. 
1lla-112a. Residential life for VWIL students would 
also “vary significantly” from VMI. Id. at 66a. There 
would be no barracks at VWIL. YWIL students would 


Baldwin will retain its identity, daily life on campus would not 
be any different.” VMI II C. A. App. 633. 

6 When VWIL was planned, only one Mary Baldwin student 
was participating in ROTC. No Mary Baldwin student had 
been commissioned in the preceding three years. VMI II C. A. 
App. 640. 


11 


live in Mary Baldwin student housing, in which pri- 
vacy would be respected. Id. at 127a-128a.. VWIL 
freshman students would room together in separate 
sections of the Mary Baldwin residence halls “to 
facilitate the development of group identity while also 
encouraging good relationships and friendships with 
other freshmen.” Id. at 1l4a. “VWIL participants 
will be encouraged to participate in MBC activities 
and class functions.” Jd. at 1l4a-l1l5a. VWIL stu- 
dents would not be required to eat meals together. 
Id. at 1lla. VWIL would not use class or dyke sys- 
tems, but instead would have a mentor ag require- 
ment. VMI II C. A. App. 460, 894-895. VWIL also 
would also not use VMI’s expulsion-only honor code. 
Pet. App. 114a-1 15a. 

Mary Baldwin College does not have a math and 
science focus and does not offer a Bachelor of Science 
degree. Pet. App. 13la. Its faculty “hold{s) signifi- 
cantly fewer Ph.D.’s than the faculty at VMI,” id. at 
129a, and receives significantly lower salaries, VMI 
IC. A. App. 493. The physical training facilities at 
Mary Baldwin are far less extensive and sophisticated 
than those at VMI. Pet. App. 130a-131a. 

4. The Remedial Decisions Below. The district 
court approved VMI’s proposed remedial plan. Pet. 
App. 58a-13la. The court acknowledged that the pro- 
posed VWIL “differs substantially from the VMI 


program,” id. at 55a; see id. at 12a, 67a-68a, but found 


Mary Baldwin student dorms include a “wide range of 
living arrangements,” such as “[rjesidence halls * * * ele- 
gantly equipped with brass chandeliers, plush carpeting and 
mahogany furniture.” Pet. App. 127a. Many are converted 
single-family homes, furnished by the college, and each with 
“its own distinct character.” Jbid. Some have “televisions, 
cable hook-ups and microwave ovens.” /bid. 


12 


the differences to be “justified pedagogically” based 
on “developmental and emotional differences between 
the sexes.” Jd. at 72a, 76a; see id. at 62a. The court 
accepted the conclusions of the Task Force that “a 
military model and, especially VMI’s adversative 
method, would be wholly inappropriate for educating 
and training most women for leadership roles,” id. at 
63a, and found VWIL’s cooperative confidence build- 
ing method to be more appropriate for “the different 
educational needs of most women,” id. at 10a. 

The court concluded that the adversative method 
was “inappropriate for most women” because “most 
women reaching college generally have less confi- 
dence than men.” Pet. App. 64a. Young women there- 
fore “do not need to have uppityness and aggression 
beaten out of them.” Id. at 73a-74a. Whereas “the 
VMI model is based on the premise that young men 
come with [an] inflated sense of self-efficacy that 
must [be] knocked down and rebuilt,” “[wJhat [women] 
need is a system that builds their sense of self- 
efficacy through meeting challenges, developing self- 
discipline, meeting rigor and dealing with it, and 
having successes.” Id. at 10a-lla. [The ‘nature of 
an experience that is growth-producing for a majority 
of women, according to the literature, is one that is 
supportive, is one that emphasizes positive motiva- 
tion.’” Id. at 223a. See generally pages 37-40, infra. 
Based on those notions of “what women need,” the 
court predicted that VWIL’s method “will produce 
the same or similar outcome for women that VMI 
produces for men.” Pet. App. 64a; see id. at 75a-76a. 
The court concluded that “{iJf VMI marches to the 
beat of a drum, then Mary Baldwin marches to the 
melody of a fife and when the march is over, both will 
have arrived at the same destination.” /d. at 84a. 


13 


The court of appeals affirmed, Pet. App. 1a-30a 
(VMI II), with Judge Phillips dissenting, id. at 3la- 
52a. The panel majority devised a new “special in- 
termediate scrutiny test” with which to review the 
constitutionality of VMI’s proposed remedy. It inter- 
preted this Court’s decision in Mississippi Univ. for 
ae v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982), to require 
only: 


1. that the governmental objective be “consis- 
tent with a legitimate governmental role” 
and “not pernicious,” id. at 14a, 16a, 22a; and 


2. that the sex-based classification be “impor- 
tant in serving” that objective, id. at 14a-15a, 
16a. 


In the court’s view, Virginia’s asserted objective of 
“providing the option of a single-gender college 
education,” id. at 20a, sufficed to meet that test, 
and the challenged exclusion of women from VMI 
was “by definition necessary for accomplishing thlat] 
objective,” id. at 16a. 

Recognizing that, without more, its analysis would 
provide “little or no scrutiny” of single-sex educa- 
tional programs, the court then added a new “third 
step,” applicable to cases in which the State’s objec- 


The intermediate-scrutiny equal-protection test for sex- 
based classifications set forth in Hogan, 458 U.S. at 724, 
requires an “exceedingly persuasive justification” for exclud- 
ing members of one sex from an institution of higher education. 
“Th{at) burden is met only by showing at least [I] that the clas- 
sification serves important governmental objectives and [2] that 
the discriminatory means employed are substantially related to 
the achievement of those objectives.” Ibid. (internal quotation 
marks omitted). 


14 


tive is to achieve “homogeneity of gender” in separate 
educational programs. Pet. App. l6a-18a. Under that 
third step: 
3. The benefits provided to each sex through 
separate programs must be “substantively 
comparable.” Id. at 17a.° 


The court then concluded that VWIL would be 
substantively comparable to VMI, because 


both VMI and VWIL * * seek to teach 
discipline and prepare students for leadership. 
The missions are similar and the goals are the 
same. The mechanisms for achieving the goals 
differ—VMI utilizing an adversative and perva- 
sive military regimen and VWIL proposing to 
utilize a structured environment reinforced by 
some military training and a concentration on 
leadership development—but the difference is 
attributable to a professional judgment of how 
best to produce the same opportunity. 


Id. at 26a. 

In approving the continued exclusion of women 
from VMI, the court reasoned that, “[iJf we were to 
place men and women into the adversative relation- 
ship inherent in the VMI program, we would destroy, 
at least for that period of the adversative training, 
any sense of decency that still permeates the 
relationship between the sexes.” Pet. App. 23a. The 


® The court emphasized that it was not requiring “separate 
but equal,” Pet. App. at 18 n.*, nor that the programs be “the 
same,” id. at 17a, because “equal methods and equal results” 
are not required for “different classes of people,” and any sug- 
gestion to the contrary “is justified only by a needless, and 
indeed baseless, demand for conformity,” id. at 25a. 


15 


court acknowledged that the VWIL degree will lack 
the historical benefit and prestige of a VMI degree, 
but stated that those intangible benefits “must be the 
byproduct of a longer-term effort.” Jd. at 27a. 

The Fourth Circuit voted, sua sponte, not to 
reconsider the case en banc. Pet. App. 246a-250a. 
Judge Motz wrote an opinion dissenting from that de- 
cision, in which Judges Murnaghan, Michael, and Hall 
joined. Id. at 25la-257a. 

INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

Since its founding in 1839, the Virginia Military 
Institute has not admitted women. That practice has 
correctly been held to violate the Equal Protection 
Clause, and the question before the court in this case 
is how that violation should be remedied. Respon- 
dents have argued that the value to men of a men-only 
VMI is an absolute barrier to women’s admission. 
The remedy they chose continues to maintain VMI 
exclusively for men, and offers an alternative for 
women that is admittedly separate, different, and 
unequal. They defend that plan on the basis of 
harmful sex-role stereotypes, and continue to resist 
the determination of liability. The program for 
women that they sponsored—itself a constitutionally 
inadequate remedy—in their view provides women 
more than they constitutionally deserve. 

Women are entitled to equal access to all the 
benefits that VMI seeks to provide exclusively to 
men. Women who, but for their sex, are qualified for 
VMI and want to go to VMI are entitled to an equal 
opportunity to attend the program they find more 
valuable; they cannot be relegated to a separate and 
substantially different education. The only adequate 
redress for women’s unconstitutional exclusion from 


16 


VMI is to order that VMI’s men-only admissions 
policy be ended. 

I. A. Traditional remedial principles demand a 
remedy that closely fits the violation. Once a consti- 
tutional violation is identified, the court’s remedial 
order must eradicate, to the greatest extent possible, 
the harm caused by the unconstitutional conduct. 
Application of that principle makes it evident that an 
order enjoining VMI’s men-only admission policy is 
the only adequate remedy in this case, and that the 
remedy approved by the court of appeals falls far short 
of the goal of providing complete relief. 

VMI’s men-only admissions policy has caused and 
continues to cause both tangible and intangible 
harms. It has deprived women of the VMI educational 
experience, which is unlike the experience at any 
other college in Virginia. VMI has an intensive, 
highly structured military-style educational program 
that challenges students to achieve more than they 
might otherwise have accomplished, and that has been 
remarkably successful in producing leaders in male- 
dominated careers. Women barred from VMI are also 
excluded from membership in the circle of VMI’s 
powerful alumni and from the particular prestige 
carried by a VMI degree. Finally, VMI’s admissions 
policy has communicated a message that, in the eyes 
of the Commonwealth, women do not possess the 
qualities of self-discipline, ability to withstand stress, 
and respect for-hierarchy that are widely associated 
with VMI. The only way to offer women the benefits 
of VMI, and to cure the stigma imposed on women by 
their historical exclusion, is to prohibit its men-only 
admissions policy. 

B. The court of appeals viewed the prospect of 
women’s admission to VMI as presenting a “Catch 


17 


22” for women, because, in its view, women’s admis- 
sion would “destroy” the very opportunity women 
seek to share. Under that theory, respondents’ inter- 
est in preserving VMI’s benefits exclusively for men 
outweighs women’s right to equal treatment. That 
theory is, not surprisingly, completely without sup- 
port in modern equal protection doctrine. Preserving 
a benefit for one sex is not an adequate reason for 
denying it to the other; sex discrimination is not self- 
justifying. 

Respondents have not, in any event, shown that 
integration of women at VMI would be impossible, or 
even that the changes that might be required at VMI 
when women are admitted would have a substantial or 
significant negative impact on the character or the 
effectiveness of VMI’s educational program. Accom- 
modations necessary to preserve privacy or account 
for physical differences would not change the funda- 
mental nature of the program. The court of appeals’ 
concern that the “decency that still permeates the 
relationship between the sexes” would suffer as a 
result of women’s admission to VMI is constitu- 
tionally invalid; it is another example in a long 
history of official discriminations against and exclu- 
sions of women in the name of protecting them. The 
experience of coeducation at the federal military 
service academies also shows that the admission of 
women into a rigorous, military-style educational 
program does not impair any governmental interest 
in producing military personnel, let alone “citizen- 
soldiers.” 

II. A. The court of appeals approved a remedy that 
is itself unconstitutional. It would be appropriate for 
the Court to review that remedy under strict scru- 
tiny, because differences in treatment based solely on 


18 


sex are inherently suspect. The long history of 
discrimination against women, the general irrele- 
vance of sex as a ground for official decision-making, 
and women’s continuing underrepresentation in gov- 
ernment, all support the application of strict scrutiny 
here. 

B. The constitutional violation in this case is, 
however, plain even under intermediate scrutiny. 
The approved remedy was designed, defended, and 
approved through the use of impermissible sex- 
stereotypes and overgeneralizations about the ca- 
pacities and aspirations of “most” men and “most” 
women. Equal protection precludes reliance on such 
stereotypes and generalizations to foreclose in- 
dividual opportunity. The inequality of treatment 
caused by the substantial differences between the 
sex-segregated VMI and VWIL programs is invalid 
under intermediate scrutiny. 

Respondents’ asserted interest in providing single- 
sex education cannot support the VWIL remedy. 
Respondents have shown no real interest in providing 
single-sex education, but have asserted it post hoc, in 
order to reserve VMI for men only. An interest in 
providing single-sex education would, in any event, 
not validate a program that offers substantially differ- 
ent programs and benefits to men and women and that 
bases those differences on invalid assumptions about 
the limited abilities of women. 


ARGUMENT 


Respondents violated the Equal Protection Clause 
by excluding women from VMI solely on the basis of 
their sex. The unconstitutionality of that practice 
was clear. This Court held in Mississippi Univ. for 
Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 724 (1982), that a 


19 


State cannot prohibit enrollment in a state 
institution of higher education on the basis of sex 
without an “exceedingly persuasive justification” for 
doing so. The court of appeals in VMI I correctly held 
that Virginia “failed to articulate an important 
objective which supports the provision of [VMI’s] 
unique educational opportunity to men only.” Pet. 
App. 137a. 

The court of appeals erred, however, in its remedial 
analysis. The only adequate remedy in this case is 
for VMI to stop excluding women from its student 
body on the basis of their sex. VMI’s men-only admis- 
sions policy was unconstitutional because it excluded 
all women regardless of their individual abilities and 
characteristics. The remedy necessary to end that 
harm is an admissions policy based on individual 
qualifications and not on sex. When the women-only 
policy at the Mississippi University for Women was 
held to violate equal protection, qualified men were 
required to be admitted. Hogan, supra. When the 
men-only admissions policy at the University of Vir- 
ginia was invalidated for the same reasons, qualified 
women were required to be admitted. Kirstein v. 
Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Virginia, 309 F. 
Supp. 184 (E.D. Va. 1970). And when exclusion of 
girls from Philadelphia’s Central High School was 
found to violate equal protection, qualified girls were 
required to be admitted. Newberg v. Board of Pub. 
Educ., 478 A.2d 1352 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1984). Women 


Newberg was decided under both the Equal Protection 
Clause to the United States Constitution and the Equal Rights 
Amendment to the Pennsylvania Constitution, Pa. Const. Art. 
I, § 28. The same remedial principles apply to violations of 
either provision. 


20 


who, but for their sex, meet VMI’s admissions stan- 
dards must likewise be admitted to VMI. 

The court of appeals in VMI I erred when it sug- 
gested that “parallel” single-sex programs might be 
an adequate remedy for VMI’s unconstitutional ex- 
clusion of women. Point I below demonstrates that, 
in view of the distinctiveness cf VMI’s education- 
al program, VMI’s powerful prestige, exceptionally 
strong alumni support, and the harmful message 
about the different capabilities of men and women 
created by VMI’s long-standing exclusion of women, a 
new, wholly separate school for women cannot pos- 
sibly be an adequate remedy for the constitution- 
al violation in this case. Predictably, the separate 
VWIL program is not. Point II demonstrates that 
reserving VMI for men only, while creating a sepa- 
rate and substantially different program for women at 
Mary Baldwin College, is itself unconstitutional. The 
separate VWIL program cannot, for that additional 
reason, be a remedy for the exclusion of women from 
VMI. 


I. INVALIDATING WIS MEN-ONLY ADMISSIONS 
POLICY IS THE ONLY ADEQUATE REMEDY FOR 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATION IN THIS 


CASE 


A. Allowing Qualified Women To Attend VMI Is 
The Relief That Will Most Fully Remedy The 
Constitutional Violation 


Remedial principles require a close fit between the 
constitutional violation and the remedy. The remedy 
“must be designed as nearly as possible to restore the 
victims of discriminatory conduct to the position they 
would have occupied in the absence of such conduct.” 
Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267, 280 (1977) (internal 


21 


quotation marks omitted). I[Thhe court has not 
merely the power but the duty to render a decree 
which will so far as possible eliminate the discrim- 
inatory effects of the past as well as bar like discrim- 
ination in the future.” Louisiana v. United States, 
380 U.S. 145, 154 (1965); see also Swann v. Charlotte- 
Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 402 U.S. 1, 16 (1971). 

Where persons have been unconstitutionally ex- 
cluded from an institution in violation of equal protec- 
tion, removing the exclusionary bar should be the 
presumptive remedy. That is true both because the 
tangible and intangible benefits offered at separate 
institutions are likely to differ (thus perpetuating the 
unequal treatment), and because reservation of any 
institution to males is “likely to be a witting or 
unwitting device for preserving tacit assumptions of 
male superiority.”" Moreover, where the State’s pur- 
poses are “as well served by a gender-neutral classi- 
fication” here, by a sex-neutral admissions policy— 
“as one that gender classifies and therefore carries 
with it the baggage of sex-stereotypes, the State 
cannot be permitted to classify on the basis of sex.” 
Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268, 283 (1979). As the Court 
emphasized in Orr, “this is doubly so where the 
choice made by the State appears to redound * * * to 
the benefit of those without need for special solici- 
tude.” Ibid. Maintaining VMI’s current admissions 
policy will benefit only men, will continue to foster 
negative stereotypes, and denies women the complete 
remedy that admission to VMI would provide. 


u C. Jencks & D. Riesman, The Academic Revolution 297-298 
(1968). 


22 


1. Allowing qualified women to attend VMI is 
the only way to assure them equal access to 
VMI’s unique attributes 


Women who have been barred from VMI have been 
denied the opportunity to experience its distinctive 
educational method, and have been foreclosed from the 
career possibilities and other “intangible” life-long 
benefits associated with attending and graduating 
from VMI. Both courts below recognized that fact. 
See Pet. App. 152a (court of appeals) (Virginia fails to 
offer women “the unique benefit of VMI’s type of 
education and training”); id. at 192a (district court) 
(“women have no opportunity anywhere to gain the 
benefits of [VMI’s] education”); see also id. at 218a. 
The only remedy that can provide women the equal 
opportunity they have been denied is admission to 
VMI. The leadership program at Mary Baldwin, 
which would be “equivalent to a [curricular] minor,” 
Gov’t Exh. 52, at 1 (L. 248), does not come close to 
matching the comprehensive VMI program from 
which women have been excluded. Given VMI’s dis- 
tinctive benefits, a separate program, however de- 
signed, could not possibly provide an adequate 
remedy. 

As the district court found, a new program at a 
separate, all-female institution also cannot “supply 
those intangible qualities of history, reputation, 
tradition, and prestige that VMI has amassed over the 
years.” Pet. App. 60a-6la. VMI’s own expert com- 
pared VMI and its traditions to “English cathedrals,” 
that were “built over a period of 150 years.” VMI I 
C.A. App. 1249. VMI’s students and graduates enjoy 
the benefits of association with an established and 
renowned institution with a distinctive reputation. 


23 


VMI has one of the oldest alumni organizations in 
the country, and its alumni network is “exceptionally 
close to the school.” Pet. App. 1922. “Those who 
survive the [VMI] experience are forever set apart in 
their own minds and those of their colleagues as a 
special breed. * * * It is clearly an advantage to 
* * * be part of such a network.” VMI I C. A. App. 
1750 (L. 218). The alumni network is “enormously 
influential,” VMI II Tr. 1227, especially in the 
historically male-dominated fields of engineering, the 
military, business, and public service in which VMI 
graduates tend to pursue careers, id. at 1228. See 
also VMI II, Pet. App. 50a-51a (Phillips, J., dissent- 
ing). Respondents have consistently asserted that 
VMI alumni disproportionately serve in military 
leadership positions, see R. 152, at 12 (J 62), and 
disproportionately achieve influential and lucrative 
positions in public and private life, id. at 17 (J 87); see 
also VMI II Tr. 1228-1231. In Sweatt v. Painter, 339 
U.S. 629 (1950), this Court deemed such intangible 
qualities to be “more important” than tangible re- 
sources when comparing the quality of separate 
educational institutions. Id. at 634. In so holding, the 
Court emphasized “those qualities which are in- 
capable of objective measurement but which make for 
greatness ina * * * school.” Jbid. Such qualities 
included “reputation of the faculty, experience of the 
administration, position and influence of the alumni, 
standing in the community, traditions and prestige.” 
Ibid. A new and separate program for women cannot 
possibly match VMI in those enormously important 
respects. 


24 


2. Allowing qualified women to attend VMI is 
the only way to cure the state-sponsored sex 


stereotyping and stigma resulting from 
VMI’s exclusionary policy 


VMI stands as an official monument to the discred- 
ited view that women are categorically different from, 
and in many respects inferior to, men. VMI’s men- 
only admissions policy is a relic of an era when 
women were generally considered unfit for higher 
education of any type, and especially unfit for 
leadership or military service. VMI celebrates the 
fact that its male tradition harks back to that “time 
when society expected men to achieve adult status 
through experiences that differed from those consid- 
ered appropriate for women.” VMI I C. A. App. 1752 
(L. 220). The continued exclusion of women from 
VMI thus imparts the impermissible message that, as 
a matter of official policy, Virginia continues to be- 
lieve that women are not suited for rigorous military 
training, or for military service or other leadership 
positions that require such training. In that respect, 
women’s continued exclusion from VMI is “practi- 


2 VMI’s men-only admissions policy was adopted when it 
opened in 1839, and the school’s current mission “was estab- 
lished early in the life of the institution.“ Pet. App. 214a. 
Women at that time were “academically disenfranchised.” 
Hogan, 458 U.S. at 727 n.13. In the early 19th century, there 
was “great resistance towards the idea of providing higher 
education for women, because it was believed that they were 
mentally and physically inferior to men and therefore unable to 
attend class on a regular basis.” United States Commission on 
Civil Rights, More Hurdles to Clear (1980) (Clearinghouse 
Publication No. 63), reprinted in Yellow Springs Exempted 
Village School Dist. Bd. of Educ. v. Ohio High School Athletic 
Ass'n, 647 F.2d 651, 670 (6th Cir. 1981). 


25 


cally a brand upon them, affixed by law, an assertion 
of their inferiority” that “denigrates the dignity” of 
the excluded women, and “reinvokes a history of 
exclusion.” J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel T. B., 114 S. Ct. 
1419, 1428 (1994) (quoting Strauder v. West Virginia, 
100 U.S. 308, 308 (1880); see also Roberts v. United 
States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 625 (1984) (referring to 
“stigmatizing injury” caused by private club’s 
exclusion of women). 

VMI’s admissions policy conveys the message that, 
while men can surmount their limitations and exceed 
their expectations, for women, biology truly is des- 
tiny.“ When government thus inflexibly prejudges 
individuals’ capabilities based on their sex, it an- 
nounces that, in the eyes of the State, men and women 
are not truly equal. The only remedy that can coun- 
teract that message is to consider women eligible for 
admission to VMI. 


B. Respondents Failed To Show That It Would Be 
Impossible To Admit Women To VMI 


Respondents argued below that, “[iJf women were 
admitted to VMI, the whole program would col- 


8 The district court found that VMI had substantial trans- 
formative potential: “VMI takes students that are average 
from an academic perspective and, through the character de- 
velopment program, graduates people who have more than 
average commitment and motivation as well as character.” 
Pet. App. 206a. VMI accepts all qualified Virginia applicants. 
Gov't Exh. 75, at 32 (L. 148). The minimum combined SAT 
score for admission to VMI is 700, VM/ I C. A. App. 425, and 
the average score of men admitted to VMI is 1053, id. at 1789 
(L. 234). Matriculants must meet the national ROTC fitness 
standard, but they are not required to be particularly athletic. 
Yet even women with superior academic and athletic ability 


are barred from competing alongside men at VMI. 


lapse.“ In response, the court of appeals “did not 
direct the Commonwealth of Virginia to change VMI 
to a coeducational college,” Pet. App. 7a, because 
women’s admission to VMI might create a “Catch 22,” 
whereby “the change caused by [women’s] admission 
would destroy the opportunity,” ibid. (quoting VMI I, 
id. at 148a). 

Because of the strong presumption that admission 
of women to VMI is the correct remedy in this case, 
respondents face the heaviest burden of justification 
in not adopting that remedy. A desire to maintain the 
benefits of VMI in their current form exclusively for 
men clearly is not such a rationale: 


Since any gender-based classification provides one 
class a benefit or choice not available to the other 
class, * * * that argument begs the question. 
The issue is not whether the benefitted class 
profits from the classification, but whether the 
State’s decision to confer a benefit only upon one 
class by means of a discriminatory classification 
is substantially related to achieving a legitimate 
and substantial goal. 


Hogan, 458 U.S. at 731 n. 17.“ Nor is the tautology 
that women, if admitted, could not partake of the 


* R. 152, at 48 ( 270). 

The preservation of advantages for a favored class of 
beneficiaries is obviously not a valid reason for excluding oth- 
ers. See, e. g., Cooper v. Aaron, 358 U.S. 1, 13 (1958) (“adverse 
effect upon the educational program” is insufficient reason to 
delay school desegregation); Buchanan v. Warley, 245 U.S. 60, 
82 (1917) (assertion that “acquisitions [of houses] by colored 
persons [would] depreciate property owned in the neighbor- 
hood by white persons” cannot justify racial exclusion); City of 
Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 448 


27 


special ethos of a men-only institution. VMI’s 
mission of educating “citizen-soldiers” also plainly 
does not require that women continue to be excluded. 
See, e.g., Pet. App. 254a-255a (opinion of Motz, J., 
dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc). Indeed, 
respondents have repeatedly asserted that citizen- 
soldiers are successfully produced elsewhere in Vir- 
ginia, and would be at VWIL.” 


1. The admission of women would not 
“destroy” VMI 

The court of appeals discussed three areas in which 
the admission of women would require changes at 
VMI—“physical training, the absence of privacy, 
and the adversative approach.” Pet. App. 147a-148a. 
Respondents have not demonstrated that any of the 
changes that might be necessary in those areas jus- 
tifies continued exclusion of women from VMI. 

a. Privacy. If women were admitted to VMI, 
“{ajllowance for personal privacy would have to be 
made.” Pet. App. 17la. Respondents have not shown, 
however, that affording members of each sex privacy 
from members of the other sex for sleeping, and for 
those few minutes each day required for personal 
hygiene and changing clothes, would materiaily inter- 
fere with VMI's practice of providing cadets with a 
minimum of privacy. All cadets could continue to lack 
privacy vis-a-vis their own gender when sleeping, 


(1985) (AITme city may not avoid the strictures of [the Equal 
Protection Clause) by deferring to the wishes or objections of 
some fraction of the body politic” to support ordinance with 
exclusionary effect on disabled persons.). 

® See, e.g., R. 152, at 97 (J 536) (referring to “other state 
institutions that produce citizen-soldiers”). 


dressing and using the bathroom. And at all other 
times, individuals of both sexes could be subjected to 
close scrutiny by the entire group. Thus, if VMI so 
chose, men could continue (as at present) to lack 
privacy from other men, and women could lack privacy 
from other women. 

b. Physical training standards. The court of 
appeals relied on evidence regarding strength differ- 
ences between men and women to support its conclu- 
sion that admission of women would materially alter 
VMI. Pet. App. 147a-148a. It is conceded, however, 
that some—indeed many—women are able to meet 
VMI’s current physical standards.“ 

In addition, the various physical challenges that 
VMI provides are not ends in themselves. They are 
part of the means of “adversative” training, designed 
to “creat[e] training situations which are stressful 
enough to show [the students] that they are capable of 
doing tasks which surpass their previously self- 
imposed mental and physical limits.” VMI I C. A. App. 
1668 (L. 192). There are a number of well-known 
methods for dealing with variations of physical ability 
within a student or similar population. Certain tasks 
can be adjusted according to sex-neutral ability 


" The district court found that “some women are capable of 
all of the individual activities required of VMI cadets,” Pet. 
App. 170a, including all the rat line tasks, the current physical 
training drills, and the VMI physical fitness test. Id. at a- 
234a; see also id. at 234a (“15% of females in the applicant pool 
could successfully meet the requirements of the current VMI 

fitness test”); and see respondents’ witness’s testimony 
in VMI I C.A. App. 357-358 (regarding physical training and 
military drill, “we probably could have women come in here 
and many of them probably could do some of these things, or 
maybe all of them”). 


29 


groupings based on persons’ size, strength or exper- 
ience, or limited accommodations can be made in 
response to physical differences between women and 
men. VMI has completely failed to show that it 
cannot use one or more such methods when women 
are admitted, nor has it identified any interest that 
would justify its failure to make an accommodation. 

Indeed, VMI already makes accommodations for 
many of its male cadets. Those who participate in 
NCAA sports, including less strenuous sports such 
as golf, see VMI 1 C. A. App. 1658 (L. 182), are excused 
from “rat training” while practicing their sport. Pet. 
App. 195a. In addition, many current male VMI cadets 
fall short of VMI’s physical fitness standards. VMI 
cadets take a physical fitness test each semester, 
consisting of a set of calisthenics and a timed 1.5-mile 
run. L. 285-288. Almost 50% of new cadets fail the 
test and are offered remedial training. VMI I C. A. 
App. 564-565. Some male students graduate from VMI 
still unable to pass the fitness test. Ibid. Admitting 
women to VMI would not for the first time introduce 
physical disparities among cadets; they already exist. 

e. The adversative approach and “decency be- 
tween the sexes.” The court of appeals rejected the 
prospect of women participating with men in adversa- 
tive training because it would “destroy, at least for 
that period of the adversative training, any sense of 
decency that still permeates the relationship between 
the sexes.” Pet. App. 23a. “(G)rating egos and set- 
ting the aggressiveness of one person against another 
through conflict, egalitarianism, lack of privacy, and 
stress” is, the court believed, inappropriate in an 
environment in which both women and men are 
present. Ibid. 


30 


That view is an impermissible basis for decision in 
this case. The conclusion that it is unseemly for men 
to behave in a harsh and disciplinary way toward 
women, or for women to do so toward men, reflects 
a “romantic paternalism” that cannot constitute a 
legitimate—let alone an important—state interest.“ 
Women in the United States engage every day in ac- 
tivities that may require harsh “cross-gender con- 
frontation.” They arrest disobedient suspects, com- 
mand emergency medical teams, cross-examine recal- 
citrant male witnesses, discipline rowdy youths, and 
serve as drill sergeants in the armed forces. The idea 
that women cannot—or should not—engage with men 
in activities that require aggression and “grating 
egos” is just as unacceptable as a justification for a 
State barring women from a renowned leadership 
educational program as it would be for a state to 
prohibit their participation in any other educational 


program or profession. 


s The unconstitutional exclusion of women from jury 
service was similarly historically based on States’ asserted in- 
terests in protecting women from “ugliness and depravity” and 
experiences that would “prove humiliating, embarrassing and 
degrading to a lady,” or because “[rjeverence for all woman- 
hood would suffer in the public spectacle of women . . . so en- 
gaged.” J. Z. B., 114 S. Ct. at 1423; see also Goesaert v. Cleary, 
335 U.S. 464, 466 (1948) (upholding law prohibiting women 
from obtaining bartenders’ licenses except to work in bars 
owned by their husbands or fathers based on the “moral and so- 
cial problems” predicted if women independently tended bar); 
Bradwell v. Illinois, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 130, 141, 142 (1873) 
(Bradley, J., concurring in the judgment). 


31 


2. The example of the federal military service 
academies 


The experience of the federal military academies in 
admitting women also shows that citizen-soldiers can 
be trained in a coeducational environment without 
“destroying” the institution.” The district court 
acknowledged that “the introduction of women did not 
significantly change West Point,” Pet. App. 209a,” 
and that Injothing has changed at the [Naval] 
Academy [since the admission of women] except some 
physical training requirements and some facilities,” 
id. at 210a." At West Point, “women perform and 


On October 7, 1975, President Gerald Ford signed Public 
Law 94-106, § 803, 89 Stat. 537-538 (codified at 10 U.S.C. 4342 
note), requiring the Military, Naval, and Air Force Academies 
(located at West Point, Annapolis, and Colorado Springs) to 
admit women as cadets starting in 1976. The law provides 
that “the academic and other relevant standards required 
for appointment, admission, training, graduation, and com- 
missioning of female individuals shall be the same as those 
required for male individuals, except for those minimum 
essential adjustments in such standards required because 
of physiological differences between male and female 
individuals.” 10 U.S.C. 4342 note. Congress enacted a similar 
provision for integration of women into the Coast Guard 
Academy, see Public Law 94-572, § 1, 90 Stat. 2708 (codified at 
14 U.S.C. 182(a)), and regulatory authorization opened the way 
for women’s admission to the Merchant Marine Academy 
starting in 1974. 46 C. F. R. 310.53 (1974). 

See generally Pet. App. 208a-209a (quoting Gov’t Exh. 68). 

a A VMI committee that studied the feasibility of coed- 
ucation at VMI reported in 1986 that the Naval Academy’s 
coed plebe indoctrination system “imparts stress and pressure 
for the entire first year,” and women are totally integrated 
into the entering class except for the obstacle course and some 
of the physical aptitude exercises.” Pet. App. 210a 


32 


compete as well as men in cadet basic training, cadet 
field training, and cadet advanced training,” id. at 
209a, and at Annapolis Imlale and female midship- 
men do equally well,” id. at 210a.” In 1984, a woman 
graduated first in her class at Annapolis. Gov’t Exh. 
67, at 7 (L. 109). In 1989, a female cadet attained the 
position of First Captain of the Corps of Cadets, the 
highest ranking position a cadet can hold at West 
Point, commanding approximately 4200 cadets. VMI I 
C.A. App. 738-739; General Accounting Office, Report 
to Congressional Requesters, Military Academy: 
Gender and Racial Disparities 10 (1994). 

In sum, as the court of appeals’ own remand order in 
VMI I recognized, enjoining VMI from continuing to 
use a men-only admissions policy is a feasible remedy; 
it is the only remedy that satisfies the constitutional 
command of equal treatment of women. 


ll. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A WOMEN-ONLY 
LEADERSHIP TRAINING PROGRAM AT MARY 
BALDWIN COLLEGE DOES NOT REMEDY THE 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL EXCLUSION OF WOMEN 
FROM VMI BECAUSE THE SEPARATE, 
DIFFERENT VMI AND VWIL PROGRAMS 
THEMSELVES VIOLATE EQUAL PROTECTION 


As we have shown above, the court of appeals erred 
in assuming in its original remand order that sepa- 
rate “parallel programs” might be an appropriate 
remedy for the constitutional violation in this case. 
Pet. App. 156a. The court further erred in finding 


2 The Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs was not in- 
cluded in the 1986 VMI study regarding the predicted effects 
if VMI were to admit women, and was not addressed in the dis- 
trict court’s findings. The Air Force Academy’s student body 
is now approximately 15% women. 


33 


VWIL’s program an adequate “parallel” to VMI under 
the Equal Protection Clause. There are substantial, 
undisputed differences between VMI and VWIL that 
render VWIL unable to provide to women what they 
are denied at VMI. Nor are those differences the 
product of happenstance; they are deliberate and are 
unconstitutionally premised on explicit and archa- 
ic sex-based stereotypes and generalizations about 
the sociological and psychological characteristics of 
women and men. Especially in view of the role of 
education in shaping individual skills and aspirations, 
reliance on stereotypes to exclude women from VMI 
unconstitutionally “reflect[s] and reinforce[s] pat- 
terns of historical discrimination.” J. E. B., 114 S. Ct. 
at 1428. 


A. Classifications That Deny Opportunities To 
Individuals Based On Their Sex Should Be 
Subjected To Strict Judicial Scrutiny 


We demonstrate herein that respondents have failed 
to offer the “exceedingly persuasive justification” 
necessary to justify their proposed remedy under 
intermediate judicial scrutiny. See Hogan, 458 U.S. 
at 724. But we believe that strict scrutiny is, in fact, 
the correct constitutional standard for evaluating 
differences in official treatment based on sex, and that 
the complete exclusion of women from VMI’s unique 
and valued public educational program should be 
reviewed under that standard. VMI should be per- 
mitted to maintain its men-only admissions policy 
only if that policy is narrowly tailored to serve a 
“compelling” state interest. See City of Clehurne v. 
Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 482, 440 


ad 


(1985); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 682 
(1973) (plurality opinion).” 

This Court has recognized—and this case illus- 
trates—that sex “generally provides no sensible 
ground for differential treatment.” Cleburne, 473 
U.S. at 440. Although the phenomena of sex and race 
discrimination differ from each other in some impor- 
tant respects, sex, like race, is an immutable and 
highly visible characteristic that “frequently bears 
no relation to ability to perform or contribute to 
society.“ Frontiero, 411 U.S. at 686 (plurality 
opinion). Governmental decision-making based on 
stereotypical views and “gross generalizations” about 
women and men nevertheless persists. J. E. B., 114 
U.S. at 1427. The fact that a person’s sex is readily 
observed yet rarely relevant makes it both a common 


3 Regardless of the level of judicial scrutiny, federal execu- 
tive and congressional policies and programs having to do with 
the conduct and control of military affairs should continue to 
receive the judicial deference they have traditionally been 
accorded. See, e.g., Weiss v. United States, 114 S. Ct. 752, 760 
(1994) (AChourts must give particular deference to the deter- 
mination{s] of Congress, made under its authority to regulate 
the land and naval forces.”) (internal quotation marks omit- 
ted); Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503, 507 (1986) (“Our 
review of military regulations * * * is far more deferential 
than constitutional review of similar laws or regulations 
designed for civilian society.”); Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 
57, 64-65 (1981) (“[PJerhaps in no other area [than Congress’s 
authority over military affairs) has the Court accorded Con- 
gress greater deference.”); Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 756, 
758 (1974) (“Congress is permitted to legislate both with great - 
er breadth and with greater flexibility” when the statute gov- 
erns military society); Orloff v. Wilioughby, 345 U.S. 88, 94 
(1953). VMI is not part of the United States military, and its 
interests are not entitled to any special deference. 


35 


and presumptively impermissible basis for official 
decision. Special judicial vigilance is required to pre- 
vent sex from serving as a convenient, but harmful 
and constraining, proxy for actual abilities and needs. 

Members of the Court have also noted the many 
parallels between women’s and racial minorities’ 
experience of official discrimination. When four 
Justices in Frontiero maintained that classifications 
based on sex, like those based on race, national origin, 
or alienage,“ were “inherently suspect,” they par- 
ticularly noted this country’s “long and unfortunate 
history of sex discrimination,” including the histor- 
ical similarities in the treatment of women and 
blacks. 411 U.S. at 684-685. In J. E. B., that history 
continued to inform the level of scrutiny through 
which the Court reviews sex-based differences in 
treatment. 114 S. Ct. at 1425. Respondents here seek 
to perpetuate a sex-based exclusion that dates from a 
time when women could neither vote nor “hold office, 
serve on juries, or bring suit in their own names, and 
married women traditionally were denied the legal 
capacity to hold or convey property or to serve as 
legal guardians of their own children.” Ibid. (quoting 
Frontiero, 411 U.S. at 685). This case is a par- 
ticularly vivid illustration of the ways in which the 
hand of the past can continue to control current 
attitudes and opportunities for women. 

Despite the fact that women are a numerical 
majority in the United States, women remain vastly 


™ Alienage and national origin classifications are suspect, 
although, like sex classifications, they do not share all of the 
characteristics of racial classifications. See, e.g., Graham v. 
Richardson, 403 U.S. 365, 370-375 (1971); Sugarman v. 
Dougall, 413 U.S. 634, 641-643 (1973). 


36 


politically underrepresented in state and federal 
government. That relative political powerlessness 
also demonstrates the need for searching judicial 
analysis when government treats men and women 
differently. Frontiero, 411 U.S. at 684-686 & n.17. 

Over the past two decades, decisions by this Court 
striking down a variety of policies and practices that 
discriminate on the basis of sex have evidenced “a 
strong presumption that gender classifications are 
invalid.“ J. E. B., 114 S. Ct. at 1433 (Kennedy, J., 
concurring in the judgment). To remove any remain- 
ing ambiguity about the general illegitimacy of 
classifications that deny valuable benefits to indi- 
viduals based solely on their sex, this Court should 
now hold that such classifications are inherently 
suspect and subject to strict judicial scrutiny.” This 
Court, however, has not previously applied that level 
of scrutiny to sex-based classifications. See, e.g., id. 
at 1425 n.6 (finding it “once again” unnecessary to 
decide whether sex-based classifications are “inher- 
ently suspect”); Hogan, 458 U.S. at 724 n.9. We 
therefore argued in the courts below, and we show in 
the balance of this brief, that VMI’s policy of 
excluding women cannot stand under the “inter- 
mediate” scrutiny applied by this Court in its prior 
cases. Reversal would, of course, also be compelled 
under a strict scrutiny standard. 


* Strict scrutiny of such classifications based on sex will not 
necessarily be “fatal in fact.” For example, where discrimina- 
tion persists, “government is not disqualified from acting in 

to it.“ Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 115 S. 
Ct. 2097, 2117 (1995). The compelling interest in respecting in- 
dividuals’ privacy would clearly justify separate arrangements 
for men and women while sleeping and while using bathroom 
and shower facilities. 


37 


B. The VWIL Remedy Plainly Violates Equal 
Protection Under Intermediate Scrutiny 


1. VWIL is materialiy different from VMI 
in ways that impermissibly reflect and 
reinforce archaic stereotypes about women 
and men 

Both courts below acknowledged that the proposed 
VWIL, in the words of the district court, “differs 
substantially from the VMI program.” Pet. App. 55a. 
Stark differences exist in the curricula and educa- 
tional techniques used at the two institutions. See 
id. at 7a-12a, 18a n.“, 24a-28a, 67a-68a; see pages 2-5, 8- 
11, supra. And as the district court tellingly found, 
“even if all else were equal between VMI and [VWIL], 
the VWIL program cannot supply those intangible 
qualities of history, reputation, tradition and prestige 
that VMI has amassed over the years.” Pet. App. 60a 
(footnote omitted); see pages 22-23, supra. 

Despite those differences, the district court ap- 
proved the creation of a separate VWIL as a remedy 
by relying on the generalization that women are more 
psychologically and sociologically suited than men 
to a confidence-building, public-service-oriented pro- 
gram, while VMI’s rigorous military-style training is 
more suitable for men. The court, for example, ex- 
pressly embraced the view that women are less confi- 
dent and aggressive than men. Pet. App. 64a, 73a. 

The district court’s stereotypical sex-based gen- 
eralizations reflect the justifications presented by 
respondents at trial. Responclents’ witnesses’ testi- 
mony, including the testimony of their experts, 
frequently employed impermissible stereotyping. 
One of respondents’ experts, for example, declared 
that “aggressiveness [and] the fear of failureſ] are not 


38 


incentives that propel women to want to succeed and 
to achieve success” to “the same extent as seen in 
males.” VMI I C. A. App. 1177. Another stated that 
women are “not capable of the ferocity requisite to 
make the program work, and they are also not capable 
of enduring without * * * psychological trauma if 
they went through the rat program.” Id. at 202. A 
third proclaimed that “women basically have not the 
same threshold on emotion as men do. * * * [T]hey 
break down emotionally.” Id. at 1057-1058. [ln the 
rat line with a bunch of upperclassmen all over her, [a 
woman would] break[] down crying.” Id. at 1058. An 
expert also insisted that even- * * those women 
who * * * are more macho than thou would not make 
up a cohort who would be able to deal with rats in the 
invariant way that VMI now deals with rats.“ Id. at 
192. 

VMI’s expert on higher education concluded that 
VMI’s focus on “absolute equality” would be inappro- 
priate for women because women “respond more 
naturally to an ethic of care,” premised on the notion 
that “no one should be hurt,” rather than an egal- 
itarian “ethic of justice.” VMI I C. A. App. 1754 (L. 
222) (emphasis omitted). The same expert found the 
“doubting” aspect of the adversative model inappro- 
priate for women, because, for women, “confirmation” 
is “a prerequisite rather than a consequence of 
development.” Id. at 1755 (L. 223). And VMI would 
be inappropriate for women, he concluded, because 
women develop through “a relationship of connection” 
and “a sense of community” rather than through self- 
discipline and self-reliance. Ibid. VMI's experts also 
relied on “the different vulnerabilities of men and 
women,” VMI II C.A. App. 684, to conclude that the 
strain imposed by men on the rat line would be 


39 


matched at VWIL by exposure to “fields in which 
women at the present so often flounder. Spatial 
things, geometric things, topology, math and physics, 
and leadership itself.” Id. at 684-685. 

Another of VMI's expert witnesses analogized 
women who would be attracted to VMI and women 
who would be attracted to VWIL to two types of 
women in the late 19th century: Women who would 
prefer VMI were like those earlier women with 
“high-roller ambition” who aspired to become 
lawyers, VMI II C.A. App. 578-579—aspirations the 
expert deemed “as much fancy as * * * reality,” id. 
at 579. The women who would prefer VWIL were 
more like realistic 19th-century women who “became 
nurses, teachers, librarians because those were the 
professions they could enter.” /bid. Another expert 
stated that even women who are confident and out- 
going, as opposed to “overdisciplined, oversubdued, 
and self-mistrustful,” could benefit from VWIL, 
because they would be “reminded that their leader- 
ship styles, while impressive, have also the hazard of 
being oppressive.” Id. at 681-682. Those women would 
“profit” from VWIL “by discovering limitations to 
their strenuousness.” /bid. 

One of respondents’ experts concluded that admis- 
sion of women would impair (he VMI system because 
of “the dating” and young women’s “aspirations” to 

that are “still in the south very common.” 
VMIIC. A. App. 196-197. [Wiomen in such a setting 
are almost inevitably cheerleaders. Girls don’t follow 
sports the same way boys do.” Id. at 221-222.“ Admis- 


The same expert commented lone reason | suspect (girls) 
don’t do as well on verbal tests, they don’t read as many sports 
stories as boys do.” VMI II Tr. 546. 


40 
sion of women to VMI would not work, in part 
because, “in Virginia, there are still men who divide 
the women into two classes, the good girls and the bad 
girls.” Jd. at 197. Women could not be “rats” because 
they can’t shed their gender. They can’t shed their 
physical attributes.” Id. at 193. 

This Court’s decisions preclude basing different 
treatment of men and women on such stereotypi- 
cal characterizations of the sexes. Hogan clearly 
instructs that ſelare must be taken in ascertaining 
whether the [government’s! objective itself reflects 
archaic and stereotypic notions.” 458 U.S. at 725. 
The Court there invalidated a single-sex admissions 
policy in part because the policy tendled] to per- 
petuate the stereotyped view of nursing as an 
exclusively woman’s job,” and “ma[de] the assumption 
that nursing is a field for women a self-fulfilling 
prophecy.” Id. at 729, 730. Excluding women from 
VMI, and providing them with an all-female alter- 
native that is not a rigorous military school, perpetu- 
ates exactly the same kind of impermissible asso- 
ciation of each sex with particular professions—here 
the premise that men, and not women, are fit to be 
strong leaders in the military and other fields that 
require leaders to cope with adversity.” 


“The particular stereotypes upon which the court below 
relied are distressingly similar to Justice Bradley’s discredited 
conclusion in Bradwell, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) at 141 (Bradley, J., 
concurring in the judgment), that women’s “natural and prop- 
er timidity and delicacy” supported the exclusion of women 
from the practice of law. See generally Orr, 440 U.S. at 283 
(statute requiring payment of alimony to women but not to 
men carried “the baggage of sexual stereotypes”); Califano v. 
Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 217 & n.18 (1977) (plurality opinion) 
(statutory distinction between widows’ and widowers’ social 


41 


Even where stereotypes may in part reflect current 
realities, the Court has condemned them, both be- 
cause present practices may themselves result from 
historical sex-based bias, and because the law must 
not operate to restrict men and women te socially 
assigned roles. J. E. B., 114 S. Ct. at 1428 (law must 
not “reflect and reinforce patterns of historical dis- 
crimination”). The lower court’s finding that, for 
example, women are less aggressive than men may 
reflect the effects of traditional sex-based limitations 
on social roles that have often discouraged aggres- 
sive behavior in women while encouraging it in men. 


security survivors’ benefits was based on “archaic and over- 
broad” generalizations); Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 198-199 
(1976) (distinction between ages at which males and females can 
purchase 3.2% beer reflected “outdated misconceptions”); 
Stanton v. Stanton, 421 U.S. 7, 15 (1975) (statute setting dif- 


society has long imposed”); see also Bray v. Alexandria 
Women's Health Clinic, 113 S. Ct. 753, 759 (1998) (describing as 
“objectively invidious” under 42 U.S.C. 1985(3) the purpose of 
“‘saving’ women because they are women from a combative, 


42 


Barring women from VMI’s adversative training 
makes women’s presumed unfitness for it, and for the 
leadership opportunities it creates, as much a “self- 
fulfilling prophecy” as the presumption about natural 
sex roles rejected in Hogan. 458 U.S. at 730. 

2. Generalizations about women and men 
cannot support sex-based classifications, 
such as VMI’s admissions policy, that 
foreclose individual opportunity 

The Mary Baldwin College Task Force developed a 
significantly different program for VWIL because it 
concluded that “aspects of VMI’s military model, 
especially the adversative method, would not be 
effective for women as a group.” Pet. App. 8a 
(emphasis added). But the Task Force, and the court 
chat approved VWIL as a remedy, did not purport to 
find—nor could they possibly have found—that all 
women are less aggressive or less confident than all 
men, or that VMI’s program was educationally in- 
appropriate for all women. Indeed, they candidly 
acknowledged that VMI’s adversative methodology is 
not “inherently unsuitable to women,” id. at 155a, and 
that some women would indeed be qualified for, would 
prefer, and would benefit from that methodology, id. 
at 76a, 155a; see id. at 74a, 223a, 234a. The court 
nonetheless approved the VWIL program on the 
premise that average psychological and sociological 
differences between the sexes can justify denying all 
women admission to an educational program that 
some fully qualified women want to enter. 

The Equal Protection Clause condemns such a use 
of sex-based generalizations, both because they deny 
to women who do not conform to those 
opportunities afforded to all men (whether they fit 


43 


them or not), and because the most basic equal 
protection principles require that women and men be 
treated as individuals, not as members of groups that 
are conclusively presumed to have or to lack certain 
capacities or ambitions. Women whose choices or 
abilities are different from those of the “typical” or 
“average” woman cannot be denied an important edu- 
cational opportunity, and be relegated instead to a 
substantially different program that they do not want 
and that does not meet their needs, solely because 
most women would not be inconvenienced by that 
limitation.” 

Even where there are statistically significant 
differences between the behavior or attitudes of men 
and women, the Court has consistently invalidated 
legal restrictions or generalizations based on those 


® See, e. g., J. E. B., 114 S. Ct. at 1429; id. at 1432 (O’Connor, 
J., concurring); id. at 1433-1434 (Kennedy, J., concurring in 
the judgment); Jaycees, 468 U.S. at 625 (“overbrozd assump- 
tions about the relative needs and capacities of the sexes force[) 
individuals to labor under stereotypical notions that often bear 
no relationship to their actual abilities”); Hogan, 458 U.S. at 
726 (rejecting “outdated assumption that gender could be used 
as a ‘proxy for other, more germane bases of classification’” ) 
(quoting Craig, 429 U.S. at 198); Wengler v. Druggists Mut. 
Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142, 151 (1980); Orr, 440 U.S. at 280-281, 283; 
Goldfarb, 430 U.S. at 204-207 (plurality opinion); id. at 219-220 
(Stevens, J., concurring in the judgment); Stanton, 421 U.S. at 
14-15; Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 645 (1975); 
Frontiero, 411 U.S. at 686-687 (plurality opinion); Reed v. Reed, 
404 US. 71, 76-77 (1971); but see Bradwell, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) at 


44 


differences. Although some “truth may be contained 
in some stereotypes,” this Court has “made abun- 
dantly clear in past cases that gender classifications 
that rest on impermissible stereotypes violate the 
Equal Protection Clause, even when some statistical 
support can be conjured up for the generalization.” 
J.E.B., 114 S. Ct. at 1427 n.11 (citing Weinberger v. 
Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 645 (1975)).” Sex may as a 
factual matter correlate with certain attitudes, but 
the Equal Protection Clause deems sex, like race, 
“irrelevant as a matter of constitutional law” to the 
government’s assessment of an individual’s predis- 
positions. 114 S. Ct. at 1432 (O'Connor, J., concur- 
ring). The constitutional determination that sex does 
not determine attitude or personality is “a statement 
about what this Nation stands for,” even where it may 
not be “a statement of fact.” bid. 


® See also Craig, 429 U.S. at 200-201 (invalidating sex-based 
differential ages for beer purchase despite statistics showing 
that young men in the relevant age group presented greater 
safety risks as a result of drunk driving than did young 
women); Weinberger, 420 U.S. at 645 (invalidating sex-based 
social security survivors’ benefits despite “empirical support” 
that men are more likely than women to be primary bread- 
winners); Frontiero, 411 U.S. at 688-689 (plurality opinion) 
(invalidating presumption of wives’ but not husbands’ depen- 
dency for purposes of benefits determinations despite “empir- 
ical” fact that “wives in our society frequently are dependent 
upon their husbands, while husbands rarely are dependent 
upon their wives”). 


45 


3. Respondents have not demonstrated an 
interest in single-sex education, and such 
an interest would not, in any event, 
justify excluding women from VMI 

The court of appeals mischaracterized the issue in 
this case as “whether a state may sponsor single- 
gender education without violating the Equal Protec- 
tion Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.” Pet. 
App. 4a. That is not the issue.” Assuming that a 
State may be able, consistent with equal protec- 
tion principles, to establish single-sex educational 
programs in appropriate circumstances,” Virginia 
nevertheless cannot continue to reserve VMI only for 
men. 

The exclusion of one sex from a college program 
reserved for the other involves sex-based classi- 


* Moreover, th, result we urge in this case would not affect 
the constitutionalit, of private single-sex colleges, even when 
they receive public funds or tax exemptions. The provision of 
public funding, even when accompanied by extensive govern- 
ment regulation, does not convert privately controlled insti- 
tutions into government actors subject to constitutional restric- 
tion, or render the government constitutionally responsible for 
a private entity's policies. Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991 
(1982); Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982). 


® Contrary to the assumption of the court of appeals, single- 
sex education is not self-justifying. See Pet. App. 253a (Motz, 
J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc). The exclusion 
of one sex from a program reserved for the other, however, 
can be a means to achieve an important (or compelling) govern- 
mental goal, such as eradication of the effects of discrimination 
in the existing educational system. For example, public single- 
sex education may be permissible based on a “compensatory 
purpose” if it were shown that “members of the gender bene- 
fited by the classification actually suffer a disadvantage related 
to the classification.” Hogan, 458 U.S. at 728. 


46 


fications. Such classifications must be constitu- 
tionally justified. Hogan requires an “exceedingly 
persuasive justification” for them when they result in 
the sex-based denial of access to an educational 
program solely on the basis of sex. 458 U.S. at 724. 
The relevant inequality caused by respondents’ ex- 
clusion of women from VMI in this case lies in the 
fact that it reserves the benefits of VMI’s program, 
prestige and powerful alumni network exclusively to 
men. It is undisputed that no school in Virginia— 
including VWIL—offers to women the same or even a 
closely similar program, with its associated prestige 
and alumni support. In light of the dramatic differ- 
ences between the two programs, respondents must 
establish an important governmental interest in 
offering VMI’s benefits to men, but not women, and 
they must also prove that the exclusion af, women 
from VMI is needed to serve that interest.“ 
Respondents’ invocation of a generalized interest in 
single-sex education cannot justify single-sex pro- 
grams that are vastly different in content and in the 
value of the degrees they offer. Moreover, establish- 
ing a justification for offering a single-sex education- 
al opportunity on the ground that-some students may 
learn better in such an environment does not support 
confining all students seeking a military-style leader- 
ship education to such programs. And respondents 
have failed in this case to demonstrate that they do, 


In Hogan, the material benefit that plaintiff was denied 
(given his access to other, equal nursing schools in the State) 
was Mississippi University for Women’s proximity to his 
home. Yet the Court held that he should be admitted to MUW. 
Women denied admission to VMI suffer a significantly greater 
deprivation. 


47 


in fact, have a genuine interest in providing single- 
sex education to college students in Virginia. Re- 
spondents asserted such an interest at the liability 
phase, but that contention was obviously pretextual: 
Respondents could not explain why, if they sought to 
provide Virginians with the option of single-sex 
education, such an option was provided to men but not 
to women. Pet. App. 15la-152a. Virginia also had no 
law or official policy statement supporting single-sex 
education. Id. at 153a. The Commonwealth’s general 
abandonment of all other single-sex education years 
ago, including the conversion to coeducation of each of 
its four previously all-female public colleges, further 
demonstrated the absence of any genuine and im- 
portant, sex-nevtral state interest in single-sex 
education. Id. at 154a.™ 

The court of appeals upheld respondents’ remedial 
choice because it did not correctly apply Hogan. 
Through the use of its “special intermediate scru- 
tiny” test, it did not meaningfully question—as it 
was required to—whether the separation of men and 
women into substantially different programs at VMI 
and VWIL was needed in order to serve an important 
state purpose, or whether that separation was, 
instead, impermissibly premised on overbroad and 
archaic generalizations. That court’s legal analysis 


* See Weinberger, 420 U.S. at 648 n.16 (court “need not in 
equal protection cases accept at face value assertions of legis- 
lative purposes, when an examination of the legislative scheme 
and its history demonstrates that the asserted purpose could 
not have been a goal of the legislation”); see also Hogan, 458 
U.S. at 730; Califano v. Westcott, 443 U.S. 76, 86-88 (1979); 
Goldfarb, 430 U.S. at 212-213 (plurality opinion). 


48 49 


was wholly inconsistent with this Court’s consti- CONCLUSION 

tutional sex discrimination cases.“ The judgment of the court of appeals should be 
The court of appeal’s deferential approach to reversed. 

respondents’ asserted interests was especially in- Respectfully submitted 


appropriate here in view of the remedial posture of 
this case. Respondents viotated the Constitution. 


VMI's exclusionary policy, dating from 1839, was Drew S. Days, III 
indisputably based from its inception on archaic Solicitor General 
assumptions about men’s fitness and women’s inca- DEVAL L. PATRICK 
pacity for military-style leadership training. Respon- Assistant Attorney General 
dents failed at the liability stage of this case to PAUL BENDER 

provide any constitutional justification whatever for Pr „ e 
having elected to continue to maintain that anach- — — 
ronistie and harmful poliey through the late 20th — * 
century.” They bear a heavy burden to prove that Jessica DUNSAY SILVER 
they have erased all effects of that discrimination, THOMAS E. CHANDLER 
that any prospective interest they now assert in Attorneys 

single-sex education is, at the very least, important 

and genuine, and that exclusion of women from VMI NOVEMBER 1995 

is necessary to achieve that interest. They have not 

satisfied that burden. 


The court of appeals’ “special intermediate scrutiny” test 
reduces to a requirement that separate single-sex programs be 
sufficiently “comparable” so that the benefits provided to one 
gender do not “tend[], by comparison to the benefits provided 
to the other, to lessen the dignity, respect, or social regard of 
the other gender.” Pet. App. 17a. That anaiysis is reminiscent 
of Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 549-550 (1896), which 
approved racial segregation so long as it was “reasonable,” and 
“not for the annoyance or oppression or a particular class.” 

Although single-sex education may not- necessarily send a 
stigmatizing message that renders it “inherently unequal,” cf. 
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, 495 (1954), the 
exclusion of women from VMI does send a powerful, harmful 


message. See pages 24-25, supra. 


