SOURCE: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/94-1941.ZC.html

 

 United States v. Virginia et al., 518 U.S. 515 (1996). 

 LII 

 Supreme Court 

 United States v. Virginia et al. (94-1941), 518 U.S. 515 (1996). 

 Dissent 
 [ Scalia ] Opinion 
 [ Ginsburg ] Concurrence 
 [ Rehnquist ] Syllabus 

 HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version HTML version 
 WordPerfect version 

Nos. 94-1941 and 94-2107

 UNITED STATES, PETITIONER 94-1941 v. VIRGINIA
 et al. VIRGINIA, et al., PETITIONERS 94-2107 

on writs of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
 the fourth circuit

[ June 26, 1996 ]

 Chief Justice Rehnquist
 , concurring in judgment.

The Court holds first that Virginia violates the Equal Protection
 Clause by maintaining the Virginia Military Institute's (VMI's) all male
 admissions policy, and second that establishing the Virginia Women's Institute
 for Leadership (VWIL) program does not remedy that violation. While I agree
 with these conclusions, I disagree with the Court's analysis and so I write
 separately.

Two decades ago in Craig v. Boren , 429
 U.S. 190 , 197 (1976), we announced that "[t]o withstand constitutional
 challenge, . . . classifications by gender must serve important governmental
 objectives and must be substantially related to achievement of those objectives."
 We have adhered to that standard of scrutiny ever since. See Califano 
 v. Goldfarb , 430
 U.S. 199 , 210-211 (1977); Califano v. Webster , 430
 U.S. 313 , 316-317 (1977); Orr v. Orr , 440
 U.S. 268 , 279 (1979); Caban v. Mohammed, 441 
 U.S. 380 , 388 (1979); Davis v. Passman , 442
 U.S. 228 , 234-235, 235, n. 9 (1979); Personnel Administrator of
 Mass. v. Feeney , 442
 U.S. 256 , 273 (1979); Califano v. Westcott , 443
 U.S. 76 , 85 (1979); Wengler v. Druggists Mutual Ins. Co. ,
 446
 U.S. 142 , 150 (1980); Kirchberg v. Feenstra , 450
 U.S. 455 , 459-460 (1981); Michael M. v. Superior Court, Sonoma
 Cty. , 450
 U.S. 464 , 469 (1981); Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan ,
 458
 U.S. 718 , 724 (1982); Heckler v. Mathews , 465
 U.S. 728 , 744 (1984); J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T. B. ,
 511 U. S. ___, ___, n.6 (slip op., at 10, n.6) (1994). While the majority
 adheres to this test today, ante , at 6, 15, it also says that the
 State must demonstrate an " `exceedingly persuasive justification' " to
 support a gender based classification. See ante , at 6, 11, 12, 13,
 15, 16, 28, 29, 39. It is unfortunate that the Court thereby introduces
 an element of uncertainty respecting the appropriate test.

While terms like "important governmental objective" and "substantially
 related" are hardly models of precision, they have more content and specificity
 than does the phrase "exceedingly persuasive justification." That phrase
 is best confined, as it was first used, as an observation on the difficulty
 of meeting the applicable test, not as a formulation of the test itself.
 See, e.g. , Feeney , supra , at 273 ("[T]hese precedents
 dictate that any state law overtly or covertly designed to prefer males
 over females in public employment require an exceedingly persuasive justification").
 To avoid introducing potential confusion, I would have adhered more closely
 to our traditional, "firmly established," Hogan , supra , at
 723; Heckler , supra , at 744, standard that a gender based
 classification "must bear a close and substantial relationship to important
 governmental objectives." Feeney , supra , at 273.

Our cases dealing with gender discrimination also require that the proffered
 purpose for the challenged law be the actual purpose. See ante ,
 at 15, 18. It is on this ground that the Court rejects the first of two
 justifications Virginia offers for VMI's single sex admissions policy,
 namely, the goal of diversity among its public educational institutions.
 While I ultimately agree that the State has not carried the day with this
 justification, I disagree with the Court's method of analyzing the issue.

VMI was founded in 1839, and, as the Court notes, ante ,
 at 18-19, admission was limited to men because under the then prevailing
 view men, not women, were destined for higher education. However misguided
 this point of view may be by present day standards, it surely was not unconstitutional
 in 1839. The adoption of the Fourteenth
 Amendment , with its Equal Protection Clause, was nearly 30 years in
 the future. The interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause to require
 heightened scrutiny for gender discrimination was yet another century away.

Long after the adoption of the Fourteenth
 Amendment , and well into this century, legal distinctions between men
 and women were thought to raise no question under the Equal Protection
 Clause. The Court refers to our decision in Goesaert v. Cleary ,
 335
 U.S. 466 (1948). Likewise representing that now abandoned view was
 Hoyt v. Florida , 368
 U.S. 57 (1961), where the Court upheld a Florida system of jury selection
 in which men were automatically placed on jury lists, but women were placed
 there only if they expressed an affirmative desire to serve. The Court
 noted that despite advances in women's opportunities, the "woman is still
 regarded as the center of home and family life." Id ., at 62.

Then, in 1971, we decided Reed v. Reed , 404
 U.S. 71 , which the Court correctly refers to as a seminal case. But
 its facts have nothing to do with admissions to any sort of educational
 institution. An Idaho statute governing the administration of estates and
 probate preferred men to women if the other statutory qualifications were
 equal. The statute's purpose, according to the Idaho Supreme Court, was
 to avoid hearings to determine who was better qualified as between a man
 and a woman both applying for letters of administration. This Court held
 that such a rule violated the Fourteenth Amendment because "a mandatory
 preference to members of either sex over members of the other, merely to
 accomplish the elimination of hearings" was an "arbitrary legislative choice
 forbidden by the Equal Protection Clause." Id ., at 76. The brief
 opinion in Reed made no mention of either Goesaert or Hoyt .

Even at the time of our decision in Reed v. Reed ,
 therefore, Virginia and VMI were scarcely on notice that its holding would
 be extended across the constitutional board. They were entitled to believe
 that "one swallow doesn't make a summer" and await further developments.
 Those developments were 11 years in coming. In Mississippi Univ. for
 Women v. Hogan , 458
 U.S. 718 (1982), a case actually involving a single sex admissions
 policy in higher education, the Court held that the exclusion of men from
 a nursing program violated the Equal Protection Clause. This holding did
 place Virginia on notice that VMI's men only admissions policy was open
 to serious question.

The VMI Board of Visitors, in response, appointed a Mission Study Committee
 to examine "the legality and wisdom of VMI's single sex policy in light
 of" Hogan . 766 F. Supp. 1407, 1427 (WD Va. 1991). But the committee
 ended up cryptically recommending against changing VMI's status as a single
 sex college. After three years of study, the committee found "`no information'"
 that would warrant a change in VMI's status. Id ., at 1429. Even
 the District Court, ultimately sympathetic to VMI's position, found that
 "[t]he Report provided very little indication of how [its] conclusion was
 reached" and that "the one and one half pages in the committee's final
 report devoted to analyzing the information it obtained primarily focuses
 on anticipated difficulties in attracting females to VMI." Ibid .
 The reasons given in the report for not changing the policy were the changes
 that admission of women to VMI would require, and the likely effect of
 those changes on the institution. That VMI would have to change is simply
 not helpful in addressing the constitutionality of the status after Hogan .

Before this Court, Virginia has sought to justify VMI's single sex admissions
 policy primarily on the basis that diversity in education is desirable,
 and that while most of the public institutions of higher learning in the
 State are coeducational, there should also be room for single sex institutions.
 I agree with the Court that there is scant evidence in the record that
 this was the real reason that Virginia decided to maintain VMI as men only. [n.*] 
 But, unlike the majority, I would consider only evidence that postdates
 our decision in Hogan , and would draw no negative inferences from
 the State's actions before that time. I think that after Hogan ,
 the State was entitled to reconsider its policy with respect to VMI, and
 to not have earlier justifications, or lack thereof, held against it.

Even if diversity in educational opportunity were the State's
 actual objective, the State's position would still be problematic. The
 difficulty with its position is that the diversity benefited only one sex;
 there was single sex public education available for men at VMI, but no
 corresponding single sex public education available for women. When Hogan 
 placed Virginia on notice that VMI's admissions policy possibly was unconstitutional,
 VMI could have dealt with the problem by admitting women; but its governing
 body felt strongly that the admission of women would have seriously harmed
 the institution's educational approach. Was there something else the State
 could have done to avoid an equal protection violation? Since the State
 did nothing, we do not have to definitively answer that question.

I do not think, however, that the State's options were as limited as
 the majority may imply. The Court cites, without expressly approving it,
 a statement from the opinion of the dissenting judge in the Court of Appeals,
 to the effect that the State could have "simultaneously opened single gender
 undergraduate institutions having substantially comparable curricular and
 extra curricular programs, funding, physical plant, administration and
 support services, and faculty and library resources." Ante , at 11-12
 (internal quotation marks omitted). If this statement is thought to exclude
 other possibilities, it is too stringent a requirement. VMI had been in
 operation for over a century and a half, and had an established, successful
 and devoted group of alumni. No legislative wand could instantly call into
 existence a similar institution for women; and it would be a tremendous
 loss to scrap VMI's history and tradition. In the words of Grover Cleveland's
 second inaugural address, the State faced a condition, not a theory. And
 it was a condition that had been brought about, not through defiance of
 decisions construing gender bias under the Equal Protection Clause, but,
 until the decision in Hogan , a condition which had not appeared
 to offend the Constitution. Had Virginia made a genuine effort to devote
 comparable public resources to a facility for women, and followed through
 on such a plan, it might well have avoided an equal protection violation.
 I do not believe the State was faced with the stark choice of either admitting
 women to VMI, on the one hand, or abandoning VMI and starting from scratch
 for both men and women, on the other.

But, as I have noted, neither the governing board of VMI nor the State
 took any action after 1982. If diversity in the form of single sex, as
 well as coeducational, institutions of higher learning were to be available
 to Virginians, that diversity had to be available to women as well as to
 men.

The dissent criticizes me for "disregarding the four all women's
 private colleges in Virginia (generously assisted by public funds)." Post ,
 at 32. The private women's colleges are treated by the State exactly 
 as all other private schools are treated, which includes the provision
 of tuition assistance grants to Virginia residents. Virginia gives no special
 support to the women's single sex education. But obviously, the same is
 not true for men's education. Had the State provided the kind of support
 for the private women's schools that it provides for VMI, this may have
 been a very different case. For in so doing, the State would have demonstrated
 that its interest in providing a single sex education for men, was to some
 measure matched by an interest in providing the same opportunity for women.

Virginia offers a second justification for the single sex admissions
 policy: maintenance of the adversative method. I agree with the Court that
 this justification does not serve an important governmental objective.
 A State does not have substantial interest in the adversative methodology
 unless it is pedagogically beneficial. While considerable evidence shows
 that a single sex education is pedagogically beneficial for some students,
 see 766 F. Supp., at 1414, and hence a State may have a valid interest
 in promoting that methodology, there is no similar evidence in the record
 that an adversative method is pedagogically beneficial or is any more likely
 to produce character traits than other methodologies.

The Court defines the constitutional violation in this case as "the
 categorical exclusion of women from an extraordinary educational opportunity
 afforded to men." Ante , at 30. By defining the violation in this
 way, and by emphasizing that a remedy for a constitutional violation must
 place the victims of discrimination in " `the position they would have
 occupied in the absence of [discrimination],' " ibid ., the Court
 necessarily implies that the only adequate remedy would be the admission
 of women to the all male institution. As the foregoing discussion suggests,
 I would not define the violation in this way; it is not the "exclusion
 of women" that violates the Equal Protection Clause, but the maintenance
 of an all men school without providing any--much less a comparable--institution
 for women.

Accordingly, the remedy should not necessarily require either the admission
 of women to VMI, or the creation of a VMI clone for women. An adequate
 remedy in my opinion might be a demonstration by Virginia that its interest
 in educating men in a single sex environment is matched by its interest
 in educating women in a single sex institution. To demonstrate such, the
 State does not need to create two institutions with the same number of
 faculty PhD's, similar SAT scores, or comparable athletic fields. See ante ,
 at 34-35. Nor would it necessarily require that the women's institution
 offer the same curriculum as the men's; one could be strong in computer
 science, the other could be strong in liberal arts. It would be a sufficient
 remedy, I think, if the two institutions offered the same quality of education
 and were of the same overall calibre.

If a state decides to create single sex programs, the state would, I
 expect, consider the public's interest and demand in designing curricula.
 And rightfully so. But the state should avoid assuming demand based on
 stereotypes; it must not assume a priori , without evidence, that
 there would be no interest in a women's school of civil engineering, or
 in a men's school of nursing.

In the end, the women's institution Virginia proposes, VWIL, fails
 as a remedy, because it is distinctly inferior to the existing men's institution
 and will continue to be for the foreseeable future. VWIL simply is not,
 in any sense, the institution that VMI is. In particular, VWIL is a program
 appended to a private college, not a self standing institution; and VWIL
 is substantially underfunded as compared to VMI. I therefore ultimately
 agree with the Court that Virginia has not provided an adequate remedy.

Notes 
 * The
 dissent equates our conclusion that VMI's "asserted interest in promoting
 diversity" is not " `genuine,' " with a "charge" that the diversity rationale
 is "a pretext for discriminating against women." Post , at 15, 15-16.
 Of course, those are not the same thing. I do not read the Court as saying
 that the diversity rationale is a pretext for discrimination, and I would
 not endorse such a proposition. We may find that diversity was not the
 State's real reason without suggesting, or having to show, that the real
 reason was "antifeminism," post , at 16. Our cases simply require
 that the proffered purpose for the challenged gender classification be
 the actual purpose, although not necessarily recorded. See ante ,
 at 15, 18. The dissent also says that the interest in diversity is so transparent
 that having to articulate it is "absurd on its face." Post , at 29.
 Apparently, that rationale was not obvious to the Mission Study Committee
 which failed to list it among its reasons for maintaining VMI all men admission
 policy.

