) 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the Equal Protection Clause permits a State, as 
one alternative in a primarily coeducational system of high- 
er education, to afford its citizens the option of receiving 
the acknowledged benefits of single-sex education through 
methodologies designed by professional educators to ac- 
complish optimal and substantively comparable pedagogical 
results for both women and men. 


CONTENTS 

QUESTION PRESENTED. ...........0ceseccceescececeeseves i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ..........:s:sceseseseeeerereees iv 
RTT sc ccccccccscoscccseccccececonsevceseveceseses 1 
SEATED cccccoconsccccnsepcccseescocsececscenssensecscess 2 
A. Mary Baldwin College............scccccecsecseceseeeeees 2 
B. The Virginia Women's Institute For Leadership .... 3 

1. Development of the VWIL Program ........ 3 

2. Description of the VWIL Program .......... 7 
C. The District Court's Remedial Decision .............. 12 
D. The Court of Appeals’ Remedial Decision ........... 13 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ...........00ceccceeesesseees 15 
RETTIG oucvcsencesccsisicccscnnsoctepecsesscesensoiocsste 18 


I. THE SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS POLICIES 
AT VWIL AND VMI SUBSTANTIALLY 
ADVANCE LEGITIMATE AND IMPORT- 


Il. THE VWIL PROGRAM FULLY REMEDIES 
ANY CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATION 
THAT MAY HAVE EXISTED AS A RESULT 
OF VMI'S SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS 
POLICY, cccccccccccccccccccscccosovocscosocesoneocscosocs 23 


A. VWIL Offers Educational Benefits To 
Women That Are Comparable To 
Those Provided To Men By VMI............ 23 


B. The Differences Between VWIL And 
VMI Are Pedagogically Justified And 
Are Not Based On Archaic Stereotypes..... 28 


Ill. THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE DOES 
NOT MANDATE COEDUCATION AS THE 
ONLY PERMISSIBLE REMEDY IN THIS 


CAE cecececcdccsccccseséscotconcccossossosccososocece 42 
IV. STRICT SCRUTINY IS NOT APPLICABLE 
BS SEED CAT iccccocosccccscencccscococcccocosecesecooses 47 
A The Issue Of Strict Scrutiny Issue Is 
Not Properly Presented...............0c0s0s0+ 47 
B Strict Scrutiny Should Not Apply To 
Gender Classifications.............c.cseseeeees 48 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 
L15 S. Ct. 2097 (1995)......ceccececceeeeeeeeeeeeenes 41,49 
Arizona v. Rumsey, 467 U.S. 203 (1984)........s00000+ 49 
Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991 (1982) .........ceeeeeees 40 


Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313 (1977) .... 33,37,41,49 
City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 


488 U.S. 469 (1989)........ccccecceeeeerereceeeeeeeeees 49 
Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) ..........+++. 33,42,49 
Demarest v. Manspeaker, 498 U.S. 184 (1991) ........ 48 
Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973) ......... 42 
Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 

482 U.S. 656 (1987)........cccececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 18 
Heckler v. Mathews, 465 U.S. 728 (1984) ........ 41,43,49 


J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 
114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994)... ....cccccecccceeeeeeeeeeees 32,42 


Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547 
(1990), overruled in other part on other 
grounds, Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 
21S S. Ce. QOGT (1DDS)..cccvcccccescccccccccccccccceees 41 


Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma County, 
450 U.S. 464 (1981).......cccccceceeeeserereeeereeees 34,49 


Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974) .............+ 33 
Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 

GSB UB. TB (1ST eccccccccccccccccccccccccecccees passim 
Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U.S. 455 (1973) ............ 39 
Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (1979) .......ccccececeeseceeees 43 
Parham v. Hughes, 441 U.S. 347 (1979).............. 34,49 
Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982)........... 40 
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 

Be Dee GE Ge ieveccnesccccnccccccccoceccescoccecss 35 
Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981) ..... 32,34,41,49 
San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 

BD Delle © Gia icccscccscececcccssecncccsescocesccscoce 33 
Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975) . 32,34,41,49 
Stanton v. Stanton, 421 U.S. 7 (1975) ..........0eceee00s 34 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950) .............000 27 
United States v. Doe, 465 U.S. 605 (1984) .......... 18-19 
United States v. Paradise, 480 U.S. 149 (1987)........ 28 
Weinberger v. Weisenfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975) ....... 33 
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972) ............... 33 
Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308 (1975) ............... 32 


Yee v. City of Escondido, 112 S. Ct. 1522 (1992)...... 48 


vi 


Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist., 
113 S. Ct. 2462 (1993).......cececeeeeeeereceeeeseseres 


IN THE. 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1941 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Petitioner, 


Vv. 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ef ai., 


No. 94-2107 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ef ai. , 
Cross- 


v. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Cross-Respondent. 


On Writs Of Certiorari To The 
United States Court Of 
For The Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENTS 


Respondents respectfully submit this brief in response to 
the brief for the petitioner in No. 94-1941. 


INTRODUCTION 


In addition to 14 diverse coeducational colleges and uni- 
versities, the Commonwealth of Virginia offers students of 
either gender the opportunity to enroll in a public single-sex 
college program that is designed by experts in education to 
develop leadership and character through a comprehensive 
system of curricular and co-curricular activities including 
nity through the Virginia Military Institute (VMI), an his- 


torically all-male undergraduate institution; female students 
are offered this opportunity through the Virginia Women's 
Institute for Leadership (VWIL), a state-supported program 
at Mary Baldwin College (MBC), an historically all-female 
private college. The question addressed in this brief is 
whether the Equal Protection Clause permits the Common- 
wealth to offer this combination of coeducational and sin- 
gle-sex educational opportunities for men and women. 


STATEMENT 


Petitioner's opening brief in No. 94-1941 presents an in- 
complete picture of the VWIL program and glosses over or 
contradicts crucial facts found by the courts below. This 
brief sets forth a more accurate and representative statement 
of the record and the remedial proceedings below. ! 


A. Mary Baldwin College 

Mary Baldwin College (MBC), an historically women's 
college, was founded in 1842. MBC has responded to the 
changing role of women in society by expanding its cur- 
riculum “to include the new options open to women in 
business and the professions." Pet. App. 122a. MBC has 
“developed an emphasis on career planning," has “com- 
puterized the campus," and has added “new state of the art 
equipment for its science labs." Jd. at 122a-23a. MBC "is 
committed to the education of women for a world of ex- 
panding opportunity." Jd. at 122a. 

MBC enrolls over 700 residential undergraduate students, 
has a Phi Beta Kappa chapter, is accredited by the Southern 
Association of Colleges and Schools, and is now ranked 


first among regional liberal arts colleges in the South. See 
U.S. News & World Rep. 141 (Sept. 18, 1995); see also II 
DX 125 at 123. MBC's 55-acre campus in Staunton, Vir- 
ginia, includes the facilities of the former Staunton Military 
Academy, residence halls, classroom buildings, computer 
and science laboratories, a 40,000-square-foot physical 
education facility, playing fields, tennis courts, and a 
swimming pool. Pet. App. 123a, 126a-29a. 

The student-faculty ratio in MBC's residential program is 
11 to 1. MBC offers 28 undergraduate majors, including 
degrees in mathematics, the sciences, business, and the 
arts, and also offers pre-law and pre-med programs and a 
joint-degree engineering program with the University of 
Virginia. 94-1941 Br. in Opp. App. (Opp. App.) 17a,. 
19a-23z: Pet. App. 123a-24a. MBC is “geared in the di- 
rection of trying to encourage women to persist in math and 
physics." Jd. at 126a. 


MBC enjoys “a record of success in developing new 
programs and operating distinctive and unique programs 
within the larger traditional undergraduate residential com- 
munity." Pet. App. 125a. For example, MBC has suc- 
cessfully established a unique residential baccalaureate 
program for academically gifted, high-school-age students 
tailored to “the academic, emotional and developmental 
needs of young women." Id. at 126a. 


B. The Virginia Women's Institute For Leadership 


1. Development of the VWIL Program 


After the initial decision of the court of appeals in this 
case, the Commonwealth consulted with education experts 
regarding the concept of a program for women parallel to 
VMI and then asked MBC to develop a publicly funded 
designed to accomplish the same results for women that 
VMI achieves for men. In 1993, MBC established a Task 


Force to design a college program for women that “would 
prepare them for leadership positions in civilian and mili- 
tary life." Pet. App. 10la, 102a. The members of the 
Task Force, most of whom are experts in women's educa- 
tion at the college level, were appointed by Dr. Cynthia H. 
Tyson, President of MBC and herself an expert in single- 
sex education for women and in women's leadership and 
_ educational development. Id. at 63a, 93a, 102a.? 

The Task Force was co-chaired by Dr. James D. Lott, 
Dean of MBC and an expert in single-sex education and 
leadership education for women, and by Dr. Heather Anne 
Wilson, Dean of Students at MBC and an expert in the psy- 
chological, social, emotional, and intellectual development 
of college women. Pet. App. 63a, 91a, 94a, 102a.3 The 


2Petitioner's assertion (U.S. Br. 8) that the Task Force was 
"selected by respondents” is, quite simply, false. Pet. App. 
102a; Il Tr. 76. 


3Petitioner denigrates the testimony of Dr. Wilson, suggesting 
(U.S. Br. 9 n.4) that her conclusions were based solely on the 
year she spent as a sorority advisor. See II DX 123. In fact, 


grams . , 
JA 584-86, 591). Her testimony covered far more ground than 
the brief aside quoted out of context by petitioner, and was 


people who deal in stereotypes.” II Tr. 342 (II JA 600). 


Task Force included MBC faculty, administration, and stu- 
dent representatives. Pet. App. 102a-03a. 


The Task Force “made an in-depth study of wie published 
literature on the developmental psychology of women and 
the cognitive development of women" and “consulted out- 
side experts" in addition to drawing on its own extensive 
collective experience in women's education. Pet. App. 
63a, 103a. The Task Force was assisted by Dr. Richard C. 
Richardson, Jr., Professor of Educational Leadership and 
Policy Studies at Arizona State University, an expert in 
higher education and in the development of academic co- 
curricular programs. Pet. App. 63a, 9la-92a. Dr. Rich- 
ardson has chaired 25 college accreditation teams, including 
the team that most recently evaluated the United States: 
Military Academy at West Point. Id. at 92a. 


The Task Force conducted "a detailed study of the appro- 
priate methods by which the leadership program should be 
structured.” Pet. App. 63a. Its members reviewed mate- 
rials from VMI, met with their counterparts at VMI, exam- 
ined “the VMI methodology and outcomes,” and “observed 
VMI's holistic education” on visits to VMI. Jd. at 104a; I 
Tr. 84-85, 87, 92 (II JA 430-31, 433, 438).4 The Task 
Force “considered carefully, in light of their collective ex- 
perience and the literature on women's education, where 
VWIL should follow or depart from the VMI methodology 
to produce the same outcomes." Pet. App. 104a. After de- 
tailed study, the Task Force concluded that VWIL should 
embody challenge in all parts of its program but that the 
optimal methods "for educating and training most women 
for leadership roles" in a single-sex college environment do 


4Thus, petitioner is incorrect in asserting (U.S. Br. 8) that the 
"Task Force did not consult anyone at VMI in planning the 
curriculum." 


not include certain aspects of the VMI system. Id. at 63a. 


The Task Force's goal was to create the best system for 
educating the young women who would attend VWIL, not 
blindly to copy every aspect of VMI's program. As Dr. 
Richardson explained, “the ‘adversative’ educational model 
has never been advanced by anyone as an appropriate 
paradigm for optimizing the development of women.” II 
DX 11K at 4 (L. 308). Indeed, that system's inappropri- 
ateness “is evident from its abandonment or substantial 
modification in such military settings as the federal military 
academies and Virginia [Polytechnic] following coeduca- 
tion.” Jd. The Task Force found 


no evidence that an extreme adversative environment 
. . . iS appropriate for young women; we do find solid 
evidence, however, that an organized and disciplined 
environment which has as its purpose the building up 
of self confidence through mastery of physical, intel- 
lectual, and experiential challenges, is appropriate, is 
in fact the optimum environment for the education 
and training of women leaders. 


Il DX 39 at 3-4 (L. 329-30). The Task Force's members 
found little or no demand for a women's program identical 
to VMI. II Tr. 127, 340-41 (II JA 473, 598-99). 


While it would have been “'easier to design'" the VWIL 
program to resemble VMI more closely, MBC determined 
that such a program would have had “'no real prospect of 
successful implementation.'" Pet. App. lla. MBC felt 
that it would have been “'professionally irresponsible to 
compromise student welfare by designing a program to 
meet litigation objectives instead of student needs.'" Id. 

Accordingly, the Task Force designed VWIL to develop 
women leaders through use of a “method which reinforces 


self-esteem rather than the leveling process used by VMI." 
Pet. App. 642.5 The VWIL program is analogous to "the 
holistic VMI program, bringing together the co-curricular 
and the curricular to promote the student's development in 
all phases of her life." Id. at 63a. That program has been 
successfully implemented, and more than 40 women are 
presently enjoying the educational benefits of the VWIL 
program as its first-year class. TSR at 2.6 


2. Description of the VWIL Program 
VWIL offers women students the opportunity to obtain a 
single-sex undergraduate education with military training in 
an integrated program designed “to produce '‘citizen-sol- 
diers who are educated and honorable women, prepared for 
the varied work of civil life, qualified to serve in the armed 
forces, imbued with love of learning, confident in the func- 
tions and attitudes of leadership, and possessing a high 
sense of public service.'" Pet. App. 107a. Like VMI, 
VWIL offers an integrated and “highly structured program" 
that combines “the co-curricular and the curricular to pro- 
mote the student's development in all phases of her life” 
and that pursues “the same five goals as those pursued at 


5Petitioner misleadingly implies that VWIL was designed to re- 
flect “respondents' views of ‘the differences and the needs of 
college-age men and women.'" U.S. Br. 8 (emphasis added). 
Nothing could be further from the truth. As the evidence and 
findings below clearly show, respondents did not dictate or 
control the design of the VWIL program. VWIL was designed 
by experts in single-sex education from MBC and elsewhere, 
not by the Commonwealth or VMI. It embodies those experts’ 
views of the best methodology for developing the leadership 
skills of women coilege students in a single-sex environment. 

6*TSR" refers to Defendants’ Third Status Report, which was 
filed in the district court on October 31, 1995. Ten copies of 
that document have been lodged with the Court. 


VMI: education, military training, mental and physical 
discipline, character development, and leadership develop- 
ment." Jd. at 8a, 63a, 103a-O04a. MBC is committed to 
making VWIL work and will make improvements as neces- 
sary to ensure the program's continued success. Jd. at 30a, 
106a; Opp. App. 13a-14a; II Tr. 1528-30 (II JA 1078-80). 


As part of the VWIL program, students must demonstrate 
computer and foreign language proficiency and complete 
courses in calculus, statistics, and laboratory sciences. In 
addition, they must complete an extensive leadership devel- 
opment program including an externship and laboratory and 
speaker activities. Id. at 9a, 64a-65a, 108a-09a.7 

As at VMI, VWIL's co-curricular offerings combine with 
the academic curriculum to create a comprehensive leader- 
ship-building experience. Women enrolled in VWIL are 
required to complete four years of ROTC, which is now of- 
fered through cross-enrollment agreements between MBC 
and the ROTC units at VMI.8 VWIL students use the same 
ROTC curriculum, methods, and physical training and 
evaluation activities, and receive the same leadership train- 
ing and military career opportunities, as all other ROTC 
students. Opp. App. 12a-13a; Pet. App. 67a, 109a, 116a- 
17a. VWIL students also constitute a corps of cadets, wear 
uniforms, receive military drill and ceremony training, and 


7MBC offers VWIL students a variety of science and mathe- 
matics majors as well as an opportunity to obtain a state- 
supported degree in engineering through a dual degree pro- 
gram with the nearby University of Virginia. See supra p.3. 

8Petitioner incorrectly suggests (U.S. Br. 9-10 & n.6) that 
VWIL students will participate in the "Mary Baldwin ROTC 


i 
4 
: 
| 
: 


participate in the Virginia Corps of Cadets, which consists 
of all VWIL, VMI, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University (VPI) cadets. Id. at 110a; Opp. App. 13a. 
A chain of command has been established within VWIL, 
and each upperclass VWIL student will be assigned a mili- 
tary rank. Pet. App. 110a; TSR at 5 and Exh. 6.9 


VWIL students are required to complete eight semesters 
of physical and health education, including self-defense and 
an advanced fitness course designed especially for VWIL 
students. Pet. App. Illa. They take a strength and endur- 
ance test each semester based on the national military stan- 
dards for women, and must take additional physical training 
until they have passed the test. TSR at 5. They receive 
special “training in self-defense and self-assertiveness” as 
part of a Leadership Challenge Program that is mandatory 
for all freshman VWIL students except those participating 
in varsity sports and is “designed to be analogous to the 
VMI ‘rat challenge" physical fitness program. Id. at Exh. 
5; Pet. App. 112a. VWIL's physical training program "is 
based on the VMI physical education program" and "is de- 
signed to be comparable in rigor and challenge to the phy- 
sical training test for men at VMI." Id.!° VWIL's phy- 
sical training component “will produce women who are ca- 
pable of serving physically in the military service." Id. at 
113a. 


Before the start of their freshman year, VWIL students 
(like VMI students) participate in a special “cadre week 


*Thus, petitioner errs in asserting (U.S. Br. 9-10) that "VWIL 
would provide no military framework or training other than 
the Mary Baldwin ROTC program." 


101n addition to MBC's physical education facilities, VWIL 
students have access to VMI's facilities for various activities. 
Pet. App. 113a; see TSR at Exh. 5. 


10 


orientation" designed to provide “a physically and mentally 
demanding experience which will foster bonding and which 
will be a paradigm for VWIL itself." Pet. App. 110a, 
1l4a. This year's program included physical training, 
ROTC orientation, training in military drill and ceremo- 
nies, and a 4-day wilderness orientation. TSR at 3. 
Freshmen VWIL students room together in freshman 
residence halls and are subject to a variety of regulations, 
including room and uniform inspections and mandatory 
study periods. Pet. App. 114a; TSR at 4, 6-7. “[T]he 
VWIL program will use the highly disciplined schedule of 
the VMI model.” Pet. App. 66a-67a, 114a. After their 
freshman year, VWIL students are required to live for at 
least one year in the VWIL House, which is the center for 
VWIL meetings and activities. Jd. at 115a-16a. 


Upperclass VWIL students will serve as mentors for in- 
coming VWIL students. Pet. App. 115a.!! In addition, 
upperclass students will play an important role in orienting 
incoming students, enforcing rules and regulations, teach- 
ing VWIL standards and expectations, organizing and di- 
recting drills, and leading the VWIL Corps. Jd. at 115a- 
16a.!2 VWIL students are subject to MBC's honor code, 
which (like VMI's honor code) proscribes lying, cheating, 
stealing, and failure to report any of those infractions. Id. 


11 Petitioner asserts (U.S. Br. 11) that VWIL will not use VMI's 
mentoring system (known as the “dyke” system, see Pet. App. 


by VMI students, see I Tr. 142 (1 JA 390)), but petitioner 
cannot identify any meaningful difference in the goals of these 
two mentoring programs. 

12Thus, contrary to petitioner's assertion (U.S. Br. 11), upper- 
class VWIL students will have expanded leadership roles and 


organizational duties similar to those given to upperclass VMI 
students through VMI's "class" system. See Pet. App. 196a. 


ll 


at 114a-15a; I Tr. 1526 (11 JA 1076); II DX 82 at 24. 


Both the Commonwealth and VMI have provided exten- 
sive financial and other support for the development and 
implementation of VWIL, and they and MBC are commit- 
ted to the program's continued success. Pet. App. 63a, 
8la-83a, 102a-06a. The Commonwealth has expressed 
“unambiguous and unequivocal support of single-sex educa- 
tion for men and women," and the highest-ranking Virginia 
officials “have strongly supported VWIL." Jd. at 81a, 83a. 
Virginia's General Assembly has enacted legislation man- 
dating equal funding on a per-student basis for VWIL and 
VMI, without any limit on the maximum number of VWIL 
students. Jd. at 10a, 80a & nn. 18-19; Opp. App. 12a. 


VMI has cooperated extensively in the development and 
implementation of VWIL, and “has committed to support 
the VWIL program.” Pet. App. 102a, 105a. VMI and 
MBC have formed a joint leadership education advisory 
board that will monitor the outcomes of the two programs. 
Id. at 105a; Opp. App. 6a, 14a; see also id. at 17a, 24a- 


proval has been obtained. Pet. App. 120a; Opp. App. 6a- 
7a, 12a. 


VMI is providing VWIL with full access to and support 
from its alumni network. VMI alumni and admissions per- 
sonnel assist in recruiting for VWIL. Pet. App. 120a-21a; 
Opp. App. 3a, Sa, 10a, 14a. The VMI Alumni Association 
has opened its placement services and networks to VWIL, 


“committed to making [it] work." Jd. at 121la. 


project unfeasible,” whereas “there would be much more 
significant demand for VWIL." Id. at T3a, 75a & n.12. 


The court relied on the testimony of Dr. Elizabeth Fox- 
Genovese, “one of the leading experts on the educating of 
women,” who testified that “an adversative method of 
teaching in an all-female school would be not only inappro- 
priate for most women, but counter-productive,” because it 
would be destructive of women's self-confidence. Pet. 
App. 64a, 74a. Petitioner did not offer the testimony of 
any experts in single-sex education to refute this testimony. 
Moreover, the court expressly rejected the testimony of 
petitioner's expert in psychology, who asserted that the dif- 
ferences in methodology at VMI and VWIL were based on 
stereotypes. The court explained that this expert's “testi- 
mony was contradicted by most of the evidence in the rec- 
ord." Id. at 72a-73a. Indeed, even this expert acknow!- 
edged that there were developmental differences between 

men and women and that women would “have 
more chances for leadership at single-sex institutions.” Id. ; 
Il Tr. 914, 916, 918-19 (il JA 869, 871, 873-74). 


ing its stated goals" of producing citizen-soldiers well pre- 
pared for leadership roles in civilian and military life. Pet. 
App. 83a. Based on the experts’ conclusions that “the 


single-sex institutions be identical in every respect. In- 
stead, the court held that VWIL remedied any constitutional 


gitimate pedagogical basis for the different m, 
to achieve the substantially similar ends." Id. at 76a. 
D. The Court of Appeals' Remedial Decision 


|3Petitioner to argue (U.S. Br. 13) that the court of 
appeals failed to apply the two prongs of the test enunciated in 
Hogan, but the court of appeals made clear that its analysis 


wealth's legitimate and important objectives, because “the 
only way to realize the benefits of homogeneity of gender is 
to limit admission to one gender." Id. at 22a. In addition, 
the court found that “single-gender education at VMI is also 
directly related to achieving the results of the VMI system, 
because essential “characteristics of VMI's program" 
were incompatible with a coeducational environment. Id. 
at 6a-7a, 23a.'4 

The court also concluded that the benefits offered by VMI 


15 


ing women with a program identical to VMI would not be 
consistent with reasoned educational theory and experience, 
because “[e]ducational experts" believed that many women 
"may not respond similarly" to an adversative approach and 
that a women's program identical to VMI “would attract an 
insufficient number of participants to make the program 
work.” Pet. App. 27a. 


The court of appeals accordingly upheld the remedy ap- 
proved by the district court. In order to ensure the effec- 
tive and successful implementation of VWIL, the court re- 
manded the case to the district court with instructions to 
oversee the remedy. Pet. App. 30a. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


advance important and legitimate state objectives by offer- 
ing college students of both genders a comparable opportu- 


It is also an established fact that VWIL and VMI offer 
comparable educational benefits to their respective students. 
VWIL and VMI are each designed to achieve the same 
goals and use similar methods to achieve those goals. Both 


17 


young people for such roles, and that professional educators 
-- not lawyers or judges -- should be given the discretion 
and academic freedom to use their expertise in designing 
There is no merit to petitioner's argument that the single- 
sex admissions policies of VWIL and VMI are unconstitu- 
tional if there exists a single person who would prefer the 
program offered by the other institution. If petitioner were 
correct, there could be no public support for single-sex 
education at any level. Moreover, petitioner's argument is 
inconsistent with numerous precedents of this Court 
recognizing that government may classify on the basis of 
gender as long as the classification is “substantially related" 
to achieving an important governmental interest. 
Coeducation is not the only permissible educational meth- 
odology for Virginia and other States. Indeed, because 
VWIL offers women (as VMI offers men) the benefits of 
single-sex education as well as the additional advantages of 
a rigorous leadership and character development program, 
petitioner's preferred remedy would be less effective than 
that provided by Virginia and approved by the courts be- 
low. Petitioner's claim that VMI could become coeduca- 
tional without meaningfully changing its program is con- 
trary to the record and findings below. The finding that 
VMI could not offer the benefits of its program if it were to 
become coeducational reflects, not impermissible stereotyp- 
ing, but the reasoned conclusions of expert witnesses and 
the experience of other institutions demonstrating that fun- 
damental characteristics of the VMI system would be 
changed dramatically in a coeducational setting. Coeduca- 
tion at VMI would destroy both its single-sex nature and 
important elements of its adversative system, thereby elimi- 
nating diversity while offering no educational opportunity 
to women that is not already available elsewhere. 


Petitioner's proposal that strict scrutiny should apply to 


18 


gender classifications is not properly presented. Petitioner 

failed to raise that question below, the courts below did not 

address it, and petitioner affirmatively disclaimed reliance 

on that standard both in this Court and in the courts below. 

In any event, petitioner offers no special or compelling rea- 

sons for departing from the Court's precedents in this area. 
ARGUMENT 


The central, though unspoken, premise of petitioner's 
brief is that the Constitution should be construed to forbid 
public single-sex education. Even while effectively conced- 
ing that single-sex educational programs offer proven and 
demonstrable educational benefits to many students, par- 
ticularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds who are 
least able to afford a private education, petitioner seeks to 
impose on the Nation its dogmatic view that coeducation is 
the only permissible methodology for all public schools. 
Fortunately, neither precedent nor public policy supports 
petitioner's attempt to substitute its own preferences for the 
reasoned analyses and scholarly conclusions of the profes- 
sional educators responsible for creating and maintaining 
the valuable and beneficial single-sex programs at issue in 
this case. 

The facts of this case reveal with irresistible force the im- 
portance of preserving the ability of state and local gov- 
ernments to offer single-sex programs like VWIL and VMI 
as a complement to their primarily coeducational systems of 
public education. Rather than address those facts on the 
merits, petitioner repeatedly ignores or substitutes its own 
unsubstantiated opinions for the findings below on a host of 
issues, from the sincerity of respondents’ interest in single- 
sex education to the impact of coeducation on the educa- 
tional experience offered by VMI. It is settled law, how- 
ever, that this Court will not set aside facts found by two 
lower federal courts. Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 482 
U.S. 656, 665 (1987); United States v. Doe, 465 U.S. 605, 


19 


614 (1984). Petitiuner's attempts to rewrite the record and 
findings at this stage of the case and its last-minute advo- 
cacy of a new and higher standard of review betray peti- 
tioner's apparent recognition that it cannot prevail on the 
actual record below or the legal standard heretofore applied 
by this Court to issues such as these. Petitioner's approach 
is contrary to this Court's settled practice and should not be 
permitted to succeed. 


I, THE SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS POLICIES AT 
VWIL AND VMI SUBSTANTIALLY ADVANCE 
LEGITIMATE AND IMPORTANT GOVERN- 
MENTAL OBJECTIVES 


Under Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan, 458 
U.S. 718 (1982), a public college's single-sex admissions 
policy is ~~rmissible if it “serves ‘important governmental 
objectives'" and is “substantially related to the achieve- 
ment of those objectives.'" 458 U.S. at 724. VWIL and 
VMI are constitutional under that standard. 


The courts below found, based on modern research and 
extensive expert testimony, that single-sex education pro- 
vides unique benefits for many college students of both 
sexes. See Va. Br. 14-15, 26-27.!5 The district court ex- 
plained that “[t]he record is replete with testimony that-sin- 
gle gender education at the undergraduate level is beneficial 
to both males and females." Pet. App. 167a. It found that 
“[bJoth men and women can benefit from a single-sex edu- 
cation” and that “the opportunity to attend a single-sex col- 
lege is a valuable one, likely to lead to better academic and 
professional achievement" for some students. Id. at 168a, 
174a, 225a-27a. The court concluded that the “virtually 


1SEven petitioner conceded below that “there is ample evidence 
in the record on the value of single-gender education." [I Tr. 
238. 


20 


uncontradicted" evidence supports "Virginia's view that 
substantial educational benefits flow from a single-gender 
environment, be it male or female, that cannot be replicated 
in a coeducational setting.” Id. at 176a. 

The court of appeals affirmed these findings, holding that 
single-sex education “provid{es] substantial benefits to col- 
lege students” and “has been found to have salutary conse- 
quences for sexual equality in the job market." Pet. App. 
149a. The court also found that “[tJhe experts for both 
sides in this case appear to agree with" these conclusions. 
Id. at 150a; see id. at 168a, 225a. Thus, it is "a fact estab- 
lished in this case” that “single-gender education at the 
college level is beneficial to both sexes." Id. at 20a. 

As respondents have already explained in detail, the 
proven benefits of single-sex education are a central and 
important part of the overall experience afforded to VMI's 
students. See Va. Br. 24-36; Pet. App. 6la, 148a, 227a. 
Indeed, both courts below concluded that "the legal justifi- 
cation for VMI's all-male admission policy [i]s contained in 
the benefits that flow from a single-sex education.” Id. at 
6la. While Virginia had historically afforded women the 
same opportunity to receive the benefits of single-sex edu- 
cation at publicly supported women's colleges and univer- 
sities, Virginia's public women's colleges and universities 
each chose to become coeducational in recent years. See 
Va. Br. 6-7.!6 Virginia has now remedied this anomaly by 
creating VWIL, which (in addition to paralleling other as- 
pects of VMI's program) replicates the benefits of VMI's 
single-sex educational environment by reestablishing public 


16The Commonwealth has continued to provide financial support 
for women's single-sex college education through various 
programs of aid and assistance to Virginia's private colleges, 
including several women's colleges. See Va. Br. 8-9. 


in a coeducational setting. Instead, petitioner offers only 
to the asswmption of the court 
of appeals, single-sex education is not self-justifying," and 


to college students in Virginia." U.S. Br.’ 45 n.32, 47 
(emphasis added). 


22 


in achieving that objective. Petitioner's contrary argument 
is fully answered elsewhere (see Va. Br. 28-32) and in any 
event rests entirely on circumstances that no longer exist. 
Petitioner completely ignores the findings below that, in 
establishing VWIL, respondents have unequivocally demon- 
strated the genuineness of their support for single-sex edu- 
cation for both men and women in Virginia. The district 
court found as a matter of fact that [t]he record in this case 
shows the Commonwealth's unambiguous and unequivocal 
support of single-sex education for men and women.” Pet. 
App. 81a; see id. at 8la-83a & n.20. Indeed, “every per- 
son in Virginia's officialdom who has or has had the auth- 
ority to affect Virginia's policies on higher education has 
spoken in favor of diversity by offering single-sex educa- 
tion to men and women of the Commonwealth." Jd. at 
83a; see also id. at 29a. 


The single-sex admissions policies at VMI and VWIL are 
also substantially related to the achievement of important 
governmental objectives. Plainly, “the only way to realize 
the benefits of homogeneity of gender is to limit admission 
to one gender.” Pet. App. 22a. Exclusion of men from 
VWIL and women from VMI is directly and precisely re- 
lated to achieving the legitimate and important objective of 
providing the benefits of a public single-sex college educa- 
tion to the students who seek them. 

The single-sex nature of the educational experience at 
VMI and VWIL is also central to the attainment of the ad- 
ditional benefits provided by those programs’ specific em- 
phasis on leadership training and development. VMI's 
methodology is inextricably connected to its single-sex en- 
vironment (see infra pp. 43-47; Va. Br. 33-36), and VWIL 
is designed to maximize the benefits of its leadership pro- 
gram by capitalizing on the single-sex nature of the pro- 
gram. Indeed, the MBC Task Force found that, because of 
the need to combat cultural stereotyping, “[IJeadership de- 


23 


velopment for women will be most effective . . . if it takes 
place in a single-sex environment of challenge and support 
+++ I DX 39 at 3 (I JA 255; L. 329).!8 Thus, the 
single-sex admissions policies at VWIL and VMI are sub- 
stantially related to the achievement of important state ob- 
jectives, and they satisfy the requirements of Hogan. 

Il. THE VWIL PROGRAM FULLY REMEDIES 
ANY CONSTITUTIONAL VIOLATION THAT 
MAY HAVE EXISTED AS A RESULT OF VMI'S 
SINGLE-SEX ADMISSIONS POLICY 


A. VWIL Offers Educational Benefits To Wom- 
en That Are Comparable To Those Provided 
To Men By VMI 


Petitioner contends (U.S. Br. 22-23, 42-43) that VWIL 
does not remedy the constitutional violation found by the 
court of appeals because women continue to be denied the 
benefits of attending VMI. That contention is refuted fully 
by the record and findings below, which demonstrate that 


App. 203a. The courts below found that VMI accom. 
plishes that mission by providing its students both 
and 


men and 
trend that “could be exacerbated in a co-educational environ- 


24 


and leadership skills for military and civilian life. Pet. 
App. 54a, 150a-Sla, 155a, 203a-04a, 225a-27a. 

VWIL was purposefully designed to provide these very 
same benefits to its students. Its mission is “to produce the 
‘citizen soldier,’ i.e., women who are trained for leadership 
in both civilian and military life,” and it pursues “the same 
five goals as those pursued at VMI: education, military 
training, mental and physical discipline, character develop- 
ment, and leadership development." Pet. App. 8a, 63a. 


The means employed by VWIL to achieve these same 
goals are similar in many respects to those employed by 
VMI, although the creators of VWIL chose not to adopt 
some aspects of VMI's educational method. Like VMI, 
VWIL emphasizes leadership and character development 
through an integrated and rigorous program of physical and 
mental challenges and leadership opportunities. Like VMI, 
VWIL includes military training leading to the possibility 
of a military career and prepares its students for positions 
of prominence in either civilian or military life. See gen- 
erally Pet. App. 8a-10a, 25a-26a, 62a-64a, 67a. 

VWIL's physical education regimen “is designed to be 
comparable in rigor and challenge to the physical training 
test for men at VMI,” Pet. App. 112a, and is unsurpassed 
in the demands it imposes on women students. VWIL's co- 
curricular component uses “the highly disciplined schedule 
of the VMI model" (id. at 67a), and combines with the 
other elements of the VWIL program to provide an inte- 
grated system for the development of self-confident leaders. 
The VWIL program incorporates a mentoring scheme and a 
system of increasing authority, leadership, and responsi- 
bilities for upperclass students analogous to VMI's “dyke” 
and “class” systems. VWIL students are subject to an 
honor code and are organized along military lines to pro- 
vide each student an opportunity to experience various roles 
in the military hierarchy. The ROTC and military career 


Most importantly, VWIL (like VMI) affords its students 
the benefits of a single-sex college education. Petitioner 


that VWIL “will achieve substantially similar outcomes in 
an all-female environment." Id. at 68a, 76a (emphasis 
added). This conclusion was based on the testimony of ac- 


'9As the foregoing discussion demonstrates, petitioner is mani- 
festly wrong when it asserts (U.S. Br. 9) that VWIL's 
designers “rejected every component of VMI's system." 


26 


knowledged experts in higher education who studied the 
VWIL program in detail. For example, Harvard University 
Professor David Riesman “concluded that VWIL will pro- 
duce the kind of self-assurance in the face of accomplish- 


accord Il DX 11K at 3 (ILJA 155; L. 307). Dr. Elizabeth 
Fox-Genovese, “one of the leading experts on the educating 
of women, ... concurfred] in th{at] assessment.” Pet. 


men at VMI." II DX 11K at 6 (II JA 158; L. 310). 


The court of appeals endorsed these conclusions. The 
court noted that “both VMI and VWIL are focused on re- 


22-23) that VWIL's benefits are not comparable to VMI's 


can be obtained by more than a single " Pet. 
App. 68a. 

21Petitioner also points to VMI's allegedly “powerful prestige” 
(U.S. Br. 20), but VMI does not enjoy the academic prestige 
of public coeducational institutions like the U of Vir- 
ginia, the College of William and Mary, or VPI. attracts 


“are vastly 
degree they of- 


Siar bk Sind Sahin: eile i hese bs 
Suggesting (U.S. Br. 46) that VMI and VWIL 
different in content and in the value of the 


a= HF 
Pee 


. 


28 


justification for ignoring these factual findings.?° 
B. The Differences Between VWIL And VMI 
Are Pedagogically Justified And Are Not 

Based On Archaic Stereotypes 

VWIL was designed to provide the optimum environment 
for producing successful women leaders, and “[tJ]he meth- 
ods by which this goal could be achieved were the subject 
of intensive study and planning by professionals who are 
leaders in the field of designing and implementing educa- 
tional programs for women." Pet. App. 63a. VWIL's de- 
signers carefully incorporated the most persuasive and con- 
temporary research on leadership development. Choosing 
to depart from certain aspects of VMI's extreme adversative 


29 


ing.” Jd. at 76a. The court of appeals agreed, explaining 
that “the difference [between WWIL and VMI) is attribut- 
able to a professional judgment of how best to provide the 
same opportunity.” Jd. at 26a. 


Petitioner is unable to refute the conclusions of the ex- 


would prefer VWIL's methods to VMI's or that "> woman 
could succeed in an adversative-type prograr:. To the con- 
trary, the MBC Task Force and respondents’ experts rec- 
ognized, and the district court found, that some women 
could succeed in, and “may” prefer, a program identical to 
VMI's. Pet. App. 76a; see id. at 8a; I Tr. 702 (1 JA 949). 


The expert analyses and testimony at trial demonstrated, 
however, that VMI's methodology would be ineffective or 


for, and have a “discriminatory impact on,” many women 
students. Pet. App. 64a, 73a; II DX 11K at 4 (IJA 156). 


30 


The creators of VWIL could easily have chosen to model 
that program more precisely along the VMI lines, but their 
experience, education, study, and instincts led them to cre- 
ate a program that they believed would be vastly more suc- 
cessful in educating young women leaders in a single-sex 
environment. See Pet. App. lla; Il DX 11K at 6 (JA 
158; L. 310). The evidence, and the factual findings be- 
low, confirm the soundness of that judgment. Indeed, for 
VWIL's designers to have blindly and unthinkingly repli- 
cated VMI's methods would have made them guilty of pre- 
cisely the sort of arbitrariness that petitioner purports to 
condemn. Professional educators are obviously in the best 
position to design and implement college programs aimed at 
developing successful leaders, and the results of that proc- 
ess in this case cannot legitimately be dismissed as stereo- 
typical merely because they do not conform to petitioner's 
Petitioner has combed the record below for snippets of 
testimony (U.S. Br. 37-40), much of it wholly unrelated to 
the VWIL program, in an attempt to bolster its claim that 
VWIL's design reflects stereotyped views. But that attempt 
to impugn as archaic stereotypes the scholarly conclusions 
cited above is directly contradicted by the findings below 
and ignores the fact that even petitioner's witnesses pro- 
vided support for these conclusions. For example, a study 
conducted by one of petitioner's experts found that “the 
declines in psychological well-being (feeling depressed, 
feeling overwhelmed, low self-rating on emotional health) 
are all stronger among women than among men during the 
undergraduate years.” II DX 104 at 404-05 (II JA 278; L. 
346). Another of petitioner's experts conceded that "[tj}he 
psychological and sociological differences between men and 
women are real differences, not stereotypes." Pet. App. 
225a. 


A third expert for petitioner admitted that “there clearly 


31 


are differences between men and women, and not only ob- 
vious physiological ones, but ones having to do in part with 
how they interact, how they learn and so on." I Tr. 377 (i 
JA 625); Il Tr. 1083 (II JA 913). This expert further testi- 
fied that he was not aware of any stereotyped views being 
expressed by the members of the MBC Task Force. II Tr. 
1089-90 (II JA 918-19). 


VMI approach for educating women (II Tr. 956, 1105, 
1301 (I JA 889, 923, 992)), and some stated that they 
would not recommend the adversative method for either 
men or women. II Tr. 902, 1300-01 (II JA 861, 991-92). 
Nor did petitioner's experts assert that the VWIL program 
would be inappropriate or ineffective for women. Pet. 
App. 68a, 76a. In fact, petitioner's expert on curricular 
and co-curricular offerings admitted that neither VMI's 
program nor VWIL's program was “better than the other." 
Id. at 69a n.5, 96a. 


Petitioner's claim of impermissible stereotyping also ig- 
nores the fact that the demand among women college stu- 
dents for an adversative program like that offered at VMI is 
too small to make such a program workable. As detailed 
elsewhere (see Va. Br. 43-45), the evidence at trial showed 
that “there would be little demand for a female VMI" and 
that the VMI model “is deficient from the standpoint of at- 
tracting a sufficient clientele" from among women college 
students. Pet. App. 27a, 73a, 75a & n.12; Il DX 11J at 5 
(Il JA 148; L. 300). Wholly aside from the 
reasons for preferring the VWIL model, therefore, the dif- 
ferences between VWIL and VMI are justified by the need 


32 


to attract sufficient numbers of women students to make the 
program workable.24 


At bottom, petitioner's challenge to the VWIL program 
rests upon a fundamental misconception about the nature of 
the stereotypes condemned by this Court's precedents. 
Petitioner assumes that a gender-based classification is in- 
valid unless it relates to characteristics that hold true in 
every individual instance. But this Court's cases do not 
support such a categorical approach. In Schlesinger v. 
Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975), for example, the Court up- 
held a statute granting female Navy officers longer tenure 
before mandatory discharge than their male counterparts. 
The Court specifically rejected the contention that the gen- 
der-based classification was based on impermissible “archa- 
ic and overbroad generalizations," explaining that female 
officers “will not generally have compiled records of seago- 
ing service comparable to those of male[s]." Jd. at 508 
(emphasis added). The Court did not purport to require 
that this generalization be true in every instance; rather, the 
Court found it permissible because it reflected current reali- 
ty rather than the types of outmoded stereotypes condemned 
in past cases. See id. at 507.2 


24That fact alone serves to distinguish this case from J.E.B. v. 
Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994), and other cases 
in which a woman's ability to receive a government benefit did 
not depend upon locating a substantial number of other quali- 
fied women willing and able to join her. 


25As this Court noted in Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57, 71 
(1981), “Schlesinger v. Ballard did not purport to apply a 
different equal protection test because of the military context." 
The Ballard Court did “stress the deference due congressional 
choices among alternatives” in the ailitary context (id.), but 
deference is also due to the decisions of state and local 
governments regarding the best means of educating their 
citizens. See, e.g., Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 326 


[Footnote continued on next page] 


eats ; 


33 


Similarly, Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313, 318 

(1977), upheld a statute giving women higher social securi- 
ty benefits than men because “women ... have been un- 
fairly hindered from earning as much as men." Althoush 
this rationale was plainly not applicable to every affected 
individual, the Court expressly rejected th: suggestion tiat 
it reflected ‘archaic and overbroad genera‘izations' about 
women" or “'the role-typing society has loxe imposed’ 
upon women, such as casual assumptions that women are 
‘the weaker sex’ or are more likely to be child-rearers or 
dependents." 430 U.S. at 317 (citations omitted).26 


The lesson to be drawn from this Court's gender discrimi- 
uation cases, therefore, is that government is not precluded 
from relying on all demonstrable norms in adopting gender 
classifications. The stereotypes condemned by this Court's 
cases involved “archaic” assumptions and “outdated mis- 
conceptions" about men and women (Craig v. Boren, 429 
U.S. 190, 198-99 (1976)) that were characteristic of the 
"role-typing society has long imposed" (Stanton v. Stanton, 
421 U.S. 7, 15 (1975)), such as the stereotypes that 
“female spouses ... would normally be dependent upon 
their husbands,” Weinberger vy. Weisenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 
643 (1975), that only “male workers’ earnings are vital to 
the support of their families," id., or that "the female [is] 


[Footnote continued from previous pagej 


(1975); Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717, 741-42 (1974); San 
Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 55 
(1973); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 234-35 (1972). 


26Although these two cases involve classifications benefiting 

women, the standard for judging the constitutionality of gender 
classifications does not vary with the sex of the class benefited 
or the nature of the proffered justification. Mississippi Univ. 
for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. at 723, 724 n.9, 728. 


34 


destined solely for the home and the rearing of the family, 
and only the male for the marketplace and the world of 
ideas." Stanton v. Stanton, 421 U.S. at 14-15. 


Thus, in reviewing the constitutionality of a gender classi- 
fication, the role of the courts “is to assure that the validity 
of a classification is determined through reasoned analysis 
rather than through the mechanical application of tradition- 
al, often inaccurate, assumptions about the proper roles of 
men and women." Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 
458 U.S. at 725-26. Where the decision to utilize the chal- 
lenged classification was not made “‘unthinkingly’ or ‘re- 
flexively'" as “the ‘"accidental by-product of a traditional 
way of thinking about females,"'" Rostker v. Goldberg, 
453 U.S. 57, 72, 74 (1981), but instead “realistically re- 
flects the fact that the sexes are not similarly situated in 
certain circumstances," Michael M. v. Superior Court of 
Sonoma County, 450 U.S. 464, 469 (1981) (plurality 
opinion), the classification will be upheld, even if its ratio- 
nale cannot be said to apply with precision to every indivi- 
dual subject to it. Jd.; Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. at 
78; Parham v. Hughes, 441 U.S. 347, 354 (1979) (plural- 
ity opinion); Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. at 508. 


The VWIL program and its methodology are constitu- 
tional under these principles. Unlike the archaic and harm- 
ful stereotypes condemned in this Court's cases, VWIL is 
not based upon any outdated notions about the proper role 
of women in society. Quite the contrary, VWIL is founded 
on the principle that women's place in “the marketplace and 
the world of ideas” -- and in the military -- is the same as 
that of men, but that student demand and developmental 
norms make VWIL's methodology a more effective and 
practicable means of maximizing opportunities for the de- 
velopment of confident and successful women leaders. 
These conclusions reflect the thinking and experience of 
principled and committed educators, individuals who have 


35 


dedicated their lives to the education of women. 

Plainly, therefore, VWIL is not founded on impermissible 
stereotypes that “deprive[] persons of their individual digni- 
ty and den[y] society the benefits of wide participation in 
political, economic, and cultural life." Roberts v. United 
States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 625 (1984). In fact, 
VWIL's fundamental premise is the very antithesis of the 
stereotypes rejected by the Court in the past. VWIL rightly 
assumes that women can and will achieve success and 
leadership in business, politics, and the military to the same 
extent as men, and it is thoughtfully designed with the aid 
of modern scholarship and experienced educators to ensure 
that its graduates succeed in attaining those goals. 


The foregoing discussion demonstrates the complete inac- 
curacy of petitioner's contention (U.S. Br. 40) that VMI 
and VWIL perpetuate the stereotype that “men, and not 
women, are fit to be strong leaders in the military and other 
fields.” Petitioner attempts to analogize this case to Missis- 
sippi University for Women v. Hogan, but comparing 
VWIL to the school of nursing at issue in Hogan is nothing 
short of preposterous. That school fostered the outdated 
stereotype that nursing is a “women's” profession; VWIL, 
by contrast, cannot plausibly be said to foster the stereotype 
that women are not fit for leadership. Every woman who 
enrolls in VWIL is required to participate in ROTC so as to 
be prepared to assume a military leadership position, and 
everything about the VWIL program, including its mission, 
its curriculum, its co-curricular activities, its rigorous phy- 
sical and mental regimen, and even its name, emphasizes 
the program's overarching goal of creating bold, effective 
women leaders. 

It is equally false to suggest (U.S. Br. 24-25) that VMI 
sends the message that women are unfit for a rigorous mili- 
tary or similar career. VWIL's rigorous program for de- 
veloping tough and independent leaders unequivocally 


36 


demonstrates Virginia's belief that women can and will at- 
tain leadership positions both in the military and elsewhere. 
Indeed, VMI, VWIL, and Virginia's public coeducational 
ROTC programs, including the coeducational Corps of Ca- 
dets at VPI, all provide precisely the same opportunity for 
students to pursue a military career. The district court 
specifically found that “nothing about the ROTC programs 
at VMI is unique to VMI other than the absence of 
women," and non-VMI students perform marginally better 
than VMI students in their ROTC programs. Pet. App. 
116a-117a, 119a.27_ In short, there is no basis for peti- 
tioner's suggestion that women at VWIL will have less of 
an opportunity for a military career than men at VMI. 


Petitioner also appears to contend (U.S. Br. 41-42) that 
the States are precluded from taking into account demon- 
strated differences among students in their respective educa- 
tional needs when such differences “may themselves result 
from historical sex-based bias,” because the law must not 
"‘reinforce patterns of historical discrimination.'" Even if 
some of these demonstrable differences were shown to be 
the product of past discrimination -- a showing that peti- 
tioner has not made in this case -- it would hardly follow 
that educators must ignore these real differences in formu- 
lating programs of public education. Instead, the approach 
most in keeping with the Constitution's mandate of equal 
opportunity would be precisely that followed by the MBC 
Task Force here, namely, to develop programs that are de- 
signed to overcome and eliminate any lingering effects of 


societal stereotyping by developing self-confident graduates 


27The military's ROTC programs do not utilize, Alivsevative 
training methods, and it is not necessary for svalents <0 be 
exposed to those methods or to the other aspects o; VMI 
program in order to succeed in ROTC and the military. Pet. 
App. 67a, 118a. 


37 


of both sexes who are equally well-equipped to seek and 
obtain leadership positions in all facets of American soci- 
ety, regardless of discredited notions about which gender is 


better suited to a particular job. 

Indeed, petitioner's contrary argument is directly at odds 
with this Court's recognition that overcoming past discrimi- 
nation against women is a legitimate and important state ob- 
jective.28 If, as petitioner contends, government is pre- 
cluded from recognizing the lingering effects of discrimi- 
nation and taking steps to counteract those effects based on 


The findings and expert evidence in the record demon- 
strate that single-sex education tends to reduce the effects of 
societal stereotyping on both men and women by making 
students “more likely to take the risk of choosing a career 
normally associated with the other sex,” Pet. App. 226a, 
and that VWIL will be more effective than an adversative- 
type program at preparing most women students to assume 
leadership roles in modern society. Id, at 27a, 63a-64a, 
T3a-74a. If anything, therefore, it is petitioner, not re- 
spondents, who would “restrict men and women to socially 
assigned roles" by depriving women of the leadership de- 
velopment opportunities made possible through the VWIL 


28E g., Mississippi Univ. for Women vy. Hogan, 458 U.S. at 
728; Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. at 317. 


38 


program. Petitioner's dismissive attitude toward the rigor 
and effectiveness of the VWIL program is not only contrary 
to the record and findings below; it is insulting to the dedi- 
cated experts in women's education who created the pro- 
gram and the more than 40 young women who have already 
acted upon their desire to benefit from VWIL and its 
unique and challenging educational experience. 
C. The Equal Protection Clause Does Not Re- 
quire That Single-Sex Educational Programs 
Be Identical In All Respects 


Petitioner contends (U.S. Br. 42-44) that VWIL is an in- 
adequate remedy because it denies opportunity to any indi- 
vidual woman who might be qualified for and might prefer 
VMI's methodology. In effect, petitioner's argument is 
that a State cannot offer the admitted benefits of single-sex 
education to students of both genders if there is even one 
student who would prefer the program available to the other 
gender. That argument is without merit. 


In the first place, as a factual matter it is simply not true 
that women are denied the educational benefits afforded to 
men at VMI. All of the academic offerings at VMI are 
available to women at other public institutions in Virginia, 
and VWIL is designed to provide the same educational 
benefits and produce the same educational outcomes as 
VMI. The courts below found that it will achieve that 
goal. Moreover, those women who might prefer VMI's ad- 
versative method could not obtain it in any event, because 
there is insufficient demand to permit implementation of 
that methodology in a separate program for women and be- 
cause, as the courts below found, VMI (or any other 
school) would be compelled to eliminate or modify drastic- 
ally that methodology in a coeducational setting. See infra 
pp. 43-47; Va. Br. 33-36, 43-45. 


Second, petitioner's argument would, as a practical mat- 


39 


ter, entirely preclude state and local governments from 
funding single-sex ecucational programs of any kind for 
students of either gender, no matter how beneficial and im- 
portant those programs may be to some students.29 There 
will inevitably be some differences between parallel educa- 
tional programs, whether in location, faculty, alumni, phy- 
sical facilities, reputation, history, traditions, curriculum, 


30Moreover, direct and indirect public financial assistance 


(including tax exemptions) tor private single-sex schools or for 
students attending those schools would | be unavailable as 


well. This Court made clear in v. Harrison, 413 
U.S. 455, 465 (1973), that "a state may not induce, 
or promote to what it is 


40 


Petitioner's insistence on an absolutely precise means-end 


702 (1 JA 949); I Tr. 697. Petitioner's approach would 
preclude innovative attempts by public schools to respond 
to demonstrable needs in a wide variety of circumstances, 
including all-girls' math and science classes, special single- 
sex programs for inner-city youths, and the like (see Va. 
Br. 39-41; Br. Amicus Curiae of Women's Schools To- 
gether, Inc., ef al.), merely because the behavioral or psy- 
chological norms justifying the need for such programs are 
not applicable in every individual instance. Acceptance of 
petitioner's claim that the Constitution precludes reliance on 
any characteristics not uniformly applicable on gender lines 
would thus serve only to deny valuable opportunity to nu- 
merous students without providing concrete benefits to 

one. The impact of this rigid doctrine would, nee Be 
felt most severely by students from economically and so- 


g 
; 
i 

“FE 

a 

ie 

z® 

ESS 


{ 
td 


41 
those students who can often benefit most from a single-sex 
education and yet are least likely to be able to afford a pri- 


vate single-sex college. Id.; Pet. App. 71a, 74a. 


no showing that the generalization supporting it was true in 


an absolutely precise fit between a gender-based classifica- 
tion and the interests served by it. In Schlesinger v. 
Ballard, for example, as noted above, the Court upheld a 
gender classification even though the Government had made 
every instance. See 419 U.S. at 508-10 & n. 13.3! 


He 7 er 


hil 


*" and “‘outdated’" assumptions or “'stereotypical 
g., Heckler v. 
approving 
individuals 
ied on prior 
individuals so 
individuals had not 
(rejecting | 
though “in 
ter 
, 430 U 
for women 
Scheel Gem ensien 
he he 
or that each 
po S 2 
aw Baye 
advance the 
other 
2097 (1995). 


e* = 


AES HIAR 


Ripoet 


Petitioner identifies no authority to the contrary. Instead 
it cites cases invalidating gender classifications based on 


att 
if 


42 


notions'” containing at most a “'shred of truth.’" U.S. Br. 
43 n.29; J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419, 
1427 n.11 (1994). As explained above, the differences be- 
tween VMI and VWIL are not based on such impermissible 
stereotypes, but are instead predicated on the expert know!- 
edge, advice, and research of highly regarded professional 
educators and social scientists. The cases cited by peti- 
tioner are therefore inapposite. 

Moreover, none of the cases cited by petitioner purports 
to require the degree of tailoring that petitioner seeks. The 
classification invalidated in Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 
(1976), for example, was highly imprecise. Jd. at 201-03 
& n.16. Likewise, most of the empirical evidence in 
J.E.B. refuted the existence of amy correlation between 
gender and juror attitudes. 114 S. Ct. at 1426-27 & n.9. 
See also Hogan, 458 U.S. at 731 (record was “flatly in- 
consistent” with proffered justification); Frontiero v. Rich- 
ardson, 411 U.S. 677, 689 (1973) (plurality. opinion) ("no 
concrete evidence” supporting proffered justification). 

Petitioner's argument that the justifications for gender 
classifications must be applicable in every individual in- 
stance is, in effect, an attempt to incorporate the narrow- 
tailoring requirement of strict scrutiny into the intermediate 
scrutiny context. This Court's precedents do not permit 
that approach, however, and its adoption would effectively 
overrule numerous decisions of this Court and invalidate 
scores of federal and state laws and programs. 


Il. THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE DOES 
NOT MANDATE COEDUCATION AS THE 
ONLY PERMISSIBLE REMEDY IN THIS 
CASE 


Petitioner contends that VMI must become coeducational 


43 


in order to provide a “complete remedy." U.S. Br. 21.52 
The record and findings below conclusively demonstrate, 
however, that VWIL in fact provides a far more effective 


In addition, as both courts below found, neither women 


tion would necessarily lead to fundamental changes in that 
method. See Va. Br. 16-19, 34-36. Petitioner disagrees 
with that factual finding, but its attempt to reargue the facts 


44 


same standards and to the constant scrutiny of all other stu- 
dents. Pet. App. 6a, 23a, 19la-92a, 194a, 197a, 233a, 
237a. A system of separate privacy rights within each class 
for groups of students defined by their gender would thus 
be directly contrary to central attributes of the VMI 
method. The courts below found that the absence of pri- 
vacy is “essential to the leveling process," id. at 6a, but co- 
education would frustrate that process by separating VMI's 
student body into two distinct gender groups, each con- 


tinually asserting privacy rights as against the other. 


For the same reasons, petitioner's claim (U.S. Br. 28-29) 
that VMI's method would not be affected by the adoption 
of “ability groupings” or other “accommodations” for the 
physical differences between men and women is simply 
false. The courts below found that VMI's egalitarianism, 
including its imposition of identical physical standards on 
all students, was an essential element of its program. Pet. 
App. 146a-47a, 237a-38a.33 That egalitarian ethic would 
be severely undermined by abandonment of uniform physi- 
cal standards, causing male and female students to “per- 
ceive the treatment of them as unequal.” Pet. App. 147a. 


45 


Petitioner makes no effort to refute the factual findings 
below that VMI's adversative method could not accommo- 
date the effects of the cross-gender harassment thai would 
result from an attempt to employ that method in a coeduca- 
tional setting. Instead, petitioner erroneously contends that 
the court of appeals’ reliance on this fact is "impermissible" 
because it reflects “'romantic paternalism'" about what be- 
havior is “unseemly.” U.S. Br. 30. 


The district court found, and the court of appeals agreed, 
that the adversative system would necessarily undergo fun- 
damental changes if VMI were to become coeducational. 
Pet. App. 6a, 147a, 227a, 238a-39a. That finding was not 
based on an assumption that cross-gender confrontation is 
“unseemly” but on expert testimony and the experience of 
the U.S. military academies, which demonstrated that the 
reality of cross-gender interactions and relationships be- 
tween college students would inevitably lead to substantial 
changes in the ethic of absolute egalitarianism and the in- 
tentional harassment and intimidation that characterize the 
adversative method. Jd.; see Va. Br. 34-36. No matter 
how much petitioner would like to pretend that college stu- 
dents always interact with members of the opposite sex in 
precisely the same way that they interact with members of 
the same sex, the record and findings below (as well as 
common sense) are to the contrary.54 Moreover, peti- 
tioner's attempt to dismiss the seriousness of these concerns 


*4Even petitioner's education expert conceded that aspects of the 


consequences, for the academic for the athletic 
and for the lifestyle system." I Tr. 365, 368, 399 (1 JA 613, 
616, 647). He also stated "itese [changes] oe eee 


diminish their importance." 


46 


is, at best, disingenuous, because petitioner affirmatively 
argued below that the adversative method would have to be 
altered so as to avoid “harassment” deemed inappropriate 
for women. II JA 101.35 


Petitioner also contends (U.S. Br. 27, 31-32) that VMI 
would not be “destroy[ed]" by coeducation, and points to 
the transformation of the service academies from single-sex 
to coeducational institutions. It is no doubt true that VMI 
could survive as a college if it were to admit women. The 
central point, however, is that it would no longer offer the 
benefits of single-sex education, nor would it be able to re- 
tain the adversative system. VMI would instead become 
nothing more than a pale shadow of the service academies, 
far less attractive to students because unable to guarantee 
free tuition, student pay, or an active-duty military commis- 
sion, and indistinguishable in its methodology from the co- 
educational Corps of Cadets and ROTC program already 
available at VPI. Pet. App. 173a; I DX 58 at 25 (1 JA 
1757; L. 225). 


Indeed, far from supporting petitioner's contentions, the 
experience of the service academies further bolsters the 
conclusion that VMI's adversative methodology would not 


35Petitioner also insisted that VMI would have to enforce “a 
zero tolerance policy in regard to acts of gender discrimination 
and harassment committed by cadets," that VMI would be 
required to “make available to all cadets counseling services 
relating to problems of discrimination or harassment on the 
basis of gender,” and that “[l]ying about any violations of 
regulations governing gender discrimination or harassment 
shall be treated as an Honor Code violation." II JA 101, 103- 
04. Petitioner has yet to explain how the extreme harassment 
and intimidation inherent in the adversative method could be 
implemented in a coeducational setting without creating a 
“hostile environment” constituting impermissible sexual har- 
assment. 


47 


survive coeducation. See Va. Br. 34-35; Pet. App. 172a 
n.8, 235a-4la. Approval of petitioner's arguments would 
thus deprive both women and men of an educational option 
they now have -- namely, a single-sex college education fo- 
cused on leadership, character development, and military 
training -- without extending to them any educational op- 
portunity that is not already available elsewhere. Petition- 
er's insistence that VMI must admit women (and, implic- 
itly, that VWIL must admit men) is thus an attempt to 
lessen diversity in public higher education by mandating 
conformity and coeducation. The Constitution should not 
be construed to incorporate petitioner's view that coeduca- 
tion is the only acceptable method for educating college stu- 
dents in public institutions. 

IV. STRICT SCRUTINY IS NOT APPLICABLE IN 

THIS CASE 


For the first time in this case, petitioner asserts (U.S. Br. 
17-18, 33-36) that gender-based classifications should be 
subjected to strict judicial scrutiny. This Court should de- 
cline petitioner's untimely invitation to address that issue, 
which was neither pressed nor passed upon below. 

A. The Issue Of Strict Scrutiny Issue Is Not 
Properly Presented 

Petitioner has waived the issue of strict scrutiny by failing 
to raise that issue at any stage of this case prior to the filing 
of its opening brief on the merits in this Court. Indeed, in 
the district court, petitioner affirmatively scorned the very 
position it now advances, asserting that “the United States 
has never argued that this Court should abandon the Su- 
preme Court's well-settled adherence to the intermediate 
standard of review in gender classification cases." R. 88, 
at 3. Petitioner announced that the Government's position 
was “unequivocally that the appropriate standard in this 
case is ‘intermediate scrutiny,’ and that a classification 


48 


based on gender must be ‘substantially relaied to the 
achievement of a sufficiently important governmental ob- 
jective.'" Id. (emphasis added). 

Petitioner consistently adhered to that position in the 
court of appeals.56 And in reliance on petitioner's conces- 
sions, the courts below did not address the question of strict 
scrutiny at all. That question is, therefore, not properly 
before the Court. Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School 
Dist., 113 S. Ct. 2462, 2466 (1993); Yee v. City of Escon- 
dido, 503 U.S. 519, 532-33 (1992); Demarest v. 
Manspeaker, 498 U.S. 184, 188-189 (1991). 

Petitioner's attempt to inject the issue of strict scrutiny at 
this stage of the proceedings is particularly inappropriate 
given the contrary position advanced by petitioner the last 
time the case reached this Court. In opposing certiorari at 
the liability stage, petitioner affirmatively represented to 
this Court that “Hogan supplies the test for determining 
whether VMI's male-only admissions policy violates the 
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." 
92-1213 Br. in Opp. 9.37 Petitioner should not be permit- 
ted an eleventh-hour change in its legal posture after insist- 
ing on a contrary position for more than five years of liti- 
gation at all levels of the federal judiciary. 


B. Strict Scrutiny Should Not Apply To Gender 
Classifications 

As petitioner has observed, intermediate scrutiny is one 

of this Court's “'firmly established principles’ for evaluat- 


36See 91-1690 Gov't C.A. Reply Br. 4; see also 94-1667 Gov't 
C.A. Br. 8; 91-1690 Gov't C.A. Br. 21, 23-29. 


37Petitioner reaffirmed that position at the certiorari stage after 
the remedial decision below. See 94-1941 Pet. 19; 94-1941 
Pet. Reply Br. 5-10; 94-2107 Cross-Pet. Br. in Opp. 5 & n.2. 


49 


ing claims of gender discrimination." R. 88 at 3. Indeed, 
this Court has applied that standard in every gender-based 
equal protection case since at least Craig v. Boren, 429 
U.S. 190 (1976). Adoption of strict scrutiny for gender 
classifications would require the Court to overrule numer- 
ous prior decisions applying intermediate scrutiny to uphold 
gender-based classifications. 38 


"[A]ny departure from the doctrine of stare decisis de- 
mands special justification." Arizona v. Rumsey, 467 U.S. 
203, 212 (1984). Petitioner does not even attempt to offer 
any “special justification” for its last-minute request that the 
Court reject two decades of constitutional jurisprudence. 

Instead, petitioner merely confirms the inappropriateness 
of strict scrutiny for gender classifications by seeking to ex- 
empt the military from the impact of that standard. U.S. 
Br. 34 n.23. Petitioner's advocacy of a form of qualified 
or selective strict scrutiny is wholly incompatible with this 
Court's equal protection jurisprudence, which demonstrates 
that “inherently suspect” classifications may not be treated 
as suspect only some of the time. See Adarand Construc- 
tors, Inc. v. Pena, 115 S. Ct. at 2113; City of Richmond v. 
J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 494 (1989). Deference to 
military affairs would not insulate the military's widespread 
disparate treatment of men and women from strict scrutiny 
any more than it would permit the military to reinstitute 
racially segregated units. See Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 
U.S. at 69-71 (the military is subject to the same standard 
applied to other gender classifications, and “deference [to 
military decisionmaking] does not mean abdication"). 


38. g., Heckler v. Mathews, 465 U.S. 728 (1984); Michael M. 
v. Superior Ct. of Sonoma Cty., 450 U.S. 464 (1981); Parham 
v. Hughes, 441 U.S. 347 (1979); Califano v. Webster, 430 
U.S. 313 (1977); Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975). 


50 


In truth, intermediate scrutiny has achieved the worthy 
and balanced goal of invalidating most governmental line- 
drawing based on gender while preserving those relatively 
few gender distinctions that are supported by legitimate and 
important reasons. Adoption of strict scrutiny would serve 
only to bring into question the constitutionality of those re- 
maining gender classifications that do serve important and 
valid governmental objectives, particularly in the military, 
prisons, and education. Petitioner fails to identify any need 
for achieving that result. Indeed, petitioner's change of 
heart regarding the standard for judging gender classifica- 
tions appears to reflect nothing more than petitioner's im- 
plicit recognition that public single-sex education like that 
at VMI and VWIL can and should survive intermediate 
scrutiny .39 


CONCLUSION 


Virginia has developed a higher education program that 
includes recognition of the fact, endorsed widely by experts 
in education, that some students benefit greatly from single- 
sex colleges and develop into successful, confident adults 
more readily in such an environment. The Equal Protection 
Clause does not prohibit States from offering that oppor- 
tunity to its young women and men in parallel programs 
developed by experts to meet the needs of young people. 
The judgment of the court of appeals should be affirmed. 


December 15, 1995 Respectfully submitted. 


JAMES S. GILMORE, III 
Attorney General of Virginia 
WILLIAM H. HurpD 
Deputy Attorney General 
900 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 


GRIFFIN B. BELL 

WILLIAM A. CLINEBURG, Jr. 
KING & SPALDING 

191 Peachtree Street 

Atlanta, Georgia 30303 


ROBERT H. PATTERSON, JR. 

ANNE MARIE WHITTEMORE 

WILLIAM G. BROADDUS 

J. WILLIAM BOLAND 

McGuIRE, Woops, BATTLE 
& BOOTHE 

One James Center 

Richmond, Virginia 23219 


Counsel for Respondents 


