Supreme Court, U. 8. 
FILED 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL., 
CROSS-PETITIONERS 


*. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE CROSS-RESPONDENT 


Drew 8S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


DEVAL L. PATRICK 

Assistant Attorney General 
PAUL BENDER 

Deputy Solicitor General 
CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 

Assistant to the Solicitor General 


JESSICA DUNSAY SILVER 
THOMAS E. CHANDLER 
Attorneys 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
Whether the exclusion of women from the Virginia 
Military Institute, based solely on their sex, violates 
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment. 


(1) 


we 


U 2 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Argument: 
I. VMI's admissions policy is unconstitutional be- 


cause it excludes qualified women from a unique 
educational opportunity solely because of their 


B. Cross-petitioners have not established that 
71 
VMI are legitimate 


C. Cross- petitioners — sationallentions 
also do not justify excluding women from 


1. Virginia has no state policy of advancing 
diversity in higher education through the 
— of single-e x, military-style 


2. 1 
choices in higher education for men alone 
3. VMI need not exclude women in order to 


offer “a distinctive program of military- 
ET a 


own Ww = 


12 


12 
13 


18 


Argument—Continued: 


II. The legality of private single-sex education would 
be unaffected by a holding that VMI's admissions 
policy is unconstitutional ................................. 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991 (198277 
City of Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 
lie ete RN tt a ti nell 
Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321 (1977) . 
Faulkner v. Jones, 51 F.3d 440, motion to stay man- 
date denied, 66 F.3d 661 (4th Cir.), application 
for stay of enforcement denied, No. A-127 (Aug. 
11, 1995), cert. dismissed, 116 S. Ct. 331, cert. 


denied, 116 S. Ct. 352 (1995) 13-14, 33, 34 


Garrett v. Board of Educ., 775 F. Supp. 1004 (E. D. 
c 
International Bhd. of Teamsters v. United States, 

.. Fcc Beat Mcallen 
International Union, United Automobile Workers 
v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 499 U.S. 187 (1991)... 

J. F. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 8. Ct. 1419 
SS a 
Kirstein v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Vir- 


15 


ginia, 309 F. Supp. 184 (E.D. Va. 1970) ....15, 17, 19, 25 


McCabe v. Atchison, T. & S. F. Ry., 235 U.S. 151 


ccc 33 
Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma County, 

ee a eo 16 
Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 

2 4, 9, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25 
Missouri ex rel. Gaines V. Canada, 305 U.S. 337 

A nn 33 
Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis, 407 U.S. 163 (1972) 37 
Newberg V. Board of Pub. Educ., 478 A.2d 1352 

(Pa. Super. Ct. 1984) * — 15 
Norwood v. Harrison, 413 USS. 455 (1978) . pe SE 37 


Vv 


Cases—Continued: Page 
Regents of Univ. of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 
D x 23 
Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (19825 36 
Rostker v. Goldberg, 458 U.S. 57 (1981) 16 
Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160 (1976) 36 
Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975) 16 
Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1 (194) 36 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950 34 
United States v. Hinds County School Hd., 560 F. 2d 
eee 15 
VMI v. United States, cert. denied, 118 8. Ct. 2431 
(1998) ......... PEE PT DRS. ORES x 


Vorchheimer v. School Dist., 582 F.2d 880 (3d Cir. 
1976), aff’d by an equally divided Court, 430 U.S. 


708 (1977) . 15 
Weinberger V. Wiesenfeld, 420 US. 636 (1976) 18 
Wengler v. Druggists Mutual Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 

Er 17, 24 
Williams v. McNair, 316 F. Supp. 134 (D.S.C. 

1970), aff'd mem., 401 U.S. 951 (19717 19 
Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267 

a me 23 


Constitution, statutes and regulations: 
U.S. Const. Amend. XIV (Equal Protection 
AAA 2, 3, 6, 12, 31, 36 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Tit. VII, 42 U.S.C. 2000e 
1 a ant 16, 35 
Education Amendments of 1972, Tit. IX, 20 U.S.C. 
.. ** 27, 35, 36 
— 11 a 27 1 27 
(. — . * 36 
. — * 36 
ee . 36 
1995 Va. Acts ch. 582 (to be codified at Va. Code 
Ann. § 22.1-212.1:1 (Michie Supp. 1995)) 0 27 
34 C. F. R.: 
27 
27 
27 


Miscellaneous: 


Dianne Avery, Institutional Myths, Historical Nar- 
ratives, and Social Science Evidence: Reading 
the “Record” in the Virginia Military Institute 
Case, 5 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Women’s Stud. (manu- 
script) (forthcoming Spring 199) 

Martin Binkin & Shirley J. Bach, Women and the 
Military (1977) .................... 

44 Fed. Reg. 71,419 (197 90ÿ: 

Traci Johnson Mathena, Best Western: As It Cele- 
brates Its Vaunted Past, the City’s All-Girls 
High School Prepares for a Future That Will 
Keep It at the Head of the Class, Balt. Sun, Oct. 
30, 1994, at 8 (Magazin 

e From Pedes- 
tal to Politics, 1830-1930 (1970) * 


26-27 
19 


In the Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-2107 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, ET AL., 
CROSS-PETITIONERS 


*. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE CROSS-RESPONDENT 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals regarding lia- 
bility (VMI I) (Pet. App. 134a-157a),’ is reported 
at 976 F.2d 890. The opinion of the district court 
regarding liability (Pet. App. 158a-245a) is reported 
at 766 F. Supp. 1407. The opinion of the court of 
appeals regarding remedy (VMI II) (Pet. App. la- 
52a) is reported at 44 F.3d 1229. The opinion of the 
district court regarding remedy (Pet. App. 53a-131a) 
is reported at 852 F. Supp. 471. 


References to “Pet. App.” are to the appendix to the peti- 
tion for a writ of certiorari filed in United States v. Common- 
wealth of Virginia, No. 94-1941 (filed May 26, 1995). 


(1) 


2 
JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals regarding 
liability (VMI I) was entered on October 5, 1992. 
A petition for rehearing was denied on November 19, 
1992. Pet. App. 157a. A petition for a writ of cer- 
tiorari was denied on May 24, 1993. Pet. App. 132a- 
133a. The district court on remand approved a rem- 
edy. The United States appealed to challenge the 
remedy as inadequate, and cross-petitioners cross- 
appealed to challenge the original finding of liability. 
The judgment of the court of appeals regarding rem- 
edy (VMI II) was entered on January 26, 1995. The 
court of appeals voted sua sponte not to rehear the 
case en banc, and entered an order to that effect on 
April 28, 1995 (Pet. App. 246a-257a). On April 18, 
1995, the Chief Justice extended the time within 
which to file a petition for a writ of certiorari to and 
including May 26, 1995. The United States filed a 
petition for a writ of certiorari on May 26, 1995 (No. 
94-1941). The cross-petitioners filed a conditional 
cross-petition for a writ of certiorari on June 23, 
1995. This Court granted the petition and cross- 
petition on October 5, 1995. 116 S. Ct. 281. The 
jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 


The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution pro- 
vides that “[n]o State shall * * deny to any person 
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the 
laws.” 

STATEMENT 


This brief addresses cross-petitioners’ challenge 
(No. 94-2107) to the court of appeals’ VM I decision 
regarding liability, in which that court held that the 


3 


sex-based exclusion of women students from the Vir- 
ginia Military Institute (VMI) violates the Equal 
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. We 
earlier filed a brief in support of our challenge (No. 
94-1941) to the court of appeals’ VMI II decision ap- 
proving as a remedy for that violation the establish- 
ment of a new, separate college program that would 
exclude men. The procedural and factual background 
of the case is set forth in the Statement in our brief 
in No. 94-1941, at 2-15. That Statement is supple- 
mented below with a further description of the lia- 
bility holdings. 

1. The proceedings in the district court were 
bifurcated. After a trial regarding liability, the dis- 
trict court on June 14, 1991, entered judgment in 
favor of cross-petitioners, holding that VMI’s exclu- 
sion of women did not violate the Equal Protection 
Clause. Pet. App. 158a-245a. The district court rec- 
ognized and found that “[t]he system of education 
at VMI is not offered elsewhere in the United States,” 
id. at 192a,* and that women therefore “are denied 
a unique educational opportunity that is available 
only at VMI,” id. at 218a.“ 


The district court acknowledged that the Virginia Poly- 
technic Institute and State University (VPI), although it has 
a coeducational residential program offering military-style 
training, is a “dramatically different institution[]” offering 
“dramatically different experiences” from those offered at 
VMI. Pet. App. 192a. 


Women also have no opportunity to compete for the VMI 
State Cadetships, a group of state-funded college scholarships 
that the Commonwealth of Virginia awards exclusively to men 
who attend VMI. The Commonwealth awarded $147,104 in 
VMI-designated scholarship funds to 35 male VMI cadets in 
1990-1991. Pet. App. 189a. 


4 


The court held, however, that VMI’s exclusion of 
women met the constitutional test for sex-based clas- 
sifications set forth in Mississippi Univ. for Women 
v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982). See Pet. App. 164a- 
165a. Under that test, VMI’s policy is unconstitu- 
tional unless cross-petitioners can show that that 
exclusion “serves important governmental objectives 
and that the discriminatory means employed are sub- 
stantially related to the achievement of those objec- 
tives.” 458 U.S. at 724 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). 

During the proceedings regarding liability, the 
Commonwealth of Virginia denied that VMI’s dis- 
criminatory policy fostered any state objectives.* 
Counsel for the VMI Foundation, Inc., and the VMI 
Alumni Association, private organizations that inter- 
vened as defendants, represented VMI, its super- 
intendent and its Board of Visitors at trial. Those 
defendants asserted two “governmental” objectives 
allegedly supporting VMI’s discriminatory exclusion 
of women: “educating cadets for lives as ‘citizen- 
soldiers,“ and fostering “system-wide diversity by 
providing an opportunity for single-sex education and 
by providing a distinctive program of military-style 


The Governor stated in his Answer that “no person should 
be denied admittance to a state supported school because of 
his or her gender.” Pet. App. 142a (L. 7-8). The Virginia 
Attorney General concluded that the “positions of the Gov- 
ernor and the Commonwealth” were “inseparable.” VMI I 
C.A. App. 134 (L. 25); see Pet. App. 142a. Because neither 
the Governor of Virginia nor the Commonwealth defended 
VI's sex-based exclusionary policy at the trial on liability, 
id. at 142a, 160a, the Commonwealth obtained a stay of the 
proceedings against it on the condition that it would be bound 
by any liability determination, id. at 160a. 


5 


education.” R. 152 (VMI Defendants’ Proposed Find- 
ings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (liability phase) 
(Apr. 26, 1991) ), at 114 ( 28), 115 (38). 

The district court determined that system-wide 
“diversity in education” is a “legitimate objective“ 
for a State to pursue, Pet. App. 167a; see id. at 159a, 
and that, because “some students, both male and 
female, benefit from attending a single-sex college, 
single-sex education is a constitutionally legitimate 
form of diversity within an educational system, id. 
at 168a. It also concluded that VMI's unique method 
of instruction” contributes to diversity in Virginia’s 
educational offerings. Id. at 176a.° 

The district court next determined that VMI’s ex- 
clusion of women was substantially related to the 
achievement of diversity in Virginia’s higher educa- 
tion system, because “‘[ VMI’s] single-sex status would 
be lost, and some aspects of the distinctive method 
would be altered if it were to admit women.” Pet. 
App. 173a. The court noted that “[t]he sole way to 
attain single-gender diversity is to maintain a policy 
of admitting only one gender to an institution,” id. 
at 167a, and that, “even though some women are 
capable of all the individual activities required of 
VMI cadets, a college where women are present would 
be significantly different from one where only men 
are present,” id. at 170a.“ The court acknowledged 


The district court did not address the asserted interest in 
educating cadets for lives as citizen-soldiers. 


The court found that VMI would have to adopt less strin- 
gent physical education requirements for women, even though 
the court credited “[e]xpert testimony establish[ing] that 
* * * some women are capable of all of the individual activities 


6 


that the successful assimilation of women at West 
Point shows that, “[w]ithout a doubt, VMI could do 
likewise.” Id. at 172a n. S. But “[t]he VMI Board 
has decided that providing a distinctive, single-sex 
educational opportunity is more important than pro- 
viding an education equally available to all.” Id. at 
170a. The court concluded that VMI’s desire to avoid 
the changes that admitting women would bring “pro- 
vide[s] sufficient constitutional justification for con- 
tinuing the single-sex policy.” Id. at 172a. 

2. The court of appeals vacated and remanded, 
holding that VMI’s admissions policy violated the 
Equal Protection Clause. Pet. App. 134a-156a (VMI 
J). The court held that neither prong of the Hogan 
test was satisfied.“ The Commonwealth of Virginia, 
the court noted, “failed to articulate an important 
objective which supports the provision of [VMI’s] 


required of VMI cadets.” Pet. App. 170a-171la, 233a-235a. The 
court also found that VMI would have to alter its facilities 
to allow men and women privacy from the other sex during 
activities such as undressing and showering, id. at 171a, 233a, 
and that the presence of women would add “a new set of 
stresses on the cadets,” id. at 171a. 


7 As a preliminary matter, the court determined that 
“single-sex education is pedagogically justifiable” for “[b]oth 
men and women” and that “VMI’s male-only policy is justified 
by its institutional mission.” Pet. App. 150a-15la. But those 
conclusions did not answer the question “whether the unique 
benefit offered by VMI’s type of education can be denied to 
women by the state under a policy of diversity, which has 
been advanced as the justification and which was relied on 
by the district court.” Id. at 151a. The court emphasized that, 
by “commenting on the potential benefits of single-gender 
education,” the court did] not mean to suggest the specific 
remedial course that the Commonwealth should or must fol- 
low.” Id. at 155a-156a. 


7 


unique educational opportunity to men only.” Id. at 
137a; see id. at 155a. The court rejected the district 
court’s attribution to Virginia of the objective of pro- 
viding single-sex education to promote a diverse array 
of educational options. Jd. at 152a-153a.* It found 
that Virginia lacked any “stated policy justifying 
single-sex education in state-supported colleges and 
universities”; Virginia’s only policy statement “with 
respect to gender distinctions” in higher education 
required that its colleges and universities treat stu- 
dents “without regard to sex, race, or ethnic origin,” 
id. at 153a (emphasis added by court of appeals).° 
The court noted that Virginia has in fact abandoned 
public single-sex education at every institution of 
higher education other than VMI. Id. at 154a.“ 

The court of appeals also found no substantial rela- 
tionship between an interest in diversity and the cate- 
gorical exclusion of women from VMI: Even “[i]f 
VMI’s male-only admissions policy is in furtherance 
of a state policy of ‘diversity,’ the explanation of how 
the policy is furthered by affording a unique educa- 


* Cross-petitioners did not assert on appeal, and the court 
did not consider, the interest in training students for lives 
as citizen-soldiers. 


Moreover, [the lack of a state-announced policy to jus- 
tify gender classifications is aggravated by the reluctance of 
the Commonwealth, as a party, and its governor to participate 
in this case and in this appeal.” Pet. App. 153a. Indeed, as 
the Commonwealth’s policy was articulated by the governor, 
“VMI’s single-sex admissions policy violates state policy.” 
Ibid. (emphasis added). 


% Several of Virginia’s public colleges had previously been 
single-sex, but “[a]ll Virginia statutes requiring individual 
institutions to admit only men or women have been repealed.” 
Pet. App. 188a. 


tional benefit only to males is lacking. A policy of 
diversity which aims to provide an array of educa- 
tional opportunities, including single-gender institu- 
tions, must do more than favor one gender.” Pet. 
App. 153a-154a. 

Cross-petitioners sought review in this Court, which 
denied certiorari. VMI v. United States, 113 S. Ct. 
2431 (1993) (Pet. App. 132a-133a)." After the 
court of appeals affirmed the decision approving 
VMI’s proposed remedy, the Court granted the United 
States’ petition challenging the remedy and also 
granted the conditional cross-petition challenging the 
liability holding. United States v. Commonwealth of 
Virginia, 116 S. Ct. 281 (1995). 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The court of appeals applied established equal pro- 
tection principles to hold that the Virginia Military 
Institute unconstitutionally excludes women based 
on their sex. That holding is constitutionally un- 
assailable. The Commonwealth of Virginia reserves 
VMI for men, and thus provides no opportunity for 
women to enjoy its benefits. The Commonwealth 
offers nothing to meet the needs of women who are, 
but for their sex, qualified for VMI and want to at- 
tend. A formal state policy that offers an educational 
opportunity to men that is not offered to women is 
presumptively unconstitutional. 


11Qn remand, the district court approved a remedial plan 
that continues to exclude women from VMI and establishes an 
all-female Virginia Women’s Institute for Leadership (VWIL) 
at Mary Baldwin College, a private, liberal arts college pri- 
marily for women. Pet. App. 58a-13la. The court of appeals 
affirmed. Id. at la-52a (VMI II). We have addressed that 
remedial plan in the Brief for the United States in No. 94- 
1941. 


9 


That presumption is especially strong where, as 
here, the policy not only denies women a valued 
opportunity, but in doing so relies on and reinforces 
harmful and archaic sex-role stereotypes. VMI’s rig- 
orous, military-style education is renowned, and the 
Institute’s alumni network is an extraordinarily 
powerful one, especially in historically male-dominated 
fields. In defending its exclusionary policy, VMI has 
relied on archaic notions that men are more confident 
and aggressive than women and has concluded that 
men alone would therefore want and benefit from 
VMI’s military-style educational method. VMI’s ex- 
clusion of women echoes and reinforces historical pat- 
terns of discrimination and stereotyping that, for 
most of our history, closed to women the most rigor- 
ous educational opportunities and excluded them from 
leadership roles in business and public life. 

Such formal sex-based barriers, and the stereo- 
types that support them, have no place under our 
modern Constitution. This Court’s equal protection 
cases squarely reject governmental reliance on the 
kinds of psychological and sociological generalizations 
about women and men that cross-petitioners assert. 
Although the United States believes that strict scru- 
tiny is the correct standard of constitutional review 
for official discrimination based on sex, the uncon- 
stitutionality of VMI’s exclusionary admissions policy 
is evident under intermediate scrutiny as well. In- 
deed, this Court’s decision in Mississippi University 
for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982), alone 
compels affirmance of the liability determination in 
this case. Just as Mississippi could not constitu- 
tionally reserve a public nursing school for women 
based on “a stereotyped view of nursing as an ex- 


10 


clusively women’s job,” so, too, is Virginia’s reserva- 
tion for men of a stereotypical! male form of 
military-style leadership training constitutionally 
forbidden. 

Cross-petitioners have failed to show that VMI’s 
exclusionary admissions policy is necessary to serve 
any important governmental objective. This Court’s 
cases require that the policy be evaluated with refer- 
ence to the State’s actual goals in employing it. The 
actual objective of excluding women from VMI when 
that policy was initiated at the founding of the school 
in 1839 reflected the assumptions of that time— 
assumptions that men alone were fit for military and 
leadership roles. Before this litigation was initiated, 
Virginia never sought to supply a valid, contemporary 
rationale for VMI’s exclusionary policy. That failure 
itself renders the VMI policy invalid. 

In any event, no current rationale justifies con- 
tinuing to exclude women from VMI. The only 
objective cross-petitioners have asserted, post-hoc, is 
an interest in enhancing the “diversity” of options in 
Virginia’s system of public higher education. As 
the court of appeals correctly observed, however, Vir- 
ginia does not in fact have any policy of enhancing 
diversity by providing single-sex, military-style edu- 
cation. And the court of appeals correctly concluded 
that, in any event, a policy of diversity in higher 
education is patently inadequate to justify providing 
men, but not women, an enhanced diversity of 
choices. 

Cross-petitioners’ assertion that a State must be 
able to provide single-sex education to one sex alone 
amounts to a contention that single-sex education is 
constitutional per se. This Court in Hogan rejected 


that view, and instead required an exceedingly per- 
suasive justification in each instance in which a State 
excludes persons from an educational opportunity 
based on their sex. Although it is possible that single- 
sex education for only one sex may be constitutionally 
justifiable in order to compensate for discrimination 
that only one sex has suffered, no such rationale is 
present here. And, contrary to cross-petitioners’ con- 
tention, the fact that private colleges in Virginia 
offer single-sex education to women provides no ex- 
cuse for VMI’s policy of excluding women. No other 
school in Virginia, public or private, provides to 
women the opportunity they are denied at VMI, 
and private schools cannot, in any event, alleviate 
the Commonwealth’s constitutional obligation to treat 
the sexes equally. 

VMI need not exclude women in order to continue 
to offer “a distinctive program of military-style edu- 
cation.” It is undisputed that some women can per- 
form all the tasks required at VMI and would thrive 
under VMI’s military-style methodology. Although 
minor changes in physical training and privacy ac- 
commodations would accompany the admission of 
women, the Commonwealth has no interest in avoid- 
ing such changes, and certainly none strong enough 
to justify the continued exclusion of women. VMI 
could continue effectively to fulfill its stated mission 
of educating citizen-soldiers if both qualified men 
and women were admitted as students. 


12 


ARGUMENT 


I. VMI’S ADMISSIONS POLICY IS UNCONSTITU- 
TIONAL BECAUSE IT EXCLUDES QUALIFIED 
WOMEN FROM A UNIQUE EDUCATIONAL OP- 
PORTUNITY SOLELY BECAUSE OF THEIR SEX 


A. The unconstitutionality of VMI's policy is clear 


The Virginia Military Institute (VMI), a state 
college,“ has an admissions policy that bars all women 
as students solely on account of their sex. The policy 
excludes women without regard to their actual 
qualifications. No woman is permitted to experience 
VMI’s unique, military-style educational program, or 
take advantage of VMI’s enormous prestige and 
alumni network. Cross-petitioners ask this Court to 
hold that the Equal Protection Clause permits a State 
to offer a unique and prestigious educational pro- 
gram at a 150-year-old institution of higher educa- 
tion only to men, without offering any alternative 
whatsoever to women. 

In our opening brief in No. 94-1941, we argue 
that the only way to achieve equal protection here is 
to admit women to VMI, and that the Virginia 
Women’s Institute for Leadership (VWIL) is a pat- 
ently inadequate and unconstitutional] alternative. 
Cross-petitioners have argued in that case that VWIL 


12 VMI is one of 15 state institutions of higher education 
in Virginia. Pet. App. 138a. It is “financially supported by 
the Commonwealth of Virginia and remains ‘subject to the 
control of the [Virginia] General Assembly.’ Va. Code Ann. 
§ 23.92. It is governed by a Board of Visitors, which the 
Commonwealth expressly charges with prescribing ‘the terms 
upon which cadets may be admitted, their number, the course 
of their instruction, the nature of their service, and the dura- 
tion thereof. Va. Code Ann. § 23-104.” Ibid. 


13 


provides an adequate remedy to women for the un- 
constitutionality of VMI’s admissions policy. Here 
they make the much more extreme contention that 
they can continue to operate VMI for men only, with- 
out offering any alternative whatever to women. No 
conceivable theory of equal protection can sustain that 


proposition. 


I. VMI's policy substantially harms women 


The practical consequences for women of VMI’s 
exclusionary policy are pernicious. The policy deprives 
women who seek to attend VMI of valued educational 
benefits—benefits that cross-petitioners themselves 
have repeatedly characterized as “unique.” VMI is 
a small college offering a rigorous, military-style edu- 
cational program. It has been successful in “in- 
stilling physical and mental discipline, character, and 
a kind of moral code.” Pet. App. 204a. The barracks- 
centered military program at VMI is unavailable 
elsewhere in Virginia. See 94-1941 U.S. Br. 2-5, 
16, 22. 

VMI’s policy also excludes women from life-long 
opportunities, responsibilities, and powerful connec- 
tions that VMI has long afforded its graduates. VMI’s 
alumni network is “enormously influential,” 94-1667 
& 94-1717 (VMI II) Tr. 1227, especially in the male- 
dominated fields of engineering, the military, busi- 
ness, and public service, in waich VMI graduates most 
often tend to pursue careers, id. at 1228. This case, 
like the parallel case against the similar exclusionary 
policy of The Citadel in South Carolina, therefore 
concerns not only education, but also “wealth, power, 
and the ability of those who have it now to determine 
who will have it later.” Faulkner v. Jones, 51 F.3d 


14 


440, 451 (Hall, J., concurring), motion to stay man- 
date denied, 66 F.3d 661 (4th Cir.), cert. dismissed, 


116 S. Ct. 331, cert. denied, 116 S. Ct. 352 (1995). 
See 94-1941 U.S. Br. 2-3, 16, 22-23. 

The sex-based distinction at issue in this case is 
particularly harmful to women because of its reliance 
on sexual stereotypes. Rejection of sex-stereotyping 
lies at the core of the equal protection concern with 
classifications based on sex. VMI’s exclusion of 
women from the Commonwealth of Virginia’s 
military-style leadership educational program com- 
municates the message that, in the Commonwealth’s 
official view, rigorous, military-style training is not 
appropriate for women. That impermissible state 
policy is vividly highlighted by cross-petitioners’ de- 
fense of the exclusion of women in this case, which 
rests in large part on archaic and overbroad notions 
about men’s and women’s personalities and prefer- 
ences, including the view that men are more confident, 
aggressive, and suited to hierarchy than women, 
and that women are more emotional, caring, and 
interested in marrying than men. See 94-1941 U.S. 
Br. 37-42." In this context, cross-petitioners’ sug- 
gestion (Br. 26) that “single-sex education performs 


To invalidate VMI's exclusion of women because it is 
based on overbroad stereotypes is not to denigrate individuals 
for whom such stereotypes are accurate, but rather to reject 
the premise that, merely because stereotypes are true for some 
individuals, the State has a right to apply them to everyone. 
Reliance on stereotypes is harmful because it forecloses indi- 
vidual opportunity for persons who do not fit the traditional 
mold. Such reliance impedes accurate, current assessment of 
the needs and abilities of individual members of both sexes. See 
94-1941 U.S. Br. 40-44 (discussing case law prohibiting reli- 
ance on overbroad sex-based generalizations and stereotypes) . 


15 


a valuable service in uprooting inaccurate stereo- 
types” is bewildering. 


2. Established law 1 of VMI's 
ti _ 


- 


No modern sex discrimination case has upheld a 
policy of excluding one sex from an educational in- 
stitution to the advantage of the other.“ Nor have 
any of this Court’s modern cases accepted sociological 
or psychological generalizations about men and women 
as rendering the sexes not similarly situated for equal 
protection purposes. The Court has found women 
to be differently situated ir the equal protection con- 
text only because of biological sex differences,” un- 


See United States v. Hinds County School Bd., 560 F.2d 
619 (5th Cir. 1977) (invalidating system of separate single- 
sex public high schools); Garrett v. Board of Educ., 775 
F. Supp. 1004 (E.D. Mich. 1991) (granting preliminary 
injunction against males-only public elementary schools); 
Kirstein v. Rector and Visiiors of Univ. of Virginia, 309 
F. Supp. 184 (E.D. Va. 1970) (requiring women’s admission 
to University of Virginia); Newberg v. Board of Pub. Educ., 
478 A.2d 1352 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1984) (requiring girls’ admis- 
sion to Philadelphia's boys-only Central High School); but 
see Vorchheimer v. School Dist., 582 F.2d 880, 881-882, 886 
(3d Cir. 1976) (upholding Central High School’s exclusionary 
admissions policy in litigation in federal court in which plain- 
tiff did] not allege a deprivation of an education equal to 
that which the school board makes available to boys“), aff'd 
by an equally divided Court, 430 U.S. 708 (1977). 


Indeed, this Court in J. E. B. v. Alabama ez rel. T.B., 114 
S. Ct. 1419, 1428 (1994), invalidated sex-based preemptory 
challenges based on the sociological generalization that women 
“hold particular views simply because of their gender.” 


In approving a statutory rape law that applied differently 
to men and women, this Court expressly disavowed relying, 


16 


challenged legal disabilities," or for compensatory 
reasons. Cross-petitioners ask this Court to rely, 
for the first time, on sociological and psychological 
stereotypes to restrict educational opportunity for 
women. That position is contrary to the established 
meaning of equal protection, and should be rejected. 
As we argued in our opening brief in No. 94-1941, 
at 33-36, we believe that strict scrutiny is the correct 
constitutional standard for evaluating classifications 
that deny opportunities to individuals based on their 
sex. Because this Court has not previously applied 


as the lower court did here, on males’ greater aggressiveness, 
and instead relied on the anatomical fact that “females can 
become pregnant as a result of sexual intercourse; males can- 
not.” Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma County, 450 
U.S. 464, 473, 475, 476 (1981) (opinion of Rehnquist, J.) (“the 
statute does not rest on the assumption that males are gen- 
erally the aggressors”); but cf. International Union, United 
Automobile Workers v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 499 U.S. 187 
(1991) (holding that a sex-based policy of excluding women 
with childbearing capacity from lead-exposed job constitutes 
sex discrimination under Title VII). 


* See Rostker v. Goldberg, 458 U.S. 57, 78 (1981) (uphold- 
ing draft registration for men and not for women because 
unchallenged combat restrictions on all women made men 
and women “simply not similarly situated for purposes of a 
draft or registration for a draft“). 


1% In Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975), for ex- 
ample, the Court upheld a federal statute that afforded women 
Navy officers longer than men to gain promotion or face 
mandatory discharge, not because of any notion that women’s 
personalities or sociological role make them achieve promo- 
tions more slowly, but because legal restrictions on all women 
in combat and sea duty—which were not challer ged made 
women and men “not similarly situated with respect to op- 
portunities for professional services.” Id. at 508. 


al 


17 


strict scrutiny to sex-based classifications, however, 
we argued below, and show here, that cross-petitioners 
have not established that VMI’s exclusionary policy 
satisfies intermediate scrutiny. Indeed, VMI’s ex- 
clusion of women fails even meaningful rational- 
basis review. See Kirstein v. Rector and Visitors of 
Univ. of Virginia, 309 F. Supp. 184 (E.D. Va. 1970) 
(requiring admission of women to the University of 
Virginia). 

Under intermediate scrutiny, “the party seeking 
to uphold a statute that classifies individuals on the 
basis of their gender must carry the burden of show- 
ing an ‘exceedingly persuasive justification’ for the 
classification.” Mississippi Univ. for Women ». 
Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 724 (1982); see also J. E. B. v. 
Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994). That 
burden is met “only by showing at least that the 
classification serves ‘important governmental objec- 
tives and that the discriminatory means employed’ 
are ‘substantially related to the achievement of those 
objectives. Hogan, 458 U.S. at 724, quoting Weng- 
ler v. Druggists Mutual Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142, 150 
(1980). Cross-petitioners fail to meet both parts of 
that burden. 

Cross-petitioners’ liability is evident from a 
straightforward application of Hogan. Just as this 
Court’s “searching analysis” in Hogan revealed that 
the State lacked any actual compensatory objective 
for excluding men from a state educational program, 
458 U.S. at 728-730 & n.16, the objectives proffered 
here for the exclusion of women are not actual, non- 
discriminatory reasons for the challenged policy. 
Like the single-sex admissions policy in Hogan, which 
rested on the “stereotyped view of nursing as an 


18 


exclusively woman’s job,” id. at 729, cross-petitioners’ 
justifications reflect archaic stereotypes, and rein- 
force the view that men alone are fit for leadership 
and military careers. And just as the exclusion of 
men from the Mississippi University for Women 
(MUW) was not necessary to Mississippi’s educa- 
tional goals, id. at 731, VMI’s men-only admissions 
policy is not necessary to serve any valid educational 
goals asserted here. 


B. Cross-Petitioners Have Not Established That The 
Actual Reasons For Excluding Women From VMI 
Are Legitimate 

A sex-based classification must be evaluated with 
reference to the actual reason the State has chosen 
to employ it. Hogan, 458 U.S. at 730 & n.16. Courts 
“need not in equal protection cases accept at face 
value assertions of [state] purposes, when an exami- 
nation of the [challenged sex-based classification] 
and its history demonstrates that the asserted purpose 
could not have been a goal” of the classification. 
Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 648 n.16 
(1975). Yet, despite cross-petitioners’ burden to jus- 
tify VMI’s policy in terms of the actual reasons it 
was adopted, they have not sought to identify and 
rely on those reasons. 

VMI adopted its men-only admissions policy at its 
founding in 1839, and it has never changed that 
policy. See Dianne Avery, Institutional Myths, His- 
torical Narratives, and Social Science Evidence: 
Reading the “Record” in the Virginia Military In- 
stitute Case, 5 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Women’s Stud. 
(forthcoming Spring 1996), manuscript at 59-92 (re- 
garding VMI early history) (lodged with the Court 
and served on opposing counsel). In 1839, prevailing 


19 


social norms presumed that men alone were capable of 
military or leadership training. See, e.g., Pet. App. 
-4la-43a (Phillips, J., dissenting); Ann Firor Scott, 
The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics, 1830- 
1930, at 68 (1970) (referring to severely restricted 
educational opportunities for women in the antebel- 
lum South). Even by the end of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, few women had access to any public higher 
education at all, and that education was focused on 
practical, “feminine” skills such as typing, drawing, 
cooking, needlework and housekeeping. See, e. g., 
Hogan, 458 U.S. at 720 n.1 (regarding MUW, 
founded in 1884); Williams v. McNair, 316 F. Supp. 
134, 136 n.3 (D.S.C. 1970) (regarding Winthrop 
College for girls, founded in 1891), aff’d mem., 401 
U.S. 951 (1971). Rigorous public higher education 
was reserved for men, see, e. g., Kirstein, supra, as 
was service in the military, see, e.g., Martin Binkin 
& Shirley J. Bach, Women and the Military 4-6 
(1977). 

The original grounds for VMI’s admissions policy, 
founded on officially unquestioned and harmfully con- 
straining assumptions about men’s and women’s 
proper roles, are patently illegitimate today. Before 
this litigation was instituted, neither VMI nor the 
Commonwealth identified or acted upon any other 
basis for continuing to exclude women from VMI’s 
student body.” To affirm the court of appeals’ lia- 


In the 1980s VMI conducted a Mission Study of its ex- 
clusionary adm sions policy in the wake of this Court’s deci- 
sion in Hogan, supra. Pet. App. 208a. The Mission Study 
failed to supply any current, constitutional rationale for con- 
tinuing to exclude women from VMI. The Committee’s final 
report rejected admission of women, but “[t]he Report pro- 


20 


bility holding, this Court need go no further than to 
recognize the current constitutional invalidity of the 
reasons for which VMI initially adopted its discrim- 
inatory admissions policy. 


C. Cross-Petitioners’ Post-Hoc Rationalizations Also 
Do Not Justify Excluding Women From VMI 


Cross-petitioners have not sought to defend VMI’s 
admissions policy in terms of the actual reasons for 
which it was adopted. They have, instead, proffered 
a post-hoc objective. They now assert (Br. 28) that 
women must be excluded from VMI to serve the 
Commonwealth’s interest in “offering a diversity of 
choices in higher education.“ As cross-petitioners 
describe it, the diversity interest has two components: 
(1) enhancement of diversity by offering single-sex 
education within a system that is otherwise coeduca- 
tional, and (2) enhancement of diversity by provid- 
ing a distinctive style of military education. The 
court of appeals considered and correctly rejected 
that post-hoc “diversity” objective. This Court should 
do the same. 


vided very little indication of how this conclusion was 
reached.” Id. at 212a; see generally L. 103-109, 110-117 (Mis- 
sion Study Committee data); L. 195-199 (Final Report of 
Mission Study Committee). The report stated in a conclusory 
fashion that admission of women would “alter the mission” of 
VMI, and that, “[gliven the experience of the U.S. Service 
Academies,” demand among women from VMI would be 
inadequate. L. 196. 


Cross- petitioners do not assert here the second objective 
upon which they relied in the district court: an interest in 
producing citizen-soldiers. See pages 4, 5 n.5, 7 n.8, supra. 


21 


1. Virginia has no state policy of advancing diver- 
sity in higher education through the provision 
of single-sex, military-style education 


Cross-petitioners have failed to demonstrate that 
ei e of the two components of system-wide diversity 
that they identify—enhancing diversity by providing 
single-sex education and a distinctive military-style 
educational method—are actually aspects of the Com- 
monwealth of Virginia’s interest in diversity in its 
higher education system. The court of appeals cor- 
rectly held that Virginia lacks any state policy of 
advancing diversity in its system of higher education 
through tiie provision of single-sex education. Pet. 
App. 15la-154a; see also 94-1941 U.S. Br. 46-47.” 


State policy requires each institution of higher education 
to deal with students without regard to sex. Pet. App. 153a. 
The Governor of Virginia thus stated in his Answer in this 
case that “no person should be denied admittance to a State 
supported school because of his or her gender.” L. 7. The 
absence of a state policy in favor of single-sex education in 
higher education is borne out by the fact that all state statutes 
that formerly required single-sex admissions policies at certain 
institutions of higher education have been repealed, and none 
of Virginia’s public colleges, cther than VMI, is single-sex. 
More women than men in Virginia are enrolled in private 
single-sex institutions of higher education in Virginia, Pet. 
App. 189a, and the district court thus concluded that demand 
for single-sex public higher education is “greater among 
women than among men,” id. at 190a. This suggests that, if 
the Commonwealth actually had a policy of offering single-sex 
education as an aspect of system-wide diversity in higher 
education, it would have offered such single-sex education to 
women. In light of those facts, cross-petitioners’ contention 
(B.. 30) that the absence of single-sex public higher education 
for women in Virginia for almost a quarter of a century is the 
result of “an historical anomaly” in the application of an 


22 


Cross-petitioners appear to acknowledge (Br. 31) 
that Virginia does, in fact, lack any such policy 
at the state level.“ Instead, they argue (Br. 31-32) 
that, because the Commonwealth delegates the au- 
thority for setting admissions policies to each in- 
dividual state institution of higher education, VMI’s 
own “decision to pursue the benefits of single-sex 
education and the VMI method” is a state purpose. 

The Commonwealth of Virginia’s delegation of ad- 
missions-policy authority to VMI, however, under- 
mines, rather than supports, cross-petitioners’ posi- 
tion. If single-sex, military-style education is offered 
by the Commonwealth for its educational benefite for 
some students, the state educational system must in- 
clude both men’s and women’s military-style single- 
sex options (and presumably a coeducational option 
as well). No single institution of higher education 
has the capability to provide more than one of those 
options. Delegation to individual institutions thus 
cannot be a rational means of implementing a non- 
discriminatory state policy of enhancing educational 
diversity by providing single-sex, military-style edu- 
cation. As the court of appeals correctly concluded, 
“if responsibility for implementing diversity has 


otherwise consistent policy favoring single-sex education is 
wholly implausible. 


*2 Cross-petitioners’ only suggestion to the contrary relies 
on the fact that, during the remedial stage of this case, state 
officials, including the Governor, made statements supporting 
the remedial plan to offer women a public single-sex leader- 
ship program at Mary Baldwin College. Cross-Pet. Br. 31 
n.15; see L. 289-296. Those statements were made after the 
Commonwealth’s liability had already been determined, and 
are thus irrelevant to a review of the court of appeals’ lia- 
bility determination. 


23 


somehow been delegated to an individual institution, 
no explanation is apparent as to how one institution 
with autonomy, but with no authority over any other 
state institution, can give effect to a state policy of 
diversity among institutions.” Pet. App. 154a.™ 


2. Virginia cannot enhance the diversity of choices 
in higher education for men alone 


The basic flaw in cross-petitioners’ diversity ration- 
ale is that it completely fails to justify offering a 
diversity of choices to men but not to women. A 
State may not maintain a sex-based classification 
merely by showing that it confers a benefit on the 
favored sex; it must also justify benefitting that sex 
alone. The Court in Hogan rejected dissenting Justice 
Powell’s suggestion that a public nursing school’s 


Whether a subdivision of a State can assert the State's 
objective in support of a challenged classification depends in 
each instance on the subdivision’s authority and the nature of 
the objective. For example, in Regents of Univ. of California 
v. Bakke, 488 U.S. 265 (1978), Justice Powell concluded that 
an interest in diversity within the student body of any single 
institution was the kind of interest that a single institution 
was competent to assert. Id. at 311-312 (opinion of Powell, J.). 
And the opinions in City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 
U.S. 469 (1989), and Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 
U.S. 267 (1986), upon which cross-petitioners also rely (Br. 
32), determined only that a city or school district may take 
steps to remedy its own discrimination, not, as cross-petitioners 
assert here, that those entities could assert interests beyond 
their own ability to effectuate. See Croson, 488 U.S. at 491 
(opinion of O’Connor, J.) (“a state or local subdivision (if 
delegated the authority from the State) has the authority to 
eradicate the effects of private discrimination within its own 
legislative jurisdiction”); Wygant, 476 U.S. at 277 (opinion of 
Powell, J.) (a public employer may adopt remedial affirmative 
action if it has “a strong basis in evidence” for doing so). 


24 


exclusion of men could be justified by the State’s 
interest in providing to women the additional educa- 
tional option of attending a single-sex nursing school. 
The Court observed that reliance on the value of a 
benefit provided to one class “begs the question” of 
whether the State’s decision to confer a benefit only 
upon one class by means of a discriminatory classifi- 
cation is substantially related to achieving a legiti- 
mate and substantial goal.” 458 U.S. at 731 n.17; 
see also Wengler, 446 U.S. at 151. If the rule were 
otherwise, virtually all discriminatory classifications 
would be self-justifying. A State could, for example, 
designate its only engineering or medical school for 
men or its only school of education or art for women. 
In each of those cases, the favored class, like 
the men who attend VMI, would have a more diverse 
range of educational options from which to choose 
than they would in the absence of the single-sex 
school. 

The Commonwealth’s interest in fostering system- 
wide diversity of educational choices can therefore be 
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory rationale only insofar 
as the Commonwealth offers diversity for both men 
and women equally. As the court of appeals correctly 
held, [if VMI’s male-only admissions policy is in 
furtherance of a state policy of ‘diversity,’ the ex- 
planation of how the policy is furthered by affording 
a unique educational benefit only to males is lacking.” 
Pet. App. 153a-154a. The addition of a men-only 
VMI to the educational options otherwise available 
in Virginia to both men and women cannot be sub- 
stantially related to a nondiscriminatory interest in 
diversity. 

Cross-petitioners contend (Br. 38) that a State that 
offers a single-sex, military-style education to en- 


25 


hance diversity need not offer such education to both 
sexes, and they point to Hogan for support. The 
interest asserted by the State in Hogan, however, was 
not diversity, but compensation for discrimination 
against women. 458 U.S. at 727. Offering a single- 
sex educational option exclusively to one sex alone 
can, perhaps, be justified on compensatory grounds. 
Unlike an interest in enhancing diversity, an interest 
in compensating one sex for discrimination is not 
undermined by the absence of an equal opportunity 
for the other sex. The goal of providing compensa- 
tion for prior or present discrimination against one 
sex is necessarily served by providing benefits only 
to the disadvantaged group. Because the plaintiffs 
in Hogan argued (albeit unsuccessfully) that MUW 
excluded men in order to compensate women for dis- 
crimination, the Court did not view “the absence of 
any state-provided single-sex educational opportunity 
for the excluded gender [as] itself sufficient to render 
the challenged admissions policy unconstitutional.” 
Cross-Pet. Br. 38. The absence of an opportunity for 
women is, however, dispositive in this case, where no 
compensatory rationale is present.“ 

To the extent that cross-petitioners assert that VMI 
itself has an interest in providing the pedagogical 
benefits of single-sex education to men only, VMI’s 


To the extent that cross-petitioners mean to suggest that 
VMI serves a compensatory rationale (Br. 46) (“VMI’s males- 
only admissions policy serves to roughly equalize overall 
single-sex educational opportunities in Virginia for men and 
women” (interna! quotation marks omitted) ), they have their 
history backward. It is women, not men, who have experi- 
enced discrimination in higher education in Virginie See, 
e.g., Kirstein, 309 F. Supp. at 187. 


26 


admissions policy certainly serves that interest. Their 
argument (Br. 36-42) that single-sex education may 
constitutionally be provided to men alone, however, is 
simply a contention that single-sex education, whether 
or not provided equally to women and men, is con- 
stitutional per se. Under cross-petitioners’ analysis, 
it would be a matter of constitutional indifference 
whether a State or school district offered some or 
all of its education through single-sex institutions, 
even if all or almost all the single-sex institutions 
were for men only. This Court considered and re- 
jected that argument in Hogan. 

Hogan contemplated that single-sex education might 
be permissible where its benefits for particular popu- 
lations serve legitimate, important governmental ob- 
jectives that cannot be served by sex-neutral alterna- 
tives. But the exclusion of one sex from an educa- 
tional institution reserved for the other is clearly not 
a valid end in itself. A decision invalidating VMI's 
men-only admissions policy will not, contrary to 
cross-petitioners’ suggestion (Br. 41-42), invalidate 
single-sex public education in all circumstances; it 
will, however, properly invalidate it where, as here, 
it is not justified by an important, nondiscriminatory 


27 


would, on the other hand, sweep away any meaningful 
constitutional scrutiny of programs that exclude per- 
sons based on sex. 

Cross-petitioners contend (Br. 45) that the exclu- 
sion of women from VMI must be evaluated in the 
context “of the range of educational opportunities 
and public financial assistance afforded to women in 
Virginia’s higher education system,” including four 
private women’s colleges in Virginia and one private 
men’s college. They suggest (Br. 46) that VMI 
“helps fill a gap created by the private sector’s failure 
to provide greater or more attractive single-sex op- 
portunities for male college students.” But, as the 


Best Western: As It Celebrates Its Vaunted Past, the City’s 
AlL-Girle High School Prepares for a Future That Will Keep 
It at the Head of the Class, Balt. Sun, Oct. 30, 1994, at 8 
(Magazine). We are unaware of any single-sex public ele- 
mentary schools. With respect to single-sex classes in coedu- 
cational schools, Title IX (the federal statute that bars sex 
discrimination by educational institutions that receive federal 
funds) prohibits the provision of courses separately on the 
basis of sex, except in certain limited circumstances. See 
20 U.S.C. 1681; 34 C. F. R. 106.34 (e) (certain physical educa- 
tion classes), (e) (classes dealing exclusively with human 
sexuality); 34 C.F.R. 106.3 (permitting sex-based remedial 
action). 

In citing examples of circumstances in which it believes 
public single-sex education may be beneficial, VMI refers (Br. 
41) to a Virginia statute as “authorizing local school boards 
to offer single-sex classes in the Commonwealth’s public 
schools.” The statute, however, expressly notes that its au- 
thorization is limited to circumstances in which offering such 
classes would be “[c]onsistent with constitutional principles.” 
1995 Va. Acts ch. 582 (to be codified at Va. Code Ann. § 22.1- 
212.1:1 (Michie Supp. 1995)). To the extent that Virginia’s 
public schools receive federal funds, Title IX's limitations 
would also apply. 


28 


court of appeals correctly noted, “[n]Jo other school 
in Virginia or in the United States, public or private,” 
offers to women what they are denied at VMI. Pet. 
App. 15la (emphasis added).” In any event, the 
existence of private women’s colleges in Virginia has 
no bearing on the Commonwealth’s constitutional ob- 
ligation to treat men and women equally within its 
own system of public higher education. The Constitu- 
tion requires that the State treat all persons equally. 


3. VMI need not exclude women in order to offer “a 
distinctive program of military-style education” 


a. Cross-petitioners assert (Br. 27) that “VMI’s 
methodology has proven to be particularly beneficial 
to the adolescent male students it attracts.” But it is 
undisputed that some women can do everything that 
is required of cadets at VMI, Pet. App. 170a, and 
that “some women will thrive in the adversative en- 
vironment,” id. at 172a. There is therefore no valid 
justification for providing VMI’s military-style edu- 
cation to men and not to women. 

If VMI admitted women, the diversity of educa- 
tional options in Virginia’s system of public higher 
education would remain enhanced by the VMI pro- 
gram, but that diversity interest would be served in 
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory manner. The lower 


A State may of course design its public education system 
with an eye to the offerings already available in the private 
sector, and thus, for example, set up a medical school but not 
a law school to complement a private system that includes a 
law school but not a medical school. But the permissibility of 
viewing public and private resources as a whole for such sex- 
neutral purposes, see, e. g., Pet. App. 191a, cannot detract from 
the State’s obligation to treat men and women equally in its 
own institutions. 


29 


courts recognized that VMI is strikingly different 
from every other college in Virginia for a multitude 
of reasons beyond its exclusion of women.“ Cross- 
petitioners’ claim (Br. 34) that admission of women 
would eliminate the “very aspects of [VMI’s] pro- 
gram that distinguish it from * * * other institutions 
of higher education in Virginia” is thus simply 
incorrect. 

Although admission of women to VMI would re- 
quire some changes at that institution, those changes 
also do not justify excluding women. The only 
changes that the court of appeals anticipated would 


* VMI’s suggestion (Br. 9-10, 36) that Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University (VPI) is a coeducational equiv- 
alent to VMI was correctly rejected by the district court and 
the court of appeals. Indeed, cross-petitioners themselves 
previously repudiated that position. See, e.g., R. 152 (VMI 
Defendants’ Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of 
Law (liability phase) (Apr. 26, 1991)), at 97 (1536). The 
court of appeals in its liability opinion concluded that VPI is 
not similar to VMI. Pet. App. 151a n.8. The district court, 
too, concluded that “VMI and the military barracks at [VPI] 
are dramatically different institutions that offer dramatically 
different experiences,” id. at 192a, and that “[t]he differences 
between VPI and VMI’s educational experiences outweigh the 
similarities, independent of gender,” id. at 218a. VPI main- 
tains only a 394-person residential corps of cadets within a 
larger, non-military-oriented student body of 18,000. Id. at 
214. Thus, a coeducational VMI “would remain the only 
small college campus in Virginia offering a military pro- 
gram.” Id. at 173a-174a; see also id. at 218a. The district 
court also contrasted the operation of the respective corps: 
“VMI emphasizes uniformity, hierarchy, and the adversative 
method. VPI recognizes individual differences and is more 
informal.” Jbid. And, most importantly, VPI’s corps of 
cadets lacks the traditions, prestige and alumni ties that VMI 
enjoys. Id. at 192a. 


30 


result from admitting women to VMI are changes in 
“physical training, the absence of privacy, and the 
adversative approach.” Pet. App. 147a-148a. Cross- 
petitioners have failed to identify any state interest 
whatsoever in preserving those particular attributes 
of VMI’s method in exactly their current form—and 
they certainly have not identified any such interest 
sufficiently important to justify excluding women 
from VMI. 

Admission of women would not require VMI to 
change materially the distinctive, military-style edu- 
cational benefits it currently affords. See 94-1941 
U.S. Br. 28-33.“ As we argued in our opening brief, 
accommodations necessary to preserve privacy or ac- 
count for physical differences would be minimal, and 
would not adversely affect the ability of VMI to con- 
tinue to fulfill its mission of producing “citizen- 
soldiers” through its military-style program. The 
court of appeals’ concern that the “decency that still 
permeates the relationship between the sexes” (Pet. 
App. 23a) would suffer if the adversative“ method 


VMI asserts (Br. 34, 36) that it is “[t]he simple truth 
* * * that ‘VMI’s mission can be accomplished only in a single- 
gender environment,’” and that “that factual issue was re- 
solved against the Government by both courts below.” The 
United States does not contest that some limited changes, such 
as separate toilets, would be needed. The dispute focuses, 
rather, on the legal conclusions to be drawn regarding such 
changes—specifically, whether the admission of women would 
change VMI in a manner material to any actual state interest 
“of the Commonwealth, and whether the refusal to make those 
changes is constitutional in light of the fact that the result of 
that refusal is the exclusion of women from a unique educa- 
tional program. These are purely legal issues subject to de 
novo review. 


31 


were conducted in a coeducational environment is con- 
stitutionally invalid; women who are qualified to 
attend VMI and who want to go there cannot be ex- 
cluded in the name of advancing archaic notions of 
appropriate interaction between women and men.” 
Moreover, the benefits to men of attending VMI would 
probably be enhanced, rather than diminished, if 
women were admitted. Leadership and military 
careers in today’s society require men and women to 
interact in a mature, respectful and professional man- 
ner with members of the other sex. See, e.g., Pet. 
App. 241la-242a (district court finding that, upon the 
admission of women, “[i]f anything, the VMI ROTC 
experience would become a better training program 
from the perspective of the armed forces, because it 
woula provide training in dealing with a mixed- 
gender army”). 


0 Cross-petitioners’ assertion (Br. 35) that, if women were 
present, “the strict egalitarianism that pervades all aspects of 
the program[] would undergo radical change or disappear 
altogether” is absurd. Egalitarianism would be advanced, not 
hindered, by admitting qualified women to VMI, just as egali- 
tarianism was advanced when African American students 
were first admitted to VMI in 1968. No one suggests that 
“tensions” that are “incompatible with VMI’s educational 
method” (ibid.) arise because VMI has special programs de- 
voted to “Retention of Black Cadets,” Pet. App. 229a-230a, 
providing them with academic assistance, VMI I C. A. App. 
1435, and fostering “[s]ocial-cultural support and black stu- 
dent morale within a dominantly white institution,” id. at 
1438. See also 94-1941 U.S. Br. 29 (recounting existing dif- 
ferences in treatment of male cadets). The notion that egali- 
tarianism suffers when women and men are together, because 
minor accommodations need to be made, is inconsistent with 
the most fundamental meaning of the Equal Protection Clause. 


32 


b. Cross-petitioners contend (Br. 43-45) that VMI 
may continue to exclude women in the absence of any 
alternative because of an asserted lack of demand 
among women for a VMI-type education. There is 
no factual basis for that argument, and it is also 
contrary to established law because based on stereo- 
typed views of women’s preferences and abilities.” 
The district court thus correctly viewed the level of 
demand as irrelevant as a matter of law. Pet. App. 
174a. It found, in addition, that VMI would be able 
to achieve at least 10% female enrollment” and that 
„It jhis would be a sufficient ‘critical mass’ to provide 
the female cadets with a positive educational experi- 
ence.” Id. at 232a.“ 

Cross-petitioners do not disagree with that factual 
determination. Instead, they allege a lack of demand 
for a separate, women-only “VMI.” Even if that fac- 
tual allegation were supported (which it is not), a low 
level of demand for a separate opportunity—even one, 
like a school, that requires investment of substantial 
resources—cannot justify otherwise unconstitutional 
discrimination. Thus, at a time when separate- 


% VMI’s failure to raise this argument in the lower courts 
also waived it. 


See also Pet. App. 23la (crediting cross-petitioners’ ex- 
pert witness testimony that “successful recruitment of women 
would likely yield VMI a cadet corps of approximately 10% 
women, or 130 women”); id. at 174a (“some women, at least, 
would want to attend [VMI] if they had the opportunity”). 
VMI engages in “extensive recruiting activities” to attract 
men and makes no effort to recruit women, id. at 228a, yet 
“Cdjuring the two years preceding the filing of this action, 
* * * [VMI] receive[d] over 300 inquiries from women,” id. 
at 141a; see also id. at 229a (district court finding); see, e.g., 


L.. 156. 


33 


but-equal racial segregation was constitutionally per- 
missible, the Court held that a black person could not 
be denied admission to the State’s only (all-white) 
law school on the ground that not enough blacks 
were interested in law to justify the State’s establish- 
ment of a black law school. Missouri. ex rel. Gaines 
v. Canada, 305 U.S. 387 (1938). The equal protec- 
tion right of the black law school applicant was “a 
personal one,” and he was entitled to be furnished 
an educational program equal to that provided to 
whites “whether or not other negroes also sought the 
same opportunity.” Id. at 351. And as early as 1914 
the Court held that the failure to offer black travelers 
luxury railroad accommodations could not be justified 
on the ground that the carrier wished to segregate the 
races and too few black travelers could afford luxury 
accommodations to justify their provision for blacks. 
McCabe v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry., 235 U.S. 151. 
Cross-petitioners have failed to cite a single case to 
support their demand-based defense, and we know of 
none.™ 

As a factual matter, cross-petitioners failed to 
show that there is an actual lack of demand for a 
separate, women’s VMI. The only evidence cited re- 
garding allegedly low levels of presumed demand for 
a women’s VMI was offered in the remedial proceed- 
ings, in an effort to justify VWIL’s substantial differ- 
ences from VMI. That evidence is avowedly com- 
pletely speculative and not based on empirically re- 


* But see Faulkner v. Jones, 51 F.3d at 445 (emphasis 
omitted) (speculating, in absence of evidence of lack of de- 
mand, whether established rule that “demand is not relevant 
to an equal protection analysis” might differ when the State 
confers not a “civil right“ but an “economic benefit“). 


34 


liable surveys or other reliable methodology,” and 
was, in all events, introduced too late to be relevant 
to the already completed liability proceeding. 

It would, moreover, be impossible suddenly to cre- 
ate a new institution for women only that would be 
equal to VMI. See 94-1941 U.S. Br. 20-25. Given the 
inevitable deficiencies in facilities, faculty, prestige, 
traditions and alumni connections of a new, separate 
“women’s VMI,” it thus would not be at all sur- 
prising if some women who are interested in attend- 
ing VMI itself would not want to attend such a new, 
separate institution. The impossibility of quickly 
duplicating for women an established and successful 
men-only college is a reason that qualified women 
must be admitted to the existing institution, not a 
justification for continuing to exclude them. See 
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950) (requiring 
admission of black plaintiff to whites-only law school 
due to absence of constitutionally adequate separate 
alternative for blacks); Faulkner v. Jones, 51 F.3d 
440, 450 (requiring admission of woman plaintiff 
to men-only military college if the State failed to 
provide a constitutionally adequate single-sex alter- 
native for women), motion to stay mandate denied, 
66 F.3d 661 (4th Cir.), application for stay of en- 
forcement denied, No. A-127 (Aug. 11, 1995). 

Demand is also a product of the historical avail- 
ability of opportunities. The fact that Virginia has 


One of the experts whose testimony cross-petitioners cite 
merely extrapolated from his own conclusions about women’s 
personalities to conclude that there would be little demand 
for a women’s VMI. Pet. App. 73a-74a. A second expert 
arrived at the same conclusion by referring to demand among 
women for West Point and VPI, id. at 75a n.12, both of which 
in fact successfully appeal to ample numbers of women. 


35 


never offered—and still does not offer—a VMI edu- 
cation to women thus undoubtedly plays a large role 
in the apparent level of wornen's interest in such an 
institution.“ Sex-based of.cial policies that restrict 
opportunity based on stereotypes are harmful pre- 
cisely because they reinforce restrictive roles for men 
and women. When the roles deemed appropriate for 
men and women are thus restricted, individuals’ sense 
of possibility is artificially curtailed. Arguments 
based on “demand” are accordingly especially sus- 
pect in this setting.” 


Il. THE LEGALITY OF PRIVATE SINGLE-SEX EDU- 
CATION WOULD BE UNAFFECTED BY A HOLD- 
ING THAT VMI’S ADMISSIONS POLICY IS UN- 
CONSTITUTIONAL 


Contrary to cross-petitioners’ suggestion (Br. 41), 
the unconstitutionality of VMI’s men-only admissions 
policy, like the unconstitutionality of the MUW 
women-only admissions policy invalidated in Hogan, 
does not affect the continued legality of private single- 


“Cf. Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321, 330 (1977) 
(under Title VII, the actual applicant pool for a particular 
position may be artificially depressed “since otherwise quali- 
fied people might be discouraged from applying because of a 
self-recognized inability to meet the very standards challenged 
as being discriminatory”) ; International Bhd. of Teamsters v. 
United States, 431 U.S. 324, 365-367 (1977). 


88 It is noteworthy, for example, in light of the 1972 enact- 
ment of Title IX, that, from 1971 to 1978, girls’ participation 
in organized high school sports rose by over 600% (notwith- 
standing a 5% decrease in overall enrollment of girls in high 
school during that period). See 44 Fed. Reg. 71,419 (1979). 
Women’s participation in college intramural and intercolle- 
giate sports rose by over 100% during the same period. Ibid. 


36 


sex education. Private entities are not state actors 
under the United States Constitution; thus a ruling 
that VMI cannot constitutionally continue to exclude 
women would not, for example, require private, men’s 
institutions such as Hampton-Sydney and Morehouse 
Colleges, or private, women’s institutions such as 
Randolph-Macon and Spelman Colleges, to admit 
members of the other sex.“ 

Because the Fourteenth Amendment “erects no 
shield against merely private conduct, however dis- 
criminatory or wrongful,” Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 
U.S. 1, 13 (1948), such a ruling also will not pre- 
vent governments from providing financial assistance 
to private educational institutions, including single- 
sex institutions, pursuant to nondiscriminatory gov- 
ernmental assistance programs.” The provision of 
even substantial public assistance has been held not 
to convert an otherwise private entity into a govern- 
mental actor. See 94-1941 U.S. Br. 45 n.31. In 
Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830, 843 (1982), 
for example, the Court held that, even where public 


% With certain specified exceptions, private educational in- 
stitutions that receive federal financial assistance may main- 
tain single-sex admissions policies without violating the non- 
discrimination requirements of Title IX, 20 U.S.C. 1681 (a). 
But see 20 U.S.C. 1681(a)(1) (excepting private “institu- 
tions of vocational education, professional education, and 
graduate higher education”). Under federal law, private 
schools may not, however, refuse admission to qualified in- 
dividuals based on race—a prohibition that applies without 
regard to receipt of federal funds. See 42 U.S.C. 1981; Runyon 
v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160 (1976). Section 1981 is inapplicable 
to sex discrimination. 


n That would be true whether intermediate or strict scrutiny 
applies. 


37 


funds accounted for virtually all of a private school’s 
operating budget, the school was not subject to con- 
stitutional constraints. -A State is held constitution- 
ally liable for a private institution’s policies “only 
when it can be said that the State is responsible for 
the specific conduct of which the plaintiff complains” ; 
such responsibility exists only where the State has 
“exercised coercive power or has provided such sig- 
nificant encouragement, either overt or covert, that 
the choice must in law be deemed to be that of the 
State.” Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S. 991, 1004 (1982). 
“Mere approval of or acquiescence in the initiatives 
of a private party is not sufficient to justify holding 
the State responsible for those initiatives under the 
terms of the Fourteenth Amendment.” Id. at 1004- 
1005. 

Cross-petitioners err in contending (Br. 41-42) 
that this Court’s decision in Norwood v. Harrison, 
413 U.S. 455 (1973), is to the contrary. Norwood 
held that a State that was under a federal desegre- 
gation order, and that therefore had an affirmative 
constitutional duty to dismantle its segregated sys- 
tem of education, could not provide aid to all-white 
private schools founded in order to avoid public 
school desegregation. Id. at 467-468. Providing pub- 
lic assistance to private institutions that admit only 
members of certain groups has not been held to vio- 
late equal protection when that aid is part of a non- 
discriminatory government program serving legiti- 
mate governmental objectives. See, e.g., Moose Lodge 
No. 107 v. Irvis, 407 U.S. 163, 176 (1972) (State’s 
grant of valuable liquor license to private club does 
not render State liable for club’s policy of racial 
exclusion). 


38 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the court of appeals on liability 
should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
DEVAL L. PATRICK 
Assistant Attorney General 


PAUL BENDER 
Deputy Solicitor General 


CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


JESSICA DUNSAY SILVER 
THOMAS E. CHANDLER 


Attorneys 
DECEMBER 1995 


„„ „ COvEREwERT raimTine orrice, 1995 408017 40027 


