Supreme Court, U.S. 
riSLE DBD 


94 771 OCI 27 19% 
No. 


OFFICE OF THE CLERK 


2 


In the Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
Petitioner 
V. 
CHICKASAW NATION, 
Respondent 


Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


DAVID HUDSON CHARLES ROTHFELD* 
General Counsel GARY A. WINTERS 
DAVID ALLEN MILEY Mayer, Brown & Platt 


Assistant General Counsel Suite 6500 

Oklahoma Tax Commission 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Post Office Box 53248 Washington, D.C. 20006 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152 (202) 778-0616 

(405) 521-3141 


* Counsel of Record 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether principles of federal pre-emption or Indian 
sovereignty preclude a State from imposing a tax on motor 
fuel sold by an Indian tribe, when the fuel is purchased in 
substantial part by non-Indians or non-members of the tribe, 
and the fuel is used outside of Indian country on roads 
constructed and maintained by the State. 


2. Whether the legal incidence of Oklahoma’s tax on 
motor fuel falls upon the ultimate purchaser of the fuel. 


3. Whether federal law precludes state taxation of the 
income of Indians who work on tribal trust lands but live 
outside of Indian country. 


Se Se 


(ii) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............... (iii) 
Pl PPPOE eee eee ee 1 
SESE POURED cicecceeceweuadevnrs 2 
ee rrr ener oe ee 2 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION ..... 7 


I. OKLAHOMA’S FUEL TAX MAY BE APPLIED 
TO SALES BY THE TRIBE.............. 8 


A. Fuel That Is Sold By A Tribe To Non-Members 
And That Is Used On State Roads Is Subject To 
Ce ee re etre he 8 


B. The Legal Incidence Of The Fuel Tax Falls 
Upen Fae Ce o.oo ce ecceneeeees 20 


Il. THE TREATY WITH THE CHICKASAW 
NATION DOES NOT PRECLUDE IMPOSITION 
OF OKLAHOMA’S INCOME TAX ON TRIBAL 
MEMBERS WHO LIVE OUTSIDE INDIAN 
es a ra er ee 23 


CORMRMMEMMN ce cicsctas ve eeuen eae eeeen 29 


(iii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases “—- 
California State Board of Equaliza- 
tion v. Chemehuevi Indian Tribe, 474 
Ee 11, 22, 23 


California v. Cabazon Band of Mission 
Indians, 480 U.S. 202 (1985) ........... 13, 14 


Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 
Es se 17, 18 


Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 
Cr 9, 26 


Dept. of Taxation and Finance v. 
Milhelm Attea & Bros., 114 S. Ct. 
ee et et te ee eos 7 


Detroit v. Murray Corp., 355 U.S. 
NEES eee 18 


Dows v. City of Chicago, 78 U.S. (11 
ES SO ee eee 19 


Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990) ......... 12, 14 


McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax 
Comm’n, 411 U.S. 164 (1973) . 8, 10-14, 24, 26-29, 


34 
McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. « Wheat. ) 
ee ge 18 
Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones, 411 
Ee 10, 11, T?, 27 


Moe v. Confederated Salish and 
Kootenai Tribes, 425 U.S. 463 (1976) .... 11-14, 34 


(iv) 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Pages 

Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 471 U.S. 

pt ge eee 11, 12, 14 
New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 

a er 16 
Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Citizen Band 

Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 498 U.S. 

gs ree or are 11, 13, 18, 28 
Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. United States, 

319 U.S. 598 (1943)... ee ee eee 17 


Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sac and 
Fox Nation, 113 S. Ct. 1988 (1993) . 3, 5, 6, 12, 17, 
19, 23, 24, 28, 34 


Ramah Navajo School Board v. Bureau 
of Revenue, 458 U.S. 832 (1982) ......... 7, 10 


Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713 (1983) .... 9, 10, 15, 16 


Sac and Fox Nation v. Oklahoma Tax 
Comm’n, 967 F.2d 1425 (10th Cir. 


1992) Pee ee eee ee eee eee eee eens 5 
United States v. County of Fresno, 429 

Wi EE 6 6 Cae A De a ee ee ee pa we 
United States v. New Mexico, 455 U.S. 

Poo BE a ee a ee re eee 18 
Warren Trading Post Co. v. Arizona Tax 

Conme'a, SRO-U.B Ge tees kc te ee ee 13 


Washington v. Confederated Tribes of 
Colville Indian Reservation, 447 
U2. 206 Ee 5s i SM oe 8 4, 7, 10-15, 18, 34 


(v) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Pages 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. 

Bracker, 448 U.S. 136 (1980) .... 9, 10, 12, 16, 28 
Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217 (1959) ........ i oo 
Woodward v. De Graffenried, 238 U.S. 

ee ee a ee 6 a le 19 
Statutes 
Treaty of Sept. 27, 1830, 7 Stat. 333 ........ y i ie 
Treaty With the Seneca of July 20, 1831, 

ee gs kg bdo g 6 gap 4 a ke + 0 8 6 29 
Treaty With the Shawnee of Aug. 1, 1831, 

irae Gain ad 6 a0 06s e & 4 em 8 29 
Treaty With the Ottawa of Aug. 30, 1831, 

a St ee ek ie kk ww 8 29 
Treaty of March 24, 1832, 7 Stat. 366 .......... 28 
Treaty With the Seminole of March 21, 1866, 

ead gg ww idan) a0 4 6 « 28 
Treaty With the Chocktaw and Chickasaw of Aug. 28, 

ee kg og we ae a 4 7 
Treaty With the Creek of June 14, 1866, 

EE 28 
TE oo. oy ys AS 5S 6 6 bo ae oe 8a 24 
CE kt ce ee eee tee eee eee ee 7 
EE ee ee 1 


OS | oe ire 20, 21 


(vi) 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES Pages 
o MT Ss ee ae ES 25% 2 
Ss & F & Sr rear ar eer 2 
5 © 8. eee ee are 2 
SF 8 ee ee eee 2 
fp ag I ewe cence eeeees 2 
5 © Ear es ar 2 
» & & F  * Seerrererrr cree. 2 
5 a are 2 
ae ee ee ee ee 3 
ce © 2 Serer ree ree es ese 2 
_ = | 8 20, 21 
Ss FS) er ere es ee 21 
Se ee F Fo} re aaa 21 
eee ef Ler reer e eee 21 
y ng Bile iy OE ec eee vaweens 21 
SS 8. Pee ee 21 
~~ we SS PPP eee eee ee ee ee 2 
Soke eee eee ee eee 2 
ey EE ee ere eee Deve EF OS 2 
eee 4 eeever reer a fee 2 
= — FY * |: Pee eres ce ee Pees 21 


: 
j 
: 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, me 
Petitioner 
ve 
CHICKASAW NATION 
; Respondent 


Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals (App., infra, 1a-31a) 
is reported at 31 F.3d 964. The opinion of the district court 
(App., infra, 32a-38a) is unreported. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on July 
29, 1994. The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 
U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


2 


STATUTES INVOLVED 


Relevant portions of Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, Art. 5, and of 
the Treaty With the Chocktaw, Sept. 27, 1830, 7 Stat. 333, 
are reprinted at App., infra, 39a-43a. 


STATEMENT 


The court of appeals’ decision in this case imposes an 
extraordinary restriction on state taxing authority. The court 
held that imposition of a state tax on motor fuel sold by an 
Indian tribe is precluded by principles of federal pre-emption 
and Indian sovereignty — even though the fuel is sold to non- 
Indians, and is used outside of Indian country on roads 
constructed and maintained by the State. The court also held 
that federal law precludes the imposition of a state income tax 
on tribal members who are employed on tribal trust lands but 
who live outside of Indian country. These holdings impose 
a significant burden on the States, depart from the decisions 
of this Court, and sow considerable confusion in an already 
complex and difficult area of the law. Further review 
therefore is warranted. 


1. The State of Oklahoma imposes a tax “upon the sale 
of each and every gallon” of gasoline and diesel fuel sold 
within the State. Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, §§ 502, 502.1. See 
also id., §§ 502.2, 502.3, 502.4, 502.5, 502.6, 502.7, 516, 
520, 522, 522.1. The tax statute makes the distributors of the 
fuel “agent[s]} of the state for the collection of the excise tax” 
(id. § 506) and requires them to pay the tax due on each 
gallon of fuel sold to retailers or others in Oklahoma (id. § 
505), although “[t}he retailer’s wholesale price will include 
the motor fuel taxes which are in turn included in the retail 
price at the pump.” App. infra, 35a. The tax, imposed at 
the rate of $.17 per gallon on gasoline and $.14 per gallon on 
diesel fuel, is a significant source of revenue for Oklahoma, 
generating approximately $320 million annually. See id. §§ 
§§ 502, 502.1, 502.2, 502.3, 502.4, 502.5, 506.2, 502.7, 
520, 522, and 522.1. Over 70% of this revenue is deposited 


3 


in the State Transportation Fund for use in highway 
construction; most of the remainder is given to counties and 
municipalities for road maintenance. See id. §§ 504, 504.1, 
518, 519, 523, 523.1. 


2. Respondent (“the Tribe”), a federally recognized 
Indian tribe, owns and operates convenience stores on lands 
held in trust for it by the United States. These stores, which 
are open to the general public, sell motor fuel and other 
goods both to tribal members and to non-member customers. 
App., infra, 2a. While the State has exempted from tax fuel 
purchased by respondent for use in tribally owned vehicles 
(see id. at 35a), it has collected the tax on fuel obtained by 
respondent for resale at the Tribe’s convenience stores. 


Invoking principles of Indian sovereignty, respondent 
brought this suit against the Commission in 1991, seeking to 
enjoin collection of the tax “on all motor fuel it purchases for 
resale” (App., infra, 35a (emphasis added)) — including fuel 
sold to non-Indians for use on state roads lying outside of 
Indian country.' The United States District Court for the 
Eastern District of Oklahoma rejected respondent’s claim. 
App., infra, 35a-37a. The court began by noting that 
“[f]ederal law does not preempt the state motor fuel tax 
scheme,” which meant that the Tribe could prevail only by 
“show[ing] that the motor fuel tax infringes on the right of 
tribal self-government.” App., infra, 36a. On that issue, the 
district court explained that this Court’s decisions “seek[] an 
accommodation between the interests of the Tribes and the 
Federal Government, on the one hand, and those of the State, 
on the other.” Ibid. 


In conducting that inquiry, the court made a series of 
factual findings: 


' For the definition of Indian country, see Oklahoma Tax 
Commission v. Sac and Fox Nation, 113 S. Ct. 1985, 1991 (1993). 


4 


In Oklahoma the gasoline transported onto Indian 
country is for resale only and is used almost exclusively 
off of Indian country on State jurisdiction roads. * * * 


Further, the Tribe does not construct or maintain 
roads and highways for the use of the general public in 
Oklahoma. The State of Oklahoma constructs and 
maintains 111,412.76 miles of streets, roads and 
highways in Oklahoma which is funded by the state tax 
on motor fuel. All of the road mileage maintained by the 
state is off Indian Country. 


App., infra, 36a-37a. 


Against this background, the court found that the tax 
exemption sought by respondent would serve principally to 
permit it “‘to market an exemption from state taxation to 
persons who would normally do their business elsewhere.’” 
App., infra, 37a, quoting Washington v. Confederated Tribes 
of Colville Indian Reservation, 447 U.S. 134, 155 (1980). In 
addition, because the motor fuel subject to tax is used almost 
exclusively on state roads maintained by Oklahoma outside 
Indian country, “the gasoline tax used to maintain these roads 
is directed at off-reservation value where the taxpayer is 
receiving State services, whether the taxpayer is a tribal 
member or not.” Ibid. “In this context,” the court 
concluded, “the patrons of tribal gas stations are properly 
subject to the State’s motor fuel taxes.” Jbid. 


The court of appeals reversed, holding that the district 
court erred in two respects. App., infra, 12a-16a. First, the 
court of appeals concluded that the district court should have 
found the legal incidence of the tax to be on the retailer and 
therefore, in this case, on the Tribe. The court of appeals 
recognized that “the statutes do not expressly declare the legal 
incidence of the taxes to be on the retailer” (App., infra, 
13a), and acknowledged that “it may well be that the tax is 
ultimately passed on to the consumer at the pump.” Jd. at 
14a. But the court nevertheless relied on the observation that 


5 


“[t]he statutes nowhere require the amount of the tax to be 
included in the retail price at the pump, a requirement which 
we could interpret as imposing the tax on the consumer.” Jd. 
at 13a. The court also found that certain statutory provisions 
— in particular, those providing that distributors receive 
credits for tax remittances that cannot be collected from 
retailers — make the distributor “no more than a transmittal 
agent for the taxes imposed on the retailer.” Jd. at 14a. 


In this setting, the court of appeals concluded that the 
district court also erred in rejecting respondent’s claim that 
the motor fuel tax was displaced by principles of Indian 
sovereignty. The court of appeals reasoned that 


[b]ecause they are directed toward funding traditional 
government activities, the taxes fall within the ambit 
of the sovereignty of the tribal government. * * * 
Where the state action conflicts with a power within 
the traditional scope of Indian sovereign authority, 
preemption is presumed in the absence of an explicit 
statement of congressional intent to the contrary. 


App., infra, 15a-16a. The court of appeals therefore held 
that “the district court’s balancing of the respective tribal and 
state interests at stake was not relevant to the determination 
of the propriety of the fuel taxes”; it directed a grant of 
summary judgment in the Tribe’s favor. Jd. at 16a. 


3. This case also involves a claim that the State cannot 
impose its income tax on persons who are employed by the 
Tribe on tribal trust lands. See App., infra, 33a. The 
district court found that claim controlled by the Tenth 
Circuit’s decision in Sac and Fox Nation v. Oklahoma Tax 
Comm’n, 967 F.2d 1425 (10th Cir. 1992), and dismissed it 
as moot. App., infra, 38a. While the appeal in this case was 
pending, however, this Court vacated and remanded the Tenth 
Circuit’s decision in Sac and Fox (see Oklahoma Tax Comm’n 
v. Sac and Fox Nation, 113 S. Ct. 1985 (1993)), and the 


6 


court below accordingly addressed the merits of respondent’s 
claim. 

The court of appeals first held that the State may impose 
the tax on tribal employees who are not members of the Tribe 
(App., infra, 21a-22a), but that the tax may not be applied to 
employees who are members of the Tribe and who live on the 
formal reservation or in Indian country. Jd. at 23a-24a. In 
the portion of the holding at issue here, the court then held 
that the state may not tax the income of tribal members who 
are employed by the Tribe but who live outside of Indian 
country. Noting that this Court in Sac and Fox left open the 
question whether such persons are presumptively outside the 
scope of the State’s taxing jurisdiction (id. at 25a, citing 113 
S. Ct. at 1992), the court of appeals concluded that such a 
presumption should not apply. See id. at 26a. 


The court nevertheless held, however, that state taxation 
of tribal members is expressly barred by the United States’ 
treaty with the Chickasaw Nation. That treaty provides, in 
relevant part: 


The Government and the people of the United States are 
hereby obliged to secure to the said [Chickasaw] Nation 
of Red People the jurisdiction and government of all the 
persons and property that may be within their limits west, 
so that no Territory or State shall ever have [the] right to 
pass laws for the government of the [Chickasaw] Nation 
of Red People and their descendants; and that no part of 
the land granted them shall ever be embraced in any 
territory or State; but the U.S. shall forever secure said 
[Chickasaw] Nation from, and against, all laws except 
such as from time to time may be enacted in their own 
National Councils, not inconsistent with the Constitution, 
Treaties, and Laws of the United States; and except such 
as may, and which have been enacted by Congress, to 
the extent that Congress under the Constitution are 
required to exercise a legislation over Indian Affairs. 


GN eee OO oh oe BR ee en 


7 


Treaty of Sept. 27, 1830, 7 Stat. 333 (emphasis added).? 
The court concluded that “[t]he crucial question in 
determining the validity of the income tax under the relevant 
treaty language is * * * whether the law is one imposed on 
the Chickasaw Nation or its descendants. Residency is 
simply not relevant to this determination.” App., infra, 30a. 
The court therefore held that Oklahoma’s income tax may not 
be imposed “on the wages of Chickasaw members, earned on 
the reservation or in Indian country, regardless of the 
residence of those members.” Jbid.? 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


This case involves a “vexing” and “intricate” question 
(Washington v. Confederated Tribes of the Colville Indian 
Reservation, 447 U.S. 134, 138 (1980)) that “has occupied 
the Court many times in the recent past” (Ramah Navajo 
School Board, Inc. v. Bureau of Revenue, 458 U.S. 832, 847 
(1982) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting)): how to “‘reconcile the 
plenary power of the States over residents within their 
borders with the semi-autonomous status of Indians living on 
tribal reservations.’” Dept. of Taxation and Finance v. 


? The treaty actually was concluded with the Choctaw, but it is 
undisputed that a subsequent treaty made the Chickasaw the 
beneficiaries of the Choctaw agreement. See App., infra, 29a-30a 
& n.10. The United States reaffirmed the treaty in 1866, see 
Treaty with the Choctaw and Chickasaw of April 28, 1866, 14 Stat. 
769, Art. 10, and again in 1871. 25 U.S.C. § 71. 


* The decision below also addressed challenges to two other 
Oklahoma taxes. The court of appeals upheld the validity of the 
State’s tax on 3.2% beer sold in tribal stores. App., infra, 4a-12a. 
In addition, respondent contended that the State was improperly 
requiring the collection of sales tax on retail sales made to the 
Tribe; the State responded that it treated such sales as exempt from 
tax. Both the Tribe and the court accepted Oklahoma’s statement 
of its policy as valid. Jd. at 16a-19a. 


8 


Milhelm Attea & Bros., 114 S. Ct. 2028, 2035 (1994), 
quoting McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Comm’n, 411 U.S. 
164, 165 (1973). The court of appeals’ answer to that 
question should not stand. The approach taken by the court 
below significantly, and improperly, diminishes the power of 
the States to raise revenue; it departs from this Court’s 
precedents in the placement of the legal incidence of the 
challenged tax; and it threatens to cause enormous confusion 
about state authority in an area of great concern both to the 
States and to Indian tribes. Because only this Court can 
police the complex and competing sovereign interests at work 
here, further review of the decision below is in order. 


I. OKLAHOMA’S FUEL TAX MAY BE APPLIED TO 
SALES BY THE TRIBE 


A. Fuel That Is Sold By A Tribe To Non- 
Members And That Is Used On State Roads 
Is Subject To Tax 


At the outset, the nature of the fuel tax that was 
invalidated by the court below bears emphasis. The economic 
burden of the tax plainly falls upon the ultimate consumer of 
fuel, as the court of appeals itself understood; the court 
acknowledged that “it may well be that the tax is ultimately 
passed on to the consumer at the pump.” App., infra, 14a. 
The purchasers bearing that burden are, in substantial part, 
non-Indians or non-members of the Tribe. The motor fuel 
subject to tax is, in large measure, used outside of Indian 
country. And perhaps most significant, the tax revenues are 
used to defray the costs (of road construction and 
maintenance) imposed upon the State — and only upon the 
State — by the use of that fuel. 


In nevertheless invalidating the fuel tax, the court of 
appeals found a single consideration dispositive. It concluded 
that the legal incidence of the tax falls upon the retailer (and 
therefore, in this case, upon the Tribe), and proceeded to 
apply a conclusive presumption against the validity of such a 


PBI Nite en Fwd 2 40 


9 


tax. We explain below that the court’s placement of the 
levy’s legal incidence was wrong. But even granting for the 
moment that the legal incidence of the tax does fall upon the 
Tribe, the decision below plainly departed from this Court’s 
precedents: it elevated form over substance, wholly 
disregarded the State’s weighty interest in taxing the 
recipients of state services, and imposed a dramatic restriction 
on state taxing authority. It should be set aside by this Court. 


1. While the court of appeals resolved this case through 
application of a dispositive presumption, as a general matter 
“there is no rigid rule by which to resolve the question 
whether a particular state law may be applied to an Indian 
reservation or to tribal members.” White Mountain Apache 
Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 142 (1980). “Instead, [the 
Court] ha[s] applied a flexible pre-emption analysis sensitive 
to the particular facts and legislation involved. Each case 
‘requires a particularized examination of the relevant state, 
federal, and tribal interests.’” Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. 
New Mexico, 490 U.S. 163, 176 (1989) (citation omitted). 
As the Court explained just last Term, 


Resolution of conflicts of this kind does not depend on 
“rigid rule[s]” nor on “mechanical or absolute 
conceptions of state or tribal sovereignty,” but instead on 
a “particularized inquiry into the nature of the state, 
federal, and tribal interests at stake, an inquiry designed 
to determine whether, in the specific context, the exercise 
of state authority would violate federal law.” 


Milhelm Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2035 (citation omitted). 


In conducting this inquiry, “‘[c]ongressional authority 
and the “semi-independent position” of Indian tribes * * * 
[are] two independent but related barriers to the assertion of 
state regulatory authority over tribal reservations and 
members.’” Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713, 718 (1983) 
(citations omitted). Thus, “state authority may be pre-empted 
by federal law, or it may interfere with the tribe’s ability to 


10 


exercise its sovereign functions.” Ramah Navajo, 458 U.S. 
at 837.4 On the tribe’s side of this equation, the Court 
considers whether application of state law on tribal lands 
“‘would interfere with reservation self-government.’” Rice, 
463 U.S. at 718, quoting Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones, 
411 U.S. 145, 148 (1973). At the same time, the Court has 
“recognized that ‘any applicable regulatory interest of the 
State must be given weight.’” Jd. at 719. — 


The Court has followed this approach in assessing the 
validity of at least some aspects of state taxation. It is clear, 
for example, that the principle of Indian sovereignty does not 
preclude imposition of state taxes that fall on an Indian tribe 
for “tribal activities conducted outside the reservation.” 
Mescalero Apache, 411 U.S. at 148. See Colville, 447 U.S. 
at 163-164. Even as to activities taking place on reservation 
or trust lands, it also is plain that “sales to persons other than 
reservation Indians * * * are legitimately subject to state 
taxation.” Milhelm Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2031. And so far as 
such transactions are concerned, the Court has held repeatedly 
that States may exercise their authority directly against tribes 


* “The trend has been away from the idea of inherent Indian 
sovereignty as a bar to state jurisdiction and toward reliance on 
federal pre-emption. * * * The modern cases thus tend to avoid 
reliance on platonic notions of Indian sovereignty and to look 
instead to the applicable treaties and statutes which define the limits 
of state power.” McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 172. See Colville, 447 
U.S. at 178-179 (opinion of Rehnquist, J.). This distinction may 
not make much of a practical difference, however. Principles of 
Indian sovereignty “provide[] a backdrop against which the 
applicable treaties and federal statutes must be read” (McClanahan, 
411 U.S. at 172); those principles accordingly give content to the 
unique preemption doctrine applied to state laws affecting Indians. 
See generally Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713, 718-719 (1983); 
White Mountain Apache, 448 U.S. at 143. Traditions of Indian 
sovereignty and the practicalities of Indian self-government 
therefore bear on the existence of preemption. 


11 


by requiring them to shoulder tax collection obligations on the 
States’ behalf; States may “impose tax collection and book- 
keeping burdens on reservation retailers who are themselves 
enrolled tribal members, including stores operated by the 
tribes themselves.” Jd. at 2036. See Oklahoma Tax Comm’n 
v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 498 U.S. 505, 512, 
513 (1991); California State Board of Equalization v. 
Chemehuevi Indian Tribe, 474 U.S. 9, 12 (1985) (per 
curiam); Colville, 447 U.S. at 151, 159; Moe v. Confederated 
Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 425 U.S. 463, 481-483 (1976). 


2. a. To be sure, the Court has taken a more rigid 
approach where the full weight of state taxation has fallen 
directly upon the on-reservation activities of Indian tribes. 
The Court thus has characterized McClanahan, the seminal 
modern decision in the area, as holding that 


even on reservations, state laws may be applied unless 
such application would interfere with reservation self- 
government or would impair a right granted or reserved 
by federal law. * * * Even so, in the special area of 
state taxation, absent cession of jurisdiction or other 
federal statutes permitting it, there has been no 
satisfactory authority for taxing Indian reservation lands 
or Indian income from activities carried on within the 
boundaries of the reservation. 


Mescalero Apache, 411 U.S. at 148 (emphasis added). See 
Moe, 425 U.S. at 475-476. 


The Court has applied this principle repeatedly to 
invalidate state taxes whose legal and economic incidence 
necessarily fell on tribal activities taking place in Indian 
country — for example, a state income tax on “a reservation 
Indian whose entire income derives from reservation sources” 
(McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 165), or a tax on a tribe’s royalty 
interests in reservation oil and gas leases (Montana v. 
Blackfeet Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 759, 761 (1985)), or a 
tax on the sale of cigarettes on the reservation “to tribal 


12 


members for their own consumption.” Milhelm Attea, 114 S. 
Ct. at 2031.° These decisions followed from the notion of 
Indian sovereignty that underlies the Court’s analysis in this 
area, for all of the challenged taxes infringed to some degree 
“‘on the right of reservation Indians to make their own laws 
and be ruled by them.’” White Mountain Apache, 448 U.S. 
at 142, quoting Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 220 (1959). 
See McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 172. After all, a state tax on 
reservation sales by the Tribe to its members could “interfere 
with internal governance” (Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676, 686 
(1990)) by regulating the relationship between the tribal entity 
and individual members of the Tribe; direct taxation of a 
tribe’s income could impose potentially ruinous liability and 
threaten to displace the mechanisms of tribal self-government. 


But the rule against direct taxation of a tribe’s on- 
reservation activities has never been stated in absolute terms. 
It is, instead, a “presumption against jurisdiction” (Sac and 
Fox, 113 S. Ct. at 1990 (emphasis added)) under which 
“Indian tribes and individuals generally are exempt from state 
taxation within their own territory.” Blackfeet Tribe, 471 
U.S. at 764 (emphasis added). See White Mountain Apache, 
448 U.S. at 144 (“state law is generally inapplicable”) 
(emphasis added); Duro, 495 U.S. at 686 (“[w]e have held 
that States may not impose certain taxes on transactions of 
tribal members on the reservation”) (emphasis added). And 
McClanahan, the fountainhead of the Court’s doctrine, stated 
its rule as applicable only to taxes on Indian lands or income. 


5 See also Sac and Fox, 113 S. Ct. at 1990-1993 (income tax, 
and excise tax and registration fees on vehicles, imposed on Indians 
in Indian country); Colville, 447 U.S. at 162-164 (taxes on motor 
vehicles owned by tribes or their members); Moe, 425 U.S. at 480- 
481 (personal property tax on reservation property, license fee on 
Indian retailers doing business on the reservation, and tax on on- 
reservation sales of cigarettes by Indians to Indians). 


13 


b. So far as we are aware, this rule has never been 
applied to invalidate a state tax in the circumstances here: 
where the economic burden of the tax falls (as the court 
below acknowledged might well be the case) on purchasers 
who are non-Indians or non-members of the Tribe; where the 
State undeniably could impose the tax directly on those 
purchasers — and could, under Milhelm Attea, Potawatomi, 
Colville, and Moe, require the Tribe to collect and remit the 
tax; and where use of the product sold generates costs that are 
imposed entirely upon the State. Indeed, the Court has 
declared the rule against state taxation inapplicable in just 
such a situation, emphasizing that its holdings invalidating 
state levies on Indian income did not address claims “that the 
State could not tax that portion of the receipts attributable to 
on-reservation sales to non-Indians.” Moe, 425 U.S. at 
482. See also Colville, 447 U.S. at 178 (opinion of 
Rehnquist, J.) (“[h]istorically this Court has found Indians to 
be exempt from taxes on Indian ownership and activity 
confined to the reservation and not involving non-Indians”) 
(emphasis added).’ 


° The Court in Moe was addressing Warren Trading Post Co. v. 
Arizona Tax Comm’n, 380 U.S. 685 (1965), where the Court 
invalidated a state gross proceeds or income tax imposed on an on- 
reservation Indian trader. The Court noted that the “challenge to 
these [taxes] is limited to the State’s attempt to apply them to gross 
income from sales made on the reservation to reservation Indians.” 
Id. at 686 n.1. That was so even though the legal incidence of the 
tax on sales to non-Indians plainly fell on the Indian trader. The 
tax immunity of licensed Indian traders is generally equivalent to 
that of Indians themselves. See Milhelm Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2036. 


7 In California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 480 U.S. 
202, 215 n.17 (1987), the Court observed in a footnote that “[i]n 
the special area of state taxation on Indian tribes and tribal 
members, we have adopted a per se rule. * * * Accordingly, it is 
unnecessary to rebalance these [state and tribal] interests in every 


14 


The reason is apparent. Requiring a tribe to remit a tax 
on sales to non-members, and that will be used to meet costs 
imposed on the State by use of the goods sold, in no sense 
imposes a “burden which frustrates tribal self-government.” 
Moe, 425 U.S. at 483. To the contrary, it is difficult to see 
how such a tax has any bearing whatsoever on the tribes’ 
ability “to control their own internal relations, and to 
preserve their own unique customs and social order.” Duro, 
495 U.S. at 685-686. The tax, moreover, does not fall upon 
any value generated by Indians on Indian land: 


It is painfully apparent that the value marketed by the 
[retailers] to persons coming from outside is not 
generated on the reservation by activities in which the 
Tribes have a significant interest. * * * What the 
[retailers] offer these customers, and what is not 
available elsewhere, is solely an exemption from state 
taxation. 


Colville, 447 U.S. at 155. And the Court has repeatedly 
“rejected the proposition that ‘principles of federal Indian 
law, whether stated in terms of pre-emption, tribal self- 
government, or otherwise, authorize Indian tribes thus to 
market an exemption from state taxation to persons who 
would normally do their business elsewhere.’” Milhelm 
Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2035, quoting Colville, 447 U.S. at 155.° 


case.” But Cabazon Band, which was not a case involving state 
taxation and which relied for its observation on Blackfeet Tribe and 
McClanahan, cannot be read as approving preemption of state law 
in the circumstances of this case. 


* After the decision below, the Tribe imposed its own tax on 
gasoline and diesel fuel that is roughly equivalent to that imposed 
by the State. See Tribal Law 11-011 (Aug. 11, 1994). That the 
Tribe is not now marketing its tax exemption by undercutting other 
retailers, however, does not mean that it — or Oklahoma’s many 
other tribes — will not do so in the future. In any event, even if 


15 


At the same time, the State has a compelling interest in 
imposing the challenged tax, for the sale and use of motor 
fuel “has a significant impact beyond the limits of” Indian 
country. Rice, 463 U.S. at 724. It is the existence of state- 
funded public highways that makes possible the Tribe’s sale 
of fuel, while the use of that fuel requires considerable 
expenditures for the maintenance and construction of state 
roads. “This particular ‘spillover’ effect is qualitatively 
different from any ‘spillover’ effect of income taxes or taxes 
on cigarettes. ‘A State’s regulatory interest will be 
particularly substantial if the State can point to off-reservation 
effects that necessitate state intervention.’” Jbid., quoting 
New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 462 U.S. 324, 336 
(1983). And here — in contrast to other cases in which state 


the Tribe does not lower its prices, the tax exemption nevertheless 
is valuable only because it allows for imposition of a tribal tax that 
otherwise would not be feasible. See Colville, 447 U.S. at 154- 
159. Yet the State 


does not infringe the right of reservation Indians “to make 
their own laws and be ruled by them,” Williams v. Lee, 358 
U.S. 217, 220 (1959), merely because the result of imposing 
its taxes will be to deprive the Tribes of revenues which they 
currently are receiving. The principle of tribal self- 
government, grounded in notions of inherent sovereignty and 
in congressional policies, seeks an accommodation between the 
interests of the Tribes and the Federal Government, on the one 
hand, and those of the State, on the other. * * * While the 
Tribes do have an interest in raising revenue for essential 
governmental programs, that interest is strongest when the 
revenues are derived from value generated on the reservation 
by activities involving the Tribes and when the taxpayer is the 
recipient of tribal services. The State also has a legitimate 
governmental interest in raising revenues, and that interest is 
likewise strongest when the tax is directed at off-reservation 
value and when the taxpayer is the recipient of state services. 


Id. at 156-157. 


16 


taxes have been invalidated (see White Mountain Apache, 448 
U.S. at 150) — the Tribe does not construct or maintain 
highways for the use of the general public; that burden falls 
entirely on the State. 


As the district court found, 


In Oklahoma the gasoline transported onto Indian 
country is for resale only and is used almost exclusively 
off of Indian country on State jurisdiction roads. * * * 


Further, the Tribe does not construct or maintain 
roads and highways for the use of the general public in 
Oklahoma. The State of Oklahoma constructs and 
maintains 111,412.76 miles of streets, roads and 
highways in Oklahoma which is funded by the state tax 
on motor fuel. All of the road mileage maintained by the 
state is off Indian Country. Therefore, the gasoline tax 
used to maintain these roads is directed at off-reservation 
value where the taxpayer is receiving State services, 
whether the taxpayer is a tribal member or not. 


App., infra, 36a-37a. 


The court of appeals accordingly erred in holding that 
“the district court’s balancing of the respective tribal and state 
interests at stake was not relevant to the determination of the 
propriety of the fuel taxes.” App., infra, 16a. Instead, this 
is a proper case for application of a different principle: 


“This Court has repeatedly said that tax exemptions are 
not granted by implication. ... It has applied that rule to 
taxing acts affecting Indians as to all others. ... If 
Congress intends to prevent the State of Oklahoma from 
levying a general non-discriminatory * * * tax applying 
alike to all its citizens, it should say so in plain words. 
Such a conclusion cannot rest on dubious inferences.” 


pene 


ae n es 
0 th ind Dae np an a IQA a 


17 


Mescalero Apache, 411 U.S. at 156, quoting Oklahoma Tax 
Comm’n v. United States, 319 U.S. 598, 606-607 (1943).° 


3. In these circumstances, the holding below, which 
invalidates the fuel tax simply because the legal incidence is 
said to fall on the Tribe, rests upon the most sterile 
formalism. It is indisputable, after all, that the State could 
accomplish precisely the same thing by declaring the tax to 
fall on the consumer and directing the Tribe to collect and 
remit the levy. In the court of appeals’ view, then, “the only 
difference between” a constitutional tax and one that is 
invalid is “their names.” Sac and Fox, 113 S. Ct. at 1993. 


If this defect may be cured simply by declaring in the 
text of the tax statute that the legal incidence falls on the 
consumer, as the court below appeared to suggest (App. 
infra, 13a), its decision “has no relationship to economic 
realities. Rather it stands only as a trap for the unwary 
draftsman.” Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 
274, 279 (1977). And as this case illustrates, the trap would 
be a significant one. The Oklahoma statute does not, after 
all, “expressly declare the legal incidence of the taxes to be 
on the retailer” (App., infra, 13a), and the State consistently 
has understood the incidence of the tax to fall on the 
consumer. That the court of appeals nevertheless found the 
incidence of the tax to rest on the Tribe — and that the Tribe 
is entitled to a tax exemption as a result — is sure to foment 
litigation, as other tribes across the country attempt to convert 
statutory ambiguities into tax immunities. The possibility that 
States could withdraw those exemptions after the fact by 


° While it thus is clear that the tax may be imposed on sales of 
fuel to non-members of the Tribe, it is our view that the tax could 
be imposed on sales made to members of the Tribe as well. The 
fuel they purchase will be used on state roads outside of Indian 
country; as the district court explained, all users of fuel — whether 
or not tribal members — therefore will be obtaining off-reservation 
services from the State. 


18 


changing the statutory language is not a complete solution to 
this problem, because Indian sovereign immunity would 
prevent recovery by the States of forgone tax revenues. See 
Potawatomi, 498 U.S. at 509-511. 


If, on the other hand, the immunity conferred by the 
court of appeals cannot be eliminated with the stroke of a 
pen, the ultimate constitutionality of a State’s tax regime 
would turn on “mere nomenclature.” Colville, 447 U.S. at 
163-164. This is so even though “[t]here is no economic 
consequence that follows necessarily from the use of * * * 
particular words, * * * and a focus on that formalism merely 
obscures the question whether the tax produces a forbidden 
effect.” Complete Auto, 430 U.S. at 288. Such an approach 
could impose crippling burdens on state governments. 


In either case, then, review plainly is in order. The 
decision below departs from this Court’s clear holdings: 
“[t]here is of course no question that the Court has discarded 
the controlling significance of the label a State attaches to its 
taxes. A tax instead must be judged by its ‘practical 
operation.’” Colville, 447 U.S. at 188 (opinion of Rehnquist, 
J.), quoting Detroit v. Murray Corp., 355 U.S. 489 
(1958).'° And the court of appeals’ approach entirely 


© The Court has found the legal incidence of the tax to be 
controlling in one circumstance: when a state levy falls directly on 
the United States. That is because the Federal Government’s 
immunity from state taxation “has taken on essentially symbolic 
importance, as the visible ‘consequence of that [federal] supremacy 
which the constitution has declared.’” United States v. New 
Mexico, 455 U.S. 720, 735 (1982), quoting McCulloch v. 
Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316, 436 (1819). That rationale has 
no application to the relationship between States and Indian tribes, 
however. The United States, as the “supremfe]” sovereign, is 
wholly immune from state regulation and taxation. In contrast, the 
rules of Indian sovereignty are adjusted to accommodate state 
interests. See pages 9-11, supra. 


SO Pig RS Ai h Yee R Be Pe Mattbae! 829 AE AD AL ee het Ni de 


19 


divorces Indian tax immunity from its rationale, leaving it as 
an engine for the destruction of the state fisc. This is a 
matter of the greatest significance to the States, for “[iJt is 
upon taxation that the several States chiefly rely to obtain the 
means to carry on their respective governments.” Dows v. 
City of Chicago, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 108, 110 (1871). 


4. As this discussion suggests, the issue here is of 
considerable practical importance. In the most immediate 
terms, the motor fuel tax is a very significant source of 
revenue for Oklahoma, producing more than $300 million 
annually. Under the court of appeals’ rule, the taxes forgone 
on sales by respondent — and by Oklahoma’s 40 other tribes 
— would be substantial. But that will not be the extent of the 
State’s loss; “marketing” of the tax exemption by the tribes 
will take business (and therefore taxable sales) from non- 
Indian retailers, further diminishing tax revenue. The 
amounts involved surely will be significant. Cf. Milhelm 
Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2031 (purchases of untaxed cigarettes by 
non-Indians cost State $65 million in annual revenue)."’ 


More broadly, the decision below threatens state taxing 
authority and creates great uncertainty in an area of enormous 
day-to-day concern to the States. That decision raises doubts 
about the validity of any tax that does not in terms declare its 
legal incidence. As we suggest above, it is sure to prompt 
litigation. Its express disregard of the functional concerns 
that underlie controlling concepts of Indian sovereignty and 
preemption — and its holding that the “state interests at 
stake” are simply irrelevant (App., infra, 16a) — departs 


" This is a particular problem in Oklahoma because it is home 
to many tribes; in addition, the history of Oklahoma allotments 
means that Indian country is scattered helter skelter across the 
State, so that purchasers of fuel always are likely to be near an 
Indian retailer. See generally Sac and Fox, 113 S. Ct. at 1987, 
1993; Woodward v. De Graffenried, 238 U.S. 284 (1915). 


a TE OT a 


20 


from the principles announced by this Court, sowing 
confusion in what already is a vexing area. Further review 
therefore is in order. 


B. The Legal Incidence Of The Fuel Tax Falls Upon 
The Consumer 


The decision below regarding the fuel tax should be set 
aside for another reason as well: the foundation for its 
holding — the conclusion that the legal incidence of the tax 
falls on the retailer — is incorrect. While that determination 
involves a matter of state law, the court of appeals’ analysis 
departs from what this Court has held to be the proper 
approach in determining the legal incidence of state taxation. 
Because the decision below also disrupts administration of an 
essential component of the State’s system of taxation, further 
review is warranted. 


1. The court of appeals’ holding that the legal incidence 
of the tax falls on the retailer turned largely on its analysis of 
a statutory provision indicating that taxes are remitted to the 
State by distributors “‘on behalf of a licensed retailer,’” and 
that a distributor that is unable to collect the tax from the 
retailer may deduct that amount from its future tax 
remittances. App., infra, 13a-14a, quoting Okla. Stat., Tit. 
68, § 505C. But that provision suggests only that the legal 
incidence of the tax falls somewhere down the distribution 
chain from. the distributor; it says nothing about whether that 
incidence comes to rest with the retailer rather than the 
consumer. And other statutory provisions make it clear that 
it is the consumer that bears the legal incidence of the tax. 
Thus, the basic definitional elements of the motor fuel tax 
code — which were wholly disregarded by the court below — 
refer to the requirement that “a distributor, dealer, or retailer 
* * * collect taxes levied by this act” (Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 
501C (emphasis added)) — indicating that the obligation of 
both the distributor and the retailer is that, of collecting the 
tax from someone further down the distribution chain. 


21 


This conclusion is confirmed by the exemption provisions 
of the tax code. Exemptions are granted to the consumer of 
fuel, and are passed up the distribution chain to the retailer 
and then to the distributor. This regime, which in certain 
circumstances releases the ultimate purchaser from its 
obligation to pay the fuel tax, must be understood as placing 
the incidence of the tax on that purchaser. 


Thus, tax is not due on diesel fuel “used exclusively for 
purposes other than to operate motor vehicles on the public 
highways of this state” (Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 509.2A 
(1994)), and any person who places diesel fuel purchased 
under such an exemption “into the fuel tank of a motor 
vehicle for use in operating the motor vehicle on the public 
highways shall be liable for the taxes.” Id, § 509.2C 
(emphasis added). Fuel purchased by a county, city, or town 
for use in its vehicles is exempt from tax “provided that if the 
diesel fuel is placed directly into the fuel supply tank or tanks 
of the motor vehicle by the supplier, certification must be 
made on the invoice and all such sales must be reported by 
the supplier on forms furnished by the Oklahoma Tax 
Commission.” Jd., § 509.2(F). Similar exemptions are 
provided for fuel sold for use in passenger buses or coaches, 
by public school vehicles, by FFA or 4-H club trucks, or by 
volunteer fire departments. Jd., §§ 509.2E, 527. And 
“[e]very person actually engaged in farming in Oklahoma or 
in a state which borders the State of Oklahoma and buying 
motor fuel to be used for farm tractors or stationary engines 
* * * and used exclusively for agricultural purposes * * * 
may purchase such motor fuel without paying the tax.” Id. 
§ 509(b) (emphasis added).'* That these provisions relieve 


2 The court of appeals itself cited this provision for the 
proposition “that the tax is not imposed on the distributor.” App., 
infra, 14a. We agree that the exemption does indeed stand for that 
proposition — and for the further proposition that the tax is 
imposed on the consumer. 


22 


the consumer of the burden of “paying the tax” makes clear 
that the consumer ordinarily bears that burden, and thus the 
legal incidence of the levy. 


The court of appeals itself evidently acknowledged that 
its analysis of the statutory language was far from dispositive, 
premising its conclusion on the observation that the tax 
“statutes nowhere require the amount of the tax to be 
included in the retail price at the pump, a requirement which 
we could interpret as imposing the tax on the consumer.” 
App., infra, 13a. But a similar approach, which gave 
dispositive significance to the absence of “‘any ... explicit 
pass-through’ language,” already has been rejected by this 
Court. Chemehuevi, 474 U.S. at 10, quoting 757 F.2d 1047, 
1056 (9th Cir. 1985) (emphasis added by the Court). In 
Chemehuevi, the Court held: 


None of our cases has suggested that an express 
statement that the tax be passed on to the ultimate 
purchaser is necessary before a State may require a 
tribe to collect * * * taxes from non-Indian 
purchasers and remit the amounts of such tax to the 
State. Nor do our cases suggest that the only test 
for whether the legal incidence of such a tax falls on 
purchasers is whether the taxing statute contains an 
express “pass on and collect” provision. 


474 U.S. at 11. Instead, a court is to apply “nothing more 
than a fair interpretation of the taxing statute as written and 
applied.” Jbid.'? The Tenth Circuit’s analysis of the motor 
fuel tax is not such a fair reading of the statute. 


We recognize, of course, that this Court often is reluctant 
to review determinations made by courts of appeals regarding 


The court below recognized this holding in connection with 
its analysis of another tax — Oklahoma’s levy on 3.2% beer. See 
App., infra, 9a. 


23 


the meaning or application of state law. But in the setting 
presented by this case, the Court has been vigilant in policing 
decisions that will disrupt the delicate and complex 
adjustments of sovereign power between States, Indian tribes, 
and the United States. That is particularly so when it is the 
validity of an essential state law that hangs in the balance. 
The Court in Chemehuevi thus set aside the judgment of a 
court of appeals in a case very similar to this one — and, 
indeed, found it appropriate to do so summarily. Moreover, 
as we have suggested, the approach to the legal incidence 
issue taken by the court below will encourage litigants to 
attempt to convert arguable ambiguities in state tax statutes 
into tax immunities. In these circumstances, this Court 
should set aside the decision below. 


Il. THE TREATY WITH THE CHICKASAW NATION 
DOES NOT PRECLUDE IMPOSITION OF 
OKLAHOMA’S INCOME TAX ON TRIBAL 
MEMBERS WHO LIVE OUTSIDE INDIAN 
COUNTRY 


The challenge to the second tax at issue in this case 
concerns a question the Court left open in Sac and Fox: 
whether Oklahoma may impose its income tax on enrolled 
members of an Indian tribe who earn income on Indian trust 
lands but do not live either on the formal reservation or 
within the boundaries of Indian country. The court below, 
construing the treaty between the United States and the 
Chickasaw Nation, held the tax invalid. Because this decision 
is plainly wrong, bars the State from taxing a group of 
residents to whom it provides substantial services, and is 
based on an interpretation of language that is found in treaties 
with Indian tribes across the Nation, further review by this 
Court is warranted. 


1. In Sac and Fox, this Court was faced with the 
question whether Indians living in Indian country (but not on 
the formal reservation) may be subjected to state income tax 


24 


for income earned on Indian trust lands. Although the Tenth 
Circuit had held that the presumption against state jurisdiction 
to tax arises whenever a tribal member earns income on trust 
lands, this Court rejected any approach that fails to take 
account of residence: “The residence of a tribal member is 
a significant component of the McClanahan presumption 
against state tax jurisdiction.” 113 S. Ct. at 1991. 


The Court proceeded to hold that tribal members who 
live in Indian country, like members who live on the 
reservation, are presumptively outside the state’s ‘axing 
jurisdiction. 113 S. Ct. at 1991, 1993. The decision was 
based on the view that the tradition of tribal sovereignty — 
which undergirds the McClanahan presumption against state 
taxation of the income of Indians who live and work on the 
reservation — extends beyond the formal boundaries of the 
reservation to the “informal reservations, dependent Indian 
communities, and Indian allotments, whether restricted or 
held in trust by the United States,” that comprise Indian 
country. Jbid., citing 18 U.S.C. § 1151. But the Court did 
not reach the question whether pre-emption or sovereignty 
principles preclude the State from taxing “income earned 
from work performed by the Tribe itself when the employee 
does not reside in Indian country.” 113 S. Ct. at 1992. 


In this case, the court below purported to read Sac and 
Fox as merely extending the presumption against state tax 
jurisdiction to tribal members living in Indian country. App.., 
infra, 24a-25a. The court went on to declare that no 
presumption of invalidity applies to state income taxes on 
Indians living outside Indian country, but that a state 
nevertheless may be prohibited from imposing such taxes if 
“the tribe [can] show that the tax is barred by one of the two 
independent barriers to the exercise of state jurisdiction over 
Indians, i.e. interference with reservation self-government or 
impairment of rights granted or reserved by federal law.” 
App., infra, 26a-27a. While petitioner has no quarrel with 
this statement in the abstract, the court’s construction of the 


25 


treaty with the Chickasaw — which it held to create such an 
independent bar to taxation — is insupportable. 


2. The court below relied on Article IV of the treaty, 
which provides: 


The Government and the people of the United States are 
hereby obliged to secure to the said [Chickasaw] Nation 
of Red People the jurisdiction and government of all the 
persons and property that may be within their limits west, 
so that no Territory or State shall ever have [the] right to 
pass laws for the government of the [Chickasaw] Nation 
of Red People and their descendants; and that no part of 
the land granted them shall ever be embraced in any 
territory or State; but the U.S. shall forever secure said 
[Chickasaw] Nation from, and against, all laws except 
such as from time to time may be enacted in their own 
National Councils, not inconsistent with the Constitution, 
Treaties, and Laws of the United States; and except such 
as may, and which have been enacted by Congress, to 
the extent that Congress under the Constitution are 
required to exercise a legislation over Indian Affairs. 


Treaty of Sept. 27, 1830, 7 Stat. 333. The court focused in 
particular on the language providing that “no Territory or 
State shall ever have [the] right to pass laws for the 
government of the [Chickasaw] Nation,” and held that “[t]he 
crucial question in determining the validity” of Oklahoma’s 
tax is simply “whether the law is one imposed on the 
Chickasaw Nation or its descendants.” App. infra, 30a. 
Under this analysis, “[rJesidency is simply not relevant.” 
Ibid. All that matters is whether the law — although facially 
neutral as between Indians and non-Indians — is being applied 
to members of the Tribe. 


In our view, this approach does violence to the plain 
terms of the treaty, which precludes the State from “pass[ing] 
laws for the government of the [Chickasaw Nation]” 
(emphasis added). In light of the McClanahan presumption, 


26 


this language may reasonably be read as barring state laws 
that regulate the affairs of tribal members, or that displace the 
mechanisms cf tribal government, in Indian country. But it 
cannot fairly be stretched to proscribe a non-discriminatory 
state income tax imposed on persons living outside of Indian 
country, who receive from the State both a myriad of 
particular services and “[t]he intangible value of citizenship 
in an organized society.” Cotton Petroleum, 490 U.S. at 
189. One would not, after all, characterize a state income tax 
imposed on a federal employee who lives within the State’s 
jurisdiction as a law passed “for the government of the United 
States.” 


That the holding below went too far is confirmed by the 
treaty language preceding that relied upon by the court of 
appeals. Read in context, the treaty provides that the “United 
States are hereby obliged to secure to the said [Chickasaw] 
Nation of Red People the jurisdiction and government of all 
persons and property that may be within their limits west, so 
that no Territory or State shall ever have the right to pass 
laws for the government of the [Chickasaw] Nation of Red 
People and their descendants” (emphasis added). This 
provides expressly that the agreement confers rights to the 
Tribe “within their limits” (what we would now call the 
reservation, trust land, or Indian country); the conferral of 
these rights. “so that” state laws may not be passed for the 
Tribe makes clear that the treaty has effect only within Indian 
country. | 


It may be added that the tax here is not imposed upon the 
payment of funds by the tribal government in Indian country; 
it falls, instead, upon individual members of the Tribe who 
reside outside of Indian country. See United States v. County 
of Fresno, 429 U.S. 452, 461 n.9 (1977) (“The theory * * * 
that a tax on income is legally or economically a tax on its 
source, is no longer tenable”) (citation omitted). By 
declaring that the residence of that tribal member “is simply 
not relevant” (App., infra, 30a), the court of appeals 


27 


therefore necessarily has held that tax immunity is an 
entitlement conferred upon individual Chickasaws. While the 
court purported not to resolve the question (see id. at 30a 
n.11), this rule would seem to preclude the imposition of 
Oklahoma’s income tax on all Chickasaw Indians who live 
outside Indian country, not just those who derive their income 
from work on the reservation. Indeed, taken to the limits of 
its logic, the court’s analysis would preclude the imposition 
of any state law on members of the Tribe — including all the 
other laws of Oklahoma and the laws of other states when 
Chickasaw Indians journey beyond the borders of Oklahoma. 
The parties to this treaty surely cannot have intended to 
provide Chickasaw Indians with a blanket exemption from all 
state law. But if that is not what the treaty means, the 
holding of the court below is insupportable. 


Moreover, that holding cannot be reconciled with the 
usual rule that Indians are “subject to nondiscriminatory state 
law otherwise applicable to all citizens of the State” when 
they travel beyond the reservation boundaries. Mescalero 
Apache, 411 U.S. at 148-149. While that presumption may 
be overcome by “express federal law” (ibid.), the treaty 
language relied upon here hardly carries the necessary clarity. 
In fact, this Court has never found federal law sufficient to 
overcome the rule of Mescalero Apache. That is not 
surprising, for the interest of Indians in remaining “free from 
state jurisdiction and control” (McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 168) 
is most significant when “on-reservation conduct involving 
only Indians is at issue.” White Mountain Apache, 448 U.S. 
at 144. See Potawatomi, 498 U.S. at 511." 


The court of appeals evidently found it significant that on- 
reservation Indian immunity from state regulation is stated more 
explicitly in the treaty with the Chickasaw than in the treaties 
addressed in McClanahan and Sac and Fox. See App., infra, 27a- 
28a. That observation, however, hardly supports the court’s 
conclusion. The tax at issue in McClanahan was invalidated 


28 


3. The holding below, which grants tax immunity to a 
class of Oklahoma residents, is important in its own right. 
More broadly, it has national significance because language 
either identical to, or to the same effect as, that of the 
Chickasaw treaty recurs in treaties with tribes across the 
county. The 1832 treaty with the Creek, for example, 
provides that “[t]he Creek country west of the Mississippi 
shall be solemnly guarantied to the Creek Indians, nor shall 
any State or Territory ever have a right to pass laws for the 
government of such Indians, but they shall be allowed to 
govern themselves * * * .” Treaty of March 24, 1832, 7 
Stat. 366, Art. XIV. The 1856 treaty with the Creek and 
Seminole provides that “[t]he United States do hereby, 
solemnly agree and bind themselves, that no State or 
Territory shall ever pass laws for the government of the 
Creek or Seminole tribes of Indians * * * .”'© Many other 
treaties are written in similar terms, providing, for example, 
that Indian lands will never be within a State or Territory, 
“nor subject to the laws thereof.” Treaty with the Seneca of 
July 20, 1831, 7 Stat. 351, Art. XI; Treaty with the Shawnee 
of Aug. 1, 1831, 7 Stat. 355, Art. X; Treaty with the Ottawa 
of Aug. 30, 1831, 7 Stat. 359, Art. IX. 


The Tenth Circuit’s expansive reading of the language in 
the treaty with the Chickasaw therefore provides fertile 
ground for challenges to state taxation. And because the 


because it fell upon a reservation Indian and therefore was 
(needless to say) subject to the McClanahan presumption; the Court 
left open whether the tax at issue in Sac and Fox could be applied 
to Indians living outside of Indian country. 


'S The obligations of this treaty were reaffirmed in 1866. See 
Treaty with the Creeks of June 14, 1866, 14 Stat. 785, Art. 12. 


© The United States’ treaty obligations to the Seminole also 
were reaffirmed in 1866. See Treaty with the Seminole of March 
21, 1866, 14 Stat. 755, Art. 9. 


29 


court’s decision cannot logically be limited to Indians who 
derive their income from work performed within Indian 
country, the holding below provides a basis for precluding the 
imposition of state income (or other) taxes on amy member of 
these tribes that lives outside Indian country, regardless of 
where the tribal member works. While the court below thus 
in terms declined to apply the McClanahan presumption to 
Indians living outside of Indian country, the effect of its 
decision was to confer a general tax immunity upon Indians. 
That decision should be set aside by this Court. 


CONCLUSION 
The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted. 


DAVID HUDSON CHARLES ROTHFELD* 
General Counsel GARY A. WINTERS 
DAVID ALLEN MILEY Mayer, Brown & Platt 


Assistant General Counsel Suite 6500 

Oklahoma Tax Commission 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Post Office Box 53248 Washington, D.C. 20006 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152 (202) 778-0616 

(405) 521-3141 


* Counsel of Record 


OCTOBER 1994 


—— 


“ROBERT L. WADLEY, VICE- 


la 


APPENDIX A 
PUBLISH 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


CHICKASAW NATION, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 


STATE OF OKLAHOMA ex rel. 
OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
ROBERT E. ANDERSON, CHAIRMAN 
OF THE TAX COMMISSION, 


No. 92-7117 


CHAIRMAN OF THE TAX 
COMMISSION, AND DON 
KILPATRICK, SECRETARY OF 
THE TAX COMMISSION, 


Nm ee ee ee” 


Defendants-Appellees. 


APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF OKLAHOMA 


(D.C. No. CV-91-310-NJ) 


Bob Rabon of Rabon, Wolf & Rabon, Hugo, Oklahoma, for 
Plaintiff-Appellant. 


David Hudson, General Counsel (with David Allen Miley, 
Assistant General Counsel, on the brief), Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, for Defendants- 
Appellees. 


he 


Before ANDERSON, McKAY, and EBEL, Circuit Judges. 


McKAY, Circuit Judge. 


Appellant Chickasaw Nation (“Tribe” or “Chickasaw”), 
a federally recognized Indian tribe, challenged the State of 
Oklahoma’s authority to impose certain taxes on sales, 
income, motor fuel and 3.2% beer to transactions occurring 
in Chickasaw Indian country. The case was submitted to the 
district court upon stipulated facts on cross motions for 
summary judgment. The Chickasaw appeal from the district 
court’s grant of summary judgment on each of the issues in 
favor of the State of Oklahoma and from that court’s denial 
of the Chickasaw’s cross-motion for summary judgment. 


I. FACTS 


In submitting the case to the district court for rulings on 
the cross-motions for summary judgment, the parties 
stipulated, inter alia, that 


B. plaintiff [the Tribe] owns and operates retail sales 
outlets on lands held in trust for it by the United States 
on which it sells tobacco products, motor fuel, beer and 
other goods. It does not collect sales taxes on its sales to 
tribal or non-tribal members but is required to pay sales 
taxes on motor fuel products and beer when it purchases 
them from its wholesale vendors at said retail locations. 
Defendants [the State] impose sales taxes on retail 
purchases of goods made by plaintiff where defendants 
contend such goods are used for “proprietary” as 
opposed to “governmental” purposes and when defendant 
contends the goods are purchased for resale to non-tribal 
members. 


C. plaintiff has approximately 275 tribal member and 
non-tribal member employees who earn their wages on 


——e—E—E eee 


3a 


tribal trust lands. Defendants are collecting state income 
taxes on the earnings of said employees. 


(Amended Pre-Trial Order at 2-3, Appellant’s App. Doc. 11.) 


We review the grant or denial of summary judgment de 
novo, applying the same legal standard used by the district 
court. Applied Genetics Int’l, Inc. v. First Affiliated Sec., 
Inc., 912 F.2d 1238, 1241 (10th Cir. 1990). We view the 
record in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
grant of summary judgment, here, the Tribe, to determine 
whether there is any genuine issue of material fact remaining 
for trial. Russillo v. Scarborough, 935 F.2d 1167, 1170 
(10th Cir. 1991); Deepwater Invs., Lid. v. Jackson Hole Ski 
Corp., 938 F.2d 1105, 1110 (10th Cir. 1991). 


In their Amended Joint pretrial Order, the parties 
stipulated that the sole issues of “fact” remaining to be 
litigated were as follows: 


A. The Chickasaw Nation is beneficiary to treaties with 
the United States which agree that no state may pass laws 
for it. (Defendant contends that this is a question of law 
and not an issue of fact.) 


B. Defendants have attempted to and are imposing state 
tax laws on the plaintiff tribal government and its 
constitutents [sic] in violation of said treaties, 
congressional enactments and federal policy. Such 
conduct by the defendant is preempted by federal law and 
infringes on plaintiff's right to self government and 
frustrates federal policy. (Defendant contends that this 
is a question of law and not an issue of fact.) 


(Amended Pre-Trial Order at 4). With respect to the first 
issue, the Chickasaw point to treaty language stating that “no 
territory or state shall ever have a right to pass laws for the 


4a 


government of the [Chickasaw] or their descendants.”' The 
State responds that the treaties cited by the Chickasaw are not 
relevant because they were later abrogated by acts of 
Congress. The district court did not address the issue, 
finding that the taxes did not abridge the Tribe’s right of self 
government and thus did not violate the treaty language. We 
agree with the State that both the continuing viability of the 
treaties cited by the Chickasaw and the interpretations thereof 
are questions of law and not of fact. Turning to the second 
stipulated issue remaining for trial, we conclude that whether 
the taxes imposed by the State contravene the aforementioned 
treaties and are violative of the Chickasaws’ right to self- 
government is also a question of law rather than an issue of 
fact. 


Accordingly, as the parties have stipulated to all of the 
facts before us, there can be no genuine issue of material fact 
remaining for litigation, and our review is limited to the 
question whether the substantive law was correctly applied. 
Franks v. Nimmo, 796 F.2d 1230, 1235 (10th Cir. 1986). 
We therefore review de novo the district court’s treatment of 
both of these issues and their impact on the four taxes in 
dispute in this case. 


Il. BEER TAX 


The Chickasaw operate retail stores in which they sell 
3.2% beer. This beer is purchased from wholesale 
distributors. Oklahoma law provides for a tax upon 3.2% 
beer, in the amount of $11.25 per 31 gallons. 37 Okla. Stat. 
Ann. § 163.3 (West 1990). The district court concluded that 
the State of Oklahoma had a strong interest in regulating 
3.2% beer and that under our holding in Citizen Band 
Potawatomi v. Oklahoma Tax Com’n, 975 F.2d 1459 (10th 


1 The treaty actually refers to the Choctaw Nation rather than 
the Chickasaw. However, the treaty provisions were later applied 
by Congress to the Chickasaw. See supra n.9. 


sh AM ade Bi RL ba tes ee Ke a ce Bo aah 


5a 


Cir. 1992), this regulatory authority encompassed the power 
to tax the sale of such beer. The district court thus assumed 
that the power to tax is encompassed within the power to 
regulate. We first address this assumption. 


In Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713 (1983), the Supreme 
Court faced the issue whether California could require a 
member of an Indian tribe who operated a general store on an 
Indian reservation, in which she sold alcoholic beverages, to 
obtain a state liquor license. The Court set out a two-part test 
to determine when state regulation of activities in Indian 
country is preempted. Jd. at 718. Such preemption occurs 
when application of state law: 1) “would interfere with 
reservation self-government,” or 2) “would impair a right 
granted or reserved by federal law.” Jd. (quoting Mescalero 
Apache Tribe v. Jones, 411 U.S. 145, 148 (1973). In 
determining whether application of state law would interfere 
with Indian self-government, the court must consider the 
tradition of Indian sovereignty. If there is a tradition of 
Indian sovereignty in the area concerned, then an explicit 
statement from Congress providing that state law shall apply 
is usually required. Id. at 719-20. The Rice Court concluded 
that “tradition simply has not recognized a sovereign 
immunity or inherent authority in favor of liquor regulation 
by Indians.” Jd. at 722. 


Tuming io the second prong of the test, the Court 
considered whether the state liquor licensing provisions were 
preempted by federal law. The Court held that, in enacting 
18 U.S.C. § 1161,” Congress intended to delegate both to the 


? “The provisions of sections 1154, 1156, 3113, 3488, and 
3669, of this title [barring introduction of alcoholic beverages into 
Indian country], shall not apply . . . to any act or transaction within 
any area of Indian country provided such act or transaction is in 
conformity both with the laws of the State in which such act or 
transaction occurs and with an ordinance duly adopted by the tribe 
having jurisdiction over such area of Indian country... .” 18 


6a 


states and to the tribes, its authority to regulate liquor 
transactions. Id. at 730-31. Accordingly, the Court held that 
section 1161 authorized state regulation rather than 
preempting it, and the state could properly require tribe 
members to obtain a state liquor license. Id. at 734. 


In Potawatomi, this court held that the Supreme Court’s 
reasoning in Rice was applicable to Oklahoma’s licensing 
requirements with respect to 3.2% beer, notwithstanding the 
argument that such beer was not an “alcoholic beverage” 
within the scope of § 1161 because of the bifurcated 
Oklahoma regulatory scheme classifying such beer as a 
“nonintoxicating beverage.” Potawatomi, 975 F.2d at 1462- 
64. We held that Congress in § 1161 had delegated the 
authority to regulate liquor, including 3.2% beer, and that 
Oklahoma had a “significant regulatory interest” in 3.2% 
beer despite its classification as a “nonintoxicating beverage.” 
Id. at 1464. 


The Tribe argues that, notwithstanding the Court’s 
Statements in Rice about the power to “regulate” liquor 
transactions, and notwithstanding this court’s statements on 
that matter in Potawatomi, that power has nothing to do with 
the power to tax those transactions. We agree that the power 
to regulate does not automatically encompass the power to tax 
in all circumstances. However, “[t]he mere fact a statute 
raises revenue does not imprint upon it the characteristics of 
a law by which the taxing power is exercised.” American 
Petrofina Co. of Texas v. Nance, 859 F.2d 840, 841 (10th 
Cir. 1988) (quoting State ex rel. Tindal v. Block, 717 F.2d 
874, 887 (4th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 465 U.S. 1080 
(1984)). Likewise, we do not find the fact that the beer taxes 
are deposited into the general treasury of the State of 
Oklahoma, Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 37, § 163.6 (1992), 
determinative of the issue. Where the taxation is an integral 


U.S.C. § 1161 (1988). 


eve Leyes 


Ta 


part of the overall regulatory structure in a traditionally 
heavily regulated area, as opposed to a simple revenue 
measure, the tax may properly be considered to be regulatory 
and to fall within the regulatory authority. See, e.g. Colville, 
447 U.S. at 158 (noting-that taxes may be used for regulatory 
purposes as well as for raising revenue). Such is the case 
here. Not only is the tax imposed on transactions involving 
a heavily regulated commodity, but the tax provisions 
themselves are contained within Title 37 of the Oklahoma 
Statutes, the portion of the Oklahoma Code establishing that 
regulation, rather than in the Revenue and Taxation Code 
contained in Title 68. The beer tax is thus clearly 
differentiated in the Oklahoma statutory structure from the 
sales, gasoline, and income taxes, which are included in Title 
68. We therefore hold that the beer taxes at issue in this case 
are encompassed in the congressional delegation of authority 
to regulate the sale of alcohol in Indian country contained in 
18 U.S.C. § 1161. 


Moreover, even were we to conclude that the taxation of 
3.2% beer is not part of the State’s regulatory authority, we 
would conclude that the beer tax is valid because it is not a 
tax imposed on the Indian retailer. The statute provides that 
the following persons are liable for payment of the tax: 


(a) Manufacturers. When the sale is made by a 
manufacturer, located and doing business in this state, to 
a wholesaler, located and doing business in this state, the 
tax shall be paid by the wholesaler. 


(b) Wholesalers. When the sale is made by a 
wholesaler, located and doing business in this state, to a 
retail dealer located and doing business in this state, the 
tax shall be paid by the wholesaler. Such wholesalers 
may sell only to licensed retail dealers nonintoxicating 
beverages upon which the tax provided by this act has 
first been paid by such wholesaler. 


8a 


When the sale is made by a wholesaler, located and 
doing business outside this state, and who has obtained 
an-Oklahoma wholesale beverage dealer’s license, to a 
retail dealer located and doing business in this state, the 
wholesaler shall be liable for and must pay to the Tax 
Commission the beverage tax due on such sales. In the 
event of a retail dealer, doing business in this state, 
purchases beverage from a wholesaler doing business 
outside this state, and who does not have an Oklahoma 
wholesale beverage dealer’s license, the retailer shall be 
liable for and must pay . . . the tax due on such 
Sales. ... 


For the purpose of collecting and remitting the tax 
imposed under this act, the wholesaler collecting such tax 
is hereby declared to be the agent of the state for such 
purposes, and his failure to remit or pay such tax to the 
state, when due, shall constitute embezzlement, any such 
wholesaler, upon conviction, shall be punished as 
provided by law for the embezzlement of public funds. 


(c) Retail Dealers. Retail dealers, where the out-of-state 
manufacturer or wholesaler has paid the tax under the 
provisions of this act, shall not be required to pay the 
tax. However, nothing in this act shall operate to relieve 
any retail dealer from payment of the tax where such 
retail dealer has at any time in his possession. . . 
nonintoxicating beverages upon which the tax has not 
been paid. 


37 Okla. Stat. Ann. § 163.4 (West 1990 & Supp. 1994) 
(emphases added. 


The Tribe argues that, since the statute does not explicitly 
provide that the legal incidence of the tax is on the consumer, 
as was the case in the cigarette tax considered in Washington 
v. Confederated Tribes of Colville, 447 U.S. 139 (1980), or 
on the wholesaler, the cases such as Colville upholding 


bos 2 » wee al Pes Te NER LSE NOL Re 


LE LE EE FDRG OT I ea ila a, 


9a 


cigarette taxes are inapplicable, and the tax must properly be 
seen as legally falling on the Indian retailers. 


First, we observe that the Supreme Court has squarely 
rejected the idea that an explicit statutory mandate that the tax 
be “passed on and collected” is required in order to 
determine that the legal incidence of a tax does not fall on the 
Tribe. California Bd. of Equalization v. Chemehuevi Tribe, 
474 U.S. 9, 11 (1986) (per curiam). Rather, the test to be 
derived from Coleville and analogous cases “is nothing more 
than a fair interpretation of the taxing statute as written and 
applied, without any requirement that pass-through provisions 
or collection requirements be ‘explicitly stated.’” Id.; see 
also, Colville, 447. U.S. at 141-42 and n.9 (accepting 
conclusion that cigarette tax fell upon first event upon which 
tax can constitutionally be imposed, i.e. the sale to the 
consumer, despite lack of explicit statutory language imposing 
legal incidence of tax on consumer); Indian Country, U.S.A. 
v. Oklahoma Tax Comm’n, 829 F.2d 967, 984 (10th Cir. 
1987) (accepting district court’s conclusion that legal 
incidence of Oklahoma sales tax fell on consumer despite lack 
of explicit provision so providing), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 
1218 (1988). 


A fair interpretation of the beer tax at issue here 
establishes that the legal incidence of the tax is on the beer 
wholesaler, and not on the Indian retailer. As set forth 
above, the statute specifically provides that the wholesaler 
must pay the tax. The wholesaler is liable for the tax when 
it first purchases the beer from the manufacturer and when it 
sells the beer to the retailer. In addition, the statute provides 
that the wholesaler may only sell beer upon which the tax has 
first been paid. The triggering event for the payment of the 
tax thus occurs before the sale to the retailer. 


The Tribe argues that the triggering event for the 
imposition of the tax is the actual sale of the beer by the 
wholesaler to the tribal retailer. This argument is based on 


10a 


the statutory language stating that “/wJhen the sale is made by 
the wholesaler, . . . the tax shall be paid by the wholesaler.” 
37 Okla. Stat. Ann. § 163.4(b) (emphasis added). According 
to the Tribe, since the trigger for the in,position of the tax is 
an event, i.e. the sale transaction itself, that occurs wholly in 
Indian country, the State has no jurisdiction to tax. This 
argument is dependent on an erroneous conception of the 
function of the word “when” in the statute. Contrary to the 
Tribe’s characterization, we believe the word does not carry 
a temporal connotation, but instead serves as a substitute for 
the phrase “in the event that.” Thus, the proper reading of 
the above-quoted language is “in the event that the sale is 
made by the wholesaler, . . . the tax shall be paid by the 
wholesaler.” This construction is consonant with the 
structure of § 163.4, which sets forth a series of potential 
transactions, indicating which entity is responsible for paying 
the tax in each example, and is the only construction that is 
compatible with the requirement that a wholesaler only sell 
beer upon which the tax has first been paid.’ 


> We are aware that the statute does make retailers responsible 
for paying the tax in two circumstances--when the retailer purchases 
beverage from a wholesaler located outside the state who does not 
have an Oklahoma wholesaler’s license and who has not paid the 
tax, and in any other case where the retailer possesses beer upon 
which the wholesaler has not paid the tax. Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 37, 
§ 163.4(b)-(c). Neither situation is before us today. However, we 
note that the provisions of the statute making the retailer liable for 
the tax are evidently designed to give the retailer an incentive to 
ensure that the wholesaler has paid the tax, rather than to make the 
retailer primarily liable. Of course, in the event that the Tribe 
were to possess beer upon which the tax had not been paid, the 
Tribe’s sovereign immunity would prevent the state from suing the 
Tribe to recover the tax. See Oklahoma State Tax Com’n v. 
Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 111 S. Ct. ‘905, 912 (1991). Thus, 
inasmuch as the statute provides for the Tribe’s potential secondary 
liability, it is unenforceable. However, in light of the fact that the 


} 
Seo boo Mah a SAA OA aes cae 


ee Ma ee 


lla 


The Tribe also points to the fact that the statute makes 
the wholesaler the agent of the state for purposes of 
“collecting” the tax as proof that the statute imposes the tax 
upon the retailer, i.e., the Tribe, rather than upon the 
wholesaler. 37 Okla. Stat. Ann. § 163.4(b). After all, the 
Tribe argues, if the tax is “collected,” it must be collected 
from someone, and that someone must be the retailer. We 
find this argument unpersuasive in light of the clear statutory 
language making the wholesaler liable for “paying” the tax. 
Rather, we conclude that the language making the wholesaler 
the state’s agent for “collecting” the tax is intended to 
provide the theoretical basis for the remainder of that 
paragraph making the wholesaler liable for embezzlement of 
state funds in the event of a failure to remit the appropriate 
sums to the state. 


Even if it were true that the economic burden of the tax 
falls on the Tribe because the wholesalers simply incorporate 
the tax into the wholesale cost, this would not be 
determinative of the question of the legal incidence of the tax. 
Just as a nondiscriminatory tax imposed on a private entity 
that does business with the United States and that passes the 
cost of that tax on to the United States does not violate 
federal sovereign immunity, see South Carolina v. Baker, 485 
U.S. 505, 521 (1988) (quoting Alabama vy. King & Boozer, 
314 U.S. 1, 8-9 (1941)); id. at 523; Memphis Bank & Trust 
Co. v. Garner, 459 U.S. 392, 397 (1983), so a 


Tribe is required to have a valid state license to sell beer and those 
licenses are conditioned on compliance with the relevant laws, we 
believe that the statutory prohibition on retailers having in their 
possession beer on which the tax has not been paid provides the 
state adequate power to enforce the tax provisions without being 
required to sue the Tribe to recover the tax. If the Tribe were to 
possess beer on which the wholesaler had not paid the tax, the 
Tribe’s liquor license could be revoked. See Oklahoma Stat. Ann. 
tit. 37, § 163.8; id. §163.11™)(5) 


12a 


nondiscriminatory tax imposed on non-exempt private entities 
that do business with Indian tribes and that pass the cost of 
those taxes on to the tribes does not violate tribal sovereign 
immunity. See Seneca-Cayuga Tribe v. State ex rel. 
Thompson, 874 F.2d 709, 715 (10th Cir. 1989) (“It has long 
been settled law that retained tribal sovereign immunity is co- 
extensive with that of the United States.”). 


The Supreme Court has validated the states’ authority to 
collect sales taxes from wholesalers where an Indian tribe 
refuses to collect those valid taxes from its sales to non- 
members, see Oklahoma Tax Com’n v. Potawatomi Indian 
Tribe, 498 U.S. 505, 514 (1991), despite the fact that such 
sales taxes are likely to be passed on to the retailer as part of 
the wholesale price. We conclude that the state may similarly 
impose a beverage tax upon wholesalers as an integral part of 
the overall regulatory scheme, despite the possibility that such 
tax might be included as part of the wholesale price of the 
beer. 


Accordingly, since we hold as a matter of law that the 
Oklahoma tax on 3.2% beer is authorized as part of the 
regulatory authority granted by Congress to the states and 
because we hold that the tax is a tax upon the wholesaler 
rather than upon the retailer, there can be no conflict with the 
Tribe’s right to self-government, and the district court 
properly granted summary judgment in favor of the state on 
this issue. 


Il. MOTOR FUEL TAX 


Oklahoma law imposes several taxes on motor vehicle 
fuel, totaling sixteen cents per gallon. Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 
68, §§ 502, 502.2, 502.4, 502.6, 516, 520 & 522 (1992). 
Corresponding taxes are imposed on-diesel fuel. Id. §§ 
$02.1, 502.3, 502.5, 502.7 & 522.1. The State exempts 
from these taxes fuel purchased by the tribe for use in tribally 
owned vehicles for tribal purposes. (Appellees’ Br. at 10.) 
However, the State contends that when the Tribe purchases 


13a 


fuel for resale at tribally owned gas stations, the tax must be 
paid. The Tribe argues that these taxes are imposed on the 
retailer, and consequently are void as direct taxes on the 
Tribe. The State responds that the taxes are passed on to the 
consumer in the retail price. The district court accepted the 
State’s analysis as to the incidence of the taxes. The court 
then concluded that the taxes are not preempted by federal 
law, and passing to the second step of the analysis, concluded 
that the fuel taxes did not infringe on tribal sovereignty. 


We believe that a fair reading of the statutes involved 
indicates that the district court erred in two respects. First, 
in concluding that the taxes were passed on through the retail 
price to the consumer, the district court substituted economic 
assumptions for the language of the statutes. The statutes 
nowhere require the amount of the tax to be included in the 
retail price at the pump, a requirement which we could 
interpret as imposing the tax on the consumer. Cf. Okla. 
Stat. Ann. tit. 68, § 302 (cigarette tax to be included in price 
to consumer). While the statutes do not expressly declare the 
legal incidence of the taxes to be on the retailer either, we 
believe that is the clear import of the statutory language. 


The statutes imposing the fuel taxes provide that “[t]here 
is hereby levied an excise tax of [varying amounts] per gallon 
upon the sale of each and every gallon of gasoline sold, or 
stored and distributed, or withdrawn from storage, within the 
state, for sale or use, to be reported and collected as provided 
by law... .” See, e.g., id. § 502. The tax remittance 
procedure indicates that the incidence of the tax is on the 
retailer. The statute requires the distributors to make monthly 
reports indicating the amount of fuel received and sold by the 
distributor, and to remit to the Tax Commission the amount 
of tax due. Id. § 505(B)-(C). The statute goes on to provide 
that “[mJotor fuel taxes remitted by a distributor on behalf of 
a licensed retailer . . . that are subsequertly determined to be 
uncollectible by the distributor may be credited against 
subsequent motor fuel tax liability imposed by law upon such 


14a 


distributor.” Jd. § 505(C) (emphasis added). Thus, unlike 
the beer taxes at issue above, the statutes imposing the motor 
fuel taxes explicitly state that the distributor must remit the 
tax on behalf of the retailer. Similarly, the statute provides 
that if the distributor pays the taxes and is subsequently 
unable to collect the money from the retailer, the distributor 
may deduct the uncollected amount from its future payments. 
The statute thus ensures that the distributor is not burdened 
with the tax. In the fuel tax scheme, the distributor is no 
more than a transmittal agent for the taxes imposed on the 
retailer. 


Moreover, the exemptions provided in the fuel tax 
statutes also indicate that the tax is not imposed on the 
distributor. For example, the exemption for fuel purchased 
for agricultural use provides that “[e]very person actually 
engaged in farming ... may purchase such motor fuel 
without paying the tax.” Id. § 509 (b) (emphasis added). The 
same section provides that the person involved in agriculture 
ar. claiming the exemption must apply for an exemption 
permit, which he must show to the distributor. Id. § 509(d)- 
(e). Similarly, § 505 of Title 68 gives the retailer the option 
of paying the tax due on all diesel fuel, or meeting the 
requirements to be considered a distributor. Jd. § 505(E). 
Section 505 thus also indicates that the retailer is responsible 
for paying the tax. 


We think it evident that the import of the language and 
the structure of the fuel tax statutes is that the distributor 
collects the tax from the retail purchaser of the fuel. While 
it may well be that the tax is ultimately passed on to the 
consumer at the pump, the question is whether the statutes in 
question legally impose the taxes on the Tribe. The question 
of who bears the ultimate economic burden of the tax is 
distinct from the question of on whom the tax has been 
imposed. See White Mountain Apache, 448 U.S. at 151 n.15; 
Memphis Bank & Trust Co. v. Garner, 459 U.S. 392, 397 
(1983). 


: 
4 
: 


15a 


Having determined that the motor fuel taxes are legally 
imposed on the retailer rather than on the distributor or the 
consumer, we next confront the second error committed by 
the district court. The district court concluded that the motor 
fuel taxes were not federally preempted. This conclusion 
may have been based on the assumption that the statutes 
imposed the taxes on the consumer. However, since we 
conclude that the taxes are imposed on the retailer, we must 
consider the issue of preemption. 


State activity is preempted by federal law when either of 
two independent barriers is present: if application of state law 
“would interfere with reservation self-government,” or 
“would impair a right granted or reserved by federal law.” 
Rice, 463 U.S. at 718 (quoting Mescalero Apache Tribe v. 
Jones, 411 U.S. 145, 148 (1973). When determining 
whether application of state law would interfere with Indian 
self government, the court must consider the tradition of 
Indian sovereignty. If there is a tradition of Indian 
sovereignty in the area concerned, then preemption is 
presumed absent an explicit statement from Congress that 
state law shall apply. Jd. at 719-20. 


The activity with which we are here concerned is the 
taxation of motor fuel. Motor fuel, unlike alcoholic 
beverages, is not a traditionally heavily regulated commodity 
and the fuel taxes are not part of a comprehensive regulatory 
scheme. The fuel tax is a simple revenue raising measure of 
the sort commonly imposed by sovereign governments to fund 
their activities. Unlike the beer tax, the motor fuel taxes are 
contained in Title 68 of the Oklahoma statutes, the Revenue 
and Taxation Code. Here, the proceeds of the fuel tax go 
almost exclusively to the building and maintaining of 
highways in the state of Oklahoma, both within Indian 
country and without. This fact does not alter the nature of 
the fuel taxes as simple revenue measures. Because they are 
directed toward funding traditional government activities, the 
taxes fall within the ambit of the sovereignty of the tribal 


16a 


government. Accordingly, the district court erred in 
concluding that imposition of the fuel tax on the tribal retailer 
was not preempted by federal law. Where the state action 
conflicts with a power within the traditional scope of Indian 
sovereign authority, preemption is presumed in the absence 
of an explicit statement of congressional intent to the 
contrary. Rice, 463 U.S. at 719-20. The state has directed 
our attention to no such explicit grant of congressional 
approval of the taxation scheme here at issue and we know of 
none.* Because the presumption of preemption is an 
independent barrier to the exercise of state authority in Indian 
country, the district court erred in requiring the Tribe to show 
that the fuel taxes infringed on the right of tribal self- 
government. Consequently, the district court’s balancing of 
the respective tribal and state interests at stake was not 
relevant to the determination of the propriety of the fuel 
taxes. We therefore hold as a matter of law that the district 
court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the 
State on this issue. We reverse the grant of summary 
judgment in favor of the state and the district court’s denial 
of the Tribe’s motion for summary judgment. We direct the 
trial court to grant summary judgment in favor of the Tribe 
on the question of the imposition of the state motor fuel taxes 
on Indian retailers. , 


IV. SALES TAXES 


The third tax contested by the Tribe in the district court 
was the 4.5% Oklahoma sales tax codified at Okla. Stat. Ann. 
tit. 68, § 1354 (Supp. 1994). The Tribe objected that the 


* In White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 
151 n.16 (1980), the Supreme Court declined to reach the question 
whether Indian reservations might be encompassed by the Hayden- 
Cartwright Act, 4 U.S.C. § 104, which provides for the imposition 
of state fuel taxes “on United States military or other reservations.” 
This issue was not raised before this court, and we express no 
opinion on it. 


17a 


State was requiring retail dealers selling to the Tribe at retail 
to collect the sales tax from the Tribe. The district court 
granted summary judgment to the State. At oral argument, 
it became apparent that the sales tax dispute centered on a 
misconception engendered by a previous position of the 
Oklahoma State Tax Commission, which position has since 
been clarified. The State had furnished a letter clarifying its 
policy on this issue to the Oklahoma Gas and Electric 
Company in January, 1993. During oral argument counsel 
for the State indicated that the contents of that letter 
represented the current State position on the sales tax. The 
Tribe stated that it did not object to the current State policy, 
but argued that the State should be required to let retailers in 
the area know of the new sales tax policy. In light of this 
development at oral argument, we vacate the district court’s 
grant of summary judgment in favor of the State on the 
question of the imposition of the sales tax, and we reprint in 
haec verba the contents of the letter explaining the current 
State position on the sales tax: 


[I]t is the position of the Business Tax Division that 
sales to an Indian tribe are exempt from state and local 
sales taxes as outlined in the Division’s exemption letter 
of January 21, 1988, which was provided to all federally- 
recognized Indian tribes in Oklahoma. 


However, the 1988 letter indicates that the exemption 
is limited to purchases made by the Tribe for 
governmental use as opposed to business use. In order 
to clarify the Division’s position, I will further outline 
the proper limits of the exemption as the Division 
understands them. 


A tribe may purchase taxable goods and services 
exempt from sales taxes if the tribe purchases the item 
directly, makes payment for the purchase directly and if 
the tribe is the consumer/user of the item, whether the 


18a 


item is used in tribal governmental offices or in a 
tribally-owned and operated business place. 


Therefore, in order to be entitled to the exemption, 
the sale must satisfy the following requirements: 


1. The sale must be made directly to the federally 
recognized Indian tribe. 

2. Payment must be received directly from the 
tribe. 

3. The tribe must be the consumer or user of the 


purchased good which is consumed or used 
within Indian Country. 


In order to document these requirements your 
company should maintain the following records: 


1. Invoices or statements of account should be billed to 
the tribe in its officially recognized name and mailed 
to the tribe. 


2. Payment in the form of a bank draft should be drawn 
on an account owned by the tribe in its name. 


3. The location at which the service is established 
should be owned and operated by the tribe on its 
Indian Country. 


This exemption does not extend to individuals, 
corporations, partnerships, or other business or legal 
entities who are purchasing items which may be used on 
Indian Country and which are purchased ostensibly “for 
the Tribe” or for business ventures under tribal license or 
contract with private parties. The exemption only applies 
to transactions with a federally-recognized Indian tribe 
itself. 

The exemption also does not extend to purchases of 


items which a tribe does not use itself, but which it 
intends to resell to the general public from a business 


19a 


place on Indian Country for the purpose of marketing a 
tax exemption to those who would otherwise be required 
. to pay sales taxes elsewhere. 


(Appellant’s Reply Br. Exh. A.) As the Tribe has no 
objection to the sales tax policy as expressed in the letter, we 
need not examine the matter further.° 


IV. INCOME TAX 


The final issue contested by the Tribe is the imposition 
of the Oklahoma state income tax on wages paid by the Tribe 
to persons employed by the Chickasaw Nation on tribal trust 
lands. The district court ruled this question moot in light of 
this court’s holding in Sac and Fox Nation v. Oklahoma Tax 
Comm’n, 967 F.2d 1425 (10th Cir. 1992). In Sac and Fox, 
we held that, absent explicit congressional authorization, the 
state lacked jurisdiction to tax the income of tribal members 
earned on tribal reservations. In so holding, we relied on the 
Supreme Court’s decision in McClanahan v. Arizona State 
Tax Comm’n, 411 U.S. 164 (1973), to conclude that the 
residency of the tribal member-employee was irrelevant to the 
question of immunity from the state income tax. Sac and Fox, 
967 F.2d at 1428 n.3. The State filed a petition for certiorari 
before the Supreme Court on the issue of the applicability of 


> Much of the State’s Brief on appeal treated the sales tax 
dispute as though it were based on the Tribe’s objections to the 
State’s decision to collect sales taxes from wholesalers selling to the 
Tribe for resale. The Tribe insisted in its Brief and in its Reply 
Brief that this was a misstatement of the issue. The Tribe explicitly 
denied any objection to the current State practice of collecting the 
sales tax from wholesalers selling to the Tribe for resale, reiterating 
that its sole objection was to the collection of sales taxes on retail 
purchases made by the Tribe. In light of the Tribe's 
characterization of the issue, we need not address the question of 
the State’s requirement that wholesalers selling to the Tribe for 
resale pay the sales tax. 


20a 


the income tax to employees who are enrolled members of the 
Tribe. The Sac and Fox also filed a petition for certiorari on 
the issue of the applicability of the income tax to non-member 
employees. The Supreme Court denied the petition of the Sac 
and Fox, 113 S. Ct. 466 (1992), and granted the State’s 
petition. 113 S. Ct. 459 (1992). After the district court 
dismissed this final issue as moot, the Supreme Court vacated 
our decision in Sac and Fox as to the tribal member 
employees and remanded the case. 113 5. Ct. 1985 (1993). 
The Supreme Court held that while residency in Indian 
country was sufficient to invoke the McClanahan presumption 
against state jurisdiction to impose an income tax on the 
income of tribal members earned on tribal reservations, this 
court had erred in concluding that residency was irrelevant to 
the McClanahan analysis. Id. at 1991. The Court concluded 
that because all of the Indians in question might live in Indian 
country, there was no need to consider the question whether 
Indians not living in Indian country might also be outside the 
taxing jurisdiction of the state. Jd. at 1992. The Court 
remanded the case for a determination of the residency of the 
Indians concerned. We further remanded the case to the 
district court for a residency determination. 7 F.3d 925 (10th 
Cir. 1993). 


The Tribe conceded in its brief on appeal that, with 
respect to tribal member employees, this issue would be 
controlled by the Supreme Court’s ultimate resolution in Sac 
and Fox, which had not been decided at the time the briefs 
were filed. At oral argument, the Tribe contended that 
despite the Supreme Court’s holding in Sac and Fox, the 
specific treaties between the Chickasaw and the government 
of the United States barred the imposition of the state income 
tax on the wages of tribal members employed by tribal 
businesses, regardless of the residence Of those members. 
The Tribe also asserted at oral argument that, notwithstanding 
the Supreme Court’s decision in Sac and Fox, the State: is 
barred by the relevant treaties from applying its income tax 


2la 


to the income of non-members earned from their employment 
by tribal Gusinesses on tribal lands. 


We first address the validity of the income tax as applied 
to non-member employees. We hold that the question of the 
applicability of the Oklahoma income tax to the wages of 
non-members earned from employment on tribal lands is 
controlled by this court’s decision in Sac and Fox. As we 
noted there, the Supreme Court has generally approved 
nondiscriminatory taxation of nonmember activities, “so long 
as such taxation does not conflict with relevant statutes or 
treaties or impermissibly interfere with a tribe’s ability to 
govern itself.” Sac and Fox, 967 F.2d at 1429. The Tribe 
does not contend that the income tax imposed on non- 
members in any way interferes with the Tribe’s ability to self- 
govern. Instead, the Tribe relies on the treaty language that 
“no territory or state shall ever have a right to pass laws for 
the government of the [Chickasaw Nation] or their 
descendants” for the proposition that such taxation is barred. 
(Appellant’s Br. at 11). We find this argument unpersuasive 
on two accounts. First, on its face, the treaty language 
prohibits the states only from passing laws governing the 
Tribe and its descendants, not non-members. It is settled that 
the income tax is imposed on the employee, not the employer: 
“The theory, which once won a qualified approval, that a tax 
on income is legally or economically a tax on its source, is no 
longer tenable.” United States v. County of Fresno, 429 U.S. 
452, 461 n.9 (1977) (quoting Graves v. New York ex rel. 
O’Keefe, 306 U.S. 466, 480 (1939)). Therefore, to the 
extent that the income tax is imposed on non-member 
employees who have no established claim to tribal ancestry, 
the tax does not infringe upon the treaty prohibition.° 


® The fact that the Tribe might be required to withhold and 
submit the tax does not constitute an unreasonable burden on the 
Tribe’s ability to govern itself. Colville, 447 U.S. at 159-60; Moe 
v. Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes, 425 U.S. 463, 483 


22a 


Second, the Supreme Court has rejected the proposition 
that the economic burden of the income tax is passed on 
through the employee to the employer in such a way as to 
interfere with the Tribe’s right to govern itself so as to 
mandate holding the employees immune from the state income 
tax. Id. The purpose of tax immunity 


was not to confer benefits on the employees by relieving 
them from contributing their share of the financial 
support of the other government, whose benefits they 
enjoy, or to give an advantage to a government by 
enabling it to engage employees at salaries lower than 
those paid for like services by other employers, public or 
private, but to prevent undue interference with the one 
government by imposing on it the tax burdens of the 
other. 


Id. Since the income tax is not a tax on the source of the 
income, it does not impose any burden on the tribal 
government. While the Court in County of Fresno and in 
Graves was discussing the tax immunity of federal rather than 
tribal employees, this difference is not determinative, as “it 
has long been settled law that retained tribal sovereign 
immunity is co-extensive with that of the United States.” 
Seneca-Cayuga Tribe, 874 F.2d at 715; see Cotton Petroleum 
Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 163, 175 (1989). We 
accordingly hold that the Oklahoma income tax is valid as 
imposed on non-member employees of Chickasaw businesses 
on tribal land.’ 


(1976). 


7 We need not decide whether, in the event that the Tribe were 
to impose its own income tax upon the salary of non-members 
employed in tribal businesses, such a tax would be entitled to the 
same treatment as the federal income tax under Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 
68, § 2358(D)(8), which provides for the deduction of the amount 
of such tax from the Oklahoma adjusted gross income for purposes 


23a 


We now consider the question of the validity of the 
Oklahoma income tax as applied to tribal members earning 
income from tribal employment in Indian country. In Sac 
and Fox, the State of Oklahoma argued that the McClanahan 
presumption against state tax jurisdiction over Indians was 
limited to Indians living on the Sac and Fox reservation, and 
was not applicable to Indians living in Indian country. As 
noted above, this court in Sac and Fox disagreed and 
concluded that, under the rule of McClanahan, imposition of 
a state income tax on the income of tribal members earned 
from tribal employment in Indian country was presumptively 
barred regardless of the residence of the members, in the 
absence of express congressional authorization. The Supreme 
Court reversed and remanded, ruling that the residency of the 
tribal member was “a significant component of the 
McClanahan presumption against state tax jurisdiction,” and 
that to the extent that this court had ruled without su~h a 
reference to residency, this court had erred. Sac and Fox, 
113 S. Ct. at 1991. The Court held, however, that 
McClanahan was not limited to Indians living on a formal 
reservation, and that residency in Indian country was 
sufficient to invoke the McClanahan presumption against tax 
jurisdiction. Jd. With respect to tribal members residing 
either on the formal reservation or in Indian country and 
earning income from tribal employment in Indian country, we 
think it clear that pursuant to Sac and Fox the rule of 
McClanahan continues to bar imposition of the state income 
tax.* 


of calculating the Oklahoma income tax, or under any analogous 
provisions of state law. 


* We give no credence whatsoever to the State’s argument that 
the “disestablishment” of the reservation allegedly incurred as a 
result of the Dawes Act of 1891 removed any bar to state taxing 
jurisdiction. The Supreme Court has thrice rejected this notion, 
twice when presented by the same litigant. See Sac and Fox, 113 


24a 


We next turn to the somewhat more difficult question of 
the validity of the state income tax as applied to the income 
of tribal members employed by tribal businesses in Indian 
country, but who do not reside either on the formal 
reservation or in Indian country. The State contends that this 
issue is controlled by the Supreme Court’s decision in Sac 
and Fox. Accordingly, the State argues that the bar to state 
tax jurisdiction is limited to Indians living on the reservation 
or in Indian country. 


The State’s position fundamentally misreads the Court’s 
holding in Sac and Fox. In construing Sac and Fox, it is 
important to view the opinion in context. The Court in that 
case decided a limited question, namely, whether an Indian 
living in Indian country but not on the formal reservation was 


S. Ct. at 1991; Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Citizen Band Potawatomi 
Indian Tribe of Okla., 498 U.S. 505, 511 (1991); Moe v. 
Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes, 425 U.S. 463, 477-479 
(1976). We assume, with all the dangers inherent in assumptions, 
that, sooner or later, the State will tire of presenting this argument. 
See Sac and Fox, 967 F.2d at 1428 n.2 (“It appears as though the 
State of Oklahoma persists in fighting a battle it has already lost.”). 
See also Indian Country, U.S.A. v. Oklahoma Tax Comm’n, 829 
F.2d 967, 975 n.3 (10th Cir. 1987), cert. denied sub nom 
Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Muskogee Creek Nation, 487 U.S. 1218 
(1988) (“The State seems to believe that the Indian country status 
of the [reservation] rests on whether the exterior boundaries have 
been disestablished. It does not. . . . Tribal lands, trust lands, 
and certain allotted lands generally remain Indian country despite 
disestablishment.”). Cf. Hagen v. Utah, 1994 U.S. LEXIS 1869 
(Feb. 23, 1994). In Hagen, the Court concluded that the Uintah 
reservation had been “diminished” by various acts of Congress, and 
that therefore a town originally within the reservation was now 
outside the reservation and subject to state criminal jurisdiction. 
Notwithstanding the diminishment of the Uintah reservation in 
Hagen, there was no question but that the land within the 
diminished reservation retained its status as Indian country. 


25a 


encompassed within the McClanahan presumption against 
state tax jurisdiction. As previously discussed, the Court 
rejected the State’s contentions in Sac and Fox and held that 
such Indians were within the scope of McClanahan. The Sac 
and Fox Court did not address the question with which we are 
faced in this case. The Court did, however, indicate that 
Indians living outside Indian country but earning their salary 
from tribal employment in Indian country might nevertheless 
be outside the taxing jurisdiction of the state.* Id. at 1992. 
Thus, the Court recognized that the issue in both McClanahan 
and Sac and Fox was the applicability of the presumption 
against state tax jurisdiction, rather than the ultimate 
determination of whether such jurisdiction existed. This 
question, which the Court left unresolved, is the issue before 
us today. 


Consonant with the distinction between the presumption 
against tax jurisdiction and the ultimate question of the 
existence of such jurisdiction, the Supreme Court in Sac and 
Fox did not rule that the residency of the tribal members on 
the reservation or in Indian country was the controlling factor 
in the ultimate determination whether an income tax could 
validly be applied to the income of tribal members employed 
in Indian country. Rather, such residency is a “significant 
component” merely of the presumption against state tax 
jurisdiction, and residency in Indian country is sufficient to 
invoke the benefit of that presumption. Sac and Fox, 113 5. 
Ct. at 1991. To read the Court’s decision in Sac and Fox as 
holding categorically that an Indian must live on the formal 


® While the Court made this statement with respect to the tribe's 
right to self-government rather than preemption by federal law, the 
latter argument was not raised in Sac and Fox. As the right to self- 
government and preemption by federal law are each independently 
sufficient bars to the application of state law, we do not believe that 
the Court’s reference to the right to self-government in any way 
implies that federal preemption would not suffice. 


26a 


reservation or in Indian country in order for taxation to be 
barred, one would have to ignore the plain meaning of the 
term “presumption,” as well as the fact that the Court 
expressly acknowledged the possibility that such taxation 
might be barred even as applied to Indians not living on the 
formal reservation or in Indian country. See id. at 1992 
(declining to decide whether taxation might be barred by 
tribe’s right to self-government, independently of its 
territorial jurisdiction over Indian country); cf Mescalero 
Apache Tribe v. Jones, 411 U.S. 145, 148 (1973) 
(distinguishing between state’s lack of authority to tax income 
arising from activities occurring on the reservation and the 
power to tax income arising from activities off the 
reservation). Under such a view, rather than being a 
“significant component” of the presumption, residency on the 
reservation or in Indian country would be dispositive of the 
entire preemption determination. We do not believe such was 
the Supreme Court’s intent. We therefore conclude that the 
proper interpretation of the Court’s decisions in Sac and Fox 
and in McClanahan is that they merely establish a 
presumption in favor of Indians and against state tax 
jurisdiction over Indians living in Indian country and earning 
income from activities in Indian country. With respect to 
Indians living outside Indian country but earning income from 
activities within Indian country, that presumption does not 
exist. A lack of a presumption, however, is not equivalent to 
a determination that the state may impose its tax. Rather, the 
absence of the presumption merely affects the burden-shifting 
engendered by the presumption. In the absence of the 
presumption against state tax jurisdiction, the initial burden is 
no longer on the state to show that there has been an explicit 
congressional grant of authority to tax in order to overcome 
the presumption. Instead, where Indians living outside Indian 
country are concerned, the initial burden remains on the tribe 
to show that the tax is barred by one of the two independent 
barriers to the exercise of state jurisdiction over Indians, i.e. 


27a 


interference with reservation self-government or impairment 
of rights granted or reserved by federal law. 


While in Sac and Fox the tribe argued--and the Court 
refused to decide--that the tribe’s right to self-government 
barred the tax, in this case the Chickasaw argue that the 
taxation is barred by the relevant treaties between the Tribe 
and the United States, which are, of course, federal law. 
Applying the rule set forth above, we now tum to the 
question whether, in the absence of the McClanahan 
presumption, the Tribe has met its burden of showing that the 
state income tax is preempted as applied to tribal member 
employees not residing in Indian country but earning their 
income from tribal employment in Indian country. 


“The beginning of our analysis must be with the treaty 
which the United States Government entered with the 
[Chickasaw Nation].” McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 173-74. 
This analysis requires a particularized examination of the 
specific treaties involved in this case. In McClanahan, the 
Supreme Court construed the treaty between the United States 
and the Navajo Nation in 1868. That treaty provided for the 
setting aside of land “for the use and occupation of the 
Navajo tribe of Indians,” and stated 


that no persons except those herein so authorized to do, 
and except such officers, soldiers, agents, and 
employ[ee]s of the government, or of the Indians, as may 
be authorized to enter upon Indian reservations in 
discharge of duties imposed by law, or the orders of the 
President, shall ever be permitted to pass over, settle 
upon, or reside in, the territory described in this article. 


Id. at 174. The Court noted that this language did not 
constitute an explicit statement that the Navajos were to be 
exempt from state law or state taxes. Nevertheless, applying 
the general rule that “[dJjoubtful expressions are to be 
resolved in favor of” the Indians, id. (alteration in original) 
(citation omitted), the Court concluded that the state was 


28a 


barred from imposing its income tax upon the Navajo 
members on income derived from employment on tribal 
lands. In so doing, the Court emphasized that the question 
before it was a narrow one: “whether the State may tax a 
reservation Indian for income earned exclusively on the 
reservation.” Jd. at 168 (emphasis added). 


In light of the ambiguous language of the Navajo treaty 
and the narrow question before the Court in McClanahan, it 
is not unduly surprising that the Court in Sac and Fox 
declined to fashion from McClanahan a blanket exemption 
from state income taxation for all tribal members. This is 
especially true when one considers that the Sac and Fox Court 
was faced with treaty language even more ambiguous than 
that in McClanahan. The treaty between the United States 
and the Sac and Fox Tribe provided no more than that the 
land that the United States ceded to the Sac and Fox “shall 
remain the property of said Sac and Fox Nation, to the full 
extent that it is now the property of said Nation--subject only 
to the rights of the United States therein. . . . and subject to 
the rights, legal and equitable, of those persons that are now 
legally located thereon. . . .” Sac and Fox, 113 S. Ct. at 
1988. 


In stark contrast to the language in the treaties between 
the United States and the Navajo and the Sac and Fox, 
respectively, the language in the treaty between the 
Chickasaw and the United States is abundantly clear. Article 
IV of that treaty provides as follows: 


The Government and the people of the United States are 
hereby obliged to secure to the said [Chickasaw] Nation 
of Red People the jurisdiction and government of all the 
persons and property that may be within their limits 
west, so that no Territory or State shall ever have right 
to pass laws for the government of the [Chickasaw] 
Nation of Red People and their descendants; and that no 
part of the land granted them shall ever be embraced in 


29a 


any Territory or State; but the U.S. shall forever secure 
said [Chickasaw] Nation from, and against all laws 
except such as from time to time may be enacted in their 
own National Councils, not inconsistent with the 
Constitution, Treaties, and Laws of the United States; 
and except such as may, and which have been enacted by 
Congress, to the extent that Congress under the 
Constitution are required to exercise a legislation over 
Indian Affairs. 


7 Stat. 333 (emphasis added).'° In 1866, the United States 
reaffirmed the above obligations, Stating that 


{aJll the rights, privileges, and immunities heretofore 
possessed by said nations or individuals thereof, or to 
which they were entitled under the treaties and legislation 
heretofore made and had in connection with them, shall 
be, and are hereby declared to be, in full force, so far as 
they are consistent with the provisions of this treaty. 


Treaty of April 28, 1866, 14 Stat. 769, Art. XLV; id. Art. 
X. These obligations were again reaffirmed in 1871, which 
reaffirmation stands to this day. See 25 U.S C.A. § 71 (West 
Supp. 1994). See also Oklahoma Enabling Act, § 1, 34 Stat. 
267, 267-60) (1906) (“[N]othing contained in [the Oklahoma 
Constitution] shall be construed to limit or impair the rights 
of person or property pertaining to the Indians of said 
Territories ....”). 


In comparison to the treaty at issue in the Sac and Fox 
case, the Chickasaw treaty explicitly provides that no state 


© The treaty actually refers to the Choctaw, rather than the 
Chickasaw. However, in 1837, the Choctaw consented to the 
formation of a district within their reservation for the Chickasaw, 
“to be held on the same terms that the Choctaws now hold it.” 
' Treaty of January 17, 1837, 11 Stat. 573, Art. I. Thus, the 
Chickasaw became the beneficiaries of the above language referring 
to the Choctaw. 


30a 


would ever be permitted to pass laws for the government of 
the Chickasaw or their descendants. The crucial question in 
determining the validity of the income tax under the relevant 
treaty language is therefore whether the law is one imposed 
on the Chickasaw Nation or its descendants. Residency is 
simply not relevant to this determination. We believe that, 
reading the treaty as the Indians would have understood it, 
and construing any ambiguities in the treaty language in favor 
of the Indians as we must, see McClanahan, 411 U.S. at 174, 
the specific treaty involved in this case preempts the 
imposition of the state income tax on the wages of Chickasaw 
members, earned on the reservation or in Indian country, 
regardless of the residence of those members. Accordingly, 
we hold that, consistent with the Supreme Court’s decision in 
Sac and Fox, the Oklahoma income tax may not be imposed 
on the income of Chickasaw tribal members, earned from 
tribal enterprises on the reservation or in Indian country, 
regardless of whether the tribal member actually lives on the 
reservation or in Indian country.'' We therefore vacate the 
district-court’s dismissal of this issue as moot, reinstate the 
claim, and direct the district court to grant summary judgment 
in favor of the Tribe on this issue. 


Vv. CONCLUSION 


To summarize, we AFFIRM the district court’s grant of 
summary judgment in favor of the State on the issue of the 
imposition of the tax on 3.2% beer. We REVERSE the grant 
of summary judgment in favor of the State on the issue of the 
imposition of the state motor fuel taxes, and we direct the 
district court to GRANT summary judgment in favor of the 
Tribe on this issue. We VACATE the district court’s grant 
of summary judgment in favor of the State on the issue of the 


" In so holding, we do not suggest that the state may not impose 
its income tax on the income of tribal member employees earned 
outside Indian country. This issue is not before us. 


3la 


sales taxes. With respect to the income taxes, we AFFIRM 
the district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the 
State on the question of the imposition of the state income 
taxes on non-member employees of tribal businesses on 
Chickasaw Indian country. We VACATE the district court’s 
dismissal as moot on the question of the imposition of the 
State income tax on the wages of tribal member employees 
earned from tribal employment in Indian country, and who 
live in Indian country, we REINSTATE the Tribe’s claim on 
this issue, and we direct the district court to GRANT 
summary judgment in favor of the Tribe on this issue. We 
similarly VACATE the district court’s dismissal as moot on 
the question of the taxation of the income of tribal member 
employees earned from tribal enterprises in Indian country, 
but who do not reside in Indian country. We also 
REINSTATE that claim, and we direct the district court to 
GRANT summary judgment in favor of the Tribe on that 
issue. 


AFFIRMED in part, VACATED in part, REVERSED in 
part, and REMANDED with instructions. 


32a 


APPENDIX B 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR the 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF OKLAHOMA 


CHICKASAW NATION, 
Plaintiff, 
v. 
STATE OF OKLAHOMA ex rel. 


OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
et al., 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) No. 91-310-NJ 
) 
) 
) 
) 


Defendants. 
ORDER 


Now before the court for determination are cross-motions 
for summary judgment, as well as the responses and replies 
thereto. The instant case was stricken from the May 4, 1992, 
Non-jury Trial Docket upon stipulation of the parties that the 
case be decided upon the pleadings. The issues as framed in 
the Amended Joint Pretrial Order are as follows: 


(1) Whether defendants may lawfully impose state beer 
taxes on plaintiff by requiring the wholesale vendor to 
include such taxes in the price of beer sold to tribally 
owned retail outlets on tribal trust lands. 


(2) Whether defendants may lawfully impose state motor 
fuel taxes on plaintiff by requiring the wholesale vendor 
to include such taxes in the price of motor fuel sold to 
tribally owned retail outlets on tribal trust lands. 


(3) Whether defendants may lawfully impose state sales 
taxes on plaintiff on retail purchases it makes for tribal 
use from retail vendors. 


33a 


(4) Whether persons employed by plaintiff on tribal trust 

lands must pay state income taxes on wages paid them by 

Plaintiff. 
It is agreed by the parties that Plaintiff is a federally 
recognized tribe, and that Plaintiff owns and operates retail 
sales outlets on lands held in trust by the United States on 
which it sells tobacco products, motor fuel, beer and other 
goods. Plaintiff does not collect sales taxes an its sales to 
tribal or non-tribal members but is required to pay sales taxes 
on motor fuel products and beer when it purchases them from 
its wholesale vendors at said retail locations. Defendants 
impose sales taxes on retail purchases of goods made by 
Plaintiff where Defendants contend such goods are used for 
“propietray” as opposed to “governmental” purposes and 
when Defendant contends the goods are purchased for resale 
to non-tribal members. 


Beer Tax 


The Tribe sells 3.2% beer, beer containing 3.2% alcohol 
by weight, at its convenience stores an tribal trust lands. Sales 
are made to tribal members and nonmembers. The State 
imposes a tax on 3.2% beer by requiring the wholesale beer 
distributors to include the beer tax in the wholesale price of 
the beer. The tax is passed on, through the retailer, ta the 
ultimate consumer as a cost of the product which is included 
as part of the retail price. Okla. Stat. tit. 37, § 163.4 (1990). 


The Tribe directly challenges the Commission’s 
application of state law against the Tribe an its own territory, 
arguing that such application contravenes both federal law and 
Chickasaw treaty rights. Further, it is the Tribe’s contention 
that if such laws can be applied, they are unlawful if they 
impact sales to tribal members and therefore, exemptions 
should be afforded the Tribe on sales to its tribal members. 
The Commission takes the position that the Tribe is obligated 
to comply with State beer laws. Under Federal law, 18 
U.S.C. § 1154(a), the sale of “malt...liquor, including beer” 


34a 


is prohibited in Indian Country. Title 18 U.S.C. § 1161 lifts 
this prohibition if the transaction is in conformity with bath 
State laws and tribal ordinances. See Rice v. Rehner, 463 
U.S. 713, (1903) (Congress authorized state regulation over 
Indian liquor transactions by enacting Section 1161 and that 
Congress intended that state laws would apply of their own 
force to govern tribal liquor transactions). 


In 1959, Oklahoma amended its constitution, eliminating 
the state prohibition on “intoxicating liquors.” Okla. Const. 
art. 27, § 11 (1959) (repealed 1904). The Oklahoma 
Constitution now provides that “[t]he Legislature shall enact 
laws providing for the strict regulation, control, licensing, 
and taxation of the manufacture, sales distribution, 
possession, and transportation of alcoholic beverages...” 
Okla. Const. art. 28, § 3. “The Oklahoma legislature has 
since enacted the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Act, 
Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 37, §§ 501-599 (West 1990 & Supp. 
1992), regulating the sale and distribution of statutorily 
defined intoxicating“ beverages. Under this act, the 
licensing and regulation of ”intoxicating“ beverage sales are 
under the authority of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage 
Laws Enforcement Commission, see Id. § 514, while the 
licensing, regulating and taxing of ”nonintoxicating* beverage 
sales, including 3.2% beer remain with the Tax 
Commission.” Citizen Band Potawatomi v. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission, Nos. 91-6312 & 91-6312, 1992 U.S.App. 
LEXIS 22870 (10th Cir. September 21, 1992). 


While the Alcoholic Beverage .Laws Enforcement 
Commission is responsible for the licensing and regulation of 
“intoxicating” beverage sales, the Tax Commission maintains 
responsibility for the collection of state excise taxes on such 
beverages, see Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 37, §§ 542-543, 545-546, 
553 (West 1990), and for issuing distributor and wholesaler 
permits to aid in the collection of such taxes. Id. §§ 543.1- 
543.2. 


35a 


At the time this issue was briefed by the parties, they did 
not have the benefit of a recent Tenth Circuit opinion, Citizen 
Band potawatomi, supra, holding that Oklahoma has a 
substantial interest in regulating 3.2% beer, notwithstanding 
_ its statutory definition as a “nonintoxicating” beverage. More 
importantly, the court held that the Tribe lacked sovereign 
immunity in the regulation of liquor. In light of these 
findings the court construes both federal and state statutory 
law to allow the imposition of a tax on beer sold by the 
Tribe, there being no discriminatory effect to disallow an 
exemption on sales to tribal members. 


Motor Fuel Tax 


The Tribe purchases motor fuel and other petroleum for 
use and sale on tribal lands. Motor fuel taxes are similar to 
beer taxes in that the motor fuel distributors are required to 
report and remit the tax on fuel sold to retailers. The 
retailer’s wholesale price will include the motor fuel taxes 
which are in turn included in the retail price at the pump. 
Okla. Stat. tit. 68, §§ 505, 506, (1990). It is the position of 
the Tribe that this is a direct tax to the tribe, and further, the 
scheme does not allow for exemptions to tribal members. The 
Commission states that exemptions have been previously 
granted to Indian tribes for motor fuel purchased for use in 
tribally owned vehicles used for tribal government purposes 
only and not for resale. The Commission argues, however, 
that in the instant case of first impression, the Tribe attempts 
to avoid payment of taxes on all motor fuel it purchases for 
resale. . 


Although Indian tribes retain attributes of sovereignty 
over both their members and their territory, this is not to say 
that the laws of a State can have no force within reservation 
boundaries. See White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 
448 U.S. 136 (1980). “As a result, there is no rigid rule by 
which to resolve the question v’hether a particular state law 


36a 


may be applied to an Indian reservation or to tribal 
members.” Id. 


In McClanahan vy. Arizona State Tax Commission, 411 
U.S. 164 (1973), the Supreme Court found two independent 
barriers to application of State law on Indian Country. First, 
the exercise of such authority may be preempted by federal 
law. Second, it may unlawfully infringe, “on the right of 
reservation Indians to make their own laws and be ruled by 
them.” Jd. Federal law does not preempt the state motor fuel 
tax scheme. Therefore, the Tribe must show that the motor 
fuel tax infringes on the right of tribal self-government. 


The principal of tribal self-government, grounded on 
notions of inherent sovereignty, and in congressional policies, 
seeks an accommodation between the interests of the Tribes 
and the Federal Government, on the one hand, and those of 
the State, on the other. Washington v. Confederatated Tribes 
of Colville, 447 U.S. 134 (1980). In Colville the Court 
entered a balancing approach to determine whether State 
cigarette taxes were applicable to cigarette sales on the 
Colville Reservation. The Court stated: 


While the Tribes do have an interest in raising revenues 
for essential governmental programs, that interest is 
strongest when the revenues are derived from value 
generated on the reservation by activities involving the 
Tribes and when the taxpayer is the recipient of tribal 
services. The State also has a legitimate governmental 
interest in raising revenues, and that interest is likewise 
strongest when the tax is directed at the off-reservation 
value and when the taxpayer is the recipient of state 
services. 

In Oklahoma the gasoline transported onto Indian 
Country is for resale only and is used almost exclusively off 
of Indian Country on State jurisdiction roads. Exemptions are 
available to Indian tribes for motor fuel purchased for use in 
tribally owned vehicles used for tribal government purposes. 


37a 


The Court in Colville noted, “We do not believe that 
principles of federal Indian law, whether stated in terms of 
pre-exemption, tribal self-government, or otherwise, authorize 
Indian tribes thus to market an exemption from state taxation 
to persons who would normally do their business elsewhere.” 


Further, the Tribe does not construct or maintain roads 
and highways for the use of the general public in Oklahoma. 
The State of Oklahoma constructs and maintains 111,412.76 
miles of streets, roads and highways in Oklahoma which is 
funded by the state tax on motor fuel. All of the road mileage 
maintained by the state is off Indian Country. Therefore, the 
gasoline tax used to maintain these roads is directed at off- 
reservation value where the taxpayer is receiving State 
services, whether the taxpayer is a tribal member or not. 


“Congress has passed laws under which Indians have 
become full-fledged citizens of the State of Oklahoma. 
Oklahoma supplies for them and their children schools, roads, 
courts, police protection and all the other benefits of an 
ordered society. Citizens of Oklahoma must pay for these 
benefits. If some pay less, others must pay more...’ Only the 
same duties are exacted as from our own citizens. The 
burden must rest somewhere. Revenue is indispensable to 
meet the public necessities. Is it unreasonable that this small 
portion of it shall rest upon these Indians?’” Oklahoma Tax 
Commission v. United States, 319 U.S. 598 (1943) (citations 
omitted). In this context, the patrons of tribal gas stations are 
properly subject to the State’s motor fuel taxes. 


Sales Tax 


The Tribe is exempt from sales taxes on items it 
purchases for its own governmental use. However, it is the 
Contention of the Commission that when the Tribe purchases 
inventory for resale at the tribal store, the Tribe is not exempt 
from collecting the sales tax and remitting it to the State. The 
Tribe argues that the imposition of the sales tax an: tribal 
members On tribal lands is not authorized by law, and further 


38a 


refuses to collect said taxes. See Oklahoma Tax Commission 
v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 111 S.Ct. 905 
(1991); Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe v. Oklahoma 
Tax Commission, 969 F.2d 943 (10th Cir. July 14, 1992). 


The Oklahoma Sales Tax, similar in nature to the motor 
fuel tax, is to paid out pursuant to the direct appropriation by 
the Legislature for the good of the citizens of Oklahoma. 
Okla. Stat. tit. 68, § 1353 (1990). The rationale discussed in 
relation to the motor fuel tax is appropriately applied to the 
sales tax which is imposed upon tribal members and non- 
Indians alike. The burden of paying for the many services 
provided by the State and enjoyed by all its citizens must be 
borne equally between tribal members and non-Indians alike. 


Income Tax 


The final issue concerning the application of Oklahoma’s 
Income tax law has been decided by the Tenth Circuit in Sac 
and Fox Nation v. Oklahoma Tax Commission, 967 F.2d 1425 
(10th Cir. June 16, 1992). Therefore, this issue is moot. 


ACCORDINGLY, the court find that Defendants’ 
Motion for Summary Judgment should be granted and 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment should be denied. 


IT IS SO ORDERED this 30th day of September, 1992. 


FRANK H. SEAY 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE 


39a 
APPENDIX C 


Article IV of the Treaty With the Chocktaw of Sept. 27, 
1830, provides: 


The Government and people of the United States are 
hereby obliged to secure to the said Choctaw Nation of Red 
People the jurisdiction and government of all the persons and 
property that may be within their limits west, so that no 
Territory or State shall ever have a right to pass laws for the 
government of the Choctaw Nation of Red People and their 
descendants; and that no part of the land granted them shall 
ever be embraced in any Territory or State; but the U.S. shall 
forever secure said Choctaw Nation from, and against, all 
laws except such as from time to time may be enacted in their 
own National Councils, not inconsistent with the Constitution, 
Treaties, and Laws of the United States; and except such as 
may, and which have been enacted by Congress, to the extent 
that Congress under the Constitution are required to exercise 
a legislation over Indian Affairs. 


Okla. Stat, Tit. 68, § 501C provides in relevant part: 


Nothing in this section shall require a distributor, dealer 
or retailer to collect taxes levied by this act or remit taxes to 
the state on diesel fuel used exclusively for purposes other 
than to propel motor vehicles over the public highways of this 
state as provided in Section 509 of this title. 


Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § SOSC provides: 


Every distributor, at the time of making the monthly 
reports required by this section, shall remit to the Tax 
Commission the amount of tax due. 


It shall be unlawful for any distributor, retailer or dealer 
to sell or offer for sale in this state, motor fuel or diesel fuel 
while delinquent in the payment of any excise tax due the 
State. 


40a 


Motor fuel taxes remitted by a distributor on behalf of a 
licensed retailer of the distributor or collected on behalf of a 
nonlicensed purchaser of motor fuel that are subsequently 
determined to be uncollectible by the distributor may be 
credited against subsequent motor fuel tax liability imposed 
by law upon such distributor. For purposes of this 
subsection, motor fuel taxes collected on behalf of a licensed 
retailer of the distributor or collected on behalf of a 
nonlicensed purchaser shall be deemed uncollectible if such 
taxes are deducted for purposes of calculating the federal 
income tax liability of the distributor. The method for 
crediting uncollectible motor fuel taxes as provided by this 
subsection shall be prescribed in rules and regulations of the 
Oklahoma Tax Commission. 


Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 509(b) provides in relevant part: 


Every person actually engaged in farming in Oklahoma 
or in a state which borders the State of Oklahoma and buying 
motor fuel to be used as fuel for farm tractors or stationary 
engines owned or leased and operated by him and used 
exclusively for agricultural purposes, who has obtained an 
agricultural exemption permit, as provided in this article, may 
purchase such motor fuel without paying the tax levied by 
Section 502 of this title and one-half cent ($0.005) per gallon 
of the tax levied by Section 516 of this title. 


Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 509.2 (Supp. 1994) provides in 
relevant part: 


A. The tax levied by this act shall not apply to diesel 
fuel used exclusively for purposes other than to operate motor 
vehicles on the public highways of this state. Provided that 
distributors shall execute on monthly reports, certification that 
-the purchasers represented to the seller that the diesel fuel 

was to be used exclusively for purposes other than to operate 
motor vehicles on the public highways. 


«x * 


4la 


C. Any person who places diesel fuel that was 
purchased under an exemption permit authorized by this 
section into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle for use in 
operating the motor vehicle on the public highways shall be 
liable for the taxes levied under Sections 502.1, 502.3, 502.5, 
502.7 and 522.1 of this title. Further, the permit issued shall 
be subject to cancellation and if so canceled shall not be 
reissued for a period of at least one (1) year. Such person 
shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon 
conviction, be fined not more than One Thousand Dollars 
($1,000.00), or shall be sentenced to a term of not more than 
one (1) year in the county jail. 


x * * 


E. The tax levied by Sections 502.1 and 522.1 of this 
title shall not apply to diesel fuel used exclusively in 
passenger motor buses or coaches, having a seating capacity 
of ten or more persons, when such fuel is purchased by and 
used exclusively in public transit systems operated by any 
county, city or town of this state, or by any public trust 
created under the laws of this state of which a county, city or 
town of this state is the sole beneficiary thereof. Provided 
this exemption shall be allowed only when supported by a 
certificate executed by such city or trust on forms prescribed 
and furnished by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. 


F. The tax levied by Sections 502.1 and 522.1 of this 
title shall not apply to diesel fuel purchased by any county, 
city or town for use as fuel to propel motor vehicles on the 
public roads and highways of this state, when said vehicles 
are being operated for the sole benefit of said county, city or 
town; provided that if the diesel fuel is placed directly into 
the fuel supply tank or tanks of the motor vehicle by the 
supplier, certification must be made on the invoice and all 
such sales must be reported by the supplier on forms 
furnished by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. 


Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 527 provides: 


42a 


A. Gasoline, diesel fuel or special fuels used solely and 
exclusively in district-owned public school vehicles or FFA 
and 4-H Club trucks for the purpose of legally transporting 
public school children shall be exempt from all state taxes; 
and gasoline, diesel fuel or special fuels purchased by any 
school district for use exclusively in school buses leased or 
hired for the purpose of legally transporting public school 
children, or in the operation of vehicles used in driver 
training, shall also be exempt from all state taxes. 


B. Gasoline, diesel fuel or special fuels used solely and 
exclusively as fuel to propel motor vehicles on the public 
roads and highways of this state, when leased or owned and 
being operated for the sole benefit of a county, city, town, or 
a volunteer fire department with a state certification and 
rating, shall be exempt from all state taxes levied by this title. 
Provided, if the gasoline, diesel fuel or special fuels are 
placed directly into the fuel supply tank or tanks of the motor 
vehicles by the supplier, certification must be made on the 
invoice and all such sales must be reported by the supplier on 
forms provided by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. 


