y) Bupreme Court, & 

= FILE? 

No. 94-771 ; DEC 6 1994 
EP RE OF THE TL ih 


Jn the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 


Petitioner, 
Vi 
CHICKASAW NATION, 
Respondent. 
On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 
PETITIONER’S REPLY BRIEF 
DAVID HUDSON CHARLES ROTHFELD* 
General Counsel GARY A. WINTERS 
DAVID ALLEN MILEY Mayer, Brown & Platt 


Assistant General Counsel Suite 6500 . 
Oklahoma Tax Commission 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Post Office Box 53248 Washington, D.C. 20006 


Oklahoma City, OK 73152 (202) 788-0616 
(415) 521-314] 


* Counsel of Record 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


A. An Otherwise Permissible Tax is Not Rendered Invalid 
Simply Because Its Legal Incidence Falls on an Indian 
ia ee A OE! 2 


B. The Incidence of Oklahoma’s Fuel Tax Falls on the 
ES conte tat OE LO OP ent One ain a es da 7 


C. Oklahoma’s Income Tax May be Applied to Tribal 
Members Who Live Outside of Indian Country ...... 8 


(I) 


i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 


Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 47\ U.S. 
tat CE 6 ee ae eee re eee Se 


California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 
Ge UD. Bee CEPR) a cette nese aes 


California State Board of Equalization v. 
Chemehuevi Indian Tribe, 474 U.S. 9 (1985) 


Washington v. Confederated Tribes of 
Colville Indian Reservation, 447 U.S. 
30 Clee bk ere eee eee 


Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 
Oe SD ee 


Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990) ........ 


McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Commission, 
IER PS Me OY ee ae 


Dept. of Taxation and Finance v. Milhelm Attea 
& Bros., 114 8. Ct. 2028 (1994) ....... 


Moe v. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 
9 US. Ga Ie rire 0st ec ens 


Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713 (1983) ........ 


Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Sac and Fox Nation, 
se Rem. freee 


Warren Trading Post Co. v. Arizona Tax Comm’n, 


See U.S. Gee CIGD 6 eee eee ass 


White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 
ie ae SD os eo eee ees 


In the Supreme Court of the Anited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


OKLAHOMA TAX COMMISSION, 
Petitioner, 


Vv. 


CHICKASAW NATION, 
Respondent. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 


PETITIONER’S REPLY BRIEF 


Respondent asserts that this case involves nothing more than 
narrow issues of state law and treaty interpretation. But the Tribe 
is able to make this argument only by disregarding the first and 
principal issue presented in the petition: whether federal law 
precludes state taxation of sales by Indians to non-Indians that 
impose substantial burdens on the State. Respondent plainly is 
wrong in contending (Br. in Opp. 7) that the resolution of this 
question is in any sense dependent on “review of the factbound 
“incidence-of-the-fuel tax question” (as the Tribe characterizes the 
petition’s second question); to the contrary, the first question 
presented in the petition asswmes that the legal incidence of the fuel 
tax falls on the Indian retailer. The question whether such a tax 
may be validly imposed is of great importance to States, to Indian 
tribes, and (as the amicus brief filed by the Petroleum Marketers 


2 


Association of America (“PMAA”) demonstrates) to the business 
competitors of Indians across the nation. Indeed, the contention 
that this case lacks significance is belied by the extraordinary filing 
of two amicus brief opposing certiorari, which suggests that those 
belittling the importance of the holding below protest entirely too 
much. 


Respondent acknowledges that the decision below holds the 
validity of a state tax to turn entirely on the levy’s nomenclature. 
The Tribe does not deny (or, for that matter, make any response at 
all to) our submission that such a holding is flatly inconsistent with 
this Court’s decisions. And respondent does not take issue with 
our observation that the court of appeals’ decision will foment 
litigation, disrupt state tax administration, and lead to substantial 
drains cn state revenues. Because that naolding imposes 
extraordinary restrictions on state taxing authority, provides tribes 
with a blueprint for obtaining tax exemptions for their commercial 
activity, and departs from decisions of this Court, further review 
is warranted. 


A. An Otherwise Permissible Tax is Not Rendered Invalid 
Simply Because Its Legal Incidence Falis on an Indian 
Tribe 


|. Given respondent’s myopic focus on state law, the 
undisputed nature of the federal holding below bears emphasis. As 
we explain in the petition (at 8, 13) and as respondent evidently 
recognizes, the economic burden of the fuel tax falls on purchasers 
who are non-Indians or non-members of the Tribe; the State 
undeniably could impose the tax directly upon those purchasers and 
could require the Tribe to collect the levy; the fuel is used in large 
measure outside of Indian country; and the tax is used to defray 
costs that are imposed upon the State — and not upon respondent 
— by the use of that fuel. Respondent takes issue with none of 
this." The court below nevertheless invalidated the tax for the sole 


' Pointing to the use of federal funds to construct roads in Indian 
country, amici Muscogee (Creek) Nation (at Br. 12-13) and Cherokee 
Nation (at Br. 8-9) — but not respondent — challenge our statement of the 
issue. In fact, the record in this case reflects, as the district court found 
and as respondent does nor deny, that “the Tribe does not construct or 


3 


reason that the legal incidence of the levy falls upon the Tribe. 
Respondent (in the brief portion of its submission directed to the 
first question presented in the petition) defends that holding as a 
proper application of “a per se rule forbidding direct state taxation 
of Indian tribes regarding their Indian country activities.” Br. in 
Opp. 7, 24. But that argument cannot be reconciled with this 
Court’s decisions. ! 


2. At the outset, we note that respondent is simply incorrect 
in contending (Br. in Opp. 24) that the Court has never tolerated 
a direct state tax on an Indian tribe. As we explained in the 
petition (at 13), the Court has expressly declared the rule against 
State taxation of tribes inapplicable in the very situation presented 
here, explaining that its holdings invalidating state levies on Indian 
income did not address claims “that the State could not tax that 
portion of the receipts attributable to on-reservation sales to non- 
Indians.” Moe v. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 425 
U.S. 463, 482 (1976).2 We also explained in the petition (at 15- 


maintain roads and highways for the use of the general public in 
Oklahoma.” Pet. App. 37a (emphasis added). The district court also 
found, and respondent again does not dispute, that the fuel subject to tax, 
which is sold in stores catering to the general public, “is used almost 
exclusively off of Indian country on state jurisdiction roads.” Id. at 36a 
(emphasis added). It therefore is inarguable that the sale and use of the 
fuel imposes substantial burdens on the State, and no burden at all on the 
Tribe. This conclusion is not significantly changed even if the federal 
expenditures are viewed as relevant. Amicus Cherokee Nation reports (at 
Br. 8) that the Federal Government has allotted less than $18 million to 
Indian reservation road construction in Oklahoma in 1994. In contrast, 
the state fuel tax produces more than. $300 million annually, at least 90% 
of which is devoted to road construction and maintenance. See Pet. 2-3. 
The relative extent of the burden imposed upon the State is manifest. 


> As we explained in the petition (at 13 n.6), the Court in Moe was 
referring specifically to Warren Trading Post Co. v. Arizona Tax 
Comm'n, 380 U.S. 685 (1965), where an on-reservation Indian trader — 
who bore the legal incidence of the tax — failed even to challenge the 
portion of a gross income tax falling on the proceeds of sales to non- 
Indians. And as respondent itself acknowledges (Br. in Opp. 15 n.10), 
“‘Indian trader’ cases * * * furnish analogous precedent” for cases 


4 


16) that the Court has held the rationale of the rule barring direct 
state taxation of tribes to have no application where, as here, the 
tax falls upon activities that have “a significant impact beyond the 
limits of” Indian country. Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713, 724 
(1983). In doing so, the Court has expressly distinguished the very 
cases relied upon by respondent, explaining that such “‘spillover’ 
effect[s] [are] qualitatively different from any ‘spillover’ effect of 
income taxes or taxes on cigarettes.” J/bid. (citation omitted). 
Respondent — which cannot contest the significant “spillover” 
effect of its fuel sales (see Pet. 15) — does not deny the relevance 
of, and makes no attempt to explain away, this authority. 


Respondent also is wrong in asserting that our submission asks 
the Court to revisit prior holdings (see Br. in Opp. 7) or would 
limit the preemption of state taxes to those on Indian property or 
income. /d. at 22. To the contrary, we recognized in the petition 
(at 11-12 & n.5) that the Court repeatedly has invalidated a range 
of state taxes whose legal and economic incidence fell on tribal 
activities taking place in Indian country — taxes that necessarily 
interfered with the mechanisms of tribal self-government. But as 
we explained in the petition (and as respondent rather elliptically 
acknowledges, see Br. in Opp. 22), the Court consistently has 
stated this rule not as an absolute, but rather as a presumption 
under which Indian tribes generally are immune from state taxation. 
See Pet. 12 (quoting Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Sac and Fox 
Nation, 113 S. Ct. 1988 (1993); Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 471 
U.S. 759 (1985); White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 
U.S. 136 (1980); Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990); 
McClanahan vy. Arizona State Tax Comm’n, 411 U.S. 164 (1973)). 
Respondent’s argument to the contrary rests entirely on California 
v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 480 U.S. 202 (1985), where 
the Court alluded in a footnote to “a per se rule” making it 
“unnecessary to rebalance these [state and tribal] interests in every 
case.” /d. at 215 n.17. As we explained in the petition (at 13), 
however — and as respondent again does not deny — Cabazon 
Band did not involve state taxation at all, did not address the issue 


involving taxes on Indians. 


5 


presented here, and therefore cannot fairly be read as requiring 
preemption in the circumstances of this case.’ 


In fact, respondent fails to offer any support at all for its 
proposed rule. We explained in the petition (at 13) that the Court 
never has invalidated a state tax in the circumstances of this case, 
where the economic burden of the levy falls on non-Indian 
purchasers who could themselves be subjected to tax, and when the 
levy “is directed at off-reservation value where the taxpayer is 
receiving State services” (Pet. App. 37a); respondent does not take 
issue with that proposition. In this setting, respondent plainly is 
wrong in asserting (Br. in Opp. 7, 24) that congressional silence 
somehow represents an endorsement of its position. And 
respondent offers no rationale for invalidating a tax that — unlike 
those that have been struck down by the Court (see Pet. 12, 14-15) 
— does not remotely interfere with the mechanisms of tribal 
government. 


3. For a variety of reasons, respondent also is wrong in 
asserting that the decision below lacks significance because the 
Oklahoma legislature could save the challenged tax with “a stroke 
of the pen” by declaring its legal incidence to be on the consumer. 
Br. in Opp. 7; id. at 24-25. First, this argument expressly 
recognizes that the holding below turns entirely on a semantic 
formalism. But as we explained in the petition (at 17-18) — and as 
respondent pointedly does not deny — this Court repeatedly has 
held that state tax laws cannot be invalidated on semantic grounds 
that have “no relationship to economic realities.” Complete Auto 
Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274, 279 (1977). The Court in 
Complete Auto therefore rejected precisely the argument now 
advanced by respondent, holding that the possibility of saving a tax 
by changing its name does not justify “a focus on formalism that 
merely obscures the question whether the tax produces a forbidden 


> The corclusion that state and tribal interests need not be rebalanced 
“in every case” hardly means that all state taxes falling on tribes are 
invalid in all circumstances. That there is no need to balance interests 
when a personal income tax falls on a reservation Indian’s income from 
reservation sources, for example, does not suggest that balancing is 
inapplicable in the very different circumstances of this case. 


6 


effect.” Jd. at 288. Respondent offers absolutely no response to 
this authority. 


Second, the holding below is of great practical significance 
even if the State may save the tax prospectively by (for example) 
declaring it to fall on the consumer’s “privilege” of using motor 
fuel. We explain in the petition (at 17-18) — and respondent again 
does not deny — that in such circumstances Indian sovereign 
immunity would preclude the collection of forgone tax revenue. 
Moreover, as amicus PMAA demonstrates (at Br. 4-5), changing 
the legal incidence of the tax would not solve the State’s problem, 
because tribes could chase the tax exemption up the distribution 
chain by the simple expedient of becoming distributors (or even, if 
need be, refiners). 


This prospect of manipulation also belies respondent’s 
argument (Br. in Opp. 5-6 & n.5) that the question here is 
unimportant because other state fuel tax statutes are not identical to 
Oklahoma’s. Some of the tax statutes cited by respondent place the 
legal incidence on the distributor; in those jurisdictions, the 
decision below gives tribes a blueprint for obtaining tax immunity 
by chasing the legal incidence. In others, as in Oklahoma, the 
Statutes simply indicate who is to pay the tax to the State without 
expressly declaring the legal incidence (in Oklahoma, of course, the 
statute requires remittance of tax by the distributor, not the 
retailer); in those jurisdictions, the statutory ambiguities will foment 
litigation. In all jurisdictions, then, the rule announced below will 
be significant and destructive. . 


Third, the importance of the exemption granted respondent is 
vastly compounded by the virtual certainty that Oklahoma’s tribes 
(and those in other States that follow respondent’s lead) will market 
their tax exemptions by undercutting non-Indian retailers. 
Respondent declares that it “cannot even imagine a conceivable 
motivation” for tribes not to enact their own fuel taxes i: amounts 
equivalent to Oklahoma’s. Br. in Opp. 25 n.13 (emphasis in 
original). In fact, however, this Court’s experience (in Dept. of 
Taxation and Finance v. Milhelm Attea & Bros., 114 §. Ct. 2028 
(1994), Washington v. Confederated Tribes of Colville Indian 
Reservation, 447 U.S. 134 (1980), and Moe, among other cases) 
makes clear that tribes invariably market their tax exemptions, for 


7 


a perfectly logical and legitimate reason: doing so maximizes 
revenue. And as PMAA demonstrates (at Br. 11-12), such a 
development would play havoc with the intensely competitive fuel 
markets in Oklahoma and other states. It also would vastly 
diminish state tax revenue. For all of these reasons, review of the 
decision below is imperative. 


B. The Incidence of Oklahoma’s Fuel Tax Falls on the 
Consumer 


The Tribe’s contention that review is not warranted to 
determine where the legal incidence of the fuel tax falls is directed 
largely at a straw man.* We do not contend, as respondent 
suggests (Br. in Opp. 13-15), that California State Board of 
Equalization vy. Chemehuevi Indian Tribe, 474 U.S. 9 (1985), stated 
an absolute rule placing the legal incidence of every state 
transaction tax on the ultimate consumer. But that decision does 
stand for the proposition that the Court will intervene when a court 
of appeals manifestly misinterprets a significant state tax law in a 
manner that renders it invalid. That is the case here. 


We demonstrated in the petition (at 20-22) that a definitional 
provision of Oklahoma law refers to the collection of taxes by a 
distributor or retailer, indicating that both collect the tax from 
someone further down the distribution chain. Another provision 
declares that consumers using fuel for agricultural purposes may 
purchase it “without paying the tax,” again indicating that it is the 
consumer who ordinarily is expected to pay the tax. The Tribe’s 
response to these points is telling. It does not contest our 
interpretation of these provisions; instead, it dismisses the statutory 
language as “colloquialisms” that do not “accurate[ly]” state the 


* The Tribe is wrong in contending (Br. in Opp. 16) that petitioner 
previously has stated the legal incidence of the tax to fall upon the 
distributor. Petitioner certainly did inform the court of appeals — as the 
statute expressly provides — that “motor fuel distributors are required to 
report and remit the tax on fuel sold to retailers.” CA Br. 10. But 
petitioner immediately went on to add that “[t]he retailer's wholesale price 
will include the motor fuel taxes which are in turn included in the retail 
price at the pump.” /J/bid. Petitioner has never suggested that the 
wholesaler bears the legal incidence of the fuel tax. 


8 


meaning of the levy. Br. in Opp. 19. We take this extraordinary 
contention — that the statutory text should be ignored because it is 
not “accurate” — as an implicit concession that the holding below 
cannot be squared with the plain terms of the statute. 


Respondent’s other contentions take it no further. Thus, the 
Tribe maintains (Br. in Opp. 20-21) that the existence of 
exemptions to the tax does not establish the levy as one on 
consumers. But the important point, of course, is that the 
particular exemptions available in Oklahoma turn on the consumer’s 
use of the fuel — and that the obligation to pay the tax is placed 
upon a consumer who uses the fuel in a manner inconsistent with 
the exemptions. Respondent makes no attempt to explain away 
these provisions. instead, respondent relies (Br. in Opp. 17-18) 
upon elements of the statute indicating that distributors remit the tax 
on behalf of retailers and relieving distributors of the obligation to 
remit uncollectible taxes. As we explained in the petition, 
however (at 20), these provisions demonstrate only that distributors 
do not pay the tax on their own behalf; they say nothing about who 
further down the distribution chain is intended to bear the ultimate 
legal incidence of the levy. Respondent therefore has failed to 
refute our submission that the court of appeals plainly erred in its 
placement of the fuel tax’s legal incidence, and therefore in its 
invalidation of a significant state tax as it applies to a large category 
of taxpayers. 


C. Oklahoma’s Income Tax May be Applied to Tribal 
Members Who Live Outside of Indian Country 


We agree with respondent that the court of appeals, in holding 
Oklahoma’s income tax invalid as applied to tribal members who 
earn income on trust land but who live outside of Indian country, 
purported to rely on the federal treaty with the Chickasaw Nation 


* Respondent also observes (Br. in Opp. 18) that the statute does not 
in terms tax the use, gift, possession, or consumption of fuel and does not 
place a payment obligation on persons possessing untaxed fuel. But in 
contrast to cigarette stamp taxes, which are respondent's point of 
reference, there is an obvious enforceability problem in determining 
whether a particular gallon of gasoline in an automobile’s fuel tank has 
been taxed. Cf. Milhelm Attea, 114 S. Ct. at 2031. 


9 


rather than on more general principles of federal law. But 
respondent plainly misstates the meaning of the court’s holding 
regarding that treaty. Focusing on language providing that no State 
“shall ever have a right to pass laws for the government of the 
[Chickasaw] Nation of Red People and their descendants,” 
respondent suggests that the court read the treaty to proscribe state 
laws that regulate the tribal government. See Br. in Opp. 9, 27-29. 
Respondent therefore reports that the court invalidated the tax 
because, as applied to employees of the tribal government, it 
“increase[d] the costs to and reduce[d] the efficiency and efficacy 
of the Chickasaw government.” Id. at 29 (emphasis in original). 
The Tribe adds that “the only circumstance in which the guarantee 
that no state shall pass laws for tribal governments * * * becomes 
relevant in the context of state taxation * * * is with respect to 
member employees of those governments who reside outside of 
Indian country.” /d. at 9 (emphasis in original). 


It is plain from the face of the court of appeals’ opinion, 
however, that the court held nothing of the sort. Instead, it read 
the treaty to proscribe state laws that govern individual members of 
the Chickasaw Nation. It held: “the Chickasaw treaty explicitly 
provides that no state would ever be permitted to pass laws for the 
government of the Chickasaw or their descendants. The crucial 
question in determining the validity of the income tax under the 
relevant treaty language is therefore whether the law is one imposed 
on the Chickasaw Nation or its descendants.” Pet. App. 30 
(emphasis added). See id. at 21a (“on its face, the treaty language 
prohibits the states only from passing laws governing the Tribe and 
its descendants, not non-members”). The question posed by the 
court therefore was, not whether the tax fell upon the tribal 
government, but whether it fell upon individual Chickasaws.° 


* This is quite clear from the court's analysis. If the court had 
reasoned that state law is preempted because “[i]mposing the state's 
income tax on employees of [the tribal] government increases the costs to 
and reduces the efficiency and efficacy of the Chickasaw government” 
(Br. in Opp. 29 (emphasis deleted)), it would have held that the tax could 
not be imposed on non-member employees of the tribal government; in 
fact, the court held the tax valid as applied to such employees. Pet. App. 
2la-22a. Indeed, the court of appeals expressly rejected respondent's 


10 


Respondent’s interest in mischaracterizing the scope of the 
decision below is understandable. As we explained in the petition 
(at 27, 28-29), the court of appeals’ actual holding is 
extraordinarily broad: if correct, it seemingly would preclude the 
application of any state law to any Chickasaw. And the importance 
of that decision transcends the controversy between the parties here. 
Respondent itself acknowledges (Br. in Opp. 28) that identical 
language appears in treaties with three other tribes (the Chocktaw, 
Creek, and Seminole). We noted in the petition (at 28) that very 
similar language recurs in many additional treaties across the 
nation. Review of the decision below therefore plainly is in order. 


For the foregoing reasons and the reasons stated in the 
petition, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 


Respectfully submitted. 


DAVID HUDSON CHARLES ROTHFELD* 
General Counsel GARY A. WINTERS 
DAVID ALLEN MILEY Mayer, Brown & Platt 


Assistant General Counsel Suite 6500 
Oklahoma Tax Commission 2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N. W. 
Post Office Box 53248 Washington, D.C. 20006 
Oklahoma City, OK 73152 (202) 788-0616 
(415) 521-3141 

* Counsel of Record 


DECEMBER 1994 


understanding of the treaty, holding that “[s]ince the income tax is not a 
tax on the source of the income, it does not impose any burden on the 
tribal government.” /d. at 22a. 


