PDF PAGE 1
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
Syllabus
COLLINS, DIRECTOR, TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF
CRIMINAL JUSTICE, INSTITUTIONAL
DIVISION v. YOUNGBLOOD
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 89-742. Argued March 19, 1990-Decided June 21, 1990
Respondent was convicted in a Texas state court of aggravated sexual
abuse and sentenced to life imprisonment and a $10,000 fine. After his
conviction and sentence were affirmed on direct appeal, he applied for a
writ of habeas corpus in state court, arguing that Texas law did not au-
thorize both a fine and prison term for his offense, and thus that his judg-
ment and sentence were void and he was entitled to a new trial. The
court, bound by a State Court of Criminal Appeals' decision, recom-
mended that the writ be granted. Before the writ was considered by
the Court of Criminal Appeals, however, a new statute was passed al-
lowing an appellate court to reform an improper verdict assessing a pun-
ishment not authorized by law. Thus, the Court of Criminal Appeals
reformed the verdict by ordering that the fine be deleted and denied the
request for a new trial. Arguing that the new Texas law's retroactive
application violated the Ex Post Facto Clause of Art. 1, § 10, of the Fed-
eral Constitution, respondent sought a writ of habeas corpus in Federal
District Court, which was denied. The Court of Appeals reversed.
Relying on the statement in Thompson v. Utah, 170 U. S. 343, that ret-
roactive procedural statutes violate the Ex Post Facto Clause unless
they "leave untouched all the substantial protections with which existing
law surrounds the ... accused," the court held that respondent's right to
a new trial under former Texas law was a "substantial protection."
Held:
1. Although the rule of Teague v. Lane, 489 U. S. 288-which prohib-
its the retroactive application of new rules to cases on collateral review-
is grounded in important considerations of federal-state relations, it is
not jurisdictional in the sense that this Court, despite a limited grant of
certiorari, must raise and decide the issue sua sponte. Since Texas has
chosen not to rely on Teague, the merits of respondent's claim will be
considered. Pp. 40-41.
2. The application of the Texas statute to respondent is not prohibited
by the Ex Post Facto Clause. Pp. 41-52.
(a) The definition of an ex post facto law as one that (1) punishes as a
crime an act previously committed, which was innocent when done, (2)


PDF PAGE 2
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Syllabus 497 U. S.
makes more burdensome the punishment for a crime, after its commis-
sion, or (3) deprives one charged with a crime of any defense available
according to law at the time when the act was committed, Beazell v.
Ohio, 269 U. S. 167, is faithful to this Court's best knowledge of the orig-
inal understanding of the Clause: Legislatures may not retroactively
alter the definition of crimes or increase the punishment for criminal
acts. Respondent concedes that Texas' statute does not fall within the
Beazell categories, since it is a procedural change in the law. However,
he errs in arguing that this Court's decisions have not limited the
Clause's scope to those categories, but have stated more broadly that
retroactive legislation contravenes the Clause if it deprives an accused of
a "substantial protection" under law existing at the time of the crime,
and that the new trial guaranteed by Texas law is such a protection.
When cases have described as "procedural" those changes that do not vi-
olate the Clause even though they work to the accused's disadvantage,
see, e. g., Beazell, supra, at 171, it is logical to presume that "proce-
dural" refers to changes in the procedures by which a criminal case is
adjudicated as opposed to substantive changes in the law. The "sub-
stantial protection" discussion in Beazell, Duncan v. Missouri, 152 U. S.
377, 382-383, and Malloy v. South Carolina, 237 U. S. 180, 183, has im-
ported confusion into the Clause's interpretation and should be read to
mean that a legislature does not immunize a law from scrutiny under the
Clause simply by labeling the law "procedural." It should not be read
to adopt without explanation an undefined enlargement of the Clause.
Pp. 41-46.
(b) Kring v. Missouri, 107 U. S. 221, and Thompson v. Utah,
supra, are inconsistent with the understanding of the term "ex post facto
law" at the time the Constitution was adopted, rely on reasoning that
this Court has not followed since Thompson was decided, and have
caused confusion in state and lower federal courts about the Clause's
scope. Kring and Thompson are therefore overruled. Pp. 47-52.
882 F. 2d 956, reversed.
REHNQUIST, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which WHITE,
BLACKMUN, O'CONNOR, SCALIA, and KENNEDY, JJ., joined. STEVENS,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which BRENNAN and
MARSHALL, JJ., joined, post, p. 52.
Charles A. Palmer, Assistant Attorney General of Texas,
argued the cause for petitioner. With him on the brief were
Jim Mattox, Attorney General, Mary F. Keller, First Assist-
ant Attorney General, and Michael P. Hodge, Assistant At-
torney General.


PDF PAGE 3
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
Jon R. Farrar argued the cause and filed a brief for
respondent. *
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the
Court.
The question presented in this case is whether the appli-
cation of a Texas statute, which was passed after respond-
ent's crime and which allowed the reformation of an improper
jury verdict in respondent's case, violates the Ex Post Facto
Clause of Art. I, § 10. We hold that it does not.
Respondent Carroll Youngblood was convicted in a Texas
court of aggravated sexual abuse. The jury imposed punish-
ment of life imprisonment and a fine of $10,000. After his
conviction and sentence were affirmed by the Texas Court of
Criminal Appeals, Youngblood applied for a writ of habeas
corpus in the State District Court. He argued that the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure did not authorize a fine in
addition to a term of imprisonment for his offense, and, thus,
under the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeals in
Bogany v. State, 661 S. W. 2d 957 (1983), the judgment and
sentence were void, and he was entitled to a new trial.I In
April 1985, the District Court, feeling bound by Bogany, rec-
ommended that the writ be granted.
Before the habeas application was considered by the Texas
Court of Criminal Appeals, which has the exclusive power
under Texas law to grant writs of habeas corpus, see Tex.
Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Art. 11.07 (Vernon 1977 and Supp.
1990), a new Texas statute designed to modify the Bogany
*Solicitor General Starr, Assistant Attorney General Dennis, Deputy
Solicitor General Bryson, and James A. Feldman filed a brief for the
United States as amicus curiae urging reversal.
Arthur F. Mathews and Thomas F. Connell filed a brief for Wilbert Lee
Evans as amicus curiae.
In Bogany, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals held that a jury ver-
dict which included a punishment unauthorized by law was void at its in-
ception and had to be set aside. It concluded that Texas law at that time
did not give appellate courts authority to reform such verdicts.


PDF PAGE 4
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
decision became effective. Article 37.10(b), as of June 11,
1985, allows an appellate court to reform an improper verdict
that assesses a punishment not authorized by law. Tex.
Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Art. 37.10(b) (Vernon Supp. 1990);
see Ex parte Johnson, 697 S. W. 2d 605 (Tex. Crim. App.
1985). Relying on that statute, the Court of Criminal Ap-
peals reformed the verdict in Youngblood's case by ordering
deletion of the $10,000 fine and denied his request for a new
trial.
Youngblood then sought a writ of habeas corpus from the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of
Texas, arguing that the retroactive application of Art.
37.10(b) violated the Ex Post Facto Clause of Art. I, § 10, of
the Federal Constitution. The District Court concluded that
since Youngblood's "punishment ... was not increased (but
actually decreased), and the elements of the offense or the ul-
timate facts necessary to establish guilt were not changed,"
there was no ex post facto violation. App. to Pet. for Cert.
C-6.
The Court of Appeals reversed. Youngblood v. Lynaugh,
882 F. 2d 956 (CA5 1989). It relied on the statement in this
Court's decision in Thompson v. Utah, 170 U. S. 343 (1898),
that retroactive procedural statutes violate the Ex Post
Facto Clause unless they "'leave untouched all the substan-
tial protections with which existing law surrounds the person
accused of crime,"' Lynaugh, supra, at 959 (quoting 170
U. S., at 352). It held that Youngblood's right to a new trial
under the Bogany decision was such a "substantial protec-
tion," and therefore ordered that a writ of habeas corpus be
issued. We granted certiorari. 493 U. S. 1001 (1989).
Because respondent is before us on collateral review, we
are faced with a threshold question whether the relief sought
by Youngblood would constitute a "new rule," which would
not apply retroactively under our decisions in Teague v.
Lane, 489 U. S. 288 (1989), and Butler v. McKellar, 494
U. S. 407 (1990). Generally speaking, "[r]etroactivity is


PDF PAGE 5
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
properly treated as a threshold question, for, once a new rule
is applied to the defendant in the case announcing the rule,
evenhanded justice requires that it be applied retroactively
to all who are similarly situated." Teague, supra, at 300.
The State of Texas, however, did not address retroactivity in
its petition for certiorari or its briefs on the merits, and when
asked about the issue at oral argument, counsel answered
that the State had chosen not to rely on Teague. Tr. of Oral
Arg. 4-5. Although the Teague rule is grounded in impor-
tant considerations of federal-state relations, we think it is
not "jurisdictional" in the sense that this Court, despite a lim-
ited grant of certiorari, must raise and decide the issue sua
sponte. Cf. Patsy v. Board of Regents of Fla., 457 U. S.
496, 515, n. 19 (1982) (Eleventh Amendment defense need
not be raised and decided by the Court on its own motion).
We granted certiorari to consider the merits of respondent's
ex post facto claim, and we proceed to do so.
Although the Latin phrase "ex post facto" literally encom-
passes any law passed "after the fact," it has long been recog-
nized by this Court that the constitutional prohibition on ex
post facto laws applies only to penal statutes which disad-
vantage the offender affected by them. Calder v. Bull, 3
Dall. 386, 390-392 (1798) (opinion of Chase, J.); id., at 396
(opinion of Paterson, J.); id., at 400 (opinion of Iredell, J.).
See Miller v. Florida, 482 U. S. 423, 430 (1987).2 As early
opinions in this Court explained, "ex post facto law" was a
term of art with an established meaning at the time of the
framing of the Constitution. Calder, 3 Dall., at 391 (opinion
of Chase, J.); id., at 396 (opinion of Paterson, J.). Justice
Chase's now familiar opinion in Calder expounded those leg-
'Although there has been some debate within the Court about the accu-
racy of the historical discussion in Calder v. Bull, see Satterlee v. Matthew-
son, 2 Pet. 380, 381 (1829) (note by Johnson, J.), the Court has con-
sistently adhered to the view expressed by Justices Chase, Paterson,
and Iredell in Calder that the Ex Post Facto Clause applies only to penal
statutes.


PDF PAGE 6
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
islative Acts which in his view implicated the core concern of
the Ex Post Facto Clause:
"1st. Every law that makes an action done before the
passing of the law, and which was innocent when done,
criminal; and punishes such action. 2d. Every law that
aggravates a crime, or makes it greater than it was,
when committed. 3d. Every law that changes the pun-
ishment, and inflicts a greater punishment, than the law
annexed to the crime, when committed. 4th. Every law
that alters the legal rules of evidence, and receives less,
or different, testimony, than the law required at the
time of the commission of the offence, in order to convict
the offender." Id., at 390 (emphasis in original).
Early opinions of the Court portrayed this as an exclusive
definition of ex post facto laws. Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch
87, 138 (1810); Cummings v. Missouri, 4 Wall. 277, 325-326
(1867); id., at 391 (Miller, J., dissenting) ("This exposition of
the nature of ex post facto laws has never been denied, nor
has any court or any commentator on the Constitution added
to the classes of laws here set forth, as coming within that
clause"); Gut v. State, 9 Wall. 35, 38 (1870). So well ac-
cepted were these principles that the Court in Beazell v.
Ohio, 269 U. S. 167 (1925), was able to confidently summa-
rize the meaning of the Clause as follows:
"It is settled, by decisions of this Court so well known
that their citation may be dispensed with, that any stat-
ute which punishes as a crime an act previously commit-
ted, which was innocent when done; which makes more
burdensome the punishment for a crime, after its com-
mission, or which deprives one charged with crime of
any defense available according to law at the time when
the act was committed, is prohibited as ex post facto."
Id., at 169-170.


PDF PAGE 7
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
See also Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U. S. 282, 292 (1977).
The Beazell formulation is faithful to our best knowledge of
the original understanding of the Ex Post Facto Clause: Leg-
islatures may not retroactively alter the definition of crimes
or increase the punishment for criminal acts. Several early
State Constitutions employed this definition of the term, and
they appear to have been a basis for the Framers' under-
standing of the provision. See The Federalist No. 44, p. 301
(J. Cooke ed. 1961) (J. Madison); 2 M. Farrand, Records of
the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 376 (1911); Calder, 3
Dall., at 391-392 (opinion of Chase, J.); id., at 396-397 (opin-
ion of Paterson, J.). The Constitutions of Maryland and
North Carolina, for example, declared that "retrospective
laws, punishing facts committed before the existence of such
laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive, un-
just, and incompatible with liberty; wherefore no ex post
facto law ought to be made." See Constitution of Maryland,
Declaration of Rights, Art. XV (1776); Constitution of North
Carolina, Declaration of Rights, Art. XXIV (1776). Other
State Constitutions, though not using the phrase "ex post
facto," included similar articles. See Declaration of Rights
and Fundamental Rules of the Delaware State § 11 (1776);
Constitution or Form of Government for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, Declaration of Rights, Art. XXIV (1780).
'The Beazell definition omits the reference by Justice Chase in Calder
v. Bull, 3 Dall. 386, 390 (1798), to alterations in the "legal rules of evi-
dence." See also Hopt v. Utah, 110 U. S. 574, 590 (1884) (approving pro-
cedural changes "leaving untouched the nature of the crime and the amount
or degree of proof essential to conviction"). As cases subsequent to Cal-
der make clear, this language was not intended to prohibit the application
of new evidentiary rules in trials for crimes committed before the changes.
Thompson v. Missouri, 171 U. S. 380, 386-387 (1898) (rejecting ex post
facto challenge to retroactive application of statute making admissible
handwritten documents as handwriting exemplars); Hopt, supra, at
588-590 (upholding retroactive application of statute making felons compe-
tent to testify).


PDF PAGE 8
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
Another historical reference, Blackstone's Commentaries,
which was discussed by the Framers during debates on the
Ex Post Facto Clause, see 2 M. Farrand, Records of the Fed-
eral Convention of 1787, pp. 448-449 (1911), and deemed an
authoritative source of the technical meaning of the term in
Calder, see 3 Dall., at 391 (opinion of Chase, J.); id., at 396
(opinion of Paterson, J.), buttresses this understanding. Ac-
cording to Blackstone, a law is ex post facto "when after an
action (indifferent in itself) is committed, the legislator then
for the first time declares it to have been a crime, and inflicts
a punishment upon the person who has committed it." 1 W.
Blackstone, Commentaries * 46. Although increased punish-
ments are not mentioned explicitly in the historical sources,
the Court has never questioned their prohibition, apparently
on the theory that "[t]he enhancement of a crime, or penalty,
seems to come within the same mischief as the creation of a
crime or penalty." Calder, supra, at 397 (opinion of Pater-
son, J.). The Beazell definition, then, is faithful to the use of
the term "ex post facto law" at the time the Constitution was
adopted.
Respondent concedes that Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Ann.,
Art. 37.10(b) (Vernon Supp. 1990), does not fall within any of
the Beazell categories and, under that definition, would not
constitute an ex post facto law as applied to him. The new
statute is a procedural change that allows reformation of im-
proper verdicts. It does not alter the definition of the crime
of aggravated sexual abuse, of which Youngblood was con-
victed, nor does it increase the punishment for which he is
eligible as a result of that conviction. Nevertheless, re-
spondent maintains that this Court's decisions have not lim-
ited the scope of the Ex Post Facto Clause to the finite
Beazell categories, but have stated more broadly that retro-
active legislation contravenes Art. I, § 10, if it deprives an ac-
cused of a "substantial protection" under law existing at the
time of the crime. He argues that the new trial guaranteed
him by former Texas law is such a protection.


PDF PAGE 9
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
Several of our cases have described as "procedural" those
changes which, even though they work to the disadvantage
of the accused, do not violate the Ex Post Facto Clause.
Dobbert v. Florida, supra, at 292-293, and n. 6; Beazell v.
Ohio, 269 U. S., at 171; Mallett v. North Carolina, 181 U. S.
589, 597 (1901). While these cases do not explicitly define
what they mean by the word "procedural," it is logical to
think that the term refers to changes in the procedures by
which a criminal case is adjudicated, as opposed to changes in
the substantive law of crimes. Respondent correctly notes,
however, that we have said that a procedural change may
constitute an ex post facto violation if it "affect[s] matters of
substance," Beazell, supra, at 171, by depriving a defendant
of "substantial protections with which the existing law sur-
rounds the person accused of crime," Duncan v. Missouri,
152 U. S. 377, 382-383 (1894), or arbitrarily infringing upon"substantial personal rights." Malloy v. South Carolina,
237 U. S. 180, 183 (1915); Beazell, supra, at 171.
We think this language from the cases cited has imported
confusion into the interpretation of the Ex Post Facto
Clause. The origin of the rather amorphous phrase, "sub-
stantial protections," appears to lie in a 19th-century treatise
on constitutional law by Professor Thomas Cooley. T. Coo-
ley, Constitutional Limitations * 272. According to Cooley,
who notably assumed the Calder construction of the Ex Post
Facto Clause to be correct, Constitutional Limitations * 265,
a legislature "may prescribe altogether different modes of
procedure in its discretion, though it cannot lawfully, we
think, in so doing, dispense with any of those substantial pro-
tections with which the existing law surrounds the person ac-
cused of crime." Id., at * 272.
This Court's decision in Duncan v. Missouri, supra, subse-
quently adopted that phraseology:
"[A]n ex post facto law is one which imposes a punish-
ment for an act which was not punishable at the time it
was committed; or an additional punishment to that then


PDF PAGE 10
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
prescribed; or changes the rules of evidence by which
less or different testimony is sufficient to convict than
was then required; or, in short, in relation to the offence
or its consequences, alters the situation of a party to his
disadvantage; but the prescribing of different modes or
procedure and the abolition of courts and creation of new
ones, leaving untouched all the substantial protections
with which the existing law surrounds the person accused
of crime, are not considered within the constitutional in-
hibition. Cooley Const. Lim. (5th ed.) 329." Id., at
382-383 (other citations omitted) (emphasis added).
Later, in Malloy v. South Carolina, supra, we stated that
even with regard to procedural changes, the Ex Post Facto
Clause was "intended to secure substantial personal rights
against arbitrary and oppressive legislative action." Id., at
183. We repeated that recognition in Beazell itself, while
also emphasizing that the provision was "not to limit the leg-
islative control of remedies and modes of procedure which do
not affect matters of substance." Beazell, supra, at 171.
We think the best way to make sense out of this discussion
in the cases is to say that by simply labeling a law "proce-
dural," a legislature does not thereby immunize it from scru-
tiny under the Ex Post Facto Clause. See Gibson v. Missis-
sippi, 162 U. S. 565, 590 (1896). Subtle ex post facto
violations are no more permissible than overt ones. In
Beazell, supra, we said that the constitutional prohibition is
addressed to laws, "whatever their form," which make inno-
cent acts criminal, alter the nature of the offense, or increase
the punishment. Id., at 170. But the prohibition which
may not be evaded is the one defined by the Calder catego-
ries. See Duncan, supra, at 382; Malloy, supra, at 183-184.
The references in Duncan and Malloy to "substantial protec-
tions" and "personal rights" should not be read to adopt with-
out explanation an undefined enlargement of the Ex Post
Facto Clause.


PDF PAGE 11
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
Two decisions of this Court, relied upon by respondent, do
not fit into this analytical framework. In Kring v. Missouri,
107 U. S. 221 (1883), the Court said "it is not to be supposed
that the opinion in [Calder v. Bull] undertook to define, by
way of exclusion, all the cases to which the constitutional pro-
vision would be applicable." Id., at 228. It defined an ex
post facto law, inter alia, as one which, "'in relation to the
offence or its consequences, alters the situation of a party to
his disadvantage."' Id., at 228-229 (quoting United States
v. Hall, 26 F. Cas. 84, 86 (No. 15,285) (D Pa. 1809)) (empha-
sis deleted). And in Thompson v. Utah, 170 U. S. 343
(1898), the Court held that a change in Utah law reducing the
size of juries in criminal cases from 12 persons to 8 deprived
Thompson of "a substantial right involved in his liberty" and
violated the Ex Post Facto Clause. Id., at 352.
Neither of these decisions, in our view, is consistent with
the understanding of the term "ex post facto law" at the time
the Constitution was adopted. Nor has their reasoning been
followed by this Court since Thompson was decided in 1898.
These cases have caused confusion in state and lower federal
courts about the scope of the Ex Post Facto Clause, as exem-
plified by the opinions of the District Court and Court of Ap-
peals in this case. See also Murphy v. Kentucky, 465 U. S.
1072, 1073 (1984) (WHITE, J., dissenting from denial of certio-
rari) (noting "the evident confusion among lower courts con-
cerning the application of the Ex Post Facto Clause to
changes in rules of evidence and procedure"); United States
v. Kowal, 596 F. Supp. 375, 377 (Conn. 1984) (Supreme
Court jurisprudence applying ex post facto prohibition to ret-
roactive procedural changes "is not all of one piece"); L.
Tribe, American Constitutional Law 638 (2d ed. 1988) (proce-
dural changes upheld by the Court "can hardly be distin-
guished in any functional way from those invalidated").
The earlier decision, Kring v. Missouri, was a capital case
with a lengthy procedural history. Kring was charged with
first-degree murder, but pursuant to a plea agreement, he


PDF PAGE 12
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
pleaded guilty to second-degree murder. The plea was ac-
cepted by the prosecutor and the trial court, and he was sen-
tenced to 25 years in prison. He appealed the judgment,
however, on the ground that his plea agreement provided for
a sentence of no more than 10 years. The State Supreme
Court reversed the judgment and remanded for further pro-
ceedings. In the trial court, Kring refused to withdraw his
guilty plea to second-degree murder and refused to renew his
plea of not guilty to first-degree murder, insisting instead
that the acceptance of his earlier plea constituted an acquittal
on the greater charge. The trial court, over Kring's objec-
tion, directed a general plea of not guilty to be entered, and
upon retrial, he was convicted of first-degree murder and
sentenced to death.
At the time the crime was committed, Missouri law pro-
vided that a defendant's plea of guilty to second-degree
murder, if accepted by the prosecutor and the court, served
as an acquittal of the charge of first-degree murder. After
the crime, but before Kring made his plea, a new Missouri
Constitution abrogated that rule. The State was thus free,
as a matter of Missouri law, to retry Kring for first-degree
murder after his conviction and the 25-year sentence for
second-degree murder were vacated. The Supreme Court of
Missouri held that the new law did not violate the Ex Post
Facto Clause, because it effected only a change in criminal
procedure.
This Court reversed by a vote of 5 to 4. As support for
the view that Calder did not define an exclusive list of legisla-
tive Acts falling within the constitutional prohibition, Justice
Miller's opinion for the Court quoted a jury charge given by
Justice Washington sitting in the District Court: "'[A]n ex
post facto law is one which, in its operation, makes that crimi-
nal which was not so at the time the action was performed; or
which increases the punishment, or, in short, which, in rela-
tion to the offence or its consequences, alters the situation
of a party to his disadvantage."' Kring, supra, at 228-229


PDF PAGE 13
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
(quoting United States v. Hall, supra, at 86) (emphasis in
original). Applying that test, the Court concluded that be-
cause the new Missouri Constitution denied Kring the benefit
of an implied acquittal which the previous law provided, it"altered the situation to his disadvantage," and his conviction
for first-degree murder was void. Kring, supra, at 235-236.
The Court's departure from Calder's explanation of the
original understanding of the Ex Post Facto Clause was, we
think, unjustified. The language in the Hall case, heavily
relied upon in Kring and repeated in other decisions there-
after, does not support a more expansive definition of ex post
facto laws.
In Hall, a vessel owner was sued by the United States for
forfeiture of an embargo bond obliging him to deliver certain
cargo to Portland, Me. As a legal excuse, the defendant ar-
gued that a severe storm had disabled his vessel and forced
him to land in Puerto Rico, where he was forced by the Puerto
Rican government to sell the cargo. In dicta, Justice Wash-
ington hypothesized that, according to the law in effect at the
time Hall forfeited the cargo, an "unavoidable accident" was
an affirmative defense to a charge of failing to deliver cargo.
His jury instruction then explained that a subsequent law im-
posing an additional requirement for the affirmative defense -
that the vessel or cargo actually be lost at sea as a result of
the unavoidable accident -would deprive Hall of a defense of
his actions available at the time he sold the cargo and thus be
an invalid ex post facto law.
This analysis is consistent with the Beazell framework. A
law that abolishes an affirmative defense of justification or
excuse contravenes Art. I, § 10, because it expands the scope
of a criminal prohibition after the act is done. It appears,
therefore, that Justice Washington's reference to laws "relat-
[ing] to the offence or its consequences," was simply short-
hand for legal changes altering the definition of an offense or
increasing a punishment. His jury charge should not be
read to mean that the Constitution prohibits retrospective


PDF PAGE 14
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
Opinion of the Court 497 U. S.
laws, other than those encompassed by the Calder catego-
ries, which "alte[r] the situation of a party to his disad-
vantage." Nothing in the Hall case supports the broad con-
struction of the ex post facto provision given by the Court in
Kring.
It is possible to reconcile Kring with the numerous cases
which have held that "procedural" changes do not result in ex
post facto violations by saying that the change in Missouri
law did take away a "defense" available to the defendant
under the old procedure. But this use of the word "defense"
carries a meaning quite different from that which appears in
the quoted language from Beazell, where the term was linked
to the prohibition on alterations in "the legal definition of the
offense" or "the nature or amount of the punishment imposed
for its commission." Beazell, 269 U. S., at 169-170. The
"defense" available to Kring under earlier Missouri law was
not one related to the definition of the crime, but was based
on the law regulating the effect of guilty pleas. Missouri had
not changed any of the elements of the crime of murder, or
the matters which might be pleaded as an excuse or justifica-
tion for the conduct underlying such a charge; it had changed
its law respecting the effect of a guilty plea to a lesser in-
cluded offense. The holding in Kring can only be justified if
the Ex Post Facto Clause is thought to include not merely the
Calder categories, but any change which "alters the situation
of a party to his disadvantage." We think such a reading of
the Clause departs from the meaning of the Clause as it was
understood at the time of the adoption of the Constitution,
and is not supported by later cases. We accordingly over-
rule Kring.
The second case, Thompson v. Utah, must be viewed in
historical context. Thompson was initially charged with his
crime-grand larceny committed by stealing a calf-in 1895,
when Utah was a Territory. He was tried by a jury of 12
persons and convicted. A new trial was subsequently
granted, however, and in the meantime Utah was admitted


PDF PAGE 15
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 Opinion of the Court
into the Union as a State. The Constitution of the State of
Utah provided that juries in noncapital cases would consist of
8 persons, not 12, and Thompson was retried and convicted
by a panel of 8.
This Court reversed the conviction. It reasoned first that
while Utah was a Territory, the Sixth Amendment applied to
actions of the territorial government and guaranteed Thomp-
son a right to a 12-person jury. 170 U. S., at 349-350. The
Court then held that "the State did not acquire upon its ad-
mission into the Union the power to provide, in respect of fel-
onies committed within its limits while it was a Territory,
that they should be tried otherwise than by a jury such as is
provided by the Constitution of the United States." Id., at
350-351. Because the State Constitution "deprive[d] him of
a substantial right involved in his liberty" and "materially al-
ter[ed] the situation to his disadvantage," the Court con-
cluded that Thompson's conviction was prohibited by the Ex
Post Facto Clause. Id., at 352-353.
The result in Thompson v. Utah foreshadowed our decision
in Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145 (1968), which held
that the Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury-then be-
lieved to mean a jury of 12, see, e. g., Patton v. United
States, 281 U. S. 276, 288-289 (1930)-was incorporated and
made applicable by the Fourteenth Amendment against the
States. The Court held that since Utah was a Territory
when Thompson's crime was committed, and therefore obli-
,gated to provide a 12-person jury by the Sixth Amendment,
the Ex Post Facto Clause prevented the State from taking
away that substantial right from him when it became a State
and was no longer bound by the Sixth Amendment as then
interpreted. The right to jury trial provided by the Sixth
Amendment is obviously a "substantial" one, but it is not a
right that has anything to do with the definition of crimes,
defenses, or punishments, which is the concern of the Ex
Post Facto Clause. To the extent that Thompson v. Utah


PDF PAGE 16
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment 497 U. S.
rested on the Ex Post Facto Clause and not the Sixth
Amendment, we overrule it.'
The Texas statute allowing reformation of improper ver-
dicts does not punish as a crime an act previously committed,
which was innocent when done; nor make more burdensome
the punishment for a crime, after its commission; nor deprive
one charged with crime of any defense available according to
law at the time when the act was committed. Its application
to respondent therefore is not prohibited by the Ex Post
Facto Clause of Art. I, § 10.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Reversed.
JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE BRENNAN and
JUSTICE MARSHALL join, concurring in the judgment.
The "Ex Post Facto" Clause of the Constitution I has been
construed to embrace any law that deprives a person accused
of crime of a "substantial protection" that the law afforded
at the time of the alleged offense. Thus, the Clause prohib-
its not only the retroactive creation of new criminal offenses
and more harsh penalties, but also substantial changes in pro-
cedure that are designed to protect the defendant from a
wrongful conviction. The question in this case is whether a
law that changed a postconviction remedy for an erroneous
sentence-by conforming it to the law in effect at the time
of the offense instead of affording the defendant a new trial
on all issues-effected a "substantial" deprivation within
the meaning of our cases. I agree with the Court's conclu-
IThe Court's holding in Thompson v. Utah, 170 U. S. 343 (1898), that
the Sixth Amendment requires a jury panel of 12 persons is also obsolete.
Williams v. Florida, 399 U. S. 78 (1970).
Art. I, § 10, of the Constitution provides in part:
"No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or Confederation; grant
Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any
Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill
of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Con-
tracts, or grant any Title of Nobility."


PDF PAGE 17
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment
sion that the new law did not violate the Ex Post Facto
Clause, but I believe that conclusion is entirely consistent
with our precedents. I
Respondent committed a crime that was punishable by a
maximum sentence of life imprisonment and was convicted on
March 17, 1982. Under Texas law, it was the jury's task to
impose sentence as well as to determine guilt or innocence.
By consequence of a faulty instruction, respondent was im-
properly sentenced to life imprisonment and a fine of
$10,000. The following year, in Bogany v. State, 661 S. W.
2d 957 (1983), the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals held in a
somewhat similar case that the fine was not authorized by
law, and that no reviewing court had authority to correct
such an erroneous sentence. Instead, the entire judgment
was deemed "void" and the defendant was entitled to a new
trial.2 Understandably, the Texas Legislature recognized
that corrective legislation was in order, for it is difficult to
understand why an error in sentencing should necessitate a
second trial on the issue of guilt or innocence.
I At the time of respondent's offense, it apparently was well established
under Texas law that, as a general proposition, when a criminal jury ren-
dered a verdict not authorized by law the verdict was void at its inception.
See, e. g., Ex parte McIver, 586 S. W. 2d 851, 854 (Tex. Crim. App. 1979);
Ocker v. State, 477 S. W. 2d 288, 290 (Tex. Crim. App. 1972). However,
until the Court of Criminal Appeals decided Bogany, there was some doubt
both as to whether that general rule would apply to the error in this case
and as to whether the sentence imposed by the jury in this case was in fact
unlawful. See, e. g., Adams v. State, 642 S. W. 2d 211, 213-214 (Tex.
App. 1982) (reforming jury's sentence); Bogany v. State, 646 S. W. 2d 663,
664-665 (Tex. App.) (stating that jury's sentence could be reformed),
rev'd, 661 S. W. 2d 957 (Tex. Crim. App. 1983); id., at 960 (McCormick, J.,
dissenting) (contending that supplementary fine was authorized by law).
For purposes of this opinion, I assume that both the substantive limitation
upon respondent's sentence and the procedural limitation on the remedial
powers of reviewing courts were law at the time that respondent's offense
was committed.


PDF PAGE 18
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment 497 U. S.
Theoretically, the legislature might have remedied the
situation in either of two ways. It might have authorized a
punishment of both life imprisonment and a $10,000 fine for
respondent's offense or, alternatively, it might have author-
ized a court to correct the sentence by eliminating the fine.
The former option would plainly have violated the Ex Post
Facto Clause because it would have increased respondent's
punishment beyond the penalty authorized at the time of his
offense. The second option, which the Texas Legislature
adopted, is not subject to that defect; nor does it criminalize
previously innocent conduct or make any change in the proce-
dures used to convict or to sentence respondent. It created
a new remedy designed to conform respondent's sentence to
that authorized by law at the time of his offense. Such legis-
lation does not violate the Ex Post Facto Clause.
The argument to the contrary is based on our cases holding
that the Clause applies to procedural, as well as substantive,
changes that deprive a defendant of "substantial personal
rights" and a claim that respondent's right to a new trial after
an erroneous sentence was such a right. The argument mis-
reads our precedents and overlooks the critical importance of
evaluating the procedural right at issue by reference to the
time of the offense.
II
In Kring v. Missouri, 107 U. S. 221 (1883), the Court
rejected the argument that the Ex Post Facto Clause has no
application to procedural changes. At the time of Kring's
offense, Missouri law provided that the acceptance of a plea
of guilty to second-degree murder constituted an acquittal of
first-degree murder. A subsequent amendment to the Mis-
souri Constitution abrogated that rule and Kring was there-
after convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to
death. The Missouri Supreme Court held that there was no
violation of the Ex Post Facto Clause because the retroactive


PDF PAGE 19
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment
amendment was merely a procedural change.3 This Court's
reversal of that holding demonstrates that the Clause applies
to some procedural changes, but our decision rested on the
fact that the change had deprived the defendant of a complete
defense to the charge of first-degree murder and to the impo-
sition of the death penalty. We wrote:
"Whatever may be the essential nature of the change,
it is one which, to the defendant, involves the difference
between life and death, and the retroactive character of
the change cannot be denied." Id., at 224.
"In the case before us the Constitution of Missouri so
changes the rule of evidence, that what was conclusive
evidence of innocence of the higher grade of murder
when the crime was committed, namely, a judicial con-
viction for a lower grade of homicide, is not received as
evidence at all, or, if received, is given no weight in be-
half of the offender. It also changes the punishment,
for, whereas the law as it stood when the homicide was
committed was that, when convicted of murder in the
second degree, he could never be tried or punished by
death for murder in the first degree, the new law enacts
'The Missouri Supreme Court relied upon the reasoning of the St.
Louis Court of Appeals. See State v. Kring, 74 Mo. 612, 631 (1881). The
relevant passage from the Court of Appeals opinion was quoted (and then
disavowed) by this Court in Kring v. Missouri, 107 U. S. 221, 223-224
(1883):
"'Formerly it was held in Missouri (State v. Ross, 29 Mo. 32) that, when a
conviction is had of murder in the second degree on an indictment charging
murder in the first degree, if this be set aside, the defendant cannot again
be tried for murder in the first degree. A change introduced by sect. 23 of
art. 2 of the Constitution of 1875 has abrogated this rule. On the oral ar-
gument something was said by counsel for the defendant to the effect that
under the old rule defendant could not be put on his trial for murder in the
first degree, and that he could not be affected by the change of the con-
stitutional provision, the crime having been committed whilst the old con-
stitution was in force. There is, however, nothing in this; this change is a
change not in crimes, but in criminal procedure, and such changes are not
ex post facto. Gut v. State, 9 Wall. 35; Cummings v. Missouri, 4 id. 326."'


PDF PAGE 20
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment 497 U. S.
that he may be so punished, notwithstanding the former
conviction." Id., at 228.
Thompson v. Utah, 170 U. S. 343 (1898), involved an of-
fense committed while Utah was a Territory, but the case was
tried after Utah became a State. At the time of the offense,
the defendant was entitled to a trial by a 12-person jury, but
under the new State's law only 8 jurors were required. We
held that this retrospective procedural change deprived
Thompson of "a substantial right belonging to him when the
offense was committed," and therefore violated the Ex Post
Facto Clause.
"We are of opinion that the State did not acquire upon
its admission into the Union the power to provide, in re-
spect of felonies committed within its limits while it was
a Territory, that they should be tried otherwise than by
a jury such as is provided by the Constitution of the
United States. When Thompson's crime was commit-
ted, it was his constitutional right to demand that his
liberty should not be taken from him except by the joint
action of the court and the unanimous verdict of a jury of
twelve persons. To hold that a State could deprive him
of his liberty by the concurrent action of a court and
eight jurors, would recognize the power of the State not
only to do what the United States in respect of Thomp-
son's crime could not, at any time, have done by legisla-
tion, but to take from the accused a substantial right be-
longing to him when the offence was committed.
"It is not necessary to review the numerous cases in
which the courts have determined whether particular
statutes come within the constitutional prohibition of ex
post facto laws. It is sufficient now to say that a statute
belongs to that class which by its necessary operation
and 'in its relation to the offence, or its consequences,
alters the situation of the accused to his disadvantage.'
United States v. Hall, 2 Wash. C. C. 366; Kring v. Mis-
souri, 107 U. S. 221, 228; Medley, Petitioner, 134 U. S.


PDF PAGE 21
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment
160, 171. Of course, a statute is not of that class unless
it materially impairs the right of the accused to have the
question of his guilt determined according to the law as it
was when the offence was committed." Id., at 350-351.
In Beazell v. Ohio, 269 U. S. 167 (1925), we made it clear
that the question whether a particular procedural change has
a sufficiently drastic impact on a defendant to be character-
ized as "substantial" is a matter of degree. In that case we
held that the rule applied in Kring and Thompson did not
preclude the retrospective application of a rule allowing two
codefendants to be tried jointly for a noncapital offense. We
summarized our earlier cases construing the Ex Post Facto
Clause and explained:
"The constitutional prohibition and the judicial interpre-
tation of it rest upon the notion that laws, whatever their
form, which purport to make innocent acts criminal after
the event, or to aggravate an offense, are harsh and op-
pressive, and that the criminal quality attributable to an
act, either by the legal definition of the offense or by the
nature or amount of the punishment imposed for its com-
mission, should not be altered by legislative enactment,
after the fact, to the disadvantage of the accused." 269
U. S., at 170.
"And there may be procedural changes which operate to
deny to the accused a defense available under the laws in
force at the time of the commission of his offense, or
which otherwise affect him in such a harsh and arbitrary
manner as to fall within the constitutional prohibition.
Kring v. Missouri, 107 U. S. 221; Thompson v. Utah,
170 U. S. 343. But it is now well settled that statutory
changes in the mode of trial or the rules of evidence,
which do not deprive the accused of a defense and which
operate only in a limited and unsubstantial manner to his
disadvantage, are not prohibited." Ibid.


PDF PAGE 22
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment 497 U. S.
"Just what alterations of procedure will be held to be
of sufficient moment to transgress the constitutional pro-
hibition cannot be embraced within a formula or stated in
a general proposition. The distinction is one of degree.
But the constitutional provision was intended to secure
substantial personal rights against arbitrary and oppres-
sive legislation, see Malloy v. South Carolina, 237 U. S.
180, 183, and not to limit the legislative control of reme-
dies and modes of procedure which do not affect matters
of substance." Id., at 171.
III
The foregoing cases make it clear that the mere fact that
this case involves a procedural change in Texas law is not suf-
ficient to exclude it from the coverage of the Ex Post Facto
Clause. But it is equally clear that our analysis should focus
on the impact of the change upon the "right belonging to [the
defendant] when the offense was committed." Thompson,
170 U. S., at 351. In this case, neither the defendant's right
to a fair trial nor his right to be protected against unau-
thorized or excessive punishment has been impaired in the
slightest by the new Texas rule.
This conclusion follows immediately from an observation
which is both sensible and evident from precedent: A pro-
cedural protection is likely to be substantial, when viewed
from the time of the commission of the offense, only if it af-
fects the modes of procedure by which a valid conviction or
sentence may be imposed. The claims in Kring and Thomp-
son both satisfy this threshold test. In Kring, the proce-
dural change-which deprived Kring of a defense based upon
an earlier trial or plea-made it easier for the State to obtain
a first-degree murder charge against a defendant who had
never been subject to any valid conviction for the crime in
question, much less a valid conviction for first-degree mur-
der. In Thompson, the reduction in the size of the jury
made it easier for the State to obtain a unanimous verdict


PDF PAGE 23
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD
37 STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment
against a defendant who, before the verdict, likewise had not
been convicted.
Mallett v. North Carolina, 181 U. S. 589 (1901), is, how-
ever, distinguishable from Kring and Thompson because it
fails to meet the threshold test. In Mallett, a valid convic-
tion had been obtained against the defendant. Under the
defendant's theory in that case, however, the State would
have been prohibited from relying upon this conviction be-
cause it had been vacated by an intermediate appellate court.
Although the North Carolina Supreme Court reinstated the
conviction, Mallett claimed that it lacked power to do so. At
the time Mallett committed his crime, the State was prohib-
ited by state law from appealing the adverse decisions of in-
termediate appellate courts in criminal cases. This restric-
tion had been removed, but Mallett contended that the State
had thereby enacted an ex post facto law. As the case came
to this Court, it was conceded that Mallett was convicted
after a trial which afforded him all the procedural and sub-
stantive protections guaranteed by North Carolina law at the
time he committed his offense. Nevertheless, according to
Mallett's theory, the State was prohibited from relying upon
his conviction because of the combination of an intervening-
and, for this Court's purposes, erroneous -appellate decision
and a restriction upon the State's access to the appellate
processes. Not surprisingly, we rejected this claim.
This case is comparable to Mallett. Respondent does not
claim that he was denied any procedural protections relevant
to the determination of his guilt or innocence. Nor does he
claim that his life sentence was unauthorized by law or that it
was the consequence of improper procedures. Finally, he
does not argue that he has been deprived of any avenue of
review for correcting errors that may have vitiated the valid-
ity of his conviction or sentence. For example, respondent
does not contend-and we do not see how he could plausibly
contend-that the State has deprived him of any opportunity
to challenge his conviction on the ground that the improper


PDF PAGE 24
OCTOBER TERM, 1989
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment 497 U. S.
sentencing instruction somehow infected the jury's delibera-
tions about his guilt or about the propriety of life imprison-
ment. Respondent instead claims, as did the defendant in
Mallett, that an unrelated error must bar the State from re-
lying upon his concededly valid conviction, and predicates
this claim solely on a restriction upon the State's access to
appellate-or, more precisely in this case, postconviction-
remedies.' Unlike the defendants in Thompson and Kring,
Youngblood wishes to have a new trial according to the same
procedures, regulated by the same laws, open to the same ev-
idence, and capped by the same sentencing limitations that
resulted in his conviction and his life sentence.5
Obviously, as our decision in Beazell itself makes clear,
a procedural protection does not become substantial merely
because it meets the low threshold that I have discussed.
It does, however, become insubstantial by failing to do so.
Whatever else may be said of the factors that determine
whether a procedural protection affects substantial rights, it
is difficult to imagine how a retroactive law could, when
viewed from the standpoint of the date the offense was com-
mitted, implicate substantial rights of any defendant if the
law does no more than expand the flexibility of postconviction
processes available to the State with respect to a defendant
4 In Mallett v. North Carolina, 181 U. S. 589 (1901), the unrelated in-
tervening error was an incorrect decision by the intermediate appellate
court; in this case, it was the imposition of a supplementary fine in addition
to the life sentence. In Mallett, the restriction upon the review process
prohibited the State from taking an appeal; in this case, it prohibits the
courts from saving the conviction and sentence by removing the improper
supplement.
5Indeed, this case is afortiori by comparison to Mallett. In that case,
the defendant would benefit from an evidentiary exclusion at the secondary
trial, although that exclusion would be entirely the consequence of the ap-
pellate court's incorrect interpretation of state law and not a consequence
of the trial procedures established by North Carolina law in effect at the
time of the offense. By contrast, in this case the procedures at the second
trial would be in all relevant respects identical.


PDF PAGE 25
COLLINS v. YOUNGBLOOD 61
37 STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment
who is subject to a valid conviction and sentence. Indeed,
respondent has barely even attempted to articulate any jus-
tification for the Texas procedure that the legislature abol-
ished. The mere possibility of a capricious and unlikely
windfall is not the sort of procedural protection that could
reasonably be judged substantial from the perspective of the
defendant at the time the offense was committed.
Accordingly, I concur in the Court's judgment, but not in
its opinion.
