Supreme Court, U.S. 
FILED 


T) NOV 14 1995 


No. 95-5207 CLERK 
ania ieeteiaieiatee) 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


BYRON KEITH COOPER, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Court of Criminal Appeals of Oklahoma 


JOINT APPENDIX 


ROBERT A. RAVITz * W. A. Drew EDMONDSON 

JuLiIA C. SUMMERS SANDRA D. HOWARD * 

Kim CHANDLER JOHNSON Office of the Attorney Genera! 

Office of the Oklahoma County for the State of Oklahoma 
Public Defender 112 State Capitol Building 

820 Robert S. Kerr, Rm 611 Oklahoma City, OK 73105 

Oklahoma City, OK 73102 (405) 521-3921 

(405) 278-1550 Counsel for Respondent 

Counsel for Petitioner 

* Counsel of Record 


ee 
PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED JULY 13, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED OCTOBER 5, 1995 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Relevant Docket Entries 
Excerpts From Transcript of Motion Hearings, April 


Excerpts From Transcript of Pre-Trial Motions and 
Competency Hearing, May 4-5, 1992 


Excerpts from Transcript cf Jury Trial Proceedings, 
May 5-22, 1992 


Opinion of the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals on 


Order of the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals Deny- 
ing Rehearing and Directing Issuance of Mandate.... 


Order of the Supreme Court of the United States grant- 
ing Certiorari and leave to proceed in forma pauperis, 
October 5, 1995 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


DATE 


——- 
— ——— 


ENTRY 


August 8, 1990 


August 27, 1990 


December 20, 1990 
and January 18, 1991 


May 4-5, 1992 


May 5-22, 1992 


Defense counsel filed Application for 
Determination of Competency. Judge 
Eugene Mathews entered Order direct- 
ing Department of Mental Health to 
examine Petitioner at the Oklahoma 
County Jail and make determinations 
as to the stattorily required questions. 


Post-Examination Competency Hear- 
ing he'd before Judge Bana Blasdel; 
upou finding of incompetency, Peti- 
tioner was committed to Eastern State 
Hospital for further evaluation and 
treatment. 


Upon Petitioner’s return from Eastern 
State Hospital, a second post-examina- 
tion competency hearing was held be- 
fore Judge Richard Freeman. Finding 
Petitioner competent, Judge Freeman 
entered Order to Resume Criminal 
Proceedings. 


On the day trial was to begin, another 
competency hearing was held, at the 
conclusion of which District Judge 
Richard Freeman determined Peti- 
tioner to be competent to stand trial 
under Oklahoma’s standard of “clear 
and convincing.” 


Petitioner was tried for and convicted 
of Murder in the First Degree for the 
murder of Harold Sheppard. Follow- 
ing the penalty phase the jury assessed 


DATE 


June 5, 1992 


January 10, 1995 


February 13, 1995 


tent. Court overruled the objection 
and sentenced Petitioner to die by 
lethal injection. 

Court of Criminal Appeals of Okla- 
homa affirmed conviction and sentence. 


Court of Criminal Appeals of Okla- 
homa denied petition for rehearing and 
directed issuance of mandate. 


3 
DISTRICT COURT OF OKLAHOMA COUNTY 


No. CF-89-5084 
Tue STATE OF OKLAHOMA 


vs. 


BYRON KEITH COOPER 


TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 
MOTION HEARINGS HAD ON APRIL 239, 1992 


Before the HONORABLE RICHARD W. FREEMAN, 
District Judge. 


[207] MR. MILDFELT: * * * I have one last issue 
that I need to make a record on if I'm not cutting any- 
body off. 

THE COURT: All right. 

MR. MILDFELT: Mr. Cooper, today, and I need to 
make a record on this. I think he’s faking, I don't know 
how the Court feels, but this week or last week he lunged 
at or swung or appeared like he was going to hit Mr. 
Ravitz and Mr. Bush got between them. Because I didn’t 
come over there. Mr. Ravitz is my co-counsel and he and 
! were not communicating. The last time we communi- 
cated we were hollering at one another through the bars 
up in the jail. 

Today, at one point when I got too close to him, he 
grabbed a chair and told the deputies to keep me away 
from him. He has hollered in here so loud at times that 


Lae 


we 
will pay for it, have him examined tomorrow, just to see, 
you know, what assessment is correct, because I'm not a 
doctor and I get into these cases and I’m for trial 
and I say I’m ready for trial and I say he’s faking. But 
I'm not a doctor and so I want to be fair, so I'm not 
picking a hired gun. 

THE COURT: Are you raising insanity? 

MR. MILDFELT: Not as a defense to the crime but 
incompetence, I have to do that, because the Court's seen 
him and seen him act today and we've got a week or two 
weeks of trial coming up and I perceive a very difficult 
situation. He is not communicating with me, [209] he’s 
not happy with me. I don’t know where he’s going to sit 
in the courtroom. I don’t know whether he’s going to 
. allow himself to be dressed out. I don’t know whether 
he’s incompetent or whether he’s faking. 

And, yes, I’m raising that issue and I just allow it to the 
Court, let the D.A. pick whomever they want to go look 
at him and we'll pay for it. We've got a court fund with 
40 big ones in it and we'll pay for it but I think we ought 
to assure ourselves of that before we proceed out. 

THE COURT: Well, are you telling me that you're 
unable to defend him or what are you saying to me now? 
You know, he’s been adjudicated competent. 

MR. MILDFELT: Competent before this Court. 


5 


THE COURT: And I will say after viewing the tape 
of his interview he’s quite an intelligent person. He has a 
good command of language. There’s not the slightest in- 
dication to me on that tape that he isn’t very sound. He's 
a sharp individual. 

Now, I understand people can come and go and I 
understand he’s been in jail for quite a while. This case 
has lain dormant for some time because of the inability of 
the defense to get funds, I understand, but I don’t know 
that that has been a hindrance to the preparation of the 
case because really, I don’t know what [210] you have 
in the way of evidence, if any, that you intend to offer. 


FP 
8 
. 
‘f 
z 
e 
i 
g 
z 
8 


municating, that’s obvious. 

THE COURT: I've seen the letters. 

MR. MILDFELT: He’s accused me of trying to kill 
him with a nylon rope. He says I hit him. 

Now, I bond with my clients and it is not above me to 
kind of punch them on the shoulder in a fatherly sort of 
way, not in a way of anger and I would never touch a 
client in anger unless a client grabbed me. 

He and I did get in a hollering match the last time I 
talked to him. He refused to talk to me about this case 
at all, refuses to acknowledge that he has this case. Con- 
tinues to talk about a rape case and a kidnapping case 
and that the girl won't show an that he’s been screaming 
and hollering over here today, that see the girl, as if the 
girl had testified. And he cried I believe this afternoon 
or this morning. 

THE COURT: Well, he’s been adjudicated [211] 
competent and I've observed him on the tape to be com- 
petent and the fact that he may be putting on an act or 
not now, I'm not the least bit concerned about that, per- 
sonally. 


MR. MILDFELT: Well, I think it can raise it’s ugly 
head at any time. 

THE COURT: It can. And if he creates a disturb- 
ance during the trial I think, if he is faking and if he 
does do that, that’s going to go against him? The jury's 
not going— 

MR. MILDFELT: But if he’s not faking, Your 
Honor— 

THE COURT: It’s a travesty, perhaps. We're talking 
about two things. Insanity as a defense to a crime or 
incompetence to assist counsel. So, if an incompetent 
person is convicted of a crime that he committed when 
he was sane, I don’t see any harm’s done. 

MR. MILDFELT: All right, Your Honor, if that's 
the Court’s ruling. I just wanted you to know that we 
would pay for it. 

THE COURT: Do you want to have him examined? 

MR. MILLER: No. judge, but if he is incompe- 
tent today, if someone were to raise a question of his 
competency, I believe we'd have to have a hearing to 
decide if he is. 

[212] THE COURT: I think so. 

MR. MILLER: But Mr. Mildfelt has said three 
times the word faking and that’s his opinion. No one 
else has raised the issue of his competency and for the 
record, I’ve seen the man two weeks in a row at formal 
arraignment and on another charge, possession of a 
weapon that he made in the jail charge that we prelimed. 
I prelimed the offense about three weeks ago. I went 
down to formally arraign him one day and then the Judge 
passed it on over to another day. 

I observed him three times and when he’s not talking 
about this case, he seems to be just fine. He may be 
belligerent, but he never acted like he didn’t know what 
was going on around him. And for my perspective, I 
think I have the right or the duty to come forward if I 
thought he was incompetent. 


7 


THE COURT: You both have the duty if you think 
he’s incompetent to come forward and— 

MR. MILLER: And neither one of us do, J , So 
that's the test. If he’s incompetent today or Day a 
question about it, we have to have him looked at, but I 
don’t think he is, Mr. Mildfelt doesn’t think he is. The 
Cou.! already indicated he doesn’t think— 

MR. MILDFELT: Gentleman, I have two people in 
my office, investigators, that think he is. I don’t [213] 
think he is and I only say that for the record because I’m 
going to be candid in front of the Court. I’m an officer 
of the Court. I don’t think he is, but two of my investi- 
gators think he is. I'm not a doctor. 

THE COURT: What you think counts in the court, 
of course. If you have any evidence you want to put on 
to that effect or if you want to have him examined your- 
self and you have the funds, while feel free to do so. 


* * * * 


8 
DISTRICT COURT OF OKLAHOMA COUNTY 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 
PRE-TRIAL MOTIONS AND COMPETENCY HEARING 
HAD ON MAY 4 AND 5, 1992 


Before the HONORABLE RICHARD W. FREEMAN, 
District Judge. 


{99} Q (By prosecutor) Do you see him talking like 
he is right now off to nobody like he’s talking about some 


rape charge or something? ae 
A (By Charles Owen Smith) He stays in his room 


it seems like a lot, you know, talking to himself. . . . 

* * * ok 
[102] Q (By defense counsel) And you have, if I 
understood correctly, seen him in his room talking to 
himself like he’s doing sitting over in the corner today 


here in the courtroom? 
A (By Charles Owen Smith) Yes, sir, I have. 


* 2 * * 
[106] Q (By defense counsel) Now, when you say he 
talks to himself, do you see him talking to himself over 


there now? 
A (By Anthony Boult) Yes. 


* ok * * 
[188] DR. PHILIP MURPHY 


Called as a witness on behalf of the Defendant, after first 
being duly sworn, testified on his oath as follows; to wit: 


ry 


9 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MILDFELT: 


Would you state your name for the Judge, please? 
Yes, Philip J. Murphy. 

And what is your profession or occupation, please? 
I’m a licensed clinical psychologist. 

Can you tell us about your educational background? 
Yes, I received a Bachelor’s in psychology and 
biology from City College of New York in 1967, a 
Master’s and Ph.D. in clinical and physiological psychology 
from the University of Maryland in 1972. 

I was involved in a one-year internship at Creedmoor 
State Hospital from 1970 to 71, which is a state hospital 
in New York State and a one-year clerkship at the Wash- 
ington Veterans Administration Hospital for 1971 to °72. 

Q_ And when did you get your Doctorate? 

A_ I passed my orals in ’72, then I went on to be a 
[189] professor or an associate professor terured at 
Oklahoma State University from 1972 to 1982. 

Q What else have you done experience-wise that 
qualifies you to be a clinical psychologist? 

A Part of the training has to do with receiving a 
Ph.D. in clinical psychology in a nationally-approved 
training program which the University of “O” was. The 
internship was also A.P.A. approved at Creedmoor State 
Hospital. 

Upon completion of your dissertation and having all 
the court work and the clinical clerkships, then you receive 
your degree. Then I was licensed in the state of Oklahoma 
in 1975, and have been in continuous private practice 
since that time. 

Q Have you been qualified to testify in courts in the 
state of Oklahoma before this day? 

A Yes, I have. 

Q Did your office contact you yesterday, doctor, to 
examine Byron Keith Cooper? 

A Yes. 


rO?rO?O 


10 


Q And did you perform an examination of him some 
time in the evening hours of May the 4th, last night? 

A That's correct. 

Q Prior to that examination, did you review any 
records from Eastern State Hospital? 

{190} A_ Yes, I did. 

Q_ And can you tell me what, if anything, those con- 
tributed to your examination, the records that you exam- 
ined from Eastern State Hospital? 

A Yes, they did. The records from Eastern State 
Hospital begin in August, I think August 28th of 1990. 
He had been sent to Eastern State for competency follow- 
ing Dr. Edith King’s evaluation that he was not competent 
just prior to that in August of 1990, so they sent him up 
there for an evaluation. 

When he first entered Eastern State, both Dr. Patter- 
son and Dr. Lazarica (spelled phonetically), both found 
him to be severely ill, looking very schizophrenic, thought 
disorder, very psychotic. Inside of a month, by the end 
of September, and by the way, they placed him on Halidol 
at that time, which is an antipsychotic medication, which 
would fit that diagnosis. 

However, by the end of the month of September, Dr. 
Lazarica was feeling that he wasn’t seeing much schizo- 
phrenia in the man. What he was noticing more was 
other types of borderline problems, personnel disorder 
problems, sociopathic problems. 

When you look then in the nursing record then in 
October, you come up with things like, and this is from 
the nurse, this is a world-class, first-class [191] manipu- 
lator, seems to want his way a little more and etcetera, 
etcetera. 

They took him off Halidol at the latter part of Septem- 
ber and the reason for that was that Dr. Lazarica felt 
that he really didn’t see any dose response curve between 
the Halidol they were giving him and any benefit it was 
having on the patient. 


They finally released him back to Oklahoma County in 
December, basically feeling he was competent at that time 
to stand trial. He had been on some antidepressants after 
he was on Halidol and the antidepressants were for a 
different problem. 

They did a blood level on his antidepressants some time 
in November and found interestingly that one of his blood 
levels was lower than would be expected. My clinical 
interpretation of that was that in fact his system was 
clearly needing that type of medicine and in fact, was 
overutilizing it and that’s why in fact one of the blood 
levels had come up low. 

Q_ And they had taken him off of it? 


A_ No, this was when he was on it. They have certain 
expectations with a given dose of what his blood level 
should be. And one of the particular metabolites of the 
antidepressant he was on, showed low. 

What I’m saying is that clinically when I see that [192] 
it’s almost diagnostic information. It’s like that system 
really has an affinity for that drug and therefore it’s 


utilizing it and coming up lower than expectation on the 
blood level. 


Q Anything else you gathered from Eastern State 
records before you went to see him that you thought was 
significant at that time before you go see him? 


A Well, yeah, there was on the diagnosis going in, 
he had part of the five axis diagnosis that’s used today, in 
psychiatric diagnosis is a focal level of functioning. His 
focal level of functioning when he came in was rated at 
a 15. A 15 was based upon his being apparently mute, 
very noncommunicative. 

That is interesting in that also a 15, which is an ex- 
tremely low number saying the person’s barely fuunction- 
ing at all would be gotten from smearing feces. And I 
thought that that was interesting consistency given some 
of the evidence that had been spoken about yesterday. 


12 


Q Now, after you had all that information, did you 
go over and see him in County Jail? 

A I did, last night. 

Q. And did you make an examination, however you do 
that and conduct some tests with him? 

A I did. 

[193] Q. Asa result of your examination and your tests 
with him, what did you determine? 

A Well, it’s complicated so I'll sort of list them. 

First, some part of his behavior is due to malingering. 
He is attempting to look worse than he is. 

Q. Okay. 

A Secondly, that I think that he’s not schizophrenic 
but that he suffers from an affective, major affective dis- 
order which would be on a separate branch of mental 
illness than schizophrenia, which is a thought disorder. 

Q_ But it is a form of mental illness? 

A Yes, it is and it is episodic, meaning that he is 
going to get bad and then all by itself, even without 
medication, come back up to levels of functioning he had 
before. I think that’s what happened, in fact, back in 
August of 1990, when he first went to Eastern State. 

I think he had an active exacerbation of that illness. 
That's what he looked like. He was probably psychotic 
at that time. That’s what people were seeing and they 
were presuming that he was schizophrenic. When he 
remitted in about a month, that’s where everybody was 
confused about what’s going on with this guy. He’s not 
responding perfectly to the medicine. So that’s the second 
finding. 

The third finding is that he, even when I was able [194] 
to get to the point of speaking quite coherently with him, 
his thought patterns were quite clear, showed no evi- 
dence of any structural problems in his thinking. Then 
he would sort of confuse, and I don’t mean that necessarily 
in a conscious way. His time sense to me seems confused. 
It was hard for me to track anything with him in time. 


13 


So, the third finding has to do with his ability to help 
you as counsel and at this point in time, I don’t think that 
he can do that effectively. In that sense, I don’t judge him 
to be competent right now. 

Q * * * There was some testimony yesterday, I don’t 
know whether you were present when that was given, 
about a person called Noryb? 

A Yes. 

* # * * 

Q Were you present when some of that came on? 

A_ I saw the picture but I wasn’t present when the 
more dramatic aspects occurred. 

Q Did you discuss anything with him about Noryb? 

A Oh, yes. Yes. 

Q And what did you glean from that? What finding 
did you make from that? 


A One, I think that Noryb is real. I mean, I do not 
[195] think that that is a part of his manipulation and 
his malingering. It is a complex inside his mind which 
probably, and I’m not going to be able to say one hundred 
percent, my belief is it’s a combination of a step-father he 
had, who his mother had killed back when he was a 
young teenager or mid-teen. And I think, based on the 
information I have, that this man was probably the only 
positive father image that this man has experienced in 
his lifetime. 


I think he represents, Noryb represents sort of a complex 
of God and father. He is very frightened of Noryb and 
yet he wants Noryb’s protection. I think you personally 
represent Noryb in some degree to him and that’s why he’s 
afraid of you. 

Q You believe he’s honestly genuinely afraid of me? 

A_ Yes, I do believe he is honestly afraid of you. 


Q You don’t think that’s any part of any malingering 
whatsoever? 


A_ No, that is not malingering. 


14 


Q Do you believe that in view of all of these facts 
that he can effectively communicate with me as his at- 
torney? 

A Not at this time. 


Q Now, you talked about this disorder that he has. 
This is a recognized disorder? 


[196] A Yes. 
Q Is it treatable? 
A Yes, it is. 


Q_ How do you treat it? 


A My suggestion would be to begin him on a regimen 
of Lithium and to see what effects that will have. I can- 
not say at this time whether he is manic depressive, which 
is one diagnosis on that affective disorder or whether he 
is major depression recurrent. 

But along that line, Lithium would be the one medi- 
cation that I think would have a clearer shot at helping 
him get clearer so that he could communicate effectively 
with you. 

* * * * 


Q_ Does the stress affect him? 

A Yes, it does. The stress of going to court, of hav- 
ing these things come up is a problem. It probably adds 
to his decompensation and I think that that also is po 
tentially treatable. And I think with minor anti-anxiety 
agents that that might be helpful in a sort of limited dose 
as he’s preparing for these types of proceedings. 

Q But the stress didn’t cause the condition? It's a 
[197] mental condition that occurred before the stress, 
would that be fair? 


A That’s fair. 


Q_ The stress just aggravates the condition? 
A That is correct. 


* * * * 


15 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


{198} * * * Q (By Mr. Miller) Now, Doctor, you 
reviewed the records of Eastern State Hospital, right? 

A That's correct. 

Q And you reviewed the report, I'm sure, of Dr. King 
when she looked at him back in August of 90? 

A Yes. 

* * * * 
{199} * * * Q_ And then you talked to the Defendant, 
right? 

A Last night, that’s right. 

Q And what else did you do? 

A Well, I was here yesterday afternoon observing him 
in the courtroom. 

Q Okay. Anything else? 

A That's probably the total amount of the data. I 
did also look at some records on his mother, some psy- 
chiatric records of his mother. 

Q_ And you said that she was misdiagnosed as schizo- 
phrenic also? 

A _ I believe that, yes. When I looked at those records 
I believe that probably the more proper diagnosis for her 
would have been very similar to him, meaning, more af- 
fective disorder. 

Meaning, | believe that that would be more of an af- 
fective disorder. 

* ok + ok 
{200} * * * Q Who were the people testifying when 
you left? 

A I don't recall. At the time the testimony was going 
on, | was reviewing notes, so I really wasn’t tracking 
much who was up here testifying. 


* * * + 
Q Can you tell me what it was that you remember 
the witnesses saying that you heard that would affect your 
diagnosis? 
A 1 don’t think that there was anything that I heard 
from this seat that affected the diagnosis. 


16 


Q_ So the feces business, that has nothing to do with 
[20i ] it, right? 

A The only consistency with the feces is one I men- 
tioned that, | mean, | cannot say whether the feces is an 
effect of this man’s disorder right now or whether that’s 
part of the malingering. 

* of * ~ 


Q So, the bottom line, the things that all the pris- 
oners—excuse me, the residents came in here and testi- 
fied to of the County Jail, that wouldn't have any effect 
on you? 

A No, meaning I could chalk that up to it being 
simply malingering. I could chalk it up to this is a partial 
decompensation to do with his getting ready for trial. 

Q Partial? So at least part of it is malingering is 
what you're telling me? 

A Yes, definitely. 

Q Because the things that they were doing that they 
testified to that you heard of at least, a lot of those things 
weren't really consistent with the disorder that he has, is 
that true? 

A Yeah, I think that’s accurate. 

Q Alright. Now, the testimony from some of the 
State’s witnesses that same yesterday afternoon indicated 
that he acted rather normally. 


[202] A_ Right, the guard who was on the previous 
pod. 


Q That wouldn't be consistent, that kind of activity, 
normal conduct. That wouldn't be consistent with this 
disorder either, would it? 

A The disorder that I'm talking about that he has? 

Q_ Yes, sir. 

A Yes, meaning it would be consistent because it's 
episodic meaning, what happens is the person goes 
through a period of time when he is ill, and then all on 
its own, even without treatment, he’s going to come back 
to a previous level of functioning, so— 


17 


Q_ It can happen every five minutes? 

A No, no. It would not be that quick. I mean, and 
I don't have enough information. In other people it can 
happen sometimes several times a day would be very, 
very fast. Sometimes it’s years. So it has a long vari- 
ation. 

Q_ So it would be abnormal for him, what I'm hearing 
you say, it would be abnormal for Mr. Cooper to snap 
in and out of it, it would take longer than that? 

A Meaning momentarily, yes. 

Q How long would you normally expect him to be 
involved in this episodic disorder? 

A Well, the only information we have really comes 
from Eastern State Hospital and I would think that at 
least from that data—and he was in a complete different 
[203] environment that it was, I don’t know how long 
before Edith King had evaluated him that he had been 
there, but at least from the time that he was in Eastern 
State until the time that he apparently was out of the 
disorder was about a month. 

Q So, if he was all right the day he came to court 
on the 4th in the morning, you wouldn't have expected 
him to have these kind of manifestations of the disorder 
in court, would you? 

A Right. 

Q. And another thing, I'm sorry, another thing, if he 
was all right the morning he came to court on the 4th? 

A You mean yesterday? 

Q Yes. You wouldn't have expected him to be under 
the symptoms of this disorder the day before, then snap 
out of it and snap back into it the day of court? That's 
what you're saying, right? 

A Right. 

* * * * 
[204] ** * A Again, how much of what we're seeing 
is malingering, I think some part of it is malingering, I 
think some part of it is the disorder. 


Q_ If we put it on a continuum from zero to a hun- 
dred, you really don’t know how much on what end, do 
you? How much is malingering and how much of it is 
the disorder? 

A For most of the actions, yes, | don’t know. * * * 
It would take a lot more study. At the same time, the 
fact that both are present, I think, is the more important 
finding. * * * 

Q And the kind of time you're talking about is what 
they would have utilized at Easterr State Hospital for the 
three months from August 27th to November 26th that 
he was there, of 1990? 

A Uh-huh. 


Q Okay. And when he went down to Eastern after 
Dr. King looked at him, they had a history that was a lot 
like Noryb or Norid or whatever his name is— 

A Right. 

{205} Q And that his mama was dead. that was part 
of it, right? 

A_ He told me last night that his mother was dead. 

Q But that’s the same thing he was saying back then 
according to the records, right? 

A That's correct. 

Q And that his lawyer was trying to kill him? 

A That's correct. 

Q  That’s true. And during the three-month initiated 
by Dr. King, the three months at Eastern, the doctors 
all thought at first that he was really sick, that he was 
psychotic, schizophrenic, right? 

A What I'm saying is that he probably was psychotic, 
he was not schizophrenic, although it’s hard when you 
take a snapshot of somebody to be able to know without 
a knowledge of the force of the illness, is this schizo- 
phrenia or is this psychosis of another fashion. 

Q Dr. Murphy, the truth is, though, as you told me 
in the hall that Dr. King, in your opinion and the doc- 
tors at Eastern when they first diagnosed him in calling 
him schizophrenic, they were wrong? 

A In that diagnosis, right. 


19 


Q Sure. ORs 

A But not in the diagnosis of psychosis, which is a 
more general term. 

{206} Q Okay. Psychosis. That’s having any disorder, 
right? . 

n Psychosis is having a serious disorder which bas- 
ically gets in the way of your being able to have suffi- 
cient contact with reality to be competent, legally. 

Q You mean every time anybody has a psychosis 
they're incompetent legally? 

A Yeah, eo - they would be. They're out of 

their mind. That does not mean that somebody with let's 
say somebody who's schizophrenic diagnosis, they'll be 
schizophrenic their entire life. That does not mean that 
every moment in their lifetime that they are psychotic. 
Okay? They will go back into psychotic outbreaks from 
ime to time. 
“_ All right. With Dr. King and doctors at Eastern, 
what you're telling me is that the wild look that Dr. King 
so scientifically described and the fact that he wasn't 
capable of impulse control, those things all led her to 
believe at the time from this snapshot view that he was 
schizophrenic? 

A That's correct. 

Q Now, you're saying that’s not right, he was an 
affect disorder that’s not at all related, correct? 

A. That's correct. 

Q Now, Doctor, you also read Dr. Russell's estima- 
tion [207] of him when she shipped him back in No- 
vember? 

A Yes, I did. 

* * «x * 

Q And in that report she says that she believed his 
symptoms are more consistent with classified malingering 
that it is with any—I think she says psychosis, basically, 
doesn’t she or disorder? 

A. This is the last line of the report, “Mr. Cooper does 
not appear to meet the criteria for a clinical syndrome, 


20 


however, his Symptoms and supporting documentation 
appear to be indicative of a V code malingering, D.S.M. 
III-R. I can explain what that means. 

[208] Q Go ahead. 


A At the time when he’s being discharged, he is fine. 

They've got him off all medicine, he’s coherent, he’s 
doing fine. So, at that point in time, he does not, an 
example would be he wouldn't have a cold. He wouldn't 
be showing symptoms of any particular disorder at that 
time. And clearly, he also seemed to be based on some 
of their other—his manipulation on the ward, his—the 
comment I made about a first class manipulator in the 
nursing chart, yeah, he probably would warrant a V code 
malingering. * * * 
[209] A * * * It’s really all understandable, meaning 
when he first comes in he’s sick. It’s apparent to Dr. King, 
it’s apparent to Dr. Patterson, Dr. Lazarica and when you 
see somebody and you just see them in a psychotic state, 
especially in America, the first thing you think of is 
thought disorder. They look schizophrenic. 

A normal person who, if they had a breakdown and 
you saw them acutely ill, they would look schizophrenic. 
It takes a longer look at the course of the illness to decide 
in fact is that initial diagnosis of schizophrenia valid or 
does another diagnosis be warranted. 

At the time when Dr. Russell is writing this report, she’s 
looking at him and at that moment in time, after he’s 
been over his episode of effective disorder, he is fine. 
What she’s saying is, hey, there’s nothing wrong with this 
guy and at that moment in time, there isn't anything wrong 
with this guy. What's she’s saying then is, hey, based « . 
his ward behavior, I think he’s malingering at this 
moment. 


[210] Now, interestingly, when he was taken off Halidol. 
he wanted himself to be taken off Halidol and in fact the 
doctor agreed, Dr. Lazarica. 


21 


Also, when they were ready to send him back, he told 
them I want to go back to court, I’m ready to go back. 
So that part doesn’t hold true with just a simple under- 
standing of him has a malingerer. 

Q So, the point is, though doc, that you can’t really 
tell when someone’s a good faker, you can’t really tell if 
they’re malingering or if they've partially got a disorder 
or if they’re psychotic, you just can’t tell? 

A I just did tell, meaning last night when I did my 
evaluation of him, I found that he is in fact malingering. 
But that’s not a total picture. Yes, he is malingering, yes, 
he has a serious problem, no it is not schizophrenic. 


* * * * 


Q_ So, since you don’t know on the continuum of one 
to [211] a hundred or zero to a hundred where the ma- 
lingering range ends and this disorder that you now 
describe for the first time begins, it’s really very difficult 
for you to say how much he is able to understand and 
assist, versus how much he cannot, is that true? 

A_ I don’t think so. 

Q_ Explain that. 

A Okay. My description of this disorder for the first 
time is simply based on that I have the luxury of seeing 
the course of this man’s illness, where Dr. King or Dr. 
Patterson and Dr. Lazarica, didn’t have that luxury. They 
were just seeing him right at the time. 

Now, when it comes to his ineffectiveness to aid coun- 
sel, I’m basing that not on the fact that this guy will lie 
at every turn. Okay? And I’m not saying that he won't. 

What I'm saying is that there’s a confusion right now 
that makes it very difficult for anybody who’s attempting 
to get good information back and forth from him and 
that’s what the problem is. That type of confusion is 
probably linked to this affective disorder, therefore, if we 
can treat that underlying disorder, hopefully, he'll become 
less confused and a better person to work with when he 
works with his attorney. 


22 


Q Okay. Now, Doctor, the point is that it’s certainly 
[212] possible isn’t it, it’s certainly possible that this whole 
affective disorder that you're seeing in him is because he’s 
really good at malingering? 

A_ No, that’s not possible. 


* * * * 


[213] Q Which affective disorder does he have? 
A He has either a form of manic depression or major 
depression recurrent with psychotic features. 


* * * * 


[219] Q * * * [WJhat does it mean here when it refers 
to manic episode under mood disorder? What does that 
mean? 

A Basically, you can have a manic episode where a 
person typically is not in complete touch with reality. 
They may, for example, imagine that they’re a deer or a 
fawn dancing in the forest. They may stay up for days 
and days on end without—they may be aggressive. They 
[220] may glare at you in a strange sort of way. They 
may, when they shake your hand, try to, not because 
they really want to, but almost break it. They have all 
those things are different parts of somebody when they 
are mad. 

* * a * 

Q_ Well, is he in a manic episode or not? 

A No, I don’t think he’s in a manic episode. 

Q_ What’s he in? 

A Again, what we're saying is that he has severe 
enough disorder to be looked at in terms of the more 
serious problems. Those would be along one of two trees. 
Either a thought disorder or an affective or mood disorder. 

When it comes to precisely what exact diagnosis he fits, 
I don’t have the information to say is this man bipolar or 
is he showing some major depression recurrent or is he 
showing what would be psychlothymic? 


* * * * 


23 


[221] A * * * When you can diagnose somebody as 
bipolar, one, you have to show that they have a probable 
family history. It’s a genetically determined predisposition. 
And in those people, Lithium has a very high probability 
of being effective. 

I do not know if he’s bipolar or not because I don’t 
have the information. Okay? What I do know is that 
he is showing the effects of affective loss in his life that 
is making him at times psychotic as he was, for example, 
back in August of 1990. He is not schizophrenic. 


* * * * 


[223] Q How could you say, Doctor, that he honestly 
is afraid of Mr. Mildfelt when you also clearly say that 
he’s not honest? 

A Because some people are situational, in fact, most 
of us are situational. We may lie in one situation and 
another situation, we’re honest. It’s part of human nature. 

Q That's true, but how are you capable of judging 
his credibility based on the short time you spent with him, 
sir? 

A Basically, based upon the testing that I did that 


- found what I had said previously that, yes, he is malinger- 


ing, yes, he has a major disorder. It is not schizophrenia. 
[224] Q And that told you he was afraid of Mr. 
Mildfelt? 

A No. What the fear to do with Bob Mildfelt has to 
do with the connection to Noryb which is a consistent 
delusional persona that he does fear. It’s sort of his God/ 
father * * *. 

* * * * 

Q Would it affect your opinion about how much of 
this is malingering and how much of this in an affect or 
disorder to know that he manipulates prisoners and did 
otherwise? 

A Im sure he manipulates prisoners and I’m sure he 
manipulated the people at Eastern State. We’re not deal- 
ing with an either/or. We're dealing with two things 
coinciding at the same time. 


24 


Q_ So it wouldn’t affect your opinion? 

A No. 

Q What about the fact that he managed to file himself 
a couple of pro se federal lawsuits on his own. Would 
that bother you or make any difference? 

[225] A _ No, it would just tell me that the 50 that he 
earned on the I.Q. test was obviously bogus, which was 
the way I decided he obviously was malingering. 

Q So, I guess bottom line what you're saying is that, 
at least the way you call it, he can act normally or has 
acted normally through a great part of, probably most of 
his adult life, right? 

A I can’t say that. Certainly he’s had periods of 
where he’s acted normally. I don’t know to what propor- 
_ * * * *~ 

Q * * * When you were talking to all the Defense 
people and the various investigators, did you ask them 
if there was other indications through his life that he has 
a documented history of disorder? 

A We went over his history and his history has a lot 
of evidence of abuse and neglect. To what degree any 
[226] treatment occurred, I’m unaware of it. He has been 
incarcerated I think a good amount of his adult life. 


* a * * 


[235] Q * * * [Tjhe way I understand your review 
* * * is that he definitely fits under all the mood disorders 
or at least he fits somewhere under one of those mood 
disorders, is that correct? 

That’s fair. 

But, he also fits under the malingering disorder? 
Malingering is not a disorder, it’s a V code. 
Excuse me. The malingering code? 

That’s correct. That’s correct. That’s what ] began 
my testimony with a long time ago. 


r>O?>O > 


25 


Q If you've got one of these disorders whenever you're 

not manifesting any of the symptoms of it, are you in- 
competent then? 
[236] A No, meaning you would have to have pres- 
ently, at the time, symptoms which are going to be inter- 
fering with your mental functioning and that would judge 
at that moment in time whether somebody is competent 
or not. 

Q_ So if you would have had the opportunity to see 
him once a month over the last two years and eight 
months, from what you understand from his file, you 
would have expected to find times when he was fine? 

A Id think so. 

Q You know, you're a doctor, you see a lot of people 
like this, you wouldn’t have said he was crazy all the time, 
every time you saw him, based on what you understand. 

A Yes, you're right. 

Again, let me point out that I’m not even saying he’s 
crazy now. What I am saying is that he lacks the ability 
to competently confer with his counsel. That’s the finding 
I found. 3 

QI understand what you said. And it’s all affected 
by how much malingering he’s doing as to whether he has 
the ability or the desire, true? 

A_ No, it’s not all affected, meaning that is one factor. 

Q. That’s a factor? 


A Yes. * * * . 
[239] REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MILDFELT: 

* * * * 


Q Is there anything inconsistent * * * with your 
diagnosis here today as to his mental condition that he 
is malingering in part and that he has a real mental con- 
dition? 

A There’s nothing inconsistent. 

Q_ (By Mr. Mildfelt) The bottom line, Dr. Murphy, 
do you have an opinion as to whether or not his mental 


26 


condition is such that he is unable to communicate with 
his attorney? p . * * 


A I have the opinion that he is unable at the present 
time to effectively communicate with his counsel. 
” * + * 


[240] THE COURT: Doctor, what about ‘%e next 
question that follows the one that Mr. Mildfelt asked 
you, if he’s unable to consult with his attorney and ra- 
tionally assist in his defense, do you think he can attain 
competency within a reasonable time provided with a 
course of treatment, therapy or training? 

A Yes, I think that he, and I have to speak in prob- 
abilities, but I think probably he would be able to, espe- 
cially if a regimen of Lithium would be instituted. Lith- 
ium is a medication that takes a certain amount of time 
to get the right blood levels on. That would also be, 
that would provide diagnostic information. Because if in 
fact * * * that’s his specific problem which I haven't 
identified, then that would show if he gets better by it, 
then sure enough, it’s nailed, diagnostically. 

THE COURT: What would you say in terms of time. 
Are you talking about a couple of weeks or months? 

A Well I think that if there was an aggressive ap- 
proach anu they had the facilities to do the blood levels, 
I think in terms of maybe a month. I mean if he got a 
-good hit on it and they got those blood levels up [241] 
there, then hopefully they should be, a month or six 
weeks, something like that, time frame. 


ad 4 * * 


[244] CHARLES MOREHEAD 
Called as a witness on behalf of the State, after first 


being duly sworn, testified on his oath as follows; to-wit: 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MILLER: 


Q State your name, please. 
A Charles R. Morehead. 


27 


Speak up. 

Charles R. Morehead. 

How do you spell your last name? 
M-o-r-e-h-e-a-d. 

Where do you work? 

Oklahoma County Jail. 

How long have you worked there? 

Five months. 

What division or floor are you assigned to? 
It varies from day today, mostly 12. 
Mostly 12? 

Yes, sir. 

Is that the maximum security floor? 

Yes, sir. 

[245] Q How long have you worked up there, the 
whole time, whole five months? 


POPFOFOFPOPOPO?PO 


A_ No, sir, about a quarter of the time. 

Q_ What shift do you work? 

A Six to two. 

Q In the morning 6:00 to the afternoon two p.m.? 

A Yes. 

Q And during that time six to two, have you had 
occasion to interact with inmates on the 12th floor? 

A Yes, I have. 

Q On more than on occasion? 

A Yes. 

Q How many days a week do you work? 

A Six. 

Q During those six days a week that you work, do 
you ever have an occasion to walk amongst the prisoners 
on a daily basis? 

A Yes, Ido. 

Q Approximately how many times? 

A If I’m working a pod, about 10 times a day. 

Q_ Do you now Byron Cooper? 

A Yes, I do. 

Q Do you see him in the courtroom today? 

A Yes, I do. 


28 


Q Where's he at? 

[246] A_ Right there in the corner. 

Q_ What’s he got on? 

A Orange coveralls. 

MR. MILLER: Would the record reflect that he’s 
identified the Defendant, Cooper? 

THE COURT: The record should so reflect. 

Q (By Mr. Miller) Have you ever had occasion to 
interact with Mr. Cooper while you were working as a 
D.O.? 

A_ Yes, I have. 

Q How many times do you think, ball park, have you 
had occasion to work the pod that he is on? 

A Twenty. 

Q_ Have you had occasion to have any verbal contact 
and communication with him in those 20 times that you've 
worked that pod? 

A Yes, I have. 

Q On those 20 days that you worked that pod, 
would you have interacted with the inmates approximately 
10 times each day? 

A Yes. 

Q Have you ever, during the four or five months 
that you’ve worked up there, observed Mr. Cooper to 
act in an unusual way? 

A_ No, I haven't. 

[247] Q How would you characterize his activities 
over the last five months? 

A Normal activity. 

Q_ Had you ever interacted with him, talked to him? 

A Yes, I have. 

Q Did you ever have any difficulty in making him 
understand what you were saying? 

A: No, I haven't. 

Q Have you ever observed him to talk to someone 
that was not in the room? 

A_ No, I haven't. 

Q Hallucination? 

A No. 


iis Ge tial ‘ten, the very last time that you 
talked to Byron Cooper? 

A Yesterday. 

Q When? 

A Approximately 6:15 I escorted him downstairs so 
they [248] could feed him before he went to court. 

Q 6:15 a.m.? 

A Yes, sir. 

Q How do you escort him to court? 

A We just walk him to the elevator, take him down 
to the second floor where he’s held until they come to 
owt 

Q And yesterday when you were taking him to court, 
did you notice him talking to anybody that wasn’t there? 
No, I didn't. 

Did you have any conversation with him? 
Sins etiar Giletr ecind him whed happened to bis 
Did 


you hear that? 
Yes, I did. 
Did Cooper respond? 
Yes, he did. 
What did he say? 
He said he hurt it and that was all he would say. 
Did you have to ask him more than once or the 
officer have to ask him more than once? 
No, just once 
How long did it take Cooper to respond? 
Right away. 
Any other conversation? 
A 


A 
Q 
A 
hand. 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
Q 
other 
A 
Q 
A 
Q 


[249] 


30 


OQ How long were you with Cooper yesterday morning? 
A Three to four minutes. 

Q And during that three to four minutes you saw 
a 

A 


Q And where were you at when you talked to him? 
A_ I walked into 12 B pod where he was in his cell. 
Q You went to his cell? 

A Yes, I did. 

Q. Why is that? | 
A One of the officers said that he would like to talk 
me. 


A When I walked over he had bent down to talk to 
me through the little bean hole in the door. 

Q You did not open the door? 

A_ No, I didn’t. 

Q_ And what was the conversation at that time? 

{250} A _ He told me that he had been in a fight with 
an inmate by the last name of Bruner and he said that 
they had made up and everything was cool. That was 
about it. 

Q Do you know why it was that he wanted to talk to 
you? 

A Because Bruner had been calling, Bruner wanted 
to be moved and he was telling me that everything was 
fine between him and Bruner, that they made up. 

Q Did he have any difficulty in explaining to you the 
message he thought he wanted to convey? 

A_ No, no problem. 


31 


Q Did you ever talk to him and respond to him from 
the statements that he made to you? 

A Yes, I told him I understand that they made up 
and I'd see what I could do about moving Inmate Bruner. 
Or not moving him? 

Right. 
Any other conversation at that time? 
No 


All right. Have you ever seen him rub feces on his 
9 


A No, I haven't. 

Q Have you ever seen him do anything with his toilet 
like put his hand in it and swish it around and stuff? 

A_ No, I haven't. 

[251] Q Have you ever heard anybody talk about it? 

A Yes, I did, yesterday. 

Q When? 

A Some investigators from the Public Defender’s Of- 
fice came up and the other inmates told the investigators 
that he did that. 

Q But you never heard them say that before that day? 

A No. 

Q Have you ever had inmates come and report odd 
conduct of other inmates? 

A Of other inmates, yes. 

Q Is it common, in your opinion, that they would 
come and report it? 

A Yes. 

MR. MILDFELT: Your Honor, I object to it. 

MR. MILLER: Five months, Judge, working up there. 

THE COURT: What others do? I don’t know that 
that is—I guess it might show some kind of course of con- 
duct of the inmates up there. 


I'll sustain the objection. 
MR. MILLER: That's it. 


fo>roro 


32 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MILDFELT: 


Q Officer Morehead, if I understood correctly, about 
a (252] fourth of your time of that five months has been 
on the 12th floor, is that correct? 

Yes, sir. 

Where are you assigned now? 

Today I work the 4th floor. 

The what floor? 

The 4th. 

Where did you work yesterday? 

The 12th floor. 

Okay. The day before that? 

The 12th floor. 

The day before that? 

I believe the 10th floor. 

Don’t you all usually stay in the control room rather 
than out on the pod? You all don’t spend a whole lot of 
time out in the pod with the inmates, would that be a 
fair statement? 


OFOPFPOPOPO?PO?Y 


THE COURT: Anything further? 
MR. MILLER: Next witness, Judge, I'm ready for. 


(Witness sworn. ) 


STEVE CARRELL 
Called as a witness on behalf of the State, after first [253] 
being duly sworn, testified on his oath as follows; to-wit: 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MILLER: 


What's your name, please? 

Steve Carrell. 

Where do you work? 

Oklahoma County Sheriff's Department. 


>O?rO 


33 


How long have you worked there? 

Since December of °91. 

Are you over in the new jail now? 

Yes, sir. 

What floor do you usually work? 

I work all floors. 

What shift do you usually work? 

Six a.m. to two p.m. 

Have you ever had occasion to come in contact 


Approximately how many times? 

Six to eight times. 

Do you see him in the courtroom today? 
Yes, I do. 


POPFPOPFOPrEFOPOPO?PO?PO 


N 
ar 
= 
© 
a 
J 

~ 


MR. MILLER: Would the record reflect he’s iden- 
tified the Defendant, Cooper? 

THE COURT: The record should so reflect. 

Q_ Do you see how he’s sitting over there today? 

A Yes, sir. 

Q All balled up like that? Have you ever seen him 
sit like that before? 


Yes. 

Did you have occasion to see him Monday morning? 
Yes I did. 

What time? 

In between the hours of 6:45 to 7:30. 

6:45 to 7:30. Where were you at? 

I was in the same pod as he was. 


>OPF>O?rO> 


34 


Q_ What was the purpose of being there? 

A_ I was watching several inmates that were fixing to 
eat breakfast before they were transported over to court 
that morning. 

[255] Q Would these be some of the inmates that of- 
ficers brought down from where they stayed? 

A_ Yes, it would. 

Q And was it your job to observe them the whole 
time they were there? 

A Yes, it was. 

Q_ And during this 45 minutes, did you have occasion 
to observe Mr. Cooper the whole time he was there? 

A Yes, I did. 

Q_ What did he do? 

A Basically walked around, had a conversation with 
another inmate, ate, drank coffee. 
Ate? 
Ate. 
Breakfast? 
Yes. 
What did he have, do you remember? 
I believe it was either oatmeal or rice and toast. 
I’m not sure. 

Q Okay. Do you know if he ate it all? 

A_ No, I do not. 

.Q_ But you saw him eating at different times? 

A The several inmates that I watched, I have to 
watch each one of them grab a tray, but I did not see 
him for sure eating at all. I just know he had picked 
up a tray [256] and took it to his table. 

Q And how long did he sit there in front of his tray 
while he was with the food? 

A About 25, 30 minutes. 

Q And when did he have the conversation with the 
other inmate? 

A About seven to probably 7:10. 

Q Where was he at when he did that? 

A_ Standing by the table that he was eating at. 


>O?rorod 


35 


Q Did they have any difficulties between them? 

A_ No, they did not. 

Q Did it appear that Mr. Cooper was talking and 
understanding what the communication was all about from 
what you could see? 

A Yes, it was. 

Q During the 45 minutes that you observed him dur- 
ing breakfast did you ever see him talking off to some- 
body that wasn’t there? 

A_ No, I did not. 

Q Did he act out of the ordinary from the six to 
eight times you’ve seen him? 

A_ No, sir. 

Qin any way? 

A_ No, sir. 

Q Have you ever seen him act out of the ordinary? 
{257} A _ No, I have not. 

Q If he'd have started talking off to somebody that 
wasn’t there up in the sky or something, what would you 
have done about it? 

A Went over and asked him if there was anything 
wrong, if he needed some help. 

And could you have got help for him? 

Yes, I could have. 

Did you have any conversations with him? 

Yes, I did. 

Okay. And what was the conversation about? 

I had asked him if he’d gotten into a fight. 

said yes. Talking about why he had moved from 
pod 12 A to pod 3 B and back to A and then back to B. 
Did he make sense when he was telling you all 


=>O>O>O 


20 


A Yes, he did. 

Q Did you know what he was talking about? 
A Yes. 

Q Did you ever have to ask him to repeat himself or 
explain it? 

A_ No, I did not. 


36 


Q Did you ever ask him any questions about it while 
you were conversing with him? 

A Pardon? 

[258] Q Well, did you say something like, well, who 
did you fight or anything like that? 

A I asked him who it was but he told me but I can- 
not remember who it was at this time. 

Q Okay. But what I mean, sir, is when you asked 
him the question about who it was, did he respond to 
you? 

A Yes, he did. 

Q_ Did he appear to know what he was saying when 
he said it? 

A Yes, he did. 

Q_ Did you have to ask him more than once? 

A No. | 

Q_ Did you ever have to ask him any question more 
than once? 

A_ No, I did not. 

Q_ How long did that conversation go on? 

A Five, 10 minutes. 

Q_ I waut to be sure about this now. This was yester- 
day morning? 

A Yesterday morning. 

MR. MILLER: Thanks. That's all, Judge. 


CROSS EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MILDFELT: 


Q Officer, how many pepole were down there eating 
breakfast when you were watching? 
[259] A Approximately 16, sir. 

Q Was that your job to watch them eat breakfast? 

A Yes, it was. 

Q Did you have a conversation with all of them? 

A_ No, sir, I did not. 

Q Was it just Mr. Cooper you had a conversation 
with? 

A Him and two other residents had asked me ques- 
tions. 


37 


Q And this conversation you had with him lasted 
five to 10 minutes for him to explain to you or are you 
just guessing on that? 

A Approximately five or 10 minutes. 

MR. MILDFELT: Nothing further. 


* * * * 


[261] [By Mr. Mildfelt] 


I got him up in the stand and the closer I would get 
to him—and I didn’t invade his space to the point where 
he would strike back at me, but I would do it subtly and 
slowly and I didn’t take large leaps or moves. And he 
watched me so intently with his eyes and I watched his 
eyes and I don’t believe that that man was faking * * *. 

Every time I would get close to his space where [262] 
he is seated in this little witness enclave that is surrounded 
by these boards that are all nailed together and stained 
up real pretty that encloses this witness chair, he would 
stand up and he would get away from me as far as he 
could and so I would back off and I'd give him a little 
space. And I would talk to him again and he'd sit down 
and I'd get close and he’d back up. And whichever way 
that I would go at him, he would move away from me. 
And I remember when I went to the north end of the 
chair and I leaned towards this way, that he started to 
crawl over this railing onto the court reporter’s table. 

All that could have been a show. I still backed off. He 
sat in the chair again. So, I’ve approached him from 
every side. I’ve approached him from all ways this way 
except I haven’t approached him from the front. So 
yesterday, I approach him from the front. And that’s the 
last thing I did. I regret doing that. 

He stood up and he got as far back against the rail 
behind the witness chair as he could get. I edged closer. 
He got as far back and he got up on that rail. So I’ve 
got him up on the rail and I’m thinking, hey, what can I 
lose? Let me just see what he does now because he can 
go no further back, but as the Court knows, there’s a 


38 


space of about two-and-a-half feet [263] behind this rail 
and a marble wall. 

Without looking for his safety at all and looking what's 
behind him, when I moved the least bit and I didn’t move 
very far towards him, he fell to get away from me. He 
fell. He hit his head. The thud on that marble when he 
jacknifed backward off of that railing into that marble 
could be heard at the back of that courtroom. * * * 

We got him back up here in the witness enclave, he’s 
just busted his head, tears are streaming down his eyes 
and he does not respond in any normal fashion. He starts 
talking that Noryb is going to be mad at him. That 
Noryb is going to angry with him. And he was crying 
and that wasn’t faking. And I don’t think anybody in 
the courtroom, Marlon Brando in his finest hour could 
not have faked that under that kind of pain and that kind 
of trauma, it cannot be done. And he was not responsive 
to the situation. He should have been mad at me, he 
should have been mad at you, he should have been mad 
at the deputies. Instead, he’s afraid because he has this 
fear that Noryb’s going to be angry with him. * * * 
[264] * * * Dr. Murphy says, yeah, a lot of him is 
malingering but there’s one thing he’s not malingering. 
He has a mental condition and that mental condition— 
and first of all, he says he is genuinely, Byron Keith 
Cooper is genuinely afraid of me, which makes me sad 
because I am his lawyer. I am his chief trial counsel and 
he is genuinely afraid of me. 

But I asked the doctor, bottom line, can he commun- 
icate with his attorney? He cannot. Is it treatable? It is. 
That is the question that the Court has to decide. 

Based on that evidence, I don’t think there’s any ques- 
tion but that there is a doubt as to his present compe- 
tency. It can be cured and it can be treated, but it does 
exist, Your Honor. 

MR. MILLER: It probably won’t surprise the Court 
that I don’t think that there is any doubt but that he’s 
competent. But I think we're past the doubts or no [265] 


doubts stage. When I read 1175.3 
already had the doctor look im. 
it. We've already had a doctor testify about the five 
factors that the doctor’s supposed examine the 


not he is able to consult his lawyer. That’s done and 
the doctor says kind of a hodgepodge of things, but the 
bottom line, we know he’s a malingerer and that some 
vague affect or mood disorder, he says, is present. 

Judge, the next step once you have the doctor’s testi- 
mony about that is 1175.4. And it says that it’s the 
Defendant’s burden to come forward with clear and con- 
vincing evidence that a person is incompetent. More 
importantly, Judge, it says a person shall be presumed 
to be competent. Presumed competent, Judge. And what 
do we have to support that presumption and refute any 
evidence that he is clearly and convincingly incom- 
petent? 

Number one, the doctor, while he was resolved that 
no matter what else he said he was going to stick in there 
some disorder from the D.S.M. III. 

First, it was manic depressive and then it was manic 
depressive and this other deal, major depressed disorder 
and then it was everything under the mood disorder cate- 
gory and then maybe it was all those things [266] plus 
P.T.S.D., Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Those are the 
different or ranging variations that the doctor presented 
us as far as possible disorders, because he doesn’t know. 

All he does know for sure and the only other thing 
he was resolved about and as is clearly defined in D.S.M. 
III-R as the mood disorder is that this man is a ma- 
lingerer. He’s a classic example of one. He lies. He’s 
faking everybody out. The doctor said specifically that 
all that stuff that he heard from the jail that the De- 
fendant supposedly did and I don’t know whether he did 
it or not, but all that was a bunch of faking. It was 


40 


aspects of the malingering is what the doctor called it. 
He didn’t put anything into any of that. 

Next he said that he was malingering on part of the 
diagnostic testing. Next he said that this business in 
court the last two days, that’s malingering. It’s an aspect 
of malingering, he used the term, the same term. In 
other words, that’s not part of this disorder that we've 
heard so much or so little about, actually. 

And finally, he concedes that three other doctors, two 
of whom who saw Cooper for three whole months, for at 
least certain parts of the time that they saw him, thought 
he was schizophrenic but they're wrong. 

Then they thought he was a malingerer, but [267] 
. they’re wrong. Because he is a malingerer with an affect 
disorder. Who's right, Judge? Has he established or have 
they have established by clear and convincing evidence 
that he’s right? 

Here’s how we've shown he’s not. The doctor said 
that if he was really under the effect or the symptoms of 
an affect disorder, mood disorder then he couldn't just 
snap in and out. He would specifically not expect Cooper 
to be okay the morning before court yesterday, specifi- 
cally. That he was bad last week, okay yesterday morn- 
ing and then bad when he crossed the threshold here in 
the courtroom. 

But that’s exactly what we’ve shown you he did. We've 
got officers who have been up there with him for four or 
five months as the first officer yesterday. He said he'd 
never seen anything like this business, never heard any- 
thing about any of this business. He’s talked to Cooper 
many times. There was never a problem. 

As recently as April 15th, Cooper coherently talked 
about his testimony in another criminal case in a court- 
room. Whether he would lie or not. Since that time he’s 
written you this letter. The doctor said that was—told 
me out in the hall it was a bunch of bull but in court he 
said it was an aspect of malingering again. 


41 


On the day of Court, Judge, he’s brought down [268] 
by one officer. There’s a conversation about his injuries, 
he’s coherent. There’s none of this talking off or spouting 
off. The next officer, he’s sitting at the table, probably 
eating his breakfast, definitely with his breakfast, 45 min- 
utes, five to 10 of which he has a coherent, somewhat 
lengthy involved conversation about different pods and 
being moved and not being moved and the officer under- 
stood all of it and Cooper never had any difficulty with 
him. 

That is a wholly different person than the individual 
who would answer questions that were not too difficult 
for him yesterday that he did not feel like he’d be trap- 
ped in, and the person that upon being posed very diffi- 
cult questions, just like when he talked to the doctor 
last night, he just sat there quietly. All balled up. He’s 
faking. That's the way it looks to me. 

Now, I know it’s been a few weeks ago since he’s filed 
these, but I think it’s pretty telling about his intelligence 
and his ability to run a game on all of us and to cause this 
hearing for the last day and a half when you look at those 
lawsuits. We can’t prove y°t, and maybe before it’s over, 
rll be able to. We can’t prove yet that he wrote every 
word of the lawsuit, but we know he signed under a 
certification, he admits he can read that says he had read 
them and all facts are true and [269] correct. And he 
put his name and his name is several places throughout 
that lawsuit. He did it twice, once in October and once 
in January. 

And then as recently as a week or two weeks ago, 
Mr. Nolan serves him some papers up in the jail and 
Cooper knows exactly what they’re all about. Doesn't 
ask a question about them, he just starts reading them. 

There’s nothing consistent about this, Judge, except 
that when he gets in the courtroom, he’s a faker. He 
doesn’t want to pay the piper here. He doesn’t want to 
run the risk of the jury trial. I say after two years and 
eight months, after already being looked at by this doctor 


42 


and all the testimony you've heard, they have not shown 
by clear and convincing evidence under 1175.4 that he is 
incompetent. 

MR. MILDFELT: Your Honor, may I briefly re- 
spond? 

THE COURT: Sure. 

MR. MILDFELT: And it will be very brief. 

Apparently, Mr. Miller doesn’t think you can be a 
malingerer and have this disorder. That is incorrect, ac- 
cording to the doctor. If you will remember last Wednes- 
day I said, not once but I think twice, two of my investi- 
gators have a doubt as to his competency. We will pay 
for it. Mr. Miller can pick the psychiatrist or the [270] 
doctor. He chose not to. We picked a doctor on short 
notice yesterday because we were set for trial and now 
he faults the doctor’s findings. 

Those are the doctor’s findings. He’s a qualified doctor. 
He’s given his sworn testimony here. His sworn testimony 
is that this man cannot communicate with his lawyer. We 
have met our burden of proof. * * * 

[271] THE COURT: Well, it looks to me like 1175.4, 
A, paragraph B says, “The court at the hearing on the 
application—”, which is what we just completed, “shall 
determine by clear and convincing evidence if the person 
is incompetent. The person shall be presumed to be com- 
petent for the purpose of the allocation of the burden of 
proof and burden of going forward with the evidence.” 

Well, I think I’ve used the expression, I know I've 
talked to Mr. Mildfelt and said in the past that normal 
is like us. Anybody that’s not like us is not normal, so I 
don’t think normal is a proper definition that we are to 
use with incompetence. My shirtsleeve opinion of Mr. 
Cooper is that he’s not normal. Now, to say he’s not 
competent is something else. 

I respect Dr. Murphy and I don’t dispute Dr. Murphy's 
diagnosis. He examined Mr. Cooper under adverse cir- 
cumstances and hastily and has seen just a limited ex- 


43 


posure to Mr. Cooper. I don’t fault him for that. From 
what he observed, he’s probably accurate. 

But you know, all things considered, I suppose it’s 
possible for a client to be in such a predicament that he 
can’t help his defense and still not be incompetent. I 
suppose that’s a possibility, too. 

I think it’s going to take smarter people than [272] me 
to make a decision here. I’m going to say that I don’t 
believe he has carried the burden by clear and convincing 
evidence of his incompetency and I’m going to say we're 
going to go to trial. 


44 
DISTRICT COURT OF OKLAHOMA COUNTY 


(Title Omitted in Printing) 


TRANSCRIPTS OF JURY TRIAL PROCEEDINGS 
HAD ON MAY 5-22, 1992 


[The following record was made at the bench on May 5, 
Vol. I, page 9.]} 

MR. MILDFELT: And the Court knows he’s sitting 
over there in the corner. He’s not going to be sitting next 
to me. He will not allow me within about two-and-a-half 
to three feet of him. I think that’s probably about the 
closest I could get to him yesterday or last Wednesday 
before he would shy away and back from me. 

The Court, if the Court so orders me, I'm going to be 
trying a case with a man that I can’t even get close to, 
and yet, I have got to be able to turn to him and ask him 
questions when witnesses testify. And I can’t do that. 
Number |, he can’t communicate to me. Number 2, I can’t 
get close to it and there’s a medical [10] basis for that. 
And so I'm not ready. 


(The following exchange took place at the bench during 
voir dire of the jury on May 5, Vol. I, pages 120-122.] 


THE COURT: What did you want to say Ms. Ervin? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Well, I just feel 
that I think he comes across to me as just creepy. 

THE COURT: As what? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Creepy. That's all 
I can say. 

THE COURT: Oh, well, yeah, but you know about 
judging the book by the cover, don’t you? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: I know that. But— 


45 


THE COURT: You know, it would probably be ap- 
propriate in a lot of cases for the Defendant not to even be 
present where you wouldn’t even look at him, and [121] 
you make a decision based on the evidence without ever 
seeing the fellow. 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: I understand that. 
I just feel like I couldn’t be fair. 


THE COURT: * * * He does look creepy, but we're 
not going to find him guilty because he looks creepy. 
* * * Are you saying, though, that you're leaning toward 
guilty just because of his appearance and the charge that 
he’s got against him? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Right. 

[122] THE COURT: Are you leaning that way so that 
you don’t think you can be fair about the case? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Yeah. 


* * * * 


MR. MILLER: Ms. Ervin, you said earlier that you 
understand that all Defendants are presumed innocent? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Right. I under- 
stand that. 

MR. MILLER: And I think you said that you would 
be willing to look at the case that way basically. Is that 
true? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: Right. 

MR. MILLER: Have you changed your mind or 
* * * are you still ready to do that? 

PROSPECTIVE JUROR ERVIN: I don’t think I 
could do that. 


. * * * 


THE COURT: I'll excuse you, Ms. Ervin. 


[The following excerpts are from voir dire of the jury on 
May 6, Vol. II.] 

[144] MR. MILDFELT: * * * That's my client. Has 
everybody noticed he’s dressed in orange? * * * And 


46 


would you notice that he is not participating in the pro- 
ceedings? * * * And do you agree his hair is sticking 
out like this? 

~ oa * *” 
[145] MR. MILDFELT: * * * It would be a fair state- 
ment you're able to see him, and he’s dressed in orange 
jail uniforms, he’s seated over there in a chair about five 
feet from me, and he has his head down and he looks like 
he’s taking a nap. Is that a fair assessment of the descrip- 
tion I've given of my client? 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR JENNINGS: That’s my im- 


pression. 
[147] PROSPECTIVE JUROR DENTON: Just from 
his body language and the way he appears withdrawn 
from everything that’s going on in here, he could either 
be guilty or he could be depressed or he could be tired. 
[The following excerpt is from cross-examination of State’s 
witness Sidney Asher on May 11, Vol. V, page 75.] 

Q Twice as big as this guy sitting over there in the 
fetal position. Is that right? 

A That's right. 


[The following discussion took place at the bench on May 
12, Vol. VI, page 132.] 


. THE COURT: Mr. Ravitz, do you want to make a 
record on something? 

MR. RAVITZ: Yes, sir, Judge. * * * First of all, 
just for the record Mr. Cooper is still dressed out in 
orange coveralls sitting in the back * * *. He, from time 
to time, talks in a very loud voice. [t's obvious that the 
jury can, in fact, hear him, though he has not been dis- 
ruptive. But I don’t think anybody can hear what, exactly, 
he’s saying. I can’t and I’m closer to him. He does not 
seem to be paying any attention to the trial and, from 
time to time, sits in a fetal position. 

[The following discussion took place at the bench on May 
14, Vol. VIII, pages 135-144.] 


47 


DEPUTY WILLIAM GRIMSLEY: * * * Deputy 
Albertson asked me what he had in his hand. | said it 
looks like candy, which he had access to through commis- 
sary in the jail. And there’s a real heavy odor of feces in 
the area. And I look at it close, and it doesn’t look like 
candy. 

THE COURT: Do you think it’s feces? 
~ DEPUTY WILLIAM GRIMSLEY: Yes, sir, I do. 

MR. MILDFELT: [Id tell the Court that it is. I 
smelled something, but I thought it was just bad breath, 
or something, and I thought, boy it’s pretty [135] strong, 
but I did not say anything about it. I just didn’t know 
that my client was over there * * * eating feces. 

MR. MILLER: Well, now, did anybody see him eat it? 

MR. MILDFELT: Apparently the bailiff did. 

DEPUTY WILLIAM GRIMSLEY: Both of us did, 
Your Honor. 

MR. RAVITZ: * * * Again, Judge, for the record, 
* * * it’s our contention that Mr. Cooper is incompetent, 
that he does not understand the proceedings against him. 

MR. MILDFELT: And he’s babbling over there right 
now as we're speaking and has been continually. 

MR. RAVITZ: He’s been babbling off and on, and 
sitting in a fetal position. Again, it’s our contention that 
the Court used the wrong standard in deciding compe- 
tency. And again, we'd ask the Court to discontinue the 
trial and commit Mr. Cooper to a mental hospital. 


* *” * * 


[137] THE COURT: Let the record reflect that Mr. 
Cooper was taken upstairs by the deputies at my request, 
* * * and now they are returning to the [138] courtroom. 
And * * * what do you have to tell us? 

DEPUTY GRIMSLEY: We took Mr. Cooper up- 
Stairs, put on a pair of rubber gloves, extracted the ma- 
terial from his hand, and I smelled it and it had the 
definite oder of human feces to it, at which time I placed 


48 


it into a rubber glove, tied a knot in it, and placed it in 
a paper bag. * * * 

MR. RAVITZ: And in your opinion, that is what he 
was eating? 

DEPUTY GRIMSLEY: That is correct, sir. 

MR. RAVITZ: You have no doubt about that? 
[139] DEPUTY GRIMSLEY: No doubt. 


MR. RAVITZ: Okay. And subsequent to that he, 
evidently voluntarily threw up. Is that correct—or in- 
voluntarily threw up. It wasn’t of his own accord. Is 
that correct? 

DEPUTY GRIMSLEY: Upstairs, yes, he did, sir. 


* * * * 


[141] MR. MILDFELT: Did you tell him to wash 
his hands an [sic] clean up when you took him upstairs? 
*_* * 


DEPUTY ALBERTSON: I told him to get cleaned 
up. 
MR. RAVITZ: Judge, again, we would move for a 
mistrial. We do not believe Mr. Cooper is competent to 
aid and assist us. If the Court remembers the testimony of 
Dr. Murphy, stress can cause this type of situation. * * * 
[142] We would ask the Court to continue this matter if 
they’re not willing to grant a mistrial and appoint an 
independent expert to advise the Court as to the com- 
petency of Mr. Cooper. * * * 

MR. MILDFELT: And, Judge, I think the record 
should be clear that since this trial has started Mr. Cooper 
has never spoken to me. I have attempted to speak to him 
because the doctor testified last week that he was scared 
of me. I couldn’t communicate with him. To my knowl- 
edge, he hasn’t spoken to Mr. Ravitz, either. And that’s 
two weeks of trial tomorrow. 

MR. RAVITZ: That is correct, Judge. 


49 


[144] THE COURT: Well, of course, I heard all that 
testimony and evidence and I don’t claim any special 
knowledge, you know, of psychology or psychiatry. I 
just have to do the best I can with the tools I’ve got to 
work with. I'll overrule your motion. We'll go ahead and 
go on to the end of this thing. 

MR. RAVITZ: We move for a mistrial based on the 
Court's ruling. 

THE COURT: Overruled. 


50 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEALS OF OKLAHOMA 


No. F-92-533 


BYRON KEITH COOPER, 

» Appellant, 

THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA, 
Appellee. 


Jan. 10, 1995 
Rehearing Denied Feb. 13, 1995 


An Appeal from the District Court of Oklahoma 
County; Richard J, Freeman, District Judge. 


Byron Keith Cooper, Appellant, was tried by jury and 
convicted of Murder in the First Degree (21 O.S.Supp. 
1982, § 701.7(A)) in Case No. CRF-89-5084-7, in the 
District Court of Oklahoma County. The jury found the 
existence of five aggravating circumstances and recom- 
mended punishment of death. The trial court sentenced 
accordingly. From these judgments and sentences Ap- 
pellant has perfected this appeal. The Judgment and 
sentence for First Degree Murder is AFFIRMED. 


OPINION 


LUMPKIN, Presiding Judge: 


Appellant Byron Keith Cooper was tried by jury and 
convicted of Murder in the First Degree (21 O.S.Supp. 
1989, § 701.7) in the District Court of Oklahoma Coun- 
ty, Case No. CF-89-5084. The jury found the existence 
of five (5) aggravating circumstances (Appellant was 


51 


previously convicted of a felony involving the use or 
threat of violence; the murder was especially heinous, 
atrocious and cruel; the murder was committed to avoid 
arrest or prosecution; the murder was committed while 
Appellant was serving a sentence for a conviction of a 
felony; and Appellant posed a continuing threat to so- 
ciety) and recommended punishment of death. The trial 
court sentenced accordingly. From this judgment and 
sentence Appellant has perfected this appeal. We affirm.’ 


I. FACTS 


Eighty-six-year-old Harold Sheppard was found dead 
in his home at Northeast 13th and Fonshill streets by a 
friend who was helping him with plans to renovate his 
home. The victim’s wife had died years earlier and his 
daughter lived in another state. Mr. Sheppard lived only 
with his little dog, which authorities found protecting 
the victim’s body. He was found on September 8, 1989; 
based on interviews with people in the neighborhood, 
authorities estimate he died on September 4, after being 
stabbed to death that same evening. 


A former cocaine dealer who sold drugs in the area 
frequented by Appellant witnessed Appellant’s arrest by 
detectives on September 19. The dealer testified that a 
week or two before the arrest, Appellant had approached 
him, showed him a credit card with someone else’s name 
on it, and offered to purchase merchandise in exchange 
for cocaine. The dealer could not remember the name 
on the credit card, but remembered the first name started 
with “H.” The dealer initially refused; but after Appel- 
lant persisted, said he could use a watch. A short time 
later that same day, Appellant returned with a gold Seiko 
watch. An acquaintance who happened to be present 


1 In so doing, we note the following: this case was filed Decem- 
ber 7, 1992; it was fully briefed and at issue April] 4, 1994; and 
it was submitted to this Court on May 4, 1994. 


52 


during the exchange said he wanted a watch, too. Ap 
pellant told him he would get him one. 


On September 5, the day after Mr. Sheppard was 
killed, Appellant used Mr. Sheppard’s J.C. Penney credit 
card to purchase watches. One watch, a goal Seiko, was 
bought at the J.C. Penney store in Shepherd Mall; the 
other at the Penney store in Crossroads Mall. Both were 
purchased the same day. Authorities became aware of 
the purchases less than two weeks later, when the vic- 
tim’s daughter received the bill for the purchases. The 
clerk at the Shepherd Mall store remembered the pur- 
chase at her store. In fact, she was suspicious because 
Appellant did not look like the kind of customer to whom 
Penney would issue a credit card. She attempted to call 
Harold Sheppard, the name on the card, during the re- 
mainder of the week; no one ever answered the telephone. 
She later gave authorities Appellant’s description and a 
composite drawing, which was distributed to law enforce- 
ment personnel. 


On September 19, detectives spotted Appellant in the 
vicinity of Northeast 4th and Laird. When they turned 
their car around to investigate further, Appellant began 
running from them. When he was apprehended a short 
time later, he was carrying a portion of a car antenna 
commonly used as a pipe to smoke crack cocaine. 


Appellant was questioned by authorities for several 
hours. During the interrogation, Appellant admitted mur- 
dering not only Harold Sheppard, but also Monteen 
Warner, whose body was discovered on September 17, 
1989 at her home at 1021 Northeast 6th Street (evidence 
of the Warner homicide was not presented until the sec- 
ond stage). However, Appellant also retracted the ad- 
missions, and denied being inside either residence. Ap- 
pellant denied being involved in a murder at 13th and 
Fonshill, despite the fact detectives had not told him Mr. 
Sheppard’s house was located at that intersection and 
despite the fact Appellant told the detectives he had not 


53 


heard anything about the murders in the news media. To- 
ward the end of the interview, Appellant conceded he 
may have committed the murders, but could not remem- 
ber. 


Appellant had been staying with Walter Sam Ray, a 
man he met in prison. At that apartment, authorities 
found two box-type cameras which Mr. Sheppard's 
daughter identified as belonging to her father. Also found 
at the apartment was a watch which had belonged to Mr. 
Sheppard. Using chemical reagents, technical investiga- 
tors discovered traces of blood on a shoe, sock and blue 
jeans, all belonging to Appellant and all found in a box 
of Appellant’s belongings in Ray’s apartment. Two hairs 
which were microscopically consistent with Mr. Sheppard 
were also found on one of Appellant’s shoes found at the 
apartment. 


At Mr. Sheppard’s house, authorities found Appellant's 
fingerprints on a flashlight, a metal can, a watch case, 
and a carton of Salem cigarettes, the brand Mr. Shep- 
pard smoked. Appellant’s prints were also found on the 
charge receipt he signed at the Sheppherd Mall J.C. 
Penney store. Authorities found a Viceroy brand cig- 
arette butt on the kitchen floor. Appellant had a pack of 
Viceroy brand cigarettes when he was apprehended. Ap- 
pellant is a non-secretor, meaning his blood type cannot 
be discovered in o’.uer bodily fluids such as saliva. No 
blood type could be detected from the Viceroy cigarette 
butt, indicating that if saliva were left on it, the person 
who did so could be a non-secretor. 


Appellant in the police interview could not explain how 
his fingerprints could have been placed on the items in 
Mr. Sheppard’s house. However, he did say if he had 
killed the man, his prints should have been found on the 
weapon, and he was certain they would not be. Authori- 
ties found a butcher knife in the draining board in the vic- 
tim’s kitchen. No prints were found on the knife, and 
there was no visible blood; however, when a chemical 


54 


reagent was sprayed on the knife, the blade exhibited 
swipe marks which would be_exhibited if blood on the 
blade had been wiped off. 


II. PRE-TRIAL ISSUES 


A. 


For his first proposition, Appellant complains the au- 
thority used to determine competency is unconstitutional. 
A sizeable portion of pretrial proceedings focused on Ap- 
pellant’s competency. His attorneys complained he would 
not communicate with them and that he thought his lead 
attorney was a devil who wanted him dead. A non-jury 
competency hearing was afforded Appellant in December 
1990 and January 1991 pursuant to sections 1175.1 
through 1175.8 of Title 22, at the conclusion of which 
Appellant was adjudged competent to stand trial. 


Appellant acknowledges a hearing was held, but com- 
plains the presumption of competency, combined with the 
requirement he show incompetency by “clear and convinc- 
ing” evidence, 22 O.S.Supp.1985, § 1175.4(B), is such 
a harsh standard it is violative of his right to Due Process 
of Law. He argues the standard of proof on him should 
have been preponderance of the evidence. 


It is a basic precept that statutes are presumed to be 
constitutional and the person alleging their unconstitution- 
ality has the burden of proof. Newton v. State, 824 P.2d 
391, 396 (Okl.Cr.1991); State v. Hunter, 787 P.2d 864, 
865 (OkI.Cr.1990); Nunley v. State, 660 P.2d 1052, 
1056 (OkI.Cr.1983), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 867, 104 
S.Ct. 205, 78 L.Ed.2d 179 (1983). 


The statutory reference to “competency” covers two 
requirements: a defendant must have sufficient ability to 
consult with an attorney; and the defendant must be able 
to understand the nature of the charges and gs 
being brought against him. 22 ©.S.1981, § 1175.1. The 
question of a defendant’s competency can be raised by the 


55 


defendant, his attorney, the prosecutor or even the court; 
however, it must state facts “sufficient to raise a doubt” 
in the court’s mind of the defendant’s competency. Any 
such application and sufficient notice must be provided 
the defendant and must contain certain facts and rights. 
22 O.S.Supp.1983, § 1175.2. Once such an application 
is filed, the court must hold a hearing to examine the ap- 
plication. The court may also entertain other evidence 
pertinent to the question at that hearing. A court finding 
merit to the application must order an examination by 
doctors or appropriate technicans, who shall examine the 
defendant and determine if he can appreciate the nature 
of the charges; if he is capable of assisting his attorney; 
and other questions concerning the attainment of com- 
petency (if incompetent), whether the defendant is men- 
tally ill, and whether he poses a threat to himself or others 
if released without treatme 22 O.S.Supp.1990, § 1175.3. 
Following an initial deterimination by doctors or tech- 
nicians and upon application, the court is required to hold 
a hearing on the competency issue. At that hearing, the 
defendant is presumed competent, and must prove by 
clear and convincing evidence he is incompetent. 22 
O.S.Supp.1985, § 1175.4. 


Medina v. California, 505 U.S. , 112 S.Ct. 2572, 
120 L.Ed.2d 353 (1992) -is dispositive of Appellant’s 
argument he cannot be presumed competent. /d. at 
112 S.Ct. at 2575, 120 L.Ed.2d at 363 (“Based on our 
review of the historical treatment of the burden of proof 
in competency proceedings, the operation of the chal- 
lenged rule, and our precedents, we cannot say that the 
allocation of the burden of proof to a criminal defendant 
to prove incompetence ‘offends some principle of justice 
so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people 
as to be ranked as fundamental.’” (quoting Patterson v. 
New York, 432 U.S. 197, 202, 97 S.Ct. 2319, 2322, 53 
L.Ed.2d 281 (1977)). 


In Medina, the criminal defendant bore the burden of 
proving his incompetency by a preponderance of the evi- 


56 


dence. Oklahoma law requires he prove his incompetency 
by clear and convincing evidence. To determine whether 
this offends notions of Due Process requires some discus- 
sion of allocation of proof and fundamental concepts of 
Due Process. - 


Exactly what “due process” is has never been satis- 
factorily defined. This Court has stated it is “older than 
written Constitutions,” and the phrase “is synonymous 
with ‘law of the land’ as found in Magna Carta.” It then 
concluded the phrase “intended the general law which 
reads before it condemns, which proceeds upon inquiry 
and renders judgment only after trial. It means that every 
citizen shall hold his life, liberty, and property under the 
protection of the general rules which govern society.” 
Ex Parte Hollins, 34 ( Ok1.Cr. 70, 75, 14 P.2d 243 (1932); 
see also Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. 519, 
4 L.Ed. 629, 645 (1819) (same). This Court has also 
defined it as a provision intended “to guarantee proce- 
dural standards adequate and appropriate, then and there- 
after, to protect, at all times, people charged with, or 
suspected of, crime by those holding positions of favor 
and authority.” Lyons v. State, 77 Okl.Cr. 197, 232, 138 
P.2d 142 (1943), aff'd, 322 U.S. 596, 64 S.Ct. 1208, 
88 L.Ed. 1481 (1944), overruled on other grounds, Hop- 
per v. State, 736 P.2d 538, 540 (OkI.Cr.1987). The law 
is “due process” when it operates on all alike during the 
regular course of its administration through the courts, 
and does not subject one to the arbitrary exercise of the 
powers of government. Shaw v. State, 76 Okl.Cr. 271, 
134 P.2d 999 (1943) (syllabus); see also Ward v. State, 
444 P.2d 255 (OklI.Cr.1968), cert. denied, 393 USS. 
1040, 89 S.Ct. 665, 21 L.Ed.2d 588 (1969) (Require- 
ments of due process are met if a criminal trial is held 
according to a settled course of judicial proceedings). 


Perhaps the best exposition on the characteristics of 
due process occurred in an 1878 New York case, where 
the writer said: 


57 


It is difficult to define with precision the exact mean- 
ing and scope of the phrase “due process of law.” 
Any definition which could be given, would probably 
fail to comprehend all the cases to which it would 
apply. It is probably wiser, as recently stated by Mr. 
Justice Miller of the United States Supreme Court, 
to leave the meaning to be evolved “by the gradual 
process of judicial inclusion and exclusion, as the 
cases presented for decision shall require, with the 
reasoning on which such decisions may be founded.” 
(Davidson v. Board of Administrators of New 
Orleans, 17 Albany Law Journal, 223) It may how- 
ever be stated generally that due process of law re- 
quires an orderly proceeding adapted to the nature 
of the case in which the citizen has an opportunity 
to be heard, and to defend, enforce, and protect his 
rights. A hearing or an opportunity to be heard, is 
absolutely essential. We cannot conceive of due 
process without this. In his argument in the Dart- 
mouth College case (4 Wheat., 519, 4 L.Ed. 629), 
Webster defined “due process of law” as a proceeding 
“which proceeds upon inquiry and renders judgment 
only after trial.” Mr. Justice Edwards in Westervelt 
v. Gregg (12 N.Y. 209) defines it as follows: “Due 
process of law undoubtedly means in due course of 
legal proceedings to those rules and forms 
which have been established for the protection of 
private rights.” ... .; and if found to be suitable 
or admissible in a special case it will be adjudged to 
be “due process of law,” but if found to be arbitrary, 
oppressive and unjust, it may be declared to be not 
due process of law. 


Stuart v. Palmer, 74 N.Y. 183, 191, 194 (1878); see also 
Brown v. Board of Levee Com'rs, 50 Miss. 468, 478-79 
(1874) whether written “per legale judicium pariu, 
suorum, rel per legem terrae” as found in the Magna 
Carta; “by the law of the land, or the judgment of his 
peers”; “due process of law”; “due course of law”; or 


58 


“according to the law of the land,” all have the same gen- 
eral interpretation); Westervelt v. Gregg, 12 N.Y. 202, 
209 (1854). 


However, the term also denotes more than simply the 
law of the land or the law as it was at the time the 
constitution took effect: 


. . . « For that would seem to deny to the legislature 
the power to alter, change, or amend the law. Yet 
we know that it is every day's practice for the law- 
making department of the government to repeal old 
laws, enact new, and change remedies. 


The principle does not demand that the laws exist- 
ing at any point of time shall be irrepealable, or that 
any forms of remedies shall necessarily continue. 


It refers to certain fundamental rights which that 
system of justice, of which ours is a derivative, has 
always recognized. If any of these are disregarded, 


sth el teen nok a et ee results. As 
the Supreme Court has observed: “[bJeyond the specific 
guarantees enumerated in the Bill of Rights, the Due 
Process Clause has limited operation. We, therefore, have 
defined the category of infractions that violate ‘funda- 
mental fairness’ very narrowly.” Medina, 505 U.S. at 
——, 112 S.Ct. at 2576, 120 L.Ed.2d at 362 (quoting 
Dowling v. United States, 493 U.S. 342, 352, 110 S.Ct. 
668, 674, 107 L.Ed.2d 708 (1990)). Indeed, as the 
Medina court continued: 


59 


The Bill of Rights speaks in explicit terms to many 
aspects of criminal procedure, and the expansion of 
those constitutional guarantees under the open-ended 
rubric of the Due Process Clause invites undue in- 
terference with both considered legislative judgments 
and the careful balance that the Constitution strikes 
between liberty and order. As we said in Spencer v. 
Texas, 385 U.S. 554, 564, 87 S.Ct. 648, 653, 17 
L.Ed.2d 606 (1967), “it has never been thought that 
[decisions under the Due Process Clause] establish 
this Court as a rule-making organ for the promulga- 
tion of state rules of criminal procedure.” Accord, 
Estelle v. McGuire, 502 U.S. 62, ——, 112 S.Ct. 
475, 481, 116 L.Ed.2d 385 (1991); Marshall v. 
Lonberger, 459 U.S. 422, 438, n. 6, 103 S.Ct. 843, 
853, n. 6, 74 L.Ed.2d 646 (1983). 


Medina, 505 U.S. at ——, 112 S.Ct. 2576, 120 L.Ed.2d 
at 362. 


From this, we can gather that, however due process is 
defined, it is satisfied if a defendant has notice* and a 
right to be heard at a public proceeding at which all 
constitutional and statutory provisions are observed ac- 
cording to those rules and forms which have been estab- 
lished for the protection of private rights, in such a way 
that it operates on all alike. With those principles in 
mind, we now turn to the standard of proof a criminal 
defendant in Oklahoma must bear to prove his incom- 


petence. 


“The function of a standard of proof, as that concept 
is embodied in the Due Process Clause and in the realm 
of factfinding, is to ‘instruct the factfinder concerning the 
degree of confidence our society thinks he should have in 
the correctness of factual conclusions for a particular type 


2 Appellant does not raise a lack of notice in connection with any 
of these proceedings; accordingly, we do not discuss this require- 
ment of Due Process. 


60 


of adjudication.” Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 
423, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979) (quoting 
In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 370, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 25 
L.Ed.2d 368 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring)). The 
Addington Court further observed the standard serves to 
allocate the risk of error between the litigants and to in- 
dicate the relative importance attached t> the ultimate 

It seems clear the “preponderance-of-the-evidence” 
standard is generally used in civil proceedings, ¢.g., mat- 
ters involving monetary disputes, etc., because society has 
a minimal concern with the outcome of such private 
suits. It therefore makes sense that litigants “share the 
risk of error in roughly equal fashion.” /d. . 


But in criminal cases, the interests of the defendant are 
of such magnitude that they have been protected by stan- 
dards of proof designed to exclude as nearly as possible 
the likelihood of an erroneous judgment. In other words, 
“{iJn the administration of criminal justice, our society 
imposes almost the entire risk of error upon itself, by 
requiring the State to prove the guilt of an accused beyond 
a = one doubt.” /d., 441 U.S. at 423-24, 99 S.Ct. 
at : 


At issue here is the intermediate standard, which our 
Legislature has termed “clear and convincing.” In using 
this standard our Legislature has determined the inter- 
ests at stake in this area are more substantial than other 
civil proceedings (which a competency hearing has been 
determined to be, see Miller v. State, 751 P.2d 733, 737- 
38 (OkLCr.1988)). 


The standard of proof used “is more than an empty 
semantic exercise.” Addington, 441 U.S. at 425, 99 S.Ct. 
at 1809 (quoting Tippett v. Maryland, 436 F.2d 1153, 
1166 (4th Cir.1971) (Sobeloff, J., concurring in part 
and dissenting in part), cert. dismissed sub nom. Murel v. 
Baltimore City Criminal Court, 407 U.S. 355, 92 S.Ct. 


61 


2091, 32 L.Ed.2d 791 (1972)). By placing a certain 
standard on a certain party, it gives courts an indication 
of “the value society places on individual liberty.” /d. 

This Court, in considering what standard should govern 
in a present competency proceeding, must assess the pre- 
sumption of competency together with the extent of the 
defendant's interest in not being tried while incompetent 
and the State’s interest in being assured a defendant is 
not merely attempting to escape prosecution by feigning 
incompetence in a field where “[{t]he subtleties and 
nuances of psychiatric diagnosis render certainties virtu- 
ally beyond reach in most situations.” Medina, 505 U.S. 
at ———, 112 S.Ct. at 2580, 120 L.Ed.2d at 367; Adding- 
ton, 441 U.S. at 430, 99 S.Ct. at 1811-12. 


Appellant’s case in an excellent example of why our 
Legislature set the standard of proof so high. His attor- 
neys first informed the trial court they were concerned 
about his competency because he refused to communi- 
cate with them, seeing them as evil forces seeking his 
death. However, even his own experts admitted the pos- 
sibility Appellant .was malingering. The State’s expert, 
relying on inconsistent answers given to various health 
care personnel at Eastern State Hospital, Appellant's 
record, and observations of Appellant himself, concluded 
Appellant was competent. In the second hearing, held 
just before trial started, evidence indicated Appellant 
acted normally in other criminal proceedings and in situa- 
tions which did not involve the murders. Even his own 
psychologist admitted one health care professional at 
Eastern State had labeled him a “world-class, first-class 
manipulator”; and was of the opinion Appellant both had 
an affective disorder and was malingering (although he 
was of the opinion it was the affective disorder, and not 
the malingering, which prevented Appellant from com- 
municating with his attorneys). 

We list these facts here not to determine at this junc- 
ture whether Appellant was in fact mentally ill, whether 


62 


he was malingering, or both; but to illustrate the inexact- 
ness and uncertainty attached to proceedings of this na- 
ture, proceedings based on diagnoses which are “to a large 
extent based on medical ‘impressions’ drawn from subjec- 
tive analysis and filtered through the experience of the 

i ician.” Medina, 505 U.S. at , 112 S.Ct. at 
2580, 120 L.Ed.2d at 367 (quoting Addington, 441 U.S. 
at 430, 99 S.Ct. at 1811-12). The State has great inter- 
est in assuring its citizens a thorough and speedy judicial 
process, together with the presumption of competency 
which is historically based on our law. A truly incom- 
petent criminal defendant, through his attorneys and ex- 
perts, can prove incompetency with relative ease. There- 
fore, we find forcing a criminal defendant to prove by 
clear and convincing evidence he is incompetent is not 
subject to proscription under the Due Process Clause, be- 
cause it does not “offend[] some principle of justice so 
rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as 
to be ranked as fundamental.” Medina, 505 U.S. at . 
112 S.Ct. at 2577, 120 L.Ed.2d at 363 (quoting Patter- 
son, 432 U.S. at 202, 97 S.Ct. at 2322-23). 


We therefore reject Appellant's first proposition of 
error. 


_ We now turn to Appellant’s third proposition, whether 
Appellant presented sufficient evidence to show he was 
incompetent. 


Appellant had two competency hearings: one in late 
December 1990 and early January 1991; and the second 
at the start of his trial, May 1992. Appellant now com- 
plains both rulings were incorrect. 


This Court has held there are two questions which 
must be addressed in determining present competency. 
First. we look at whether the defendant was able to un- 
derstand the nature of the charges and proceedings 
brought against him; and second, whether the defendant 


63 


had the ability effectively and rationally to assist in his 
defense. Smith v. State, 819 P.2d 270, 273-74 (OkI.Cr. 
1991), cert. denied, U.S. ——, 112 S.Ct. 2312, 
119 L.Ed.2d 232 (1992). As we discussed above, a 
defendant is presumed competent, and must prove other- 
wise by clear and convincing evidence. 22 O.S.Supp. 
1985, § 1175.4 


The first hearing piesents no real problem. At that 
hearing, Dr. Edith King testified Appellant was clearly 
incompetent before he was sent to Vinita. She gave as 
examples Appellant seemed very vague concerning his 
charge and became agitated when asked about the mur- 
der charge; he had difficulty focusing on any subject for 
very long; he did not appear to know what would happen 
to him if he were convicted, saying he would probably 
get to go home. Dr. King opined Appellant displayed a 
thought disorder, with possible auditory and visual hal- 
lucinations. However, she thought he could be treated. 
She admitted the possibility Appellant was malingering, 
and testified that he seemed more in touch with reality 
the day of the hearing. However, she could not say he 
was competent the day of the hearing. On the other 
hand, Dr. Jeanne Russell testified she conducted the 
screening interview with Appellant when he entered East- 
ern State Hospital. At that time, he denied knowing the 
charges against him, his birthdate, or what his attorney’s 
role was. She also reviewed his hospital record, talked 
with the staff, and contacted the Department of Correc- 
tions concerning previous mental history. She also ob- 
served him herself. She did not think Appellant’s an- 
swers were consistent with answers given other staff 
members, who recorded some of his statements in his rec- 
ord. In those records, there were at least four occasions 
recorded where he expressed an understanding of court- 
room procedure, knew what the charges against him were, 
and was aware of the consequences of a conviction. The 
records also showed Appellant expressed an interest in a 
plea of not guilty by reascn of insanity, indicating he had 


64 


some knowledge of a possible defense. On one occasion, 
Appellant was reported to have said: “[y]ou’re wasting 
your time going over courtroom proceedings with me. I 
know them. I've already spent 10 calendar years behind 
bars.” On another occasion, a notation stated Appellant 
“won't discuss charges with staff. No reservations in 
talking with peers,” and reportedly said “I’ve got nothing 
to lose, I've already got two murder raps on me.” * 


Based on this evidence, we do not find error in the 
trial court’s ruling Appellant was competent. 


At the second post-examination competency hearing,* 
Appellant’s evidence was stronger. Defense counsel pre- 
sented inmates from Appellant’s jail pod who testitied 
as to Appellant’s strange behavior; he compulsively and 
continually cleaned his cell; played with his feces, smear- 


3 Appellant argues on appeal Dr. Russell was not a credible wit- 
ness, as she was not on Appellant’s psychiatric team at Eastern 
State and had never had any significant personal contact with him. 
We find this unpersuasive. See Johnson v. State, 761 P.2d 484, 
492 (Okl.Cr.1988) (psychiatrists who were responsible for evaluat- 
ing Appellant almost five years earlier were dead at time case 
remanded for post-evaluation competency hearing ; however, medical 
records were still intact and a doctor on staff at Eastern State 
Hospital testified regarding the information in appellant’s record. 
Court did not question ability of later doctor to make analysis 
‘based on records alone.) 


‘ At trial, Appellant’s attorneys argued to the court the hearing 
held right before trial was not the post-examination competency 
hearing, but rather the first hearing, at which the court must have 
a “doubt” as to a defendant’s competency before he can order an 
evaluation. See sections 1175.2 and 1175.3 of Title 22. Trial 
attorneys also argued that because the hearing was the pre- 
evaluation hearing, the trial court used the wrong standard in 
determining there was no merit to Appellant’s claim. However, on 
appeal, Appellant seems to have abandoned that argument, instead 
referring to both the earlier hearing and the hearing immediately 
before jury selection as “post-examination competency hearings.” 
Appellant’s brief-in-chief at 18; see also brief at 15. We therefore 
need not address the question presented at the trial! level concerning 
which hearing was actually held before trial. 


65 


ing it on his face; and talked to himself or to thin air. 
Dr. Philip Murphy agreed with the comment of a nurse 
at Eastern State who labeled Appellant a “world-class, 
first-class manipulator”; however, the psychologist also 
testified Appellant suffered from major affective (i.e., 
mood) disorder, which was a form of mental illness. The 
disorder was episodic in form, meaning it would wax 
and wane on its own, which made treatment difficult; 
however, it was treatable. And although Appellant was 
a malingerer, it was the mental illness which kept him 
from communicating with his counsel. Therefore, Ap- 
pellant was not competent. 


The prosecution’s evidence consisted of various jailers 
who had worked in the jail pod in which Appellant was 
housed. None of them had noticed anything strange 
about Appellant, such as compulsive cleaning of his cell, 
smearing feces on his face or talking while no one else 
was there. They testified Appellant communicates nor- 
mally with other inmates and seemed to be aware of his 
surroundings. The prosecution also presented evidence 
Appellant had filed two pro se civil rights complaints in 
federal court, one in October 1991 and one in January 
1992. When responses were served on him in jail, he 
appeared to read the responses and understand their con- 
tents. 


The court was not required to give controlling effect 
to the opinion of the expert, and instead found in accord 
with the State’s lay witnesses. This is permissible. Moore 
v. State, 672 P.2d 1175, 1177 (Okl.Cr.1983). As we 
said in Siah v. State, 837 P.2d 485, 487 (Okl.Cr.1992), 
“this Court has never imposed a static analysis for the 
lower court to apply in all post-examination competency 
hearings, and we decline to do so now.” Examining the 
entire record of the proceedings before us, Fox v. State, 
524 P.2d 60, 65 (Okl.Cr.1974) we hold the trial judge 
did not abuse his discretion in finding Appellant had not 
met his burden of proving incompetency. 


66 

This proposition is without merit.° 

For his fourth proposition, Appellant alleges the court 
erred in accepting trial counsel’s waiver of his right to 
have a jury determine competency. On both occasions, 
the court specifically asked defense counsel if they wanted 
a jury trial on the issue of competency; on each occasion, 
they expressly waived it. Defendant acknowledges that; 
however, he complains they did not consult him before 
waiving the right, as he claims they must do. 


The applicable statute reads in pertinent part: 


B. The court, at the hearing on the application, 
shall determine, by clear and convincing evidence, if 
the person is incompetent. ... . If the court deems 
it necessary, or if the person alleged to be a person 
requiring treatment, or any relative, friend, or any 
person with whom he may reside, or at whose house 
he may be, shall so demand, the court shall schedule 
the hearing on the application as a jury trial to be 
held within seventy-two (72) hours of the request, 


22 O.S.Supp.1985, § 1175.4 (emphasis added). This 
Court has interpreted that provision to mean a defendant 


5 We feel compelled to address an extremely lamentable comment 
by the trial judge, if only to show no error occurred other than a 
slip of the tongue. At the same hearing during which defense 
counsel expressed his opinion Appellant was faking incompetency 
(but was not positive that was the case), the court agreed the 
issue could rise again. In response to counsel’s cautionary observa- 
tion Appellant may not be faking and could damage his chances if 
he acted up in front of the jury, the court stated: “It’s a travesty, 
perhaps. We're talking about two things. Insanity as a defense 
to a crime or incompetence to assist counsel. So, if an incompetent 
person is convicted of a crime that he committed when he was sane, 
I don’t see any harm’s done.” However, this Court does not look 
at the record in isolation. During the second competency hearing, 
the trial court exhibited an overabundance of caution in protecting 
Appellant’s rights. See 5-4 Tr. 31-38, 260-272; I Trial Tr. 3-8. In 
other words, although the court may have made an injudicious 
comment, his judicious actions belied his words. 


67 


is entitled to a jury trial on the issue of competency only 
if he demands it. Scott v. State, 730 P.2d 7 (OkI.Cr. 
1986). 


Appellant's cases are inapplicable. Beck v. State, 626 
P.2d 327, 328 (OkI.Cr.1981), concerns itself with section 
1162 of Title 22, dealing with sanity, not competency. 
Hayes v. State, 541 P.2d 210, 212 (Okl.Cr.1975) deals 
with a valid waiver of trial by jury. 

Here, Appellant was not speaking to his attorneys. 
Under the circumstances, they did the best they could, 
calculating the bench would be kinder to them than a 
jury would. This proposition is without merit. 


Ill. JURY SELECTION ISSUES 


A. 


Appellant in his seventh proposition of error complains 
the prosecutor defined “reasonable doubt” for the jury dur- 
ing voir dire. The record shows during voir dire, the 
prosecutor asked one prospective juror: “And you can’t 
define it, like we've said, but without telling me what it is, 
do you think you can come to a conclusion about what 
that means, what reasonable doubt is, what’s reasonable, 
what's a doubt, all that?” 


We find no error, as we find this question did not at- 
tempt to define reasonable doubt. Cf. Diaz v. State, 728 
P.2d 503, 511 (OkI.Cr.1986) (Comment by prosecutor 
“You have heard all this talk about beyond a reasonable 
doubt and you heard the Court . . . saying that that is 
not the same thing as beyond a shadow of a doubt.” Did 
not constitute the prosecutor’s “defining” the phrase, nor 
did the remark create an erroneous impression.); Wald 
v. State, 513 P.2d 330, 333 (OkI.Cr.1973) (Question by 
prosecutor “. . . does the term ‘reasonable doubt’ to you 
in your mind connote to you beyond all doubt whatso- 
ever? In other words the law implies or gives the State 
of Oklahoma the burden of proving a person charged 


68 


with a crime the burden of proving that person guilty be- 
yond a reasonable doubt, but I’m sure ve 
heard the term beyond a shadow of a doubt or beyond 
all doubt, and what I am asking you, would you hold 
State of Oklahoma to a greater degree of than 
law imposes?” Held, no attempt made by the prosecutor 
to define the term of reasonable doubt). 


Accordingly, this assignment of error is without merit. 


In his eighth proposition of error, Appellant contends 
the trial court improperly excused for cause two panel 
members based on their answers to questions about the 
death penalty. 


The first juror to which Appellant objects is Florence 
Fields. She first said she could consider the death pen- 
alty in a proper case. She related she had a cousin whose 
body was found three days after she was abducted and 
murdered; she had another relative to whom she was not 
very close who had been stabbed to death by a boyfriend. 
The abduction and murder occurred approximately five 
or six months before this trial; the stabbing occurred three 
or four years before. During questioning by the prosecu- 
tor, Ms. Fields then-said she did not believe in the death 
penalty “under no circumstances.” Consequently, when 
asked if she could sentence someone to death, she said 
she could “not really” do that. At that point, the court 
stepped back in, reminded her she had said she could do 
so. When asked to explain her answers, she said “Well, 
if you consider it all the way around, then I wouldn't. I 
could consider it, but just to say I would put somebody 
to death, no.” The court, in an attempt to interpret her 
answer, asked “[y]ou could consider it, but you couldn't 
put them to death. Is that what you’re saying?” to which 
Ms. Fields responded “yes.” Then in response to ques- 
tioning by defense counsel, she said there were no cir- 
cumstances where she could give the death penalty. She 


69 


then said there might be circumstances where the death 
penalty was deserved, but “I don’t know if I could really 
do that.” She said she would keep an open mind. How- 
ever, when again asked by the prosecutor, she said she 
would not ever give the death penalty. At that point, the 
court excused her for cause. 


The Supreme Court in Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 
412, 105 S.Ct. 844, 83 L.Ed.2d 841 (1985), dispensed 
with earlier language in Witherspoon vy. Illinois, 391 U.S. 
510, 88 S.Ct. 1770, 20 L.Ed.2d 776 (1968) by. holding 
a party need not prove a juror’s bias against the death 
penalty with “unmistakable clarity,” observing this was 
because “determination of juror bias cannot be reduced 
to question-and-answer sessions which obtain results in 
the manner of a catechism.” Wainwright, 469 U.S. at 
424, 105 S.Ct. at 852. 


What common sense should have realized experience 
has proved: many veniremen simply cannot be 
asked enough questions to reach the point where 
their bias has been made “unmistakably clear”; these 
veniremen may not know how they will react when 
faced with imposing the death sentence, or may be 
unable to articulate, or may wish to hide their true 
feelings. Despite this lack of clarity in the printed 
record, however, there will be situations where the 
trial judge is left with the definite impression that a 
prospective juror would be unable to faithfully and 
impartially apply the law. For reasons that will be 
developed more fully infra, this is why deference 
must be paid to the trial judge who sees and hears 
the juror. 


Id., 469 U.S. at 424-26, 852-53. We have followed that 
philosophy. See, e.g., Robedeaux v. State, 866 P.2d 417, 
424 (OkLCr.1993); Banks v. State, 701 P.2d 418, 421- 
422 (OkI.Cr.1985), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 1036, 112 
S.Ct. 883, 116 L.Ed.2d 787 (1992). 


70 


The same thing is true concerning Verna Kolar. She 
told the court the district attorney’s office had prosecuted 
her brother in a case a few years before; however, she 
also said her brother admitted the accusations and pled 
guilty, so she held no grudges. She first said she could 
base the punishment on the crime and surrounding facts.° 
She then said she could “probably” agree on a verdict 
imposing death, “but I do not know if I could sleep well 
that night doing so.” The court then observed: 


Well, it’s very difficult sometimes for people to sleep 
for anything, you know. This is one of those times 
you just have to do what you think is right. You say 
you probably could. Now we're talking about where 
the law and the evidence warrant, could you agree 
on a verdict imposing the death penalty. I’m not 
trying to make you say one or the other; I’m just 
asking what you think? 


PROSPECTIVE JUROR KOLAR: No, no I could 
not. 


THE COURT: If you found beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the Defendant was guilty of Murder in the 
First Degree, and if, understand the evidence, the 
facts and circumstances of the case, the law would 

_ permit you to consider a sentence of death, are your 
reservations about the death penalty such that, re- 
gardless of law, the fact and circumstances of the 
case, you would not inflict the death penalty? 


PROSPECTIVE JUROR KOLAR: No sir, I 
would not. 


®When asked if she had any feelings that would prevent or im- 
pair her from considering the death penalty, she replied: “I want 
to say, yes, I do and, no, I don’t. There have been instances when 
I could answer that easily and say, yes, that person is guilty, that 
person deserves to die. And there have been other instances when 
I could not say that.” 


Kolar the night to consider 
her the next morning without further questioning. De- 
fense counsel did not object. 


The same analysis applies to Ms. Kolar as to Ms. 
Fields. Wainwright, supra; Robedeaux, supra, Banks, 
supra. 


This proposition is without merit. 
Cc, 


Appellant then complains his constitutional rights were 
violated by the use of “death qualification” voir dire 
questions. 


We have repeatedly considered this argument, and have 
repeatedly rejected it. Boltz v. State, 806 P.2d 1117, 
1123 (OkLCr.1991), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 846, 112 
S.Ct. 143, 116 L.Ed.2d 109 (1991); Moore v. State, 761 
P.2d 866, 877 (Okl.Cr.1988); Johns v. State, 742 P.2d 
1142, 1148 (OklLCr.1987); Banks v. State, 728 P.2d 
497, 502 (Okl.Cr.1986); Hager v. State, 665 P.2d 319, 
322 (Okl.Cr.1983). We do so yet once again. Appel- 
lant’s ninth proposition of error is without merit. 


72 


IV. FIRST-STAGE TRIAL ISSUES 


A. 

For his fifth proposition, Appellant claims his case 
must be reversed because the court gave the jury the 
standard flight instruction, OUJI-CR 806." Appellant did 
not testify at trial, nor did he offer any explanation for 
his conduct. 


Appellant points out this Court in Mitchell v. State, 
876 P.2d 682 (OkI.Cr.1994), declared improper a 
court’s giving the flight instruction in cases where the de- 
fendant did not explain his departure. The Court rea- 
soned that giving the instructions in a situation such as 
this one violated a defendant's presumption of innocence, 
see 22 O.S.1981, § 836," as it “assumf{ed] the defendant 
[has] committed the crime.” Mitchell, 876 P.2d at 684. 


TIt appears the instruction was based on the evidence Appellant 
ran when first confronted by police, rather than on evidence Appel- 
lant left the scene of the murder, although the record could have 
been clearer on this point. Appellant’s counsel admitted as much 
during oral argument, pointing out the only reference by the 
prosecutor to flight during his closing argument was in connec- 
tion with Appellant’s attempts to run from police when spotted sev- 
eral days after the murder. 


* That section, in effect and unchanged since our laws were 
adopted from the Dakota Laws of 1887, reads: “A defendant in a 
crimina] action is presumed to be innocent until the contrary is 
proved, and in case of a reasonable doubt as to whether his guilt 
is satisfactorily shown, he is entitled to be acquitted.” In supple- 
mental authority, Appellant has provided us with United States 
Supreme court cases containing dicta which indicate the presump- 
tion of innocence is “axiomatic and elementary.” See e.g., In re 
Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 25 L.Ed.2d 368 (1970). We 
recognize the possibility the presumption of innocence may be so 
ingrained in our system of justice as to assume Fourteenth Amend- 
ment Due Process proportions. However, the law upon which our 
statutory presumption of innocence is based predates even Coffin 
v. United States, 156 U.S. 482, 453, 15 S.Ct. 394, 403, 39 L.Ed. 481, 
491 (1895), the basis for all subsequent Supreme Court pronounce- 
ments on the subject. Indeed, it is this statutory presumption, and 


73 


The State acknowledges Mitchell, but argues it should 
be applied prospectively only, since it constituted a “clear 
break from prior law.” State’s brief at 25.° Appellant in 
his reply brief cited Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314, 

1 Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649 (1987), which held 
that a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions 
is to be applied retroactively to all cases pending on di- 
rect review or not yet final, with no exception for cases 
in which the new rule constitutes a “clear break” with 
the past. We must therefore determine whether Griffith 
is applicable in this case. We hold it is not. 

Griffith and the retroactivity principle is indeed appli- 


for Vuletich v. State, 735 P.2d 668 (Okl.Cr.1987), quoted by Mitchell 
as authority for the infirmity in language from OUJI-CR 806. It 
was in Vuletich where we said: “[i)t is improper to tell a jury 
they must determine guilt or innocence. It is the jury’s duty to 
determine whether the State has demonstrated guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt... . . If the State fails to sustain its burden, 
the jury must find the defendant not guilty. See 22 0.S.1981, 
§ 836. A determination of innocence is not required.” /d.-at 569. 


* At oral argument, the State proposed Mitchell should be applied 


74 


issues of state law. To the contrary, the Court hes ex- 
plicitly stated that when questions of state law are at issue, 
state courts generally have the authority to determine the 
retroactivity of their own decisions. See Harper v. Vir- 
ginia Dept. of Taxation, 509 US. . , 113 S.Ct. 
2510, 2519, 125 L.Ed.2d 74, 88 (1993); American 
Trucking Associations, Inc. v. Smith, 496 U.S. 167, 178, 
110 S.Ct. 2323, 2330-31, 110 L.Ed.2d 148 (1990); 
Great Northern R. Co. v. Sunburst Oil & Refining Co., 
287 U.S. 358, 364, 53 S.Ct. 145, 148, 77 L.Ed. 360 
(1932); see also Lackey v. Scott, 28 F.3d 486, 491 (Sth 
Cir.1994) (Texas Court of Criminal Appeals decision 
requiring definition of reasonable doubt not governed by 
Griffith, as “Constitution neither prohibits trial courts 
from defining reasonable doubt nor requires them to do 
so”; citing to American Trucking); McSherry v. Block, 
880 F.2d 1049, 1052-53 & n. 2 (9th Cir.1989), cert. 
denied, 499 U.S. 943, 111 S.Ct. 1404, 113 L*Ed.2d 459 
(1991); Diggs v. Owens, 833 F.2d 439, 442 (3d Cir. 
1987) (holding Griffith applied to constitutional rules of 
criminal procedure; does not require retroactive applica- 
tion of “new procedural decisions not constitutionally 
grounded”); Royster v. Fauver, 775 F.2d 527, 529 (3d 
Cir. 1985); Galloway v. Beto, 421 F.2d 284, 289 (Sth 
Cir.1970), cert. denied, 400 U.S. 912, 91 S.Ct. 137, 27 
L.Ed.2d 151 (1970) (court not bound by Texas court’s 
pronouncement on double jeopardy, but is bound by Texas 
court’s holding on the relationship of two offenses as it 
affects an implied acquittal doctrine). 

This Court has heretofore made pronouncements 
which it declared would be applied prospectively only. 
See e¢.g., Perez v. State, 798 P.2d 639, 640 (OKI.Cr. 
1990); State v. Neal, 604 P.2d 145, 147 (OkI.Cr.1979); 
Walton v. State, 565, P.2d 716, 718 (OkI.Cr.1977). 
Appellant, however, responds those rulings were based on 
federal caselaw which was overruled by Griffith. 


75 


We recognize this, but find it has no bearing on our 
analysis. A state court is empowered to use federal law 
in analyzing questions of state law. We are free to use 
these federal cases as persuasive authority for the purpose 
of guidance; however they do not themselves compel the 
result we have reached. Michigan v. Long, 463 US. 
1032, 1041, 103 S.Ct. 3469, 3476-77, 77 L.Ed.2d 1201 
(1983). We have done so before, and do so here. See 
also Rivers v. State, 889 P.2d 288, 291 (OkI.Cr.1994). 

The basic principles of retroactivity in criminal cases 
before Griffith were established in Linkletter v. Walker, 
381 U.S. 618, 636, 85 S.Ct. 1731, 1741, 14 L.Ed.2d 601 
(1965); Tehan v. Shott, 382 U.S. 406, 86 S.Ct. 459, 15 
L.Ed.2d 453 (1966), and Johnson v. New Jersey, 384 
U.S. 719, 86 S.Ct. 1772, 16 L.Ed.2d 882 (1966). In 
summing up those cases, the Court in Stovall v. Denno, 
388 U.S. 293, 297, 87 S.Ct. 1967, 1970, 18 L.Ed.2d 
1199 (1967), said: 

“(t}he criteria guiding resolution of the [retroactivity] 
question implicate (a) the purpose to be served by 
the new standards, (b) the extent of the reliance by 
law enforcement authorities -on the old standards, 
and (c) the effect on the administration of justice of 
a retroactive application of the new standards.” 


Stovall, 388 U.S. at 297, 87 S.Ct. at 1970. See also 
Solem v. Stumes, 465 U.S. 638, 104 S.Ct. 1338, 79 
L.Ed.2d 579 (1984). This is the standard this Court 
has used previously. See Edwards v. State, 591 P.2d 313, 
317 (Okl.Cr.1979); Rutledge v. State, 527 P.2d 1373, 
1375 (Okl.Cr.1974); Poke v. State, 515 P.2d 252, 254 
(OkL.Cr.1973); Garrett v. State, 438 P.2d 945, 948 
(OkI.Cr.1968) (ruling correcting deficient instruction to 
be applied prospectively only). We find these criteria 
still valid in interpreting our state law questions. See 
Griffith, 479 U.S. at 329-34, 107 S.Ct. at 716-19 (White, 


76 


J., with whom Rehnquist, C.J. and O° joi 
issenting)." Connor, J., join, 


© We are not the only state to hold in this fashion. See People 
v. Carrera, 49 Cal.8d 291, 261 Cal.Rptr. 848, 369-71, 777 P.2d 121, 
142-48 (1989); People v. Robinson, 229 Cal.App.3d 1620, 281 
Cal.Rptr. 26, 29 (1991) (defendant convicted, then escaped. In 
interim, appellate court hands down ruling which would have been 
favorauie to appellant had his appeal been decided earlier. Court 
refuses to apply retroactively, as to do so would be “inherently 
offensive to the judicial process.”); Fenelon v. State, 594 So.2d 
292, 295 (Fla.1992) (case banning flight instruction given prospec- 
tive application only; harmless error analysis conducted); Green 
v. State, 641 So.2d 391, 395 (Fla.1994) (stressing prospectivity) ; 
Taylor v. State, 630 So.2d 1088, 1042 (Fla.1993), cert. denied 
—— US. ——, 115 S.Ct. 107, 180 L.Ed.2d 64 (1994) (same) ; 
Gray v. State, 640 So.2d 186, 198-94 (Fla.App.1994) (notes state 
supreme court moved away from prior caselaw, which would have 
held Fenelon applied retrospectively ; cases cited) ; Gilliam v. State, 
582 So.2d 610, 612 (Fla.1991) (caselaw requiring sentencing judge 
in capital case to expressly evaluate in written order each mitigat- 
ing circumstance to determine whether it is supported by evidence 
applied prospectively only; prior holdings not fundamental! changes, 
but rather “evolutionary refinements”); State v. Singletary, 549 
So.2d 996, 999 (Fla.1989) (decision requiring judge to be present 
during voir dire questioning by attorneys to be applied prospec- 
yore wom be Catlett v. State, 627 So.2d 558, 559 ( Fla.App. 1993) 
recognizing prospective application of Singletary; P , 
142 Ill.2d 204, 164 [ll.Dec. 616, 6388, 568 N.E.24 st, 088 taeee> 1 
cert. denied, 502 U.S. 858, 112 S.Ct. 161, 116 L.Ed.2d 126 (1991) 
(Holding in People v. Gacho, 122 Il\.2d 221, 119 Ill.Dec. 287, 522 
N.E.2d 1146 (1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 910, 109 S.Ct. 264. 102 
L.Ed.2d 252 (1988) requiring new instruction in multiple murders 
involving mitigating evidence in capital cases was prospective only ; 
Griffith not applicable) ; Foster v. State, 689 So.2d 1263, 1298-99 
(Miss.1994) (noting prospective application of decision prohibiting 
use of two specific aggravating circumstances in capita] case under 
common fact pattern); People v. Sprowal, 84 N.Y.2d 113, 615 
N.Y.S.2d 828, 331-32, 688 N.E.2d 973, 967-77 (1994) (decisions 
requiring defendant to be present during sidebar conferences be- 
tween judge and prospective juror to be applied prospectively only, 
even though absence in some instances could have a “substantial 
effect” on the ability to defend against the charges); People v. 
Garcia, 161 Mise.2d 1, 612 N.Y.S.2d 552, 555-56 (N.Y.A.D.1994) 
(recognizing Griffith, but using Linkletter factors to determine 


77 


Having established the criteria this Court uses to de- 
termine whether a holding of state law should be retro- 
active, we now turn to the case sub judice. 


Concerning (b) the extent of the reliance by law en- 
forcement authorities on the old standards, there can be 
little debate OUJI-CR 806 “would have been given in the 
proper sitmetion by every court in this jurisdiction based 
on caselaw that existed before “iditchell.” Rivers, 889 
P.2d at 292. The Mitchell Court itself noted use of the 
instruction had caused “confusion” in the past. /d., 876 
P.2d at 685. And this Court has approved of its use in 
prior cases similar to Appellant’s, regardless of whether 
an explanation was given. See /d., 876 P.2d at 686-87 
(Lumpkin, P.J., which whom Lane, J., joins, dissenting), 
and cases cited therein. 


Concerning (c) the effect on the administration of jus- 
tice of a retroactive application of the new standards and 
(a) the purpose to be served by the new standards, re- 
quiring only a prospective application places Appellant 
“in the same situation as those on post-conviction, elimi- 
nating the inherent inequality that results between appel- 
lants whose appeals are separated only by time.” Rivers, 
889 P.2d at 292. It also eliminates the inherent unfair- 


retroactivity of state issue) ; Geesa v. State, 820 S.W.2d 154, 163-65 
(Tex.Crim.App.1991) (holding dealing with definition of reasonable 
doubt prospective only, as it does not change the standard of proof 
of reasonable doubt; Griffith not applicable) ; Barnes v. State, 876 
S.W.2d 316, 328 (Tex.Crim.App.1994), cert. denied, —— U.S. ——, 
115 S.Ct. 174, 180 L.Ed.2d 110 (1994) (following Geesa) ; Labrum 
v. Utah State Board of Pardons, 870 P.2d 902, 912 n. 9 (Utah 
1993); Hurn v. State, 872 P.2d 189, 198-99 (Alaska App.1994) 
(decision placing duty on tria] judge to make record of a defendant's 
decision not to testify to be applied prospectively; using factors 
enunciated in Linkletter and Stovall); State v. Adams, 156 Ariz. 
88, 750 P.2d 31, 32 (Ariz.Ct.App.1987) ; State v. Ottwell, 852 S.W.2d 
370, 372 (Mo.Ct.App.1993) (State supreme court decision holding 
instruction on intoxication violated Due Process to be applied pros- 
pectively, except in cases where complaint was preserved at trial 
by appropriate objection ) . 


78 


sue an ie ee —— prior existing caselaw can 
on court , who gave the instruction i 
good faith. Jd. re ecg 


We therefore hold Mitchell does not automatically 


apply retroactively, see Rivers, 889 P.2d at 292, i 
does not apply in this case. pans 


There is another, equally compelling, reason Mitchell 
does not apply here. This Court in Mitchell made it clear 
whether reversible error occurred would be determined 
by the particular facts of each case. See Id., 876 P.2d 
at oy (“Based on the facts in this case, it was reversible 
error to give instructions on flight” (emphasis added) ). 
This fact-specific dictate is also reflected in Kentucky ; 
Whorton, 441 U.S. 786, 788-89, 99 S.Ct. 2088, 2089- 
90, 60 L.Ed.2d 640 (1979). There, a state district court 
failed to give an instruction on the presumption of inno- 
cence. The Kentucky Supreme Court reversed, feeling 
such an instruction was mandated by Taylor v. Ken- 
tucky, 436 U.S. 478, 98 S.Ct. 1930, 56 ' Sd.2d 468 
( 1978). The United States Supreme Court disagreed, 
stating the failure to give a requested instruction on the 
presumption of innocence does not in and of itself violate 
the Constitution. Rather, “such a failure must be evalu- 
ated in light of the totality of the circumstances—includ- 
ing all the instructions to the jury, the arguments of 
counsel, whether the weight of the evidence was over- 
whelming, and other relevant factors—to determine 
whether the defendant received a constitutionally fair 
trial.” Whorton, 441 U.S. at 789, 99 S.Ct. at 2090. See 


also Hyatt v. State, 779 P.2d 993, 995 (Okl. Cr.1 
(following Whorton). pene? 


The facts of this case do not require reversal. As noted 
above, it seems clear the flight instruction was given here 
not based on Appellant's flight from the crime, but from 
his flight from police several days after the crime. The 
evidence showed when Appellant was apprehended after 
the chase, he was carrying a device commonly used to 


79 


smoke crack cocaine. He was arrested for possession of 
drug paraphernalia based on this charge. 


Therefore, Mitchell is not applicable here, as it does 
not “assume the defendant to have committed the crime” 
for which he was on trial. Mitchell, 876 P.2d at 684. If 
anything, the instruction was improperly given, not be- 
cause of flight to avoid arrest on a murder charge, but be- 
cause it would tend to show he committed the crime of 
possession of drug paraphernalia, a crime with which he 
was not charged. See Compton v. State, 74 Okl.Cr. 48, 
53, 122 P.2d 819, 821 (1942) (flight signifies not merely 
leaving, but leaving under a consciousness of guilt and 
for the purpose of evading arrest). Accordingly, we find 
any error in giving the flight instruction was harmless, as 
the misdirection of the jury has not “resulted in a mis- 
carriage of justice,” or has not constituted “a substantial 
violation of a constitutional or statutory right.” 20 O.S. 
1991, § 3001.1. 


Consequently, we find Appellant's fifth proposition to 
be without merit. 
B. 


At trial, Appellant’s attorneys submitted the following 
handwritten instruction defining reasonable doubt. 


“You are instructed that the term proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt means evidence which creates a 
moral certainty as to the guilt of the defendant. If 
the evidence does not amount to a moral certainty 
in your mind you must find the defendant not 


guilty.” 
The instruction was refused. For his sixth proposition, 
Appellant claims the court erred in refusing the instruc- 
tion. 

We disagree. This Court has a long history of holding 
it is error to give an instruction defining reasonable 
doubt, whether it is requested by the defendant, see Grant 
v. State, 703 P.2d 943, 946 (OkI.Cr.1985), Spitznas v. 


80 


State, 666 P.2d 1307, 1307-08 (OkI.Cr.1983), Tempier 
v. State, 494 P.2d 667, 671-72 (Okl.Cr.1972) Mort v. 
State, 94 Okla.Crim. 145, 156, 232 P.2d 166, 177 
(1951); or given by the court, see Fellows v. State, 508 
P.2d 1089, 1090-91 (OklI.Cr.1973), Young v. State, 373 
P.2d 273, 277-79 (OkLCr.1962), cert. denied, 371 U.S. 
957, 83 S.Ct. 513, 9 L.Ed.2d 504 (1963); Brookshire v. 
State, 284 P.2d 752, 754-55 (OkLCr.1955), Lippoldt v. 
State, 271 P.2d 745, 749 (OkI.Cr.1954), Wallace v. 
State, 96 Oxl.Cr. 163, 164-65, 250 P.2d 484, 485-86 
(1952). This iS so because to give such an instruction 
tends to confuse the jury. 


Specifically, we have addressed the “moral certainty” 


language requested by appellant’s trial counsel. In doing 
SO, we stated: 


Fourthly, the defendant complains of error in trial 
court by a refusal to allow the defense counsel to 
use the term ‘moral certainty’ as synonymous with 
‘beyond a reasonable doubt’... . 


The defendant goes on . . . to urge that the court 


only authority . . . the case of Gray v. State, 56 
Okl.Cr. 208, 38 P.2d 967 (1934), wherein the 
Court held that while the terms ‘moral certainty’ and 
‘beyond a reasonable doubt’ are 8 in some 


holds that it is not necessary for the trial court to 
define what is meant by a ‘reasonable doubt,’ and 


81 


In more recent years, trial courts have been severely 
criticized by this Court for attempting to define the 
term ‘reasonable doubt.’ See Bell v. State, Okl.Cr., 
381 P.2d 167 (1963); and, it has even been held 
reversible error to so define this difficulty-of-definition 
term. Wilson v. State, Oki. Cr., 403 P.2d 262 
(1965); Lee v. State, Okl.Cr., 430 P.2d 858 (1967). 


We reiterate the phrase ‘reasonable doubt’ is self- 
explanatory, and definitions thereof do not clarify its 
meaning, but rather tend to confuse a jury; therefore, 
instructions defining it are unnecessary, and should 
not be given. The same logic should apply in at- 
tempts in voir dire examinations to explain to the 
jury what is meant by ‘reasonable doubt.’ 


Templer, 494 P.2d at 671-72. See also Victor v. Ne- 
braska, 511 U.S. ——, 114 S.Ct. 1239, 127 L.Ed.2d 583 
(1994). 

Accordingly, Appellant's sixth proposition is without 
merit. 

G. 

In his tenth proposition, Appellant alleges the court 
erred in allowing into evidence a color photograph of Mr. 
Sheppard taken at the scene. The photograph showed 
the position of the body after it had been rolled off its 
side. It displayed characteristics of a body which had 
been left unattended for four days. During the second 
stage, the prosecution introduced photographs of Mrs. 
Warner as she was found half-nude in her residence. 
Other photographs depicted the injury caused by the 
ramming of the knife-sharpening tool into her neck. 


We have carefully reviewed the photographs and do 
not find them unduly gruesome. As we recently said in 
McCormick v. State, 845 P.2d 896, 898 (OkI.Cr.1993), 
“[g]ruesome crimes result in gruesome photographs.” We 
find no abuse of the trial court’s discretion in admitting 
the photographs. Accordingly, this proposition is without 


82 


Vv. COMPETENCY OF COUNSEL 


Appellant next argues his counsel was incompetent. 
He bases this allegation on two grounds. The first is his 
attorney’s sharing his beliefs with the court Appellant was 
“faking” incompetence. The second portion relates to his 
incompetence to stand trial; he essentially argues his coun- 
sel was incompetent in his representation because Appel- 
lant himself was incompetent, and therefore could not 
communicate with counsel. 


The second portion of Appellant’s arguments hinges on 
the trial court’s determination he was competent. If Ap- 
pellant was competent and merely malingering, any lack 
of communication with counsel was solely Appellant's 
fault; if Appellant were incompetent, this case would be 
reversed on that basis. Therefore, we will reserve the 
second portion of Appellant’s argument until we reach 
the threshold imatter of Appellant’s competency. 


Concerning the first portion of the proposition, the 
record shows counsel filed an application for determina- 
tion of competency in August 1990. At that time, Ap- 
pellant was examined by a psychologist who recommended 
he be sent to Eastern State Hospital at Vinita for exami- 
nation, which the District Court ordered. Upon comple- 
tion of his treatment, Appellant was returned to Okla- 
homa County, where his counsel waived determination by 
jury. A post-examination competency hearing presented 
to the bench was held, and at the conclusion of the hear- 
ing Appellant was adjudged competent. During that hear- 
ing, defense counsel presented the same psychologist who 
had examined Appellant before he went to Vinita. He 
claims on appeal counsel was ineffective for failing to get 
a new psychologist, someone who could base impressions 
on an interview with Appellant after his return from 
Vinita instead of relying almost exclusively on data ob- 
tained before he left. 


We first address the claim counsel was somehow incom- 
petent because he was candid with the court in sharing 


83 


his belief Appellant was “faking” competency. This did 
not occur during either the first competency hearing or 
even during the second one; rather, counsel made his 
comment at the end of another hearing discussing other 
motions which occurred after the first competency hear- 
ing. Counsel felt the need to make a record on his client’s 
uncooperative and threatening attitude. Counsel also 
quickly followed up his personal belief with the statement 
he was not a doctor, and others in his office felt Appellant 
was incompetent; therefore, he felt obliged to raise the 
issue again. After the court reminded counsel of the 
results of the first competency hearing, counsel observed 
incompetency could happen at any time, then essentially 
let the matter drop at that time. 

However, immediately before the start of jury selection 
proceedings, the same counsel recanted his earlier state- 
ments, telling the court his client was incorapetent and 
requested another hearing. 


In short, counsel had not made his statements at the 
first hearing. After the first hearing and before the second 
one, counsel as an officer of the court candidly expressed 
his impressions, as he had a duty to do. Model Rules of 
Professional Conduct Rule 3.3(a)(2)," 5 O.S.Supp. 
1988, Ch. 1. App. 3-A. By the time of trial and the 
second hearing, counsel recanted his statements. Appel- 
lant has cited us no authority—and we know of none— 
declaring an attorney incompetent as a matter of constitu- 
tional law because that attorney may harbor doubts as to 
his client’s sincerity in a criminal proceeding. 

Concerning counsel’s failure to obtain another expert 
for the post-examination competency hearing, we find no 
error. Evaluating the entire record of competency pro- 


1! That rule reads: 
(a) a lawyer shall not knowingly: 


(2) fail to disclose a fact to a tribunal when disclosure is 
necessary to avoid a criminal or fravdulent act by the client. 


84 


ceedings before us, Fox v. State, 524 P.2d 60, 65 (Okl. 
Cr.1974),” selection of another expert would not have 
changed the outcome of the proceedings. The record was 
virtually brimming with evidence Appellant was malinger- 
ing (that evidence is discussed in II.B., above). 


Absent evidence to the contrary, and examining coun- 
sel’s performance during both hearings, we cannot declare 
that Appellant has rebutted the “strong presumption that 
counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable 
professional assistance,” Camron v. State, 829 P.2d 47, 
56 (OkI.Cr.1992) (citing Strickland v. Washington, 466 
U.S. 668, 694-96, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 2068-69, 80 L.Ed.2d 
674 (1984); or that but for his conduct, there was a 
reasonable probability the result of the proceeding would 
have been different. A reasonable probability i is a proba- 
bility sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome. 
Id. 829 P.2d at 56; Strickland, 466 U.S. at 698, 104 
S.Ct. at 2070. 


In light of the discussion contained in Appellant's third 
proposition, it follows Appellant’s counsel was not incom- 
petent because he could not communicate with Appellant 
either in preparing for or during trial. As we have previ- 
ously observed, “[aJlthough appellant was a difficult client 
to repreesnt, he was not an incompetent one.” Johnson vy. 
State, 761 P.2d 484, 492 (OkI.Cr.1988). The decision 
not to communicate with counsel was Appellant's alone; 
whatever reasons he may have had for not communicat- 
ing, it was not because he was unable to do so. 


'? There, we said: 


It is not sufficient for the defense counsel merely to say that 
he is unable to communicate with his client; and, that his 
client’s mental processes seem to waver while he is discussing 
the case with him; and, that his client does not understand 
the seriousness of a charge, to constitute justification for a 
finding that the defendant is mentally incompetent. In consid- 


ering this question it is necessary that we consider the entire 
record. 


85 


VI. SECOND-STAGE TRIAL ISSUES 


A. 


Appellant next contends the court committed error by 
failing to instruct the jury it had the option to return a 
life senence regardless of its findings of aggravaung 
circumstances. 

We have rejected this argument previously. Williamson 
v. State, 812 P.2d 384, 410 (Okl.Cr.1991), cert. denied, 
US. ——, 112 S.Ct. 1592, 118 L.Ed.2d 308 
(1992). We do so again. 


This eleventh proposition is without merit. 
B. 


Appellant next contends the court erred in failing to 
instruct the jury it could consider sympathy for the ac- 
cused in assessing punishment. 

We have addressed this issue before and have con- 


tinually found it to be lacking. Stout v. State, 817 P.2d 
737, 740 (1991). We do so again. 


This twelfth proposition of error is without merit. 
Cc. 


Appellant in his thirteenth proposition of error contends 
the court erred in not instructing the jury its findings con- 
cerning mitigating circumstances did not have to be 
unanimous. 


This, too, has been considered and rejected by this 
Court. Mayes v. State, 887 P.2d 1288, (OklLCr.1994). 
Accordingly, this proposition of error is without merit. 
D. 
For his fourteenth proposition of error, Appellant as- 
serts the court erred in giving instructions which permitted 
jurors to ignore mitigating evidence. 


86 


We have rejected this argument as well. Williamson, 
812 P.2d at 409. We do so again. 


E. 


In his fifteenth proposition of error Appellant claims 
the instruction defining “heinous, atrocious or cruel” is 
unconstitutional because it does not adequately channel 
the jury’s discretion. 

We addressed this argument in Nuckols v. State, 805 
P.2d 672, 674 (OkLCr.1991), cert. denied, 500 U.S. 960, 
111 S.Ct. 2276, 114 L.Ed.2d 727 (1991). We see no 
need to address it again. See also Walton v. Arizona, 
497 U.S. 639, 654-55, 110 S.Ct. 3047, 3057-58, 111 
L.Ed.2d 511, 529 (1990); Maynard v. Cartwright, 486 
U.S. 356, 108 S.Ct. 1853, 100 L.Ed.2d 372 (1988); 
United States v. Pretlow, 779 F.Supp. 758, 773 (D.N.J. 
1991); United States v. Cooper, 754 F.Supp. 617, 623 
(N.D.11.1990); Nguyen v. State, 769 P.2d 167, 174 
(OKLCr.1988), cert. denied, 492 U.S. 925, 109 S.Ct. 
3264, 106 L.Ed.2d 609 (1989). 


We find no merit to this proposition. 


F. 

For his sixteenth proposition, contends there 
was insufficient evidence to sustain the aggravating cir- 
cumstance he killed Mr. Sheppard to avoid arrest or 
prosecution for burglary. 

The existence of this aggravating circumstance is deter- 
mined by looking at the killer’s intent. Romano v. State, 
847 P.2d 368, 387 (OkLCr.1993), aff'd, 512 US. > 
114 S.Ct. 2004, 129 L.Ed.2d 1 (1994); Williamson v. 
State, 812 P.2d 384, 407 (OkLCr.1991), cert. denied 
— US. ——, 112 S.Ct. 1592, 118 L.Ed.2d 308 


(1992); Stouffer v. State, 738 P.2d 1349, 1361-1362 
(Ok1.Cir.1987), cert. denied, —— U.S. ——, 112 S.Ct. 


87 


1573, 118 L.Bd.2d 217 (1992); Moore v. State, 736 
P.2d 161, 165 (OkICr.1987), cert. denied, 502 US. 
913, 112 S.Ct. 313, 116 L.Ed.2d 255 (1991). In the 
absence of his own statements of intent, such evidence 
may be inferred from circumstantial evidence. Banks v. 
State, 701 P.2d 418, 426 (OkLCr.1985); cert. denied, 
502 U.S. 1036, 112 S.Ct. 883, 116 L.Ed.2d 787 (1992). 


Ha 
HH 
HE 
iF 
i 
4k 
HL 


dal 
fhe 
iH 
: | : : 
+ 


show 
not be detected or 
arrested as a result of his burglary. See Parks v. State, 
651 P.2d 686, 695 (OkLCr.1982), cert. denied, 459 
U.S. 1155, 103 S.Ct. 800, 74 L.Ed.2d 1003. 


“avoiding arrest” aggravating circumstance, codified at 21 
O.S. § 701.12(5)," in a standardless, ad hoc fashion, 
rendering it unconstitutionally vague. However, Appellant 
has not supported his contentions with relevant argument 
and citations of authority, instead making vague refer- 


8 That statute reads in pertinent part: 
Aggravating circumstances shal] be: 


5. The murder was committed for the purpose of avoiding 
or preventing a lawful arrest or prosecution ; 


ences to other aggravating circumstances he claims are 
address it. Munson v. State, 758 P.2d 324, 335 (OkLCr. 
1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 1019, 109 S.Ct. 820, 102 
L.Ed.2d 809. We note in passing the Oklahoma death 
penalty statutes have previously been held to be constitu- 
tional. See Jones v. State, 660 P.2d 634, 643 (OkILCr. 
1983). 


Accordingly, this proposition is without merit. 
G. 


In his seventeenth proposition of error, Appellant 
claims the trial court erroneously allowed evidence of 
unadjudicated crimes and bad acts to be submitted to the 
jury. He points with particularity the evidence he mur- 
dered Mrs. Warner. He claims this violated his rights 
under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the 
United States Constitution. 


The evidence in question was used in support of the 
aggravating circumstance a probability existed Appellant 
would commit criminal acts of violence that would con- 
stitute a continuing threat to society. There is no require- 
ment of a prosecution resulting in a conviction for this 
continuing threat aggravator to be applied. 21 O.S.1981, 
§ 701.12(7). Indeed, this Court has held that unadjudi- 
cated acts can be used to prove the defendant is a con- 
tinuing threat to society. Walker v. State, 723 P.2d 273, 
285 (OkLCr.1986), cert. denied, 479 US. 995, 107 
S.Ct. 599, 93 L.Ed.2d 600 (1986); Johnson v. State, 
665 P.2d 815, 822-23 (Okl.Cr.1982). The reason for 
this was explained in Johnson, where this Court quoted 
from Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262, 96 S.Ct. 2950, 49 
L.Ed.2d 929 (1976) to the effect that a jury can con- 
sider several things to determine whether a defendant 
should receive the death penalty, adding: 


“that the defendant's counsel is ac- 


defendant or his counsel shall be permitted to 
present argument for or against sentence of 
death. 


Therefore, it is not necessary there be a final con- 
viction for an unrelated criminal offense to be ad- 
missible at the sentencing stage. Prior criminal ac- 
tivity is relevant to the jury determination on the 
aggravating circumstance the defendant would con- 
stitute a continuing threat to society. It is “essential 
that the jury have before it all possible relevant 
information about the individual defendant whose 
fate it must determine.” Jurek, supra. The evidence 
of the Lawrence killing was properly admitted. 


Johnson, 665 P.2d at 822-23. Here, Appellant was given 
to rebut the unadjudicated acts against 


ample 

Mrs. Warner, which he did in an exemplary manner. We 
find the evidence tested under the fire of cross-examination 
to be reliable. Accordingly, Appellant’s proposition is 
without merit. 


90 


H 


For his eighteenth proposition, Appellant alleges the 
“continuing threat” aggravating circumstances is vague 
and overbroad. We have repeatedly rejected that argu- 
ment. See Malone v. State, 876 P.2d 707, 7715-16 
(OkiLCr.1994) and cases cited therein; Snow v. State, 
876 P.2d 291, 298 (OkI.Cr.1994). 


This proposition is without merit. 
I 


As a follow-up proposition, Appellant contends the 
jury relied upon the unconstitutional aggravating circum- 
stances of heinous, atrocious or cruel; continuing threat; 
and avoiding arrest or prosecution in arriving at its de- 
cision. As we have found none of the aggravators consti- 
tutionally infirm, this nineteenth proposition is without 
merit. 

J. 

In his twentieth proposition, Appellant contends the 
death penalty procedure is unconstitutional, as it allows 
the prosecutor to have unbridled discretion in determining 
when to seek the death penalty. 

We considered this identical argument in Romano vy. 
State, 847 P.2d 368, 392-93 (OkI.Cr.1993), aff'd, 512 


US. ——, 114 S.Ct. 2004, 129 L.Ed.2d 1 (1994), and 
rejected it there. We do so again. 


~ 


In his twenty-first proposition of error, Appellant states 
the trial court allowed an improper application of the 
aggravating circumstance the murder was commited by a 
person while serving a sentence of imprisonment on con- 
viction of a felony, 21 O.S.1981, § 701.12(6). A brief 
discussion is required here. 

Evidence at trial showed Appellant had been sen- 
tenced to the penitentiary for two convictions of robbery 


91 


with a firearm in Oklahoma County case CFR-80-3020. 
He was incarcerated January 19, 1981. After being re- 
leased, he committed second degree burglary and was 
placed back in the penitentiary system on July 20, 1987. 
Appellant was admitted to the Pre-Parole Conditional Su- 
pervision (PPCS) program and the procedure was ex- 
plained to him on June 27, 1989. 

The evidence also established that under the PPCS 
program, if an inmate does not agree to abide by certain 
rules and conditions, he can be returned to prison. For 
the first month or so, Appellant did well on the program, 
however, he missed an office visit in August and had 
some curfew violations. The first part of September, Ap- 
peliant’s probation officer had decided to classify Appel- 
lant as a program failure and send him back to a lock- 
down unit; however, she was unable to do so because 
of a bed shortage in prisons. Mr. Sheppard was killed 
September 4; Mrs. Warner was killed September 16. 
During this time, Appellant was still in PPCS. 


Appellant acknowledges he was on the PPCS pro- 
gram, but argues the aggravator the jury found does not 
apply to those in his situation. 

The statute reads in pertinent part: Aggravating 
circumstances shall be: 


(6) The murder was committed by a person while 
serving a sentence of imprisonment on conviction 
of a felony; 


Appellant argues the statute is only applicable to those 
inside the prison walls; therefore, he was not actually 
“serving” a term of imprisonment at a Department of 
Corrections institution at the time of the killing. 

We have not addressed this particular aspect of this 
aggravator before. However, we have held those who 
are in the PPCS program are still incarcerated. See 
Barnett v. Moon, 852 P.2d 161, 162 (Okl.Cr.1993) 
(“. . . pre parole is by definition not parole, but a prepa- 


92 


ratory status to parole itself. And since “parole” means 
— from jail, vr or other confinement after ac- 
y serving part a sentence, logically pre 

means before such release.”): —- ge 
P.2d 164, 165 (Okl.Cr.1993) (“As set forth in Barnett, 
the question concerning the PPCS program is not whether 
an inmate is in custody, because he is; but the degree of 
confinement used in that custody. The degree of con- 
finement is not of concern to this Court, so long as an 
administrative procedure affords an appropriate method 
by which the decision to change the degree of confine- 
ment can be justified”). We have held in other areas 
an inmate need not actually be confined within prison 
walls to be considered imprisoned. Hunt y. State, 793 
P.2d 1366, 1368 (OkI.Cr.1990) (defendant outside pri- 
son walls on limited pass can be convicted of “escape” ); 
McCoy v. State, 536 P.2d 1309, 1312 (OKI.Cr.1975) 
(inmate who escapes from hospital can be convicted of 
escape). See also Urbauer v. State, 744 P.2d 1274, 1275 
(OkI.Cr.1987) (“for purposes of escape from a penal 
institution, ‘custody’ may be restraint by either physical 
means or a superior force acting as a moral restraint.” ) 
Given these earlier cases indicating one need not be be- 
hind bars to be “imprisoned,” and the fact the conditions 
of PPCS were explained to him when he was released 
from a correctional facility, Appellant cannot claim he 
did not have notice his status was the same. 


Clearly, Appellant was “imprisoned” as the term is 
commonly defined. It seems obvious the Legislature en- 
acted this aggravator in order to protect persons who 
even though they may be incarcerated, are still members 
of society. It makes little sense to hold the aggravator can 
be used to protect one segment of society, while not pro- 
tecting an even greater segment of that same society."* 


The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals was faced 
ith 
similar situation in Whisenhant v. State, 555 So.2d 219 ( Ala.Cr.App. 
1984), aff'd, 555 So.2d 235 (Ala.1989), cert. denied, 496 U.S. 943, 


93 


Therefore, this proposition is without merit. 


L. 


For his twenty-second and last proposition of error, 
Appellant claims as unconstitutional the statutory require- 
ment a jury list aggravating circumstances as specific find- 
ings of fact before the death penalty can be imposed. He 
claims this runs afoul of the constitutional prohibition 
against special verdicts found in Okla. Const. art. 7, 


§ 15.” 


We have previously addressed that contention in Ro- 
mano v. State, 847 P.2d 368, 384-85 (OkI.Cr.1993), 
aff'd, 512 US. , 114 S.Ct. 2004, 129 L.Ed.2d 1 


(1994). We see no need to address it again. 


VII. MANDATORY SENTENCE REVIEW 


This Court is required by 21 O.S. 1991, § 701.13(C) 
to determine whether (1) the sentence of death was im- 
posed under the influence of passion, prejudice or any 
other arbitrary factor, and (2) whether the evidence sup- 
ports the jury’s finding of aggravating circumstances as 
enumerated in 21 O.S. 1981, § 701.12. Pursuant to this 
mandate, we shall first determine whether the evidence 
was sufficient to support the imposition of the death pen- 
alty. 

The prosecution alleged five aggravating circum- 
stances: Appellant was previously convicted of a felony 


110 S.Ct. 3230, 110 L.Ed.2d 676 (1990). There, a defendant com- 
mitted a murder while on parole. The court held that was sufficient 
to satisfy the aggravating circumstance the murder was committed 
while “under sentence of imprisonment.” /d., 555 So.2d at 229, 231. 


5 That section reads: 
In all jury trials the jury shall return a general verdict, and 
no law in force nor any law hereafter enacted, shall require 
the court to direct the jury to make findings of particular 
questions of fact, but the court may, in its discretion, direct 
such special findings. 


94 


involving the use or threat of violence to the person (21 
O.S.1981, §701.12(1)); the murder was especially 
heinous, atrocious, or cruel (21 O.S.1981, § 701.12(4)); 
the murder was committed for the purpose of avoiding or 
preventing a lawful arrest or prosecution (21 O.S.1981, 
§ 701.12(5)); the murder was committed by a person 
while serving a sentence of imprisonment on conviction 
of a felony (21 O.S.1981, § 701.12(6)); there existed a 
probability that the defendant would commit criminal 
acts of violence that would constitute a continuing threat 
to society (21 O.S.1981, § 701.12(7)). 


The jury found the existence of all five. We have ad- 
dressed the sufficiency of the evidence supporting murder 
during imprisonment; and the evidence supporting the 
aggravator he killed Mr. Sheppard to avoid arrest or 
prosecution for burglary. 


To show prior violent felonies, the prosecution pre- 
sented witnesses who had been victims of a robbery and 
car theft committed by appellant in 1980. The witnesses 
were getting in a vehicle outside a supermarket in Okla- 
homa City when Appellant approached them, pointed a 
pistol at them and angrily threatened to blow their heads 
off if they did not give him their money and the car keys. 
Another witness testified Appeliant became friendly with 
her to the point she began to feel uncomfortable around 
him and would not answer her door when he would 
attempt to visit her. One night when she arrived at her 
Bethany apartment she saw movement in her apartment 
before she entered. She notified police, who chased down 
and arrested Appellant. Appellant had rifled through 
her belongings; arid was Carrying an electrical cord he had 
ripped from an appliance in the apartment. The cord 
was approximately five and one-half to six feet long; and 
the clear implication was Appellant intended to use the 
cord in some manner against the woman who occupied 
the apartment. Evidence showed Appellant was con- 
victed of two counts of robbery relating to the super- 


95 


market holdup, and one count of second degree burglary 
relating to entering the woman's apartment in Bethany. 


This evidence is sufficient to support the aggravating 
circumstance Appellant was previously convicted of a 
felony involving the use or threat of violence to the 
person. 

Also supported by the evidence is the aggravating cir- 
cumstance there existed a probability Appellant would 
commit criminal acts of violence that would constitute 
a continuing threat to society. 


Mr. Sheppard was killed on or about September 4, 
1989. On September 17, the brutalized body of Mon- 
teen Warner was found inside her home at !021 N.E. 6th, 
a few blocks from Mr. Sheppard’s home. A television set 
was missing from the home. Ms. Warner was naked 
from the waist down, a plastic bag over her head. A 
nylon rope or belt was found underneath her. Also found 
under the body was a wooden mallet broken in two. A 
sharpening steel, bent at the handle with traces of human 
blood on it, was also found; the object was apparently 
hammered into the victim’s throat. In addition, numer- 
ous bruises were found on her body. An autopsy revealed 
she had been choked with enough force to break a bone 
in the neck, Cause of death was suffocation. Evidence 
both at the scene and from other witnesses connected 
Appellant to this crime. The evidence also indicated Ap- 
pellant had performed some yard work for Ms. Warner, 
and was unhappy about how much he was paid. 


Other evidence showed Appellant seriously beat a fel- 
“¥y inmate in the county jail in June 1990. Witness 
heard Appellant tell the inmate, David Schnelle, he was 
going to kill him. Schnelle had to be hospitalized; he re- 
quired surgery to remove a broken bone from his retina, 
an eye was knocked out of its socket, and a cheek bone 
was broken in the beating. No explanation was given for 
the beating; but Appellant became angry at Schnelle sev- 


96 


eral days before during a card game, and had threatened 
to beat him. 


In February 1992 during a search of Appellant’s cell, 
authorities found a homemade ice pick consisting of 
three metal rods (originally reinforcement rods in the 
concrete around the jail windows) sharpened at one end 
and tied together with torn sheets. 


This evidence more than supports the aggravating fac- 
tor that there existed a probability Appellant would com- 
mit criminal acts of violence that would constitute a 
continuing threat to society. 


The remaining aggravating circumstance is the murder 
was especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel. The 86-year- 
old Mr. Sheppard was stabbed in the abdomen; there 
were three stab wounds on the left side of the victim’s 
neck; there were cuts on his hand. The characteristics of 
the wounds indicated they may have been made by some- 
one behind the victim; who reached around and stabbed 
him in the front. The cuts on the hand indicated the 
victim struggled to fend off the knife. The knife wound to 
the abdomen was two and one-eighth inches wide, and ex- 
tended at least four and one-half inches into the body, 
damaging the large intestine, small intestine, the liver, 
and the diaphragm. The medical examiner testified death 
was not immediate; the victim could have lived as long 
as 30 minutes or more. The crime scene revealed blood 
all over the bedroom, including large puddles on a 
dresser, as if the victim had doubled over the dresser at 
some point. He was not found in front of the dresser. 
Presence of the blood throughout the bedroom indicates 
the victim did not immediately lose consciqusness after 
being stabbed repeatedly; rather, he moved around the 
room before falling between the bed and the wall. 


In the light most favorable to the prosecution, this 
evidence supports the jury’s finding the murder was espe- 
cially heinous, atrocious or cruel. It showed the victim 
suffered serious physical abuse while still conscious. 


97 


In contrast to this evidence in support of aggravation, 
Appellant presented the following mitigating circum- 
stances: he was abandoned by his father by age 3; by 
age 4 he was begging on the streets; his developmental 
history was slowed by a poor home life; an adverse psy- 
chological impact of being told his parents had been 
killed when they had not been; the only father figure in 
his life was killed by his mother while he was still rela- 
tively young; his growth years were marred by a mother 
with alcohol problems who physically abused him by 
beating him with extension cords, sticks, bats and other 
items; his mother’s rejection of him after he was released 
from a delinquent boys’ home; adverse influences and 
condition at the boys’ home; he had been institutionalized 
for approximately 12 years of his first 18 years of life; 
he was sexually abused while in prison; he was addicted 
to drugs at an early age, and was addicted at the time 
of the homicide. 


Reviewing the evidence in mitigation and aggravation, 
we find the sentence of death to be factually substantiated 
and appropriate. We find no indication the sentence of 
death was imposed under the influence of passion, pre- 
judice or any other arbitrary factor. 


VIII. CONCLUSION 


Finding no error warranting reversal or modification, 
the judgment and sentence for Murder in the First Degree 
is AFFIRMED. 


JOHNSON, V.P.J., and LANE and STRUBHAR, JJ., 
concur. 


CHAPEL, J., concurs in results. 


98 


IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA 


(Title Omitted in Printing ) 


ORDER DENYING REHEARING 
AND DIRECTING ISSUANCE OF MANDATE 


Petitioner has filed a Petition requesting this Court 
grant rehearing and stay the mandate in Cooper v. State, 
P.2d , 66 OBJ 166 (OKLCr. 1-10-95). In it, 
Appellant alleges two reasons why rehearing should be 
granted: this Court erred in ruling the presumption of 
innocence is a state, and not federal constitutional right; 
and this Court erred in ruling a mental health professional 
could give an opinion based on inadequate medical rec- 
ords. 


We find Petitioner is not entitled to a rehearing as he 
has failed to show that our opinion in this case conflicts 
with current case law or an express statute; and he has 
not presented this Court with some question decisive of 
the case that has been submitted by the attorney of rec- 
ord and overlooked by this Court. Those are the sole 
grounds upon which rehearing can be based. See 22 
O.S.Supp.1994, Ch. 18, App. Rules of the Court of Crim- 
inal Appeals, Rule 3.14(B)(1) & (2). 


This Motion for Rehearing is DENIED. The Clerk of 
this Court is ordered to issue the mandate forthwith. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


WITNESS OUR HANDS AND THE SEAL OF THIS 
COURT this 13th day of February, 1995. 


s/ Charles A. Johnson 
CHARLES A. JOHNSON 


Presiding Judge 


Not Participating 
CHARLES S. CHAPEL 
Vice-Pres.ding Judge 


s’ Gary L. Lumpkin 
Gary L. LUMPKIN 
Judge 


‘'s’ James F. Lane 
JaMES F. LANE 
Judge 


s’ Reta M. Strubhar 
Reta M. STRUBHAR 


Judge 


100 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


No. 95-5207 


BYRON KEITH COOPER, 
Petitioner 
Vv. 


OKLAHOMA 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEALS OF OKLAHOMA 


ON CONSIDERATION of the motion for leave to 


proceed herein in forma pauperis and of the petition for 
writ of certiorari, it is ordered by this C 


it of 
tiorari be, and the same is hereby, granted. The brief of 
petitioner is to be filed with the Clerk and served upon 
opposing counsel on or before 3 p.m., Thursday, No- 
vember 16, 1995. The brief of respondents ts is to be filed 
ee Se SO ee ee ee ee ee 
before 3 p.m., Friday, December 15, 1995. A reply brief 
if any, is to be filed with the Clerk and served upon op- 
posing counsel on or before 3 p.m., Wednesday, January 
3, 1996. Rule 29.2 does not apply. 


October 5, 1995 


