g | 
S No. 95-5207 (g) 
2 
Y ~ 

RS In THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


BYRON KEITH COOPER, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


STATE OF OKLAHOMA, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF AMICI CURIAE 
AND BRIEF OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 
ON MENTAL RETARDATION, 

THE ARC, 

THE AMERICAN ORTHOPSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION, 
THE AMERICAN NETWORK OF COMMUNITY 
OPTIONS AND RESOURCES, AND 
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY 
AFFILIATED PROGRAMS IN DEVELOPMENTAL 
DISABILITIES AS AMICI CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


JAMES W. ELLIS 

Counsel of Record 
BARBARA E. BERGMAN 
1117 Stanford, N.E. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 
(505) 277-2146 
Counsel for Amici Curiae 


WILSON - Eres Printing Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


VI 


jA/ 


Fah ued 


| 
1 


inl ui 


Phy some to Rule 37.3(b 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF AMICI CURIAE 


mental retardation. Amici wish to present to the Court 
relevant information from the clinical literature on 
fendants with mental retardation. Amici also wish 
address the particular difficulties present when the eviden- 
tiary burden is placed on a defendant by clear and con- 

Amici believe that the Oklahoma statute, providing 
that a defendant can be found incompetent to stand trial 
only if the defendant proves incompetency by clear and 
convincing evidence, will produce trials of substantial 
numbers of incompetent defendants, and will thereby risk 
erroneous convictions. 


CONCLUSION 


For the above-stated reasons, we respectfully urge the 
Court to grant this motion for leave to file the accom- 
panying brief in the present case in support of Petitioner. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JAMES W. ELLIS 
Counsel of Record 

BARBARA E. BERGMAN 

1117 Stanford, N.E. 

Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 

(505) 277-2146 

Counsel for Amici Curiae 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAB -.00 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT |... 


ARGUMENT: 
I. ANY TRIAL OF AN INCOMPETENT DE- 


Il. 


Ill, 


FENDANT RAISES THE MOST SERIOUS 
ISSUES OF FAIRNESS ................. spannberpunntnnaent 


DEFENDANTS WITH MENTAL RETARDA- 
TION FACE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF 
BEING TRIED WHILE INCOMPETENT, AND 
PLACING AN EXTRAORDINARY BURDEN 
OF PROOF ON THEM WILL INCREASE 
THAT RISK UNACCEPTABLY |W... 


PERMITTING STATES TO REQUIRE DE- 
FENDANTS WITH MENTAL DISABILITIES 
TO DEMONSTRATE THEIR INCOMPE- 
TENCE BY “CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVI- 
DENCE” CREATES A SUBSTANTIAL RISK 
OF MISCARRIAGES OF JUSTICE ................ 


heavy burden, which will be understood by 


Page 
1 


12 


12 


18 


15 
19 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


FEDERAL CASES: Page 
Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418 (1979) ..._. 12, 13, 15 
City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 

EY Tree oe ee 7 
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 

ey WT I i 12, 14 
Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162 (1975) i a 4 
Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S. 402 (1960) ___. 6 
Godinez v. Moran, 118 S. Ct. 2680 (1998)... 4,6 
Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 487 (1992) 5, 16, 17 
Pate v. Robinson, 383 U.S. 375 (1966) 4 
Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989) 5 
Riggins v. Nevada, 504 U.S. 127 (1992)... 6 
Woodby v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 

ns Rs I i 13 

STATE CASES: 

Angela P. v. Ronald P., 623 P.2d 198 (Cal. 1981) . 14 
Fiz v. Fiz, 847 S.W.2d 762 (Mo. 1998)... 14 
Estate of Larimore v. Chatterton, 381 N.E.2d 76 

Ga Ga, TEED annie 14 
Matter of C.G., 687 P.2d 66 (Okla. 1981) i4 
Orkin Exterminating Co. v. Traina, 486 N.E.2d 

| 8 ee 14 
Pickens v. Black, 885 S.W.2d 872 (Ark. 1994) __. 14 

STATUTES: 


Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 54-56d(b) (West 1994) 12 
Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 22, § 1175.4 (West Cum. Supp. 


1996) .. 12 
Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. tit. 50, § 7408(a) (1995 Cum. 

ID ccncnenthitennittiectcictnarasibictchahaitinncsaatianiliilt eta 12 
R.I. Gen. Laws § 40.1-5.3-8(b) (1994 Cum. Supp.) .. 12 


STATE JURY INSTRUCTIONS: 


Oklahoma Jury Instructions—Civil 3.2 sits 15 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


MISCELLANEOUS AUTHORITIES: 


American Association on Mental Retardation, Men- 
tal Retardation: Definition, Classification, and 
Systems of Supports (9th ed. 1992)... 

American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Mental 
Health Standards 7-5.8 (1989) 

Bonnie, The Competence of Criminal Defendants 
with Mental Retardation to Participate in Their 
Own Defense, 81 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 419 
RE ee een Te eee 


tion: Defendants and Victims (Ronald W. 


Daniel, Beck, Herath, Schmitz & Menninger, Fac- 
tors correlated with psychiatric recommenda- 
tions of incompetency and insanity, 12 J. Psy- 
chiatry & Law 527 (1984) . 

Edgerton, The Cloak of Competence: ‘Stigma in 
the Lives of the Mentally Retarded (1967). 

Ellis & Luckasson, Mentally Retarded Criminal 


18 


6,8 


10 


11 


Defendants, 58 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 415 (1985) .... passim 


Everington & Luckasson, Addressing the Needs of 
the Criminal Defendant with Mental Retarda- 
tion: The Special Educator as a Resource to the 
Criminal Justice System, 24 Education & Train- 
ing in Mental Retardation 193 (1989) — 

Everington, Demographic variables associated with 
competence to stand trial referral and «valuation 
of criminal defendants with mental retardation, 
17 J. Psychiatry & Law 627 (1989)...s—ist 

Everington, The Competence Assessment for 
Standing Trial for Defendants with Mental Re- 
tardation (CAST-MR): A Validation Study, 17 
Crim. Just. & Behav. 147 (1990) 

Forte, The Role of the Clear and Convincing Stand- 
ard of Proof in Right to Die Cases, 8 Issues in 
Law and Medicine 183 (1992) 

Grisso, Five-Year Research Update (1986-1990): 
Evaluations for Competence to Stand Trial, 10 
Behav. Sci. & the Law 358 (1992) shenee 


10 


10 


14 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Heilbrun & Collins, Evaluations of Trial Compe- 
tency and Mental State at Time of Offense: Re- 
port Characteristics, 26 Professional 3 


2M on Evidence $340 (J.W. Strong 
ed., 4th ed. 1992) ccieetbelabiiiienatt iis 


vant Attributes, in Mental Retardation and the 
Criminal Justice System: Defendants and Vic- 


tims 17 (Ronald W. Conley, Ruth Luckasson & 
George N. Bouthilet eds., 1992) ees 
Note, Earl Washington’s Confession: Mental Re- 
tardation and the Law of Confessions, 81 Va. L. 
ed | QR SR SRP I as 
Perlin, Law and Mental Disability (1994) no oe 
Perske, Unequal Justice? What Can Happen When 
Persons with Retardation or Other Develop- 
mental Disabilities Encounter the Criminal Jus- 
ft. fo Cee a 
Steadman, Beating a Rap? Defendants Found In- 


| 
1 
i 


Page 


8,9 


18 


11 


11 
17 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Steadman & Hartstone, Defendants Incompetent to 
Stand Trial, in Mentally Disordered Offenders: 
Perspectives from Law and Social Science 39 
(John Monahan & Henry J. Steadman eds., 
PSS Ad AE 

White, Nichols, Cook, Spengler, Walker & Look, 
DP. » ~*° Overshadowing and Mental Retarda- 
tio... 2 Meta-Analysis, 100 Am. J. Mental Re- 
a 

Zetlin & Turner, Self-Perspectives on Being Handi- 
capped: Stigma and Adjustment, in Lives in 
Process: Mildly Retarded Adulte in a Large 
City 93 (Robert B. Edgerton ed., 1984)... 


ee 


Page 


Ne ee re 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


| Octoper Term, 1995 


No. 95-5207 


BYRON KEITH Cooper, 
Vv. 
STATE OF OKLAHOMA, 


Respondent. 


Petitioner, 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals 


BRIEF OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 
ON MENTAL RETARDATION, 
THE ARC, 

THE AMERICAN ORTHOPSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION, 
THE AMERICAN NETWORK OF COMMUNITY 
OPTIONS AND RESOURCES, AND 
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY 
AFFILIATED PROGRAMS IN DEVELOPMENTAL 
DISABILITIES AS AMICI CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 


Amici curiae are national professional and voluntary 
organizations concerned with the interests of citizens who 
have mental disabilities. Amici thus have expertise con- 
cerning criminal defendants with mental disabilities and 
the nature of their possible incompetence. 


2 


THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION ON MENTAL 
RETARDATION (AAMR) is the nation’s oldest and 
largest interdisciplinary organization of professionals in 
the field of mental retardation. AAMR has appeared 
before this Court on numerous occasions as amicus 
curiae, most recently in Romer v. Evans, No. 94-1039. 


THE ARC (formerly the Association for Retarded 
Citizens of the United States) is an association of parents, 
family members, professionals, and persons with mental 
retardation devoted to promoting the interests of people 
with mental retardation and their families. 


THE AMERICAN ORTHOPSYCHIATRIC ASSO- 
CIATION is an interdisciplinary professional organiza- 
tion of mental health professionals, including psychiatrists, 
psychologists, social workers, educators, and allied pro- 
fessionals concerned with the problems, causes, and treat- 
ment of mental disabilities. 


THE AMERICAN NETWORK OF COMMUNITY 
OPTIONS AND RESOURCES (ANCOR) represents 
more than 660 agencies nationwide that together support 
more than 50,000 people with mental retardation and 
other disabilities. Most of the members operate com- 
munity residences and support people in their own homes. 
About 85 percent of ANCOR members are nonprofit 
agencies. The remainder are proprietary agencies or un- 
incorporated family care homes. 


THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVER- 
SITY AFFILIATED PROGRAMS IN DEVELOP- 
MENTAL DISABILITIES (AAUAP) is a _ national 
organization of university-based research, training, and 
model demonstration programs in the field of mental 
retardation. 


3 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The prospect of a criminal trial proceeding when the 
defendant’s mental disability renders him incapable of 
understanding what is happening and unable to assist his 
counsel is anathema to our system of justice. Such trials 
certainly were unacceptable at common law. In modern 
terms, a trial while defendant is unfit to proceed increases 
the risk of the conviction of an innocent person while, at 
the same time, impeaching the dignity and reputation of 
our courts. 


Raising the burden of persuasion on the defendant to 
prove his own incompetence by “clear and convincing 
evidence” increases the likelihood that incompetent de- 
fendants will actually face trial in Oklahoma. To deter- 
mine whether such an increased risk is tolerable under the 
Due Process Clause, this Court must first determine 
whether the risk is increased appreciably by the heavier 
burden. If, as amici believe, the risk is expanded substan- 
tially, the Court must then determine whether there is a 
sufficiently compelling reason that justifies this increased 
number of cases that will violate the constitutional pro- 
hibition against trying unfit defendants. 


Amici’s analysis focuses on defendants with mental re- 
tardation, who clearly fall within the scope of the Okla- 
homa law. Forensic clinicians generally agree that indi- 
viduals with mental retardation already pose a substantial 
problem of undetected incompetence even without the in- 
creased burden of persuasion. The “invisible” nature of 
their handicap is exacerbated by their strong motivation 
to prevent others from finding out how disabled they are. 
The result is that truly unfit defendants, a crucial minority 
of whom may be innocent, will face trials they do not 
comprehend. Raising the standard of proof can only in- 
crease the number of such defendants standing trial. 
Additionally, amici’s survey of evidentiary formulations in 
state law demonstrates that in many states, including Okla- 


4 


homa, the interpretation of “clear and convincing evi- 
dence” creates an extraordinarily heavy burden of proof 
on disabled defendants. 


The state has two possible motivations for this novel 
and exceptional law, only one of which is legitimate. The 
legitimate goal would be to detect malingering defend- 
ants. But for defendants with mental retardation, ma- 
lingering is simply not a practical problem. And even for 
defendants with mental illness, there is no empirical evi- 
dence to suggest (nor any logical reason to suppose) 
that raising the burden will somehow selectively identify 
or target those who may attempt to feign incompetence. 


The only other motivation for raising the burden to this 
extraordinary level is to allow for the trial of a greater 
number of defendants, regardless of whether they are fit 
to stand trial. This is not a legitimate state purpose. 


Since the risk of incompetent defendants standing trial 
is increased substantially by the Oklahoma law, and since 
the law does not address directly a substantial problem 
that outweighs that risk, this Court should hold that it 
violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 


ment. 
ARGUMENT 


I. ANY TRIAL OF AN INCOMPETENT DEFENDANT 
RAISES THE MOST SERIOUS ISSUES OF FAIR- 
NESS. 


Following a venerable common law tradition, this Court 
has repeatedly emphasized that no trial of an incompetent 
defendant will be tolerated. Pate v. Robinson, 383 U.S. 
375 (1966); Godinez v. Moran, 113 S.Ct. 2680, 2685 
(1993). Writing for a unanimous Court, Chief Justice 
Burger described this principle as “fundamental to an 
adversary system of justice.” Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 
162, 172 (1975). 


The importance that this Court has placed on the prohi- 
bition against trying individuals with such severe disabili- 


5 


ties that they are not competent derives both from history 
and contemporary perceptions of fairness. “Few principles 
are as firmly embedded in Anglo-American criminal juris- 
prudence as the doctrine that an ‘incompetent’ defendant 
may not be put to trial.” Michael L. Perlin, Law and 
Mental Disability 502 (1994); Medina v. California, 505 
U.S. 437, 446 (1992) (“The rule that a criminal de- 
fendant who is incompetent should not be required to 
stand trial has deep roots in our common-law heritage.” ). 
But amici are less concerned with tracing the precise 
lineage of competence jurisprudence through Hale and 
Blackstone, than with fair treatment of individuals with 
disabilities and the practical functioning of competence 
evaluations in the contemporary criminal justice system." 


The Due Process requirement* that defendants must be 
competent to stand trial is not merely an artifact of ancient 


1 Amici recognize that in determining the requirements of due 
process in criminal cases there have been differences within the 
Court on the precise role of historical antecedents and of balancing 
contemporary equities. See Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 487, 
453-54 (1992) (O’Connor, J., concurring in the judgment). While 
recognizing the importance of traditions in making these judg- 
ments, amici, as organizations concerned with mental disabilities, 
believe the Court should be aware of the practical consequences 
of adopting constitutional rules in this area. 


2 Although amici remain deeply troubled by the continuing prob- 
lem of individuals with menta! retardation on death row in those 
states that still permit such executions, see Amici Curiae Brief 
of American Association on Mental Retardation et al., Penry v. 
Lynaug ‘92 U.S. 302, 336 (1989), we do not believe that the 
Court sow d decide this case under the Eighth Amendment, as 
applied to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment. Although this 
Court’s Eighth Amendment cases requiring full and fair adjudica- 
tion in death penalty cases are certainly broad enough to encom- 
pass a ruling prohibiting a state from substantially increasing the 
risk of a capital trial of an incompetent defendant, amici believe 
that the Due Process Clause offers a preferable source for such a 
holding. This Court has never suggested that states may be less 
vigilant in preventing the trial and punishment of incompetent 
defendants in noncapital cases. 


6 


legal concerns. It is central to our courts’ assurance to the 
nation’s citizens that all cases involving accusations of 
crimes are being fairly adjudicated. “Competence to stand 
trial is rudimentary, for upon it depends the main part of 
those rights deemed essential to a fair trial, including the 
right to effective assistance of counsel, the rights to sum- 
mon, to confront, and to cross examine witnesses, and the 
right to testify on one’s own behalf or to remain silent 
without penalty for doing so.” Riggins v. Nevada, 504 
U.S. 127, 139-40 (1992) (Kennedy, J., concurring in the 
judgment).* 

But in addition to unfairness to defendants, the prohi- 
bition on trying incompetent individuals has an additional 
justification. It has long been recognized that trying a 
defendant who lacks a basic understanding of the charges 
and proceedings is an unacceptable affront to the court 
system itself. Trial of a defendant whose disability renders 
him unable to comprehend that trial with “a rational as 
well as factual understanding,” Dusky v. United States, 
362 U.S. 402 (1960), has been analogized to the trial of 
a defendant in absentia. The courts cannot command the 
respect of our citizens if they allow such sham proceedings. 
“To proceed against such a person offends the moral 
dignity of the process.” Richard J. Bonnie, The Com- 
petence of Criminal Defendants with Mental Retardation 
to Participate in Their Own Defense, 81 J. Crim. L. & 
Criminology 419, 426 (1990) (hereinafter Bonnie). 


Therefore in the case at bar, there are two basic issues. 
The first is how greatly the Oklahoma rule placing the 
burden on the defendant by “clear and convincing evi- 
dence” increases the likelihood of a trial of a defendant 
who does not meet the Dusky criteria. And the second 


3 While there is a sense in which the goal of the competence re- 
quirement can be characterized as “modest,” Godinez v. Moran, 113 
S.Ct. 2680, 2688 (1993), its function is no less crucial because of 
its relatively limited expectations of defendants. 


wand 


7 


issue is whether that increase in the number of trials of 
incompetent individuals is justified by a sufficiently com- 
pelling benefit to the criminal justice system. 


Amici are particularly concerned about the unique prob- 
lems presented by defendants with mental retardation.‘ 
We believe that placing this extraordinarily heavy burden 
on defendants who have mental retardation will result in a 
substantial number of factually incompetent defendants 
facing trial. We further believe that any hypothesized or 
anticipated benefit to the criminal justice system from this 
rule is illusory. 

II. DEFENDANTS WITH MENTAL RETARDATION 
FACE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF BEING TRIED 
WHILE INCOMPETENT, AND PLACING AN EX- 
TRAORDINARY BURDEN OF PROOF ON THEM 
WILL INCREASE THAT RISK UNACCEPTABLY. 


As this Court has recognized, people with mental re- 
tardation “have a reduced ability to cope with and func- 
tion in the everyday world.” City of Cleburne v. Cleburne 
Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 442 (1985). There are few 
settings in which this is as dramatically true as it is in the 
criminal justice system. See generally The Criminal Jus- 
tice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Vic- 
tims (Ronald W. Conley, Ruth Luckasson & George N. 
Bouthilet eds., 1992) (hereinafter Conley). 


Although detailed and reliable empirical data on the 
rate of referral for evaluations are not plentiful,’ it is 


*The case at bar involves an individual whose competence was 
questioned because of mental! illness rather than mental retarda- 
tion. This Court has never suggested that different rules should 
be applied, or that different constitutional factors are to be con- 
sidered, in mental illness cases on the one hand and mental re- 
tardation cases on the other. The Oklahoma statute clearly governs 
both groups of individuals, and amici believe that the Court 
should consider the risk of trying any and all incompetent defend- 
ants under that statute. 


5 See generally Thomas Grisso, Five-Year Research Update 
(1986-1990): Evaluations for Competence to Stand Trial, 10 


widely accepted among scholars, clinicians, and lawyers 
involved in the criminal justice system that many defend- 
ants with mental retardation fail to receive an adequate 
assessment of their competence to stand trial. See, ¢.g., 
Bonnie, supra, at 420-21; Ira Mickenberg, Competency to 
Stand Trial and the Mentally Retarded Defendant: The 
Need for a Multi-Disciplinary Solution to a Multi-Discipli- 
nary Problem, 17 Cal. W. L. Rev. 365 (1981); James 
W. Ellis & Ruth A. Luckasson, Mentally Retarded Crimi- 
nal Defendants, 53 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 415, 458 (1985) 
(hereinafter Ellis & Luckasson); Laboratory of Com- 
munity Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Competency 
to Stand Trial and Mental Illness 6 (1973) (hereinafter 
Laboratory of Community Psychiatry) (“it is our impres- 
sion that the competency issue is raised too often for the 
mentally ill and too infrequently for the mentally re- 
tarded”). This is particularly troubling since mental re- 
tardation can produce such limitations in the person’s abil- 


Behav. Sci. & the Law 353 (1992); Kirk Heilbrun & Steven Col- 
lins, Evaluations of Trial Competency and Mental State at Time 
of Offense: Report Characteristics, 26 Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice 61 (1995); Henry J. Steadman & Eliot 
Hartstone, Defendants Incompetent to Stand Trial, in Mentally 
Disordered Offenders: Perspectives from Law and Social Science 
89 (John Monahan & Henry J. Steadman eds., 1983). 


® The accepted definition of mental retardation is that of the 
American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR): “Mental 
retardation refers to substantial limitations in present functioning. 
It is characterized by significantly subaverage intellectual function- 
ing, existing concurrently with related limitations in two or more 
of the following applicable adaptive skill areas: communication, 
self-care, home living, social skills, community use, self-direction, 
health and safety, functional academics, leisure, and work, Mental 
retardation manifests before age 18.” American Association on 
Mental Retardation, Mental Retardation: Definition, Classification, 
and Systems of Supports 5 (9th ed. 1992). This disability, al- 
though often confused with mental illness, has substantially dif- 
ferent characteristics. See generally James W. Ellis & Ruth A. 
Luckasson, Mentally Retarded Criminal Defendants, 53 Geo. Wash. 
L. Rev. 415, 423-25 (1985). 


9 


fairness of the trial process are compromised.’ Several 
attributes common to criminal defendants who have men- 
tal retardation make this problem particularly serious. 


Unlike many defendants with mental illness, the poten- 
tial incompetence of i ividuals with mental retardation 


cognitive deficits “and their characterstic dependency and 


T Amici do not mean to suggest, of course, that al) defendants 
with mental retardation are incompetent to stand trial. While 
many such individuals are competent, and substantially more can 
be rendered competent by targeted education and habilitation, see 
Ellis & Luckasson, supra, at 459-60, the probiem remains serious. 
While reliable data are not yet available, anecdotal experience of 
clinicians in the field strongly suggests that trials of incompetent 
defendants who have mental retardation occur with disturbing 


* Of course, some defendants who have menta! retardation may 
also be mentally ill. See John H. Noble, Jr. & Ronald W. Conley, 
Toward an Epidemiology of Relevant Attributes, in Conley, supra, 
at 17, 26; Ruth Luckasson, The Dually Diagnosed Client in the 
Criminal Justice System, in Mental Retardation and Mental 
Health: Classification, Diagnosis, Treatment, Services 354 (Jack 
A. Stark, Frank J. Menolascino, Michael H. Albarelli & Vincent C. 
Gray eds., 1988). While the presence of both disabilities may mean 
that such defendants are more likely to be referred for evaluation 
on competence issues, the evaluator may fail to identify both dis- 
abilities, and if one handicap “masks” the other, the evaluation 

not produce an accurate assessment of the individual’s func- 
tioning. /d. See also Michael J. White, Cassandra N. Nichols, 
Robert 8S. Cook, Paul M. Spengler, Blain S. Walker & Karsten K. 
Look, Diagnostic Overshadowing and Mental Retardation: A Meta- 
Analysis, 100 Am. J. Mental Retardation 293 (1995) (gathering 
most recent research on dual diagnosis) . 


10 


malleability which permits them to be easily manipu- 
lated”). Or the individual's retardation may mean that he 
lacks the most rudimentary knowledge necessary to meet 
the Dusky test, such as the roles of the major participants 
in the trial. Ellis & Luckasson, supra, at 431. 


It might be expected that such gross deficiencies in the 
knowledge and understanding necessary to be competent 
under the not-extraordinarily-demanding Dusky test would 
be readily detectable. The underidentification of incom- 
petence among defendants with mental retardation be- 
comes understandable only upon closer examination of the 
situation in which these individuals find themselves. See 
Ellis & Luckasson, supra, at 427-32. One factor is the 
lack of experience and training of criminal justice system 
personnel in identifying and dealing with individuals with 
mental retardation. Caroline Everington & Ruth Luckas- 
son, Addressing the Needs of the Criminal Defendant with 
Mental Retardation: The Special Educator as a Resource 
to the Criminal Justice System, 24 Education & Training 
in Mental Retardation 193, 194 (1989). Typically, the 
possibility of a defendant’s incompetence comes to light 
only when he exhibits behaviors that call attention to his 
mental illness. Caroline Everington, Demographic vari- 
ables associated with competence to stand trial referral 
and evaluation of criminal defendants with mental re- 
tardation, 17 J. Psychiatry & Law 627, 637 (1989); 
Ellis & Luckasson, supra, at 458 n.242. Even clinicians 
employed by the criminal justice system to evaluate po- 
tentially incompetent defendants focus almost exclusively 
on the possibility that the defendant’s perceptions and 
understanding may be impaired by mental illness. A.E. 
Daniel, Niels C. Beck, Adolph Herath, Mark Schmitz & 
Karl Menninger, Factors correlated with psychiatric rec- 
ommendations of incompetency and insanity, 12 J. Psy- 
chiatry & Law 527, 538 (1984); Caroline T. Everington, 
The Competence Assessment for Standing Trial for De- 
fendants with Mental Retardation (CAST-MR): A Vali- 


11 


dation Study, 17 Crim. Just. & Behav. 147, 148-49 
(1990). 


But the key to the phenomenon of underidentification 
is that typically an individual who has mental retardation 
tries to make certain that no one discovers the actual 


extraordinary efforts to mask the existence and extent of 
their disability and its effects, even when the revelation 
and understanding of the handicap would work to their 
advantage. See Ellis & Luckasson, supra, at 430-31, 457- 
58. See also John J. McGee & Frank Menolascino, The 
Evaluation of Defendants with Mental Retardation in the 
Criminal Justice System in Conley, supra, at 55, 63 
(“many persons with mental retardation are never identi- 
fied, because they are perceived as quiet, cooperative, and 
‘normal’ in appearance”); Robert Perske, Unequal Jus- 
tice? What Can Happen When Persons with Retardation 
or Other Developmental Disabilities Encounter the Crimi- 
nal Justice System (1991) (journalistic accounts). 


* This phenomenon has long been recognized by clinicians and 
social scientists who study mental retardation. Sec, e.g., Robert B. 
Edgerton, The Cloak of Competence: Stigma in the Lives of the 
Mentally Retarded 148 (1967); Andrea G. Zetlin & Jim L. Turner, 
Self-Perspectives on Being Handicapped: Stigma and Adjustment, 
in Lives in Process: Mildly Retarded Adults in a Large City 93 
(Robert B. Edgerton ed., 1984). 


12 


Ill. PERMITTING STATES TO REQUIRE DEFEND- 
ANTS WITH MENTAL DISABILITIES TO DEMON- 
STRATE THEIR INCOMPETENCE BY “CLEAR 
AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE” CREATES A SUB- 
STANTIAL RISK OF MISCARRIAGES OF JUS- 
TICE. 


A. Requiring proof at a level higher than the standard 


“preponderance of the evidence” reflects a judgment 
about the acceptability of different types of errors. 


This Court has made clear that a principal function of 
establishing a standard of proof is “to allocate the risk of 
error between the litigants and to indicate the relative 
importance attached to the ultimate decision.” Addington 
v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 423 (1979). “The more stringent 
the burden of proof a party must bear, the more that party 
bears the risk of an erroneous decision.” Cruzan v. Di- 
rector, Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261, 
283 (1990). In the instant case, the issue becomes who 
will bear the risk of error where the evidence about a 
defendant's competence is not perfectly certain. The 
Oklahoma statute declares that a defendant must stand 
trial even if he produces credible proof that he is incom- 
petent by a “preponderance of the evidence” standard un- 
less that proof also satisfies the more burdensome stand- 
ard of “clear and convincing evidence.” Okla. Stat. Ann. 
tit. 22, § 1175.4 (West Cum. Supp. 1996). 


© Only a few states currently place the burden of demonstrating 
incompetence on defendants by “clear and convincing evidence” as 
Oklahoma does. See, ¢e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 54-56d(b) (West 
1994); Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. tit. 50, §7408(a) (1995 Cum. Supp.) ; 
R.I. Gen. Laws § 40.1-5.3-3(b) (1994 Cum. Supp.). But if this 
Court were to approve the constitutionality of the Oklahoma ap- 
proach, it is likely that legislators in other states would seek to 
adopt such a “constitutionally-certified” measure for limiting the 
rights of criminal defendants. Each such state would, of course, 
be incorporating by reference its own prior understanding of the 
term “clear and convincing evidence.” 


the correctness of factual conclusions for a particular type 
of adjudication.’” Addington, 441 U.S. at 423 (quoting 
In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 370 (1970) (Harlan, J., 
concurring) ). While acknowledging that jurors, in par- 
ticular, may not master the precise nuances of differences 
between various standards of proof, Addington made clear 
that the identification of a standard of proof “is more than 
an empty semantic exercise.” /d. at 425 (internal cita- 
tions omitted). It is the law’s method of telling triers 
of fact how certain they must be before they can reach 
a certain conclusion. 

By requiring proof that a defendant with a mental dis- 
ability is incompetent by “clear and convincing” evidence, 
the Oklahoma statute instructs the judge or jury that it 
must allow the trial to proceed unless its certainty about 
the proof of incapacity rises to an extraordinary level. To 
evaluate the constitutionality of this burden, it is important 
to consider the meaning that courts have ascribed to 
“clear and convincing evidence.” 


Although the concept of a burden of persuasion some- 
where between “preponderance of the evidence” and “proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt” may have its origins in the 
equity cases of chancery courts, see 2 McCormick on 
Evidence § 340 (J.W. Strong ed., 4th ed. 1992), much 
of the impetus for its modern development derives from 
decisions of this Court prescribing its use for constitu- 
tional reasons. See, e.g., Woodby v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 385 U.S. 276, 285 (1966) (“clear, 
unequivocal, and convincing evidence”). In recent dec- 
ades, the use of this standard has proliferated in both case 


14 


law and statutes. See, e.g., Cruzan v. Director, Missouri 
Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990). 


Thé interpretations of this formulation by state courts 
reveal the magnitude of the burden it imposes. See, ¢.g., 
Angela P. v. Ronald P., 623 P.2d 198, 204 (Cal. 1981) 
(requiring evidence “so clear as to leave no substantial 
doubt; sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 
assent of every reasonable mind”) (internal quotations 
omitted); Orkin Exterminating Co. v. Traina, 486 N.E.2d 
1019, 1022 (Ind. 1986) (“a standard which is but mi- 
nutely below the ‘reasonable doubt’ standard”); Estate of 
Larimore v. Chatterton, 381 N.E.2d 76, 77 (Ill. App. Ct. 
1978) (“a quantum of proof which leaves no reasonable 
doubt in the mind of the trier of fact”); Fix v. Fix, 847 
S.W.2d 762, 765 (Mo. 1993) (“The evidence must be un- 
questionable in character. The evidence must be so clear, 
cogent, and convincing as to exclude every reasonable 
doubt in the mind of the trial court.”); Pickens v. Black, 
885 S.W.2d 872, 876 (Ark. 1994) (“the evidence must 
be so strong as to be substantially beyond reasonable 
doubt”). Similarly, commentators who have addressed 
the meaning of this standard have described this as an 
extraordinary burden. See, e.g., David F. Forte, The Role 
of the Clear and Convincing Standard of Proof in Right 
to Die Cases, 8 Issues in Law and Medicine 183, 185 
(1992) (“For most courts, it is the highest standard of 
proof that can be applied in civil cases.” ). 


Oklahoma’s Supreme Court has found that a similarly 
heavy burden rests on any litigant who must prove a 
matter by “clear and convincing evidence.” “Clear and 
convincing evidence is that measure or degree of proof 
which will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm 
belief or conviction as to the truth of the allegation 
sought to be established.” Matter of C.G., 637 P.2d 
66, 71 n.12 (Okla. 1981) (citing as authority cases from 
the states of Washington, Alaska, Kansas, Oregon, and 
Colorado. 


15 


Since some jurisdictions, like Oklahoma, require or per- 
mit competence determinations to be made by juries, 
judicial explanations of the standard are particularly im- 
portant when they take the form of jury instructions. The 
Oklahoma jury instruction, applicable at the time of 
Petitioner’s case, emphasized the defendant's extraordinary 
burden. Oklahoma Uniform Jury Instructions — Civil 3.2, 
cited at p.6 of the Petition for Writ of Certiorari (“you 
must be persuaded, considering all the evidence in the 
case, that the proposition on which the party has this 
burden of proof is true, and that this conclusion is un- 
mistakable and free from serious or substantial doubt as 
to its correctness” ). 


A decade and a half ago, this Court identified “clear 
and convincing” merely as “intermediate” between “pre- 
ponderance” and the criminal standard, and speculated 
that its precise meaning might prove elusive to triers of 
fact. But it is now clear that many states instruct fact- 
finders that the intermediate standard is an extraordinarily 
heavy burden on litigants.” 


C. Permitting the trial of a defendant unless the fact- 
finder concludes that the proof of incompetence 
rises to the level of “clear and convincing evidence” 
will result in the trial of substantial numbers of 
defendants who lack any real understanding of the 
proceedings or who cannot assist in their defense. 


Requiring a jury (or a judge) to find that the evidence 
of a defendant's trial incompetence is “unmistakable,” or 
that it is “sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 
assent of every reasonable mind,” or that it produces “a 


"Of course, it is possible that these explanations of “clear and 
convincing evidence” by the state courts are more demanding than 
the burden envisioned by this Court in cases like Addington which 
mandated that governments prove certain matters according to 
that standard. But the issue in this case is whether the states may 
constitutionally impose on defendants the burden of demonstrating 
their own incompetence by “clear and convincing evidence” as it 
has been formulated in state law. 


16 


firm belief or conviction,” requires that the defendant face 
trial if substantial and persuasive evidence falls short of 
this elevated standard. Enforcement of this rule makes 
the trial of genuinely incompetent defendants inevitable. 


Approval of the Oklahoma statute would vastly increase 
the risk of incompetent individuals being tried, convicted, 
and punished. In Medina v. California, 50S U.S. 437 
(1992), this Court said that states could place the burden 
of persuasion on the issue of competence on defendants by 
a preponderance of the evidence. In doing so, the Court 
observed that it was not substantially increasing the risk 
of incompetent defendants facing trial because the rule 
affected only “a narrow class of cases where the evidence 
is in equipoise; that is where the evidence that a defendant 
is cOmpetent is just as strong as the evidence that he is 
incompetent.” /d. at 449. Thus, while it is theoretically 
possible that an incompetent defendant would face trial 
because the evidence on competence was in absolutely 
perfect balance, in reality all that Medina did was to 
permit states to require the defendant to come forward 
with evidence of incompetence, rather than sitting back, 
uncooperatively, in the hope that the state would be 
unable to make a showing of his fitness to stand trial. As 
Justice O'Connor observed, “States may therefore decide 
that a more complete picture of a defendant’s competence 
will be obtained if the defense has the incentive to pro- 
duce all the evidence in its possession.” /d. at 455 
(O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment). 


By contrast, raising the burden on defendant from 
“preponderance” to “clear and convincing” will add noth- 
ing to that incentive, since the defense would need no 
further inducement to produce all the evidence of in- 
competence in its possession. The state’s reason for rais- 
ing the burden on defendant must be sought elsewhere. 


Since a heightened burden is unnecessary to address 
cases in which no evidence is presented, and since it is also 
unnecessary to encourage the defense to present evidence 


17 


it has of defendant's incompetence, its only justification 
must be that the state wants the opportunity to try, con- 
vict, and punish some of the defendants who can persuade 
the trier of fact, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
they are unfit for trial. There may be a public demand for 
the punishment of the individual thought to be responsible 
for a particular crime, coupled with the perception that 
incompetence to stand trial is a legal technicality whose 
only function is to frustrate the criminal justice system. 
See generally Henry J. Steadman, Beating a Rap? De- 
fendants Found Incompetent to Stand Trial (1979). Re- 
duced to its essentials, the state’s interest in raising the 
defendant’s burden above preponderance is nothing more 
than the desire to try and to win more cases.” Such a 
justification cannot outweigh the risk of erroneous con- 
viction that is inherent in any trial of an incompetent 
defendant. 


Another concern that may be relevant to the issue of 
the standard of proof is the possibility that some defend- 
ants may “feign incompetence in order to avoid trial.” 
Medina, 505 U.S. at 455 (O'Connor, J., concurring in 
the judgment). As a simple matter of logic, of course, 
any increase in the difficulty of establishing incompetence 
will reduce the number of persons found unfit, and some 
of those “screened out” by the heightened standard may 
be malingerers."" But there is no empirical support for 
the proposition that raising the standard of proof will 
selectively identify malingerers. 


It is also important to note that whatever the prevalence 
of malingering may be in the area of mental illness, it is 


2 Indeed, if Oklahoma succeeds in its claim that the Due Process 
Clause permits requiring the defendant to prove his incompetence 
by “clear and convincing evidence,” it is unclear why a state could 
not require defendant to prove his incompetence beyond a reason- 
able doubt. 


‘8 The same would be true, of course, if the state raised the 
barrier to proof “beyond a reasonable doubt,” or if it lifted the 
ban on trying incompetent persons altogether. 


18 


substantially less likely among defendants with mental 
retardation. First, it would be extraordinarily difficult to 
feign mental retardation convincingly. This is true both 
because of the nature and design of the psychometric in- 
struments available to measure intelligence, and because 
individuals who have mental retardation have had it 
since chi .“* and generally have a “paper trail” of 
identification of their disability in school and social service 
records.” Additionally, malingering is not a real world 
problem in mental retardation cases because of the char- 
acteristic efforts by these defendants to attempt to mask 
the true severity of their disability.” 


Any criminal trial of a factually incompetent individual 
impeaches the credibility and the very legitimacy of the 
criminal justice system. Trials of defendants who do not 
understand the proceedings, or who cannot assist counsel, 
carry the real prospect of valid alternative theories of the 
case that remain unexplored, exculpatory evidence that is 
not presented, potentially false confessions that go un- 
challenged,” and meritorious defenses that no one can 
raise. Such trials raise the likelihood of the conviction 


14 By definition, mental retardation must be manifested before 
age 18. See supra note 6. 


It is even more unlikely that a defendant who actually does 
have mental retardation could successfully feign legal incompetence 
in the Dusky sense. Even if they were motivated to appear less 
knowledgeable and aware than they actually were, individuals whose 
measured intelligence is in the lowest 2'» percent of the population 
cannot plausibly be expected to be very good at calibrating their 
“pretended” deficits with any degree of sophistication or credibility. 


16If anything, individuals with mental retardation are charac- 
teristically “anti-malingerers,” seeking to appear smarter and more 
knowledgeable than they actually are. 


17 False confessions are a particular problem with defendants 
who have mental retardation. See American Bar Association, 
Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards 7-5.8, Cmt. at 308-310 
(1989); Note, Earl Washington's Confession: Mental Retardation 
and the Law of Confessions, 81 Va. L. Rev. 1471 (1995); Ellis & 
Luckasson, supra, at 445-52. 


19 


and punishment of innocent persons to an intolerably 
high level. 


CONCLUSION 


For the aforementioned reasons, amici urge reversal 
of the judgment of the Oklahoma Court of Criminal 
Appeals. 

Respectfully submitted, 


JAMES W. ELLIS 
Counsel of Record 
BARBARA E. BERGMAN 
1117 Stanford, N.E. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 
(505) 277-2146 
November 16, 1995 Counsel for Amici Curiae 


