Supreme Court, U.S. 
FILED 


Q) DEC 21 1999 


No. 95-210 CLERK a 


IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON FOODS, INCORPORATED, 


Petitioners, 


Uv. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent, 


and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
LOCAL 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 
AND ALL AFFILIATED WITH THE 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 


Intervenor. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


CHARLES P. Roserts III 
(Counsel of Record) 
HAYNSWORTH, BALDWIN, 
JOHNSON & GREAVES, P.A. 
2709 Henry Street 
Greensboro, N.C. 27405 
(910) 375-9737 


Counsel for Petitioners. 


Washington,0.C. + THIEL PRESS + (202) 328.3286 


(t) 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether Petitioners’ chicken catchers, forklift drivers, 
and live haul drivers, who go to farms of independent 
growers, where they catch, cage, and load live chickens 
owned by Petitioners and deliver them to Petitioners’ 
processing plant, are agricultural laborers within the 
meaning of 29 U.S.C. § §152(3) and 203(f) and therefore 
exempt from the National Labor Relations Act. 


(1) 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


The parties before this Court are those set forth in 
the caption.* 


*Tyson Foods, Inc., is involved in a joint venture and/or 
partnership with Trasgo, S.A. DE C.V.; Offshore Systems, Inc.; 
Aleutian Fuel Services; Ucluelet Seafood Processors; Universal 
Plan Investments; and Shanghai Ocean Wealth Products Corpora- 
tion. Tyson Foods, Inc., was the parent company of Holly Farms, 
Inc. There are no other parent companies or non-wholly-owned 
subsidiaries. 


(111) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED ...................... 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING................. 
IID gg cc ccc ccccccccccvces 
Ee 
eo cccceuccovee’ 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED............ 


I, Because The Board’s Interpretation Of Section 3(f) 
Of The FLSA Is Contrary To The Plain Language 
Of That Section, Clear Congressional Intent, The 
Court's Prior Interpretations Of That Section, 

And The Secretary Of Labor’s Interpretations 
Of That Section, It Is Not Entitled To 


Di eee eee eden edb ies eceese ¢ 


Il. Congress Exempted The Whole Field Of Agriculture 
Including All Practices By A Farmer Or On A Farm 
As An Incident Tv Or In Conjunction With Such 


DE wc ecceoceseeeeseecooeres 


Ill. Holly's Chicken Catchers And Forklift Drivers Per- 
form Essential Agricultural Functions On Farms 


And Are Clearly Agricultural Laborers........... 


A. The Chicken Catchers And Forklift Drivers Per- 
form Work On A Farm As An Incident To Or 


In Conjunction With Farming Operations. ..... . 


B. The Chicken Catchers And Forklift Drivers 
“Harvest” Live Chickens And Are Engaged 


PP IED og co cccccceescececcs: 


IV. Holly's Live Haul Drivers Perform Delivery To 
Market As An Incident To Or In Conjunction 
With Holly's Farming Activities And Are 


Exempt Agricultural Laborers............655. 


(wv) 


A. The Live Haul Drivers Are Engaged In Delivery 

To Market And Other Practices Incidental 

We PEGE, ccoccdcerececiocccoece $0 
B. Holly Is Acting As A Farmer From The Time It 

Sends Its Live Haul Crews To The Farms Until 

Such Time As The Live Chickens Are Deliv- 

ered To The Processing Plants ..............55. $1 


GEPTERI occ cece ccccecceeceecsccccsceceees 34 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 
American Ship Building Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300 

CUED cosets oceccosetecbeusddueceseecues 8, 13 
Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 

Sea ¢ 00 0t660606e0 666 e5 Chbbbebnsedee ce passim 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System v. 

Dimension Financial Corp., 474 U.S. 361 (1986)... .. 8, 12-13 
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 

Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984)... ......260066- 8, 13 
Coleman v. Sanderson Farms, Inc., 629 F.2d 1077 

SEG Gc oo occ eedeosoesesebeseesesones 33 
Dole v. United Steelworkers of America, 494 U.S. 

ft  -— PPT TreeTaurir CTL eTeeeriTiTer 8,12 
Domsea Farms, Inc., 211 N.L.R.B. 832 (1974)......... 24 


Draper Valley Farms, Inc., 307 N.L.R.B. 1440 (1992) .. . . 22, 29 
Farmers Reservoir & Irrigation Co. v. McComb, $337 


Ge. TER (UUGED cc cccccvcccccecceses 13, 14, 20, 24-25 
Imco Poultry Division of International Multifoods 

Corp., 202 N.L.R.B. 259 (1978)... 2... eee eccees 21-22 
Johnston v. Cotton Producers Association, 244 F.2d 

ft | PPPYTTTUTITerererereerririte 27-28 


Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527 (1992) .......... 8,15 


(v) 


Cases, continued: Page 
Maneja v. Waialua Agricultural Co., 349 U.S. 254 

CE cocoececseeseebesestdecece 9, 10, 14, 26, 30 
NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 (1969)....... 6, 7,8 
NLRB v. Hearst Publications Inc., 322 U.S. 111 

GIDOR, cc ccc cece ecee ees ceeceseseeeerecscces 12 
NLRB v. Hendricks County Rural Elec. Membership 

Corp., 454 U.S. 170 (1981)... ce eee eee ewes 11 
NLRB v. Hudson Farms, Inc., 681 F.2d 1105 (8th 

Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1069 (1982).......... 33 
NLRB v. Town & Country Evectric, Inc., 64 U.S.L.W. 

ss KTS TTT TTT TT TTT TTT TTTTrTrere 11 
Packard Motor Car Co. v. NLRB, 330 U.S. 485 (1947)... .. 11-12 
Phelps Dodge Corp. v. NLRB, $13 U.S. 177 (1941). ........ 12 
Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U.S. $29 (1979)............ 20 
Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883 (1984)............. 11 
Valmac Industries, Inc. v. NLRB, 599 F.2d 246 (8th 

DC okt ad 666 Uh ebb bebe Seebadbecvecdnces 33 
Statutes: 
Tee ee all 2 
Fair Labor Standards Act §3(f), 29 U.S.C. 

Dc cesedbaseseee se voveccceses passim 
National Labor Relations Act §2(3), 29 U.S.C. 

DOD GEDUED cccccccccecceccesoes 2, 8-9, 11, 12, 22 
National Labor Relations Act §9(a), 29 U.S.C. 

DE CUEEED occ ence cece eecescsocecceecoees 6 
National Labor Relations Act § §10(a) & (b), 29 

U.S.C. $9160(a) & (B) (1978)... cece cc eeee 7 
National Labor Relations Act § §10(¢) & (f), 29 U.S.C. 

ti of rrr rr rr rrr re ee ee 7 


Regulations: 


29 C.F.R. §780-105(b) (1994)... 2... ee eee eee 
a Se 
29 C.F.R. §780-118(b) (1994) .... 0.0.2.0... cee eee 
I I ec nena sandal 
29 C.F.R. § 780-187, et seg. (1994)... 0. ee ce eee eee 
29 C.F.R. §780-151(k) (1994) .... 2.0... cece e eee 


Miscellaneous: 
81 Cong. Rec. 7648, 7653, 7657, 7658 


No. 95-210 


IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON FOODS, INCORPORATED, 


Petitioners, 
v. 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent, 


and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
LOCAL 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 
AND ALL AFFILIATED WITH THE 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 


Intervenor. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Fourth Circuit is reported at 48 F.3d 1360 (4th Cir. 
1994). (Pet. App. 1).' The order of the National Labor 


' References to the Joint Appendix are designated as “App.” 
followed by the appropriate page number(s). References to the 
' [footnote continued} 


2 


Relations Board is reported at 311 N.L.R.B. 273 (1993). 
(Pet. App. 79). 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit was entered on March 10, 1995. 
The court of appeals entered an order denying Petition- 
ers’ Petition for Rehearing and Suggestion for Rehearing 
in Banc on May 9, 1995. Petitioners’ Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari was filed on August -, 1995. (App. 2a). The 
Court granted the petition, limited to question number 
five, on November 6, 1995. (App. 46a). The Court has 
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §1254(1) (1993). 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


This case involves consideration of Section 2(3) of 
the National Labor Relations Act (“NLRA’’), 29 U.S.C. 
§152(3) (1973), and section 3(f) of the Fair Labor 
Standards Act (“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. §203(f) (1978). 


Section 2(3) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C, §152(3), pro- 
vides: 

The term “employee” shall include any employee, 
and shall not be limited to the employees of a par- 
ticular employer, unless this subchapter explicitly 
states otherwise, and shall include any individual 
whose work has ceased as a consequence of, or in 
the connection with, any current labor dispute or 
because of any unfair labor practice, and who has 
not obtained any other regular and substantially 
equivalent employment, but shall not include any 


individual employed as an agricultural laborer, or in 
the domestic service of any family or person at his 


Appendix to the Petition for Writ of Certiorari are designated as 
“Pet. App” followed by the appropriate page number(s). 


3 


home, or any individual employed by his parent or 
spouse, or any individwal having the status of an 
independent contractor, or any individual employed 
as a supervisor, or any individual employer by an 
employer subject to the Railway Labor Act, as 
amended from time to time, or by any other person 
who is not an employer as herein defined. 


Section 3(f) of the FLSA, 29 U.S.C. §203(f), defines 
“agriculture” as follows: 


“Agriculture” includes farming in all its branches 
and among other things includes the cultivation and 
tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultiva- 
tion, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural or 
horticultural commodities (including commodities 
defined as agricultural commodities in section 
1141j(g) of Title 12), the raising of livestock, bees, 
fur-bearing animals, or poultry, and any practices 
(including any forestry or lumbering operations) 
performed by a farmer or on a farm as an incident 
to or in conjunction with such farming operations, 
including preparation for market, delivery to stor- 
age or to market or to carriers for transportation to 
market. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


For many years, Petitioner Holly Farms Corporation 
(“Holly”) has been engaged in the production and mar- 
keting of poultry products at various facilities throughout 
the United States, including Monroe and Wilkesboro, 
North Carolina; Glen Allen, Harrisonburg, and Temper- 
anceville, Virginia; and Center and Seguin, Texas.” Its 
operations have included hatcheries, live haul operations, 


“The stock of Holly was purchased by Petitioner Tyson 
Foods, Incorporated (“Tyson”) on July 18, 1989. (Pet. App. 
94). 


4 


feed mills, feed haul operations, maintenance facilities, 


processing plants, and transportation operations. (Pet. 
App. 227-229). 


Holly is a vertically integrated poultry company. The 
process starts with female breeder hens referred to as 
pullets. Approximately eighty percent of the pullets are 
purchased from breeder companies. The remainder are 
produced by Holly. The baby pullets (one to two days 
old) are transported to the farms of independent growers 
who are under contract with Holly to raise the pullets. 
The baby pullets are unloaded at the farms by pullet 
service employees of Holly. The pullets are then grown 
by the independent grower to the age of twenty wecks. 
(App. 7a-9a). 


Once the pullets reach the age of twenty weeks, they 
are caught and loaded on trucks and transported to laying 
houses by employees of Holly called pullet movers. The 
laying houses are owned by independent farmers. The 
pullets lay eggs, which are collected and placed into car- 
tons by the independent farmer. The eggs are loaded on 
trucks and delivered to Holly’s hatcheries by employees 
of Holly called egg haulers. Holly’s hatchery employees 
place the eggs into setters, where the eggs are kept warm 
for a period of eighteen days. Holly’s hatchery employ- 
ees then take the eggs from the setters to incubators, 
where they are hatched. Once the eggs are hatched, the 
chicks are removed from the incubators, placed on con- 
veyor belts, and carried to work stations at which the 
chicks are debeaked and vaccinated by employees of 
Holly. (App. 9a-12a). 


On the same day that they are hatched, the broiler 
chicks are delivered by Holly employees (“‘chick deliv- 
ery” employees) to the farms of independent farmers 
who are under contract with Holly to raise the chicks. 


~— —-- — 


5 


The broiler chicks are grown by the independent farmers 
until they reach the age of forty-nine days. When the 
chicks reach the age of forty-nine days, Holly’s live 
haul crews go to the farms. These crews consist of a 
supervisor, nine chicken catchers, one forklift driver, 
and one live haul driver. The catchers manually catch 
the chickens and place them in cages. The caged chickens 
are loaded on the live haul trucks by the forklift oper- 
ator. When the truck is full, the live haul driver delivers 
the chickens to the processing plant and then returns to 
the farm for additional loads. At the end of the shift, the 
live haul driver transports the live haul crew to Holly’s 
processing plant. (App. 4a-5a, 12a-l4a; Pet. App. 230- 
231 n.54). 


When the live haul trucks reach the processing plant, 
the trailers on which the caged chickens have been loaded 
are attached to a “yard shuttle truck” by a Holly 
employee, who then transports the trailer either to a 
holding shed or to the processing plant receiving depart- 
ment. (App. 28a-29a). The chickens are subsequently 
processed and marketed. 


Holly also operates a feed mill where it manufactures 
poultry feed. The feed is delivered by Holly’s feed 
haul drivers to the independent broiler growing farms. 
The independent grower, however, actually does the feed- 
ing of the chicks. (App. 4a, 6a-7a). 


On February 16, 1989, Chauffeurs, Teamsters and 
Helpers, Local Union Nos. 29, 71, 355, 391, 592, 657, 
and 988 (hereinafter collectively “the Union’’) filed a 
representation petition with the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board (““NLRB” or “Board’’) seeking to repre- 
sent “a unit comprised of all hatchery, live haul and 
feed haul employees . . . at [Holly’s] Wilkesboro, North 
Wilkesboro, Hayes, Roaring River, Seacrest, Suncrest, 


6 


and Fairplanes, North Carolina facilities.”” (App. 19a). 
Pursuant to Section 9(a) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. §159(a), 
a hearing was held to determine the scope of the appro- 
priate bargaining unit. 

Over the objection of Holly that the live haul employ- 
ees were agricultural employees not covered by the 
NLRA, the Board directed an election in the following 
bargaining unit:® 


All live haul employees (chicken catching crews) 
employed at the processing facility of the Respond- 
ents located at Wilkesboro, North Carolina and 
feed haul, feed mill and service center employees 
employed at the facility of the Respondents located 
in Roaring River, North Carolina, excluding all 
office employees, guards and supervisors as defined 
in the Act. 


(App. 40a, 44a). 


On July 27, 1989 an election was held in which the 
Union failed to receive a majority of the valid votes 
cast. The Union filed unfair labor practice charges with 
the Board alleging that Holly committed numerous viola- 
tions of the NLRA during the Union’s organizing activi- 
ties. The Board’s General Counsel issued an unfair labor 
practice complaint against Holly. The General Counsel 
alleged that Holly’s unfair labor practices were so serious 
that the possibility of a fair rerun election was remote 
and requested that a bargaining order under the Court’s 
decision in NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 
(1969), be issued on the basis of signed authorization 
cards. 


3The Board agreed with Holly that Holly’s hatchery employ- 
ees, including egg haulers and pullet haulers, were exempt agricul- 
tural laborers. (App. 21a-22a, 43a). 


— 


7 


The NLRB acquired jurisdiction under Sections 10(a) 
and (b) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. §§160(a) and (b). 
A hearing was held before Administrative Law Judge 
Robert M. Schwartzbart (“ALJ”) beginning on Novem- 
ber 27, 1989, and concluding on May 2, 1990. (App. 
la-2a). 


The ALJ issued his decision on March 12, 1992. He 
concluded that Holly had engaged in a number of unfair 
labor practices during the organizational drive at the 
Wilkesboro facility, that Holly’s unfair labor practices 
had made the possibility of a fair rerun election unlikely, 
and that a Gissel bargaining order should issue in the bar- 
gaining unit previously approved by the Board. (Pet. 
App. 785-817). 


Holly filed timely exceptions to the ALJ’s decision 
with the NLRB. On May 28, 1993, the Board issued 
its decision and order. The Board affirmed the AL]’s 
conclusions, in pertinent part, and specifically approved 
of the issuance of a Gissel bargaining order. (Pet. App. 
147-156). The Board declined to reconsider the bar- 
gaining unit found appropriate in the prior representation 
hearing. (Pet. App. 83). Board Member Oviatt dissented 
from this part of the decision on the ground that Holly’s 
live haul crews were agricultural employees excluded 
from the Act’s coverage. Member Oviatt would have 
dismissed all allegations of the complaint that alleged 
violations with respect to the live haul workers. (Pet. 
App. 187-191). 


On June 7, 1993, Petitioners timely filed a Petition 
for Review with the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Fourth Circuit. On July 19, 1993, the Board filed a 
Cross-Application for Enforcement of its Order. The 


court of appeals acquired jurisdiction pursuant to Sec- 
tions 10(e) and (f) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. § §160(e) & (f). 


8 


On March 10, 1995, a panel of the court of appeals 
enforced the Board’s order. Judge Niemeyer dissented 
in pertinent part because in his opinion, the chicken 
catchers, forklift drivers, and live haul drivers were 
agricultural employees exempt from coverage by Section 
2(3) of the NLRA. (Pet. App. 38-61). The Court granted 
certiorari to resolve this issue. (App. 46a). 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


This case presents the single issue of whether the 
NLRB, as affirmed by the panel of the court of appeals, 
acted reasonably in holding that Holly’s chicken catchers, 
forklift drivers, and live haul drivers were employees 
under §2(3) of the NLRA, rather than exempt agri- 
cultural laborers. Petitioners contend that the Board’s 
conclusion is contrary to express statutory language, clear 
congressional intent, interpretations of the Secretary of 
Labor, and prior interpretations by the Court of the 
pertinent statutory language. Accordingly, the Board’s 
conclusion is not entitled to deference and should be 
rejected. E.g., Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527, 
537 (1992); Dole v. United Steelworkers of America, 
494 U.S. 26, 42 (1990); Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve Sys. v. Dimension Fin. Corp., 474 
U.S. 361, 368 (1986); Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-843 
(1984); American Ship Bldg. Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 
300, 318 (1965). Rejection of the Board’s conclusion 
that the live haul employees are not exempt agricultural 
laborers mandates the rejection of all unfair labor prac- 
tices directed at live haul employees, as well as the Gissel 
bargaining order. 


Section 2(3) of the NLRA, specifically exempts “‘any 
individual employed as an agricultural laborer” from 


9 


the statutory definition of “employee.” Since 1946, in 
riders to the Board’s appropriation acts, Congress has 
directed the Board to look to §3(f) of the FLSA, in 
determining whether an individual is an agricultural 
laborer. 


The plain language of §3(f) defines the term agri- 
culture to include raising poultry, harvesting agricultural 
commodities, and engaging in any practices by a farmer 
or on a farm that are incidental to or in conjunction with 
the farming operations of the farmer or the farm. Rather 
than give this language its natural meaning, the Board 
has, by administrative fiat, interpreted § 3(f) in a manner 
which excludes the activities of all nonfarmers, no matter 
how related the activities are to agriculture. 


The Board’s interpretation ignores the express language 
of §3(f), which provides that agriculture includes “‘har- 
vesting” of “agricultural commodities” and that “prep- 
aration for market” and “delivery to storage or market” 
are practices that are incidental to farming practices. 
The Board’s interpretation ignores extensive contempor- 
aneous legislative history demonstrating that independent 
businesses, which perform farming practices on farms, are 
within the agricultural exemption. The Board’s inter- 
pretation ignores interpretations of the Secretary of 
Labor defining the practices of catching, caging, and load- 
ing live chickens as practices incidental to raising poultry. 
Finally, the Board’s interpretation ignores decisions of 
the Court holding that integrated processors of agri- 
cultural products who perform activities on a farm that 
are related to the farm’s farming operations are covered 
by the exemption, despite their motivation to benefit 
their nonagricultural profit-seeking enterprises. Maneja 
v. Watalua Agric. Co., 349 U.S. 254, 261-263 (1955); 
see Bayside Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298, 303 


10 


n.13 (1977) (discussing interpretative bulletin of Wage 
and Hour Division of Department of Labor). 


Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift drivers conced- 
edly work on the farms of the independent growers. 
They catch and cage the chickens and load them on 
trucks for delivery to market. These functions constitute 
the harvesting of an agricultural commodity (poultry) 
and fall within the definition of primary agriculture. 
29 C.F.R. §§780.112, 780-118(b) (1994). They also 
constitute preparation for market. 29 C.F.R. §780.- 
151(k). Even, assuming, arguendo, that the Board is 
correct that Holly is not acting as a farmer in catching 
and caging its own chickens, the chicken catchers and 
forklift drivers are clearly engaged either in primary 
agriculture or in secondary agriculture as an incident 
to farming operations. The chickens must be caught 
before they can be shipped to market. 


Although the live haul drivers perform the majority 
of their work on the roads, they are engaged in delivery 
to market, a specific secondary agricultural function. 
They also transport the catchers and forklift operators 
to and from the farms. These activities are also within 
the definition of secondary agriculture. Maneja, 349 U.S. 
at 261-262. 


The activities of the live haul drivers are incidental to 
Holly’s farming practices. The Board concedes that Holly 
is a farmer when it breeds poultry and hatches eggs 
to produce broiler chicks. Although Holly ceases to be 
a farmer while the chickens are being raised by the 
independent grower, title to the chickens remains with 
Holly at all times. When Holly goes on the farms and 
regains possession of the chickens by catching, caging, 
loading, and delivering them to market, Holly resumes 


re 


1} 


its status as a farmer. The Board’s adoption of an invar- 
iable rule to the contrary eliminates the “delivery to 
market” exemption for farmers who contract out part of 
the intermediate raising process, even though the farmer 
does his own preparation for and delivery to market. 
The Board’s conclusion is contrary to the language of 
the statute and clear congressional intent. 


Holly’s chicken catchers, forklift drivers, and live haul 
drivers satisfy the plain language of §3(f). Petitioners 
request that the Court reverse the judgment of the court 
of appeals finding that these employees are not agricul- 
tural laborers exempt from coverage of the NLRA. 


ARGUMENT 


1. 

BECAUSE THE BOARD'S INTERPRETATION OF SEC. 
TION 3(f) OF THE FLSA IS CONTRARY TO THE PLAIN 
LANGUAGE OF THAT SECTION, CLEAR CONGRES.- 
SIONAL INTENT, THE COURT'S PRIOR INTERPRETA. 
TIONS OF THAT SECTION, AND THE SECRETARY OF 
LABOR’'S INTERPRETATIONS OF THAT SECTION, IT 
IS NOT ENTITLED TO DEFERENCE. 


Section 2(3) of the NLRA defines the term “employee” 
broadly to include “any employee”, subject to certain 
specific exceptions. Because the term “employee” was 
not given any specific definition by Congress, except by 
way of limitation, the Court has, over the years, deferred 
to the Board’s development of the parameters of this 
term. NLRB v. Town & Country Elec., Inc., 64 U.S.L.W. 
4022 (U.S. Nov. 28, 1995) (paid union organizers can be 
employees); Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883 
(1984) (undocumented aliens can be employees); NLRB 
v. Hendricks County Rural Elec. Membership Corp., 
454 U.S. 170 (1981) (certain confidential employees are 
employees); Packard Motor Car Co. v. NLRB, 330 U.S. 


12 


485 (1947) (company foremen are employees); NLRB 
v. Hearst Publications Inc., 322 U.S. 111 (1944) (inde- 
pendent newsboys are employees); Phelps Dodge Corp. v. 
NLRB, 313 U.S. 177 (1941) (job applicants are 
employees). 


Where, however, as here, a specific exception to the 
§2(3) definition of employee is involved, the Board is 
not free to disregard or whittle away at the exception. 
Thus, when Congress overruled the Packard and Hearst 
decision by amending §2(3) to exclude supervisors and 
independent contractors, the Board was bound to fol- 
low these exceptions. Similarly, the Board has no dis- 
cretion to ignore Congress’ intent to exclude “any 
individual employed as an agricultural laborer” from 
the NLRA definition of employee. Nor is the Board 
free to impose its own definition of an “agricultural 
laborer.” Rather, “[a]nnually since 1946, Congress, 
in riders to the Appropriations Acts for the Board, has 
tied the definition of ‘agricultural laborer’ in §2(3) 
of the NLRA to §3(f) of the FLSA.” Bayside, 429 
U.S. at 300 n.6. The NLRB has no special expertise or 
authority in interpreting the FLSA. Instead it is the 
Secretary of Labor who is charged with interpreting the 
FLSA. 


While the Board is free to choose between conflicting 
reasonable interpretations of this statutory definition, 
Bayside, 429 U.S. at 302, it is not free to disregard the 
clearly expressed intent of Congress. E.g., United Steel- 
workers of America, 494 U.S. at 42 (“Because we find 
that the statute, as a whole, clearly expresses Congress’ 
intention, we decline to defer to OMB’s interpretation”); 
Dimension Fin. Corp., 474 U.S. at 368 (“The traditional 
deference courts pay to agency interpretation is not to 
be applied to alter the clearly expressed intent of Con- 


13 


gress”); Chevron, 467 U.S. at 842-843 (“If the intent of 
Congress is clear, that is the end of the matter’’); Amer- 
ican Ship Bldg. Co., 380 U.S. at 318 (“The deference 
owed to an expert tribunal cannot be allowed to slip into 
a judicial intertia which results in the unauthorized 
assumption by an agency of major policy decisions prop- 
erly made by Congress”). Moreover, once the Court 
determines the clear meaning of a statute, the principle 
of stare decisis applies and the agency must act consist- 
ently with that interpretation. Lechmere, 502 U.S. at 
537. 


The Board, in the decision under review, as well as 
other decisions interpreting the scope of the agricultural 
exemption, has blatantly ignored the plain language of 
the §3(f) definition of “agriculture,” the Court’s interpre- 
tations of that section, the Secretary of Labor’s inter- 
pretation of that section, and clearly stated congressional 
intent to exempt the whole field of agriculture, including 
all practices by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to 
or in conjunction with such farming practices. The 
Board’s conclusion that Holly’s chicken catchers, forklift 
drivers, and live-haul drivers are not agricultural laborers 
is not entitled to deference. 


I. 
CONGRESS EXEMPTED THE WHOLE FIELD OF AGRI. 
CULTURE INCLUDING ALL PRACTICES “Y A FARMER 
OR ON A FARM AS AN INCIDENT TO OR IN CONJUNC- 
TION WITH SUCH FARMING PRACTICES. 


The intent of Congress in enacting the agricultural 
exemption is not subject to speculation. It is clearly 
defined in the language of §3(f) and in the contempor- 
aneous legislative history of §3(f). See Farmers Reser- 
voir Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755, 765 (1949). “The 
exemption was meant to embrace the whole field of 


14 


agriculture,” and its coverage is “coterminous with the 
sum of those activities necessary in the cultivation of 
crops, their harvesting, and their ‘preparation for market, 
delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for trans- 
portation to market.’ ’’ Maneja, 394 U.S. at 260. 


The word “agriculture” has two meanings. The pri- 
mary meaning consists of “farming in all its branches”, 
including, inter alia, the raising of poultry and the har- 
vesting of agricultural commodities. The secondary 
meaning “includes any practices, whether or not them- 
selves farming practices, which are performed either by 
a farmer or on a farm, incidently to or in conjunction 
with ‘such’ farming operations.” Farmers Reservoir, 337 
U.S. at 762-763. 


Thus, under the express language of §3(f), an indi- 
vidual will be deemed an agricultural laborer if he falls 
within any one of the following categories: 


(1) He performs primary farming activities; 
(2) He performs work on a farm as an incident to 


or in conjunction with the farming operations 
of the farm; or 


(3) He is employed by a farmer and he performs 
practices incidental to or in conjunction with 
his employer’s farming operations. 

If the individual falls within either category | or 2, it 
is irrelevant whether or not his employer is a farmer. He 
is considered an agricultural employee because of the 
nature of his work. Only if the individual does not fall 
within either category 1 or 2 does the status of his 
employer become important. 


If it were not clear from the language of the statute 
itself, the contemporaneous legislative history removes all 
doubt that Congress intended that the definition of an 


— <4 


15 


agricultural laborer would include nonfarmers so long as 
their work involved primary farming activities or 
occurred on a farm and was incidental to the farming 
operations of the farm. During the Senate discussions of 
the FLSA, Senator Black described the scope of the 
agricultural exemption as follows: 


The bill specifically and unequivocally excludes 
certain industries and certain types of business from 
its scope and effect. It specifically excludes workers 
in agriculture of all kinds and of all types. There 
is contained in the measure, perhaps, the most com- 
prehensive definition of agriculture which has been 
included in any one legislative proposal. 

We have placed together in the bill definitions of 
agricultural work which have been fixed from time 
to time in other legislative enactments, and in 
addition to that we have drawn liberally from Mr. 
Webster’s definition of agriculture. 


81 Cong. Rec. 7648 (1937). 


Despite the comprehensiveness of the agricultural 
exemption, Senator Tydings became concerned that an 
unintended “loophole” had been left in the proposed 
bill, which at that time limited the secondary farming 
exemption to “ ‘any practices ordinarily performed by 
a farmer as an incident to such farming operations.’ ” 
81 Cong. Rec. 7653 (citation omitted). Thus Senator 
Tydings posed the following scenario: 


What I am thinking of is that quite often the 
threshing crew is not a part of the farmer’s organ- 
ization. There are men who make a business of 
going around with threshing and baling machines 
with enough help to come upon a farm and make 
a contract with the farmer to thresh his wheat. 
I should like to know if in such a case it is the 
Senator's opinion that the threshing crew would be 


16 


exempt, or whether they would be under the 
operation of the hours provision of the bill. 


Id. Senator Tydings explained that it was his understand- 
ing that “farming in all its operations, from the time the 
grain is put into the ground until it leaves the farm, is 
to be exempted from the provisions of the measure.” 
Senator Tydings expressed concern that the independent 
wheat thresher would not be exempt. Senator Borah 
responded that he believed the threshers hypothesized 
by Senator Tydings would be exempt and pointed 
out that “[w]heat is not worth very much unless it is 
threshed.”” Jd. 


The debates focused on various examples posed by 
Senators. Senator Overton questioned Senator Black 
regarding cotton. The following colloquy occurred: 


MR. OVERTON: I assume after the cotton is 
matured and is being picked the picking would be 
considered part of an agricultural pursuit, would 
it not? 

MR. BLACK. Certainly, it would be so con- 
sidered. 


MR. OVERTON. I am going just one step fur- 
ther. After the cotton is picked it has to be ginned. 
Suppose a farmer has a gin on his own farm and gins 
his own cotton — not the cotton of others — is that 
a process in the agricultural handling of cotton? 


MR. BLACK. As defined by this bill, yes; unques- 
tionably. 


81 Cong. Rec. 7657. Senator Black used an example of a 
farmer erecting a shirt manufacturing operation on his 
farm as an example of an operation that would not be 
incidental to agriculture. 81 Cong. Rec. 7658. 


17 


Subsequently, the issue raised by Senator Tydings 
regarding the independent wheat thresher came up again. 
Senator Bone espoused a position opposite to that taken 
by Senators Tydings and Borah: 


{I]f a man operates a threshing outfit, and goes 
from one farm to another farm, such a man is an 
independent contractor. He is not a farmer. That 
is not an operation incident to farming, because the 
man is engaging in a cold-blooded business opera- 
tion, going from one farm to another, precisely 
as a huckster goes around and sells tinware to 
farmers. 


. . . « He does not own a farm. He has not any 
connection with it except to take his threshing 
apparatus there and thresh the wheat and then get 
off the land. 


81 Cong. Rec. 7569. 


In order to clarify this issue, Senator McGill proposed 
an amendment to add the words “or on a farm” after the 
word “farmer,” as well as the phrase “including delivery 
to market” after the word “operations.” 81 Cong. Rec. 
7888. Senator McGill explained the purpose of the 
amendment as follows: 


[T]he purpose of the amendment is to broaden 
the definition of “employee” as applied to agri- 
culture. I can readily see how some have construed 
the language of the bill to mean that one who 
operates a thrashing machine outfit and employs 
a crew and is employed by a farmer to thrash his 
wheat might be included under the provisions of the 
bill. Likewise, those who are engaged in harvesting 
and delivering to market might be included. 


Id. 


18 19 


Senator McGill was then questioned by Senator George threshed, as in the case of grain, or picked, as in the 
as follows: case of peanuts in the field. 


MR. GEORGE. Is it the purpose of the amendment 
to exempt those who thresh grain? 


MR. McGILL. Those who thresh grain, who harvest 
grain and deliver it to market. 


MR. GEORGE. Would the amendment also apply 
to the harvesting of any other crop? 


MR. McGILL. It would apply to any commodity 
produced on a farm. 


MR. GEORGE. Would it apply to peanut pickers 
who pick in the fields? 


MR. McGILL. Yes. 


MR. GEORGE. And who move peanuts to the 
market? 


MR. McGILL. Yes; that is my understanding. 


MR. GEORGE. ! should like to ask the Senator 
from Alabama if that is his interpretation of the 
amendment. 


MR. BLACK. That is my interpretation of the 
amendment, and it is my belief that the bill as orig- 
inally drawn covers what is now contained in the 
language of the amendment; but some Senators who 
were doubtful about it wished to draw a clarifying 
amendment. 


MR. GEORGE. I am sure it does not in fact do so, 
because the picking of peanuts and the harvesting of 
grain in my part of the country are done purely by 
contract with outsiders, who in a great many cases 
have no farm interest. What I want to get at is 
whether, in the opinion of the Senator from Ala- 
bama, the language of the amendment of the Sena- 
tor from Kansas includes any fiele crop that is 


MR. BLACK. Unquestionably. 


MR. McGILL. I may say to the Senator from 
Georgia and other Senators that it is my object to 
make the language of the amendment broad enough 
to include all work done on a farm, so long as it is 
incidental to agricultural purposes. 


MR. GEORGE. And so long as it is merely prep- 
aratory and necessarily preparatory to the market- 
ing of the field crop. Is that true? 

MR. McGILL. That is true; and the language 


would also include all labor performed in making 
delivery to market. 


81 Cong. Rec. 7888. The amendment was approved and 
was included in the final version of the bill. 


There can be no doubt that had the question been 
posed to Senator McGill as to whether the amendment 
would include the catching, caging, and loading of live 
chickens, his answer would have been “yes.” Such 
activities are indistinguishable from picking cotton, 
picking peanuts, and threshing wheat. They are “neces- 
sarily preparatory to the marketing” of the agricultural 
product. 


20 


Ill. 
HOLLY’S CHICKEN CATCHERS AND FORKLIFT DRIV- 
ERS PERFORM ESSENTIAL AGRICULTURAL FUNC- 
TIONS ON FARMS AND ARE CLEARLY AGRICUL- 
TURAL LABORERS. 


In concluding that Holly’s live haul crews were not 
agricultural laborers, the Board relied solely on its view 
“that when an employer contracts with farmers for the 
care and feeding of the employer’s chicks, the employer’s 
status as a farmer engaged in the raising of poultry ends 
with respect to those chicks.”” (App. 22a). Accepting for 
the moment the Board’s position that Holly is not actin 
as a farmer when it sends its live haul crews to the farm, 
the Board’s decision does not even purport to address the 
“or on a farm” language of §3(f). “Canons of construc- 
tion ordinarily suggest that terms connected by a disjunc- 
tive be given separate meanings, unless the context dic- 
tates otherwise; here it does not.” Reiter v. Sonotone 
Corp., 442 U.S. 329, 339 (1979). Congress added the 
phrase “or on a farm” to §3(f) specifically for the pur- 
pose of exempting a nonfarmer who was performing 
work on a farm incidental to the farming operations of 
that farm. Farmers Reservoir, 337 U.S. at 767. Nor did 
the Board consider whether the chicken catchers and 
forklift drivers are engaged in primary agriculture. “If 
an employee is employed in [primary agricultural activ- 
ities], he is engaged in agriculture regardless of whether 


# although the Court has approved this conclusion as it 
applies to feed mill drivers who deliver poultry feed to the inde- 
pendent growers’ farms, Bayside 429 U.S. at 303-304, it does not 
apply once Holly begins catching and cooping the chickens that it 
initially raised before turning them over to the independent grower 
for the maturation process. As is discussed at Section IV B of this 
brief, Holly does function as a farmer in catching, caging, loading 
and delivering its own chickens to market. 


21 


he is employed by a farmer or on a farm.” 29 C.F.R. 
§780.105(b). Clearly, even assuming, arguendo, that 
Holly is not acting as a farmer at the time that it catches 
and cages the chickens, that is not dispositive. 


A. The Chicken Catchers And Forklift Drivers 
Perform Work On A Farm As An Incident To 
Or In Conjunction With Farming Operations. 


Because the work of the chicken catchers and forklift 
drivers is performed on the farms of the independent 
growers, these individuals are exempt agricultural labor- 
ers if their work is performed “as an incident to or in 
conjunction with” the farming operations of the inde- 
pendent grower. Although the Board did not address 
this issue in the decision under review, it states in its 
Brief in Opposition to the Petition for Certiorari that 
“the activities of the live haul workers are incidental, 
not to the operations of the independent growers, but 
instead to petitioners’ poultry slaughtering operation.” 
(Brief at 23). This rationale has been followed by the 
Board in other decisions both prior and subsequent to 
the decision under review. 


In Imco Poultry, Division of International Multi- 
foods Corp, 202 N.L.R.B. 259, 260-261 (1973), the 
Board stated: 


As the service crew employees involved herein are 
engaged in handling and transporting chicks on the 
farms of independent growers only after Respond- 
ent’s farming operations have ended, these employ- 
ees cannot be performing practices incident to, or 
in conjunction with, Respondent’s farming opera- 
tions. More accurately, they are engaged in non- 
farming operations which are incident to, or in 
conjunction with, a separate and distinct business 


22 


activity of the Respondent, i.e., shipping and 
marketing. Furthermore, since the activities of the 
employees named herein on the growers’ farms are 
all related to transportation and the employees have 
no business relationship with the independent farm- 
ers, we conclude that the employees’ activities were 
not incidental to the independent farmers’ poultry 
raising operations. 


In Draper Valley Farms, Inc., 307 N.L.R.B. 1440 
(1992) the Board held that the employer’s “chicken 
catchers are engaged in activity incidental to a separate 
and nonfarming business activity of the Employer, and 
thus do not fall within the agricultural labor exemption 
contained in Section 2(3) of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Act, 29 U.S.C. §152(3).” Relying on Jmco Poul- 
try, the Board asserted that at the time that the chicken 
catchers begin their work on the farms of the independ- 
ent growers, the poultry raising activities of both their 
employer and the independent grower have “concluded.” 
307 N.L.R.B. at 1440. 


The Board’s position that the activities of catching and 
caging live chickens on the farms of the independent 
growers are not incidental to the farming operations of 
either Holly or the independent growers is irrational, 
contrary to clearly expressed congressional intent, and 
contrary to precedents of the Court and the Secretary 
of Labor. The Board concedes that Holly is a farmer 
engaged in the primary agricultural function of raising 
poultry up until such time as it sends the chicks to the 
farms of the independent growers. Thus, the Board 
found that Holly’s hatchery employees, egg haulers, and 
pullet haulers are agricultural employees (App. 21a-22a, 
43a). The Board apparently further concedes that the 
activities of the independent grower in feeding, caring 
for, and raising the chickens are primary agricultural 


23 


tasks. Nevertheless, according to the Board, the activities 
of catching, caging, and loading the chickens are not 
incidental to the poultry raising operations of either 
Holly or the independent growers. 


Catching, caging, and loading live chickens that have 
been raised first by Holly and subsequently by the 
independent growers are tasks that are clearly incidental 
to, or in conjunction with, someone’s (Holly or the inde- 
pendent grower) poultry raising operations. The catch- 
ing, caging, and loading process does not involve any 
changes to the natural state of the chickens. The only 
purpose of these functions is to enable the chickens to 
be delivered to market. If the chickens are not caught, 
they will presumably remain on the farm until such time 
as they die either as a result of accident, malnutrition, or 
old age. Even the small farmer who raises chickens for 
his own table must catch his chickens before he can eat 
them. 


The language of §3(f) expressly includes “preparation 
for market” as an activity that is incidental to the farm’s 
farming operations. Moreover, the Secretary of Labor 
has interpreted “preparation for market” as including 
“culling, grading, cooping, and loading” of poultry. 
29 C.F.R. §780.151(k). 


The Board’s position that Holly is acting as an incident 
to its processing operations in sending out its live haul 
crews to the farms, even if true, is irrelevant. Nowhere in 
the language of the exemption, or in the legislative his- 
tory, is there any suggestion that the activity being per- 
formed on a farm must be “solely” or “exclusively” 
incidental to the farming operations of the farm. An 
activity may be incidental to a multitude of other opera- 
tions. The independent wheat thresher cited in the 
legislative history is obviously acting as an incident to 


24 


his own business operations, as well as the farming opera- 
tions of the farmer. The Board’s strained interpretation 
of what is incident to farming operations effectively 
renders the ‘on a farm” language in §3(f) meaningless. 
Under the Board’s view, if the independent grower does 
his own catching, caging, and loading of chickens, he is 
exempt as a farmer.” However, if anyone else performs 
these activities, he is not exempt because he is acting in 
the interest of some other business interest. The inde- 
pendent wheat thresher, peanut picker, and cotton picker 
are not exempt inasmuch as their motivation is to advance 
their own business interests. Yet, the Court has clearly 
observed that “the wheat threshing companies, even 
though they were separate enterprises, were included in 
the exemption because their work was incidental to farm- 
ing and was done on the farm.” Farmers Reservoir, 337 
U.S. at 767. 


Recognizing the untenability of this position, the 
Board asserts in its Brief in Opposition that the “on a 
farm” exemption is limited to independent business 
enterprises that do nothing but thresh wheat, pick pea- 
nuts, pick cotton, etc. (Brief at 24). According to the 
Board, if the independent business enterprise has any 
other business operations the exemption does not apply. 
In support of this proposition, the Board cites to Farmers 
Reservoir, 337 U.S. at 767, where the Court stated: 

On the floor of the Senate it was objected that 


[the original language of §3(f)] would exclude the 
threshing of wheat or other functions necessary to 


5 See Domsea Farms, Inc., 211 N.L.R.B. 832 (1974) (employ- 
ees of commercial fish farm who “harvest” coho salmon “by kill. 
ing them in freezing water, putting them in tubs, and transferring 
them to an outside contractor's processing plant for dressing, pack- 
aging, and distribution for market” are agricultural laborers). 


25 


the farmer if those functions were not performed by 
the farmer and his hands, but by separate companies 
organized for and devoted solely to that particular 
job. (Footnote omitted). 


Petitioner is unaware of any Board decision in which 
this rationale has ever been stated. Thus, it cannot be 
used to justify the Board’s decision. Moreover, there is 
no indication in the legislative history that Congress’ 
discussion of a company that went from farm to farm 
threshing wheat was intended to limit the exemption to 
independent companies that did nothing else, anymore 
than it was intended to limit the exemption to wheat 
threshers. The examples used by the Senators were 
intended to illustrate, not limit, the exemption. The 
Court’s use of the word “solely” in Farmers Reservoir 
appears intended to highlight the fact that even if the 
independent company had no farming operations what- 
soever and was organized as a purely separate business 
enterprise, its employees would nevertheless be exempt 
if they performed functions on the farmer's farm that 
were necessary to the farmer. Indeed, in Bayside, the 
Court recognized that “[a]n employer’s business may 
include both agricultural and nonagricultural activities.” 
429 U.S. at 301. The interpretation of the Board's 
counsel repic cents nothing more than an attempt to 
usurp major policy decisions more properly made by 
Congress. 


The Board's narrow view of the phrase “as an inci- 
dent to or in conjunction with such farming operations” 
focuses on the ultimate motivation of the Company to 
market processed chicken at a profit, a wholly irrelevant 
consideration®, and is inconsistent with the Court’s 


°This is the same motivation behind Holly's hatchery opera- 
tions. These operations have no independent purpose other than 


[footnote continued] 


26 


decision in Maneja, where the Court addressed the agri- 
cultural status of employees of a “corporation, which is 
engaged in the growing, harvesting and processing of 
sugar cane” at its ten thousand acre plantation. The 
Court described the employer's «rations as “the agri- 
cultural analogue of the modern industrial assembly 
line.” 349 U.S. at 256. The company planted, grew, 
cultivated and harvested sugar cane. It loaded the sugar 
cane on railroad cars and transported the freshly cut 
sugar cane over portable tracks to the processing plant, 
where it processed the sugar cane into raw sugar and 
molasses. It then stored the sugar and molasses in ware- 
houses on the plantation and subsequently shipped the 
sugar and molasses throughout the United States. In 
holding that the railroad workers who transported the 
sugar cane to the processing plant were agricultural 
employees, the Court specifically rejected the proposi- 
tion that the Act drew “a distinction between large and 
small farms or between mechanized and non-mechanized 
agriculture.”” 349 U.S. at 261. It also rejected the con- 
tention that Waialua was not entitled to the exemption 
because it was delivering the sugar cane to its own pro- 
cessing mills. 349 U.S. at 262-263. 


Clearly, the ultimate motivation of Waialua was to 
market the processed sugar and molasses for a profit. In 
transporting the sugar cane to its processing plant, it was 
acting in furtherance of its processing and marketing 
operations. Nevertheless, it was also acting as “an inci- 
dent to or in conjunction with” the farming activity of 
growing sugar cane. 


providing chickens to be processed and marketed, hopefully at 
a profit. Yet, the Board found that the hatchery employees were 
agricultural laborers. 


27 


In Bayside, the Court cited with approval the interpre- 
tative bulletin of the Wage and Hour Division of the 
Department of Labor regarding “contract arrangements 
for raising poultry.” 429 U.S. at 303. This bulletin, 
reads in pertinent part: 

Feed dealers and processors sometimes enter into 
contractual arrangements with farmers under which 
the latter agree to raise to marketable size baby 
chicks supplied by the former who also undertake 
to furnish all the required feed and possibly addi- 
tional items. Typically, the feed dealer or processor 
retains title to the chickens until they are sold. 
Under such an arrangement, the activities of the 
farmers and their employees in raising the poultry 
are clearly within section 3(f). The activities of the 
feed dealer or processor, on the other hand, are not 
“raising of poultry” and employees engaged in them 
cannot be considered agricultural employees on that 
ground. Employees of the feed dealer or processor 
who perform work on a farm as an incident to or in 
conjunction with the raising of poultry on the farm 
are employed in “secondary” agriculture (see § § 
780.137 et seq, and Johnston v. Cotton Producers 
Assn., 244 F.2d 553). 


29 C.F.R. § 780.126. 


This bulletin of the Department of Labor clearly con- 
templates that the processor’s employees who work on 
the farms of the independent growers can be engaged in 
agriculture. In fact, the case cited by the Department of 
Labor, Johnston v. Cotton Producers Association, 244 
F.2d 553 (5th Cir. 1957), involved an employee of a 
retail store who caught, cooped, and loaded on trucks 
chickens that were being raised by independent farmers. 
After being loaded, the chickens were transported to 


28 


processing plants. The Fifth Circuit held that this work 
was agricultural: 


It is, of course, the nature of the employee’s 
work rather than the nature of the employer’s busi- 
ness that brings him within or excludes him from 
the benefits of the Act. . . . Substantially all of [the 
employee's] work was done as a part of or in con- 
nection with the preparation for market and the 
delivery to market of poultry raised on farms. To 
the extent that this work was done on farms it was 


agricultural. 


244 F.2d at 555 (citations omitted). 


The phrase “incident to or in conjunction with such 
farming operations” was intended to exclude activities 
performed by a farmer or on a farm that were uncon- 
nected to the farming activities of either the farmer or 
the farm. The example used in the legislative history was 
of a farmer who operated a shirt factory on his farm. 
The shirt factory would clearly be unrelated to the farm- 
ing activities of either the farmer or the farm. Congress 
did not intend to exclude activities related to the agri- 
cultural activites of the farm simply because the employer 
of the farm workers was motivated by some independent 
goal to make a profit. 


Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift operators are 
clearly acting as an incident to or in conjunction with the 
farming activites of either Holly Farms or the inde- 
pendent grower. The Board’s conclusion to the contrary 
is not entitled to deference and should be rejected. 


29 


B. The Chicken Catchers And Forklift Drivers 
“Harvest” Live Chickens And Are Engaged In 
Primary Agriculture. 

Under the plain language of §3(f), harvesting of agri- 
cultural commodities constitutes primary farming. The 
Secretary of Labor has held that the term “harvesting” 
includes reducing an agricultural commodity to pos- 
session. 29 C.F.R. §780.118(b). He has further held 
that “the term [agricultural commodity] includes domes- 
ticated animals and some of their products such as .. . 
eggs... .” 29 C.F.R. §780.112. The Secretary also 
views harvesting as including “transportation to a concen- 
tration point on the farm.” 29 C.F.R. §780.118(b). 
Clearly, the chicken catchers, who catch and cage live 
chickens, thereby reducing them to possession, are 
engaged in harvesting. Similarly, the activities of the 
forklift driver in transporting the live chickens to the 
live haul truck, which is parked on the farm, constitute 
harvesting.’ The Board’s position that §3(f) includes 
harvesting of crops, but not animals such as poultry, 
Draper Valley Farms, Inc., 307 N.L.R.B. 1440 (1992), 
is contrary to the plain language of the statute and is 
not entitled to deference. 


It might be argued that Congress would not have 
added the “on a farm” language to §3(f) if harvesting 
was already included within the definition of primary 
agriculture. In fact, Senator Black was quite vocal 
that the preexisting language was sufficient to cover 
the independent wheat thresher and that the amend- 


7 Contrary to the assertion of the panel majority in the court 
of appeals (Pet. App. 46), Holly did not concede that the chicken 
catchers and forklift drivers were not engaged in primary agricul- 
ture. Holly’s position was that they performed essential agricul- 
ore functions on a farm and came with the language and intent 
of §3/(f). 


30 


ment was unnecessary. Because some senators dis- 
agreed, the amendment was added to make the intent 
of Congress clear. Senator Black’s original interpre- 
tation, however, is supported by the plain language of 


§ 3(f). 


IV. 
HOLLY’S LIVE HAUL DRIVERS PERFORM DELIVERY 
TO MARKET AS AN INCIDENT TO OR IN CONJUNC- 
TION WITH HOLLY’S FARMING ACTIVITIES AND ARE 
EXEMPT AGRICULTURAL LABORERS. 


A. The Live Haul Drivers Are Engaged In Delivery 
To Market And Other Practices Incidental To 


Farming Operations. 


Section 3(f) specifically defines “delivery to storage or 
to market” as a secondary farming practice. In Maneja, 
the Court held that a farmer’s employees who delivered 
sugar cane to the farmer’s processing plant were engaged 
in “delivery to market.””’ The Court further held that 
“the transportation of farm implements, supplies and 
field workers to and from the fields” is a secondary farm- 
ing practice. 349 U.S. at 261-262. 


The live haul drivers transport the chicken catchers 
and forklift drivers to and from the fields and deliver the 
live chickens to Holly’s processing plants. Thus, these 
drivers are engaged in secondary farming practices and are 
agricultural laborers if their activities are incidental to 
Holly’s farming operations. 


31 


B. Holly Is Acting As A Farmer From The Time It 
Sends Its Live Haul Crews To The Farms Until 
Such Time As The Live Chickens Are Delivered 


To The Processing Plants. 


Holly produces hatching eggs and breeds and hatches 
chicks. The hatched chicks are subsequently sent to con- 
tract growers to be raised to the age of forty-nine days. 
Holly retains title to the chicks while they are in the 
hands of the contract grower, and provides food, super- 
vision, and other services to the grower. When the 
chickens reach the age of forty-nine days, Holly sends 
its live haul crews to the farms of the growers, where it 
catches, cages, and loads the live chickens on the live haul 
trucks and delivers the chickens to the processing plants. 


It is undisputed that Holly is acting as a farmer in pro- 
ducing hatching eggs and breeding and hatching chicks. 
According to the Board, however, Holly ceases for all 
time to be a farmer once it delivers the chicks to the 
independent growers. Although the Board’s position 
that Holly is not acting as a farmer while the chicks are 
in the possession and control of the contract growers 
has been approved as reasonable, its position that Holly 
is not acting as a farmer when it catches, cages, and 
loads the chickens onto trucks and delivers them to 
market is irrational and contrary to the intent of Con- 
gress. 


In Bayside, the Court addressed the agricultural status 
of feed haul drivers of a vertically integrated poultry 
company whose operations were substantially similar 
to those of Holly. The drivers delivered feed from the 
employer’s feed mills to the independent growers. The 
Court recognized that because the drivers did not work 
“on a farm”’, their status turned on “whether their activ- 


’ 99 


ity should be regarded as work performed ‘by a farmer’. 


32 


429 U.S. at 301. The Court held that although the issue 
was debatable, the Board acted reasonably in rejecting 
“the argument that all of the activity on a contract farm 
should be regarded as agricultural activity of an inte- 
grated farmer such as Bayside.” 429 U.S. at 302. The 
Court noted that the contract farmer, not Bayside’s 
employees, stored the feed and used it to feed the chicks 
and that the operation of a feedmill was not an agricul- 
tural operation. 429 U.S. at 303. 


Bayside clearly does not control the disposition of 
this case. The Bayside drivers delivered feed, a processed 
product, to the independent farmers. Bayside did not 
have control of the chicks at the time the feed was 
delivered to the growers, and its employees were not 
involved in feeding the chicks. The independent growers 
were in possession of the chicks and were responsible for 
feeding and caring for the chicks. Thus, Bayside was not 
acting as a farmer at the time that its feed haul drivers 
were delivering feed to the growers. 


Holly’s status in catching, caging, loading, and deliver- 
ing chickens to market is fundamentally different from 
Bayside’s status in delivering poultry feed to the inde- 
pendent growers. Holly not only has title to the chick- 
ens, but it also retakes possession and control of the 
chickens from the independent grower. Its employees 
actually perform the agricultural tasks of catching, cag- 
ing, loading, and delivering to market. In these circum- 
stances, it is apparent that it is Holly, not the inde- 
pendent grower, which is acting as a farmer. 


The Board’s position that the employer’s status as 
a farmer ends when it turns the chicks over to the 
independent growers is reasonable while the chicks are 
in the possession and control of the independent grow- 
ers. It is not reasonable, however, to the extent that 


33 


it constitutes an invariable rule that the employer can 
never resume its status as a farmer. Holly is a farmer 
in producing hatching eggs and breeding and hatching 
chicks. It is not a farmer while the chicks are in the 
possession and control of the independent farmer. Holly 
resumes its status as a farmer when it sends its live haul 
crews to the farms to regain possession and control of the 
live chickens to which it holds title and to deliver them to 
market. It is the character of Holly’s activities, not those 
of the independent grower, which make Holly’s live haul 
drivers agricultural laborers. Coleman v. Sanderson 
Farms, Inc., 629 F.2d 1077, 1081 (5th Cir. 1980).° 


Because Holly’s live haul drivers are periorming deliv- 
ery to market of live poultry owned and initially raised 
by Holly, they are exempt agricultural laborers. The 
Board’s conclusion to the contrary eliminates the “deliv- 
ery to market” exemption for farmers who contract out 
part of the growing process, a result that is contrary to 


the language of the statute, as well as congressional 
intent. 


SUnlike the Fifth Circuit’s decision in Sanderson Farms, the 
Eighth Circuit’s decisions in NLRB v. Hudson Farms, Inc., 681 
F.2d 1105 (8th Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1069 (1982), 
and Valmac Industries, Inc. v. NLRB, 599 F.2d 246 (8th Cir. 
1979), which hold that live haul drivers are equivalent to the feed 


haul drivers in Bayside, contain no significant analysis of the facts 
in Bayside or of §3(f). 


34 


CONCLUSION 


Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift drivers perform 
essential farming activities on farms and satisfy the plain 
language of §3(f), whether or not Holly is acting as a 
farmer at the time of these activities. The Board’s posi- 
tion, however, that Holly is not acting as a farmer is 
irrational and not entitled to deference. Holly acts as 
a farmer in producing hatching eggs and breeding and 
hatching chicks. Although it contracts out the raising 
process to independent growers, it retains title to the 
chicks at all times. When it sends its live haul crews out 
to the farm to catch, cage, and deliver its chickens to 
market, Holly resumes its status as a farmer. Thus, all 
of these employees, including the live haul drivers, are 
agricultural laborers. 


Petitioners respectfully request tha. the judgment of 
the court of appeals be reversed in pertinent part. 


Dated this 21st day of December 1995. 


Respectfully submitted, 


CHARLES P. RoBertTs III 
HAYNSWORTH, BALDWIN, 
JOHNSON AND GREAVES, P.A. 


2709 Henry Street 
Greensboro, N.C. 27405 
(910) 375-9737 


Counsel for Petitioners. 


