>. Supreme Court of the Anited States 
4: ieee Ocroper Term, 1995 


9 oe HOoL_y Farms CorPoRATION; 
Wee. ie TYSON Foops, INCORPORATED, 
ey i Petitioners, 
LA NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BoarD, 

oe ; 2 : and 

: : CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
‘he Locats 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 

Z" INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
ERK Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


) 


BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENT UNIONS 


J. DAVID JAMES 
(Counsel of Record) 
P.O. Box 990 


Greensboro, NC 27402 
€910) 274-2992 


JUDITH A. Scorr 
25 Louisiana Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001 


Witeon - Eras Pantine Co., lnc. - 789-0086 - WasnincTon, D.C. 20001 


o> - 


COUNTERSTATEMENT OF THE 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the National Labor Relations Board reason- 
ably concluded that petitioners’ live haul workers (chicken 
catchers, forklift drivers and live haul drivers) are Na- 
tional Labor Relations Act “employees” within the mean- 
ing of NLRA § 2(3), 29 U.S.C. § 152(3), and not ex- 
empted “agrivultural laborers” within the meaning of that 
provision. 


(i) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
COUNTERSTATEMENT OF THE QUESTION PRE- 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 0..0.0.....0.0.....cccccccccceccesceseesees iv 
COUNTERSTATEMENT OF THE CASE 1 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .......... a 2 
a 4 
CONCLUSION ... | 1h 


(ili) 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 


Bayside Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 
EE eS ee 3, 4, 6, 11 
Coleman v. Sanderson Farms, Ine., 629 F.2d 1077 
EE Td Ra See ee ae 13 
Draper Valley Farms, 307 N.L.R.B. 1440 (1992)... 10,11 
Farmers Reservoir & Irrigation Co. v. McComb, 


337 U.S. 755 (1949) .......................... ETT KTR 5 
Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402 (1941) 000 14 
Idaho Metal Works v. Wirtz, 383 U.S. 190 (1966) 11 
Imco Poultry, 202 N.L.R.B. 259 (1973) er a 10 
Johnston v. Cotton Producers Ass'n, 244 F.2d 553 

I As 13 
Maneja v. Waialua Agricultural Co., 349 U. S. 254 

RAE. Seen ieee s. Estee, eae 11 
Mitchell v. Budd, 350 U.S. 473 (1956) RAE Re ene 6,11 
National Broiler Mktg. Ass'n v. United States, 436 

U.S. 816 (1978) i ee 6,7 


STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 


Section 2(3) of the National Labor Relations Act, 


29 U.S.C. § 152(3) ....... passim 
Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 
U.S.C. § 203 (f) | passim 
29 C.F.R. § 780.125 . —, - i 5 
rer sa re 13 
29 C.F .R. § 760.148 ........................ 3 3, 12, 13, 14 
MISCELLANEOUS 


P. Ahlo, Broiler Grower Contracts in the United 
States, Broiler Industry (October 1988) 7 
J. Beierlein, et al., Optimizing the Assembly 
Processing-Distribution System of Processed 
and Further-Processed Chicken in Pennsylvania, 
8 Agribusiness 335 (1992) . 10 
V. Benson, et al., The Chicken Broiler Industry: 
Structure, Practices, and Costs, Agricultural 
Economic Report No. 381 (U.S. Dep’t of Agri- 
culture 1977) 10 


v 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


M. Eckman & R. Brewer, The Commercial Broiler 
Industry, Aiabama Agribusiness (Auburn Univ. 
Cooperative Extension Service 1988) 

W. Henson, The U.S. Broiler Industry: Past and 
Present Status, Practices, and Costs, Pennsy!- 
vania State University Agricultural Experiment 
Stations No. 149 (May 1980)... 

F. Lasley, et al., The U.S. Broiler Industry, Agri- 
cultural Economic Report No. 591 (U.S. Dep’t 
TELE ENES EO 

C. Parkhurst & G. Mountney, Poultry Meat and 
Egg Production (Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. 
1988) SEER aE eA SOUS ON TE ee 

M. Timmons & P. Ahlo, A Broiler Production 
Analysis Equation, 66 Poultry Science 586 
(April 1987) ......... ALP SES STEVE Ace SANE aS) ee ED 


Page 


8,9 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-210 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON Foops, INCORPORATED, 


7 Petitioners, 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
Loca.s 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENT UNIONS 


The opinions below, the basis for this Court's juris- 
diction, and the statutory provisions involved are set out 
at pp. 1-3 of the Brief for the Petitioners. 


COUNTERSTATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The facts that frame the question presented are fully 
set out in the following two paragraphs of the opinion 
below: 


The (Holly Farms] Wilkesboro plant is a vertically 
integrated poultry operation. In its hatchery opera- 
tions, Holly Farms hatches pullets, or laying hens. 
At twenty weeks of age, the pullets are transferred to 
“laying houses” operated by independent “contract 
growers.” The eggs produced by the pullets are 


2 


transported back to the Holly Farms hatchery oper- 
ations, where they are hatched. The Company trans- 
ports the resulting chicks to independent contract 
growers who are paid to raise the chicks into full- 
grown broiler chickens. When the birds are seven 
weeks old, the live-haul crews catch, cage, and 
transport them to a storage and cooling area near 
the processing plant, where they will be slaughtered 
and prepared for market. 


The employees in the live-haul unit serve as the 
Wilkesboro facility’s chicken-catching crews. A crew 
consists of a live-haul truck driver, a forklift oper- 
ator, and about nine “chicken catchers.” The live- 
haul driver drives a flat-bed truck, which carries the 
entire crew to the farms of the independent contract 
growers who raise the broiler chickens. Under cover 
of darkness, the chicken catchers manually catch and 
cage the chickens, the forklift operator places the 
steel cages on the flat-bed truck, and the truck de- 
livers the chickens to a storage area near the Com- 
pany’s processing plant. [48 F.3d at 1369-70 (foot- 
note omitted ).] 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Live haul workers employed by vertically integrated 
poultry companies collect full grown broilers from the 
independent contract farms where the chickens are raised 
and transport the broilers to the companies’ processing 
plants. The line-drawing issue in this case is whether 
these live haul workers are doing work incident to the 
companies’ processing operations (and are therefore “em- 
ployees” covered by the National Labor Relations Act) 
or incident to the farming operations of raising the broil- 
ers (and are therefore “agricultural laborers” exempted 
from coverage under the NLRA). 


The legal determinants of the line to be drawn are 
well settled. The live haul workers are exempted from 
coverage under the NLRA if, but only if, those workers 


3 


are involved in “agricultur{al]” operations as that term 
is defined in § 3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Under the express language of FLSA § 3(f), the raising 
of chickens is an agricultural operation. On the other 
hand, as this Court recognized in Bayside Enters., Inc. 
v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 (1977), the processing of 
chickens for ultimate sale to the consumer (e.g., the 
slaughtering and dressing of the chickens) is not an 
agricultural operation. Infra at 4-6. 


The factual determinants of the line to be drawn are 
equally definite. Through the exercise of their economic 
leverage over independent contract farmers, the vertically 
integrated poultry companies, like petitioners here, have 
Structured their overall business in a manner that (i) 
limits the independent farmer’s function to the raising 
of chickens; and (ii) assures that the company’s own 
processing plant employees—using the company’s own 
equipment—perform all live haul operations. And the 
integrated poultry companies have done so precisely to 
facilitate the efficient use of the companies’ highly capital- 
ized processing plants. All this being so, the various live 
haul operations at issue here are classified by the in- 
dustry and by independent experts as a component part 
of the companies’ “processing” operations and not as a 
component part of the contract farmers’ chicken raising 
operations. Infra at 6-10. 


Not surprisingly, then, the NLRB has consistently 
taken and adhered to the position that the integrated 
poultry companies’ live haul workers are doing work in- 
cidental to the companies’ non-exempt processing opera- 
tions rather than incidental to exempted farming opera- 
tions. And the NLRB’s position finds strong support in a 
directly-on-point Department of Labor interpretive regu- 
lation (29 CFR § 780.143) elaborating on FLSA § 3(f). 
Infra at 10-13. 


The plain language of FLSA § 3(f) does not answer 
the precise line drawing legal question presented here. 


4 


And the Board’s resolution of that question is entirely 
consistent with the purposes of Congress in exempting 
“agricultur[al]” operations from both the FLSA and the 
NLRA. In these circumstances, the NLRB’s eminently 
reasonable judgment of where to draw the line between 
agricultural and nonagricultural operations in the specific 
context of the vertically integrated poultry industry is en- 
titled to substantial deference and should be affirmed. 
Infra at 13-14. 
ARGUMENT 


This case presents a single, line-drawing question— 
albeit one that runs through a major American industry: 
in the specific context of vertically integrated broiler 
chicken production where does “agriculture” end and 
where does “processing” begin. 


This question arises because what is in biological terms 
unitary—the hatching, raising and processing for con- 
sumption of a single broiler chicken—has been compart- 
mentalized by the law and by industry economic im- 
peratives. 


A. The legal determinants of the line to be drawn 
are well settled. The National Labor Relations Act gov- 
erns labor relations between employers in and affecting 
interstate commerce and their employees with one excep- 
tion relevant here—NLRA § 2(3) defines the term “em- 
ployee” to exclude “any individual employed as an agri- 
cultural laborer.” 29 U.S.C. § 152(3). And, Congress, 
in riders to the Appropriations Acts for the National 
Labor Relations Board (“NLRB” or “Board”), has tied 
the definition of “agricultural laborer” in NLRA § 2(3) 
to the definition of “agriculture” in § 3(f) of the Fair 
Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”). See Bayside Enters., 
Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298, 300 n.6 (1977). 


! FLSA § 3(f) provides, in full: 


“Agriculture” includes farming in all its branches and 
among other things includes the cultivation end tillage of the 


5 


As this Court has explained, the FLSA § 3(f) term 
“agriculture” has both a primary and a secondary mean- 
ing. “First, . . . [a)griculture includes farming in all its 
branches. Certain specific practices such as cultivation 
and tillage of the soil, dairying, etc., are listed as being 
included in this primary meaning.” Farmers Reservoir 
& Irrigation Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755, 762 (1949). 
The “raising of . . . poultry” is one of the express § 3(f) 
primary agricultural activities. Supra n.1. But “[s}laugh- 
tering, which is the antithesis of ‘raising,’ is not included” 
in the statutory definition of “raising . . . poultry.” 29 
CFR § 780.125. 


In addition, and more broadly, “[a]griculture is defined 
[by FLSA § 3(f)] to include things other than farming 
as so illustrated. It includes any practices, whether or 
not themselves farming practices, which are performed 
either by a farmer or on a farm, incidentally to or in 
conjunction with ‘such’ farming operations.” Farmers 
Reservoir, 337 U.S. at 763. An outer boundary of § 3(f) 
“agriculture,” then—and the one relevant here—is set 
at non-farming practices performed on a farm “as an 
incident to or in conjunction with [the] farming opera- 
tions” in question. Supra n. 1 (emphasis added). 


At the same time, it is well settled that the processing 
of broiler chickens for ultimate sale to the consumer— 
e.g., the slaughtering and dressing of the chickens—is not 
an FLSA § 3(f) agricultural activity. 


This Court squarely held in Bayside that the fact that 
an integrated poultry company—one that, e.g., hatches 


soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing, and harvest- 
ing of any agricultural or horticultural commodities (including 
commodities defined as agricultural commodities in section 
1141j(g) of Title 12), the raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearing 
animals, or poultry, and any practices (including any forestry 
or lumbering operations) performed by a farmer or on a farm 
as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming opera- 
tions, including preparation for market, delivery to storage 
or to market or to carriers for transportation to market. 


6 


chicks, puts the chicks out to independent farmers to be 
raised and then takes the full grown broilers and processes 
the birds—engages in (or contracts for the performance 
of) certain farming activities does not somehow render 
all of the company’s activities agricultural in nature. To 
the contrary, where such a company has and runs a 
“mill . . . which . . . produces poultry feed and [a] 
processing plant in which it slaughters and dresses 
poultry,” the mill and the plant are “nor agricultural 
operations.” Bayside, 429 U.S. at 301 (emphasis added). 
See also Mitchell v. Budd, 350 U.S. 473, 480-82 (1956). 


It follows, said the Bayside Court, that “the status of 
. . . drivers” employed by the integrated poultry company 
who deliver feed from the company’s mill to farmers who 
have contracts with the company to raise chickens “is 
determined by the character of the work they perform 
for their own employer,” and that “the work of the con- 
tract farmer cannot make the drivers agricultural labor- 
ers.” 429 U.S. at 303. On this cases Bayside holds 
that the integrated poultry company’s feed mill drivers 
are “employees” within the meaning of NLRA § 2(3) 
and not “agricultural laborers” within the meaning of the 
exemption stated in that provision. /d. 


B. The factual determinants of the line to be drawn 
here are equally definite. 


By and large broiler chicken production is vertically 
integrated. See, e.g., National Broiler Mktg. Ass'n v. 
United States, 436 U.S. 816, 821 (1978) (“All the mem- 
bers of NBMA are ‘integrated,’ that is, they are involved 
in more than one of these stages of production .... The 
member . . . places its chicks with [the] independent 
grower for the growing out period . . . and with its own 
employees, usually collects the mature chickens from the 
grower.” ). 


Moreover, as this Court recognized in National Broiler 
Mktg. Ass'n, the integrated poultry companies have sub- 


7 


stantial economic leverage in their relationship with these 
independent contract farmers. 436 U.S. at 824-26.° 


As here, the integrated poultry companies have almost 
invariably exercised their economic leverage (i) to limit 
the independent farmer's function to the raising of 
chickens; and (ii) to assure that the company’s own 
processing plant employees—using the company’s own 
equipment—perform all live haul operations.” 


It is very much to the point that the integrated poultry 
companies have structured their contractual relationship 
with their independent farmers in this manner precisely 
to facilitate the efficient use of the companies’ highly 
capitalized processing plants. The companies contract 
with numerous chicken-raising farms in the vicinity of the 
companies’ processing plants, and when the chickens 
reach the proper age, size and weight the companies dis- 
patch the companies’ own live haul crews and equipment 
to collect the grown chickens. In this way the companies 
are able to secure for themselves the flexibility and the 
economies of scale that are essential in “supply[ing} 
wholesome products on a continual, reliable, and profit- 


2 See, e.g., P. Ahlo, Broiler Grower Contracts in the United 
States, Broiler Industry (Oct. 1988) 26 (“The broiler industry in 
the United States consists primarily of contract growers and large 
vertically integrated firms called integrators. The integrators, 
through ownership or control, coordinate the stages of production 
and distribution of broiler chickens.”); M. Timmons & P. Ahlo, 
A Broiler Production Analysis Equation, 66 Poultry Science 586, 
586 (April 1987) (“The growers provide the labor and capital for 
the growout stage without ever owning any broilers.” ). 


%A 1977 survey of approximately 1000 contracts between inte- 
grated poultry companies and independent growers found that live 
haul operations were performed by the company itself in more 
than 95 percent of the cases. William L. Henson, The U.S. Broiler 
Industry: Past and Present Status, Practices, and Costs, Pennsyl- 
vania State University Agricultural Experiment Stations No. 149, 
at 20 (May 1980). 


able basis.” M. Eckman & R. Brewer, The Commercial 
Broiler Industry, Alabama Agribusiness (Auburn Univ. 
Cooperative Extension Service 1988) 2. 


Integration in the poultry industry permits the collec- 
tion of large amounts of a uniform product available 
when needed. ... In the case of broilers, turkeys, 
and fowl for meat, processing plants can coordinate 
production needs by hauling in flocks from several! 
farms to supply the birds needed for the plant for 
a day. 


* * * 


. . . Most company trucks and cars now have two- 
way radios, permitting constant coordination between 
the plant and the farm. For example, if a truck 
breaks down or becomes stuck in the snow or mud, 
the processing plant has several hours to send in an 
alternate source of birds to keep the plant running 
near capacity. [C. Parkhurst & G. Mountney, 
Poultry Meat and Egg Production 151-52 (Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Co. 1988 ).]} 


All this being so, the various live haul functions at 
issue here are classified by the industry and by independ- 
ent experts as a component part of the integrated poultry 
companies’ “processing” operations and not as a com- 
ponent part of the contract farmers’ chicken raising op- 
erations. Thus, trade publications and industry studies 
analyze the “processing” operation as consisting of dis- 
tinct stages, including “assembling,” “slaughtering,” “evis- 
cerating,” “packaging,” and “storage.” As the Table set 
out below illustrates, the “assembling” stage is defined 
specifically to include the live haul “catching,” “loading” 
and “transporting” functions performed by the integrated 
poultry company worker whose status is at issue here. 


_~ 


Poultry-Processing Functions 


TABLE 10.1. 
[Parkhurst & Mountney, supra, 155 (emphasis added). } 


Additional processing 


uncooked 


Eviscerating 


Slaughtering 


Assembling 


Whole carcass cut up 
Hand or mechanically 


Individual parts 


Half carcasses 


Whole carcass 


of remaining viscera 
Separation of heart, 


gizzard and liver 
Washing 


Opening and inspection 


Removing preen gland 


Defeathering 
Washing 


Scalding 


Bleeding 


Shackling 


Killing 


Transporting 


Unloading 


Catching 


Loading 


deboned meat 


Plant cleanup and 


Other 


Weighing 
Chilling 


Grading 
Storage 


Removing head and feet 


Packaging 


Additional processing 


cooked 


sanitation 


Waste disposal 


Ice packed 


Chilled 


Plastic bags with and 


Cooked, deboned meat 
Fried battered parts 


Barbecued 


Waste treatment and 


Dry pack, refrigerated 


Frozen 


without vacuum 
Tray with plastic overwrap 


Cardboard cartons 


Canned whole or 


by-product recovery 
Insect and rodent contro! 


Plant and product safety 
Plant security 


Canned 


including laminates 


and overwraps 
Metal, cardboard or wood 


deboned 


Fiscal and personnel 


Freeze or heat, 
dehydrated 
Irradiated (future) 


ice-packed bulk containers 


Comminuted products 


stews, etc. 
Rolls 


Canned soups, 
Ham 


management 


10 


See also e.g. V. Benson, et al., The Chicken Broiler 
Industry: Structure, Practices, and Costs, Agricultural 
Economic Report No. 381 (U.S. Dep't of Agriculture 
1977) (outlining industry trends in “processing” opera- 
tions, defined to include, inter alia, “assembly,” “slaught- 
ering,” and “eviscerating”); F. Lasley, et al., The U.S. 
Broiler Industry, Agricultural Economic Report No. 591 
(U.S. Dep't of Agriculture 1988) (analyzing trends in 
“processing and transportation costs, which include as- 
sembling”); J. Beierlein, et al., Optimizing the Assembly 
Processing-Distribution System of Processed and Further- 
Processed Chicken in Pennsylvania, 8 Agribusiness 335 
(1992) (analyzing the economic efficiency of the “assembly- 
processing-distribution system” utilized by the broiler in- 
dustry in Pennsylvania). 


C. It is against this legal and factual backdrop that 
the NLRB has consistently found that the integrated 
poultry companies’ live haul workers are engaged in tasks 
incidental to the companies’ non-exempt processing op- 
erations rather than tasks incidental to exempted farming 
operations: 


As the service crew employees involved herein are 
engaged in handling and transporting chicks on the 
farms of independent growers only after Respondent’s 
farming operations have ended, these employees can- 
not be performing practices incident to, or in con- 
junction with, Respondent’s farming operations. More 
accurately, they are engaged in nonfarming opera- 
tions which are incident to, or in conjunction with, a 
separate and distinct business activity of the Re- 
spondent, i.e., shipping and marketing. [/mco Poul- 
try, 202 NLRB 259, 260-61 (1973).] 


Accord e.g. Draper Valley Farms, 307 NLRB 1440, 1440 
(1990) (“[W]e find that the Employer’s chicken catchers 
are engaged in activity incidental to a separate and non- 
farming business activity of the Employer, and thus do 
not fall within the agricultural labor exemption contained 


in Section 2(3) of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 
U.S.C. § 152(3).”).* 


D. The Board’s position in the foregoing cases finds 
strong support in a Department of Labor interpretive 
regulation elaborating on FLSA § 3(f) that addresses the 
precise situation here.” The DOL regulation states, in 
pertinent part: 


*In Draper, the Board also fully (albeit summarily) disposed of 
the argument—which petitioners seek to assert in the alternative 
here although they did not assert it below (see Brief for Petitioners 
at 29-30)—that the catching of chickens constitutes “primary” 
agricultural activity: 

[Wie reject the Employer's contention that its chicken 
catchers are engaged in primary agricultural! activity, namely 
“harvesting,” as defined in Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor 
Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 208(f). Although the harvesting 
of crops is included in the primary definition of agriculture 
under Section 3(f), only the “raising” of poultry is covered, 
not ita so-called harvesting, even assuming, arguendo, that 
term is appropriate in any context when applied to poultry. 
[307 NLRB at 1440 (footnote omitted). | 


* The Department of Labor has been entrusted with the adminis- 
tration of the FLSA, and the Department’s regulations interpreting 
the FLSA are therefore entitled to substantial deference. EF.¢. 
Idaho Metal Works v. Wirtz, 383 U.S. 190, 205 (1966); Mitchell v. 
Budd, 350 U.S. at 477-80. For that reason, this Court in Bayside 
looked to the DOL’s interpretation of §3(f) in reviewing and up- 
holding the NLRB’s decision that truck drivers employed by inte- 
grated poultry companies to deliver feed to their contract farmers 
are not “agricultural 'aborers” exempt from coverage under NLRA 
§$2(3). See 429 U.S. at 303. By the same token, the Court followed 
the DOL’s lead in Maneja v. Waialua Agricultural Co., 349 U.S. 
254, 260-63 (1955). There the DOL had determined that workers 
employed by a farmer who transported sugar cane grown by the 
farmer on its plantation to the farmer's processing plant on that 
same plantation—-which the farmer used for the sole purpose of 
processing its own sugar cane—were agricultural employees under 
FLSA $3(f). While reasonable minds could differ on that line- 
drawing exercise it is beyond question that the workers ties to 
a single farmer on a single farm put those workers in a distinctly 
different position than the live haul workers here. 


farmer or for the farmer’s own benefit. To the contrary, 
those functions are performed by the integrated poultry 
company itself for the benefit of the company’s processing 
activities. See supra at 6-10. 


Indeed, 29 CFR § 780.143 provides the short but com- 
plete answer to the contention of petitioners and their 
amici that the Board's position on the status of live haul 
workers in the broiler chicken industry is contrary to 
congressional intent. See Brief for the Petitioners at 13- 
19; Brief of Amicus Curiae California Agricultural Labor 
Relations Board (“Cal. Agr. Bd. Br.”) at 10-12, 14-19; 
Brief Amicus Curiae for the American Farm Bureau 
Federation, et al. (“Am. Farm Bur. Br.”) at 16-18. 


Petitioners’ amici accurately identify the congressional 
intent underlying the “on a farm” language in FLSA 
§ 3(f): viz., to make it clear that where a farmer for his 
own economic benefit utilizes an independent contractor 
to assist the farmer in the performance of tasks that the 
farmer would otherwise be required to do through the 
farmer’s own employees, the contractor’s employees are 
not subject to the FLSA. See Cal. Agr. Bd. Br. at 10-12, 
14-19; Am. Farm Bur. Br. at 16-18.° 


* Petitioners do not advert to the congressional intent to benefit 
the farmer that underlies FLSA §3(f)'’s “on a farm” language. 
Rather, petitioners present lengthy excerpts from discussions on the 


13 


But the situation here, as the NLRB has recognized, 
does not involve the contracting out of work by farmers 
for the farmers’ own economic benefit. In the vertically 
integrated poultry industry the contract farmer's role ends 
when the broilers have been raised to maturity. At that 
point those farmers have no tasks to contract out. The 
only issue here, it bears repeating, is the proper char- 
acterization of work performed by integrated poultry 
companies through the companies’ own employees using 
the companies’ own equipment “in furtherance of [the 
companies’] own [nonfarming] enterprise[s].” 29 CFR 
§ 780.143." 


Senate floor regarding the “on a farm” language, see Brief for the 
Petitioners at 15-19, as if those discussions support petitioners’ 
position. In truth, those discussions only underscore the point that 
the intent of Congress was to protect the interests of the farmer 
in situations where the farmer finds it necessary for his own eco- 
nomic benefit to turn to outside contractors to perform tasks on 
his farm the farmer would otherwise do himself. Petitioners have 
pointed to nothing in the legislative materials that evince a broader 
or different congressional purpose, or that speak to the specific 
line-drawing problem presented in this case involving integrated 
poultry companies that perform work on a farm with the com- 
panies’ own employees aud equipment for the benefit of the com- 
panies’ own nonfarming operations. 


? Petitioners’ reliance on DOL Regulation § 780.126, which cites 
approvingly to Johnston v. Cotton Producers Ass'n, 244 F.2d 553 
(5th Cir. 1957), is misplaced. See Brief for the Petitioners at 27-28. 
The live haul functions in Johnston were performed by an inde- 
pendent retail supply store for the benefit of the store’s “farmer 
customers,” 244 F.2d at 554, and not by a vertically integrated 
poultry company for the benefit of the company’s own non-farming 
processing operations. DOL Regulation § 780.126 and Johnston are 
thus entirely consistent with DOL Regulation § 780.143 and with 
the congressional intent underlying FLSA § 3(f). 

The result reached by the Fifth Circuit in Coleman v. Sanderson 
Farms, Inc., 629 F.2d 1077 (5th Cir. 1980), is, to be sure, in conflict 
with the principles stated in 29 CFR § 780.143, as well as with the 
consistently-held position of the NLRB and the decision of the 
Fourth Circuit below (although the Coleman case arose under the 
FLSA not the NLRA and the Fifth Circuit explicitly noted that no 


14 


E. In the face of all the foregoing, petitioners’ last 
ditch argument is that the Board’s determination in this 
matter is directly contrary to the “plain language” of 
$ 3(f) of the FLSA, and on that account cannot stand. 
Brief for the Petitioners at 9, 12-13. 


The plain statutory language in question states that 
“[a}griculture” includes activities “performed by a farmer 
or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with 
. . . farming operations.” Supra n. 1, pp. 4-5. On its 
face—and as both the Department of Labor and the 
NLRB have recognized—the only thing plain is that § 3 
(f) does not encompass all activity on a farm but only 
activity “incident to or in conjunction with farming op- 
erations” and does not settle with any plainness what is 
“incident to or [is] in conjunction with . . . farming op- 
erations” and what is incident to or is in conjunction 
with nonfarming operations. 

That issue in the concrete setting of the vertically 
integrated poultry industry presents an occasion for line 
drawing by the Board in an area where Congress has not 
spoken directly to the “infinite variety of specific situa- 
tions” that might arise in the application of FLSA § 3(f). 
Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402, 412 (1941). “To determine 
upon which side of the median line the particular instance 
[in this case] falls calls for the expert, experienced judg- 
ment of those familiar with the industry.” /d. at 413. 
As the Bayside Court recognized: 


Accordingly, regardless of how [this Court] might 
have resolved the question as an initial matter, the 
appropriate weight which must be given to the judg- 
ment of the agency whose special duty is to apply 
th{e] broad statutory language [in § 3(f)] to varying 
fact patterns requires enforcement of the Board’s 
order. [429 US. at 304.] 


issue of appropriate deference to the NLRB was therefore presented, 
629 F.2d at 1081 n.4). The Coleman Court, however, failed to even 
mention 29 CFR § 780.143, much less to deal with the economic 
realities in the vertically integrated broiler industry that bring this 
case squarely within the terms of that DOL regulation. 


15 


CONCLUSION 


For the above stated reasons, and for the reasons set 
forth in the Brief for the Respondent Board, the judg- 


ment below should be affirmed. 

Respectfully submitted, 
JON HIATT J. DAVID JAMES 
815 16th Street, N.W. (Counsel of Record) 
Washington, D.C. 20006 P.O. Box 990 
JAMES DONALD MooreHEap _— (910) _ 274-2992 
LAURENCE GOLD JUDITH A. ScoTT 
1000 Connecticut Ave., N.W. 2" Louisiana Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20036 Washington, D.C. 20001 


