HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION, ET AL., PETITIONERS 


v. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


Drew S. Days, IT 
Solicitor General 


LAWRENCE G. WALLACE 
Deputy Solicitor General 


RICHARD H. SEAMON 
Assistant to the Solicitor 
General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


wT. 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Petitioners’ “live haul’ crews—which consist of 
chicken catchers, forklift operators, and live haul 
drivers—collect broiler chickens that have been raised 
by independent contract growers and transport them 


sented is whether the National Labor Relations 
Board reasonably concluded that those workers are 
not “agricultural laborer[s]” excluded from the cov- 
erage of the National Labor Relations Act. 


(1) 


The Board reasonably determined that petitioners’ 
chicken catchers, forklift operators, and live haul 
drivers are “employee[s),” rather than “agricultural 
laborer[s),” under Section 2(3) of the National 
Labor Relations Act ......0..........ccccccccces cccccceeseeeceeneeeee 


Il. The Board reasonably concluded that petitioners’ 
live haul crews do not engage in secondary 
EEE eae 
A. The Board’s conclusion is consistent with the 

text of Section 3(f) of the FLSA, as con- 
strued by this Court ...0...........ccccccecccceccceeeemeee 
B. The Board’s conclusion is consistent with the 
—- history of Section 3(f) of the 
se 
Department of Labor’s regulations interpret- 
ing Section 3(f) of the FLSA .......................... 

III. Petitioners’ “primary farming” argument should 

not be considered because it was not raised 

below; in any event, it conflicts with the text of 
the statute and the Department of Labor’s inter- 
pretive regulations | 

IV. The Board’s determination that petitioners’ live 

haul employees are not “agricultural laborer[s)” 

is entitled to deferemee o.oo... ccccccccccccceeneeeeeeens 


asd 


$1 


la 


IV 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 


Page 

A.H. Phillipe, Inc. ¥. Walling, 324 US. 490 

(1945) 36 
36 
33 


Arnold Vv. Ben Kanowsky, Ine., 361 US. 888 
RE Se EE 
Astoria Fed. Savings & Loan Ass'n V. anes 
501 U.S. 104 (1991) ............................. o- 
Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB: 
429 U.S. 298 (1977) ................... passim 
29 
2h 
34 


216 N.L.R.B. 502 (1975) . 
Camaco Produce Co., 297 N.L.R.B. 906 (1990)... 
Domsea Farms, Inc., 211 N.L.R.B. 882 (1974)... 
Draper Valley Farme, Inc., 307 N.L.R.B. 1440 


EE SS 2 ad 19, 33 
Farmers Reservoir & Irrigation Co. v. McComb, 

337 U.S. 755 (1949) 2... ..13, 15, 23, 24, 35 
Imco Poultry, 202 N.L.R.B. 259 (1978) ................. 5, 16 
Imperial Garden Growers, 91 N.LR.B. 1034 

Re ae 26 
Johnston V. Cotton Producers Ass'n, 244 F.2d 5538 

(Gth Cir. 1967) ............................... 30 
Maneja V. Weialna Agricultural Co. 249 US. 254 

(1955) ............ .. 18,19 
Mitchell v. Budd, 350 U.S. 473 (1956) _. - 17 
NLRB Vv. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 494 U.S. 

775 (1990) 35 


NLRB v. Gisrel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 (1969). 6-7 
NLRB vy. Hendricks County Rural Electric Mem- 


bership Corp., 454 U.S. 170 (1921) .... 35 
NLRB v. Samuel B. Gass, 3T7 F.2d 438 (ist Cir. 

ENT eee ee eee 29 
NLRB V. Town & Country Electric, Inc., 116 S. Ct. 

450 (1995) .... 12, 35 
NLRB v. Transportation Management Corp., 462 

U.S. 393 (1983) oouunene 35 


Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944) _.. 25 
Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883 (1984) ....11, 82, 34 
Taylor v. Freeland & Kronz, 503 U.S. 638 (1992). 32 
Woelke &2 Romero Framing, Inc. v. NLRB, 456 

U.S. 645 (1982) 11, 32 


v 


Statutes, regulations and rule: Page 
Ach of Sept. 90, 1904, Pub. La He. 108-8338, Tit. IV, 
108 Stat. 2670 ................ sti 

Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. 201 aon: 
§ 3(f), 29 U.S.C. 208(f) ..-......-..—.---------------= + passim 
§ 18(a) (6), 29 U.S.C. 213 (a) (6) -.. —— 35 

National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. ‘151 et 

seq.: 

§ 2(3), 29 U.S.C. 152(3) ................... 5, 8, 11, 12, 82, 34 
§ 8(a) (1), 29 U.S.C. 158(a) (1) —..............-...-.-. 6 
§ 8(a) (3), 29 U.S.C. 158 (a) (3) —..............-..... - 6 
§ 10(e), 29 U.S.C. 160(e) -................-....---.- — = 

29 C.F.R.: 
| $5 
Section TBO.VOD ........-....<---cccce-ceceeeececeennnnnnnnennnenennen 34 
a 33 
Section TBO.11B8 (a) ...........<-c-c-c--ec--c-eeceeeeenenennees 34 
Section 780.118 (b) .........-.--.--------<---cceeeeeeceeeeeennee 34 
Section 780.125 (1) _.......---.----.--n--neeeevenemnemeees 21,33 
Section 780.126 ........................-.........19, 21, 25, 26, 30 
Section 780.129 ..................--.<...-.-- 26 
TTL NTT EE 27 
Section 780.136 .............--.-.--c--eee0m- - 23 
ee 27 
oe 27 
TTT ANAT 23 
TTT TTT 29 
| ae 29 

NN $1 

Miscellaneous: 
81 Cong. Rec. 7653 (1937) ..................... 23, 24 


Iu the Supreme Court of the Anited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-210 
HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. Al- 
A78) is reported at 48 F.3d 1360. The decision and 
order of the National Labor Relations Board (Pet. 
App. A79-A205) and the decision of the administra- 
tive law judge (Pet. App. A206-A935) are reported 
at 311 N.L.R.B. 273. The Board’s decisions in the 
representation proceeding (J.A. 17a-23a, 33a-45a) 


are unreported. 
JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered 
on March 10, 1995. A petition for rehearing was 
denied on May 9, 1995. Pet. App. A936-A938. The 


(1) 


oe 
petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on August 
4, 1995, and was granted on November 6, 1995, lim- 
ited to the fifth question presented by the petition. 


Joint Appendix (J.A.) 46a. The jurisdiction of this 
Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


STATEMENT 


1. Prior to July 1989, petitioner Holly Farms 
Corporation was engaged in the production, process- 
ing, and transportation of poultry. Pet. App. A5. 
On July 18, 1989, petitioner Tyson Foods, Inc. 
(Tyson), acquired 100% of the stock of Holly Farms, 
making it a wholly owned subsidiary of Tyson. /d. 
at A4, All, A61, A715.' The issue before this Court 
concerns employees at Holly Farms’ facility in 
Wilkesboro, North Carolina, id. at A230-232, which 
is a “vertically integrated poultry operation.” /d. at 
A39. Operations at the Wilkesboro facility involve 
two kinds of chickens: “pullets,” which are used for 
breeding; and broiler chickens, which are destined 
for human consumption. J.A. 5a, 7a, 12a, 15a. 
Although the employees at issue here are involved 
only with broiler chickens, some understanding of 
the processes involving each type of chicken is 
necessary. 

Holly Farms purchases about 80% of its baby 
pullets from breeder companies and hatches the other 


1In a ruling that was upheld by the court of appeals and 
is no longer at issue, the National Labor Relations Board 
found that petitioner Tyson became a successor to petitioner 
Holly Farms as of July 18, 1989. Pet. App. Al8-A27, A110- 
A114. For convenience, hereafter we sometimes refer to 
petitioners collectively as “Holly Farms,” even when discuss- 
ing ongoing events that both precede and follow the date of 
successorship. 


When the pullets are 20 weeks old, they are taken 
from the growers’ farms to “laying houses” also 
owned by independent farmers. J.A. 9a. work- 


At Holly Farms’ hatchery, the eggs are hatched 


and the new chicks are vaccinated and have their 


beaks trimmed. J.A. 1la-12a. 


‘f 


boys.” J.A. 12a-13a. The independent growers raise 
the broiler chicks to 49 days of age. J.A. 13a.* It is 


2 The contract between Holly Farms and the independent 
growers provided in relevant part (App., infra, 2a-Sa): 
B. THE GROWER AGREES: 


the Producer to raise the birds to marketable weight. 
2. To utilize his best skill, judgment, and knowledge in 
caring for and rearing the birds. 


4. To be present during the catching or removal of the 
broilers and to raise and move, prior to the arrival of 


4 


at that point that the employees at issue here, the 
“live haul” crew, enter the picture. J.A. 28a, 32a. 

Holly Farms’ live haul crews are made up of about 
150 workers. J.A. 32a. Each crew consists of one 
live haul driver, one forklift operator, and several 
chicken catchers. J.A. 4a-7a, 13a, 28a, 36a. The live 
haul driver transports the crew on a flat-bed truck 
to the independent growers’ farms. There, the 
chicken catchers manually capture the broiler chicks 
and place them in steel cages; the forklift operator 
lifts the cages onto the truck; and the driver returns 
with the loaded cages and the crew to the processing 
plant. Pet. App. A41, A230 n.54, A831; J.A. 13a- 
14a. At the processing plant, the driver drives the 
truck onto scales and then proceeds to an unloading 
dock, where other employees unload the cages. Pet. 
App. A820 n.285, A831 & n.291. In the course of a 
shift, each live haul crew typically makes several 
trips between the processing facility and the inde- 
pendent growers’ farms. See id. at A831-A832. 

2. On February 16, 1989, Chauffeurs, Teamsters 
and Helpers Local Union No. 391, a/w International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters, AFL-CIO (the Union) 
filed a representation petition with the National 
Labor Relations Board (Board), seeking an election 
in a unit consisting of Holly Farms’ hatchery em- 
ployees; the Wilkesboro live haul employees; and the 
service center mechanics, feed haul employees, and 
feed mill employees at a Holly Farms facility in 


live haul, the equipment to insure proper care of the 
equipment and facilities. 
Although this contract was not formally moved into evidence 
in the Board proceeding, it was the subject of testimony before 
the Board and was marked as an exhibit. 


5 


Roaring River, North Carolina. J.A. 19a, 22a-23a, 
37a-38a; Pet. App. A211-A212, A233.* Holly Farms 
urged the Board’s Regional Director to dismiss the 
Union’s petition on the ground that all of the em- 
ployees in the proposed unit were “agricultural 
laborer[s]” excluded from the definition of “em- 
ployee” under Section 2(3) of the National Labor 
Relations Act (NLRA or Act), 29 U.S.C. 152(3). 
J.A. 19a. 

The Regional Director concluded that the Wilkes- 
boro live haul employees are not “agricultural labor- 
er[s].” J.A. 22a. He explained that “the Board has 
consistently held that when an employer contracts 
with farmers for the care and feeding of the em- 
ployer’s chicks, the employer’s status as a farmer 
engaged in the raising of poultry ends with respect 
to those chicks.” Jbid. (citing Imco Poultry, 202 
N.L.R.B. 259 (1973)). He dismissed the Union’s 
petition, however, concluding for other reasons that 
the Union had not proposed an appropriate bargain- 
ing unit. J.A. 23a. 

On review of the Regional Director’s decision, the 
Board found that the Wilkesboro live haul employees 
and the employees working at the Roaring River 
facility constituted an appropriate bargaining unit, 
and the Board directed an election in that unit. J.A. 
44a; Pet. App. A211-A212, A233-A235.* 


* The Roaring River facility included a feed mill operation, 
at which feed mill employees produced feed that was delivered 
by feed haul drivers to the farms of independent growers 
where pullets, broilers, and hens weve raised. J.A. 4a, 6a-Ta. 


* The Board also held that Holly Farms’ hatchery employees, 
including the egg haulers and pullet haulers, are agricultural 
laborers. J.A. 2la-22a, 48a. 


6 


3. On July 27, 1989, the Board conducted an elec- 
tion in the unit that it had determined in the repre- 
sentation proceeding was appropriate. The election 
resulted in a 95 to 95 tie, with one determinative 
challenged ballot. Pet. App. A235, A818-A819. The 
Union filed election objections and unfair labor prac- 
tice charges against petitioners. Jd. at A208-A209 
n.48, A213-A215. The Board’s General Counsel is- 
sued complaints against petitioners, which were later 
consolidated with the Union’s election objections and 
the ballot challenge. Jd. at A208 n.48. 

After a hearing, an administrative law judge 
(ALJ) sustained the challenge to the determinative 
ballot cast in the July 27, 1989, election; the election 
thus ended in a tie. Pet. App. A818-A819, A856- 
A857. The ALJ found that petitioners had com- 
mitted “many serious violations” of the NLRA that 
precluded the holding of a fair rerun election. /d. 
at A816.° In-addition, he found that the Union had 
achieved majority status in the unit, which it had 
demonstrated by signed authorization cards. See id. 
at A789. Based on those findings, the ALJ ordered 
petitioners to recognize and bargain with the Union 
as the representative of the Wilkesboro live haul and 
Roaring River employees, pursuant to NLRB vy. 


5’ The ALJ found that petitioners’ officials at the Wilkesboro 
facility had violated Section 8(a) (1) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. 
158(a) (1), by, among other things, threatening employees 
with arrest for distributing union literature on company prop- 
erty in non-work areas during non-work time, repeatedly 
interrogating employees regarding their union sympathies, 
and threatening employees with retaliation for wearing union 
insignia; and had violated Section 8(a) (3), 29 U.S.C. 
158 (a) (3), by, among other things, discriminatorily granting 
a pay increase before the election. Pet. App. A795-A796, 
A876, A878, A880, A883. 


7 


Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S. 575 (1969). Pet. App. 
A794, A919. Relying on the Board’s determination 
in the representation proceeding, the ALJ rejected 
petitioners’ renewed contention that the Wilkesboro 
live haul employees are “agricultural laborer[s]” ex- 
oy from the NLRA’s coverage. Jd. at A786- 

787. 

The Board upheld the ALJ’s unfair labor practice 
findings and his entry of a Gissel bargaining order. 
Pet. App. A134-A163, A182-A183. In rejecting peti- 
tioners’ challenge to the Gissel order, the Board (with 
one member dissenting) relied on its prior determina- 
tion in the representation proceeding that the Wilkes- 
boro live haul employees are not “agricultural labor- 
er[s].” Jd. at A83 n.8. 

4. The court of appeals (with one judge dissent- 
ing in part) enforced the Board’s order. Pet. App. 
Al-A53. As relevant here, the court upheld the 
Board’s determination that the Wilkesboro live haul 
— are not “agricultural laborer[s].” Jd. at 

Relying on Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 
429 U.S. 298 (1977), the court of appeals explained 
that, under the NLRA, “agriculture is defined in 
both a primary and a secondary sense”: “[t]he 
primary meaning encompasses farming in all its 
branches, including the raising of - poultry,” while 
“the secondary meaning includes any practices, 
whether or not themselves farming practices, which 
are performed either by a farmer or on a farm, 
incidental [ ] to or in conjunction with primary farm- 
ing operations.” Pet. App. A44-A45 (internal quota- 
tion marks omitted). The court remarked that peti- 
tioners conceded that the Wilkesboro live haul em- 
ployees do not engage in “primary” farming activi- 


8 


ties. Jd. at A46. The court sustained the Board’s 
determination that they also do not engage in “sec- 
ondary” farming activities. Jd. at A52. The court 
reasoned that the live haul employees’ activities occur 
after “the Company has turned the broiler chicks 
over to independent contract growers and the Com- 
pany’s status as a farmer engaged in raising poultry 
(a primary agricultural activity) has ended.” /d. at 
A48. The court held that those activities thus are 
not incidental to any primary farming operations on 
the part of petitioners. Jd. at A48-A49. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


I. The National Labor Relations Act (NLRA or 
Act) defines the term “employee” to exclude “agri- 
cultural laborer[s].” 29 U.S.C. 152(3). To be an 
“agricultural laborer’ for purposes of the Act, a 
worker must engage in “[a]griculture,” as that term 
is defined in Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Stan- 
dards Act (FLSA), 29 U.S.C. 203(f). See, e.g., 
Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298, 
300 n.6 (1977). As this Court has explained, Section 
3(f) of the FLSA defines “[a]griculture” to mean 
farming in a “primary” and a “secondary” sense. 
See, e.g., Bayside, 429 U.S. at 300. 

Petitioners did not argue before the National 
Labor Relations Board (Board) or the court of ap- 
peals that their “live haul” crews engage in primary 
farming. See Pet. App. 46a. Thus, the only question 
that this Court should address is whether the Board 
reasonably concluded that the live haul crews also do 
not engage in secondary farming. 

II. The Board reasonably concluded that petition- 
ers’ live haul crews do not engage in secondary 
farming. 


9 


A. The text of Section 3(f) indicates that second- 
ary farming must meet three requirements: (1) it 
must be performed either “on a farm” or “by a 
farmer”; (2) it must be performed “as an incident 
to or in conjunction with” primary farming opera- 
tions; and (3) those primary farming activities must 
be ones that are performed either by the same farmer 
who undertakes the putative secondary farming ac- 
tivity or on the same farm where the putative second- 
ary activities occur. 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 

Petitioners’ live haul drivers do not meet the first 
requirement. They do not work “on a farm”; they 
merely drive to and from the farm. Moreover, nei- 
ther their work nor that of the other members of the 
live haul crews (the chicken catchers and forklift 
operators) is performed “by a farmer.” Under the 
Board’s Imce Poultry rule, which this Court upheld 
in Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298, 
302 n.9 (1977), Holly Farms ceases to act as a 
farmer when it turns the broiler chicks over to 
the independent growers. It does not resume its fore- 
gone “farmer” status when, 49 days later, it dis- 
patches the live haul crews to the independent grow- 
ers’ farms to collect the mature chickens. At that 
point, Holly Farms is engaged in chicken-processing, 
which is not primary farming. 

Even if we assume arguendo that the live haul 
crews meet the first requirement, they nonetheless 
do not engage in secondary farming because they do 
not meet the second and third requirements. If their 
work is deemed to be performed “by a farmer” (i.c., 
Holly Farms), their work must be incidental to some 
primary farming activity by Holly Farms. That con- 
dition is not satisfied. Moreover, if it is recognized 
(as is the case) that the chicken catchers and fork- 


10 


lift operators work “on a farm,” their work may 
qualify as secondary farming only if it is incidental 
to the independent grower’s poultry-raising opera- 
tions. The Board reasonably concluded that the work 
of the chicken catchers and forklift operators is not 
incidental to those operations, because the live haul 
crews’ work begins only after the independent grow- 
ers’ work ends. The live haul crews play no role in 
the growers’ discharge of their contractual responsi- 
bilities, and the growers take no part in the work 
of the live haul crews. 

Petitioners argue that the chicken catchers and 
forklift operators engage in secondary farming be- 
cause they are involved in the “preparation for mar- 
ket” of the chickens; and that the live haul drivers 
are involved in the “delivery to market” of the 
chickens. Those arguments ignore that, under Sec- 
tion 3(f), the practices of preparing a product and 
transporting it to market constitute secondary farm- 
ing only if they are performed “by a farmer or on 
a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with” the 
primary farming operations of that farmer or on 
that farm. 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 

B. Although petitioners rely on the legislative his- 
tory of the phrase “or on a farm” in Section 3(f), 
it sheds no light on the question presented here. 

C. The Department of Labor’s regulations inter- 
preting Section 3(f) of the FLSA support the Board’s 
conclusion in this case. Those regulations make clear 
that the proper analysis focuses on whether the work 
of petitioners’ live haul crew is performed “as an 
incident to or in conjunction with” the primary 
farming operations of the independent growers. The 
regulations also make clear that it is more accurate 
to characterize the live haul crews’ work as incidental 


11 


to Holly Farms’ chicken-processing operation (which 
is not primary farming) than to the growers’ farm- 
ing operations. 

III. Petitioners seek to argue for the first time in 
their opening brief on the merits that the chicken 
catchers and forklift operators are engaged in pri- 
mary agriculture. Petitioners’ failure to advance 
that argument before the Board precludes its con- 
sideration in judicial proceedings to review the 
Board’s decision. See 29 U.S.C. 160(e); Woelke & 
Romero Framing, Inc. v. NLRB, 456 U.S. 645, 665- 
666 (1982). In any event, petitioners’ primary farm- 
ing argument is without merit. Petitioners argue 
that the work of the chicken catchers and the fork- 
lift operators is analogous to the “harvesting” (29 
U.S.C. 203(f)) of a crop. The statutory definition 
of “[{a]griculture,” by its terms, precludes the anal- 
ogy. The statute sets forth “the raising of * * * 
poultry” and other animals in a separate clause from 
the one that includes the term “harvesting.” /bid. 
That structure indicates that the term “harvesting’”’ 
refers to the process of collecting crops of plants, not 
animals. 

IV. The Board’s conclusion that the workers on 
petitioners’ live haul crews are “employee[s],” rather 
than “agricultural laborer[s],” under Section 2(3) 
of the NLRA is entitled to “considerable deference.” 
Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883, 891 (1984); 
see Bayside, 429 U.S. at 302. 


12 
ARGUMENT 


THE BOARD REASONABLY DETERMINED THAT 
PETITIONERS’ CHICKEN CATCHERS, FORKLIFT 
OPERATORS, AND LIVE HAUL DRIVERS ARE “EM- 
PLOYEE([S),” RATHER THAN “AGRICULTURAL 
LABORER[S],”" UNDER SECTION 2(3) OF THE 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT 
The rights afforded to workers by the National 
Labor Relations Act (NLRA or Act) extend only to 
a worker who falls within the Act’s definition of an 
“employee.” See NLRB v. Town & Country Electric, 
Ine., 116 S. Ct. 450, 453 (1995). Section 2(3) of the 
Act provides that “[t]he term ‘employee’ * * * shall 
not include any individual employed as an agricul- 
tural laborer.” 29 U.S.C. 152(3). The question be- 
fore this Court is whether the Board reasonably 
concluded that the workers in petitioners’ “live haul” 
crews are “employee[s],” rather than “agricultural 
laborer[s],” under Section 2(3) of the Act and are 
therefore within the Act’s coverage. 


I. TO BE AN “AGRICULTURAL LABORER,” A 
WORKER MUST ENGAGE IN EITHER “PRIMARY” 
OR “SECONDARY” FARMING 
The NLRA itself does not define the term “agri- 
cultural laborer” for purposes of Section 2(3) of 
the Act. As this Court has observed, however, “[a]n- 
nually since 1946, Congress, in riders to the Appro- 
priations Acts for the [National Labor Relations] 
Board, has tied the definition of ‘agricultural laborer’ 
in $2(3) of the NLRA to § 3(f) of the [Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA)].” Bayside Enterprises, Inc. 
v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298, 300 n.6 (1977); see Pub. L. 
No. 103-333, Tit. ITV, 108 Stat. 2570 (1994) (un- 
numbered section) (Board’s current appropriations 
Act). 


13 


Section 3(f) of the FLSA ties the definition of 
“agricultural laborer” to that of “[a]griculture,” 
which is defined as follows (29 U.S.C. 203(f)): 


“Agriculture” includes farming in all its 
branches and among other things includes the 
cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the 
production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting 
of any agricultural or horticultural commodities 
(including commodities defined as agricultural! 
commodities in section 1141j(g) of title 12), the 
raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, or 
poultry, and any practices (including any for- 
estry or lumbering operations) performed by a 
farmer or on a farm as an incident to or in con- 
junction with such farming operations, including 
preparation ‘or market, delivery to storage or to 
market or to carriers for transportation to 
market. 


As this Court has explained, the definition of “[a]g- 
riculture” in Section 3(f) of the FLSA “includes 
farming in both a primary and a secondary sense.” 
Bayside, 429 U.S. at 300; accord Farmers Reservoir 
& Irrigation Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755, 762-763 
(1949). Farming in its primary sense is defined in 
the first part of Section 3(f), as including “the culti- 
vation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, 
cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricul- 
tural or horticultural commodities * * * [and] 
the raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, 
or poultry.” 29 U.S.C. 203(f). “[S]econdary farm- 
ing” (Bayside, 429 U.S. at 301) is defined in the 
second part of Section 3(f), as including “any prac- 
tices * * * performed by a farmer or on a farm 
as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming 
operations, including preparation for market, deliv- 


14 


ery to storage or to market or to carriers for trans- 
portation to market.” Thus, “(t]he raising of poultry 
is primary farming, but hauling products to or from 
a farm is not primary farming. Such hauling may, 
however, be secondary farming if it ‘s work per- 
formed ‘by a farmer or on a farm as an incident 
to or in conjunction with such farming opera- 
tions.’ Bayside, 429 U.S. at 301. 

Petitioners did not argue before the Board or 
the court of appeals that the live haul crews engage 
in primary farming. Pet. App. A46. The only ques- 
tion properly before this Court therefore is whether 
the Board reasonably concluded that the live haul 
crews also do not engage in secondary farming. 
We show in Point II, infra, that the Board’s conclu- 
sion is reasonable. We show in Point III, infra, that 
petitioners’ “primary farming” argument, if consid- 
ered, should be rejected. 


Il. THE BOARD REASONABLY CONCLUDED THAT 
PETITIONERS’ LIVE HAUL CREWS DO NOT 
ENGAGE IN SECONDARY FARMING 


A. The Board’s Conclusion Is Consistent With the 
Text of Section 3(f) of the FLSA, as Construed by 
This Court 


1. To constitute secondary farming under Section 
3(f) of the FLSA, an activity must meet three con- 
ditions. First, the activity must be performed either 
“by a farmer” or “on a farm.” 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 
Second, the activity must be performed “as an inci- 
dent to or in conjunction with” primary farming 
activities. /bid. Third, those primary farming activ- 
ities must be ones that are performed either by the 
same farmer who undertakes the putative secondary 


15 


farming activity or on the same farm where the 
putative secondary activities occur. See ibid. 

As this Court has explained, the third requirement 
is imposed by the use of the word “such” in Section 
3(f)’s definition of “[a]griculture.” Farmers Reser- 
voir, 337 U.S. at 766 n.15. Secondary farming by a 
farmer or on a farm must be incidental to “such” 
primary farming activities as are undertaken by that 
farmer or on that farm, respectively. See ibid. 
For example, if a farmer processed not only com- 
modities produced on his or her own farm but also 
commodities produced by other farmers, the process- 
ing of the other farmers’ commodities would not con- 
stitute secondary farming. /bid. 

2. Petitioners do not contend that the live haul 
drivers work “on a farm,” nor could they do so; the 
live haul drivers merely drive to and from the farms 
of the independent growers.’ Petitioners do contend 
(Pet. Br. 33; see also Amicus Br. of American Farm 
Bureau et al. (AFB Br.) 11-12) that the live haul 
drivers’ work, as well as that of the chicken catchers 
and the forklift operators, is done “by a farmer.” In 


support of that contention, petitioners argue that 


Holly Farms acts as a farmer when it dispatches 
the live haul crews to the farms of the independent 
growers. Pet. Br. 31. That argument cannot be 
squared with this Court’s decision in Bayside. 


* In contrast to petitioners, amicus National Broiler Council! 
(NBC) does assert (NBC Br. 9) that the live hau! drivers 
“assist the chicken catchers” on the growers’ farms. The rec- 
ord contains testimony by one live haul driver indicating that 
he assisted in chicken catching on occasion, but not as part of 
his regular job duties. That evidence does not support the 
broad conclusion that the live haul drivers work “on a farm.” 
Cf. Pet. App. A58 (Niemeyer, J., dissenting). 


16 


Bayside was an integrated poultry operation that 
bred and hatched chicks on its own farms but con- 
tracted with independent growers to raise the chicks 
to maturity for slaughtering at Bayside’s processing 
plant. Bayside, 429 U.S. at 299, 301-302. The ques- 
tion befor: -he Court was whether the work of the 
truck drivers employed by Bayside who hauled 
poultry feed from Bayside’s feed mill to the farms 
of the independent contract growers constituted work 
done “by a farmer” for purposes of Section 3(f) of 
the FLSA. Bayside, 429 U.S. at 301-304. 

The Court upheld the Board’s determination that 
the drivers’ work was not performed “by a farmer.” 
Bayside, 429 U.S. at 302-304. The Court held that 
the Board had reasonably “rejected the argument that 
all of the activity on a contract farm should be re- 
garded as agricultural activity of an integrated 
farmer such as Bayside.” /d. at 302. In doing so, 
the Court specifically sustained the Board’s /mco 
Poultry rule, 202 N.L.R.B. 259, 260 (1973), which 
provides that, “when an employer contracts with in- 
dependent growers for the care and feeding of the 
employer’s chicks, the employer’s status as a farmer 
engaged in raising poultry ends with respect to those 
chicks.” Bayside, 429 U.S. at 302 & n.9. 

In a straightforward application of the /mco 
Poultry rule here, the Board likewise concluded that 
Holly Farms’ status as a farmer ends when its broiler 
chicks are delivered to the farms of the independent 
growers. The work of the live haul crew with respect 
to those chicks does not begin unti' after the growers 
have raised the chicks to maturity. At that point, 
Holly Farms has ceased to act as a farmer. Thus, 
none of the work of the live haul crews (including 


= 


17 


that of the chicken catchers and forklift operators) 
is done “by a farmer.” 

Petitioners argue (Pet. Br. 32) that Bayside “does 
not control” this case because petitioners’ live haul 
crews “actually perform the agricultural tasks of 
catching, caging, loading and delivering to market.” 
That argument falls short of the mark, however. 
Practices such as catching chickens and delivering 
them to market may constitute secondary farming 
if performed “by a farmer.” But if such work is not 
performed “by a farmer” (or “on a farm”), it can- 
not constitute secondary farming.” 

3. Whether or not this Court accepts our sub- 
mission that the work of the live haul crews is not 
done “by a farmer,” their work does not meet the 
second and third requirements for secondary farming. 

a. If the Court agrees with our submission that 
the work of the live haul crews is not done “by a 
farmer,” it is unnecessary to analyze the work of 
one component of the crew, the live haul drivers, 
because it is undisputed by the parties (see p. 15 
and note 6, supra) that the live haul drivers also do 
1.0t work “on a farm.” The Board’s conclusion that 


* Contrary to AFB’s contention (AFB Br. 10-11), Mitchell 
Vv. Budd, 350 U.S. 473 (1956), does not require a contrary 
conclusion. See also NBC Br. 10. The Court in Mitchell held 
that, when a farmer grew tobacco on its own farm and 
processed that tobacco (and only that tobacco) in its off-farm 
bulking plant, “the agriculture operation * * * end[ed] * * * 
with the delivery of the tobacco at the receiving platform 
of the bulking plant.” 350 U.S. at 481. The present case 
poses the analytically prior question of whether Holly Farms 
is properly regarded as a farmer at all when the mature 
chickens are collected, cooped, and delivered from growers’ 
farms to petitioners’ processing plant. 


18 


those drivers are not agricultural laborers would 
therefore have to be upheld. 

We do not dispute that the chicken catchers and 
forklift operators work “on a farm” (29 U.S.C. 
203(f)): the farms of the independent growers. It 
is also undisputed that the independent growers’ op- 
erations constitute primary farming: “the raising of 
* * * poultry” (29 U.S.C. 203(f)). However, for 
the work of the chicken catchers and forklift oper- 
ators to constitute secondary farming by virtue of 
its performance on a farm, it must meet the second 
and third requirements: namely, it must be per- 
formed “as an incident to or in conjunction with” 
the operations of the independent growers. 29 U.S.C. 
203 (f) ; see pp. 14-15, supra. 

The Board reasonably concluded that the work of 
the live haul crew is not incidental to the independent 
growers’ operations. The growers conduct their oper- 
ations under contracts that require them to raise peti- 
tioners’ chicks until they are 49 days old. At that 
point, the chicks are mature and ready for process- 
ing, and the growers’ operations end. It is only at 
that point, however, that the live haul crew’s work 
begins. The live haul crew thus plays no role in the 
growers’ discharge of their contractual duties. Nor 
do the independent growers exercise any control over 
the live haul crew (who at all times remain peti- 
tioners’ employees) or otherwise take any part in its 
work.* 


* Petitioners err in asserting (Pet. Br. 25-26) that the 
Board’s construction of the phrase “incident to or in conjunc- 
tion with such farming operations” focuses on the ultimate 
motivation of Holly Farms to market processed chicken at a 
profit and is therefore inconsistent with Maneja v. Waialua 
Agricultural Co., 349 U.S. 254 (1955). Holly Farms’ profit 


19 


Thus, although the live haul crews’ work comes on 
the heels of the independent growers’ operations, it 
is more accurately characterized as the first step of 
petitioners’ chicken-processing operation, rather than 
as the last step of the independent growers’ primary 
farming operations. See Draper Valley Farms, Inc., 
307 N.L.R.B. 1440 (1992). Accordingly, the Board 
reasonably concluded that the live haul crews’ work 
is incidental to petitioners’ processing operation, 
which, as explained below, is not primary farming. 
See p. 21, infra; see also Bayside, 429 U.S. at 301; 
29 C.F.R. 780.126.’ 


motive is not germane to the Board’s construction of the 
statutory phrase. Moreover, Maneja is distinguishable from 
the present case. The Court in that case held that railroad 
workers who hauled farm implements and field laborers 
between their employer’s sugar cane fields and its mill were 
agricultural laborers. Maneja, 349 U.S. at 260-263. The 
hauling was plainly performed “on a farm as an incident to 
or in conjunction with such farming operations” under Section 
3(f), because the employer’s mill, railroad tracks, and fields 
were all located on the employer’s sugar plantation, and only 
cane grown in those fields was processed at the mill. 349 U.S. 
at 256-257. 


* Amicus NBC argues (Br. 13 n.5) that it was irrational 
for the Board to classify pullet haulers, but not chicken 
catchers, as agricultural laborers. The Board could reasonably 
distinguish between those two categories of workers, however, 
on the ground that the chicken catchers’ work was performed 
in conjunction with Holly Farms’ processing operation, which 
was not primary farming activity, see Bayside, 429 U.S. at 
301, whereas the pullet haulers’ work was performed in con- 
junction with Holly Farms’ poultry-raising operation, which 
was primary farming activity, see 29 U.S.C. 203(f). See J.A. 
22a (concluding that egg haulers and pullet haulers are agri- 
cultural laboreys because, “[a]lthough hauling, generally, 


20 


b. If the Court rejects our submission that the 
work of the live haul crew is not performed “by a 
farmer,” that determination would reflect acceptance 
of petitioners’ contention (Pet. Br. 31) that Holly 
Farms acts as a farmer when it sends the live haul 
crews to the independent growers’ farms. Even 
under that theory, however, to meet the second and 
third requirements for secondary farming, the crews’ 
activities would have to be performed “as an incident 
to or in conjunction with” some primary farming 
operation conducted by Holly Farms. 

The crews’ activities are not performed inciden- 
tally to any primary farming operation by Holly 
Farms. Although the independent growers’ poultry- 
raising operations qualify as primary farming, under 
this Court’s decision in Bayside the independent 
growers’ operations cannot be attributed to Holly 
Farms. See 429 U.S. at 300-302 (upholding Board’s 
view that the primary farming activities of inde- 
pendent growers are not attributable to integrated 
poultry company ). 

Moreover, the crews’ work could reasonably be 
characterized as incidental to Holly Farms’ process- 
ing operation. Indeed, Holly Farms’ “live produc- 
tion” manager testified that the crews’ work is the 
first step of the processing operation. J.A. 29a. The 
Court in Bayside recognized, however, that poultry- 
processing is not primary farming. See 429 U.S. at 


would appear to be a non-farming activity, the employees 
making pickups in the circumstances presented here, par- 
ticularly considering the process and functional integration in 
the hatchery, are similarly engaged in the exempt activity of 
raising poultry”). 


21 


301. The Department of Labor has similarly recog- 
nized that “[t]he activities of the * * * [poultry] 
processor are not ‘raising of poultry.’” 29 C.F.R. 
780.126; see also 29 C.F.R. 780.125(b) (“Slaughter- 
ing, which is the antithesis of ‘raising,’ is not in- 
cluded” in the “ ‘raising of poultry.’ ”’). 

Holly Farms does engage in primary farming 
operations when its employees hatch the eggs of the 
broiler chicks that are delivered to the independent 
growers’ farms. See J.A. 10a-12a, 2la. But those 
operations end on the day that the chicks are hatched. 
J.A. 12a. The live haul crews’ work does not begin 
until 49 days later, after the chicks have been raised 
to maturity by the independent growers. J.A. 13a. 
The work of the crew is too remote from the hatchery 
operations to be incidental to those primary farming 
operations. 

Hence, even if, contrary to our submission, the 
Court determines that Holy Farms was acting as a 
farmer when it sent the live haul crews to the inde- 
pendent growers’ farms, the crews’ work is not sec- 
ondary farming because it is not performed inciden- 
tally to any primary farming operation by Holly 
Farms. 

4. Petitioners argue (Pet. Br. 19, 23) that the 
chicken catchers and forklift operators engage in 
secondary farming because they are involved in the 
“preparation for market” of petitioners’ chickens; 
and (id. at 30) that the live haul drivers engage in 
secondary farming because they are involved in the 
“delivery * * * to market” of the chickens. See also 
NBC Br. 11-12; Amicus Br. of California Agricul- 
tural Labor Relations Board (CALRB Br.) 18. 
Those arguments ignore the text of Section 3(f) of 


22 


the FLSA. Section 3(f) lists “preparation for mar- 
ket” and “delivery * * * to market” among the 
specific “practices” that constitute “[a]griculture” 
only if performed “by a farmer or on a farm as an 
incident to or in conjunction with” the primary 
farming operations conducted by the farmer or on 
the farm. 29 U.S.C. 203(f). As explained above, 
the live haul crew’s work falls outside Section 3(f) 
because it is not performed incidentally either to any 
primary farming operation by Holly Farms, or to 
the independent growers’ operations.” 


B. The Board’s Conclusion Is Consistent With the 
Legislative History of Section 3(f) of the FLSA 


Although petitioners rely heavily (Pet. Br. 15-19) 
on the legislative history of Section 3(f) of the 
FLSA, it does not support them. The legislative his- 
tory cited by petitioners explains the origin of the 
phrase “or on a farm” in Section 3(f). It does not 
cast doubt on the Board’s conclusion, based on a dif- 
ferent portion of Section 3(f), that petitioners’ live 
haul crews do not engage in secondary farming be- 
cause their work is not performed “as an incident to 


** Amicus NBC argues (Br. 12) that “catching chickens on 
a farm and delivering them for processing is unquestionably 
‘incident to or in conjunction with’ the raising of poultry, 
just as harvesting wheat * * * is incidental to the raising of 
that commodity.” It is not enough, however, to be able to say 
in the abstract that a practice is “incident to” a primary 
farming activity. Rather, the practice must be “incident to” 
the primary farming operation of the farm on which the 
practice occurs, or, if performed by a farmer, “incident to” 
that farmer’s primary farming operations. See pp. 14-15, 
supra. Neither condition is met in this case. 


23 


or in conjunction with” the independent growers’ 
operations. 

In the bill originally introduced in the Senate, 
“[a]griculture” was defined to include “any practices 
ordinarily performed by a farmer as an incident to 
such farming operations.” 81 Cong. Rec. 7653 
(1937). As this Court explained in Farmers Reser- 
voir, the phrase “or on a farm” was inserted after 
the phrase “by a farmer” by an amendment on the 
Senate floor (337 U.S. at 767 (footnotes omitted) ) : 


As originally introduced, the exemption covered 
such practices only if performed by a farmer. 
On the floor of the Senate it was objected that 
this would exclude the threshing of wheat or 
other functions necessary to the farmer if those 
functions were not performed by the farmer 
and his hands, but by separate companies or- 
ganized for and devoted solely to that particular 
job. To take care of that situation the words 
“or on a farm” were added to the definition. 
Thus, the wheat threshing companies, even 
though they were separate enterprises, were in- 
cluded in the exemption because their work was 
incidental to farming and was done on the farm. 


The Court in Farmers Reservoir made particular 
reference to the objection of Senator Tydings, who 
stated: 


In the case I visualize . . . the farmer is not 
performing the service. The man to whom [| 
refer makes a business of doing nothing but 
threshing. He owns his own machine, and hauls 
it from farm to farm, and enters into contracts 
with farmers to thresh their crops; the point 
being that while he is dealing with an agricul- 


24 


tural commodity, he is not necessarily a farmer, 
and he is not doing work ordinarily done by a 
farmer. 


Id. at 767 n.16 (quoting 81 Cong. Rec. 7653 (1937) ). 

As petitioners observe (Pet. Br. 14-15), the legis- 
lative history clearly shows that “Congress intended 
that the definition of an agricultural laborer would 
include nonfarmers so long as their work involved 
primary farming activities or occurred on a farm 
and was incidental to the farming operations of the 
farm.” While that history illuminates the purpose 
of the “or on a farm” phrase, it does not directly ad- 
dress the portion of Section 3(f) that is of central 
concern here: the phrase “as an incident to or in 
conjunction with such operations.” 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 

The threshing-machine operation described in the 
legislative history, which was considered by at least 
some legislators to constitute secondary farming, dif- 
fers significantly from the work of petitioners’ live 
haul crews. First, the live haul crew is not par of 
an enterprise that is in the “business of doing noth- 
ing but” providing chicken catching and trsmsporta- 
tion services. Rather, the activities of tke live haul 
crew are merely the first part of petiticaers’ chicken- 
processing operation, which itself * only part of 
petitioners’ vertically integrated poultry operation. 
Second, the chickens collected axd transported by the 
live haul crew belong to petitioners, not the inde- 
pendent growers. See J.A 5a, 6a, 29a; Pet. Br. 31. 
While Congress may hve intended by adding the 
phrase ‘or on a facm” to reach the employees 
of an independent -ontractor hired by a farmer to 
perform a service for the farmer, such as threshing 
the farmer’s wheat, the legislative history does not 


25 


demonstrate that Congress intended to sweep within 
the agricultural exemption workers who (as here) 
enter onto a farm to perform a service, not for the 
farmer upon the farmer’s commodities, but for an 
industrial firm upon the industrial firm’s commodi- 
ties. The Board could therefore reasonably conclude 
that such workers’ activities are not performed “as 
an incident to or in conjunction with” the primary 
farming operations of those farms. 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 
Instead, such workers are properly regarded as in- 
dustrial workers entitled to the NLRA’s protection, 
rather than agricultural! laborers. 


C. The Board’s Conclusion Is Consistent With the 
Department of Labor's Regulations Interpreting 
Section 3(f) of the FLSA 


The Board’s conclusion accords with the Depart- 
ment of Labor’s interpretive regulations, which the 
Board seeks to follow “whenever possible,” Camsco 
Produce Co., 297 N.L.R.B. 905, 908 & n.14 (1990) 
(quoting Jmperial Garden Growers, 91 N.L.R.B. 
1034, 1037 (1950)), and which “constitute a body of 
experience and informed judgment to which courts 
and litigants may properly resort for guidance.” 
Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944). 

The Department of Labor regulation addressing 
the present situation, entitled “Contract arrange- 
ments for raising poultry,” states as follows (29 
C.F.R. 780.126) : 


Feed dealers and processors sometimes enter 
into contractual arrangements with farmers un- 
der which the latter agree to raise to marketable 
size baby chicks supplied by the former who also 
undertake furnish all the required feed and 
possibly additional items. Typically, the feed 


26 


dealer or processor retains title to the chickens 
until they are sold. Under such an arrangement, 
the activities of the farmers and their employees 
in raising the poultry are clearly within section 
3(f) [of the FLSA]. The activities of the feed 
dealer or processor, on the other hand, are not 
“raising of poultry” and employees engaged in 
them cannot be considered agricult:: al employees 
on that ground. Employees of the teed dealer or 
processor who perform work on a farm as an 
incident to or in conjunction with the raising of 
poultry on the farm are employed in “secondary” 
agriculture (see $§ 780.137 et seg. and Johnston 
v. Cotton Producers Assn., 244 F. 2d 553). 


Under this regulation, as under the Board’s decision, 
the status of petitioners’ live haul crews depends 
upon whether they engage in secondary farming, 
which in turn depends upon whether they “perform 
work on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction 
with the raising of poultry on the farm.” 29 C.F.R. 
780.126. Other Department of Labor regulations 
confirm the Board’s conclusion that the live haul 
crews do not engage in secondary farming because 
their work is not performed “as an incident to or in 
conjunction with” the independent growers’ poultry- 
raising operations. 

In keeping with the text of Section 3(f) (see pp. 
14-15, supra), the regulations provide that second- 
ary farming must meet three requirements (29 
C.F.R. 780.129) (bracketed numerals added) : 


To come within this secondary meam..g, [1] 
a practice must be performed either by a farmer 
or on a farm. [2] It must also be performed 
either in connection with the farmer’s own farm- 
ing operations or in connection with farming 


27 


operations conducted on the farm where the 
practice is performed. [3] In addition, the prac- 
tice must be performed “as an incident to or in 
conjunction with” the farming operations. 
The first and third requirements are readily evident 
on the face of Section 3(f). As the regulations ex- 
plain, the second (“in connection with”) requirement 
is derived from Section 3(f)’s use of the word 
“such.” See 29 C.F.R. 780.141; see also pp. 14-15, 
supra. 

As discussed above, petitioners’ live haul drivers 
do not meet the first requirement; they do not work 
“on a farm,” and their work is not done “by a 
farmer.” See pp. 17-18, supra; see also 29 C.F.R. 
780.134 (“Any practice which cannot be performed 
on a farm, such as ‘delivery to market,’ is necessarily 
excluded [from secondary agriculture] * * * when 
performed by someone other than a farmer.” (cita- 
tions omitted)). In any event, none of the workers 
on the live haul crews meets the second (“in connec- 
tion with”) and third (“incident to”) requirements 
prescribed in the Department of Labor’s regulations. 

With regard to the “in connection with” require- 
ment, the regulations state (29 C.F.R. 780.143): 

The fact that a practice performed on a farm 
is not performed by or for the farmer is a 
strong indication that it is not performed in 
connection with the farming operations there 
conducted. 


The regulations add that, in determining whether a 
practice is performed “for” a farmer, it is “highly 
significant” whether the practice involves property to 
which the farmer has title or for which the farmer 
otherwise has responsibility. Jbid. As discussed 


28 


above, the live haul crews’ work involves property 
that belongs to petitioners, not the independent grow- 
ers."' Moreover, Holly Farms has not been retained 
by the independent growers to render the independ- 
ent growers any service; rather, the growers have 
been hired by Holly Farms to perform a service for 
Holly Farms: raising the chicks to maturity. The 
live haul crews’ work begins only after the independ- 
ent growers’ responsibilities have ended. See pp. 
18-19, supra. That work is therefore not performed 
“in connection with” the independent growers’ opera- 
tions. 

With regard to the “incident to” requirement, the 
regulations state in relevant part (29 C.F.R. 
780.144) : 


The line between practices that are and those 
that are not performed “as an incident to or in 
conjunction with” such farming operations is not 
susceptible of precise definition. Generally, a 
practice performed in connection with farming 
operations is within the statutory language only 
if it constitutes an established part of agricul- 
ture, is subordinate to the farming operations 


" Tf, in contrast to the facts of this case, the chicken catchers 
and forklift operators of an independent contractor were hired 
by a grower to cage and load chickens both raised and owned 
by the grower, the work of the chicken catchers and forklift 
operators might be characterized as being performed “for” 
the grower, and therefore to occur “in connection with” the 
grower’s poultry-raising operations. Cf. 29 C.F.R. 780.126 
(whether employees of independent contractors who work on 
a farm are engaged in secondary agriculture “depends, of 
course, on whether the practices are performed as an incident 
to or in conjunction with the farming operations on the 
particular farm”). 


29 


involved, and does not amount to an independent 
business. 


The work of the live haul crew is in no sense sub- 
ordinate to the independent growers’ operations. As 
explained above, the live haul crew plays no role in 
the independent growers’ discharge of their con- 
tractual responsibilities, nor is the live haul crew 
under the direction of the independent growers.” 
Accordingly, even if the live haul crew’s work were 
deemed to occur “in connection with” the independent 
growers’ operations, it would not constitute secondary 
farming under the Department of Labor’s regulations 
because it is not incidental to those operations. 
Petitioners err in relying (Pet. Br. 23) upon a 
regulation that defines “preparation for market” to 
include “[cJulling, grading, cooping, and loading” of 
poultry. 29 C.F.R. 780.151(k). Another regulation 
“emphasize[s] that ‘preparation for market,’ like 
other practices, must be performed ‘by a farmer or 
on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with 
such farming operations’ in order to be within sec- 
tion 3(f).” 29 C.F.R. 780.150. The latter regulation 
makes clear that, to constitute secondary farming, it 
Is not enough that an activity prepares a product for 
market; the activity must, in addition, occur “as an 


"Cf. Bayside Enterprises, Inc., 216 N.L.R.B. 502, 505 
(1975) (work of truck drivers employed by integrated poultry 
producer, who delivered and unloaded poultry feed on farms 
of independent growers, was incidental to the operation of the 
employer’s feed mill rather than the growers’ farms), aff'd, 
429 U.S. 298 (1977); NLRB v. Samuel R. Gass, 377 F.2d 438, 
443-444 (1st Cir. 1967) (same: court notes that “[i}t is sig- 
nificant that these drivers are not employed or paid by the 
farms nor are they under the control of the farmers”). 


30 
incident to” and “in connection with” primary farm- 
ing operations. 

Petitioners also err in relying (Pet. Br. 27-28) on 
the decision cited in 29 C.F.R. 780.126, Johnston v. 
Cotton Producers Ass’n, 244 F.2d 553 (5th Cir. 
1957). See also NBC Br. 21; CALRB Br. 13. 
Johnston was employed by a retail store that sold 
baby chicks, feed, and other supplies to farmers. 
Johnston, 244 F.2d at 554. The court held that he 
was exempt from the FLSA as an agricultural 
laborer because “[s]ubstantially all of [his] work 
was done as a part of or in connection with the 
preparation for market * * * of poultry raised on 
farms.” Jd. at 555. Unlike Holly Farms’ live haul 
crews, which play no role in the independent growers’ 
poultry-raising operations, Johnston not only caught, 
cooped, and loaded the chickens onto trucks but also 
“supervise[d] the giuwing of the chicks by growers 
on their farms.” Jd. at 554. Moreover, unlike Holly 
Farms, the retail store that employed Johnston had 
no use for the mature chicks; it retained title to the 
chicks simply as security for the purchase price of 
the chicks and other material sold to the farmers. 
Ibid. The mature birds in Johnston, once cooped and 
caught, were delivered to third-party processors, not 
to the retail store. See ibid. Under those circum- 
stances, it was reasonable to conclude that the em- 
ployee’s activities were performed “as an incident to 
or in conjunction with” the growers’ operations. 
That conclusion does not conflict with the Board’s 
contrary conclusion in the quite different circum- 
stances of this case. 


31 


III. PETITIONERS’ “PRIMARY FARMING” ARGU- 
MENT SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED BECAUSE 
IT WAS NOT RAISED BELOW; IN ANY EV ENT, IT 
CONFLICTS WITH THE TEXT OF THE STATUTE 


AND THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR’S INTER- 
PRETIVE REGULATIONS 


Petitioners and some of their amici argue that the 
chicken catchers and forklift operators (but not the 
live haul drivers) engage in primary farming by 
‘harvesting” an “agricultural commodity.” Pet. Br. 
29-30; AFB Br. 8-9; NBC Br. 9, 17. This Court 
should decline to consider petitioners’ “primary 
farming” argument. If the argument is considered, 
it should be rejected. 

A. Petitioners did not advance a primary farm- 
ing argument before the Board or the court of ap- 
peals, and neither the Board nor the court addressed 
it.” Petitioners also did not raise the primary farm- 
ing argument in their petition for a writ of cer- 
tiorari; it appears for the first time in their opening 
brief on the merits. Cf. Sup. Ct. R. 24(a) (brief on 
the merits “may not raise additional questions or 
change the substance of the questions already pre- 


** Although petitioners did not expressly “concede” the pri- 
mary farming issue, as the court of appeals believed (Pet. 
App. A46), they did not raise that issue at all. Instead, they 
made only a secondary farming argument. See Pet. C.A. 
Opening Br. 12 (“[T)he activities of catching, caging, and 
loading live chickens onto a truck for delivery are clearly 
incidental to or in conjunction with the primary farming 
practice of raising poultry on those farms.”); Pet. C.A. Reply 
Br. 18 (“The thrust of Petitioners’ position with regard to 
the chicken catchers and forklift operators is that they per- 
form work on a farm that is incidental to the farming activi- 


ties performed by the owner of the f - 
pow Hy e farm.”) (emphasis 


32 


sented”). The question whether chicken catchers 
and forklift operators engage in primary farming is 
analytically distinct from the question whether they 
engage in secondary farming. See pp. 12-14, supra. 
Each of those questions, moreover, is one that the 
Board should have an opportunity to consider in 
the first instance. See, e.g., Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, 
467 U.S. 883, 891 (1984) (“the task of defining the 
term ‘employee’ is one that has been assigned pri- 
marily to the agency created by Congress to admin- 
ister the Act”) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Under those circumstances, this Court should decline 
to consider petitioners’ primary farming argument. 
See, e.g., Taylor v. Freeland & Kronz, 503 U.S. 638, 
645-646 (1992). Indeed, petitioners’ failure to ad- 
vance their primary farming argument before the 
Board creates a statutory bar to its consideration in 
judicial proceedings reviewing the Board’s order. See 
29 U.S.C. 160(e) (“No objection that has not been 
urged before the Board * * * shall be considered by 
the [reviewing] court, unless the failure or neglect 
to urge such objection shall be excused because of 
extraordinary circumstances.”); Woelke & Romero 
Framing, Inc. v. NLRB, 456 U.S. 645, 665-666 
(1982) (holding that under 29 U.S.C. 160(e) the 
court of appeals “was without jurisdiction to con- 
sider” an issue “not raised during the proceedings 
before the Board’). 


4 Petitioners framed the question presented in a manner 
that could be read to encompass a “primary farming” argu- 
ment. See Pet. iv (“Are chicken catchers, forklift drivers, 
and live-haul drivers of a vertically integrated poultry pro- 
ducer considered agricultural employees under Section 2(3) 
of the National Labor Relations Act (‘NLRA’ or ‘Act’), 29 
U.S.C. § 152(3) (1978) ?”) (question 5). In the body of their 
petition, however, petitioners asserted only a secondary farm- 
ing argument. See Pet. 60-61. 


33 


B. In any event, petitioners’ contention that the 
chicken catchers and forklift operators are engaged 
in “harvesting” poultry conflicts with the text of 
Section 3(f) of the FLSA and the Department of 
Labor regulations interpreting the statute. 

Section 3(f) differentiates “the production, culti- 
vation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural 
or horticultural commodities” from “the raising of 
livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, or poultry.” 29 
U.S.C. 203(f). If the practices of “cultivation, grow- 
ing, and harvesting” applied to poultry, then the 
statutory phrase “the raising of * * * poultry” would 
be superfluous. That result should be avoided. See, 
e.g., Astoria Fed. Savings & Loan Ass’n vy. Solimino, 
501 U.S. 104, 112 (1991). To avoid it, Section 3(f) 
must be construed to make only the “raising” (and 
not the “harvesting’”’) of poultry a primary farming 
activity. 

The chicken catchers and forklift operators do not 
“raise” the poultry that they catch and load onto 
trucks. The poultry has already been “raised” by 
the independent growers. Under the explicit wording 
of the statute, therefore, the chicken catchers and 
forklift operators are not engaged in primary agri- 
culture. See Draper Valley Farms, Inc., 307 N.L.R.B. 
1440 (1992); accord 29 C.F.R. 780.125(b) (‘The 
‘raising’ of poultry includes the breeding, hatching, 
propagating, feeding, and general care of poultry.”’). 

Petitioners’ contrary argument (Pet. Br. 29-30) 
rests on a misreading of the Department of Labor’s 
interpretive regulations. The regulations define the 
term “agricultural commodities” to include “domesti- 
cated animals and some of their products.” 29 C.F.R. 
780.112. The regulations also state that “ ‘[h]arvest- 
ing’ does not extend to operations subsequent to and 
unconnected with the actual process whereby agricul- 


34 


tural commodities * * * are severed from their 
attachment to the soil or otherwise reduced to posses- 
sion.” 29 C.F.R. 780.118(b). Reversing that nega- 
tive formulation, petitioners argue that harvesting 
must include all operations in which “agricultural 
commodities,” including “domesticated animals” such 
as poultry, are “reduced to possession.” Pet. Br. 29. 

Although petitioners’ argument is plausible in 
isolation, it fails to take into account the positive 
definition of “harvesting” in the regulations (29 
C.F.R. 780.118(a) ): 


The term “Harvesting” as used in section 3(f) 
[of the FLSA] includes all operations customar- 
ily performed in connection with the removal of 
the crops by the farmer from their growing 
position. 
The regulation goes on to confirm that “harvesting” 
is an activity performed upon non-animal agricul- 
tural commodities, such as “the cutting of grain, the 
picking of fruit, the stripping of bluegrass seed, and 
the digging up of shrubs and trees grown in a 
nursery.” Ibid. While the “harvesting” of some non- 
crop agricultural commodities, such as fish, may con- 
stitute “farming” (see Domsea Farms, Inc., 211 
N.L.R.B. 832 (1974); 29 C.F.R. 780.109)), “farm- 
ing,” as applied to poultry, is limited by statute to 
the “raising of * * * poultry.” 29 U.S.C. 203(f). 


IV. THE BOARD'S DETERMINATION THAT PETI- 
TIONERS’ LIVE HAUL EMPLOYEES ARE NOT 
“AGRICULTURAL LABORER([S]” IS ENTITLED TO 
DEFERENCE 


This Court has repeatedly recognized that the 
Board’s interpretation of the term “employee” in 
Section 2(3) of the NLRA “‘is entitled to considerable 
deference.” Sure-Tan, 467 U.S. at 891; see also, 


35 


e.g., Town & Country Electric, Inc., 116 S. Ct. at 453; 
NLRB vy. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 494 U.S. 
775, 786-787 (1990). In addition, the Court has 
stated that the Board’s construction of the exemption 
for agricultural laborers in Section 3(f) of the FLSA 
“is one we must respect even if the issue might ‘with 
nearly equal reason be resolved one way rather than 
another.’” Bayside, 429 U.S. at 302 (quoting Farm- 
ers Reservoir, 337 U.S. at 770 (Frankfurter, J., con- 
curring) )."° Where, as in this case, the Board’s 
conclusion that particular employees are not “agricul- 
tural laborer[s]” reflects a reasonable interpretation 
of the text of Section 3(f) and is consistent with the 
legislative history of that provision, the Board’s prior 
decisions, and the Department of Labor’s construction 
of the statute, “the appropriate weight which must 
be given to the judgment of the agency whose special 
duty is to apply this broad statutory language to 
varying fact patterns requires enforcement of the 
Board’s order.” Bayside, 429 U.S. at 303-304; see also 
NLRB vy. Transportation Management Corp., 462 
U.S. 393, 401-402 (1983); NLRB v. Hendricks 
County Rural Electric Membership Corp., 454 U.S. 
170, 189-190 (1981). 

Moreover, because Section 3(f) defines an area 
partially exempted from the regulatory framework 
established by the FLSA,”* it must be “narrowly con- 


'* This Court’s decision in Bayside forecloses petitioners’ 
argument (Pet. Br. 11-12) that the Board’s interpretation of 
Section 3(f) is not entitled to deference. See also NBC Br. 
20; AFB Br. 19. 


16 See, e.g., FLSA Section 13(a) (6), 29 U.S.C. 213(a) (6) 
(partial exemption from minimum wage and overtime pay 
provisions for certain employees employed in “agriculture” 
as defined by Section 3(f)); see generally 29 C.F.R. 780.100. 


36 


strued against the employers seeking to assert [it]” 
and its application must be limited to those falling 
“plainly and unmistakably within [its] terms and 
spirit.” Arnold v. Ben Kanowsky, Inc., 361 U.S. 388, 
392 (1960); accord A. H. Phillips, Inc. v. Walling, 
324 U.S. 490, 493 (1945). It cannot be said that 
Holly Farms’ chicken catchers, forklift operators, and 
live haul drivers fall “plainly and unmistakably” 
within the Section 3(f)’s agricultural exemption. The 
Board’s determination that these employees are 
NLRA “employees” is therefore entitled to affirmance. 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the court of appeals should be 
affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted. 
Drew S. Days, IIT 
FREDERICK L,. FEINSTEIN Solicitor General 
General Counsel LAWRENCE G. WALLACE 
LINDA SHER Deputy Solicitor General 
Associate General Counsel RICHARD H. SEAMON 
NORTON J. COME Assistant to the Solicitor 
Deputy Associate General 
General Counsel 
JOHN EMAD ARBAB 
Attorney 
National Labor Relations 
Board 


JANUARY 1996 


APPENDIX 


WILKESBORO DIVISION 
Effective 2/4/85 


AGREEMENT 


THIS AGREEMENT made this the —— day of 
, 19—, by and between Holly Farms 
Poultry Industries, Inc., a North Carolina corpora- 
tion, hereinafter referred to as the “Producer,” and 
, hereinafter 
referred to as the “Grower.” 


WITNESSETH: 


THAT WHEREAS, Holly Farms Poultry Indus- 
tries, Inc. is engaged in the production of poultry on 
an integrated basis, being responsible for the rear- 
ing of chickens from the breeder hens to the process- 
ing of the poultry into dressed product; and 


WHEREAS, the Grower has represented himself 
as an experienced and knowledgeable person in the 
field of rearing poultry, possessing skill and knowl- 
edge to supervise and direct the efficient rearing of 
broilers; and 


WHEREAS, the Producer desires to utilize the pro- 
fessed skill, judgment, discretion and knowledge of 
the Grower on a contractual basis for the production 
of broilers for use in its processing plants; and 


WHEREAS, the compensation of the Grower is 
predicated upon the skill, knowledge and discretion 
which he agrees to utilize and purports to possess in 


(la) 


2a 


the production of the chickens under his control and 
supervision ; and 


WHEREAS, the Grower warrants that he is the 
owner of or in the possession of a farm together with 
improvements located thereon, sufficient and adequate 
for use in rearing chickens or broilers. 


NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of these 
premises and the mutual agreements herein set out, 
the parties do hereunto agree as follows: 


A. THE PRODUCER AGREES: 


1. To furnish and deliver baby chicks to the 
Grower’s farm to be grown out as broilers subject to 
the termination right of either party as set forth 
hereinafter. 

2. To furnish and deliver all feed and medication 
which the Producer, with the advice of the Grower, 
determines to be adequate and sufficient to rear the 
broilers to marketable weight. 

8. To pay Grower in accordance with the formula 
or method hereinafter set out in this agreement on 
the following time schedule: 


a. The Grower will notify the Producer when 
the unused feed may be picked up. 

b. The Grower’s settlement will be made 
within a period of fourteen (14) working days 
from the day the unused feed is picked up. 


B. THE GROWER AGREES: 


1. To furnish the necessary housing, equipment, 
fuel, water, shavings or litter, electricity, labor, and 
other facilities or items that are necessary in the 


3a 


opinion of the Producer to raise the birds to market- 
able weight. 

2. To utilize his best skill, judgment, and knowl- 
edge in caring for and rearing the birds. The Grower 
further agrees that no feed, chicks, or medication 
furnished by the Producer will be used for any pur- 
pose other than the rearing of birds under this agree- 
ment, and that in the event feed or other supplies 
remain in the feeders after the rearing of ore flock, 
this feed or supplies will be utilized in the rearing 
of the next flock or returned to the Producer. 

3. To permit at any time inspection of birds and 
growing facilities by the Producer or its agents. 

4. To be present during the catching or removal of 
the broilers and to raise and move, prior to the arrival 
of live haul, the equipment to insure proper care of 
the equipment and facilities. 

5. To exercise the necessary supervision and plan- 
ning in order to provide properly maintained roads 


or passageways to poultry houses and around poultry 
houses. 


6. To warrant that the Grower is the owner of the 
land, buildings, and equipment utilized in the rearing 
of the chickens or that the Grower is in the legal 
possession of the property and has the right and 
authority to utilize the same for this purpose. 


C. THE PRODUCER AND THE GROWER 
JOINTLY AGREE: 


1. That the delivery date and the number of baby 
chicks to be placed with the Grower will be deter- 
mined by consultation and agreement between the 
Grower and the Producer with the final decision 
being made by the Producer. 


4a 


2. That after the removal of each flock, the Grower 
will be paid in accordance with a method or formula 
as follows: 


a. A figure to be known as the individual 
Grower’s Efficiency Point Factor will be ascer- 
tained. The Grower’s efficiency point factor will 
be calculated by determining the Grower’s total 
number of net live weight pounds of poultry 
grown and the total efficiency points assigned for 
settlement purposes of the feed (580 points per 
100 pounds), and chicks (20 points each) util- 
ized in producing the broilers. After the Grow- 
er’s efficiency points have been determined, the 
total number of pounds of broilers will be divided 
into the total efficiency points giving the efficiency 
point factor. The efficiency point factor ascer- 
tained by this division will constitute for settle- 
ment purposes the individual Grower’s settlement 
based on the average of all grower’s efficiency 
points whose broilers were moved in the same 
settlement period. (The average of all grower’s 
efficiency points whose broilers were moved in 
the same settlement period is known as the “‘float- 
ing average.” ) 


b. Basic Grower Payment 


(1) The individual Grower’s efficiency point factor 
per pound in relation to the floating average as as- 
certained by the method set out above will be applied 
to Exhibit A entitled “Basic Grower Payment Sched- 
ule.” The applicable figures appearing in the column 
will be ascertained and payment will be made by ap- 
plying the figures to the applicable column on 


Sa 


Exhibit A. For example, the average of all growers’ 
efficiency points (floating average) whose broilers 
were moved in the same settlement period is 10.30 
points, and the individual Grower’s efficiency point 
factor is 10.00 points, then the individual Grower will 
receive floating average pay plus a .30 point equiv- 
alent lower than the floating average which scales out 
on Exhibit A to be $149.00 per thousand broilers sold. 
If the floating average is 16.30 points, then the indi- 
vidual Grower’s efficiency point factor is 16.60 points, 
and the individual Grower will receive floating aver- 
age pay less a .30 point equivalent higher than the 
floating average which scales out on Exhibit A to be 
$131.00 per thousand broilers sold. 

(2) The settlement period for obtaining the float- 
ing average will be one week (Monday through 
Saturday’s kill), but in no case will the settlement 
period contain less than 10 flocks. For example, 
when 8 flocks are moved in a particular week, two 
flocks would be added to these 8 flocks making up the 
10-flock settlement group. The efficiency point fac- 
tors used for these two flocks would be the same as 
the floating average efficiency point factor from the 
previous week. 

(3) For the purpose of determining the weekly 
floating average, growers whose efficiency point fac- 
tor is 1.50 points per pound more or less than the 
average for the settlement period will not be used 
for figuring grower pay other than his own. 

(4) A copy of the composite Grower’s efficiency 
points for determining the floating average will be 
available at the office of the Producer. 


(c) Market Advantage Bonus Payment. A 
market advantage bonus payment will be paid 


6a 


to the Grower based upon the Market Advantage 
Factor determined by reference to the chart at- 
tached hereto as Exhibit B and its relationship 
to the Monday Final Georgia Dock Market plus 
one cent. The Monday Final Georgia Dock Mar- 
ket plus one cent set forth on Exhibit C refers to 
the simple average of three quoted markets 
(Monday of the week of processing and the two 
previous Mondays). The prices set forth on 
Exhibit B refer to the quoted cash price per 
bushel of Chicago, Illinois #2 yellow corn and 
the quoted cash price per ton of Decatur, Illinois 
49% soybean meal. These prices will be aver- 
aged on Monday of the week of processing for 
the previous three Mondays of trading and are 
not necessarily indicative of the price which the 
Producer pays for any and all of its corn and 
soybean meal. The market advantage factor as 
determined by Exhibit B is predicated upon the 
average consumption of corn and soybean meal 
per pound of dressed poultry, the average quoted 
market price of corn and soybean meal for the 
three Mondays immediately preceding the week 
of processing, and the estimated freight on the 
corn and soybean meal. The market advantage 
factor is then related to the Monday Final Geor- 
gia Dock Market plus one cent by use of the 
Market Advantage Bonus Payment Chart (Ex- 
hibit C) in order to determine the market 
advantage bonus payment per thousand birds 
processed. The Monday Final Georgia Dock 
Market plus one cent is used for convenience and 
is not necessarily indicative of the price at which 
the Producer sells its poultry products and the 
market advantage bonus payment chart includes 


7a 


an estimated constant factor to cover all addi- 
tional 

As an example in determining the market ad- 
vantage bonus payment, assume corn price of 
$2.70 per bushel and soybean meal of $160.00 
per ton. Exhibit B shows a market advantage 
factor of 15.38. Then assuming a Monday Final 
Georgia Dock Market plus one cent of 49.00 
cents per pound, the market advantage bonus 
payment determined by use of Exhiibt C is $9.50 
per thousand birds sold. 

d. A settlement sheet prepared in accordance 
with the procedures hereinabove set out and re- 
flecting the amount paid the Grower, the effi- 
ciency point factor per pound, the average of the 
Monday Final Georgia Dock Market price plus 
one cent of the Monday of the week of processing 
and the two previous Mondays; the average of 
the previous three Monday’s daily prices on #2 
yellow corn and 49% soybean meal; and other 
information will be furnished the Grower. 


3. In the event of one hundred percent (100% ) 
loss of al! birds placed in any one house as a result 
of fire or disease not resulting from the negligence or 
intentional acts of the Grower, the Producer will pay 
the Grower $7.00 per thousand chickens placed for 
each week including fractions thereof which the 
Grower has had the chickens. For example, if fire 
destroys a house of 10,500 birds at five weeks and 
two days of age, the grower pay for this house is 
$388.50. A loss of eighty percent (80%) or more of 
the flock shall be interpreted for purposes of this 
paragraph as one hundred percent (100%) loss. 

4. That for the convenience of not having to 
initiate a new agreement after each flock, this agree- 


8a 


ment shall remain in full force and effect with the 
privilege on the part of either party to terminate the 
same after the removal of any particular flock. In 
the event of termination, the Producer shall have the 
right and privilege to enter the premises and remove 
any feed, medication, equipment, and other property 
belonging to the Producer. 

5. In the event the Producer in its sole judgment 
shall determine that the flock or birds in possession 
of the Grower is deteriorating or that the Grower is 
failing to maintain the normal and ordinary growth, 
or in the event the Grower shall wrongfully dispose 
of feed, chicks, medication, or any other property of 
the Producer, then the Producer may engage a court 
of proper jurisdiction and obtain an injunctive or 
mandatory order authorizing the Producer to go upon 
the premises of the Grower and remove therefrom the 
birds, feed, medication, supplies, or other property 
belonging to the Producer. The Grower, under these 
circumstances, does hereby forfeit any compensation 
or payment he would otherwise receive with refer- 
ence to this flock. 

6. That title to feed, chicks, and medication fur- 
nished by the Producer is and shall remain the sole 
«ad exclusive property of the Producer. 

7. The Producer and Grower are each independ- 
ent contractors performing services using their sep- 
arate discretion and judgment. The Producer and 
the Grower shall, in their separate and independent 
discretion, employ and supervise exclusively their 
own servants, agents and employees. 

8. That Producer shall under no circumstances be 
held responsible for damages to Grower caused by 
delay or failure to perform hereunder when such 
delay or failure is due to fire, strikes, acts of God, 


\ 


9a 


legal acts of public authorities or delays or defaults 
due to labor, feed, chick, or medication shortages. 


The provisions of the paragraph are subject to and 
are not inconsistent with Part C, section 3, page 7, 


of this agreement. The Producer agrees to comply 
with the provisions of Part C, section 3, page 7 of 


this agreement. 


IN WITNESS WHEREOPF, the respective parties 


have hereunto, either in person or by their authorized 
agents, affixed their hands and seals hereto. 


HOLLY FARMS POULTRY INDUSTRIES, INC. 


By 
Grower (Seal) 
Spouse (Seal) 


Business Name or Account Name of Grower 


Address 


( ) 


Telephone Number Social Security or Identification 
Number 


[ Exhibits Omitted] 


® 6. 6. (oveemment peuerime orice, 1006 405017 40052 


