14 60 
No. 95-210 L 
— — — ; 
eel 

IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON FOODS, INCORPORATED, 


Petitioners, 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent. 


and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
LOCAL 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 
AND ALL AFFILIATED WITH THE 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 


Intervenor. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


CHARLES P. Roserts III 
(Counsel of Record) 
HAYNSWORTH, BALDWIN, 
JOHNSON & GREAVES, P.A. 
2709 Henry Street 
Greensboro, N.C. 27405 
(910) 375-9737 


Counsel for Petitioners. 


Wesungton.0.C. + THIEL PRESS + (202) 328.3206 


(1) 


Page 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
vb „b „60 1 
ARGUMENT: 
I. Board Counsel Proffers Rationales That Are Con- 
trary To Decisions Of The Board. These Ration- 
ales Cannot Be Used To Sustain The Board's 
Di eee eek e eee heehee / 55 3 3 
II. Board Counsel's Interpretation Of The Section 30f) 
Definition Of Secondary Agriculture Is Artificial. 5 


A. The Chickens Must Have A Farmer And The 
Only Two Choices Are Holly Or The Inde- 
, 5 6 


B. The Work Of The Live Haul Crews Is Inci- 
dental To The Farming Operations Of 
Both Holly And The Independent 
ee ee 10 


C. The Agricultural Exemption Does Not Turn On 
The Destination Of The Chickens............... 12 


III. Holly Did Not Waives Its Contention That Its 
Chicken Catchers And Forklift Operators Are 


Engaged In Primary Agriculture.................. 14 

IV. Board Counsel's Interpretation Of Primary F arm- 
ing Is Inconsistent With The Statute............... 18 
,, ̃ heCh ˙¹iÜ qq⁵¼q 3ꝶqà— ! ·ͤhÿmna „ 20 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 
Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 

EER err Per Pe ea ee eee ee 7 
Coleman v. Sanderson Farms, Inc., 629 F.2d 1077 (5th 

r ee wns Gee Se ebereeecceececnecs 17 
Domsea Farms, Inc., 211 N. L. R. B. 832 (19747) 19 


Farmers Reservoir and Irrigation Co. v. McComb, 337 
, ie oe wes ewe 6 6 ve 6 0:0 9 4. 7-8,9 


(ut) 
Cases, continued: Tage 


Johnston v. Cotton Producers Association, 244 F. 2d 


958 Geb Cis. e %hůh h eae 13,17 
Local 512, Warehouse & Office Workers’ Union v. NLRB, 

795 F.26 766 (Och Cis. 1GBG) 0. wc cccecccuues eae 14 
Local 900, IVE v. NLRB, 727 F. 2d 1184 (D.C. Cir, 

10h99 %%% 14 
Mane ja v. Waialua Agricultural Co., 19 U.S. 254 

(Ass 6 „ „% % % f R67”5«. 2. 12, 13 
Mitchell v. Budd, 350 U.S. 473 (19500) 2. 12 
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Automobile 

Jus. Co., 463 U.S. 3B (IGGB) . oo W 5 
NLRB v. Action Automotive, Inc., 469 U.S. 490 (1985) 10 
Produce Magic, Inc., 311 N. L. R. B. 1277 (1998) ........... 5 
SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947) ......... 5,8 
Statutes: 
Fair Labor Standards Act, §3(f), 29 U.S.C. §203(f) 

(TOTS). „ „% % eee en passim 
National Labor Relations Act §2(3), 29 U.S.C. 

BISA(S) h T! 16 
National Labor Relations Act 89 0b), 29 U.S.C. 

1% %⅙ñf»ůtlrn e een ee EE 10 
National Labor Relations Act §10(e), 29 U.S.C. 

Die G „%% oun eam 14. 16 
Regulations: 
29 C.F.R. 700.109 .. ccc ie eee 19 
20 GF. a. %ig ene 18 
29 C. F. . 5 700. 116% %%% vnn 19 
20 G. F. A. Mi hc al 18, 19 


29 Cr. a. % %,. 12 


Page 
Miscellaneous: 
e ũ ůͥͤͥõͥůͥ́òvvñ 4 $s 4 
Poultry Meat and Egg Production 191, (Van Nostrand 
r ůͤoͤ 2 11 


(itt) 


No. 95-210 


IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


— — — — 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON FOODS, INCORPORATED, 


Petitioners, 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent. 
and 
CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
LOCAL 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 


AND ALL AFFILIATED WITH THE 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 


Intervenor. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The National Labor Relations Board (“NLRB” or 
Board“), in its brief, concedes that Holly's chicken 
catchers and forklift operators work on a farm“ within 
the meaning of §3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act 
(“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. §203(f) (1978). NLRB Br. 18. 
Board counsel! does not dispute that the chicken catchers 
and forklift operators perform “preparation for market” 


2 


and that the live haul drivers perform “delivery to mar- 
ket.” NLRB Br. 21-22. Board counsel’s sole position is 
that the activities of the live haul crew are not performed 
“as an incident to or in conjunction with” the farming 
operations of either Holly or the independent grower. 
Rather, according to the Board, the work of these 


employees is incidental to Holly's processing operations. 
NLRB Br. 22. 


The Board’s interpretation of the phrase “as an inci- 
dent to or in conjunction with such farming operations“ 
is highly artificial and contrary to the plain language of 
§3(f). Section 3(f) specifically defines “preparation for 
market” and “‘delivery to storage or to market” as activ- 
ities that are per se incidental to farming. 


Board counsel, however, argues that the farming oper- 
ations of both Holly and the grower have ended at the 
time that the live haul crews perform their work. Thus, 
according to Board counsel, the chickens have no farmer, 
even though they have not been reduced to possession or 
delivered to market. 


The absurdity of Board counsel's position is readily 
apparent and is contrary to the Court’s decisions in 
Mitchell v. Budd, 350 U.S. 473, 481 (1956) and Maneja 
v. Waialua Agric. Co., 349 U.S. 254, 260-262 (1955). The 
work of the chicken catchers and forklift operators 
begins and ends on the farm and results in no physical 
changes to the chickens. It constitutes “harvesting”’ in 
that it is the sole means by which the chickens are reduced 
to possession. Holly’s processing operations, on the other 
hand, occur at a plant many miles away and result in a 
product that is sold in supermarkets. 


In its efforts to prove that the independent grower 
ceases to be a farmer when the live haul crew arrives on 
the farm, Board counsel has effectively proved Holly’s 
contention that it resumes its status as a farmer. Thus, 


aa 


— — 


3 


as Board counsel argues, the chickens are owned by Holly 
and the live haul functions are performed by Holly. 
Clearly, Holly has resumed its status as a farmer. Thus, 
the live haul employees satisfy the statutory definition of 
agricultural laborers. The Board’s conclusion to the con- 
trary is unreasonable and should be rejected. 


ARGUMENT 


I. 
BOARD COUNSEL PROFFERS RATIONALES THAT ARE 
CONTRARY TO DECISIONS OF THE BOARD. THESE 
RATIONALES CANNOT BE USED TO SUSTAIN THE 
BOARD'S DECISION. 


As was discussed in Holly’s opening brief, the Board 
has historically read the “‘on a farm” language out of 
§3(f) by taking the position that if anyone other than 
the farmer performs a particular practice with regard to 
the farmer’s agricultural commodities, that person is act- 
ing in furtherance of some separate business interest. 
Under the Board’s view, no one, other than a farmer, can 
ever be exempt. Holly Opening Br. 24. The notion that 
only a farmer can perform secondary agricultural tasks 
has been reduced by the Board to a hornbook principle 
that the Board cites by rote. Thus, in this case, the sole 
justification offered by the Board to support its conclu- 
sion that Holly’s live haul employees are not agricultural 
laborers is “that when an employer contracts with farm- 
ers for the care and feeding of the employer’s chicks, the 
employer’s status as a farmer engaged in the raising of 
poultry ends with respect to those chicks.” J.A. 229. 


In its brief, the Board’s appellate counsel now concurs 
(as it must) with Holly’s statement that “the legislative 
history clearly shows that ‘Congress intended that the 
definition of an agricultural laborer would include non- 
farmers so long as their work involved primary farming 


4 


activities or occurred on a farm and was incidental to the 
farming operations of the farm.“ NLRB Br. 24 (quoting 
Holly Br. 14-15). Thus, the Board now concedes that 
“wheat threshing companies, even though they were sep- 
arate enterprises, were included in the exemption because 
their work was incidental to farming and was done on the 
farm.“ NLRB Br. 23 (quoting Farmers Reservoir & Irri- 
gation Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755, 767 (1949)). 


On its face, this concession would seem to also con- 
cede that the Board’s decision is erroneous as its concerns 
Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift operators. The 
Board’s counsel, however, attempts to contain the dam- 
age flowing from this concession by arguing that Congress 
only intended to exempt employees of independent con- 
tractors who are in the “ ‘business of doing nothing but’ 
providing chicken catching and transportation services.“! 
(NLRB Br. 24). Section 3(f) contains no such limitation 
and no specific citation to the legislative history is given 
to support the Board’s assertion. In fact, there is nothing 
in §3(f) or the legislative history that even remotely sug- 
gests that Congress was concerned about what other busi- 
ness interests, if any, the third party might have. Instead, 
Congress was interested in the nature of the work being 
performed. 81 Cong. Rec. 7888 (1937). 


Board counsel’s analysis of §3(f) and its legislative his- 
tory cannot be found in any Board decision. The Court 
has made explicitly clear that “courts may not accept 


in footnote 11 of his brief, Board counsel attempts to fur- 
ther qualify this asserted limitation on §3(f). Thus, he states that 
if “the chicken catchers and forklift operators of an independent 
contractor were hired by a grower to cage and load chickens both 
raised and owned by the grower, the work of the chicken catchers 
and forklift operators might be [within the definition of agricul- 
ture]. NLRB Br. 28 (emphasis added). Board counsel’s importa- 
tidn of an ownership requirement is not supported by the language 
of §3(f). His use of the word “might” demonstrates the extreme 
reluctance with which he makes the necessary concéssion. 


5 


appellate counsel's post hoc rationalizations for agency 
action. “It is well established that an agency’s action must 
be upheld, if at all, on the basis articulated by the agency 
itself.“ Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assen v. State Farm Mut. 
Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 50 (1983) (citations 
omitted); see also SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 
196 (1947). 


What is more damaging to this post hoc analysis, how- 
ever, is that it directly contradicts prior decisions of the 
NLRB. Thus, in Produce Magic, Inc., 311 N. L. R. B. 1277 
(1993), the Board held that employees of a “custom har- 
vester,“ who was in the “business of doing nothing but“ 
going to the farms of clients, packing lettuce grown on 
the farms into cartons, and loading the cartons onto 
trucks, were not engaged in secondary agriculture. The 
sole basis proffered to support this conclusion was that 
the lettuce was grown by the farmer rather than the 
employer. Clearly, if an agency decision cannot be 
upheld on the basis of a post hoc rationalization never 
considered by the agency, it cannot be upheld on the 
basis of a rationalization that is directly contrary to the 
agency's own decisions. 


The fact that Board counsel felt compelled to resort to 
a post hoc rationale that was directly contrary to a prior 
Board decision is a strong indication that the Board’s deci- 
sion is not entitled to any deference. Indeed, as will be 
shown below, the Board’s decision has no reasonable 
basis whatsoever. 


II. 
BOARD COUNSEL’S INTERPRETATION OF THE SC. 
TION 3(f) DEFINITION OF SECONDARY AGRICUL- 
TURE IS ARTIFICIAL. 


The Board, in its brief, makes the following significant 
concessions: 


6 


(1) Holly acts as a farmer in conducting its hatchery 
operations (NLRB Br. 21); 


(2) Holly’s pullet haulers, who catch pullets on the 
farms of independent growers and transport them 
to laying houses owned by other independent 
growers, and Holly’s egg haulers, who transport 
eggs from the laying houses to Holly’s hatcheries, 


are agricultural laborers (NLRB Br. 5 n.4); 


(3) The independent growers, who raise the broiler 
chicks under contract with Holly, are farmers 
engaged in primary agriculture (NLRB Br. 18); 


(4) Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift operators 


work on the farms of the independent growers 
(NLRB Br. 18); 


(5) Holly’s chicken catchers and forklift operators per- 
form “preparation for market” (NLRB Br. 21-22); 
and 


(6) Holly's live haul drivers perform “delivery . . . to 
market“ (NLRB Br. 21-22). 


Despite these concessions, Board counsel takes the pos- 
ition that “the live haul crew’s work falls outside Section 
3(f) because it is not performed incidentally either to any 
primary farming operation by Holly Farms, or to the 
independent growers’ operations.” NLRB Br. 22. This 
position is based on an artificial reading of the phrase as 
an incident to or in conjunction with such farming opera- 
tions.“ 


A. The Chickens Must Have A Farmer And The Only 
Two Choices Are Holly Or The Independent 


Growers. 


The first difficulty with the interpretation of Board 
counsel is that it leads to the inevitable conclusion that 
the chickens, while still running loose on the farm, have 
no farmer. Under Board’s counsel’s view, at the precise 


———_——~ — —— > -—- 


7 


moment that Holly’s live haul crew arrives at the farm, 
the independent grower ceases to be a farmer with res- 
pect to the chickens that he has raised. NLRB Br. 18. In 
addition, Holly assertedly ceased to be a farmer with res- 
pect to these same chickens when it turned them over to 
the farmer to be raised. NLRB Br. 16. Inasmuch as the 
Board does not suggest that anyone else is the farmer of 
these chickens, it follows that the chickens have no farmer. 


The absurdity of this conclusion is obvious. Moreover, 
it constitutes a repudiation of the argument that the Board 
advanced in Bayside Enters., Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 
(1977). In Bayside, the Board took the position that “the 
owners of the farms are independent contractors rather 
than employees of Bayside and therefore the farming 
activity at these locations is attributable to them rather 
than Bayside.” 429 U.S. at 302. Having prevailed on 
that issue in Bayside, the Board now contends that the 
catching and caging of the chickens on the farms of the 
growers is not attributable to the independent grower. 


If the Board had held, as it did in Bayside, that the 
work of Holly’s live haul crews was incidental to the 
independent growers’ farming operations, this conclusion 
might be deemed reasonable. If the Board had held that 
the work of the live haul crews was incidental to Holly’s 
farming operations, this conclusion would clearly be 
reasonable. What if cannot do is deny that these activities 
are incidental to anyone’s farming operations. 


The Board correctly notes that secondary practices 
must be incidental to “such” farming operations, ie. 
the farming operations of the farmer who performs the 
secondary practice or the farming operations of the farm 
on which the practices take place. NLRB Br. 14-15. In 
Farmers Reservoir Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755, 766 
n.15 (1949), the Court explained that “processing on 
a farm of commodities produced by other farmers is inci- 


dental to or in conjunction with the farming operations 
of other farmers and not incidental to or in conjunction 
with the farming operation of the farmer on whose prem- 
ises the processing is done.” (citation omitted). Here, 
Holly’s chicken catchers perform activities on chickens 
raised on the farms on which they perform their work. 
Furthermore, the chickens are owned by Holly. Thus, 
the such“ requirement of §3(f) is clearly satisfied. 


Board counsel cites to a regulation of the Secretary of 
Labor, which states that “[t]he line between practices 
that are and those that are not performed ‘as an incident 
to or in conjunction with’ such farming operations is not 
susceptible of precise definition.” NLRB Br. 28. While 
this may be true for certain types of activities, Congress, 
in enacting §3(f), specifically denominated certain activ- 
ities, including “‘preparation for market” and “delivery to 
storage or to market,” as activites that are incidental to 
or in conjunction with primary farming. Thus, the 
Board’s contention that the live haul crew’s work is 
more accurately characterized as the first step of Hol- 
ly’s] chicken-processing operation, rather than as the last 
step of the independent growers’ primary farming opera- 
tions” (NLRB Br. 19) is directly contrary to the express 
statutory language.” 


As explained in Holly’s opening brief, the statute does 
not require that the secondary practices be solely“ or 


2In its brief, the Intervenor-Union cites to publications from 
the poultry industry which classify the live haul operations with 
processing operations. Union Br. 6-10. Inasmuch as this informa- 
tion was never presented to or relied upon by the Board, it cannot 
be used to sustain the Board's decision. Chenery, 332 U.S. at 196. 
Furthermore, the statutory definition of agriculture takes prece- 
dence over any classification scheme of the industry. Indeed, in the 
representation hearing, the Board rejected the contention that the 
live haul employees shared a community of interest with the pro- 
cessing plant employees. J.A. 35a. 


9 


exclusively“ incidental to farming operations. If that 
were the case, the independent wheat thresher cited in 
the legislative history would not be exempt because his 
employees would be acting in furtherance of the wheat 
thresher’s separate business interests. The statute does 
not even require that the activities be more“ related to 
the farming operations than to some other operation. 
Holly Br. 23-24. All that is required is that the activities 
be fairly characterized as being incidental to the farming 
operations. See Farmers Reservoir Co., 337 U.S. at 766 
(work of irrigation company employees in supplying water 
to farmers, which farmers used to irrigate crops, “does 
constitute a practice performed as an incident to or in 
conjunction with farming“). 


Even if the statute required a comparison of all opera- 
tions to which the secondary activites were incidental to 
determine which operation it was most incidental to, the 
Board’s argument would still fail. Board counsel’s efforts 
to characterize the activities of catching and caging chick- 
ens and delivering them to market as part of a process- 
ing” or “slaughtering” operation is unpersuasive. Holly's 
processing operations take place at a separate location 
many miles from the farms and involve killing the chick- 
ens and performing a substantial number of operations 
that result in the ready to cook product that appears in 
the local supermarket. The activities of the live haul 
crew are not even remotely similar to the activities that 
occur at Holly’s processing plant. The work of the chicken 
catchers and forklift operators begins and ends on the 
farms. These employees effectuate no physical changes 
whatsoever in the chickens. They merely reduce the 
chickens to possession and transport them to market.“ 


3 Although, as the Board notes, Holly’s live production man- 
ager testified that the catching and delivery of the chickens was the 
first step of the processing operation (NLRB Br. 20) this testimony 


[ footnote continued 


10 


If the Board’s analysis were adopted, it would logically 
follow that Holly’s hatchery operations would be non- 
agricultural inasmuch as these operations are the „first 
step” in the processing of the chicken. Yet, the Board 
concedes, as it must, that Holly’s hatchery employees 
are agricultural laborers. 


B.The Work Of The Live Haul Crews Is Incidental 
To The Farming Operations Of Both Holly And 
The Independent Growers. 


The Agreement between Holly and the independent 
growers, which is set out completely in the Appendix to 
the Board’s brief, establishes their mutual relationship in 
raising the chickens. The Agreement states that Holly “‘is 
engaged in the production of poultry on an integrated 
basis, being responsible for the rearing of chickens from 
the breeder hens to the processing of the poultry into 
dressed product.” NLRB Br., App. la. Although Holly 
retains “title to feed, chicks, and medication” at all times 
(NLRB Br., App. 8a), the independent grower uses his 
experience, skill, and knowledge “to supervise and direct 


was given in the context of an inquiry into the “community of 
interest” between the live haul crews and the processing employees. 
Under §9(b) of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. 
§159(b), the Board employs a community of interest” analysis in 
determining whether different groups of employees should be 
included within the same bargaining unit. NLRB v. Action Auto- 
motive, Inc, 469 U.S. 490, 494 (1985). At the Board’s represen- 
tation hearing, Holly's primary contention was that the live haul 
employees were exempt agricultural laborers. However, it made an 
alternative contention that, if the live haul employees were found 
to be statutory employees, they shared a community of interest 
with the processing plant employees and that the unit should 
include the processing plant employees. J.A. 35a. The Board, 
however found that the processing plant employees did not share 
a sufficient community of interest to warrant their inclusion in the 
bargaining unit. J.A. 39a. Thus, Board counsel is once again argu- 
ing contrary to the Board’s own decision. 


eS eet 


— — — 


11 


the efficient rearing of broilers.” NLRB Br., App. la. 
Holly's employees actually do the catching and caging of 
the chickens on the farms of the grower. However, the 
Agreement requires the grower “[t]o be present during 
the catching or removal of the broilers.” NLRB Br., 
App. 3a. 


Clearly, the Board’s position that neither Holly nor the 
independent grower is functioning as a farmer during the 
catching, caging, and delivery to market of these chickens 
is factually without support. In fact, both Holly and the 
grower have a vested interest in the chickens during this 
process, Holly because of its ownership interest and the 
independent grower because his pay is based largely on 
the total pounds of poultry grown. 


In an effort to prove that the independent grower 
ceases to function as a farmer when Holly’s live haul 
crew arrives at the farm, Board counsel makes the follow- 
ing argument: 


[T]he live haul crews’ work involves property that 

- belongs to petitioners, not the independent growers. 
Moreover, Holly Farms has not been retained by the 
independent growers to render the independent 
growers any service; rather, the growers have been 
hired by Holly Farms to perform a service for Holly 
Farms: raising the chicks to maturity. The live haul 
crews’ work begins only after the independent grow- 
ers’ responsibilities have ended. 


NLRB Br. 28 (footnote omitted). With the exception of 
the last sentence,* Holly agrees completely with these 


*The contract requires the grower to be present during the 
catching process. NLRB Br., App. 3a. Moreover, a publication 
cited by the Union indicates that the grower's responsibilities con- 
tinue during and after the catching and loading process. C. Park- 
hurst and G. Mountney. Poultry Meat and Egg Production 191 
(Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. 1988). 


12 


factual assertions. What Board counsel has effectively 
done is prove Holly’s contention that it resumes its status 
as a farmer when its live haul employees begin their work. 
Indeed, Board counsel states “it is ‘highly significant’ 
whether the practice involved property to which the 
farmer has title or for which the farmer otherwise has 
responsibility.“ NLRB Br. 27 (citing 29 C. F. R. §780.- 
143). If, as Board counsel asserts, the grower is no longer 
a farmer, then Holly, by necessity, must resume its status 
as a farmer.) Under §3(f), agriculture is not completed 
until the agricultural commodity is delivered to market 
or to storage for delivery to market. See Mitchell v. 
Budd, 350 U.S. 473, 481 (1956). 


C.The Agricultural Exemption Does Not Turn 
On The Destination Of The Chickens. 


In Maneja v. Waialua Agric. Co., 349 U.S. 254, 260- 
262 (1955), the Court held that the employer’s employ- 
ees who transported workers to and from the fields and 
sugar cane from the fields to the employer’s mill were 
agricultural laborers. Board counsel argues that the deter- 
minative facts in Maneja were that “the employer’s mill, 
railroad tracks, and fields were all located on the employ- 
er’s sugar plantation, and only cane grown in those fields 
was processed at the mill.” NLRB Br. 18-19, n.8. The 
suggestion appears to be that had the mill been located 
off the plantation, the Court would have reached a dif- 
ferent conclusion. 


5 Board counsel’s assertion that even if Holly acts as a farmer 
in sending out its live haul crews, the live haul employees would 
still not be agricultural laborers (NLRB Br. 21), makes no sense. 
If Holly is acting as a farmer in catching, caging, and delivering 
its chickens to market, then its live haul employees are by defin- 
ition acting incidentally to Holly's farming operations. Similarly, 
Holly does not comprehend Board counsel's assertion that even if 
the live haul employees act as an incident to farming operations, 
they do not act “in connection with” farming operations. NLRB 
Br. 28. 


13 


It is clear, however, that the Court's decision in Maneja 
was not based on the location of the mill. In fact, the 
Court pointed out that “had Waialua not owned a mill, 
its transportation activities from field to mill would come 
squarely within the agricultural exemption covering ‘deliv- 
ery to storage or to market or to carriers for transporta- 
tion to market. 349 U.S. at 261. Obviously, the Court 
saw no difference between delivery to a mill on the em- 
ployer's property and delivery to a mill located elsewhere. 


The more fundamental point established by Maneja, 
which runs counter to the entire line of reasoning of Board 
counsel, is that the agricultural exemption does not turn 
on the ultimate destination of the agricultural product. 
Whether the market is the employer’s processing plant, 
another person's processing plant, a wholesaler, a retailer, 
or the ultimate consumer is simply irrelevant. It is the 
nature of the employee's duties, not the destination of 
the product, that is determinative. 


The position of Board counsel, however, is inalterably 
premised on the fact that the destination of Holly's chick- 
ens is Holly's processing plant. It is this fact, and this 
fact alone, on which Board counsel asserts that the activi- 
ties of the live haul crew are incidental to Holly's process. 
ing operations. Indeed, Board counsel attempts to dis- 
tinguish the Fifth Circuit's decision in Johnston v. Cotton 
Producers Assn., 244 F.2d 553 (5th Cir. 1957), largely on 
the grounds that the employer of the employee who 
caught and cooped the chickens “had no use for the 
mature chicks” and the chickens “were delivered to 
third-party processors, not to the retail store.“ NLRB Br. 
30. This distinction, which focuses solely on the destin- 
ation of the chickens, is simply irrelevant. 


In summary, Board counsel’s analysis of the §3(f) 
definition of secondary agriculture is result-oriented and 
unpersuasive. Holly requests that the Court reject this 
analysis. 


14 


III. 
HOLLY DID NOT WAIVE ITS CONTENTION THAT ITS 
CHICKEN CATCHERS AND FORKLIFT OPERATORS 
ARE ENGAGED IN PRIMARY AGRICULTURE. 


The Board argues that Holly waived its contention that 
its chicken catchers and forklift operators are engaged in 
“primary agriculture” by allegedly not raising it before 
the Board or the court of appeals. NLRB Br. 31-32. This 
contention is without merit. 


Section 10(e) of the Act, 29 U.S.C. § 160(e), provides, 
in pertinent part, that “[n]o objection that has not been 
urged before the Board . . . shall be considered by the 
court, unless the failure or neglect to urge such objection 
shall be excused because of extraordinary circumstances.” 
In Local 512, Warehouse & Office Workers’ Union v. 
NLRB, 795 F.2d 705 (9th Cir. 1986), the Ninth Circuit 
explained § 10(e) as follows: 

Congress enacted section 10(¢) to ensure that the 
NLRB has an opportunity to apply its special exper- 
tise to an issue before that issue is presented to an 
appellate court. Section 10(e) bars judicial 
review when no objection has been filed. , or 
when only an ambiguous, general objection to the 
decision has been filed. However, an objection 
will meet the statutory requirement if it is not “so 
ambiguous as to be totally ineffective to adequately 
apprise the Board” that the issue is disputed. 


Id. at 713 (citations omitted). Section 10(e) requires 
“notice of objection.” It does not require “briefing and 
argument before the Board.“ Local 900, ICE v. NLRB, 
727 F.2d 1184, 1192 (D.C. Cir. 1984). 


Throughout this proceeding Holly has consistently and 
repeatedly argued that the live haul employees are exempt 
agricultural laborers and cannot properly be included in a 
bargaining unit. On March 14, 1989, the Board held a rep- 


15 


resentation hearing to determine the scope of the appro- 
priate bargaining unit. At this hearing, counsel for Holly 
stated on the record that it was Holly's position that all 
of the employees in the requested unit “are exempt from 
the coverage of the National Labor Relations Act as being 
agricultural employees within the provisions of the Fair 
Labor Standards Act.” Rep. Hearing at 10. 


On March 27, 1989, the Board’s Regional Director 
issued a Decision and Order dismissing the Petition. J. A. 
17a-23a. The Union subsequently filed a Request for 
Review with the Board. The Regional Director treated it 
as a motion for reconsideration and reopened the hearing 
for further evidence. Subsequently, on June 20, 1989, 
the Regional Director issued a Supplemental Decision in 
which he found that Holly’s hatchery employees were 
exempt agricultural laborers, but that the live haul 
employees were not agricultural laborers. J. A. 33a-42a. 


On or about April 7, 1989, Holly filed with the Board 
a Request for Review and Stay of Election. In this 
Request, Holly’s counsel stated: 


The Regional Director also erred in his original 
order wherein he concluded that “the live haul 
employees, designated as chicken catchers, who 
work out of the processing plant . . . [are] not 
included either in the primary or secondary defin- 
ition of “agriculture” in section 3(f) of the FLSA.” 
(Decision and Order p. 2). 


Request for Review pp. 3-4. Holly contended in this 
Request that all of the live haul employees were agricul- 
tural laborers under the prevailing precedents. 


On July 20, 1989 the Board issued its Decision on 
Review and Order in which it denied Holly’s Request for 
Review. J.A. 43a-45a. This Decision was not a final order 
and was not immediately appealable. However, in the 
ensuing unfair labor practice case, Holly continued to 


16 


press its contention that the live haul employees were 
exempt agricultural laborers. In the ALJ’s Decision, issued 
on March 12, 1992, the ALJ stated: 


The Respondents maintain, as they have during 
the course of Case 11-RC-5583, that the live haul 
employees cannot appropriately be included in a 
Board-found bargaining unit because they are agri- 
cultural workers, exempt under Section 2(3) of the 
Act.... 


I. of course, am bound by the Board’s prior 
determination that the unit as described is appro- 
priate. 


Pet. App. 786-787. 


Holly filed timely exceptions to the ALJ’s Decision. 
These exceptions specifically challenged the ALJ’s con- 
clusion that the live haul unit was an appropriate bargain- 
ing unit. Respondents’ Exceptions, nos. 119, 487, 549(w). 
The Board majority, however, declined to reconsider “‘the 
Board’s prior determination in the representation case 
that the live haul workers are statutory employees.“ Pet. 
App. 83. 


Clearly, the Board was repeatedly placed on notice of 
Holly’s position that the live haul employees were exempt 
agricultural laborers within the meaning of §3(f) of the 
FLSA. This is all that was required under §10(e) of the 
NLRA. 


In its brief to the Fourth Circuit, Holly continued to 
press its contention that the live haul employees were 
exempt agricultural laborers. Holly discussed §3(f) in 
detail and the various precedents interpreting §3(f). 
Although Holly discussed the secondary branch of agri- 
culture in greater detail®, at no point did Holly suggest 


® This was the result of the fact that most of the cases dealing 
with live haul crews have focused on the secondary branch of 


[footnote continued 


17 


or concede that the chicken catchers and forklift opera- 
tors were not engaged in primary agriculture. Indeed, 
Holly pointed out that r] egardless of whether a partic- 
ular practice constitutes ‘primary’ farming or ‘secondary’ 
farming, the legal effect is the same: Individuals engaged 
in such employment are not employees under the Act.“ 
Br. at 11. 


In the petition for certiorari, Holly contended that 
“Holly’s chicken catchers, forklift drivers, and live-haul 
drivers clearly come within the scope of the agricultural 
exemption.” Pet. 63. Holly did not limit this contention 
to either primary or secondary agriculture. 


The Board’s contention that Holly waived the pri- 
mary” agriculture issue is without merit. Holly repeat- 
edly advised the Board and the court of appeals of its 
contention that the live haul employees were exempt agri- 
cultural laborers within the meaning of §3(f). The posi- 
tion of Board counsel that Holly had some sort of obliga- 
tion to argue more forcefully the primary agriculture 
issue is without merit. Holly argued the applicability of 
§3(f), which includes both the primary and secondary 
branches of agriculture.’ That was sufficient to preserve 
its position. 


§3(f). E.g., Coleman v. Sanderson Farms, Inc., 629 F.2d 1077 
(5th Cir. 1980); Johnston v. Cotton Producers Assoc., 244 F.2d 
553 (5th Cir. 1957). 


’ Significantly, §3(f) does not contain the words primary 
or “secondary.” These classifications were developed by the 
Court in Farmers Reservoir. 


18 


IV. 
BOARD COUNSEL’S INTERPRETATION OF PRIMARY 
FARMING IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE STATUTE, 


Board counsel argues that the term “harvesting,” as 
used in §3(f), is limited to crops and that chickens can be 
raised but cannot be harvested. This contention is based 
on the fact that §3(f) first speaks of “the production, 
cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural or 
horticultural commodities” and then speaks of “the rais- 
ing of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, or poultry.” 
According to Board counsel, the second phrase is super- 
fluous if animals can be harvested. NLRB Br. 33. 


This contention is unfounded. Section 3(f) specifically 
mentions harvesting of “any” agricultural commodity. 
Chickens are clearly an agricultural commodity. 29 
C. F. R. §780.112. The term “raising of . . . poultry” 
speaks to the process of feeding and caring for chickens, 
functions that are analytically distinct from “harvesting.” 
Thus, §3(f) includes both the raising of poultry and the 
harvesting of any agricultural commodity. The first 
phrase does not render the second phrase superfluous. 
Furthermore, having clearly stated that any agricultural 
commodity could be “harvested,” there was no need for 
Congress to repeat this term when it exempted the “‘rais- 
ing of... poultry.” 

Although Board counsel candidly admits that Holly’s 
interpretation of the Secretary of Labor’s regulations is 
“plausible in isolation,” (NLRB. Br. 34), he contends 
that this interpretation is nevertheless inaccurate. Board 
counsel does not appear to dispute that the Secretary of 
Labor has indicated that harvesting extends to the “act- 
ual process whereby agricultural commodities are 


reduced to possession” and to “transportation to a con- 
centration point on the farm.“ 29 C. F. R. §780.118(b). 


a ů— · ů ˙—vĩ¹·8—h —̃ —AU— 


19 


Rather, Board counsel points to language at the begin- 
ning of the regulation and argues that this language fore- 
closes the primary farming argument. The language relied 
upon states that harvesting includes all operations cus- 
tomarily performed in conection with the removal of 
the crops by the farmer from their growing position.” 29 
C.F.R. §780.118(a). From this language, the Board argues 
that only crops, and not chickens, may be harvested. 


Holly readily concedes that harvesting includes all 
operations customarily performed in connection with the 
removal of the crops by the farmer from their growing 
position.“ 29 C. F. R. §780.118(a). In addition, however, 
harvesting includes the actual process whereby agricul- 
tural commodities are . . . reduced to possession” and 
“transportation to a concentration point on the farm.” 29 
C. F. R. §780.118(b). The fact that harvesting includes“ 
activities regarding crops does not preclude it from apply- 
ing to chickens. Indeed, Board counsel concedes that fish 
can be harvested. NLRB Br. 34 (citing Domsea Farms, 
Inc. 211 N.L.R.B. 832 (1974); 29 C. F. R. §780.109). It 
is illogical that the harvesting of fish, a non-crop agricul- 
tural commodity not even mentioned in § 3(f), constitutes 
primary agriculture, but the harvesting of poultry, an agri- 
cultural commodity specifically mentioned in § 3(f), does 
not constitute either primary or secondary agriculture. 


20 


CONCLUSION 


The Board’s conclusion that Holly’s live haul crews do 
not satisfy the statuiory definition of either primary or 
secondary agriculture is irrational and is not entitled to 
deference. Holly respectfully requests that the Court 
reverse the decision of the Fourth Circuit on this issue. 


Dated this 14th day of February 1996. 


Respectfully submitted, 


CHARLES P. Roserts III 
HAYNSWORTH, BALDWIN, 
JOHNSON & GREAVES, P.A. 
2709 Henry Street 
Greensboro, N.C. 27405 
(910) 375-9737 


Counsel for Petitioners. 


