No. 95-210 


IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITE STATES‘E®* 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION; 
TYSON FOODS, INCORPORATED, 


Petitioners, 
v. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent, 


and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS, 
LOCAL 391, 29, 71, 355, 592, 657, 988, 
AND ALL AFFILIATED WITH THE 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
Intervenor. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 


CHARLES P. Roserts III Drew S. Days, Il 

(Counsel of Record) (Counsel of Record) 

HAYNSWORTH, BALDWIN, SOLICITOR GENERAL 
JOHNSON & GREAVES, P.A. RICHARD H. SEAMON 

2709 Henry Street DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 

Greensboro, N.C. 27405 Washington, D.C. 20530 

(910) 375-9737 (202) 514-2217 

Counsel for Petitioners. JOHN E. ARBAB 


J. Davip JAMES NATIONAL LABOR 
RELATIONS BOARD 


SMITH, FOLLIN r 
- Washington, D.C. 20570 


& JAMES, L.L.P. 
Post Office Box 990 (202) 273-2958 


Greensboro, N.C. 27402 Counsel for Respondent. 
(910) 274-2992 


Counsel for Intervenor. 


Weshington,0.C + THIEL PRESS + (202) 326.3286 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED AUGUST 4, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED NOVEMBER 6, 1995 


(1) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Relevant Docket Entries 


APPENDIX A — Portions of Testimony At 3-14-89 Repre- 
sentation Hearing In Case No. 11-RC-5583 (Testimony 


APPENDIX B — Decision and Order dated 3-27-89 In 
Case No. 11-RC-5585. . 


APPENDIX C — Order Reopening Case dated 4-28-89 
In Case No. 11-RC-5583 


APPENDIX D — Portions of Testimony at 5-12-89 
Representation Hearing in Case No. 11-RC- 
5583 (Testimony of Sam Whittington) 

APPENDIX E — Supplemental Decision and Direction of 
Election dated 6-20-89 In Case No. 11-RC-5583 


APPENDIX F — Decision on Review and Order dated 
7-20-89 In Case No. 11-RC-5583 


la 


CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


IN THE MATTER OF: HOLLY FARMS CORPOR. 


ATION AND TYSON 
FOODS, INC. 


BOARD CASE NOS. —11-RC-5583, 11 CA-13184, 


Date 
2-8-89 
2-16-89 


3-14-89 


3-27-89 
4-28-89 


5-12-89 
5-18-89 
6-1-89 

6-20-89 


7-20-89 


11-CA-13267, 11-CA-13487, 
11-CA-13520, and 
11-CA-13619 


Documents 
Initial Unfair Labor Practice Charge 


Representation Petition filed in Case No. 
11-RC-5583 


Representation Hearing in Case No. 11-RC- 
5583 


Decision and Order in Case No. 11-RC-5583 


Order Reopening Case and Reopening Hearing 
and Notice of Hearing in Case No. 11-RC-5583 


Reopened Hearing in Case No. 11-RC-5583 
Initial Unfair Labor Practice Complaint 
Initial Answer 


Supplemental Decision and Direction of Elec- 
tion in Case No. 11-RC-5583 


Decision on Review and Order in Case No. 
11-RC-5583 


10-13-89 Order Consolidating Cases, Consolidated Com- 


plaint and Notice of Hearing 


11-27-89 Hearing on Consolidated Cases Opens 


Date 
5-2-90 
3-12-92 
5-28-93 
3-10-95 


5-9-95 


8.4.95 
11-6-95 


2a 


Documents 
Hearing on Consolidated Cases Closes 
Decision of Administrative Law Judge 
Board's Decision and Order 


Opinion of United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


Order Denying Petition for Rehearing with 
Suggestion for Rehearing In Banc 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari 


Order Allowing Certiorari 


3a 


APPENDIX A 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


Case No, 11-RC-5583 


In the Matter of: 
HOLLY FARMS FOODS, INC. 
AND 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS, AND 
HELPERS LOCAL UNION NO. 391, 
affiliated with INTERNATIONAL 
BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
CHAUFFEURS, WAREHOUSEMEN AND 
HELPERS OF AMERICA, AFL-CIO 


Pages: 1-158 
Place: WINSTON-SALEM, NORTH CAROLINA 
Date: TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 1989 


*_ * * 


(13] DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. HUDSON: 


Q. Mr. Whittington, will you state your name for the 


record, please? 

Sam Whittington. 

Q. And who are you employed by? 
A. Holly Farms. 
Q 
A 


> 


In what capacity are you employed? 
I'm the live production manager. 


4a 


Q. Okay, Mr. Whittington, could you describe in 
general terms Holly Farms operations in North Carolina? 

A. What we do we take baby chicks as we call pullets 
and we place these in pullet growing houses, We raise 
these pullets up to twenty weeks of age. We move them 
from the pullet house — we have the pullet movers — to a 
laying house where we collect the hatching eggs and — by 
contract farmers. Then, we bring the hatching eggs in by 
the egg haulers to our hatchery facilities. 

We hatch the baby chicks. We process the baby 
chicks there in the hatchery by piggy back system where 
that we trim the beaks and vaccinate the birds. Then, 
these birds go from the hatchery back out to contract 
growers. They keep the [14] birds there for about seven 
weeks of age. Just makes a fryer or the bird that ends up 
at the supermarket. These are where the catchers go out 
and catch the bird from the farms and bring them back 
into out processing facilities. 

And, in that we have feed delivery department 
where that — the feed mill where we make the different 
type feeds that we feed the pullets, the hens and the 
broilers. Then, we have feed delivery guys that deliver 
the feed from the feed mill out to the growing farms. 

Q. Are you familiar with the petition of the labor 
Union that’s seeking to represent certain job descrip- 
tions at Holly Farms? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. And, I’m going to ask you a couple questions 
concerning those jobs. The chicken catchers — could 
you describe for us the job duties that a chicken catcher 
has? 

A. The catcher, himself, he catches the birds at the 
broiler growing farm. Puts them into a cage and you want 
the rest of what goes with him? Catchers? 


Q. Yes. 


5a 


A. Then, we have drivers that drive the trucks out 
to the — we have a crew — let me start off. We have a 
crew that goes to the catching farm. In that we have the 
truck drivers and we have a fork lift operator. And we 
have nine catchers and a supervisor that makes up a 
catching crew. And, they leave our [15] facilities, go out 
to the catching farm, catch their days chickens. The 
forklift operator drives a truck to the farm and he oper- 
ates a forklift by putting the cages inside the broiler 
house for the catchers to put the birds in. Loads the 
truck back and then the drivers, then take the trucks to 
and from the farm. 

Q. What does a chicken catcher work out of? What 
facility? 

A. At the processing plant. 

Q. Do they have their own office at the processing 
plant? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. The pullet movers — could you describe what 
they do and the difference between a pullet mover and a 
chicken catcher? 

A. The pullet movers are in the hatchery area, 
They’re the people — when we take the pullet and raise it 
up to twenty weeks of age — we get ready to move it to 
the laying farm — they're the guys that go out and catch 
these pullets and then we have a group of guys with them 
that vaccinate the birds at that same process and then we 
move them to the laying house. 

Q. For the record, what is a pullet? 

A. A pullet is a female young hen before she starts 
laying eggs. 

Q. A pullet is not used — doesn’t go through the 
normal life haul operation, is that correct? 

A. No. 

Q. They're used for laying eggs. 


6a 
[16] A. Right. 
Q. What do the pullet movers work out of? 
A. They work out of the hatchery department. 
Q. Which hatchery? 
A. Hatchery number two. 
Q. Is that the only facility? 
A. Yes, 
Q. Okay. Let’s start with the live haul drivers. They 


go, as you said, with the live haul crew. Where do they 
transport chickens from and to? 
A. From the contract grower back to the processing 
facilities. 
Q. Okay. Where do they report in and out of? 
A. They report into the live haul operation at the 
processing plant. 
Same place as the chicken catchers? 
Yes. 
And, the forklift operators? 
The same facilities. They work as a unit. 
Do they — they work as a unit at all times? 
Yes. 


>O>O>L 


*_ * © 


[21] Q. The feed drivers — the feed mill drivers — 
could you describe their job? 

[22] A. The drivers are the men that deliver the feed 
to the different birds — the pullets, the hens and the 
broilers. What they do, they pick up their load of feed at 
the feed mill. They load their feed. They take it out to 
the growing farm, unload the feed as it’s instructed by 
the delivery sheet. 

And, they report in and out of where? 
Roaring River. 

And, they unload and load themselves? 
Yes. 


>O>e 


7a 


Q. What kind of facilities are located at Roaring 
River? 

A. At Roaring River we have the feed mill where we 
manufacture the feed and then in a separate department 
we have the feed deliver men and then, on that same 
facility, we have a shop there. 

Q. So, the feed mill’s a different facility then the 
deliver? 

A. Yes, two different departments. 


*_ * * 
[27] Q. Who is the live haul driver — who is their 
supervisor? 
A. Ray Loven. 


Q. And, the forklift operators? 

A. The forklift operator would be under the super- 
visor of each crew. And, that supervisor reports to Ray 
Loven. 

Q. So, each crew has its own supervisor? 

A. Right. 

Q. Approximately how many crews are there? 

A. There's twelve. 

. And, a crew consists of the forklift, the chicken 
catchers and the drivers. 

[28] A. That’s right. 


= 


[37] Q. * * * But let’s start with pullets. Pullets, | 
understand, are breeder chickens. Is that right. They’re 
the ones who are going to lay the eggs. 

A. That’s correct. Yes, sir. 

Q. And, you get those from somewhere — from 
some where other than Holly Farms. Is that right? 

A. Part of them we buy from breeder companies 
as a baby chick and a portion of those chickens we pro- 
duce ourselves, 


Q. Is it fair to say that the largest proportion are the 
ones that you buy? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you know about what the percentages would 
be on that? 

A. 80% or better. 

Q. 80% or more you buy from somebody outside the 
Company. 

A. As baby chicks. 

Q. Now, when you buy them from outside the Com- 
pany as baby chicks they’re then taken from the place 
that you buy them to some farmers who are going to 
raise them. Is that right? 

A. True, yes. 

Q. Now, the farmers who raise them are not Com- 
pany employees. They’re independent. Is that correct? 

A. They’re contract growers. 

Q. Okay. What are the people called who take these 
breeders from the place that you buy them to the con- 
tract growers? 

A. That’s the people that sell the product. They 
deliver [38] them on their truck. 

Q. So, you don’t have any people — 

A. We have service personnel that help unload the 
chickens at the farm. 

Q. Who is that? 

A. That is the breeder service men, pullet service 
men. 

Q. But they’re not any of the job descriptions we've 
been through here? 

A. No. 

Q. Okay. Tell me again. They are called contract 
growers? Is that — 

A. Yes, sir. 


Se 


9a 


Q. Now, the time these contract growers get these 
breeder chickens the chickens are within.a week old. Is 
that right? 


A. Yes. One or two days old. 

Q. Okay. And, the contract grower raises these 
chickens until twenty weeks? 

a Vee 

Q. And, I’m talking about breeders again. 

A. That’s right. 

Q. All that growing is done by the contract grower 
and that’s not done by Company people? 

A. The facilities that the chickens are in are by the 
farmer — by the contract grower. 

Q. Okay. 

[39] A. We have employees that supervisor those 
growers. 

Q. Who are those employees? 

A. Those are the pullet service men that we referred 
to earlier. 

Q. But there again, they’re not part of the group 
classifications here? 

A. No. 


* * * 


[41] Q. The pullet movers will load the grown chick- 
ens onto the truck, drive the truck to the laying house 
and then unload the [42] truck. Is that a fair description 
of what they do? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. Now, the laying houses, are those owned 
by Holly Farms or are those independent? 

A. They’re independent farmers. 

Q. And, so the independent farmers will see to the 
laying of eggs — 

A. Through the supervision of our personnel, yes. 


10a 


Q. And, again, who supervises them? 

A. The breeder service personnel. 

Q. And, those aren’t within the bargaining unit 
proposed here either? 

A. No. 

Q. So, after the eggs are hatched, then we have egg 
haulers that come out to pick up the eggs, is that right? 

A. That’s right. 

Q. And, are the eggs collected by the farmers and 
put in one place? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Are they put into cartons or something so they 
won’t break? 

A. Into cartons, yes. 

Q. And, that’s done by the people who operate the 
laying houses? 

A. The farmer. 

[43] Q. So, the egg hauler takes those cartoned eggs 
and puts them on the truck and drives them to the 
hatchery. Is that right? 


A. That’s right. 

Q. And, unloads them at the hatchery? 

A. Correct. 

Q. And, that’s all the egg hauler does? 

A. Yes. . 

Q. Now we’re in the hatchery. Is the hatchery owned 


by Holly Farms? 

A. Yes. 

Q. So — so when the eggs are unloaded at the hatch- 
ery someone takes them and puts them into incubators 
or something? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Who does that? 

A. The production people in the hatchery. 


lla 


Q. Okay. And the production people are within our 
proposed unit? 

A. Yes. 

Q. They put them in incubators. Do they do any- 
thing else to them before they hatch? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. And, when they hatch they pull the baby chicks 
out of the incubators and put them onto some kind of 
conveyor belt? 

A. They’re put into sitters and then employees 
transfer them [44] from the sitters to a hatcher and then 
when they hatch then they pull them out and put them 
onto the belt. 

Q. Let’s go back a minute. They put them into 
sitters or setters? 

A. Setters. 

Q. S-e-t-t-e-r. What’s a setter? 

A. A setter is where the eggs stay eighteen days. 

Q. And, that’s before they hatch, obviously, if 
they’re eggs. Are they kept warm there? 

A. Sure. 

Q. And, who is it that puts them into the setters — 

A. Production people in the hatchery. 

Q. And, the production people than take them from 
the setter to the incubator where they hatch? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And, then, once they hatch, the production 
people take them from the incubator to some kind of 
conveyor belt? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Okay. And, the production people also sort of 
keep the place clean, too? 

A. That’s right. 

Q. Is that all that the production people do? 


12a 


A. Keeping things clean and sitting the eggs — 
transferring the eggs — when you say clean, they are 
washing and disinfecting the hatchers each time that you 
pull a hatch of [45] chickens out of them. 

Q. So, now while we’ve gone from the egg haulers to 
unloading the trucks to putting them on the setters to 
putting them in incubators to putting them in the con- 
veyor belt, plus keeping things clean and disinfecting and 
all that. We’re now on the conveyor belt, okay. 

The baby chicks go down the conveyor belt, at 
which point what happens to them? 

A. The ladies that are paid by the box picks the 
chicks up, trims the beak and vaccinates the chicken. 

* * * 


[46] Q. So, they’re debeaked and vaccinated and then 
what? 

A. Then, they’re ready to be delivered to the grow- 
ing farm if they’re broilers. If they’re going to be sexed — 
then they are sexed and then delivered to the growing 
farm. 


* * * 


[47] Q. And the chick delivery boys take them out 
to farms where they’re to be grown? 

A.  That’s correct. 

Q. Now, the people who grow them on these farms 
are, again, independent contract growers, is that right? 

A. Right. 

Q. So, the chick delivery boys, their function is to 
take boxes of newly born chicks, put them on a school 
bus or a bus of some sort and take them out and deliver 
them to the people who are going to grow them. Is that 
correct? 

A. That’s correct. 


13a 


Do they unload them there? 

Yes. 

Take them off the bus and put them down? 

Put them in the house. 

And, at this point, you said they’re within — this 
is the day that they’re hatched. 

A. That’s right. 

Q. How long do they stay at the independent con- 
tract [48] growers? 

A. Basically forty-nine days. 

Q. Are they inoculated or vaccinated in that time? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. So, the next interaction the Company has with 
these contract growers, except for possibly some super- 
vision, is when they pick them up after forty-nine days. 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. Who picks them up? 

A. The catchers — live haul. 

Q. This crew that we’re talking about, the catcher 
live haul crew? 

A. That’s right. 

Q. Now, the catcher live haul crew primarily consists 
of catchers and drivers. 

A. Forklift — 

Q. And forklift people. Do the forklift people come 
out to the farms? 

A. Sure. 

Q. So, there are three types of people who come out 
to the farms that pick them up. 

A. That’s right. 

Q. And, when you say catcher what catcher means is 
they run around the ground grabbing them and putting 
them in boxes or cartons or cages or something. Is that 
right? 

[49] A. Basically, yes. 


rere 


l4a 


Q. And, the forklift people take those cages and lift 
them up onto the truck, is that right? 
A. That’s right. 
Q. And, the other people are called live haul, is that 
right? 
A. These people are live haul. 
Q. The live haul drivers will then drive them from 
the independent grower to the processing plant? 
Correct. 
And, then will they unload them there? 
They park the truck there. 
Park the truck there and somebody else unloads 


A 

Q 

A 

Q 

A. Correct. 
Q. Who unloads it? 

A. People at the processing plant. 

Q. Is the processing plant Holly Farms owned 
place? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Are the people who unload the trucks there and 
go in the processing plant, are those part of the unit 
that we’ve proposed here? 

A. No, sir. Not the ones that unload the chickens if 
that’s what you’re referring to. 

Q. That’s what I meant by that question. So, when 
we look at this crew that goes out to these independent 
growers, they [50] pick up grown chickens that are 
going to be broiler chickens, these aren’t breeders any- 
more, Is that right? 

A.  That’s right. 

Q. They run around the ground, they catch them 
and put them in cages, load them on the trucks and 
then drive them to the processing plant. Is that right? 

A. That’s — 


l5a 


Q. Do they vaccinate them there? I mean do they 
vaccinate them when they catch them? 
A. No. 


i =. 


[57] Q. * * * The contract growers who actually 
grow the breeder chickens up to twenty weeks get paid 
by the square footage? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. Of their farm? 

A. Right. 

Q. The laying facility operators get paid by the 
number of eggs they get picked up by Holly Farms? 

A. That’s correct. 

Q. And, the broiler growers who take the one day 
old or newly hatched baby chicks and raise them to 
forty-nine weeks, how do they get paid? 

A. By the thousand of birds. 


* * * 


[110] Q. Let me have a minute please. One other 
question. We talked about the chicken catchers going 
out there and running down the chickens and putting 
them in boxes. And, those are employees of Holly Farms 
but, the farm hands who work on the farm on a day to 
day basis are employees of the independent contractor, 
is that correct? 

A. If they have — 

MR. HUDSON: Objection. 
{111] BY MR. LESSLEY: 
Q. If they have any? 
MR. HUDSON: I don’t believe he has knowl. 
edge of who the farmer hires as an employee. 
BY MR. LESSLEY: 
Q. If you know. 


l6a 


MR. HOGG: We would be willing to agree that if 
the farmer has any employees, they're his employee but, 
we don’t know whether he does or not. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: Do you know 
whether the farmer has employees? 

THE WITNESS: Some farmers do. Basically, it's 
the owner of the farm that looks after the chickens. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: Objection is over- 
ruled. 

eS eS 


17a 


APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BEFORE THE 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


Case No. 11-RC-5583 


HOLLY FARMS FOOD, INC. ! 
Employer 


and 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS 
LOCAL UNION NO. 391, AFFILIATED WITH 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
CHAUFFEURS, WAREHOUSEMEN AND HELPERS 
OF AMERICA, AFL-CIO 


Petitioner 


DECISION AND ORDER 


Upon a petition duly filed under Section 9(c) of the 
National Labor Relations Act, as amended, a hearing was 
held before a hearing officer of the National Labor Rela- 


tions Board. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(b) of the Act, 


the Board has delegated its authority in this proceeding 
to the undersigned. 


Upon the entire record in this proceeding, the under- 
signed finds: 


18a 


1. The hearing officer’s rulings made at the hearing are 
free from prejudicial error and are hereby affirmed. 


2. The Employer is engaged in commerce within the 
meaning of the Act and it will effectuate the purposes 
of the Act to assert jurisdiction herein. 


3. The labor organization(s) involved claim(s) to rep- 
resent certain employees of the Employer. 


4. No question affecting commerce exists concerning 
the representation of certain employees of the Employer 
within the meaning of Section 9(c)(1) and Section 
2(6)(7) of the Act, for the following reasons: 


(See Attached) 


ORDER 


It IS HEREBY ORDERED that the petition filed 
herein be, and it hereby is, dismissed. 


RIGHT TO REQUEST REVIEW 


Under the provisions of Section 102.67 of the Board’s 
Rules and Regulations, a request for review of this 
Decision may be filed with the National Labor Relations 
Board, addressed to the Executive Secretary, 1717 
Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Washington, D.C. 20570. 


This request must be received by the Board in Washing- 
ton by April 10, 1989. 


Dated March 27, 1989 /s/ Willie L. Clark, Jr. 
Regional Director, Region 


at Winston-Salem, North Carolina 


[SEAL] 


19a 


IThe Employer’s name appears as amended at the 
hearing. 


2The Employer is engaged in the operation of an inte- 
grated poultry business with hatcheries located in North 
Carolina at Wilkesboro, North Wilkesboro, Hayes, Sea- 
ford, Suncrest, Catawba and Fairplanes. In addition, the 
Employer has a feed manufacturing plant in Roaring 
River, North Carolina, and a processing plant which 
produces broilers for sale to retail stores. The Petitioner, 
in its petition, seeks a unit comprised of all hatchery, 
live haul and feed haul employees, including the follow- 
ing classifications: driving, maintenance, blood testers, 
quality control, injector, primary breeders, breeders, 
feather sexing, and chicken catchers at the Wilkesboro, 
North Wilkesboro, Hays, Roaring River, Seacrest, Sun- 
crest, and Fairplanes, North Carolina facilities; but 
excluding all office employees, guards and supervisors as 
defined in the Act. At the hearing, the Petitioner asserted 
that an appropriate unit would in addition to the above 
classification, include all feed mill employees and feed 
mill mechanics at the Roaring River facility, plus the 
employees at the Employer’s Catawba, North Carolina 
hatchery. 


The Employer takes the position that all petitioned- 
for employees are agricultural employees specifically 
excluded from the definition of “employee” in Section 
2(3) of the Act. It further asserts, in the alternative, that 
the petitioned-for employees fall into four separate 
categories: (a) hatchery employees; (b) live haul em- 
ployees; (c) feed haul employees; and (d) blood test 
employees, which share a community of interest only 
within their separate groups. The Petitioner and the 
Employer each filed briefs which have been carefully 
considered. 


20a 


The record indicates that chickens used for breeding 
purposes, called pullets or breeder chickens, and chickens 
destined for retail stores, called broilers, are both grown 
from the same process. Hatchery employees process 
eggs, which have been picked up and transported from 
breeder farms under contract with the Employer. The 
eggs are first put into setters and are then transferred to 
incubators. When the chicks hatch, they are vaccinated, 
de-beaked, sexed, boxed and shipped to the breeder 
farms where they are grown. Once grown, the chickens 
are separated into the categories of pullets and broilers. 
Chicken catchers, as part of live haul crews (which 
include, one truck driver, and one fork lift operator), 
catch the broilers, box them and transport them to the 
processing plant. Pullet movers catch the pullets, vacci- 
nate them, box and then transport them to laying houses. 
The breeder chickens then lay eggs which are gathered 
by the contract farmer and hauled by the Employer’s 
employees to the hatchery to start the process again. 
Additionally, about 80 percent of the breeder chickens 
are purchased as baby chicks from farms and are then 
combined with the hatchery-produced chickens at the 
laying house. The record reflect that there is significant 
interchange among employees who are based at the 
hatchery locations. For example, hatchery employees 
are sent to gather eggs and to do the work of blood test 
department employees, The hatchery live haul drivers 
regularly perform hatchery and maintenance work. Also, 
blood test employees help hauling eggs, and help the 
pullet crews to catch chickens. 


The record indicates that live haul employees consist 
of two separate and distinct groups, broiler catchers and 
pullet catchers. The broiler catchers work out of the 
processing plant while the pullet catchers and egg haulers 


a aed y an 


2la 


work in the hatchery operations. There is no interchange 
between these classifications. Broiler haulers do not haul 
pullets and pullet haulers do not haul broilers. 


The Employer's feed mill operation at Roaring River, 
North Carolina consists of a feed mill, where grain is 
processed into feed, and a truck service center. At this 
location, feed mill employees process the feed and feed 
haul drivers transport it to the contract farms. Mechanics 
at this location service the trucks used to haul the feed. 
The record reflects that there is no interchange between 
the feed mill employees and any of the employees work- 
ing in the hatcheries or the processing plant. 


Section 2(3) of the Act excludes agricultural laborers 
from the classification of employees covered under the 
Act. Since 1946, Congress has added riders to the Board’s 
appropriation bill providing that no part of the appro- 
priation shall be used in connection with bargaining 
units composed of agricultural laborers as set forth in 
Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Section 
3(f) defines agriculture as follows: 


Agriculture includes farming in all its branches and 
includes . . . the raising of poultry, and practices, 
... performed by a farmer on a farm as an incident 
to, or in conjuction with such farming opera- 
tions... 


The hatchery employees, on the basis of the record 
herein, are clearly engaged in the raising of poultry 
within the meaning of Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor 
Standards Act. See, e.g., Arkansas Valley Industries, Inc., 
167 NLRB 391 (1967); Lindstrom Hatchery and Poultry 
Farms, 49 NLRB 776) (1943); Bayside Enterprises, Inc. 
vs. N.L.R.B., 429 U.S. 298, 50 L, Ed. 2d. 494, 97 S. Ct 
576 (1977). As to the employees who engage in the 
pickup and delivery operations at the hatcheries (who 


22a 


also perform hatchery and maintenance duties), it is clear 
that their work in the hatchery is likewise agricultural in 
nature Moreover, although hauling, generally, would 
appear to be a non-farm activity, the employees making 
pickups and deliveries in the circumstances presented 
here, particularly considering the process and functional 
integration in the hatchery, are similarly engaged in the 
exempt activity of raising poultry. Therefore, I conclude 
that the egg haulers and pullet haulers are also agricul- 
tural workers. Arkansas Valley Industries, Inc., 167 
NLRB 391 (1967). 


As to the live haul employees, designated as chicken 
catchers, who work out of the processing plant, I con- 
clude that their position is not included either in the 
primary or secondary definition of “agriculture’’ in 
Section 3(f) of the FLSA. In this connection, the Board 
has consistently held that when an employer contracts 
with farmers for the care and feeding of the employer’s 
chicks, the employer’s status as a farmer engaged in the 
raising of poultry ends with respect to those chicks. 
Impco Poultry, Division of International Multifoods 
Corporation, 202 NLRB 259 (1973). Thus addressing the 
unit placement of the chicken catching crews, the record 
contains sufficient evidence of their functional integra- 
tion, with other processing plant employees to warrant 
their inclusion with those employees, and would not 
otherwise warrant their inclusion in a separate unit. 


Feed haul drivers do nothing but deliver grain to the 
contract farmers. These deliveries do not constitute work 
incident to the farmer’s farm, but are, rather, work inci- 
dent to the feed mill. By the same token, the feed mill 
employees and the mechanics are not involved in farming. 
Consequently, the feed mill employees, feed haul em- 
ployees and the mechanics at the Employer’s Roaring 


—=——_— 


23a 


River, North Carolina facility are clearly non-agricultural 
employees. Bayside Enterprise, Inc. vs. N.L.R.B., 429 
U.S. 298, 50 L.Ed. 2nd. 494, 97 S. Ct. 576 (1977). The 
Petitioner, however, seeks a multi-location unit including 
all of the Roaring River employees along with the em- 
ployees at the seven other locations of the Employer 
whom I have found to be agricultural employees. Fur- 
ther, the Petitioner, who for the first time at hearing 
included the feed mill employees in its petition, has not 
expressed a desire to represent only the Roaring River 
employees as a separate single location unit. Accordingly, 
as to the groups of individuals whom I have found to be 
agricultural employees, I find that no question affecting 
commerce exists within the meaning of 9(c)(1) of the 
Act, concerning the representation of “employees” as 
defined in Section 2(3) of the Act. 


Moreover, as to those classification of employees 
whom I have concluded to be non-agricultural, and, 
therefore, subject to the coverage of the Act, I conclude 
that either the Petitioner has not sought their inclusion 
in an appropriate unit or as to the Roaring River em- 
ployees has not expressed its desire to represent them as 
a single location unit. Therefore, I shall dismiss the 
petition in its entirety. 


24a 


APPENDIX C 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BEFORE THE — 
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


Case No. 11-RC-5583 


HOLLY FARMS FOOD, INC. 
Employer 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS 
LOCAL UNION NO. 391, AFFILIATED WITH 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
CHAUFFEURS, WAREHOUSEMEN AND 
HELPERS OF AMERICA, AFL-CIO 


Petitioner 


ORDER REOPENING CASE AND 
REOPENING HEARING AND 
NOTICE OF HEARING 


On March 27, 1989, a Decision and Order dismissing 
the instant petition, was issued by the undersigned on 
the grounds that certain of the employees sought were 
agricultural employees and therefore exempt from 
coverage under the Act and that the Petitioner had not 
expressed a desire to represent those non-agricultural 
employees determined to be covered by the Act. As the 
petition was dismissed, the subject case was closed on 
March 27, 1989. On our about April 6, 1989, the Peti- 
tioner filed a Request for Review wherein it asserted, 
inter alia, that it wished to proceed to an election in any 
unit or units the Board may find appropriate. I have 


25a 


reviewed the Request for Review and decided to treat 
such Request for Review as a motion for reconsidera- 
tion, and as the record evidence is insufficient to deter- 
mine the scope and composition of an appropriate 
bargaining unit or units of the employees subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Act, I find the taking of additional 
evidence is necessary concerning the appropriate bar- 
gaining unit or units of the non-argicultural employees 
of the Employer who the Petitioner seeks to represent 
by the subject petition. Accordingly, 


IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Case No. 11-RC- 
5583 be, and it hereby is, reopened; and 


If IS FURTHER ORDERED that the hearing in 
this matter be reopened for the limited purpose of 
receiving such further relevant and material evidence 
in this matter as the parties may present concerning 
the appropriate bargaining unit or units of those employ- 
ees of the Employer subject to the jurisdiction of the Act 
who the Petitioner seeks to represent by its petition 
herein. 


YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that pursuant to 
Sections 3(b) and 9(c) of the Act, on the 12th day of 
May, 1989, at 9:00 a.m., at 437 Federal Building, 251 
North Main Street, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, a 
reopened hearing will be conducted before a hearing 
officer of the National Labor Relations Board solely - 
upon the aforesaid question of the appropriate bargain- 
ing unit or units of employees of the Employer subject 
to the jurisdiction of the Act, at which time and place 
the parties will have the right to appear in person or 
otherwise, and give testimony. 


27a 


26a 
, : APPENDIX D 
Dated at Winston-Salem, North Carolina, this 28th 
day of April, 1989. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 
/s/ Willie L. Clark Jr. Case No. 11-RC-5583 
Willie L. Clark Jr. 
National Labor Relations Board In the Matter of: _ HOLLY FARMS CORPORATION, 
Region 11 EMPLOYER 
447 Federal Building AND 


251 North Main Street 


Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27101 CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND 


HELPERS LOCAL UNION NO. 391, 
affiliated with INTERNATIONAL 
BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS, 
CHAUFFEURS, WAREHOUSEMEN 
AND HELPERS OF AMERICA, 
AFL-CIO 

PETITIONER 


Pages: 159-309 
Place: WINSTON-SALEM, NORTH CAROLINA 
Date: MAY 12, 1989 


* * 


[173] BY MR. HUDSON: 

Q. Mr. Wittington, let’s get your full name, please. 

A. Samuel Smith Wittington. 

Q. Who is your employer? 

A. Holly Farms Food. 

Q. In what capacity? 

A. I’m the live production manager for Wilkesboro. 

Q. You testified in the original hearing in this 
matter? 

A. Yes, sir. 


28a 


Q. Okay. Sam, I’m going to ask you a few questions 
concerning the live haul crews and the processing plant 
employees. The employees located in the processing 
plant. What’s, could you repeat, again, what is your 
duties at Holly Farm? Who are you in charge of over: 
seeing? / 

A. In a live production manager capacity, I’m over 
any of the functions up to the processing plant. 

Q. And, that includes the live haul crews? 

A. Live haul crews, hatcheries, feed mill. 

Q. Could you specify the live haul crews? 

A. The live haul crews in that department is the 
people that catch the broiler that is ready to come in to 
be processed at the processing plant. 7A 

And, how many different job descriptions are 
there within the crew? How many job functions are 
there? | 

[174] A. There’s three. There’s drivers, forklift 
operators and catchers. 

* * * 


[178] Q. Okay. Could you describe the dependence 
that the processing plant has upon the chicken catching 
crews as far as the job functions are concerned? . 

A. Well, what we do, the catching process is timed 
in relation to plant processing in order to keep the birds 
from sitting in the holding sheds where the birds are 
going to drift in body weight to between catching time 
and processing. So, the catchers, what we have them is 
time for their work schedules in relation to the processing 
shifts and the catchers work so dictates keeping the 

ing plant [179] running. ‘ 
-" ‘ So, the lan haulers bring the trucks with the 
chickens into the processing plant? 

A. Yes, sir. 


29a 


Q. And, who unloads the truck? 

A. The truck, the trailer is dropped on the scales 
and a live haul employee then puts a yard bird, a yard 
shuttle truck, to the trailer and then puts it in the holding 
shed or either it’s taken straight on down to the process- 
ing plant at receiving. 


Q. And, who operates the shuttle, what are they 
called? 


A. Yard birds what the name on there. 

Q. And, who operates those? 

A. The one that takes the birds off of the scales is a 
live haul employee. And, then the birds are put in a hold- 
ing shed and then the plan processing has employees with 
yard birds that come up to the scale to pick up the birds 
and the live haul scale man tells the plant receiving person 
what trucks to take down in rotation. 

Q. So, the live haul scale man communicates with 
the processing plant employee. 

A. Receiving, yes. 

Q. Alright. So — 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: Mr. Hudson, for 
clarification purposes as we go through, when you get 
these categories, if [180] you would specify, have the 
witness specify how many people we're talking about in 
any one category. 

MR. HUDSON: Okay. 

Q. Sam is it true that the catching and delivery of 
the chickens and delivery to a processing plant, is that 
the first step in the processing plant operation? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And, so, the method that you've just described 
earlier, that's part of the coordination between the two 
groups? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And, the operation of the entire system? 


30a 


A. Uh-huh. . 
Q. If the chicken catchers were to not deliver the 


chickens on time or to have a problem, that would 
affect the entire processing plant? 

A. Like I said, we run it close time here between 
catching and processing to keep the birds from having to 
sit in a holding shed. So, yes, occasionally if we have, if 
we get behind or short on labor, truck tears up, there 
are times when the plant runs out of birds and they have 
to give the employees a break of ten or fifteen minutes 
before they get a truck there. 

Q. And, if the live haul group didn’t work at all, 
what would happen? 

A. Plant wouldn’t run. Wouldn’t process birds. Now, 
if [181] they had, if they had carried over birds that 
were going to be further processed, that had been, you 
know, brought in the prior day, that department could 
take a further process. But as far as processing the live 
birds and that’s really where it all originates from. 

Q. And, if the plant is not functioning correctly, 
what is the effect on the live haul operations? 

A. It would be the same, same situation. Like, if 
it comes a snow we have to coordinate between the 
plant, of course, and live haul as to how many chickens 
we're going to bring in. 

Q. So, it’s basically the same operation, all one 
operation? 

A. Yes, it’s all one, one, one’s dependent on the 
other one, 

Q. Sam, could you clarify for us what would happen 
with the other operations in the live haul production 
other than chicken catching crews if, say, the processing 
plant was to be shut down or closed down? We under- 
stand from what you have said earlier that the chicken 


Sla 


catching crews would not be able to work because of the 
shutdown of the processing plant, but how about the 
other operations under your, in live production? 

A. If the plant was down for a day or two days or a 
matter of, you know, a week, it wouldn't have any, any 
influence on the other departments. 

Q. And, which departments are those? Could you 
specify? 

A. It would be all the live production. It would be 
the hatcheries, the feed mill, feed delivery. 

[182] Q. The entire live haul production other than 
the chicken catching crews? 

A. That's true. 

Q. They would not be affected? 

A. Not on short term, no, sir. 

Q. Sam, I’m — 

MR. HUDSON: You wanted, Mr. Hearing Officer, 
some numbers regarding the live haul people, the chicken 
catching crews. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: That's correct. 
Every job category I need a number for them and | 
assume they're only located at this one facility. Is that 
correct? 

THE WITNESS: That’s correct. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: I need a number 
of the people there in each category. 

MR. HOGG: I got Mr. Wittington’s list and gave 
them to you. Could you temporarily give them back to 
him, so we can count? What I'll do is go ahead and ask 
him to give you the numbers of the different groups, so 
we can save time. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: You mentioned 
under live haul there were drivers, forklift operators, 
catchers and I think there are also fuel attendants there 
at this location. Is that correct? 


32a 


THE WITNESS: Yes. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: How many drivers 
are there? dale 

[183] THE WITNESS: There's twenty-seven within 

one or two. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And, forklift 
operators? 

THE WITNESS: There’s twelve, one for each 
crew. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And catchers? 

THE WITNESS: There is, there's about a hun- 
dred, there’s about a hundred and nine to twelve. You 
have people coming and going. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And, the fuel 
attendants? 

THE WITNESS: There's two. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And, you referred 
to all of these people as live haul employees? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. 

MR. HOGG: That’s a hundred and fifty to a 
hundred and fifty-two at my count. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And, those are 
the only people you referred to as live haul employees? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. Now, in that list I think 
we have two, two cage repairmen along with the. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: That was cage? 
C-a-g-e? Cage repair? 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: And, they were 
included in which category? Catchers? 

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. In that count, yes, sir. 

HEARING OFFICER REESE: That would be 
one hundred and nine [184] to one twelve, including the 
two cage repairmen. 

THE WITNESS: Yes. 


33a 
APPENDIX E 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BEFORE THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD 
REGION 11 


HOLLY FARMS FOODS, INC. 


and Case No. 11-RC-5583 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS 
LOCAL UNION NO. 391, AFFILIATED WITH 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF 
TEAMSTERS, CHAUFFEURS, 
WAREHOUSEMEN AND HELPERS OF 
AMERICA, AFL-CIO 


SUPPLEMENTAL DECISION AND DIRECTION 
OF ELECTION 


Upon a petition duly filed under Section 9(c) of the 
National Labor Relations Act, as amended, a hearing was 
held on March 14, 1989, at Winston-Salem, North Caro- 
lina, before a hearing officer of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board. 


Thereafter, on March 27, 1989, the Regional Director 
issued a Decision and Order dismissing the petition on 
the grounds that Petitioner sought to represent certain of 
the Employer's employees who are exempt from coverage 
under the Act; that the Employer's “Chicken Catchers” 
appeared to share acommunity of interest with employees 
not sought by Petitioner; and, that Petitioner did not 
express a desire to represent a single-location unit at the 
Employer's Roaring River location. 


Both parties timely filed Requests for Review of the 
aforementioned Decision and Order. In its Request for 


34a 


Review filed on or about April 6, 1989, the Petitioner 
asserted, inter alia, that it wished to proceed to an elec- 
tion in any unit or units the Board might find appropri- 


ate. The undersigned Regional Director treated Petition- — 


er's Request for Review as a motion for reconsideration 
and on April 28, 1989 issued an Order Reopening Cases 
and Reopening Hearing And Notice of Hearing. 


A reopened hearing was held on May 12, 1989, at 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, before a hearing officer 
of the National Labor Relations Board, for the purpose 
of taking additional evidence concerning the scope and 
composition of an appropriate bargaining unit or units of 
the Employer's non-agricultural employees. Subsequent 
to the reopened hearing, both parties filed briefs which 
have been carefully considered. 


The Employer is engaged in an integrated poultry 
business which is administratively divided into divisions. 
Although the record is silent regarding the number of 
divisions, it is clear that the Live Production Division 
administratively controls its hatchery, live haul, feed 
haul and feed mill operations. Several categories of 
employees within the Live Production Division are 
“agricultural” employees exempt from coverage under 
the Act. The Live Production Division “agricultural” 
employees include all its hatchery employces, all its live 
haul employees assigned to its hatcheries, and all of its 
blood test employees. The Employer’s Roaring River, 
North Carolina, Service Center is administratively con- 
trolled by its Fleet Administrative Services Division 
which also controls three other Service Centers in the 
Wilkesboro, North Carolina area. There are approxi- 
mately 198 employees in the first unit and approxi- 
mately eight employees in the second unit found appro- 
priate herein. 


35a 


The Petitioner asserts that the Regional Director 
erred in his March 14, 1989 decision in finding certain 
of the Employer's employees to be “agricultural” em- 
ployees exempt from coverage under the Act. It argues 
that Arkansas Valley Industries, Inc., 167 NLRB 391 
(1967) and Lindstrom Hatchery and Poultry Farms, 
49 NLRB 776 (1943) cited in the decision are dis- 
tinguishable from the facts herein. Further, Petitioner 
states that since North Carolina exempts agricultural 
employees from mandatory Workers Compensation 
coverage, the Employer, by providing Workers Compen- 
sation coverage for all of its employees, impliedly did not 
consider certain of its employees to be “agricultural” 
employees prior to the filing of the Petitioner's petition. 
The Petitioner also asserts that it is ready to proceed to 
election in any unit or units which the Board or Regional 
Director might find appropriate. The Employer contends 
that the Regional Director erred in not finding that all 
of the employees sought by Petitioner are “agricultural”’ 
employees. The Employer, in the alternative, argues that 
the only appropriate collective bargaining unit of the 
non-agricultural employees are: (a) Live Haul (Chicken 
Catchers) and processing plant or Live Haul alone; (b) 
Feed Haul; (c) Feed Mill; and (d) all four of the Employ- 
er’s Service Centers--three of which are not sought by 
Petitioner. There is no history of collective bargaining 
among any of the employees at issue. 


Upon the entire record in this matter, I find that the 
hearing officer’s rulings at the original hearing and sup- 
plemental hearing are free from prejudicial error and 
such rulings are hereby affirmed. In addition, I find that 
the Employer is engaged in commerce; that a labor 
organization's claim to represent certain employees of 
the Employer and; a question affecting commerce exists 


36a 


concerning the representation of certain employees of 
the Empioyer within the meaning of Section 9(c)(1) and 
Section 2(6) and (7) of the Act. 


Both the Petitioner and Employer are essentially ad- 
vancing the same arguments, which were made in their 
respective briefs following the first hearing, regarding the 
law applicable to the agricultural exemption. The Peti- 
tioner’s argument regarding Workers Compensation 
benefits is unconvincing as it merely proves that the 
Employer is providing a benefit which he might not be 
mandated to provide. I, therefore, reaffirm my decision 
of March 27, 1989, finding that the Employer’s Hatchery 
employees, pullet haulers, egg haulers and blood test 
employees are agricultural employees. 


As to the scope and composition of appropriate col- 
lective bargaining units containing the remainder of 
the Employcr’s employees whom the Petitioner seeks to 
represent, the record evidence, consisting of the evidence 
at both the original and reopened hearing, indicates that 
the Live Haul employees (Chicken Catcher crews), Feed 
Haul employees, and Feed Mill employees are all part of 
the Employer’s Live Production Division under the super- 
vision of Sam Wittington, the Live Production Manager. 
The non-agricultural Live Haul employees include 27 
truck drivers, 12 forklift operators, and 2 fuel attendants 
all of whom are divided into 12 chicken catching crews. 
The chicken catching crews catch, box and transport 
chickens to the Employer’s processing plant in Wilkes- 
boro, North Carolina. The Feed Mill employees include 
3 receiving employees, 3 panel operators, 3 pellet mill 
controllers, 3 cleanup men, 3 vitamin pourers and 6 main- 
tenance and repairmen. They produce the feed which the 
Employer's 27 Feed Haul drivers transport to the farms 
where the chickens are raised. All Live Production 


37a 


division employees share the same fringe benefits and 
personnel policies. All Live Production division employees 
are on the same wage system—they all start at the same 
minimum and their wages are raised usually within 60 to 
90 days depending on their job performance. However, 
there is little or no interchange between the Live Haul, 
Feed Haul and Feed Mill employees and each department 
is supervised day-to-day by its own supervisor. Moreover, 
the record of the second hearing clearly reflects that the 
Employer’s Live Haul employees are not organizationally 
integrated with its Processing Plant employees and they 
do not share common supervision up to and including the 
division level. There is no significant interchange among 
or between the Employer’s Live Haul employees and its 
Processing Plant employees and they are stationed in 
different buildings with their own separate restroom, 
breakroom and recreation room facilities. Furthermore, 
while the Employer’s Live Haul employees are function- 
ally integrated with its Processing Plant employees inso- 
far as they provide chickens for processing, all the Live 
Division employees share in getting the chickens ready 
for processing and are thus also functionally integrated 
with the Processing Plant. The Feed Mill and Feed Haul 
employees are located in Roaring River, North Carolina, 
approximately 15 miles from the Live Haul employees’ 
home base in Wilkesboro, North Carolina. According to 
the record, the Employer's Roaring River, North Caro- 
line Service Center, which is a part of the Employer's 
Fleet Administrative Services Division, includes 6 me- 
chanics and 2 parts men. The Service Center employees 
are siationed in their own separate building at the Em- 
ployer’s Roaring River location. The Roaring River 
Service Center employees are organizationally distinct 
from the Live Production Division employees. The 
Service Center employees share the same personnel 


38a 


policies and fringe benefits as do all of the Employer’s 
employees. However, unlike the Employer’s Live Pro- 
duction Division employees, the Roaring River Service 
Center mechanics do not start at a minimum (or basic) 
entry level. Rather, a mechanic's starting wage is based 
upon his individual qualifications. The Roaring River 
Service Center employces have no interchange with the 
Live Production Division employees and do not have 
any common supervision with them. Therefore, I find 
that the Employer’s Roaring River Service Center em- 
ployees do not share a community of interest with its 
Live Production Division employees. The record also 
reflects that the Roaring River Service Center employees 
have little or-no interchange with their counterparts at 
the Employer’s other Service Centers. The Roaring River 
Service Center employees are locally hired. The Em- 
ployer’s Service Centers, while able to service all of the 
Employer’s fleet, are all intended to specialize in specific 
vehicles within the Employer’s fleet. The Roaring River 
Service Center is primarily dedicated to maintaining and 
repairing I.ive Production Division vehicles. The Roaring 
River Service Center employees wear uniforms the color 
of which they chose as the unit color. The employees at 
the other Service Centers choose their own respective 
uniform colors. 


In representation cases, the Board gives consideration 
to the unit sought by a petitioner. See E. H. Koester 
Bakery Co., Inc., 136 NLRB 1006 (1962). Further, the 
Board consistently determines whether the petitioned- 
for unit can be considered appropriate for purposes of 
collective bargaining rather than whether the petitioned- 
for unit constitutes the most appropriate unit. See The 
Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New 
York, 222 NLRB 309 (1976). Moreover, the Board, con- 


39a 


siders whether a labor organization seeks to represent the 
employees on a comprehensive basis. See Hegins Corpora- 
tion, 255 NLRB 1236 (1981); Purnell’s Pride, Inc., 252 
NLRB 110 (1980); Beckett Aviation Corporation—Cleve- 
land, 254 NLRB 88 (1981); Penn Color, Inc., 249 NLRB 
1117 (1980); Renzetti’s Market, Inc., 238 NLRB 174 
(1978). 


The Petitioner herein seeks a unit comprised of all of 
the Employer’s Live Production Division employees and 
the Employer’s Roaring River Service Center employees. 
Petitioner is thus impliedly seeking the broadest appro- 
priate unit or units within the Employer’s Live Produc- 
tion Division which the Board might find appropriate. 
Further, the Petitioner does not seek to represent thie 
Employer's Processing Plant employees who, as the com- 
plete record reflects, do not share a sufficient community 
of interest with its Live Haul employees to make them 
inseparable for collective bargaining purposes. Therefore, 
giving proper consideration to Petitioner’s request and 
the fact that the Employer's Live Production Division 
employees share the same overall supervision, wage 
policies, personnel policies and fringe benefits, in addi- 
tion to their functional integration, I find that the Live 
Production Division employees share a sufficient com- 
munity of interest to constitute an appropriate unit for 
collective bargaining purposes. Further, I find that the 
Employer's Roaring River, North Carolina Service Center 
employees share a community of interest because they 
share the same day-to-day supervision; they are geo- 
graphically separate from the other Service Centers: 
and, they have established a group identity through 
their choice of the color of their uniforms. Further, | 
find that the Employer has not overcome the presump- 
tive appropriateness of the Roaring River Service Center 


40a 


as a single-location unit. In this connection, the record 
does not show that the interest of the Roaring River 
Service Center employees have merged with those of its 
other service centers. See Beckett Aviation Corp., 254 
NLRB 88 (1981); Renzetti’s Market, Inc., 238 NLRB 
174 (1978). Thus, while a unit consisting of all Service 
Centers may also be appropriate, I am convinced on the 
record herein that such a unit is not the only appro- 
priate unit. 


In light of the above and the record as a whole, I find 
that the following employees of the Employer constitute 
units appropriate for the purpose of collective bargaining 
within the meaning of Section 9(b) of the Act: 


UNIT A 

All of the Employer's Live Haul (Chicken Catch- 
ing crews) employees at the Employer’s facility 
in Wilkesboro, North Carolina, and the Employ- 
er’s Feed Haul, and Feed Mill employees at the 
Employer’s facility in Roaring River, North 
Carolina, excluding all office employees, guards 
and supervisors as defined in the Act. 


UNIT B 
All of the employees of the Employer at its Ser- 
vice Center in Roaring River, North Carolina, 
excluding all office employees, guards and super- 
visors as defined in the Act. 


An election by secret ballot shall be conducted by the 
undersigned among the employees in the units found 
appropriate at the time and place set forth in the notice 
of election to be issued subsequently, subject to the 
Board’s Rules and Regulations. Eligible to vote are 
those in the units who were employed during the payroll 
period ending immediately preceding the date of this 
Decision, including employees who did not work during 


4la 


that period because they were ill, on vacation, or tem- 
porarily laid off. Also eligible are employees engaged in 
an economic strike which commenced less than 12 
months before the election date and who retained their 
status as such during the eligibility period and their 
replacements. Those in the military services of the 
United States may vote if they appear in person at the 
polls. Ineligible to vote are employees who have quit or 
been discharged for cause since the designated payroll 
period, employees engaged in a strike who have been 
discharged for cause since the commencement thereof 
and who have not been rehired or reinstated before the 
election date, and employees engaged in an economic 
strike which commenced more than 12 months before 
the election date and who have been permanently re- 
placed. Those eligible shall vote whether or not they 
desire to be represented for collective bargaining pur- 
poses by Chauffeurs, Teamsters and Helpers Local 
Union No. 391, affiliated with International Brotherhood 
of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of 
America, AFL-CIO. 


In order to assure that all eligible voters may have 
the opportunity to be informed of the issues in the 
exercise of their statutory right to vote, all parties to the 
election should have access to a list of voters and their 
addresses which may be used to communicate with 
them. Excelsior Underwear, Inc., 156 NLRB 1236 
(1966); NLRB v. Wyman Gordon Company, 394 U.S. 
759 (1969). Accordingly, it is directed that two copies of 
an election eligibility list, containing the names and 
addresses of all eligible voters, must be filed with the 
Regional Director within seven (7) days from the date of 
this Supplemental Decision and Direction of Election. 
The names on the list should be in alphabetical order. No 


42a 


extension of time to file this list may be granted except 
in extraordinary circumstances, nor shall the filing of a 
request for review operate to stay the filing of such list. 
Failure to comply with this requirement shall be grounds 
for setting aside the election whenever proper objections 


are filed. 


Under the provision of Section 102.67 of the Board's 
Rules and Regulations, a request for review of this 
Supplemental Decision may be filed with the National 
Labor Relations Board, addressed to the Executive 
Secretary, 1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, 
DC 20570. This request must be received by the Board 
in Washington before July 5, 1989. 


Dated at Winston-Salem, North Carolina, this 20th 
day of June, 1989. 


/s/ Willie L. Clark, Jr. 
WILLIE L. CLARK, Regional Director 
National Labor Relations Board 
Region 11 
447 Federal Building 
251 North Main Street 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27101-3986 


43a 
APPENDIX F 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BEFORE THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 


BOARD 
HOLLY FARMS FOOD, INC. 
Employer 
and Case 11-RC-5583 


CHAUFFEURS, TEAMSTERS AND HELPERS 
LOCAL NO. 391, AFFILIATED WITH 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF 
TEAMSTERS, CHAUFFEURS, 
WAREHOUSEMEN AND HELPERS 
OF AMERICA, AFL-CIO 

Petitioner 


DECISION ON REVIEW AND ORDER 


Petitioner's Request for Review of the Regional Direc. 
tor’s Supplemental Decision and Direction of Election is 
granted solely with regard to the Regional Director's 
conclusion that the Employer's Roaring River Service 
Center employces do not share a sufficient community of 
interest with the remaining petitioned-for employees to 
be included in a single unit. In all other respects, Peti- 
tiner’s and Employer's Requests for Review are denied. 
Employer's application for stay of election also is denied. 
In denying review of the Regional Director's findings that 
the Employer's egg haulers, pullet haulers, and blood 
testers are agricultural employees as defined in Section 
2(3) of the Act and Section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Stand. 
ards Act, the Board finds that those workers are agricul. 
tural laborers under the secondary definition of agricul. 
ture set forth in Section 3(f). See Bayside Enterpnses v. 


44a 


NLRB, 429 U.S. 298 (1977); Farmers Reservoir & Irriga- 
tion Co. v. McComb, 337 U.S. 755 (1949). 


Based on the Regional Director’s findings, the relevant 
portions of which are uncontradicted, we find that the 
petitioned-for unit combining the Employer's Roaring 
River Service Center employees with its live haul, feed 
haul, and feed mill employees is an appropriate unit for 
bargaining. The factors cited by the Regional Director 
indicating that a separate unit of service center employees 
might be appropriate, such as separate supervision and 
wage systems, and the absence of interchange between 
employee groups, do not establish that those employees 
lack a sufficient community of interest to be included in 
a single unit with the Employer's other employees. 
Service center employees are subject to the same per- 
sonnel policies and receive the same fringe benefits as 
other employees. Further, employees at the Roaring 
River Service Center maintain and repair the vehicles 
used by other unit employees, thus demonstrating func- 
tional integration. We find that these factors, which are 
not disputed, establish that employees at the Roaring 
River Service Center share a sufficient community of 
interest with the remaining employees in the petitioned- 
for unit to warrant both groups’ inclusion in a single 
bargaining unit. 


Accordingly, the Regional Director’s finding that the 
requested overall unit of live haul, feed haul, feed mill, 
and Roaring River Service Center employees is not 
appropriate is reversed. The case is remanded to the 
Regional Director for further appropriate action, includ- 
ing rescheduling the election and the posting of revised 
Notices of Election. 


45a 


JAMES M. STEPHENS, CHAIRMAN 
MARY MILLER CRACRAFT, MEMBER 
DENNIS M. DEVANEY, MEMBER 


Dated, Washington, D.C., July 20, 1989. 


46a 
APPENDIX G 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
No. 95-210 
Holly Farms Corporation, et al., 
Petitioners 
v. 


National Labor Relations Board, et al. 


ORDER ALLOWING CERTIORARL 
Filed November 6, 1995. 


The petition herein for a writ of certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit 
is granted limited to Question 5 presented by the petition. 


November 6, 1995 


