Supreme Court, U.S 
FILED 


Y NOV 9 1995 


No. 95-26 
OFFICE OF THe CLERK 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


. > 7 


HERBERT MARKMAN AND POSITEK, INC., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 
WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. AND 
ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


JOINT APPENDIX - VOLUME II 


WILLIAM B. MALLIN* FRANK H. GRIFFIN, III* 
Lewis F. GOULD, JR. PETER A. VOGT 
TIMOTHY P. RYAN POLLY M. SHAFFER 
STEPHAN P. GRIBOK GOLLATZ, GRIFFIN & EWING 
TIMOTHY S. COON Two Penn Center Plaza 
ECKERT SEAMANS CHERIN Sixteenth Floor 
& MELLOTT Philadelphia, PA 19102 
600 Grant Street Telephone: (215) 563-9400 
42nd Floor Attorneys for Respondents 
Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
Telephone: (412) 566-6000 

Attorneys for Petitioners 


*Counsel of Record 


— 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED JULY 3, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED SEPTEMBER 27, 1995 


EDITOR'S NOTE 


THE FOLLOWING PAGES WERE POOR HARD COPY 
AT THE TIME OF FILMING, IF AND WHEN A 
BETTER COPY CAN BE OBTAINED, A NEW FICHE 
_WILL BE ISSUED, 


ne 


_ 
\ ¥ 


. 
| 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
VOLUME I 
SS GRU. 2 0 oo 0 4a eee OS 0b OS Caw oe l 
District Court for the Eastern 
District of Pennsylvania, No. 91-CV-940 .... 1 
United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, No. 92-1049 ......... 5 
PE kk 06 0s oe HES 00 e008 8 9 8 8 
kg PPC TE Tee 282 
Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc.'s 
Supplemental Requested Interrogatories 
ED. Saw he Le MG aw SER EMOD Scilelaee 284 
Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Supplemental Requested Instruction ........... 286 
Motion of Defendant Westview Instruments, 
Inc. for Directed Verdict Pursuant to Rule 50 
of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure......... 290 


Order Dated September 20, 1991, Entered 

September 23, 1991, Not Vacating Order of 

September 17, 1991 Denying Defendants’ Motion 
ke PR Se ee eee 292 


‘i 
VOLUME Il 
United States Patent No. Re. 33,054 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.'s 
Advertising Brochure for Datascan............ 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Datascan dated December 1989 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Equipment Price List for Datamark and . 
Datascan dated July 1, 1985 ................ 


Excerpt of File Wrapper of United 
states Patent Re. No. 33,054 ....... 0000008 


The following opinions, orders, judgments 
and memorandum have been omitted in 
printing this Joint Appendix because they 
appear on the following pages in the 
Appendix to the printed Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari: 


Opinions of United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, filed April5, 1995 ......... 


Judgment, United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, filed April5, 1995 ........ 


Order, Ordering, sua sponte, that the Appeal 
be heard en banc, filed November 5, 1993 ...... 162a 


Order Providing for Additional Briefing and 
Other Matters for Rehearing en banc, filed 
January 7, 1994 2.0... eee eee eee 164a 


Judgment of United States District Court 

for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 

in Favor of Defendants and Against 

Plaintiffs, filed October 1, 1991 .. 2... eee. 168a 


Order of United States District Court 

for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 

in Favor of Defendants and Against 
Plaintiffs, filed September 30, 1991 .......--. 169a 


Memorandum of United States District Court 

for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 

Granting Motion for Directed Verdict, 

filed September 30, 1991 2. 170a 


ce 
Hee 


Pree SRR 


Spese 1G2m 


meegs Bajnea { PST) SI 
~~8rurw sour, 0) Sumpscocs suodas jo vogusas3 am 


i 
te 


ut 
dHEHE 
ins 


4ToR) oO) suesedds Sureuess que posn ass pus Sumo 
po BPar a ne nee 


ae , 


i can 
ait 
ie 


ft 
HE tH Wd [pier 
ili i i 
an Ha 


a3 8 


WeqyseW 


a (1) ist) JU9}B $3}BjIS poy 


6861 ‘ZI “deg 3ue7eg JO a38q «pensstey (sr) 
PSO'EE “PY sseqummy yua7eg 


2 9ld 


6361 TIS = uae ST) 


62 


(cBBhon ](4jfe Me Colle) : pours [Say x Jove 


92 


FIG. 4 


wooo ns , 
aso ded 3 


ere 


ve foy- 
cI) a 


Eaters Re oe xy 


cc 


FIG. 3 


eal fe s__} feu 


HHRMA 


Ee 6 el ee Ae me ieee Eke eer rr 


wsyed “STN 


6861 “ZI “des 


S6Z 


7 JO Z OUS 


PSOE ON 


ra i Heed ity ihe Mr Hie as 
| i a it sl i 1 


iyi Ht aa Hf | Ha) Hi 
Ft itty putt at HAN Tt THE cF 
in if ti ih f i ‘ ii He i te int fi 

in a Hf I Ut i Ha if i lt 
tt | HI Mile fis | Ni 1F 
Han ‘a iit lhl aa de 


yued 08 sus0; jag yuazed peu 
6 oq) a sreedds [ ] meqoesg (180g | posopee Bue 
A 


rg 

_ 
He 
La S 


apew SLOgIPPS aq) S2;E>TpE} S1TER) a... 
soused Gow = —-gagoeds anssyau syrup J0 


ee iif AH ae HEE if fieth tHE i 
: ee Hh Hh a hi Hh 


HEE i 
it | it if it i iP if i re 


HE, 
E at a au inti fea i ef Bit i , c 
ie ete Al; laBINN GE 
i Hi i Hl i Hit fr HU 
tHE te ht et SH 
Lie 


Ht 
Tene Hf 
He Hi aH 


vl 
ih 


TR iH alt fl! i tight 
cea i a 
nah ill Hil li HH i mH iF 
i i A Hi ft i itt it it 
rt A E i fil 
Hh tit a an he af ia 
a Hil Hila ig i 
ui He it 
a! Hath in i 
he iN ‘ial il | ie 


Apanrsod 
= worsen bps 


He 


yee 
te ome 
eh Sara OL a 
pA 
MUR poreosse 


if Het a HHA ii tie eal 
eofade He : i i 7 ue 
‘litt th ti Hay iit Mi il i 
pe Ht LF Hi hy ie Hin Hit Hh Hi i + 
eu mi ite Hl efi 
i Le if ine Lil He i. tity at ual 
a He ea | 
it ai fi i i i i cf His ; AEE pregeu 

ae i i iil tl sla Ht Mi 


et mat 
1 ie 
bce ue 

He ut (Ha 

jel ‘ Ti i i pyle i HH hi 


ae rf? fit 
Phil £ iF LE Hi Hi aH 
HE Halli {HE ‘fl 


Hit rib ee Hi HGH TREE HI TE 4 


iF i 
Hi Hi Anta Hi ile i (hie 
all “lA yi ii itd Hi 


Ran aa 
aq Aww 


Fn ri CC 

: i Hi il ult ibiadsiniel! HS, Ni bal Ld Hi f 
‘ee a 
fel a st ie it He Hy 
ea iH i iil HUE i tt Ha 


t He Hot 
He | Eide tl Herth ir hit Hi Hit it 


He sHtis att 


vi 


et 


ua 
Hi 


L, 


3 r 


i 


trk 
i 


nit 


Tay 
a 
1; 


WN neil 
i 


iif 
: i 
ut Hid 


a 
itt itu if it Hen 


dh 


Hl: ia 
ta if 
Hal 


il x 


iE 


ae z 
brat a Hee 


iis 


tl 


Hi 


i | 
i tf 


| 
Rite 


I 


| 


elt 


; 
tal 


cE 


i 
Hi | 


Hel 
it 
al 


a 
aE 


SuOnatep sounds s¥ fam se As08gaAm1 0] SUODIPpE 


i 


20a: Guan 


snounds s71780] put iss1ap UED wIIsAs pres Aqasagm 


xe onde Beer 


reas € wi a5n 305 pardepe ‘QT wNEPD Jo marks aU] “I 


‘uooms peuTmsaiepesd « Surssed sopouse [ye 
UO SIPOS JeqQ Pres 1De3eP O8 aqeusado puT soOsEB=002d 


au Gn ett Gam 
wa spy etn nee a= ete yarn 
©) PpeisewUOS s2uuEDs feondo au0 ISEa] 18 


pe 


At 
me 
fi 
"TEE 
4 


4 


AMERICA’S FIRST CHOICE 
FOR INVENTORY CONTROL 


> 


DATAS © Au 


FROM THE peas 
MAKERS OF DAIAMARK 


> ' PLAINTIFF'S 


EXHIBIT 


© 


~ 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS. INC 


ELLA LINK © HOUS!( 


So DATAS CAN 


Operating your Laundry / Drycleaning business without a good cash management and inventory control system can be expen 
sive The International Fabricare Institute and other industry authorities estimate that the amount of money lost through inven 
tory shrinkage can vary from 3% to 6% of your annual gross dollars That can be quite a bit of money Westview Instruments 
developed the DATASCAN® Portable Bar Code Reader as the complete answer to inventory contro! When used with the 
Datamark® Lister. Datascan® provides the strongest cash control system available today 


HERE IS HOW THE DATASCAN’ SYSTEM WORKS: 


The Datamark® Lister prints an invoice number and a bar code on each laundry druclean ticket processed The 
Lister then stores in its computer memory the invoice number and the ticket cash total! (up to 500 invoices) When this 
memory is full (or on a daily basis). all invoices are transferred to Datascan’ memory. which can hold an incredible 
8000 invoices. After a customer pays for his order. his paid invoice can then be removed from the Datascan’” record 
by Simply “wanding™ the bar code on the paid invoice. Any invoices that are left in the Datascan” record are unpaid 
and. therefore. must be in inventory. After a physical inventory is taken. by simply “wanding the bar codes on each 


invoice hanging on line. Datascan® will find al! “extra” invoices and “missing” invoices compute the inventory cash 
total. and provide a printed record 


—— | a 
— wa | cnesse 8.0 | ee 
14. et 
000319 +9 | Strep vray - i 
* oom 3. 40 j Olea, ad 
ae ooomzi = 12.50 o +298. 26 
ae Fo oomz 3.50 | TRA tem, 
oom! > = oss. 5 pre Bs 
a ne @ poo — rt 22 
oe 6 onate = 2.0 | rm 
ons 1 | @ooaz? pont vow j 7 UT Can, 
a +? wi | egoaze a) | rim tn 
we" ah _ 00B0 vero | Oar yy 2'0r7 ‘cas 
a” nn oA 00331 3 pes. 
oe @-7° | eoouae 2.73 bet oa 
On «8 ott | oosse 4.20 case = 12.95 
os ae 900336 +.0 | conn -” 
pat | cose = 18.8 %.26 
le ee —— 3.9 | "0h os 
sont eoosss 23.79 hee m © 1881 
= . ——— ome 868. a 
we. wee 
a 


THE DATASCAN® SYSTEM STREAMLINES YOUR BUSINESS. 


Tracks 8000 invoices from up to 10 Datamark® Listers 


Identifies old or dead” Sock in inventory 
Provides a printed record of all paid invoices 
Gives complete cash control using just a simple cash register 


The Datascan” Reader is fully portable: you charge its batteries with an AC adapter it can be held in one hand or carried 
on its belt clip. Datascan” also has an easy-to-read 32-character display and a stainless-steel bar code wand It is simple and very 
easy to use And best of all. behind every Westview Instruments product stands our reputation for quality and customer satisfaction 


WI WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS. INC. 


imousTma: Cowrrocs Drvrsiow 
6723 STELLA Lx . Houston Texas 77005 . (713) 668-2326 


Stop Upcharge Losses 


- LAST TIME YOU CLEANED THESE ores $3957 $4 95? 


SILK PANTS | PAID 9295. 
LAS 


DATAMARK gives you all the are ta you 
deserve without the math errors. More impor- 


tantly, you give your customers the consistent pric- 
ing they demand without the hand-written scribble. 


DATAMARK automatically: 
¢ Records all incoming orders 
¢ Tracks all unpaid orders 
¢ Balances to the cash drawer and, 
¢ Lists every missing invoice. a 
THAT’S CASH CONTROL! DATAMARK 3 set the standard. Now 


When pricing is done by hand, who is in charge of DATAMARK XI sets the pace 


the price — you or your employee? Considering qussumemmmemees 
— 
DATIAMARK 


what you’re losing, DATAMARK might just be less 
CALL US TODAY ... (713) 668-2326 America’s First Choice 


expensive than your next box of ball point pens. 
WI ) WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS: INC. "equa 
INDUSTRIAL CONTROLS DiviSiONn 


Va DATAMARK 


THE MOST POPULAR PRICING MACHINE IN THE INDUSTRY... 
FOR SOME VERY POWERFUL REASONS. 


4 
\ 
Automatically prices, multiplies, . 


Se i ht eM Me 


discounts, taxes, and totals 


Simple and reliable, fast and 
accurately 


accurate .. . aS casy to use 
as a calculator 


Complete cash and inventory 
reports, production print-outs 


Time clock and automatic 
by garment and department 


date advance 


High-speed, double-dot printing ..° % Discount/coupon key 
for neat. legible nckets 


for special pricing 


Communications link to 
computer or 
bar code reader 


4 Department totals, 
tracking up to 
36 stores, operators, 


or routes 
Saves and recalls ad - Full-travel keyboard 
over 6500 invoices — ria’ featuring gold 
In InVvet ory ftossbar contacts 


Rugged designed to withstand Preset pricing with multe upcharges 100% Programmable keys for up to 
the heat, lint, and chemical vapors 


Over 65,000 pricing combinations 84 descriptors 
L found in every plant assures correct upcharging for all garments 


2-Level keyboard design doubles the 
No hard disks, disk drives, or diskettes 


upcharge possibilities 
WI? WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS INC 


(713) 668-2326 


AMERICA'S FIRST CHOICE 


b 


DATAMARK 


AMERICA'S FIRST CHOICE 


EQUIPMENT PRICE LIST 


Oh MME ees tae Ne PARAS RT TRS SIE 26", SR Reon 3,295.00 
These are only some of the features that make Datamark America s #1 selling listing machine 

Simple and reliable, fast and accurate as easy to use as a Calculator 

- Elmmnates costly mistakes made while marking in and adding up tickets 

- Automatically prices, multiplies, discounts, taxes, and totals = accurately 

- Provides neat. legible hckets with consistent pricing for you and your Customers 

- 100% programmable item keys for up to 84 descriptors 2-level keyboard doubles the upcharge possibilities 

. 3 preset pricing levels (with manual overnde) and multiple upcharges for each garment 
Over 65,000 pricing combinations assures correct upcharging for all garments 

- Compiete ticket review for up to 15 garment lines 

. Multiply/vord key and vanable % discount/coupon key (under owner control) 

- 4programmabie department keys tracking up to SNES, ES, & or routes 
Automatically increments the invoice number Automatically advances the date. day. and time 

. Panes tho Gehan olen euest and Geo epanatar, clave, and mating tp autiner GO Gs? 
Automatically prints a hcket message and bar code - Simple intertace to the Datascan® Bar Code Reader 
Provides basic and necessary cash management for a laundry/drycieaning operation 

- Forces every sale through the cash register - Saves and recalls over 6500 invoices 

- Complete invoice listings and cash reports. including non-clearing and closing readings by depariment and rouie 

- Production reports by department. inciuding average price garment average discount. and average ticket sale 

- Rugged designed 10 withstand the heat. lint. and chemicals found in every plant 
No hard disks no cxsk drives. no diskettes. and no cooling fans 
Full-travel keyboard featuring gold crossbar contacts - Fast. bi-directional printing and bold, high-quality print 
Selt-diagnostics and self-testing - 5 year battery backup memory protection 
Full one year manvtacturer s warranty 

DATAMARK® F — 2 LEE LP IA DORN STII 3,995.00 
includes all DATAMARK XI features - Saves and recalls over 3000 invoices 

- invoice search by date invoice number customer number. or department 
a 

DATAMARK” CONNECTION Software... - 495.00 
- Contains all the personal computer software necessary to communicate with your Datamark Lister 

. Allows all Datamark management and inventory data to be transferred directly to your home or office 
Allows remote pncing/upcharge changes and inventory adjustments 
Dinauindely pupa 

DATASCAN® RS a | 1,995.00 
Tracks 8,000 invoices from up to 4 DATAMARK XI or or DATAMARK PLUS L Listers 
Speeds up the process ing a physical inventory identifies “extra” invoices and “mwssing invorces 

udes a 40-col nd connecting cables 


° oo racter alphanumeric display - Stainiess-steel bar code wand 
ph cteree peat “a . ra be heid in one hand 
: ed C adapter or recha rging long-life batteries - 2-tier battery backup memory protection 


B. HOUSTON AND SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE 


wi WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. |]  &xHisiT 
industrial Controls Division y 


6723 Stella Link . Houston, TX 77005-4397 . (713) 668-2326 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS. INC ”” (pum 


WW ] a werrrnas contnocs ome 
SS 6723 Sre.ca Lx « Houston, TX 77006 DATAMARK 


(713) 668-2326 
EQUIPMENT PRICE LIST 


spanner IRS ts fa | 2495.00 


> aames costly mistakes made marking-in a ond cdding-ap ¢ tickets | 


¢ Automatic of invoice, operator and store numbers 

Offers greater u and pricing revenues | 
oe 

20 Item Keys, 12 Color Keys, 4 Pattern Keys | 
Non-Clearing and Closing Cash Readings Group Cash Total 

Easily expandable to any other DATAM RK® System — 

Bold, High-Quality Print * Fast, Bi-Directional Printing 

20-Character Alphanumeric Display ¢ Modular Full-Travel Keyboard 

Message Printing ¢ Complete Ticket Review 

Complete Preset Price Print-Out * 8 Garment Print Lines 

Easy to operate, simple to program * Machine Prompting 

Self-Diagnostics and Seif-Testing Memory Protection 


nets Sic cu secnaghavksccenddaedséhsivecksvesss Jil 2995.00 


* Includes all System 1 Features 

* Non-Clearing and Closing Cash Readings with 10 Group Cash Totals 
* Central Marking Capability for up to 10 Stores (or Routes) 

* Accumulative and Resettable Production for all Items | 
* Complete Daily Invoice Listings for up to Tickets | 
See 12 Color Keys, 6 Patten Hoye 


. Se coe 12 Garment Print Lines 

* Multiply Key, % Discount Key * Piece Count 

* Easily Expandable 

ED bn bic eehskabehoeberseecss ,00bednnndeaeds 3295.00 
* Includes all Systems 1 and 2 Features 

* Production Report, Setiedien danmune Setsetieen, haunts , Average Ticket Amount, and 


Percent of Sales by Item 

* % Discount and Dollar Discount (Under Owner Control) 

* Automatic Tax Calculation and Printing 

© Consists S500 Gnusies Tadking (with Options! Ostessen Gar Code Reade) 


* Full RS-232C Interface * Automatic Bar Code Printing 
ee Gre sn ons nc honedensédebensseeebobecsusunaanl 1995.00 
* Tracks 8000 Invoices from u had! an) ane appeal 
. eee a Physical Inventory 
“Extra” Invoices and “Missing” Invoices : 
* Includes 40-Colu an TNE GS CORRES GEeae 
* Fully Portable with Belt Clip * Can be held in one hand 4 
* Uses AC Adapter ¢ Memory Protection 
¢ 32-Character Alphanumeric Display © Stainless-Steel Bar Code Wand 
DATAMARK® SYSTEM 3 and DATASCAN® READER PACKAGE................ 00 
8 HOUSTON AND SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE 7 


“})} Baetent end Trademert Office 


aoores OnenerSS-Ont® OF Pe an TRADEMARE 
Weennger OC 202 
RST ame APP Cant | atTioanty Ooc ~O 


03/23/74 


F ecmere te CNGEne wrtnen Whe Series fer HERSERES wri Conte te SEDHEaIED © SOCEEE stemeENeS, Bust. 1 


28 Reteyee | 10 ERIE OR & StECHEF eRe emer: 
L) Tee cephcoteh tas teen tried wih eterna! Gomngs SEER Ore SECOND He CAERERIHED GEEDEES ERIN Heth lemE OF SORERIT Vere! 
me ee 
(7) Anemante suteect mane: Revang Seen mencetes, Hemel Semmes oe veneued = venganee te Hrs Olle Benen, 
. [ 7) Tee corecnes @ semetnete Gamengs Reve Benn recereet om Teese Gewese oe | | ecceneee, 
(—) ae sccomante (nee ex pienciens 
We [”) Teel) reneeet eeeeeng comrecten ant'@ We | | reeesed sebriens! & subslinele BREEN) OF Gomengs fone om 
nes crews) cee (_ ) seereene ey he fetene CO | @eneaereree by he Cnamener (her Sapteneten!. 
tj weseses See mE Cee eR Fee en, WOE Ree | | cemrOres. | | SRDEROTEs tece SemeneHER Nerere 
we Povent ont Tentemars Ofhce ae camer Senet Ge emeng Changes. es ed 
covecees. Correctoons (uh) be erecies eEaRke eth Be een teet ieee Be! FerWh on the srigched letter “INFORMA On OF Ow 
T ORAWING CranGEt”. FTOUNt* 
1 | | Acmnemteegment 1 Gace of te ciaee te ererrty eneer 35. U.5.C. Ta. 8 ee 
| | Meee tere © Geren! seetecater, Herre! eee — 
‘ | | Saco ie ROSCOE eamees to te + KOmtten ter sHOmaNEE enemt He Herma! matern, preneteten a8 1 Hn ments 1s CusRS — 
eccersence @P De Wavnce eter bs wore Quays, 1995.0. 1). #59 0.6 23. 
“ | | Om 
PTOL-2 (he +. OP tiamete ts acon 


001655 


599,948 -2- 
233 


1. File PTO 1449 with copies of prior art discussed on 
pages 2 and 3 of specification. 


2. The following is a quotation of 35 U.S.C. 103 which 
forms the basis for all obviousness rejections set forth in this 
Office action: 


A patent may not be obtained though the invention is 
not identically disclosed or described as set forth in section 
102 of this title, if the difference between the subject matter 
sought to be patented and the prior art are such that the 
subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the 
time the invention was made to a person having ordinary 
skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. 
Patentability shall not be negatived by the manner in which 


3. Claims 1-14 are rejected under 35 U.S.C. 103 as 
being unpatentable over Stewart taken with the prior art 
discussed on pages 2 and 3 of specification. 


Stewart, in column 4, line 57 and in column 6 
discusses a dot matrix printer for the bar code (column 2, 
line 41) and selection of any desired information for the 
label. It would be obvious to employ these concepts with the 
prior art inventory systems. 


4. Any inquiry concerning this communication should be 
directed to Examiner Harold Pitts at telephone number 703- 


557-9626. 


Pitts/karen 


8/9/84 


310 


/s/__ 


HAROLD L. PITTS 
EXAMINER 


311 


IN THE UNITED STATES PATENT AND 
TRADEMARK OFFICE 


In re: Application of HERBERT MARKMAN 
Serial No.: 599,948 Examiner: 
Filed: April 13, 1984 Group Art Unit: 


For: INVENTORY CONTROL AND REPORTING 
SYSTEM FOR DRYCLEANING STORES 


AMENDMENT 


Hon. Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks 
Washington, D.C. 20231 


Sir: 


Responsive to the Official Action mailed August 23, 
1984, the period for response being extended concurrently 
herewith, please amend the above-identified patent 
application as follows: 


[CERTIFICATION EXECUTED BY 
STEPHAN P. GRIBOK, ESQ.} 


1062-1 312 
IN THE CLAIMS 


1 (amended). An inventory control and reporting 
system, comprising: 


a data input device for manual operation by an 
attendant, the input device having switch means operable to 
encode information relating to sequential transactions, each 
information including transaction identity and descriptions of 
each of said [a plurality of] articles associated with the 
transactions [a transaction]; 


a data processor including memory operable to record 
said information and means to maintain an inventory total, 
said data processor having means to associate sequential 
transactions with unique sequential indicia and to generate at 
least one report of said total and said transactions, the unique 


e ~ 


sequential indicia and the descriptions of articles in the 
another; [and,} 


a dot matrix printer operable under control of the data 
processor to generate a written record of the indicia 
associated with sequential transactions, the written record 
including [comprising a plurality of] optically-detectable bar 
codes having a series of contrasting spaced bands, the bar 
codes being printed only in coincidence with each said 
transaction and at least part of the written record bearing a 
portion to be attached to [directly associated with] said 
articles; and, 


Cancel claim 2, without prejudice. 


23 (amended). The system of claim 1 [2], wherein 
the written record comprises further indicia in addition to the 
bar codes, wherein the bar codes for a given transaction 
[and] are automatically generated by the data processor and 
printer immediately upon commencement of an entry for the 
given [a] an 1 all uni ial_indici 


atec 
hogitea 4 SSOK ted W 


a 3.4 (amended). The system of claim 32, wherein the 
rther indicia comprises alpha-numeric indicia also 


4.5 (amended). The system of claim 43, wherein the 

rinter is adapted to print [operable] in a higher i 

Nn nee gher resolution 

and in a higher speed mode, for printing the further indicia 
leti F said sail 


1062-1 314 
REMARKS 


The Amendment is submitted in response to the 
Official Action of August 23, 1984, wherein the Examiner 
rejected the claims under 35 USC 103 over U.S. Patent 
4,264,396 - Stewart, in combination with the prior art 
discussed on pages 2 and 3 of the specification. Applicant 
hereby amends the claims to more particularly point out and 
distinctly claim the subject matter regarded as the invention, 
and to more clearly distinguish the invention over the cited 
disclosures. Every effort has been made to avoid the 
introduction of new matter. The number of claims is 
reduced, and no fee is required. The claims as amended are 
believed to be in condition for allowance and allowance 1s 


respectfully requested. 


In support of the rejection under Section 103, the 
Examiner states: 


Stewart, in column 4, line 57 and in column 
6, discusses a dot matrix printer for the bar 
code (column 2, line 41) and selection of any 
desired information for the label. It would be 
obvious to employ these concepts with the 
prior art inventory systems. 


Applicant interprets the Examiner’s position as an 
assertion that a reasonably-routine combination of Stewart 
and the references cited on page 2 and 3 of the specification 
would reach the invention. Although applicant agrees that 
Stewart teaches a unit for printing of bar code indicia on 
labels concurrently with the use of the labels, Stewart's 


1062-1 315 


disclosure taken in combination with all or any part of the 
references mentioned in the specification still fails to disclose 
or suggest the claimed invention to a person of ordinary skill 
in the art. The specification mentions Patent 3,876,075 - 
Wesner, 3,478,316 - Block et al and 4,340,810 - Glass. 
Wesner teaches a means of keeping a running inventory 
total, Block teaches use of scannable tags for laundry items 
and Glass teaches scannable tags for general warehouse use. 
Applicant’s claimed invention involves more. 


According to the claimed invention, the generation of 
concurrent, unique, transaction-identifying indicia in the 
form of optically-scannable bar codes is part of a specific 
system that is characterized by increased security over the 
usual invention system. Unlike the usual system in which 
apparatus generates non-unique indicia (e.g., Stewart’s price 
indicia) and/or indicia that is not produced concurrently with 
the commencement of a transaction (e.g., pre-printed tags), 
applicant's system is operable to keep a running reconcilable 
inventory total by adding input articles and subtracting output 
articles, and also protects against the possibility of 
undocumented or spuriously-documented articles entering the 
system. Accordingly, the claimed system is particularly 
applicable to retail drycleaning establishments. 


Applicant respectfully requests that the Examiner note 
that there are features present in applicant's independent 
claim 1 that relate not only to means for production of bar 
code indicia, but also to uniqueness of indicia and recited 
means operable to prevent indicia becoming available except 
upon commencement of a transaction. Means are also 
provided for reconciling the very same unique and 


1062-1 316 


concurrently-generated indicia at later points during 
processing whereby the entry or exit of inventory articles in 
irregular ways can be localized. 


In the prior art inventory system, totals are 
maintained but no effort or apparatus is devoted to detecting 
spurious transactions. As described in the specification, 
some basic difficulties with retail drycleaning establishments 
relate to the fact that attendants sometimes process 
undocumented articles through the system and pocket the 
proceeds. Another difficulty is that the loss, misplacement 
or separation in process of even a single article of even 
relatively-minor value will have a major impact on the 
customer’s estimation of the quality of the establishment. 
These features distinguish drycleaning-type applications of 
inventory control from the usual warehouse application. In 
a warehouse application, retail sales application or the like, 
the problems are entirely different. In these situations, the 
objective is to keep a running total (for re-ordering, etc.) and 
to collect non-unique materials into a batch (for shipping and 
billing). Use of bar code indicia in these applications does 
not disclose or suggest to a person of ordinary skill that it 
would be advisable, or possible, or how any inventory or 
marking apparatus might be advantageously used in a 
laundry and drycleaning situation. 


The Examiner cited Stewart in combination with the 
usual inventory control system, asserting that Stewart makes 
it obvious to print bar codes reflecting “any information". 
Applicant respectfully requests that this position be 
reconsidered in view of the claims as amended. Stewart fails 
to disclose or suggest a code printing system to concurrently 


1062-1 317 


generate unique indicia for tracking a transaction. At 
column 2, lines 39-40, the Stewart label is printed with the 
name of the store as well as the article price. These indicia 
will be identical for all articles of the same type. Similar} 

at column 5, lines 27-37, Stewart specifically teaches that ee 
ecient manne. + seem 


There is no disclosure or suggestion in Stewart that 
there would be any benefit whatsoever to using concurrently - 
generated unique bar code indicia as a :.seans of increasing 
- securing of transaction-identifying tags. Stewart ignores 

entire concept of security and uniqueness of transactions 
or articles. In view of the benefits in security to be obtained 
according to the claimed invention, any general statements 
in Stewart about the information to be printed fail to disclose 
applicant's invention. Stewart's exampies, and Stewart's 
— teach only printing of no-unique indicia such as 


The claims as amended are not directed to a basi 
printer of bar code indicia per se, nor to devices Sracieten 
transaction-identifying indicia per se. Instead, as taughted 
[sic] and Claimed only by applicant, there is a specific 
benefit in the security of inventory control systems, and 
ro ee se among characterized i by a plurality of 
-s with unique transactions, that the system 

Operable with unique bar code indicia, generated only in 
coincidence with (€.g., upon commencement of) the 
(ransaction. In this manner, as fully described in the 
specification, it is not possible to take advantage of pre- 
printed bar code tags. The attendant cannot unaccountably 


1062-1 318 


discard the tags (because they are uniquely associated with 
the sequential transactions), and cannot add or subtract any 
article from inventory without that article being reconcilable 
at at [sic] least one optical scanning station. 


Other benefits also accrue. The concurrently-printed 
codes are substantially cheaper than multi-part pre-printed 
forms. The generation of identifying indicia upon 
commencement handles data entry and marking in a 
convenient and nearly-foolproof way. 


Assuming arguendo that a person of ordinary skill in 
the art was to attempt a combination of the teachings of 
Stewart, Block et al and Wesner, he would combine the 
references consistently with their teachings. The skilled 
person might generate price labels for a transaction to be 
read upon delivery of the goods to the customer; keep a 
master record of the number of transactions in progress by 
adding and subtracting the input and output items 
respectfully as in Wesner and Block et al. These references, 
however, lack any disclosure or suggestion that the further 
features of a means for associating transactions with unique 
indicia that limits the production of indicia. Only applicant's 
equipment is operable to produce unique transaction- 
identifying indicia upon commencement of a transaction and 
not otherwise. Together with optical scanning means for 
accuracy of inventory control by effectively eliminating the 
possibility of spurious transactions by misuse of unique 
indicia labels. 


The claims as amended particularly point our and 


1062-1 319 


distinctly claim the subject matter required to reach these 
benefits. In independent claim 1, the system is recited as not 
only including an input and printing device as in Stewart, but 
also totalizing, reporting and optical scanning means as well. 
Furthermore, claim 1 recites features relating to the 
uniqueness of the indicia produced by said means and the 
printing of the unique indicia only in coincidence with 
transactions. In claim 2, the printed bar codes are indeed 
dot-matrix bar codes, but unlike the teaching of the 
references, the bar codes produced represent unique 
sequential indicia. Claim 3 specifically recites the 
interaction of the data entry, totalizing and scanning elements 
that together with unique generation of indicia upon 
commencement of a transaction preclude unaccountable entry 
of articles into inventory as well as unaccountable exit. 


Further refinements of the invention which are recited 
in the claims and are likewise missing in the references 
relate to the mixture of optically-scannable and alpha- 
numeric indicia, generated at different print speeds, the 
multi-part nature of the printed media, the reconcilable 
nature of the system at any of various stations besides the 
initial receipt or ultimate delivery, and a unique keyboard 
matter in these claims as well sa in independent claim 1 
relate not only to general purpose inventory control or 
general purpose totalizing, but also the specific usefulness of 
concurrently-generated unique bar code indicia in a laundry 
of such a system into the pricing, marking and actual artile 
[sic], processing to improve the entire operation. 


1062-1 320 


Every effort has been made to amend the claims to 
distinguish over the references cited by both the Examiner 
and by the applicant. The claims as amended are believed 
to patentably distinguish over the references whether taken 
along or in any combination of features that might 
reasonably be undertaken by a person of ordinary skill aware 
of the disclosures. The claims are believed to be in 
condition for allowance and prompt allowance is respectfully 


requested 
Respectfully submitted, 


Date: 22 Feb 1985 /s/ 
Stephan P. Gribok 
Reg. No. 29,643 
STEELE, GOULD & FRIED 
3232 IVB Building 
1700 Market Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
(215) 563-8020 


Docket: 1062-1 


321 
Rei Lit , 


IN THE UNITED STATES PATENT AND 
TRADEMARK OFFICE 


In Re: Application of Herbert Markman 
Serial No.: Examiner: 
Filed: Group Art Unit: 
For Reissue of Patent No.: 4,550,246 
Issued: October 29, 1985 


For: INVENTORY CONTROL AND REPORTING 
SYSTEM FOR DRYCLEANING STORES 


REISSUE DECLARATION AND POWER OF 
ATTORNEY BY INVENTOR 


Hon. Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks 
Washington, D.C. 20231 


Sir: 


As a below named inventor, I hereby declare that: 
My residence and post office address are 631 Fariston Drive, 
Wynnewood, PA 19096. I am a U.S. citizen. I believe | 
am the original, first and sole inventor of the subject matter 
which is described and claimed in Letters Patent No. 
4,550,246 granted on October 29, 1985 and in the attached 


322 
specification and claims, and for which invention I solicit a 
reissue patent. 


I have reviewed and understand the contents of the 
above-identified specification, including the claims. 


I acknowledge the duty to disclose information which 
is material to the examination of this appucation in 
accordance with 37 CFR 1.56(a). 


No applications for patent or inventor's certificate 
have been filed by me or on my behalf at any time prior to 
the filing date of application SN 599,948 resulting in Letters 
Patent 4,550,246. An application for patent in Canada, SN 
494,168 was filed on October 29, 1985. 


I believe that original Patent No. 4,550,246 is partly 
invalid or inoperative because of error without any deceptive 
intent on my part, by virtue of my claiming less than I had 
a right to claim in the patent, and by virtue of an inadvertent 
failure to comply with the examiner’s requirement for 
submission of copies of prior art which was otherwise 
identified in the specification, except for two references as 
noted below. 


The following discussion of limitations in the claims 
as issued show that I claimed less than I had a right to claim. 
In each case, the unnecessary limitations were discovered 
during the initial stages of litigation instituted by Max 
Business Systems, Inc. ("Max"), plaintiff in Civil Action 
No. C87-927A filed on or about May 8, 1987 in the U.S. 
District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, for 


323 


declaratory judgment of non-infringement and invalidity of 
U.S. Pat. 4,550,246. Max asserts that an inventory control 
and reporting system believed by me to fall within the fair 
scope of my invention does not infringe the claims thereof. 


The limitations which render the claims unnecessarily 
narrow over all known prior art, are: 


1. Tracking of Individual Artic 


It may be argued that the claims are limited to 
a system that tracks individual articles such as 
individual pieces of clothing brought by a single 
consumer to a drycleaning establishment or the like. 
I believe that tracking of a transaction whether it 
involves one article or several is properly disclosed 
and allowable. The claim language recites entry of 
"descriptions of each of said articles associated with 
the transactions". This passage is more limited than 
I had a right to claim because, although individual 
articles, €.g. a pair of pants, could be accounted for 
by individual marking, scanning and reconciliation in 
reports, the grouping of such articles into sets for 
tracking (€.g., a suit comprising pants under jacket 
and/or a suit and a Dress or other spearable [sic] 
articles grouped together) is reasonably disclosed as 
forming part of the invention and is allowable over 
the prior art. Accordingly, I seek to correct the 
patent by inserting claims describing the information 
entered more broadly as --data relating to the 
transactions-- rather than “descriptions of each of said 
articles". 


324 
2. Continuously-Numbered Indicia 


It may be argued that my patent claims are 
limited in scope to indicia which must be sequential, 
continuously-numbered indicia; and not merely 
unique indicia assigned sequentially to the 
transactions. The invention is fa.rly defined as 
requiring only that an indicia be uniquely associated 
with individual transactions, such that the transactions 
can be thereafter tracked or traced. However, the 
security, benefits and operability of the system 
according to the invention are achieved as a result of 
the uniqueness of the indicia and the coincidence of 
a unique indicia with each transaction. These result 
from unigue indicia being assigned sequentially to 
sequential transactions; and not from continuous- 
numbering indicia used. The point at which a 
"transaction" is born could be defined as the point of 
arrival, bundling, etc.; however, according to my 
invention a unique indicia is associated with each 
transaction, in substantial coincidence with each 
transaction reaching some defined point at which the 
unique indicia is assigned, tracking is thereafter 
possible. Continuously sequential numbering is not 
required to accomplish tracking in my computerized 
system, nor is it necessary to distinguish over the 
prior art. Accordingly, I seek to correct this possibly 
misleading interpretation [sic] my invention by 
securing broader claims without the term "sequential" 
as a modifier of indicia alone, reciting instead that 
unique indicia are --sequentially assigned to the 
transactions--. 


325 


It may be argued that my patent claims are 
limited in scope to systems only in which an 
inventory total is "maintained" by being incremented 
every time a new transaction is added to inventory 
and decremented [sic] every time a completed 
transaction is removed from inventory. The 
invention is fairly defined, however, as also 
encompassing a system in which the information 
needed for generating the inventory total is 
maintained and reflects the additions and deletions, 
but no particular register is actually counted up and 
down until this information is used for generating an 
inventory report, i.e., when such information is 
called for by an operator. I regard the difference 
between constantly maintaining an inventory total, on 
the one hand, and maintaining the information by 
which the total is generated periodically or 
intermittently on command, on the other, as fully 
equivalent. Therefore, any claims limitation 
requiring continuing inventory totals is unnecessary 
to distinguish over the prior art. I seek to prevent 
this interpretation and correct the error, by reciting 


means for generating an inventory report, rather than 
necessarily means to "maintain" a total. 


4. Dot Matrix Printer 
I was mistaken in believing that a dot matrix 


printer is required to print bar codes. I now know 
that other types of printers will print bar codes. I 


326 


seek to correct this error by deleting "dot matrix” in 
broader claims. 


5. Connection of Optical Scanner and Data 
Processor 


It may be argued my patent claims are limited 
in scope to at least one optical scanner which is at all 
times "connected" to the data processor, being 
operable to detect the bar codes on all articles passing 
a predetermined station. The invention is fairly 
defined as_including an arrangement in which an 
optical scanner is used to generate and temporarily 
store a list of scanned bar codes, which are thereafter 
downloaded from the optical scanner to the data 
processor during a temporary connection. Such a 
limitation is not necessary to distinguish over the 
prior art. I seek to correct this incorrect 
interpretation, and accordingly seek broader claims 
changing the recited relationship of the optical 
scanner and data processor from "connected to" to -- 
for data communication with--. 


6. Grammatical Form of Means Clauses 


Correction of the above-noted matters in the 
new broad claim requires that a number of "means" 
clauses be rewritten in the more classical form of 
"means for [verb in gerund form]". The claims have 
been amended to avoid such errors in grammar and 
consistency. The foregoing errors occurred 
innocently and with deceptive intention. 


327 


In addition to the foregoing unnecessary limitations 
found in the claims as issued, reissue is requested to correct 
an inadvertent error wherein prior art known to applicant and 
his attorneys, and identified in the specification, was 
nevertheless inadvertently not filed responsive to the 
examiner’s requirement that copies of the prior art be filed. 
In the single official action in the application, the examiner 
required that applicant file copies of the references 
mentioned in the Prior Art section of the specification. 
Although I believed that the reference copies had been filed, 
in fact they had not. (See Declaration of — Gribok, 
submitted concurrently). 


None of these were described in the unfiled 
Information Disclosure Statement except to note that some 
were discussed in the specification and the remainder were 
of "general interest". 


Notwithstanding the inadvertent failure to comply 
with the examiner’s requirement for copies of references 
from the specification, the references were at most 
cumulative with those already cited by the examiner. The 
examiner cited Block, U.S. Pat. 3,478,316, which concerns 
inventory control in connection with a laundry or retail 
establishment including automatically-scannable tags. The 
examiner also cited U.S. Pat. 4,264,396 - Stewart, which 
concerns a general purpose bar code printing machine. I had 
stated in the specification that bar codes were known, and 
inventory control systems were known. The claimed 
invention, however, which is not found in, disclosed or 
suggested by any of the references, concerns a specific 
inventory control system in which bar codes are generated in 


328 


coincidence with initiation of transactions brought into 
inventory such that the transactions and the generation of bar 
codes are [sic] have a one-for-one relationship. This makes 
it impossible to have an undocumented transaction in 
inventory (because no bar code would be attached to any 
undocumented transaction) or to surreptitiously remove a 
transaction having a bar code associated therewith (because 
manual correction of the data processor’s memory file would 
be necessary to delete the record of this documented 
transaction and thereby avoid detection). 


The three references that were required, but 
inadvertently not supplied to the examiner, were described 
in the specification. One of these, Block, et al, U.S. Patent 
3,478,316, was supplied by the examiner. Therefore, two 
references namely Wesner, U.S. Pat. 3,876,075, and Glass, 
U.S. Pat. 4,340,810 were not submitted in full text. Wesner 
teaches an automated laundry counting system based on a 
computer, and accordingly is cumulative with Block, of 
record. Glass, Pat. 4,340,810 teaches bar code printing in 
connection with a general warehouse inventory control 
system. However, the bar code is pre-printed on tags 
according to Glass, and is used to label outgoing packed 
boxes. The bar code is not generated in coincidence with 
the addition of a new traceable transactions to inventory. 
Glass teaches that machine readable codes are useful because 
they cannot be hand altered. A plurality of pre-printed 
labels for individual items, cartons and distribution lists are 
produced ahead of time. When the items are loaded in a 
carton or the like, the pre-printed label applicable to the 
carton is selected and attached to the carton. Therefore, this 
reference also lacks coincidence between receipt of items for 


329 
a transaction and generation of the machine-readable code. 


The references mentioned in the Information 
Disclosure Statement that was prepared but inadvertently not 
filed are all filed in the Information Disclosure Statement 
submitted concurrently herewith. It is believed that the 
invention is patentable over the references mentioned, 
particularly because the subject references are cumulative, at 
most, with those cited by the examiner. 


Max Business Systems, plaintiff in the declaratory 
judgment action seeking invalidity of my patent, has included 
in its complaint three published articles which are asserted to 
establish that my invention is not patentable. I was not 
aware of the articles until Max filed its complaints. The 
three articles are from Modern Materials Handling. They 
include examples of inventory control systems based upon 
preprinted bar codes, and general purpose bar code printers. 
These references are therefore also cumulative with those 
already of record in the application. Nowhere in the 
references, nor in their combination, is there any teaching 
that security is improved by specifically generating the bar 
code in coincidence with initiation of transactions into 
inventory such that undocumented transactions can be 
detected either by their missing a machine-generated code or 
by their unofficial removal from inventory after generation 
of a machine readable code indicates that they have been 
received. 


In summary, patent 4,550,246 is wholly or partly 
inoperative or invalid due to my claiming less than I had a 
aright to claim and due to the inadvertent noncompliance 


330 


with the examiner’s requirement for copies of the prior art 
mentioned in the specification. The claims presented 
herewith are amended to remove limitations that were 
unnecessary to distinguish the invention over the prior art. 
The claims have also been amended to better comply with 35 
USC 112, second paragraph. 


POWER OF ATTORNEY 


I hereby appoint the following persons as my 
attorneys to transact all business in the Patent and Trademark 
Office in connection with this application, with full power of 
revocation and substitution, and to receive the Letters Patent, 
and request that correspondence be held with said attorneys 
at the address shown: 


J. Rodman Steele, Jr. - Reg. No. 25,931 
Lewis F. Gould, Jr. - Reg. No. 25,057 
Harvey D. Fried - Reg. No. 28,298 
Stephan P. Gribok - Reg. No. 29,643 
Karl L. Spivak - Reg. No. 18,934 
Gregory A. Nelson - Reg. No. 30,577 
John Lezdey - Reg. No. 22,735 


Steele, Gould & Fried 

1700 Market Street, Suite 3232 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
Telephone (215) 563-8020. 


And, I declare further that all statements made herein 
of my own knowledge are true and all statements made on 
information and belief are believed to be true, and further 


331 


that these statements are made with the knowledge that 
willful false statements and the like so made are punishable 
by fine or imprisonment, or both, under 18 USC 1001, and 
may jeopardize the validity of the application or any patent 
which may issue thereon. 


Date: _8/27/87__ ls/_ 
Herbert L. Markman 


