DEC 29 1995 
EcRK 


Ci F I D 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HERBERT MARKMAN AND POSITEK, INC., 
Petitioners, 
V. 
WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. AND 
ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


Of Counsel WILLIAM B. MALLIN 
Counsel of Record 

Lewis F. GOULD, JR. TIMOTHY P. RYAN 

STEPHAN P. GRIBOK TIMOTHY §. COON 

ECKERT SEAMANS CHERIN ECKERT SEAMANS CHERIN 

& MELLOTT & MELLOTT 

1700 Market Square 600 Grant Street 

Suite 3232 42nd Floor 

Philadelphia, PA 19103 Pittsburgh, PA 15219 

(215) 575-6000 (412) 566-6000 
Attomeys for Petitioners 
Herbert Markman and 
Positek, Inc. 


(i) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............ 


l. Respondents Misstate Both The 
Record And The Basis For The 
Opinions Of The Courts Below ....... 


2. Respondents Mischaracterize 
Petitioners’ Argument Where 
There Is A Genuine Issue 
GES Deeb cee cet ivedes 


3. Respondents Misstate The Scope 
Of The Seventh Amendment Right 
SORE TON os-6:ced ee eeewn eels 


4. The Historical Record Establishes 
That Interpretive Disputes As To 
The Meaning Of Patents Must Be 
Resolved By The Factfinder ......... 


5. Respondents’ Discussions Of The 
Precedents Of This Court Are 
Irrelevant And Mistaken .......... 


6. The Need For Construing Claim 
Terms Does Not Render The Patent 
Void For Vagueness .........6-6-. 


7. The Analogous Interpretive Issues 
Urged By Respondents Are Erroneous . . 


(ii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 


Bischoff v. Weathered, 76 U.S. 
ho bit) Se a 15, 16 


Boulton v. Bull, DAVIES PATENT CASES 162 
(Commen Pleas 1795) . cc ccc ccc ccccces & 


Bovill v. Moore, DAVIES PATENT CASES 361 
(Common Pleas 1816) ........6000 eee ee 10, 12 


Brooks v. Fiske, 56 U.S. (1S How.) 212 
DE he oak 6b pes-epe eee Vieebesecccccs 12 


Century Electric Co. v. Westinghouse 
Electric & Mfg. Co., 191 F. 350 


OS Ay Carne ee 19 
Coupe v. Royer, 155 U.S. 565 (1895) ......... 15, 16 

| DMI, Inc. v. Deere & Co., 755 F.2d 
SS ee 4 
Dimick v. Schiedt, 293 U.S. 474 (1935)... 6.6.06. 7 


E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. v. 
Phillips Petroleum Co., 849 F.2d 
1430 (Fed. Cir.), cert. denied, 488 
Dn? (he eu Gane wheacebscoecccecee 13 


Evans v. Eaton, 20 (7 Wheat) U.S. 161, 
Dt. ite avl Sh hewee doe 6eebeseac 12, 14 


(iii) 

Finney v. Guy, 189 U.S. 335 (1903) ............ 20 
Goodyear Dental Vulcanite Co. v. 

Sy SP Ss EE Cele bs wweotcccue’ 19 
Granfinanciera S.A. v. Nordberg, 

es SE we ceeeecbccousebse ns 13 
Harries v. Air King Products Co., 

oe Fe eee eee 14 
Heald v. Rice, 104 U.S. 737 (1881) .......... 16, 17 


Hilton Davis Chemical Co. v. Warner- 
Jenkinson Co. , 62 F.3d 1512 


I as Ra ks 2 ae | 13 
Huddart v. Grinshaw, DAVIES PATENT CASES 265 

I ee a i ee ne bt 10 
Hogg v. Emerson, 47 U.S. (6 How.) 

I ciel ee i Me i ae a 17 
Intervet America, Inc. v. Kee-Vet Lab, 

Inc., 887 F.2d 1050 (Fed. Cir. 1989) ........ 9, 10 
Keystone Bridge Co. v. Phoenix Iron 

RG Ee a eran 17 
Kneass v. Schulykill Bank, 

a . C S , ae ocek 14 
Liardet v. Johnson (K.B. 1778) ............5. 8,9 


Loom Co. v. Higgins, 105 U.S. 580 (1881) ........ 17 


(iv) 


Market Street Cable Ry. Co. v. Rowley, 
05S U.S. GRR GEREED o's wae ee eeeetcosvcecs 


Macbeath v. Haldimand, \ T.R. 172, 
99 Eng. Rep. 1036 (K.B. 1786) ............. 


Morris v. Bramsom, DAVIES 
PATENT CASES 202 (K.B. 1776) ........... 10, 


Neilson v. Harford, WEBSTER PATENT CASES 
Pe Grn, PD «couwee ct Cod ees t 400060 * 


North American Vaccine, Inc. v. 
American Cyanamid Co., 7 F.3d 1571 
, fo 2 eee ery ee ae se 


Philadelphia and Trenton Railroad Co. 
v. Stimpson, 39 U.S. (14 Pet.) 376 (1840) ....... 


R v Else (1785), DAVIES PATENT CASES 144, 
|] WEBSTERS PATENT CASES 76 ...........-.-- 


Silsby v. Foote, 55 U.S. (14 How.) 
ri ti | Serre rrrerverrrrrreria et o 


Singer Mfe. Co. v. Cramer, 
oe OU Be Ge bs SOS 6k i her eidhewes 


Teamsters v. Terry, 494 U.S. 558 (1990) .......... 


Tucker v. Spaulding, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 
SG a. « sc ew odebane het eee 


Turner v. Winter, 
Le § § % BAP serge 7 


(v) 
United States v. State Investment Co. , 

RR a i es a ae 20 
Walker v. New Mexico & S. Pac. 

 e- A 2 fy re 7 
Washburn v. Gould, 29 F. Cas. 312 

Py ann +. oiddo oe Uedee ese es See 13 
Winans v. Denmead, 56 U.S. (15 How.) 

ia ete eta hia eek Catawe’ 15 
Winans v. New York & Erie R.R. Co., 

62 U.S. (21 How.) 88 (1859) ............. 14, 15 
Constitution 
ae ee a passim 
Statutes 
pS Us a ar ee ae ne ee te 9,17 


Act of 1870, Ch. 230 , § 26, 
06 Sent. 196 Cutty ©, IBFD) ow ccc ccc ccs 1] 


Act of 1836, Ch. 375, § 6, 
Se CUED Bick 54 dws Cisie'ees's M1 


Act of April 10, 1790, Ch. 7, 
a a i i na es ll ll 


(vi) 
Other Sources 


ADAMS & AVERLY, THE PATENT 
SPECIFICATION: THE ROLE OF 
LIARDET V. JOHNSON, 7 J. Legal 
Hist. 156 (1986) 2... ee ee eee nee 12 


A. CORBIN, CORBIN ON CONTRACTS, §§ 534, 554. . 19, 20 


Essay, NOTE ON THE PATENT LAWS, 
3 Wheaton 655 (1818) 2... eee ee ee 7 


E. WALTERSCHEID, THE EARLY EVOLUTION OF 
THE UNITED STATES PATENT LAW: ANTECEDENTS 
(Part 3), 77 J. Pat. & T. Off. Soc’y 771 


CD cg cere eee es bee eee hee ade eee ee ys 9 


GERALD GUNTHER, LEARNED HAND: 
THE MAN AND THE JUDGE, 138 (1994) ........ 14 


1 J. OLDHAM, “THE MANSFIELD - 
MANUSCRIPTS AND THE GROWTH OF 
ENGLISH LAW IN THE EIGHTEENTH 
CENTURY (Chapel! Hill & 
ae Ee «ceed newanedene eevee 6, 8 


S. WILLISTON, WILLISTON ON CONTRACTS, 
§§ 602, 616 (3d Ed. 1961) ... 1-0 e ee ee eee 19, 20 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 

Petitioners submit this Reply Brief to reply to the conten- 
tions of respondents and certain amici. Respondents and their 
supporting amici respond to contentions not advanced by 
petitioners, misstate the record below, mischaracterize the 
opinions of the trial judge and the Federal Circuit and 
misconstrue the precedent of this Court. In apparent recogni- 
tion that their position on the Constitutional issue before the 
Court is wrong, respondents and these amici attempt to 
convince this Court not to address the Constitutional question 
raised by this case and, failing that, advance a position that 
would undermine the Seventh Amendment right to a jury trial 
on infringement issues in patent litigation. 

1. Respondents Misstate Both The Record And The 

Basis For The Opinions Of The Courts Below. 

Respondents mistakenly suggest that the decisions of the 
trial judge and the majority were predicated upon holdings that 
there was no genuine dispute as to the meaning of the patent 
terms at issue and that the “correct” construction of the patent 
arrived at below could be ascertained from the patent docu- 
ments as a matter of law. This simply is untrue. The trial 
judge here based his decision on his misdirected view that the 
interpretation of a patent is always a question of law reserved 
exclusively for the judge’s decision. In his view, the jury’s 
verdict of infringement could be discarded by labelling the 
issue a legal question. 

Respondents state that “[t}he trial court determined the 
meaning of the patent claims as a matter of law from the 
patent documents.” Opp. 2. This statement, which forms the 
foundation for respondents’ arguments to this Court, is false. 
The trial judge did not cite a single passage from the claims, 
the patent specification or the file history to support his 
erroneous interpretation of the term inventory which is not 
defined in these documents. Instead, the trial judge, relied on 
extrinsic evidence, weighed evidence, evaluated credibility, 
rejected evidence and disregarded express admissions of 


2 


respondents to support his erroneous factual findings, because 
he insisted that interpretation of a patent is always a legal 
question. oe 

Claim | of the ‘054 patent requires that the system “main- 
tain an inventory total." At trial, petitioners introduced 
evidence to establish what the term “inventory” meant to one 
of ordinary skill in the relevant art--a meaning consistent with 
the specification and file history. The trial judge rejected this 
evidence and adopted, without an appropriate evidentiary 
foundation, constructions of the term "inventory" which he 
stated were the “ordinary and customary meanings" of the 
term.' He concluded that “[iJnventory means articles of 
clothing” and that to infringe the patent, the accused system 
must maintain an inventory of descriptions of articles of 
clothing. There was no evidence that the ’054 patent requires 
the system to keep in its memory indefinitely the descriptions 
of articles of clothing. The trial judge did not cite to the 
evidence upon which he relied in making factual determi- 
nations as to the “ordinary and customary meaning” of the 
term at issue. 

According to respondents: "Markman’s system, as defined 
by the patent, tracks articles of clothing through the dry 
cleaning process. The tracking of articles is accomplished by 
printing bar-coded article tags, attaching the tags to articles of 
clothing and scanning them at predetermined stations." Opp. 
5. Respondents’ description is incorrect. The infringed claims 
of the "054 patent do not require that bar coded tags be 
attached to individual articles or that such articles be moni- 
tored as they move through the drycleaning process. As the 


‘See, e.g., irial Judge's Opinion at 137a, “[t}hese definitions [of 
petitioners’ expert} are contrary to the ordinary and customary meanings 
of these terms . . ."; “Plaintiffs” technical expert's testimony is based on 
an artificial interpretation of key words and phrases that runs counter to 
their ordinary meaning.” 


3 


evidence at trial established, the patent’s requirement of a 
"memory operable to record said information" is satisfied if 
the accused system possesses memory which enables it to 
record or print information regarding the articles.? The trial 
judge’s erroneous conclusion is not supported by the claims, 
the patent specification, its prosecution history or other 
evidence. The jury’s finding is supported by the evidence. 

Respondents also mischaracterize the claims of the '054 
patent as requiring the patented system to track individual 
articles of clothing through the drycleaning process. Though 
this may well describe a preferred embodiment of the '054 
patent, it misrepresents the elements of independent claim 1, 
a claim of the 054 patent which respondents infringed as 
found by the jury. Having the capability to generate individu- 
al garment tags and thereby track individual garments through 
the drycleaning process is but one possible embodiment of the 
invention, an embodiment not required in claim 1. To the 
contrary, throughout the patent specification, the invention is 
described in terms of controlling “batches” or groups of 
articles in inventory. The trial judge’s conclusion that the 
054 patent requires individual articles of clothing and not 
batches to be processed is defective. 

By reading into independent claim 1 the requirement of 
attachment of individual bar coded tags to individual articles 
of clothing (and thereby enabling the system to track individ- 
ual articles), the trial judge erroneously read into claim | 
additional claim elements contained in dependent claims 5 and 
6. However, dependent claims 5 and 6 are not limitations of 
claim 1. The Federal Circuit has heid repeatedly that it is 
improper to read the requirements of a dependent claim into 


*See, ¢.g., Testimony of inventor that “The primary claim, Claim 1, does 
not require that the system retain details as far as the articles associated 
with the ticket after the ticket is produced.” App. 188. 


4 


an independent claim. See, e.g., DMI, Inc. v. Deere & Co., 
755 F.2d 1570, 1574 (Fed. Cir. 1985). Consequently, claim 
1 of the '054 patent does not require that individual garments 
be tracked through the drycleaning process. As found by the 
jury based on the evidence, the accused system infringes claim 
1 as it requires only that the “written record” be attached to 
articles, either individually or in batches. 

The evidence introduced at trial does not lend support to the 
judge’s conclusion or, at the very least, there is substantial 
evidence supporting the jury’s contrary interpretation. The 
evidence established that the ordinary meaning of inventory as 
used in the drycleaning industry is not limited to articles of 
clothing. Rather, Westview conceded that: “inventory” may 
mean dollars or it may mean articles of clothing; that both 
kinds of inventory are important in the industry; that the 
accused system was designed to account for inventory in both 
dollar and invoice forms; and that the accused system main- 
tains an inventory by listing the invoices representing the 
batches of articles taken in by an establishment. 

Respondents, recognizing that their position on the law is 
without support, now attempt to redraft the majority opinion 
to hold something which it does not. According to respon- 
dents: “The Court agreed that the trial court properly used 
the patent documents to interpret the claims and, upon review 
of the claim language, specification and prosecution history, 
concluded that the district court’s claim construction was 
correct." See, Opp. 14. This simply is not the case. The 
trial judge did not predicate his findings on the claim lan- 
guage, the specification or the prosecution history, nor did he 
apply the substantial evidence standard. Rather, the trial 
judge, guided by the fiction that construing the claim terms is 
always a legal question, rejected the jury’s findings by 
ignoring evidence, reweighing evidence and drawing unsup- 
ported inferences from the evidence. 


5 


The majority similarly adopted the position that it, upon de 
novo review, should weigh evidence and make credibility 
determinations en route to resolving claim construction issues 
as a legal question. The majority opinion did not conclude 
that the jury’s verdict was not supported by substantial 
evidence. Like the trial judge, the majority concluded that 
judges must always interpret patents as a matter of law in 
every infringement action for damages. As respondents 
concede, but characterize as the “general holding,” the Federal 
Circuit squarely held that “in a case tried to a jury, the court 
has the power and obligation to construe as a matter of law 
the meaning of language used in the patent claim." 30a. 

This legal question now stands at the very threshold of 
every patent infringement suit. Indeed, the majority explicitly 
ejected the notion that the issue was not before it; it empha- 
sized that “Markman squarely raised the issue of whether the 
court acted within its power in granting JMOL after the jury 
had construed the claims," 55a, and denied that its decision 
concerning the proper allocation of functions between judge 
and jury as to claim construction issues was dictum. The 
majority’s constitutional holding which governs every infringe- 
ment case in the nation is before this Court for decision. 

2. Respondents Mischaracterize Petitioners’ Argument 

Where There Is A Genuine Issue Of Material Fact. 

Respondents contend that petitioners here are advancing the 
argument that the interpretation of claim language is triable to 
a jury irrespective of the existence of a genuine issue of 
material fact. Opp. 19. This misstates petitioners’ position. 
See petitioners’ Question Presented for Review: "In a patent 
infringement action for damages, is there a right to a jury trial 
under the Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion of genuine factual disputes about the meaning of a 
patent?” Petitioners concede that if no triable issue of fact 
exists, the trial judge may withdraw the issue from the jury. 


6 


Pet. Brief at 35. But where there is a dispute of fact, the issue 
cannot be taken from the jury by simply saying that the issue 
is always a legal question. 

3. Respondents Misstate The Scope Of The Seventh 

Amendment Right To Jury Trial. 

Respondents argue that the right to jury trial on issues of 
patent interpretation does not attach because such issues are 
mere “incidents” or “procedural details." This argument is 
unsupportable in both law and logic.” As Judge Mayer’s 
concurring opinion below recognized, “[t]o decide what the 
claims mean is nearly always to decide the case" and "[nJot 
infrequently, the ultimate question of infringement, indisput- 
ably a matter for the jury, is effectively dictated by the 
construction given the patent claims." 57a; 67a. 

This Court’s teachings are clear that the Seventh Amend- 
ment bestows upon a litigant in a civil case the right to trial by 
jury as to those issues which go to the "fundamental elements" 


*Respondents’ contention that “[hJere the trial judge’s use of the directed 
verdict device in determining the meaning of the claims as a matter of 
law was directly in line with the power of judges under the common law” 
begs the question before the Court which is a litigant’s fundamental right 
to trial by jury as to issues of claim construction when there exist 
genuine disputes of fact as to the meaning of terms used in the patent. 
Additionally, respondents’ contention in and of itself is inaccurate. 
Respondents fail to acknowledge, as a leading commentator has 
explained, that the concept of a “directed verdict” in eighteenth century 
trial practice “differs from the modern concept of the directed verdict as 
a final determination. The eighteenth-century jury was considered to 
have a moral obligation to follow the direction of the judge in his 
construction of applicable laws, but there was no legal obligation to do 
so. Nevertheless, trial judges did frequently direct juries to find for one 
party or the other, and juries ordinarily complied.” 1 J. OLDHAM, THE 
MANSFIELD MANUSCRIPTS AND THE GROWTH OF ENGLISH LAW IN THE 
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY (1992) at p. 150. This practice, which did not 
limit the power of the jury at common law, is no basis for restricting the 
role of the jury today. 


7 


or the “substance of the common law right of trial by jury.” 
Walker v. New Mexico & S. Pac. R.R. Co., 165 U.S. 593, 
596 (1897). Issues of claim construction constitute *funda- 
mental elements" and, as Judge Mayer recognized, in most 
cases go to the very heart of the common law right of trial by 
jury of infringement issues in a patent suit. Petitioners’ right 
to trial by jury cannot be extinguished by relabelling this 
central issue as a “procedural incident." 

4. The Historical Record Estabiishes That Interpretive 
Disputes As To The Meaning Of Patents Must Be 
Resolved By The Factfinder. 

Respondents do not dispute that the Seventh Amendment 
guarantees a jury trial in all cases where legal as opposed to 
equitable rights are at issue. Teamsters v. Terry, 494 U.S. 
558, 564-65 (1990). That distinction incorporates English 
practice as of 1791. Dimick v. Schiedt, 293 U.S. 474, 476 
(1935). Curiously, the majority conducted no historical 
analysis to determine whether interpretation of the patent was 
an issue triable to a jury at common law. Respondents 
likewise proclaim that “[h]istorical analysis . . . provides 
limited guidance in examining the particular question of 
or the judge or the jury interprets patent claims.” Opp. 
at 25. 


“Amicus U.S. Surgical's efforts to undermine the significance of the state 
of English patent law as of 1791 are misleading. Its contention that 
“[p)atent law in England as [sic] that time was scarcely describable” is 
maccurate. As of the time of the adoption of the Seventh Amendment, 
a well defined body of English case law had developed and was being 
Seasntapaghpaaisintaamantitobunae aan tena 
i from the “ jety” of 

at mas poms Some 
of English patent law to be known by the enactors of the Seventh 
Amendment” is mistaken. /t is important to emphasize that the Seventh 
Amendment incorporates the common law, not English textbooks. 

(continued...) 


The rationale underlying respondents’ efforts to deflect the 
Court's attention away from the proper analysis is simple -- it 
is beyond question that according to the common law of 
England as of 1791 the jury has always had a role in deter- 
mining a patent's scope. Respondents’ attempts to distinguish 
the leading authorities on this point are unconvincing. 
Respondents contend that Liardet v. Johnson (K.B. 1778); 
Turner v. Winter, 1 T.R. 602 (K.B. 1787); and Neilson v. 
Harford, WEBSTER PAT. CAS. 295 (Exch. 1841), are distin- 
guishable because these cases involved patent validity determi- 
nations based on the alleged insufficiency of the patent 


162, 204, ively. Moreover, even the reporting that did take place 
when the full courts sat was selective and intermittent Bde oon gn 
118-19, 1814. Consequently, U.S. Surgical’s report concerning 
volume of precedents existing in England in the 18th Century does not 
undercut to any extent the state of the English common law discussed in 
petitioners’ Brief. 


9 


specification.” However, respondents ignore the fact that 
determinations concerning validity, like infringement, require 
the patent to be interpreted and that juries making those 
interpretive determinations performed that specific function in 
England as of 1791.° It has been consistently held as logic 
dictates that patents must be interpreted identically for 
purposes of both validity and infringement. See, ¢.g., Intervet 
America, Inc. v. Kee-Vet Lab, Inc., 887 F.2d 1050, 1053 
(Fed. Cir. 1989) ("[c}laims must be given the same construc- 


*The description of the Liardet decision advanced by amicus U.S. 
Surgical is flatly wrong and demonstrates its lack of understanding of the 
English precedents applicable here. Contrary to U.S. Surgical’s 
contention that Liardet was “not a decision reviewed by the King’s 
Bench,” the case was reviewed before the full Court of King’s Bench 
which ordered a new trial. Moreover, petitioners’ statement of Lord 
Mansfield's instructions to the jury to determine “all objections made to 
exactness, certainty and propriety of the specification” is precisely 
correct. This portion of the jury instruction is taken directly from Justice 
Buller’s handwritten notes of the case, not as U.S. Surgical contends, 
from Justice Buller’s work, TRIALS AT Nisi Prius, or from a party's 
“pamphiet.” U.S. Surgical apparently does not recognize that Justice 
Buller was a judge on the King’s Bench who participated in hearing and 
deciding the motion for a new trial in the Liardet case. Even U.S. 
Surgical’s most recent secondary authority states that, in the ascendence 
of the specification in English patent law, Liardet v. Johnson “\ed the 
way.” E. Walterscheid, THE Earty EVOLUTION OF THE UNrTED 
STATES PATENT LAW: ANTECEDENTS (PART 3), 77 J. Pat. & T. Off. 
Soc’y 771, 801 (1995). Liardet is a leading English patent case which 
unequivocally demonstrates that English juries as of 1791 were called 
upon to decide issues of patent interpretation. 


*For example. in Liardet, in proving whether the challenged invention 
was “new”, it was necessary for the jury to compare the specification to 
comparable inventions in dictionaries, other printed sources and as 
described in testimony. In doing so, the jury necessarily had to discern 
the “subject matter which the applicant regards as his invention.” See, 
35 U.S.C. § 112. 


10 


tion when considering infringement as when considering 
validity.”) (emphasis in original). 

Respondents also attempt to distinguish several other leading 
cases on the basis that the juries in those cases were called 
upon to decide whether the invention subject to the patent was 
“new” in light of the accused device or other prior art. In 
both Huddart v. Grinshaw, DAVIES PAT. CAS., 265 (K.B. 
1803) and Bovill v. Moore, DAVIES PAT. Cas., 361 (C. P. 
1816), the juries interpreted the terms of the patents at issue 
in order to determine whether a new invention was disclosed. 
In each of these cases, the jury was assigned the task of 
determining the scope of the words used in the patent disclo- 
sure so as to enable them to pass upon the invention’s novelty. 
See also, Morris v. Bramsom, 1 DAVIES PaT. CAS. 202, 203 
(K.B. 1776) (an improvement on an existing machine could be 
patented; however, as Justice Buller stated, “it must be for the 
addition only and not for the old machine too" thereby 
requiring the jury to construe the patent specification to 
determine whether an alleged new improvement to the existing 
machine was disclosed).’ 

Respondents attempt to further undermine the significance 
of these English precedents by contending that such jury 
determinations concerning the scope of a patent have “no 


Respondents’ citation of Macbeath v. Haldimand, | T.R. 172, 99 Eng. 
Rep. 1036 (K.B. 1786), cannot support the proposition advanced by 
respondents as that case dealt only with the construction of written 
documents and letters about which there was no factual disagreement to 
be submitted to the jury. Tellingly, Justice Buller observed that if letters 
“be written in so dubious a manner, as to be capable of different 
constructions, and can be explained by other transactions, the whole 
evidence must be left to the jury to decide upon; for they are to judge of 
the truth or faisehood of such collateral facts which may vary the sense 
of the letters themselves: but if they be not explained by any other 
circumstances, then, like deeds or other written agreements, the 
construction of them is a mere matter of law." 1 T.R. at 182. | 


ll 


precise correlate in the historic record to modern patent 
infringement actions because the system of patent claiming has 
changed in styie and content." Opp. 31-32. In essence, 
respondents and certain of their supporting amici contend that 
because the statutory requirement of a claim did not appear in 
this country until 1836, prior precedents construing patent 
specifications (rather than strictly “claims") are irrelevant. 
These contentions are without merit. 

The patent laws in the United States, like those of England 
prior to 1791, have always required inventors to point out 
their inventions in detail sufficient to distinguish any relevant 
prior art and to disclose to the public what protection the 
patent confers. The first patent statute enacted in this country 
required that the patent “describ[e] the said invention or 
discovery, clearly, truly and fully." Act of April 10, 1790, 
Ch. 7, § 1, 1 Stat. 109. Not unlike the procedure in modern 
practice, as of 1791 in the United States the applicant for a 
patent was required to submit “a specification in writing, 
containing a description . . . of the thing or things by him or 
them invented or discovered, . . . which specification shall be 
sO particular... as . . . to distinguish the invention or 
discovery from other things before known and used." Jd. § 2. 
The Act of 1836, ch. 357, § 6, 5 Stat. 117 (July 4, 1836) 
expressly included the word “claim” requiring that the 
applicant “|s}hal! particularly specify and point out the part, 
improvement or combination, which he claims as his own 
invention.” Claims as commonly used today were expressly 
made part of patent law by the Act of 1870, Ch. 230 § 26, 16 
Stat. 198 (July 8, 1870), which mandated that an applicant for 
a patent ‘shall particularly point out and distinctly claim the 
part, improvement, or combination which he claims as his 
invention or discovery.” 

This evaluation is wholly irrelevant to the Seventh Amend- 
ment analysis. Claims, much as they are presently employed, 


12 


were in common use even before the first mention of claims 
in a statutory form in 1836. See, ¢.g., Evans v. Eaton, 20 (7 
Wheat.) U.S. 161, 194 (1822) (specification concluded, “I! 
claim as my invention, . . . ."); Philadelphia and Trenton 
R.R. Co. v. Stimpson, 39 U.S. (14 Pet.) 376, 378 (1840) 
(discussing patent issued in 1831 as “[t}he specification 
describes the invention with minute particularity, and con- 
cludes: "What I claim as my invention or improvement, is . . 
Px: The making of claims as a mandatory portion of the 
specification as provided in the Act of 1870 simply codified 
the preference for particular claiming already expressed by 
decisions of this Court. See Brooks v. Fiske, 56 U.S. (15 
How.) 212, 215 (1853) (specification and drawings to be 
considered "[o]nly for the purpose of enabling us to correctly 
interpret the claim"). See also, Silsby v. Foote, 55 U.S. (14 
How.) 218 (1852) (discussing “claims” of the specification). 
Though the statutory requisites may have changed, the 
essential functions of construction remained unaltered." 

In addition, even if the English precedents are somehow 


"The specificity required of specifications under 18th Century English law 
is effectively the same as that required of claims under existing American 
law. See Pet. Brief fm. 15. With respect to the English practice of 
including claims at the end of a specification, it has been observed that. 
[t]he distinction between the description element of the specification and 
the claim was a statutory creation -- Patents Act (1883), s.5-First 
Schedule. Actual practice long pre-dated that Act, however, to the extent 
that patentees did end their specifications with a statement of the features 
of the invention that they considered new and important. See, R v Else 
(1785), Dav. Pat Cas. 144, 1 Web. 76, Casp. 103; Bovill v. Moore 
(1816), 2 Marsh 211." Adams & Averly, The Patent Specification: The 
Role of Liardet v. Johnson, 7 J. Legal Hist. 156, n.16 (1986). This was, 
moreover, essential in any specification for a new improvement after 
such patents were validated in Morris v. Bramson, Davies Pat. Cas. 202 
(1776), and junes construing such specifications were performing a task 
virtually identical to modern claim construction. 


13 


limited to juries construing the “specification” rather than the 
“claims” (a distinction without substance), the analysis cannot 
change. It is well-settled that the patent specification should 
be looked to in divining the scope of patent terms (i.c., 
construction). E. 1. DuPont de Nemours & Co. v. Phillips 
Petroleum Co., 849 F.2d 1430, 1433 (Fed. Cir.), cert. 
denied, 488 U.S. 986 (1988) ("[i}t is entirely proper to use the 
specification to interpret what the patentee meant by a word or 
phrase in a claim"). Thus, a construction of a patent’s scope 
often entails the need to construe the patent’s specification 
today just as it did under English practice prior to and 
following 1791.° 

Though Judge Story is acknowledged by the Federal Circuit 
to be “the leading intellectual property scholar of that era,” 
(see, Hilton Davis Chemical Co. v. Warner-Jenkinson Co. , 62 
F.3d 1512, 1516 (Fed. Cir. 1995)), respondents and their 
supporting amici fail to distinguish meaningfully his views on 
this issue. In Washburn v. Gould, 29 F. Cas. 312 (C.C.D. 
Mass. 1844), Judge Story summarized English practice 
explaining that, “[T]he jury are judge of the meaning of words 
of art, and technical phrases, in commerce and manufactures, 
and of the surrounding circumstances, which may materially 
affect, enlarge or control the meaning of the words of the 
patent and specification.” /d. at 325. Similarly, though Judge 


"Even if it is assumed that the 1870 Act created a different claiming 
requirement, inventors could not thereby be stripped of their nght to a 
jury trial in light of the Seventh Amendment's command that it be 
preserved. Granfinanciera S.A. v. Nordberg, 492 U.S. 33, 51 (1989) 
(Congress “lacks the power to strip parties contesting matters of private 
night of their Constitutional nght to a trial by jury."). Moreover, respon- 
dents fail to explain why a clear historical practice of juries interpreting 
patents in the validity context is not sufficiently “analogous” for Seventh 
Amendment purposes to require jury interpretation in the closely related 
infringement context which 1s governed by the identical interpretation. 


14 


Learned Hand has been described as “one of the Nation’s 
great patent judges” (see, Gerald Gunther, Learned Hand: 
The Man And The Judge, 138 (1994)), respondents and their 
amici remain silent with respect to Judge Hand's view that the 
interpretation of patent claims was “plainly a question of fact" 
subject to “clearly erroneous” review on appeal. Harries v. 
Air King Products Co., 183 F.2d 158 (2d Cir. 1950)."° 

5. Respondents’ Discussions Of The Precedents Of 

This Court Are Irrelevant And Mistaken. 

Respondents devote considerable attention to attempting to 
establish that this Court has in the past concluded that claim 
construction is a matter of law in a case where there does not 
exist a genuine dispute as to the proper construction of a 
patent term. This analysis misses the point of this appeal. 
Respondents do not cite a single decision of this Court which 
even remotely supports the erroneous conclusion reached by 
the majority below. The Court accurately stated the control- 
ling legal principles with respect to the interpretation of patent 
terms in Evans v. Eaton, 20 U.S. at 193-94, “[i]t is not 
disputed that the specification does not contain a good and 
sufficient description of the improved [invention], and of the 
manner of constructing it: and if there had been any dispute 
on this subject, it would have been a matter of fact for the 
jury, and not of law for the decision of this court.” 

In support of their position, respondents rely heavily upon 
Winans v. New York & Erie R.R. Co., 62 U.S. (21 How.) 88, 
101 (1858), where the Court interpreted a patent as a matter 


"The views of Justice Story and Judge Hand were in accordance with the 
early American understanding. See, Kneass v. Schulykill Bank, 14 F. 
Cas. 746, 747 (Cir. Pa. 1820) (jury instructed that it was to resolve the 
interpretive dispute by reference to the patent specification, learned 
treatises, and expert testimony of those “acquainted with and practicing 
this art” and that the interpretation of the patent terms en route to an 
infringement finding was “for you to decide upon this evidence. “) 


15 


of law since its meaning was clear from the text of the patent 
alone. As the Court concluded, “[i}f the construction given by 
the court to the specification be correct, and in fact the only 
construction of which it is capable, as we think it is, it would 
be wholly superfluous to examine experts that teach the court, 
what they could clearly perceive without such information.” 
(emphasis supplied). This Court's decision in Winans is silent 
as to the division of responsibility between the judge and jury 
if a genuine dispute as to the meaning of a patent term is 
presented.’ Respondents cite similar language from a 
hornbook quoted in Coupe v. Royer, 155 U.S. 565 (1895). 
Like Winans however, Coupe involved no disputed claim 
construction issue. Moreover, to the extent that language 
from Coupe’is relevant, respondents ignore that Coupe 
explicitly reaffirmed the controlling analytical framework of 
Bischoff v. Weathered, 76 U.S. (9 Wall.) 812 (1869), see 
discussion infra. As the Coupe Court reiterated: 
A case may be so clear that the court may feel no need of 
an expert to explain the terms of art or the descriptions 
contained in the respective patents, and may, therefore, feel 
authorized to leave the question of identity to the jury, 
under such general instruction as the nature of the document 
seems to require. And in such plain cases the court would 
probably feel authorized to set aside a verdict unsatisfactory 
to itself, as against the weight of the evidence. But in all 
such cases, the question still would be treated as a question 


"Respondents attempt to emphasize one sentence of dictem from Winans 
v. Denmead, 56 U.S. (15 How.) 339 (1853), that patent interpretation is 
a “question of law to be determined by construing the letters-patent” and 
the “specification of claim annexed to them.” That dictum, however, 
does not address the question here presented of whether there is a nght 
to a trial by jury when there exists a material question of fact on the 
meaning of a patent term That question 1s affirmatively answered by 
Evans v. Eaton and Bischoff v. Weathered. 


16 


of fact for the jury, and not a question of law for the court. 
155 U.S. at 578-79 (emphasis added) (quoting Bischoff, 76 
U.S. (9 Wall.) at 814). 

Respondents attempt to distinguish Bischoff as involving 
“whether the prior patent disclosed the same invention as the 
current patent,” Opp. at 40, is unconvincing because Bischoff 
directly supports the proposition that a jury and not the judge 
must interpret both the prior and the current patents. In 
Bischoff, this Court endorsed the “common practice” of 
making such determinations by submitting to the jury expert 
testimony regarding “the nature of the various mechanisms or 
manufactures described in the different patents produced." 
The Court, emphasizing the role that the jury has in determin- 
ing the meaning of the patent terms, noted that judges might 
set aside clearly incorrect verdicts as against the weight of the 
evidence, but nonetheless concluded that the question remains 
an issue of fact for resolution by the jury, and not as a 
question of law for the judge. Jd. at 814. 

Similarly, respondents attempt to distinguish Tucker v. 
Spaulding, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 453 (1871), as a case involving 
the issue of whether “an identity existed between the accused 
device and the patented device.” Opp. 40. In Tucker, the 
Court held that an existing patent and expert testimony on the 
issue of “diversity or identity" were improperly withheld from 
a jury. The Court described the issue of identity as a "mixed 
question of law and fact,” holding that "the resemblance lof 
the two patents} was close enough to require the submission 
of the question of identity to the jury, and the admission of the 
testimony of experts on that subject." Id. at 456. 

Indeed, this is the very basis for the Court’s conclusion in 
Heald vy. Rice, 104 U.S. 737 (1881), where a validity defense 
turned on whether a reissued patent and an original one were 
identical. In Heald, the Court interpreted the two patents 
because their language was “clear.” Id. at 749. The Court 


17 


expressly distinguished Bischoff on the basis that "Jf it appears 
on the face of the instruments that extrinsic evidence is not 
needed to explain terms of art,” then construction or inter- 
pretation “consequently is [a] matter of law for the court.” Jd. 
(emphasis supplied). See also, Market Street Cable Ry. Co. v. 
Rowley, 155 U.S. 621, 625 (1895) (patent construction 
presents a “matter of law for the court" where “[nJo extrinsic 
evidence was given or needed to explain terms of art, or to 
apply the descriptions to the subject matter.") (citing Heald). 

The cases cited by respondents stand only for the proposi- 
tion that where the terms themselves are clear without 
resorting to extrinsic evidence and no genuine issue of 
material fact is raised, there simply is no interpretive dispute 
for the jury to decide.'? But the authorities do not support 
the notion that the judge can impose an interpretation where 
there is evidence supporting a contrary finding by the jury. 

6. The Need For Construing Claim Terms Does Not 

Render The Patent Void For Vagueness. 

In a further effort to avoid the Constitutional issue, respon- 
dents argue that if there is a factual dispute concerning the 
meaning of a claim term, there would be no need of further 
inquiry because such a dispute would, by definition, demon- 
strate a violation of 35 U.S.C. § 112, which requires a 
patentee to accurately set forth his invention in the claims of 
the patent. That position ignores both reality and the devel- 
oped body of case law relating to the interpretation and 
construction of a patent claim. It is frequently the case that 
parties in patent litigation dispute the meaning of claim terms, 
which underlies the development of established claim construc- 


'?This same rationale underlies the basis for the other decisions cited by 
respondents as purportedly supporting their position. See, Singer Mfg. 
Co. v. Cramer, 192 U.S. 265, 275 (1904); Keystone Bridge Co. v. 
Phoenix Iron Co., 95 U.S. 274, 276 (1877), Loom Co. v. Higgins, 105 
U.S. 580 (1881); Hogg v. Emerson, 47 U.S. (6 How.) 437 (1848). 


tion principles which permit a court or jury to turn to the 
specification, prosecution history, expert testimony and other 
evidence to resolve such disputes. According to respondents, 
if the court or jury must go beyond the patent to resolve a 
dispute over claim meaning, then the claim would be void for 
vagueness. Of course, this is not sensible and is not the law. 

Courts have long recognized that language does not have 
the precision of a mathematical formula and that sometimes an 
inventor’s description of his invention in his claims is the best 
that he can do within the limitations of expression. See, ¢.g., 
North American Vaccine, Inc. v. American Cyanamid Co., 7 
F.3d 1571, 1779-80 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (claims in light of 
specification must only reasonably apprise others of scope of 
invention and if language is as precise as subject matter 
permits, no more can be demanded). If the evidence shows 
that persons skilled in the art would understand a term in a 
patent, such as in the present case where the evidence demon- 
strated that the term “inventory” means both physical and cash 
inventory, that is sufficient. 

7. The Analogous Interpretive Issues Urged By Re- 

spondents Are Erroneous. 

Respondents and certain of their supporting amici contend 
that construction of a patent is most analogous to a statute and 
that, accordingly, there is purportedly no role for the jury in 
interpreting the meaning of patent terms, even when there is 
a material factual dispute over meaning. If a patent is deemed 
to be a “baby statute," that might indicate that its construction 
is the province of the judge. However, in the two hundred 
year history of patent litigation in this country (as well as in 
the common law of England), not a single decision is cited 
supporting the proposition that patents are like statutes and 
should be construed in a like manner. This is understandable 
because statutes are publicly enacted laws whereas patents are 
grants related to a specific invention privately worked out 


19 


between the inventor and the Patent Office. This new analogy 
is ingenious but without foundation. It is hard to fathom how 
a new and dubious analogy could alter the teachings of the 
relevant historical record and the relevant precedents. 

The great weight of authority and the more reasoned 
analogy is that a patent is more like a contract with the 
government and, accordingly, should be construed using 
established principles of contract interpretation. This more 
appropriate analogy finds support in this Court’s own deci- 
sions. See, e.g., Goodyear Dental Vulcanite Co. v. Davis, 
102 U.S. 222, 227 (1880). Lower courts have adopted the 
same view. See, e.g., Century Electric Co. v. Westinghouse 
Elec. & Mfg. Co., 191 F. 350, 354 (8th Cir. 1911). It was 
also recognized at English common law. See Pet. Brief, fn. 
27. 

Briefs of some of the amici supporting affirmance take issue 
with petitioners’ suggestion that interpretation and construction 
of a patent, as with any written instrument, involve distinct 
phases of analysis which often require that certain issues be 
resolved by the jury. This is not a distinction created by 
petitioners, but is one that is well recognized in the law. As 
Professor Corbin explains, “The question of interpretation of 
language and conduct -- the question of what is the meaning 
that should be given by a court to the words of a contract, is 
a question of fact, not a question of law." A. Corbin, Corbin 
on Contracts, § 554, p. 219 (1960). Professor Corbin 
explains that the process of “interpretation” is determining 
what ideas the language in the instrument induces in other 
persons, while “construction” relates to a determination of the 
legal operation of an instrument once its meaning has been 
ascertained. Corbin, § 534 p. 8-9. His views are in agree- 
ment with those of Professor Williston. See, Williston on Con- 
tracts, § 602, p. 320 (3d Ed. 1961). 

This distinction has a significant impact under circumstanc- 


20 


es, as in the present case, where a dispute as to the meaning 
of a term is presented at trial. In such circumstances, the 
meaning of the disputed terms must be found as a fact before 
construction can proceed, and it is the role of the jury to make 
that finding. Corbin, § 554 p. 226-27 (jury should resolve 
opposing interpretations of contract terms); Williston, § 616 
p. 652, 660 (it is the jury’s function to interpret the meaning 
of written terms where the meaning is not so clear as to 
preclude doubt by a reasonable person). Even if a patent is 
not considered to be a contract, the model of contract con- 
struction as described above fits squarely with issues involving 
the interpretation and construction of a patent." 

In the final analysis, the various analogies advanced by 
respondents and U.S. Surgical are not helpful, especially in 
light of the persuasive historical record and authorities 
supporting petitioners’ position. It is telling that respondents 
attempt to downplay the forceful historical record while 
grasping for strained analogies to escape the Constitutional 
mandate. In Seventh Amendment jurisprudence, a page of 
history is more persuasive than volumes of indirect and 
doubtful analogies, mostly newly discovered for litigation. At 
English common law in 1791, the meaning of "inventory" on 
this record would go to the jury. The jury verdict rendered in 
1991 should be preserved by the Seventh Amendment. 


"Respondents and their amici rely on other tangential purported 
analogies, such as determinations of foreign law, meaning of land 
patents, jurisdiction or the admissibility of evidence. Foreign law 
obviously is a special situation because the inquiry by definition is one 
of pure law. See, Finney v. Guy, 189 U.S. 335, 342 (1903). Similarly, 
the purported analogy to land patents is misplaced as this Court has held 
that disputed meaning of the patent grant presents a question for the jury. 
United States v. State Investment Co. , 264 U.S. 206, 211 (1924). Since 
petitioners’ position, based upon the relevant history and authorities, 
addresses the merits of the infringement finding, jurisdictional and 
evidentiary rulings are beside the point. 


Dated: December 28, 1995 


Of Counsel 

Lewis F. Gould, Jr. 
Stephan P. Gribok 
Eckert Seamans Cherin 
& Mellott 

1700 Market Street 
Suite 3232 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 


21 


Respectfully submitted, 


William B. Mallin 
Counsel of Record 
Timothy P. Ryan 
Timothy S. Coon 
Eckert Seamans Cherin 
& Mellott 

600 Grant Street 

42nd Floor 

Pittsburgh, PA 15219 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
Herbert Markman and 
Positek, Inc. 


