IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HERBERT MARKMAN AND POSITEK, INC., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. AND 
ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Respondents. 
On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 
JOINT APPENDIX - VOLUME I 
WILLIAM B. MALLIN* FRANK H. GRIFFIN, III* 
Lewis F. GOULD, JR. PETER A. VOGT 
TIMOTHY P. RYAN POLLY M. SHAFFER 
STEPHAN P. GRIBOK GOLLATZ, GRIFFIN & EWING 
TIMOTHY S. COON Two Penn Center Plaza 
ECKERT SEAMANS CHERIN Sixteenth Floor 
& MELLOTT Philadelphia, PA 19102 
600 Grant Street Telephone: (215) 563-9400 
42nd Floor Attomeys for Respondents 
Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
Telephone: rR 566-6000 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


PETITION FOR CERTIORARI FILED JULY 3, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED SEPTEMBER 27, 1995 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY | RGRan 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
VOLUME I 
ad scl ei als es ee ed l 
District Court for the Eastern 
District of Pennsylvania, No. 91-CV-940 .... 1. 
United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, No. 92-1049 ......... 5 
ee EE Sia Nidle cee et bes RCO SS KC's “8 
ee Se bee ose Ee eS TR 282 
Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Supplemental Requested Interrogatories 
are be bk 60 WW Baw a a sce ee ws 284 
Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Supplemental Requested Instruction ........... 286 
Motion of Defendant Westview Instruments, 
Inc. for Directed Verdict Pursuant to Rule 50 
of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure......... 290 


Order Dated September 20, 1991, Entered 
September 23, 1991, Not Vacating Order of 
September 17, 1991 Denying Defendants’ Motion 


for Summary Judgment... . 0. ccc cece cece 292 


ii 
VOLUME II 
United States Patent No. Re. 33,054 .......... 293 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Advertising Brochure for Datascan 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Advertising Brochure for Datamark 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Equipment Price List for Datamark and 
Datascan dated December 1989 .............. 306 


Respondent Westview Instruments, Inc.’s 
Equipment Price List for Datamark and 
Datascan dated July 1,1985................ 307 


Excerpt of File Wrapper of United 
States Patent Re. No. 33,054 


The following opinions, orders, judgments 
and memorandum have been omitted in 
printing this Joint Appendix because they 
appear on the following pages in the 
Appendix to the printed Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari: 


Opinions of United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, filed April5, 1995 ........... la 


Judgment, United States Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit, filed April 5, 1995 ........ 160a 


i l 
Order, Ordering, sua sponte, that the Appea 
be heard en banc, filed November 5, 1993 ...... 162a 


Order Providing for Additional Briefing and 
Other Matters for Rehearing en banc, filed 


January 7, 1994 .....-- eee reer ees 164a 
Judgment of United States District Court 

for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 

in Favor of Defendants and Against nina 
Plaintiffs, filed October 1, 1991 ......--++--> 


Order of United States District Court 


for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 
in Favor of Defendants and Against 


Plaintiffs, filed September 30, 1991 .......... 169a 


Memorandum of United States District Court 

for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania 

Granting Motion for Directed Verdict, sate 
filed September 30, 1991 2... 6. ee ee eens 


CIVIL ACTION DOCKET 
CLERK OF COURT 


U.S. DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


JUDGE 
HON. MARVIN KATZ 


FILE DATE CASE-ID 
12/10/91 91-CV-940 


PLAINTIFF/ATTORNEY 
HERBERT MARKMAN, ET AL 
MALLIN, WILLIAM B. 


DEFENDANT/ATTORNEY 
WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC., ET AL 
GRIFFIN, Ill, FRANK H. 


DATE *** PROGRESS IN CASE *** 

2/12/91 Complaint. filing fee $ 120 receipt #335061 
(kv) 

3/22/91 Answer to complaint and crossclaim by 


DEFENDANT ALTHON ENTERPRISES 
against WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS (td) 


5/1/91 


6/7/91 


8/29/91 


9/3/91 


9/18/91 


9/20/91 


2 


Answer to Complaint and Counterclaim by 
DEFENDANT WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. (jmp) [Entry date 
05/02/91] 


Answer by HERBERT MARKMAN, 
POSITEK, INC. to counterclaim of deft 
Westview Instruments, Inc. (td) 


MOTION BY DEFENDANT WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. FOR SUMMARY 
JUDGMENT, MEMORANDUM, 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE. (td) [Entry 
date 08/30/91] 


Amended answer to complaint by 
DEFENDANT WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. with counterclaim 
against plffs’. (td) [Entry date 09/05/91] 


ORDER THAT THE [36-1] MOTION FOR 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT IS DENIED 

( SIGNED BY JUDGE MARVIN KATZ ) 
09/18/91 ENTERED AND _ COPIES 
MAILED. (td) 


Request for Interrogatories to jury by 
PLAINTIFF HERBERT MARKMAN, 
PLAINTIFF POSITEK, INC. (td) 


9/20/91 


9/20/91 


9/23/91 


9/27/91 


9/30/91 


9/30/91 


3 


Requested Jury instructions by PLAINTIFF 
HERBERT MARKMAN, PLAINTIFF 
POSITEK, INC. (td) 


‘ORDER THAT THIS COURT’S ORDER 


DATED 9/17/91 DENYING WESTVIEW’S 
MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT BE 
AND HEREBY IS NOT VACATED. 
THERE IS A GENUINE ISSUE OF 
MATERIAL FACT AS TO WHETHER 
DEFT’S PRODUCT STORES IN MEMORY 
INDIVIDUAL ARTICLES, ETC. ( SIGNED 
BY JUDGE MARVIN KATZ ) 09/23/91 
ENTERED AND COPIES MAILED. (td) 
[Entry date 09/23/91] 


Supplemental Pretrial Memorandum of deft 
Westview Intruments, Inc. (td) [Entry date 
09/24/91] 


Minute entry: Trial resumes 9/26/91. Ruling: 
Infringement issue to be given to the jury 
first. Deft’s motion for directed verdict - 
DEFERRED. (td) [Entry date 09/30/91] 


MOTION BY DEFENDANT WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. FOR DIRECTED 
VERDICT PURSUANT TO RULE 50 OF 
THE F.R.C.P., MEMORANDUM. (td) 


Memorandum of law by DEFENDANT 
WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. 


9/30/91 


9/30/91 


10/1/91 


10/25/91 


4 


concerning construction of claim language. 
(td) 


Questions to jurors and answers thereof. (td) 
{Entry date 10/01/91] 


MEMORANDUM AND ORDER THAT 
THE MOTION FOR A_ DIRECTED 
VERDICT IS GRANTED ( SIGNED BY 
JUDGE MARVIN KATZ ) _ 10/01/91 
ENTERED AND COPIES MAILED. (td) 
[Entry date 10/01/91] 


ORDER THAT JUDGMENT IS ENTERED 
IN FAVOR OF DEFTS AND AGAINST 
PLFFS ( SIGNED BY JUDGE MARVIN 
KATZ ) 10/02/91 ENTERED AND COPIES 
MAILED. (td) (Entry date 10/02/91] 


Notice of appeal to the USCA FOR THE 
FEDERAL CIRCUIT by PLAINTIFF 
HERBERT MARKMAN, PLAINTIFF 
POSITEK, INC., Fee Status: $105.00, Copies 
to JUDGE MARVIN KATZ , Clerk USCA, 
Appeals Clerk, and PETER A. DUNN, 
PETER A. VOGT, FRANK H. GRIFFIN, 
JOHN C. DORFMAN, TERRY D. JACK C. 
GOLDSTEIN, PATRICK J. HAGAN, 
TIMOTHY P. RYAN, WILLIAM B. 
MALLIN, LEWIS F. GOULD JR. (dt) [Entry 
date 10/29/91] 

[Edit date 10/29/91] 


10/25/91 


11/6/91 


5 


Copy of Clerk’s notice to USCA For the 
FEDERAL CIRCUIT re: [100-1] appeal (dt) 
{Entry date 10/29/91] 

[Edit date 10/29/91) 


Notice of Docketing ROA from the USCA for 
the Federal Circuit Re: [100-1] appeal. 
USCA FEDERAL CIRCUIT NUMBER: 92- 
1049. 11/04/91 (td) [Entry date 11/07/91] 
(Edit date 11/07/91] 


6 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 
DOCKET FOR APPEAL 92-1049 


October 25, 1991 
Jan. 3, 1992 
Feb. 18, 1992 
Mar. 9, 1992 
Mar. 16, 1992 
May 7, 1992 


January 7, 1994 


AS OF 10/04/95 


Notice of appeal filed by plaintiffs in 
the district court. (Ip) 


BRIEF FOR THE APPELLANT, 
filed. (MS-1/3/92) (cr) 


BREIF [sic] FOR THE APPELLEE, 
filed. (MS-2/18/92) (cr) 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE 
APPELLANT, filed. (MS-3/9/92) (cr) 


JOINT APPENDIX (Vols-I-II 12 
copies each filed. (MS-3/16/92) (cr) 


ARGUED. (Nies, CJ, Rich and 
Archer, JJ). (tth) 


ORDER: Additional briefing by 
parties & amici may be filed as 
follows: Briefs for appellants on 
rehearing in banc due February 1, 
1994; briefs for appellees due March 
14, 1994. Court is particularly 
interested in briefing on ... see order 
for language... Amicus briefs on 
rehearing in banc may be filed in 


Feb. 14, 1994 


Mar. 14, 1994 


May 4, 1994 
92-1049 
(df) 


April 5, 1995 


7 


accordance with Rule 29. Oral 
argument will be scheduled after briefs 
have been filed. Briefs shall be filed 
in 30 copies. [by Clerk] (df) 


BRIEF FOR APPELLANTS, (Harbert 


Markin [sic] and Positek, Inc.) filed. 
(MS-2/14/94) (cr) 


SUPPLEMENTAL BRIEF FOR 


APPELLEES, (Westview Instruments 
Inc.) filed. (MS-3/14/94) (cr) 


Submitted after ORAL ARGUMENT 
by William B. Mallin and Frank H. 
Griffin, Ul 
{IN BANC] 

(ARCHER, RICH, NIES, NEWMAN, 
MAYER, MICHEL, PLAGER, 
LOURIE, CLEVENGER, RADER & 
SCHALL) 


AFFIRMED. (ARCHER, CHIEF 
JUDGE) "JUDGMENT ENTERED" 
(pjt) OPINION FOR THE COURT 
FILED BY CHIEF JUDGE 
ARCHER, IN WHICH CIRCUIT 
JUDGES RICH, NIES, MICHEL, 
PLAGER, LOURIE, CLEVENGER 
and SCHALL JOIN. CONCURRING 
OPINIONS FILED BY CIRCUIT 
JUDGES MAYER and RADER 


April 26, 1995 


DISSENTING OPINION FILED BY 
CIRCUIT JUDGE NEWMAN. (pjt) 
52 F3d 967 


ISSUED AS A MANDATE TO THE 
US DCT ED/PA. (ip) 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF 
CERTIORARI FILED 07/03/95. 
SUPREME COURT No. 95-0026. 
U.S.L.W.: 94-3068 (EOD 08/18/95 
BY JA) 92-1049 


[40)JJOHN MIKULA, PLAINTIFF’S WITNESS, SWORN 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MALLIN: 

Q Would you state your name, please? 
A My name is John Mikula. 

Q Where do you live? 


Al live at 1520 Lexington krive [sic] in Dresher, 
Pennsylvania. 


Q What is your profession? 

A I’m a computer consultant. 

Q What is your educational background? 

[41] A I received a Bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering from the University of Pennsylvania in 1965. I 
graduated with honors, belonged to civil engineer honor 


societies. I received a Master’s degree in electrical 
engineering from the University of Pennsylvania in 1967 and 


10 


a Master’s degree from Penn State University in engineering 
science. 


Q For the record, what is electrical engineering? What is the 
study of electrical engineering? 


A Electrical engineering has evolved over time and whereas 
when I was in school it was the study of vacuum tubes and 
electronics using transistors, today it’s more a study of 
computer architecture. 


Q Would you tell the jury a brief resume of your work 
experience after you graduated? 


“A After I graduated, I first worked for Eastman Kodak in 
Rochester, New York on classified Government projects but 
having to do with data reduction, mathematical analyses and 
general data processing type areas. After that I worked for 
a company called Kentron Hawaii, Limited in Honolulu and 
we tracked missile test flights in the middle of the Pacific. 
My job was data reduction, doing mathematical analyses and 
defining performance of computer programs, working with 
programmers to define data processing systems. After that 
I worked with American Electronics Laboratories in 
Colmer(ph), Pennsylvania doing defense related work and 
having to do with computer pro[42]gramming, things like 
tracking aircraft for the American Military, direction finding 
systems based on airplanes looking for enemy receivers and 
thing [sic] like that. 


During that time while I was with American Electronic 
Laboratories, microprocessors were just coming into 


11 


existence and at that time as a young engineer, I was very 
excited about microprocessors were a way of shrinking down 
big, expensive computer systems into a tiny chip. It was a 
brand new field. The expansiveness of the field was apparent 
and I wanted very much to get into that. Working as I was 
on defense contracts which tend to trail the state of the art in 
developments of new computers, new hardware, I went with 
a small company and the sole goal of that company was to 
develop systems based on microprocessors. They were 
system developers. Developers were people who had 
products they needed and wanted to sell so we were a 
general system developer. We did the electronics. I 
personally did the programming of the microprocessors to 
make it meet with whatever system needs a customer had. 


After that in approximately 1981, I joined the company 
I’m with now which is called Matrix Graphics and the 
purpose of that company had to do with using bar codes 
another new technology just coming into popularity at that 
time and we were involved for the entire duration in the 
printing of bar codes using different kinds of printers and 
[43] for the last several years in projects using the scanning 
of bar codes to make bar codes do useful work for people. 


Q I think by now people know what a bar code is or bar 
codes are but I think you ought to explain it. 


A The simplest explanation is the thing you see in a grocery 
store on every package of Wheaties is a band of black and 
white lines and this is a way of encoding information that 
can easily be entered into a computer. The whole purpose 
of a bar code is to encode information so it can be entered 


12 


into a computer without the need for key strokes by a person 
which tends to be slow and erroneous. 


Q During your work over these recent years, have you been 
on the cutting edge of technology, computer technology and 


bar code technology? 
A Yes, we have. 


Q Do you keep track of trade and technical literature in the 
computer area of technology and bar code area of 
technology? 

A Yes. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer this 


witness as an expert on computer equipment, computer 
matters and bar code technology. 


THE COURT: My practice is that the other side may if 
it wishes examine on qualifications now or reserve until 
cross whichever you prefer. 


[44] MR. GRIFFIN: I'll examine him on qualifications 
now if I may, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Sure. 


VOIR DIRE EXAMINATION 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


13 
Q Mr. Mikula, what trade literature do you keep track of in 
your business? 


A There are two primary bar code magazines that are 
published. I read those faithfully and a number of computer 
related magazines, some familiar ones like Byte and PC 
World and some more specialized ones. 


Q You've been involved with Matrix Graphics since 1981? 
A Yes. 


Q What education have you had since 1981, formal 
education? 


A I have not had formal education since 1981. 

Q When was your last formal education? 

A That would have been -- I have to think back. I received 
the second Master’s degree from Penn State University back 


in approximately 1975. After that I did attend classes at 
Temple in Ambler which were business-related classes. 


Q Your MBA from Temple was with an emphasis on finance 
and accounting, is that corret [sic]? 


A I didn’t receive an MBA from Temple. I was in the MBA 
program but did not -- 


Q Your Masters from Penn State in engineering science, 
when [45] was that, sir? 


14 
A That was in 1974. 


Q And your courses there dealt primarily with statistics and 
what else? 


A The statistics and analysis. The statistics courses involved 
the application of computer programs to statistics. There 
were some specialized computer programs at the time having 
to do with dedicated kinds of statistical analysis. 


Q That was basically computers which we now look at as 
minis and mainframes? :, 


A Minis. 


Q It was not personal computers? 


A That’s correct. 


Q Sir, you were involved, were you not, at least your 
company was, in providing firm wearboard to Mr. Markman 
so that he could try to create his initial or I think it’s his 
second working model of his claimed invention? 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I think this goes beyond 
voir dire on qualifications. 

THE COURT: I'll allow it as a matter of the order of 
proof. 


A I don’t know where it fit into his development cycle but, 
yes, we did provide a board to Mr. Markman. 


15 


Q What specific training have you had in, and I mean formal 
education, in the area of bar codes? 


A I’ve had no formal education in bar codes, formal being 
[46] attending a university. 


Q What formal education have you had in dealing with 
personal computers and the programming of them? 


A I've had no formal university training. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, I would object on the 
grounds that the proffer as an expert has been too broad and 
that his area of expertise is substantially limited by his 
training and if it is to be offered as an expert in computer 
science, he hasn’t been qualified. 


THE COURT: I'll allow the witness to testify. Of 
course, the weight of his testimony is a matter exclusively 
for the jury to determine. 

DIRECT EXAMINATION (Cont’'d.) 
BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Mr. Mikula, were you retained to make a study in 
connection with this litigation of Westview’s inventory 
control system, the “Datamark" and “Datascan" and how 
they work together? 


A Yes, I was. 


16 


Q Looking at Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, the number is "2-0", 
what is that? 


A That is a “Datamark” inventory control system. 


Q Looking at Plaintiff's Exhibit 3, which is intended to 
cover these two items, what is Plaintiff's Exhibit 3? 


A That is a "Datascan” together with a "Datamark" and a 
[47] "Datamark" and a “Datascan" comprise an inventory 
control system. | 


Q Did you study Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 and Plaintiff's Exhibit 
3? . 


A Yes, I did. 


Q What other material did you look at and review in 
connection with your study of the way Westview’s inventory 
control system works and what it’s comprised of? 


A In addition to actually working with the hardware, I had 
an operator’s manual for the "Datamark" unit. I had program 
listings for both units, the "Datamark" and the "Datascan" 
and these program listings were dated 1985 and 1987. 


In addition, I had various pieces of sales and promotional 
literature from Westview of which this is one example but 
there are also quite a few other pieces including price lists 
that listed the current array of systems and the capabilities 
thereof and I also examined the deposition of Mr. Jenkins, 


17 


who’s the president of Westview, and some invoices printed 
by Westview for the sale of "Datamark" units. 


Q I show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 4 and ask you what that is. 


A This is an operator’s manual for the "Datamark" dated 
October 1, 1985. 


Q Did you use that in your study? 


A Yes, I did. 


[48]Q I show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 5 and ask you what that 


A This is an operator’s manual for the “Datamark" dated 
February 28, 1988. 


Q Did you use Plaintiff's Exhibit 5 in your study? 
A Yes, I did. 
Q I show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 6 and ask you what that is. 


A This is a price list for "“Datamark" and “Datascan" 
equipment dated July ist, 1985. 


Q Did you use that in your study? 


A Yes, I did. 


18 


Q I'll show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 7 and ask you what that 
is. 


A This is an equipment price list for the "Datamark" and the 
Datascan" and the date is December °89. 


Q Did you use that in your study? 
A Yes, I did. 


Q I show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 8 of which there’s a blow- 
up on the easel. What is that? 


A This is a sales or promotional brochure produced by 
Westview Instuments [sic] for the "Datascan”". 


Q I'll show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 9 and ask you what that 
is. 


Q[sic] This is also a promotional brochure produced by 
Westview Instruments for the "Datamark" with references to 
the "Datascan"[sic]} 

Q Did you use that in connection with your study? 

[49]A Yes, I did. 

Q I show you Plaintiffs Exhibit 10 and ask you what that is. 


A This is a program listing dated 1985 produced by 
Westview Instruments. 


19 
Q Did you use that in your study? 


A Yes, I did. 
Q { show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 11 and ask you what that is. 


A This is a set of program listings dated 1987 produced by 
Westview Instruments. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer in 
evidence Plaintiff's Exhibits 1 through 11 inclusive. 


THE COURT: My practice is if there’s no audible 
objection, they’re automatically admitted. 


MR. MALLIN: Thank you. 
BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q After October 29th, 1985, which is the date the original 
patent was issued, was there one or more than one model of 
"Datamark"? 
A More than one model. 
Q What models were there? 
A Referring to the two price lists in 1985, the models were 
identified as System I, System II and System III. In the later 


price list, they were identified as the "Datamark" [50] 
System III, the "Datamark" Plus and the "Datamark" XI. 


20 


Q Would you show me which price list covers the XI and 
the Plus? 


A The 1989 price list. 


Q Plaintiff's Exhibit 9. Do "“Datamark" XI and the 
"Datamark" Plus involve the printing of bar code 
coincidental with the transaction? 


A Yes, they do. 


Q Does that show on the price list of this Plaintiff's Exhibit 


A There is an allusion on here to the printing of bar codes. 
It does say, “automatically prints and ticket message and bar 
code”. 


Q Which model is Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 here in court? 
A That is the "Datamark" System III. 


Q Does the "Datamark" System III print bar code 
coincidental with the transaction? 


A Yes, it does. 


Q Before we go on and look at some of the equipment in 
detail, would you tell the jury just in a general way how 
Westview’s Inventory control system comprised of the 
“Datamark" and the "Datascan" working together whichever 


21 


model without the details of any little differences between 
models, tell us how it works? 


A We can talk on the System III because it’s in front of us 
[51] and I can point to it. (Indicating) 


The “Datamark" unit, the bigger one, consists of a 
keypad, a display and a printer that’s on the left side of a 
unit. When a customer brings a transaction, a group of 
clothing in to a drycleaning store, a ticket is inserted into the 
printer and the keypad is used to print the ticket and an 
example of a ticket can be seen on here. Essentially what 
the ticket includes is the sequential invoice number. Invoice 
is the terminology for the ticket number used by ours and 
Westview. The ticket also contains a listing of the individual 
articles of clothing that were brought in as part of that 
bundle and description includes the type of clothing, pattern 
and the price charged for cleaning that item. It also includes 
a total for that ticket. At the bottom of the ticket is a bar 
code. The bar code contains the same number that’s at the 
top of the ticket. 


The invoice number is unique. It’s automatically assigned 
by the "Datamark" when the transaction starts. 


The other piece of equipment, the “Datascan", actually 
consists of two pieces. The smaller unit is a data processor 
connected to a bar code one or scanner and this is used 
primarily for taking inventory in the drycleaning store. The 
scanner is run over the individual ticket and a list is put 
together inside the "Datascan" of what invoices are found. 


22 


The printer that’s behind the "Datascan" is used to produce 
[52] reports generated by the "Datascan”. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, may I have the witness step 
down to the "Datamark"? 


THE COURT: You don’t need my permission, Counsel. 
Just make yourself comfortable in the courtroom. 


(Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 
BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Now, would you first for the jury without getting into 
every detail print a ticket out as though a customer came in 
with drycleaning? Show the jury that. 


A The procedure is really very simple. You start a 
transaction by inserting a ticket into the printer mechanism 
which is in here. It first asks you for a strip tag number. 
That can either be the number on the strip tag that was 
mentioned that’s attached to clothing or it can be a customer 
Number. There’s various ways to use that. I'll just use the 
number 1234. I press “Enter” that the number is correct and 
you’ve heard printing occur and we’ll go into exactly what’s 
printed when. 


The display says "Begin mark" and that means start 
accepting various articles of clothing for the transaction. 
The keypad consists of a set of keys that are labeled "pants", 
"sweater", "dress" so these are prelabeled item keys. You 
can see they’re color coded keys to identify the color of the 


23 


garment. There are a set of keys that are the pattern of the 
[53] garment, numeric keys and some special keys. 


To begin marking, I press the key labeled "Dress" and the 
display shows the word "Dress" and the pre-set price in this 
system. If I want to indicate a color for the dress, "green", 
I press "green" and the word appears and if it’s "plaid", I 
press "plaid" and "PL" appears here indicating "plaid". If 
that’s correct, I press the "Enter" key and two things will 
happen. Asterisks will appear on here which is a signal to 
the operator that the "Enter" key has been pressed and it’s 
been accepted as part of the ticket and printing will occur 
(demonstrating) so at that point on the ticket it has been 
printed on the lines that you can see on there which would 
say "Dress green plaid” and that price. 


If I enter a second item, let’s say it’s a sweater, orange, 
check, again I see all those details plus a pre-set price for 
cleaning a sweater. I press "Enter" and a second item has 
been printed on the ticket. If I’ve completed all the items 
that have come in, I press the total listing key labeled 
"Dryclean" (demonstrating) and the printing that’s occurred 
applies the sales tax giving me the total of that transaction 
which also appears on the screen $10.02, a friendly message 
and a bar code. The bar code, as I mentioned, is the same 
contents as the ticket number or the invoice number. These 
are the unique numbers used to identify these tickets. 


Q Id like to put an exhibit sticker on that ticket which [54] 
you've printed Plaintiff's Exhibit 25. 


24 


Looking at Plaintiff's Exhibit 25 we see lines down at the 
bottom. What is that? 


A Those lines are bar codes. It’s a series of wide and 
narrow bars which a scanner with its associated reader and 
code implement can translate into a set of numbers for a 


computer. 

Q The ticket that you put in there, Plaintiff's Exhibit 5, 
before you put it in the printer here, did it have any bar 
codes on it? 

A No, it did not. 


MR. MALLIN: I’m not sure whether you can see it but 
this is the exhibit. 
(Exhibit was shown to the jury by Mr. Mallin.) 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer Plaintiff's 
Exhibit 25. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Look at the "Datamark" and will you tell the jury what its 
basic components are? 


A The basic components are the visible components. First, 
the keypad which as you've seen are dedicated to the 
function of drycleaning, the items key, color keys, numeric 
keys and the totalizing key. 


25 


The second component is the display to prompt the 
operator to show certain information, etc. 


[55] A third component is the printer which is in this part 
of the "Datamark" and this is what we call a dot matrix 
printer which pertains to the way characters or bars or any- 
thing is formed with this printer. 


Inside the "Datamark" is a printed circuit board and that 
printed circuit board contains a microprocessor which I 
mentioned before is really a shrunk down computer. It’s the 
basic unit inside that contains the intelligence of the printed 
circuit board. It also contains a chip that has a program 
memory and this is a set of sequence of instructions that the 
microprocessor follows to carry out all the functions. 


Q Approximately -- Is a chip large or small? 


A Roughly it depends which chip, an inch by two inches for 
the big ones. 


Q By looking at the outside of Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, the 
"Datamark", can you tell what it would print without 
knowing what chip is in it? 


A No, I can’t. 


Q Now the first time I asked you just briefly print out a 
ticket so we can see what a printed out ticket was, now I'd 
like you to go into the process and explain in more detail 
what the mechanism is going on in this computer 
"Datamark". 


26 


A Id like to print two tickets since we're presenting a 
number of different things that are technically important. 


[56] The first thing was the functional striking of the keys 
and the ticket. The second thing is the relationship of the 
printing with relation to how certain things are performed at 
the keypad. If you can see that one better, we can reference 
the ticket on the first chart. Again I place the ticket and no 
printing has occurred. You heard a sound which is the ticket 
being clamped into the printer. I get the message again to 
enter the strip tag number. I'll just enter some different 
number. Press "Enter" and at this point the first line of the 
ticket has been printed. The first line of the ticket includes 
the date, the last date set into the machine, the unique 
sequential invoice or ticket number and the tag number that 
I enter. You heard the printing occur. That occurred just 
after the tag number is entered and "Enter" is pressed. 


As I do an individual item, I'll do the green plaid dress 
again, again, [sic] now.at this time it’s in working memory. 
I can change the color of that to a blue dress. 


Going back to the green one, at the time I pressed "Enter" 
again, again you’ll hear the printer go and it will print the 
one item of the item. (Demonstrated) 


When I get -- I'll put the second item in, sweater, orange, 
check, press "Enter" there’s a second line printed. When I'm 
satisfied that the transaction is fully entered and I press the 
total key, all the printing on the [57] bottom of the ticket 
will occur. In other words, the tax will be calculated and 
printed, the total will be printed on the ticket. These are 


27 
indicators that this can be used to localize things by store 
and by operator number and there’s a long process which is 
the printing of the bar code so at this point all the individual 
items have been entered. It totally listed -- It knows 
everything it’s ever going to know. 


Q What knows everything? 


A I speak in terms of the processor, it being the data 
processor inside along with its associated memory. The 
memory is where details are stored and used later. 


Q Those transcriptions are in the memory of the data 
processor at this point? 


A Yes, they are and I can demonstrate that. At this point -- 
I'll make this clear by making one more entry. Let’s add a 
sweater that’s blue and mixed to our ticket. There is a 
working area of memory if you will that is the entry that I’m 
currently making and trying as an operator to get right. Once 
I press "Enter", this becomes part of the ticket memory. 
The memory of the system at this point has all the detail that 
is on the ticket and I can demonstrate that because one of the 
things that I can do is to review what's in memory but I'm 
at the point where I’m about to print out the total. As an 
operator, | want to review everything that was in that ticket 
so I press "Clear" key a number of times. It first [58] tells 
me the first item was dress, green plaid. Second item was 
the orange sweater and the third item was the blue sweater. 
Since those are in memory, I can go back and I can delete 
one of those items so at this point right before I’m about to 
print out the totals, all the details of the ticket are in 


28 


memory. When I press the total key (demonstrating), the 
information at the bottom including the bar code, which was 
the long repetitive motion you heard, is printed. Once the 
ticket is ejected, the thing that is maintained in memory are 
the unique invoice number, the date of the transaction and 
the total. 


Q On the second ticket you've printed out, I’ve attached 
Plaintiff's Exhibit 26. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer Plaintiff's 
Exhibit 26 in evidence. 


THE WITNESS: There is one other feature I'd like to 
mention of the "Datamark" itself before we get into how the 
whole system works together and I showed you, for 
example, how when you strike a key, I strike the pants key, 
the word “pants” comes up here. Also on the bottom there’s 
a message of "Have a nice day” or whatever is chosen. 


One of the functions of this keypad is to be able to go 
through when a person initially purchases a "Datamark” put 
into that system the meaning of those keys. This is called an 
that are alphabet and other keys that are numeric. The [59] 
numeric ones are always numeric. There’s a chart in the 
operator’s manual that gives you the corresponding keys to 
the alphabetical keys. 

Q Are these steps and occurrences that you've just described 
for the “Datamark", are they reflected in the Westview 
"Datamark" operating manual? : 


A Yes, they are. 


Q Now I would like to direct your attention to the "Data- 
scan" and would you explain to the jury how the "Datascan” 
works? 


A The "Datascan” is actually comprised of the portable unit 
as well as the general purpose printer. The "Datascan” itself 
includes another microprocessor with its own program stored 
in an ecom. It includes a display and a scanner for reading 
bar notes and on the front of the scan are a number of other 
bar codes. They have labels on them: Enter, Yes, No and 
individual numbers so these bar codes are really for the 
purpose of -- They are functionally identical to keypads to 
individual keys so scanning this "Enter" key, "Enter" bar is 
the same on here as if I had the “Enter” key. 


The "“Datascan” also as I mentioned, has its own display 
just like you can see but it’s the way of guiding an operator 
through operating a "Datamark"ing system. 


THE COURT: Excuse me, sir. You're going to have to 
keep your voice up because it’s becoming increasingly 
difficult for me to hear you, perhaps for the stenographer so 
I'd apprec[60]iate it if both you and the attorney would just 
speak up a little bit particularly when your backs are turned 
toward her, it’s difficult. 


THE WITNESS: Certainly. 


The "“Datascan" is used in conjunction with the 
"Datamark". Its method of operation is that it’s tied to the 


30 


"Datamark” with the cable and the list of invoices is 
transferred from here to here. Now let me -- 


BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q From here to here. For the record, you'd better say -- 


A From the "Datamark" to the "Datascan” and to make that 
a little more clear, in the "Datamark" when we have printed 
the ticket at the beginning of a transaction, I mentioned that 
the memory of the "Datamark” retains a list of the date, the 
invoice number, the unique invoice number and the amount 
of that invoice. Those are retained in the memory of the 
"Datamark". Those are taken out of the “Datamark" 
memory when a person comes to pick up their order and 
there are different ways of getting it out. For example, in 
the "Datamark” the invoice number is entered from the 
keypad. In any event, those are taken out as they’re picked 
up so the “Datamark" at any time includes a list of the 
invoices that should be in -- still be in the drycleaning 
establishment and we can do a number of reports from the 
"Datamark". One report is an invoice listing and that would 
give us a list of the current invoices. We can see an example 
of that invoice listing here [61] where it’s labeled "Invoice 
Listing” and again ticket number. It includes the date, the 
invoice numbers and the amounts of the invoices along with 
the total for all of the invoices. 


So the important point is in memory is a list of the 
invoices that should still be in the store. 


31 


By attaching the "Datamark” to the "Datascan" by the 
cable as I’ve shown, we transfer that list of invoices, the 
invoice numbers, dates and totals are transferred to the 
memory of the “Datascan" so again at this point the 
"Datascan" has its list of what should be in the store. 


Now at this point the "Datascan" can be used in two 
ways. It can be used if you will to take invoices or tickets 
back out of inventory if additional things are picked up by 
the customer to keep this memory updated with what’s in the 
store but its more important use is to take inventory. 


The way that’s used is an operator will attach it or hold 
it as this operator has, go through the store and scan the bar 
codes that are on all the tickets attached to all the 
transactions, the orders from people. So what we’re doing is 
the "Datascan” has its knowledge of what should be there, 
we're going there and scanning everything we actually find 
in the store and from that the “Datascan" would produce a 
report. It can produce a report of all the invoices that it is 
expected to find and did find. It can produce a report of 
extra invoices and a list of missing invoices and this same 
[62] exhibit shows what the report looks like from a 
"Datascan". It’s called inventory, the date of which the 
report was generated, a list of the listed invoices. These are 
the correct invoices the "Datascan” expected to find and we 
did, extra invoices, spurious additions, tickets that should not 
be there. It also gives the dollar list for those invoices. It 
gives a total of all the invoices that were actually found both 
the good ones and the extra ones, the dollar total, then 
there’s a list of the missing invoices. It gives the invoice 
numbers and the amounts of those invoices as well as the 


32 
total of the missing invoices so this is the way in which the 
"Datascan" is used to reconcile inventory. It should -- It 
does know what should be there and by comparing what 


should be there to what’s actually found to be there, it can 
tell you the extras and the missings. 


MR. MALLIN: The record should show he was referring 
to the reverse side of the blow-up of Plaintiff's Exhibit 8. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q In the two you’ve looked at from Westview, did it 
indicate that the Westview system had the ability to detect 
extra, missing transactions? 


A Yes, it did. 
Q In the industry, what does a preprinted bar code mean? 


A Preprinted bar code means that -- In the system like this, 
for example, you would buy your invoice ticket from 
some[63]}one who has the ability to print the bar codes for 
you. You would not have the ability to print them yourself. 
The bar codes would have sequentially numbered bar codes 
on each invoice or each ticket to identify them one from 
another. 


Q Does "Datamark" and "Datascan" inventory control 
system use preprinted bar code tickets? 


A No, it does not. 


33 


Q Is there any advantage to printing the ticket coincidental 
to the transaction as opposed to using preprinted bar codes? 


A Well, there are two real advantages. One, the process of 
buying preprinted tickets is expensive. For the 
demonstration here where we’re not using preprinted tickets, 
we can go to a stationery store and buy very inexpensive 
multipart tickets. To buy them from a printer preprinted is 
many times more expensive than the nonpreprinted. 


The second item is the security aspects of preprinted 
versus printed on-the-spot tickets. If you buy your preprinted 
ticket, you’re storing them somewhere hoping you won't lose 
them or having them disappear in different ways. You don’t 
have the control that you have here. Here the important -- 
That bar code does not exist anywhere until clothing is really 
received into inventory. 


Q Can a “Datamark" unit work with more than one 
"Datamark” unit? 


A "Datascan” unit. 


[64]Q Can a "Datascan” unit work with more than one 
"Datamark” unit? 


A Yes, it can. 
Q And how many? 


A In the sales literature, it states that a singie "Datascan" 
unit can handle up to 10 "Datamark”" units. 


34 


Q Can you conveniently point out any place where that’s 
stated by Westview? 


A It’s on the equipment price list dated 1985 and the 
description of the "Datascan" bar code reader it says it 
tracks 8,000 invoices from up to 10 "Datamark" systems. 


THE COURT: Again, sir, it’s -- For me at least I wasn't 
able to hear so you really have to keep your voice up. She 
can’t take it down. It’s not important whether I hear. It's 
important whether she does. 


MR. MALLIN: I very much want the Judge to hear so 
keep your voice up. 


THE WITNESS: On the 1985 price list the statement is 
that the "Datascan" bar code reader tracks 8,000 invoices 
from up to 10 "Datamark" system three listers. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Now I would like to direct your attention to the two 
Westview computer printouts that you referred to earlier, 
Plaintiff's Exhibit 10 and Plaintiff's Exhibit 11. Would you 
explain what those are? 


(65]A I'll use as Exhibit 10 as an example and this is a 
listing produced in the course of development work on the 
program that controls the "Datamark”. 


In this particular instance, this one has a printed copyright 
statement 1985 by Westview Instruments. Without going into 


35 


all the details of just how microprocessor programs are 
developed, the programmer produces what’s called source 
code. This is a code that’s made by a programmer and it 
includes individual statements of what the unit is supposed 
to do. On this listing the source code would be roughly 
from here to here and it appears to be English and it’s 
readable by a programmer. This source code is routinely 
development system through a set of programs and the 
output of that process is what’s called machine code. 
Machine code is the information that’s on the left side of the 
listing and that’s the actual coding that goes into the ecom, 
the chip associated with the microprocessor that actually 
contains the programmer. The microprocessor can decode 
this information and do its individual steps. 


Q Is it fair to call that a computer printout? 
A Yes. 


Q Does the computer printout that you have in your hand, 
Plaintiff's Exhibit 10, does it show the printing bar code 
coincidental with the transaction? 

A Yes, it does. 

[66]Q Let’s go to Plaintiff's Exhibit 11. This is also a 
Westview printout and so we don’t have to repeat, I take it 


what you said about the other would apply to here except for 
the date. 


A That’s correct. It says copyright 1987. Format is 
identical. Some of the information is different. 


36 
Q Does Plaintiff's Exhibit 11 -- Is that the right one you 
have in your hand? 
A Yes. 


Q -- show the printing the bar code and the tickets 
coincidental with the transaction? 


A Yes, it does. 


MR. MALLIN: You may take your seat again. That’s 
all I have, Your Honor. 


CROSS EXAMINATION 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Mikula, you’ve told us how the "Datamark" system 
works. I want to direct your attention to back to after you 
had gone ahead and run up the total and your Plaintiff's 
Exhibit 25 had been printed out. If you didn’t have this piece 
of paper, is there any way that this "Datamark” can tell you 
what comprises -- what actual articles of clothing comprised 
this order? 


A No, you cannot tell from the "Datamark”. 


Q The "Datamark" doesn’t have enough memory to take 
care [67] of that, is that correct? 


A I can’t answer the question on whether it has enough 
memory. I do know it does not retain the individual items. 


37 


Q That's right. As soon as you print it out, that’s lost from 
its memory. 

A It’s no longer accessible by the "Datamark". Certain 
pointers are destroyed when the ticket is ejected and you can 
no longer get that information. It’s eventually totally lost 
from memory. 

Q So what this system tracks and -- 


: Let me back up one for you, sir. You said that the 
Datascan" can be used in conjunction with the "Datamark", 

correct? 

A That’s correct. 

Q The "Datascan" gets its information from the "Datamark". 


A That’s correct. 


Q And the "Datascan” can’t have any more information than 
it gets from the "Datamark”. 

A That is true from one or more "Datamarks”. 

Q That's right and if the “Datamark” can’t tell what 
individual items of clothing are associated with the invoice 
number, the “Datascan" can’t know that either, is that 
correct? 


A That’s correct. 


38 


Q Once this ticket is created, this "Datamark"/" Datascan" 
unit loses all ability to in any automated fashion tell us [68] 
what articles of clothing are associated with this ticket? 


A Yes, with the term "any automated fashion". 


Q That’s right. I could sit there and read the ticket but let’s 
say the ticket was lost and someone came in and said: I had 
invoice No. 1234, is there any way this system could tell the 
drycleaner that that happened to be a green dress and an 
orange sweater? 


A No, there is not. 

Q So this system cannot track individual items of clothing 
through the drycleaning process. 

A The tracking occurs on an invoice basis not individual 
items of clothing. 

Q And the reports are on an invoice basis? 

A That’s correct. 


Q It totals up the doiiars but it doesn’t total up the items of 
clothing associated with the invoice? 


A Associated with a specific invoice, that’s correct. 


Q Now, sir, when you were asked to take a look at the 
"Datamark” unit, were you asked to take a look at any other 
units that list a laundry listing like "Datamark"? 


39 
A Not real equipment, no. 
Q Are you familiar, sir, with the "Liberty Lister"? 


A Yes, I am. 


Q Does the "Liberty Lister" generate any reports that are 
different than the reports that you can get from the 
Datascan"/[69]"Datamark" system? 


A You have to understand that I did not work with the 
Liberty Lister*. I’m going from memory from some sales 
brochures. I do not believe so. 


Q So the same reports you can get from the "Liberty Lister" 
system you can get from the "Datamark" system? 


A I would like to examine the "Liberty Lister" system 
before I say that. 


Q That’s your recollection? 


A There’s no -- 


Q The “Liberty Lister" had a preprinted bar code and the 
Datamark" unit has a bar code which is printed out by the 
system, is that correct? That's the only difference. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I object. We're not only 
beyond the scope, we're also into the defense. The law is 
quite clear during the case in chief on infringement, we 


40 


shouldn’t get into the defenses. We get the defenses first 
and then the rebuttal. 


THE COURT: Overruled. As a matter of the order of 
proof, it’s more efficient to do it this way. 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Sir, are you familiar with a company named 
Intermek(ph)? 


A Yes, I am. 
Q What is Intermek? 


A Intermek is a manufacturer of bar code printer and [70] 
Q Does Intermek also provide consulting services to 
companies? 


A Yes, they do. 
Q And does Intermek design systems for companies? 
A Yes, they do. 


Q Are you familiar with any of the systems designed by 
Intermek? 


A I have read some brochures on Intermek systems. 


41 


Q Do you know when Intermek started 
first igni 
systems with bar codes? —— 


A No, I don’t know that date. 
Q It was before 1980, wasn’t it? 
A Ye, it was. 


[71] BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Mikula, you told us before lunch actually when I was 
questioning you on your qualifications that your company 
had done some work with Mr. Markman in conjuncti with 
the second working model of this invention, is that correct? 


A I said we had done some work ian? ' 
note . I didn’t know which 


Q When did you do that work, sir? 


A That work was done in late 1983. 


42 
A It does continue to today. The nature of it is that we 


own computer and that has happened. We're no [72] longer 
an active part of his system. The only ongoing relationship 
is occasional repair work to some old boards. 

Q Sir, you testified I believe that one of the publications that 
you receive and monitor is Byte magazine? 

A That’s correct. I do read Byte magazine. 


Q Would you characterize Byte as a popular magazine or a 
trade publication? 


A A popular magazine. 


Q Are you familiar, sir, with the article in the May 1981 
Byte magazine entitled, "Print your own bar codes"? 


A I have read that article, yes. 


Q I'll hand you an [sic] copy of what has been previously 
marked as Defendant's Exhibit No. 19 and ask you, sir, is 
that the article -- 


[73] THE COURT: I'm just trying to get a sense of the case 


and if we just tried the issue of infringement initially, how 
much time would it take for you to present your case 


43 


assuming he did not inquire into the 


MR. MALLIN: Yes and I have Mr 
Otte on et | . Markman. Some of 


THE COURT: Roughly we would finish up when? I’m 
just asking for both your informed judgments. 


MR. MALLIN: And the very next wi sinithtn 
patent expert and then I’m assuming you're asking beyond 
Mr. Markman’s testimony some of it would bear perhaps -- 
Damage witness, of course, doesn’t go to infri ' 


THE COURT: Understood. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor we could finish very 
. * ’ 
quickly. I intend to call only one witness if -—- 


Pen ant gubee © bet son (si 8 gape - [74] 
> you [sic to it -- for completin 
the plaintiffs’ case on that issue? 


MR. RYAN: Probably one more day, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: You'd be finished sometime tomorrow 
your guesstimate is and you you'd -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: I'd finish 
and a half. very promptly within an hour 


44 


THE COURT: You people are the pros. Give me your 
whether we should do it that way. That does seem 
to be the crux of the case. I know you filed a motion on the 


subject. 


MR. MALLIN: I think it’s better to do all the liability 
issues. 


THE COURT: How long would that take if we got all the 
liability out of the way? 


MR. MALLIN: If he puts evidence in on prior art and so 
on, we would rebut it. 


MR. GRIFFIN: That would add several days at a 


THE COURT: Do you agree with the time estimate on all 
liability? 


MR. MALLIN: I could be longer. 


THE COURT: Okay. I’m not sure what's the best way 
and I'd sort of like to leave my options open so why don't 
we do this at this point? Let’s limit the [75] examinations 
just to the issue of infringement as a matter of proof. I ruled 
otherwise before lunch. I -had an opportunity to read 
counsel’s memorandum which was submitted to me after I 
ruled and let me just see how it goes doing it that way so 
you examine just on infringement and he'll be finished 
sometime tomorrow and we'll talk again. 


45 


* * * 


[76]Q You have the Byte magazine article in front of you? 
A Yes, I do. 


Q Did you read it at or about the time it came out? 


A I don’t remember when I originally read it. I reread it 
recently. 


Q It deals with putting -- 


You testified earlier on direct examination that the 
Datamark” literature says that it will detect extra or missing 
transactions. Where in the literature does it say that? 

A Well, if I can go to the display 


Q Please do. 


(Witness stepped down to the board.) 


Q The wording is extra and missing invoices and it’s (77) 
not transactions, isn’t that correct? 


A I'm not sure I understand the difference. Transaction -- 
invoice. 


46 


Q Mr. Mikula, when did you first start working with bar 
codes? 


A In the late °70s. 


Q When did you first start working with on demand bar 
code printing? 


A I have to clarify just what I did. The controller board that 
we developed was a general purpose controller board which 
allowed a range of existing dot matrix printers to print bar 
codes. I have to differentiate what we did versus how the 
end users actually used what was printed. Ours was a 
general purpose controller. You commanded it to print a bar 
code and we did the dot-by-dot construction of the bar 
codes. The actual use of it whether it was what we call a 
batch printing process where a great number of bar codes are 
printed or whether it was on demand where bar codes are 
printed as you need them, I don’t know necessarily where all 
these were used by the end users. We sold our boards to 
people who integrated them with computers and then resold 
them for various users -- to end users. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you, sir. 
[78] MR. MALLIN: No questions. 
THE COURT: Thank you, sir. 


MR. MALLIN: Plaintiff calls Mr. Chovanes. 


47 


EUGENE CHOVANES, PLAINTIFF’S WITNESS 
SWORN 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Would you state your name, please? 
A My name is Eugene Chovanes. 
Q What is your address? 


A My address is, residence address is 114 Marle Avenue in 
Bala~Cynwyd, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Philadelphia. 


Q Have you had experience with patents and the question of 
infringement of patents? 


A Yes. 
Q Would you tell the jury about your experience? 


A Well, I am 65 years of age. After high school, I went into 
the Army World War II Europe, then I went into Lehigh 
University 1946 to 1950, graduated from Lehigh with a 
Bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering. In 1957, I 
went to work for a patent law firm called William Steel 
Jackson and Sons. This was a law firm, a very old-time law 
firm. I am still with that firm, Jackson and Chovanes. I am 
the survivor of the people in that firm. We have practiced 


48 


patent law -- I’ve been in the practice of patent law since 
1957 to the present. 


(79]Q In your practice of patent law, what kind of areas did 
you deal with? Did you deal with patent prosecutions before 
the Patent Office? 


A Well, first of all, I’m a member of the bar. I graduated 
from Villanova School of Law in 1960 so I am admitted to 
practice in the United States Patent and Trademark Office 
since 1960 or ’61 right in that time as a lawyer to practice 
before the Patent Office. 


Q Have you practiced before the Patent Office? 


A I have practiced before the United States Patent Office 
since 1960 but in fact from 1957 on I have been with a 
patent law firm, my predecessor, doing work for them in 
their their [sic] present firm. 


Q Aside from practicing before a Patent Office, have you 
had experience in determining whether accused devices of 
one kind or another infringe patents? 


A Yes, in my practice, I have evaluated patents, I have 
prosecuted patents before the United States Patent and 
Trademark Office. I have made searches on patent matters. 
I have defended patents in courts. I have prosecuted patents. 
I have appeared as an expert witness as I’m now doing in 
patent practice on a number of occasions. I have searched in 
the United States Patent Office which is a vast library of 
patents to determine in my opinion patentability or lack of 


49 


patentability validity of (80) patents. I have negotiated patent 
matters, licenses regarding patents. 


I think that pretty well covers what I’ve been doing. 


Q Have you had experience in evaluating claims and scope 
of claims of patents? 


A Yes, I have. Each patent has a claim or claims and in 
evaluating patents and in determining whether there is 
infringement in my opinion or not infringement, I have 
worked on claims and could have -- When you apply to the 
United States Patent and Trademark Office for a patent, you 
write an application on behalf of the client with the invention 
and you must submit claims. That’s the definition. That’s the 
legal boundary of what the patent is for so I have worked 
with the Patent Office in perhaps hundreds of applications 
determining and arguing for claims and determining what 
claims are so I have had modestly extensive experience with 
Claims of patents. 


Q Have you done any teaching in the area of patents? 


A Yes. I was a part-time or adjunct, however one wants to 
call it, of patent law at Villanova University School of Law 
from approximately 1968 to 1980 and I would teach patent 
law to the law students. This wasn’t their main course, of 
course, but I would go Out once a week for three hours 
combining two sessions into one extended one [81] and I 
taught patent law for I’d say approximately 12 years. 


50 


Q On the occasions when you have appeared as an expert 
witness in patent cases, have you sometimes testified on 


claim evaluation and infringement of patents? 


A I have. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I offer this witness as an 
expert on patents and patent -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: No need to voir dire, Your Honor. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 

Q Were you retained to make a study to determine whether 
the Westview inventory and control system, the Datamark 
and "Datascan” working together, infringed Mr. Markman’s 
’054 patent? 


A Yes. 


Q Were you here in court to hear Mr. Mikula’s testimony 
describing the Westview inventory control system? 


A Yes. 

Q Prior to hearing him in court, had he imparted to you the 
substance of that information about the Westview inventory 
control system? 


A Yes. 


Q Have you looked at other materials as part of your study? 


51 
A Yes. 


[82]Q Would you tell the jury what other materials you have 
looked at? 


A Well, I looked at the patent in suit. That’s the reissued 
patent. I have looked at the original patent on which the 
reissued patent was granted or reissued. I looked at the file 
histories of both those patents. That means the record, the 
official record in the United States Patent Office, Patent 
Trademark Office -- I'll refer to it as the Patent Office -- 
which is a history, which is a record of every document that 
exists with respect to the prosecution how that patent was 
obtained. 


One of the requirements in patent practice is that 
everything must be be [sic] in written form. If you interview 
the examiner, there has to be a record of that interview so I 
reviewed what’s called the file history. That’s the file of 
everything that went on with respect to the application of 
that patent, the examination of the patent, the responses from 
the actions of the Patent Office, the response from the 
applicant back. I reviewed both histories on that. There was 
prior art cited in the application, that is, prior art meaning 
patents or other possible documents which would show what 
went on before the application and the patent examiner, one 
of over a thousand who’s a specialist in this area and is 
assigned to him, he’s an expert, he will in his search and so 
forth [83] of Patent Office records determine to the best of 
his ability what is the best prior art, that is, what went on 
before and that becomes a record in this file so I considered 
that in the file history, in both file histories. 


52 


I have reviewed -- studied and reviewed a lot of 
documents of Westview, the defendant, in this action. Some 
of them are left over here but, for example, price sheets, 
operator’s manuals both the 1985 "Datamark" and the 1988. 
I have studied the pleadings in this case, who is saying what, 
motions in this case, studied those, and a lot of brochures 
relating to -- of Westview relating to what or describing 
what their system does, how it does it. 


Of course, as I stated earlier, Mr. Mikula demonstrated 
all this to me. I was present where he did it in a private 
session with me and I saw it again today. I saw the tickets. 
I have reviewed the tickets that are involved here. I have 
reviewed the printouts of the "Datascan" printer. There may 
be some others but I’m trying to review it. 


Q Everybody will be happy to hear I’m not not [sic] going 
to try to mark all of that but there are a couple of things. 


I show you Plaintiffs [sic] Exhibit 1. What is that? 


A This a copy of the patent in suit what this case is all 
about. 


[84] MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer 
Plaintiff’s Exhibit 1 in evidence. Your Honor, since it’s the 
patent in suit, I would like to pass it among the jury if I 
may. 


THE COURT: My practice is all the exhibits will go 
to the jury at the conclusion of the matter unless there’s 
some extraordinary circumstance so why don’t we do it that 
way if you don’t mind. 


53 
BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q I show you Plaintiff's Exhibit 13 and ask you what that is. 


A This is a copy of the original patent upon which the 
reissued patent in suit was filed and obtained. 


Q When was the original patent filed? 


A The original patent that is Plaintiff's Exhibi 
bit 13 
on April the 13th, 1984. nas 


Q When was that patent issued by the Patent Office? 
A This patent was issued -- by this patent, I’m referring to 


— Plaintiff's Exhibit 13 -- on October the 29th 


Q When was the application made for the reissue of the Mr. 
Markman’s '054 patent, the patent in suit? 


Q[sic] You said when was it issued? 
Q First when was it issued? 


A The patent in suit, Plaintiffs [sic] Exhibi issued 
. it 1, was 
[85] on September the 12th, 1989. 


Q When was the application made for the reissued patent? 


A The application for the reissued patent made 
August the 28th, 1987. aS 24 


54 


Q You mentioned a moment or two ago you looked through 
certain Westview brochures and literature and I want to 
direct your attention to Plaintiff’s Exhibit 8. Is that one of 


the ones you looked at? 


A Yes. 


Q I direct our attention to the blow-up of that exhibit each 
side which has been marked as Plaintiff's Exhibits 8-A and 


8-B and have you looked at those blow-ups as well? 


A Yes. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer 
Plaintiffs’s Exhibits 8-A and 8-B. 8 is already in evidence. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q You touched on it in describing what you looked at. Will 
you tell the jury how you go about getting a patent from the 
U. S. Government? We'll start with an inventor coming up 
with an invention or what he or she feels is an invention. 


A The U. S. Patent Office requires that an inventor or [86] 
his assignee who he sells his invention to in effect apply to 
the United States Patent Office for a patent and in applying, 
you must file a patent application. The application must 
conform to patent practice. It has to have a drawing if it 
lends itself to a drawing. It has a description or a 
specification of what the inventor feels is the best mode. It’s 
not the scope of his invention but he has to put forth at least 
one preferred embodiment, is the word of art, to show one 
way, the way maybe he thinks is best at that time but he’s 


55 


not held to that in time and then what is considered to be the 
iio eee Se paaae bb Ge chain ox deine 
ae You only need one claim in a 
patent the patent practice permits you to put alternative 
claims in. It’s somewhat analogous -- Excuse me. The 
claim is the legal definition of the patent. It’s analogous if 
you own a piece of real estate if you look to your deed, a 
Huse oF something, the house isn’t described in all that but 
area of land that you own is laid out starting at a point 
a Certain point from a corner back a hundred feet over to the 
west 200 feet so forth back to the beginning. 


The claim of a patent is an attempt to find the 
the 1 Cetera intellectual concepts + tote 
rome going back to the Constitution. It’s one of 
Pieces of property (87) that’s set forth in the 
Constitution of the United States. You set forth the claim and 
FE reas 20 put in as many claims as you wish to try 
differentiate the different scopes of your invention as well 
as trying to set forth by definition the invention in different 
ways because you're going to have to -- you get the right to 
exclude others if you get the patent for 17 years from that 
Piece of property so the law, the patent practice is such that 
it gives you in this application, it not only gives you but 
demands that you set forth in your claim the definition of 
your invention, the legal boundary, when a patent is issued 
rights does it give the patent holder, if and when s 
patent is issued from the date of issue not before -- and 
Nee ey amas every Vesntay ~ for 17 yous thom 
patent, the patent holder which we call the 
patentee has the right for 17 years to exclude others from 
Bee, mins oF using that invention defined, of course, in 
or claims. After 17 years, it’s now free for anyone 


56 


to do it. That’s part of what the patent incentive of the 
incentive sentence patent meaning open to give them out 
after 17 years it becomes public domain. 


Q You mentioned the ingredients of the application but I 
want to focus specifically on an issued patent itself like 
Plaintiffs [sic] Exhibit 1, the reissued Mr. Markman °054 
[88]patent. What are the basic compoents [sic] of a patent 
issue? 


A The basic components of a patent issue certainly the prior 
claims. You look at the claims as to what is patented, each 
individual claims and then there are drawings if the case 
lends itself to that and there are what we call a specification. 
It’s a written portion which would include the claims but it 
sets forth in the description the preferred embodiment or as 
required by the law the best mode that the inventor 


contemplates at that time. 


Q Is the claim of the patent limited to the preferred 
embodiment or the best mode? 


A Absolutely it is not limited to either, absolutely not 
limited to either. The claim defines the invention and the 
claim is what you look to to [sic) see if it defines the 
invention. The best mode is one way of doing it or the 
preferred embodiment and that’s synonymous. 


Q Plaintiff's Exhibit 1, Mr. Markman’s °054 patent, is a 
reissued patent. Will you tell the jury what that means? 


A Well, as far as being a patent of invention, the reissued 
patent is simply the original patent that has gone back and in 


again but I believe I'm entitled to not only what was given 
to me originally but I’m entitled to more. 


that’s come up. Someone said in a prior sui 
Prior suit or something 
Some things came up, we went to take a look at this and we 
icine! cate, OX this Isic} [90] including for our 


58 


broader claims and we talk about broad and narrow as to 
how big that definition is so Claims 14 and 15 were granted 
on the reissue. 


Q Now -- 
A In addition to the original 13 in identical form -- 
Q So we're clear in this, the first 13 claims in the issued 


pat-- in the reissued patent were already in the reissued 
patent? 


A That is correct. 
Q Were they identical to the reissued patent ? 
A Absolutely. 


Q What was the effective date of those first 13 claims in the 
reissued patent? 


A By effective date I understand that to mean that when did 
they become effective excluding others from making, using 
or selling the legal effect? Those 13 claims in the reissued 
patent were the original identical claims in the original 
patent, Plaintiff's Exhibit 13, those claims are effective as of 
the date of issuance of the original patent which was October 
the 29th, 1985. 


[91)Q What is the effective date of the two additional 
claims, Claims 14 and 15, of Mr. Markman’s reissue 054 


patent? 


Q Now would you please tell the jury what is meant b 
. * . y 
infringing a patent or a claim of a patent? 


A Well, in determining infringement and talking about 
infringement, we have to consider one claim at a time 
because each claim stands on its own. To infringe a patent 
you only have to infringe one claim. Many patents or some 
patents only have one claim but nevertheless, we take one 
claim at a time. We see what that claim says or in patent 
Practice what the claim requires. This is in an effort now to 
determine what that claim is, what it defines, what the 
invention is so we look at that claim and obviously we see 
mpeg Is it to a system? Is it to a machine? Is it to 
a process? Is it to a substance such as a , i 

like that, pharmaceutical sto hnatadong. diy rape 


[92] Now we look to the claim of the patent which I said 
defines the scope. It’s just like your piece of property I 
talked about and then we see whether the infringer is coming 
in on that, whether in effect it’s a trespasser across your 
property. You have a right to exclude that infringer. To 
determine whether or not he is infringing, you must look 
first of all to the claim. You take the claim of the patent. 
What are the elements of that claim? Within those elements, 
what are the limitations? We call limitations, meaning, what 


60 


does it say about that? You look to see what does it say 
about all of that. Now once you look at the claim language, 
the elements and all that, now you look at the accused 
device, that’s the term, or accused system. That’s the term 
of patent practice. You look to the accused system and you 
look to see if each and every one of those elements in your 
claim -- Not one of them can be missing or in addition, if 
there’s functional language, does it do what that functional 
language requires which means what the effect or how it 
works, you see if that’s present in the accused device within 
the language of that claim and what is called by the accused. 
If you call something a leg and if it’s a tail, it’s still a leg. 
You look to see what it is and not what it’s called. You look 
to see if those elements are present and that description or 
functional [93] language is present or its equivalent. Patent 
practice recognizes that there’s -- you can’t be drafting 
claims, everything. You must interpret that fairly, the claim 
so its equivalent in patent -- and patent practice has come 
down: Does that element or language there present in 
equivalent form, as to how patent practice has defined 
equivalent, form which means is it doing it in the same way, 
substantially the same way, to obtain substantially the same 
result with substantially the same means so you look to if it’s 
not within the language -- and by language, I don’t mean 
exactly those words, you still have the evuivalent [sic] -- you 
look to see if those are present in the accused system and 
when we say reading, we say if the claim then reads on the 
accused device because what you’re doing is you're reading 
the elements of the claim and looking to see if they are 
present in the system. If each and every one of those 
elements the functional language or the equivalent is present, 
then infringement is made out. 


61 


Q Did you make a determination of whether Westview's 
inventory and control system comprised of the "Datamark" 
and "Datascan" infringes Claim 1, PX 1, Mr. Markman’s 
’054 reissue patent? 

A Yes, I did make such a determination. 

Q And did you read Claim 1 on the accused system? 

A Yes, I did read Claim 1 on the accused system. 


[94]Q I'd like to put Claim 1 up so the jury can follow what 
you're doing. 


( Counsel did so.) 


MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, may I walk around so I 
can see? 


THE COURT: Sure. Walk around and make yourself 
comfortable. You don’t need my permission. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Is Claim 1 a dependent or an independent claim? 
A Claim 1 is an independent claim. 


Q What is the difference between an independent claim and 
a dependent claim? 


A Well, I said earlier that patent practice permits more than 
one claim as far as setting forth defining the invention. Now 


62 


I also said each claim stands by itself. Now the first claim, 
for instance in this case, is independent in that it sets forth 
the system that is being patented here and it sets forth the 
elements and I'll be referring in my own way to elements A, 
B, C and D and then it concludes with functional language 
"whereby". That’s an independent claim. It’s standing in 
effect by itself. 


Now Claim 2, which isn’t here, but this is to illustrate it, 
that is it’s not on the board, it would say: A system of Claim 
1 having further, and it defines some further limitation. 


[95] Now we say that 2 is dependent on 1. First of all, 
patent practice permits that kind of a writing simply so you 
don’t have to put in 2 because it does stand totally by itself. 
It’s not dependent in that way. It stands by itself but instead 
of putting in B -- A, B, C [sic] D, all that stuff again, when 
it says: A system of Claim 1, then you have to take 
everything from Claim 1 and put it in 2 wherein -- this is 
illustrative -- Element D is a pink color. Now we don’t make 
patents in pink color. I’m just trying to illustrate something 
which means 1 back there not only covers pink but covers 
red and blue and everything else so we have that sort of 
independent and dependent claim and it would just follow 
that if you did not infringe an independent claim which 
means you didn’t have Elements A, B, C, and D, then you 
would not infringe dependent Claim 2 which says A, B, C 
and D is pink so this is simply a way of shortcutting writing 
but you must go to each claim but dependent always means 
everything on the claim or claims prior in which it’s 
dependent is included in this claim. 


63 


Q Let's come back to Independent Claim 1 which stands on 
its own. Would you please, and feel free to step down by 
using the blow-up of Independent Claim 1 which I’m going 
to mark as PX 1-A and the charts that are up, the 
"Datamark" and "Datascan" or whatever you want to use, 
[96]would you please read Independent Claim 1 on the | 
accused Westview system? 


MR. GRIFFIN : Objection, Your Honor. That seems to 
me to be asking the witness at this point to then give -- 
substitute for the jury determining the ultimate question. 


THE COURT: Well, no. I think he can read it if you 
insist that he do. 


Is that the most useful way to present it because it’s 
admitted into evidence. 


MR. MALLIN: He’s going to read the claim on the 
accused device so you go down through the claim and you 
show this is where it is on the accused device. 


THE COURT: All right. I’m with you now. 


Overruled. 
BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Using whatever material you choose, and you can step 
down, would you read Claim 1 using -- so the jury can read 
it -- Plaintiff's Exhibit 1-A which is a blow-up of Claim 1 
and whatever other materials. Read Claim 1 on the accused 
Westview system. 


ted 


MR. GRIFFIN: Same objection, Your Honor, because 
I believe that’s the function of the jury in this case. 


THE COURT: Overruled. Rule 704. 


[97] ( Witness stepped down to the board.) 


A This is Independent Claim 1 of the reissue patent in suit 
and the claim runs from No. 1 down here to the period at 
the very end. It’s -- In patent practice a claim is set forth in 
a long sentence regardless how long the sentence is and there 
are abbreviation marks. Again you're permitted to choose - 
- The drafter of the claim is permitted to choose how he 


wants to present. 


Now in this instance, we look to what the claim 
introduces, what is it about. It’s the inventory control and 


reporting system, comprising -- 


There’s been a lot of testimony. You've seen it. 
Places where I really feel there’s absolutely no controversy 
I will still cover it but I won’t go into it in depth and I think 
there’s no question referring, for instance, here to Plaintiffs 
[sic] Exhibit 8-A that this is the accused system is an 
inventory control system, reporting system comprising -- 
Comprising is a word you'll always see which means with a 
colon we’re now going to set forth these elements and may 


I mark this if -- 
MR. MALLIN: It’s all right with me. 


THE COURT: It doesn’t matter to me, sir. Whatever 
you’d like. 


oe 


65 
THE WITNESS: Okay. Thank you. 


Nothing magic in the marking. I’m j 
go through it. mang. Um just uying PG wo 


Now, if we took this and we simply -- If w 
as a data input device, nachapationtong, fae one bn 
broadly speaking. I told you about the four elements here so 
we have the data input device as A, a data processor that 
would be B then a dot matrix printer, this is C, at least one 
optical scanner I'll designate that D so we have elements, 


broadly Elements A, B, C, D. Again I don’t think -- On the 
“Datamark the data input device is the keyboard. You put 
in the data with that. It doesn’t matter what you call it, what 
the accused device calls it and so forth, in the patent itself 

in the description it’s clearly the keyboard but the drafter of 
the claim he’s got to try to foresee and cover within the 
invention whatever possibilities may arise that are validly his 
So it was set forth as a data input device under the patent 

It’s the keyboard so you have a keyboard on the 
Datamark". No question that’s there. 


Again, data processor. Mr. Mikula was here testifying 
as an expert in his area and he indicated in here that this is 
See a naan Namennenane Gr Shits Of Compan. 
Those within what’s called a data 
i oe processor. Again 


_ Now a dot matrix printer and I wi 

incidentally and go into these in detail. I'm eh rn 
give a broad picture now. A dot matrix printer. Here was 
the printer. The ticket when he typed it came right out here 
There’s a little printer right there. He has two little things 


66 


there: Pup, pup, pup. At least one optical scanner. Again, 
all those things I studied, reviewed over there’s no question 
that this is a scanner goes over within that so we have 


Elements A, B, c. D. 


Now we have to go back. Now let’s see about this other 
thing in here. "A data input device for manual operation by 
an attendant". Well, the person, in this case the laundry 
clerk, the one that’s there, takes them, puts in suit, coat, 
whatever it is there. By attendant. "The input device" -- 
Now we go back in here. The input device that they're 
talking about is in here -- "having switch means operable to 
encode information relating to sequential transactions”. 


Now ‘t’s go here for just one moment to this 
sequential transaction. Sequential means one following 
another. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Objection, Your Honor. The basis for 
my objection is the way Mr. Chovanes is proceeding is it’s 
my understanding that the determination of the scope of the 
patent is a question of law for the Court. He can help the 
jury out as an expert in saying how he thinks you can look 
at the accused device but to interpret, take away [100] the 
Court’s function and to interpret the patent itself is improper. 


THE COURT: I’ll hear the testimony. I can use all the 
help I can get. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Go ahead, please. 


67 


A Now sequential -- Up in here sequential transaction simply 
means one after another. 


Now going back again to the keyboard, "having switch 
means’ -- again that’s simply keys in the accused -- 
operable to encode information relating to sequential 
transactions". 


Well, that’s what happens. One customer comes in, the 
manual operator encodes, puts in there -- encode means take 
data from one; put it into another medium. It’s putting it into 
the computer putting it into a microprocessor: One shirt, 
puts it in the memory of that processor, plaid, punches it, 
puts it in the memory of the processor so it’s encoding that 
information into the memory of the processor. So it is 
encoding information relating to those sequential 
transactions. 


Customer 1 comes in: Coat, suit, tie. Another person 
comes in next: One dress, sweater, so it records it. 


“../@ach of the transactions having articles [101] 
associated therewith". 


In other words, it’s encoding information which we will 
see then will be printed out on a ticket relating to those 
articles. 


"...descriptions of said articles associated with the 
transactions". 


68 


So clearly here along with its limiting language here is 
being read on the accused system, the keyboard is there with 


these things. 


Now Element B -- and remember I have just designated 
them Element B for my explanation purposes -- a data 
processor. Okay. I said we had a microprocessor including 
memory. See these are certain limitations -- including 
someone here -- "... memory operable to record said 
information." 


Well, the said information is this up in here, said 
information including transaction identity. 


Going back for one moment, transaction identity it puts in 
information about that. Now Mr. Mikula and the operating 
manuals and all this when a person comes in, you put a 
customer identification on there. It’s a customer tag 
number. In this instance, they put it right here, Tag 121961 
on this ticket. The customer comes in and they give a 
customer identification so it has that “including memory 
operable to record said information". 


[102] Well, as set forth in their manuals and as was shown 
here and so forth by Mr. Mikula, when we put in the 
custommer [sic] one, you put in one, then here pants, 
sweater, color here, the color’s right here blue, that appears 
on this thing here, on the scanner and it’s in a memory of 
this computer. The memory is holding it in there. Mr. 
Mikula pointed out how when you put the ticket in there 
even after you print out one and go to the next item in that 
transaction, it’s still in that memory because before you print 
the total, you go back and change and see it so the computer 


69 


here it does have memory operable to record. To record is 
when you put it on the ticket here in this instance then it’s 
recorded on the ticket but it’s put in from the keyboard, it’s 
encoded into the microprocessor, the microprocessor holds 
it there and it puts it on the ticket but it still holds it until we 
-- We'll get to that at a certain point. 


"...and means to maintain an inventory total". That’ 
another thing that this data processor includes a memory. | 
told you how it reads on it there, "...and means to maintain 
an inventory total." Well, that’s inherent in this system 
because Item -- the first transaction comes in: One sweater, 
coat, $7.00. It's remembered in here. It’s always 
remembered in here as to the total of that transaction $7.00 
so then when -- as Mr. [103] Mikula stated and is in the 
operating manuals and so forth, you can at any time get this 
computer, get this "Datamark" to tell you what is the total 
like. For instance, if you start off in a day, the total is zero. 
You get 20 customers in, I mean 20 transactions and you 
say: | wonder what my inventory total is: pup it hits: zet, 
zet, Zet it prints out, it will show you by inventory or 
invoice number and for that day if it’s 001 happens to be the 
first one and so forth, it will have $6.00, next one so down 
at the bottom it will show the inventory total for that day 
i's in the operating manuals and it’s just the way the system 


We're reading it through now. "... said data processor” 
~ that simply -- “having means to associate sequential 
transactions" -- that's one after another - “with unique 
sequential indicia”. 


70 


So here we have “sequential” transactions -- it repeats that 
word in there -- one after another -- "with unique sequential 
indicia”. Those words there cover -- If you recall, the 
"Datamark” here assigns an invoice number. That's this 
number right here. That’s this number right here, on here. 
It’s zero, zero, one eight. It assigns that number to it and 
also as we will see this bar code down here is that same 
number written in this scan that the expert was talking about 
today how you scan [104] all that so anyway the processor 
has means to associate the transaction with unique sequential 
indicia. It gives an invoice number and that bar code “to 
generate at least one report of said total”. 


Now that’s where it takes the zero, zero, one invoice 
number $6.00, zero, zero, two, $8.00, zero, zero three, 
$9.00 and gives you the total so that generates the total. 
"report of said total". That's this inventory total we're 
talking about here. " Said” is a fancy way of going back the 
way it was maintains that total, "generates at least one report 
of said transaction” so the total is in there and the 
transactions are in the report by the invoice number you 
identify it. It’s over in there. 


Now the next term here, " unique sequential indicia", that 
is the invoice number -- " and the description of articles * -- 
the description of articles was pants [sic] sweater, blue; the 
next one was sweater, yellow, some other description and so 
forth -- those description of articles -- so now we have 
unique sequential indicia. That’s the invoice number and the 
description of articles in the sequential transactions. That's 
each one, the serial numbers on each ticket now and there's 
a description of articles on the tickets. 


71 


If you'll recall when they're printed out, the -- not 
recall but it's right on there ~ “the {105} unique sequent 
indicia and the sequential transactions being reconcilable 
against One another." 


Now you can go out to this point which is how this thi 
works, this is Westview's brochure but you see - and we're 
all familiar with this -- here's a batch of clothes or a package 
of clothes that’s enveloped in a plastic envelope and attached 
to that envelope is this ticket that has been printed up this 
invoice number and so forth so not only this is perhaps -- 
well, it can be anywhere in the system where this is so 
enveloped -- but you can look to see here the invoice 
number, which is the unique sequential indicia, and you can 
look at the list of clothes in this case one pants, black CK 
-- maybe that means check -- and you can see is there a pair 
of black pants if you look in there or is there a gray suit, is 
there a pantssuit [sic], so forth so you can reconcile, which 
means check one back against another, you can reconcile to 
which are right here, the specific items are right here on the 
ticket. You'll go out and you'll simply -- I mean go to that 
point and when you say reconcilable, you'll see if they’re 
there if one agrees with another. 


pe ve Bone through A and B. Shall I continue with C and 


[106]Q Yes. 


72 


A C is a matrix printer. It works -- The data processor is 
what works it there "to generate a written record of the 
indicia associated with the -- 


The written record is the ticket. They have to print it out. 
The indicia that they're talking about is the indicia above 
associated with sequential transactions. It’s the invoice 
number as well as the bar code. It didn’t call for the bar 
code yet but it will. That’s the indicia, a written record of 
the indicia associated with. That’s the invoice number in the 
bar code. It generates that on the ticket. The written record. 
That’s the ticket. I'll just put “ticket” here ( Writing) 
"including -- Now the written record which is the ticket -- 
"including optically-detectable bar codes having a series of 
contrasting spaced bands". 


There’s no question of course on that. The bar codes are 
on there, on tickets printed out here. Here’s Plaintiff's 
Exhibit 25 and Plaintiff's Exhibit 26. The bar code is down 
here in the bottom and seeing them right there which are 
printed right at that time, “including optically-detected bar 
codes” and that’s the purpose of having a series of 
contrasting spaced bands. They have that. "...the bar codes 
being printed only in coincidence with each said 
transaction”. Well, they don’t exist. When [107] the ticket 
goes in there as brought out by Mr. Mikula, it doesn’t have 
any bar codes. When it comes out of that printer, it’s got 
them so they are printed only in coincidence with each 
It’s only printed when the goods are brought in at that time 
so -- "... and at least part of the written record”. At least 
part. It could be the whole but at least part of the written 
record, “bearing a portion to be attached to said articles". 


73 


To be attached. In other words, when this ticket is printed 
here under here, it’s to be attached to the said articles. 
Well, we can see clearly here on their own this is a written 
record attached to the articles of the individual articles there 
and they have an envelope over them and they’re attached. 
You can go look at it and see if those individual things are 
right there. 


This is at least one optical scanner connected to the data 
processor which it is connected through here at one point. 
You take this "Datascan" and you put a connecting line in 
there and so forth and, “operable to detect said bar codes on 
all articles passing a predetermined station". 


Let’s take the station, here. Whatever it is is a station and 
bar codes are being detected on all articles at that station. It 
could be when they’re being sent out [108] the door finally 
when a customer comes or when or as stated in the operating 
manuals and that sort of thing you take a physical inventory, 
you go out and go wherever those things are in the system 
and you scan them to see what's there and what isn’t. 


" Whereby" -- we call this functional language. It’s not 
part of D. Remember up here I said that was the preamble 
so this is functional language. It tells you, puts in there what 
the system does. "Whereby said system can detect and 
localize spurious additions to inventory as well as spurious 
deletions therefrom". Of course you know spurious is false 
or counterfeit or whatever you want to call it. The manual 
and everywhere else, manuals they have that but here 
showing you right here in this “Datascan" which is the 
opposite side of this after a physical inventory is taken by 
simply wanding -- wanding is the bar code -- on each invoice 


v4 


hanging on line -- there you are -- "Datascan" will find all 
extra invoices and missing invoices, compute the inventory 
cash total and provide a printed record". 


And again as Mr. Mikula pointed out here after it’s been 
scanned, it shows a list of invoices so much on Plaintiffs 
{sic] Exhibit 8-B and missing invoices and the extra invoices 
so you see there’s some invoices in there that shouldn’t or 
some invoices that should be and weren’t when [109] you’re 


computing the total. 
That is the way I would read that claim. 


Q Have you reached an opinion as to whether Westview’s 
accused inventory control system comprised of the 
"Datamark” and the "Datascan" infringes Independent Claim 
1 of Mr. Markman’s '054 reissue patent? 


A Yes, I have reached an opinion and based on the analysis, 
of course, in more depth or extensively, I’ve done my 
opinion is that there is infringement of Claim 1 of the reissue 
patent in suit by the accused system that has been testified to 
here today. 


( Witness resumed the stand.) 


Q I would now like to direct your attention to Claim 10 of 
Plaintiff's Exhibit 1 reissue patent 054 and I'll put a 
blow-up before the jury that I’m going to mark for the jury 
as Plaintiff's Exhibit 1-B. This is much shorter. Would you 
please read the Dependent Claim 10 of Mr. Markman’s 
patent on the accused Westview system? 


75 
A Yes. 


( Witness stepped down to the board.) 


I said this is dependent back on 1. The system of Claim 
1 is everything here. I won’t cover it. 


In order to infringe Claim 10, you must infringe Claim 1. 


Now further -- It’s a further limitation -- It [110] means 
something that you have to satisfy more in an accused 
device. The accused device now has not only a cover now 
but blue. "Wherein the input device" -- that’s the keyboard 
-- "is a keyboard having alpha-numeric keys". 


Mr. Mikula testified to that and apparently if it’s got 
numbers on there, it’s got numeric. If it’s got the option of 
having those keys -- and I’m no expert on this -- if you put 
in A, B and C, then you’ve got the alpha so my 
understanding is from the testimony and I think the 
description as I recall it in the accused device’s operating 
manual they are alpha-numeric keys, “and also having keys 
specific to plurality of common attributes of the articles -- 


Here, for instance, plaid or red. In other words, you may 
have a red shirt but you may also have a red dress so that is 
what is meant by plurality of attributes of the articles. 


-- "and common optional attributes of the sequential 
transactions, said common attributes being recorded using 
single key strokes." Of course they mean the common 
attributes of both of these so red for either a dress or pants 
is a common attribute and single key strokes. 


76 


Now common optional attributes of sequential 
transactions. For instance, there’s a percent here. [111] 
Well, when I went to the cleaners the other day to get mine, 
they gave me a senior citizen’s discount so that would be a 
percent that would be a discount off. I accepted it with 
mixed emotions but nevertheless, that would be the attribute 
there. I think it would come under 10. 


Q Now, would you turn your attention to Claim 14? 
A Should I go up there or come down here? 


Q Either way. You can sit up there because I won't take the 
jury’s time to go to the blow-up. 


Before I go to 14 on Claim 10, did you arrive at an 
opinion as to whether the accused Westview system infringes 
Dependent Claim 10 of Mr. Markman’s '054 patent? 


A Yes, I did arrive at an opinion. 
Q What is your opinion? 


A That the accused system, Westview system does infringe 
Claim 10 of the patented suit. 


Q Now turning to Claim 14 of Mr. Markman’s °054 reissue 
patent -- I’m going to put it up for the jury but I’m not going 
to ask you to read through the blow-up of Claim 14 I’ll mark 
as Plaintiffs [sic] Exhibit 1-C. Is Claim 14 an independent or 
dependent claim? 


77 
A It is an independent claim. 


Q Did you read Independent Claim 14 on the Westview 
accused system? 


[112J)A Yes, I did. 


Q Did you arrive at an opinion as to whether the Westview 
accused system infringes Claim 14 of Mr. Markman’s 054 
patent? 


A I did arrive at that opinion, yes. 
Q What is your opinion? 


A My opinion is that the accused system does infringe Claim 
14 of the reissue patent. 


Q I'd like to return to Claim 1 for a moment, please. 
Perhaps it would be easier if you came down here so you'd 
be in front of the blow-up. 


( Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 


Q I'd like to direct your attention to the particular language, 
“ a data processor including memory operable to record said 
information, and means to maintain an inventory total". 


I want to ask you specifically does Claim 1 in Mr. 
Markman’s *054 patent require that the descriptions of each 
articie maintain -- be maintained in the computer memory 
until the customer comes and gets his or her order back? 


78 


MR. GRIFFIN: Objection, Your Honor. That is a 
question of law for the Court and as Mr. Chovanes knows 
and the Court knows, the proper interpretation of that 
independent claim requires a review of the specifications 
[113] and drawing and also of the file and he’s now asking 
for a legal conclusion from Mr. Chovanes as opposed to 
asking him for any type of factual testimony. 


THE COURT: I'll hear it. Yes, sir. I didn’t mean to cut 
you off. 


MR. MALLIN: No, Your Honor, I do not after your 
ruling is favorable. 


THE COURT: Okay. 
BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Would you answer the question? Do you remember the 
question? 


A I remember the question. I would prefer if the reporter -- 
THE COURT: No, just rely on your memory. 

A The answer is no. I don’t want to get a double negative 

there. No. That is, it does not require that it be maintained 

beyond ad infinitum. 

Q Please explain. 


A Well, here it says, "a data processor including memory 
operable to record said information". 


79 


It is required that the processor do remember and in fact 
the data processor does remember it. It remembers it until 
it’s recorded on the ticket. Once it’s recorded in the ticket, 
there’s no need -- there’s no requirement of the claim to 
maintain. The word is not up [114] in here: to maintain up 
in the memory operable to record information. It is not 
required to maintain. 


Q What is required to be maintained? 


A What is required here is to be maintained an inventory 
total which is a total of the price, the total price on each 
individual transaction so there must be a total of those 
transactions in the way that is shown on the ticket here in 
this exhibit. There is a -- the invoice numbers which indicate 
transactions. Each transaction is remembered here by an 
invoice number and then this is also maintained in the data 
processor, micro-processor is the invoice number and the 
amount on that ticket, individual ticket total, individual 
transaction total is maintained in the computer and then the 
total down at the bottom, the total down here on this ticket, 
that’s the inventory total. That is required under the claim to 
be maintained. That’s this inventory total here. Data 
processor including means to maintain an inventory total and 
we can see it does that. 


Q Now does Independent Claim 1 that Mr. -- of Mr. 
Markman’s °054 patent require that part of the written 
record, the ticket, be attached to each individual garment 
which is part of the transaction? 


A No. 


80 


Q And please explain why not. 
[115]A Well -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, for the record I’d note the 
same objection that I made to the last conclusion. 


THE COURT: Of course, sure. 
A May I answer that? 
Q Yes. 


A One of the ways is to simply look to the patent itself 
which is Patent Exhibit 1 and in numerous places throughout 
that patent in setting forth what is the best mode and so 
forth, they talk about the ticket being -- the tag being 
attached to badges, in other words, or badges they’re 
alternatives but in four or five places in here there is a 
reference to a ticket being attached to batches of the articles 
so in the claim, for instance, in Column 4, Lines 48, the bar 
code tags which are the ticket here may be attached to 
articles of clothing and/or batches thereof for use with 
standing apparatus which would facilitate generation of 
reports according to the various things there but -- and in a 
number of places there you read that batches and/or means 
or batches, the bar code tags may be attached to articles of 
clothing or batches that are on there so clearly they’re being 
attached to what we can designate here as batches but to the 
clothing, to the articles. 


81 


{116]Q In patent practice, is it customary to refer back to 
the specifications in the patent to help you understand what 
the claim is? 


A Yes. If there’s any perceived ambiguity, you may refer 
back to the specification to clear that up. 


Q Is there a claim of Mr. Markman’s ’054 patent that does 
require the ticket or a portion of the written record to be 
attached to the individual articles of clothing? 


A Yes. There is a Dependent Claim 5 that is directed to that 
specific embodiment. 


Q I have a blow-up that shows -- Dependent Claim 5 is the 
one you referred to? 


A I believe -- 


Q It shows several but it shows Dependent Claim 5. Using 
that blow-up which I will mark as Plaintiff's Exhibit 1-D, 
would you point out to the jury where that dependent claim 
requires that a ticket or a written record or a portion of it be 
attached to the individual items of clothing? 


A Well, Dependent Claim 5, again you'll recall about 
dependent claims where here 5 is the system of Claim 1 so 
everything in the system of Claim 1 that we went through 
earlier is in Claim 5 and it goes on. 


" Wherein the written record" -- that’s the ticket -- that’s 
multiple separate parts concurrently" -- Now [117] Claim 5 
stands by itself. It’s an entirely different claim. The plaintiff 


82 


is not claiming it’s infringed but where there would be such 
an arrangement where the written record, the ticket, "has 
multiple separate parts printed concurrently" -- you can 
separate them -- "including a customer ticket, an 
establishment ticket and a plurality of article" -- that says 
taps there; that in a patent 2 is a typographical error -- that 
should be tags -- "at least one of the tickets and tags having 
a bar code printed thereon and each tag being detachable 
from the written record for direct association with at least 
one of the customer articles”. 


So that would require I think at least one direct 
attachment to at least one of the articles. 


Q In patent practice, is it appropriate, is it an appropriate 
interpretation to take a new limitation in a dependent claim 
and put that back into the independent claim? 


A No, no. Again -- I just pulled this analogy up but if the 
independent claim would say "of color" and the dependent 
claim says " blue", it doesn’t mean you’ve got to take it 
back; just the opposite that you’ve got to take blue into the 
independent. The independent stands by itself. Dependent is 
specifically directed to -- And each claim stands by itself is 
specifically directed to, [118] for instance, a blue sweater. 
In this instance, Claim 5 is a specific claim directed to direct 
attachment on at least one article which would mean that the 
Independent Claim 1 on which this depends is broader so 
we’re back to support for the argument that the specification 
says batches. You don’t have this written record under Claim 
1 is not required to be attached to each article. A batch of 
articles as you see so Clearly here in Plaintiff's Exhibit 8-A 
where it’s enveloped with this wrapping and then the ticket 


83 


is attached to those articles by those means provides the 
necessary support for that to read on the claim for the claim 
to read on that system. 


MR. MALLIN: You can take the stand if you would. 


May it please the Court, I offer in evidence the blow-ups 
marked 1-A, 1-B, 1-C and 1-D. 


That's all I have, Your Honor. 


[119]BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Chovanes, let’s get right to the heart of it, okay? For 


your opinion to stand up, inventory has to equal dollars, 
doesn’t it? It can’t equal articles of clothing. 


A The answer is that articles of clothing are included ‘n the 
inventory so I can’t answer -- I mean I just don’t follow your 
question. 


Q Well, then let’s go put back up on the easel Plaintiffs [sic] 
Exhibit 1-A which was Independent Claim No. | and you 
went through all of this and _ow told us that the 
"Datamark"/"Datascan" system infringed for a lot of 
different reasons but you said it had a means to maintain an 
inventory total. For that to be right, inventory has to mean 
dollars, doesn’t it? 


A The inventory total referred to in “B" that you are 
pointing to there is in the accused device a dollar total. 


84 


Q All right. And given your interpretation and when you say 
inventory means dollars there, you need a system to make 
sure that it can detect localized spurious additions to 
inventory; somebody is going to put money into the till? 

A I don’t -- Is your question is someone going to put [120] 
money into the till? 


Q The spurious addition means illegitimate addition, doesn’t 
it? 


A May I come down? 
Q Please stay there. 


A Well, I'll refer to the claim. I want to be careful that I 
answer your question based on my understanding so I must 
understand your question and then I will answer. Your 
question is as to the “whereby” clause, "Whereby said 
system can detect and localize spurious additions to 
inventory as well as spurious deletions therefrom"? 


Q Yes, sir. 


A And my answer is yes based on Westview’s own 
representation. 


Q So inventory there must mean dollars? 
A It ends up in dollars but that’s why your very first 


question when you said is inventory totally dollars, inventory 
is tied in with the transactions and the transactions very 


learly identify the articles of clothing. TI are identified 
in the written record so -- 


Q Let’s go back? 
A I’m not through with my answer yet. 


So in the written record, there is a total at the bottom of 
dollars for that particular transaction on a [121] ticket and it 
-- that can be seen over on this exhibit. 


Now that dollar total on the ticket is carried forward in 

the "Datamark" in the accused system but that dollar total is 
also reconcilable through the number with the articles so 
inventory -- although the inventory total carried by the 
accused system in the printout is a dollar total, that’s 
reconcilable back with -- through the written record with the 
invoice numbers as well as the articles associated with that 
transaction so it is all tied together. 


Q So you're saying, sir, and let me make sure I understand 
it, that the written record that reconciles all of this and 
allows the system to reconcile all of this is the invoice? 


A The claim calls for it in those specific elements and the 
requirements of those elements. Included in the elements of 
the claim is the written record. It’s one of the elements 
which is by the accused system which goes to this entite way 
it works, the way it works, the way you describe so a ticket 
and invoice or ticket, same words for both things, is part of 
what is called for in the Claim 1 and which is present in the 
accused system. 


86 
Q Sir, you didn’t direct the jury’s attention back to the 
patent itself to the specifications and the drawings until you 
wanted to deal with the question of whether [122] something 
was to be attached to individual articles. I'd like to direct 
your attention back to the patent itself and I'd ask you to 
look at Page 5, detail description of the preferred 
embodiments. 
A Excuse me, Mr. Griffin, you're talking about Column 5? 
Q Column 5. 
A Yes, because there are two columns labeled on each page. 
Q Look over actually at Column 6, sir. 
A All right. 
Q And it’s describing what happens. "Information -- Talking 
in terms of articles of clothing and I direct your attention to 
the second full paragraph. 
A Excuse me. There are line numbers. 
Q I'll direct your attention to Line 20. 
A Column 6, Line 20? 
Q 20 right before the printed line. 


A I have it. 


87 


Q It says, "This information is manually entered on a data 
input device especially adapted for drycleaning operations, 
and is stored in the system memory”. 


That referred to descriptions of the article of clothing? 


{[123]A Now we're reading as to how the preferred 
embodiment in the patent is? 


Q We're looking at that and we’re going to try to find out 
from all of this what inventory means, sir. 


A You read correctly and are you asking me to define 
information now, is that -- 


Q Then do you think information there refers to information 
about the individual articles of clothing? 


A Well, right up above in the sentence before it says, “The 
keyboard is discussed more fully hereinafter. At least 
information as to the customer’s identity is required” -- That 
was the customer’s number that we talked about in the 
accused structure -- "together with information as to the type 
of articles being deposited suit, color, so forth and the 
particular operations such as dry cleaning to be performed on 
the articles” and in particular, of course there’s designated 
dry cleaning or laundry or provisions for that. “This 
information is manually entered on a data input device." 


That was your question. The information set forth there 


is the same as the information that’s being put in by the 
accused. 


Q And it’s stored in system memory then and the remainder 
is itself stored in the system memory. That’s what it says 
there. The information isn’t stored in the [124] memory 
system in the "Datamark”, is it? 


A It sure is. 
Q It’s stored in the system memory? 
A It sure is. 


Q And you can go back to this system and if you don’t have 
the invoice, you lose it, you can say: What did Mrs. Jones’ 
number, whatever her number is, order? What’s it made of? 
You can do that with this system. 


A That’s not what it’s saying in this preferred embodiment 
and that’s certainly not what the claim requires. In the 
operating manuals, both °85 and °88 of Westview, the 
information that is put in as to garments, customer tag -- 
customer’s number is stored. The claim calls for operable to 
record. Mr. Mikula testified when that information in the 
"Datamark” appears on screen, it is stored in the memory of 
that "Datamark" microcomputer, microprocessor. It’s stored 
there and Mr. Mikula brought out how you can even revise 
that or get a print back on that until you finally push the 
total or the “Enter” key on that particular transaction so the 
claim calls the memory to be such and specifically, "a data 
processor including memory operable to record said 
information” . 


The "Datamark" processor does remember the description 
of articles and that satisfies the claim. 


89 


Q You're telling us because it keeps it there until you [125] 
print out the ticket, that is storing it in memory? 


A Until you print out the ticket but finally the ticket is print 
[sic] out, it is still stored in there while individual lines of 
the ticket as Mr. Mikula said but essentially, right, I am 
saying that the claim is satisfied, Claim 1 is satisfied, the 
language of that claim which defines the invention, the 
limitation that the data processor includes memory operable 
to record said information. My testimony is that that data 
processor, "Datamark", has memory operable to record said 
information meaning as to the specific articles as well as the 
tag, the customer’s number until the ticket is finally 
completely printed. 


Q All right, sir. Let’s try it another way. 


Background of the invention. Paragraph 1. "Field of the 
Invention. This invention relates to inventory control devices 
capable of monitoring and reporting upon the status, location 
and throughput of inventory in an establishment”. 


Do you believe, sir, that that inventory there is associated 
with cash? 


A Will [sic], yes, it’s associated with cash. 

Q Does it mean cash? 

A Sir, may I just explain that when you say associated with 
cash, the invention in the specifications where you refer to 


the background is patent practice to tell the [126] general 
area when you first get in. What is the area? This is the area 


90 


of inventory control and it gives broadly the area that it’s 
entered into but I must get back to say to look to define the 
invention, you look to the claim. This language is simply 
background material and even at this point in the patent, 
you're simply giving what has gone on before and what the 
background is but in no way can you take each word and 
apply it to the definition of the invention. It just doesn’t -- 


That's not patent practice. 


Q All right. Let's just look at the claim without reference to 
anything. 


A All right. 
Q What you've labeled as Paragraph A -- 
A Element A. 
Q Doesn't that just describe a typewriter? 
A Well, a claim does not describe anything. 
Q Let's put it differently, 
A I'm not through yet. 

The claim does not describe anything. It defines. It's 
laying out areas so you don't look to say does "A" describe 
a typewriter. It doesn’t. It defines a certain element in a 


certain way so you look to see when you, just as we did it 


in determining whether or not a claim is infringed, you take 
the language of the claim and [127] and [sic] you apply it to 
the accused device or the element of the device. 


91 
Q I take it, sir, you're getting paid to testify here today? 
A I certainly am. I have a big family. 


Q How much? 


A I am getting paid $150.00 per hour which is my normal 
rate. 


Q Now, you say Paragraph A defines something? 

A Yes. 

Q Can it define a typewriter? 

A Is your question does it? 

Q Is a typewriter a data input device? 

A A typewriter has a keyboard. In that sense, you put data 
into that machine by virtue of a keyboard so in that sense, 
the term data input device for manual operation by an 
attendant, as to that specific language, the answer is yes, the 
keyboard of a typewriter would be a data input device. 

Q Okay. And having a switch is keys operable to encode -- 


A Are you asking me that question or are you telling me that 
is the case? I mean if that's a question -- 


Q No, it's not a question. 


A I'm sorry. 


92 , 


[128]Q When you go through this and if you took what you 
have labeled as Section A, a typewriter could be defined -- 


A If your question -- and I'm just trying to make certain we 
understand each other, Mr. Griffin -- if your question is does 
Element A -- could Element A read on a typewriter -- 


Q Yes. 


A -- 1 will then answer that but I have to look at it so you'll 
have to bear with me. 


"A data input device for manual operation by an 
attendant” -- You put data into it as I have testified. -- “the 
input device having switch means operable to encode 
information" -- 


Well, it encodes. In this instance it encodes it directly 
from the switches on to the paper so it's encoding 
information broadly. -- " relating to sequential transactions" 
-- Well, if you had a typewriter and people were there 
bringing in -- typewriter at the laundry, for instance, and one 
customer was coming in after another, it could type out 
individual tickets so that would be yes. -- “each of the 
transactions having articles associated therewith" -- So again 
the typewriter could be at the desk of the laundry and the 
person typing out and each transaction the articles would be 
there [129] -- " said information including transaction 
identity” -- Well, you could have a list and type on the 
customer's invoice number on a sheet or ticket so yes -- 
"and descriptions of each of said articles associated with the 
transactions” . 


93 


You could type out the description and so forth so again 
to the question by itself would Element A read on a 


typewriter in a laundry receiving as we've set forth, the 
answer is yes. 


Q Now I'd ask you to accept, sir, that the term data 
processor can be used to refer to a number of things and in 
a number of businesses refers to a clerk whose job it is to 
input data and and [sic] with that, I'd ask you if the 
paragraph that you labeled "B" whether that would read on 
a system that had a smart clerk with a pencil and a piece of 


A I'm drawing a blank as to visualize what you're saying. 
Q A data processor meaning a smart clerk -- 

A Meaning not a machine but a person? 

Q A person. 

A I don't think data processor is used that way. 

Q I believe, sir, that we can find plenty references to data 
processor meaning an individual who works in a data 
processing department whose job it is to -- 


[130]A But the data processor there would be working with 
a data processing machine. Is that your hypothetical? 


Q He or she could be or he or she could manually -- 


94 


A Does the person have a machine or not have a machine in 
your hypothetical? 


Q No, sir, no machine yet. We'll add that later. 


A And what is your question? 


Q Doesn't that read on a smart clerk with a pencil and a 
piece of paper? 


A Oh, I could never testify to that. A data processor reading 
this claim and looking what's involved including memory 
operable to record said information, that refers to a machine 
and means -- 


Q Well -- 
A Excuse me. I'm not through yet. I'm sorry. 


"and means to maintain an inventory total, said data 
processor having means to associate sequential transactions 
with unique sequential indicia and to generate at least one 
report of said total and said transactions, the unique 
sequential indicia and the description of articles in the 
sequential transactions being reconcilable against one 
another". 


No, my testimony with that element would never cover a 
person with a pencil. You look to what is the invention all 
about and such an interpretation would be [131] absolutely 
absurd. I would not practice patent law if -- 


Q Well -- 


A I'm not through. 
~ if that was any semblance of logic or -- No, absolutely 


Q Well, sir, pda, tc We're talking about an inventory 
control system and you're saying and you've 
defined what inventory is going to be for us and I'd like to 

ee ae ae ee SO SRN Up Oo eter 


WV 


If we say,” a data processor” -- and we call that person a 
clerk -- “including memory operable to record said 


total it up at the end of the day, isn’t it? -- “and said 
transactions, the unique sequential indicia and the 
descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another” -- that's looking 

that list back and forth"? = a 


[132JA Is that a question? 
Q Yes, sir 


A Well, it’s my really humble and respectful opinion you’ 
you're 
totally wrong and just without any basis. The data processor 
here refers to a machine. We look to the patent. You 


96 


interpret the data processor. There's no ambiguity there. It's 
in reference to a machine. Now you then could take every 
patent virtually in the U. S. Patent Office and say: Can a 
person do that? Can a person do that? And that would be 
totally outside of any inventiveness. 


Q Then it’s correct to avoid something like that which is a 
literal interpretation of this claim, you go back and you take 
a look at the specifications, the file wrapper, the drawings to 
see what this patent covers and what these words mean, isn’t 


that correct? 


Al disagree that your representation is a literal 
interpretation of the claim. In patent practice, a literal 
infringement looks to -- you look to the elements of the 
claim and see whether they're present in the accused device 
in terms of what the patent is all about. This patent isn’t 
about a clerk, as respectful as I am of clerks, it’s not with 
respect to a clerk and a pencil. The patent by all we've 
described and all we've been talking about and all that’s in 
a patent is with reference to a (133) data processor which is 
a machine capable and well known -- As Mr. Mikula said, 
he has been in the forefront here. He got into -- 
Microprocessors used to be big then they made them small. 
They put on the chips. I don’t know anything about this data 
processor in terms of wiring and all that but I think that -- 
And this is written for a person skilled in the art. A person 
skilled in the art here would know what a data processor is 
in terms of it with the introduction of the chip in 1951 or 2. 
We all know that. I mean you go in, you don’t have a clerk 
print out my credit card, things and all that. That's all done 
by what we call computers or processors or microprocessors 


97 


or data processors. It’s all in that box there, mysterious there 
but that’s what we're talking about. 


Q What's the difference between a data 
microprocessor? PENS 8S 8 


A I am not an expert in that. It 

: - It appeared to me from 
listening to the testimony of Mr. Mikula that a data 
processor term covers a microprocessor. A microprocessor 
Just seems to be a smaller, within the computer and chip 


Q Sir, is it your testimony here today that if this patent -- | 
aot eae et testimony here today that this patent does 
require the system to be able to track of indivi 
pop fom keep of individual 


A Well, again, that question has to be answered 

sin on coche tens in 
to be attached and are attached to the batches, to the articles 
as called for in the claims, it does keep track. You can 
reconcile all the items on that and through the total and 
through the invoice number the total and invoice sored are 
back in the “Datamark", you can reconcile the whole works 


# Person comes in and you do all those things and so forth, 
you are keeping -- you are reconciling with the invoice 


number the articles and with the actual inventory of articles 
out on line so the claim, what the claim calls for is what I 
have gone over there in great detail and that’s all present, 
that’s the test of infringement. Are the elements of the claim 
or their equivalent present in the accused structure and we've 
shown how they are or I have tried to show how they are. 


Q Any system that has a ticket, that is capable of [135] 
reconciling the inventory according to your testimony? 

A No, I didn’t say that any system. I said -- 

Q Well, sir -- 

A May I go ahead? 

Q Yes. Go ahead. 

A I'll let you go ahead. 

Q I'll be happy to listen to your testimony -- explanation. 

A My sole testimony is that the system that has been 
described here by Mr. Mikula, the system that’s present in 
that table, the system that’s set forth in Westview’s 
documents from them in my opinion could for the reasons 
explained infringe Claim 1. Any other system -- you know, 
I haven't studied any other system -- could do all the work 
that’s in this machine here far above -- 


Q I’m going to put on the easel Defendant’s Exhibit 3-A. 
It’s a blow-up of Claim 1. It’s taken from the file wrapper. 


99 


Sir, you testified you reviewed the file 
ee wrapper for the 
originally filed patent, is that correct? 


A That is correct, the file wrapper or prosecution history 
They're generally synonymously referred to. 


Q Do you recall this section from it? 


. ’ ith the Court’s permission may I come 
, 


[136]Q Please do. 


( Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 
A Okay. 


Q Do you remember this, sir? 


A Well, I remember it generally. I would 
: appreciate being 
able to look directly at -- because that’s a voluminous file -- 


Q I'll hand you what has been previously marked 

’ . as 
Defendant's Exhibit 3 and ask you to tell t}- Court what that 
is. 


A This appears to be and based on what I studied before 
seems to be a certified copy, that is, the Patent Office has 
run the copy and run the ribbon through and put the seal on. 
This is to certify a copy of the file wrapper and contents of 
the file identified above ( Read) and this is a certified copy 


100 


from the Commissioner. It’s a copy of that file of the 
Q And this is from the original patent application? 

A Yes. 

Q Do you recall the portions here that are underlined are 


language which was added to the patent after -- added to the 
language of the claim after the application was initially 


rejected? 


A Mr. Griffin, if you will bear with me, I'll get that part of 
this. 


[137] THE COURT: I hate to bother you, Counsel. While 
he’s looking for it, where do I look for what you're referring 
to? Can you tell me is it No. 3 in your book here? 

MR. GRIFFIN: 3 in the book here. 

THE COURT: Would you mind showing me? 

MR. GRIFFIN: Sure. 

(Counsel did so.) 
THE COURT: Thank you, sir. Sorry to bother you. 


THE WITNESS: It is on -- 


THE COURT: Go ahead, sir. That’s fine. Go ahead. 


Don’t wait for me. 


101 
THE WITNESS: Well, I’ll wait for Mr. Griffin. 
(Pause) 
THE COURT: Thank you. 


A If this purports -- and I just want us to understand 

' one 
another before we begin to -- if this purports to be a copy of 
one page and these are the actual pages that were filed -- 


Q It’s a copy of the claim, sir. 


exhibit here is Page 2 of that amendment 
ion? and what is your 


practice is the examiner examines and offers sugs 
deems necessary for whatever reasons so I would say they 


102 


are at this point, I would want to simply qualify them as 
changes made in this instance to Claim 1 by applicant's 
attorney and specifically the language which is underlined 
was added during this activity, during this response and the 
language which is in brackets was deleted from what was 
there originally -- 


Q Thank you, sir. 
A -- as filed. 


Q And wasn’t that language added and that language deleted 
after the patent examiner rejected the original [139] patent 
application? 


A In the earlier office actions to which this is a response, 
there were -- Let me get to specifically the language so again 
we don’t misinterpret. Prior to that response -- that’s a part 
of the response -- the examiner, in the Patent Office on 
August 23rd, 1984 examined Claims 1 to 14 and he rejected 
Claims 1 to 14 but he rejected them on a certain basis and 
the specific basis that he rejected them over was prior art 
which included a steward(ph) record. These changes were 
made to distinguish from the prior art or to make more clear 
or for whatever reason as explained. 


If you wish, I can go into what the applicant’s attorney 
explained here. 


Q Sir, let’s take a language which was added so that this 
application satisfied the applicant. 


103 
A Well, I’m not conceding to satisfy it. Changes were made. 


Q Changes were made in — 
ad . to a re 
appl he asa jection of the 


A That is correct. 


Q All right. Now let’s first take a look at the 
: at Paragraph tha 
starts with the dot matrix printer. done 


A Okay. 


Q Now in the original application, it required only -- [140] 

bearing © pore nit least part of the writen record 
n to be directly associ ith said i 

palm y lated with art, is 


A Well, are you referring to the -- You said to the dot 


matrix printer questio , aan 
what? é a Nn was again the original claim 


Q When it was first submitted -- 
A Right. 


A Well, specifically here again, the claim as Originally 
wees The written record” and it had the word -- 

| Rot have including" but it had "comprising a 
plurality of optically detectable bar codes having a series” -- 
I'm sorry -- "a series of contrasting space bands, the bar 


104 


codes being printed only" -- it didn’t have “only” then -- 
"being printed in coincidence with each said transaction and 
at least part of the written record bearing a portion to be 
directly associated with said articles". 


That was the way the claim read as originally put in. 


Q And and [sic] it was changed to say, “part of the written 
record bearing a portion to be attached to said articles", 
didn't it? 


[141]A Yes. The “directly associated with" was deleted and 
inserted was “attached to" -- the words “attached to said 
articles". Of course, the articles here plurality remain the 
same. It was originally “articles” and continued the articles 
up there like we have up there, a batch of articles. 


Q If we go back and look at what was added to Claim 1 
after the initial application was rejected, we see in the first 
paragraph they added an explanation of the transactions, 
said, “each of the transactions having articles associated 
therewith", is that correct? 


A Well, no. First of all, again you're characterizing as an 
explanation. That is not what a claim does. A patent claim 
defines, and that's very, very important and it added the 
language, “ each of the transactions having articles 
associated therewith, said information". It added that 
language and which is as underlined there so it did it, not 
descriptive language. It's a definition. You look to see does 
the accused device come under that just as | have done so 
this now becomes part of those metes and bounds. It's as 
simple as that. You're adjusting the metes and bounds of 


105 


what you own by way of this invention here and what is 
defined so that was simply set in there as you see in that first 
paragraph. 


Q And entire language which appears on the bottom of [142] 
the page and three quarters of this one, “at least one optical 
scanner connected to the data processor and operable to 
detect said bar codes on all articles passing a predetermined 
station", is that correct? 


A As I view it here, this paragraph here, the last -- This -- 
Wait a minute. All right. This was added. If I'm -- Let me 
just see what page is added correctly because we're dealing 
with two pages here, one added over the other. What you 
read was added. At least one, “said bar codes on all articles 
passing to a station", that was added. 


Also what was added and presumably you want to bring 
this in although this was on the second page, this too is 
simply the page number. It doesn’t mean anything except it 
was Carried over to the second page but that’s part of the 
Claim 1 that I read here so this whereby clause which we 
added the functional language was also added in that 
amendment which was in response to the examiner's 
rejection. 


Q Sir, will you please take the stand again? 
A Sure. 


( Witness resumed the stand). 


106 
Q Sir, who drafts the abstract that is printed with the patent? 


A The applicant or his attorney. Generally it's his [143] 
attorney that does the work. 


Q So that person should understand what the patent covers, 
correct? 


A Does that person understand what the patent covers? Well, 
yes, he’s presumed based on information given to him. 


Q Does this not refer -- I'm talking about the abstract on the 
first page of the patent which is the first thing that appears 
on the patent after the U. S. Patent documents and other 


publications, the first written prose paragraph is the abstract, 
is that correct? 


A This is on Plaintiff's Exhibit 1 that you're referring to on 
the first coversheet which is sort of a summary sheet of what 
happened? 


Q That's correct. 

A And your question? 

Q Does that explain in the abstract what the invention is? 
A No. 

Q What does it do? 


A The abstract has been something that has been added in 
recent years. The purpose of the abstract is to permit a 


107 


classification in a general way or a general understanding of 
where the direction of the patent is, however, in the law or 
in ‘ye regulations I should say in [144] patent practice, I 
don’t have it at my fingertips, but there's a specific reference 
to an abstract shall not be determinative in setting forth the 
scope of the patent so I'm willing to go through the abstract 
with you but -- 


Q We understand -- 


A The purpose of the abstract is not to interpret the 
invention or the claims. 


Q The abstract gives you an idea, doesn’t it, sir, of what the 
drafter thought of the claim? 


A No. 


Q All right. Then we'll skip the abstract. Does the 
specification, “which includes the drawing” explain -- You 
told the jury when you were referring earlier to the question 
of whether articles had to be attached -- I assume the records 
had to be attached to the articles of clothing. You referred 
back to the specifications and you said when you're not sure 
~- and this is paraphrasing you -- when you're not sure of 
what this means, you go back and take a look at the 
specifications, and actually when you interpret the patent, 
it’s proper to look at the specifications and the drawings and 
the prosecution history, is that fair? 


A Well, first of all, you mischaracterize some of my 
testimony. I was never in doubt from the claim itself [145] 
without going back that the reference to arts and specifically 


108 


-- and I’m not in doubt either that specifically the claim 
covers, “at least part of the written record bearing a portion 
to be attached to said articles”. Articles is plural so without 
going back ambiguity or anything else, there's no ambiguity 
there. That refers to articles and we see them right here so 
SE ae 
there be any ambiguity, you can go back. . 
cantoaiy hove tua if poo gp tamh, Gay’ fing Gott 
batches perhaps in four or five places. I mentioned one but 
we can refer to the specification, to the drawings to further 
or whatever reason look to see perhaps there is something 
there but again the specification and the drawings are not 
determinative of the claims. The claims define the invention. 
The law requires you to give the best mode means, 
the beat way you think but you could not conceivably give 
every detailed way that your invention could be infringed in 
a description. 


Going to the claim language, it is totally improper to take 
one sentence out of context or something where it's the best 
mode, the preferred embodiment using both the same to say: 
Well, that’s the way the invention has to work. You have to 
go back to the claim. 


Q If we try to come up with a definition of the term [146] 
“inventory” and we go back and we look at the patent and 
we go through it and we see references to tags attached to 
articles of clothing, articles to be cleaned, laundry articles 
and/or batches thereof, given articles, inventory articles, 
identification of the articles, input of items, given articles, 
location of specific articles, doesn't it become clear that 


inventory refers to the articles of clothing? 


109 


MR. MALLIN: I object, Your Honor. He didn’t direct to 
the witness where these quotations come from. 


THE COURT: Overruled. 


A Well, we look again to the claim to see what the language 
of the claim is. As far as articles of clothing, I've explained 
and will explain again the specific articles of clothing are a 
part of the written record. We can go to the ticket which is 
attached to the batches to this right in here and I can go and 
see -- I mean let me specifically take the ticket that is written 


out. It has the inventory with the inventory total in cash. 
There is on there an invoice number. Next to that invoice 
number, and the jury -- 


May I go down to point that out? 
(Witness stepped down to the jury.) 


(Continuing) Here is an inventory total as we refer to in 
the claim. It's $188.87. In there are the [147] invoice 
number listings 314, 315, 316 with a separate 356 on each 


one, 275, 350 so there is a corresponding cash amount for 
each one of these invoice numbers. 


Now with the invention -- I'm sorry. You were tied up 
there. 


With the invention, you go and you scan the bar codes. 
That's the invention. You scan the bar codes and so forth, 
the bar codes that are printed at the time, and you find out 
what's extra, what's missing so you now can in here find the 
extra invoices, find the extra ones and missing invoices. You 


110 


would also reconcile by going out and looking to the invoice 
numbers, for instance, 322, you can look to see Invoice 322, 
the ticket here. See it says 322. This one doesn’t but an 
example you can see the total here for 322. 322 it should be 


350 so you'd see is there a 350 right here. 


{1} (Commencing at 9:30 a.m. there was an on the record 
side bar discussion after which the following proceedings 
were held in open court with the witness Chovanes resuming 


the stand.) 
MR. GRIFFIN: May I, Your Honor? 


THE COURT: Of course. 
CROSS EXAMINATION (Cont'd) 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Chovanes, yesterday you told us each and every 
element of a patent at suit has to be in the accused device in 


order to be -- 


A The element or its -- 


Q You gave us the opinion that the "Datamark" infringed the 
patent at suit. To get to that opinion you had to read and 


interpret the claims, didn’t you? 


111 


A I had to read the claims on the accused 
structure 
system. , accused 


Q And in doing that, you had to gi 
. give some meaning to the 
words and phrases used in the claim, correct? 


A That is correct. 


Q Let's take a quick look at those but before we do and to 
make it easy for you and the jury, perhaps I can put this 
right up here for you. For the record what I have referred to 
as “this” is Plaintiff's Exhibit 1-A which had been marked 
up yesterday by Mr. Chovanes. 


[2] In the first paragraph of that Independent Claim No. | 
it defines for us what said information means, doesn’t it, sir? 


A Said information, the answer is yes. 


descriptions of said articles 
) lem. associated with the 


A Correct. 


Q Now, let's turn to some of the words 

and phrases you had 
to look at yesterday and if you look at Claim 1 and if you 
can refer to that or if you're more comfortable just referring 
to the patent, I'll give you the line numbers, Lines 56 and 57 
Me's the Paragraph which you've marked as * B" up 


A Okay. 


112 


Q It talks about memory operable to record said information, 
transaction identity and descriptions of each of said articles 
associated with the transactions. For the “Datamark" to 
infringe, doesn’to [sic] that have to mean capable of 
temporarily keeping the information until the ticket is 
printed? 


A Including memory operable to record said information. 
Your question is in order for that to read on the accused 
system, the accused system must keep it in [3] there for a 
period of time short or long? 


Q Okay. 
A The answer is yes. 


Q Now you will agree with me, won't you, that once the 
"Datamark" ticket is printed, the "Datamark" no longer has 
any description of articles of clothing recorded in memory, 
won't you? 


A It’s my understanding that the -- from Mr. Mikula’s 
explanation and my reading of the operating manuals and the 
other material that the article descriptions are still in there. 
Now as to what you can retrieve, that’s something else. 

Q And the article descriptions once the ticket is printed is no 
longer there? 

A My understanding is they are there. There is something 
like a production report which can retrieve those article 
descriptions. Now, that is not the inventory total but the end 


113 
of the day after printing all of the tickets, you can still 
retrieve ; from the "Datamark" a listing of how many sweaters 
Just in total groups went in and how many total suits so the 
article description is in there but not with respect to this 
security aspect. 
Q It doesn’t tie to the individual transaction? 
A That is correct. 


Q So -- 


[4]A The article description, once the ticket is entered. when 
they say printed because it’s being printed successively but 
the -- I mean the final entry, when you say “Enter”, then for 
Purposes of article description tying in the "Datamark" to the 
transaction, it is not in there. 
Q That’s right so to put it another wa i 

' y, Once a ticket has 
been printed, the "Datamark" can no longer tell you what 
that order is comprised of? 


A That is correct. That transaction is 
f 
seapect to the indicie. a — with 


Q Now, sir, would you -- 


A It is on the ticket at that point and 
you can go out and 
look at it on the ticket and on the articles as you can see. 


Q We'll get to the ticket in a minute, sir. 


If you'll take a look at the patent, Column 6, Line 24 -- 


114 
A I have it. 
Q -- it’s talking about the information and it says, " This 
information is manually entered on a data input device 
specially adapted for drycleaning operations and is stored in 
the system memory." 


Doesn’t that suggest to you that it’s kept information a 
little bit longer than just the short time [5] it takes to print it 
out? 


A On, no, I won't agree with that. 

Q All right. Let’s take a look. 

A May I explain why? 

Q No. You can explain when you're asked that, sir. 

A Okay. 

Q Please take a look at Lines 31 to 35. It says, "The 
processor is programmed to associate sequential customers 
and/or transactions with the unique indicia, generally a 
number, whereby the customer and/or transaction number 
can later be used to call up information associated with it". 


Doesn’t it suggest that it has to stay in the system so it 
can be recalled later? 


A No. One, this is the preferred embodiment one way of 
doing it but the very fact -- statement, “whereby the 
customer and/or transaction number can later be used" -- and 


115 


you can use it in the "Datamark" -- "to call up information 
associated with it", meaning the transaction number, the 
Customer Humber. That is the very heart in many ways the 
security involved. You can call up by using that customer 
number, you can call up -- the customer number or the 
invoice number, information -- 


Q What information can you call up from the "Datamark" 
using that number? 


A I was just going to say that when you inte 
i ——“£... 


The information that is called up is the sequential 
transactions by invoice number and the total dollars 
associated with each of those invoice transactions and then 
the total of all the invoice numbers which represent these 
transactions as to what is in inventory. That was the -- That 
is on that ticket on one of the displays over there. 


Q Please get to the ticket. Let me digress for a second. 

Do you agree or disagree with the following statement and 
ig eat oe "In interpreting a claim of a 
meh ip hae oe look to the prosecution history of 
A I didn’t quite catch -- Did you say one may? 


Q One may look to the prosecution history of 
the patent 
to the other claims in the patent. 2 vars 


116 


A As a general statement with respect to patent practice, 
that’s a valid statement. 


Q The way the patented system works, the unique indicia, 
the individual number is what is used to call up information 
about that order, is that correct? 


A Well, when you say the patented system, we must go to 
the claim. What does the claim define? 


Q Would you answer that please, sir, yes or no and if [7] 
you say no, we’ll go on to something else and then if you 
say yes, we have finished the question? 


Alt can’t be answered yes or mo because you're 
characterizing the patent system and I’m just saying you're 
not characterizing the patent system correctly. The patent 
system is characterized as what is defined by the claim. 


Q Yesterday we talked about your interpretation of the word 
inventory as used in claim No. 1. Now I'd like to direct 
your attention to the patent Column 9, Lines 50 to 61. 


A I have that, Mr. Griffin. 


Q And that says, " In this respect each unique number or 
code or other indicia associated with an article or that 
transaction remains alive until all of the articles is completed 
and delivered to the customer together. Therefore, the 
inventory can be reconciled at any point in the sequence. 
Upon sorting or unsorting the batches, for example, at 
sorting stations, optical scanning inputs data to reconcile the 
inventory with the expected inventory. Any loss of articles 


117 


or errors in entering data can be immediately reported before 
the — association of given articles to a given customer 
is lost." 


Does that suggest to you «hat usi = 
: ing the -- using invento 
it Means to include the articles of clothing? fl 


[8]A Again, this is one preferred embodi 
’ iment. It doesn’ 
Suggest that by the only way -- raed 


Q Sir, let’s look at Column 7, Lines 35 to 41. 


A I wasn’t completed with my answer. Ma 
aunt y - May I complete the 


Q Please complete the other answer. 


A The suggestion there in that one example and that’s really 
only what is being given when you say preferred 
embodiment or best mode, that’s an example. It indicates in 
that best described mode, which is not the invention designed 
by the claim, you go to the claim for that, but it would 


Suggest there that an inventory cash total would adequate 
or would be within the scope. rs 


Now I’m sorry, you went to another -- 


Q Why don’t we then take a look at Column Lines 
7, 
through 41? 35 


A Column 7 -- 


Q Lines 35 through 41. 


118 


Do you have that, sir? 


A I do. 


Q And it says, " Unlike the conventional laundry operating 
system in which pre-printed alpha numeric character labels 
( i.e., using Arabic numerals and letters) are attached to 
articles or containers for articles in inventory, according to 
the invention custom-[9]printed bar code labels are used". 


Doesn't that suggest to you that inventory includes the 
articles of clothing? 


A No. In the term that the inventory is used there and that 


transaction and it goes on to then say, " These tickets are 
attached to articles" -- just as we see it there -- “for articles 


in inventory". 


Well, those articles are in inventory. The inventory is 
what the inventory control system as “Datamark" and 
"Datascan" and as defined by the Claim 1 is directed to the 
cash total inventory which as I stated yesterday, that ties in 
with what the articles are there. You can start with the cash, 
check out the articles by going to where the tickets are 
attached to the batches there and see that the articles are 
there but I think that statement is consistent with the 


invention. 


Q Well, then, let’s take a look at Column 8, Lines 21 to 23 
where it says, "The garment tags and customer ticket 


119 


associate a unique indicia with transactions, persons 
physical items in inventory." we 


Doesn't that suggest to you that the wa 
y this system 
considers inventory it considers the articles in inventory? 


(10JA Well, again, it’s the preferred embodiment but I think 
that very statement supports the reading of Claim 1 - 


Q All right. 


A - which covers the accused system. If you read that 
particular statement that you read, the garment tags and 
customer ticket, now we have the customer ticket -- 
associated unique indicia -- that is the invoice number and 
bar code which is the same as the invoice number with 
transactions, the transaction being that group of items that 
are brought in -- persons and physical items in inventory. 


Q That's right. 


A Well, the customer ticket has on there the invoice 


there, sce what's on that ticket: One brown 

: suit, one blue 
coat, you look in the package that is right there, the thing 
you -- and and [sic] you see whether it’s there so I think that 


reading of Claim 1 I think that is right on point with 
: what 
the accused system is doing, the "Datamark" and "Datascan" 


120 


(11]Q So you think the ticket, mot the system is the 
important thing for tying it all together and giving you the 
description of the individual articles? 


A On, no, I didn’t say that. I didn’t say that ticket is 
important. I'm continuing. You asked a question. The entire 
claim defines the invention. The claim does include a written 
record which is a ticket. If we didn’t have any ticket here, 
if there was no ticket, I wouldn't be sitting here. I would say 
no infringement. How could I say that? So as an independent 
person here, consultant, I have to look at this whole thing in 
the way I'm looking at it and be totally objective and the 
written ticket is part of this system. It’s called for in the 
claim so it’s got to be present but it's one element in a 
claim. 


Q Sir, let's go back to the claim and Claim | and in the 
patent, Lines 59 to 61, that’s your Paragraph “ B" still. 
That's the unique indicia. 


Looking at this, doesn’t that require a data processor 
having the means to generate at least one report of said total 
and transactions” jsic) plural, then going on, and I'm 
paraphrasing now, in which the descriptions of the articles 
are reconcilable against the unique sequential indicia or in 
this case invoice number? 


A And, Mr. Griffin, what's the question? 
Q The question is isn’t that what that requires? 


{12]A What the unique and -- and I'm taking -- 


121 


Q Let's break it down if you're ha 
ate a . ving trouble. You have to 


A I can answer that question. I'm not having trouble 
. a | 
want to make myself clear to everyone. - on 


Q Since it's got a couple parts let's take it 

, piece by piece. 
The da procesr ba ove the mean 1 generate est 
one report of said total and said transactions and transact 
is plural, correct? was 


A Is your question in this statement "means an 
to maintain 
inventory" -- 


Q No, sir. The question, sir, is it sa 
» Sir, ys a data processor 
ear a means 10 associate ~- taking the means to associate ~ 
to generate at least one report of said total and said 
hansections, the data processor has to be able to prepare, 
ve the means to generate at least one report of said total 
~~ total referring back to earlier -- and said transactions, 
transactions referring back to earlier in the claim, correct? 


A Well, your earlier question that you didn’t allow me to 
che dhe nn eas (Game. 6 jun ead 0 
pen as to where you're talking. I'll answer that 


Q Right at the end of your bracket thre, [sic] sir. 


Al know where you're referring. The word here is 
[13}transactions so as to the question is that transactions 
plural, the answer is yes that word is plural. As to the 
second question you asked me, you asked me whether the 


122 


claim requires that at least one report of said total and 
transactions as required here. The answer is yes and the 
accused system does it and I was pointing out right on the 
ticket there that it gives the report of what is called for 
there. 


Q Well, let's take a look at that then for a second. 


A I'm trying to answer the question and if you interrupt 
when I haven't completed it, fine. 


Q Go ahead and complete it. 


A So it does generate a report, at least one report of said 
total and said transactions. 


Q Sir, is your testimony that the report, the one report is the 
ticket? 


A No. 

Q All right. How does -- 

A It hasn't been -- 

Q Then tell me how the one report of said total and said 
transactions have the unique sequential indicia and 
description of the articles in the sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another? 

A May I go to the ticket over there? 


Q Please. 


123 
[14] ( Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 


I'm sorry. I wanted to get the claim language. 


Q Here's the claim language. | 
pbs : thought you wanted to look 


A And both. I’m sorry. 


As to what I understand, Mr. Griffin 
, Mr. , your question is 
this. We have -- In reading the claim on the accused device, 


the claim states, “A data processor includ memory 
operable to record". ns 


Now we already reported out in memory. 


Q Mr. Chovanes, I'm not asking you to go over everything 
you went over yesterday. The one or two points we're 
talking about now is in response to my question that it does 
generate at least one report of the total and said transactions 
plural, and it continues there. It says unique sequential 
indicia, which are the invoice numbers and the description 
of the articles and the sequential articles -- that's the articles 
each time somebody brings something in -- has to be 
Se nee Seen mete agen oe 


A I was simply trying to answer one of your questions that 


you asked about three questions and 
ttt lobe « ago interrupted. You 


Q Would you answer the question? 


124 


A - is the printed report the ticket? I'm trying to [15] 
distinguish so that we don't get confused there is in answer 
to your question -- I'm honestly trying to answer your 
question. You asked me whether it’s the ticket that is that 
generates at least one report. My answer was no. I'm simply 
trying now to explain why it isn’t the ticket and what is that 
written report. I want to make clear, because this is 
important, that when we talk about a ticket, we're talking 
about this that is attached to the garment, to be attached to 
the garment, to be attached to the batch here. When we're 
talking about a written report, we're talking about this 
written report that comes out of the "Datascan" and that 
written report that comes out of the"Datascan" which Mr. 
Mikula showed how that comes out and out of the other, that 
written report -- out of the "Datamark" II, that is, a said data 
processor having means to generate at least one report of 
said total and said transactions and the said transactions are 
which are identified here. Here's what we're talking about 
on that report. Here's that from the accused system. Here 
are the transactions. 


Q Sir -- 


A I'm not through with this, Mr. Griffin. I want to explain 
this. You asked. 


Here are the transactions 1-4, 1-5, 1-6. Here ure the total 
for that transaction in dollars. Here is [16] the inventory 
total. This inventory total is this word " said” total here. “At 
least one report of said total” and the total is associated 
sequential transactions to generate at least one report of said 
total. That's the said total and said transactions, here are the 
said transactions. 


descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another”. Here where they are on 
the ticket they're reconcilable. That limitation is not put back 
in with the said means to generate that. That limitation 
which you're referring to the unique sequential indicia, this 
is the invoice number as well as the bar code, "and the 
description of articles in a sequential transaction being 
reconcilable against one another", that’s referring here in 
Kans Of defining the invention that reads on what is done 


Q You're saying, sir -- 
(17]A You go out and you look at the ticket 

» you look at the 
items on the ticket, you see if they're present there and you 


see the transaction, you have the number of the transaction 


Q Wouldn't that be true in a manual system? 


A I don’t know what you mean by a manual -- 


126 
how they would reconcile what's there and it’s a unique 
sequential indicia but you're only looking at one transaction 
there, aren't you, sir? You're not looking at all of them. 


A You have a lot of questions in there and I'm not clear 
which one you're asking. If you'll ask me one question and 
I'll -- 


Q Let’s go back to the patent then. How many transactions 
are reflected on that ticket? 


A Now by that ticket are you referring -- 


Q The one that you're pointing to on the exhibit where you 
have your pointer. 


A That's Plaintiff's Exhibit 8-A. 
Q Yes, sir. 
A There is a ticket which is rather large with a person 


scanning the bar code on that ticket so I'll refer to that aad 
your question is how many transactions does that [18] ticket 


represent? 

Q Yes. 

A And the answer is one. 

Q How does just that ticket reconcile the unique sequential 


indicia and descriptions of the articles in the sequential 
transactions against one another? 


127 


A Well, you have to go if you want to say more than one 
transaction on one very clearly that is shown here on 
Plaintiff's Exhibit 8-A where you have two batches. You'll 
have one ticket which is that transaction, the blue on this 
blow-up so you reconcile that transaction with that ticket. 
You go to the next ticket and you reconcile that description. 
You have the invoiice [sic] number in there with the read. 


Q Sir, is that anything other than the physical -- 


A You reconcile the transactions by going to each ticket on 
line. 


Q Is that anything other than taking a physical inventory? 
A Well, what do you mean by physical inventory? 


Q If you say you have to look at each ticket and count each 
little item because you're doing it manually, isn’t that a 
physical inventory? 


A Well, I don’t know what you mean by physical inventory. 
As part of the system, as part of the system, [19] that’s part 
of the entire patent that is involved in Claim 1 so that’s what 
you do within it. Now if you say is everything in here totally 
never heard before, well, I don’t think there’s a patent in the 
whole world that doesn’t have elements -- 


Q That wasn’t my question, sir. 
A Well, if you're saying physical inventory does that involve 


a human being looking and counting, I don’t think this 
invention purports to limit a human being’s activity. 


128 


Q Sir, isn’t this whole section that you are talking to us 
about deals [sic] with the data processor and what its 
memory is capable of doing? 


A Well, you can’t generalize, Mr. Griffin, like that. You 
have to go through a claim and that’s patent practice. You 
don’t come up with a sweeping statement. I have labored, 
and you have to do that, to identify each item but that's the 
nature of items. You must go through each item and you 
can’t generalize just as if on a land deed you can’t roughly 
say 500 feet and 6 inches. You've got to laboriously pace it 
off so I really have to go through it the way I am. I’ve been 
doing that for 34 years. 


(Witness resumed the stand.) 
Q I'd like you to take a look at the patent and here to give 
us a help if you would look, sir, at the first claim still and 


now it’s Column 10 and it’s the Line 67 through [20] the top 
of the next page, Column 11, doesn’t that say, "The written 


record including optically detectable bar codes", codes 
plural? 
A The word codes is plural, yes. 


Q Would you show me where there are bar codes in plural 
on the "Datamark" system? 


( Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 
A Right here. (Indicating). 


Q That's a single bar code, is it not? 


129 
A No. 


Q It’s not a single bar code? 


A May I answer that? This is referred to as bar codes. It 
also can be referred to as a bar code so really you’re talking 
as to two descriptions. The patent says bar codes. That’s 
really grasping here, Mr. Griffin, when you say -- Bar codes 
is totally referred to as -- It’s a bar -- I'll explain why and 
I’m not an expert but based on what Mr. Mikula has said, 
you see -- 


Q If you’re not an expert, sir, and you can’t explain, I don’t 
think you ought to because it’s not proper testimony. 


Al listened to Mr. Mikula very carefully. He’s a 
tremendous expert. 


Q Then we all did. 


A Let me explain why it’s a bar code, it can be [21] 
determined a bar code. These series of whole things here 
represent this number up in here. It’s the same thing so you 
look and find five spacings make one number so you could 
say five spacings, a thin, thin, thin, thin, fat. That represents 
one number. That would be one traditionally. Fat, thin, thin, 
thin, and a little bit more space thin, thin, that represents 
another. Fat, fat. It’s like the semifore(ph), you used to do 
that, so now when it runs there, it reads up in there it reads 
it boom, boom, boom just in the wink of an eye so it’s 
reading zero, zero, one, eight so it’s a code in the sense that 
each grouping of five represents one code for a number one 
then the next grouping of five represents code for number 


130 


two then the next grouping for three so there are codes for 
individual numbers but if you want to call the whole thing a 
bar code, now it’s called codes or code so this is a -- These 
are bar codes. 


Q Sir, would you take a look at Figure 2 in the reissue - 
patent? I’m putting this up on the stand. It’s a blow-up. It’s 
Exhibit 4-A. It’s a blow-up of Figure 1 and Figure 2 in the 
reissue patent. 


A Yes. 
Q Figure 2 is a depiction of a ticket, is it not? 
A Yes. 


Q And it has multiple bar codes on it, does it not? 


(22]A It has bar codes plural, bar codes. 


Q And there are as I see one, two, three, four [sic] five, 
different lines of code? 


A That is true. This would be bar codes one, bar codes and 
then it’s my understanding this is repeated here. 


© That is a written record including optically detected bar 
codes, plural, correct? 


A This has -- That’s bar codes up in here and this is bar 
codes. This, incidentally, so we're clear, this is one 
embodiment of the invention. That is one in which you 
would take a ticket and you would split these up. These are 


131 


intended to be separated, these bar codes down in here and 
then you would attach them to individual articles or 
individual batches or something in here but you must 
remember again this is one embodiment. It’s covered by a 
separate claim. We talked about that. We’re not claiming 
that is, the plaintiff is not claiming that this is infringed so 
this is merely illustrative of one way the invention can be 
used but again, the specification sets forth the best mode 
how one way the invention can be made -- can be used but 
the claim defines how all these things can be used. This is 
one embodiment and this is not -- this kind of ticket that’s 
split up is just one possibility that you can use and it’s not 
being the claim that’s being infringed here. 


(23]Q Sir, you just said best mode and you referred to best 
Tove, Yesucraay- Does that mean generally that in disclosing 

invention to the Patent Office and disclosing it in the 
patent the individual has to set out the information necessary 
to let someone who would be skilled in the art reproduce it 
witht ay 17 years when the patent expires somebody 

at it and take that i 

which is describe ‘? hor eruarr 


A Yes. 

Q And -- 

A And even before that on a standard so they can make 
additions to it or noninfringing or something but the answer 
Is yes to your question. 


Q If you would look, sir, at Claim 1, Line lumn 
’ ’ , 11,C 
on yours, Column 11, Lines 4 and 5 -- " " 


132 
A I have it, Mr. Griffin. 


Q -- that's where it says, "bearing a portion to be attached 
to said articles", correct? 


A I see that. 


Q When the claim was rejected, that said, “directly 
associated with", did it not? 


A Well, again I want to make perfectly certain that we are 
discussing correctly. Could you let me have it? 


(Exhibit was placed in front of the witness.) 


A This is what we were discussing yesterday as being a (24) 
copy of one sheet. 


Q So the record is clear, that's Defendant's Exhibit 3- A? 


A But I would also appreciate having the certified copy of 
the file history from which this was taken. 


Q I'm handing you, sir, Defendant's Exhibit 3 from which 
Defendant's Exhibit 3-A was taken. 


A Thank you. 
( Exhibit was handed to the witness. ) 


Q I have a very simple question. 


133 
A All right. Let me just get this here if you'll bear with me. 


A Okay. I have the corresponding page here. Yes, Mr. 
Griffin. 


Q Where in the "Datamark" system is the written record or 
a portion of it attached to the articles of clothing? 


A Well, we will go to the specific language here. "At least 
part of the written record” -- that's what's required here -- 
"At least part of the written record bearing a portion to be 
attached to said articles" -- That's what you're asking me. If 
we look to here, this is at least part of the written record is 
the written record at least part of it is attached to said 
articles. 


Q Well, sir, isn’t that attached to the plastic bag? 

A Here are the articles the batch I was pointing out. [25] 
Here are the articles. They're enveloped by this plastic bag. 
They're grouped together and the ticket, the written record 
is attached to these articles. 

Q That's attached to the plastic bag thers, isn’t it, sir? 


A It is stapled or otherwise pinned or something to the 
plastic bag. 


Q Have you ever picked up your suit from the drycleaners 
and seen one of these tags that are actually attached to the 
suit? 


A Yes. I might be wearing one with one on now. 


134 


Q So that a tag attached to as opposed to associated with, 
correct? 


A Not as opposed to, no. 


Q All right. 


A I mean attached -- To me I have absolutely no question 
that the tag is attached to the articles. 


Q All right. 


A When you envelope it with -- I mean you could say well, 
the ticket is right on that bag and that bag -- As a matter of 
fact, I find a lot of things more difficult -- I find it difficult 
to get those batches of clothes from the bag and ripping and 
pulling and doing all of that so I think they're attached pretty 
well. 


Q All right. Now, sir. Let's take a look at (26) Claim 1, 
Column 11, Line 6 and it says, “at least one optical scanner 
connected to the data processor”. 


Do you see that, sir? 


A I do. That's this right here what I've designated as " D". 
One optical scanner -- 


Q Do you know what an optical scanner is? 


A Based on what I have learned here and in the case and so 
forth, it's that scanner there. 


135 


Q The optical scanner is just this part, isn’t it, sir, and I’ 
holding up the wand? An 


A The wand? 
Q That's correct. 


A I'm no expert there but I would say that’s an optical 
scanner, yes. ( 7 


Q The wand is the optical scanner? 


A I would qualify that further. If we simply chopped the 
wand off, that is, chopped it off the cord here and so forth, 
I don’t think you'd have much of an optical scanner. An 
optical scanner has to go into something. 


Q That's what we're talking about. 

A All right. Your question to me, just so we understand one 
another, is the actual pencil or whatever it is there with the 
little eye, is that an optical scanner? My answer is yes. 


Q Where on the “Datamark” system is the optical scanner 
[27] connected to the data processor, "Datamark"? 


A Well, two things: No. 1 -- 
Q Could you just tell us where? \ 
A I will answer you in the best way I can and that is that 


when the system was demonstrated by Mr. Mikula in the 
manuals, in the descriptions, you take and you connect the 


136 


"Datascan” er [sic] which is designated as the datascanner to 
the "Datamark” so, you know, the ankle bone is connected 
to the thigh bone and the thigh bone is connected to the knee 
bone. You've got the scanner into the processor. 


Q This whole thing is a bar code reader, is it not? 


A Well - 


Q The whole thing I’m referring to is the datascanner unit. 
It’s a bar code reader because it has an optical scanner 
attached to it and it has internal processing chips to enable 
it to read what the optical scanner scans. 


All I'm trying to find out is where is an optical scanner in 
this system, the "Datamark" system which you say infringes, 
where is an optical scanner attached to the processor, the 
"Datamark" itself? 


A Again, you have many questions in there. I'll take one at 
a time and I'll answer them all as to the best of my ability. 


Your first question as I understood it, you held up the box 
that is attached to the optical scanner and you [28] said: This 
is a reader, Well, whatever Westview wants to call that, 
okay. I don’t care what they call it. If you're calling it a 
reader, okay. However, it is simply this. Whatever is in this 
box, and I'll refer to this right in here this box here, it’s 
connected to that "Datascan” box. As Mr. Mikula has 
testified, there’s a processor in there. As a matter of fact, 
you could take that, maybe you can print out from that. 
However, a critical part of the system, of the accused system 
-- it won't work otherwise -- is you've got to have an 


saiilieaiiiaiaaiaiiaiil “ —-.. a 


137 


umbilical cord there and it has to be tied in from the 
Datamark" into the scanner here. You have to unload those 
and you do it here -- In your descriptions, you unload into 
this so I said there are 2 reasons: No. 1, you are connected. 
It happens to be -- if 1 may walk over here -- that it is not 
pe nt sar ya ths ir oar wpa repr 
sO you can go walk around and make a portable 

ieahiiaiandaes Maik cedd- tates dain, ome “taeenanee 
however, certainly it's connected through to the processor to 
Pd rp You have a data processor in the 
datascanner ou have processor 

"Datamark". ; ta rere 


It's basic patent law if you can avoid a patent by breaking 
something down into two instead of one, patents would he 
laughing matters. 


[29]Q I believe, sir -- 


A If the claim were going from Market Street to City Hall - 


Q Mr. Chovanes, the Judge will tell the 
applicable here I'm quite sure. spcianatantn 


Does Figure 1 in the patent show a -- I'll hold 
Defendant's Exhibit 4-A for the jury. Does Figure 1 show an 
optical scanner attached directly to the data processor? 


A In the best mode which is shown here which was required 
but only an example of what is called -- 


138 


int to the on that, sir, before you remove it. 
| hint The answer would be yes. We happen to have two 
on Figure 1, This to agpasentty © busy piace. TMS 
showing two on here. But there’s a “Datamark here -- I'm 
sorry. It’s illustrative of the thing. soap ee ap a 

, the the data processor, ; 
Poe ern is the scanner directly connected and 
the answer is yes it is tied in there but that's one 
embodiment, the best embodiment. To take the invention and 
simply say we're going to unplug the scanner and later do it 
-- later plug it, you can’t do that. 


Q The datascanner you told us is portable, right? 
A That is correct. 


[30}Q And it can be moved any place around in the dry- 
cleaning establishment? 


A Or to another drycleaning establishment. 


Q Where is it connected to the data processor and operable 
to detect bar codes on all articles passing a predetermined 
station? 


A All right. The reference there as I understand it is to "D". 
“At least one optical scanner” - we've determined that 
.."connected to the data processor". You have my basis there 
of why I say that’s the case because we've been discussing 
it - “and operable to detect said bar codes on all articles 


passing a predetermined station." 


139 


Well, again I can go right here to this blowup, Plaintiffs 
[sic] Exhibit 8-A, and the the [sic] optical scanner is optical 
to detect -- operable to detect bar codes on all artic 
passing a predetermined station. Here’s a predetermined 
station. It simply means one place. A predetermined stati 
can be right here with the articles passing or they can be in 
a group and you walk down the articles. As to whether the 
person is moving, again you can’t invade patents by saying: 
Well, we're not putting the articles past the station, but the 
person is moving down the line. We're keeping the articles 
steady. We're keeping the articles stationary so again you 
just can’t do that. 


(31]Q Sir, let's take a look then at what this patented 
system says, not what you'd like it to say but what it says 
and it says, “at least one optical scanner connected to the 
data processor and operable to detect said bar codes on all 
articles passing a predetermined station, whereby said system 
can detect and localize spurious additions to inventory as 
well as spurious delections [sic] therefrom” and if you don’t 
have a fixed point and you're not always monitoring at the 
same point, how are you going to detect and localize 
spurious additions to inventory as well as spurious deleti 
therefrom? 


A Very simply and it’s shown right here. 


Let's take 10 packages, 10 bundles. 10 of these batches 
are hanging on the line and whether it’s 10,000 or 10, the 
same principle would hold but you have 10 of them hanging 
on the line now. You have the “Datamark" is sitting over 
there. The operator, the person here just as shown in 
Plaintiff's [sic] Exhibit 8, now takes and goes down and 


140 


scans every bar code, the bar codes on each ticket on those 
10 batches that are hanging there. Now that is then read into 
the processor. A ticket is printed out as shown here on the 
reverse of -- not a ticket, I’m sorry, a report -- Plaintiffs’s 
8, Exhibit 8-B and Mr. Mikula showed how that printer is 
there, is put on to the "Datascan", then there is printed out 
the -- as shown [32] here listed invoices, extra invoices, 
missing invoices, total of them missing. So it now as pointed 
out again in “Datascan", Exhibit 8-B here and after a 
physical inventory is taken by simply wanding, wanding in 
quotes, the bar codes in each invoice hanging on a line just 
as is done here. “Datascan” will find all ‘extra’ invoices and 
‘missing’ invoices, compute the inventory cash total and 
provide a printed record” [sic] which is here so that’s 
precisely how the accused system, how we can read this 
limitation on the accused system. 


Q How does that tell you that somebody took a sweater out 
of -- a green sweater out of Mrs. Jones’ order? 


A Well, what you do if someone - you want to check 
out, you then go to the claim. What does the claim call for? 
We went over that. 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Chovanes, with the “Datamark" system, if the ticket 
is lost, is there any way of telling what articles make up that 
order? 


141 


A You'd probably have a complaining customer. They'd tell 
you what's in it but I think trying to answer it as | 
understand it, I haven't thought of that but I would say no 
that it is -- If the ticket is lost, what articles are missing, | 
would say no way other than relying on the customer. 


Q Under the system claimed in the patented suit, it would be 
possible, would it not, to reconstruct that information? 


A Well, again, we're back to the claim. The claim covers 
what the accused is doing so under -- The claimed invention 
in, for instance, the preferred embodiment where you might 
have as in Claim 5, that I said was a dependentt [sic] claim, 
there you're attaching the written record or part of the 
written record like in, for instance, Figure 1 that I showed 
there where you're attaching a tag directly to that garment, 
to be listed in the data processor. In that embodiment, you 
what is stated as we have [34] put it forth so the answer to 
your thing is the claim covers the accused structure as it 
operates. 


Q That's right because part of the things that in going back 
to this claim would do, this system would do with the -- 
what the “Datamark" system doesn’t do is, “the unique 
sequential indicia and the descriptions of articles in the 
sequential transactions being reconcilable against one 
another" and you can get a report of that, is that correct? 


A First of all, this system -- You opened up your question 
with “this system”. What system are you talking about? 


142 


Q Let's talk about the system claimed in the patent and in 
Claim 1. 


A The claim -- The invention covered by Claim 1, all right. 
Now what is the question with respect to that? 


Q That invention if the written record of the transaction was 
lost would still be able because it can generate a report. 


A No, no, no because the claim covers all these versions. 
Q Let me -- 


A You're taking - You're constantly missing the point that 
when you’re required by the best mode and the reason 
you're required by the best mode the law doesn’t -- and [35] 
you may change later on. You may say: Well, I had three 
versions the best mode now wasn’t the best mode because 
we can’t see in the future totally but the best mode means 
that they don’t want the inventor coming in and -- Because 
you must remember what the -- why you're getting a patent. 
You're getting a patent because you're disclosing an 
invention. Then you get a definition with the claim but they 
don’t want an inventor coming in and telling what may be 
just a version that’s not very good but he’s keeping the good 
version as he thinks in this end under wraps so he’s got to 
put forth what he believes the best mode is. 


Now you cannot read that version as you're constantly doing 
as to the claimed invention. The claim sets forth the 
invention. That includes whether or not as we're doing in 
this instance, the missing ticket that you're referring to, then 


143 


you don’t know what article is missing there but you look to 
the claim. The claim says the ticket is printed up 


Q Sir, isn’t one of the stated functions of this patented 
system the tracking of articles through the drycleaning 
process? 


A It’s an example of a function again set forth -- Are [36] 
you referring to the specification, some specific place? 


Q I was going to direct your attention, sir, to Column 2, 
specifically Line 50 through Line 57 where it says, "Article 
identification, customer identification and descriptic 
needed for generation of cost and pricing reports are entered 
and the articles to be cleaned are associated with a unique 
scanning and data input”, and then the important language, 
“whereby the progress of articles through the laundry and 
drycleaning system can be completely monitored”. 


A First of all, it does state that. You're reading correctly but 
again that is background of the invention. It’s giving some 
~- what the inventor feels is what some of the things the 
system can do and it can do those things but those are not 
the claims that require that. The accused structure is by its 
very own admission doing certain things. One of them is 
within the claimed structure, Claim 1, so as to the 


now are attempting to read all that as being necessary in the 


144 


claimed invention or accused device, it’s just not correct. It’s 
(37] just not patent -- the way patents are done and on top of 
it, it would render every patent worthless because you could 
pick out one statement and then by hindsight say: Aha, you 
said we’re doing this; we're not doing that. You said it 
should be a red data processor; ours is blue and that’s really 
what some of the arguments here on something like that 
come down to. 


Q Sir, especially when a claim is unclear or can be read in 
a number of different ways, isn’t it important to go back and 
look at what the inventor says in the background of the 
invention and look at the specifications for guidance to see 
what it means? Is that a yes or no? 


A Well, as a broad statement, it goes back to what you 
said first. You do look at the specification, you do look to 
the drawings if there are these ambiguities. There are no 
ambiguities here. You read it in view of what was stated but 
you look to the claim language over and over. This is patent 
practice. You look to the claim language. Again it’s simply 
like you -- I can say to you: Look, boy, our property out 
there is great; it’s got trees. May or may not be true. That 
doesn’t define my property. When it comes down to it, when 
I’m selling my property to you, you’re going to look to see 
what property do I have. You look to the description, the 
metes and bounds, so many feet that way, so many feet that 
* way and so many feet (38] back. That’s what the claim does 
and the information that discloses on the best mode and the 
preferred embodiment is certainly a part of the patent but the 
claim is what defines it and here very definitely -- 


145 
[39] REDIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Under patent practice if the preferred embodiment, the 
description of the structure of the system describes two 
possible ways of doing something, does that mean that you 
have to read both possible ways into each claim? 


: co apg es adage rovangscapagenry no. 
ou can one of those two and either one to read i 
the accused structure. ae 


Q And if you have two claims, one of which claims it by 
doing it the one way and one of which claims it by doing it 
the other way, is that in accordance with normal patent 
practice? 
A Yes. 


Q Does Westview’s accused infri ; 
system 
14? infringe Claims 1, 10 


A Yes. 


Q Does Westview’s accused system infringe Claims 
5, 
and 7 that I put up on the board? . 


A No. \ 
MR. MALLIN: That’s all I have. 


[40] THE COURT: Thank you, sir. 


146 
THE WITNESS: Thank you, Your Honor. 


( Witness excused.) 


- V 


[2] MR. GRIFFIN: I wanted to make it clear on the way 
Your Honor wanted to proceed. I was left with the message 
at the end of the day yesterday is it the Court’s intention to 
complete the question on -- and submit that and add the 
plaintiffs’ case on infringement to go directly to all the 
defenses? 


THE COURT: May I ask for your best guesstimate as to 
(A) if we do the question of infringement first, when will 
you be ready to go to the jury with that? In other words, 
when will I be in a position to charge? 


MR. GRIFFIN: I'd expect you'd be able to do that by this 
afternoon. 


MR. MALLIN: I don’t think it’s the right way to 
proceed. We're here to try the whole case and we're 
prepared to try the whole case and I think we ought to try 
[3}the whole case. At an earlier time we wanted a 
bifurcation. They opposed it. We spent money and got the 
witness ready. 


Secondly, I'll have to call all my witnesses in any event. 
My one witness who will testify to damages also is going to 
put in the invoices to show the infringement so we're not 
going save anything much on that part of it and I just simply 
think we ought to go ahead and do the case. Our direct case 


147 


in chief is an infringement case and we ought to see what 


they have, not only infringement or anything. I don’t think 
it’s going to be all that long in any event. 


MR. GRIFFIN: The reason I asked is this witness 
yesterday testified one of the things he did was reviewed the 
prior art and that opens up the entire prior art question. If 
we are going to go ahead and deal with just the infringement 
question now, I have to go ahead and question him. 


THE COURT: Let me ask -- 


MR. MALLIN: What he testified is in reviewing the file 


wrapper, he reviewed the prior art cited on the file wrapper 
in terms of the claims. 


THE COURT: Let me just ask you if I may for my 
education on the witnesses if we go with infringement, is 
prior art one of the issues on infringement? 


[4] MR. GRIFFIN: No. 


MR. MALLIN: Only to the extent that it’s in the file 
wrapper. 


THE COURT: The file wrapper is -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: Yes. 


MR. MALLIN: Validity is something different from 
infringement but I think we ought to get the case on validity 
and go to the jury. A lot of these jurors it was clear in the 
voir dire would like to go home and they don’t have to be 


——— ve gor to put the evidence in. Since it's-a new way of 


148 


very bright to know if they say no there’s -- We've spent a 
lot of money. We’re prepared. There’s been orders on how 
to get ready and go to the jury. 


[5] THE COURT: Let me go back to my original question. 
If we go just with the infringement, when I will be in a 
position to charge the jury. 


MR. MALLIN: I think it’s going to take -- First of all, 


149 
THE COURT: Today is only Thursday. 


MR. MALLIN: Right. It would be very early next 
week. 


2 GRIFFIN: It would take us several trial days to put 
it in. 


THE COURT: So your guess is -- 


dealing with the case, I’m being told at the last minute I’ve 
got to cross examine their witnesses on infringement and 
later I’ve got to get ready for summation and you've got to 
figure out a charge on the infringement and we've got to do 
it in a very inefficient, fragmented way so I think it’s a 
while before we get to the jury and we'll -- 


THE COURT: Let me put it differently. If we do all of 
the liability aspects, when will I be in a position to charge 
the jury? 


MR. MALLIN: If you do all the liability aspects, other 
than -- Three days I suppose. 


MR. GRIFFIN: I guess -- 

THE COURT: Give him a chance. 
MR. RYAN: Two to three. 

THE COURT: So that would be -- 


MR. RYAN: Perhaps Tuesday of next week. 


MR. GRIFFIN : My guess is if they take until Monday or 
Tuesday, the jury doesn’t get the whole case until Thursday 
or Friday. Mr. Mallin and I don’t think damages is going to 
take a lot of time. Certainly our evidence -- 


THE COURT: Let me ask you this if I may again just to 
try to get it in my mind. Let’s say we go just on 
infringement now and then there’s a verdict in favor of the 


plaintiff on infringement, how long would the rest of [6] the 
case take? 


MR. GRIFFIN : A verdict in favor of the plaintiff in favor 
wah eo At this point to put on the defense 
Cc nging the validity of the patent and they have to put 
their damages -- ‘ sa 


If your damages go quickly, we would 
, put on our 
challenge to it 2, 2 1/2 days. 


THE COURT: Well, how long will the whole thing take 
after the jury decides in his favor assuming that -- 


150 


MR. GRIFFIN: It would be the same thing as the entire 
trial. 


THE COURT: I’m sorry, would it take two days did you 
say after the verdict? 


MR. GRIFFIN: After the verdict and he will put on his 
damage evidence, we would put on ours. We would put on 
our evidence about development, prior art, what wasn’t 
disclosed and legal challenges. I think it would take us my 
guess 2 1/2 days. We’d pare down some of the depositions 
we would read. 


THE COURT: On that hypothetical, are you talking about 
both sides taking 2 1/2 days after the verdict of the plaintiff? 


MR. GRIFFIN: Us taking that time. 


—_——FHE-COURT-How about you?—__—_-_ —_— 


MR. MALLIN: I think altogether it could be done [7] in 
two or three days. 


THE COURT: After the verdict? 

MR. MALLIN: The whole thing. If I win on 
infringement, I think we can do the rest of the case in two 
or three days. 

THE COURT: You’re not disagreeing with that. 


MR. GRIFFIN: No. 


151 


THE COURT: Two or [sic] days after a favorable verdict 
-- I'm not saying there is one but if you're successful -- 


MR. MALLIN: I don’t think we should allow stopping 
for a verdict on infringement. We ought to go ahead and do 
the case so it’s not a matter of dividing this up. 


THE COURT: What’s your response to that? 


MR. GRIFFIN: I don’t see how a damage expert is at all 
connected with the infringement action. 


THE COURT: I’m not clear either. 


MR. MALLIN: I went home and analyzed that. He’s -- 
The witness we call him damages but the first thing we’re 
going to do he knows how many infringing systems were 
sold. Part of the infringement is they were selling. This jury 
is entitled to know that they really did infringe even though 


THE COURT: Isn’t that a stipulated item that [8] they 
were selling? 

MR. GRIFFIN: We don’t challenge our own invoices 
certainly. 


THE COURT: And you don’t challenge the authenticity? 


eee ee ee 


MR. GRIFFIN: No. We produced them. 


MR. MALLIN: Somebody’s got to explain the invoices. 


152 
MR. RYAN: Perhaps I -- 


If they could stipulate to the number of infringing systems 
that were derived from those invoices -- 


THE COURT: Exactly. 


MR. GRIFFIN: We can talk about that because I want to 
see -- 


MR. MALLIN: You see what we’re into already. 


MR. GRIFFIN: My suspicion, Your Honor, is we can sit 
down and count them although we would probably come up - 


MR. MALLIN: Right from the beginning, Your Honor, 
you told us how to try this case it’s created some difficulty 
but I got the message. A few weeks ago I said maybe you'd 
bifurcate damages; you said no, Your Honor. I suggest to 
you that we go and do this case and get it done whether we 
win or lose, you know, let’s do the case. 


{9] THE COURT: Well, you’re gradually educating me 
about a patent case. Although I’m inexperienced in patent 
matters, I have very good teachers and I am educable. I had 
the benefit of your memorandum actually on a somewhat 
related point about the order of proof which I found very, 
very helpful and it highlighted the importance of separating 
infringement in the jury’s mind and in this case it does seem 
to me from all that I’ve seen of the preliminary papers 
including the motion for summary judgment that the thrust 
of the case really does go on infringement and that’s where 


153 


the biggest difference is and that seems to me to be a key 
decisive issue so balancing all those considerations, we'll go 
to the jury solely on the issue of infringement and I would 
appreciate your economizing to the extent that you can in 
getting the evidence in promptly but that’s what we'll do. 


MR. MALLIN: That's very unusual in a patent case. I 
must put on the record that's being done over my objection. 


an. ae 


{11} MR. RYAN: With the Court's permission, the 
plaintiffs next call Mr. Donald Pfingstler. 


DONALD JOSEPH PFINGSTLER, PLAINTIFFS’ 
WITNESS, SWORN 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. RYAN: 
Q Again would you please state your name for the record? 
A My name is Donald Joseph Pfingstler. 
Q Mr. Pfingstler, where do you live? 


A I live at 300 Chauser(ph) Court North in Sewickley, 
Pennsylvania. 


Q With whom are you presently employed? 


A I'm employed by the Barrington Consulting Group, Inc. 


154 
Q And what is the Barrington Group? 


A The Barrington Consulting Group is a financial economic 
and accounting consulting firm that deals primarily in 
financial analysis of matters that are in dispute such as this 
litigation here. 


Q Could you briefly describe for us, Mr. Pfingstler, your 
educational background? 


A Following high school? 
Q Yes. 


A Following high school I attended Gannon University 
which is located in Erie, Pennsylvania and I graduated [12] 
from Gannon in 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in 
Business Administration with a concentration in accounting. 


Q And following your graduation from college, could you 
briefly describe for us your employment history? 


A Sure. Following graduation I joined the international 
public accounting firm of Arthur Anderson [sic] Company in 
their Chicago office. Initially I joined as a staff accountant 
in the audit and practice. | was with Arthur Anderson [sic] 
in total for approximately a 12-year period of time until 
October of 1980 in various capacities. I had about a two-year 
period in there from 1969 through 1971 when I was on leave 
of absence for service in the U. S. Army. After I completed 
that service, I returned to Arthur Anderson [sic] and over 
that period of time from roughly 1971 to 1980, I received a 
series of promotions as I gained additional experience and 


155 


took on more responsibilities for both the review and 
conduct of audit examination of business records as well as 


other consulting projects within that organization. 


Following my tenure with Arthuur [sic] Anderson [sic], 
I left Arthur Anderson [sic] in about October of 1980 and 
was one of the finding [sic] partners of one of the firms 
called Peterson's Consulting in Chicago and they're in a 
business very similar to the kinds of things I'm doing now. 
It's also [13] a forensic accounting and financial economic 
firm doing these kind of matters. 


I was partner in that firm in 1985 when I relocated to the 
Pittsburgh area to open Peterson Consulting office in that 
city, remained then in a partner capacity until approximately 
1987 at which time Peterson was sold and in effect the form 
of the organization switched from being a partnership to a 
corporation. 


At that point in time I became a vice president within 
Peterson Consulting and was in charge of the Pittsburgh 
office of Peterson Consulting. | remained in that capacity 
until approximately the middle of 1990 when I left Peterson 
Consulting and was one of the finding [sic] shareholders of 
the Barrington Consulting Group. 


Q Do you hold any professional certifications? 


A Yes. I'm a certified public account [sic] and I’m licensed 
to practice in both the States of Illinois and Pennsylvania. 


Q And do you participate and are you a member of various 
professional organizations? 


156 


A Yes. I'm a member of the American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants as well as the State societies for both the 
States of Illinois and Pennsylvania and there’s a few other 


professional organizations that I have membership in as well. 


[14}Q Mr. Pfingstler, are you experienced in the review and 
analysis of business and financial records? 


A Yes. I've been doing that for over 20 years. 

Q Have you been involved in the review and analysis of 
financial records in connection with a patent infringement 
action? 

A Yes, on a number of different occasions. 

MR. RYAN: Your Honor, | offer Mr. Pfingstler as an 
expert witness on the analysis of business and financial 
records. 

MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, I have no questions about 
the witness's qualifications in that area but I would ask for 
an offer of proof of why we need him. 

THE COURT: I think it’s what we discussed at side bar. 

Why don’t you just get right to that? 

MR. RYAN: Thank you, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Under our local rules, we don’t have 


offers of proof as such when the witness has been identified 
in the pretrial memorandum as I| assume this one was. 


157 
MR. RYAN: He was. 


THE COURT: If you can get right to the substance -- 
BY MR. RYAN: 


(15]Q Mr. Pfingstler, were you and the Barrington Group 
retained by me and my firm to consult with us in connection 
with various business records and analyses in connection 
with this case? 


Yes: aoe 


Q And could you please describe for us some of the 
materials which you reviewed in connection with that 
engagement? 


A Okay. Do you want my response at this time to deal with 
the limited question that I understand is in front of us now? 


THE COURT: If you would. Just deal with that. 
BY MR. RYAN: 
Q In connection with the business records, sir. 
A Okay. Well, essentially we reviewed a list of information 
concerning a number of "Datamarks" and “Datascans” that 
the plaintiffs represented had been sold as well as stacks of 


invoices that also deal with the sale of products made b 
Westview over a period of time. ' 


158 


Q And did you specifically review those materials with an 


eye to determining the number of infringing systems sold by 
Westview? 


A Yes, that was among the things we did. 
Q Did you do all this work yourself, Mr. Pfingstler? 


A No. I had several members of my staff that [16] 
participated in the analysis work we did. 


Q They were under your supervision? 
A Yes. 


Q What time period did you key in on in connection with 
the sales of the Westview system? 


A Well, essentially we looked at information as I can best 
recall now on sales information from around the 1985 
timeframe [sic] into sometime I believe in 1991. I don’t 
think the records we had went all the way through to the 
current date. I believe they cut sometime earlier off in 1991 
but I can’t tell you precisely what the start and stop point 
was but in broad terms I think that covers the area. 


Q After your review of the invoices and the various 
materials that you described, did you arrive at an opinion to 
a reasonable degree of certainty as to the number of systems 
sold by Westview in that time period? 


A In terms of the number of infringing systems, I did. 


159 
Q Could you please tell the jury what that number is? 


A 695 systems. 


MR. RYAN: No further questions at this time, Your 
Honor. 


THE COURT: Okay. 
CROSS EXAMINATION 
BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q When you counted infringing systems, who told you [17] 
what systems were infringing? 


A An infringing system -- We assumed based on our 
discussions with counsel and with the other experts and also 
with Mr. Markman, we made the assumption that in order 
to have an infringing system, you had to have both a 
"Datamark" and a "Datascan" so it had to be in combination 
of that. 


Q I just want to get it clear you didn’t make any independent 
judgment about something being infringing at all, did you? 


A We conducted the analysis under that assumption with 
respect to the numbering systems given that assumption it 
would infringe. 

Q It’s what the lawyers and the experts told you? 


A Constituted an infringing system, that’s correct. 


160 
MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you. 


THE COURT: Thank you, sir. 
(Witness excused.) 
MR. MALLIN: Mr. Markman, please. 


HERBERT LEONARD MARKMAN, ONE OF THE 
PLAINTIFFS, SWORN 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Please state your name. 
A Herbert Markman. 
[18]Q Where do you live? 
A 631 Fairston Drive in Wynnewood, Pennsylvania. 
Q And are you one of the plaintiffs in this case? 
A Yes. 


Q Would you tell the jury your educational background 
beyond high school? 


A I attended Drexel Institute of Technology which is now 
Drexel University and I received a Bachelor of Science 
specializing in commerce and engineering science and that 


161 


was my undergraduate degree. I also received a Master’s in 
Business Administration from Drexel University in 1968. 


Q Give us a brief resume of your career experience after 
you left Drexel? 


A For a short period of time I worked for a small consulting 
firm called Morrison Associates which did data processing 
consulting and then I went to work for a company called 
Rentex Services Corporation which is in the business of 
providing uniform rental and linen supply services to general 
industry and at Rentex I started out as Director of 
Management Information System, ran the Computer 
Department and then became Assistant Treasurer still 
providing guidance for the data processing group and for the 
last 2 1/2 years was Vice President of Operations and was 
responsible for half of the company’s plants [19] throughout 
the United States. 


Q What year does that get us up to? 
A 1973. 
Q What did you do after 1973? 


A In 1973 I started my own consulting firm to provide data 
processing systems to the, primarily to the uniform rental 
and linen supply industry and actually I just provided 
consulting for the first couple of years and about 1975 we 
incorporated H. L. Markman Associates and at that time 
started provided turnkey(ph) data processing systems for the 
textile rental industry and that provided the hardware and the 


162 


software and the training support and that really continued 
until 1984. 


Q And then what did you do? 


A In 1984 we formed Drycleaning Computer Systems, Inc. 
which is now called Positek, Inc. It was just a name change. 


Q Let’s be sure we're clear. You formed Drycleaning 
Computer Systems, Inc. 


A Yes. 
Q I take it it was a company you owned? 


A It was a new company and we started with three 
employees. 


Q At some point the same company changed its name to 
Positek? 
{20]A Just in January of this year. 


Q And tell the jury the nature of that business. 


A Weil, I had been working on developing a system prior to 
forming that company for the retail drycleaning industry and 
that company supplied a hardware/software system for retail 
drycleaners to help them perform accurate, consistent 
pricing, do inventory cash control and we started growing 
that business from ’84 through this year. We still consider us 
a small company but we've grown to 45 employees which 
we have and we’re located in Norristown, Pennsylvania. 


163 


Q And Norristown, is that where the assembly operation is 
performed? 


A Yes. That’s where we do the customer support, assembly 
and research and development for the company. 


Q I show you Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 1 which is the reissue patent 
suit and ask you whether you are the owner of the patent? 


A Yes, I’m the owner of the patent. 

Q And I show you Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 13, which is the 
original 2, 4, 6 [sic] issued October 29th, 1985. Were you 
the owner of that patent as well? 

A Yes, I’m the owner of that patent. 


Q Did you license that patent as DCCS, Inc. so that Positek 
could use it? 


[21JA Yes, there’s a licensing agreement between myself 
and DCCS Positek. 


Q I show you Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 24. What is that? 


A That’s the ticket license agreement that was in 1984 
between myself and Drycleaning Computer Systems, Inc. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer Plaintiffs’ 
Exhibit 24. 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


164 


Q Does Drycleaning Computer Systems, Inc. under that 
name or Positek sell patented products? 


A Yes, we do. 


Q On the products that you sell at the time after the reissue 
patent, did you put any marking on the product to show that 
it’s a patented product? 


A Yes, we have. 


Q I show you Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 25. Can you tell me what _- 


that is? 


A This is a label that we put on the printers that we ship out 
for the patented systems and it says Drycleaning Computer 
Systems, Inc. and it refers to the patent numbers: The U. S. 
patent number, the reissue patent number and the Canadian 


patent number. 


Q And printers that that’s put on is that part of the printed 
system that you sell at Positek? 


A Yes. 
[22]Q Before the reissue patent while the original patent was 
in fact after it was issued after October 29th 1985, did 
DCCS -- 

What’s that name again, dry -- 


A Drycleaning Computer Systems, Inc. 


165 


Q Did it put a notification on the patented systems being 
sold concerning that it was patented? 


A Yes, we did. 
Q And what did that notification say? 
A It was a similar label. It only had the initial -- 


The initial one only had the original patent number on it 
and and [sic] it didn’t contain the reissue number on it 
because it didn’t exist and it didn’t contain the Canadian 
patent because that was issued after the original patent. 


Q Would you tell the jury what a drycleaning trade show is? 
A It’s a major event. 


Drycleaners also attend and coin operated laundry 
companies and it’s held every two years and I’ve been 
attending those during 1980 and 1990. It’s our major contact 
with the industry from a marketing standpoint. 


Q Did you you [sic] say the show is held every two years? 
A Yes. 


Q Was one held this year? 


[23]A Yes. There was just one recently held. I think it was 
during the last week of June in Las Vegas. 


Q And was one held in 1989? 


—— 


166 


A There was one held in 1989. I believe that was in Dallas, 
Texas. 


Q___ And that means there was one held in 1987? 


A The ’87 one I believe was either New Orleans or Atlanta 
but they’re every -- 


Q That’s why I’m not asking you whether there was a show 
-- There’s a lot of trade shows so since the issuance of the 
original patent, do I have it there would be a cleaning show 
in ’87, 89 and ’91? 

A Right. 

Q Did Drycleaning Computer Systems, Inc. or Positek -- 


And you attend and display your products at that trade 
show? 


A Yes. 

Q Who comes to those trade shows? 

A As far as the attendees? 

Qs ‘Yes? 

A It’s really drycleaners from all over the United States and 
actually all over the world; people as far away as Australia 
at the one in Las Vegas. 


Q Is this an important show? 


167 


A It’s the most important as far as we're concerned for [24] 
our industry because it’s held every two years and it takes a 
lot of effort. The reason it's not every year it takes so much 
effort to prepare for the shows that to have them every year 
would be too monumental a task. 


Q Do companies that provide systems and supplies or 
equipment for the drycleaners put on displays at that show? 


A Yes. Every significant vendor who is supplying systems 
to that industry I would say would be at that show. 


Q Now at the 1987, 1989, 1991 show, did Drycleaning 
Computer Systems, Inc. Positek and you display the patented 
system? 

A Yes, we did. 

Q Did you personally attended [sic] each of those two years? 
A Yes, I did. 


Q At each of those three shows did Westview Instruments 
have a display or booth? 


A Yes, they did. 


Q And at the display booth presented by Westview 
Instruments at those shows to the drycleaning industry, was 
the "Datamark" and the "Datascan" inventory control system 
displayed? 


A Yes, it was. 


168 


Q And did Westview Instruments have brochures at those 
[25] shows displaying its system? 


A Yes, it did. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, I offer Plaintiffs’ 
Exhibit 25. 


I have nothing further at this time. 
THE COURT: Very good, sir. 
MR. GRIFFIN: 
CROSS EXAMINATION 
BY MR. GRIFFIN: 
Q Mr. Markman, is the purpose of your invention to track 
SS re ee ee 


MR. MALLIN: Under the rulings of how you wanted to 
proceed, I object to that question at this point. 


THE COURT: Well, it does seem to me that it goes to 
the issue that we're trying of infringement so I'll overrule 
your objection for that reason. 

A Could you repeat the question? 


Q Yes, sir. I'll rephrase it. 


169 


Does your invention track the specific articles belonging 
to a customer through the drycleaning process? 


A My invention is an inventory control and reporting system 
which has several options and as I understand it, the options 


are presented in the claims [26] and one of the options that 
is presented in one of the subsequent claims other than | 
tracks individual articles. 


Q It’s not limited to tracking individual articles with a tag. 
Let's talk in terms of tracking the articles associated with the 
unique indicia through the drycleaning process. 


A The system -- 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, now he’s gotten into the 
patent terminology. This is the inventor not a patent expert. 


When we start using the patent terminology, I don’t think 
it's appropriate cross examination. 


THE COURT: Well, as you point out, he is the inventor 
and I don’t think there's anything unfair about asking that 
question. Overruled. 


A The system tracts [sic] individual tickets that have unique 
ticket numbers as far as the inventory contre’ system is 
concerned. 


Q And the information about the articles of clothing 
associated with each ticket is stored in your system, is it not? 


A One of the options that the system has is to store the 
detailed information regarding the ticket. 


170 


[28]}Q How much computer memory, sir, do you have to 
have to carry out your invention? 


A See, I think -- There's a distinction here. We had a 
system that we offered for sale that is -- which deals with 
certain aspects that are in the patent. The patent doesn't 
really say how much memory you have to have. It doesn’t 
say what kind of computer you have to have. It doesn’t deal 
with any of those specific issues and I can answer the 
questions -- I'm not a patent attorney. I'm not a lawyer. I 
can answer the questions -- I know how we implement the 
patent at Drycleaning Computer and Positek. I really -- In 
terms of the patent itself and how it’s implemented by other 
people, there's all kinds of ranges of memory devices that 
can be utilized. 


Q My question is as the inventor, what's your understanding 
of how much you need in memory to be able to do what 
your $ystem is supposed to do. 


MR. MALLIN: Objection, Your Honor. He just said 
there could be a range of memory. 


THE COURT: Overruled. It seems to me it’s an 
appropriate question. 


A I don’t really -- If you want a range of memory, it 
probably is 32 K bytes of memory to 16 K bytes of memory 
up to two million bytes of memory. It can be implemented 
in many different ways depending on the system design. 


171 
{29)Q How many pages of text is 16 K bytes? 


A We're talking about 16,000 positions of memory but it's - 


Q How many pages of text does that turn out to be? 
A I don’t know. 

Q Do you know -- 

A Depends on how fine the type is. 

Q Do you know how much information that can store? 


A 16,000 positions of -- digits of memory or alpha/numeric 
fields but -- 


Q Is that sufficient to track orders and what makes them up 
through the drycleaning process? 


A I don't know. 


Q When you applied for your reissue patent, did you not 
explain to the Patent Office your invention was for tracking 
articles and groups of articles through the drycleaning 
process? 


A I have to look at the materials but I don’t have the reissue 
patent in front of me. I have to see what you're referring to. 


Q Is the purpose of your system to track articles of clothing 
through the drycleaning process? 


172 


A The purpose -- It’s an inventory control and reporting 
system that has certain elements in it and you are tracking -- 
The primary tracking done is done with [30] the unique 
ticket numbers as they enter and leave inventory in order to 
provide inventory control and that can be done and is done 


through the implementation of it at the invoiice [sic] 
summary total which is the total dollars per ticket. 


Q And your claim in your patent, sir, says that the -- 


In your system, the unique sequential indicia and I take it 


A The ticket number is one implementation of that. 


Q And the description of the articles in the transaction, I 
guess the dropping off of the bundle of clothes, are 
reconcilable against each other? 


A Yes. 


Q So in your system, you can go in and see if there is an 
article of clothing missing from an order? 


A By looking at the ticket. 
Q If you lost a ticket, can you quiry [sic] your system? 


A One option, okay, which is covered I believe in the first 
claim of the option is to -- The way to do the reconciliation 
-- One way of doing the reconciliation is to look at the ticket 
or a copy of the ticket because most drycleaners keep 
multiple copies of the ticket in a control file and so one 


173 


could go to the customer, one goes on the clothes and one to 
be kept. Any one of the copies can be used to do that 
reconciliation. 


[31]Q There’s a green sweater that you know you saw 
somebody, the operator of the -- saw someone take out of an 
area. Your system lets you identify the invoices that you'd 
have to check to find which one might be missing a green 
sweater? 


A As I said, there’s many options in the system. As a matter 
of fact, if you want to talk -- I guess they were calling it the 
preferred embodiment which I guess is different ways things 
work but we have many, many options of how that can be 
done. One of the options, one of the options is to maintain 
the detail. Another option is not to maintain the detail. 


Q As an inventor, when you were coming up with this 
system, did you conceive it as being a system to track the 
articles through the drycleaning process? 


A That was conceived that way as an additional claim 
because it was a future enhancement to the system which I 
thought would be worthwhile but it wasn’t the primary 
reason that I developed the invention. It was a future 
alternative that I had developed. 


Q What was the primary reason why you developed the 
invention? 


A It’s an inventory control and reporting system and has the 
component parts that we've been talking about for the last 


day and an half and I thought it had merit [32] because I had 


1/4 


never seen anybody anyplace do it the way I was envisioning 
it being done and I guess that’s why the Patent Office said 
it was right twice. 


Q And the way you envisioned it being done was to be able 
to monitor completely the progress of articles through the 
laundry and drycleaning system, correct? 


A There’s a basic -- The basic way I saw it being done was 
at a level where the ticket was controlled and the items 
within the ticket reconcilable against the ticket. I have an 
additional claim which includes that which says you can put 
tags on the ticket and that was an enhancement to the system 
which I felt would give it ancther level of value to the 
original concept. 


Q Well, then, sir, let’s see if we can’t understand this. By 
looking at the language which you added -- 


A I'll tell you, I’m going to have trouble with this because 
I’m not a patent attorney. I can tell you what I do. That’s 
why I hire patent attorneys. I get as messed up in this 
language as anybody. 


Q Let’s just try to unmess it and use the language which 
you've used before, okay? Do you recall -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, I’m going to try to stay 
away from issues that -- 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


175 
Q You were asked about about [sic] an invention you had 
[33] designed by Jolicoeur Limited which was taken on I 
think it was the 16th of July of this year? 
A Yes. 
Q Do you recall that? 
A Yes, I do. 


Q And do you recall being asked the question in what way 
are they different, meaning the Jolicoeur system and your 
invention? 


[34]Q Do you recall being asked the questions? 


A I recall being asked about the Jolicoeur system. I don’t 
specifically recall my answer to it. 


Q Do you recall being asked, "In what way are they 
different?" | 


A I suppose so, yes. 

Q Do you recall what your answer was? 

[35]A Not exactly. 

Q Would it refresh your recollection if I read it to you? 


A Um-hum. 


176 


Q "The bar code was printed on the back spaces strictly on 
a turnaround document for later data entry and specific 
articles that are identifiable by the customer who dropped 
them off and were owned by the customer were not tracked 
into the inventory control system as they were in the 
invention” . 


Does that refresh your recollection and fairly represent 
what you said there? 


A In the Jolicoeur situation, the -- It was preprinted bar code 
used as a turnaround document and the items there were not 
tracked or even cross referenced as to the individual owner 
because they were napkins and tablecloths that were -- It was 
strictly used as a count and when those items went in, they 
went to somebody else, another restaurant. 


Q And that’s to contrast with your system where they are 
tracked into inventory control and are cross referenced? 


A See, what we have in the system is a primary claim as to 
the inventory control and reporting system, then we have a 
tracking system which is spelled out as I [36] understand it 
-- I’ve learned more about this thing -- it’s a dependent claim 
so the system has both -- The system described -- The 
inventory control system, the reporting system described has 
an option which is a dependent claim to put tags on and 
track it. 


Q If you’re now going to start talking about independent 
claims, I’m afraid we’re going to have to go back to -the 
claim language which you said you don’t want to talk about. 


177 


A The patent has -- As far as I’m concerned, the way the 
patent was conceived, it does not have to retain in memory 
the details associated in the computer memory, the details 
associated with the ticket after the tickets is created. 


Q In your system, is there a difference between a ticket and 
a report? 


A Yes. 
Q Is there a difference between a ticket, a report and a tag? 


A Yes. 


Q In your system, is a microprocessor -- does a 
microprocessor have to have the means to be able to 
generate at least one report of the inventory total and 
transactions -- 


A See -- All right. Go ahead. 
[37]Q -- and cross reference the items of clothing? 


A We’re getting involved in claim language, okay? We had 
somebody here who -- I know what the system does and I 
know what I conceived it to do. I know what the elements 
are. If we’re talking about -- I’m not a patent attorney and 
we're trying to interpret this -- you’re trying to get me to 
interpret it in that way. 

Q No I’m not, sir. What I’m trying to do is as the inventor 


of the system who had before told us that in distinguishing 
it from an earlier system which you made, you said, the 


178 


earlier system, the individual items were not tracked into 
inventory -- the inventory control system as they were in the 
invention and I’m trying to find out -- You said that under 
oath. That was what you said in trying to describe how that 
differed from your invention and -- 


A There was no -- In the Jolicoeur system, there was no 


Q I’m not asking about that. I’m talking about this system. 
Isn’t it the purpose of this system to track the items of 


clothing, sir? 

A The purpose of the system is as far as being an inventory 
control and reporting system is to keep track of individual 
tickets that are assigned unique numbers from an inventory 
for inventory control purposes. 


*+* * * 


[38)BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q How do you localize spurious additions and deletions 
from inventory in your system? 


A The system described in the patent? 

Q Yes, sir. 

[39]A Okay. When you create a ticket, a unique number is 
assigned to that ticket and coincidental with that ticket being 
produced, the number is produced and a bar code that 
represents it is produced and at that instant, the system 


179 


enters the -- the transaction enters the inventory control 
system as far as the ticket number and the dollar amounts of 
the ticket are concerned. 


Q Does it not also include the transaction identity and the 
description of each of the said articles associated 
with the transaction? 


A The description of those articles can be printed on the 
ticket. 


Q And is it not -- Are they not stored in the system 
memory? 


A Ata minimum while the ticket is being produced and once 
the ticket is produced, the storage of those articles, the 
details of those articles are not required as far as the details 
other than the total dollar amount in memory and the 
additions and deletions are created by either entering the 
ticket number at a later point which verifies that it’s been 
picked up and the way the reconciliation is done is by taking 
an inventory and when you take an inventory, you can have 
additional tickets or missing tickets. : 


One of the ways you have additional tickets is [40] 
somebody brings an order back because they did a junkie job 
cleaning the clothes and you want them recleaned and they 
forgot to put it back into the system. A missing ticket can be 
created because of the clerical error because the ticket; and 
the dollars are missing. That’s by taking inventory is how 
you reconcile the dollar amounts and the dollar amounts 
associated with each ticket in order to control the inventory 
which is one of the things that the drycleaners or anybody 


180 


trying to control their inventory is trying to do and that’s 
what the invention is all about. 


Q Are you telling us today that the invention does not 
require descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions 
to be kept in system memory so they would be reconcilable 
against the number? 


A The transaction is the ticket number. The ticket number 
is unique. The unique ticket number is kept in memory. The 
articles associated with that ticket number being the shirt, the 
pants are not required to be kept in memory after the ticket 
is created. They can be but they’re not. 


Q And that’s the way you originally came up with this 
invention? 


A I don’t know what you mean by that. 


Q That’s what you intended to come up with when you [41] 
came up with this invention, a system which didn’t store 
individual article descriptions in memory, is that correct? 


A It could keep those articles in memory and I’m not saying 
it can’t and the way I sell it, which is a version of the 
system that we market, it has the capability of doing it and 
there is a variable retention of that information. You have to 
answer a question how long do you want to keep it but that 
is not -- That’s not -- That is just one variable which does 
not have to -- the invention does not need that retention in 
order for the original concept to -- 


Q Why do you have the invention as you implement it store 
that information? 


A I thought that that option was what's -- See it’s -- The 
system as we implement it, which is not what the patent is 
covering, has all kinds of options because we feel that there 
may be -- We're trying to fulfill the need for an entire 
marketplace. Some people could care less about the detail 
articles associated with the ticket. They're just interested in 
inventory control. If that’s all they care about, that’s -- we 
can implement the system that way. If they're interested in 
the details, the system can be implemented that way. It’s an 
option and I tried to cover all options that somebody could 
want and [42] the ones I knew about in 1980, in the 
beginning, 1983, '84 whatever the timeframe [sic] was, are 
the ones I put in and since then we've put many more 
options that are not even included in the patent. We keep 


enhancing the product. I have three or four people working 
full time on research and development. 


Q It’s been your testimony that tracking of articles through 
the process isn't something that you think is basic to your 
invention, is that right? 


MR. MALLI?" Objection Your Honor. This question has 
been asked and answered about six or seven times now. 


THE COURT: Overruled. I don’t think so? 


A Could you repeat the question? 


182 
Q Yes. Is it your testimony that tracking of articles, whether 
they be individual or batches, isn't something that is basic to 
your invention? 
A It’s one of the components. 
Q Now, sir, you asked for a reissue patent, correct? 
A Correct. 
Q And that reissue added a Claim 16 I believe. 
MR. MALLIN: 14 and 15. 
Q 14 and 15. Excuse me. That's right. I ought to look at it. 
Is that correct? 
[43)A I happen to have it here so - 
Claim 14 and 15 were added, yes. 
Q And in doing that and the reason -- Let me go back. 
Nothing from Claim | was deleted, was it? Nothing from 
your original patent Claim 1 was deleted when you got your 
reissue patent, was it? 


A Claims | through 13 stayed unchanged. 


Q And so you added -- wanted a Claim 14 to make some 
points clear and 15 to make other points clear? 


183 


A Well, what happened was -- and I don’t know -- This 


patent was challenged with many -- with prior art, all kinds 
of issues. 


Q We're not supposed to get into those, sir. Maybe -- 
A You're talking about the reissue patent -- 


Q Let me get into what you said when you went to get 
the reissue patent. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, he was cut off when he was 
explaining the context. 


THE COURT: I'm sorry. Go right ahead. 


A Okay. What happened was that other people were 
including Liberty and Max and a whole bunch of other 
companies said that there was prior art, the patent was 
invalid. There were all kinds of issues so what I did to 
clarify all of that, I sent the patent -- I took it back to the 
experts. The experts I felt were the Patent Office [44] and I 
said: Okay, experts, if people are saying it's invalid, there's 
prior art, all this kind of problems, I'm going to put it in 
your hands and you make the decision and -- because you're 
the expert and Liberty, Max and whoever else wanted to put 
all kinds of materials in front of the Patent Office and I 
understood that if any of that material was in fact valid, I 
would lose the patent because the patent wouldn't be reissued 
so the claims that are reflected, the primary reason for the 
reissue patent are the claims - of the claims that are 
reflected there clarify the contentions that were being made 
about the patent in terms of what these parties felt the issues 


184 


were and I just felt give it to the Patent Office, they're the 
experts. If they say it’s no good, it's no good if it’s -- 


Q You didn’t take it to the Patent Office. You took it back 
to your patent attorneys, didn’t you? 


A I took it back to my patent attorneys, that’s correct. 


Q Then you filed an affidavit with the Patent Office, didn’t 
you? 


A Yes, I did. 


Q And in part of that affidavit you said, “It may be argued 
that the claims are limited to a system that tracks individual 
articles such as individual pieces of clothing [45] brought in 
by a single consumer to the dry cleaning establishment and 
the like -- 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I think the witness ought to 
be able to look at the piece of paper that’s being read from 
rather than see it orally. 

MR. GRIFFIN: I'll be happy to, Your Honor. 

While we're taking care of the clerical issue there to make 


sure the certified copy is appropriately marked, I'll move off 
this and come back to it. 


(Pause) 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


185 


Q Mr. Markman, was it your understanding that Claim 1 
dealt with tracking individual articles of clothing through the 
drycleaning process? 

MR. MALLIN: Now we're exactly asking the lay 
witness, the inventor, not what the invention was but for him 
to explain what's in Claim 1 for which we brought a patent 
expert to testify -- 


THE COURT: Would you rephrase the question, 
Counsel? 


MR. GRIFFIN: Yes, sir. 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Did you work with your patent counsel to add language 
after your initial application was rejected? 


A I communicated with him, yes. 

[46]Q Did you review the language that was to be added? 
A I read the language that was to be added. 

Q And you understood what you were doing then? 


A I understood what he told me he was doing. I'm not a 
patent attorney. Some of this stuff -- In fact, because of 


__some of the expert witness, I understand more than I ever 


did before. I'm not a lawyer. I'm not a patent attorney. I 
know what the invention is. And I rely on the patent 


186 


attorneys to submit that to the Patent Office and follow their 
rules. 


Q I know you sat here and you listened to Mr. Chovanes? 


A Right. 


Q I don’t want you to testify based on what you heard Mr. 
Chovanes say. We want you to testify based upon what your 
understanding of your patent is, okay? 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, this witness's understanding 
of what a patent is isn’t relevant in this case. This witness's 


THE COURT: Let me hear the question, object if you 
wish and I'll rule on it. I haven't heard the question. You 
interrupted him in the preface I think unintentionally. 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q You added language to your patent and let's take a look 
at it because I don’t want to be unfair to you. I [47] put 
Defendants’ Exhibit 3-A up on the easel. 


Now, when you added the language in the first paragraph: 
"Each of the transactions having articles associated 
therewith, said information meaning the information which 


was being put in --" 


Then it goes on, "-- including transaction identity and 
descriptions of each said articles”. 


187 
Why did you add “of each said article"? 


A You know, when this was all done, which is in, what, 
1985 I guess, the patent counsel and I reviewed what he was 
doing; why he was doing it. I understood it then. I’m not 
sure if I understand it now. I’ [sic] know what the final 
results were but I don’t remember all the reasoning that we 
went through in order to come up with the end result. 


Q You said you knew why he was doing it. Was he doing it 
to meet the objections of the patent examiner? 


A We submitted the patent and there were some objections 
and it was changed to resubmit it. It was resubmitted in 
order to deal with those objections and once it was 
resubmitted, the patent was granted and it was not only 
granted once, it was granted twice. I feel real good about 
that that it’s a very difficult, long process. I do not 
understand the procedures that you have to go through in 
dealing with the Patent Office. I'm not a [48] patent 


attorney. 


Q Sir, when I started to ask you questions about what you 
said in the Patent Office before, you said -- Your counsel 
rightly pointed out that you ought to have the exact language 
in front of you and I have it in front of me now. I'm going 
to try to find it in the certified record of the Patent Office so 
you will have it. 


Rather than delay the Court's time -- 


THE COURT: I think your colleague can help you there. 


188 
BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Sir, is it the purpose of your invention to be able to tell 
whether an individual item has been lost out of someone's 
drycleaning order? 


A The primary -- It's an inventory control and reporting 
system that tracks individual tickets that have unique 
numbers and the retention of the detail after the ticket is 
created is an option in the system and is not what the 
primary function of the system is. I think I said that several 
times. 


Q Where is it stated as an option as you understand it? 
MR. MALLIN: I'm sorry. I didn’t hear the question. 


THE COURT: And where is it stated as an option [49] as 
you understand it? 


A I have to start reading through the patent. | mean -- The 
primary claim, Claim 1, does not require that the system 
retain details as far as the articles associated with the ticket 
after the ticket is produced. 


Q If it doesn’t, how do you generate a report of the total and 
the transactions with the unique sequential indicia and 


descriptions of the articles in the sequential transactions — 


being reconcilable one against the other? 


A Okay. I think we just spent this morning like and 
yesterday hours on this stuff. 


189 


Q Let’s try it another way then. I'm putting in front of you, 
sir, a document which has been marked as Defendants’ 
Exhibit 2. It is the certified copy from the Patent Office of 
the reissue patent filed. I'm opening it, sir, to a portion of 
it which is "Reissue Declaration and Power of Attorney by 
Inventor” and I'm turning it to Page 2 of that where it says, 
"Tracking of individual articles". Okay? Do you have that in 
front of you? Directing your attention to the paragraph -- 


A I see. "Tracking of individual articles". 

Q “Tracking of individual articles" and that goes -- 

A Right. I see that. 

Q Does that paragraph suggest, sir, that at that time you 
were telling the Office that while it may be argued [50] that 
the claims are limited to a system that tracks individual 
articles such as individual pieces of clothing, you think it 


also ought to include the tracking of batches of articles 
brought in? 

A The purpose of this claim -- 1 mean of this document was 
that the patent was being reissued under the objection 

of -- 

Q Sir, could you read that paragraph, please? 


MR. MALLIN: I think he ought to be allowed to finish 
his answer. 


THE COURT: Sure. Go right ahead, sir. 


190 


A Okay. It says right up here "Max Business Systems, 
plaintiff". Okay. And I think I have to give some 
background here because Max Business Systems was formed, 
they infringed the patent and in 1987 they sued me to declare 
the patent invalid. They came up with all kinds of objections 
and they said this is why we consider the patent invalid and 
they had lots of paper. "It may be argued" is that Max was 
arguing that these issues were problems so what we did is -- 
when I say "we", it’s myself and my patent attorney -- said: 
Fine, let's send all this back to the Patent Office. "It may be 
argued" that’s what Max is arguing and we sent this back in, 
Max sent in loads of paper, Liberty Lister sent in loads of 
papers and as a net result of that, in 1989, the patent was 
reissued, all [51] 13 claims were held and two additional 
claims were added and I went through this whole thing so 
that the Patent Office who I felt were the experts would 
make the decision and all this language was reviewed by 
them and they reissued the patent and at that point I had 
flipped a coin and if they said we're not going to reissue it, 
the patent was mine so I'm not a patent attorney. I know 
what the reason for this is and that’s why this document was 
created. 


Q This is something that you signed, isn't it, sir? 

A Yes, it is. 

Q And so this fairly reflects what you thought, doesn’t it? 
A Yes, it does. 


Q And you told the Patent Office that you thought instead of 
limiting it just to individuals, you said, "The grouping of 


191 


such articles into sets for tracking print, e.g., a suit 
comprising pants under a jacket and/or suit or dress or other 
separable items grouped together is reasonably disclosed as 
forming a part of the invention". 


You're talking about tracking articles in groups 
identifying what is part of the group and tracking individual 
lines, aren't you? 

A That's too many questions all at once. 
Q Okay. If it could be argued it was limited to [52] tracking 


individual articles, and that's what you said it could be, 
right? v 


A Can I read -- I have to read what this is all about because 
it’s complicated and -- 


Q Please read. 


Q Mr. Markman, did you have an opportunity to review 
your declaration? 


A Parts of it, yes. 


Q And you took a look at what you said about tracking [53] 
clothes? 


A Yes. 


Q I'd like you to keep that in mind, please, sir. 


192 


Right now I'm going to hand to you a document which 
has been marked as Defendants’ Exhibit No. 76 and ask you 
to turn to Page, handwritten numbers, 467 of this exhibit, 
Page 467 of Defendants’ Exhibit 76, an inventory report 
generated by your prototype machine, prototype unit. 


A Yes. 


Q That is a prototype of your invention that we're referring 
to, correct? 


MR. MALLIN: I understood that question to be asking 
about the prototype of the invention and I thought the ruling 
of the Court was not to get into those issues at this point. 


THE COURT: I'm not sure I understand what the 
problem is. 


MR. GRIFFIN: I don’t think there is one, Your Honor, 
because we're just going to what Mr. Markman thought his 
system did and what it tracked and it seems to me probative 
of what his system was -- what his original system was 
doing. It doesn’t track clothing. It doesn't -- 


THE COURT: It seems to me -- that way to me, [54] 
Counsel. I don’t see what's wrong with the question. 


MR. MALLIN: And, of course, it’s my position all along 


we're happy to get into that sort of thing at the appropriate 
time. 


THE COURT: Right. The only issue we're trying now is 
whether the products produced by Westview infringes on 


193 


Mr. Markman’s patent claim and the question does seem it’s 
relevant on that issue. 


BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q I'll rephrase the question for you. Is that an inventory 
report generated by a prototype of your invention? 


A This is an inventory report that was generated by the first 


= 


Q Does that show ticket number? 

A Yes. 

Q Does it show account number? 

A Yes. 

Q Does it show garment type? 

A Yes.. 

Q It tracked individual items of clothing, correct? 

A This is a listing -- I have to look at the rest of the 
brochure to get -- to understand the context because I haven't 
really dealt with this for many years so I'd like to look at the 
rest of the pages. 

{[55]Q Please. 


(Witness did so.) 


194 


A It appears as if this report reflects one of the options ‘n 
the system and that option is to keep the detail recoras 
relative to the tickets on file but it is only -- it is only one of 
the options. It is not required as part of the invention. 


Q Are you trying to tell us, sir, that your invention did not 
require the system to maintain information about individual 
items or maintain descriptions of items which made up an 


A It only requires that that information be present, detailed 
information on ticket at the time the ticket is generated. 
Once the ticket is generated, the unique number, which is 
the ticket number, and the total, being the total dollars, is 
retained. To retain any more information is optional under 
the invention and you may or may not retain that detail but 
it is not part of the primary invention. 


Q Then, sir, please tell me why you added the language to 
Claim 1 after your original patent had been denied, the 
application had been denied that said, "said total and said 
transactions the unique sequential indicia and the descriptions 
of articles in the sequential transactions being reconcilable 
against one another"? 


[S6J]A The unique articles which we've gone over many 
times are printed on the ticket during the process of printing 
the ticket. Once the ticket is totaled, you do not have to 
retain the detail as far as the articles associated with the 
unique number pass that point in time. 


Q Isn't it true you never made a unit that did only that? 


195 
A Let me think about that. 


A Probably the commercial use -- In commercial use it’s 
probably true that the product that we sell which is not -- 


Q The question was isn’t it true you never made a unit like 
that? That's the question, yes or no? 


A We never sold a unit like that. 
Q Did you ever make a unit like that? 
A I’m not sure. 
MR. GRIFFIN: No further questions, Your Honor. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I would like to read to the 
jury an allegation appended to the complaint which is 


admitted by Westview. 


THE COURT: Are you finished with this gentleman? 


MR. MALLIN: Oh yes. I'm sorry. I was looking at these 
papers. Very bad to forget your client. 


(Witness excused.) 
{57] MR. MALLIN: Now I would like to read. 


Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in the papers that 
plaintiffs filed in this case Paragraph 10, plaintiff said, 
“Westview Instruments is in the business of, inter alia," -- 


196 
that’s a legal word for among other things so maybe I'll read 
it again in plain English. 
"Westview Instruments is in the business business [sic] of, 


inter alia, manufacturing and selling inventory control 
systems.” 


And Westview in response to that said answering 
Paragraph 10, "Westview admits the allegations above. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, am I understanding of the 
way the Court has elected to proceed at this point we're 
going to stop on infringement and infringement only? 


THE COURT: Very good. That’s exactly right. 
(Mr. Griffin handed up a document.) 


THE COURT: I will defer on the motion you were kind 
enough to hand up for the present. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you, sir. It was a Rule 50 motion 
which we handed to you, sir. 

THE COURT: That is correct. I'll simply defer ruling on 
that and you may proceed. 


MR. GRIFFIN: I'd like to have Mr. Jim Jenkins take the 
stand, sir. 


[58] JAMES ALAN JENKINS, DEFENDANT'S [sic] 
WITNESS, SWORN 


197 
DIRECT EXAMINATION 

BY MR. GRIFFIN: 
Q Mr. Jenkins, how old are you, sir? 
A I'm 41 years old. 
Q Where do you work? 
A I work at Westview Instruments in Houston, Texas. 
Q What's your job at Westview? 
A At Westview I'm president of the company. 
Q What else do you do there? 
A Well, I do the design and supervise the construction, 
development of listing machines, car wash controllers, bar 
code readers and time clocks. 
Q Where did you go to school, sir? 
A I got my BS do. Je E in electrical engineering from the 
University of Houston magna cum laude and I went to Rice 


i and picked up a Master’s Degree in electrical 
engineering. 


Q Do you have any formal education beyond that? 


A No, sir. 


198 


Q Did you do any development work when you were at 
Rice? 


A Well, I developed the first wave guide laser -- 
Q What's a wave guide laser? 


A It produces millimeter light. It’s optimally pumped [59] 
by a CO2 laser. At the time we were developing it so we 
could pierce the cloud that spaceships have to pass through 
when they're entering the atmosphere. 


Q What is your relation to the "Datamark" system? 
A I was the developer of the "Datamark" system. 


Q I'd like to ask you a lot of other questions about that but 
right now we're going to confine ourselves just to the system 
and how it works. 


Can the "Datamark” system maintain an inventory total? 
A No, sir, it can’t. 
Q Would you explain to us why that is? 


A Well, what the unit does is as it’s been explained before, 
it totals the tickets that are entered into the machine and 
keeps a running listing of those invoice numbers and ticket 
totals. When we are -- One way of looking at it is it keeps 
a -- It keeps a listing of the cash inventory that’s coming into 
a drycleaning shop. The inventory, of course, is the cash 
that you have there and and [sic] then your cash register 


199 


keeps track of the dollars that are leaving the drycleaning 
shop. The listing machine of itself doesn’t keep a running 
total of the inventory. The total of the inventory, the cash 
total can only be generated when you actually go out and do 
a physical inventory of the laundry tickets. 


(60]Q When you do that, what physically does the machine 
do? 


A Well, the "Datamark” since it’s keeping a listing of these 
tickets that are in the inventory and cash totals, you plug 
your “Datascan” into the "Datamark" and that dumps the 
information from the "Datamark" into the "Datascan” then 
in theory, the "Datascan” has all of the I'll say the cash that 
has come into the business, you take the "Datascan” and you 
wand out any tickets -- When I say wand out, you wand 
through the bar code on those tickets and then -- 


Q Which tickets are those? 


A I'm sorry. Those are the laundry tickets. When you wand 
those tickets, it subtracts those tickets from the 
“Datascan" and and (sic) then at that point your "Datascan" 
in theory should have all of the tickets that are throughout 
the drycleaning plant so you take your “Datascan" and you 
wand through every ticket that you can find in the 
drycleaning plant and it will give you a list of -- First of all, 
it will give you a total of the inventory and it will calculate 
it at that point then it will give you a list of all of the extra 
invoice numbers and ticket totals that are found and then also 
a list of all the missing invoice numbers and ticket totals that 
it could not match up. 


200 


[61]Q Now, a number of people have been referring to a 
blow-up which is over here by the jury which has been 
marked as Plaintiff's Exhibit 8-B and I'll bring it around so 
we can all see. This is part of the "Datascan" brochure. It 
has on it pictures of three different reports, does it not? 


A Right. 
Q One says inventory. Would you tell us what that is? 


A That was the inventory-that I was referring to just a few 
minutes ago. There’s a date on that inventory. That would 
have been the date at which point an operator would have 
taken the "Datascan" and gone throughout the drycleaning 
plant to wand all the tickets. The listed invoices -- 


Q That’s the middle one? 
A No. Would you like me to explain the ticket? 
Q Yes, would you please? 


A The listed invoices represents the invoices -- invoice 
dollars that it found of the ticket that you wanded through. 
found that shouldn’t have been there for whatever reason and 
dollars that they represent. Since you had no listing of that 
invoice number, you would have to manually enter the dollar 
amount. You'd have to take that right off of the ticket. 


[62]Q Does this report, the inventory report ever list all of 
the invoice numbers? 


201 

A No, sir, it does not. 
Q So there’s no way of tying a num*> 0 that report? 
A No, there isn’t. 
Q That’s only with your -- That’s only -- 

What is this missing invoices [sic]? 
A Right above that it has the total inventory. That would be 
the calculated inventory that it found from you wanding 
through. At no point did it maintain that total. It’s that total 
that’s calculated as you wand it through the drycleaning 
shop. 


Q That’s not the total that comes from the "Datamark" 
itself? 

A No, it’s not. It’s something you go out and find. It’s a 
total that’s generated as you're going through and wanding 
those individual invoice numbers. 

Q The invoice listing, what's that? 

A The invoice listing you notice there’s a date up there, 
4/25. That represents the invoices that came into your 
drycleaning shop for that day like 4/25. 

Q That information does come from the "Datamark"? 


A That comes from the "Datamark" but in no way does that 
represent an inventory. All that is is the amount of business 


202 


that came into your shop, say, on one day. Now [63] you 
could get a total for all of the days but still in that case, it’s 
not an inventory because it in no way reflects the amount of 


business that’s being paid for at the register. 
Q Would you explain that to me? 


A Well, that invoice listing represents the business that’s 
coming in, your business through the listing machine. 


Q What happens -- How does it record if it does something 
that goes out? 


A Well, the only way to record what goes out is to 
physically go over to the machine and remove it or as | 
mentioned previously, take the "Datascan" and wand those 
invoice numbers out. 


Q Now where it says "Invoices removed". 


A That's what I just described. Those would be where the 
stack of invoice [sic] you had wand through the bar codes 
and that would remove the bar codes from the record. 

Q Does the "Datascan"/"Datamark" system create another 
report? | 


A The “Datascan" does not I believe. The "Datamark" 
generates some other reports. 


Q What reports are those? 


203 


A The “Datamark" will generate what we call an "X" 
reading and also a "Z" reading. An "X" reading is like a 
[64] subtotal. As you're running tickets through your listing 
machine, the "Datamark", it’s keeping a total of the ticket 
totals. As the ticket goes through, it's keeping a total of all 
the tickets and an "X" reading would be just a reading that 
accumulates. A "Z" reading is -- When you take a "Z" 
reading, it zeros it. There’s one other too. It prints out a 
production report. 


Q What goes on the production report? 


A A production report is basically nothing more than a total 
of each of the items and I should say each of the types of 


items that has gone through the machine. In other words, if 
I started a production report on the first of the month, as I'm 
running tickets through, it might say pants and the number 
of pants that went through the machine accumulate. At the 
end of the month, I could zero that or I could let it keep 
running. It's just a running total. A lot of drycleaning 
managers will pay the production help off of that. Again in 
no way does that represent an inventory total. 


Q Is that report -- Does it have invoice numbers with it? 


A No, sir, it does not. 


Q Is there any report that your system generates that ties 
invoice numbers and description of clothing together? 


A No, there’s not. 


204 


{65}Q Is your system capable of identifying spurious 
additions or deletions to inventory? 


A No, sir. 
Q Can it localize it? 
A No, it can’t. 


Q When I say spurious additions and deletions to inventory, 
I'm referring to articles of clothing. 
A Right. 
Q Why can’t it? 
A By its very nature it’s portable and there’s no way of 
identifying where it is you're reading the particular ticket. In 
order to use the "Datascan” properly, you have to wand 
through every ticket in the drycleaning shop rack. It means 
not only the tickets hanging up on the rack but any of the 
tickets in the process. In other words, the reading of the 
ticket is of no value to the operator. 
Q You're not reading it at any one location? 
A No, sir. 

MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you. 

CROSS EXAMINATION 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q Good afternoon. 


Is it true that you have a great deal of difficulty with the 
language of patent claims? 


A I suppose not any more than anyone else does. 


(66]Q Well, put it this way. You do remember I took your 
deposition in Houston? 


A Yes, sir. 


Q I went there and counsel representing you was there and 
a court reporter took down what we said and you took the 
oath? 


A Yes, sir. 


Q And at that deposition did you tell me, say to me, "I will 
tell you up front that I have a very difficult time with 
language in patents"? 


A Yes, sir. 


Q There’s no question about that, right? You're not 
meaning in anything you said today, and I’m not suggesting, 
to be changing that testimony, are you? 


A No, sir. 


Q In the "Datamark" system, is it also true that you told me 
in Houston that the information that the customer brought in 
is stored in the "Datamark"? 


206 
A Yes, sir, there is some information that’s stored in it. 
Q And, for example, even after a description of an article is 
printed, you can press the right buttons and brings up on the 
display what it said? 
A I don't understand. 
Q I assume you know how to work this? 
[67]JA Yes, sir. 
Q Maybe you can come down and show us. 
(Witness stepped down to the exhibit.) 
A What would you like? 
Q Is it on? 
A It looks like it’s -- Okay, I -- 


Q Now the customer had come in and I give you a red dress 
and and [sic] a blue suit. What would the attendant co? 


A He would grab a ticket first thing. 
Q A ticket does not have a bar code? 
A That's correct. He'd slide it in the machine. He would 


type in strip tag number, press the “Enter” key and 
then he would start marking in the clothes. You said -- 


207 
Q A red dress I think I said. 


A Okay. Dress red, enter, and a blue dress. 
Q A blue suit I think I said. 
A Two-piece blue suit, enter, okay. 


Q Each of those items are now printed on the ticket even 
though we can’t see the ticket? 


A That's correct. 
Q What does the display screen say now? 
A It says suit two, blue, 5.50. 


Q If you wanted to check what the first item was, is there a 
way to bring that up on the display screen? 


A Sure. You press the “Clear” key. There's the first [68] 
item and then there's the second item. 


Q Which says -- 

A Blue suit. 

Q I want to see the first item again. 
(Witness demonstrated.) 


Q And that says dress red? 


A Yes, right. 

Q If I’m following you correctly, you printed those two 
items on the ticket, they’ve already been printed and yet you 
can go into the memory and bring out on the display screen 
the description of each of those items? 

A It’s stored in a buffer until the ticket is printed. 

Q But it’s there in the memory to be brought up? 


A That’s correct. There would be.no way of getting it 
otherwise to the printer. 


Q That’s the point. It goes in the memory as a way of 
recording on the ticket what the items are? 


A Correct. 
Q That's what you mean by getting the printer. 

Please turn it off. 

MR. GRIFFIN: No, please don’t turn it off because I'd 
like the jury to see when you total the ticket and you can’t 
get the information out of it. 

BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Total the ticket. Mr. Griffin wants it totaled. 


[69] (Witness did so.) 


209 


Q By using the memory, the items have been recorded on 
the ticket? 


A That's right. They've been recorded on the ticket. 

Q And I think what Mr. Griffin wants to be brought out at 
this point you cannot pull the description of the individual 
items out of the "Datamark". 


A The "Datamark” right now has no record, has no record 
of the red dress or the two-piece blue suit. 


Q So what you're saying according to your testimony at that 
point when you printed it out, the red dress and the blue suit 
left the memory of the computer? 
A That's correct. 
MR. MALLIN: Is it all right to turn it off now? 
MR. GRIFFIN: Why don’t we just leave it on? 
(Witness resumed the stand.) 


BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q I put Exhibit 8-B up again which is a blow-up of a sign of 
a Westview document, right? 


A Yes. 


Q I assume when that document was issued , you reviewed 
it back whenever? 


210 
A I’m sure I have read it, yes. 


Q Now one of the reports shown there -- And this is [70] 
meant for customers to look at, right? 


A Yes. 

Q We have it blown up so the jury can see it more easily 
here but Exhibit 8 is the way it ordinarily exists in the 
ordinary course of business? 

A Yes, sir. 

Q And it was meant to be sent to customers so they could 


read about Westview’s inventory reporting system, isn’t that 
correct? 


A Yes. 


Q Incidentally, Mr. Jenkins, you do agree with me that the 
Westview system is an inventory reporting and control 
system? 


A Well, I think you're mixing apples and oranges a little bit. 


Q Mr. Jenkins, didn’t you tell me in Houston that the 
Westview system was an inventory control and reporting 
system? 


A Yes, but there's -- 


Q You told me that straight out in those words. I asked you 
directly in Houston. I came down there to find out what this 


211 


case is about and you sat there under oath and I asked you 
at that time whether Westview’s system was an inventory 
control and reporting system and you told me yes, didn’t 
you? 

[71]A Well, there’s two -- 

Q Did you tell me that? 

A Yes. 


Q Okay. Now -- 
MR. GRIFFIN: Perhaps you could do -- 


Excuse me, Your Honor. I object. I think he ought to 
give the same courtsey [sic] -- 


THE COURT: Sure. 
BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Have you changed your mind? 
A Not at all. I haven't changed my mind. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, if he hasn't changed his 
mind, I think we can go on to my questions now. 


THE COURT: Just like I did with your client, Counsel, 
let him finish his sentence. He had a “but” there and I think 


you inadvertently -- 


212 


A There’s two types of inventory a drycleaner is concerned 
about. If he doesn’t have an idea what it represents in what 
the inventory is in dollars that’s cash and that’s represented 
by dollars on the bottom of each of the laundry tickets, that’s 
petmegeedie ne nnn = earners whachpsest 
that he performs for his customer. 


The other type of inventory that he’s concefned about 
because customers will give him a problem if he’s [72] not 
is the items, the individual articles of clothing. That's 
another type of inventory. If he is not careful with that type 
of inventory, he has a problem also. The 
"Datamark"/"Datascan" was designed to take care of the first 
type of inventory. 


Q When we had our discussion in Houston, you knew it was 
in connection with this patent infringement case, right? 
A Yes, sir 


Q And you read the pleadings. You knew what the case was 
about in general? 


A That's right. 


Q Although I understand you have trouble with language of 
patents, I want the record to be clear. In Houston did this 


happen at the deposition: 


"Question: Mr. Jenkins, I want to ask you a number of 
marketed by Westview comprised of the "Datamark" XI and 
a “Datascan”. First of all, is it correct that those two pieces 


213 


of equipment together comprise an inventory control and 
reporting system? 


“Answer: Yes.” 


MR. GRIFFIN: Mr. Mallin, could you please tell us what 
page you're on? 


MR. MALLIN: Yes, I'll be happy to. 93. 
[73]BY MR. MALLIN: 


Q And you answered, "Yes" , is that correct and at that point 
you made no distinctions or discussions of any special 
meaning or different types of inventory control system, is 
that correct? 


A That's correct. 
Q You answered it with a straight yes. 

Now on Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 8 in it’s [sic] normal size form 
which was sent out to customers to look at, you informed 
customers, Westview but you read it, and potential 
customers that the Westview system was America’s first 
choice for inventory control, isn’t that correct? 

A Yes, sir 


Q And on the back of the form you gave examples of 
reports prepared, isn’t that so? 


A Yes, sir. 


214 


Q And one of the reports has the title "Inventory" on it. 
Now I want to make sure we understand this and like 


television, cross examination isn’t for us to have an 
argument but just so we can understand your testimony, that 
first says, "List of invoices". Do you see that? 

A Yes. 

Q And it has a figure under it. What does it represent? 


A That figure represents the invoice dollars that the [74] 
"Datascan” was able to find. 


Q And the "Datascan” er -- Where you got that was from 
the "Datascan"er? 


A I got it from the "Datamark". You're talking about the 
information? 


Q The listed invoices. Where did that come from? 
A The printout was from the "Datascan”. 

Q The printout of the report was from which? 

A From the "Datascan”. 

Q From the "Datascan"? 

A Right. That report was from the "Datascan”. 


Q And where did the information come about the number of 
listed invoices? 


215 
A From the "Datamark". 
Q Had it been unloaded into the "Datascan” yet? 


A In order to get that report, it would already had to have 
been done at that time. 


Q Do you mean unloaded? 


| A It would have to have been loaded into the "Datascan", 


yes, sir. 


Q So the invoices are listed by pressing the keys and they go 
into the "Datamark" and then they’re unloaded into the 
"Datascan"? 


A At some future point, yes. 

Q And what I’m trying to get at is those listed [75] invoices 
at that time all represent the dollar value of all invoices that 
have been put into the "Datamark” whether they’re present 
in the "Datamark” or the "Datascan", is that correct? 

A That list of invoices is the list -- It’s the dollar inventory 


that was found by the "Datascan” as you went through the 
plant and wanded all the tickets. 


Q Could you do that wanding at the point where the 
Customer is taking the orders back? 


A When the customer comes to pick up their clothes? 


Q Yes. 


216 
A It wouldn't have any value. It would have no value at all. 


Q My question is could it be done? 


A I suppose so. 


Q Is that one way when the customer comes to pick up the 
clothes that you take that particular transaction out of the 
"Datascan" or “Datamark" by wanding it out when the 
customer picks it up? 


A It might be done that way. 


Q Or the attendant gets a batch of invoices and wands them 
out? 


A Right. 


Q On this particular report, this is what's listed by going 
through and finding out what's hanging on the racks 
[76] or wherever to find out what's listed? 


A The key word is "wherever". I'd have to be anywhere in 
the drycleaning shop. 


Q Now the next line is “Extra invoices". How does the 
Westview system determine that there are extra invoices? 


A Well, as you're wanding invoices, if you found an 
invoice, you'd wand that invoice, you'd wand the bar code 
on the invoice and then the "Datascan" would beep to tell 
you that it could not find that invoice so at that point you'd 
have to take the ticket and then wand in because there's a 


217 


little keyboard on the "Datascan". You'd have to wand in the 
amount of that ticket and that’s the number that's represented 
there. 


Q Now the next item is the missing invoices. How does the 
Westview system find the missing invoices? 


A Well, since the "Datascan” is loaded up with these invoice 
numbers and ticket totals and as you've gone through your 
entire plant and wanded the invoice, the bar coded invoice, 
then if it cannot find an invoice that the "Datamark" says is 
there, it will flag it at least in the computer and then when 
it does the printout, it will find all the flagged invoices and 
print it out. 


Q Is it fair to say that the computer compares the 
information obtained by the "Datascan" with the information 
in it to determine whether something is [77] missing? 


A Okay. That's confusing because the 
"Datamark"/"Datascan" system is actually two computers. 
There's the "Datamark" is a computer and the “Datascan" is 
a computer so the actual comparing is done in the 
"Datascan". 

Q But in the computer the comparing is done -- 

A In the “Datascan". 

Q In the "Datascan” the computer comparing is done? 


A Right. 


218 
Q And the report is printed up of the type you described? 
A That's correct? 


A So when the system is used this way, it’s not necessary 
for anyone to do it manually? 


A No, it’s not. That's what it replaces. 


Q And then on missing invoices I see the first one the 7.98 
I assume is $7.98? 


A Yes. 

Q And then the zero, zero, two, seven, five is what? 

A That's the invoice number. 

Q That would be the invoice number represented by the bar 
code on that invoice. By this system the “Datascan” has 
looked at the bar code, made the comparisons you have 
described and then the report prints out the missing [78] 


invoice number and the dollar amount of that invoice, am I 
correct? 


A That's correct. 

Q And it goes right on another invoice dollar amount and so 
on and then it comes up with the total of the missing 
transactions? 


A The missing invoice. 


219 
Q The invoice represents a transaction, doesn't it? 
A Not really. 
Q Then on this the invoice is totaled. 
Just so I'm clear, the Westview system can detect the 
report out? 
A Yes. 


Q And it does not tell you which particular items of clothing 
are in the transaction are represented by the invoice? 


A No. 


Q The Westview system does not have individual bar tags 
attached to the individual item of clothing? 


A It doesn’t have any tags of any kind attached to the 
clothing. 


[79]Q The other two reports we covered but the one on the 
left is a report of invoices removed? 


A Yes, sir. 


Q Is that referring to when the customer comes in to move - 


220 
A It's whenever an invoice is left at a drycleaning shop. 


Q And which of the two pieces of equipment prints out this, 
the "Datascan"? 


A The “Datascan”. 

Q What period does this report cover? 
A It could be at any time. 

Q So up to that point? 

A Correct. 


Q And the middle report invoice listing, that’s printed out by 
the "Datascan” also ? 


A That's correct. 
[80]Q What period does that report cover? 


A It’s variable. It depends on what date you're requesting it 
for. 


Q If you requested it as of a particular time, could you get 
it up to that time? 


A No. It would be by month and day. 
Q Any day that you wanted it you could get it. 


A If it was in the memory. 


221 
MR. MALLIN: That's all I have, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Thank you. 
MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, very briefly. 
REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
BY MR. GRIFFIN: 


Q Mr. Jenkins, just for trying to explain the middle report, 
and I think it’s unclear 23 to how you get that report, what 
period of time it covers and what it represents so if you 
could just tell that to the jury please? 


A The invoice listing has a list of the invoices and the 
dollars associated with that invoice and it represents 
whatever those invoice numbers and dollars that were 
transferred from the “Datamark". If you -- Let’s say you 
opened -- If you opened up a brand new store and had no 
invoices or no clothing and started accepting clothes, that -- 
and you left that invoice running without taking [81] out any 
invoices, removing any, that invoice listing would just keep 
running. It would be just adding to the invoice listing by 
invoice number and dollar amount so it represents the 
invoices that have come into the drycleaning shop through 
the listing machine minus any invoices that have been 
removed at some point. 


Q You said that in response to one of the questions from 
Mr. Mallin that an invoice does not really represent the 
transaction. What did you mean by that? 


222 


A Well, it's my understanding that a transaction has to 
involve articles of clothing. If you don’t have at least one 
article of clothing, you have no transaction. 

Q How much information can the “Datamark" itself store? 


A The System III "Datamark" has 2,000 bytes of memory 
available for storing invoice numbers, ticket totals. 


Q That's called two kilobytes? 
A Two kilobytes, exactly. 

MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you. 

RECROSS EXAMINATION 

BY MR. MALLIN: 
Q Just one thing, Mr. Jenkins. In the ordinary course of 
running a drycleaning establishment, when you use a 
"Datamark" and print a ticket, have an invoice without 
transaction, it has one or more articles of clothing for that 
transaction? 
[82)A Yes, sir. 


Q You're raising a point and theoretically there could be an 
invoice without having articles? 


A No. There would not be an invoice without articles. 


223 


Q When you go through here, do you print the bar code and 
you have the invoice, you have articles? 


A That's correct. 


Q And there’s a number in that, number on that invoice 
which is readable and it’s in bar code and that’s what can be 
referred to in the various steps and reports where you can 
locate or try to locate that invoice through the number and 
bar code? 


A That's correct. 
Q And the invoice has articles associated with it? 
A That's correct. 
MR. MALLIN: That's all, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Thank you, sir. 
(Witness excused.) 

MR. GRIFFIN: Your Honor, at this time we'd offer into 
evidence Defendants’ Exhibit 32, which is the certified copy 
of the file wrapper for the original patent, Defendants’ 
Exhibit 4, which is the certified copy of the file wrapper for 
the reissue patent, Defendants’ Exhibit 76, which contained 
the prototype printout Mr. [83] Markman identified and, 


Your Honor, Defendants’ Exhibit 3-A and Defendants 
Exhibit 4-A which are blow-ups of portions of the patent. 


224 


At that point, Your Honor, on the issue of infringement, 
we rest and renew our Rule 50 motion. 


THE COURT: I'll defer on that. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, I offer Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 26 
which is a "Datascan” operating manual. 


MR. GRIFFIN: He's out of time and out of order but I 
have no objection, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Same ruling. Without objection it is 
admitted. 


THE COURT: Both sides rest on the infringement issue 
I take it? 


Okay. Let me see counsel if I may at side bar for just a 
moment. 


(At side bar.) 


THE COURT: I rule as follows on the points for charge. 
All points for binding instructions are denied at the present 
time without prejudice. I will charge on the burden of proof 
and the meaning of preponderance. I will explain as best I 
can the two-step analysis for infringement. I will describe the 
dependent and [84] independent claims. I will explain the 
doctrine of equivalence. I will explain the doctrine of file 
wrapper estoppel without using that name. I will cover the 
substance of all of the points which you've submitted on 


225 


those subjects in my own words and I will use standard 
instructions on expert testimony, the role of the jury and 
credibility . 


MR. MALLIN: May I ask, first of all, I take it [85] our 


THE COURT: I'll cover them in substance but I'll use 
my own words. 


MR. MALLIN: I want to be sure I have my objection on 
the record. 


May I ask a couple of questions? 
THE COURT: Certainly. 


MR. MALLIN: Will you instruct the jury that the way to 
measure infringement is to compare the accused device to the 
claims patent? 

THE COURT: Yes, sir, in substance I will. The doctrine 
will get across though. 


MR. MALLIN: In substance you will also explain you do 
not measure infringement by comparing the accused device 
to preferred embodiment or commercial embodiment? 


THE COURT: In substance I will. I'll use my own 
words. 


226 


MR. GRIFFIN: If the issue of interpretation of the patent 
which is to be judged against is a question for the Court, are 
you going to instruct them on the scope of the patent? 


THE COURT: I'm going to explain it as best I can 
basically using the terminology in the patent but attempting 
to simplify it and and [sic] interpret it so it’s understandable 
i efimninatl io ond but [86] ‘ally poi 
by those claims. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor -- 


THE COURT: I'm sorry. I didn’t mean to walk away 
from you. 


MR. MALLIN: We're going to start the argument right 
now? 


THE COURT: I think so. Yes. 


(In open court.) 


THE COURT: Okay. We've now concluded the 
presentation of the evidence on this stage of the case and the 
next stage of the case is that each of the lawyers has an 
opportunity to argue his position and summarize his position 
for you. Under our rules, the plaintiffs’ attorney goes first, 
attorney has the right of the third speech. 


Don’t worry about all the exhibits. We'll send them all 
out to you at the conclusion of the case and you can look at 
them to your heart’s content and I will also after all the 


227 


speeches are done explain to you the law which will be 
binding upon you for purposes of the case. And the next 
stage will be to listen to these very able lawyers sum up on 
this phase of the case which they will now do. 


Is plaintiff ready to close? 


[87] MR. MALLIN: I think I need to check where some of 
the exhibits are. 


(Pause) 


THE COURT: When I say exhibits in the case, ladies and 
gentlemen, the question that you will have to answer is do 
the products manufactured by defendant Westview infringe 
any of the following claims of plaintiff Markman’s patent 
and then you will answer yes or no as to the three claims at 
issue in the case which are Claim No. 1, Claim No. 10 and 
Claim No. 14 and you will have in the jury room with you 
the Plaintiffs’ Exhibit No. 1 and that will contain the three 
claims that I have referred to and then you will keep an open 
mind, of course, until you've heard the lawyers and until 
you've heard my instructions as to the law and then you'll 
talk it over and make your decision one way or the other 
with regard to those three claims. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, ladies and 
gentlemen of the jury. 


This is summation and the summation only on the 
infringement part. Plaintiffs respectfully submit to you that 
the evidence shows that Westview Instruments’ inventory 
and control system comprised of the “Datamark” and the 


228 


"Datascan” infringes Claims 1, 10 and 14 of Plaintiffs [sic] 
Exhibit No. 1, Mr. Markman’s reissue patent. 


[88] Up until this point you haven't, although you've seen 
blow-ups, you real [sic] really haven't had an opportunity to 
look at the patent in detail and I recommend that to you 
when you go into the jury room for your deliberations on the 
infringement issue to determine whether the plaintiffs have 
proven infringement by a preponderance of the evidence. 
Remember when we had an opening statement, we were 
dealing with other issues. We talked about other issues that 
had to be proved by clear and convincing evidence. That's 
not so on infringement. The question is whether plaintiffs 
have have [sic] proved infringement by preponderance of the 
evidence. 


I respectfully submit to you that you can return that 
infringement is clear. You can go in, you look through the 
patent. The patent has certain information on the front. It has 
drawings and specifications and it has something called the 
preferred embodiment and that has been explained is simply 
setting forth one way to practice -- that’s what lawyers use 
-- practice the invention. It does not give you the scope of 
the claim. It gives you one way to practice the invention and 
it can give options. 


For example, this patent says over and over again, over 
and over again [sic] that you can have an inventory control 
system that deals with the transaction that has [89] articles 
associated with it, that the ticket is associated with the 
transaction, associated with the batch if you will and you 
find this patent uses the word “batch” or you can do it by 
individual articles by keeping track of the particular dress or 


229 


a suit. You can do it one way or the other then you come to 
the claims and there are 15 of them in the reissue patent. It’s 
important to note the plaintiff says Westview has infringed 
three of those claims: 1, 10 and 14. We do not claim that 
they have infringed all of them nor do we have to claim that 
they have infringed all of them. Infringing one is enough to 
create liability for infringement. We claim that they have 
infringed three of those claims and that’s determined by 
measuring the accused Westview system against the claim, 
not against a Mr. Markman option or some alternative way 
of doing it in the preferred embodiment which is the way to 
get it in the public domain. Everything gets in the public 
claims go in the public domain afterwards. That’s what 
makes our patent system so important to the progress of 
science and the useful art and I tell you if those patents can’t 
be enforced, then they can’t serve that purpose and the 
trouble with this case is that defendant has been busily 
proving that the defendants do not infringe Claim 5 and 6. 


[90] See, Claim 5 says the system of Claim 1 that means 
you've got to have what’s in Claim 1 but then it goes on and 
adds some things: "Wherein the written record has multi 
separate -- written parts concurrently including an 
establishment ticket and a plurality of tags, at least one of 
the tickets and tags having a bar code printed thereon and 
each tag being detachable from the written record for direct 
association with at least one of the customer’s articles”. 


So there is a tag on an individual suit. That’s something 
that’s in addition to the rest of Claim 1. The size -- Then it 
goes on. 


230 


It would be complete foolishness frankly to think this 
requirement was back in Claim 1. There wouldn't be any 
point in adding 5 if that's what Claim 1 meant and the 
specification says batches are individually. And Claim 6, the 
system of Claim 1, “Wherein the data input device is a 
keyboard and the printer is operable to generate tags for 
direct attachment to article comprising textile materials, the 
article being pieces of drycleaning”. 


That's something in addition to Claim 1. Claim 1 only 
requires -- only deals with the transaction with the articles 
associated with it. It uses the word “is” on articles. It 
doesn't require in that claim that there be [91] a written 
record, a tag or whatever you want to call it on the 
individual items of equipment. 


So while defendants have successfully proved that they do 
not infringe Claims 5 and 6, that isn’t in issue. We never 
said they infringed Claims 5 and 6. We never said that they 
attached tickets to individual articles of clothing. 


Now we brought to you a technical expert who explained 
how their system works so you can see how it prints out, 
you can see how the description of articles are put in 
memory in order to record just like the claim says and the 
rest of it to go through. We brought a technical expert to 
explain that and then we brought a patent expert to read -- 
this is the way patent law works; it may be a strange way of 
saying it -- to read the claims on the accused system and he 
went through the claim item by item which you'll be be [sic] 
glad to hear that I'm not going to insist upon repeating but 
he went through the claim item by item to show how that 
claim reads on the Westview system, the Westview system 


231 


as explained in their operating manuals, their brochures and 
their equipment, all that information came from them and it 
was explained further by the technical information and our 
patent expert, a man with immense experiencec [sic], with 
immence experience has taught law in an excellent law 
school, [92] understands what is being done, laid that out 
very clearly and capably and correctly that shows that the 
Claim 1 reads on the accused system, so does Claim 3 and 
when you look at Claim 4, it’s obviously without a doubt 
they all read on the system. He was the only witness that 
you heard in this courtroom who had that kind of 
experience, that kind of background and that kind of 
knowledge to read these claims on the accused system. No 
opposing expert was presented on that. No expert testified 
for the defendant. 


Mr. Jenkins, who is involved in this, gave some testimony 
on the system indirectly working claim interpretation into it 
what's an inventory, what's this expecting I take it that 
you're going to take that back to the claim language but he 
didn’t try to deal with the claim language because he had 
already testified at his deposition that he has trouble knowing 
what that means and I’m not criticizing him for that. I mean 
it’s an area of expertise. He has trouble with it so the effort 
for him to indirectly read the claim, in all due respect, I do 
not think is entitled to weight but so you have clear-cut 
testimony from an expert reading the claims, a clear-cut 
Opinion that the accused inventory control system Westview 
infringes the patent. I respectfully suggest to you that there's 
no way that that testimony coupled with the other [93] 
testimony doesn’t meet up with to show that these three 
claims were infringed. 


232 


I mentioned to you about the preferred embodiment of the 
patent which is helpful to go and see what the possibility is 
but doesn't measure the claim, and, incidentally, the Judge 
will instruct you that you determine infringement by 
comparing the accused system to the claims and you do not 
determine infringement by comparing the accused to the 
preferred embodiment and you do not determine 
infringement by comparing the accused system to a 
commercial embodiment. The fact that Mr. Markman had a 
number of ideas of what could be done which found their 
way in their differing claims which deal with specific things 
just simply means that a defendant infringed one claim but 
not necessarily all claims. It's not any afterthought for 
litigation that Claim | deals with batches of tickets. The best 
interpretation and clear interpretation right on -- where it 
says here: [sic] At least a part of the record, written record 
to be attached to said articles” -- articles with an "s". To be 
attached. To be attached doesn’t mean attached at a precise 
moment. Here it is attached to the articles, a batch and in the 
specifications, it says that any -- he says that any number of 
times to show it could be done one way or the other, Claim 
5 has it the one way and Claim 1 [94] covers the batch. The 
specifications say the optical scanner reads unique bar codes 
associated with articles or batches thereof”. 


Another place it says, "Written records are produced and 
may be attached to garments”. 


It goes on another place and talks about individual articles 
in inventory or for a group of articles in inventory. 


The system relies -- I'm quoting from the patent -- "The 
system relies on the bar code indicia or associated with 


233 


articles or batches" and and [sic] that’s not the end of it. I 
don’t want to just continue on and on with it so at this point 
I just simply submit to you based upon the clear-cut evidence 
of the accused system, it is clear that the claim has been 
satisfied. 


Let me touch on one other point that started out as 
important and I think it rapidly diminished. “A data 
processor including memory operable to record said 
information and means to maintain an inventory report". 
This is important language. An inventory is maintained and 
a dollar inventory is clearly maintained. The memory 
operable to record said information is said very precisely and 
we saw that a couple of times right in front of us the keys fit 
the description of the articles in the memory. It’s printed out 
and it’s still in the memory until the [95] ticket is finally 
printed out then there seemed to be some disagreement 
whether it’s accessible or not. That isn’t the point. The point 
is the description of the articles was not contained in the 
memory until the customer got the material back. There's no 
reason to do that when we're dealing with batches so that 
that language it’s just like it was drawn to the “Datamark" 
system. The data processor with memory operable to record 
said information and memory is operable to record the 
information on the ticket and the ticket has the list of the 
individual articles so under Claim 1, Claim 5 is different. 
Under Claim 1 we have the list of articles on the ticket. It’s 
not required that the articles have tags on it and you follow 
it all the way through some concept of tracking. 


Incidentally, when you read these claims, you won't find 
the word “tracking” any place. The claims deal with what 
they deal with. Remember Mr. Chovanes talking about 


234 


Claims drawing an area, drawing an area and and [sic] if an 
infringer comes in that area, he has even infringed the 
patent. 


I just want to say one or two other things and I'm going 
to stop at this point. There was a suggestion -- It's 
sometimes said that Westview is a small company so maybe 
it's okay for them to infringe. Of course, that’s not the way 
it works but not only that, Mr. [96] Markman is a small 
company. He worked by sweat to develop this company. He 
tried to develop the business. It’s gone from three to seven 
employees over the number of years. He made the invention. 
I'm not saying to you that you ought to decide in his favor 
because he's a small businessman but nor should you decide 
against him because allegedly Westview is a small company. 
What we should decide and where we are right now is 
whether this accused system infringes Claims 1, 10 and 14 
and when you go to the jury room, you need to look at all 
three of those claims and I earnestly submit to you that you 
ought to hearken back to the testimony of the one person that 
testified who had done this any number of times, who's 
compared claims to accused devices and knows how to do it 
and accept his testimony as well as all the other evidence and 
arrive at a verdict that Westview has infringed Claim 1, 


infringed Claim 10 and infringed Claim 14. 


You don’t even have to render a verdict on Claims 5 and 
6. They're not going to be submitted to you. The evidence 
very clearly established that they didn’t infringe them. 
Nobody ever contended it and most of the case we were 
busy trying to determine whether Claims 5 and 6 are 
infringed. Look at those when you go back in the jury room. 
When you see what those mean, what it takes to infringe 


235 


those, you'll know that Claim 1 means what the [97] patent 
expert said it means and the way he read it on. 


You can see I have a certain amount of enthusiasm. I've 
got to watch it. I'll be here for the next couple of hours 
telling you and telling you and the years during my -- as a 
student I learned you can only absorb so much while sitting 
there. I’m going to restrain my enthusiasm. 


Thank you and I'll ask you to make a decision in favor of 
my clients and with that, I'll take my seat. Thank you. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Members of the jury, I told you when we 
started this case that I thought it would come down to couple 
of very basic points and one of them was this “Datamark" 
just doesn’t have the memory and the capability to do what 
this patent claims to do. 


It’s very interesting to me that after I told you that, we 
went and heard a tortured, tortured reading of the claim. 
Judge Katz is going to instruct you as I understand it, on the 
meaning of the other patent but when you go and compare 
this device to the claim and you take a look at it, you're 
going do see a lot of things and let's just go back for a few 
seconds and see what it is. What is it that we have to deal 
with? 


There are a lot of reasons why the - Westview 
“Datamark"/"Datascan” unit doesn't infringe but you only 
[98] need to look at a couple. It doesn’t have memory 
operable to record. Now we all heard that record only means 
print out on the ticket. I suggest to you when you take a look 
at the patent and you listen to the Judge, you'll find -- and 


236 


you read this as you go along, you'll see that that doesn’t 
mean just print it out on the ticket. We don’t start talking 
about a ticket, the written record until you get further down 
in the claim. It's quite obvious that what this claim is dealing 
with is a computer system which is capable of keeping track 
of the descriptions, the identity and descriptions of each said 
articles which is in the first part of the claim, and you heard 
that the Westview system doesn’t do that. The Westview 
system is an inventory cash control system and the document 
which has been sitting up on the easel in front of you for the 
last couple of days says that -- I'll find the exact reference 
to it on here -- I've got it underlined on my copy. Maybe I'll 
look at that and come back in a second. 


It gives you complete cash control using a simple cash 
register. You have a record of paid invoices. It speeds up the 
process of taking a machine inventory. It doesn’t maintain an 
inventory. It doesn’t have the ability to go ahead and identify 
the spurious -- detect and localize spurious additions to the 
inventory, that is, it can’t tell you whether something has 
been taken out of [99] one place or another. It's not designed 
to do that. The system just doesn’t read on the patent no 
matter how hard Mr. Chovanes tried to make it. We went 
through a number of things and some of the examples | 
made with him: Doesn't this look like a typewriter and 
couldn't this be a smart clerk. That was to show you that 
you can take language and try to make it meet any kind of 
situation here. 


The key to! the whole thing is it doesn’t track articles of 
clothing through the drycleaning system. It doesn't have the 
ability to do a number of things that Claim No. | says it has 
to do. Yes, it has a bar code reader. A bar code reader is 


237 


not physically attached to the unit. Yes, it gets some 
information back and forth but the “Datascan” never gets 
told what the description of the articles -- excuse me -- the 
identity and description of each said article associated with 
the transaction. It doesn’t create a report of said total and 
to read out, the unique sequential indicia and the descriptions 
of the articles in the sequential transactions. It just doesn't 
do that and when you go through each of these, you'll see 
that the system does not infringe and you'll hear from His 
Honor that before you can find that it infringes that as Mr. 
Chovanes says, [100] each and every element of the patent 
in suit has to be present in the accused device and you'll 
hear that and it just simply isn't there. 


Mr. Mallin suggested that you go back and you take a 
look at the patent. I think you'll find that very interesting. 
We referred to a lot of places in the patent and we saw 
people trying to get away from the concept of clothing as 
inventory for this system as opposed to it being a cash 
inventory system. The Westview system is a cash inventory 
system. The claim covers something which can be both but 
it does itself have to have individual descriptions of clothing 
and could be in batches but it has to have the description 
there. There’s no way of determining whether someone has 
taken a shirt out of an order or not and again you'll see that 
when you look at the patent look — see what the patent 
means. 


I'm not surprised that Mr. Chovanes, as nice a man as he 
is, came in here and testified this was infringement. That 
was his job. He's an expert. He told you he was being paid 
and he was being paid by the hour to come in and testify. 


238 


You heard from the other expert, Mr. Mikula, who told 
us what the “Datamark" did or didn’t do. I was pleased to 
hear that. He also had a business relationship with Mr. 
Markman and Mr. Markman just wouldn't, wouldn't [101] 
address the question of: Did you have descriptions of articles 
tied to this invoice? He wouldn’t do it. He kept going around 
when he tried to explain why his system wasn’t the same as 
the earlier system and you'll recall I used the deposition with 
him at that time. He said it was because it didn’t have 
individual items of clothing in an inventory and another thing 
that people haven't pointed out to you which is very 
interesting: In Dependent Claim 7, which isn’t involved in 
this lawsuit, it says the system of Claim 1 adapted for 
specific use in a drycleaning establishment the optical 
scanner. Now they're going to add more optical scanners 
along a sequence of retail drycleaning operations. They're 
going to put them around more places and the indicia and 
description of articles being reconciled -- They know the 
system Claim | has a -- What they're doing is they’re saying 
they 're going to add more optical scanners around the system 
to be able to find these descriptions of articles of clothing 
when you get to Claim 7 and you can’t get the description of 
the system from the Westview system. It doesn’to do the 
same thing. 


Now I know at this point that I’m probably covering a 
number of things which you've heard and you've heard way 
too much and I don’t want to go back and go over the 
evidence you've heard from everyone. I do very much [102] 
want to thank you for listening to it all and especially for 
putting up with me when | was gecting a little exasperated 
with Mr. Chovanes. I was at that point trying to go through 
claims which is one of the things you'll have to do when you 


239 


go back in the jury room and I'm sure when you go back 
and talk this over, you'll find that the system doesn’t 
infringe and one thing His Honor Judge Katz will explain to 
you is the burden of proof in this case. It is the plaintiffs’ 
burden of proof in here to show you that the “Datamark” 
does infringe. We believe we've gone a step further and 
shown you that it doesn’t. That isn’t our burden here. 


I thank you very much and I feel very confident when you 
deliberate that you will determine that the "Datamark” does 
not infringe any of the patents in suit. 


MR. MALLIN: I'll try to be brief. I have only a couple 
points to make. 


It's one of the saddest things about our litigation process 
that when there’s no answer in the evidence, we all too often 
make personal attacks. Mr. Chovanes didn’t deserve that. 
Mr. Chovanes, I'm sure you saw, is a high-level person. 
pe one ear gpa apm 

get paid for his conclusion. What a cynical view of a man 
who's been a professor at law schools. He’s asked to make 
a study. He [103] gives his conclusion. If the person that 
hires him doesn’t like his conclusions, what is the reason for 
that? The reason for that. There's no — Unless you're going 
to dismiss him by a personal attack. I plead you not to do 
that. That's not what we're about here. 


And then he made an attack on Mr. Markman who made 
the invention. Mr. Markman was trying to explain to you in 
answer to questions that there aren't these options to every 
invention and as you look at these claims in the patent, 
you'll see they're all there. 


240 


Summation by opposing counsel over and over again 
demonstrated the problem. There must be all this memory 
because you're trying to keep track of the individual articles 
like you do in Claims 5 or 6 but look at the specifications. 
Look at the patent and that’s not required for Claim |. It’s 
simply not required. It’s circular reasoning. The accused 
system cannot infringe because it keeps -- doesn’t keep track 
of the individual items but then when you look in Claim 1 
and Claim 10 and Claim 14, it doesn’t require that the 
individual items be kept -- that you tag them. That’s Claims 
5 and 6. Why would we have 5 and 6 if 1 and 10 -- So you 
see the circular reasoning and I leave you with one final 
thought. 


We're asking you to find in favor of my clients. You go 
back to the jury room and you read Claim 1 and you [104] 
read Claim 10. You read Claim 14 and you look to see if 
you see the word “track”. You won't find it. You look to see 
if you see the words “individual articles, tags attached to". 
You won't find it. You look in the specifications and see 
whether the overall vendor understands that it can be batches 
and it can be individual articles and you will find that over 
and over again and then if you look at Claims 5 and 6, you 
and so when you cut the circle and approach it the way the 
Judge will explain and compare this accused system, 
compare this accused system to what Claim 1 covers, not 
what Claim 5 covers or what Claim 10 covers and what 
Claim 14 covers, I think the conclusion will be clear to you. 
We only bear the preponderance of the evidence. I think the 
conclusion of infringement of Claims 1, 10 and 14 are very 


clear to you. I implore you cast the personal attacks aside, 


241 


look at the facts of the law and come in with a verdict for 
my clients. 


{2} MR. RYAN: Your Honor, this instruction in essence, 
removes the jury’s interpretation of the testimony that was 
received as to the elements of the patent claims. It attempts 
to go down and list the elements and make it into a fact, an 
instruction from you when in fact that’s for the jury to 
decide. As to what, for example, the memory, Your Honor, 
that is incorrect. 


THE COURT: Point out to me what you're saying. 


MR. RYAN: It does not infringe the patent on the 
inventory total. It takes away the discretion of the jury. 


THE COURT: I'll have to ask you what is wrong with 
that. Show me where that’s wrong on the Claim 1 that’s 
quoted here. Do you object to the words “and means” 
because the data processor including memory is able to 
record, etc. seems to be in there. 


MR. RYAN: I wouldn't have any problems with the 
Court instructing the jury that the system must have a data 
processor including memory operable to record. 


242 


MR. GRIFFIN: The basic problem with it, Your Honor, 
is that this is an overly vague and ambiguous [3] claim. It’s 
the Court’s obligation to interpret to the jury what does it 
mean. 


MR. RYAN: Your Honor, if I may, if we can go back 
to the patent claim if the Court would note that the data 
processor only requires memory to record said information - 


MR. GRIFFIN: That’s a simplistic approach that they’ve 
taken throughout this case by separating things and take it 
apart. If you take a look at the entire patent especially 
something like Claim 7 where it talks about in the 
description of the articles, it’s clear from the entire patent 
their system must have information stored in the memory so 
it’s been able to reconcile it to generate the reports and 
everything down the line and when they try to break it out 
into tiny pieces, it doesn’t work. 

MR. RYAN: That’s essentially asking for a directed 
verdict. That’s just one example of this thing is one of the 
defense’s problems. They're -- 

THE COURT: What's the next point that you have? 

MR. RYAN: This in particular, Your Honor, “system 
which does not have memory operable to record and store." 
That’s inaccurate. 


THE COURT: Is the word “store” used in the [4] claim? 
That’s all I’m asking you. 


243 


MR. RYAN: No, sir. It’s not. 

MR. GRIFFIN: The word “store” is not used in the 
claim and in the description in the specifications they 
specifically use the word “store”. 


THE COURT: "Memory operable to” -- Okay. What’s 
the next point? 


MR. RYAN: And later use, it has nothing to do with it, 
Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Is the later use covered in the claim? 

MR. RYAN: Not ours. That's the point. 

MR. GRIFFIN: I submit to you it is covered because of 
the language that’s used and the way you interpret that 
language as against the defendants’ claim -- 

THE COURT: What's the next point that you have? 

MR. RYAN: Articles of clothing as Mr. Chovanes -- 

THE COURT: What does the claim say? 

MR. RYAN: Articles. 

THE COURT: What's the next point you have? 


MR. RYAN: I need a moment to look at it. 


244 


THE COURT: I’m giving you the moment. I was just 
handed it too. 


[5] MR. RYAN: The claim doesn’t say anything about 
fixed. 


THE COURT: Okay. What the next point? 


MR. RYAN: I don’t understand -- This has got to be a 
typo of some sort. 


MR. GRIFFIN: There’s a typo here. 


THE COURT: "Therefrom". Okay. I’ve got it. Thank 
you. 


MR. RYAN: Excuse me, Your Honor. I apologize. I 
need a minute to look through this. 


Is the Court intending to read any of this? 


THE COURT: Just go down to the substantive objections 
that you have to the point -- I think you’re down to the last 


paragraph. 
MR. RYAN: I apologize. I’m bouncing around. 


I disagree with this entirely, the language of 


THE COURT: Don’t quarrel about that, Just deal with 
the last paragraph if you would. 


245 
MR. MALLIN: Your Honor, our problem is it just takes 
certain things out and gives undue emphasis. For example, 
the claim has a printed bar code coincidental with the 
transaction. That’s there but -- - 


THE COURT: Can I just finish with him, please? 
Was there something else, Counsel? 


[6] MR. RYAN: Yes, there is, Your Honor. I apologize 
for my delay. 


THE COURT; That’s all right. 


MR. RYAN. Your Honor, instead_of this sentence, why 
can’t we just read the claim -- "must" is pejorative that we 
don’t need to add. I don’t understand -- 


THE COURT: Can you just tell me what part of the last 
paragraph you object to? 


MR. RYAN: That it must be able to detect and localize 
illegitimate -- 


THE COURT: But that’s what the last paragraph says 
doesn’t it? 


MR. RYAN: It says "can" detect and localize. It doesn’t 
say "must". 


THE COURT: I understand. Thank you. 


246 


MR. RYAN: And this cash inventory, actual physical 
inventory, Your Honor, we strongly object to that. That’s 
argument of counsel. 


MR. GRIFFIN: I believe that’s an interpretation. 
THE COURT: Okay. Thank you, gentleman. 
( In open court.) 


THE COURT: This is the moment I’m sure you've all 
been waiting for, right? Wrong. 


This is my opportunity to speak to you and [7] explain the 
law which you must follow in carrying out your obligations 
as jurors. 


Nothing that I say should be taken by you as an 
expression of my opinion on the facts. The facts are solely 
within your province and you call them as you see them. 


The record on the facts is now closed on the issue that 
you have before you in this phase of the case. 


It wouldn’t be fair to ask: What about this fact? What 
about that fact? It’s either in the record at this point or it’s 
not. If it’s in the record, then we rely on your recollection 
of what the testimony was and what the exhibits show. Be 
confident in relying on your memory. If it’s not in the 
record, we can’t reopen the trial in fairness to both sides. 
We'd have to resume the trial on this phase. We’d have to 
give the plaintiff an opportunity to present information about 
the facts that are missing. We'd have to give the defendant 


247 


an opportunity to present information about what’s missing. 
We'd have to give both sides an opportunity to argue about 
what’s missing and that is why the record has to be closed 
at a certain point or the trial would never end. 


The plaintiff, that’s Mr. Markman and his company, have 
the burden of proof. In answering the question that you have 
before you, "Do the products [8] manufactured by defendant 
Westview infringe any of the following claims of plaintiff 
Markman’s patent?” and then I list the three claims which 
are in dispute which I'll explain to you and you'll say yes or 
no as to the three claims, it is Mr. Markman and his 
company which have to establish all of the elements which 
I will give you necessary to prove infringement. If they 
haven’t proven to your satisfaction one of those elements, 
they lose the case because the plaintiff has the burden of 
tilting the scales in its favor by a fair preponderance of the 
evidence. 


Now the scales can tilt slightly or otherwise in the 
plaintiff's favor and if plaintiff has satisfied you by a fair 
preponderance of the evidence that there was an infringement 
of the claims by Westview, of course, the plaintiff wins but 
if a fact is missing or if the credible evidence does not 
persuade you of one of the elements that I will describe 
necessary for the plaintiff to win, then your answer should 
be no to the particular question about the three claims. When 
I say persuade you by credible evidence, your main task is 
to use your common sense and I know you've listened. 
You’ ve listened carefully to the evidence in the case. You’ ve 
seen the witnesses and you make your own judgment based 
on the years of living, the relationships you’ve had, the 
dealings with people as to [9] what is the truth and that’s 


248 


your task. You are truth seekers. You have no axe to grind. 
You are not partisans. If you get stuck, just say: What is the 
truth? Who is telling the truth? And all of the tests of 
common sense in judging credibility may be applied by you. 
What was the witness’s demeanor on the witness stand? Was 
the witness evasive in answering the questions? Was the 
witness straightforward in answering the questions? Did the 
testimony of the witness be he an expert witness or an 
ordinary fact witness make sense and the law trusts you and 
you alone to make that particular judgment. I have absolutely 
nothing to say about whom you believe and what you 
believe.. These two parties stand equal before the law. You 
have heard their case on this phase and you simply call it as 
you see it. 


Plaintiff is claiming damages for infringement of a patent. 
They call that the patent in suit which the plaintiff owns. The 
defendants deny that there was an infringement of the patent 
by the defendant corporations. Once a patent is issued, the 
law confers upon the owner of the patent the right to exclude 
others from making, using or selling the patented invention 
throughout the United States for a term of 17 years, thus, 
infringement of a patent occurs whenever any person without 
authority makes, uses or sells the patented invention 
anywhere in the [10] United States during the 17-year 
period. The disputed issue for your decision is whether the 
plaintiff has met its burden of proving by a fair 
preponderance of the evidence that the Westview products 
infringed those three claims that I will explain to you in 
more detail. 


Now I’m going to take a drink -- I assure you it’s water 
-- before I go into the explanation of the three claims. 


249 


Please don’t worry if you don’t remember everything 
because you will have in the jury room with you Plaintiff's 
[sic] Exhibit No. 1 and that exhibit will set forth the claims 
that are in dispute in this case. This is what it looks like. It’s 
marked at the bottom, Plaintiff's [sic] Exhibit No. 1, and 
you will have that and you will see what is claimed is so on 
and so forth and you'll see in there a Claim No. 1 in the 
next to the last page and a Claim No. 10 on the last page 
and a Claim No. 14 which is in a slightly different kind of 
type so don’t worry, you'll have that and you can look at it 
and study the document to determine the language that the 
claim uses or the claims, I should say, use. 


Claim No. 1 is for an inventory control and reporting 
system comprising a data input device for manual operation 
operable to encode information relating to sequential 
transactions each of the transactions having [11] articles 
associated therewith, said information including transaction 
identity and descriptions of each of the articles associated 
with the transactions. 


Claim No. 1 for the inventory control and reporting 
system also comprises a data processor including memory 


' operable to record said information and means to maintain an 


inventory total, said data processor having means to associate 
sequential transactions and to generate at least one report of 
said transactions, the unique sequential indicia and the 
descriptions of articles in sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another. That’s No. 2. 


No. 3. Claim No 1’s inventory control and reporting 


system comprises a dot matrix printer operable under control 
of the data processor to generate a written record of the 


250 


indicia associated with sequential transactions, the written 
record including optically detectable bar codes having a 
series of contrasting bands, the bar codes being printed only 
in coincidence with each said transaction and at least part of 
the written record bearing a portion to be attached to said 
articles and at least one optical scanner connected to the data 
processor and operable to detect said bar codes on all articles 
passing a predetermined station, whereby said system can 
detect and localize spurious additions to inventory as [12] 
well as spurious deletions therefrom. That’s claim No. 1. 


Claim No. 1 defines a system that “includes a data 
processor or computer which has sufficient memory to 
record information about sequential transactions and which 
also has the means or ability to generate at least one report 
of inventory total and transaction totals in which the unique 
sequential indicia or invoice number and the descriptions of 
articles in the sequential transactions can be reconciled 
against one another. 


A system which does not have memory operable to record 
information about those matters that I’ve described including 
memory operable to record the information including the 
descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another does not infringe the patent 
in suit. 


The claim also defines a system in which the data 
processor or computer has the memory which I just referred 
to and the means to record an inventory total. Further, the 
claim defines a system which has at least one optical scanner 
connected to the data processor operable to detect bar codes 
on the articles of whatever they are that pass a 


251 


predetermined station. A system which does not have that 
does not infringe this patent. The claim is of an inventory 
and control system which can detect and localize spurious -- 
that is to say incorrect or [13] illegitimate -- additions as 
well as deletions from inventory. That is Claim No. | and 
what it means. Mercifully the other claims I will be able to 
cover much more briefly. 


Claim No. 10 is called a dependent claim. Claim No. 1 
and Claim No. 14 are what are called independent claims. 
I'll explain those two notions to you. An independent claim 
does not .refer to any other claim of the patent. An 
independent claim must be rea separately to determine the 
scope of the claim. A dependent claim incorporates all of the 
limitations or words of the claim as to which the dependent 
claim refers. 


An [sic] dependent claim includes all of the language in 
the claim or claims from which it directly or indirectly 
depends. If you find that the claim on which it depends is 
not infringed, then you cannot find infringement of the 
dependent claim. As applied to this case, if you find, for 
example, that there’s no infringement of Claim No. 1, then 
you cannot find an infringement of Claim No. 10 because 
Claim No. 10 is a dependent claim. Claim No. 10 is a 
keyboard having keys specific to a plurality of common 
attributes of the articles. 


Claim No. 14 -- I have finished with No. | and 10 now. 
We're up to 14 -- is an independent claim and [14] Claim 
No. 14 is an inventory control and ,e¢porting system 
comprising at least one optical scanner operable to detect bar 


252 


codes on all articles passing a predetermined station. That’s 
Claim No. 14. 


That’s all you need to know for the moment about what 
the claims mean. You can refer to the specific language if 
you don’t remember my use of it. It’s not a problem for you 
to do that. 


Before Westview’s system can be found to infringe the 
patent claims in suit, the accused Westview system -- they 
just use that terminology, accused Westview system, because 
Westview is the defendant that the plaintiff Markman and his 
corporation sued -- the accused Westview system must come 
within the scope of the patent claims that I have described to 
you, that is, the combination of elements that you find 
recited in the claims of the patent in suit must also be found 
combined in Westview’s system before Westview’s system 
can be said to infringe those claims. Westview’s system 
infringes plaintiff's patent if it infringes one of the claims, 
that is, if it infringes Claim 1 and if it infringes Claim 14, 
the two independent claims, or if it infringes 1 and 10 
combined or you could find Gut & dosen't initings any of 
om & Cat's whet your decision &. 


In deciding the issue of infringement, the issue [15] is not 
simply a comparison of Westview’s system with plaintiff's 
commercial embodiment or a preferred embodiment, rather, 
your decision is to be made on the basis of comparing the 
patent claims as I’ve explained them which measure the 
invention with the accused Westview system that’s sitting 
over there and which we've heard so much about. — 


253 


In order to find Westview liable for the infringement, the 
law requires you to do a two-step analysis which I will 
explain to you now. 


First, you must determine the meaning of the claims 
taking the interpretation as I’ve explained it to you using the 
drawings and the file histories. As you've heard, the file 
history is the prosecution history, is the record of the 
communications between the inventor and the the [sic] Patent 
the terms of a claim would normally be understood by those 
of ordinary skill in the art. 


The meaning must be of an ordinary and of a custom 
meaning unless it appears from the file history that the 
inventor used the terms differently. I have interpreted those 
terms for you. After you've decided what the claims mean, 
you apply the claims as interpreted [16] to the Westview 
productions in question to determine if the claims read on 
them. That’s a term of art that these patent lawyers use and 
what it means is if the words of the claims cover the 
Westview product -- Frankly I have never heard that term 
"read on" but your education and mine have improved 
considerably with these able lawyers explaining these 
concepts to us and now I’m sure we understand what "read 
on” means if we didn’t at the beginning of the case. 


In doing this, you must consider whether or not claims 
literally cover the products. Literally cover means that all of 
the structural elements recited in a given claim and having 
all of the limitations set forth in that claim are found in the 
accused products. All such elements and limitations must be 


254 


present. In other words, each element of a claim is material 
and essential and for infringement to be found, every 
element or its substantial equivalent must be found in the 
accused product. 


Now I used the words "or its sustantial [sic] equivalent" 
and permit me to go into an explanation of what that means 
in the jargon. They call that the doctrine of equivalents but 
the jargon isn’t important and the notion I’m sure you will 
understand when you hear my explanation. 


Plaintiffs in this case argue that their patent [17] is 
infringed by the defendant's products both literally and 
because of this doctrine of equivalents. Infringement under 
the doctrine of equivalents may exist if the accused products 
perform substantially the same function in substantially the 
same way as to obtain substantially the same results as the 
claimed invention. 


an element of a patent do not shelter an infringer. What 
constitutes equivalency must be determined considering the 
context of the patent and the particular circumstances of the 
case. It must also be kept in mind that the doctrine of 
equivalents has certain limits. For example, the doctrine may 
not be used to support an interpretation that would resurrect 
or reopen subject matter surrendered or dropped during 
prosecution by Mr. Markman of the patent application. Also 
equivalents must be established with respect to the claims of 
the patent not for the commercial purposes for which the 
products are used. 


255 


In applying the doctrine of equivalents, remember that the 
infringement requires each and every element of the asserted 
claims that I’ve burdened you with in such detail earlier or 
the equivalent of each and every element that I explained in 
all of the detail must be present. 


[18] One of the limits or restrictions on the use of the 
doctrine of equivalents is that someone is barred or 
prevented from taking a certain position because it would be 
inconsistent with his previous position and it would be unfair 
to permit him to take a different position now. That simply 
means that if a patent holder abandoned a contention or point 
during the application process, he canaot later come back 
and say that his claim should be interpreted in light of the 
abandoned subject matter. 


The doctrine of equivalents is not to be used to include 
anything contrary to the limitations expressed to the Patent 
Office during the application process. This applies to claim 
amendments to overcome rejections as well as to arguments 
made to obtain the patent. This means that in deciding what 
is a substantial equivalent to the literal meaning of the 
elements of the claim, it is necessary to look at what is in 
the file history, the application and communication back and 
forth between the applicant and the Patent Office. You will 
all have that if you wish to study it in as much detail as you 
care to. 


If the applicant abandoned or dropped the contention or 
point during the application process, he cannot later go back 
and claim that his patentt [sic] should be interpreted 
considering what he originally argued for and later gave up. 


256 


[19] He is prevented from later asserting those positions he 
abandoned or gave up and this applies to amendments made 
to overcome objections by the Patent Office as well as 
arguments made by the the [sic] applicant and later 
abandoned during the application process. 


A person may infringe a patent without any attempt to do 
so if the above-stated elements that I’ve described are proven 
by the plaintiff by a fair preponderance of the evidence. 


If you decide that plaintiffs have not proven an 
infringement as to the three claims, that is the end of your 
deliberations. The case is over. You are discharged and the 
defendant wins. You would answer "No" to the questions 
that are submitted to you and you'd notify the clerk and 
you’d come in and we’d take your verdict. 


If you answer "Yes" to one or more of the questions, we 
will resume the trial and hear the evidence on the remaining 
issues as to the validity of the patent as well as the issue of 
the amount of plaintiff's damages and we will hear counsel’s 
arguments and whatever evidence they wish to present on 
those remaining issues in the case. 


Jurors sometimes wonder about how long they’re required 
to deliberate. The answer is that you may take as much time 
as you need in order to reach a unanimous [20] verdict 
considering the evidence and the reasonable inferences from 
the evidence. On the other hand, if you know what your 
answer is, if you’re satisfied from having heard the trial, it 
isn’t necessary to put on a show and take an lot of time. If 
you know the answer is "Yes", you answer"Yes". If you 


257 


know the answer is"No", you answer "No" and we'll take 
your verdict. 


You as members of the jury may not reach a decision 
based upon speculation, conjecture or guess but may find for 
a proposition only if there is evidence of that fact or 
proposition. 


In deciding this case, base your verdict solely on the 
evidence before you and the law as I have given it to you. 
The law as I have given it to you is binding. You must 
follow it whether you agree with me or not. But the facts are 
solely up to you and I have nothing to say to you with 
regard to the facts. I’ve tried as best I can not to give you 
any indication of my view of the facts and you are not the 
[sic] take any indication about how I think about the facts 
because they are solely for your determination. I have 
nothing to say about that. 


Discuss and respect each other’s views. Your verdict must 
be unanimous. You would then when you reach a unanimous 
verdict, yes or no, you see the eight blank lines, you all sign 
that. You are never to reveal to any [21] person, not even to 
the Court how you stand numerically before you have 
reached a unanimous verdict so if you will remain seated for 
just a moment, I'll see counsel at side bar. 


( At side bar.) 


THE COURT: Okay. First, the plaintiff, any objections 
to the charge? 


MR. MALLIN: Yes, Your Honor. 


258 
THE COURT: Okay. 


MR. MALLIN: First of all, we renew our objection to the 
point being submitted not being granted. 


THE COURT: Well, if there’s anything specific where 
I’m dead wrong, just call it to my attention and I'll try to 


correct it. 
MR. MALLIN: The charge indicated in describing Claim 


1 that the description, the articles had to stay in the memory 
throughout the system and the claim doesn’t so provide. 


THE COURT: What part of the claim are we referring 
to? Perhaps you can help me. Either side can help me on 


that issue. 


MR. RYAN: Your Honor read verbatim I believe a 
portion of the instruction which was submitted by defendants 


this morning. 


THE COURT: But where is that issue in the [22] claim, 
either side? 


MR. RYAN: It’s in the first element, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: If you could just point it out to me -- 
MR. RYAN: Information -- 


THE COURT: Data processing -- 


259 


MR. RYAN: -- including memory operable to record a 
means to maintain -- 


I believe the Court’s instruction left the impression as 
defendants requested this morning that articles’ descriptions 
must be maintained in inventory or maintained in memory 
rather than merely recorded. 


THE COURT: (To the jury) Members of the jury, if 
you'll look at the Plaintiff's [sic] Exhibit 1, you'll see that 
one of the elements of the inventory control and reporting 
system comprises a data processor including memory 
operable to record said information and means to maintain an 
inventory total, and said information refers back to the 
earlier part of the claim which is a data input device to 
encode information relating to sequential transactions, each 
of the transactions having articles associated therewith, said 
information including transaction identity and descriptions of 
each of said articles associated with the transactions. 


23] That's what the claim means. 
( Continued at side bar) 


MR. RYAN: The Court also instructed the jury with 
respect to the commercial embodiment issue that the jury 
cannot -- "simply" is the word the Court used -- cannot 
simply base its decision on comparison between the accused 
device and the patent language, Your Honor. 


Your Honor, a commercial or preferred embodiment is all 
irrelevant in the determination and shouldn’t even be part of 
the jury’s deliberation. 


260 


MR. GRIFFIN: I think the Court’s charge was clear and 
accurate. 


MR. RYAN: There are things clear in the patent law the 
inappropriateness of doing that. 


THE COURT: ( To the jury) I tried to make it as clear as 
I could and considering my own limitations as an expert in 
the patent field, I don’t know if I did. If I didn’t say this, let 
me try one more time. 


In deciding the issue of infringement, you do not base 
your decision on a comparison of Westview’s system with 
the plaintiff's commercial embodiment, rather, your decision 
of infringement is to be made on the basis of comparing the 
patent claims which measure the invention with the accused 
Westview’s system. 


Now if the patent claims that I have tried to [24] explain 
as best I can don’t cover the accused Westview system as I 
have explained in more detail, then there’s obviously no 
infringement and your answer is no. 


( Continued at side bar.) 
THE COURT: Yes. 


MR. RYAN: The Court also gave a very, very lengthy 
and repeated instruction on the doctrine of equivalents -- 
excuse me; I'll take that back -- on the doctrine of file 
wrapper estoppel which is not even a part of this case. There 
has never been any evidence that anything was surrendered 
during the prosecution of this patent. 


261 
THE COURT: Let me hear the other side if I may. 


MR. GRIFFIN: There is in the case statements made to 
the Patent Office and there’s evidence of the addition of the 
language claim after the first patent was rejected. The 
statements about that are relevant and should be considered. 


MR. RYAN: We agree that the file history with all these 
other items can in fact be used. That’s not the objection. I 
believe that the Court repeated the doctrine of file wrapper 
estoppel about four times about the effects of it when it’s not 
part of the case. 


MR. MALLIN: Your Honor -- 


THE COURT: I’ve got to have one lawyer on each [25] 
side. I’m sorry. 


( To the to the [sic] jury) You may, of course, consider 
the history of the patent claim and how it went through the 
Patent Office and I gave you a rather extensive description 
of the effect of amendments and deletions and I told you how 
to apply that to interpreting the claim. If you find that is 
inapplicable because there’s no evidence that the amendments 
or limitations applied to define the scope of Mr. Markman’s 
patent in this case, obviously you don’t have to apply all 
those complicated rules which are called file wrapper 
estoppel I’m told but I tried not to use the terminology in 
describing the claim but if you find it doesn’t apply, you 
don’t have to worry about it. You just ignore it. 


( Continued at side bar) 


262 


}AR. RYAN: I want to make our position clear that we 
believe there is absolutely no evidence on file wrapper 
estoppel or prosecution estoppel and that issue shouldn’t be 
part of the case. 


THE COURT: I'll hear the other side. 


MR. GRIFFIN: We heard testimony about the additions 
to the claim which were made after the first rejection so that 
is -- The Court has a right to consider it in interpreting the - 


THE COURT: Let’s go on to the next point. 
[26] MR. RYAN: The Court’s comment by instructing the 
jury if they found no infringement, they could go home 
effective -- we find very prejudicial. 

THE COURT: What can I do? That’s the truth. 

MR. RYAN: It’s just unnecessary, Your Honor. 

THE COURT: Well, I don’t see -- 


MR. MALLIN: There’s nothing to do to correct it now 
but we’d object. 


THE COURRT [sic]: I don’t know what theré is to do 
except tell them the consequences of their decision if they 
decide that the case is over. 


Let’s not argue over it. 


263 


MR. RYAN: To put my position on the record, when we 
were conducting the voir dire, some of the jurors indicated 
they had some scheduling problems next week which may 
prevent them from serving on a long case and by offering 
that up you've given them an opportunity to effectively not 
have to come back here next week. 


THE COURT: ( To the jury) Members of the jury, you 
should not let the fact that a "No" answer will terminate this 
case affect your decision on whether the decision on the case 
is -- the answer is yes or no. You have to be intellectually 
honest and call it as you see it. If an intellectually honest 
answer is "Yes", then abide by your oaths, answer "Yes" 
and we'll proceed and [27] hear whatever the other evidence 
is if that’s what your verdict is. If the intellectually honest 
answer is "No" then you answer "No" and we’ll take your 
verdict "No" in that regard. 


(Continued at side bar) 
THE COURT: Does the plaintiff have any other points? 
MR. MALLIN: No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. Defendant. 
MR. GRIFFIN: Only two, Your Honor. 
When you read the Claim 14 to them, you only covered 
the last paragraph or the last point of it and it would be 


sufficient I think to point out that Claim 14 has that language 
in it and they can read it when they get it if necessary. 


264 
THE COURT: Okay. 


MR. GRIFFIN: And the second point is we want to 
preserve on the record our objection to proceeding where 
instead of allowing the jury to deliberate based upon the 
Court’s interpretation, you’ve asked them to determine the 
patent because you said to them at one point that: You must 
first determine the meaning of the patent. 


THE COURT: ( To the jury) Two points if I may, ladies 
and gentlemen of the jury. I gave you a very abbreviated 
version of Claim 14 and Claim 14 is the one in [28] the 
slightly different color -- not color but different type on 
Plaintiff’s [sic] Exhibit 1 and there’s -- You’ll have Claim 14 
in its entirety but basically it’s a data input device having 
switch means for encoding information, each of the 
transactions having articles associated therewith. Data 
processor including memory, a printer operable under 
control of the data processor to generate a written record at 
least part of the written record bearing a portion to be 
attached to said articles and at least one optical scanner for 
data communication with the data processor and operable to 
detect bar codes on all articles passing a predetermined 
station. 


Now that’s what Claim 14 means and I haven’t read even 
this time all of Claim 14. I’ve just told you what it means 
and I have also’ told you what Claim 1 means and what 
Claim 10 means and what I tell you about what those claims 
mean is the Court’s interpretation which insofar as I've told 
you this is what the claim means, that’s binding upon you 
for purposes of your deliberations. 


265 
( Continued at side bar) 


THE COURT: Anything further? 
( No response) 
(In open court) 


THE COURT: See you when you have a verdict, 


Trial Testimony of September 27, 1991 -- Volume IV 


[1] Has the jury reached a verdict with regard to the 
question that was submitted? Whichever of you is the 
spokesperson for the jury can tell me. 


THE FOREPERSON: We have, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: If you'll be good enough to show the 
original sheet to counsel just to reduce the anxiety levels. 


(The clerk did so.) 


THE COURT: Now I'll take the verdict from you if I 
may. 


| "Do the products manufactured by defendant Westview 
any of the following claims of plaintiff Markman’s 
patent?" 


266 


First, with regard to Claim No. 1, what is the verdict of 
the jury, yes or no? 


THE FOREPERSON: Yes. 


THE COURT: Then with regard to the Claim No. 10, 
what is the verdict of the jury, yes or no? 


THE FOREPERSON: Yes. 


THE COURT: And finally with regard to Claim No. 14, 
what is the verdict of the jury, yes or no? 


THE FOREPERSON: No. 


{2} THE COURT: Do counsel agree that the verdict of the 
jury be recorded on this aspect of the case? 


MR. MALLIN: Yes, Your Honor. 
MR. GRIFFIN: Yes, Your Honor. 


THE COURT: Okay. The verdict of the jury is hereby 
recorded on this aspect of the case. 


THE COURT: I'll hear both sides now as agreed on the 
motion for directed verdict as to which I deferred previously. 


(3] (Jury was recessed for the evening.) 


MR. GRIFFIN: Thank you, sir. 


267 


This Court earlier denied Westview’s motion for summary 
judgment because it found there was a disputed issue of fact 
concerning “Datamark”’s ability to store material in 
memory. The evidence that has been introduced at trial has 
shown there is no dispute about what the "Datamark" does 
and its ability to store information. 


THE COURT: What about -- 
MR. GRIFFIN: Excuse me. 


THE COURT: Go ahead. I didn’t mean to interrupt your 
sentence. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Both the plaintiffs and the plaintiffs’ 
expert and the defendant agreed on how the machine works. 


THE COURT: What I was going to ask you was what 
about that representation in the manual that | referred to 
when I ruled on your motion for reconsideration? How do 
you deal with that? 


MR. GRIFFIN: If I can -- 

THE COURT: I forgot what exhibit it is. Perhaps you can 
help me with your substantive argument in that regard. Do 
you know what I’m referring to? 

MR. GRIFFIN: I believe it’s Page -- 


MR. MALLIN: Plaintiff’ [sic] Exhibit 4, Page 3. [4] 
Plaintiff’ [sic] Exhibit 5, Page 7. 


268 


THE COURT: Well, I have Plaintiff [sic] Exhibit 4 and 
I’m looking at Page 3 and Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 5 -- 


MR. RYAN: Page 7, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: And I’m looking at Page 7. Okay. 
MR. GRIFFIN: What that -- 


THE COURT: What’s the language? I’ve forgotten. 
Where are we on Page 3? 


MR. GRIFFIN: I can tell you the one on Page 7. 


THE COURT: Okay. That’s good. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Up at 10, "Once" -- Where it says once 
the garment... and price are... displayed" 


THE COURT: I see that. Let me read that to myself. 
Okay. 


MR. GRIFFIN: What that is is that short process that 
both Mr. -- I keep forgetting -- Mr. Mikula and Mr. Jenkins 
described is that before the ticket is completely printed and 
the bar code is put on it, there is a buffer where the 
descriptions in that one article are stored until the ticket is 
printed out. Once the ticket is printed out and the bar code 
on the bottom is printed, that article description is no longer 
in memory and there’s no association between that article 
description and the invoice number with the exception that 
they’re both printed on the ticket but there’s nothing in the 
[5] system at that time which would allow anybody to run a 


269 


report which would reconcile the invoice number and the 
article description so there is nothing there that would get to 
the main purpose of the system as described in the patent 
which is the inventory and control system whereby they can 
detect and localize the spurious additions and deletions to 
inventory and that’s -- 


THE COURT: Spurious additions to inventory. 


MR. GRIFFIN: Where that leaves us is just on that point 
alone which was the point that the Court saw as there being 
a dispute that there really is no dispute unless you can 
torture the reading of this patent to say that it doesn’t have 
to maintain the article description in memory so that it can 
run a report where the unique sequential indicia which would 
be the number, invoice number and the descriptions of the 
articles are reconcilable against one another. You can read 
that out of the patent and you can say you want to take it 
very literally and you don’t want to interpret it in language 
which I believe is ambiguous at best in light of what is said 
about it in the specification and in the drawing. We believe 
that the interpretation of this claim is a question of law for 
the Court. It’s our view of it that when you read this claim 
in the light of this claim and the dependent claims on it and 
especially Dependent [7] Claim 7, it becomes quite clear that 
the system which is described here is one where the extra 
thing that comes to the ballgame as far as the reconciliation 
of the unique sequential indicia and the article descriptions 
is the ability to store that in memory so at least as it says in 
here, "...to generate at least one report of said total and said 
descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions being 


270 


reconcilable against one another" that’s the end of that 
second paragraph in the Claim 1 -- 


THE COURT: Let me just get that in front of me on 
Claim 1. 


Well, does your client’s product have what one could 
argue to be a short memory to accomplish the -- 


MR. GRIFFIN: No, sir because it cannot run a report 
where the unique sequential indicia and the descriptions of 
the articles can be reconciled against one another. 


THE COURT: What about the way they demonstrated it 
with the invoice being produced? Does that store the 
memory for a short time and then produces the dress and the 
coat and so on? 


MR. GRIFFIN: What it does is it takes the information 
and keeps it in a buffer until the ticket is printed. It doesn’t 
keep it there to be able to run a [7] report from it and 
obviously where it is there is some place where you can’t 
reconcile it because you haven’t run the ticket off of it. It’s 
not a way to accomplish the goal of the patented system and 
the reason, Your Honor, that it becomes more clear when 
you look at the various different parts of the patent and not 
even going outside of the claims, when you take a look at 
Dependent Claim No. 7 where the dependent claim goes on 
and says this is the one that where they’re going to have a 
series of optical scanners -- 


THE COURT: I have it in front of me. I’m just reading 
it to myself. 


271 
(Pause) 


MR. GRIFFIN: -- that’s where they say, "...the indicia 
and the descriptions of articles being reconcilable at each of 
said plurality" so instead of it being recognized at one place 
in Claim 1 now it’s reconciliable at a lot of them and that 
couldn’t happen with the "Datamark” system even just one 
time because it doesn’t maintain the description and there is 
no capability of running the report and I think it is clear, 
Your Honor, when you look at the various descriptions in 
this specification and the description of what their particular 
patented system is to do and it starts off with the entire 
description of the field of invention where it [8] describes the 


It goes on to explain it. "... whereby the progress of 
articles through the laundry and drycleaning system can be 
completely monitored" explains that the detailed description 
of the preferred embodiments, what it does or the 
information and items uniquely positively associated with one 
another throughout the processing and you take that and then 
you take Mr. Markman’s own earlier testimony where he 
was trying to show why the Jolicoeur system, which he had 
earlier developed, wasn’t the same as this and he said 
because it doesn’t -- I forget the exact language but the 
thrust of it was because it doesn’t have the individual 
articles. I think I have the exact language. It’s in the 
summary judgment motion. I’m trying to find the exact 
quote for you. 


272 
THE COURT: Yes. 


MR. GRIFFIN: I think Mr. Vogt will pull that out for 
me. 


THE COURT: Okay. Is it the premise of your argument 
that inventory means articles of clothing not just dollars? 


MR. GRIFFIN: I think it means both in this [9] patent, 
Your Honor. 


THE COURT: And usat I have to interpret what is the 
meaning of inventory? Is that the premise on which your 


contention turns? 


MR. GRIFFIN: Yes, sir. That is one of the things that I 
believe this Court must do. 


The actual quotation comes from the Markman deposition 
of July 16, 1991 at Page 11 and it was attached to the 
motion for summary judgment as Exhibit "G" and what Mr. 
Markman was asked about his earlier system and this one 


question: 
"In what way are they different? 


"Answer: The bar code was printed on a back space 
strictly as a turnaround document as a later -- and specific 
item that are identifiable by a customer who dropped them 
off and who weren’t owned by the customer were not 
tracked into the inventory control system as they were in the 
invention." 


273 


It becomes very clear when you look at the inventory, 
when you take a look at the explanation in the specification 
and read the claim understanding how they describe the 
words that the purpose of the Markman patented system is 
to have a computerized -- for lack of a better term - 
inventory control and reporting system where they had a data 
input device, a place to put the [10] information in and 
making sure that it was able to encode the information about 
the transactions and it’s very clear in the first section what 
it has to be including transaction identity and descriptions of 
each of said articles associated with the transaction and if all 
you were going to say is all you have to do is type up a 
ticket, that wouldn’t make any sense. 


And the next one is, "a data processor including memory 
operable to record said information and means to maintain an 
inventory total, said data processor having means to associate 
sequential indicia with sequential transactions with unique 
sequential and to generate at least one report of said 
descriptions of articles in the sequential transactions being 
reconcilable against one another" and you read that against 
the later part of that claim where they're talking about the 
optical scanner detecting things in the bar codes and saying 
whereby you can locate spurious additions to inventory and 
various deletions therefrom", it becomes very clear they’re 
talking about a system that will remember something about 
the description of the article and be able to help track that 
and then you go through the dependent claims and you can 
see where that system is built upon and I would suggest to 
the Court and it is in the record so far in [11] this case even 
though it was on the infringement part, we did ask Mr. 
Mikula about the Liberty Lister machine and he said there 


274 


was no difference between that and the "Datamark" system 
except one used a preprinted bar code and "Datamark" used 
the bar code generated by the machine itself and it makes 
certain sense that if this patent were only to cover the 
preprinted bar code because there is no dispute at all about 
Liberty Lister that Mr. Markman wouldn't say Liberty Lister 
infringes, then it’s clear that the "Datamark" isn’t covered 
by this patent; doesn’t read on it. It does not have that 
system that will keep track of the descriptions of the articles 
of clothing, tie that to the bar code so you can tie it to the 
invoice number so you can tie everything in that order 
together. 


THE COURT: Let me hear the other side if I may. I 
think I understand your argument. 


MR. MALLIN: May it please the Court, there is no basis 
for granting a judgment notwithstanding a verdict. The issue 
was submitted to the jury by the Court. The Court gave to 
the jury interpretation of the claims taken in great part from 
the submission of the defendant some over my objections I 
may say. It was presented to the jury. The jury had to apply 
the law as given to them from the Court to the facts they 
found. 


A lot of what we heard just a few moments ago is [12] 
disagreeing with the facts that we must now take it that the 
jury found and it’s a normal way where the jury applies the 
law to the facts. Mr. Griffin wasn’t up here more than two 
minutes when he talked about Mr. Jenkins’ testimony about 
something being held in the buffer at some point. He said 
that to the jury. It did not carry the day with the jury. That’s 
why we have juries. Mr. Griffin has interpretations of Mr. 


275 


Mikula’s testimony. He has interpretations of Mr. 
Markman’s testimony. I don’t accept those interpretations. 
I don’t think that’s the point. That all went to the jury. 
That’s why we had the jury in the box to make those 
determinations. We had a patent expert read the claims on 
the accused device. We made the demonstrations before the 
jury. We put the operating manuals in and the brochures in 
that used words that the information was committed to the 
memory. One of it says committed to the memory. The other 
Says saved in the memory so without belaboring the point, 
Your Honor, the jury has spoken. There’s no basis for 
setting aside the verdict of the jury on infringement and I 
respectfully suggest that the motion should be denied and we 
should go on with the trial. 


THE COURT: May I ask you the same question I asked 
the other side? In your view -- Let me put it this way. The 
other side, as I understand it, takes the [13] position that 
inventory means articles of clothing and dollars. In other 
words, the other side says inventory means not just dollars. 
Now let's just assume hypothetically that that’s correct just 
hypothetically. I’m not asking you to agree with it. If that’s 
correct, does your Claims 1 and 10 read on the Westview 
product? 


MR. MALLIN: Yes. 
THE COURT: Show me how. 
MR. MALLIN: Because the claim says to maintain an 


inventory total. If the inventory total is in dollars, that’s 
fine. If the inventory total is the listed items, that is fine. A 


276 


patent isn’t read in the hypertechnical way that they want to 
read it. The claims are meant to cover things that-- 


Remember, the claim draftsman isn’t sitting with 
somebody’s particular product and describing it. He’s 
describing a concept here. Again Mr. Jenkins testified about 
inventories. Their own brochure was put in and it says, 
"Complete cash and inventory reports” -- I’m reading from 
Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 9 which is a "Datamark" brochure that 
says, "Complete cash and inventory reports production 
printout is by garment and department." 


THE COURT: Can I just interrupt you on that particular 
point? Assume hypothetically that that brochure is spurious, 
that is, it makes a claim about [14] controlling inventory 
which is untrue, that the device I asked you to -- I ask you 
to assume hypothetically does not control articles of clothing 
in a drycleaning establishment’s inventory. I’m not asking 
you to agree with those assumptions but if those assumptions 
are correct, does your claim read on the defendants’ device? 


MR. MALLIN: I’m not quite sure I follow. The first 
point is the jury had the right to resolve this to mean 
whatever they resolved it to mean to fit in the claim. That’s 
what we submitted to them. 

THE COURT: But if the device -- 

Does their device track articles of clothing? 

MR. MALLIN: Individual articles of clothing? 


THE COURT: Yes. 


277 


MR. MALLIN: No. As I said to the jury, their device 
does not put tags on the individual items of clothing and 
follow those individual articles. There’s another claim that 
does that, you know. This claim doesn’t do that. You 
interpret the claim and have them to apply it, the jury to 
apply it so it’s a jury question. 


THE COURT: Okay. Let me see if I can put it this way. 
This device of Westview’s does not track individual articles 
of clothing. Assume hypothetically that Westview puts in its 
advertising the false, spurious claim that its device does 
track individual articles of [15] clothing. That is untrue. Ask 
you to assume that. 


Does your -- I’m trying to put it in your vocabulary 
and I’m having difficulty. 


Does your Claim 1 read on that falsely advertised device? 

MR. MALLIN: I’m still having some difficulty because 
the claim reads on a device that does what the claim says. I 
think your question is if they said it put individual article 
tags on individual items of clothing -- 

THE COURT: And that was false -- 

MR. MALLIN: -- and it did, could they be patent 
infringing? I’m afraid I’d have to hit the law books. I’ve 
never had that question before. 


THE COURT: It’s an open question you say? 


278 


MR. MALLIN: I'd have to hit the law books because | 
haven’t dealt with an accuser who tells the world that his 
product does something and it doesn’t. He's getting the 
benefit of selling what appears to be a patent device in the 
marketplace but, Your Honor, I’ve never looked up that 
legal question and I would not make a representation to the 
Court as to what the law is on that subject. I would have to 
search the law and think about it further. 


THE COURT: Well, could I impose on you and the [16] 
other side to focus on that question and just give me what 
authority you can on it? I'd like to educate myself as best I 
can. In this field, as you know, I’m no expert in this field 
and I’d would [sic] very much appreciate both your advices 
on that. 


MR. MALLIN: I’ll be happy to do that, Your Honor. I 
want to emphasize that quite apart from that issue, an 
appropriate issue was submitted to the jury under the 
interpretation of the Court on the testimony to determine 
whether the accused device is explained by the witnesses, 
our witnesses, his witnesses. It was for the jury and they 
have spoken and there’s no basis for a judgment 
notwithstanding a verdict to take it away from the jury. 


THE COURT: I guess it’s really a motion for a directed 
verdict which if granted would apply to both defendants. | 
take it that’s the posture because there’s no judgment. 


MR. MALLIN: I think under the rules if there’s a motion 
notwithstanding the verdict -- Because the rule says if you 
make a directed verdict and it’s either denied or not granted, 


279 


then you can go ahead with the judgment notwithstanding the 
verdict. 


THE COURT: But there’s no judgment yet. You don’t 


have a judgment. You just have a verdict on one [17] phase 
of the case. 


MR. MALLIN: Yes, I understand. 


THE COURT: In any event, if I grant the motion, it will 
apply to both defendants Westview and Althon. 


MR. MALLIN: There wouldn't be any -- I take it if you 
don’t think there’s an infringement case, if you think that 
there should be a determination notwithstanding the verdict 
that there should not be infringement that the accused system 
does not infringe Claims 1 and 10, that would apply to both 
defendants. I don’t think that’s the problem. 


THE COURT: On the part of the claim that talks about 
the optical scanner if I could ask you to take a peek at that 
with me and help me, "At east one optical scanner operable 
to detect bar codes on all articles passing a predetermined 
station.” 


How does this Westview device do that? Do you say -- 


MR. MALLIN: They go out with their "Datascan". First 
of all, they can take out of inventory when a customer 
comes. They can do that and, therefore, that’s one point they 
can do it. Since it’s a portable scanner, they can do it at any 
point they want to check it at any predetermined point they 
want to check it. They can do it as the witnesses explained 


280 


and Mr. Jenkins had a contrary [18] view and they both had 
the statements for the jury and that’s exactly the kind of 
issue for a jury to resolve. 


THE COURT: Your view of inventory is what? What do 
you say inventoryy [sic] means? 


MR. MALLIN: You've got to look at a particular place. 
An inventory can be dependirg 1 the circumstances of a 
particular establishment, a business, an inventory in common 
parlance can be a dollar amount to say I have a million 
dollars in inventory of widgets or it could be I have a 
thousand items or a hundred thousand of this or ten thousand 
of another. You can’t read a patent claim -- If one operator 
has an inventory report that shows items, that’s an inventory, 
another one has dollars, that’s an inventory and we saw 
various reports where they had invoice numbers as well as 
dollars. 


THE COURT: Well, is it your position then that 
inventory means both articles and dollars? 


MR. MALLIN: It can mean either. 
THE COURT: But in this -- 


MR. MALLIN: In this case what it says is maintain an 
inventory total. A dollar total does it. Some other infringer 
might maintain a physical total. That would do it too. And 
of course the descriptions are on the tickets which are 
reconcilable by looking at the tickets. 


281 


[19] Your Honor, I'll be happy to look up, even though 
I don’t think it’s directly applicable, I'll be very happy to 
review the point of law that the Court evinced interest in. 


282 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


HERBERT MARKMAN 
and POSITEK, INC. 


v. 


WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. 
and ALTHON 
ENTERPRISES, INC. 


CIVIL ACTION 


No. 91-0940 


[FILED SEP 30 1991 
MICHAEL E. KUNZ, 
Clerk 


By: /s/ Dep. Clerk 


JURY OUESTION 


1. Do the products manufactured by defendant Westview 
infringe any of the following claims of plaintiff 


Markman’s patent? 
Claim #1 
Claim #10 


Claim #14 


Yes_x No 
Yes x No 
Yes No_x 


PLEASE SIGN THE SHEET AND SUMMON THE 


CLERK. 


s/ signed by | 


s/ signed by j 


283 


284 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


HERBERT MARKMAN and 
POSITEK, INC., 


Plaintiffs : CIVIL ACTION 
Vv. : NO. 91-0940 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. 
And ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Defendants 


SUPPLEMENTAL REQUESTED 
INTERROGATORIES TO THE JURY 


Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc. respectfully 
suggests that the interpretation of the patent in suit is a 
question of law for the Court. The question of infringement 
can involve questions of fact. Under those circumstances the 
Court should have the issue of infringement determined 
through the use of special interrogatories which ask specific 
questions about the accused device. Westview requests that 
the Court utilize the attached interrogatories. 


/s/Frank H. Griffin, Il 
Frank H. Griffin, Ill 
Peter A. Vogt 

Gollatz, Griffin, Ewing 


Dated: September 27, 1991 


285 


& McCarthy 
Sixth Floor 
Two Penn Center Plaza 
Philadelphia, PA 19102 
(215) 563-9400 


Attorneys for Defendant 
Westview Instruments, 
Inc. 


286 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


HERBERT MARKMAN and 
POSITEK, INC., 


Plaintiffs : CIVIL ACTION 
ne : NO. 91-0940 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. 
And ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Defendants 


Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc.'s 


Supplemental Requested Instruction 


Defendant Westview Instruments, Inc. respectfully 
requests the Court instruct the jury as follows: 


You have heard testimony concerning the meaning of 
the patent claim language involved in this case. The 
interpretation of a patent, however, is a question which is 
decided by the Court, as an issue of law. I have reviewed 
the patent involved in this suit including the claim language, 
specifications and drawings and the prosecution history of 
the patent. This patent, the invention, relates to inventory 
control devices capable of monitoring and reporting upon the 
status, location and throughput of inventory in an 
establishment, here dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
Claim 1 of the patent in suit reads as follows: 


287 


an inventory control and reporting system, 
comprising; 


a data input device for manual operation 
attendant, the input device having switch means puede Mae 
encode information relating to sequential transactions, each 
of the transactions having articles associated therewith, said 
information including transaction identity and descriptions of 
each of said articles associated with the transactions; 


ine a data processor including memory operable to record 
said information and means to maintain an inventory total, 
said data processor having means to associate sequential 
transactions with unique sequer’‘*! indicia and to generate at 
least on report of said total and sid transactions, the unique 
sequential indicia and the descriptions of articles in the 
Sequential transactions being reconcilable against one 
another; 


a dot matrix printer operable under control of the data 
processor to generate a written record of the indicia 
associated with sequential transactions, the written record 
including optically-detectable bar codes having a series of 
contrasting spaced bands, the bar codes being printed only in 
coincidence with each said transaction and at least part of the 


written record bearing a portion to be attached to said 
articles; and 


at least one optical scanner connected to the data 
processor and operable to detect said bar codes on all articles 
passing a predetermined station, 


a whereby said system can detect and localize spurious 
additions to inventory as well as spurious deletions therefore. 


288 


That language, is, in places, subject to different 
interpretation. I instruct you that when you consider 
whether the Westview Instruments, Inc. Datamark system 
infringes you should understand that Claim 1, as stated, 
defines a system that includes a data processor, or computer, 
which has sufficient memory to record information about 
sequential transactions, including the identity and 
descriptions of the articles of clothing involved, and which 
also has the means or ability to generate at least one report 
of inventory total and transaction totals in which the unique 
sequential indicia, or invoice number, and the description of 
the articles in the transaction can be reconciled against one 
another. A system which does not have memory operable to 
record and store and later use information about or including 
the descriptions of articles does not infringe the patent in 
suit. 


The claim also defines a system in which the data 
processor, or computer, has both the memory which I just 
referred to and the means to maintain an inventory total. A 
system which does not have both that memory and means to 
maintain an inventory total does not infringe the patent in 
suit. 


Further, the claim defines a system which has at least 
one optical scanner connected to the data processor operable 
to detect bar codes on all articles of clothing which pass a 
predetermined, or fixed station. A system which does not 
have that does not infringe this patent. 


The claim is of an inventory and control system 
which must be able to detect and localize spurious, that 
illegitimate, additions to inventory as well as deletions from 


289 


inventory. As used in Claim 1, inventory refers to both cash 
inventory and the actual physical inventory, that is articles 
of clothing. A system which does not have that does not 
infringe this patent. 


You must determine whether the Westview 
Instruments, Inc. Datamark system reads on Claim 1. That 
is, does the Datamark system have all of the elements 
described in Claim 1. 


Frank H. Griffin, [I 

Peter A. Vogt 

Gollatz, Griffin, Ewing & 
McCarthy 

Sixth Floor 

Two Penn Center Plaza 

Philadelphia, PA 19102 

(215) 563-9400 


Attorneys for Defendant 
Westview Instruments, Inc. 


Date: September 27, 1991 


290 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


HERBERT MARKMAN and 
POSITEK, INC.., 


Plaintiffs - CIVIL ACTION 
Vv. : NO. 91-0940 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. 
And ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Defendants 


MOTION OF DEFENDANT WESTVIEW 
INSTRUMENTS, INC. FOR DIRECTED VERDICT 
PURSUANT TO RULE 50 OF THE FEDERAL 


RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 


Pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 50, defendant Westview 
Instruments, Inc. ("Westview"), respectfully moves this 
Court for a directed verdict at the close of the evidence 
offered by plaintiffs. 


As a matter of law, plaintiffs have failed to show by 
a preponderance of the evidence that Westview’s 
DATAMARK or DATASCAN or the combination of the two 
have infringed the patent-in-suit. 


/s/ Frank H. Griffin, II 


Frank H. Griffin, UI 
Peter A. Vogt 


291 


Gollatz, Griffin, Ewing & 
McCarthy 

Sixth Floor 

Two Penn Center Plaza 

Philadelphia, PA 19102 

(215) 563-9400 —~ 


Attorneys for Defendant 
Westview Instruments, Inc. 


Dated: September 26, 1991 


292 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA 


HERBERT MARKMAN and 
POSITEK, INC., 


Plaintiffs : CIVIL ACTION 
v. : NO. 91-0940 


WESTVIEW INSTRUMENTS, INC. 
And ALTHON ENTERPRISES, INC., 


Defendants 


ORDER 


AND NOW, this 20th day of September, 1991, upon 
consideration of the Motion of Defendant Westview 
Instruments, Inc. for Reconsideration of this Court's Order 
Denying Westview’s Motion for Summary Judgment, it is 
hereby ORDERED that this Court’s Order dated September 
17, 1991 denying Westview’s motion be and hereby is not 
VACATED. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether defendant’s product stores in memory individual 
articles. Compare Jenkins Dep. p. 108 (Exh. B Motion) 
with Operator’s Manual p. 6 attached to plaintiff's Memo in 
Opposition. 


BY THE COURT: 
/s/ Marvin Katz, J. 


[ENTERED: 9/23/91 
CLERK OF COUPT] 


