ea 


Supreme Court, U.S. 
wot bee D 


rhs 


A 9 
No. 94-1867 UG 1995 
IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


AMERICAN LIFE LEAGUE INC., et al., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


“~— JANET RENO, 
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES, 


Respondent. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF TO 
RESPONDENTS’ BRIEFS IN OPPOSITION 


MARION EDWYN HARRISON* 

DANIEL M. REDMOND 

LAW OFFICES MARION EDWYN HARRISON 
107 Park Washington Court 

Falls Church, Virginia 22046 

(703) 532-0303 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


August 9, 1995 
Seer amnersiemr: imate RR Em SR EONLMRESRORE NERA ERR DOR ST OE EA PR 


PRESS OF BYRON 8. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page Number 


TABLE OF CONTENES .ccivccscccccscccctovctes i 


I. Respondents Do Not Address 
The Lopez Majority: There Is 
No Substantial Interstate Commerce 
ATRNGE Ob SUR DAES cc vccccceccccccccccecs 1 


Il. Respondents Skirt any Definition of 
Nonviolent Physical Obstruction of 
Entrances to Clinics and Leave FACE in 
PE GE aintd otc carcinewcrccccceccs 5 


Ill. Strict Scrutiny Is the Proper 
BENET BAN ON cab cca vacenevicecccoveccovesé 8 


COPFEAAMIEY be cccdscensecescccceccecseccecsees 9 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page Number 
CASES 
Cheffer v. Reno, 55 F.3d 1517 


(21 Cle. SOON i. ccctcbciticioncsdls eee 6 


Madsen v. Women’s Health Center, Inc. 
134 S, Ct, FENG GPRD: vecic ccvbtdeccccécncdccsasen 8 


United States v. Lopez, 115 S. Ct. 1624 (1995) ... 1,2, 3,4 


United States v. Wilson, 
880 F. Supp. 621 (E.D. Wis. 1994) ..........2-006s $7 


Wickard v. Filburn, 317 U.S. 111 (1942) ............ 1,2 


UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION 


Ast, 4,98 .cccccccccccccccctscccccscessecseseose 3 
Art. I, § 8, Cl. 3 (Commerce Clause) ........ 1, 2,3, 4,9 
Dare AGRON ccacodccetsocccnsceseacensewe 7,9 
TED AGS cc ccccccoccccesosuesoeoeese 2, 4,7 


ProcrGoemts AGO 2c cccccccceccececesovcesses 9 


STATUTES 


18 U.S.C. § 248 (FACE) ........0ecccceee 1, 2, 4, 5, 6,8 


I. Respondents Do Not Address 
The Lopez Majority: There Is 
No Substantial Interstate Commerce 
Affect to Justify FACE 


Respondents contend that FACE, in Respondent Reno’s 
words, “passes muster under two of the categories identified by 
the Court” in United States v. Lopez, 115 S. Ct. 1624 (1995). 
Respondent Reno Brief, at 9. Ergo, FACE is sustainable 
under Lopez as (1) a proper use of “Congress’s power to 
regulate or protect ‘persons or things in interstate commerce” 
and (2) “as an exercise of Congress’s power to regulate 
‘activities that substantially affect interstate commerce.’ ” 
Ibid. But the key quoted language is that of Respondent Reno, 
not that of Lopez. 


Preliminarily, Petitioners note that, as to (1), supra, 
neither Lopez nor other Commerce Clause cases speak to 
“protect” or “protection” but to “regulate” or “regulation.” The 
Commerce Clause is authority to regulate persons or things in 
interstate commerce, not to protect them. 


Respondents attempt to fabricate a Commerce Clause 
criminal law stance that reflects the sweeping regulatory law 
dimension which the federal courts evolved during the 59 years 
preceding Lopez - that is, an almost irrebuttable presumption 
that if Congress felt a local activity implicated interstate 
commerce, federal jurisdiction would be sustained, with or 
without demonstrable substantiality. It mattered little whether 
the interstate commercial impact were slight or substantial. A 
plausible, if thin, interstate reed was adequate. Wickard v. 


2 


Filburn, 317 U.S. 111 (1942) (a trivial quantity of homegrown 
wheat integrally a part of a national crop regulatory system). 
Lopez, however, changed that, enquiring more discerningly not 
only about substantially of impact but also about the very 
existence of economic activity or commerce. Further, 
Repondents attempt to apply their expansive Commerce Clause 
reading not to regulatory, but to criminal, law. FACE, after all, 
regulates nothing; it criminalizes. 


To engineer this legerdemain, Respondent Reno quotes 
not from the Lopez majority opinion but from one of two 
concurrences. “The Court [did not] reason . . .” as Respondent 
Reno contends, Respondent Reno Brief, at 11; two concurring 
Justices did. However, Justices Kennedy and O’Connor also 
signed the najority opinion. Consequently, their concurring 
comments ae to be interpreted in the context of the majority 
opinion, notas the holding of the Court. 


Resfondent Reno’s approach reveals the paucity of 
Respondent:’ arguments: Respondents find no support in the 
Opinion of te Court and must resort to out-of-context reliance 
upon a conaurrence, ignoring the fact the concurring Justices 
also signed he Opinion of the Court. 


FACE presents a case as clear as the Lopez statute in 
dealing withprivate conduct having no substantial affect upon 
interstate conmerce. Congressional efforts to justify FACE in 
Tenth Amendment terms failed to make a substantial link 
between wiat it was designed to do and interstate commerce. 
As Chief Justice Rehnquist, addressing Justice Breyer’s dissent, 
wrote in Lopez: 


3 


Justice Breyer rejects our reading of 
precedent and argues that “ Congress. . . could 
rationally conclude that schools fall on the 
commercial side of the line.” Post, at 1664. 
Again, Justice Breyer’s rationale lacks any real 
limits because, depending on the level of 
generality, any activity can be looked upon as 
commercial. Under the dissent’s rationale, 
Congress could just as easily look at child 
rearing as “fall[ing] on the commercial side of 
the line” because it provides a “valuable service 
-- namely, to equip [children] with the skills 
they need to survive in life and, more 
specifically, in the workplace.” Ibid. We do 
not doubt that Congress has authority under the 
Commerce Clause to regulate numerous 
commercial activities that substantially affect 
interstate commerce and also affect the 
educational process. That authority, though 
broad, does not include the authority to regulate 
each and every aspect of local schools. 


115 S. Ct. 1633. 


Respondents argue against Petitioners in much the 
same way Justice Breyer argued against the majority in Lopez. 
But under this reasoning, as Chief Justice Rehnquist rightly 
points out, there is no limit to legislation in any area Congress 
wishes to enter, however local in nature. The Constitution 
makes the Federal Government one of limited powers (U.S. 
Const., Art. I, 4, §8),a restriction that virtually had disappeared 


ro 


4 


in regulatory law over the 59-year diversion. Lopez attempts to 
restrict the further emasculation of those constitutional 
limitations, particularly as to criminal law applicability. To 
accept Respondents’ arguments would signal Congress and the 
federal courts that the intervening (and nullifying) approach to 
the Tenth Amendment, gone for a short time, was reinstated; 
and, more dramatically, that the expansive Commerce Clause 
sweep evolved over 59 years now, notwithstanding Lopez, was 
to be extended to criminal law. 


Respondent Reno claims that FACE “may be sustained 
as an exercise of Congress’s power to regulate ‘activities that 
substantially affect interstate commerce.”” Opposition Brief, at 
9. But nowhere does Respondent Reno demonstrate that this 
conclusion is based upon anything more than Congress’s desire 
to render impossible peaceable (and nonpeaceable) prayer, 
protest and demonstration around abortion clinics. Absent is 
any real interstate commerce justification for intruding into 
what are essentially local matters where trespass and other local 
laws abound to preserve property rights and the peace and to 
prosecute violent crimes against abortion facilities and 
personnel. 


Congress spoke of interstate commerce in committee 
hearings and cited alleged connecting links with violence 
around public health facilities, but nowhere did anything more 
than offer conclusional findings based upon inadequate 
showings of substantial interstate commerce impact. As Chief 
Justice Rehnquist also said in Lopez, that in reviewing 
legislation, as “a part of our independent evaluation of 
constitutionality under the Commerce Clause we of course 


5 


consider legislative findings, and indeed even congressional 
committee findings...” 115 S. Ct. at 1631. In short, this 
Court is not bound by such findings to establish substantial 
impact upon interstate commerce. Respondents, not content 
with inadequate and conclusional congressional findings, go 
further, enveloping every peaceful citizen who prays, sidewalk- 
counsels or demonstrates in some kind of alleged national 
conspiracy the totality of which substantially affects interstate 
commerce.! 


Il. Respondents Skirt any Definition of 
Nonviolent Physical Obstruction of 
Entrances to Clinics and Leave 
FACE in Definitional Limbo 


Nowhere in their opposing briefs do Respondents try to 
deal with the vexing questions raised by FACE’s prohibition of 
nonviolent physical obstruction of entrances to abortion clinics. 
Respondents do mention United States v. Wilson, 880 F. Supp. 
621 (E.D. Wis. 1994), appeals pending, Nos. 95-1308, 95- 
1309, 95-1933, 95-1488 & 95-1494 (7th Cir.) Respondent 


There may be scant limitation to the reach of substantial affect 
under Respondents’ reasoning: Citizens who peacefully pray 
or demonstrate for or against nuclear power plants, military 
bases, pipelines, forests, open space, dams, affirmative action, 
homosexual activity, gun control and the like would be subject 
to federal jurisdiction as substantially affecting interstate 
commerce (and subsuming an economic activity). And if one 
blocked, even temporarily or accidentally, a proscribed 
entrance, and intended (economic, political, social or other) 
injury, the next FACE-type enactment would apply. 


6 


Reno Brief, at 12; Respondents National Abortion Federation, 
et al. Brief, at 6, 12. But they do not tell the Court that the 
District Court found one section of FACE to be constitutionally 
flawed -- namely, the provision in 18 U.S.C. § 248(a)(1) that 
prohibits as a crime something Congress termed in § (b), the 
penalties provision, “a non-violent physical obstruction” of 
entrances to reproductive health facilities with a fine of not 
more than $10,000 and imprisonment of not more than six 
months or both, for a first offense. 


Respondents also fail to address Cheffer v Reno, 55 
F.3d 1517, 1521 (11th Cir. 1995), which sustained the 
constitutionality of FACE but held FACE, 28 U.S.C. 
§248(a)(1), applicable only to physical “force or threat of 
force”: 


The term “force” is often interpreted to 
mean “physical force.” See Johnson v. 
Mississippi, 421 U.S. 213, 222-227, 95 S.Ct. 
1591, 1597-1599, 44 L.Ed.2d 121 (1975) 
(interpreting similar language -- “by force or 
threat of force willfully injures, intimates, or 
interferes with” - to provide protection against 
violence). The context of [FACE] reinforces 
the “physical force” interpretation. 


This increases the uncertainty as to FACE’s 
applicability and dilutes its supposed substantial affect upon 
interstate commerce, for surely that substantial affect which 
Respondents perceive would be identical whether a criminal 
defendant ran afoul of the statute by nonphysical or physical 
force. 


7 


Nor do Respondents attempt to deal with the Tenth 
Amendment, not to mention the First Amendment questions 
inherent in criminalizing such conduct that does not involve 
physical violence. Of course, Congress did not define what it - 
had in mind, thus making potentially criminal the peaceful 
picketing and praying of Petitioners and other like-minded 
individuals around abortion facilities, which naturally can 
cause nonviolent physical obstruction of clinic entrances 
(however temporary), although Petitioners and like-minded 
protesters are standing on public sidewalks or streets and do 
nothing that can be interpreted as threatening. 


In Wilson the District Court analyzed Tenth 
Amendment considerations limiting the power of the Federal 
Government and concluded: 


Applying these principles to the case at 
bar, it is without question that non-violent 
physical obstruction is closely analogous to 
simple trespass, which historically and 
traditionally has rested within the domain state, 
and even local, authorities. Indeed, in such 
situations, Congress itself acknowledges that 
Tenth Amendment concerns are of prime 
importance in deciding whether or not to 
intervene in matters of state and local concern. 
42 U. S. C. § 10501, discussed, supra. 
Therefore, the Tenth Amendment analysis 
clearly confirms the Court’s earlier conclusion 
that Congress has exceeded the scope of its 
Commerce power. 


. . . This case represents a point at which the 
bedrock constitutional principle of enumerated 


8 


powers is strained beyond meaning and 
recognition and a point at which the delicate 
balance and distinction between the powers of 
the Federal Government and the powers of the 
States is irretrievably lost. 


880 F. Supp. at 634. 


Ill. Strict Scrutiny Is the Proper Review Level 


Respondent Reno asserts that Madsen v Women’s 
Health Center, Inc., 114 S. Ct. 2516 (1994), demonstrates 
Petitioners’ error in contending FACE should be subject to 
strict scrutiny. Respondent Reno Brief, at 18, n. 7. But 
Petitioners correctly described Madsen: FACE is a statute, not 
an injunction; Madsen provides no guidance in evaluating 
whether FACE is not content- and viewpoint-neutral. 


Intervening Respondents compound the error, 
mystifyingly accusing Petitioners of “vehement opposition” to 
Madsen. Yet Petitioners have expressed no opinion about the 
wisdom of Madsen, only arguing Madsen affords no basis for 
any scrutiny less than strict scrunity because it is inapplicable. 
The scrutiny level which FACE commands is of fundamental, 
and precedental, import, itself an adequate ground for Supreme 
Court review. 


9 
CONCLUSION 


Petitioners raise serious constitutional questions 
involving the Commerce Clause, the First, Tenth and 
Fourteenth Amendments. For the foregoing reasons and those 
set out in the Petition, summarized in Part III, none of which 
Respondents convincingly address, this honorable Court should 
grant the Writ. 


Respectfully submitted. 


MARION EDWYN HARRISON* 
DANIEL M. REDMOND 

LAW OFFICES MARION EDWYN HARRISON 
107 Park Washington Court 

Falls Church 22046 

(703) 532-0303 

and 

1825 K Street, N.W. 

Suite 901 

Washington, D.C. 20006 

(202) 965-0800 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


April 9, 1995 


