
[PDF PAGE 1]


[PDF PAGE 2]
la 
PUBLISHED 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 
sete, 
AMERICAN Lire LeacuE, 
INCORPORATED; Davin G. P. 
ENGLEFTELD; Patricia LOHMAN: 
Geratp Weynes, Reverend: 
AnToineTTE C, Cleary; PATRICIA 
Savino, 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
Vv. 
JANET RENO; NATIONAL ABORTION 
FEDERATION; COMMONWEALTH 
; 
No. 94-1869 
Women’s Cunic; Caprro. Women’s 
Center, INcorPorATED; GEORGE 
Trier, Doctor; Susan WICKLUND, 
Doctor; NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR 
Women, 
Defendants-Appellees. 
AMERICAN Civic Liperties UNton: 
ACLU FounpaTion oF Vinci, 
Amici Curiae. 
Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of Virginia, at Alexandria. 
Leonie M. Brinkema, District Judge. 
(CA-94-700-A) 
Argued: November 3, 1994 
Decided: February 13, 1995 
Before HALL and MICHAEL, Circuit Judges, 
and CHAPMAN, Senior Circuit Judge. 


[PDF PAGE 3]
2a 
Affirmed by published opinion. Judge Michael wrote the opinion, in 
which Judge Hall and Senior Judge Chapman joined. 
COUNSEL 
ARGUED: Marion Edwyn Harrison, LAW OFFICES OF MARION 
EDWYN HARRISON, Falls Church, Virginia, for Appellants. Mark 
L Levy, Civil Division, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUS- 
TICE, 
Washington, 
D.C.; 
Deborah 
A. 
Ellis, NOW LEGAL 
DEFENSE AND EDUCATION FUND, New York, New York, for 
Appellees. ON BRIEF: Frank W. Hunger, Assistant Attorney Gen- 
eral, Helen F. Fahey, United States Attomey, Mark B. Stern, Jonathan 
R. Siegel, Civil Division, Deval L. Patrick, Assistant Atorney Gen- 
eral, William R. Yeomans, Counsel to the Assistant Attomey General. 
Civil Rights Division, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUS- 
TICE, Washington, D.C.; Martha F. Davis, NOW LEGAL DEFENSE 
AND EDUCATION FUND, New York, New York; Catherine Albisa, 
CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE LAW & POLICY, New York, 
New York, for Appellees. Catherine Weiss, Louise Melling, Karen 
Leiter, Reproductive Freedom Project, Steven R. Shapiro, AMERI- 
CAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION FOUNDATION, New York, New 
York; 
Stephen 
B. Pershing, AMERICAN 
CIVIL LIBERTIES 
UNION FOUNDATION OF VIRGINIA, Richmond, Virginia, for 
Amici Curiae. 
OPINION 
MICHAEL, Circuit Judge: 
Plaintiffs, the American Life League, Inc. and five individuals, all 
actively opposed to abortion, appeal from a judgment upholding the 
validity of the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act of 1994 
(the Access Act or Act), Pub. L. No. 103-259, 108 Stat. 694 (1994) 
(to be codified at 18 U.S.C. § 248). We affirm. 
In affirming we first conclude that the Access Act is within the 
commerce power of Congress and that congressional action here was 
t 
¢ P


[PDF PAGE 4]
3a 
picketing), we examine it under the First Amendment. Because we 
find that the Act is content and viewpoint neutral, we subject it to 
expression, and that it is narrowly tailored. We also conclude that the 
Act is neither overbroad nor vague. The Act's liquidated damages 
Provision also withstands the First Amendment challenge. Third, we 
conclude that the Act does not violate the First Amendment’s Free 
42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb to 2000bb-4. 
States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. 
Plaintiffs allege the following in their second amended complaint. 
Plaintiff American Life League, Inc. (ALL) conducts educational and 
legislative activities "relating to the human rights of persons born and 
unborn." The five individual plaintiffs, Antoinette C. Cleary, David 
G. P. Englefield, Patricia Lohman, Patricia Savino and the Reverend 
some ALL members have "demonstrated, prayed and sidewalk- 
counseled within the vicinity of abortion clinics." Plaintiffs’ activities 
Plaintiffs also allege that their continuing anti-abortion activities 
put them in jeopardy of violating the Access Act. They claim that the 
Act, by outlawing their activities, violates the Constitution and 
RFRA. 


[PDF PAGE 5]
—_—_—__ooo 
ee 
4a 
Plaintiffs brought this action against Janet Reno, Attomey General 
of the United States. The district court allowed five additional defen- 
dants to intervene: the National Abortion Federation; the National 
Organization for Women; Commonwealth Women’s Clinic and Capi- 
tol Women’s Center, two reproductive health clinics that provide 
counseling, birth control advice, contraceptives, medicine, pre-natal 
care and abortions; and Dr. George Tiller and Dr. Susan Wickland, 
two physicians who perform abortions. The district court accepted (as 
did we) an amicus brief from the American Civil Liberties Union and 
the ACLU Foundation of Virginia. 
On June 1, 1994, five days after the complaint was filed, the Attor- 
ney General filed a motion to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 12(b)(6). The district court acted with dispatch, holding a 
hearing on June 10, 1994, and issuing an opinion and order dismiss- 
ing the second amended complaint with prejudice on June 16, 1994. 
See American Life League, Inc. v. Reno, 855 F. Supp. 137 (E.D. Va. 
1994). Plaintiffs now appeal that order. 
I. 
Congress passed the Access Act in response to protracted and 
nationwide violence and access obstruction at facilities providing 
abortions. Between 1977 and early 1993, more than 1,000 acts of vio- 
:
lence against abortion providers and more than 6,000 clinic blockades 
i
were reported in the United States. S. Rep. 117, 103d Cong. Ist Sess. 
31 (1993); H. R. Rep. No. 306, 103d Cong. 2d Sess. 6-7 (1993) 
5 
reprinted in 1994 U.S.C.C.A.N. 699, 703. These acts included at 
least 36 bombings, 81 arsons, 131 death threats, 84 assaults, two kid- 
E 
nappings, 327 clinic invasions, and one murder." /d. Congress con- 
cluded that state and local law enforcement agencies were often 
: 
unable and sometimes unwilling to protect the patients and staffs of 
: 
these clinics from violence and severe disruption. S. Rep. No. 117 at 
5 
5, 18-21; H. R. Rep. No. 306 at 10. 
The Access Act aims to protect and promote public safety and 
health "by establishing Federal criminal penalties and civil remedies 
i 
for certain violent, threatening, obstructive and destructive conduct 
: 
that is intended to injure, intimidate or interfere with persons seeking 


[PDF PAGE 6]
Se 
da 
to obtain or provide reproductive health services." Act, § 2. To that 
end the Act provides criminal and civil penalties against anyone who: 
(1) by force or threat of force or by physical obstruc- 
(3) 
intentionally damages or destroys the Property of a 
facility, or attempts to do SO, because such facility provides 
reproductive health services . ees 
Act, § 3(a).' 
The Access Act defines its key terms. Act, § 3(e). The term "inte;- 
fere with" means "to restrict a person’s freedom of movement." "Tn- 
timidate" means "to place a person in reasonable apprehension of 
bodily harm to him- or herself or to another." "Physical obstruction" 
means "rendering impassable ingress to or egress from a facility that 
Provides reproductive health Services ..., or rendering passage to or 
from such a facility . . . unreasonably difficult or hazardous." "Repro- 
ductive health services" means "reproductive health services provided 
in a hospital, clinic, Physician’s office, or other facility, and includes 
medical, surgical, counselling or referral services relating to the 
human reproductive System, including services relating to pregnancy 
or the termination of a pregnancy." 
The Act also provides a tule of construction: "[nJothing in this sec- 
tion shall be construed — (1) to prohibit any expressive conduct 
(including peaceful picketing or other peaceful demonstration) pro- 
"The Act also Prohibits the same activities if directed at (i) any person 
lawfully exercising or seeking to exercise the right of religious freedom 
at a place of religious worship or (ii) the Property of a place of religious 
worship. Act, § 3(a). Those portions of the Act are not at 
issue ir this 
ase. 


[PDF PAGE 7]
6a 
tected from legal prohibition by the First Amendment to the Constitu- 
tion." Act, § 3(d). 
The criminal penalties prescribed by the Act vary with the nature 
of the violation. For example, a first offense involving only a nonvio- 
lent physical obstruction carries a penalty of imprisonment for not 
more than six months or a fine of not more than $10,000. An offense 
resulting in death carries a penalty of imprisonment for any term of 
years or for life. Act, § 3(b). 
The civil remedies prescribed by the Act include injunctive relief, 
compensatory or statutory damages ($5,000 per violation), punitive 
damages, and costs and fees. Act, § 3(c). These civil remedies are 
available to any person injured in providing or obtaining services at 
a reproductive health facility. Finally, the Act also authorizes civil 
actions by the Attorney General of the United States or any State 
Attomey General. /d. 
We tum now wo plaintiffs’ several challenges to the Act. 
Il. 
A. 
As a threshold matter plaintiffs argue that Congress lacks the 
power to pass the Access Act. The Act identifies the Commerce 
Clause and section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment as the sources of 
congressional power in this instance. Act, § 2. We conclude that the 
commerce power permits Congress to regulate activities affecting 
reproductive health services. As a result, we need not reach plaintiffs’ 
argument 
that section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment 
does not pro- 
vide Congress with authority. 
A federal statute is valid under the Commerce Clause if Congress 
(1) rationally concluded that the regulated activity affects interstate 
commerce and (2) chose a regulatory means reasonably adapted to a 
permissible end. Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Recl. Ass'n, 452 
U.S. 264, 276 (1981). 


[PDF PAGE 8]
7a 
health facilities engage doctors and other staff in an interstne market. 
For example, Dr. David Gunn, who was murdered in Florida in 1993, 
that interstate commerce was threatened. S. Rep. No. 117 at 31; H.R. 
Rep. No. 306 at 8-9. 
tional right to choose an abortion, (4) Protecting the safety of repro- 
ductive health care Providers, and (5) protecting reproductive health 
care facilities from physical destruction and damage. 
Together, these findings, these means and these objectives are 
more than ample to justify Congress's invocation of the commerce 
power. See Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379 U.S. 241 
(1964); Katzenbach y. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964), 
In a final, brief subpoint under their argument that "there is no con- 
Stitutional authority for [the Access Act]," plaintiffs urge us to reject 


[PDF PAGE 9]
8a 
the Act as an unwarranted "incursion upon federalism and the federal 
judiciary." Brief for Appellants at 39, 44. First, plaintiffs suggest that 
any public safety problems at reproductive health facilities should be 
handled under existing state laws. Second, they express concem that 
the Access 
Act gives federal courts "undue jurisdiction" 
and will add 
a flood of new cases tw already crowded federal dockets. We must 
reject these arguments. Congress, not the courts, determines the need 
for new federal laws. And Congress, subject only to Article III of the 
Constitution, establishes the jurisdiction of the inferior federal courts. 
See, e.g., Kline v. Burke Constr. Co., 260 U.S. 226, 233-34 (1922); 
Sheldon v. Sill, 49 U.S. (8 How.) 441, 448 (1850). 
IV. 
A. 
The Constitution ordains that "Congress shall make no law... 
abridging the freedom of speech." U.S. Const. amend L. Plaintiffs 
claim that the Access Act abridges this freedom. 
We begin our consideration of plaintiffs’ freedom of speech claims 
by repeating the elements of a basic offense under the Act. A violator 
must (1) "by force or threat of force or by physical obstruction,” (2) 
“intentionally injure[ }, intimidate[ }, or interfere[ ] . . 
. with any per- 
son," (3) "because that person [the victim] is . . 
. obtaining or provid- 
ing reproductive health services." Act, § 3a). 
The government's first defense is that the Act does not implicate 
the First Amendment at all; rather, it regulates conduct that is outside 
the First Amendment. According to the government, the Act leaves 
plaintiffs free to engage in any form of protected speech they choose. 
In many respects the government is correct. The Access Act does 
not prohibit protestors from praying, chanting, counseling, carrying 
signs, distributing handbills or otherwise expressing opposition to 
abortion, so long as these activities are carried out in a non-violent, 
non-obstructive manner. What the Act does prohibit is force, the 
threat of force and physical obstruction intended to deprive someone 
of the lawful right to use or provide reproductive health services. 


[PDF PAGE 10]
EE 
a 
9a 
The use of force or violence is outside the scope of First Amend- 
ment protection. Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 113 S$. Ct. 2194, 2199 (1993) 
("a physical assault is not by any stretch of the imagination expressive 
conduct protected by the First Amendment"). True threats of force 
also lie outside the First Amendment. Watts v. United States, 394 U.S. 
705, 707 (1969) (holding that "[wJhat is a threat must be distin- 
guished from what is constitutionally protected speech"); see R.A.V. 
v. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538, 2546-47 (1992). Finally, certain 
physical obstructions, such as a blockade of pedestrian traffic, are not 
protected by the First Amendment. See Cameron y. Johnson, 390 U.S. 
611, 617 (1968) (holding that a statute which prohibited unreasonable 
interference with access to a courthouse was 
a "valid law... 
and the 
fact that free speech is intermingled with such conduct does not bring 
with it constitutional protection"). 
Thus, the Act does target unprotected activities. But the Act cannot 
escape First Amendment scrutiny entirely. The Act might incidentally 
affect some conduct with protected expressive elements, such as 
peaceful but obstructive picketing. The right to peaceful protest lies 
near the heart of the freedom of speech. Accordingly, we examine the 
Act under the First Amendment. 
The first step in our First Amendment inquiry is to determine 
whether the Act is content and viewpoint neutral. Plaintiffs argue that 
the Act is a content- or viewpoint-based restriction because it outlaws 
conduct for its anti-abortion message. If plaintiffs are correct, then we 
Subject the Act to strict scrutiny. To pass this test a law must be nec- 
essary to serve compelling governmental interests by the least restric- 
tive means available. See, ¢.g., RA.V.,.112 S. Ct. at 2549-50 (1992); 
Burson v. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. 1846, 1851 (1992) (plurality). If plain- 
tiffs are incorrect, if the Act is content and viewpoint neutral, then we 
subject it to intermediate scrutiny. To pass this test a law must be nar- 
rowly tailored to serve substantial governmental interests. See, e.g., 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989); Clark v. 
Cammunity for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 (1984). 
The neutrality inquiry does not focus on the motive of the violator. 
Rather, a statute regulating expressive conduct is neutral if it is justi- 


[PDF PAGE 11]
10a 
fied without reference to the content of the violator’s message or 
point of view. Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc., 114 S. Ct 
2516, 2523-24 (1994); Ward, 491 U.S. at 791. Congress’s purpose is 
the main consideration. /d. 
The Access Act identifies its purpose in plain language: 
the purpose of this Act [is] to protect and promote public 
safety and health and activities affecting interstate com- 
merce by establishing Federal criminal penalties and civil 
remedies for certain violent, threatening, obstructive and 
destructive conduct that is intended to injure, intimidate, or 
interfere with persons seeking to obtain or provide reproduc- 
tive health services. 
Act, § 2. The Act also includes rules of construction: 
Nothing in this section shall be constued— 
(1) 
to prohibit any expressive conduct (including peaceful 
picketing or other peaceful demonstration) protected from 
legal prohibition by the First Amendment to the Constitu- 
uon; 
(2) 
to create any new remedies for interference with activi- 
ties protected by the free speech or free exercise clauses of 
the First Amendment to the Constitution, occurring outside 
a facility, regardless of the point of view expressed... 
. 
Act, § 3(d). Together, the Act’s statement of purpose and rules of 
construction indicate that the Act was not passed to outlaw conduct 
because it expresses an idea. Instead, Congress passed the Act to pro- 
mote public safety and health and to protect interstate commerce from 
disruption. 
Plaintiffs insist that these lofty statements of purpose and construc- 
tion are subterfuge. They say Congress really intended to "suppress 
only the anti-abortion side of a fierce national debate." Brief for 
Appellants at 8. This argument ignores the Act’s substantive provi- 


[PDF PAGE 12]
lla 
sions. These unambiguous provisions do not target any message based 
on content or viewpoint. 
The Act protects reproductive health services and those who use 
and provide them. Reproductive health services embrace "medical, 
surgical, counseling, or referral services relating to the human 
ductive system." Act, § 3(e). The Act thus protects access to all repro- 
ductive 
health 
services, 
including 
both 
abortion 
and services 
connected with carrying a fetus to term. It applies, for example, to 
facilities opposing abortion and to facilities offering pregnant women 
counseling about alternatives to abortion. For example, AAA Women 
for Choice, Inc., a facility run by plaintiff Patricia Lohman, would be 
protected. AAA Women for Choice offers "counsel, comfort and 
alternatives 
other than abortion 
to pregnant women." Second 
Amended Complaint at 4 6. 
Moreover, the Act punishes anyone who engages in the prohibited 
conduct. For example, anyone who, with the requisite intent, blocks 
a person from entering a facility to obtain or provide reproductive 
health services violates the Act. The viewpoint of the obstructer is 
irrelevant. The Act forbids the obstructive conduct not because of the 
content of any message that conduct might convey, but because of its 
harmful effects. 
Plaintiffs press on and say that the Act’s apparent neutrality is not 
enough. They charge that the inclusion of protection for anti-abortion 
Services is a ruse to make the Act look neutral. In reality, they argue, 
the Act aims to suppress the anti-abortion movement. They note that 
one is a wrongdoer under the Act only when he commits the pro- 
scribed conduct because the victim is obtaining or providing repro- 
ductive health services. The "because" element is the Act’s Achilles’s 
heel, according to plaintiffs. They Say only people who oppose abor- 
tion will be punished under the Act: those who protest at reproductive 
health facilities for reasons unrelated to the abortion issue will never 
violate the law. As examples, plaintiffs Say those protesting at clinics 
on labor and environmental issues would not violate the Act. On this 
basis plaintiffs conclude that the Act is aimed at their motives for pro- 
testing and thus at their message and its viewpoint. 
This lack-of-neutrality argument overlooks the distinction between 
what the Act does and does not regulate. Again, the Act does not pro- 


[PDF PAGE 13]
12a 
hibit peaceful protestors from praying, chanting, counseling, carrying 
signs, distributing handbills, or otherwise expressing their opposition 
to abortion. What the Act does prohibit is force, the threat of force, 
and physical obstruction, when carried out because a person is using 
or providing reproductive health services. The "because" or motive 
element does not render the Act content or viewpoint based. As we 
explain below, the Act’s motive requirement simply narrows its 
reach, and this narrowing is within congressional prerogative. 
In Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 113 S. Ct. 2194 (1993), the Supreme 
Court upheld a Wisconsin law that enhanced the sentence for the 
crime of aggravated battery when the defendant intentionally selected 
his victim because of the victim's race. Just like plaintiffs here, the 
defendant argued that he was being punished for his motive for act- 
ing. The unanimous Supreme Court rejected that argument, saying 
{motive plays the same role under the Wisconsin statute as it does 
under the federal and state anti-discrimination laws, which we have 
previously upheld against constitutional challenge." Jd. at 2200. The 
Court reasoned that "the penalty-enhancement statute [was] aimed at 
conduct unprotected by the First Amendment." Jd at 2201. Thus, 
Wisconsin’s statute did not target conduct on the basis of its expres- 
sive elements. Mitchell’s conclusion was consistent with the Supreme 
Court’s prior recognition that "where government does not target con- 
duct on the basis of its expressive content, acts are not shielded from 
regulation merely because they express a discriminatory idea or phi- 
losophy." R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538, 2546-47 (1992). 
As the Supreme Court observed in both Mitchell and R.A.V., the 
distinction between targeting the expressive elements of conduct and 
targeting the proscribable elements of conduct undergirds many fed- 
eral laws. For example, Title VII includes a motive requirement. Title 
VO makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an 
employee "because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1) (emphasis added). The 
Supreme Court has held that Title VII does not infringe an employer’s 
First Amendment rights. Hishon v. King & Spalding, 467 U.S. 69, 78 
(1984). Another example is a provision in the Fair Housing Act that 
prohibits using force or the threat of force to injure, intimidate, or 
interfere with a person "because" he is participating in certain housing 
programs. 42 U.S.C. § 3631 (emphasis added). That provision, 


[PDF PAGE 14]
13a 
despite its motive requirement, has been upheld as a content- and 
viewpoint-neutral regulation. United States v. Hayward, 6 F.3d 1241, 
1249-51 (7th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1369 (1994); United 
States v. Gilbert, 813 F.2d 1523, 1529-31 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 484 
U.S. 860 (1987).? 
Thus, Congress may enact laws to Punish proscribable conduct 
even though the conduct is motivated by certain biases or beliefs. 
More important for this case, Congress can exercise its prerogative to 
Single out and address "conduct thought to inflict greater individual 
and societal harm" by using a motive requirement to narrow the reach 
of a law. Mitchell, 113 S. Ct. at 2201; see 
FCC v. Beach Communica- 
tions, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2096, 2102-03 (1993). Indeed, in passing the 
Access Act Congress determined that intentional interference with 
access tO reproductive health services is more damaging to federal 
interests than activity that affects such access only incidentally, e.g., 
labor or environmental protesting. We repeat, Congress may choose 
to legislate only against actions it considers to be more serious. More- 
Over, a Statute 
is not rendered non-neutral simply because one 
ideologically defined group is more likely to engage in the proscribed 
conduct. See United States y. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968) (uphold- 
ing a statutory prohibition on burning draft cards despite the fact that 
most violators would likely oppose the Viemam War). 
For these reasons, we find that the Access Act is content and view- 
point neutral. The Act is justified without reference to the violator’s 
viewpoint or the content of his message. Therefore, we subject the 
Act to intermediate scrutiny. 
threat of force [to] willfully injure }, intimidate{ }, or interfere{ ] with 
. 
- for the purpose of interfering with" a person's right to vote) (empha- 
Sis added). 


[PDF PAGE 15]
l4a 
S. 
Intermediate scrutiny is required when a statute potentially regu- 
lates conduct that has protected expressive elements. The intermediate 
scrutiny test was first enunciated by the Supreme Court in O’Brien. 
O’Brien was convicted under a federal statute which made it a 
crime to destroy a draft card knowingly. In the Supreme Court 
O’Brien argued that his "act of burning his (draft card] was protected 
‘symbolic speech’ within the First Amendment." O’Brien, 391 U.S. 
at 376. The Supreme Court upheld the conviction, noting that Con- 
gress could regulate conduct that has an expressive element, given 
sufficient justification: 
even on the assumption that the alleged communicative ele- 
ment in O’Brien’s conduct is sufficient to bring into play the 
First Amendment, it does not necessarily follow that the 
destruction of a [draft card] is constitutionally protected 
activity. This Court has held that when "speech" and "non- 
speech" elements are combined in the same course of con- 
duct, a sufficiently important governmental 
interest 
in 
regulating the nonspeech element can justify incidental limi- 
tations on First Amendment freedoms. 
Id. The Court then laid down a test for reviewing a statute, such as 
the Access Act, that may incidentally affect speech as it regulates 
conduct. Under O’Brien’s test such a statute passes constitutional 
muster “if it [1] furthers an important or substantial governmental 
interest; if [2] the governmental interest is unrelated to the suppres- 
sion of free expression; and if [3] the incidental restriction on alleged 
First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is essential to the fur- 
therance of that interest." /d. at 377. 
1. 
O’Brien’s first prong asks whether the Act furthers important or 
substantial government interests. For easier discussion we group the 
several interests suggested by the government. 


[PDF PAGE 16]
15a 
One group relates to protecting public health, safety and com- 
merce. This interest includes Protecting patients and staff from vio- 
lence and harm and protecting reproductive health facilities from 
physical destruction or damage. It also includes protecting interstate 
patient traffic and the interstate market for the services of doctors, 
nurses, Counselors, and other staff. 
A second group of interests relates to protecting women and men 
from violence and threats in the exercise of their rights. The Supreme 
Court has recognized that goverment "has a Strong interest in pro- 
tecting a woman's freedom to seek lawful medical or counseling ser- 
vices in connection with her pregnancy." Madsen v. Women’s Health 
Center, Inc., 114 S. Ct. 2516, 2526 ( 1994). This freedom includes the 
constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. See Roe v. Wade, 410 
U.S. 113 (1973); Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791 
(1992). Also, both women and men have the constitutional right to 
obtain and use contraceptives. See Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 438, 
440, 446 (1972); Casey, 112 S. Ct. at 2807. They should be able to 
use reproductive health facilities to exercise this right. 
Together, or separately, these interests are significant. The govern- 
ment has a substantial interest in acting tO protect them, as Congress 
did by passing the Access Act. 
p 
O’Brien next asks whether the government's interests relate to sup- 
pressing free expression. This analysis is essentially the same as the 
content- and viewpoint-neutrality test we applied earlier. See IV.B., 
supra. We concluded that the Act was justified without reference to 
the message or viewpoint of anyone who might violate it. Relying on 
the Act’s plain language, we also noted that its purpose was not 
related to suppressing expression. Instead, we found that the Act out- 
lawed certain actions because of their harmful effects. We next 
‘Tejected plaintiffs’ contention that the Act’s avowed purpose shrouded 
an illicit purpose. We believe this analysis is sufficient for the Act to 
pass the second prong of the O’Brien test? 
*We add a comment here about the-government’s acknowledgment 
that "the national campaign of violent and obstructive pro-life protests 


[PDF PAGE 17]
16a 
3. 
Under O'Brien's third prong we consider whether the incidental 
restriction on alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than 
required to meet the government’s interests. This has been interpreted 
as a requirement for "narrow tailoring." Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 799 (1989). The statute must not "burden sub- 
stantially more speech than is necessary to further the government's 
legitimate interests." /d. 
The Act meets this standard. Much of the conduct (force and vio- 
lence) outlawed under the Act lacks any protected expressive element 
at all. Of course, peaceful but obstructive protesting, which plaintiffs 
argue has expressive elements, could run afoul of the Act. For ex- 
ample, protesters blocking a clinic door as they pray might violate the 
Act's prohibition on physical obstruction. However, such a violation 
would be simply a consequence of the government's lawful aim to 
protect access to reproductive health services. And the Act proscribes 
no more expressive conduct than necessary to protect safe and reliable 
access to reproductive health services. After all, the Act leaves open 
ample alternative means for communication. In a non-violent, non- 
obstructive manner, protestors may still stand outside reproductive 
health facilities and express their anti-abortion message. They may 
still proclaim their views and make their pleas by voice, signs, hand- 
bills. symbolic gestures and other expressive means.‘ 
2 
In sum, the Access Act serves substantial government interests 
such as preventing violence, preserving public access to reproductive 
health services, and protecting citizens in their exercise of constitu- 
was the catalyst that led to passage of the Act." Brief for Appellee United 
States at 22 n.7. This acknowledgment does not mean that Congress 
acted to curb protected expression. Protecting reproductive health facili- 
ties, patients, and providers is a legal purpose, unrelated to suppressing 
free expression. 
‘Our conclusion that the Act is narrowly tailored is also supported by 
the reasoning that compels us not to apply the overbreadth doctrine. See 
1V.D., infra. 


[PDF PAGE 18]
17a 
tional rights. It is not aimed at expression, and it is narrowly tailored. 
It passes O’ Brien’s test. 
D. 
Plaintiffs next assert that the Act is unconstitutionally overbroad 
and vague. They claim that "[{t}housands of persons who daily engage 
in peaceful activities around abortion clinics now risk arrest [and] 
prosecution" for exercising their First Amendment rights. Brief for 
Appellants at 29. They specifically point to "sign-carrying . 
. . and 
rosary-Carrying processions outside clinics." /d. at 28. Plaintiffs’ argu- 
ment is this: the Act’s alleged overbreadth and vagueness will have 
a "chilling effect" on such activities. 
As for overbreadth, "{ojnly a statute that is substantially overbroad 
may be invalidated on its face." Houston y. Hill, 482 U.S. 451, 458 
(1987) (citations omitted). Such an invalid Statute proscribes so much 
protected speech that it must be struck down entirely. Accordingly, 
the overbreadth doctrine is "strong medicine" to be applied "sparingly 
and only as a last resort." Broadrick v, Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 613 
expression, such as peaceful picketing, that picketing would be pro- 
hibited only in the most narrow and justifiable circumstances. Under 
the Act. "physical obstruction" involves intentionally "Tendering 
impassable ingress or egress from a facility . . . or rendering passage 
to or from such a facility . 
. 
. unreasonably difficult or hazardous." 
Act, § 3(e)(4). Thus, it is difficult to see how the Act is substantially 
overbroad in relation to its legitimate scope of Outlawing violence and 
barriers to access. 
The vagueness doctrine is concemed with clarity. A statute is 
unconstitutionally vague if it does not give a "person of ordinary 
intelligence a reasonable Opportunity to know what is prohibited 
- 
. 
« «" Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108 (1972). The 
vagueness doctrine protects both free speech and due process values. 
The Access Act’s anti-obstruction Provisions closely resemble a 
Statute the Supreme Court upheld against a vagueness challenge in 
Cameron v. Johnson, 390 U.S. 611 (1968). In Cameron arrested civil 


[PDF PAGE 19]
18a 
rights protestors challenged Mississippi's Anti-Picketing Law, which 
provided: 
1. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in con- 
cert with others, to engage in picketing or mass demonstra- 
tions in such a manner as to obstruct or unreasonably 
interfere with free ingress or egress to and from any public 
premises .... 
Id. at 613. The Supreme Court rejected the vagueness challenge on 
the grounds that the terms "obstruct," "unreasonably" and "interfere 
with" were perfectly clear, widely used, and well understood. Accord- 
ing to the Court, the statute "precisely delineates its reach in words 
of common understanding." /d. at 616. 
Like the Anti-Picketing Law upheld in Cameron, the Act here 
speaks in clear, common words. Moreover, the Act goes beyond the 
statute in Cameron by defining many of its terms. The Act defines 
"interfere with" to mean "restrict a person’s freedom of movement." 
Act, § 3(e)(2). It defines "intimidate" to mean "place a person in rea- 
sonable apprehension of bodily harm... ." Act, § 3(¢)(3). These and 
other narrowing definitions in the Act should inform those opposed 
to abortion that they will not offend this law by peaceful, non- 
obstructive picketing. 
We conclude that the Access Act is neither overbroad nor vague. 
E. 
Plaintiffs’ final freedom of expression challenge to the Access Act 
concerns a civil damage provision. The Act authorizes injured persons 
to file private actions, and it permits them to elect to recover $5,000 
per violation in lieu of actual damages. Act, § 3(c). Plaintiffs claim 
that this damage provision is unconstitutional under NAACP v. Clai- 
borne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886 (1982). 
Specifically, plaintiffs say that under Claiborne Hardware only 
actual damages caused by unprotected conduct may be recovered. But 
that is not what Claiborne Hardware says. Claiborne Hardware 


[PDF PAGE 20]
19a 
involved a money judgment imposing joint and several liability 
against ninety-two participants in a mass boycott of white-owned 
businesses. The Supreme Court addressed whether all members of the 
group could be held liable for the violent acts of a few. "Civil liability 
may not be imposed merely because an individual belonged to a 
group,” the Court said. /d. at 920. The Court did not consider what 
the constitutional measure of damages might be after a defendant was 
found liable for an unprotected act. 
The Act here does not subject anyone to damages caused by pro- 
tected expression. It does subject violators to limited liquidated dam- 
ages for unprotected conduct. We know of no tule prohibiting a 
_ liquidated damages provision that may in a particular case impose 
more than actual damages for unprotected activity.® 
V. 
Plainuffs’ last claims concem protections afforded religion. Specif- 
ically, they argue that the Access Act offends the First Amendment’s 
Free Exercise Clause and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 
1993 (RFRA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb to 2000bb-4. 
A. 
The Free Exercise Clause provides that "Congress shall make no 
law . . . prohibiting the free exercise" of religion. U.S. Const. amend. 
I. The clause forbids government from adopting laws designed to sup- 
press religious belief or practice. Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. 
v. Hialeah, 113 S. Ct. 2217, 2222 (1993). However, a neutral, gener- 
ally applicable law does not offend the Free Exercise Clause, even if 
the law has an incidental effect on religious practice. Employment 
Div., Dept. of Human Resources v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 878-79 
(1990). 
Relying on Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, plaintiffs claim that the 
Access Act violates the Free Exercise Clause. They say it aims to 
‘The reasonableness of the amount ($5,000) of the liquidated damages 
per violation is not at issue here. 


[PDF PAGE 21]
20a 
restrict nonviolent protest because of the protestors’ religious motiva- 
_ tion. In Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye the Supreme Court examined 
city ordinances aimed at suppressing the Santeria religion. The ordi- 
nances prohibited ritual animal slaughter, a Santeria religious prac- 
tice. The ordinances carefully outlawed only animal sacrifice and the 
possession of animals for sacrificial purposes. They did not outlaw 
hunting, fishing, or the killing of animals for food. In short, the ordi- 
nances accomplished a religious gerrymander. They singled out reli- 
gious practices for discriminatory treatment. The Supreme Court 
subjected the ordinances to the same level of exacting (strict) scrutiny 
it applies to content-based restrictions on speech. Church of Lukumi 
Babalu Aye, 113 S. Ct. at 2233-34. The ordinances were held uncon- 
stitutional. 
: 
By contrast, the Access Act punishes conduct for the harm it 
causes, not because the conduct is religiously motivated. See [V.B., 
supra. By necessity, then, the Act does not punish religious belief. It 
proscribes violent, forceful or threatening conduct without regard to 
expressive content or viewpoint. See [V.B., supra. Under the Act it 
makes no difference whether a violator acts on the basis of religious 
conviction or temporal views. The same conduct is outlawed for all. 
Therefore, the Act is a generally applicable law, neutral toward reli- 
gion. It does not offend the First Amendment’s Free Exercise Clause. 
The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) mandates that 
government shall not "substantially burden a person’s exercise of reli- 
gion" unless the government demonstrates that the burden furthers a 
"compelling governmental interest" by the "least restrictive means." 
42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1. 
The Access Act and RFRA were passed by the same Congress, but 
RFRA was passed first. RFRA’s rule of construction says that federal 
statutes enacted after RFRA are subject to its provisions unless the 
later statute "explicitly excludes [RFRA’s] application by reference to 
{the RFRA statute]." /d. at § 2000bb-3(b). The Access Act does not 
exclude RFRA’s application, so we examine plaintiffs’ claim that the 
Access Act violates RFRA. 


[PDF PAGE 22]
ee 
2la 
The threshold inquiry under RFRA concems burden. If a statute 
does not substantially burden a religious practice, then the statute 
does not implicate RFRA. 
Plaintiffs’ complaint alleges that they do not "condone 
. 
. 
. non- 
peaceable or violent conduct." Accordingly, a proscription on vio- 
lence and force cannot substantially burden their religious exercise. 
However, plaintiffs’ complaint also alleges that their opposition to 
abortion (on religious grounds) requires them to obstruct physically, 
through peaceful picketing, access to clinics Offering abortion ser- 
vices. We will assume that this allegation, coupled with plaintiffs’ 
assertion that the Access Act violates their RFRA rights, satisfies 
their obligation to plead a substantial burden on their religious exer- 
cise. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 8. This requires us to move to RFRA’s next 
level: an examination of whether the alleged substantial burden 
imposed by the Access Act furthers a "compelling governmental 
interest" by the "least restrictive means" available. 
We begin with some background. Congress passed RFRA as a 
response to Employment Div., Dep't of Human Resources v. Smith, 
494 U.S. 872 (1989). The "findings" section of RFRA states that 
Smith "virtually eliminated the requirement that government justify 
burdens on religious exercise imposed by laws neutral toward reli- 
gion." 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb(a). The "purpose" section adds that RFRA 
aims "to restore the compelling interest test a set forth in Sherbert 
v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 (1963), and Wisconsin y. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 
(1972)." Id. at § 2000bb(b).* 
*RFRA contemplates that courts will rely on cases decided prior to 
Smith when applying the statute's compelling interest standard. See 42 
U.S.C. § 2000bb(a)(5) (finding that the “compelling interest test as set 
forth in prior Federal court rulings [prior to Smith] is a workable test'' ; 
S. Rep. 111, 103d Cong. ist. Sess. 8 reprinted in 1993 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
1892, 1898 (noting that the "committee expects that courts will look to 
free exercise cases decided prior to Smith for guidance"); id. at 9 (stating 
that "the compelling interest generally should not be construed more 
stringently or more leniently than it was Prior to Smith") (foomote omit- 
ted). 


[PDF PAGE 23]
22a 
In Sherbert South Carolina denied unemployment benefits to a 
Seventh-day Adventist fired for refusing to work on her Sabbath. The 
Supreme Court reversed. It found uncompelling South Carolina's 
asserted interest in deterring “unscrupulous claimants feigning reli- 
gious objections to Saturday work." Sherbert, 374 U.S. at 407. In 
Yoder Wisconsin convicted three Amish parents for refusing to send 
their children to school beyond the eighth grade. Wisconsin's highest 
court reversed the convictions, and that result stood in the United 
States Supreme Court. Wisconsin's asserted interest of preparing self- 
reliant citizens for participation in society was rejected as uncompel- 
ling by the Supreme Court. The Amish had introduced convincing 
evidence that accommodating their religious objections by excusing 
a year or two of compulsory schooling would not impair the physical 
or mental health of the children or undermine their ability to be self- 
supporting and good citizens. Yoder, 406 U.S. at 221-29. In both 
Sherbert and Yoder the Supreme Court carefully distinguished cases 
involving the government’s paramount interest in protecting physical 
or mental health, public safety, or public welfare. Sherbert, 374 U.S. 
at 403; Yoder, 406 U.S. at 230. In addition, Sherbert noted that reli- 
gious accommodation could be denied when the accommodation, by 
allowing non-uniform treatment, presented a problem of sufficient 
magnitude to render a statutory scheme unworkable. Sherbert; 374 
U.S. at 408-09. 
In Free Exercise Clause decisions cited by or following Sherbert, 
the Supreme Court has recognized these compelling governmental 
interests in a variety of situations. For instance, the Court found the 
need for uniformity paramount in a case requiring an Amish employer 
to pay Social Security taxes for Amish employees, United States v. 
Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 258-59 (1982), and in a case denying Jewish ser- 
vicemen 
the right to wear a yarmulke, Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 
U.S. 503, 508-510 (1986). It found public welfare paramount in a 
case enforcing the draft against persons who considered a particular 
war "unjust," Gillette v. United States, 401 U.S. 437, 462 (1971), and 
in a case denying tax exemptions to educational institutions with 
racially discriminatory policies, Bob Jones University v. United 
States, 461 U.S. 574, 604 (1983). The Court found the public health 
and safety interest decisive in upholding mandatory vaccination, 
Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11 (1905),’ and in enforcing 
"Jacobson did not explicitly address the Free Exercise Clause. It did, 
however, discuss fundamental "liberty" interests. 197 U.S. at 26-27 and 


[PDF PAGE 24]
23a 
child labor laws, Prince y. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 168-70 
(1944) (finding that a state’s interest in Protecting health justified pro- 
hibiting a nine-year-old Jehovah’s Witness from distributing religious 
literature). 
Finally, we do not think the Free Exercise Clause shields conduct 
violating a criminal law that protects people and property from physi- 
cal harm. Cf Reynolds v. United States, 98 U.S. (8 Otto) 145, 166 
(1878) (posing the following rhetorical question: "[S]uppose one 
believed that human sacrifices were a necessary part of religious wor- 
ship, would it be seriously contended that the civil government under 
which he lived could not interfere to prevent a sacrifice?"). 
Second, we believe the Access Act is sufficiently narrow. The 
Act's prohibitions are directed Only to those actions Congress found 
to be a national problem, specifically force, threat of force and physi- 
cal obstruction. The Act does not sweep within its prohibitions activ- 
ity unrelated to the serious trouble Congress sought to address. 
We conclude that the Access Act serves sufficiently compelling 
government interests by the least restrictive means available. It there- 
fore does not violate RFRA. 
VI. 
"There are manifold restraints to which every person is necessarily 
subject for the common good. On any other basis organized society 
could 
not 
exist 
with 
Safety 
to 
its members." 
Jacobson 
y. 
38-39. Sherbert, 374 U.S. at 403, and Yoder, 406 U.S. at 230, construe 
Jacobson as a health and Safety case. 


[PDF PAGE 25]
24a 
Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11, 26 (1905) (Harlan, J.). In passing the 
Access Act, Congress acted to ensure that violence and aggressive 
obstruction are not used as means of settling what has become a loud 
and vexing public dispute. 
The Access Act strikes a balance among competing rights holders. 
It protects those who seek or provide reproductive health services 
without suppressing robust debate about abortion. Those opposed to 
abortion or to any other reproductive health service retain the freedom 
to express their deeply-held moral or religious views in a peaceful, 
non-obstructive way. 
The district court’s order dismissing the complaint is affirmed. 
AFFIRMED 


[PDF PAGE 26]
25a 
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
Alexandria Division 
CIVIL ACTION NO. 94-700-A 
AMERICAN LIFE LEAGUE, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
v. 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
and JANET RENO, 
Defendants. 
OPINION AND ORDER 
I. The Parties Involved in this Lawsuit. 
[Filed Jun 16, 1994, U.S. District Court, Alexandria, Virginia] 
* On June 3, 1994, the Court previously granted a Motion to Inter- 
vene, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 24(aX2), filed by the National 
Abortion 
Federation, 
Commonwealth 
Women’s 
Clinic, 
Capitol 
Women’s Clinic, Dr. George Tiller, Dr. Susan Wicklund and the Na- 
tional Organization for Women. On June 10, 1994, the Court denied, 
from the bench, plaintiffs’ Motion for Class Certification, which had 
been filed with their Complaint. 


[PDF PAGE 27]
26a 
motions that the plaintiffs’ Second Amended Complaint 
creates a ripe controversy for this Court to consider and 
decide.? 
Plaintiff American 
Life League, 
Inc. 
(ALL) 
is an 
organization located in Stafford, Virginia, which con- 
ducts various educational and legislative activities “relat- 
ing to the human rights of persons born or unborn.” ALL 
alleges that it does not advocate or condone violent 
conduct 
in pursuit of its goals. However, ALL also 
alleges that it and its members intend to interfere with 
abortion providers and to injure them financially, by 
persuading their customers—pregnant women—not 
to 
undergo abortion procedures. Similarly, ALL alleges that 
2 Federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction. See, e.g. Marbury 
v. Madison, 
1 Cranch 
(5 U.S. 
137, 
173-80 
(1803). 
It is the 
responsibility of the complainants to allege facts demonstrating that 
they are the proper parties to invoke judicial resolution of this 
dispute and that an actual or threatened application of FACE exists. 
See, Bender v. Williamsport Area School District, 475 U.S. 534, 549, 
106 S. Ct. 1326, 1335, 89 L.Ed. 2d 501 (1986); Renne v. Greary, 111 S. 
Ct. 2331, 2338 (1991). Plaintiffs’ original Complaint did not allege that 
they intended any actions which would arguably invoke the statute in 
question. Plaintiffs’ First Amended Complaint alleged that they have 
obstructed in the past and ‘may obstruct” entrances to abortion 
facilities. At oral argument, after dismissing the Amended Complaint 
as not ripe, the Court permitted plaintiffs to amend again. Plaintiffs’ 
Second Amended Complaint alleges that while individual plaintiffs are 
peaceable and nonviolent, “‘in the aggregate, their action at times has 
constituted, and in the future will constitute, in the words of FACE, 
a ‘physical obstruction’ (that is, temporarily rendering impassable 
ingress to an abortion facility)’ and that by so doing, they interfere 
with, and/or intimidate and/or injure abortion seekers and providers. 
As 13 U.S.C. § 248 applies to whoever, by physical obstruction, inter- 
feres with a person because that person is obtaining or providing 
reproductive health services, the plaintiffs’ allegations that they plan 
to do so, combined with their allegations that they have regularly 
done so in the past, create a sufficient showing that FACE will be 
applied to them. 


[PDF PAGE 28]
27a 
its members’ 
activities 
at various abortion 
facilities 
necessarily injure or intimidate pregnant women in that 
ALL seeks to evoke feelings of religious or moral guilt or 
general emotional distress, for the purpose of dissuading 
women from aborting their pregnancies. 
Plaintiff Patricia Lohman runs a pregnancy counseling 
service, located approximately 250 feet from an abortion 
clinic, which counsels pregnant women about alterna- 
tives to abortion. She also shares ALL’s intent to obstruct 
clinic 
entrances. 
The 
other 
named 
plaintiffs 
are 
individuals 
who have 
engaged, 
and 
would 
like 
to 
continue 
to engage, 
in demonstrating, 
praying 
and 
sidewalk-counseling in the vicinity of facilities which 
nonviolent, but, like ALL’s numerous members, they 
frequently pursue their activities in concert with other 
like-minded individuals. They allege that their combined 
physical presence has caused and will cause physical 
obstruction 
of the 
entrance 
to 
facilities 
providing 
reproductive health care,. and that they intend to inter- 
fere, nonviolently, with abortion patients and providers. 
Defendant Janet Reno, in her capacity as Attorney 
General of the United States, is charged with the en- 
forcement of the laws of the United States, including 
FACE.® Intervenor National Abortion Federation (NAF) is 
a professional organization of physicians, 
nurses and 
clinics providing reproductive care, including abortions, 
for women. Intervenors Commonwealth Women’s Clinic, 


[PDF PAGE 29]
28a 
Capitol Women’s Clinic, Dr. George Tiller and Dr. Susan 
Wicklund are clinics and physicians that perform abor- 
tions and have been threatened and stalked and whose 
facilities have been damaged by violent anti-abortion 
protestors. Intervenor National Organization for Women 
has among its members thousands of women who may 
seek abortions or other reproductive health services. 
Il. The Statute at Issue. 
On May 
26, 
1994, 
President 
Clinton 
signed 
the 
Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act into law, 
stating that he intended it to be vigorously enforced. 
FACE is a criminal statute which provides for both 
criminal penalties and civil remedies against: 
‘‘whoever— (1) by force or threat of force or by 
physical obstruction, 
intentionally 
injures, 
intimi- 
dates or interferes with or attempts to injure, intim- 
idate or interfere with any person because that 
person is or has been, or in order to intimidate such 
person or any other person or any class of persons 
from, obtaining or providing reproductive heaith 
services.”’ 
18 U.S.C. § 248 (a) (1).* The essential elements of a viola- 
tion of 18 U.S.C. § 248 (a) (1) are conduct and specific 
intent. The Act prohibits three kinds of conduct: (1) the 
use of force; (2) the threat of force; and (3) physical 
obstruction. The specific intent necessary to run afoul of 
*The statute provides for the following criminal penalties: for a 
first offense, a fine or imprisonment for up to one year. Anyone 
committing a second or subsequent offense shall 
be fined in accordance with this title, or imprisoned not more 
than 3 years, or both; except that for an offense involving exclu- 
sively a nonviolent physical obstruction, the fine shall be not 
more than $10,000 and the length of imprisonment shall be not 
more than six months, or both, for the first offense; and the fine 


[PDF PAGE 30]
29a 
FACE is intent to injure, intimidate or interfere with a 
person who is obtaining or has obtained or is providing or 
has provided, reproductive health services. 
Plaintiffs’ 
nonviolent 
activities, 
as 
described 
in 
their second 
Amended Complaint, 
fall within the statute’s ambit 
because they allege that they will cause a physical 
obstruction of clinics that provide abortion services, with 
the requisite intent to financially injure the abortion 
providers and to “interfere with” the women who may 
be entering a facility to procure an abortion. 
Ill. Congress’s Authority to Enact FACE. 
At 
the 
outset, 
the 
Court 
rejects 
the 
plaintiffs’ 
argument that Congress lacked authority to enact FACE. 
Congress has the power, under the Commerce Clause, 
U.S. Const. art. I § 8, cl. 3, and the Necessary and Proper 
Clause, U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 18, to regulate in- 
terstate commerce and intrastate activity that affects 
interstate commerce. United States v. Wrightwood Dairy 
Co., 315 U.S. 110, 120 (1942); Katzenbach v. McClung, 
379 U.S. 294, 301-302 (1964); Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. 
v. United States, 379 U.S. 241 (1964). This authority 
extends to enacting criminal penalties 
for individual 
acts, even if not all of the potential defendants had 
shall be not more than $25,000 and the length of imprisonment 
shall be not more than 18 months, or both, for a subsequent 
offense; and except that if bodily injury results, the length of 
imprisonment shall be not more than 10 years, and if death re- 
Sults, it shall be for any term of years or for life. 
Civil remedies include injunctive relief, compensatory and punitive 
damages, along with costs and reasonable attorney and expert witness 
fees. In lieu of actual damages, statutory damages of $5,000 per viola- 
tion are available. 18 U.S.C. § 248(cX 1A) and (B). FACE also empow- 
ers the Attorney General, of the United States, as well as the State 
attorneys general to bring civil actions for injunctive relief and civil 
penalties against individual or group violators. 18 U.S.C. § 248(cX2) 
and (3). 


[PDF PAGE 31]
30a 
actual connections 
to interstate commerce. 
Perez v. 
United States, 402 U.S. 146, 154-156 (1971); Russell v. 
United States, 471 U.S. 858 (1985). The legislative history 
of FACE shows that Congress had evidence both of 
numerous women crossing state lines to obtain reproduc- 
tive services no longer available in their home states and 
of anti-abortion organizations crossing state lines in order 
to orchestrate violence against abortion providers and 
patients. S. Rep. No. 117, 103d Cong., 
Ist Sess. The 
Senate hearings also include extensive testimony con- 
cerning the inability and, in some cases, unwillingness of 
local law enforcement authorities to provide adequate 
protection for reproductive health service clinics, their 
staffs, and patients. Jd. We find that Congress had 
ample evidence of the impact upon interstate commerce 
of myriad threats, bombings, stalkings, blockades and 
assaults inflicted on reproductive health services provid- 
ers and patients, and that the prohibitions in FACE are a 
reasonable and appropriate means to address the prob- 
lem. See Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclama- 
tion Ass’n., 452 U.S. 264, 276 (1981). 
IV. Freedom of Expression Issues. 
At the heart of plaintiffs’ constitutional challenge are 
their arguments that FACE prohibits and penalizes, or 
5 For example, the Senate Report notes in its discussion of the need 
for such legislation that: 
From 1977 to April 1993, more than 1,000 acts of violence 
against abortion providers were reported in the United States. 
These acts inchuded at least 36 bombings, 81 arsons, 131 death 
threats, 84 assaults, two kidnappings, 327 clinic invasions, and 
one murder. In addition, over 6,000 clinic blockades and other 
disruptions have been reported since 1977. The record before the 
Committee establishes that state and local law enforcement 
is 
inadequate to handle this situation, and that Federal legislation is 
urgently needed. 
Id.at 3. 


[PDF PAGE 32]
3la 
chills, free expression of religious, moral and philosophi- 
cal beliefs; that it impermissibly focuses criminal and 
civil sanctions on particular viewpoints; and that it is 
unconstitutionally 
vague, 
giving law-abiding 
citizens 
inadequate guidance as to exactly what it prohibits. 
Plaintiffs first argue that FACE is overbroad because 
they believe it imposes criminal and civil penalties for 
forms 
of expression, 
such 
as praying and sidewalk 
counseling, which are covered by the First Amendment. 
Overbreadth refers to a statute’s being written so as to 
include protected First Amendment activity along with 
unprotected conduct. Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 
601, 612 (1973). Their argument is largely based on their 
expressed concern that the term “‘injure,’’ which is not 
defined 
in the Act, might include 
psychological 
or 
emotional injury, which could result from plaintiffs’ pure 
speech. Plaintiffs make the point that pure speech, 
which is at the core of First Amendment protection, 
may, and is, in the context of abortion protest, intended 
to, “‘injure’’ by causing emotional pain and to “‘intimi- 
date”’ or, if persuasive and articulate, even ‘‘interfere.”’ 
They argue that persons who desire to express their 
views, pray and sidewalk-counsel at the entrance of 
reproductive health services facilities are now afraid to 
do so for fear that these peaceful, nonviolent, expressive 
activities are prohibited by FACE. 
In other words, 
plaintiffs argue that their First Amendment expression 
will be ‘‘chilled.”’ 
Contrary to plaintiffs’ assertions, the Court finds that 
this statute avoids infringing on legitimate First Amend- 
ment rights. Nothing in the language of FACE prohibits 
pure speech; rather the Act criminalizes the use of force, 
threat of force, and physical obstruction. 
18 U.S.C. 
§ 248(a) (1). These acts have long been outside the scope 
of the First Amendment’s protection. See Wisconsin v. 
Mitchell, 
113 S.Ct. 2194, 2199 (1993). In Mitchell, 
a 
unanimous Court held that a penalty enhancement for 


[PDF PAGE 33]
32a 
criminal conduct motivated by racial bias did not violate 
the First Amendment. The Court explained that conduct 
does not become ‘‘speech”’ entitled to the protection of 
the First Amendment whenever the actor intends to 
express an idea through his conduct. Id., quoting Roberts 
v. 
United States Jaycees, 
468 U.S. 
609, 628 (1984) 
(‘‘[VJiolence or other types of potentially expressive 
activities that produce special harms distinct from their 
communicative impact 
. .. are entitled to no constitu- 
tional protection’’). FACE is crafted to prohibit and 
penalize only those ‘‘potentially expressive’’ acts that 
Congress found were producing and would continue to 
produce ‘‘special harms distinct from their communica- 
tive impact.’’ See Roberts, supra. Even the non-violent 
blocking which plaintiffs contemplate constitutes the 
torts of trespass, battery and false imprisonment under 
state laws. More importantly, 
in the scenario which 
plaintiffs have chosen to present for the Court’s review, 
non-violent 
obstruction 
of clinic 
entrances 
prevents 
women from exercising their constitutuional right to an 
abortion. See Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973); Planned 
Parenthood v. Casey, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (1992). The First 
Amendment protects the plaintiffs’ right to hold and 
express beliefs opposing abortion; it does not give them 
unfettered license to express those beliefs in conduct. 
Similarly, threats to use force are not protected by the 
First Amendment, and Congress may criminalize threats 
to a particular victim if doing so furthers an important 
interest. See R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538, 
2546 (1992). 
Plaintiffs’ argument 
that their rights to pray and 
counsel 
will be chilied 
is but a restatement of the 
previous argument. As discussed above, FACE does not 
apply, on its face, to purely verbal activity. Plaintiffs 
rely upon R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, supra, in which the 
Supreme Court found a ‘“‘hate crime’”’ o 
prohibit- 
ing the display of certain symbols, objects, appellations 
and graffiti facially invalid. This reliance is misplaced. 


[PDF PAGE 34]
i 
33a 
The St. Paul ordinance focussed on particular viewpoints 
and directly prohibited verbal expression; as discussed 
infra, FACE does neither. 
Because FACE’s language refers to action, not words, 
plaintiffs have exercised their creativity to find interpre- 
tations of the Act’s terms that encompass pure speech. 
However, their arguments ignore the definitions of the 
relevant terms included in the Act itself, which each 
describe tortious conduct rather than viewpoint expres- 
sion. The Act, for example, defines the term ‘‘interfere 
with” to mean ‘“‘to restrict a person’s freedom of move- 
ment.’’ 18 U.S.C. 
§ 248(e) (2). Words or prayers alone 
will not restrict a person’s freedom of movement. Speak- 
ing or praying accompanied by shoving or positioning 
oneself to block a walkway, as plaintiffs intend, will 
restrict 
a person’s freedom 
of movement. 
The 
for- 
mer—pure speech—does not violate the Act; the lat- 
ter—speech plus conduct—will create a prohibited inter- 
ference. 
In addition to drafting FACE narrowly so as to prohibit 
certain conduct, rather than speech, Congress included 
‘‘Rules of Construction”’ the first of which is: ‘‘“—Nothing 
in this section shall be construed— (1) to prohibit any 
expressive conduct (including peaceful picketing or other 
peaceful demonstration) protected by the First Amend- 
ment to the Constitution.’’ 18 U.S.C. § 248(d) (1). While 
the Court agrees with plaintiffs that Congress could not 
make a fatally flawed law constitutional merely by 
including a saving clause, in this context the rule of 
construction removes any ambiguity which plaintiffs can 
inject into the otherwise plain meaning of the Act’s 
words. Without ambiguity, there is no chill. Protestors 
who are not chilled by the existing laws against trespass 
and assault could not reasonably be chilled by this Act: 
The plaintiffs also argue that FACE is unconstitutional- 
ly vague on its face. Their argument is essentially the 
same one addressed above in the overbreadth discussion. 


[PDF PAGE 35]
34a 
A statute is unconstitutionally vague if people ‘‘of com- 
mon intelligence must guess at its meaning.’’ Hynes v. 
Mayor of Oradell, 425 U.S. 610, 620 (1976). The Court 
does not agree that the Act is vague. The language of 
FACE is neither technical nor arcane. Moreover, most of 
the operative words come from other statutes which the 
Supreme Court has construed and found not unconstitu- 
tionally vague. Of particular relevance is the Supreme 
Court’s decision that a statute which prohibited ‘‘picket- 
ing or mass demonstrations in such a manner as to ob- 
struct or unreasonably interfere with free ingress or 
egress’’ was not unconstitutionally vague. Cameron v. 
Johnson, 390 U.S. 611, 612 (1968). This is the same defi- 
nition for ‘‘physical obstruction’’ that appears in FACE. 
This Court cannot hold that this definition is unconstitu- 
tionally vague. 
The remaining terms, ‘‘use of force’’ and ‘‘threat of 
force’’ are, without doubt, clear to anyone making an 
honest effort to understand rather than ignore the plain 
meaning of this Act. FACE plainly prohibits only physi- 
cal obstruction, the use of force, and threats. Congress 
need not append a laundry list of violent acts, threats 
and manners of obstructing in order to express its clear 
intent. 
The plaintiffs further argue that FACE is not view- 
point neutral because, they assert, it applies only to anti- 
abortion protestors, ‘‘and not to persons who use similar 
tactics or worse to persuade women to have abortions 
they do not want.’’ Upon a reading of the unambiguous 
language of FACE, the Court disagrees with this charac- 
terization of the statute. Plaintiffs cannot point to any 
language in FACE which supports their interpretation. 
Instead, they rely on a sentence uttered by Senator 
Kennedy during floor debate of a proposed amendment 
which 
was 
subsequently 
defeated. 
The 
proposed 
amendment, according to plaintiffs, would have provid- 
ed a cause of action for would-be protestors who allege 


[PDF PAGE 36]
35a 
violations of their First Amendment rights throught the 
suppression 
of anti-abortion 
demonstrations. 
Senator 
Kennedy spoke against the proposed amendment, stating 
“‘a cause of action for prolife demonstrator[s] will trans- 
form the bill from a clinic access bill to a clinic harass- 
ment bill.” 139 Cong. Rec. S15706 (daily ed, November 
16, 1993) (statement of Senator Kennedy). 
Plaintiffs 
argue that despite Senator Kennedy’s characterizing 
FACE as “‘a clinic access bill’’, his statement supports 
their position that FACE applies only to anti-abortion 
protestors. This needle from a veritable haystack of legis- 
lative history 
is not relevant 
to our interpretation. 
Where the plain language of a statute is clear and 
unambiguous, courts do not look to the legislative history 
to find some different meaning. 
Griffin v. Oceanic 
Contractors, Inc., 458 U.S. 564, 570 (1982); Consumer 
Product Safety Comm’n. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc., 447 U.S. 
102, 108 (1980). While it is clear from the Senate hear- 
ings that Congress was concerned about protecting clin- 
ics from violent anti-abortion protestors, FACE applies to 
‘““‘whoever’’ engages in the prohibited conduct, with the 
requisite intent to injure, intimidate or interfere with 
“any person’’ who is entering a facility to obtain repro- 
ductive health services. 18 U.S.C. § 248. Both the terms 
‘“‘whoever”’ and “‘person’”’ are gender-neutral. The Act 
defines ‘‘reproductive health services’’ as ‘reproductive 
health services provided in a hospital, clinic, physician’s 
office, or other facility, and includes medical, surgical, 
counseling or referral services relating to pregnancy or 
the termination of a pregnancy.’”’ 18 U.S.C. § 248(d). This 
broad definition of reproductive health services encom- 
passes a wide variety of services and procedures, includ- 
ing diagnosis and treatment 
of sexually transmitted 
diseases, 
infertility 
testing and treatments, 
pre-natal 
care, obstetrics, and, presumably, controversial concep- 
tion treatments, such as in vitro fertilization of surro- 
gate mothers and thawing of frozen embryos. Anyone, 
male or female, entering a facility seeking any of these 


[PDF PAGE 37]
36a 
medical services 
is protected under FACE. As such, 
although the statute is subject-specific in that it protects 
access to reproductive health services facilities, 
it is 
nevertheless viewpoint-neutral. 
V. Free Exercise Clause 
Finally, plaintiffs assert that FACE violates the Free 
Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the Constitu- 
tion, as well as the Restoration of Religious Freedom Act, 
42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb(b) (2), which provides that the gov- 
ernment cannot ‘‘substantially burden a person’s right to 
exercise of religion’’ unless it can show that such burden 
is the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling 
governmental 
interest. 
Plaintiffs’ 
argument 
is that 
Congress’s passage of FACE was motivated by ‘‘animosi- 
ty to religion.’’ They rely on Church of Lukumi Babalu 
Aya v. Hialeah, 113 S.Ct. 2217, 2234 (1993) which struck 
down a law contrived to prohibit ritual animal sacrifices 
performed by a particular sect as violating the Estab- 
lishment Clause. That case is distinguishable from the 
case at bar in several ways, not the least of which is that 
animal welfare is not constitutionally protected, whereas 
a woman's right to an abortion is constitutionally pro- 
tected. See Roe and Casey, supra. Moreover, from its 
legislative history, we know that it was the history of 
violent attacks against abortion clinics, providers and 
their patients, and other religion-neutral reasons which 
motivated Congress to enact FACE. 
It suffices here to note that the plaintiffs have not 
alleged in any of their three complaints and do not 
contend in their memoranda that physical obstruction of 
abortion 
clinics 
is a sacrament 
or important 
ritual 
necessary to their observance of their faith. They have 
alleged that they oppose abortion on religious and moral 
grounds, and that they desire to pray for the souls of 
women who are obtaining abortions and for the souls of 
their unborn children. Their goal is to prevent abortions. 


[PDF PAGE 38]
37a 
Nothing in the Act impinges upon plaintiffs’ ability to 
pray for these results. What is limited by the Act is what 
else they may do while praying and counseling. They 
may not pray and counsel so as to physically obstruct 
access to reproductive health service facilities. As de- 
fined in the Act, “‘physical obstruction’’ means ‘‘render- 
ing impassable ingress to or egress from a clinic.’’ This 
language provides adequate guidance for anyone who 
truly wants to understand the scope of the Act, rather 
than look for tortured interpretations of its words. The 
Statute, on its face, neither prohibits nor inhibits such 
prayers, counseling or self-expression. 
VI Conclusion 
For the above reasons, the Court holds that FACE is 
constitutional. The United States’ Motion to Dismiss is 
therefore GRANTED, and plaintiffs’ Second Amended 
Complaint is hereby DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. This 
decision renders moot the plaintiffs’ Motion for a Prelim- 
inary Injunction. 
The Clerk is directed to forward copies of this Opinion 
and Order to counsel of record. 
Entered this 16th day of June, 1994. 
/s/ Leonie M. Brinkema 
Leonie M. Brinkema 
United States District Judge 
Alexandria, Virginia 
