Supreme Court, u.5. | 2 } 
at a oe 


/ 
i 


> 941867 May 1 21995 


OFFICE OF THE CLERK 
No. 94- 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Anited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


AMERICAN LIFE LEAGUE INC., et al 


Petitioners, 
Vv. 


JANET RENO, 
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES, 


Respondent. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


MARION EDWYN HARRISON* 

DANIEL M. REDMOND 

LAW OFFICES MARION EDWYN HARRISON 
107 Park Washington Court 

Falls Church, Virginia 22046 

(703) 532-0303 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


May 12, 1995 


PRESS OF BYRON S. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. 1-800-347-8208 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Did Congress have the constitutional authority under 
the Commerce Clause, Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment 
and the Tenth Amendment to enact the Freedom of Access to 
Clinical Entrances Act of 1994 (“FACE”), 18 U.S.C. § 248, 
which, inter alia, makes criminal, and subject to civil damages, 
even the nonviolent physical obstruction of entrances to 
reproductive health services? 


2. Did Congress in enacting FACE abridge the freedom 
of expression protected by the First Amendment by creating 
content- and viewpoint-based restrictions upon political 
expression? 


3. Did Congress in enacting FACE violate Petitioners’ 
rights under the First Amendment Free Exercise Clause and the 
terms of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 
2000bb, et seq.? 


il 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 


There is no parent or subsidiary company to be listed 
with respect to Petitioner American Life League, Inc. ("ALL"). 
Rule 29.1. 


Petitioner ALL is a District of Columbia corporation, 
incorporated in 1981, with its office in Stafford, Virginia; 
recognized under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) as tax-exempt, with 
some 300 thousand donors. 


Petitioners Antoinette C. Cleary, David G. P. 
Englefield, Patricia Lohman, Patricia Savino and (the Reverend 
Father) Gerald Weymes are individual U. S. citizens. 


Respondent Janet Reno is Attorney General of the 
United States, as such charged with enforcement of FACE; and 
is sued in her official capacity. 


The District Court allowed five defending intervenors: 
the National Abortion Federation; the National Organization 
for Women; Commonwealth Women’s Clinic and Capitol 
Women’s Center; and Dr. George Tiller and Dr. Susan 
Wickland. The District Court also accepted, as did the Fourth 
Circuit, an amicus brief from the American Civil Liberties 
Union and the ACLU Foundation of Virginia. 


iii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED ......----++eeeeeeeeees i 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS .......---++++: ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ....--eseeseeessrcececes iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .....---eeeeeeeeerees vii 
OPINIONS BELOW .......--eeecccceeeerecesecees 1 
JURISDICTION ......ccececccccenccceeccceceees 2 
STATUTORY PROVISION INVOLVED ......--->: 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE .....----eseeeeeeeees 2 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION ...... 7 

INTRODUCTION .....--seeeeeeeeecececers 7 


i. FACE Is Beyond Commerce Clause 
Authority under United States v. 
Lopez; Is Not Authorized by §5 of the 
Fourteenth Amendment; and 
Constitutes an Unauthorized 
Incursion upon Federalism and the 
Federal Judiciary .......-++s+e+eeeeee: 7 


iV 


A. There Is No Constitutional 
Authority for a Federal 
Statute Punishing Local 
Obstruction of Abortion 
BR raga oH See ae ii 7 


B. §5 of the Fourteenth 
Amendment Does Not 


Authorize Congress to Punish 
Private Anti-abortion 
PE on 0k Caer eb eee Ke 12 


C. This Court Should Resist the 
FACE Legislative Incursion 
upon Federalism and the 
Federal Judiciary ............. 14 


Il. The Court of Appeals 
eg, Ree Spr ee err 16 


A. The Court of Appeals First 
Amendment Standard of 
Review Is Erroneous .......... 16 


B. FACE Legislative History 
Clearly Establishes 
Applicability Only to Prolife 
PMOGRINAD 0. 6 KECKA GE sc ocecccce 17 


C. FACE Abridges the Freedom 
of Expression Protected by the 
First Amendment ............. 19 


Vv 


1. A Content-specific 
Statutory Regulation 
of Expressive Conduct 
Is Presumptively 
Unconstitutional and 
Must Be Subjected to 
the Most Exacting 


2. FACE Imposes 
Content-based 
Restrictions upon 
Political Expression ..... 20 


3. FACE Imposes 
Viewpoint-based 
Restrictions upon 
Political Expression ..... 22 


4. FACE Imposes Severe 
Penalties upon First 
Amendment 
Expression ........++++: 23 


5. FACE Is Substantially 
Overbroad and 
Unconstitutionally 


vi 


6. FACE Impermissibly 
Requires Payment of 
Damages for 
Commercial Injuries 
Caused in Whole or in 
Part by First 
Amendment 
Expression .......cee0: 25 


D. FACE Violates the Free 
Exercise Clause and 
the Religious Act By 
Targeting Religious 
Beliefs and Practices .......... 27 


i. FACE Violates 
Appellants' Rights 
under the 
Free Exercise 


teks wh sb cnwnce ces 27 


2. FACE Violates the 
ree 28 


Ill. The Questions Presented Are 
SOUR wi itin 00 0-0 cedtsbadsausscane 29 


CUOINCTAIGUN cv vacucnnewececavesetéucweccéaus 30 


vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page Number 
CASES 
American Life League, Inc. v. Reno, 
47 F.3d 642 (4th Cir. 1995) ....... cee eee reece eeeees 1 
American Life League, Inc. v. Reno, 
855 F. Supp. 137 (E.D. Va. 1994) ....----eeeeeeeeees 1 
Boos v. Barry, 
485 U.S. 312 (1988) ...... cece eee re rece eeces 19, 20, 24 


Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
395 U.S. 444 (1969) 0... cece cece cee reeeceeeeeee 25 


Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic, 
113 S. Ct. 753 (1993) 2... ccc cece ecccecceeeceeceees 13 


Carpenters v. Scott, 
463 U.S. 825 (1983) ... 2... cece eee ec eceeeeecceees 13 


Church of Lukumi Babalou Aye v Hialeah, 
113 S. Ct. 2217 (1993) 2... cece ee cece reeeceeees 27, 28 


City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 
114 S. Ct. 2038 (1994) 2... cece cece cece eweeeeees 21 


Vili 


Employment Division v. Smith, 


494 U.S. 872 (1990) .... cece cee ccecccccecceeneeces 28 
Griffin v. Breckenridge, 

403 U.S. 88 (1971) 2... cence cece eeececceceereecees 13 
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 

379 U.S. 241 (1964) 2... ccc cece e cece e reece ecesecees 5 
Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Recl. Ass’n, 

452 U.S. 264 (1981) 2... cece cece ec eenreereeeeneees 5 
INS v. Vardoza-Fonseca, 

480 U.S. 421 (1987) 2... 2. cece cee cere ceceeenes aie 
Katzenbach v. McClury, 

379 U.S. 254 (1964)... cece ccc ec ee ren ceeeeeeesecees 5 
Madsen v. Women’s Health Center, Inc., 

114 S. Ct. 2516 (1994) ...... cece ee eeoeens 6, 17, 19, 20 
Marbury v Madison, 

1 Cr. (5 U.S.) 137 (1803) 2... cece cece e cece eeeeens 16 


N.A.A.C.P. v. Alabama, 
377 U.S. 288 (1964) ... 2... cece eee eeececvees - shacte eke 25 


N.A.A.C.P. v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 
458 U.S. 886 (1982) ....... cece cece reeecccees 6, 25, 26 


R.A.V. v. St. Paul, 
112 S. Ct. 2538 (1992) .... cece ec eeeeeees 19, 20, 22, 23 


ix 


Texas v. Johnson, 


Se EE c ncvvesiscccceuceecesvcscs 24 
United States v. Lopez, 
#93-1260, (April 26, 1995) ..... \eeeeces 7, 8,9, 10, 11, 12 


United States v. Lopez, 
PR ERT vcicccccvacacecccececcee 5 


United States v. O’Brien, 
a ie oa Cul wale ec een ins 6, 24 


United States v. Turkette, 
EE hg 18 


United States v. Wilson, #94-CR-140, 
slip op. (E.D. Wisc. March 16, 1995), 


MII SRW Se Gn hes ous cin vn vceceaceeceeci 11 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 

i NE eh sees os db deucns wen 6, 17 
Woodall v. Reno, 

FF ne OO CAs MONO i iik cc rvscvicceebivsdee 29 
Wurtz v. Risley, 


FE Re BO BORe Oe Cl, T9GS) oon cd viccciccccucss 25 


Xx 


UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION |. 


First Amemdmenmt ...2cccccccccccccccccssoce seriatim 
Fourth Amem@ment ....ccccccccccccscccvescseses 13 
ee oe 2, 24 
TOE REE nc ci cecvcccciseeencaweunen i, 5,7 
Fourteenth Amendment ...........-. ‘5, 7, Ah, Bae 86 
STATUTES 

ici ccc ieeneneeel seriatim 
8S UBC, BRR coo cc crcercdeventovesvccdisavens 8,9 
26 USA. SSGMEMS) cccccvvcccccssvevcseceseweees ii 
PRAT BL § EBSD) oc cccccccvccccvccncquvssesenneve 2 
BO Ue BEIGE vcsiccccvevacevesevecevespeonsvass 2 
28 U.S.C. § USAG(ANZ) 2c ccccccccvcscccssentcnccses 2 
Me UDR ETRE cacecccisescvocsescvecivececssewes 2 
43 UGA. S TFGES) oc cccccccccscvcccccvssceeseese 13 


42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb, ef seg. ........ 20200 i, xi, 2, 28, 29 


RULES 


PE ROE es 48 OE wana kkhseks ease 4 
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY 

S. 636, 103d Congress, Ist Seesion, 

Bee APO MOO EOS o's osc ccc cvnccencdeccetccg, 10 
ssosinlpniec, cc kk a RSS Ae meme 24 


Senate Committee Report # 103-117, 
103d Congress, Ist Session, at 24 
(submitted by Senator MED S6wéudvss¥ieverea 21 


LAW REVIEWS 


J. Baker, "Nationalizing Criminal Law: 
Does Organized Crime Make It Necessary or Proper?" 
16 Rutgers L.J. 495 (1985)... 0. ccc ccc ccccccccccse 15 


Baucus and Kay, "The Court Stripping Bills: 
Their Impact on the Constitution, the Courts 
and Congress," 27 Vill L.R. 988 (1982) ............. 15 


xii 
MISCELLANY 


1993 Year-End Report 
on the Federal Judiciary ....ccccsccccsccccsccccccces 15 


C. Sunnstein, Democracy and the Problem 
of Free Speech (New York; The Free Press, 1993) .... 14 


Fallon, Making Sense of Overbreadth, 
1O9 Fad hade GOS CAPPED Sie ee ddedccésvccovecsasen 24 


J. Madison, A. Hamilton, J. Jay, 
Be PORE FTE co vcccevevevessaccavetsecaeient 14 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


October Term, 1994 


AMERICAN LIFE LEAGUE, INC., et al. 


Petitioners, 
v. 


JANET RENO, 
Attorney General of the United States 


Respondent. 


The American Life League, Inc., (“ALL”), Antoinette 
C. Cleary, David G. P. Englefield, Patricia Lohman, Patricia 
Savino and the Reverend Father Gerald Weymes respectfully 
petition for a writ of certiorari to review the judgment of the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in this 
case. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals is reported at 47 
F.3d 642 (4th Cir. 1995). Appendix, at 1. The opinion of the 
United States District Court is reported at 855 F. Supp. 137 
(E.D. Va. 1994), App. at 25a. 


JURISDICTION 


The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 
U.S.C. § 1254(1), and Petitioners seek review of the Fourth 
Circuit’s judgment entered on February 13, 1995. 


STATUTORY PROVISION INVOLVED 


This case presents Commerce Clause and First 
Amendment violations. 


Petitioners sued to have FACE declared facially 
unconstitutional. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This case presents Commerce Clause and First 
Amendment issues. 


Petitioners sued Janet Reno, Attorney General of the 
United States, in her representative capacity, in the United 
States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia on May 
26, 1994, the day President Clinton signed FACE into law, 
invoking jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1346(a)(2), 
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief arising under the 
Constitution, Article I, First and Fifth Amendments, and 
declaratory relief under 28 U.S.C. § 2201. Petitioners sought 
(1) class certification; (2) a declaration that FACE is null and 
void as violative of the Constitution; (3) a declaration that 
FACE is null and void as violative of the Religious Freedom 
Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb, et seg. (“Religious 
Act’); and (4) preliminary and permanent injunctions against 
enforcement of FACE. 


3 


Petitioner ALL researches; publishes a magazine, 
newsletters, brochures and other material relating to the human 
rights of persons born and unborn; has televised a program 
called Celebrate Life!; sponsors, and participates in, symposia 
and other public and invitational means of discussion and 
education; monitors, and reports upon, state and federal 
administrative, legislative and judicial developments; and 
otherwise seeks to fulfill its corporate mandate and the 
concerns of its donors. ALL has professional and volunteer 
staff. 


Individual Petitioners and donors to ALL nonviolently 
have demonstrated, prayed and/or sidewalk-counseled in the 
proximity of an abortion clinic, often in company of other 
individuals similarly peaceably behaving. They do not 
anticipate, approve, condone, have prior knowledge of or ratify, 
nonpeaceable or violent conduct. In the aggregate, their action 
at times has constituted, and in the future will constitute, in the 
words of FACE, a "physical obstruction" (that is, temporarily — 
rendering impassable ingress to an abortion facility). In the 
course of their peaceful pursuit, in the words of FACE, they (1) 
"interfere" (that is, restrict local freedom of movement [but 
only by virtue of proximity to a pregnant mother]); and/or (2) 
"intimidate" (that is, create a reasonable - but unfounded - 
apprehension of bodily harm); and/or (3) "injure" (that is, 
cause, e.g., monetary loss to an abortion facility; and/or 
emotional concern of a pregnant mother considering abortion: 
and/or psychological reaction of the mother; and/or familial 
reaction). 


Absent enforcement of FACE, they peaceably would 
continue these local and noncommercial speech manifestations. 
As long as FACE is enforceable, they are in fear and jeopardy 
in so doing. As a result of exercising constitutionally protected 


4 


activities, ALL has been sued, in both federal and state court, 
by abortion-providers. No plaintiff ever has obtained a final 
judgment against ALL and ALL has settled no case. 


Individual Petitioners are persons opposed to abortion 
upon theological, moral and other grounds; who have 
demonstrated, prayed and/or sidewalk-counseled within the 
vicinity of abortion clinics; and whose views, religion and 
activities, absent a FACE-induced chill, fall within the range of 
ALL-donor activities enumerated in the preceding paragraph. 


On June 1, 1994, the Attorney General filed a F. R. Civ. 
P. 12 (b)(6) motion to dismiss. The District Court heard oral 
argument on June 10, 1994, and issued an opinion and order on 
June 16, 1994, dismissing the Second Amended Complaint 
with prejudice. 


On February 13, 1995, the Court of Appeals for the 
Fourth Circuit affirmed. 


FACE is a criminal statute that provides for both 
criminal and civil penalties against anyone who: 


(1) by force or threat of force or by physical 
obstruction, intentionally injures, intimidates or 
interferes with or attempts to injure, intimidate 
or interfere with any person because that person 
is or has been, or in order to intimidate such 
person or any other person or any class of 
persons from, obtaining or providing 
reproductive health services; . . . or 


(3) intentionally damages or destroys the 
property of a facility, or attempts to do so, 


5 


because such facility provides reproductive 
health services .... 


18 U.S.C. § 248(a). 


FACE defines its key terms in § 248(c); in § 248(d) it 
also provides a rule of construction that nothing in the Act shall 
be construed “(1) to prohibit any expressive conduct (including 
peaceful picketing or other peaceful demonstration) protected 
from legal prohibition by the First Amendment to the 
Constitution.” 


The criminal penalties in § 248 (b) vary with the nature 
of the crime. For a first offense involving only a nonviolent 
physical obstruction, the penalty is imprisonment for not more 
than six months or a fine of not more than $10,000. Civil 
remedies, § 248(c), include injunctive relief, compensatory or 
statutory damages ($5,000 per violation), punitive damages and 
costs and fees. Anyone injured in providing or obtaining 
services at a reproductive health facility is entitled to file a civil 
action under this provision. The Attorney General of the 
United States and any State Attorney General are also 
permitted to bring certain civil actions. 


The Court of Appeals summarily rejected Petitioners’ 
contention that Congress lacked the power under the 
Commerce Clause, §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment and the 
Tenth Amendment to enact FACE, relying entirely upon Hodel 
v. Virginia Surface Mining & Recl. Ass'n, 452 U.S. 264 
(1981); Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. y. United States, 379 US. 
241 (1964); and Katzenbach v. McClury, 379 U.S. 254 (1964). 
The Court was silent about United States v. Lopez, 2 F.3d 1342 
(Sth Cir. 1993), and Petitioners’ Lopez arguments. The Court 
did not distinguish between “affecting” and “substantially 


6 


affecting” interstate commerce but held “affecting” to be a 
sufficient nexus. According to the Court, Congress reached a 
rational conclusion in finding that violence, threats and 
physical obstruction affect interstate commerce. Similarly, 
Congress adopted regulatory means that were reasonable given 
the permissible ends it had in mind to deter violence. Finally, 
in response to Petitioners’ claim that FACE jeopardized 
federalism, the Court said that Congress, not the courts, decides 
whether new laws are needed. 


The Court holds that the conduct enjoined by FACE is 
not First Amendment-protected speech. The Court stated that 
it would not apply a strict-scrutiny test, as Petitioners 
advocated, because FACE is content- and viewpoint-neutral, 
thus requiring an intermediate-scrutiny test. In the words of the 
Court, “a statute regulating expressive conduct is neutral if it is 
justified without reference to the content of the violator’s 
message or point of view,” citing Madsen v. Women’s Health 
Center, Inc., 114 S. Ct. 2516, 2523-24 (1994) and Ward v. 
Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 788, 791 (1989). App. at 9a- 
10a. In short, congressional purpose controls. Where a statute 
may regulate conduct that contains protected speech elements, 
the Court continues, a court must use the intermediate scrutiny 
test that was first described by the Supreme Court in United 
States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968). 


The Court then rejected Petitioners’ arguments that 
FACE is overly broad and vague and that under N.A.A.C.P. v. 
Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886 (1982), a party may 
recover only actual damages by saying it knows of no rule that 
limits recovery when unprotected expression is involved. The 
Court concludes that neither the Free Exercise Clause nor the 
Religious Act requires striking FACE as unconstitutional. 


7 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


INTRODUCTION 


The Fourth Circuit decision conflicts with recently 
decided United States v. Lopez because FACE (1) exceeds 
Commerce Clause congressional power; (2) expands federal 
criminal jurisdiction beyond the power of Congress; and (3) 
intrudes upon federalism unjustified by § 5 of the Fourteenth 
Amendment. The decision also conflicts with F irst 
Amendment jurisprudence. This case is a timely and rare 
Opportunity to provide guidance for the Judiciary which will be 
dealing with FACE questions arising from at least seventeen 
cases, with the high probability that many more cases will 
ensue. Meantime, unnumbered thousands of law-abiding 
prolife citizens are chilled from exercising their First 
Amendment rights by the omnipresent threat of a macedonian 
phalanx of federal forces ready to usurp traditional local police 
power. 


I. FACE Is Beyond Commerce Clause 
Authority under United States vy. Lopez; Is 
Not Authorized by §5 of the Fourteenth 
Amendment; and Constitutes an 
Unauthorized Incursion upon Federalism 
and the Federal Judiciary 


A. There Is No Constitutional Authority 
for a Federal Statute Punishing Local 
Obstruction of Abortion Clinics 


Before both tribunals Petitioners maintained that 
Congress lacks authority under the Commerce Clause, § 5 of 
the Fourteenth Amendment and the Tenth Amendment to enact 


FACE. The Fourth Circuit and the District Court paid little 
heed to these arguments, made no real analysis of the failed 
congressional attempt to color FACE constitutional in interstate 
commerce terms and simply accepted the Government’s claims 
under a rubric that, in the Circuit Court’s words, “We conclude 
that the commerce power permits Congress to regulate 
activities affecting reproductive health services.” App. at la- 
2a. This was beyond legislative power because it displaced 
state and local criminal statutes and ordinances designed to 
regulate the same conduct without any meaningful showing 
that interstate commerce was involved. 


In United States v. Lopez, #93-1260, (April 26, 
1995),' the Court had before it the Gun-Free School Zones Act 
of 1990, which forbids “any individual knowingly to possess a 
firearm at a place that [he] knows .. . is a school zone,” 18 
U.S.C. § 922(q)(1)(A). The Court took the opportunity to 
define more precisely the limits of Commerce Clause power. 


There are “three broad categories . . .that Congress may 
regulate under its commerce power.” Slip op. at 9. 


First , Congress may regulate the use of 
the channels of interstate commerce. . 
Second, Congress is empowered to regulate and 
protect the instrumentalities of interstate 
commerce, or persons or things in interstate 


In both the Fourth Circuit and the District Court Petitioners relied upon the 

Fifth Circuit decision to reverse the Lopez conviction under the Gun-Free 
School Zones Act because the Act was beyond Congress’ power under the 
Commerce Clause. 2 F.3d 1342 (Sth Cir. 1993). This Court’s April 26, 
1995 Lopez decision was rendered after issuance of the Fourth Circuit 
mandate herein on April 7, 1995. 


9 


commerce, even though the threat may come 
only from intrastate activities. . . . Finally, 
Congress’ commerce authority includes the 
power to regulate those activities having a 
substantial relation to interstate commerce, . . . 
i.e., those activities that substantially affect 
interstate commerce. . . . 

Slip op. at 9-10. 


The first two categories did not encompass the Gun- 
Free statute. The Court held as to the third category -- “those 
activities that substantially affect interstate commerce” -- that 
§ 922(q) had nothing to do with interstate commerce. The 
statute is criminal and “is not an essential part of a larger 
regulation of economic activity, in which the regulatory scheme 
could be undercut unless the intrastate activity were regulated.” 
Id. § 992(q) also “contains no jurisdictional element which 
would ensure, through case-by-case inquiry, that the firearm 
Possession in question affects interstate commerce.” /d. 
Although the Court will consider legislative findings when 
evaluating a statute in commerce terms, it observes that 
Congress is not required to make such findings. 


The Court concludes that it will not “pile inference 
upon inference” and “convert congressional authority under 
the Commerce Clause to a general police power of the sort 
retained by the States.” Jd. The Court is unwilling to 
acquiesce in the obliteration of “what is truly national and what 
is truly local” in the Commerce Clause. Id. 


FACE, too, fails to reflect any substantial affect on 
interstate commerce. In Lopez this Court drew a line beyond 
which it said Congress could not go to enact legislation that 
supposedly deals with practices which impact interstate 


10 


commerce. As egregiously as in Lopez, Congress pushed 
federalism aside and enacted FACE to make it a federal crime 
to obstruct or interfere with, violently or peaceably, 
reproductive health facilities in every locality in the nation. 


To buttress the shaky constitutional basis for FACE, its 
Senate proponents temporarily inserted findings designed to 
masquerade the proscribed conduct as interstate commerce. 
They recited that abortion providers buy products in interstate 
commerce and that the activities of abortion-protesters may 
restrict such commerce. S. 636, 103d Congress, Ist Session, 
139 Cong. Rec. $15655 (Daily ed., November 16, 1993). 
These boilerplate provisions offer no indication, however, that 
the protestors have the required “substantial” affect upon 
interstate commerce, or that such commercial affect, if any, was 
among the real legislative purposes of FACE. FACE as 
enacted omits the findings, while substituting an anemic and 
conclusory reference to interstate commerce, in an expansive 
and nonspecific “Purpose” clause. 18 U.S.C. § 248, setting out 
§2, Pub. L. 103-259. 


To support FACE Congress may have relied upon four 
considerations. Congress evidently considered, for instance, 
that abortion clinics operate in interstate commerce. By that 
sweep who or what does not operate in interstate commerce? 
Every person and entity would be subject to minute federal 
regulation. Congressional supporters also claimed that people 
travel across state lines to clinics to procure abortions. Who 
does not cross state lines? If one considered only Washington 
Metropolitan Area residents, one would note that five Justices 
regularly cross state lines: if one stopped to pray near an 
abortion clinic, would he or she be drawn into interstate 
commerce, “substantially affect interstate commerce,” have a 
“concrete tie to intrastate commerce” or engage in “an 


Pony wai) 


1] 


economic activity that might, through repetition elsewhere, 
substantially affect any sort of interstate commerce?” So 
neither would the pregnant mother, if any, who crosses a state 
line to procure an abortion. 


By the reasoning supporting FACE, local disturbance 
around clinics lowers the number of abortions and therefore 
affects interstate commerce. By this standard any local action 
adverse to any business could be enjoined by federal statute 
because it could decrease demand for goods or services. It is 
asserted that clinic violence is a nationwide problem over 
which States have lost control. No basis for such advocacy is 
shown -- not surprising given the manifold state laws against 
violence and trespass. Yet a more basic question remains: does 
that mean that whenever Congress perceives a local problem 
occurring in many localities it may legislate to control the 
problem, regardless of lack of substantial connection with 
interstate commerce? Lopez requires otherwise. 


In United States v. Wilson, #94-CR-140, slip op. (E.D. 
Wisc. March 16, 1995), LEXIS 3439, the District Court struck 
down the FACE provision that prohibits nonviolent physical 
obstruction of entrances to clinics. 


Wilson seems anticipatory of Lopez, for it looks to 
FACE in Commerce and Fourteenth Amendment terms, finding 
no substantial connection with interstate commerce. Wilson is 
the only adjudicated FACE case to analyze the interstate 
commerce question in a serious way. All the other decisions 
have skipped that issue and reached the customary conclusion 
that the interstate commerce requirement had been met, 
whether in fact it had. 


Petitioners twice have raised the interstate commerce 


12 


issue but have been ignored. The question is important, 
accentuated by Lopez. The Court should settle the matter, by 
enunciating standards by which Congress may legislate and the 
Judiciary may adjudicate. 


Lopez struck down a statute that had no affect upon 
interstate commerce, any more than the activities of private 
local anti-abortion demonstrators have. Like FACE, the Gun- 
Free statute did not require a showing of particular connection 
to interstate commerce as an element of the federal crime it 
created. Nor did it contain explicit findings with respect to 
interstate commerce. This Court declined to assume that 
interstate commerce was affected in every case in which 
someone possessed a firearm within 1,000 feet of a school. 
Because neither an interstate commercial purpose nor a 
substantial economic effect upon interstate commerce had been 
shown, the statute fell. So, too, should FACE. It bears all the 
constitutional frailties of the Gun-Free law and puts the 
Government into strictly local law enforcement in a mockery 
of federalism.” 


B. §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment 
Does Not Authorize Congress to 
Punish Private  Anti-abortion 
Activities 


§ 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment authorizes Congress 
to provide for penalties against some forms of private 
interference with the exercise of certain constitutional rights. 


2 


In no pleading, argument or opinion in the case below was there an effort 
to link the local activity of Petitioners herein to the affecting of interstate 
commerce, much less to the substantial affecting of interstate commerce or 
to a substantial economic activity. 


13 


Griffin v. Breckenridge, 403 U.S. 88 (1971). A fundamental 
restriction upon this power is that it must be directed at rights 
which the Constitution itself protects against private 
interference. 


In Carpenters v. Scott, 463 U.S. 825 (1983), the 
Supreme Court considered the application of 42 U.S.C. § 
1985(3), having its origin in the Civil Rights Act of 1871, toa 
private conspiracy aimed at preventing the exercise of First 
Amendment rights. The Court holds that § 1985(3) affords no 
cause of action against persons engaged in such a conspiracy, 
because the rights in question are not among those "protected 
against private, as well as official, encroachment." 463 U.S. at 
833. In Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic, 113 S. Ct. 
753 (1993), the Court applied the rule of Carpenters to an 
action under § 1985(3) against persons who had obstructed 
access to abortion clinics. Because the right to abortion, like 
other elements of the general right to privacy upon which it is 
based, is "obviously ot protected against private 
infringement,” there could be no cause of action under the civil 
rights law. /d. at 764. [Emphasis by the Court.] 


Although the precise questions presented in Bray and 
Carpenters involve statutory interpretation, the limiting 
constructions are designed to avoid the "constitutional shoals 
that would lie in the path of interpreting §1985(3) as a general 
federal tort law." Bray, 113 S. Ct. at 759, quoting Griffin, 403 
U.S. at 102. [Emphasis supplied.] Thus, while enactment of 
FACE may have cured some Bray defects, it cannot cure the 
fundamental defect presented by the constitutional 
impossibility of a private violation of a right which the 
Constitution protects only against governmental infringement. 
“A burglar does not violate the F ourth Amendment, for 
example, nor does a mugger violate the Fourteenth." Bray, 113 


14 


S. Ct. at 764. Similarly, there can be no federal protection 
against private conspiracies to violate the constitutional right to 
abortion because "deprivation of that federal right (whatever its 
contours) cannot be the object of a purely private conspiracy." 
Id. [Emphasis supplied.] Therefore, although "[t]respassing 
upon private property is unlawful in all States, as is, in many 
States and localities, intentionally obstructing the entrance to 
private premises," /d. at 768, § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment 
provides no more constitutional authority for a federal statute 
against anti-abortion trespassers or clinic obstructors than it 
does for a general federal law against burglary or mugging. 


Cc. This Court Should Resist the FACE 
Legislative Incursion upon 
Federalism and the Federal Judiciary 


The Founders' fear of majority legislative tyranny 
prompted insistence upon an independent Federal Judiciary. 
See J. Madison, A. Hamilton, J. Jay, The Federalist, #78. 
Many unpopular, even despicable, persons have found 
protection in federal courts. The federal courts once had the 
support of elite opinion -- particularly law journals -- in 
safeguarding the rights of minorities to speak and protest. In an 
age of political correctness, however, some are rethinking their 
commitment to "unrestricted" free speech. See C. Sunnstein, 
Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (New York; The 
Free Press, 1993) ("We are in the midst of a dramatic period of 
new thought about the meaning of free speech in America", at 
ix). Limits which in the past would have been judged content- 
or viewpoint-based, with a slight lens adjustment, may survive 
scrutiny. 


Federal restraint upon free speech has been relatively 
rare. The overwhelming majority of cases striking down 


15 


statutes and ordinances under the First Amendment have come 
from state law. Areas of criminal law once deemed to be 
exclusively within the province of states have been federalized. | 
See J. Baker, "Nationalizing Criminal Law: Does Organized 
Crime Make It Necessary or Proper?" 16 Rutgers LJ. 495 | 
(1985). Federalization of crime has been occurring because the 
normal checks and balances within Congress do not seem to : 
operate where crime is concerned. Congress greatly has : 
expanded federal criminal jurisdiction -- which should be cause : 
for alarm within the Federal Judiciary. | 


Although Congress no longer may question its authority | 

to federalize crime, the Judiciary must. The issue is not merely | 
whether Congress has power to intrude upon the States but | 
also how far it has power to intrude upon the federal courts. 
While threats to the Judiciary from Congress generally have | 
been viewed in terms of removing jurisdiction, Congress in fact : 
rarely removes jurisdiction. See Baucus and Kay, "The Court 
Stripping Bills: Their Impact on the Constitution, the Courts 
and Congress," 27 Vill L.R. 988 (1982). The trend has been 
the opposite. As the Chief Justice warned recently, the trend 
threatens to engulf the federal courts. ("I urge Congress to 
review carefully the impact on the federal courts, and on the 
traditional balance between state and federal jurisdiction, 
before adopting the more expansive proposals in the crime 
bill.") 1993 Year-End Report on the Federal Judiciary. The 
Judiciary is not just another subservient agency available to do 
whatever Congress wishes. 


Unless FACE is struck down, the federal courts must 
accept jurisdiction over a class of criminal cases which in 
common-law terms need not rise even to the level of a trespass 
upon property or an assault (understood as less than a battery) 
upon a person. In analyzing the individual issues, this Court 


16 


should consider the arguments within this jurisdictional 
context. When deferring to congressional intent, federal courts 
do so as a matter of respect for the principle of separation of 
powers. That same principle also requires the Judiciary to 
resist congressional overreaching to confer undue jurisdiction. 


FACE involves not only the inadequacy of 
congressional definition but its very legitimacy. However 
broadly one might stretch the Commerce Clause in civil 
matters, its application to criminal matters implicates 
jurisdictional principles not applicable to civil matters. As 
Marbury v Madison, | Cr. (5 U.S.) 137 (1803), reminds us, the 
most basic use of judicial review has been defensive. Chief 
Justice Marshall therefore refused to exercise jurisdiction given 
by Congress, but not by the Constitution. If the jurisdictional 
dimension of FACE is ignored, the Judiciary may render its 
institutional integrity defenseless against a flood of federal 
criminal laws, including domestic violence,’ drunken driving, 
assault and trespass, which belong in state court. 


Il. The Court of Appeals Otherwise Errs 
A. The Court of Appeals First 
Amendment Standard of 


Review Is Erroneous 


The Fourth Circuit uncritically concluded that strict 


3 


E.g., see the proposed "Violence Against Women Act,” introduced in the 
103d Congress, as part of a federal crime bill, discussed in "A Million Mrs. 
Bobbitts", The New York Times, A26 (January 28, 1994). Abuse of children 
and female spouses, e.g., is a grievous problem, as to the gravity of which, 
unlike abortion, there is no serious disagreement. Is domestic relations law 
to be federalized? 


17 


scrutiny is not the standard to apply to FACE. Instead, the 
Court invoked an intermediate test to determine constitutional 
validity, based partly upon its determination that the restricted 
conduct was outside protected speech in many respects. But 
FACE, according to the Court, did not escape the First 
Amendment entirely, for it does affect some protected conduct 
like peaceful protest that obstructs entrances. 


The Fourth Circuit determined that FACE is content- 
and viewpoint-neutral, thus requiring a First Amendment 
neutrality enquiry that does not focus upon the motive of the 
protester. “Rather, a statute regulating expressive conduct is 
neutral if it is justified without reference to the content of the 
violator’s message or point of view. Madsen v. Women’s 
Health Center, 114 S. Ct. 2516, 1523-24 (1994); Ward v. Rock 
Against Racism, 491 U.S. 788, 791 (1989). Congressional 
purpose is the main consideration. Jd.” App. at 9a-10a. 
Finally, the Court finds that the Congress chose reasonable 
regulatory means adapted to legitimate objectives --- namely, 
stopping violence around abortion clinics. 


B. FACE Legislative History Clearly 
Establishes Applicability Only to 
Prolife Advocates 


At first blush much of FACE seems unambiguous. As 
its "Purpose", §2, states, Congress is establishing penalties and 
remedies for conduct intended to injure, intimidate or interfere 
with persons seeking or providing reproductive services. To 
understand congressional intent, however, one must scrutinize 
the language of §248(a)(1) and the legislative history, 
particularly the word “because.” Then it becomes clear: only 
those who espouse prolife views are targeted. 


18 


FACE is written in terms general enough to appear to 
criminalize First Amendment activities of disparate groups and 
individuals around abortion clinics. The Fourth Circuit, 
however, ignored venerable construction standards. The 
Supreme Court has a long-established way of construing 
statutes. In United States v. Turkette, 452 U.S. 576, 580 
(1981), for instance, the Court states that a court should look 
first at the language. If there is no ambiguity, “in the absence 
of ‘a clearly expressed legislative intent to the contrary, that 
language must ordinarily be regarded as conclusive.’” 


In INS v. Vardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 432 n. 12 (1987), 
the Court added: 


"...clearly expressed legislative intention" 
contrary to that language, which would require 
us to question the strong presumption that 
Congress expresses its intent through the 
language it chooses. 


FACE is designed to suppress only the anti-abortion 
side of a fierce national debate. The legislative history reveals 
intent that only those who espouse anti-abortion views are at 
risk.* The Fourth Circuit ignored such intent. This failure 


4 


A Department of Justice press release, dated April 11, 1995, received by 
Counsel May 9, reports the first FACE indictment of a pro-abortion 
individual. Defendant is said to have been indicted for telephoning two 
abortion-alternative counseling facilities and threatening in one call “to kill 
workers at the clinic” and in the other “to shoot prolifer supporters 
demonstrating outside abortion clinics.” The indictment is said to be in two 
counts: (1) unlawful interstate communication -- obviously not FACE; (2) 
FACE - “threat of force to intimidate and interfere with ... workers.” The 
press release does not discuss the fact that FACE legislative history deals 
solely with activity involving abortion facilities (euphemistically rephrased, 


19 


establishes a precedent for spawning innumerable criminal, 
civil and injunctive FACE actions - all in federal court. 


Cc. FACE Abridges the Freedom of 
Expression Protected by the First 
Amendment 


a A Content-specific Statutory 
Regulation of Expressive 
Conduct Is Presumptively 
Unconstitutional and Must Be 
Subjected to the Most 
Exacting Scrutiny 


Petitioners had urged application of the strict scrutiny 
articulated in R.A.V. v. St. Paul, 112 S. Ct. 2538 (1992), Boos 
v. Barry, 485 U.S. 312 (1988), and other cases involving 
prohibitions of expressive conduct by reference to the content 
of the expression. Instead the Circuit Court applied 
intermediate scrutiny, primarily relying upon Madsen, supra. 


Madsen concerns a state court injunction against 
various forms of speech and expressive conduct by prolife 
protestors in the vicinity of an abortion clinic. In upholding 
some parts of the injunction and invalidating others, the Court 
applied a newly unfolded intermediate standard of review, 
Stricter than the standard applicable to a content-neutral 
restriction of time, place and manner, but not as strict as the 
standard applicable to a content-specific statute. Although the 
injunction effectively restricted only prolife expression, the 
Court rejected the argument that it should be subjected to the 
rigorous scrutiny appropriate to content-specific statutes 


during the legislative process, as “reproductive health services”). 


20 


because to apply the statutory test in the injunctive context 
would make nearly every injunction content- or viewpoint- 
based. Jd. at 6. 


The scrutiny with respect to statutes which regulate 
expression by reference to the content of the expression or to 
the viewpoint expressed is settled beyond serious dispute: an 
exacting scrutiny. Boos v. Barry, 485 U.S. 312 (1988). 


FACE, a statute and not an injunction, should not be 
evaluated by the Madsen somewhat unclear intermediate 
standard. Rather, because it explicitly regulates expressive 
conduct by reference to content, and implicitly by reference to 
viewpoint, it must be subjected to the "exacting scrutiny" of 
R.A.V..and Boos, supra. 


2. FACE Imposes Content-based 
Restrictions upon Political 
Expression 


Aside from its direct prohibition of certain forms of 
political expression protected by the First Amendment, FACE 
clearly is unconstitutional as both a content- and viewpoint- 
based restriction on political expression. 


FACE would be unconstitutional as a content-based 
restriction even if each expressive act it punishes were deemed 
outside First Amendment protection because FACE restricts 
such acts when they are committed "because" of the provision 
of "reproductive health services" but permits the same acts 
when committed for other reasons. § 248 (a)(1), (a)(3). People 
who wish to obstruct access to businesses, schools and 
hospitals, for any reason or none, may do so with impunity 
under federal law. The protection of the statute is triggered 


21 


only when the target of the obstruction or other prohibited 
conduct is a provider of "reproductive health services" and the 
conduct is "because" of such "services." 


The actual intent required in F ACE, however, is not the 
intent to injure, intimidate or interfere with any person "who is” 
obtaining or providing abortion or other reproductive health 
services. Rather, the required intent is the intent to injure, 
intimidate or interfere with any person "because that person is 


obtaining" or providing such services. §248 3(a)(1). [Emphasis , 


supplied. ] 


\ 

Because FACE js content-specific,> it jis 
unconstitutional in the absence of a compelling distinction 
between obstruction and interference by persons objecting to 
"reproductive health services" and identical obstructions and 
interferences by environmentalists, labor picketers and others. 
No such distinction has been advanced, and the "presumption 
is . . . very strong" that none would bear scrutiny. City of 
Ladue v. Gilleo, 114 S. Ct. 2038, 2047 (1994) (O'Connor, J., 
concurring). 


5 


See also Senate Committee Report # 103-117, 103d Congress, Ist Session, 
at 24 (submitted by Senator Kennedy): 


Thus, for example, if an environmental group blocked 
passage to a hospital where abortions are performed, but 
did so as part of a demonstration over harmful emissions 
produced by the facility, the demonstrators would not 
violate this Act... . [T]he demonstrators’ motive is 
related to the facility's emissions policy and practices and 
not to its policy and practices on abortion-related 
services. 


22 


FACE Imposes Viewpoint-based 
Restrictions upon Political 
Expression 


FACE explicitly establishes a content-based restriction 
upon "obstruction" and similar activities but this is not all. 
Both its principal purpose and its principal effect are to enact 
a de facto viewpoint-based restriction targeted at anti-abortion 
protests. This purpose, only implicit in the text, is clear from 
the context of final enactment and is explicit and pervasive in 
the legislative history. . 


Nor should the last-minute legislative substitution of the 
term "reproductive health services" for "abortion-related 
services" be regarded as dispositive of the question of 
viewpoint discrimination. If a political faction, upon obtaining 
a legislative majority, may effect an otherwise impermissible 
suppression of the expressive conduct of a particular group of 
its ideological opponents simply by stretching the list of 
prohibited viewpoints --- in this case the "because" clause of 
§248(a)(1) --- so as to encompass one or two hypothetical 
situations in which somebody other than the targeted group 
conceivably might be subject to similar suppression, then there 
is not much left of the prohibition against viewpoint specificity. 


FACE is constitutionally indistinguishable from the 
statute struck down in R.A.V.. FACE also contains the 
objectionable elements of any number of hypothetical statutes 
which, were they enacted outside the context of the abortion 
controversy, would be regarded as transparent attempts to 
suppress particular viewpoints. The FACE formula is designed 
clearly to help one side in the abortion debate and hurt the 
other. A statute that does this by punishing expressive conduct, 
and which limits punishment to conduct which is engaged in 


23 


"because" of an event which in the overwhelming majority of 
actual cases is desired by one side in the debate and opposed by 
the other, is viewpoint-specific. 


FACE makes an impermissible distinction between 
expressive conduct engaged in by anti-abortion protesters and 
identical conduct designed to prevent or dissuade people from 
exercising other constitutional rights. One may obstruct access 
to public auditoriums, newspapers or the headquarters of right- 
to-life organizations without falling afoul of FACE. Only 
“reproductive health services" and the opponents of certain 
services are singled out. 


This Congress may not do. As the Supreme Court 
observed of the "hate speech" ordinance struck down in R.A. V., 
the legislature "has no such authority to license one side of a 
debate to fight freestyle, while requiring the other to follow 
Marquis of Queensbury Rulés." 112 S. Ct. at 2548. 


4. FACE Imposes Severe Penalties upon 
First Amendment Expression 


Even if it were not content-based and viewpoint-based, 
FACE would be unconstitutional because it imposes penalties 
upon various forms of nonviolent political expression. 
Although some forms of expression arguably are outside First 
Amendment protection, others are squarely within that scope. 


FACE subjects a person who "interferes with or 
attempts to . . . interfere with" another person who is or has 
been obtaining or providing abortion-related services when the 
offender's conduct is "exclusively a nonviolent physical 
obstruction" to a fine up to $10,000 and imprisonment up to six 
months, for the first offense; 18 months and $25,000 for a 


subsequent offense. 


The congressional debate on FACE is replete with 
explicit references to the psychological and emotional 
"injuries" that may be caused by listening to a message one 
does not want to hear. See, e.g., 139 Cong. Rec. $15671 (Daily 
ed, November 16, 1993) (statement of Senator Feinstein). 


Finally, FACE prohibits particular forms of symbolic 
speech that are uniquely powerful in the context of the abortion 
debate. It does so, moreover, in a context that suggests that the 
prohibition is at least partly because of this expressive content. 


Punishment of nonviolent political expression strikes at 
the very heart of the First Amendment. When, as here, the 
punishment is at least in part because of the communicative 
nature of the conduct, the law in question must be subjected to 
"the most exacting scrutiny.” Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 
412 (1989), quoting Boos, 485 U.S. at 321. See also United 
States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968). 


S. FACE Is Substantially Overbroad 
and Unconstitutionally Vague 


The terms "vagueness" and "overbreadth" are used to 
describe several distinct sorts of constitutional defect. Some of 
the constitutional commands that can be transgressed by a 
vague and/or overbroad statute regulating expression are 
grounded in the fair notice requirement of the Due Process 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment. Others are inherent in the 
First Amendment protection of freedom of expression. See 
generally Fallon, Making Sense of Overbreadth, 100 Yale L.J. 
853 (1991). FACE contains several of these defects. 


25 


To the extent FACE defines conduct which is the 
legitimate object of regulation, it does so "by means that sweep 
unnecessarily broadly and thereby invade the area of protected 
freedoms." N.4.4.C.P. y, Alabama, 377 U.S. 288, 307 (1964). 


The blanket criminalization of verbal "threats" aiso 
appears to be overbroad. The Supreme Court repeatedly has 
held that threats in the context of a political dispute may be 
punished only when they are "directed to inciting or producing 
imminent lawless action, and [are] likely to incite or produce 
such action." Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444, 447 (1969); 
see also Claiborne, 458 U.S. at 927. Cf Wurtz v. Risley, 719 
F. 2d 1438 (9th Cir., 1983) (statute proscribing "intimidation," 
defined to include "a threat to. . . commit any criminal 
offense," was overbroad). 


FACE has an impermissible chilling effect. A 
straightforward reading of key provisions reveals that they may 
be violated by the very things prolife protestors and counsellors 
try to do every day on the streets and sidewalks outside clinics. 
And, if narrowed, FACE yet would be unconstitutionally 
vague. 


6. FACE Impermissibly Requires 
Payment of Damages for Commercial 
Injuries Caused in Whole or in Part 
by First Amendment Expression 


Even if FACE did not directly punish protected 
expression or discriminate against expression on the basis of 
content and viewpoint, and even were it not vague and 
overbroad, its statutory damages provision would fail. This 
provision not only allows for the recovery of damages by 
abortion providers against peaceful prolife demonstrators who 


26 


may have stepped outside the bounds of constitutional 
protection; it specifically provides that the abortion providers 
may recover such damages without proving that they were 
incurred on account of the demonstrators’ constitutionally 
unprotected conduct. § 248(c)(1)(B). 


Claiborne holds that where damages may have been 
caused by a course of conduct which included both expressive 
conduct protected by the First Amendment and unprotected 
conduct such as violence and threats of violence, damages may 
be assessed (1) only against defendants shown to (i) have 
engaged in unprotected conduct or (ii) specifically intended to 
further the illegal aims of such conduct; and (2) only in an 
amount sufficient to compensate for the injuries shown to have 
been caused by the unprotected conduct. 458 U.S. at 916-920. 
Moreover, proof of the amount of damages attributable to the 
unprotected conduct must be with "precision." Jd. at 916. 


Indeed, FACE goes even further than the Mississippi 
law struck down in Claiborne. Not only does the clinic owner 
not have to prove with "precision" how much of his damages 
were caused by the unprotected acts rather thar by his 
opponents’ exercise of their right to free speech, he can recover 
the $60,000 even if it is proved affirmatively that the entire 
economic injury was attributable to the constitutionally 
protected activity! For instance, the owner could still opt to 
receive the $60,000 "at any time prior to the rendering of final 
judgment" even if every woman who had canceled her abortion 
appointment on the day of the demonstration testified at trial 
that she had changed her mind because she was impressed by 
the demonstrators' sincerity and the force of their arguments, 
not because of physical obstruction. 


D. FACE Violates the Free Exercise 


27 


Clause and the Religious Act By 
Targeting Religious Beliefs and 
Practices 


a FACE Violates Appellants’ 
Rights under the Free: 
Exercise Clause 


The conflict between abortion rights groups and prolife 
religious groups is bitter because it arises from a dispute about 
the most fundamental question of life. Although abortion 
advocates may be free to secure the enactment of their own 
views into law without violating the Establishment Clause, 
their attempt through FACE to suppress the religiously 
motivated expression and conduct of their opponents does 
violate the Free Exercise Clause. As the Supreme Court 
recently observed, a free exercise claim may present itself 
"upon even slight suspicion that Proposals for state 
intervention stem from animosity to religion or distrust of its 
practices." Church of Lukumi Babalou Aye v Hialeah, 113 S. 
Ct. 2217, 2234 (1993), 


The law need not explicitly target religious beliefs to 
violate the Free Exercise Clause. Rather, "if the object of a law 
is to infringe upon or restrict practices because of their religious 
motivation, the law is not neutral..." Jd. The text alone is not 
controlling. In Lukumi, the Court "reject[s] the contention. . . 
that our inquiry must end with the text of the laws at issue. 
Facial neutrality is not determinative." Jd. 


The motive requirement has the effect of exempting 
other similar but politically acceptable acts, as is revealed in the 
legislative history which distinguishes and exempts 
environmental protestors who may block hospital entrances. 


28 


In Lukumi, the targeted conduct is a religious ritual. 
The Free Exercise Clause is not limited to protection of 
religious ritual. Rather, Lukumi repeatedly uses the term 
"religious practice.” 


"A law burdening religious practice that is not neutral 
or not of general application must undergo the most rigorous of 
scrutiny.” 113 S. Ct. at 2233. FACE is subject to strict 
scrutiny if it fails on either count: neutrality or general 
applicability. It fails on both counts. As in most strict-scrutiny 
cases, Appellee cannot establish a compelling reason to justify 
this particularly worded law. 


2. FACE Violates the Religious 
Act 


Quite apart from the neutrality and general applicability 
requirements of the Free Exercise Clause, FACE violates the 
Religious Act, 42 U.S.C. §§2000bb, et seg, which affords 
Appellants even greater protection than would be afforded by 
the Court's constitutional holdings. Dissatisfied with 
Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990), Congress 
has "provide[d] a claim or defense to persons whose religious 
exercise is substantially burdened by government.” 42 U.S.C. 
§2000bb(b)(2). The Religious Act applies even to neutral laws 
of general applicability. See §2000bb(a)(1), Findings. 


The Religious Act provides protection to the free 
exercise of religion broader than the Constitution requires. 
The statute prescribes that "[g]overnment shall not substantially 
burden a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results 
from a rule of general applicability, except as provided .. ." 
42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(a). As demonstrated in the previous 
section, FACE does substantially burden Appellants’ exercise 


29 


of religion by threatening them with atrest, prosecution and 
punitive damages for engaging in religious acts of mercy. 


An exception to the Religious Act allows imposititon of 
a substantial burden "only [upon demonstration] that the 
application of the burden to the person - 1) is in furtherance of 
a compelling government interest; and (2) is the least restrictive 
means of furthering that compelling governmental interest." /d. 
at §2000bb-1(b). Thus, the Religious Act also goes further than 
the Constitution in that a compelling governmental interest is 
not sufficient. The Government must demonstrate that it has 
used the least restrictive means. 


Ill. The Questions Presented Are 
Important 


FACE has triggered seventeen additional cases. Media 
reports suggest others. This and one other currently seek 
certiorari.’ Upon information and belief, others are in the 
appellate process. Over time, notwithstanding the widespread 
FACE-induced free speech/religious rights chill, there 


6 


The other is Woodall vy. Reno, 47 F.3d 656 (4th Cir. 1995); argued 
following the instant case; subject of a two-page opinion referring to the 
instant case for its rationale. No Commerce Clause/federalism issue is 
raised in Woodall. Appellants there filed for certiorari under date of 


30 


undoubtedly will be a widening flow of FACE criminal, civil 
and injunctive cases, eventually inundating state and local 
police power. Until and unless this honorable Court enunciates 
the constitutional criteria applicable to FACE, and, if need be, 
the standard of scrutiny, while untold law-abiding citizens will 
refrain from speech perceived to be unlawful, many others will 
follow their faith and hope; and the Federal Judiciary will 
become the police courts of local America. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, Petitioners American Life 
League, Inc. And the individual Petitioners pray that their 
Petition for a Writ of Certiorari be granted. 


Respectfully submitted, 


MARION EDWYN HARRISON* 
DANIEL M. REDMOND 

LAW OFFICES MARION EDWYN HARRISON 
170 Park Washington Court 

Falls Church 22046 

(703) 532-0303 

and 

1825 K Street, N.W. 

Suite 901 

Washington, D.C. 20006 

(202) 965-0800 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
* Counsel of Record 


May 12, 1995 


