\ 
vy) SEP 5 1995 
PA 
No. 94-7427 CLERK 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 
+ 


JOSEPH V. LIBRETTL, JR., 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


¢ 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The United States 
Court Of Appeals For The Tenth Circuit 


¢ 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 
¢ 


SARA SUN BEALE 
(Appointed by this Court) 


Of Counsel: Counsel of Record 
Paut K. Sun, Jr. Duke University School of 
SmitH Heims Mutuiss & Law 
Moore, L.L.P. Science Drive & 
316 West Edenton Street Towerview Road 
Post Office Box 27525 Post Office Box 90360 
Raleigh, North Carolina Durham, North Carolina 
27611 27708-0360 


Telephone: 919-755-8720 Telephone: 919-613-7091 
Counsel for Petitioner 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


I. RULE 11(f) REQUIRES THE DISTRICT COURT 
TO SATISFY ITSELF THAT THERE IS A FAC- 
TUAL BASIS FOR THE FORFEITURE PART OF 
Pi GP CR arn't Coste cvaysTevcetwcscacece 1 


Il. THE RIGHT TO A JURY DETERMINATION OF 
CRIMINAL FORFEITURE CAN BE EXTIN- 
GUISHED ONLY BY A KNOWING AND INTEL- 
SE EEE seco cbapeusosepsorccccocerens 13 


SP gseebeacuddececascapnvecccdsoddsees 20 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
CASES 
Bushell’s Case, 124 Eng. Rep. 1006 (1670) ............ 13 
Caplin & Drysdale, Chartered v. United States, 491 
US. G7 (OOP 6 is ioc ie iececs cvvuccodstve Weathers 7 
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145 (1968)............. 14 
Greene v. Briggs, 10 F. Cas. 1135 (C.C.D.R.I. 1852) 
(Mo. S$APG . cvccdvclecvcvecssévccutousbavenesenees 15 
Jackson v. The Steamboat Magnolia, 61 U.S. (20 
Blows.) 206 CRGGF) coc ccccvcesveccbduseesestenspetues 16 
McCarthy v. United States, 394 U.S. 459 (1969) ........ 6 
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79 (1986)....... 4,17 
Sullivan v. Louisiana, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993).......... 15 
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218 (1973)........ 18 
United States v. The Betsey and Charlotte, 8 U.S. (4 
Comme) G69 CBBRED oun csavccanpotidossesibavneneen 16 
United States v. Gaudin, 115 S. Ct. 2310 (1995)....... 15 
United States v. Guardino, 972 F.2d 682 (6th Cir. 
BODE. oo cccccctsnnet sss pesseba teense 12 
United States v. Pelullo, 14 F.3d 881 (3d Cir. 1994).... 15 
United States v. Rice, 954 F.2d 40 (2d Cir. 1992)...... 12 


United States v. Robinson, 8 F.3d 418 (7th Cir. 1993) .... 18 
United States v. Snider, 957 F.2d 703 (9th Cir..1992) .... 12 
Wood v. Georgia, 370 U.S. 375 (1962).............045. 14 


Riad 00 ds 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
STATUTES AND RULES 
EEE 4 
18 U.S.C. App., Notes of Advisory Cor-mittee on 
Rules - 1 Ee Ip 4 
Te cAbscesednccdidecessescicobe 2, 11, 15 
EEE 11 
TEL b CUSbccbecbicccesccccccccctccces 10 
TTT TT TTT CTT TT Tee 11, 12 
eh euen cue c beac ce secede sdeteccecs 4 
Re > er ree 3, 4, 6 
ad cececcncascegccees sees 5, 9, 18, 19 
Ss Sec cccccccccsccccccccees 19, 20 
Ee ee 19 
DU MM ID MEUIIEOD s cvicccccccscccccccccecvcecss 19 
eS DTT eee 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12 
Dn sec ccencsescssccccces 4, 6, 18, 19 
EEE ee 6 
ee I EE Sis ccc ciccccccccccccccceces 3 
rE ohne ese bes pas esensccccetcccses 4 
U.SS.G., Ch. 1, Pt. A, intro. comment................ 4 
iii cc cchecccbeesendbescccecescccccs 3 
EEE ES 2 2 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
MISCELLANEOUS 
American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and 
Commmpemtastes (ISG. oc ccccccccccccceccccosccncgees 17 
Sara S. Beale and William C. Bryson, Grand Jury 
Laep Gnd Prastigg CIDE cc cccccccecocecvedecesosss 14 
J.M. Beattie, Crime and the Courts in England 
SORD-SGRD. CIGIE » 0 00s cecccepssdocctntaddopecdedsce 17 
Julius Goebel and T. Raymond Naughton, Law 
Enforcement in Colonial New York (1944)............ 13 
I Frederick Pollack and Frederick Maitland, The 
History of English Law (2d ed. 1923)............... 14 
5 J. Moore, Federal Practice (2d ed. 1995)............ 16 
2 David B. Smith, Prosecution and Defense of Forfei- 
> fF . Fagaee e pe eee ee 15 
Carl Ubbelohde, The Vice-Admiralty Courts and the 
American Revolution (1960) ............00cceeeenees 16 
Jack B. Weinstein, Considering Jury “Nullification”; 
When and Should a Jury Reject the Law to Do 
Justice, 30 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 239 (1993)........... 14 
5 poms. Come, SB Gee Za, TIF. cc ccceccccccccccces 16 
S. Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., Ist Sess. (1983) ....... 5, 6 
H.R. Rep. No. 247, 94th Cong., Ist Sess. (1975)...... 19 


No. 94-7427 
¢ 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


JOSEPH V. LIBRETTL, JR., 
Petitioner, 


vs. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


° 


On Writ Of Certiorari To The United States 
Court Of Appeals For The Tenth Circuit 


¢ 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 
° 


I. RULE 11(f) REQUIRES THE DISTRICT COURT TO 
SATISFY ITSELF THAT THERE IS A FACTUAL 
BASIS FOR THE FORFEITURE PART OF A GUILTY 
PLEA 


Petitioner’s opening brief showed that the Federal 
Rules of Criminal Procedurc ‘reat criminal forfeiture as a 
substantive , and that Rule 11(f) requires the court 
to satisfy itself that there is a factual basis for a defen- 
dant’s plea to criminal forfeiture charged in an indict- 
ment or information. 


2 


he owned met the requirements for forfeiture under 21 
U.S.C. 853.” U.S. Br. 31. 


Neither the Sentencing Guidelines nor the text of the 
plea agreement support the government's contention that 
paragraph 10 should be characterized as a sentencing 
“stipulation.” The Guidelines provide that a plea agree- 
ment may be accompanied by “a written stipulation of 
facts relevant to sentencing.” U.S.S.G. § 6B1.4(a) 
(emphasis added). Paragraph 10 of the plea agreement, 
which states that petitioner “agrees to transfer [to the 
government] his right, title and interest in all of his 
assets,” does not establish any facts that are relevant to 
sentencing. As noted in his opening brief, petitioner con- 
tests the effect of paragraph 10.' Assuming that it oper- 
ates as concession of forfeitability, it is analogous to a 
concession of guilt, not a sentencing stipulation. The 
court of appeals interpreted paragraph 10, like a guilty 
plea, to state an ultimate legal conclusion, not to stipulate 
one or more of the subsidiary facts that might bear on the 
correct sentence. 


Moreover, the government’s characterization of for- 
feiture as exclusively a matter of sentencing finds no 
support in the laws governing the calculation and imposi- 
tion of sentences, for these laws make no provision for 


' The government's characterization of paragraph 10 
ignores two other paragraphs of the plea agreement, which cast 
it in quite a different light. See Pet. Br. 23-24 (discussing para- 
graphs 2 and 9, as well as the district court’s ambiguous and 
misleading statements at the Rule 11 hearing). Although the 
court of appeals did conclude that petitioner intended to forfeit 
all of his property without any further proceedings, it should be 
noted that the district court made no findings concerning peti- 
tioner’s intent, and no record was developed on this point. 
Petitioner contends that he understood the agreement to pro- 
vide for further findings to determine which assets were subject 
to forfeiture. See Pet. Br. 24-25. In any event, neither court below 
made any finding that petitioner intended to stipulate that his 
property “met the requirements” of Section 853. 


3 


criminal forfeiture. The Sentencing Guidelines simply 
provide that other laws govern forfeiture procedures, 
stating that “[florfeiture is to be imposed upon a con- 
victed defendant as provided by statute.” U.S.S.G. § 5E1.4 
(emphasis added). The existing sentencing procedures 
contain no mechanism to assemble information regarding 
criminal forfeiture. Information relevant to sentencing is 
assembled by the presentence investigation and report. 
The content of the presentence investigation report is 
governed by Rule 32(b)(4) of the Federal Rules of Crimi- 
nal Procedure, which develops only the facts necessary 
for Guidelines sentencing and restitution.? Rule 32(b)(4) 
neither mentions forfeiture nor authorizes an inquiry into 
the facts necessary to determine the propriety of forfei- 
ture, such as the proceeds of the offense and property 
derived from those proceeds, the property used to facili- 
tate the offense, and any basis for forfeiting substitute 
assets 


The rationale for omitting forfeiture from the sen- 
tencing laws and procedures becomes clear upon review 
of the Federal Rules regulating criminal forfeiture, which 

forfeiture to be treated as a substantive charge 
rather than a mere matter of sentencing. Rule 7(c)(2) of 
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that 
criminal forfeiture be alleged in the indictment. There is, 
of course, no similar requirement for matters relevant to 


sentencing. Rule 31(e) requires a special jury verdict on 


2 Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(b)(4) provides that the report of the 
shall contain 1) information concern- 


presentence investigation 

ing the defendant’s history and characteristics (including prior 
criminal history and financial information pertinent to his abil- 
ity to pay a fine or restitution); 2) the Guidelines classification of 
the defendant and the offense and the suggested sentencing 
range; 3) any pertinent policy statements issued by the Sentenc- 
ing Commission; 4) information regarding the impact of the 
offense on any victims; 5) information regarding relevant non- 
prison programs and resources; and 6) other information 


required by the court. 


4 


the issue of forfeiture. Sentencing matters, in contrast, are 
determined by the judge, not the jury.* Rule 32(d) pro- 
vides for a judgment of forfeiture. Sentencing matters, 
such as the amount of a drug involved in a transaction, 
are not embodied in the judgment. 


The contrast between the procedural rules governing 
forfeiture and those governing sentencing is not acciden- 
tal. To the contrary, the draftsmen of the Federal Rules 
rejected a proposal to treat criminal forfeiture as a matter 
of sentencing, adopting instead Rules 7(c)(2), 31(e), and 
32(d). See Pet. Br. 16-19. The government’s arguments 
would have been correct if the alternative proposal had 
been adopted, but it was not. 


2. Despite the government's suggestions to the con- 
trary, petitioner’s argument fits squarely within the lan- 
guage of Rule 11(f). Rule 11(f) requires a factual basis for 
the defendant’s “plea,” and the terms of any plea must be 
determined by reference to the charges against the defen- 
dant as stated in the indictment, and by the laws that 
determine what must be alleged in the indictment and 
proved at trial. For example, use of a firearm in the 
commission of an offense may be defined as an element 
of the offense that must be alleged in the indictment, 
proved at trial, and for which there must be a factual 
basis, or it may be defined by the legislature as a matter 
merely for sentencing. See McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 
U.S. 79, 89-90 (1986) (although “many legislatures have 
made possession of a weapon an element of various 


3 See 28 U.S.C. § 994(a)(1) (1988) (Sentencing Commission 


to promulgate guidelines for use of sentencing court); U.S.S.G., 
Ch. 1, Pt. A, intro. comment (court must select sentence within 
guidelines range, but may depart outside the prescribed range if 
case presents atypical features). In capital cases, however, jury 
sentencing is authorized. 18 U.S.C. § 3593(b) (capital sentencing 
hearing to be conducted before jury unless defendant moves for 
hearing before court and government consents). For a discus- 
sion of the jury’s function in death penalty cases, see infra p. 17. 


5 


aggravated offenses,” Pennsylvania statute treats posses- 
sion as a sentencing factor which need not be proved 
beyond a reasonable doubt or tried by jury). Similarly, the 
legislature’s treatment of criminal forfeiture determines 
whether it must be treated as a substantive charge or 
merely a matter of sentencing. By enacting rules requir- 
ing that forfeiture be charged in the indictment, proved to 
the jury, and embodied in the judgment, Congress 
defined forfeiture as a substantive charge, not merely a 
matter of sentencing. The absence of any provision for 
forfeiture in the sentencing laws and procedures confirms 
the conclusion that Congress intended to treat forfeiture 
as a substantive charge. 


Criminal forfeiture is unquestionably a procedural 
oddity. It is, of course, ultimately a criminal punishment 
and a part of the defendant's sentence. But under the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure forfeiture is, none- 
theless, treated as a substantive charge that must be 
included in the indictment and submitted to the jury. As 
such, forfeiture is also properly a matter to which the 
defendant must plead, and for which a factual basis must 
be established. As explained in a Senate report that 
accompanied amendments to the RICO and CCE forfei- 
ture provisions and new forfeiture provisions applicable 
to other drug offenses, federal criminal forfeiture “is an 
in personam proceeding against the defendant in a crimi- 
nal case and is imposed as a sanction against the defen- 
dant upon his conviction.” S. Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., 
ist Sess. 193 (1983) (emphasis added). While the govern- 
ment’s brief (U.S. Br. 28) emphasizes the last part of this 
sentence, it ignores the first part, which recognizes that 
criminal forfeiture is a separate “in personam proceeding” 
or charge against the defendant within the criminal case. 
Id. 


The government's reliance on selected passages of 
legislative history and statutory text (see U.S. Br. 20-21, 
28) implicitly recognizes that this Court must look out- 
side Rule 11 to answer the question whether Congress 
has treated criminal forfeiture as a substantive charge or 


6 


as a matter of sentencing. The material cited by the gov- 
ernment is not on point, however, for none of it addresses 
the proper treatment of criminal forfeiture for procedural 
purposes, and none of it is inconsistent with the position 
petitioner advances. The only provisions that characterize 
forfeiture for procedural purposes are Rules 7(c)(2), 31(e), 
and 32 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, and 
these rules require criminal forfeiture to be treated as a 
substantive charge. Indeed, one of the Congressional 
reports upon which the government relies endorsed the 
procedural requirements of the Federal Rules, demon- 
strating that Congress intended these rules to govern and 
saw no inconsistency between forfeiture’s punitive char- 
acter and the requirement that it be treated as a substan- 
tive charge for procedural purposes.* 


Petitioner’s interpretation of Rule 11(f) is also consis- 
tent with this Court’s prior decisions and the legislative 
history of the rule. Although this Court’s decision in 
McCarthy v. United States, 394 U.S. 459 (1969), describes 
the factual basis requirement of Rule 11 without mention- 
ing forfeiture, the appropriate treatment of forfeiture was 
never an issue in that case because it was decided before 
the 1970 legislation authorizing forfeiture. Similarly, the 
Advisory Committee Note cited by the government (U.S. 
Br. 16-17) was drafted four years before the landmark 
forfeiture legislation. Though this Note does not mention 
forfeiture, it does indicate that the district court is to find 


* The report states: 

Criminal forfeiture must be alleged in the information 

or indictment. If the defendant is found guilty of the 

underlying offense, then a special verdict must be 

returned with respect to the forfeiture allegations and 

a judgment of forfeiture is entered against the defen- 

dant. Only then is the government authorized to seize 

the property. 
S. Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., Ist Sess. 193-94 (1983) (footnote 
citing Fed. R. Crim. P. 31(e) and 32 omitted), cited in U.S. Br. 21, 
28. 


7 


a factual basis for the charge or charges to which the 
defendant pleads. Once Congress altered the definition of 
the charge that must be included in the indictment and 
proved by the government as part of the case it must 
present to the jury, the definition of the plea necessary to 
resolve the case followed suit, encompassing forfeiture. 
Since the scope of the factual basis requirement turns on 
the nature of the charge and the corresponding plea, it 
too now encompasses forfeiture. 

3. The government responds to petitioner’s argu- 
ment that forfeiture is subject to abuse by arguing (U.S. 
Br. 29) that “any potential for abuse of forfeiture author- 
ity should be addressed through case-by-case inquiry into 
actual overreaching, not through the formulation of 
broad prophylactic rules.” Petitioner agrees. The factual 
basis determination is just such a case-by-case inquiry, 
wholly unlike the broad prophylactic remedy at issue in 
Caplin & Drysdale, Chartered v. United States, 491 U.S. 617 
(1989), where the defense sought an absolute prohibition 
on the forfeiture of funds that might be used to pay 
defense counsel. The factual basis requirement will pro- 
vide the court with information necessary to ensure that 
the government has not exceeded its statutory forfeiture 
authority. It will also provide information necessary to 
ensure that the defendant understands the scope of the 
forfeiture being sought and the facts necessary to support 
that forfeiture, and knowingly and voluntarily agrees to 
the forfeiture under those conditions. See Pet. Br. 14-15. 

The government has suggested no alternative that 
would provide the necessary safeguard against govern- 
ment overreaching or simple mistake. As noted above, 
the government contends that paragraph 10 of peti- 
tioner’s plea agreement forfeited all of his property 
(including legitimately obtained property) and was an 
appropriate stipulation concerning a sentencing matter. 
In the absence of a factual basis inquiry, there will be no 
mechanism for determining whether there is a factual 
foundation for such agreements. The government notes 
(U.S. Br. 32) that the court is not bound by stipulations, 


but may determine the facts relevant to sentencing with 
the aid of the presentence report. However, as discussed 
above, supra p. 3, the presentence report does not address 
the questions upon which forfeiture turns. 

This case illustrates the absence of any mechanism 
for determining the factual basis for criminal forfeiture if 
it is treated merely as a part of sentencing. The presen- 
tence report in this case did not address the factual predi- 
cates for forfeiture: it did not identify particular property 
as proceeds or derived from proceeds; it did not identify 
property used to facilitate the offense; it did not calculate 
the total proceeds; and it did not identify a factual basis 
for treating other property as substitute assets. The tran- 
scripts from the Rule 11 and sentencing hearings give no 
indication that the district court sought to identify the 
facts supporting forfeiture. The evidence relied upon by 
the government in support of its claim that a factual basis 
indeed exists (U.S. Br. 33) was introduced after sentencing 
at the ancillary third-party hearing, including the first 
and only evidence of the government's calculation of the 
total “proceeds” petitioner derived and the rationale for 
the forfeiture of legitimately obtained as well as tainted 
property. The government's brief glosses over the fact 
that after hearing this additional evidence the district 
court ruled that further evidentiary proceedings would 
be necessary to support the forfeiture order in the plea 
agreement, since the “[florfeiture statutes do not mandate 
forfeiture of property purchased with legitimate funds.” 
J.A. 309. The district court also found the existing evi- 
dence insufficient to support the government's substitute 
assets theory, observing that the government had pre- 
sented no more than unsubstantiated suspicions. J.A. 289 
(“You might suspect that, but can you proove [sic] it?”). 

4. The government's contention (U.S. Br. 36) that a 
factual basis inquiry is an “inapt method of revealing 
hidden misunderstandings between the parties” is 
squarely inconsistent with the Advisory Committee Note 
that accompanied the adoption of the factual basis 
requirement. In a passage upon which the government 


9 


itself relies in an earlier portion of its brief (U.S. Br. 16), 
the Note explains that the factual basis inquiry is 
intended to “e.g., protect a defendant who is in the posi- 
tion of pleading voluntarily with an understanding of the 
nature of the charge but without realizing that his con- 
duct does not actually fall within the charge.” 18 U.S.C. 
App., Notes of Advisory Committee on Rules - 1966 
Amendment. In other words, the factual basis require- 
ment will make clear when a defendant is pleading guilty 
because of such a misunderstanding. Moreover, the intro- 
ductory signal “e.g.” indicates that the factual basis 
requirement is intended to bring to light other forms of 
misunderstanding as well. 


The Advisory Committee and Congress did not 
accept the government’s argument that any judicial 
inquiry into the facts underlying the plea agreement 
would defeat the very purpose of such agreements, which 
the government says is to “relieve the litigants of the 
need to persuade the court that the stipulated facts are 
true.” U.S. Br. 36. The factual basis requirement reflects 
the view that if the parties cannot identify any factual 
support for their plea agreement at the Rule 11 hearing, 
the defendant’s plea is likely the result of some funda- 
mental misunderstanding which should be brought to 
light. That insight applies equally to a defendant’s admis- 
sion that he committed an offense charged in the indict- 
ment and to his admission that property named in the 
indictment is subject to forfeiture. 

Petitioner’s opening brief describes how such a fun- 
damental misunderstanding occurred in his own case. 
Pet. Br. 21-25. The government responds that a genuine 
mistake would have been raised promptly in the district 
court, and, further, that the court of appeals made “a 
detailed examination of the record” and found there was 
no misunderstanding. U.S. Br. 36. The problem with the 
government's argument is that one cannot raise a misun- 
derstanding of which he is not yet aware. For precisely 
this reason, Rule 11(f) requires an inquiry by the court in 
order to flush out such latent misunderstandings. 


10 


In petitioner’s case, there was no point prior to the 
sentencing hearing when any misunderstanding concern- 
ing forfeiture would naturally have come to light. It was 
only at the end of the sentencing hearing, after the judge 
stated the proceedings were at an end, that it became 
evident there would be no hearing on the issue of forfei- 
ture. At that point petitioner objected that there was no 
factual support for the forfeiture of all of his property. 
J.A. 154. Since petitioner raised this objection pro se on 
the spur of the moment, it is unrealistic to fault him, as 
the government does (U.S. Br. 36), for failing to describe 
his objection more fully. Moreover, since petitioner was 
given no opportunity to develop a record supporting this 
claim, and the district court made no findings on the 
issue of petitioner’s intent, the court of appeals was in no 
position to make its own findings regarding petitioner’s 
intentions. Petitioner’s case thus demonstrates the need 
for a mechanism to bring to light in the district court 
fundamental misunderstandings regarding the forfeiture 
portion of plea agreements. A factual basis inquiry would 
have required a description of the property to be forfeited 
and a brief explanation why it was forfeitable, providing 
a natural point at which any difference in understanding 
between petitioner and the prosecution would be evident. 


5. Forfeiture, unlike any other aspect of sentencing, 
has a direct impact upon the property rights of third 
parties. The government's brief gives scant attention to 
the interests of third parties, brushing them aside with 
the comment that they are adequately protected by the 
ancillary third-party procedures under 21 U.S.C. § 853(n). 
U.S. Br. 34-35. However, as petitioner has shown (Pet. Br. 
34-39), the procedures deemed adequate by the govern- 
ment provide no relief for some innocent owners whose 
rights may be extinguished by forfeiture pursuant to a 
plea agreement. The government's interpretation of Rule 
11(f) permits the property rights of third parties to be 
disturbed without even the minimum safeguard of a fac- 
tua! basis showing. The government's brief contains no 
reply to the evidence (Pet. Br. 39) that Congress 


11 


restricted the procedural protections afforded to third 
parties in the ancillary hearings in reliance on the firm 
evidentiary basis for forfeiture that would be required 
before conviction. 

The government relies heavily (U.S. Br. 32) on “the 
usual premise of an adversary system .. . that stipula- 
tions to which the parties agree are presumptively valid.” 
Because that presumption focuses exclusively on the par- 
ties who made the stipulation, it takes no account of the 
interests of third parties and provides no justification for 
allowing their rights to be adversely affected when no 
factual basis has been shown. See Pet. Br. 34-35 (defen- 
dants have no incentive to protect the property rights of 
third parties). The rights of third parties provide an addi- 
tional reason why Congress did not treat forfeiture as 
merely a matter of sentencing. 

6. The government relies upon a substitute assets 
theory to justify the forfeiture in this case, but a vital 
element is missing from this discussion. The government 
contends (U.S. Br. 33-34) that it was entitled to forfeit 
substitute assets in the amount of one million dollars 
because a state agent had estimated that petitioner had 
earned at least one million dollars from drug trafficking. 
The district court correctly rejected this argument at the 
third-party hearing, because the government did not 
meet one of the statutory prerequisites for the forfeiture 
of substitute assets. 

Section 853 establishes a two-part test for forfeiture 
of substitute assets. First, the government must identify 
forfeitable property under Section 853(a), which reaches, 
inter alia, the “proceeds” of drug trafficking. If the gov- 
ernment wishes to forfeit substitute assets, rather than 
the proceeds themselves, it must also demonstrate that it 
has satisfied at least one of five additional criteria 
described in 21 U.S.C. § 853(p)(1)-(5). In the district court, 
the government’s substitute assets claim failed at this 
second step, when the district court rejected as unproven 
speculation the government's claim that petitioner had 
secreted proceeds. J.A. 289. The government's brief does 


12 


not address this deficiency. It treats evidence 

proceeds as a sufficient basis for the forfeiture of substi- 
tute assets, despite the requirements of 21 U.S.C. 
§ 853(p)(1)-(5). Adoption of the government's arguments 
would radically expand the reach of Section 853(p), trans- 
forming it into authority permitting forfeiture of estate. 
Congress clearly did not authorize forfeiture of estate. See 
Pet. Br. 29-31. 


7. At bottom, the government’s argument is that 
petitioner accepted this bargain and should not now be 
heard to complain. See U.S. Br. 36-37, 49. This argument 
ignores the statutory - and ultimately constitutional - 
limitations on the plea agreements into which the govern- 
ment may enter. It is well established that a plea agree- 
ment cannot confer upon the sentencing court authority 
to impose an illegal sentence. See, e.g., United States v. 
Snider, 957 F.2d 703, 707 (9th Cir. 1992) (per curiam) 
(“plea agreements do not provide authority for a sentenc- 
ing court to impose punishment in excess of the maxi- 
mum provided by statute”); United States v. Guardino, 972 
F.2d 682, 687-88 (6th Cir. 1992); United States v. Rice, 954 
F.2d 40, 43 (2d Cir. 1992) (“a plea agreement obviously 
could not authorize a judge to impose whatever punish- 
ment the government and the defendant agreed to”). As 
the court of appeals recognized in United States v. Snider, 
957 F.2d at 706-07, the proposition that “ ‘a deal is a deal’ ” 
may govern civil agreements, but it cannot authorize the 
court to impose a criminal sentence for which there is no 
statutory authorization. Adherence to that principle in 
the context of forfeiture is critical, because the govern- 
ment’s financial needs may predispose it to abuse its 
authority. Rule 11(f)’s factual basis requirement provides 
the only mechanism that can prevent the government 
from exceeding the statutory limitations on forfeiture in 


guilty plea cases. 


13 


Il. THE RIGHT TO A JURY DETERMINATION OF 
CRIMINAL FORFEITURE CAN BE EXTIN- 
GUISHED ONLY BY A KNOWING AND INTEL- 
LIGENT WAIVER 


1. Petitioner's opening brief demonstrates the uni- 
form English and colonial of submitting the issue 
of criminal forfeiture to the jury, and that this historic 
practice is embraced in the Sixth Amendment. Pet. Br. 
42-44. The government seeks to minimize the importance 
of the historic record, arguing (U.S. Br. 40) that the jury’s 
“limited role was to determine what assets the defendant 
owned,” and that this “modest function” was not deemed 
a fundamental right of the defendant. The only authority 
the government cites in support of this argument is a 
brief passage in a student note.> Neither this note nor the 
government's brief to the evidence (Pet. Br. 43) 
that English and colonial juries frequently found that the 
accused owned no property despite their knowledge of 
such property. This evidence demonstrates that in crimi- 
nal forfeiture cases the jury served its constitutional func- 
tion of checking government oppression and abuse.® 


5 The only authority the note cites in support of this posi- 
tion is Julius Goebel and T. Raymond Naughton, Law Enforce- 
ment in Colonial New York (1944). Goebel and Naughton 
speculated that the requirement of a jury finding of the 
offender's forfeitable property “was possibly intended to sim- 
plify the settlement of Crown rights.” Id. at 711 (emphasis 
added). They cited no authwrity in support of this passing com- 
ment. 

© The jury’s power to temper the law with its own sense of 
fairness and justice is an important feature of our constitutional 
system, with deep roots in English and colonial history. One of 
the earliest reported examples is Bushell’s Case, 124 Eng. Rep. 
1006 (1670), named after the foreman of the jury that was fined 
and held in contempt after it William Penn and Wil- 
liam Meade. The court granted Bushell’s habeas corpus petition, 
accepting his contention that jurors could not lawfully be 
detained merely because thei: verdict was unacceptable to the 


14 


Even if the government could produce some evidence 
that the jury once served only as a device to facilitate 
forfeiture by identifying properties to be seized, the 
metamorphosis of the jury in forfeiture cases would 
merely parallel its development in other contexts. For 
example, the original purposes of the grand jury “were to 
increase the number of criminal prosecutions, to enhance 
the king’s authority, and indirectly to ruise revenue for 
the Crown, which received the property forfeited by per- 
sons convicted of crimes.” Sara S. Beale and William C. 
Bryson, Grand Jury Law and Practice § 1:02, at 5 (1984) 
(endnotes omitted).”? The grand jury’s eventual develop- 
ment into an independent institution that won praise as 
an important safeguard of individual liberty demon- 
strates that such a lay body, once constituted, may take 
on functions not originally foreseen. 


The ability to resist government oppression is the 
hallmark of the jury and a primary justification for the 
jury clause of the Sixth Amendment and the grand jury 
clause of the Fifth Amendment. See, e.g., Duncan v. Louisi- 
ana, 391 U.S. 145, 155-56 (1968) (jury a safeguard against 
corrupt or overzealous prosecutor and complacent or 
biased judge); Wood v. Georgia, 370 U.S. 375, 390 (1962) 


trial judge. Other well known examples of jury independence 
during the colonial period were the of John Peter 
Zenger (who was represented by Alexander Hamilton) and of 
the defendants in connection with the Boston Tea Party. 
For a general discussion of jury nullification, see Jack B_ Wein- 
stein, Considering Jury “Nullification”: When May and Should a 
Jury Reject the Law to Do Justice, 30 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 239 (1993). 
7 Indeed, some scholars trace the heritage of both the grand 
and Sen pug bata obene Na ere at are oo 
Conqueror to the Domesday Book, which listed all 
landowners and showed the value and extent of their 
I Frederick Pollack and Frederick Maitland, The History of 
English Law 143 (2d ed. 1923). This appears to be a close corol- 
lary of the function attributed by the government to the jury in 
forfeiture cases. 


15 


(grand jury a primary security against hasty, malicious, 
and oppressive prosecutions). By refusing to identify for- 
feitable property, common law juries performed this func- 
tion, and this common law heritage shows that the right 
to have a jury determine criminal forfeiture is an aspect 
of the Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury.* Cf. Greene 
v. Briggs, 10 F. Cas. 1135, 1142 (C.C.D.R.I. 1852) (No. 
5,674) (trial by jury required under state constitution if 
statute permits criminal forfeiture). 


2. The Framers intended to preserve the jury as it 


existed at common law (Pet. Br. 44-45), where it served as 
an important safeguard in forfeiture cases. The American 


colonists recognized the importance of requiring a jury 


® The government suggests (U.S. Br. 21 n. 8) that recogni- 
tion of a Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial of criminal 
forfeiture would necessarily require that forfeitability be estab- 
lished beyond a reasonable doubt. Yet the decisions cited by the 
government, Sullivan v. Louisiana, 113 S. Ct. 2078 (1993), and 
United States v. Gaudin, 115 S. Ct. 2310 (1995), had no occasion to 
address whether forfeiture might be an exception to the general 
rule that the jury verdict required by the Sixth Amendment is a 
verdict beyond a reasonable doubt. In any event, recognition of 


a requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt in criminal 
forfeiture proceedings would impose no undue burden on the 


government. RICO forfeitures presently require proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt. E.g., United States v. Pelullo, 14 F.3d 881, 
901-06 (3d Cir. 1994). CCE forfeitures were originally subject to 
the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, though 
several courts have concluded that enacted in 1984 
reduced the government's burden to a preponderance. For a 
discussion of these cases and an argument that Section 853 did 
not alter the burden of proof, see 2 David B. Smith, Prosecution 
and Defense of Forfeiture Cases ¥ 14.03 (1992) (since Congress 
rejected earlier bill to lower burden of proof for criminal forfei- 
ture and enacted other explicit provisions regarding burden of 
proof, courts have erred in that Congress altered over- 
all burden of proof for criminal forfeiture without any express 
statutory language or reference to this action in the legislative 
history). 


16 


trial in cases that might lead to civil forfeiture. Parliament 
extended the jurisdiction of the admiralty courts to cases 
involving seizures under the trade and navigation acts in 
response to the nullification of these laws by local juries, 
and this extension of admiralty jurisdiction led to “vig- 
orous protests in America.” 5 J. Moore, Federal Practice 
1 38.35[2] (2d ed. 1995); see Carl Ubbelohde, The Vice- 
Admiralty Courts and the American Revolution 16 (1960) 
(most common sanction for violation of trade laws was 
forfeiture of ships and cargoes). One of the chief com- 
plaints of the First Continental Congress was English 
revenue statutes that “subvert[ed] . . . the right of trial by 
jury, by substituting in their place trials in Admiralty and 
Vice-Admiralty courts, where single Judges preside, hold- 
ing their Commissions during pleasure.” 1 Jour. Cong. 93 
(Oct. 21, 1774) (message to the inhabitants of the British 
colonies); see also Jackson v. The Steamboat Magnolia, 61 
U.S. (20 How.) 296, 322, 331 (1857) (Campbell, J., dissent- 
ing) (one of the reasons colonists took up arms was their 
opposition to “the enlarged authority of [admiralty] 
courts, their interference with the common law right of 
trial by jury, and their offensive use of the laws and 
course of proceeding adopted from Roman tyrants”). 
The government has advanced no reason to believe 
that the colonists who protested the absence of a jury in 
forfeiture proceedings before the admiralty courts would 
have agreed with the suggestion (U.S. Br. 40) that the 
right to have criminal forfeiture determined by a jury is 
not of constitutional importance. There is no merit to the 
government's suggestion (U.S. Br. 39-40 & n. 15) that the 
jury’s role was constitutionally insignificant because 
criminal forfeiture was mandatory rather than discretion- 
ary. Civil forfeiture also was mandatory. The jury’s func- 
tion was the same in civil and criminal forfeiture cases, 
and the Framers’ actions indicate their understanding 
that this function was of constitutional magnitude. Cy. 
United States v. The Betsey and Charlotte, 8 U.S. (4 Cranch) 


17 


443, 446 n. 1 (1808) (admiralty jurisdiction protected gov- 
ernmental revenues, avoiding “great danger” of “caprice 
of juries”). 

3. The decisions holding that the Sixth Amendment 
does not require the jury to impose the death sentence 
(U.S. Br. 39-41) have no bearing on this case. The death 
penalty cases demonstrate only that the contours of the 
right guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment are deter- 
mined by history rather than contemporary usage. The 
statutes giving the jury sentencing authority in death 
penalty cases are of relatively recent origin. The first 
statute providing for jury discretion in capital murder 
cases was enacted by Tennessee in 1838. American Law 
Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 210.6 com- 
mentary, at 129 (1980). Prior to that time, death was the 
exclusive and mandatory penalty for many crimes. Id. 
The mandatory nature of the death penalty was qualified 
by the sentencing judge’s authority to reprieve the defen- 
dant and recommend that he be pardoned. See J.M. Beat- 
tie, Crime and the Courts in England 1660-1800 409, 420 
(1986). Since the jury had no similar discretion, it could 
shield defendants from the death penalty only by finding 
them not guilty or guilty only of a lesser offense. See id. at 
406, 408, 419-21. 

Accordingly, the death penalty decisions cited by the 
government do no more than keep the Sixth Amendment 
within its historic boundaries. The same analysis applies 
to McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79 (1986), since there 
is no historic precedent for requiring the jury to find facts 
that determine the sentence to be imposed within the 
range provided for by the offense. McMillan and the 
death penalty cases have no bearing where, as here, the 
common law required submission of the matter in ques- 
tion to the jury. 

4. If this Court concludes that the Sixth Amendment 
does not protect the right to a jury trial on forfeiture, the 
government argues (U.S. Br. 44-49) that the right to a 
special jury verdict under Rule 31(e) is no different than a 


myriad of other rights that are extinguished by a guilty 


18 


plea, even if the defendant is never made aware of those 
rights. This argument ignores the distinctions drawn by 
history, by this Court’s waiver decisions, and by the text 
of Rule 11, all of which recognize the fundamental char- 
acter of the right to a jury determination and demonstrate 
that any waiver of that right under Rule 31(e) must be 
knowing and voluntary. 

One group of cases relied on by the government (U.S. 
Br. 46) involves constitutional rights. As this Court 
explained in Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 
236-37 (1973), the knowing and intelligent waiver stan- 
dard has not been extended to all constitutional rights, 
but has generally been restricted to rights required “to 
protect a fair trial and the reliability of the truth-deter- 
mining process.” The right to trial by jury is one of these 
rights, and it is waived only by an intentional extinguish- 
ment. See id. at 237. The cases cited by the government, in 
contrast, involve constitutional rights, such as the Double 
Jeopardy Clause and the Fourth Amendment exclusion- 
ary rule, which are not essential to the truth-determining 
process. The same is true of many of the statutory rights 
cited by the government (U.S. Br. 47-48), such as statutes 
of limitation, the Speedy Trial Act, and the Interstate 
Agreement on Detainers; they too are waived by a guilty 
plea, regardless of the defendant’s knowledge. 

The right to a jury trial is also readily distinguishable 
from the other statutory provisions noted by the govern- 
ment (U.S. Br. 47), including the discovery provisions of 
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Jencks Act, 
and the Federal Rules of Evidence. These modern provi- 
sions stand in stark contrast to the right to jury trial, 
which has been identified as a fundamental right since 
our nation’s founding, and is recognized in the law of 
every state. Our history as a nation draws a clear distinc- 
tion between the right to a jury determination and the 
many other statutory rights of recent origin that are not 
deemed so fundamental that they require a knowing and 
intelligent waiver. See United States v. Robinson, 8 F.3d 418, 
421-22 (7th Cir. 1993). 


19 


Equally important, Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of 
Criminal Procedure provides a clear basis for distinguish- 
ing between the various constitutional and statutory 
rights cited by the government and the right to have 
criminal forfeiture decided by a jury. In light of the 
requirements in Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(3) & (4), it is not 
necessary to reach the Sixth Amendment issue to deter- 
mine that the knowing and intelligent waiver standard 
applies. 

The plain language of Rule 11(c) requires a knowing 
and intelligent waiver of the right to a jury determination 
of forfeiture under Rule 31(e). Rule 11(c) requires the 
court to “address the defendant personally in open court 
and inform the defendant of, and determine that the 
defendant understands” both that he has “the right to be 
tried by a jury,” Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(3), and that “there 
will not be a further trial of any kind” if he pleads guilty, 
Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(4) (emphasis added). The phrase 
“trial of any kind” plainly includes the trial leading to the 
jury verdict required by Rule 31(e). Since Rule 11(c) 
requires the court to inform the defendant of his rights 
under Rule 31(e) and to determine whether he intends to 
waive those rights by pleading guilty, it requires a know- 
ing and intelligent waiver of the right to a jury deter- 
mination of criminal forfeiture. 

Ignoring the plain language, the government 
advances a crabbed interpretation of Rule 11(c) that limits 
it to warnings that are found to be constitutionally 
required. The government argues (U.S. Br. 42) that its 
interpretation is required by the legislative history, but 
the legislative report it cites states only that Rule 11(c) 
was intended to “include” all of the warnings that were 
constitutionally required. H.R. Rep. No. 247, 94th Cong., 
1st Sess. 7 (1975). This mild statement provides no basis 
for disregarding the express terms of Rule 11(c), includ- 
ing the phrase “trial of any kind.” 

Since petitioner’s claim rests on the historic recogni- 
tion of the jury’s unique importance and the text of Rule 
11, there is no basis for the government's concern (U.S. 


20 


Br. 49) that acceptance of petitioner’s claims would 
“replace the relative certainty of Rule 11(c) with a free- 
form inquiry” into what rights should be deemed funda- 
mental. Rule 11(c) itself reflects the fundamental nature 
of the jury trial right upon which petitioner relies, and 
the rule itself imposes the requirement of a knowing and 
intelligent waiver. 


5. The government has questioned (U.S. Br. 38 n. 14) 
what relief petitioner seeks. As stated in petitioner’s main 
brief (Pet. Br. 50), if this Court holds that petitioner has 
not waived his right to a jury determination on forfeiture, 
the next step should be a remand to the district court to 
determine whether petitioner is now willing to make 
such a waiver. It is not necessary for this Court to reach 
the question of the relief to be afforded if no waiver can 
be obtained upon remand, since petitioner may make 
such a waiver if the parties reach an agreement regarding 
the scope of the forfeiture. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, as well as the reasons set forth in 
petitioner’s main brief, the judgment of the court of 
appeals should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Sara SUN BEALE 
(Appointed by this Court) 
Of Counsel: Counsel of Record 
Paut K. Sun, Jr. Duke University School of 
SmitH Hetms Mutuss & Law 
Moore Science Drive & 
316 West Edenton Street Towerview Road 
Post Office Box 27525 Post Office Box 90360 
Raleigh, N.C. 27611 Durham, N.C. 27708-0360 


Telephone: 919-755-8720 Telephone: 919-613-7091 
Counsel for Petitioner 


