
[PDF PAGE 1]
DAN 1B 1995 
No. 121, Original 
4 
at  eatee tl Pd 
CLERK   
———— EOL s, Pre 
OE TO Re ee ee 
  
In The 
Supreme Court of the United States — 
October Term, 1994 
* 
STATE OF LOUISIANA 
  
Plaintiff, 
Vv. 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI, et al., 
Defendants. 
Sd 
EXCEPTIONS OF THE STATE OF LOUISIANA 
TO THE 
FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL MASTER 
AND 
PETITION FOR NEW TRIAL 
OF THE SUPPLEMENTAL HEARING 
  
Richard P. leyoub 
Attorney General 
Jack E. Yelverton 
First Assistant Attorney General 
E. Kay Kirkpatrick 
Assistant Attorney General 
Gary L. Keyser 
Assistant Attorney General 
State of Louisiana 
Post Office Box 94095 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
70804-9095 
PH: 504-342-7900 
FAX: 504-342-6087 
January 12, 1995

[PDF PAGE 2]


[PDF PAGE 3]
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OP COIN TEINS: a sac i ies s0ee nose pies goede e bea gos i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 5 otsag soon pees eseegeng s beee Hes ii 
I, (INTRODUCTION osu can pons e pews ge50 peas pee oe ene Bo 1 
Il. MOTION FOR ORALARGUMENT ................04. 4+ 
II. PETITION FOR NEW TRIAL OF THE 
SUPPLEMENTAL HEARING ............... 000 e eee + 
IV. EXCEPTIONS TO THE REPORT OF THE 
SPECEALIMUAS TER. s ss00 essa 5 pane vage Hes & dem @ Ras HH 5 
V. ARGUMENT 
Poo. BANCO OL TNS CASE sins e oovs sacs varre awwwe ayn we 7 
B. The Applicable Law of Thalweg Boundaries ....... 11 
C. Tveatment or Expert Testimony o.oivcss vases ve vaa a: 14 
VE ISIN y wccu vecn sree Hews £994 BFE kweN Hoe Be 28

[PDF PAGE 4]
il 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Arkansas v. Tennessee, 246 U.S. 158 (1918) ........... eee eee pa 
Arkansas v. Tennessee, 397 U.S. 888 (1970) ...........0005 13, 23 
Borax Consolidated v. City of Los Angeles, 
296 U.S. 10, 565$.Ct. 23,.at29 (1935) 2 once cnne seo came veen 18 
Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 U.S. 315, 63 S.Ct. 1098 (1943) ..... 1g 
Carrick @:. Lamar, 1160S: 823: (1886) occ css e come cae wewe were 20 
City of St. Louis v. Rutz, 138 U.S. 226 
PL Bie A os pALOSOCTBOU soe airs 6 iste eons cee 19, 22 
Houston v. Thomas, 937 F.2d 247 (5th Cir. 1991) .......... 24, 28 
Indiana v. Kentucky, 136 U.S. 479 508-509 (1890) ............ as 
Louisiana v. Mississippi, 466 U.S. 96 (1984); 384 
US. 24 (1966), reh’g denied, 384 U.S. 958; 282 
U.S. 458 (1931); and 202 U.S. 1 (1906) ..............0004. 12 
Missouri e. Kentucky, 78 U:S. 395,401 (1870) oui s sain cores vans 13 
Tennessee O. Arkansas, No. 77,Original as cx0o ssa ox» wx 15,23 
Texas v. Louisiana, 410 U.S. 714, 93 S.Ct. 1215 (1973), 
GP pawe 122) wae ones wees soos ones woes 8 ee 18 
peor @, Laitie, 227 8.229, 39 OG 242 (1918) iiss a wot noes 18 
United States v. United States Gypsum Company, 333 U.S. 364 at 
395,92 L.Ed. 746, 68 S.Ct. 525 at 542 (1948) ............. 29 
W.S. Shamban & Company v. Commerce and Industry 
Conny), 478 R20 Sa(197S) as acca cane chad Gnas b tea0 bees 29 
STATUTES 
Rule 52(a) Federal Rules of Civil Procedure ............... 29 
43 U.S.C.1301 2... ccc eee eee eee 6,18 
GOVERNMENTAL DOCUMENTS 
Manual of Instructions for the Survey of the Public Lands of 
the United States, 1973, Bureau of Land Management Tech- 
nical Bulletin 6, United States Department of the Interior, 
Pree 22 (Lee) esc coca ee ees a LE BH RRC i? 
U.N. Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, 
PEE. oy Sore as weer ge BB PS 9 Be Pd EN 18

[PDF PAGE 5]
No. 121, Original 
SSS Ga 
In The 
Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
* 
STATE OF LOUISIANA 
  
Plaintiff, 
V. 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI, et al., 
Defendants. 
t —— 
EXCEPTIONS OF THE STATE OF LOUISIANA 
TO THE 
FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL MASTER 
AND 
PETITION FOR NEW TRIAL 
OF THE SUPPLEMENTAL HEARING 
SSS a 
  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
  
Pursuant to Order entered by this Court on November 14, 
1994, receiving the Report of the Special Master and granting 
permission for the filing of Exceptions, the State of Louisiana, 
through its Attorney General, files Exceptions to the determi- 
nations made by the Special Master. Additionally, the State of 
Louisiana files a Petition for New Trial of the Supplemental 
Hearing held before the Special Master in consequence of the 
Final Report rendered by him. 
At the outset, it should be stated that this matter has been 
in progress since 1986 and the Final Report of the Special Mas-

[PDF PAGE 6]
ter provides an excellent review of the history of the case in the 
District Court, the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and 
this Court, including the testimony and exhibits introduced, as 
well as a detailed procedural history of this action. 
As can be seen from Appendix “C” attached to the Final 
Report of the Special Master, the transcript of the Supplemen- 
tal Hearings was more extensive than the original trial, and 
the additional exhibits offered were indeed voluminous. The 
Special Master, ably assisted by Ms. Susani Douville, did a 
careful job of the accessioning of these additional items of evi- 
dence and insured that they were correctly marked, identified 
and maintained during these proceedings. 
Unfortunately, the Special Master has apparently misun- 
derstood and, therefore, totally misconstrued the facts pre- 
sented before him, much of which was a supplementation of 
prior testimony, but with many additional exhibits offered 
by Louisiana (which carefully and explicitly depicted the 
progression of events within the Lake Providence reach of 
the Mississippi River over the entire period of recorded his- 
tory). In essence, the Special Master has returned this Court 
to the same posture the case was in at the time of the District 
Court decision, which was completely reversed by the Court 
of Appeals for the Firth Circuit, on August 5, 1991, by rely- 
ing upon the original findings of the District Court. This, de- 
spite overwhelming evidence and testimony from supple- 
mental witnesses for Louisiana of national and international 
standing (Dr. Easterly, Mayeux and Winkley), as well as lay 
witnesses. Mississippi and the Houston Group presented 
only two previous witnesses, Austin Smith and Robert 
Jarvis, and a forester.' 
‘ The prepared testimony of the supplemental witnesses provides a foun- 
dation for the trial testimony to follow at the supplemental hearing on Sep- 
tember 12, 1994.

[PDF PAGE 7]
As will be pointed out in the Exceptions below, the Special 
Master has committed clear error in the findings presented 
and has disregarded the essential meaning of the only conclu- 
sive pieces of evidence, as well as applicable law, which were 
available in formulating his final report. The Special Master, 
like the District Court, adopted the “Austin Smith Line” at- 
tached as Appendix “A” to the report, but there is no eviden- 
tiary foundation whatsoever for this claimed line of boundary. 
No data or evidence was produced to support this line at the 
original trial in the District Court in 1989, nor could Mr. Smith 
produce any data or evidence to support the line during the 
supplemental hearings, despite being given ample opportu- 
nity and after repeated requests on cross-examination for in- 
formation of any type which might provide some possible 
documentary basis to support Smith’s verbal opinion. More- 
over, Smith admitted on cross-examination that his boundary 
line was between 7,000 to 8,000 feet (5 Sup. Tr. 100-128) too far 
to the west from the true thalweg in the various years that he 
from time to time picked in the two trials, 1949-54 (5 Sup. Tr. 
111-120, 143, 146), to claim an avulsion had occurred. This er- 
ror represents virtually the full width of the Mississippi River 
and very obviously means the Smith Line is in the wrong loca- 
tion, being located on top of the west bank (Louisiana) instead 
of adjacent to the east bank of the river (Mississippi). 
In this regard, the Special Master neglected to mention that 
the “Austin Smith Line” follows along the Louisiana levee and 
transects property owned and occupied historically by 
Louisiana riparians who have farmed it since just after the turn 
of the century, as they testified in the Supplemental Hearing 
(Surles, House, and Walters). Similar testimony was offered in 
the original trial by Louisiana (Deloney, Reed, etc.), but Missis- 
sippi offered none. In truth and fact, no Mississippi people 
have ever had anything to do with the disputed area in 
Louisiana, except to try and hunt there. There have been no 
residences established, except by Louisianans, no farming ex-

[PDF PAGE 8]
cept by Louisianans, no law enforcement except by Louisiana 
Wildlife and Fisheries agents and the Louisiana sheriff, and no 
taxes paid on the disputed area except by Louisianans to the 
Louisiana tax collector in Lake Providence, Louisiana. 
The findings and conclusions of the Special Master are not 
supported by the data and evidence, and applicable law is im- 
properly applied. It is submitted that the Master was over- 
whelmed by the complexity of the evidence and apparently 
elected to follow the reasoning of the District Court or possibly 
some broadly conceived subjective notions of equity in lieu of 
confronting and giving proper analysis to the scientific and 
technical factual issues before the Court. 
The parties have invested a huge amount of time, energy, 
resources and money on this matter and are entitled, therefore, 
to have a proper decision by application of the controlling 
rules of law to the proven facts. 
ii. 
MOTION FOR ORAL ARGUMENT   
The State of Louisiana, through its Attorney General, fur- 
ther moves the Court, in view of the importance of this litiga- 
tion to Louisiana, that this case be set for oral argument after 
all briefs have been filed. 
Ill. 
PETITION FOR NEW TRIAL OF THE 
SUPPLEMENTAL HEARING 
  
  
The State of Louisiana respectfully prays for a new trial of 
the Supplemental Hearing held before the Special Master ap- 
pointed by the Court on March 7, 1994. 
ARGUMENT   
For the same reasons stated in the Exceptions to the Report

[PDF PAGE 9]
of the Special Master, it is shown that the Special Master has 
apparently misunderstood, and, therefore, totally miscon- 
strued the facts presented before him, much of which was a 
supplementation of prior testimony by further very clear, ex- 
plicit and detailed expert testimony of new Louisiana wit- 
nesses. Additionally, as shown by the Final Report of the Spe- 
cial Master, many additional exhibits were offered by 
Louisiana which carefully and explicitly depicted the progres- 
sion of events within the Lake Providence Reach of the Missis- 
sippi River over the entire period of recorded history. 
It is submitted that the case should be decided on proven 
facts supported by documentary evidence, based upon applic- 
able rules of law and definition. 
It is further submitted that there is no evidence to support 
the findings and interpretations of the Special Master as a con- 
sequence of testimony and evidence adduced at the Supple- 
mental Hearing. 
In view of the special importance of this litigation to 
Louisiana and the other parties, it is submitted that a new trial 
of the Supplemental Hearing should be granted in the interests 
of fairness, justice and equity for the parties. 
IV. 
EXCEPTIONS TO THE REPORT OF THE 
SPECIAL MASTER 
  
  
The State of Louisiana excepts to the report of the Special 
Master now before this Court in the following particulars: 
A. 
The Special Master erred in finding that a frozen boundary 
thalweg may remain ambulatory and may be “pushed” by bar 
and shoal accretion building in the river. See pages 12 and 25 
of the Final Report; footnote 3, infra, p.12.

[PDF PAGE 10]
B. 
The Special Master erred in ignoring detailed hydro- 
graphic data and the unrefuted testimony of Louisiana’s ex- 
perts explaining the data which shows conclusively that Stack 
Island washed away completely in at least three different time 
periods: 
1) Prior to the sovereignty of either state in 1812 and 1817; 
2) In 1883; 
3) In 1948. 
The bed of the Mississippi River was scoured clean of this 
feature in each of these years. 
re 
The Special Master erred in refusing to acknowledge the ap- 
plicability of federal law and standards defining islands, for 
example, the following: 
1) An island is “a body of land extending above and com- 
pletely surrounded by water at mean high-water.” U.S. 
Coast and Geodetic Survey; (LA-PT-2) 
2) Anisland must be “above the mean high-water elevation 
of any meanderable body of water, * * *.“ Department of 
the Interior; and (Mayeux, Sup. Tr.; 43 U.S.C. 1301) 
3) An island must be higher than “top bank” elevation of the 
river or ordinary high water. Industry definition used by 
river engineers at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and 
throughout the world. (Winkley, Sup. Tr.) 
The Special Master erred by inconsistently applying subjec- 
tive and arbitrary notions concerning the definitional criteria 
for islands, confusing them with bars and shoals, so as to force 
pre-determined conclusions concerning Stack Island, Provi- 
dence Bar, the disputed area and accretionary landforms south 
of the disputed area.

[PDF PAGE 11]
D. 
The Special Master erred in simply adopting by reference 
the “Austin Smith Line” (Appendix “A” to the report) which 
is unsupported by any technical evidence or data, and con- 
trary to all controlling technical evidence, data and testimony 
from the experts, including the admissions of Mississippi’s 
Austin Smith. 
E. 
The Special Master erred in misconstruing and misapplying 
applicable rules of law. 
V. 
ARGUMENT 
A. STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
The defendants in this case, the State of Mississippi and the 
Houston Group, continue to claim accretion along the west 
bank of the river at Lake Providence, Louisiana, including bat- 
ture lands which have been used historically for farming by 
Louisiana riparians who have proven clear title and the pay- 
ment of taxes on these lands since the time of Louisiana’s sov- 
ereignty (1812). In fact, as shown at the original trial in the Dis- 
trict Court and at the Supplemental Hearing, the “Austin 
Smith Line” transects Louisiana farmland on the river side of 
the Louisiana levee which was never washed away or re-built 
by the river. Robert Jarvis, a member of the Houston family 
and only one of three witnesses for the Mississippi interests at 
the Supplemental Hearing, does not dispute this, but feels that 
since he has hunted in the general vicinity from time to time 
and has walked across some of these properties, he has a good 
claim of ownership (4 Sup. Tr. 210 et seq.). The Louisiana own- 
ers, of course, disputed these claims at both hearings. 
This case involves the boundary between the States of Mis- 
sissippi and Louisiana in the vicinity of an island located in the

[PDF PAGE 12]
Mississippi River known as “Stack Island” or “Island No. 94.” 
However, the only true island in existence in the near vicinity 
of the dispute is an extremely large island which has devel- 
oped at the geographic location of original Island No. 94 in 
1881. This island is clearly shown on various Louisiana ex- 
hibits, such as LA-1A, a U.S. Geological Survey Quadrangle 
Map. Also shown on the map is the 1881 location of the island 
patented to petitioners in 1888, being only 117.96 acres in size 
at the time. Later, it washed away entirely as shown by the am- 
ple testimony, documentary evidence and holding of the trial 
court in this case. That court, of course, also held that the island 
had migrated across the river, but did not discuss the “new” is- 
land in the river at the location of Island No. 94 in 1881. 
It is noteworthy that after its disappearance in 1883, no 
later map again referred to “Island No. 94.” After the reappear- 
ance of a new island the next year, it lost the No. 94 designation 
and became simply “Stack Island.” 
Mississippi and the Houston Group do not like to address 
the principal object of their claim - the accretion along the west 
bank of the river at Lake Providence, Louisiana. They are quite 
careful to avoid detailed factual matters and confine the argu- 
ment largely to broad-brush legal principles found in the case 
law, without applying them to the specific facts of this case. 
The accretionary features are a part of the west bank of the 
Mississippi River at Lake Providence, Louisiana (P- 1, P-2, LA- 
1, LA- 1A) and are entirely different formations from the Island 
No. 94 location. They are located in a different geographic 
vicinity; they have different histories of origin; they are differ- 
ent in size and shape; and at all times since their formation in 
the 1930’s, have been west of the boundary between the States 
of Louisiana and Mississippi. They are connected to and are a 
part of the Louisiana bank and have no island features what- 
ever, except at extreme high water. The designation of these ac- 
cretions as “Stack Island” on some maps is due to the work of

[PDF PAGE 13]
draftsmen seeking to give the area a name. 
While the Houston Group is asserting ownership to this 
bank accretion on the Louisiana side, they have carefully 
avoided any discussion of it from the very outset of the case, 
except to call it “Stack Island.” There are actually two separate 
geographic locations at issue, to wit: 
(1) The accretion to the west bank of the river at Lake Provi- 
dence has sometimes been referred to as “the island” or 
“Stack Island,” as it appears to be an island at extreme high 
water; and 
(2) The “new” island which has developed at the precise geo- 
graphic location of original Island No. 94 and is known 
and mapped as “Stack Island.” 
The trial court also avoided discussing the fact that there 
are two Separate geographic locations at issue by not specifi- 
cally referring to them. The Special Master did refer to the 
“new” island, but did not mention that it is in the precise loca- 
tion of Island No. 94, northeast of the disputed area and adja- 
cent to Mississippi. 
Under cross-examination in the District Court trial, Missis- 
sippi’s expert, Austin Smith, drew a sketch on P-2 of the accre- 
tion against the west bank of the river (Tr. 409-410), and on P-1 
drew the original Stack Island as of 1881 (Tr. 412). His testi- 
mony shows that prior to the avulsion of 1881, the island was 
located geographically in T 11 N, R9 W of the Choctaw Land 
District, Mississippi, while the accretion against Lake Provi- 
dence on the west bank of the river is located in T21N,R13E 
of the Red River Land District, Louisiana (Tr. 412). Further, 
Austin Smith admitted that the original Island No. 94 and 
“Stack Island” which has accreted to the west bank, as claimed 
by petitioners are not “one in the same,” as he had earlier testi- 
fied. (Tr. 461-463.) 
The District Court referred to the “migrating Stack Island”

[PDF PAGE 14]
10 
in the bench opinion of June 23, 1989, page 16. That court cor- 
rectly found, as Louisiana contends, that the island “was erod- 
ing and accreting and migrating generally in a southwesterly 
direction, by 1954 had moved out from under any portion of 
the superimposed original island and therefore had disap- 
peared * * *.“ In the Supplemental Hearing, it was shown that 
Island No. 94 had been completely scoured or washed away 
completely in 1811, 1883 and 1948, re-building in the interim 
periods and in 1954 at the 1881 location, as it is today. 
The State of Louisiana contends, as set forth in paragraph 
7(d) of the Pre-Trial Order filed in No. 91-1158 (Tr. 664-665), that 
Island No. Ninety-four (94) in the Mississippi River patented 
by the United States on December 29, 1888 to Stephen B. Black- 
well, located in Township 11 North, Range 9 West of Choctaw 
Meridian in Mississippi, containing 117.96 acres was eroded 
away by the natural processes of the Mississippi River, subse- 
quently re-formed as “Stack Island” and currently exists at its 
location at the time of the federal patent. It is not, however, to 
be confused with accretion to the west bank, which occurred 
commencing in the 1930’s, at the same time Stack was rebuild- 
ing in the 1881 location, only to be washed away again in 1948. 
Mississippi’s expert, Austin Smith, drew a boundary gen- 
erally along the Louisiana levee on the west bank in order to 
capture ownership of both the accretion to the west bank, as 
well as the new and extremely large island located in the river 
proper at the 1881 location of the island. The accretion to the 
west bank has been assimilated into the land mass along the 
west bank, and was so found even by the district court. In its 
Bench Opinion of June 23, 1989, the court found that this accre- 
tion to the “Louisiana shore” is “for large portions of the year 
completely dry between what is called the island and what is 
called the high bank on the Louisiana side,” making it a part of 
the bank. 
Mississippi and the Houston Group are claiming posses-

[PDF PAGE 15]
11 
sion, jurisdiction, and sovereignty of both the land accreted to 
Louisiana and to the “new” Stack Island near Mississippi. 
Hence, the Fifth Circuit characterization of the boundary dis- 
pute as “treacherous.” 
In the district court and the Fifth Circuit, defendants have 
claimed that two avulsions occurred in the Mississippi River 
in the vicinity of Lake Providence, but failed at both trials to 
present testimony or evidence of either. The Lake Providence 
Reach of the river is straight in its alignment, making an avul- 
sion extremely unlikely without the intervention of man-made 
works, such as the 1881-1882 Mississippi River Commission 
dike project which Louisiana clearly established from U.S. 
Government documents.’ 
The Special Master failed to recognized that since Missis- 
sippi and the Houston Group could not show a thalweg 
boundary against the Louisiana levee, actually claimed by 
them to be located on fast land, and could not produce any 
map or data showing how it might have been frozen there, 
they simply have no claim. 
B. THE APPLICABLE LAW OF THALWEG BOUNDARIES 
During closing argument and briefing following the Sup- 
plemental Hearing, the Special Master asked the parties to as- 
sume for purposes or argument that he would follow the Dis- 
trict Court and rule in favor of the Mississippi parties to the 
extent of holding that the northern portion of the disputed 
area is traceable uninterruptedly to the Stack Island of 1881, 
transformed in location and area by the forces of accretion and 
erosion. 
In response to the Special Master’s inquiry concerning this 
* See Statement of the Case from Brief In Opposition By The State of 
Louisiana and The Lake Providence Port Commission and Brief for Respon- 
dents in No. 91-1158, setting forth these same facts.

[PDF PAGE 16]
12 
view of the findings of Judge Barbour,’ it is to be noted that the 
lower court took the view that any accretionary feature labeled 
on a map as “Stack Island” was in fact and in law an island, re- 
gardless of its characteristics, elevation or location. The Spe- 
cial Master accepted this view and implicitly rejected applica- 
ble principles of law pertaining to features such as banks, bars, 
shoals, and islands, as well as the correct meaning of “avul- 
sion” and “boundary thalweg.” 
Proper adherence to applicable technical definitions and 
rules of law is essential to a correct decision in a case of this 
type. Both the District Court and the Special Master viewed 
sand waves, bars and shoals in the bed of the river as islands, 
even though they did not protrude above low water, were 
ephemeral, transitory, constantly changing and evolving and 
moving with the massive current of the river. To treat sand 
waves, bars and shoals as a true island distorts the factual evi- 
dence presented and causes a misapplication of the rules of 
law. In this regard, the Special Master has correctly recited the 
legal principles defined by this Court in four of the prior cases 
between the two states, as recited at pages 11 and 12 of the Fi- 
nal Report, those being Louisiana v. Mississippi, 466 U.S. 96 
(1984); 384 U.S. 24 (1966), reh’g denied, 384 U.S. 958; 282 U.S. 458 
(1931); and 202 U.S. 1 (1906). 
At page 12 of the Final Report, the Special Master also fur- 
> See letter of Special Master of October 5, 1994, and 5 Sup. Tr. 210-220, 
wherein the Special Master begins to follow the District Court view that 
Stack Island had continuous existence and accretes to the west, “pushing” 
the secondary channel/frozen channel/boundary thalweg (?) toward 
Louisiana and against the Louisiana shore. Actually, the live thalweg and 
downstream track of navigation was against the Mississippi bank for all rel- 
evant periods of time, particularly those years 1949-1954, chosen by Austin 
Smith to be the time of avulsion which purportedly froze the boundary 
along the Louisiana bank. This was clearly shown by the Winkley hydro- 
graphic exhibits, being Corps maps for all periods.

[PDF PAGE 17]
13 
ther states the Island Exception to the rule of thalweg, citing In- 
diana v. Kentucky, 136 U.S. 479, 508-09 (1890), and Missouri v. 
Kentucky, 78 U.S. 395, 401 (1870). Thereafter, quite mistakenly, 
the Special Master applies the rules from Arkansas v. Tennessee, 
397 U.S. 88, 90 (1970), and Arkansas v. Tennessee, 246 U.S. 158, 
175 (1918) to the facts of this case. Those two cases, however, 
arise out of factual circumstances dramatically different from 
those of the case now before the Court. 
Each of the cited cases dealt with classic avulsions. In the 
1970 case, an avulsion occurred leaving Tennessee lands on the 
Arkansas side of a new channel, while water in the former 
thalweg became stagnant so that the processes of erosion and 
accretion no longer occurred. In this situation, the boundary 
between the states became fixed in the middle of the old aban- 
doned channel, while the active river left this former channel, 
formed a new bed, new banks and moved to a new location. 
The same thing occurred in the 1918 case, in which roughly 
similar events occurred. None of these events occurred in the 
case now before the Court in the Lake Providence reach of the 
river. 
It is submitted that the Special Master clearly exceeded the 
holding in these cases by suggesting that a frozen boundary 
continues to be ambulatory in nature (Final Report p. 12) and 
that such a principle applies to this case. In the Lake Provi- 
dence reach of the Mississippi River, the bed has been continu- 
ously covered with flowing water from east bank to west bank 
throughout all of recorded history. All known maps, pho- 
tographs and hydrographic data show the thalweg meander- 
ing back and forth within its bed, but entirely within the banks 
of the river, ergo, the river has not abandoned a former bed, cut 
a new channel or established new banks, nor has a former 
channel ever attenuated and gradually ceased to flow, as in the 
cases cited by the Special Master. Therefore, there can be no 
frozen boundary, nor an “ambulatory frozen boundary” to be

[PDF PAGE 18]
14 
“pushed” toward Louisiana. There is no evidence whatever to 
show such an occurrence in this case. While Mississippi wit- 
ness Austin Smith claimed two avulsions occurred, he admit- 
ted that the river never cut through its banks and never made 
a new bed (5 Sup. Tr. 93-100), basing his claim on “enlarge- 
ment” which never occurred. 
The Louisiana experts (Easterly, Mayeux and Winkley) 
carefully explained the condition of the River through the pre- 
sentation of exhibits for all pertinent periods of time. Missis- 
sippi and the Houston Group did not attempt this in any fash- 
ion. 
C. TREATMENT OF EXPERT TESTIMONY 
Questions concerning the location of the boundary be- 
tween the States of Louisiana and Mississippi in the Lake 
Providence Reach of the Mississippi River, require a proper 
understanding of (1) the terminology of fluvial or riverine 
boundary determinations, especially the definitions and dis- 
tinctions emerging from the various decisions of the U. S. 
Supreme Court and treaties to which the United States is a 
party, (2) the relevant alluvial forms and fluvial processes, 1.e., 
geomorphology and hydrology, and (3) the evidence provided 
by historic cartography and related archival materials, includ- 
ing government reports or documents. The State of Louisiana 
embraced these matters in the context of its evidence and ex- 
pert testimony. Unfortunately, the intricate, detailed, and 
sometimes subtle scientific and technical presentation proved 
overwhelming to an otherwise observant Special Master. 
Judge McKusick’s failure to grasp the terminology and 
essentials of river processes in the Lake Providence Reach nec- 
essarily produces his clearly erroneous conclusions on several 
critical points of determination. Mr. Winkley, an experienced 
hydrologist, devoted so much time at the trial, and Dr. Easterly, 
an alluvial geomorphologist, discussed in prepared testimony,

[PDF PAGE 19]
iS 
the dynamics of the Mississippi River and the nature of recur- 
rent accretionary features. The Special Master, however, either 
did not comprehend that extensive testimony and considerable 
evidence, or simply chose to disregard it. 
What Judge McKusick has done is to substitute his own 
views and lay opinion for that of the experts, whose education, 
professional credentials, experience, reputation and integrity 
were unchallenged. For instance, Winkley (LA-PT-1), Chief Hy- 
drologist and Potamologist for the Corps of Engineers (river en- 
gineering, geology, river hydrology, and potamology, 2 Sup. Tr. 
122); Easterly (LA-PT-2), (political geography, boundaries, allu- 
vial geomorphology, 3 Sup. Tr. 289); Mayeux (LA-PT-4), Regis- 
tered Professional Land Surveyor, Mississippi, Arkansas, Texas, 
and Louisiana (expertise in boundary location, title abstracts, 
possessory acts and hydrographic surveys, 4 Sup. Tr. 5 et seq.) 
The experience and reputation of these witnesses is such 
that they were accepted as experts in their fields without ques- 
tion (Winkley at 2 Sup. Tr. 123); (Easterly at 3 Sup. Tr. 289); ex- 
cept as to Mayeux’s prepared testimony which was questioned 
but unrefuted (4 Sup. Tr. 8-85). 
It is therefore submitted that Judge McKusick’s view of the 
evidence, being a mere substitution of his lay opinion for that of 
the experts, is an impermissible view. 
It might prove helpful, however, to note the words of a Spe- 
cial Master who did appreciate the dynamics of the Mississippi 
River in his report (at page 2) for Tennessee v. Arkansas, No. 77 
Original: 
Maps do not do justice to the true scale of the river. 
The larger island areas are miles long. The river is ex- 
tremely wide. During high water or floods the river can 
erase or build a very large land mass in a matter of days. 
The river’s water level is very changeable. At low water 
many bars may protrude from the river’s bed, islands

[PDF PAGE 20]
16 
may seem to increase greatly in size because of exposed 
adjoining sand and mud flats, and chutes where water 
other times may flow are completely dry and passable by 
foot. At higher water stages the bars are no longer visible, 
only the more elevated portions of islands remain above 
the water surface and water flows in the chutes, dividing 
what formerly seemed to be a single piece of land. At 
flood stages, the river may completely submerge all land 
masses within its banks. 
What the Special Master, Judge Earl R. Larson, found to be 
the reality of Plum Point Reach proves equally true of Lake Prov- 
idence Reach. The sheer size of the river, with a width of more 
than a mile, the enormous volume of flow and the daily changes 
which occur must be seen and studied to be appreciated (See 
prepared testimony of Winkley and Vols. 2,3 and 5, Sup. Tr.) 
Accretionary features, in the forms of shoals, sand bars, 
and islands, continually form, evolve, disappear, and reform 
in “recurrent approximate relational positions.” In that way, 
an accretionary feature (sometimes described as “Providence 
Bar”) appears along the west bank (Louisiana) of the lower 
Lake Providence Reach in 1770, 1821, 1836, 1849, 1856, 1861, 
1874, 1884, 1907, 1930, 1933, 1950, and 1952 (by which time that 
island mass has combined with other accretion comprising the 
“Disputed Area”). 
Throughout the same time period, Island No. 94 or Stack 
Island, similarly, disappears in 1811, reforms as a mere “bar 
with a few willows” by 1817, remains “only a dry sand bar” by 
1825, forms as an island above ordinary high water by 1881 
(see Prep. Test. of Dr. Easterly, LA-PT-2), disappears by 1883 
(see Mayeux and Winkley, Sup. Tr.) and reforms as a moving 
mass of alluvion which eventually appears to locate as a bar 
(because it only appears above low water) near the vicinity of 
the sometimes “Providence Bar” and in the place of eroded 
Louisiana riparian land.

[PDF PAGE 21]
17 
In the District Court, Judge Barbour unfortunately failed to 
appreciate the evolving character of the accretionary features 
existing in the Lake Providence Reach. The Special Master in 
the instant case adopts the District Court’s error. In the for- 
mer’s “Bench Opinion,” for example, Judge Barbour charac- 
terizes Lake Providence Bar as a bar merely because it is so 
named on a map (apparently unaware of the hazards of rely- 
ing too greatly on generic place-names). More significantly, 
however, he considered Stack Island to be an island because it 
appeared above low water (a proper definition for a bar, but 
not for a true island!). Such characterizations reflect a failure to 
understand the changing and recurring character of actual ac- 
cretionary features and a misplaced reliance on generic place 
names. (In Judge Barbour’s defense, however, he did not have 
the benefit of Mr. Winkley’s extensive three-dimensional study 
of the Lake Providence Reach, together with the information 
as to both depths and elevations of various accretionary fea- 
tures, whether generically termed “bars” or “islands.”). Judge 
McKusick compounds this erroneous confusion of terms. 
An island, of course, is properly defined as “a body of land 
extending above and completely surrounded by water at 
mean high water.” (See for example, Prep. Test. of Dr. Easterly 
(LA-PT-2, p. 16) and the Trial Testimony of Mr. Mayeux). Any- 
thing less than dry at mean or ordinary high water, constitutes 
a bar or something other than a true island, no matter its for- 
mer character.‘ A moving mass of accretion, for instance, does 
not an island make! (even if it appears to extend from a former 
island location). 
* A significant problem that occurs in the evaluation of maps is the need 
to know the surface water elevation of the map. At low water and middling 
stages, all features showing above water would seem to be islands when 
they may actually be bars or shoals and would be submerged at higher 
stages.

[PDF PAGE 22]
18 
All recognized definitions of “island” contemplate “a body 
of land extending above and completely surrounded by water 
at mean high water.” This is the definition adopted by the U.S. 
Coast and Geodetic Survey, by the Department of the Interior, 
Bureau of Land Management (LA-SE-122) and by the United 
States Code, 43 U.S.C. 1301, defining lands beneath ordinary 
high water as constituting the bed and bottom of navigable 
waters. This was also briefed at page 15 of the Trial Brief Of 
The State of Louisiana. Thus, only the portion of a feature 
above high water is an island (see No. 77 Original, Judge Earl 
R. Larson, p. 15 supra). 
  
The definition of “island” is routinely followed by the 
United States in both domestic and international law and prac- 
tice, and customary international law. This definition, as de- 
rived from international law, is applied by the United States 
government in delimiting its jurisdiction with the states in 
coastal areas, as well as inland. (See for example, U.N. Conven- 
tion On The Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, Article X, 
which defines an island as a naturally formed area of land, sur- 
rounded by water, which is above water at high tide. The 
United States is a party to this convention and has applied this 
definition in the several Tidelands cases.) 
The Supreme Court of the United States has adopted, con- 
firmed and applied federal definitions, such as that of the U.S. 
Coast and Geodetic Survey, in decisions involving matters of 
this type, as in Borax Consolidated v. city of Los Angeles, 296 U.S. 
10, 56 .Ct. 23, at 29 (1935). 
The Supreme Court of the United States, in deciding Texas 
v. Louisiana, 410 U.S. 714, 93 S.Ct. 1215 (1973), at page 1221, dis- 
cussed island criteria, and cited the earlier case of Scott v. Lat- 
tig, 227 U.S. 229, 33 S.Ct. 242 (1913), with favor as concerns the 
proper definitions to be applied to features such as islands. In 
Lattig, the Supreme Court held that an island has “well defined 
banks extending from 3 to 5 feet above high water” citing cases

[PDF PAGE 23]
iv 
in the coastal areas which applied definitions similar to those 
employed by federal agencies such as the U.S. Coast and Geo- 
detic Survey. The Lattig case arose out of a dispute in an inland 
navigable river, the Snake River in Idaho, similar to the matter 
now before the court. 
In Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 US 315, 63 S Ct 1098 (1943) this 
Court, at least in dicta, recognized that “geologic realities” of a 
highly technical nature must be granted some deference. Also, 
the Court refers to “geological-legal problems of novel na- 
ture.” 
Mr. Winkley, Chief Hydrologist and Potamologist for the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Retired) and a resident of 
Vicksburg, a Louisiana witness of national and international 
stature, followed the practice of river engineers in defining an 
island in terms of “top bank,” a substitute and technical equiv- 
alent of “mean high water.” (2 Sup. Tr. 189, 264, 266). (See also, 
LA-SE-122, Manual of Instructions for the Survey of the Public 
Lands of the United States, 1973, page 22, “Every island above 
the mean high water elevation of any meanderable body of 
water, except islands formed in navigable bodies of water after 
the date of admission of a State into the Union, * * *.”) Perhaps, 
Judge McKusick could have avoided running aground of the 
Wachusetts Bar, a site of steamboat wrecks prior to 1883, if he 
had properly considered City of St. Louis v Rutz, 138 U.S. 226 11 
Sup. Ct. 337, at 346 (1891). 
  
  
A comparison of the facts of City of St. Louis v. Rutz with 
those of the Lake Providence Reach proves most instructive. In 
the former case, the dispute focused on the ownership of an is- 
land considered by some to have relocated from near the bank 
of Missouri down the river to a new location in the area of 
eroded former riparian land of Illinois. That island, first 
known as “Quarantine Island” (because of its use as such by 
the city of St. Louis), was surveyed in 1853. Ten years later, in 
1863, the island, then known as “Arsenal Island” (because of

[PDF PAGE 24]
20 
the presence of a U. S. Arsenal), was again surveyed. It was 
then designated as “St. Louis School Lands” containing in ex- 
cess of 109 acres. By contrast, Island No. 94 disappeared in the 
New Madrid Earthquake of 1811. It reappeared as a mere bar, 
not a true island, and remained such until shortly before its 
first survey in 1881. Stack Island’s short tenure as an island 
proves insignificant compared with the more stable landmass 
of Quarantine or Arsenal Island. 
Arsenal Island, subsequent to 1863, began to erode at its up- 
per end and accrete below, thereby appearing to “migrate” 
southward to the Illinois side of the Mississippi River. However, 
during that time, Arsenal Island became “a mere moving mass 
of alluvial deposits.” In the words of the Court, “to such a mov- 
able island, traveling for more than a mile, and from one state to 
another, the law of title by accretion can have no application.” 
In the somewhat related case of Carrick v. Lamar, 116 U.S. 
423 (1886), the Court noted that, by 1883, the former Arsenal Is- 
land could not be surveyed again, because of its “drifting char- 
acter” and lack of “stability and permanence.” Indeed, at that 
time, an individual settled and farmed the island of 230 acres. 
Nevertheless, the Court observed that “even during the time 
of a survey what would be a monument and a boundary today 
might require change tomorrow, and that, therefore, as long as 
the same causes continued to operate and make the island a 
mere moving mass of alluvial deposits, it was useless to estab- 
lish corners and monuments, which would be subject to imme- 
diate obliteration.” 
Judge McKusick rejects the view pronounced by this Court 
at page 24 of the Final Report. 
Much less could be said for the character of Island No. 94 af- 
ter 1881-1882. By 1882, an alluvial tail, being merely an attached 
bar, extends downstream from the former Wachusetts Bar. 
Note from the exhibits that the alluvial bar-tail is attached

[PDF PAGE 25]
21 
to Wachusetts Bar, not the 117.96 acres surveyed as Island No. 
94. This was also misconstrued by Judge McKusick, who be- 
lieved that anything shown on the map was an island and, this 
being so, was a part of Stack Island. Thus, Wachusetts Bar, at- 
tached to Island No. 94, and the alluvial bar-tail attached to 
Wachusetts Bar are seen by Judge McKusick as “one big is- 
land,” when only the 117.96 acres of it is above high water. This 
is critical to his belief that there was continuous existence — as 
the part actually surveyed (117.96 acres) was scoured away, the 
low elevation tail migrated south and lived on as an island in 
the mind of Judge McKusick. Parenthetically, even the tail 
washed away, as Austin Smith admitted. 
Within the following year, 1883, both island and accretions 
are washed away, replaced by the newly scoured steamboat 
channel, as established by the Mississippi River Commission 
(See LA-SE-159).° A subsequent, moving mass of alluvial de- 
posits formed, (just as it had after the New Madrid Earthquake 
of 1811 and just as it did in the formation of the more recent 
“Stack Island II” or “Rabbit Island,” also known locally as 
“Louisiana Bar”). In an odyssey across the Mississippi River, 
Stack Island dissipated into an agglomeration of shoals and 
bars, not unlike Providence Bar beyond. However, during that 
time, it could by no means be classified as an island. It lacked 
elevation, permanence and stability. It could not be surveyed 
nor monumented. Eventually, some bar accretions accumu- 
lated on the Louisiana side of the river, combining with rem- 
° At page 19 of the Final Report, Judge McKusick seeks to explain away 
LA-SE-159, an original 1881 Mississippi River Commission map made by 
Captain Marshall, base map 1881, with hydrography added in 1883. Missis- 
sippi witness Austin Smith admits that the map is authentic, 5 Sup. Tr. 150- 
160, and that the steamboat channel (main navigation channel) is authentic, 
5 Sup. Tr. 156. Neither is able to comprehend or admit the meaning of the 
legend information inscribed on the map explaining the use of map symbols 
or the difference between the 1881 base map and the 1883 hydrographic data

[PDF PAGE 26]
2 
nants and reformations of accretions sometimes identified as 
“Lake Providence Bar” or Louisiana “Island No. 7.” By the late 
1960’s, a new island named “Stack Island” had reformed at the 
original 1881 location and it is there today. 
In City of St. Louis v. Rutz, supra at 346, the Court carefully 
excluded any effects for the “Island Rule,” to wit: 
... We must not be understood as implying that if an 
island in the Mississippi river remains stable in position, 
while the main channel of the river changes from one 
side of the island to the other, the title to the island 
would change because it might be at one time on one 
side and at another time on the other side of the bound- 
ary between two states. The right of accretion to an is- 
land in the river cannot be so extended lengthwise of the 
river as to exclude riparian proprietors above or below 
such island from access to the river. (Emphasis added) 
The same could be said for Stack Island and Lake Provi- 
dence Reach. There, not only did the island not “remain stable 
in position,” it entirely washed away by 1883. Even if it had 
not washed away by 1883, after that time, Stack Island was 
never again an island with elevations above the ordinary high 
water mark. It was, indeed, merely a “moving mass of alluvial 
added after river survey two years later, showing the sailing channel to be 
1,500 feet wide and passing directly over the former location of the island. 
Compare with testimony of Michael P. Mayeux, 4 Sup. Tr. 138 et seq. in 
which he discovers that Mississippi listed the same map in the original trial, 
but did not use the updated 1883 version showing the island had been 
washed away and that the main channel of the river now passes over it. See 
also, 24 feet of water covering the surveyed location at low water, 59 feet at 
high water, 4 Sup. Tr. 182-186. Compare with testimony of Brien R. Winkley 
explaining the meaning of the 1883 hydrographic data in detail, 5 Sup. Tr. 6- 
42, and the preparation in Court of LA-SE-159-A, a cross-section showing 
the depth of the river at the former location of the island, 5 Sup. Tr. 42. “The 
map is authentic,” 5 Sup. Tr. 49.

[PDF PAGE 27]
pm 
| 
deposits 
Nor does Arkansas v. Tennessee, 397 U.S. 88 (1970), provide 
help to the problem of Lake Providence Reach. The premise 
that an old channel might continue to wander as long as it car- 
ries some water flow, applies to a case where the main channel 
moves because of a true avulsion. Such simply did not happen 
in the Lake Providence reach. The chute channels along the 
Louisiana bank were never the main channel. And the more re- 
cent case of Tennessee v. Arkansas, No. 77 Original, (referenced 
above) proves of limited value (although at first glance, decep- 
tively similar to the present case) because the “migrating” is- 
lands in that case were not washed away and always reap- 
peared after the floods in essentially the same position. Rather, 
the river shifted around islands as they extended their accre- 
tions. 
To summarize, therefore, Island No. 94 disappeared in 
1811 and did not again become a true island worthy of survey 
until about 1881. Shortly thereafter, it again disappeared as an 
island, became a moving mass of low elevation alluvial de- 
posits, which gave the illusion of appearing to eventually oc- 
cupy locations containing recurrent accretionary forms always 
claimed by the State of Louisiana and its assigns, namely, 
Providence Bar on the Louisiana bank. Those alluvial deposits 
came from upstream, not Stack Island, and combined with 
remnants of Providence Bar and the Louisiana bank. They only 
show on “maps, mosaics and aerial photographs” at times of 
low water and are otherwise submerged (See Final Report, p. 
17). This is why the deposits are called accretion to the bank 
and not islands. 
Remarkably, Judge McKusick employs an unusually sub- 
jective classification to accretionary features, defining “is- 
lands” in terms of their “degree of permanence” (Final Re- 
port, p. 23). If one aspect of “Stack Island’s” history proves 
evident, that is its total lack of permanence. (Indeed, how can

[PDF PAGE 28]
24 
a “migrating” mass of constantly changing size and shape be 
considered “permanent”?) Even so, while rejecting legal, sci- 
entific and technical definitions of “islands” and employing a 
definition broad enough to include various low-water land- 
forms, such as “bars,” the Special Master relies on Judge Bar- 
bour’s determination that similar accretionary features 
which exist below the Disputed Area should not be consid- 
ered “islands” but “bars” so as to render them accretions 
which could subsequently “attach” to Stack “Island” (Final 
Report, pp. 26-27, footnote 12). Such patent inconsistency de- 
fies all reason and common sense! Any attempt to subsume 
the latter features under Mr. Smith’s dubious and contra- 
dicted notions of “confluence accretions,” presented only in 
the district court, (cf. Joint Appendix, vol. I], pp. 165-166) 
does not alleviate the highly subjective and arbitrary use of 
these terms. 
To call a moving mass of accretion from 1883 to fairly re- 
cent times an “island” and then classify “Providence Bar” 
and other locational features as something other than islands 
shows rank disregard for the use of proper definitional crite- 
ria. This proves both logically inconsistent and disregards the 
realities as understood (and testified) by the several disci- 
plines represented by the experts, i.e., geography & geomor- 
phology, hydrology, and surveying. At professional meetings 
of the latter, such ignorance and disregard of the scientific 
and technical aspects of this case would surely be displayed 
as an object of ridicule and criticism. Even so, the ever-chang- 
ing definitions of “bars” and “islands” by the Special Master 
(but not, interestingly, the Fifth Circuit [See Houston v. 
Thomas, 937 F.2d 247 (5th Cir. 1991), footnote 2.)] in an obvi- 
ous procrustean effort to force a pre-determined legal result 
is without excuse. 
It is notable that the river had been swept clear of even bars 
or shoals by 1948, as shown by the Corps hydrographic survey

[PDF PAGE 29]
2 
(LA-SE-20).° There is nothing left in the bed of the river but 
sand waves and bed forms. Mississippi and the Houston 
Group did not contest this evidence, nor did Austin Smith, but 
attempted to seize upon a long low bar just beginning to de- 
velop in 1949 as “Stack Island.” 
It should be obvious that since a bar is not an island, the 
“Island Rule” cannot apply. Thus, a developing bar cannot 
“push” a minor chute or a purportedly frozen thalweg. Paren- 
thetically, since there was no island in 1948 and the thalweg 
was against the Mississippi bank at this time, as shown by the 
Corps hydrographic surveys, there can be no frozen thalweg 
to be “pushed” toward Louisiana as the bar feature, Provi- 
dence Bar, reforms. 
The burden has been on Mississippi and the Houston 
Group to show both a (1) true island and (2) continued exis- 
tence as such through time. Snap-shot photo overlays from dif- 
ferent years of bar features seemingly connected or overlying 
one another do not satisfy either requirement. Basically, the 
overlays show only a bar in one year, while in existence at that 
time, overlying a nearby location at a moment in time in yet 
° At page 21 of the Final Report, Judge McKusick blatantly dismisses a se- 
ries of 1948 Corps of Engineers hydrographic surveys (LA-SE-20A, B, C and 
D) which show at least 25-30 feet of water covering the highest point in the 
river at that time, ergo, no islands are in existence. The stated basis for rejec- 
tion of this hard evidence is that no “local observers” reported such, but to 
whom? The Master also confuses the testimony of Mississippi witness 
Burkhardt concerning the age of trees shown in the field notes from the 1881 
survey of Island No. 94, an area some 6 miles distant from the disputed area 
and 67 years earlier in time (1948-1881 = 67). The Master also suggests that 
elevations five feet higher than ordinary high which re-built after high wa- 
ter in the following year, 1949, give credence to the continued existence of 
an island. This high point, however, was the single highest point in the river 
in 1949, being a tiny area of high elevation on top of a bar. If the reading is 
based on the Vicksburg gauge and not the Lake Providence gauge, even the 
single high point is under water.

[PDF PAGE 30]
26 
another year. This technique proves nothing in terms of eleva- 
tions to meet the island requirement, or continual existence. 
Mr. Winkley clearly testified that there were no islands in 
the Lake Providence Reach as of 1883 or 1948 (3 Sup. Tr. 
264-266), as did surveyor Mike Mayeux (4 Sup. Tr. 141-145). 
Thus, whatever formed later west of the active main naviga- 
tion channel belongs to Louisiana. This testimony and evi- 
dence is unrefuted in the record of the case, except possibly by 
the Special Master, and it is an impermissible view on his part. 
Mississippi certainly had no witness willing to challenge the 
Corps data, nor Winkley, nor Mayeux, in their explanation of 
the specific details of voluminous maps and hydrographic sur- 
veys. While the Mississippi lawyers cross-examined, no Mis- 
sissippi witnesses were called, except Austin Smith. He was 
never asked by his lawyers to evaluate and discuss this hard 
data. 
All of the evidence in the record shows that after 1882, all 
of the features in the Lake Providence Reach of the river were 
bars and not true islands. Even now, the disputed area against 
the west bank of the river at Lake Providence is below ordi- 
nary high water or mean high water or “top bank,” as the Spe- 
cial Master was personally shown during the site visit by boat 
on May 5, 1994. That is, the entire disputed area was covered 
by at least thirty (30’) feet of water at ordinary high on the day 
of the visit, well below flood stage, for a significant period of 
time, although the tops of very tall trees were emerging above 
water level. 
  
Thus, a clear contrast is made between a feature such as the 
new Stack Island up river in its usual location near the Missis- 
sippi bank and the disputed area, which is nothing more than 
growing bank accretion even though there are minor channels 
through it which show in several places at low water caused 
by river action at both high and low water. See No. 77 Original, 
supra, and the comments of the Special Master, Judge Earl R.

[PDF PAGE 31]
27 
Larson. 
Both the Louisiana riparians and the State of Louisiana 
have exercised jurisdiction and possession of the disputed 
area. Neither Mississippi nor the Houston Group offered any 
evidence to show adverse possession, other than deer hunting 
activity by Robert Jarvis, as well as many other persons, in- 
cluding Louisianans. It must be remembered that Mississippi 
and the Houston Group called no witnesses in the Supplemen- 
tal Hearing except Austin Smith and Robert Jarvis. In marked 
contrast, Louisiana produced numerous witnesses to show the 
clear exercise of use, occupancy, possession and official acts of 
sovereignty through the exercise of law enforcement activities, 
continued and uninterrupted. Mississippi showed none and 
called no one in an attempt to do so. The abundant lack of evi- 
dence concerning the claims of Mississippi and the Houston 
Group to adverse possession, acquiescence and title was star- 
tling: the only claimed use of the disputed area was hunting 
during deer season; there were no witnesses from any Missis- 
sippi agency or anyone else claiming sovereign acquiescence, 
and no title or tax documents pertaining to the Louisiana Land 
District (T21N, R13E of the Red River Land District) except 
those of Louisiana riparians. The disparity in amount and qual- 
ity of relevant and probative witnesses and evidence put on by 
Louisiana, as contrasted to Mississippi, is overwhelming. 
Louisiana’s evidence, while lengthy, is clear, concise, di- 
rectly on point, and based almost entirely on official govern- 
ment maps, reports and hydrographic surveys. It is, essentially, 
unchallenged and irrefutable. On the other hand, Mississippi's 
evidence consisted largely, particularly in the Supplemental 
Hearing, of photocopies of maps and current (1994) photogra- 
phy used in cross-examination of the Louisiana witnesses in an 
effort to show that from a one dimensional plan view (bird’s- 
eye view) there was an island in the river. This type of ap- 
proach will not show elevations, which is critical to determin- 
 

[PDF PAGE 32]
28 
ing character as a true island. Mississippi witness Austin Smith 
had no new or even supportive data to back up his opinions, 
and he said, generally, that he could not really remember what 
data he might have used in the District Court trial. This was 
Mississippi's only technical witness. 
CONCLUSION 
The Court is urged to carefully review and apply the facts 
in evidence in this case as developed by the Louisiana experts, 
Hatley Harrison, Ernest Easterly, Brien Winkley and Michael 
Mayeux, based on qualitative scientific analysis, historical re- 
search, calculations and data. The totally unsupported ex cathe- 
dra opinion of Austin Smith and argument of opposing coun- 
sel carry little weight by comparison. 
Similarly, the extrapolation and adoption by both Judge 
Barbour and the Special Master of Austin Smith’s dubious con- 
fluence bar theory, actually barely discussed in his original 
trial testimony, and placement of a frozen thalweg unsup- 
ported by any objective evidence near Smith’s points 1 to 22, 
should be rejected. There is simply no evidentiary foundation. 
The case should be decided on the proven facts supported 
by documentary evidence, based on applicable rules of law 
and definition, and without resort to ad hominem urging. If 
the Court finds that the thalweg was not frozen in the east 
chute channel (as maintained by Louisiana in the District 
Court and held by the U.S. Fifth Circuit in Houston v. Thomas), 
then the law, facts, evidence and even common sense dictate 
that the present live thalweg should be the boundary between 
the states. There is certainly no evidence that the interstate 
boundary should follow along Louisiana’s levees and through 
the fields of its citizens. 
  
It is submitted that there is no evidence to support Austin 
Smith’s contentions and interpretations, and the findings of 
the Special Master are erroneous. It is the established jurispru-

[PDF PAGE 33]
20 
dence under Rule 52(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
that a finding is “clearly erroneous,” as here, when the review- 
ing court on the entire record and evidence before it is left with 
a definite and firm conviction that error has been committed. 
See United States v. United States Gypsum Company, 333 U.S. 364 
at 395, 92 L.Ed. 746, 68 S.Ct. 525 at 542 (1948); W.S. Shamban & 
Company v. Commerce and Industry Insurance Company, 475 F.2d 
34 (1973). 
Louisiana prays that this Court will reverse the findings of 
the Special Master and enter its Decree here determining the 
locus of the Louisiana Mississippi boundary at issue to be de- 
scribed according to the geodetic coordinates prepared by 
Hatley Harrison and included in the Final Report as Appendix 
B. Alternatively, that the boundary be decreed to be the present 
live thalweg of the Mississippi River. 
Respectfully submitted, 
RICHARD P. IEYOUB 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
BY: 
GARY L. KEYSER (Counsel of Record) 
Assistant Attorney General 
State of Louisiana 
Louisiana Department of Justice 
301 Main Street, 6th Floor 
One American Place 
Baton Rouge, LA 70801 
(504) 342-1457 
(504) 342-2508 
ATTORNEY FOR THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

[PDF PAGE 34]


[PDF PAGE 35]


[PDF PAGE 36]
