" w 4 : « : 
EN eS FRU HED Sy ig ! 


. as 


2S ID the’ 


r 


pe Py 


» Aa  heger et 


‘ wes - wt 

Teed a Tas 
5 : Sf nag. t. 
ae a" ~ 


i 


. TOALIYT 
iad mewhd hy SU bel state ge ab 


" 


7 
7 je 
. i“ , 
oy > 7 
* . - ‘ ad 7 
See Va. et Be oss . : 
et - ra x dy Pes: at ww, a? 7 ye : 
4 ? - ¢< U , te . a - on o . é. Fy | 7 ‘ - ° ’ 4 


ae, 


COPY 


BEST AVAILABLE 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ........0ccecevvvees ii 
INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE ..........000s0005 l 
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .. 2 
ES Ss oe ree 3 
I. SECTION 533(b) VIOLATES FREE SPEECH RIGHTS 

BY BARRING WILLING SPEAKERS FROM 

COMMUNICATING WITH WILLING LISTENERS . . 3 
Il. FEDERAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AGENCIES 

HAVE DETERMINED THAT SECTION 533(b) IS 

ANTICOMPETITIVE AND HARMS CONSUMERS .. 5 
Ii]. THE ANTICOMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF 

SECTION 533(b) ARE FELT BY MILLIONS 

OF POTENTIAL VIEWERS ........ 2c ccevees 14 


ST <4 0 nab 6 bWiak 6 065 00.0 0.066000 0% 18 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Pages 
Board of Trustees of State University of New York v. Fox, 

GB GB. Gp 0 ba hceeeeanensesustan 6 
Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792 (1993) ......... 5,6 
FCC v. National Citizens Committee for Broadcasting, 

GO Ga FOP: cosvcveciisésecd testes 4 
First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 

Ge Ga. TEE. onc 0n.bns bbba8 Bees bee 4 
Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753 (1972) .......... 3 
Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U.S. 301 (1965) .... 3 
Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141 (1943) ............ 4 
Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 

a Rr ee err 6 
Mississippi Power & Light Co. v. Mississippi ex rel. 

BGsase, Gt Gi. ee Ge 6 cad tbe eeureersdne 7 


Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 115 S. Ct. 1585 (1995) .... 6 
Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. FCC, 


GOB UB. UES CURED ccc cccevecvcccesscseeve 6 
Schneider v. State, 308 U.S. 147 (1939) .........45. 15 
Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969) .........545. 4 


Telecommunications Research & Action Center v. FCC, 
801 F.2d 501 (D.C. Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 


GB UG, SIP GR) cov ctatackusciaeweneus 15 
Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516 (1945) ............ 3-4 
Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 

Pt: Re 5,6 


Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia 
Citizens Consumer Council, Inc. , 


GS UB. FEPGOPED eis cconscécvecssenesun 3 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, Inc., 

Gi U.S. FEE GREP. cnc ceccveccccnnsceswunn 5 
Watt v. Alaska, 451 U.S. 259 (1981) 2... 1 ee ees 7 
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 

G71 U.S. GRR GREED cc cccccavctbecsectbuswal 3 


Legislative Materials: Pages 


Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition 
Act of 1992, 106 Seat. 1460 0. wees 11 
H.R. Rep. No. 628, 102d Cong., 2nd Sess. (1992)..... 17 


Administrative Decisions and Materials: 


Cable Services Bureau, FCC Cable Regulation Impact 
Survey, Changes in Cable Television Rates Between 
Apr. 5, 1993-Sept. 1, 1993 (Feb. 22,1994) ....... 11 
Implementation of Sections of the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act 
of 1992: Rate Regulation, Second Order on Recon., 


cc cccbeeesccccecccc. 11 
Letter from James H. Quello, FCC Chairman 
to Hon. Edward J. Markey (Mar. 1, 1993) ........ 10 


Letter from James F. Rill, Assistant Attorney General, 
Antitrust Division and Robert A. Mosbacher, 
Secretary of Commerce to Hon. John C. Danforth 
CCR ce gadeestesecccce. 12 

Reply Comments of the United States Department of Justice 
before the Federal Communications Commission, Telephone 
Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership Rules, 

CC Dkt 87-266 (Mar. 13, 1992)............5.. 11 

Reply of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration, In Re Teleport Communications — 

New York, File No. 13135-CF-TC(3)-92 


DMCS ph deeesceeececosccec. 12, 17 
Report of the Federal Communications Commission 

Regarding the President's Regulatory Reform 

Program (Apr. 28, 1991) ..... 6.62 6c cece eens 9 
Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership 

Rules, 3 FCC Red 5849 (1988) ............055.. 8 


Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership 
Rules, 7 FCC Red 5781 (1992) ..... 2... 00 ceee 8 


Miscellaneous: Pages 


Hong, Cable Rates Drop in Alexandria, Washington Post, 
SS F reer eee 11 
Donna N. Lampert, Cable Television: Does Leased Access 
Mean Least Access?, 44 FED. COMM. L.J. 245 


Ss MD oo ob O ee bs oe Ve CSU CO CEOS 17 
NTIA, TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE AGE OF 
DEED So wees oo te ee eedic 12-13, 16 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 

With the consent of the parties, amici curiae METS Fans 
United/Virginia Consumers for Cable Choice, ef al., hereby 
submit this brief in support of respondents. Amici are a coalition 
of consumer groups which support elimination of § 533(b) to 
promote diversity in media voices, competition in the cable 
television market, and access to video programming for people 
with disabilities. Amici represent a wide range of organizations 
and consumer interests: 

METS Fans United/Virginia Consumers for Cable Choice is 
an association of cable television consumers who believe that 
lifting § 533(b) and permitting Bell Atlantic to provide video 
programming in the Alexandria market will open up competition 
with the incumbent cable operator and provide viewers with access 
to alternative programming sources. 

The Alexandria Federation of Civic Associations, Inc. is a not- 
for-profit organization whose membership includes 75 civic, 
condominium and apartment associations in the City of 
Alexandria. The Federation believes that eliminating § 533(b) will 
promote cable competition in the City of Alexandria and increase 
the public’s access to alternative programming sources and 
government and public access channels. 

Television Viewers of America is a grassroots consumer 
organization actively pursuing legal and regulatory initiatives to 
bring nationwide competition to multi-channel video programming 
and lower rates and better service to consumers. 

Virginia Association of the Deaf, Inc., is a non-profit 
association whose goals are io serve the deaf and promote their 
unique needs in legislation, education, communication, health 
care, research, rehabilitation and individual family counseling. 
The Association believes that a favorable decision in this case will 
provide greater access to telecommunications and programming 
services that meet the needs of the deaf. 

Northern Virginia Resource Center for Deaf and Hard of 


Hearing Persons is a not-for-profit social service agency serving 


' Letters reflecting wnitien consent of the parties to the submission of this bnef 
have been filed with the Clerk of the Court 


deaf persons and those with hearing difficulties, their families, 
friends and other professionals. The Center believes that the 
increased competition offered by local telephone companies can 
increase access to video programming for deaf and hard of hearing 
persons. 

United Homeowners Association is a non-profit association 
whose goal is to inform and represent homeowners across the 
country. UHA believes that the competition from telephone 
companies in the provision of cable television programming 

Virginia Public Interest Coalition is an informal group of 
and telecommunications in Virginia. The coalition works to 
ensure that a consumer voice representing the interest of 
is heard during the public debate on telecommunications issues. 
The Coalition believes that lifting § 533(b) will result in increased 
competition in the provision of cable television services, lower 
prices and greater access to programming services. 


INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


This Court has frequently stressed that the First Amendment 
protects not simply the right of a speaker to speak, but also the 
right of the audience and the public to hear. Yet § 533(b), by 
listeners, runs roughshod over this fundamental principle of free 
speech. 

The First Amendment issue presented here is not some 
academic nicety. It is the very real question of whether millions 
of potential viewers will be prevented from fully participating in 
the most important medium of communication today. During both 
the Bush and Clinton Administrations, every federal agency with 
responsibility for fashioning telecommunications policy has 
recommended that § 533(b) be eliminated. In particular, the 
allowing competition by telephone companies in video 


2 


programming would expand subscribership by 11.2 million 
households nationwide and produce annual consumer benefits of 
some $5.36 billion. 

In determining whether § 533(b) could survive intermediate 
scrutiny, the Court should pay particular attention to the historical 
record compiled by the federal agencies involved in enforcing this 


Audiences have a right under the First Amendment to receive 
programming by local telephone companies, and this right is 
independent of the right of telephone companies to speak. This 
Court has frequently recognized that First Amendment rights 
belong to recipients — or potential recipients — of speech as well 
as to the speakers themselves. In Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy 
v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748 
(1976), for example, this Court determined that the First 
Amendment rights of the public to receive information provided 
an independent legal basis for consumers to challenge government 
regulation of speech. This Court observed that it “is clear from 
the decided cases” that the First Amendment protects the “right to 
‘receive information and ideas.” Jd. at 756-57 (quoting 
Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753, 762-63 (1972)). The Court 
has since reiterated that “the extension of First Amendment 
protection” may be justified by the value to consumers and the 
public “of the information that such speech provides.” Zauderer 
v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 471 U.S. 626, 651 (1985).’ 


2 See also Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 US. 301 (1965) (upholding 
First Amendment nghts of citizens to receive political publications from abroad, 
from foreign speakers whose ability to invoke the First Amendment was open to 
question), Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 534 (1945) (sustaining worker's 


3 


Even where a would-be speaker, rather than a listener or 
viewer, is the actual party challenging a law 
the 


vindication. The First Amendment, in particular, serves 
significant societal interests." First National Bank of Boston v. 
Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765, 776 (1978). In First National Bank, this 
Court permitted a business corporation to challenge a prohibition 
on speech not because of the First Amendment's role “in fostering 
individual self-expression,” but rather because of “its role in 
affording the public access to discussion, debate, and the 
dissemination of information and ideas." /d. at 783. This Court 
added that “the First Amendment goes beyond protection of the 
press and the self-expression of individuals to prohibit the 
government from limiting the stock of information from which 
members of the public may draw.” /d.’ 

“At the heart of the First Amendment lies the principle that 
each person should decide for him or herself the ideas and beliefs 
deserving of expression, consideration, and adherence. Our 
political system and cultural life rest upon this ideal.” Turner 
Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2458 (1994); 


right to meet, discuss, and be informed of impending election for collective 
bargaining agent), Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 143 (1943) (“this freedom 
embraces the right to distribute literature. . and necessarily protects the nght 
to receive it”), Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557, 564 (1969) (“This right to 
receive information and ideas, regardless of their social worth ___ is fundamental 
to our free society.”). 


* In this case, the diversity principle does not support the constitutionality of 
§ 533(b). In fact, that principle undermines the statute. In the Court of Appeals, 
amici addressed the question of whether the principle of diversity in FCC v. 
National Citizens Committee for Broadcasting, 436 U.S. 775 (1978) 
(“NCCB”), supported § 533(b). See Br. of METS Fans, et al. in Ct. App. 17- 
22. Amici noted that the restriction in NCCB prevented broadcasters from 
purchasing a newspaper and thus eliminating an additional voice. Section 
533(b), by contrast, prohibits a telephone company from adding its voice by 
becoming a cable provider. This is not a cross-ownership case. 


4 


see also Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792, 1798 (1993) (“the 
general rule is that the speaker and the audience, not the 
government, assess the value of the information presented”). 


Il. FEDERAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AGENCIES 
HAVE DETERMINED THAT SECTION 533(b) IS 
ANTICOMPETITIVE AND HARMS CONSUMERS 

The First Amendment right to receive information is 
particularly salient here, for every federal telecommunications 
agency has urged elimination of § 533(b) on the ground that it is 
anticompetitive and harms consumer interests. 

The court below evaluated the constitutionality of § 533(b) 
under “the intermediate level of scrutiny applicable to content- 
neutral restrictions that impose an incidental burden on speech.” 
Turner Broadcasting, 114 S. Ct. at 2469. This standard of review 
requires the Government to establish that the measure challenged 
on free speech grounds: (1) is narrowly tailored to achieve 
substantial government interests; and (2) leaves open ample 
alternative channels for communication. See, e.g., Ward v. Rock 
Against Racism, Inc., 491 U.S. 781, 789, 799 (1989). Both of 
these inquiries rest in part on an assessment of the purported 
justifications for the challenged measure, and thus can be 
advanced by an examination of legitimate, reliable information that 
bears upon these independent prongs of the “intermediate scrutiny” 
standard. 

In providing guidance to the courts about the legitimate sources 
that they should consult and consider in undertaking these 
evaluations, this Court has begun with an important cautionary 
reminder: any court exercising the power of judicial review of the 
constitutionality of a statute has an “obligation to exercise 
independent judgment when First Amendment rights are 
implicated.” Turner Broadcasting, 114 S. Ct. at 2471. The 
exercise of independent judgment is critical in determining 
whether the Government has carried its burden of demonstrating 
“that the recited harms are real, not merely conjectural, and that 
the regulation will in fact alleviate these harms in a direct and 
material way.” /d. at 2470. 


With this fundamental point established, however, the next step 
is to decide what sources provide legitimate material that will aid 
in exploring the two basic prongs of intermediate scrutiny. Here, 
this Court has stressed the importance of identifying sound 
information for the purpose of conducting these twin inquiries, 
observing that the Government cannot carry its burden under the 
First Amendment by offering “mere speculation and conjecture.” 
Rubin v. Coors Brewing Co., 115 S. Ct. 1585, 1592 (1995). 
“[R]ather, a governmental body seeking to sustain a restriction” 
against a First Amendment challenge “must demonstrate that the 
harms it recites are real and that its restriction will in fact alleviate 
them to a material degree.” Edenfield, 113 S. Ct. at 1800. Casual 
submissions based on “anecdotal evidence and educated guesses” 
are insufficient bases on which to restrict free speech rights, and 
“litigating positions,” such as those belatedly put forward by the 
Government in this case, cannot be used as reliable “proof that the 
Government’s regulation is necessary.” Rubin, 115 S. Ct. at 
1593. 

When the Government agencies charged with enforcing a given 
prohibition on speech have all concluded it is not essential to 
further any substantial government interest — and, indeed, that it 
positively disserves any such interests — it is difficult to imagine 
that the law could survive any form of First Amendment scrutiny. 
This Court has often attached weight to factual findings by 
responsible policymakers that undercut the validity of a restriction 
on speech. E.g., Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. 
FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 130 (1989); Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. 
Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241, 247 n.7 (1974). The situation here is 
much starker than anything this Court has encountered before: 
every agency participating in the formation of telecommunications 
policy that has examined § 533(b) has concluded that it retards 
competition and injures consumers. By their own statements, the 
relevant Government agencies have already established that they 
cannot meet their burden under the First Amendment of justifying 
§ 533(b). To take those agencies at their word entails no “second- 
guess[ing] [of] the Government's judgment.” Board of Trustees 
of State University of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 478 (1989). 


6 


To be sure, purported administrative “findings” would be 
suspect if they were unaccompanied by objective indicia of 
reliability, such as internal consistency and factual completeness. 
Similarly, they would be entitled to little or no weight if they were 
made for the purposes of litigation or reflected inconsistencies in 
approach or a self-interested concern in extending and protecting 
the scope of the agency’s own authority in a particular sphere. 
See, e.g., Watt v. Alaska, 451 U.S. 259, 273 (1981) (agency 
position inconsistent over time is “entitled to considerably less 
deference” than a consistently held agency view); Mississippi 
Power & Light Co. v. Mississippi ex rel. Moore, 487 U.S. 354, 
386 (1988) (Brennan, J., dissenting) (deference to agency position 
must take into account consideration of the agency’s “institutional 
interests in expanding its own power”). 

But those caveats are not applicable here. Federal 
telecommunications policymakers have unanimously condemned 
§ 533(b) as anticompetitive and anti-consumer. They have done 
so on the basis of a comprehensive historical record that reflects 
the modern development and growth of the American 
telecommunications industry. This striking conclusion about the 
counterproductive consequences of § 533(b) has been consistent 
across the different federal agencies involved in this area even 
though, from the perspective of the agencies’ narrow self-interest 
in expanding their own enforcement authority, invalidation of this 
measure likely would restrict that authority. This broad consensus 
that § 533(b) is entirely disconnected to any significant 
government interest is thus entitled to special weight in this 
Court's constitutional examination of whether this statute can 
satisfy the two distinct prongs of intermediate scrutiny. And the 
following examination clearly shows that § 533(b) is not “narrowly 
tailored” to accomplish any legitimate government interest. 

1. For years, the FCC has explained that its position on the 
inefficacy of § 533(b) is based on its considered judgment that 
“competition provided by telephone companies can be expected to 
provide . . . lower costs and greater choices for consumers and 
greater responsiveness to consumer demand by service providers.” 
Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership Rules, 3 


7 


FCC Red 5849, 5857 (1988) (quoted at J.A. 341). The evidence 
compiled by the Commission almost a decade ago demonstrated 
“that the prohibition against telephone companies providing cable 
television service within their telephone service areas no longer 
serves the public interest. . . . The ban directly deprives 
consumers of video programming services telephone companies 
could provide [and] prevents market incentives and achievement 
of efficiencies that could bring additional services to the public.” 
Id. at 5866 (quoted in J.A. 341). 

As the evidence has accumulated, the FCC has become 
increasingly emphatic in stating its position that § 533(b) does not 
serve the public interest and does not advance any legitimate 
government interest. In 1992, it issued a further report and order, 
in which it determined that removing § 533(b) would “increas[e] 
competition in the video marketplace, spur[{] the investment 
necessary to deploy an advanced infrastructure, and increas[e] the 
diversity of services made available to the public.” Telephone 
Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership Rules, 7 FCC Rcd 
5781, 5847 (1992) (quoted at J.A. 337). After reviewing the 
evidence that had been amassed in the formal administrative 
record, the Commission recommended that Congress abolish the 
prohibition on telephone companies providing video programming 
“directly to subscribers in their telephone service areas.” /d. As 
the Commission explained: “permitting local telephone companies 
to directly provide video programming will further increase 
diversity, as they will add another programming voice to those 
which now exist. . . . Most importantly, we find that the public 
will benefit greatly from the resulting increased competition in the 
video marketplace.” /d. at 5849-50 (quoted at J.A. 338). 

In May 1995, in its most recent report and order on the 
subject, the FCC formally reiterated its position that “authorizing 
telephone companies to provide video programming” would 
“promote competition in the multi-channel video programming 
market.” Govt. Supp. Br. App. 5a. “Since 1970, . . . the cable 
industry has grown from a fledgling service to a more mature 
industry that now serves a majority of households and ‘has 
replaced over-the-air broadcast teleision the primary provider of 


video programming."” /d. at |la. “These developments have . . 
. Mitigated to a fair degree the competitive concerns that led the 
Commission and Congress to adopt the cross-ownership ban.” /d. 
at 12a. 

The Commission has even gone so far as to quantify the 
tremendous benefits that would be attained by lifting the statutory 
ban on video programming by telephone companies. According 
to the FCC’s own statistics, eliminating § 533(b) “would result in 
significant price savings for consumers and stimulate provision of 
a range of new information services,” with rates falling about 20 
percent and subscribership increasing by 11.2 million households 
nationwide. Report of the Federal Communications Commission 
Regarding the President’s Regulatory Reform Program 16 (Apr. 
28, 1991) (quoted at J.A. 339-40). The Commission has 
predicted that competition would produce annual consumer gains 
of $5.36 billion, not counting “the significant gains in innovative 
uses of broadband communications in non-entertainment markets, 
such as health care, education, and telecommuting, all of which 
are very likely to follow from enhanced capacity and 
competitiveness in the supply of cable television services.” /d. 
(quoted at J.A. 340). 

The current Chairman of the FCC, Reed E. Hundt, 
summarized the Commission’s official position on the 
counterproductive nature of § 533(b) in congressional testimony 
delivered on January 27, 1994: 

Direct, facilities-based competition between cable and 
telephone companies will produce substantial benefits for 
the American public. Competition in this market will spur 
the deployment of advanced technologies that are capable 
of delivering the full range of services that customers 
demand. These services include not only entertainment 
services, but also the growing number of educational, 
health, and social services that are accessible over 
broadband technologies. 

In addition, competition in this market can be expected 
to produce the same positive results for consumers that we 


9 


have in other markets for telecommunications services that 
have undergone the transformation from monopoly to 
competition: technological and service innovation, lower 
prices, and responsiveness to consumer tastes. Telephone 
company entry also will expand the electronic marketplace 
of ideas by creating new outlets for video service 
providers. 


Elimination of the existing cross-ownership restriction 
should stimulate new telephone company investment in 
facilities that are capable of delivering video and advanced 
telecommunications services. Consumers should be the 
beneficiaries of the expanded choices that facilities-based 
competition in this market will foster. 


J.A. 376-77 (emphases added). He thus maintains the same 
position as the former Chairman of the FCC, James H. Quello, 
who also agreed that the removal of § 533(b) would “bring 
consumers lower rates, more responsive customer service, and 
greater choice of video programming sources.” Letter from James 
H. Quello, FCC Chairman to Hon. Edward J. Markey (Mar. |, 
1993) (quoted at J.A. 338-39). 

In short, the FCC has built an overwhelming administrative 
record that § 533(b)’s direct ban on video programming by 
telephone companies within their service areas is entirely 
counterproductive and thus does not serve any government 
interest.‘ 


* Experience tends to support the FCC’s conclusions. For example, many 
cable operators raised rates, re-ticred channels, or otherwise altered their service 
just as congressionally mandated rate regulation took effect, in the form of the 
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 106 Stat. 
1460. See Implementation of Sections of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation, Second Order on 
Recon., 9 FCC Red 4119, 4166 (1994). Subsequently, the FCC found that about 
30 percent of the cable systems had raised regulated rates, even under the 1992 
Cable Act. Cable Services Bureau, FCC Cable Regulation Impact Survey, 


10 


2. The Department of Justice has similarly concluded that 
removing § 533(b) “will allow another competitor to enter the 
video programming market, . . . increase the [telephone 
companies’) willingness to take the financial risk of developing 
broadband integrated networks, [and] make them more effective 
competitors.”* It has also determined that telephone companies’ 
“provision of video programming will have procompetitive 
benefits that outweigh any anticompetitive risks involved,” and 
thus they “should be allowed to own and directly provide video 
programming.” 

The Department thus has consistently urged Congress to do 
away with § 533(b), which is counterproductive of its actual 
objectives. In 1991, the Assistant Attorney General for the 
Antitrust Division, together with the Secretary of Commerce, 
stated their position in these words: “We think that Congress can 
best serve television viewers by removing barriers to entry by new 
firms into the video services marketplace. The Administration 
therefore supports removal of current legislative prohibitions 
against telephone company provision of video programming.” 
Letter from James F. Rill, Assistant Attorney General, Antitrust 
Division and Robert A. Mosbacher, Secretary of Commerce to 
Hon. John C. Danforth (Mar. 13, 1991) (quoted at J.A. 343). In 
congressional testimony presented on January 27, 1994, Anne K. 
Bingaman, Assistant Attorney General for the Antitrust Division 
in the new Administration, reaffirmed the Department’s views: 


Changes in Cable Television Rates Between Apr. 5, 1993-Sept. 1, 1993, at 3 
(Feb. 22, 1994). A notable exception was the City of Alexandria, Virginia, in 
which the incumbent cable operator — facing the prospect of head-to-head 
competition from Bell Atlantic — actually decreased its rates by more than 10 
percent. See Hong, Cable Rates Drop in Alexandria, Washington Post, Sept. 
9, 1993, at V-1. 


* Reply Comments of the United States Department of Justice before the 
Federal Communications Commission, Telephone Company-Cable Television 
Cross-Ownership Rules, CC Dkt 87-266 at 44-45 (Mar. 13, 1992) (quoted at 
J.A. 342). 


* Jd. (quoted at J.A. 342). 


“The Administration . . . strongly endorses the provisions of H.R. 
3636 that would permit existing cable and telephone companies to 
offer both video and telephonic services in the same geographic 
areas. . . . It is crucial that public policy promote competition 
between methods for delivering telecommunication services.” 
J.A. 381. 

3. These conclusions have also been independently confirmed 
by the National Telecommunications and Information Administra- 
tion (NTIA), a unit of the Department of Commerce that is 
responsible for telecommunications policy. The NTIA has 
determined that: 


In general, government restrictions that have the effect of 
limiting the uses to which new technology can be put tend 
to be inefficient and anticompetitive, and retard investment 
in that new technology. In particular, we believe that the 
current cable/telco crossownership rules are having such an 
effect wth respect to investment in broadband public 
network technology. 


NTIA, TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE AGE OF INFORMATION 235 
(1991) (quoted at J.A. 344). The NTIA has also stated that “the 
likely benefits of LEC [local exchange carrier] entry into the video 
programming business outweigh the potential costs of LEC 
provision of video programming,” and that “[t}he opportunity to 
provide programming should increase LECs’ incentives to 
construct integrated broadband network facilities to carry that 
programming to the home. This, in turn, could lead to 
introduction of a wide range of innovative voice, data, and video 
services for subscribers.” /d. 

In 1992, the NTIA reiterated its documented concerns “about 
the continuing wisdom of this restriction” on video programming 
contained in § 533(b), and noted that “we have repeatedly 
advocated its elimination.”’ As the NTIA explained again in more 


” Reply of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
In Re Teleport Communications — New York, File No. 13135-CF-TC(3)-92, 
at 3 (May 27, 1992) (quoted at J.A. 346) 


12 


detail: “Allowing telephone companies to provide video 
programming in their local service areas would significantly 
increase competition in the video services market, which would, 
in turn, yield lower prices to viewers, better service quality, and 
better programming diversity.” /d. In January 1994, this view 
was reaffirmed in congressional testimony by Larry Irving, 
Assistant Secretary of the Department of Commerce for 
Communications and Information. J.A. 382, 383. 

4. Finally, in January 1994, the Clinton Administration 
released its “White Paper on Communications Act Reforms,” 
which outlined the Administration's proposal to remove § 533(b) 
on the ground that the statute is merely an undesirable obstruction 
to the important goal of securing and promoting competition in the 
telecommunications industry. As the White Paper states the 
matter: “Although the existing cable-telephone company cross- 
ownership restriction of the 1984 Cable Act may have been 
appropriate when enacted, today it is an unnecessary and artificial 
barrier to competition in the delivery of video programming to 
American consumers and to investment in advanced local 
infrastructure.” J.A. 370. 

Taken together, these statements represent an impressive and 
extremely thorough historical record, which establishes that 
§ 533(b) does not advance any legitimate government interest. 
Instead, the administrative record compiled by these federal 
officials establishes that § 533(b) runs counter to the most 
important objectives of established governmental policy toward 
this industry, even as it imposes direct and substantial restrictions 
on free speech. This conclusion, moreover, has been reached by 
all of the officials who are charged with exercising responsibility 
across the entire spectrum of federal authority to set national 
telecommunications policy. The sound expertise reflected in the 
historical record compiled by these officials, which plainly shows 
that the very statute they are authorized to administer and enforce 
is Counterproductive and affirmatively hinders the government’ s 
asserted interest, warrants very close examination by this Court in 
assessing the validity of § 533(b). On the basis of this record, it 


13 


is simply impossible to conclude that § 533(b) is “narrowly 
tailored” to serve that interest. 


11. THE ANTICOMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF 
SECTION 533(b) ARE FELT BY MILLIONS 
OF POTENTIAL VIEWERS 


A law that shuts out millions of consumers from the Nation's 
most important medium of expression cannot be deemed to leave 
adequate alternative channels of communication open to the public. 
Section 533(b) relegates a telephone company to three “alternative” 
means of expression, which are completely unsatisfactory from the 
standpoint of the consumer interests of the public: (1) video 
programming outside its telephone service area; (2) non-video 
programming forms of speech; and (3) the creation of video 
programs distributed in-region by local broadcasters, cable 
operators, or video stores, outside the telephone company’s 
editorial control. 

Whether or not these alternatives are “ample” as to the 
telephone company speaker (and we believe that they are not), 
they plainly are inadequate from the perspective of the public. 
The first option, programming outside the region, is no alternative 
at all for consumers who are located within the telephone 
company’s service area. Out-of-region programming involves an 
entirely different audience. Members of the public are not 
fungible, and the protected rights of one audience cannot be denied 
on the ground that the speaker can address a different audience 
instead. See Schneider v. State, 308 U.S. 147, 163 (1939). 

Nor do the in-region “alternatives” offer consumers any 
meaningful substitute. To be sure, § 533(b) allows telephone 
companies to publish newspapers or distribute handbills, but in the 
modern age of telecommunications, video programming has 
become the public’s primary source of news and information. 
Millions more people have televisions than subscribe to 
newspapers, and the average television household watches 
television seven hours per day, and the average resident spends 
almost ten times as many hours watching television as reading the 


14 


newspaper. See J.A. 196-97 (Stipulated Facts 10-14). Moreover, 
the “power to communicate ideas through sound and visual images 
- . « iS significantly different from traditional avenues of 
communication because of the immediacy of the medium.” 
Telecommunications Research & Action Center v. FCC, 801 F.2d 
501, 508 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (quoting FCC Report and Order), cert. 
denied, 482 U.S. 919 (1987). 

Similarly, the in-region distribution of telephone company 
speech by cable operators and broadcasters, at the discretion of 
these existing owners, is certainly no adequate substitute from the 
perspective of consumers. The fact is that there is already far 
more video programming than these incumbent cable operators 
can possibly carry. Cable operators currently have an average 
capacity of about 40 channels. J.A. 198 (Stipulated Fact 20). Yet 
there are already available many more sources of ing: 
local broadcast stations, more than 75 basic cable networks, 42 
regional networks, 7 pay networ .s, 7 pay-per-view networks, and 
other text and audio services. j.A. 144-45 (Affidavit of William 
E. Lee 4 6(a), 6(b)). Accordingly, the Government has 
stipulated in this case that “[cJurrently, the supply of available 
video programming exceeds the available channel capacity of 
almost all cable systems.” J.A. 198 (Stipulated Fact 19). 

Furthermore, if independent video programmers are to reach 
their audiences and expand the diversity of information available 
to the public, they need the very editorial support and coordination 
that § 533(b) forbids telephone companies from providing. Thus, 
it was undisputed in the courts below that, as a prominent 
independent video producer explained, “[iJndependent video 
producers and media artists are producing much more video 
programming than is currently being distributed on existing 
systems. As long as show producers and distributors stand as 
‘gatekeepers’ for the viewing audience, voices that do not conform 
to the video carriers’ needs will not be heard." J.A. 324 
(Affidavit of Robin Smith q 6). Telephone companies’ “ability to 
package, market, and distribute video programming for access on 
media artists to reach a much larger audience." /d. (at { 7). 


1S 


Lifting § 533(b) would thus permit a wide range of new voices to 
be heard: 


A new genre of programming will emerge, utilizing the 
new interactive technologies in ways that are more 
responsive to the needs of individuals. . . . With more 
distribution outlets, small independent and non-profit 
producers will gain a precious commodity — a platform for 
diverse voices and visions that can be shared with the 

Id. (at { 8) (emphasis added). 

This effect of removing § 533(b) is also borne out by the 
historical record compiled by the federal agencies, as described in 
more detail above. The NTIA, for example, has urged that “the 
availability of broadband facilities will likely spawn new 
applications — video and non-video alike — as entrepreneurs and 
carriers devise new service offerings that will benefit the 
American public.” NTIA, TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE AGE OF 
INFORMATION 234 (1991) (quoted at J.A. 344-45). “This, in turn, 
could lead to introductions of a wide range of innovative voice, 
data, and video services for subscribers.” Jd. at 235 (quoted at 
J.A. 344). The White Paper similarly notes that the removal of 
§ 533(b) “will allow telephone companies and cable operators to 
compete in providing a full range of video, voice, and data 
services to the public. Such competition can promote investment 
that expands consumer choices and services.” J.A. 370. 

The key element in achieving these benefits for the public is 
the ability of the telephone companies to exercise editorial control 
as they would undertake to compete in providing such 
programming, which is nonetheless banned by § 533(b): 


16 


[MJere provision of transmission facilities is not 
sufficient. [Telephone companies} would still be forbidden 
to perform the kind of packaging, marketing and publicity 
functions that are crucial to the success of smaller 
producers. ... [H]aving such services available to all 
producers can make the differeace between a film that 
passes unnoticed and a professional production that serves 
to challenge people by adding to the diversity of opinion in 
the public forum. 


J.A. 326 (at { 12) (emphases added). 

Providing consumers and independent video producers with 
“leased access” cable channels in no way compensates for their lost 
Opportunity to access the extensive programming package that 
telephone companies could offer in the absence of § 533(b). The 
FCC's “leased access” requirements make available only one or 
two channels (at most) of a cable operator's capacity. J.A. 284-85 
(Affidavit of Jean Pool ¢ 4). Accordingly, Congress has 
concluded that “leased access has not been an effective mechanism 
for securing access for programmers to the cable infrastructure or 
cable subscribers.” H.R. Rep. No. 628, 102d Cong., 2nd Sess. 
39 (1992).* Even if one or two cable channels were made 
available to the telephone company or to another video 
programmer, the bottom line would be that viewers would end up 
with one (limited) voice simply replacing another, whereas what 
consumers want — and what they are constitutionally entitled to 
receive — are additional programming voices. 

For all of these reasons, § 533(b) leaves consumers with no 
adequate alternative means of communication. It is vital that 
telephone companies be permitted to provide video programming 
directly to their in-region subscribers. By directly prohibiting this 
important means of providing “lower prices to viewers, better 


* See also Donna N. Lampert, Cable Television: Does Leased Access Mean 
Least Access?, 44 Fep. Comm. LJ. 245, 248 (Mar. 1992) (“the access 
provisions of the Cable Act have wholly failed to serve their intended purpose 
of reducing the bottleneck control of cable operators”). 


17 


service quality, and better programming diversity,” § 533(b) 
deprives “all users, residential and business alike,” of these 
important benefits. NTIA Reply at 3 (quoted in J.A. 346). It 
therefore cannot pass muster under the “intermediate scrutiny” 
standard of constitutional review. 


CONCLUSION 
The judgment of the Court of Appeals should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


SAMUEL A. SIMON 
901 15th Street, N.W. 
Suite 230 

Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 408-1400 


Counsel for Amici Curiae 


October 18, 1995 


