OFFICE OF THE SLER 


IN THE 
Supreme Cort of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC., 


- Petitioner, 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, ef al., 
Respondents. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 


H. BARTOW FARR, ITI * 
RICHARD G. TARANTO 
FARR & TARANTO 
2445 M Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20037 
(202) 775-0184 


DANIEL L. BRENNER 
NEAL M. GOLDBERG 
DAVID L. NICOLL 
NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION 
ASSOCIATION, INC. 
1724 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036 


* Counsel of Record 


WILSON - Ergs PrintiING Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


eh: 


ae 


* 
x 


bel 
i 


we..- 
‘es 


‘et wt 

oe 7 

le “ep ern 
. . 


= 
Ss 
at | oan 


aot 
o\si 


a, 
ee ae 


Pe nee 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-1900 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC., 


° Petitioner, 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, et al., 
Respondents. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 


Bell Atlantic agrees with our contention that this 
Court should grant the petition for certiorari from the 
judgment of the Fourth Circuit. It vigorously urges the 
Court, however, not to adopt the suggestion that, upon 
granting the petition, the Court remand the case to 
afford the Fourth Circuit the opportunity to give full 
consideration to an important development post-dating 
the court of appeals’ decision: the Commission’s adop- 
tion, by formal rulemaking, of a construction of Section 
533(b) that transforms the terms of the question de- 
cided by the Fourth Circuit. While plenary review of the 
case at this stage certainly would be appropriate, Bell 
Atlantic has failed to show that a remand is not the 
more sensible and appropriate course. 


2 


There can be no doubt that the new Commission 
construction radically changes the issue actually decided 
by the court of appeals. In its central description of the 
Fourth Circuit's ruling, Bell Atlantic pinpoints the con- 
struction of Section 533(b) that formed the premise for 
the holding of invalidity: “‘[t}he First Amendment 
problem with § 533(b) is that the provision does not 
allow the telephone companies to engage in protected 
speech, that is, the provision, with editorial control, of 
cable television services.” Br. in Resp. 4, quoting 94- 
1893 Pet. App. 15a n.10 (emphasis deleted by respond- 
ents). See also Br. in Resp. 1 (“47 U.S.C. § 533(b) 
.. . bars local telephone companies from providing video 
programming directly to subscribers in their telephone 
service areas”). What the Commission decided in the 
recently completed rulemaking, however, was that Section 
533(b) does not in fact have that effect. Under the 
Commission’s construction of the whole of Section 
533(b), including the waiver provision of paragraph 
(4), the statute allows local telephone companies “to 
engage in protected speech, that is, the provision, with 
editorial control, of cable television services” in their 
telephone service areas. The explicit premise of the 
Fourth Circuit’s holding has been eliminated by the Com- 
mission’s rulemaking since the time the Fourth Circuit 
ruled (and denied rehearing ).' 


1 Bell Atlantic overstates the effect of Section 583(b), even aside 
from paragraph (4), when it excerpts a quote from an affidavit and 
asserts that the statute “excludes telephone companies from what 
is undisputedly ‘the most important mass medium in America.’” 
Br. in Resp. 9 (quoting Affidavit of William Lee, Ct. App. JA 141). 
What the quoted affidavit says, however, is that “video communica- 
tion is the most important mass medium in America.” (emphasis 
added). Bell Atlantic, which (among other things) has entered the 
wireless cable business and may become a broadcaster, plainly is 
not excluded from video communication, any more than are broad- 
casters (who likewise are subject to cable cross-ownership restric- 
tions). See Pet. 9, 27. 


3 


A remand to the Fourth Circuit would allow the court 
to address this issue-altering development. It also would, 
consistent with this Court’s normal certiorari policy, pro- 
vide the benefit of at least one lower-court ruling on a 
question presented for decision—here, the essential thresh- 
old question of statutory construction. And the expendi- 
ture of this Court’s resources may be rendered entirely 
unnecessary by the Fourth Circuit’s action on remand 
or, possibly, by legislation replacing Section 533(b) that 
is now making its way through Congress. 


Bell Atlantic intimates that a remand would be futile, 
pointing to several places in the parties’ papers in the 
lower courts where Section 533(b)(4) was cited or 
discussed. Br. in Resp. 16-20. This suggestion takes an 
unrealistic view of the course of proceedings. The Fourth 
Circuit could not have considered the Commission’s new 
formal rule on the proper construction of Section 533(b) 
(4), which was not even proposed until two days after 
the Fourth Circuit's last action in the case—denial of 
rehearing. Moreover, the Fourth Circuit was not presented 
with any developed argument for a “saving construction” 
of Section 533(b)(4) prior to its decision; never received 
any presentation on the issue from the Commission, the 
agency charged with administering the statute; and 
plainly misread Section 533(b)(4) in its only mention of 
the provision in its opinion. See Pet. 15-16, 22. The 
Fourth Circuit realistically would have something new and 
important to consider upon remand. 


A remand in these circumstances would be in keeping 
with Bureau of Economic Analysis v. Long, 454 US. 
934 (1981), where an “intervening Act of Congress 
changed the substantive law applied by the Court of 
Appeals.” Br. in Resp. 13 n.16. The Commission's 
formal rulemaking, subsequent to the Fourth Circuit's 
decision and rehearing denial, effects an equivalent 
change in the applicable law under Chevron U.S.A., Inc. 
v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 837 


4 


(1984).* A remand would also be consistent with this 
Court’s actions remanding for reconsideration even when 
a change in statutory construction is advanced by the 
government simply as a litigant. See, e.g., Knox v. 
United States, 114 S. Ct. 375 (1993). Bell Atlantic iden- 
tifies no case indicating that a remand would be inappro- 
priate in the present circumstance. The issue is simply 
one of prudent administration in the ordering of judicial 
consideration of important legal issues on their merits.” 
A remand in this case, to give the Fourth Circuit a full 
opportunity to consider the serious issue raised by the 
Commission’s construction of Section 533(b)(4), makes 
good sense. 


Bell Atlantic seeks to discount the seriousness of the 
issue by putting itself in the odd posture of objecting to 
the Commission’s narrowing construction of Section 
533(b), a construction that would allow Bell Atlantic 
to do what its challenge says Section 533(b) forbids: i.e., 
provide in-region wire-based video programming to sub- 
scribers. It turns established principles on their head to 
seek to broaden rather than narrow statutory restrictions 
on speech so as to invite rather than avoid a constitu- 
tional invalidation of an Act of Congress. Bell Atlantic’s 
several objections to the Commission’s construction all 
have ready answers, made compelling against the back- 
drop of the demand to save rather than condemn fed- 
eral statutes. See, e.g., Pet. 18-21; Pet. App. 117a-121a. 
In any event, it would be appropriate that these argu- 
ments initially be presented (as they have not been to 
date) to the Fourth Circuit. 


2 No such situation was presented, of course, in United States 
v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 115 S. Ct. 464 (1994), or the other 
cases noted in footnote 17 of Bell Atlantic’s response. 


* The principles governing vacatur of a lower-court judgment 
upon mootness of a case, where the judgment cannot be reentered 
and no review of the merits will ever be had in the case, are 
irrelevant to the issue. See Br. in Resp. 14-15 (relying on U-S. 
Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner Mail Partnership, 115 S. Ct. 386 
(1994) ). 


5 


CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted 
and the case either remanded for reconsideration by the 
Fourth Circuit or set for plenary briefing and argument. 


Respectfully submitted, 


H. BaRTow Fark, III * 
RICHARD G. TARANTO 
FARR & TARANTO 
2445 M Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20037 
(202) 775-0184 


DANIEL L. BRENNER 

NEAL M. GOLDBERG 

Davin L. NICOLL 
NATIONAL CA®’ ~ TELEVISION 

ASSOCIATION, INC. 
1724 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
June 1, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


