as 


Ms. PS 


be eS 
fom dike i a 
Clee RE A 
7 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Interest of Amicus Curiae ............00c0ee ees 


I. There Is No Compelling Reason for 
Common Carrier Regulation of the 


Video Programming Business ........... 


Il. The Just Compensation Remedy for Idle 
Channels Is Not Clearly Available Under 


Current Takings Jurisprudence .......... 


Ill. |The Absence of Clear Protection Against 
Forced Idleness of Common Carrier Video 


Programming Channels Will Retard Telephone 
Company Entrance into the Field ......... 


Conclusion 


na we ef es sae eae eee ees eee eee eee 68 et Se 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Page 
Board of Public Utility Comm'rs v. New York Telephone Co., 
roe fs re ee me he 9 


Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia 
v. United States, 830 F. Supp. 909 (E.D. Va. 1993), 


aff'd, 42 F.3d 181 (4th Cir. 1994), cert. granted, 


15S BS. CR. SRR CIGD occccvccteubenetunscasbas 3 
FCC v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689 (1979) ..... 4,6 
General Motors v. United States, 323 U.S. 373 (1945) ...... 8 
Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 

4508 U.S. GER GREED ccs vececoveessessanuweren 8 
Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 

tre t-) i Wayvere rrr yo 8 
National Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs v. FCC, 

oe fo of fee SO Pee 6 


PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74 (1980) 5, 10 
Southwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. FCC, 


5D Pe 867s GAG. GR. Gee oc oc eseeseeeasenen 6 
Turner Broadcasting Sys. v. FCC, 114 S. Ct. 2445 (1994) 2, 5, 11 
Yee v. City of Escondido, 503 U.S. 519 (1992) ........... 8 
Federal Statutes & Regulations 
G7 U BK. GED cccccvcccccccceseessss veel 6 
GT WE. BERD oc ccccccncocessuwecee nan passim 
GT UBM. BORED cvccocvccecnceceseceueseuewnne 4 
GF CPR GER GEE 0 60 6b 00 cocsesnsese sae 6 
Administrative Decision 
Telephone-Company Cable Television Cross-Ownership, 

0 Pirie CG. Tome RSE oo nc ccscecekheeee 3 
Other Authority 
Averch & Johnson, Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory 

Constraint, 52 Amer. Econ. Review 1053 (1962) ....... 2 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


East Ascension Telephone Company, Inc. provides local telephone 
service in parts of Louisiana. As a small telephone company, it cannot 
afford uneconomic investment to build a utopian common carrier video 
network as the sole means of providing video programming in its 
telephone service area. The disposition of this case urged by 
Petitioners, therefore, would have the practical effect of silencing East 
Ascension as a video speaker and of depriving East Ascension’s 
subscribers of an alternative to the cable incumbent. Letters indicating 
the consent of the parties to the filing of this brief have been filed with 
the Clerk. 


BACKGROUND OF THE CASE 


At issue in this case is whether § 533(b) of the Federal 
Communications Act abridges telephone company speech in violation 
of the command of the First Amendment. The central argument has 
already been developed in the principal brief submitted by Bell 
Atlantic. Only a brief recapitulation of the basic facts is necessary 
here. 

Through its subsidiary Bell Atlantic Video Services (BVS), Bell 
Atlantic seeks to provide video programming in direct competition with 
cable TV operators in Bell Atlantic’s telephone service area. Section 
533(b) bans all telephone companies, which are regulated as common 
carriers under the Federal Communications Act, from providing video 
programming to their telephone subscribers. Bell Atlantic, like East 
Ascension and other telephone companies, is caught by that restriction. 
Under § 533(b), any telephone company regulated by the FCC may 
passively transmit the programming of other providers over its own 
network; it may seek a broadcast license to transmit some of its own 
programming over a broadcast ‘requency in its own home region or 
elsewhere; it may sell its programming to cable TV stations anywhere 
so long as it can find a buyer; and it may provide video programming 
directly to customers outside its home region. But it cannot follow its 
obvious low-cost business strategy: Enter into the business of video 
programming in its own home region. The statutory prohibition holds 
whether a telephone company seeks to transmit its message over its 
own extant telephone facilities, or whether it seeks to build, purchase, 
or lease separate facilities for that purpose. And the statutory 
prohibition within the home territory holds whether the phone company 


seeks to operate its video facilities as an ordinary private owner or as a 
common carrier. 

This statutory ban on telephone company video programming 
amounts, as the Fourth Circuit held, to a flat prohibition of telephone 
company speech. Pet. App. 49a-Sla. Given that unexceptional 
finding, the burden switches to the Government to justify that statutory 
prohibition by identifying some legitimate end of the ban, under (at the 
very least) a standard of intermediate scrutiny. And it must show that 
the legitimate end could not be achieved in a more eyreditious and 
efficient way. See Turner Broadcasting Sys. v. FCC, | |4“. Ct. 2445, 
2469-70 (1994). The Petitioners seek to meet that burden by showing 
that this legislative ban was, and is, necessary to prevent cross- 
subsidization of Bell Atlantic’s video distribution services by its other 
common carriage telephone services. Their argument is that telephone 
companies hold powerful local monopoly positions that could allow 
them, if unchecked, to shift the costs of their video programming 
venture to their regulated businesses. The resulting subsidies could 
create distortions in two markets: the subsidized video programming 
market, and the subsidizing telephone market. See generally Averch 
& Johnson, Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory Constraint, 52 
Am. Econ. Review 1053-1069 (1962); Staff Report, FCC Policy on 
Cable Ownership (Nov. 1981), JA 54-58. 

The Fourth Circuit assumed the theoretical legitimacy of the cross- 
subsidy concern, but held that the total ban of § 533(b) was nonetheless 
not tailored to fit the concern. In passing, the Fourth Circuit mentioned 
at least one less restrictive form of regulation available to the FCC: 
The FCC could allow the telephone companies to enter the video 
programming market in their own region, subject to common carrier 
obligations similar in form to those imposed on their core telephone 
business. That proposal was specifically tailored to fit the business 
plan of Bell Atlantic whose complaint alleged that BVS “will provide 
some of the video programming on the network, and the network will 
also be available for use by other video programmers on a common 
carrier basis.” Complaint ¥ 28, JA 13. 

Now, in its brief to this Court, the Government asserts that ai/ 
telephone companies should be required to seek waivers of § 533(b) 
and that waivers will be dispensed only if the applicant submits to a 
common carriage requirement. Govt. Br. 40. This requirement would 
be contrary to the business plans of East Ascension Telephone 
Company, which wishes to enter the video programming market as an 


2 


ordinary private business and to compete on the same regulatory terms 
as the incumbent cable TV operators. 

The Fourth Circuit explained its common carrier proposal as 
follows: 

Moreover, we agree with the district court, 830 F. 

Supp. at 930-31, that an “obvious less-burdensome 

alternative[ |” to Section 533(b) readily presents itself 

(and indeed has been identified by the FCC as a 

possible alternative to Section 533(b) in its 

recommendation to Congress to repeal the provision): 

Congress could simply limit the telephone companies’ 

editorial control over video programming to a fixed 

percentage of the channels available; the telephone 

companies would be required to lease the balance of 

the channels on a common carrier basis to various 

video programmers, without regard to content. See 

Video Dialtone Order, supra, 7 F.C.C. Red. 5781 Tf 

141-143. 


Pet. App. 47a-48a. 

The FCC Order to which the Fourth Circuit refers offered only a 
brief analysis of the common carrier option to § 533(b). Video 
Dialtone Order, 7 FCC Red 5781, 4 141-143 (1992). The 
Commission suggested that the appropriate fraction of channels a 
telephone company could reserve for itself is on the order of 25 percent. 
Id. at | 143 n.360. An earlier Staff Report had suggested that the 
appropriate fraction should be between 20 to 30 percent. JA at 68. 
According to the Staff Report, if the telephone company is allowed to 
have a larger share, say 80 percent, then it could retain some monopoly 
power that would allow it to cross-subsidize its video programming 
services. Alternatively, if its retained percentage were too low, say 5 
percent, then the telephone company would have little incentive to 
build its new video transmission facilities in the first place. The 20-30 
percent figure was the Staff Report’s educated guess designed to split 
the difference between these two extremes. 

The FCC has carefully expressed the telephone company’s 
common carrier obligation as a percentage of the total system. If the 
telephone company could use some minimum guaranteed number of 
channels, then, according to the Staff Report, it would have a powerful 


incentive to build a video transmission system just large enough to 
cover its own needs, just as any private operator would do. JA 68. 

Simply stated, common carrier status is said to control the 
theoretical risk of cross-subsidy of video programming while permitting 
more telephone company speech than is possible under the § 533(b) 
ban. The implicit logic of this argument is this. The telephone 
company is required to build a system four times the size it needs for its 
own use. Any effort to subsidize that system would necessarily result 
in the telephone company granting three-quarters of the subsidy to 
independent programmers. The inability to keep most of the subsidy 
for itself would reduce whatever incentive the telephone company 
would have to create it in the first place. Since this common carrier 
alternative is less restrictive than the ban and, in the FCC’s view, as 
effective in countering any alleged cross-subsidy risk, the Fourth 
Circuit concluded that the alternative helped to show that the ban is not 
sufficiently tailored to the cross subsidy concern, whatever its validity. 

The constitutionality of this common carrier requirement was not 
litigated below. The Fourth Circuit did not examine this suggestion, 
which it made for only a limited purpose. “We cite the alternative not 
to imply its constitutionality, but only to show that Section 533(b) is 
itself unconstitutional.” Pet. App. 48a n.34. 

In FCC v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689 (1979), this Court 
struck down a comparable but less onerous requirement that applied to 
cable operators. The FCC had ordered all cable systems over a certain 
size to expand their capacity from a then-average |2 channels to 20 
channels, and to offer some of the new channels for public use on a 
common carrier basis. The Court invalidated the FCC’s rules as 
contrary to a statutory requirement that cable service not be subject to 
common carrier regulation. See 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)(“Any cable system 
shall not be subject to regulation as a common carrier or utility by 
reason of providing any cable service.”). The Court also noted that 
subjecting cable channels to common carriage came “at the expense of 
the journalistic freedom” of cable operators to compose their own 
package of programming. 440 U.S. at 707. “[{E}ven when not 
occasioning the displacement of alternative programming, compelling 
cable operators indiscriminately to accept access programming will 
to be extended to subscribers.” /d. at 707 n.17. The Court did not 
reach the First Amendment and Takings Clause issues presented by the 
FCC’s rules, but noted that these were “not frivolous.” /d. at 709 n.19. 


4 


More recently, the common carrier possibility for both cable and 
telephone companies was discussed in Justice O’Connor’s concurring 
opinion in Turner Broadcasting, 14 S. Ct. at 2475, as an alternative 
to compelling cable operators to carry local broadcast channels: 


If Congress finds that cable operators are leaving some 
channels empty — perhaps for ease of future 
expansion — it can compel the operators to make the 
free channels available to programmers who otherwise 
would not get carriage. See PruneYard Shopping 
Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 88 (1980) (upholding 
a compelled access scheme because it did not burden 
others’ speech). Congress might also conceivably 
obligate cable operators to act as common carriers for 
some of their channels, with those channels being 
open to all through some sort of lottery system or 
timesharing arrangement. Setting aside any possible 
Takings Clause issues, it stands to reason that if 
Congress may demand that telephone companies 
operate as common carriers, it can ask the same of 
cable companies; such an approach would not suffer 
from the defect of preferring one speaker to another. 


Turner Broadcasting, \14 S. Ct. at 2480. 


ARGUMENT 


The main purpose of this brief is to show that the hesitation that the 
Fourth Circuit expressed about the unconstitutionality of the common 
carrier alternative and that Justice O’Connor expressed about possible 
Takings Clause issues is in fact well founded. Analyzed in some detail, 
it becomes clear that in this context common carrier regulation, whose 
details are still unknown but are irrelevant to the argument made in this 
brief, would place far too great a burden on First Amendment freedoms 
to withstand examination under the intermediate scrutiny standard of 
Turner. The conclusion is plain: Just as the First Amendment makes 
it impermissible for the FCC (under strict or intermediate scrutiny) to 
ban the telephone companies from providing video programming in 
their region, so too it prevents the FCC from conditioning the right of 


telephone companies from entering that market on their willingness to 
accept some as yet unspecified form of common carrier status. 


I. There Is No Compelling Reason for Common Carrier 
Regulation of the Video Programming Business 


Historically, common carriage obligations have never been thrust 
upon private businesses without their consent. Instead, these 
obligations attach only after » firm decides voluntarily to enter a 
business that is subject to common carrier regulation. In this regard, it 
is instructive to note that the Communications Act of 1934 defines a 
common carrier as “any person engaged as a common carrier for hire, 
in interstate or foreign communication by wire or radio.” 47 U.S.C. 
§ 153(h). The regulations amplify that definition by stating that a 
communication common carrier is “[a]ny person engaged in rendering 
communication service for hire to the public.” 47 C.F.R. § 21.2 
(1994). The effect of these two definitions is to link the 
communications definition of a common carrier to its common law 
origins, and that in turn stresses the quasi-public nature of the 
undertaking: “the primary sine qua non of common carrier status is a 
quasi-public character, which arises out of the undertaking to carry for 
all people indifferently.” National Ass'n of Regulatory Util. Comm'rs 
v. FCC, 533 F.2d 601, 608 (D.C. Cir. 1976) (internal quotation 
omitted). The key element of this definition is the “undertaking” by a 
given firm to serve all individuals. It is therefore possible for a single 
company to engage simultaneously in two types of business, one for 
common carriage, and the other directed toward particular customers 
only. See Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. at 701 n.9 (“one can be a 
common carrier with regard to some activities but not others”). Thus 
in Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. v. FCC, 19 F.3d 1475 (D.C. Cir. 
1994), the Court of Appeals held that the FCC could not regulate as 
common carriage a certain “dark fiber” service just because some 
telephone companies had provided it “as a limited, customer-specific 
service.” 19 F.3d at 1481. Accordingly, the carriers were allowed to 
discontinue offering dark fiber service, without first receiving FCC 
approval. 

The decision in Southwestern Beil fits in well with the basic logic 
of common carrier regulation. Food, clothing, and shelter are 
necessities of life, but they are not provided under a common carrier 


6 


regime that requires firms in these lines of endeavor to take all 
customers indifferently. The vast range of private alternatives provides 
consumers with all the protection that they need. The discontinuation 
of dark fiber service at issue in Southwestern Bell did not disrupt or 
impair the efficiency of the overall telephone network. As such that 
service was correctly treated as a private service, analogous to the wide 
variety of services found in ordinary markets. By way of parallel, the 
video programming services at issue in this case need not be regulated 
as common carriage to assure the operation of the telephone network, 
any more than dark fiber service needs to be so regulated. Video 
programming can be offered on a limited basis to select groups of 
customers, as in Southwestern Bell, and their possible discontinuation 
does not threaten the viability of the overall telephone network. 

So understood, the present case illustrates the powerful economic 
logic behind the distinction between common carrier and private 
services. The core telephone transmission services of 1,000 separate 
telephone companies of all sizes and capacities have to be knitted 
together into a single cohesive network in order to facilitate the 
transmission of information from any point in the network to any other 
point in the network. In this environment, common carrier regulation 
ensures that telephone companies do not refuse service, or set price so 
high as to deter service, either to telephone users or connecting carriers. 
This regulation always carries with it the risk of confiscation, but that 
risk can be checked effectively by insisting that all carriers receive a 
just rate of return on the investments committed to their common 
carrier businesses. At the same time, such regulation need pose no 
threat to fundamental First Amendment values because it does not limit 
the speech of the telephone companies. 

The same sunny view of common carrier regulation is not 
appropriate in the novel context of video programming services. 
Requiring the carrier to serve all customers at a regulated price has 
never been easy even for public utilities that face relatively stable 
demand for their outputs that are in turn produced by relatively stable 
technology. In the fast-moving video programming market, instability 
and innovation are the only permanent truths, and these conditions 
make it difficult to fashion reliable rates to reflect the rapid shifts on 
both the cost and the demand side of the market. Worse still, there is 
no guarantee that any channels built at telephone company expense and 
dedicated by law to common carrier status will be leased by other 
programmers, so that the telephone company could be left with the 


7 


worst of both worlds: sharp restrictions on its rate of return if the 
venture proves successful and demand is high, ani no compensation 
from the Government if its common carrier lines lay vacant. 


Il. The Just Compensation Remedy for Idle Channels Is Not 
Clearly Available Under Current Takings Jurisprudence 


One possible way to meet this difficulty is to insist that 
compensation be provided to the telephone companies if forced to 
construct expensive facilities that then remain idle. One plausible way 
to make this argument is to treat the United States as though it leased 
those vacant channels for its own purposes when it refuses to allow the 
telephone companies to use these channels themselves. By excluding 
the telephone companies from the use of their own property, it is as 
though the Government has taken possession of them. It must then pay 
compensation for the time it uses the channels in question, just as it 
must pay compensation when it occupies a building for an indefinite 
term of years against the will of its owner. See, e.g., General Motors 
v. United States, 323 U.S. 373 (1945). 

It is, however, an open question whether this compensation claim 
would be honored by the Government, or indeed accepted by the Court. 
The precise question of whether an exclusion from the possession of 
some portion of the system constitutes a taking is not settled under this 
Court’s takings jurisprudence. It is not crystal clear whether the 
requirement that certain channels be left vacant will be treated as a 
physical taking, for which there is a virtual per se rule of compensation, 
see Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 
(1982), or in the alternative whether it will be regarded as part of a 
regulatory initiative for which compensation is required only when the 
regulation denies the owner of the property (presumably the entire 
facility) any “economically viable” use. See Lucas v. South Carolina 
Coastal Council, 112 S. Ct. 2886 (1992). 

Both these tests raise formidable difficulties of their own. Loretto, 
for example, involved the permanent physical occupation of space that 
is strongly analogous to the “electronic occupation” that occurs when 
a telephone company’s computers and cables are forced either to carry 
the video programming of others or sit idle. But the Loretto definition 
of physical taking has not been uniformly applied. In Yee v. City of 
Escondido, 503 U.S. 519 (1992), the occupation of a pad by a mobile 


home tenant was held to be “a regulation of petitioners’ use of their 
property, and thus does not amount to a per se taking.” Jd. at 532 
(emphasis in original). And that same conclusion was held to follow 
from the fact that the landowners chose to “voluntarily open” their 
premises to others. 

In our view, the forced idleness of particular property should be 
treated as a physical taking, compensable for the full period of its 
duration. It is not credible to assert that a telephone company’s 
decision to build four times the needed video transport capacity is 
“voluntary” when the FCC has mandated such excess construction as 
the price of the telephone company’s video speech. Even if the forced 
idleness is regarded only as a regulatory taking, the better view treats 
the period of idleness separately. Since no revenues have been 
collected for that period, explicit compensation from the Government 
should be required to make up the Government-created shortfall. In 
rate regulation generally it is improper to reduce the recovery allowed 
in the current period to reflect some larger than anticipated gains made 
in some previous rate period. “Past losses cannot be used to enhance 
the value of the property or to support a claim that rates for the future 
are confiscatory. And the law does not require the company to give up 
for the benefit of future subscribers any part of its accumulations from 
past operations.” Board of Public Utility Comm'rs v. New York 
Telephone Co., 271 U.S. 23, 31-32 (1926) (citation omitted). 


Ill. The Absence of Clear Protection Against Forced Idleness 
of Common Carrier Video Programming Channels Will 
Retard Telephone Company Entrance into the Field 


For these purposes, however, it is not necessary to reach a 
definitive resolution of a difficult takings question. The critical point 
is to note the cautious legal advice on the compensation question that 
must be given to a telephone company that wished to operate its own 
video programming facility. There is no way that such a company 
could be assured that compensation for its idle channels would be 
required under present law. The lack of clarity of the just compensation 
question thus lends additional urgency to the telephone company’s First 
Amendment claim that unsettled policies effectively silence its right to 
speak. The very uncertainty of the status of the compensation remedy 
only underscores the legal risks that any telephone company would bear 


9 


in committing its resources to such a hazardous business venture. Does 
it take the risk that the government will refuse to pay compensation for 
the rental value of vacant channels? That it will offer some inadequate 
compensation? What are the costs of future litigation if disputes arise, 
and the possibilities of success? 

Nor are these difficulties obviated by trying to take the idle capacity 
into account in ratemaking procedures. Here, it is conceivable that the 
FCC or state regulators could allow a telephone company to set rates 
high enough to recoup the lost revenues in some future period. But 
once again, there is no guarantee that this form of deferred 
compensation will provide any effective relief to the telephone 
companies. It is one thing for the regulator to allow certain rates. It is 
quite another for the market to pay those rates. Should a demand 
emerge for the once vacant channels, no potential customer in a 
competitive market will pay for the downtime of the channel prior to its 
own use. Those costs are sunk and hence cannot be recovered. Thus, 
the telephone companies would face this unpleasant dilemma. If the 
FCC sets the rates too low, the telephone company has no choice but to 
lease channels at those reduced levels. But if it sets them too high, then 
potential lessees will simply refuse to deal unless they receive price 
concessions. The telephone companies can lose from regulation but not 
gain. 
The scope of the government intrusion, it should be evident, is 
much greater than the intrusion inflicted on the mall owner in 
PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74 (1980). In 
Prune Yard the mall owner did not attack, and this Court did not 
address, the protester’s intrusion on the ground that it was forced to 
subsidize speech to which it was opposed. Accordingly, this Court 
allowed the protesters’ activities for reasons that are inapplicable here. 
The mall owner could not make a credible showing that its patrons 
would confuse the message of the protesters with the views of the mall 
owner; and the Court found no evidence in the record to indicate that 
the presence of protesters in the Mall would cause any economic loss 
to the mall owner’s operations. In contrast, the burdens of common 
carrier status on a telephone company are far greater. In this context, 
every channel that is used by lessees is a channel that is not available 
to the owner of the facility. Every decision to commandeer resources 
reduces the likelihood that the facility will be produced in the first 
place. Here the required lessees and the telephone company are in the 
same video programming business, so that the risk of confusion of 


10 


messages and consequent loss of advertising and good will is far 
greater. That greater negative impact of government regulation means 
that this common carrier system for video programming fails under a 
standard of intermediate scrutiny. 

The basic point here can be made by yet another analogy if we step 
back from the fast-paced world of telecommunications. Ordinary office 
and housing markets contain both leased and owner-occupied facilities. 
There is little reason to think that sensible firms operating in a 
competitive market cannot decide whether to pursue ownership or 
lease. If certain rooms lay vacant and may be needed for future 
expansion, the sensible owner can decide whether to hold them off the 
market, to rent them on a short term lease at a below-market price, or 
to rent them on a long-term lease at a higher price reserving to itself a 
buyback option. No system of rent control could do better for that 
owner or his potential tenant (who wants the unit to be available in the 
first place) than their combined voluntary choices, for no outsider has 
information about the needs of the two parties superior to that they 
themselves possess. It would be odd in the extreme therefore for the 
State to tell any landowner, “we will let you build a home for yourself 
so long as you occupy only one unit in a four unit complex” (to get the 
desired 25 percent ratio). It is more than odd to impose that 
requirement on a video programmer that has explicit First Amendment 
protection. The obligations that are contemplated by this common 
carrier suggestion are onerous even if ideally implemented and 
suffocating if not. The huge level of uncertainty associated with any 
such program means that this Court should look on the proposal with 
deep suspicion. It should not preserve § 533(b) by looking to unknown 
systems of common carrier regulation with distinctive pitfalls of their 
own. 

Justice O’Connor’s modest suggestion in Turner that “Congress 
might . . . conceivably obligate cable operators to act as common 
carriers for some of their channels” (114 S. Ct. at 2480 (emphasis 
added)) is not to the contrary. In addition to the just compensation 
issues that she has identified, another First Amendment issue is also 
raised. Justice O’Connor thought that her proposal could be subject to 
a reduced standard of review because it “would not suffer from the 
defect of preferring one speaker to another.” Jd But in the context of 
this litigation, that condition would no longer be satisfied when both 
telephone companies and cable companies compete in the same market. 
The FCC’s proposal to saddle telephone companies — and only 


telephone companies — with a common carriage requirement explicitly 
prefers one speaker to another. By exempting the cable companies who 
wield monopoly power in video distribution and imposing the common 
carriage requirement only on new entrant telephone companies, the 
FCC is deterring competition and unfairly and selectively burdening the 
video speech of telephone companies such as East Ascension 
Telephone that would not voluntarily elect common carrier regulation. 


CONCLUSION 


The FCC should not be permitted to salvage § 533(b) by appealing 
to an unknown and untested system of common carrier regulation for 
video programming. Here is yet another case where the simple solution 
is best. Section 533(b) should be struck down. If Congress or the FCC 
wishes to regulate anew in this area, they may do so, but only subject 
to the constraints of the First and Fifth Amendments. 


Accordingly, the decision below should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


SYLVIA LESSE RICHARD A. EPSTEIN 
KRASKIN & LESSE Counsel of Record 
Suite 520 1111 East 60th Street 
2120 L Street, N.W. Chicago, Illinois 60637 
Washington, D.C. 20037 (312) 702-9563 

(202) 296-8890 


Counsel for Amicus Curiae 


October 18, 1995 


12 


