(ii \0 
Nos. 94-1893 and 94-1 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, et al., 
PETITIONERS, 


V. 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE 
COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, et al., 
RESPONDENTS. 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC. 


PETITIONER, 
v. 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, et al., 
RESPONDENTS. 


ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR AMICI CURIAE 
CONSUMER FEDERATION OF AMERICA AND 
VIRGINIA CITIZENS CONSUMER COUNCIL 


OF COUNSEL: GIGI B. SOHN 
Counsel of Record 

BRADLEY STILLMAN ANDREW JAY SCHWARTZMAN 

CONSUMER FEDERATION MEDIA ACCESS PROJECT 

OF AMERICA 2000 M Street, NW 

1424 16th Street, NW Suite 400 

Suite 604 Washington, DC 20036 

Washington, DC 20036 (202) 232-4300 

(202) 387-6121 Counsel for Amici Curae 
Consumer Federation of Amenca, 


Date: August 18, 1995 Virginia Citizens Consumer Council 


CASILLAS PRESS, INC., 1717 K STREET, N.W., WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY © 


vies 


ey —r ef had 
ea ae 
cou Le ras ns 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .........-020 eee eeeee ii 
INTEREST OF THE AMICI CURIAE ..........254455 l 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ..........-555eeeee- 3 
REE 6 eb wd obs cee ce racceveseseneens 4 


I. THE CIRCUIT COURT PAID LIP SERVICE TO THE 
PUBLIC’S RIGHT TO RECEIVE INFORMATION FROM 
DIVERSE SOURCES ......2cccccccscvees 4 


II. THE COURT’S DETERMINATION THAT THERE IS 
AN "OBVIOUS LESS BURDENSOME ALTERNATIVE" 
TO THE TELCO/CABLE CROSS-OWNERSHIP BAN 
IGNORES PRACTICAL REALITIES .......... 6 


Il. THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED IN FINDING THAT 
RBOCs DO NOT HAVE AMPLE ALTERNATIVE 
CHANNELS FOR COMMUNICATION ........ 9 


GOMES oc ccccsvccedscosecssecocesens 11 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
FEDERAL CASES 


Associated Press v. U.S., 
ry US Sa.) reer re 4 


CBS Inc. v. FCC, 
453 US. 367 GUSSD) .ccccvveeeeeeeesneeee 4 


Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co. v. US, 
42 F.3d 181 (4th Cir. 1994) .. 2... 22s ees passim 


Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co. v. US, 
830 F.Supp 909 (E.D. Va. 1993) ......-++++5> 5 


United States v. O’Brien, 
24 US. SOT GSE wc ccc cece eeaweeseen 6 


Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 
395 U.S. 367 (1969)... cee c reece recenes a 


Turner Broadcasting Inc. v. FCC, 
114 S.C. 2445 (1994) 2... ewer ence reece 4 


United States v. Albertini, 
G72 US. G73 GRD wc cv cveseecscsseaeeere 6 


STATUTES AND LEGISLATIVE MATERIALS 


47 UBC C522 GP nce cccccccctsusessesueeeneue 9 
47 UBC 6522 @ on cc ccc ccccesetsesesssseueen 9 
A og. Se wrerevery, tl 10 


A’ -f -' SPPPerwrrerrirry?, fies. 10 


GE EE RE gS 10 
A 9 
H.R. 1555, 104th Cong., 1st Sess., $302(a) ........... 6 
S. 652, 104th Cong., Ist Sess., §206(b) .............. 4 
AGENCY DECISIONS 

Fourth Report and Order, FCC No. 95-357 

(Released August 14, 1995)................. 7 
Video Dialtone Order, 7 FCCRed 5781 (1992).......... 4 

OTHER AUTHORITIES 


Ameritech Goes Cable, Broadcasting & Cable, 
a. Cle wh by 6660690660006 8 


D. L. Bazelon, FCC Regulation of the Telecommunications Press, 
SUE ED Eeeds SRD CNOVED cece cccccccccss 5 


Bell Atlantic Changes its TV Plans -- Again, Washington Post, May 
Ta . 


Angela J. Campbell, Publish or Carriage: Approaches to Analyzing 
The First Amendment Rights of Telephone Companies, 70 North 


Carolina Law Review 1071 (1992) ..............005. 5 
FCC pondering franchise fees for telcos, Broadcasting & Cable, 
PCC EC. tte cc kbeaweecces cevcier 9 


Outlet Sells for $396 Million to NBC, Broadcasting & Cable, 
ri cs wil dwg BOS 6 6 6d 6600 wd 5-6 


Pian Stalls for Video Network, The Baltimore Sun, May 29, 1995 


SNET Fires Back at Connecticut Regulators[.] Connecticut Telco 
Holds Out Threat of Pulling Back from Video, Broadcasting & 
Cable, July 3, 1995 af ZB... ccc cece cc ccccccces 7-8 


US West Inc. Puts a Hold on Its Plans To Build Interactive Video 
Networks, Wall Street Journal, June 1, 1995 at B2 ....... 7 


Nos. 94-1893 and 94-1900 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, et ai., 
PETITIONERS 
v. 
THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE 
COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, et ai., 
RESPONDENTS. 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC. 
PETITIONER 
v. 
BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, et ai. 
RESPONDENTS. 
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH 
CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR AMICI CURIAE 
CONSUMER FEDERATION OF AMERICA AND 
VIRGINIA CITIZENS CONSUMER COUNCIL 


INTEREST OF THE AMICI CURIAE 


Consumer Federation of America (CFA) and Virginia 
Citizens Consumer Council (VCCC) submit this brief as amici 
curiae in support of Appellants United States of America and the 
National Cable Television Association. 

CFA is the nation’s largest consumer advocacy group, 
representing more than 50 million individual members from among 
240 national, state and local affiliates representing consumer, senior 
citizen, low income, labor, farm, public power and cooperative 
organizations. CFA has a longstanding interest in communications 


2 


policy issues. Its members’ interests include, but go far beyond, 
the prices which small and residential customers pay for telecom- 
munications services. CFA seeks to promote its members’ access 
to information essential to their participation in the civic discourse 
which is at the heart of democratic self-governance. In this connec- 
tion, it has advocated policies designed to ensure that all Americans 
have access to an affordable, state-of-the-art communications 
infrastructure to meet personal, educational, commercial and other 
national policy needs. 

CFA has also participated in scores of federal and state 
proceedings addressing telecommunications policy issues, including 
proceedings before state utility commissions and the Federal Com- 
munications Commission ("FCC" or “Commission") affecting rates 
charged to consumers and access to basic telecommunications 
services. As an active party in FCC proceedings involving the 
prohibition of provision of video programming by telephone compa- 
nies within their local exchange service areas (the subject of this 
litigation), CFA opposed the FCC’s recommendation to Congress 
that it repeal these provisions, and took issue with some aspects of 
the "video dialtone" ("VDT") regulatory regime as devised by the 
FCC. CFA has long fought vertical integration in mass media and 
common carrier telecommunications services, including attempts 
of the Regional Bell Operating Companies ("RBOCs") and other 
monopoly telephone providers to integrate vertically into competi- 
tive markets at the expense of competition in those markets. 

VCCC is a nonprofit, volunteer membership consumer 
advocacy organization that has represented consumer interests in 
Virginia since 1966. Its membership totals approximately 300 
individuals and organizations. VCCC supports consumer protection 
legislation in the Virginia General Assembly and in Congress, 
participates in State Corporation Commission proceedings on 
utility, telephone, financial services and insurance issues, and 
provides information to its members and to the public on consumer 
issues and market surveys. VCCC has been significantly involved 
for several years in the development of telecommunications policy , 
both at the state and Federal levels, and is a leading advocate for 
telephone consumers in Virginia. 


3 


CFA and VCCC are filing this brief to set forth the inter- 
ests and rights of members of the public - as speakers, as recipients 
of information and as customers. They believe that the telco/cable 
cross-ownership ban is a sound structural regulation that is narrow- 
ly tailored to meet the compelling governmental interest of ensuring 
diversity of voices and competition in the telecommunications and 
cable markets. There is not now, nor does it appear that there will 
be in the future, any viable and realistic alternative to this prohibi- 
tion that can protect diversity and competition in the marketplace 
of services, or the marketplace of ideas. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

The Circuit Court virtually ignored the public’s “para- 
mount" First Amendment right to receive information from diverse 
sources. While recognizing that government promotion of such in- 
terests is significant, the decision under review gave scant attention 
to these concerns in addressing whether the statutory provision at 
issue here is a narrowly tailored remedy. 

First, the Circuit Court’s exclusive concentration on the 
RBOCs’ rights as speakers, without regard to the public’s rights as 
recipients of information, was fundamental error. Second, the 
Court similarly erred in finding that there was an “obvious less 
burdensome alternative," to the cross-ownership ban. If the nar- 
rowly tailored analysis standard is to mean anything at all, the so- 
called "less burdensome alternative" must be real, and not theoreti - 
cal. For this reason, the Court’s reliance on the FCC’s video 
dialtone scheme is misplaced. There is currently no viable VDT 
service. While a handful of test market installations serving per- 
haps several thousand people are now under way, it is far from 
certain that this technology will prove workable in a truly competi- 
tive market. Moreover, there is evidence that at least some of the 
RBOCs have no intention of providing such service, and that they 
are primarily interested in buying existing cable systems and 
monopolizing the video programming market. 

Finally , the Court’s determination that RBOCs lack “ample 
alternatives of communication" in their service areas is incomplete. 
The RBOCs can own and operate television stations and thereby 


4 


obtain cable access through "must carry" provisions of the 1992 
Cable Act. They can deploy multi-channel "wireless cable” ser- 
vices and market their own programming to broadcasting, cable and 
direct broadcast satellite operators. They also have the option of 
leasing channels on cable systems. 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE CIRCUIT COURT PAID LIP SERVICE TO THE 
PUBLIC’S RIGHT TO RECEIVE INFORMATION 
FROM DIVERSE SOURCES. 

The Circuit Court properly recognized that "‘assuring that 

the public has access to a multiplicity of information sources is a 

governmental purpose of the highest order, for it promotes values 

central to the First Amendment.’" Chesapeake & Potomac Tele- 
phone Co. v. US, 42 F.3d 181, 198 (4th Cir. 1994) ("C&P Tele- 

phone") quoting Turner Broadcasting Inc. v. FCC, 114S8.Ct. 2445, 

2470 (1994). As this Court held in its unanimous ruling in Red 

Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367, 390 (1969), 


It is the right of the viewers and listeners,...which is para- 
mount. It is the purpose of the First Amendment to pre- 
serve an uninhibited marketplace of ideas in which truth 
will ultimately prevail, rather than to countenance monopo- 
lization of that market....It is the right of the public to 
receive suitable access to social, political, esthetic, moral 
and other ideas and experience which is crucial here. 


However, far from examining how the cross-ownership ban "prop- 
erly balances” the First Ameniment rights of the parties, CBS Inc. 


v. FCC, 453 U.S. 367, 397 ..981), and specifically whether it 
promotes the public’s First Amendment right to receive information 
from diverse sources, Associated Press v. U.S. 326 U.S. 1, 20 
(1945), the lower Court’s analysis of narrow tailoring was con- 
ducted entirely from the perspective of how the ban may impact the 
rights of the RBOCs as speakers. C&P Telephone, 42 F.3d at 199- 
202. 


Although the Circuit Court went so far as to accept that 


telephone companies have the incentive to act anticompetitively in 
the video program market to restrict diversity, id. at 200, and to 


EEE 


5 


“assume that the possibility that a telephone company may engage 
in cross-subsidization in the cable transport market presents a 
problem," id. at 201, it went no further. Indeed, the Court's 
complete disregard for the public’s right to diverse information is 
best demonstrated by the footnote following its "assumption." 
There, it echoed the District Court in stating that 

‘{e]ven under the government’s worse case scenario, in 

which the telephone companies succeed in driving out all 

competition for the provision of video transport service, the 
telephone companies would be in no better position to act 
anti-competitively in the video programming market than 
are the current monopolists in the video transport market, 
the existing cable operators.’ 
C&P Telephone, 42 F.3d at 201 n.31 quoting C&P Telephone v. 
US, 830 F.Supp. 909, 930 (E.D. Va. 1993). 

The Circuit Court’s callous disregard of the effects on 
diversity of replacing one monopoly with another clearly demon- 
strates that it did not properly consider the public’s First Amend- 
ment rights in this case.’ This inattention to diversity takes on 
greater meaning in the face of numerous recent media mergers’ 


'See also Angela J. Campbell, Publish or Carriage: Approaches to 
Analyzing The First Amendment Rights of Telephone Companies, 70 
N.C.L. Rev. 1071, 1116-1119 (1992), which argues that the narrowly 
tailored test is ill-fitted for First Amendment cases in which the speaker 
is also a common carrier, because the test is premised “on the assumption 
that there are only two relevant parties-a speaker who wants to speak and 
a government that wants to limit that speech,..." while it ignores the 
interests of the telephone companies’ customers, who have rights as 
speakers and receivers of information that will be burdened if telephone 
companies can monopolize their wires; D.L. Bazelon, FCC Regulation 
of the Telecommunications Press, 1975 Duke L.J. 213 (1975). 


*Disney’s proposed acquisition of the ABC television network, and 
Westinghouse Broadcasting’s contract to buy the CBS television network 
are but two of the largest and most widely publicized transactions of the 


many recent and pending media mergers and consolidations. Barely no- 
(continued...) 


6 


and Congressional proposals to permit further consolidation of 

control of the video programming and transport markets by elimi- 

nating broadcast multiple ownership and cross-ownership restric- 
tions.” 

Il. THE COURT’S DETERMINATION THAT THERE IS 
AN "OBVIOUS LESS BURDENSOME ALTERNA- 
TIVE" TO THE TELCO/CABLE CROSS-OWNER- 
SHIP BAN IGNORES PRACTICAL REALITIES. 


The Circuit Court undertook an exceptionally superficial 
analysis of whether, under intermediate scrutiny, the telco/cable 


cross-ownership ban is narrowly tailored to meet that goal. It 
found that the ban was not narrowly tailored because, inter alia, 
an “obvious less burdensome alternative” to the ban “readily 
presents itself." C&P Telephone, 42 F.3d at 202 citing Video 
Dialtone Order, 7 PFCCRed 5781 (1992). 

Even were this “alternative” already available, the mere 
the hurdle established by United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 
(1968). A regulation is not "invalid simply because there is some 
imaginable alternative that might be less burdensome on speech." 
United States v. Albertini, 472 U.S. 675, 689 (1985). A restriction 


less effectively absent the regulation.” /d. 

But the “less burdensome alternative” identified by the 
Court - limiting RBOCs’ editorial control over video programming 
to a fixed percentage of the channeis available - is neither effective 
nor viable. it is im fact no alternative at all. 


\ _continwed) 
eoed amid the attention © hese Wensactions was NBC's acquisition - 
jurwg he same work of several major marke: TV stations for $396 
mul lecn "Outlet sells for $396 million to NBC.” Broadcasting & Cable 
Magarine. Acgut 7. 195. a 4 

See S 652. 164m Cong. Ist Sees. $2060) (1995), H.R. 1555 
ah Com io See = WD 


7 


The FCC has considered and approved a few VDT applica- 
tions. It has recently taken steps to expedite its processing of such 
submissions. Fourth Report and Order, FCC No. 95-357 (Released 
August 14, 1995). Even so, there are now but a handful of test 
market installations serving perhaps several thousand people. No 
one maintains that VDT technology is ready for large scale deploy- 
ment, and it is far from certain that this technology will prove 
workable in a truly competitive market. Indeed, assuming all 
pending VDT applications are approved and fully constructed, they 
would reach perhaps 5% of all telephone subscribers. 

Nor is it clear that VDT systems will ever be built at all. 
Just recently, "US West Inc. pushed back its bold interactive- 
network plans for up to a year, asking federal regulators to suspend 
review of five pending applications to build video networks." US 
West Inc. Puts a Hold on Its Plans To Build Interactive Video 
Networks, Wail Street Journal, June 1, 1995, at B2. The move 
came a week after "Bell Atlantic Corp. asked the FCC to suspend 
consideration of its two pending [VDT] applications,...saying it 
wanted to review new technologies in the market." Jd. While "US 
West insisted it isn’t sbendoning plans to build an advanced com- 
munications network...," a US West executive “said he could- 
n’t...rule out the possibility that US West may decide to follow in 
the footsteps of Bell Atlantic and withdraw its pending application 
completely." id.‘ Shortly thereafter, NYNEX’s Southern New 


“See also Plan Stalls for Video Network, The Baltimore Sun, May 29, 
1995 at 13C. ["Bell Atlantic Corp. has formally withdrawn its application 
to the Federal Communications Commission for permission to build an 
advanced video network in Baltimore and five other metropolitan areas. 
saying it would file a new plan in late 1995 or early 1996. The company 
said it has withdrawn its original application because it was now techno 
logically outdated. The decision to withdraw the so-called Section 214 
application comes a month after Bel! Atlantic asked the commission to put 
the matter on hold, saying it wanted to re-evaluate the system architecture 
Al the time, Bell Atlantic said it was having misgivings about its plans to 
build a system modeled upon cable television networks -- using both 

(continued 


England Telephone subsidiary (SNET) "threaten[ed] to pull back 
its planned statewide construction of [a VDT network]....". SNET 
fires back at Connecticut regulators[.] Connecticut telco holds out 
threat of pulling back from video, Broadcasting & Cable, July 3, 
1995 at 23. In exceptions to a state PUC’s draft decision, SNET 
said that proposed cost-allocation procedures "would cause SNET 
to reconsider its entire...deployment plan, and specifically, its entry 
into the video market using an HFC architecture." /d. 

Telcos have gone far beyond the exploration of other, non- 
VDT alternatives. Bell Atlantic and NYNEX have invested approx- 
imately 100 million dollars in a new wireless technology available 
for immediate deployment. This service, called MMDS, or "wire- 
less cable," enables delivery of perhaps 100 TV channels almost 
immediately on current TV receivers.’ Indeed, Ameritech was 
recently awarded a franchise to provide cable service in its tele- 
phone service area. Ameritech goes cable, Broadcasting & Cable, 
July 3, 1995 at 6. 

What the RBOCs reticence (or inability) to operate VDT 
systems serves to highlight is that the "worst case scenario" the 
Circuit Court described is based in reality: some RBOCs may be 


“(...continued) 
traditional coaxial cable and advanced fiber-optic cable, and architecture 
known as hybrid fiber-coax."] 

‘See Bell Atlantic Changes its TV Plans -- Again, Washington Post, 
May 17, 1995 at F1. ("Once again, Bell Atlantic Corp. has changed the 
way it wants to give you television service. By the end of 1996, the local 
telephone provider hopes to compete against local cable operators by 
offering more than 100 channels of video programs to 70 percent of the 
homes in the Washington region. But the TV shows won't be coming 
over any lightning-fast fiber-optic network. Instead, Bell Atlantic plans 
to deliver them over the air to 18-inch home dishes via high-frequency 
microwave signals, using an existing technology popularly known as 
“wireless cable” TV. **** The signals would go over wireless cable 
networks owned by CAI Wireless Systems, the wireless cable firm that 


Bell Atlantic and another regional phone company, Nynex Corp., agreed 
to invest $100 million in last March. “| 


9 


less interested in competing with cable operators, than with replac- 
ing them. 

This problem will only become exacerbated, if, as expect- 
ed, the FCC rules that RBOCs that provide programming on a 
VDT system are providing "cable service" under 47 USC §522 
(5)-(6),° and therefore are required to obtain a franchise from the 
local franchising authority pursuant to 47 USC §541(b).” FCC 
pondering franchise fees for telcos, Broadcasting & Cable, July 3, 
1995 at 23. It is inconceivable that any RBOC would choose to 
operate an open system under Title I if it is required in any event 
to get a franchise under Title VI. The FCC’s decision would 
destroy any incentive to engage in VDT. 
Il. |THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED IN FINDING THAT 

RBOCs DO NOT HAVE AMPLE ALTERNATIVE 

CHANNELS FOR COMMUNICATION. 


The Circuit Court also determined that the cross-ownership 
ban did not provide KBOCs with ample alternative channels for 
communication so as to survive intermediate scrutiny. C&P Tele- 
phone, 42 F.3d at 202-203. Although the Court recognized that 
RBOCs can own cable systems outside their service areas, it 
asserted that "the telephone companies remain unable to reach the 
audience of their common carrier subscribers should they so 


*47 USC §522(5) states: “the term ‘cable operator’ means any person 
or group of persons (A) who provides cable service over a cable system 
and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest 
in such cable system or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, 
through any arrangement, the management an operation of such a cable 
system. 

47 USC §522(6) states: “the term ‘cable service’ means- (A) the 
one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) 
other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which 
is required for the selection of such video programming or other program- 
ming service;...” 

"That section states, in pertinent part, “a cable operator may not 
provide cable service without a franchise " 


10 


choose." /d. at 203. 

Here again, the Court has ignored the reality of the video 
marketplace. There are many ways for RBOCs to obtain access to 
audiences within and outside their service areas. RBOCs can 
provide programming in their service areas through marketing it 
to cable operators, broadcasters, or direct broadcast satellite sys- 
tems.* Indeed, given recent RBOC alliances with such program- 
ming experts as Capital Cities/ABC Television Network (soon to 
be owned by Disney, a prolific television and movie producer) and 
former CBS Television Network program chief Howard Stringer, 
there is no reason to believe RBOC programming will not be 
attractive to these outlets. Moreover, cable commercial leased 
access channels or public access channels are available on a non- 
discriminatory basis to all video programmers that are unaffiliated 
with a cable operator. 47 USC §§531-532. 

As noted above, RBOCs are not precluded from other 
forms of video distribution, and several have taken steps for imme- 
diate entry into video programming via "wireless cable." More- 
over, there is no bar to telco ownership of broadcast licenses; like 
all commercial broadcasters, their stations are entitled to mandatory 
carriage pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §534. 


*The Circuit Court admits that the District Court made this observation 
and does not dispute it. Instead, it cites to a so-called “inconsistent 
statement" by the District Court that was raised in that Court's discussion 
of narrow tailoring. C&P Telephone, 42 F.3d at 202 n. 36. 


11 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 
Bradley Stillman Gigi B. Sohn 
CONSUMER FEDERATION OF Counsel of Record 
AMERICA Andrew Jay Schwartzman 
Suite 604 MEDIA ACCESS PROJECT 
Washington, DC 20036 2000 M Street, NW 
(202) 387-6121 Suite 400 
Washington, DC 20036 
Of Counsel (202) 232-4300 
Counsel for Consumer Fed- 
eration of America and Vir- 
ginia Citizens Consumer 
Council 


August 18, 1995 


