BEST AVAILABLE COPY) 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether 47 U.S.C. § 533(b), which prohibits local 


telephone companies from providing video programming 
directly to subscribers in their telephone service areas, violates 
the First Amendment. 


ii 
RULE 29.1 STATEMENT 


Amicus curiae GTE Corporation is a publicly-held 
corporation in the business of providing telecommunications 
services and products to the general public. GTE Corporation 
is the parent company of GTE Service Corporation and the 
GTE telephone operating companies. The following 
subsidiaries of GTE Corporation have securities in public 
hands: 


B.C. Telecom, Inc. 

Caribbean Reservation Center, C. por. A. 

Communications Telefonicas, C. por. A. 

Florence Cellular Telephone Company, Inc. 

GTE California Incorporated 

GTE Directories Corporation Lanka (PVT.) Ltd. 

GTE Florida Incorporated 

GTE Hawaiian Telephone Company Incorporated 

GTE North Incorporated 

GTE Northwest Incorporated 

GTE South Incorporated 

GTE Southwest Incorporated 

Jacksonville Cellular Telephone Corp. 

Jacksonville Cellular Communications, Inc. 

La Compagnie de Telephone Anglo-Canadienne/ 
Anglo-Canadian Telephone Company 

MTX Italia 

Parque Industrial ITABO, S.A. 

Quebec-Telephone 

Radiowealth, Inc. 

The Micronesian Telecommunications Corporation 

Wilmington Cellular Telephone Corp. 

Wilmington Cellular Communications, Inc. 

Zona France Las Americas 


PAGE 
eee i 
EE Sob becccesecestcoscecaqsees ii 
INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE ..........066000005: l 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .........-.ccecccceess 2 
Cie eeiCibiewendeedesesccccccess: 4 


I. THE THIRD REPORT AND ORDER CANNOT BE 
A “SAVING CONSTRUCTION” OF SECTION 
533(b) BECAUSE IT IS NOT EVEN A 
“CONSTRUCTION” OF THE SCOPE OF 
SECTION 533(b)’S BAN ON SPEECH ............ 4 


Il. THE WAIVER REGIME EMBODIED IN THE 
THIRD REPORT AND ORDER IS AN 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL STANDARDLESS 
cc case ub eetecvcccccccse. 6 


Ill. THE THIRD REPORT AND ORDER CONFIRMS 
THAT SECTION 533(b)’S BAN ON TELEPHONE 
COMPANY SPEECH IS NOT NECESSARY TO 
PREVENT THE EVILS THE GOVERNMENT 
RELIES ON TO JUSTIFY THE STATUTE........ 10 


TEDSTER UGE E cases es cocccccsocccces 19 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
PAGE 

Cases 
City of Lakewood v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co., 

GBG UB. TEOCIGEED 2c cccccccsccecesccccccese 6,7 
Forsyth County, Ga. v. Nationalist Movement, 

SURE, GR BED vevcvccccsccecsocscccces: 6 
Freedman v. Maryland, 

FIORE, GOD Seco ccdcccccicceccdceceecess 8 
GTE South v. United States, 

Civ. Action No. 94-1588-A 

GED. Va. Fam. 8G, GBS) occ cccccccccccsecccces 1,2 
Kunz v. New York, 

SI ED co ch ccncceccncacesnocccsves 7 
Secretary of State of Md. v. Joseph H. Munson Co., 

FP TTT Le 5 
Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. United States, 

OSE SOP bce ccteceWnedsesesodecs. 11 
United States v. O'Brien, 

|: & , PPP rPrrrrrriririie er 13 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 

GIO Es HEED bb chee cdcdescccccsscéscdes 13 
Constitutional and Statutory Provisions 
CRG, Game, GHITNE Bcc ccccccccccccccscesctenes passim 
GIGBE. GEG cc ccccccccccdeccctcccsecess passim 


Nos. 94-1893; 94-1900 


IN THE 
Supreme Court of the Huited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL.., 
and 
NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASS’N, INC., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, ET AL.., 


Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR GTE CORPORATION 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


Amicus curiae GTE Corporation and its affiliated 
companies (“GTE”) are in the business of providing 
telecommunications services and products, including local 
telephone services, to the general public. Amicus, like Bell 
Atlantic, has challenged the constitutionality of 47 U.S.C. 
§ 533(b), which prohibits telephone companies from providing 
“video programming” to subscribers in their service areas. In 
GTE South v. United States, Civ. Action No. 94-1588-A (E.D. 
Va. Jan. 15, 1995), the District Court declared that 
Section 533(b), on its face, violates GTE’s right of free speech 


2 


guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States 
Constitution. The Government has filed a notice of appeal in 
GTE South, but the parties have agreed to stay that appeal 
pending resolution of this case by this Court. Amicus GTE 
Corporation therefore has a substantial interest in this Court’s 
determination of the constitutionality of Section 533(b).' 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Amicus GTE agrees with respondent Bell Atlantic that 
Section 533(b), as a direct ban on speech, should be subject to 
strict scrutiny, and that, under either strict scrutiny or 
intermediate scrutiny, Section 533(b) is unconstitutional. 

In this brief, amicus GTE discusses the impact of the 
FCC’s Third Report and Order on this litigation. (May 1995 
Supplemental Brief of Petitioners In Support of Petition For A 
Writ of Certiorari 1a-21a (“Gov't Supp. Br.”). In the Third 
Report and Order, the FCC concluded that Section 533(b)\(4) 
authorizes it to grant waivers to Section 533(b)’s unequivocal 
prohibition on telephone companies providing video 
programming in their service areas. The FCC explicitly 
declined, however, to specify in the Third Report and Order 
any of the terms and conditions that it would require for a 
waiver of Section 533(b), promising only to announce those 
terms and conditions sometime in the future. 

In their briefs, the Government and the National Cable 
Television Association (“NCTA”) attempt to characterize the 
Third Report and Order as a “saving construction” of Section 
533(b), one which purportedly avoids the constitutional 
infirmities with that section found by every district and circuit 
judge to consider the merits of the issue. However, as we 


' GTE has obtained the written consent of petitioners, the United States 
and the National Cable Television Association (“NCTA”), as well as of 
respondent Bell Atlantic Corporation, to file this amicus brief. The letters 
of consent are on file with the Clerk of this Court. 


demonstrate herein: 

1. The Third Report and Order is not a “saving 
construction” of Section 533(b), if for no other reason than it is 
not a “construction” of the scope of that prohibition’s ban of 
speech. The Third Report and Order purports to construe the 
FCC’s waiver authority under Section 533(b)(4), but in doing 
SO, it does not purport to delineate in any specific way the reach 
of Section 533(b)(1)-(2)'s ban on speech. It is difficult to 
fathom how the Government and the NCTA can ask this Court 
to hold that the Third Report and Order alleviates the 
constitutional infirmities in Section 533(b) when the Third 
Report and Order does not even purport to specify what speech 
will be allowed under the waiver regime that it contemplates 
and what speech will remain prohibited by Section 533(b). 

2. In any event, the waiver regime contemplated by the 
Third Report and Order is no less unconstitutional than Section 
533(b) itself. The Third Report and Order replaces an 
unconstitutional flat ban on speech with an equally 
unconstitutional flat ban on speech subject to waivers to be 
granted by bureaucrats according to standards, and subject to 
conditions, of their own making, which are as yet unknown and 
which in any event are not meaningfully constrained by any 
language in the statute. Such a standardless licensing scheme 
plainly violates the First Amendment. 

3. The real significance of the Third Report and Order lies 
not in its uselessness as a “saving construction,” but rather in 
the crucial concessions made in it by the FCC. As we 
demonstrate in Part III below, in the course of justifying its 
authority to grant waivers to Section 533(b), the FCC 
undermines the arguments advanced by the Government in 
defense of Section 533(b). In short, far from saving Section 
533(b), the Third Report and Order buries it even deeper. 


4 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE THIRD REPORT AND ORDER CANNOT BE A 
“SAVING CONSTRUCTION” OF SECTION 533(b) 
BECAUSE IT IS NOT EVEN A “CONSTRUCTION” 
OF THE SCOPE OF SECTION 533(b)’S BAN ON 
SPEECH. 


The most basic reason why the Third Report and Order is 
not a “saving construction” of Section 533(b) is that it is not a 
“construction” of that prohibition’s ban on speech. In the Third 
Report and Order, the FCC construes generally its waiver 
authority under Section 533(b)(4), but in doing so it does not in 
any specific way delineate the reach of Section 533(b)(1)-(2)'s 
ban on speech. There is simply no basis for this Court to 
conclude that the Third Report and Order sufficiently narrows 
the scope of the statutory ban on speech to save it from 
unconstitutionality, because the FCC explicitly disavows 
determining the terms and conditions under which telephone 
companies will be allowed to speak. 


In its brief, the NCTA mischaracterizes the Third Report 
and Order as having “explicitly concluded that [the] direct 
provision of video programming [by telephone companies] is 
authorized under [a] single set of conditions.” (NCTA Br. 28 
(emphasis in original).) This statement could not be further 
from the truth. The Third Report and Order most assuredly 
does not determine any “single set of conditions” under which 
telephone companies will be allowed to speak. Although the 
FCC concludes in the Third Report and Order that it has “the 
legal authority to grant waivers allowing telephone companies 
to provide video programming in their telephone service areas 
on video dialtone networks,” (Govt. Supp. Br. 2a (emphasis 
added)), it explicitly “dof[es] not decide whether telephone 
companies may provide video programming over video 
dialtone networks rather than as traditional cable operators,” 
(id). Nor, the FCC states explicitly, does it decide in the Third 


5 


Report and Order under what “terms and conditions” a 
telephone company will be allowed to provide video 
programming. (Govt. Supp. Br. 6a, n.11.) Nor does the FCC 
even decide generally whether, “if a telephone company is 
permitted to provide video programming on a video dialtone 
system, . . . that telephone company should be regulated [as a 
common carrier] under Title II or [as a cable operator under] 
Title V1 of the Communications Act.” (Govt. Supp. Br. 2a-3a 
(emphasis added).)’ 

In short, the Third Report and Order settles nothing about 
the scope of Section 533(b)’s ban on speech. Instead, it merely 
decides that the FCC has the authority under Section 533(b)(4) 
to issue good cause waivers to allow telephone companies to 
provide video programming over a video dialtone network if 
the FCC ultimately decides that it wants to do so, and subject 
to conditions not yet determined. Because the Third Report 
and Order does not even purport to determine the scope of 
Section 533(b)’s ban on telephone company speech, it cannot 
be a narrowing construction that saves Section 533(b) from the 
conclusion that the statute is facially unconstitutional under the 
First Amendment. See Secretary of State of Md. v. Joseph H. 
Munson Co., 467 U.S. 947, 967-68 (1984) (statute that imposes 
direct restriction on speech that is too imprecise to satisfy First 
Amendment is “properly subject to facial attack,” and “[t}he 
possibility of a waiver may decrease the number of 
impermissible applications of the statute, but it does nothing to 
remedy the statute’s fundamental defect”). 


* The only hint in the Third Report and Order as to the conditions 
under which the FCC wil will grant a waiver to Section 533(b) is the FCC's 


Il. THE WAIVER REGIME EMBODIED IN THE 
THIRD REPORT AND ORDER IS_ AN 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL STANDARDLESS 
LICENSING SCHEME. 


In any event, the FCC’s interpretation in the Third Report 
and Order of its waiver authority does not alleviate the 
constitutional infirmities in Section 533(b). Indeed, if anything, 
it compounds them by vesting in the FCC an unconstrained, 
standardless licensing power over the free speech rights of 
telephone companies. See Forsyth County, Ga. v. Nationalist 
Movement, 112 S. Ct. 2395, 2401-03 (1992); City of Lakewood 
v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co., 486 U.S. 750, 757, 769-72 
(1988); Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 U.S. at 964 n.12. The 
Third Report and Order, in other words, impermissibly 
“trade[s] a direct prohibition on [telephone company speech] 
for a licensing scheme that, if it is available to [telephone 
companies] at all, is available only at the unguided discretion 
of the [FCC].” Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 U.S. at 964 n.12. 


Section 533(b) makes it flatly unlawful for telephone 
companies to provide video programming, either directly or 
indirectly, to subscribers in its telephone service area. In the 
Third Report and Order, the FCC promises that it will 
“routinely” grant waivers to that seemingly unequivocal 
prohibition for “good cause,” (Govt. Supp. Br. 4a), but only 
“where the telephone company agrees to abide by the 
regulations we will establish governing its provision of video 
programming,” id. at 19a. As noted above, in the Third Report 
and Order, the FCC does not purport to determine the terms 
and conditions to which it will require a telephone company to 
agree before it will grant the telephone company a good cause 
waiver to provide video programming. Nor does Section 
533(b) set up any special procedure either for setting the terms 
and conditions for “good cause” or for considering requests 
from a telephone company for such a waiver. 


7 


In the past, this Court has looked with suspicion at statutes 
and ordinances that grant executive officials the power to grant 
or deny a license to speak. As the Court noted in Joseph H. 
Munson Co., “[b}y placing discretion in the hands of an official 
to grant or deny a license [to speak], such a statute creates a 
threat of censorship that by its very existence chills free 
speech.” 467 U.S. at 964 n.12. See City of Lakewood, 486 at 
757 (“mere existence of the licensor’s unfettered discretion, 
coupled with the power of prior restraint, intimidates parties 
into censoring their own speech”). Section 533(b), as construed 
by the Third Report and Order, has all of the attributes that this 
Court has found unacceptable in unconstitutional speech- 
licensing schemes. 


In particular: 


First, a legislature “cannot vest restraining control over the 
right to speak [in] an administrative official where there are no 
appropriate standards to guide his action.” Kunz v. New York, 
340 U.S. 290, 295 (1951). Here, there are no meaningful 
standards in Section 533(b) to restrain the exercise of the 
FCC’s discretion to grant or deny a waiver. Nothing in the 
statute purports to constrain the terms and conditions that the 
FCC can require before it will grant a waiver to Section 
533(b)’s flat ban on speech, and nothing in the statute ensures 
that the FCC will apply those terms and conditions consistently, 
uniformly, or fairly once it has set them. 


The fact that the statute authorizes waivers for “good 
cause” does not constitutionally constrain the discretion of the 
FCC. There is no statutory definition of “good cause,” and 
nothing in the statute otherwise constrains the terms and 
conditions that the FCC may set for waivers. It is 
inconceivable that this Court would uphold against First 
Amendment challenge a city ordinance that made all picketing 
illegal, on the ground that the ordinance allowed the police 
commissioner to grant a waiver for “good cause.” And we 
must believe that it would make no difference to this Court if 
the police commissioner promised, as the FCC has done, to 


issue waivers “routinely” according to “speech friendly” 
standards that he would not even begin to develop until after 
the Court had decided the constitutional challenge raised in the 
case. 


Second, a speech-licensing scheme violates the First 
Amendment unless it contains numerous procedural safeguards, 
all of which are lacking here. In Freedman v. Maryland, 380 
U.S. 51 (1965), this Court struck down a state law that 
prohibited the exhibition of any motion picture without first 
submitting it to a state administrative board for review. Even 
though the state law had established a detailed set of procedures 
to govern decisions made by the administrative board, this 
Court held that the scheme violated the First Amendment 
because certain other protections were lacking. These 
additional safeguards, which the Court held to be essential, 
included: (i) that the government officials must have the burden 
of proving that any decision they make to suppress speech is 
constitutional; (ii) that any such decision must be made within 
a specified brief period; and (iii) that expedited judicial 
proceedings to review the decision must be assured. Freedman, 
380 U.S. at 58-60. 


None of these procedural safeguards, and nothing like 
them, is present in Section 533(b) or in the Third Report and 
Order. The FCC has not even established the substantive terms 
and conditions to govern its waiver power, much less whether 
it will implement such rigorous procedures in considering 
requests for a waiver. There is no onus on the FCC to prove 
why a telephone company should not be allowed to speak; 
rather, Section 533(b) provides that, unless the telephone 
company receives a waiver, it cannot speak. There is no 
requirement that the FCC must decide waiver applications 
within any specified brief time, and it is stipulated in this case 
that waiver applications have languished at the FCC for years. 
(See J.A. 204-05.) And there is neither any provision for 
expedited judicial review of the denial of a waiver by the FCC 
nor any meaningful standards in the statute by which a court 


9 


could judge the FCC’s exercise of its broad discretion. In short, 
none of the important procedural safeguards necessary for a 
constitutional system of speech licensing is present here. 

Third, the Court has previously held that, if a legislative 
body could have served the relevant government interests in an 
alternative manner that is obviously less burdensome to speech, 
a statute is not saved by the fact that an executive official can 
give dispensation to speak. The Court made this important 
point explicitly in Joseph H. Munson Co., where it held that the 
possibility of a waiver from a statutory prohibition of speech 
does not save a statute when the government’s interests could 
have been protected by a restriction that was less burdensome 
on speech: “[W]Jhere there are alternative means to serve the 
same purpose, there is little justification for straining to salvage 
the statute by invoking the possibility of official dispensation 
to engage in protected activity.” 467 U.S. at 964 n.12. 


The importance of this point cannot be overemphasized. 
If this Court were to accept petitioners’ argument that the Third 
Report and Order avoids the constitutional difficulties with 
Section 533(b), then the “less restrictive alternative” 
requirement embodied in both strict and intermediate scrutiny 
(in First Amendment jurisprudence and elsewhere) would be a 
virtual dead letter. All that a legislature would have to do to 
avoid this requirement would be to include in the statute the 
authority of an executive official to waive the statutory 
prohibition for “good cause.” Then, so long as the executive 
official promised to apply the statute in ways that were less 
intrusive than the statute itself (even if the executive official 
would not specify the terms and conditions under which he 
would grant a waiver), the statute would be able to survive 
heightened scrutiny. That cannot be acceptable. The relevant 
constitutional question must be whether the legislature could 
have drawn the statutory ban more narrowly, without 
compromising the government’s important interests, not 
whether an executive official has the authority to narrow the 
application of an overbroad prohibition that is not necessary to 


10 


serve the government’s asserted interests. 


For all of these reasons, the waiver scheme embodied in 
the Third Report and Order does not alleviate the constitutional 
infirmities of Section 533(b). 


Ill. THE THIRD REPORT AND ORDER CONFIRMS 
THAT SECTION 533(b)’S BAN ON TELEPHONE 
COMPANY SPEECH IS NOT NECESSARY TO 
PREVENT THE EVILS THE GOVERNMENT 
RELIES ON TO JUSTIFY THE STATUTE. 


The real significance of the Third Report and Order to this 
litigation lies not in its uselessness as a “saving construction,” 
but rather in how the findings and determinations of the FCC 
contained therein undermine the Government’s justifications 
for Section 533(b)’s flat ban on telephone company speech. 


To support its conclusion that it can waive Section 
533(b)’s ban on telephone company speech (subject to 
unspecified conditions), the FCC makes at least five crucial 
concessions in the Third Report and Order. Those concessions 
confirm that Section 533(b)’s ban on telephone company 
speech is not necessary to prevent the purported evils used by 
the Government to justify it. 


1. The first major concession in the Third Report and 
Order concerns the original purported justification for the ban 
on video programming by telephone companies. Throughout 
this litigation, the Government has argued that the ban on 
telephone company speech now embodied in Section 533(b) 
was originally justified as necessary in order to allow the cable 
companies the time and opportunity to build and develop a 
nationwide cable television system that was independent of the 


control of the telephone companies. (See Govt. Br. 6.)’ In the 
Third Report and Order, the FCC expressly concedes that any 
fear that the telephone companies could extinguish the 
development of an independent cable industry is “no longer 
relevant” because since 1970, “the cable industry has grown 
from a fledgling service to a more mature industry that now 
serves a majority of households and ‘has replaced over-the-air 
broadcast television as the primary provider of video 
programming.” (Govt. Supp. Br. lla (quoting Turner 
Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. United States, 114 S. Ct. 2445, 2454 
(1994).) 


2. The second major concession in the Third Report and 
Order is the FCC’s acknowledgment that, in light of 
“significant advances in technology,” it is now “possible for a 
multitude of programmers to reach end user customers.” (Govt. 
Supp. Br. lla-12a.) What this means is that, in light of 
developments in technology, but for the impact of Section 
533(b), there could now be at least two ways for any video 
speaker to reach his or her end-user audience -- either over the 
existing nontelephone company cable delivery system or over 
the telephone company’s telephone network. In an artfully 
worded understatement, the FCC concedes that these advances 
in technology “have mitigated to a fair degree the competitive 
concerns that led the Commission and Congress to” ban 
telephone company video programming. (Govt. Supp. Br. 12a.) 


3. The third major concession in the Third Report and 
Order relates to the overall effect on competition in the 
provision of video programming if the telephone companies 
were allowed to speak over their own separate system. The 


> The Government contends that the FCC’s original ban on telephone 
company video programming was “[i}ntend[ed] to insure against arbitrary 
blockage of the gateway and to preserve a competitive environment for the 
development and use of broadband cable facilities and services and thereby 
avoid undue and unnecessary concentration of control over communications 
media either by existing carriers or other entities.” (Govt. Br. 6) (quotations 
omitted).) 


12 


FCC explicitly recognizes that “it does promote competition to 
allow a telephone company to provide video dialtone service in 
its telephone service area in competition with an existing cable 
company.” (Govt. Supp. Br. 16a-17a (emphasis in original).) 
According to the FCC, what “generally would not promote 
competition [would be] to allow a telephone company to 
purchase an incumbent monopolist cable operator in the 
telephone company’s service area.” (Govt. Supp. Br. 16a 
(emphasis added).) But Section 533(b) does not even prohibit 
a telephone company from buying the incumbent cable 
operator.‘ Rather, it prohibits a telephone company from 
providing video programming over its own telephone network 
or through a separate stand-alone cable system. In other 
words, what Section 533(b) prohibits is precisely what the FCC 
finds in the Third Report and Order would promote 
competition with the incumbent cable monopolists and would 
provide video speakers with more than one way to reach their 
audiences. Thus, the FCC effectively concedes that, as written, 
Section 533(b)’s flat ban on telephone company video 
programming actually hinders the very goals of competition 
and diversity of voices that the Government argues it is 
designed to promote. 


The combination of these first three concessions -- (i) that 
the cable companies are now firmly entrenched across the 
nation; (ii) that technology, unfettered by Section 533(b), 
would allow video speakers to reach their audiences both over 
a traditional cable system and through the telephone company 
network; and (iii) that it would promote, not hinder, 
competition to allow a telephone company to provide video 
programming in competition with the incumbent cable 
monopolist -- has enormous significance for the First 


* Section 533(b) does not prohibit a telephone company from buying 
the incumbent cable company, so long as the telephone company does not 
provide the video programming on that system. This further shows that 
Section 533(b) does not remotely serve the competitive goals that the 
Government has advanced in support of it. 


13 


Amendment analysis in this case. Specifically, in light of these 
concessions, it is clear that the only governmental interest that 
could possibly suffice to justify banning telephone companies 
from providing video programming would be if the 
Government could show that telephone company entry into 
video programming would drive the incumbent cable 
companies out of the market. Otherwise, it is better to have two 
competitors in each market, and two ways for video speakers to 
reach their intended audiences, than to have only one, even if 
the telephone companies do not compete perfectly. 

What does this mean for the interests advanced by the 
Government in support of Section 533(b)? First, it makes some 
of the Government’s arguments utterly irrelevant. For 
example, the Government places great weight on the 
speculation that telephone companies could discriminate 
against unaffiliated video programmers, arguing that “LECs 
could use their control over the network to ensure that the 
quality of their own video signal is better than that of 
[unaffiliated video programmers].” (Govt. Br. 36.) But even 
if that were true -- a dubious proposition’-- it is irrelevant. For, 


* The Government does not attempt to explain how it would be 
technologically feasible for a telephone company that was delivering a video 
signal with scores of different channels into an end-user’s home to degrade 
the quality of the signal for some channels (those carrying programs of 
unaffiliated video programmers) while maintaining the quality of the signal 
for other channels (those carrying the telephone company’s affiliated 
programming). Technology is not voodoo. If intermediate scrutiny under 
United States v. O'Brien, 39\ U.S. 367 (1968), and Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781 (1989), is to have any bite, the Government must carry 
the burden of establishing that the anticompetitive evils it relies upon to 
uphold a ban on speech are technologically feasible. The Government has 
wholly failed to do that in this case. Moreover, in other cases involving 
voice and data information services, the Government has previously agreed 
and documented that “there is no substantial risk that a [telephone company } 
could impede competition through discrimination” against competing 
providers. Ct. App. JA 2631, 2635. It is absurd for the Government to talk 
out of one side of its mouth with respect to voice and data services and out 
of the other side of its mouth to try to uphold Section 533(b)’s ban of video 
services. In any event, even if a telephone company could degrade the 


14 


whatever ability the local telephone company may have to 
discriminate against unaffiliated programmers, the incumbent 
cable company has the same ability. If either the telephone 
company or the incumbent cable company can discriminate 
against unaffiliated programmers, then it is obviously 
preferable, from the standpoint of both competition and 
diversity of voices, that the telephone company be given the 
incentive to enter the market in competition with the incumbent 
cable company.® Then, if an unaffiliated programmer is 
discriminated against by either the incumbent cable company 
or the telephone company, that unaffiliated programmer will 
(for the first time since the inception of cable television) have 
somewhere else to turn, and can play the telephone company 
off against the cable company. 

Discrimination against unaffiliated upstream competitors 
who require access to a downstream firm’s facilities is grounds 
for exclusion of that downstream firm from the upstream 
market only if (if at all) the downstream firm’s facilities are the 
only way to reach end-line consumers.’ That principle would 


quality of the signal solely for unaffiliated programming, the end-user would 
surely blame, and hold accountable, the telephone company (which is 
delivering the signal), not the unaffiliated programmer. 


* In recommending the repeal of Section 533(b), the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration, part of the 
Department of Commerce, found that telephone companies would likely not 
have the incentive to invest in the infrastructure necessary to provide video 
signals over their own network in competition with the cable companies 
unless the telephone companies could also provide video programming over 
their networks. See J.A. 345 


” It is this basic principle that makes the NCTA’s analogy of Section 
533(b) to the breakup of the Bell System fatuous. (See NCTA Br. 39.) The 
reason the Justice Department thought it appropriate to break up the Bell 
System and then exclude the local Bell telephone companies (such as Bel! 
Atlantic) from providing long-distance service was the fear that a local Bel! 
telephone company could discriminate in favor of its affiliated long-distance 
provider in access to what was characterized as its “bottleneck” local 
telephone exchange. The key to the exclusion was that unaffiliated long- 
distance providers had nowhere else to turn to reach customers in the local 


15 


be grounds to exclude the incumbent cable monopolists from 
providing video programming because, as things stand today, 
unaffiliated programmers must pass through the incumbent 
cable companies’ bottleneck facilities. But that situation would 
no longer exist if telephone companies were allowed to speak 
over their own separate systems, thus providing unaffiliated 
programmers with an alternative to delivery through the 
incumbent cable companies’ systems. And in no event is the 
possibility of such discrimination by the telephone companies 
grounds for barring them from providing video programming 
in competition with the incumbent cable monopolists. In short, 
all of the Government's arguments about the possibility that a 
telephone company would discriminate against unaffiliated 
video programmers are irrelevant, and could not possibly 
justify Section 533(b)’s ban on speech. 


telephone company’s service area. But, whatever the merits of that position, 
it has always been considered guspel at the Justice Department and 
elsewhere that, as soon as there is competition at the local telephone 
exchange level (i.e., as soon as the unaffiliated long-distance providers could 
access their customers or complete a long-distance call through a competitor 
to the incumbent local telephone company), there would no longer be any 
justification for preventing the local Bell company from providing long- 
distance service. Here, even if a telephone company discriminated against 
an unaffiliated programmer, the programmer could switch to the incumbent 
cable company for delivery of its programming. 

It is particularly ironic that the NCTA would raise the analogy to the 
breakup of the Bell system and the exclusion of local Bell companies from 
the long-distance market. For today, the incumbent cable monopolists, 
through bottleneck control of their facilities, can prevent a particular video 
programmer from reaching an end user. If the Bell system analogy were 
followed here, the incumbent cable companies would be prohibited from 
providing video programming until there was a competing way for 
unaffiliated programmers to reach their audience. What Section 533(b) does 
is prevent the telephone companies from breaking the bottleneck held by the 
incumbent cable companies, thus depriving unaffiliated programmers of an 
alternative way of reaching their audiences. Thus, to the extent the lessons 
of the Bell system breakup apply here, they require that Section 533(b) be 
invalidated so that the incumbent cable companies’ bottleneck contro! of the 
system of delivery of video speech can be broken. 


16 


Second, with respect to the Government’s other arguments 
-- that Section 533(b) is necessary (i) to prevent telephone 
companies from discriminating against the incumbent cable 
companies in telephone pole and conduit access, and (ii) to 
prevent telephone companies from gaining unfair competitive 
advantage against the incumbent cable companies by allocating 
some of the costs of their video programming network to their 
rate regulated telephone network -- it should be clear that these 
imagined evils cannot possibly justify Section 533(b)’s ban on 
speech (even under intermediate level scrutiny) unless the 
Government demonstrates that they would be so widespread 
and so pervasive as to drive the incumbent cable companies out 
of the market. It is not enough for the Government to speculate 
that telephone companies may, here or there, engage in some 
discrimination in pole and conduit access, or some cross- 
subsidization. Rather, the Government must also show that 
such alleged discrimination and cross-subsidization could rise 
to a level sufficient to drive out the incumbent cable companies. 
Otherwise, yet again, a second imperfect competitor is better 
than a monopolist, and two ways for video speakers to reach 
their audiences are better than one. Here, the Government has 
not even attempted to show that cross-subsidies and 
discrimination in pole and conduit access could rise to the level 
of driving out the cable companies. To the contrary, the 
Government has consistently argued in the context of 
information services that there is “no substantial possibility” 
that a telephone company could even impede competition 
through cross-subsidies and discrimination, much less drive 
competing providers out of the market. Ct. App. JA 1906, 
1909.* And, indeed, it would not pass the straight-face test to 
assert that these anticompetitive evils could rise to such a level 
without the FCC, the Congress, the state utility agencies, and 


* Notably, while amicus California Cable Television Association 
claims to have “unique knowledge of the incentive and ability” of GTE “to 
engage in anticompetitive behavior” against cable companies, CCTA Brief 
at 2, it fails to allege even a single instance of such conduct by GTE, much 
less the requisite pattern of widespread and pervasive conduct. 


17 


the courts noticing the problem and stepping in to solve it. 


4. In any event, if there were ever any doubt as to 
whether the Government’s twin makeweights -- discrimination 
and cross-subsidies -- are sufficiently serious as to justify 
Section 533(b)’s flat ban on speech, that doubt is removed by 
the fourth major concession made by the FCC in the Third 
Report and Order. In its brief, the Government describes the 
possibility of discrimination by telephone companies against 
competitors and improper cross-subsidies as nearly intractable 
problems, incapable of being effectively policed. (See Govt. 
Br. 34-36.) But the FCC is plainly not overwhelmed by these 
problems. 

Specifically, in concluding that it can and should grant 
waivers to Section 533(b) for some telephone company video 
programming, the FCC necessarily concludes in the Third 
Report and Order that it can deal effectively with the problems 
of cross-subsidies and discrimination through less onerous 
methods than a flat ban on speech. Indeed, in the Third Report 
and Order, the FCC trumpets that it has already “developed a 
number of safeguards that are designed to prevent cross- 
subsidization and discrimination” by telephone companies 


providing video programming. (Govt. Supp. Br. 14a n.35.) 
According to the FCC, “[t}he safeguards against cross- 
subsidization include accounting and cost allocation rules that 
separate nonregulated service costs from the costs associated 
with providing basic regulated telephone service.” (/d) 
Similarly, the FCC notes that its “non-discrimination 
safeguards include a variety of rules designed to ensure that 
unaffiliated enhanced service providers have access to the 
network on the same basis as affiliated chanced service 
providers and are not otherwise unfairly disadvantaged.” (/d ) 
Moreover, the FCC explains, in its “ongoing rulemaking 
proceeding in this [matter],” it will decide whether any 
additional safeguards are needed. /d 

Thus, the Third Report and Order makes clear that the 
FCC -- the agency in charge of enforcing Section 533(b) -- 


believes that it can handle the purported problems of cross- 
subsidies and discrimination without completely banning the 
telephone companies from speaking to the subscribers in their 
service areas. In light of that concession, it seems 
unimaginable that the Government litigators’ vague and 
speculative invocation of the purportedly intractable problems 
of discrimination and cross-subsidies could justify Section 
533(b)’s flat ban on speech by the telephone companies. 


5. The fifth, and perhaps most dispositive, concession in 
the Third Report and Order is the fundamental conclusion 
necessarily embodied in that order: that there are obviously 
less intrusive ways of protecting the interests advanced by the 
Government in support of Section 533(b) than a complete ban 
on video speech by telephone companies over their own 
networks in their own service areas. Although, as we 
demonstrated above, the Third Report and Order does not in 
fact adopt a specific less restrictive alternative to Section 
533(b), it is undeniable that the Third Report and Order 
recognizes that such obviously less restrictive alternatives are 
possible, and, therefore, that Congress could adopt one by 
statute. That concession, under either strict or intermediate 
scrutiny, is absolutely fatal. 


In sum, in its unseemly haste to persuade this Court to 
avoid passing on the constitutionality of Section 533(b) 7° 
enacted by Congress, the FCC has, perhaps unwittingly, 
undermined all of the arguments made by the Government 
litigators in defense of Congress’ flat ban on speech and 
confirmed that the statutory ban on telephone company speech 
is not necessary to serve the interests asserted by the 
Government. In short, the Third Report and Order does not 
save Section 533(b), it buries it even deeper. 


19 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the Court of Appeals should be affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted, 
RICHARD A. CORDRAY WARD W. WUESTE, JR. 
4900 Grove City Road M. EDWARD WHELAN III* 
Grove City, Ohio 43123 JOHN F. RAPOSA 
(614) 539-1661 GTE CORPORATION 
One Stamford Forum 
Stamford, Connecticut 06904 
* Counsel of Record (203) 965-2000 


Counsel for GTE Corporation and its affiliated 
domestic telephone operating companies 


October 18, 1995 


