v. . . 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE 
COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC., 
PETITIONER 


Vv. 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


JOINT APPENDIX 


Drew S. Days, ITI * LAURENCE H. TRIBE * 

Solicitor General Hauser Hall 420 

Department of Justice 1575 Massachusetts Ave. 

Washington, D.C. 20530 Cambridge, Mass. 02138 

Counsel for Petitioners Counsel for Respondents 
in No. 94-1893 


H. BARTOW F Ark, III * 

FARR & TARANTO 

2445 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

Counsel for Petitioners 
in No. 94-1900 


* Counsel of Record 


PETITIONS FOR CERTIORARI FILED MAY 18, 1995 
CERTIORARI GRANTED JUNE 26, 1995 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 


Docket entries, United States District Court for the 
Eastern District of Virginia ........................--.---.c.--00+ 1 


Complaint (December 17, 1992) —......-.............2--22cceeceeeeee 


Answer of Governmental Defendants (February 12, 
ERE SOE ELE POG at CL 18 


Concurring Statement of Commissioner Joseph R. 
Fogarty, Accompanying FCC Policy on Cable Owner- 


ship: A Staff Report (1981) —....202......2.ceeeeeee eee 24 
FCC Policy on Cable Ownership: A Staff Report 
1 LT eA Oe ONT S WELT OOw Pee Oem 31 


General Accounting Office, Telephone Communications: 
Controlling Cross-Subsidy Between Regulated and 


Competitive Services (October 1987) -....................... 79 
License Agreement For Pole Attachments And/Or 
Conduit Occupancy (September 1, 1992) —................ 102 


General Accounting Office, Telecommunications: FCC’s 
Oversight Efforts To Control Cross-Subsidization 


i ge RE RPS SS ae 118 
Affidavit of Robert W. Lucky (April 26, 1998) ............. 187 
Affidavit of William E. Lee (April 27, 1993) —.............. 142 
Affidavit of Richard A. Alston (April 27, 1993) —.......... 169 
Affidavit of Dr. Vivian M. Horner (April 28, 1993) ...... 171 
Affidavit of Thomas W. Hazlett (April 29, 19938) _........ 173 
Joint Stipulations of Fact (April 30, 1993) —................. 195 
Affidavit of Glen O. Robinson (May 19, 1993) ............. 222 
Affidavit of Bruce M. Owen (May 20, 1998) .................. 241 
Reply Affidavit of Alfred E. Kahn (May 28, 1993) ........ 272 
Affidavit of Patricia S. Ticer (June 2, 1993) —................ 282 
Affidavit of Jean Pool (June 2, 1993) ........000-00000e.... 284 
Affidavit of Robert L. Townsend (June 3, 1993) _........ 286 


(1) 


II 
TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


Pa 

Supplemental Affidavit of William E. Lee (June 3, 2 

EE Saas eee A 293 
Affidavit of H.R. Stallard (June 4, 1998) —.................... 299 
Affidavit of Robin Smith (June 4, 1998) —...................... 322 
Reply Affidavit of Bruce M. Owen (June 9, 1993) ........ 331 
Excerpts From Principal Government Documents........ 337 
Excerpts From Principal Government Documents........ 348 
Transcript of District Court Hearing on Motions (June 

Re iisihciaineteitalbiliaiaaladathihiterinigupatinanin 361 


Transcript of Oral Argument, United States Court of 
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit (February 7, 1994). 368 


Administration White Paper on Communications Act 
Reforms (January 1994) ...............-.c2cccecceeecceeneeeeeeeeees 870 


Statement of Reed E. Hundt, Chairman of Federal 
Communications Commission, Before the Subcommit- 
tee on Telecommunications and Finance, Committee 
on Energy and Commerce, United States House of 
Representatives (January 27, 1994) ........................ 875 


Statement of Anne K. Bingaman, Assistant Attorney 
General, Antitrust Division, Before the Subcommit- 
tee on Telecommunications and Finance, Committee 
on Energy and Commerce, United States House of 
Representatives (January 27, 1994) ......................... 880 


Testimony of Larry Irving, Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information, U.S. Department 
of Commerce, on Telecommunications Reform Legis- 
lation, Before the Subcommittee on Economic and 
Commercial Law, Committee on the Judiciary, House 
of Representatives (January 26, 1994) .........00......... 382 


Testimony of Larry Irving, Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information, U.S. Department 
of Commerce, on Telecommunications Reform Legis- 
lation, Before the Subcommittee on Telecommunica- 
tions and Finance, Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, United States House of Representatives 
III TIL: TI sta tuiriantdhininnascemntninapenvanessesisaseenmienss 383 


Ill 


TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued 


Order Allowing Certiorari, United States v. Chesapeake 
and Potomac Telephone Co. of Virginia (June 26, 
PE EE CC ae ae ee 885 


Order Allowing Certiorari, National Cable Television 
Association v. Bell Atlantic Corporation (June 26, 
IIIT soudtinnieulbteahinsntekintibbssiile ttstestecen ese a ae 


NOTICE 


The following opinions and order have been omitted in 
printing this appendix because they appear in the following 
pages in the printed appendix to the petition for a writ of 
certiorari in No. 94-1898: 


Opinion of the Court of Appeals (November 21, 1994) _ la 


Opinion of the District Court (August 24, 1998) .......... 58a 
Order of the Court of Appeals Denying Rehearing 
gg 8 109a 


Federal Communications Commission, Fourth Further 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (January 20, 1995).. 118a 


The following order has been omitted from this appendix 
because it appears in the printed appendix to the supplemen- 
tal brief of petitioners in support of the petition for a writ 
of certiorari in No. 94-1893: 


Federal Communications Commission, Third Report 
and Order (May 16, 1995) 000 la 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


(Alexandria Division ) 


No. 92-CV-1751 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY 
OF VIRGINIA, ET AL., PLAINTIFFS 


v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., DEFENDANTS 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


PROCEEDINGS 


‘DATE No. 
12/17/92 1 
2/8/93 3 
2/8/98 4 
2/8/98 5 
2/16/98 8 


COMPLAINT Filing Fee $120.00 Receipt 
#93884 (bonn) 


« - od * * 


MOTION to Intervene as a deft by Natl 
Cable TV (bonn) [Entry date 02/09/93] 


MEMORANDUM by Natl Cable TV in sup- 
port of [3-1] motion to Intervene as a deft 
by Natl Cable TV (bonn) [Entry date 02/ 
09/93] 


ANSWER to Complaint by Natl Cable TV 
(Attorney, James Saunders), (bonn) [En- 
try date 02/09/93] 


ANSWER to Complaint by William Barr, 
FCC, United States (Attorney Richard 
Parker), (bonn) [Entry date 02/18/93] 


(1) 


2 


eee 


DATE 


No. 


PROCEEDINGS 


3/1/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


5/21/93 


5/24/93 


13 


46 


47 


49 


ORDER this matter comes before the court 
on the motion of the National Cable Televi- 
sion Association, Inc. to intervene as a deft, 
for the reasons stated from the bench: 
NCTA’s motion to intereven [sic] as a right, 
is denied, NCTA’s motion for permissive in- 
tervention, is gratned [sic] subject to the fol- 
lowing conditions (see order for details) the 
parties are futher [sic] directed to submit to 
the court a mutually agreeable briefing sch. 
and culminating in oral argument on either 
5/13/98, 5/20/98 or 5/27/93 ent - filed 
(signed by Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies 
Mailed: yes (rvoi) [Entry date 03/02/93] 
” * 7 - 3° 
MOTION by Chesapeak [sic] & Potomac, 


Bell Atlantic Video for Summary Judgment 
(bonn) 


JOINT stipulation of fact - file by parties. 
(bonn) 


LIST of authenticated documents - filed by 
parties. (bonn) 


AFFIDAVITS and Excerpts from principal 
government documents in support of motion 
for summary judgment - filed by pltfs. 
(bonn) 


CROSS MOTION by Natl Cable TV for 
Summary Judgment (bonn) [Entry date 
05/24/93] 


MOTION by United States, FCC for Sum- 
mary Judgment (bonn) 


3 


——ErerrresssSe eee eee 


DATE No. 


PROCEEDINGS 


6/7/98 


8/24/93 


8/24/93 


9/8/93 


9/8/98 


9/20/93 


77 


97 


102 


110 


OBJECTIONS by Bell Atlantic Video, Chesa- 
peak & Potomac to exhibits filed in connec- 
tion with summary judgment (bonn) 


MEMORANDUM OPINION (signed by 
Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies Mailed: yes 
(rvoi) [Edit date 08/24/93] 


ORDER this matter comes before the court 
on cross-motions for summary judgment, for 
the reasons stated in the accompanying 
memorandum opinion, pltf’s motion for sum- 
mary judgment is gratned, [sic] and defts’ 
and intervenor-defts’ motion for summary 
judgment are denied. Defts are hereby en- 
joined from enforcement of 47 USC 583 ent- 
filed (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies 
Mailed: yes (rvoi) 


MOTION for relief from judgment and to 
alter or amend judgment by United States, 
FCC, Janet Reno (bonn) 


MOTION to intervene by Ameritech Cor- 
poration, BellSouth Corporation, GTE Serv- 
ice Corporation, NYNEX Corporation, Pa- 
cific Telesis Group, Rochester Telephone 
Corporation, Southwestern Bell Corporation 
and US West, Inc. (bonn) [Entry date 
09/09/93] 


MOTION for joinder of parties as plitfs by 
Chesapeak & Potomac, Bell Atlantic Video 
(bonn) [Entry date 09/21/93] 


PROCEEDINGS 


DATE No. 
10/7/93 121 
10/7/93 122 


ORDER granting [110-1] motion for joinder 
of parties as plitfs by Chesapeak & Potomac 
Bell Atlantic Video, granting with respect 
to specifying that the order dated 9/8/93 
applies only to Section 533(b) and not to 
the entire Section 533 and denying all 
other aspects of the [99-1] motion for relief 
from judgment and to alter or amend judg- 
ment by United States, FCC, Janet Reno, 
denying [105-1] motion to intervene by 
GTE Virginia and GTE Vantage Inc., deny- 
ing [102-1] motion to intervene by Ameri- 
tech Corporation, BellSouth Corporation, 
GTE Service Corporation, NYNEX Cor- 
poration, Pacific Telesis Group, Rochester 
Telephone Corporation, Southwestern Bell 
Corporation and US West, Inc. - entered & 
filed (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis IIT) Copies 
Mailed: Yes (bonn) 


AMENDED FINAL ORDER that the court’s 
memorandum opinion dated 8/24/93, plitfs’ 
motion for summary judgment is granted, 
and defts’ and intervenor-deft’s motions for 
summary judgment are denied. The court 
declares 47 USC Section 533(b) unconstitu- 
tional both on its face and as applied to 
pitfs. The following parties are joined as 
pitfs: Bell Atlantic Corporation, The Chesa- 
peake and Potomac Telephone Company. 
The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Maryland, The Chesapeake and Po- 
tomac Telephone Company of West Virginia, 
The Diamond State Telephone Company, 
New Jersey Bell Telephone Company and 
the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania. 
Defts. are hereby enjoined from enforcement 
of 47 USC Section 533(b) against the above 
named parties. This order supersedes and 


5 


——— ee = 


PROCEEDINGS 


10/15/93 124 


replaces the court’s order dated 8/24/98 - 
entered & filed. (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis 
III) Copies Mailed: Yes (bonn) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL of orders of 10/7/98, 
and 8/24/93 by Janet Reno, FCC, United 
States. Copy of notice mailed to all parties. 
Copy of notice, orders and docket entries 
mailed to USCA. (bonn) [Entry date 10/ 
18/93] 


[Filed Dec. 17, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division) 


Civil Action No. 92-1751-H 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, 
600 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 


and 


BELL ATLANTIC VIDEO SERVICES COMPANY, 
1320 N. Court House Road 
Arlington, Virginia 22201 

PLAINTIFFS 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, 
1919 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20554 


and 


WiLuiaM P. Bark, in his official capacity as 
Attorney General of the United States of America, 
Department of Justice 
10th & Constitution Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20530 

DEFENDANTS 


— 


For All Defendents, Serve: 


Richard Cullen 

United States Attorney for the 
Eastern District of Virginia 
1101 King Street, Suite 502 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 


COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY JUDGMENT 
AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 


1. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 
47 U.S.C. § 533(b) (“Cable Act”), prohibits The Chesa- 
peake & Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia and its 
affiliate, Bell Atlanic Video Services Company, from 
providing video programming— including television shows, 
movies, sports, news, and political reporting and opinions 
—to subscribers in C&P’s telephone service area. This is 
an action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201 and 2202 to 
declare this prohibition unconstitutional and to enjoin the 
defendants from enforcing it. The government defend- 
ants, who bear the burden of justifying this prohibition, 
have stated that the prohibition is not necessary to serve 
any valid governmental purpose and that it should be 
repealed. Congress, however, has failed to repeal the pro- 
hibition, and the defendants have indicated that they will 
continue to enforce it. 


JURISDICTION AND VENUE 


2. This Court has subject matter jurisdiction of this 
controversy under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. 

3. Venue is proper in this judicial district pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. § 1391 (e). 


PARTIES 


4. Plaintiff The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone 
Company of Virginia (“C&P”) is a corporation incor- 
porated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia 


8 


and is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Bell Atlantic Cor- 
poration, a publicly held company with over one million 
shareowners. C&P is in the business of providing tele- 
phone service in, among other places, the City of Alex- 
andria, Virginia, and is a “common carrier” within the 
meaning of section 533(b) of the Cable Act. 

5. Plaintiff Bell Atlantic Video Services Company 
(“BVS”) is a corporation incorporated under the laws of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia and is a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of Bell Atlantic Corporation. BVS was incor- 
porated for the purpose of providing video programming 
in, among other places, the City of Alexandria and is 
affiliated with C&P within the meaning of section 533(b) 
of the Cable Act. 

6. Defendant United States of America is a party to 
this action. 

7. Defendant Federal Communications Commission 
(“FCC”) is a federal agency created by Congress pur- 
suant to the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
§§ 151 et seg.) and is charged with enforcement of sec- 
tion 533(b) and other regulation of cable television pur- 
suant to 47 U.S.C. §§ 401 and 521 ef seq. 

8. Defendant William P. Barr, named in his official 
capacity as Attorney General of the United States of 
America, is charged with enforcement of section 533(b) 
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 401. 


Background 


9. In 1984, Congress passed the Cable Communica- 
tions Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. (“Cable Act”), 
which among other things prohibits telephone companies 
and their affiliates from providing video programming 
within the areas where they provide telephone service. 
Section 533(b) of the Cable Act provides in relevant part 
as follows: 


(b)(1) It shall be unlawful for any common car- 
rier, subject in whole or in part to subchapter II of 


9 


this chapter, to provide video programming directly 
to subscribers in its telephone service area, either 
directly or indirectly through an affiliate owned by, 
operated by, controlled by, or under common control 
with the common carrier. 

(2) It shall be unlawful for any common carrier, 
subject in whole or in part to subchapter II of this 
chapter, to provide channels of communications or 
pole line conduit space, or other rental arrangements, 
to any entity which is directly or indirectly owned by, 
operated by, controlled by, or under common con- 
trol with such common carrier, if such facilities or 
arrangement are to be used for, or in connection 
with, the provision of video programming directly to 
subscribers in the telephone service area of the com- 
mon carrier. 


10. The Cable Act defines “video programming” as 
“programming provided by, or generally considered com- 
parable to programming provided by, a television broad- 
cast station.” 47 U.S.C. § 522(16). 

11. Under section 533(b), it is unlawful for C&P and 
BVS, as affiliates, to provide video programming directly 
to subscribers in areas where C&P provides telephone 
service. It is also unlawful for C&P to provide channels 
of communications to BVS for use in provision of video 
programming in these areas. 


COUNT I 


SECTION 533(b) IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL ON 
ITS FACE UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT 


12. The allegations of paragraphs | through 11 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

13. Video programming is a form of speech protected 
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitu- 
tion. Video programmers own, produce, select, assemble, 


10 


package, and distribute images, ideas, information, opin- 
ions, and entertainment. 

14. The video programming prohibition in section 
533(b) of the Cable Act is, on its face, an unconstitu- 
tional prior restraint on speech. 

15. The prohibition is, on its face, a straightforward 
ban on certain types of constitutionally protected expres- 
sion, The prohibition is directed at speech itself and there- 
fore requires strict scrutiny. 

16. Under the statutory definition of “video program- 
ming,” 47 U.S.C. § 522(16), the applicability of the re- 
striction necessarily turns on the content of telephone 
companies’ speech. Congress has required government 
Officials to decide whether telephone companies are pro- 
viding prohibited speech that is “generally considered 
comparable to” television broadcast programming or 
whether they are providing non-prohibited speech which 
may also involve video images. This statutorily required 
process of official authorization, therefore, involves an 
evaluation of the video images and the context in which 
they are to be presented; a consideration of the impact 
such video images will have upon the viewer; and a deter- 
mination whether such video images will be perceived by 
the general public as a substitute for the forms of video 
speech that have been provided by others over traditional 
cable and broadcasting facilities. All of the foregoing 
involves the government in an investigation of content. 
Consequently, the statutory prohibition is content-based 
and must be subject to strict scrutiny. 

17. Section 533(b) is a speaker-specific restriction on 
protected expression that singles out speech provided by 
telephone companies and imposes a special and targeted 
prohibition on that speech in particular. Strict scrutiny 
is therefore warranted. 

18. Section 533(b) is an audience-specific restriction 
on protected expression that prevents telephone companies 
from providing video programming only to subscribers 


11 


within their telephone service areas. Strict scrutiny is 
therefore warranted. 

19. Section 533(b) violates both the First Amend- 
ment right of telephone companies to provide video pro- 
gramming and the First Amendment right of subscribers 
to receive the video programming which plaintiffs and 
other telephone companies would provide. 

20. The government defendants, which bear the bur- 
den of justifying this infringement of First Amendment 
rights, cannot prove that section 533(b) is necessary to 
serve any compelling governmental interest or even any 
substantial or important governmental interest. 

21. The speech targeted by section 533(b)—television 
shows, movies, sports, news, and political reporting and 
opinions—is not unlawful. 

22. In enacting section 533(b) in 1984, Congress 
stated that it was seeking to prevent the development of 
“local media monopolies.” This objective has not been 
achieved. In 1992, in enacting the Cable Television Con- 
sumer Protection and Competition Act, Congress found 
that “[t]he cable industry has become highly concentrated. 
The potential effects of such concentration are barriers to 
entry for new programmers and a reduction in the number 
of media voices available to consumers.” Congress found 
that “[t]he average monthly cable rate has increased almost 
3 times as much as the Consumer Price Index” since 
1986. “[Mlost cable television subscribers have no oppor- 
tunity to select between competing cable systems. Without 
the presence of another multichannel video programming 
distributor, a cable system faces no local competition. The 
result is undue market power for the cable operator... .” 

23. The government defendants themselves have found 
that section 533(b) is now hindering the objectives it was 
originally intended to promote: 


a. In 1988, defendant FCC tentatively concluded that 
the prohibition “no longer serves the public interest.” In 


12 


1992, on a full administrative record, the FCC found that 
the prohibition should be repealed. Repealing the prohibi- 
tion would “increas[e] competition in the video market- 
place, spur[] the investment necessary to deploy an ad- 
vanced infrastructure, and increas[e] the diversity of serv- 
ices made available to the public.” Separately, the FCC 
reported to the President that introducing competition 
from telephone companies “would result in significant price 
savings for consumers and stimulate provision of a range 
of new information services. Current experience with 
head-to-head competition in cable markets indicates that 
rates would fall about 20% for the entire video package; 
if competition is introduced nationwide, subscribership 
would likely expand by 11.2 million households.” 

b. Defendant Barr in his official capacity as Attorney 
General stated that “[t]elevision viewers will be best served 
by removing barriers to entry by new firms into the video 
services marketplace. The Administration, therefore, sup- 
ports removal of current legislative prohibitions against 
telephone company provision of video programming, with 
appropriate safeguards.” The Department of Justice, act- 
ing under the supervision of defendant Barr, stated that 
telephone companies “should be allowed to own and di- 
rectly provide video programming” because telephone com- 
pany “provision of video programming will have pro- 
competitive benefits that outweigh any anticompetitive 
risks involved.” 

24. The defendants to this action further have con- 
cluded that any valid governmental concerns can be ad- 
dressed by means that do not prohibit telephone com- 
panies and their affiliates from video programming. 

25. Despite their concessions that the video program- 
ming prohibition is not necessary to any governmental 
interest, defendants have indicated that they will continue 
to enforce the prohibition. Consequently, there is an 
actual and justiciable controversy between the parties. 


13 


26. Plaintiffs, as well as consumers who are being 
denied the right to receive video programming which 
plaintiffs and other telephone companies would provide, 
have no adequate or complete remedy at law to redress 
the denial of their First Amendment rights other than by 
seeking the relief sought in this action. Unless defendants 
are enjoined from enforcing section 533(b), plaintiffs and 
consumers will continue to suffer substantial and irrepara- 
ble harm. 

COUNT Il 


SECTION 533(b) IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL AS 
APPLIED UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT 


27. The allegation of paragraphs | through 26 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

28. If permitted to proceed, C&P and BVS will pro- 
vide video programming in the City of Alexandria, Vir- 
ginia. C&P will enhance its telephone network in Alex- 
andria to have the capability of carrying several hundred 
channels of video programming. In addition, C&P’s net- 
work will have the capability to deliver video programs 
on demand, which will allow consumers to select pro- 
grams from video libraries. C&P’s affiliate, BVS, will pro- 
vide some of the video programming on the network, and 
the network will also be available for use by other video 

mmers on a common carrier basis. 

29. Plaintiffs are ready, willing and, but for defend- 
ants’ enforcement of section 533(b), able to provide video 
programming to Alexandria. Consumers in Alexandria 
want to receive this programming. As a result of the 
defendants’ continued enforcement of section 533(b), both 
plaintiffs and consumers will continue to suffer substantial 
and irreparable harm. Plaintiffs have no adequate or com- 
plete remedy at law to redress the denial of First Amend- 
ment rights other than by seeking the relief sought in this 
action. 

30. Although section 533(b)(4) of the Cable Act pro- 
vides that the FCC may in particular circumstances waive 


_— 


14 


the video programming prohibition for “good cause,” this 
waiver provision is inadequate to protect the plaintiffs’ 
and consumers’ right to free speech and is itself a violation 
of the First Amendment. Congress provided no standards 
or time limits by which the FCC must grant or deny a 
“good cause” waiver, but instead admonished the FCC 
that this “waiver authority should be narrowly construed.” 
The FCC itself has not adopted any standards or time 
limits. As a result, the FCC has unbridled discretion in 
determining whether and when, if ever, a “good cause” 
waiver may be granted. 

31. As applied to the facts and circumstances of the 
video programming services that plaintiffs would provide 
in Alexandria, section 533(b) violates plaintiffs’ right of 
free speech under the First Amendment, as well as the 
First Amendment right of consumers in Alexandria to re- 
ceive plaintiffs’ video programming. 


COUNT Ill 


SECTION 533(b) VIOLATES EQUAL PROTECTION 
BOTH ON ITS FACE AND AS APPLIED 


32. The allegations of paragraphs | through 31 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

33. Section 533(b) is a legislative classification that 
interferes with the plaintiffs’ exercise of the fundamental 
right of freedom of speech. Section 533(b) discriminates 
against telephone companies that wish to provide video 
programming while permitting other, similarly situated en- 
tities to engage in this activity. 

34. Section 533(b) does not apply at all to other 
regulated utility companies, including utilities owning poles 
and conduits, that are permitted to provide video program- 
ming in their service areas. 

35. Section 533(b) also does not apply to the cable 
TV companies which Congress found have “undue market 
power.” As interpreted by the FCC, section 533(b) 


f 


15 


applies only in one direction: against telephone companies 
that seek to provide video programming, and not against 
cable TV companies that seek to provide telephone service. 
Cable TV companies and their affiliates are taking ad- 
vantage of this one-sided prohibition by providing long 
distance telephone services, cellular radio services, per- 
sona! communications services, competitive access services, 
aad other telephone services in the same areas where they 

36. Section 533(b)’s discrimination against telephone 
companies is not necessary to serve any compelling gov- 
ernmental interest. 

37. Section 533(b) violates the equal protection prin- 
ciples embodied in the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, both on its face and as applied to 
the video programming that plaintiffs would provide in 
Alexandria. 

38. Plaintiffs have no adequate or complete remedy 
at law to redress the denial of their Fifth Amendment 
rights other than by seeking the relief sought in this 
action. Unless the defendants are enjoined from enforc- 
ing section 533(b), plaintiffs will continue to suffer sub- 
stantial and irreparable harm. 


COUNT IV 


SECTION 533(b) VIOLATES PLAINTIFFS’ RIGHTS 
TO USE THEIR PROPERTY FOR EXPRESSION 


39. The allegations of paragraphs 1 through 38 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

40. Plaintiffs propose to use the existing C&P tele- 
phone network, together with certain enhancements, to 
provide video programming in Alexandria. 

41. Section 533(b) violates the rights of plaintiffs to 
harness their property's potential for constitutionally pro- 
tected expression, in violation of both the First and Fifth 
Amendments. 


16 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, plaintiffs pray that the Court enter 
an Order: 


1. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act 
is unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable on its face 
as a violation of the right to free speech guaranteed by 
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; 

2. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act 
is unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable under the 
First Amendment to the United States Constitution as 
applied to plaintiffs’ provision of video programming in 
Alexandria; 

3. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act is 
unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable as a violation 
of the right to the equal protection of the laws under the 
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution; 

4. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act is 
unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable under the First 
and Fifth Amendments to the United States Constitution 
as a violation of plaintiffs’ rights to use their propery 
for expression; 

5. Permanently enjoining defendants from enforcing 
section 533(b) of the Cable Act in any criminal, civil, 
or administrative proceedings; and 

6. Granting plaintiffs such further relief as the Court 
may deem just and equitable. 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA 
and BELL ATLANTIC VIDEO SERVICES 
ComMPANY, By Counsel 


LAURENCE H. TRIBE /s/ Wiley R. Wright, Jr. 

JONATHAN MASSEY Witey R. Wricnrt, Jr. 

1525 Massachusetts Avenue VSB #1006 

Cambridge, Mass. 02138 Haze. & Tuomas, P.C. 

(617) 495-4621 510 King Street, Suite 200 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 


(703) 836-8400 


ROBERT A. LEVETOWN 
VSB #23654 

1310 N. Court House Road 
llth Floor 

Arlington, Virginia 22201 
(708) 974-3624 

MARK C. HANSEN 
JOHNSON & GIBBS 

1301 K Street, N.W. 
Suite 800 East 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 682-4532 


Dated: December 17, 1992 


17 


JOHN THORNE 
MICHAEL E. GLOVER 
VSB #25033 

1710 H Street, N.W. 


Richmond, Virginia 23261 
(804) 772-1585 


18 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


(Caption Omitted in Printing) 


ANSWER 


Defendants United States of America, the Federal Com- 
munications Commission (the “FCC,” or “Commission” ) 
and Stuart M. Gerson, in his capacity as Interim Acting 
Attorney General,’ answer plaintiffs’ Complaint for De- 
claratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief, dated Decem- 
ber 17, 1992 (the “Complaint”), as follows: 


First Defense 
Plaintiffs lack standing to sue. 


Second Defense 


The Court lacks jurisdiction over Count IV of the 
Complaint. 


Third Defense 


Plaintiffs have failed to exhaust their administrative 
remedies. 
Fourth Defense 
The Complaint fails to state claims for which relief can 
be granted. 
Fifth Defense 


The relief sought by plaintiffs is not authorized by law. 


1 Pursuant to Rule 25(d)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Pro- 
cedure, Mr. Gerson, in his official capacity as Interim Acting At- 
torney General, is automatically substituted as a defendant herein 
for William P. Barr. 


19 


Sixth Defense 


The equitable relief sought by plaintiffs is barred be- 
cause they have an adequate remedy at law. 


Seventh Defense 


Defendants respond to the numbered paragraphs in the 
Complaint as follows: 


1. The first sentence of paragraph one states a conclu- 
sion of law to which no response is required. Sentence two 
contains plaintiffs’ characterization of this action, to which 
no response is required. As to sentence three, deny that 
defendants have stated that 47 U.S.C. § 533(b) (“Sec- 
tion 533(b)”) does not “serve any valid governmental 
purpose”; the remainder of sentence three purports to 
characterize Television Company-Cable Television Cross- 
Ownership Rules: Second Report and Order, Recommenda- 
tion to Congress, and Second Further Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking, 7 FCC Red. 5781 (1992) (the “Second 
Report and Order’), the April 1, 1992 letter from former 
Attorney General William P. Barr, and former Commerce 
Secretary Barbara H. Franklin, to Hon. Edward J. Markey, 
Chairman, Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Fi- 
nance, House Committee on Energy and Commerce (the 
“Markey letter”), and Telephone Company-Cable Tele- 
vision Cross-Ownership Rules: Reply Comments of the 
United States Department of Justice, dated March 13, 
1992 (the “Justice Reply Comments’), to all of which 
this Court is respectfully referred for a full and accurate 
statement of their contents. Admit sentence four. 

2-3. Admit. 

4. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowledge 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of the first 
sentence of paragraph four. Admit the second sentence. 

5. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowledge 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of paragraph five. 

6. Admit. 


20 


7. Admit that the Commission is an agency of the 
Federal Government created by 47 U.S.C. § 154, and is 
charged by the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 
§$ 151 et seq., with the enforcement of Section 533(b). 

8. Admit that the Attorney General of the United 
States is charged with the enforcement of Section 533(b) 
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 401 and other statutory provi- 
sions, 

9. As to sentence one, admit that in 1984 Congress 
passed the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. 
§ 521 et seq. The remainder of sentence one states a con- 
clusion of law to which no response is required. Sentence 
two purports to set out the provisions of Section 533(b) 
(1) and (b)(2), to which the Court is respectfully re- 
ferred for a full and accurate statement of its contents. 

10. Paragraph 10 purports to set out the provisions of 
47 U.S.C. § 522(16), to which the Court is respectfully 
referred for a full and accurate statement of its contents. 

11. Paragraph 11 states conclusions of law to which 
no response is required. 

12. Defendants incorporate herein by reference their 
responses to paragraphs 1-11 of the Complaint. 

13. Sentence one states a conclusion of law to which 
no response is required. Plaintiffs’ use of the term “video 
programmers” is too vague and ambiguous for defendants 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of sentence two. 

14-21. Paragraph 14-21 state conclusions of law to 
which no response is required. 

22. Sentence one purports to characterize H.R. Rep. 
No. 549, 95th Cong., 2d Sess. (1984), reprinted in 1984 
U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News (“U.S.C.C.A.N.”) 4655, 
to which the Court is respectfully referred for a full and 
accurate statement of its contents. Deny sentence two. 
Sentences 3-8 purport to characterize the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, P.L. 
102-385. 106 Stat. 1460 (the “1992 Act”), § 2, to which 


21 


Act the Court is respectfully referred for a full and ac- 
curate statement of its contents. 

23. Deny sentence one. As to paragraph 23(a): Sen- 
tence one purports to characterize the Commission’s 
tentative decision in Television Company-Cable Television 
Cross-Ownership Rules: Further Notice of Inquiry and 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 3 FCC Rcd. 5849 
(1988), to which the Court is respectfully referred for 
a full and accurate statement of its contents. Sentences 
two and three purport to characterize the Commission’s 
Second Report and Order (see 41, above), to which the 
Court is respectfully referred for a full and accurate state- 
ment of its contents. Sentences four and five purport to 
characterize the Report of the Federal Communications 
Commission Regarding the President's Regulatory Reform 
Program, dated April 28, 1992, to which the Court is 
respectfully referred for a full and accurate statement of 
its contents. 

As to paragraph 23(b): Sentences one and two pur- 
port to characterize the Markey letter (see € 1, above), 
to which the Court is respectfully referred for a full and 
accurate statement of its contents. Sentence three pur- 
ports to characterize the Justice Reply Comments (see 
id.), to which the Court is respectfully referred for a 
full and accurate statement of its contents. 

24. Paragraph 24 purports to characterize the Com- 
mission’s Second Report and Order and the Justice Reply 
Comments, to which the Court is respectfully referred 
for a full and accurate statement of their contents. 

25. As to the first sentence, admit that defendants will 
continue to enforce Section 533(b); otherwise, deny. The 
second sentence states a conclusion of law to which no 
response is required. 

26. Paragraph 26 states conclusions of law to which 
no response is required. 

27. Defendants incorporate herein by reference their 
responses to paragraphs 1-26 of the Complaint 


22 


28. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowl- 
edge to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of para- 
graph 28. 

29. To the extent the first sentence of paragraph 29 
is intended as a statement of fact, defendants lack suffi- 
cient information or knowledge to form a belief as to 


as to the truth or falsity of sentence two. Sentences three 
and four state conclusions of law to which no response 


Deny sentence three Sentence four states a conclusion 
of law to which no response 1s required. 

3]. Paragraph 3! states a conclusion of law to which 
no response ms required 

32 Defendants incorporate hereim by reference their 
responses to peragraphs |-3! of the Complaint 

7334 Paragraphs 33-34 state conclusions of law to 
wtech no response s required 

7S Sentence one states 2 conclusion of law, to which 
mo response s required. and also purports to characterize 
the 1992 Act. §2. w which the Court is respectfully 
-eferred for a full and accurate statement of is contents 
Sentence two states a conclusson of law to which no re- 
spomse s regurred Pliantifis usc of the term “Iclable 
TY companies and ther affiliates” = too vague and 
amimguous for defendants to form a behef as to the truth 
~ fairy of sentence (ree 

38 Paragraphs 3% state concluwons of aw 
«Tec? & "eEDpOMSe & "ogurTrec 

% Defendants mcorporete berem oy reference ther 
“csponmees to paragrapm®s | ‘4 of the ( omptanm 

“) Defemdans lock saficoent miormatheor of tnow 
~<iee w form « belief a w he wuth of falety & pare 
rape + 


23 


41. Paragraph 41 states a conclusion of law to which 
no response is required. 

The remainder of the Complaint is plaintiffs’ prayer for 
relief, to which no response is required, but to the extent 
a response is deemed necessary, defendants deny that 
plaintiffs are entitled to the relief requested therein, or to_ 
any relief whatsoever. 

Defendants specifically deny any and all allegations of 
plaintiffs’ Complaint not otherwise answered herein. 

WHEREFORE, having fully responded to the Com- 
plaint, defendants pray that this action be dismissed and 
that the Court grant such other and further relief as may 
be appropriate. 

Dated: February 12, 1993 


Respectfully submitted, 


STUART M. GERSON 
Assistant Attorney General 


RICHARD CULLEN 
United States Attorney 


RICHARD PARKER 
Assistant U.S. Attorney 


Of Counsel : s/ James J. Gilligan 


Tueopore C. HIRT 
RENEE LIGHT James J. GILLIGAN 
Acting Genera! Counsel! A 
Sus ANN KANTER U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of the Genera! Civil Division, Room 816 
Counsel 901 E Street, N.W. 
Dona LAMPERT Washington, D.C. 20004 
Of Counsel (202) 514-3358 
Geet Crententinns Counsel for Defendants United 


States of America, Federa! 
at — Ww Communications Commission. 
_ = y and Stuart M. Gerson in his 
Washington, D.C. 20654 

official capacity as Interim 
Acting Attorney Genera! 


24 


FCC POLICY ON CABLE OWNERSHIP: 
A STAFF REPORT 


CONCURRING STATEMENT 
of 
COMMISSIONER JOSEPH R. FOGARTY 


In Re: Issuance for Public Comment of FCC Staff Re- 
port on Cable Cross-Ownership Policies 


I concur in the Commisison’s decision ordering that 
the Report of the FCC Office of Plans and Policy staff on 
cable cross-ownership policies be issued for public com- 
ment. It should be emphasized, however, that the staff 
report is just that—a staff report—and at this point does 
not enjoy Commission approval. 

In my view, the staff report presents a decidedly mixed 
bag of policy assessment and pronouncement. I have the 
same fundamental difficulty with this report that I had 
with its predecessor on Direct Broadcast Satellite policy: * 
proposed finding of abundant program diversity and as- 
sumptions of “workably competitive” markets in video 
technology and services must be supported by pragmatic 
fact as well as general economic theory. In finding that a 
“workably competitive” video media market now exists, 
the staff report’s analysis lumps existing broadcast out- 
lets and cable systems together with subscription tele- 
vision (STV), muti-point distribution systems (MDS), 
direct broadcast satellites (DBS), low power television, 
VHF drop-ins, video cassettes and video discs. It is far 
from clear, however, that cable television service is inter- 
changeable with over-the-air broadcast television service. 
This substitutability issue is critical to the validity of the 


1 Notice of Inquiry into the Development of Regulation Policy 
in regard to Direct Broadcast Satellites for the Period following 
the 1983 Regional Administrative Radio Conference, Docket 80- 
603, 45 F.R. 72719 (November 3, 1980), Separate Statement of 
Commissioner Joseph R. Fogarty. 


25 


staff report’s policy recommendations and warrants full 
public comment. It also appear to me to be little more 
than wishful thinking to predicate a finding of “workable 
competition” on new technology and services (e.g., DBS, 
Low Power TV, and fledgling STV and MDS) which are 
more on the horizon than with us here and now. In the 
final analysis, this Commisison must have more than 
merely the assumption of a “workably competitive” mar- 
ketplace as the basis for policy making. 

In addressing the specific issues of broadcast television 
station-and network-cable cross-ownership, the staff report 
does make certain observations which deserve serious con- 
sideration. The report may be correct when it suggests 
that such cross-ownership may in fact increase diversity 
in both economic and First Amendment terms. In this 
regard, I agree that while a cable system could control 
a substantial share of the total video outlets in a com- 
munity, the relevant policy question is not “How would 
a cross-owned system behave,” but “Would its perform- 
ance or that of the co-owned broadcast station deteriorate 
under cross-ownership?” It may be, as the staff report 
suggests, that natural profit-making and investment incen- 
tives, as well as oversight and pressure from the local 
franchising authority, make it unlikely that cross-owned 
systems would be any less dedicated to the fullest possible 
development of cable’s potential. 

I also think that the staff report is excellent in its dis- 
cussion of the benefits of vertical integration which may 
be lost to consumers as a result of overly-restrictive Com- 
mission ownership rule and policy.* The price to be 


? While it is refreshing to see this acknowledgment of the bene- 
fits of vertical integration in the context of an assessment of cable 
ownership policies, it is regretable that this sensitivity has not 
been more manifest in other areas of Commission “dereculatory” 
endeavor. See Computer Inquiry I], Final Decision. Statement of 
Commissioner Joseph R. Fogarty, Dissenting in Part. 77 FCC 2d 
504, 508-511 (1980). The degree of structural separation prescribed 
by the Final Decision for the dominant carrier subsidiary’s pro- 


26 


paid for a reflexive anti-cross-ownership policy may be 
not only diminished diversity but no service at all.’ In 
the final analysis, it is the result, and not the theory, 
that counts. 

While the staff report purports to be responsive to 
these pragmatic principles in its recommendations regard- 
ing broadcast television station-and network-cable cross- 
ownership, it unfortunately balks at the consistent appli- 
cation of those principles to the telephone company-cable 
cross-ownership issue. Although the report acknowledges 
that considerable benefits of vertical integration would 
inhere in such cross-ownership, it nonetheless argues for 
retention of the existing prohibition based on the assump 
tion that cable may become a direct competitor of the 
telephone company’s local loop and local exchange serv- 
ices. While the report concedes that this competitive 
scenario is speculative, it insists that rescission of the 
cross-ownership prohibition would be “irreversible” in 
terms of forfeiting whatever benefits of inter-modal com- 


vision of customer premises equipment and enhanced services re- 
flected an analysis in which 


“all assumptions pertaining to the benefits of separation are 
treated as givens whereas any countervailing arguments per- 
taining to the benefits of vertical integration are treated as 
unproven hypotheses subject to considerable doubt.” 


Id. at 508. 


* This observation has proved all too true with regard to the 
impact of the cable-telephone company cross-ownership prohibition 
on the provision of cable service to rural America. While the 
Commission has now adopted an outright exemption from the 
cross-ownership ban for telephone company rural cable service, 
Elimination of the Telephone Company Cable Television Cross- 
Ownership Rules for Rural Areas, ——— FCC 2d ——— (Adopted 
Nov. 5, 1981), cable service that could have been provided to rural 
America by telephone companies was long denied in favor of 
protecting a vague future possibility of service from independent 
operators. See, id., Separate Statement of Commissioner Joseph 
R. Fogarty and other Statements cited at n. 1 supra. 


27 


petition might occur as a result of future independent 
cable system development. 

I have previously stated my opposition to the telephone 
company-cable cross-ownership prohibition‘ and will not 
repeat those views in full detail here. However, I think 
the line of argument in the staff report borders on halluci- 
nation. It is inanely wishful thinking to suggest that in 
the foreseeable future independent cable system operators 
will install the switching equipment and capacity neces- 
sary to duplicate and compete with the local telephone 
exchange. In terms of either economics or technological 
demand and investment, the staff report's scenario is sheer 
fantasy. 

The staff report’s “irreversibility” argument is even 
more troublesome for sound analysis and policy. The 
decision which will be “irreversible” here—and pernici- 
ously so—is the one recommended by the staff: the con- 
tinued and perhaps permanent foreclosure of telephone 
company participation and competition in the broadband 
telecommunications marketplace. Indeed, continuation of 
the prohibition on telephone company-cable  cross- 
ownership will seriously retard, if not completely pre- 
clude, the introduction and deployment of broadband. 
fiber-optic technology in the local telephone exchange. 
It will be the American consumer who will suffer the 
loss of telecommunications benefits directly attributable 
to this myopic policy recommendation. 

New and evolving fiber optic telecommunications tech- 
nology offers the potential for economic replacement of 
copper wire with glass fiber as the transmission medium 
in the local loop of the telephone exchange. This poten- 
tial is enhanced as research and development continues 
to lower both the cost and signal attenuation of fiber 


* Revision of Processing Policies for Waivers of Telephone Com. 
pany—-Cable Television “Cross Ownership.” On Reconsideration 
Separate Statement of Commissioner Joseph R Fogarty, 82 FCC 2d 
266 (1980). 


Lei a 


itil i i NY 
i 4 ita (by 1 JRA t 


HI A 
i tip fle ft at My itit iy 


it 


pn hw 


I 


1 


ae 


HU 


To 
i 


ist 
it 
Hi 


! - 


i fats 
Hh 


30 


quire joint operations.” This proposal is a classic case of 
too little too late. As this Commission's new “unregula- 


search, development, and deployment. Nothing short of 

repeal of the telephone company-cable cross- 
ownership prohibition will do, and the national public 
interest demands no less. 

I am hopeful that the Commission—if not also its 
staff—is prepared to act with intelligence and a sense 
of reality. Anti-competitive regulation in the guise of 
pro-competitive policy has ruled this area long enough 


cious prohibition—the sooner the better. 


’ Elimination of the Telephone Company-Cable Television Crose- 
Ownership Rules for Rural Areas, Separate Statement of Commis- 
sioner Joseph R. Fogarty, ——- FCC 24 —— (November 5, 1981). 


‘id 


31 


FCC POLICY ON 
CABLE OWNERSHIP 


A Staff Report by 


KENNETH GORDON 
JONATHAN D. Levy 
ROBERT S. PREECE 


November 1981 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
OFFICE OF PLANS AND PoLicy 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20554 


32 
Part I 


Chapter 1 
Introduction and Summary of Conclusions 


A. Origin and Scope of The Study 


In October 1980 the Federal Communications Com- 
mission directed its staff to study the Commission’s rules 
on ownership of cable systems.’ Five issues were to be 
examined.” The first was the rule barring the cross- 
ownership of cable systems by a telephone company serv- 
ing the same area.* This investigation considers cable- 
telco crossownership generally and goes beyond other 
recent Commission investigations and rulemakings on 
crossownership.* The second issue was whether to allow 
the ownership of many local cable systems by the same 
company. Multiple system operators (MSO’s) are a prom- 
inent feature of the cable industry.’ Currently, the Com- 
mission has no rules limiting the number of systems an 
MSO may operate. The third issue was whether cross- 
ownership between television stations and cable systems 
within the Grade B broadcast contour should be per- 


1 See FCC News Release October 22, 1980. The proceeding from 
which this study emanate is CC Docket No. 78-219. The instant 
concern of the Commissiou was with waiver policy standards for 
rural cable-telephone company cross ownership (see 47 CFR 63.55). 
Since the rural issue is being examined elsewhere in the Commis- 
sion (CC Docket 78-219) we do not cover it in this study. 


2 Since that time questions have also arisen about the desira- 
bility of foreign ownership of cable. An examination of the issues 
presented in foreign ownership is under way, and its conclusions 
will be available to the Commission in the fall of 1981. 


'47 CFR 63.54. 
*CC Docket 78-219. 
5 See Chapter 6, infra. 


33 


mitted.* The fourth issue was the prohibition against 
cable ownership by the major commercial networks.’ The 
fifth issue was “separations,” i.e., whether cable operators 


corresponding ; 
Part II of the study provides information important for 
an understanding of each of the ownership issues ex- 
amined. Therefore Chapters 2 and 3 are intended to be 


7 Ibid. 


* Separations policy is indirectly related. See Report to the 
President (supra, n. 7) for the argument that at least some of the 
media crossownership prohibitions are uunecessary in the presence 
of a separations policy. (Recommendation 3. at 31-33.) Thie con 
clusion is not extended to telephone companies however (See 
Recommendation 4, at 33-34 


34 


read in conjunction with any or all of the chapters that 
deal with the specific ownership issues in Part Ill. 

Chapter 2 contains background on the cable industry. 
The basic technical characteristics of cable are outlined 
and recent developments likely to affect cable’s “capa- 
bilities” are reviewed. A brief historical survey of the 
industry, including the effects of regulation on cable de- 
velopment, is provided. Finally, the chapter examines in 
some detail the various markets that cable serves or has 
the potential to serve, and identifies the sources and 
nature of competition in these markets. Some discussion 
of related markets, such as programming supply, that 
might be affected by cable ownership rules is included. 

Chapter 3 presents general issues about ownership rules 
or a separations requirement for cable. The meaning of 
consumer welfare, in various dimensions, is explored in 
an attempt to provide an understanding of the benefits 
and costs of the present rules and of proposed changes 
in those rules. More specifically, the chapter begins by 
examining the economic aspects of consumer welfare, in- 
cluding the question of what forces determine the services 
provided by cable, how they are produced, as well as how 
they are distributed—that is—who gets them. Paralleling 
the economic concerns are considerations of First Amend- 
ment rights and their relation to cable access. The latter 
issue is also analyzed in Chapter 3 and is linked to the 
economic aspects of ownership policy. 

Part III of the report contains the chapters that analyze 
each of the five issues and provide support for specific 
policy recommendations. When read in conjunction with 
Part II of the report, each chapter may be used by 
itself. 

Chapter 4 covers the broadcast-cable crossownership 
prohibition. Chapter 5 examines the growth of multiple 
system operators (MSO’s) to determine whether or not 
the growth of large firms within the cable industry itself 


35 


presents problems that the Commission should address. 
Chapter 6 covers the crossownership issue for the three 
commercial television broadcast networks. 

Chapter 7 examines the advantages and disadvantages 
of a separations policy for cable. Although separations 
(severing the link between the ownership and operation 
of a cable system and the determination of what services 
it carries) is not an ownership policy as such, proponents 
have argued it may eliminate some of the problems asso- 
ciated with crossownership. 

Finally, Chapter 8 examines the telephone-cable cross- 
ownership problem. A number of special features, in- 
cluding rate of return regulation, ownership of pole and 
conduit space, and a local switched service monopoly 
position characterize the telephone system and raise prob- 
lems not shared by other cases of crossownership. 

Throughout, the report attempts to minimize the use 
of technical economic terms and arguments. Except where 
absolutely central to the discussion, such arguments have 
been placed in the footnotes or, in cases where the treat- 
ment is both technical and extended, in an appendix. 


C. Summary of Conclusions 


We find that the underlying goals of the Commis- 
sion’s ownership policies—the promotion of competition 
in the economic marketplace and in the marketplace of 
ideas—are met when a wide range of media, both video 
and non-video, is available. Our analysis suggests that 
the market for video programming and many of the other 
services that cable can provide is workably competitive 
and in most cases not susceptible to monopolization. We 
see little danger arising from horizontal control, either 


© See Chapter 3 for a discussion of this term. The Commission 
has, from time to time, found it relevant to assess the competi- 
tiveness of submarkets such as video program delivery or radio 
services. 


36 


in local video markets or in national markets (i.e., the 
franchising and programming markets) associated with 
cable." Therefore, we believe that in general a policy 
extending free entry into cable to all interested firms is 
most likely to contribute to a rapidly growing, technolog- 
ically dynamic industry that meets consumers’ needs. Con- 
sumers’ preferences can best determine what cable firms 
provide, and the incentives of entrepreneurs are more 
likely to shape an efficient industry structure than a pre- 
determination by government policy-makers. Changes in 
the structure of the mass communications industry since 
the cable ownership rules were adopted have removed 
whatever need the Commission once saw for such rules. 
These changes will have even more impact in the future. 
Therefore, we make the following specific recommenda- 
tions: 
(1) The rule that prohibits broadcasters from own- 
ing cable systems in their own areas should be 
rescinded.” 


(2) The provisions in that rule that prohibit cross- 
ownership of cable by the major commercial 
networks should also be dropped.” 


(3) The Commission should not place any limita- 
tions on the number of cable systems a multiple 


system operator May Own or on the number 
of subscribers it may serve. 


We are aware that some cases of market power may 
exist or that unforeseen problems may arise in the future. 


11 Horizontal control refers to the ability to directly affect the 
price and other terms of exchange in a particular market. 


1247 CFR 76.501. See Chapter 4. 
13 Jbid. See Chapter 6. 


14 At the current time there is no rule on how many local cable 


systems a single firm may control. The issue is discussed in Chap- 
ter 5. 


37 


These do not appear to be so numerous, so comprehen- 
sive, or so likely that either comprehensive prohibitions 
such as the cross ownership rules, or flat numerical re- 
strictions on ownership, are desirable. Rather, reliance 
on enforcement of the anti-trust laws can remedy those 
few situations that are unacceptably lacking in competi- 
tion. In this fashion the cable industry will be free to 
Shape itself in the patterns that best meet the differing 
needs of individual markets, and consumers will obtain 
the benefits of an efficient industry organization. 

Because most of the markets in which cable operates 
are workably competitive,“ because the cable industry 
is still in a stage of rapid growth and experimentation, 
and because cable entrepreneurs have strong incen- 
tives to respond to and provide for the overall needs 
of cable consumers, we conclude that cable operators 
should retain the Primary responsibility for determining 
what cable programming and other services should be 
available on their systems. Therefore: 


(4) We recommend that the Commission not enact 
a separations requirement for cable operators 
in most circumstances. An exception to this 
conclusion would arise in the event of telephone 
company ownership, and is discussed below." 


Cable operators do not now exercise total control over 
what is carried over their facilities. FCC rules mandate 
carriage of all significantly viewed local broadcast signals, 
and local franchise authorities can and do require cable 
operators to provide a wide variety of facilities, services 
and program options as a condition of the franchise. 
Even more important than these requirements are the 
profitmaking pressures on the operator for providing a 


© This term is defined in Chapter 8, at page 33. See n. 9. 


16 See recommendation (5) on page 8. The general issue is 
expored in Chapter 7. 


38 


high quality, diverse, and reasonably priced set of offer- 
ings to consumers. 

Revisiting the separations question would be appropri- 
ate should cable become the means by which of a sub- 
stantial majority of communications services is provided. 
At present a monopoly outcome seems far from certain. 
Therefore, we recommend no general separations policy. 

Finally, we believe that, for the most part, the same 
conclusions about TV markets reached in connection with 
broadcasters, networks and MSO’s apply to telephone 
ownership and operation of cable systems. But in the 
market for non-video services, the potential for effective 
competition is less imminent. 

Elimination of the cable-telephone crossownership ban 
before there is some likelihood of competition (or at least 
potential competition) for local loop services would seri- 
ously limit consumer alternatives.”” While cellular, XTEN, 
and perhaps other technologies offer potential completion 
in local services, their future roles remain uncertain. In 
addition, cable crossownership now may add significantly 
to the difficulty of achieving cost based telephone rates. 
We would like to stress that these problems are a conse- 
quence of the exclusive franchise, rate base regulated 
nature of the telephone industry and do not stem from 
cable. 

Although the objective of deregulation is to allow the 
marketplace to provide the services desired by consumers, 
this goal requires freedom of entry by potential suppliers. 
In most local telephone and cable markets, free entry 
does not now exist. Therefore deregulation of crossown- 
ership is not yet possible. We do believe, however, that 
as long as the services people desire are provided at rea- 
sonable cost, it should not be the role of government to 
select the organization that provides them. Thus the 
crossownership ban may not always be necessary. Two 


17 The term “local loop” refers to the pair of copper wires that 
connects each telephone subscriber to the central office or switch. 


39 


developments could ease the problem: (1) competition 
for the local loop could arise from new technologies or 
(2) as narrowband cable technology stabilizes it may 
become possible to insure access to, and competition in 
that narrowband technology. In these circumstances cross- 
owned systems may become feasible. Chapter 8 describes 
such a regime (separations), and explains why it cannot 
be relied upon to protect competition given the present 
state of technological knowledge. 

We are mindful, however, of the expertise the telephone 
company may be able to bring to cable development. If 
the crossownership ban were to retard technological change 
in either industry, the cost to consumers might be high 
over the long run. Therefore, the Commission should be 
flexible in granting waivers from the crossownership ban 
whenever either a telephone or a cable company proposes 
an experiment that requires closely integrated cable- 
telephone operations. 

Finally, leaseback arrangements, which are currently 
available, but not extensively used, could provide a route 
for taking advantage of any economies resulting from 
joint operations. 

In sum we further recommend that the Commission: 


(5) Retain the basic features of the current cable- 
telephone crossownership ban, 


(6) expand and encourage the use of leaseback 
arrangements to take advantage of whatever 
joint economies may be available, 


(7) expand and encourage the use of waivers of the 
rule when applicants propose innovative cable 
or telephone technologies that require joint 
operation, and 


(8) continue to monitor both competitive and tech- 


nological developments that may make possible 
ending the ban entirely. 


* * * * * 


40 


Chapter 8 
Telephone Ownership of Cable 


A. Introduction 


Telephone companies and cable systems both provide 
electronic information services over wire. Many services 
can be provided by either one. With adequate switching 
and consumer premises equipment cable companies can 
do just about anything that a telephone company can. 
With some changes in telephone systems, telephone com- 
panies can do virtually anything that a cable company 
can.’ The potential for competition with the local tele- 
phone monopoly is central to arguments to ban cross- 
ownership of cable and telephone facilities and joint oper- 
ation of these facilities.” 

To encourage flexibility in the provision of new services 
and to protect cable interests, the Commission has ruled 
that a local telephone company may not operate a cable 
system in its service area. Other reasons for the ban 
that were cited by the Commission in its crossownership 
prohibition are the possible cross-subsidy between cable 


1 See USITA Member Letter (April 20, 1981), for a description 
of a cable applicant which is applying to provide telephone service. 
Because twisted pair wire used for telephone signals is narrow- 
band, it cannot carry video transmission of the quality necessary 
to allow television signals without significant cross-talk problems. 
Segregation of digital carrier systems can allow the telephone 
company to provide high speed data and even video transmission 
over existing local loop between cable and plant telephone facili- 
ties. (See “New technique could allow video transmission over 
phone lines,” Bell Laboratories Record, 503-503, October 1980.) 
New telephone technologies, especially local use of fiber optics may 
eliminate any remaining distinctions. 


2 Several other technologies are potential competitors in the 
provision of local service. These include private microwave 
(XTEN), cellular radio, satellite, and others. Whether these serv- 
ices become competitive depends on cost considerations and may 
also be affected by Commission decisions. 


41 


and telephone services; the argument that cable is an “in- 
fant industry,” which can develop fully only if protected 
from telephone control; and the problems rising [sic] from 
telephone companies’ ability to deny access to independ- 
ent cable systems through control over poles and con- 
duits.* The prohibition on crossownership is waived only 
in cases where cable service could not otherwise be pro- 
vided, or where “other good cause”* can be shown. 

Because of the high fixed costs and low variable costs 
of cable provision, cable facilities are likely to be provided 
by a single firm. This situation is reinforced by state and 
local franchise regulations. Therefore, if telephone owner- 
ship of cable facilities becomes prevalent, it is unlikely 
that a competitive cable system will develop. While there 
are a number of competing sources of entertainment broad- 
casting,” there are currently few substitutes for local tele- 
phone service. 


*To a large extent, the two last problems have been eliminated 
or reduced by the development of the cable industry and by legis- 
lation. The cable industry has grown rapidly in recent years; it 
is no longer appropriate to think of it as an infant. Likewise, pole 
attachment legislation has given independent cable operators re- 
course if the telephone company is limiting access to poles at rea- 
sonable rates. 


*Cleer and substantial economies in construction or operation 
are defined as satisfying the “other good cause” criterion in the 
Sugar Land Report and Order (76 F.C.C. 2d 230 (1980) ). 


5 See the preceding chapters. These alternatives include over- 
the-air broadcasting, DBS, MDS, STV, movie threaters, live 
theater, live sports events, newspapers and magazines, and other 
entertainment and information activities. See, also the Staff Re- 
port on Policies for Regulation of Direct Broadcast Satellites 11- 
32. This argument has two logical consequences. First, as tech- 
nologies that can compete with telephone company services are 
developed, the need for cross-ownership restrictions is reduced: 
second, if cable does not develop these two-way services (i.e., if 
it does not become an actual or viable potential competitor with the 
telephone company in basic telephone services), many prospective 
benefits arising from the ban will not develop. 


42 


Section B of this Chapter discusses the advantages of 
crossownership. Section C examines the disadvantages 
of crossownership. Section D considers several alternative 
regulatory policies including (1) dropping the ban upon 
appropriate state regulation; (2) a regulatory approach 
that relies on cost manual type cost allocation and on a 
“partial separations” policy for telephone company owned 
cable systems; and (3) maintaining the present ban. We 
conclude that the ban must be retained for the time 
being. 

The Commission now bans crossownership and opera- 
tions between CATV systems and telephone companies 
in the same service area.* Telephone companies however, 
are allowed to own and operate cable systems outside of 
their own service areas and may also own cable facilities 
if they are leased back to an independent cable system.’ 


* Final Report and Order 21 FCC 2d 307 (1970). 


7 The ban is contained in the Final Report and Order, 21 FCC 2d 
307 (1970). Under the order, independent cable systems must be 
allowed the option to construct their own facilities; the telephone 
company cannot force them to accept a telephone company owned 
facility. In practice, the lease-back of telephone company provided 
facilities has been uncommon. (Thus at present only 12 telephone 
companies post lease-back tariffs). One reason for this scarcity 
however, may be a Commission effort to discourage telephone com- 
pany ownership of cable facilities. 

While the Commission did not specifically find that anti- 
competitive behavior existed, it argued “that the prevention of such 
possible abuses fully warrant our policy findings herein, and the new 
rules which will implement them.” (21 FCC 2d at 329, 1970). 

While the Commission banned cable-telephone crossownership in 
general, it admitted that in some areas cable service may be possi- 
ble only if provided by a telephone company and that in these 
instances an application for waiver of the crossownership rules 
would be considered. 

Because the waiver process is costly and the standards on which 
waivers were to be granted were unclear, the Commission has broad- 
ened the waiver standards for rural areas. It now presumes that 
crossownership is necessary if sparsely settled areas are to receive 
cable services. On November 29, 1979, the Commission instituted 


43 


B. Advantages of Crossownership 


1. Background 


The 1970 Report and Order bans crossownership be- 
tween cable and telephone facilities because of the poten- 
tial dangers. Crossownership, however, may also offer 
benefits. Joint construction and operation may lower en- 
If these savings are large enough, then the prohibition on 
crossownership is costly and should be continued only if 
the ban results in clearly offsetting benefits. Our society 


a waiver presumption policy in jurisdictions with population densi- 
ties of less than thirty homes passed per cable mile. 81 FCC 2d 233. 

This general waiver policy allowed crossownership between cable 
systems and the local telephone company within its franchise area. 
On October 9, 1980, the Commission defined the area within which 
the thirty homes per mile measure is to be applied as the cable 
franchise area (because of the likelihood of gerrymandering) 86 
FCC 2d 254, but it reversed this decision on reconsideration, and 
decided that the service area is the appropriate standard for deter- 
mining the waiver presumption. (46 Fed. Reg. 31418, June 16, 
1981). It argued that it could control gerrymandering on a case by 
case basis. 


The telephone company/cable television rule may also be waived 
“upon showing of good cause.” See Section 63.56(a) of the Com- 
mission rules, 47 C.F.R. § 63.56(a). In this regard, the Commis- 
sion has stated that: 

The right of a telephone company to attempt to meet that 
high burden is not automatically cut off by the possibility of 
independent CATV operation in the area. This burden will 
not be met, however, by a telephone company’s merely showing 
a possible marginal advantage in joint operation over inde- 
pendent operation. 76 FCC 2d at 235-6. 

Even though the Commission recently proposed eliminating the 
ban in rural areas (See Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in CC 
Docket No. 80-767, 84 FCC 2d 835 (1981)), the general prohibi- 
tion on crossownership in ‘nore populated regions has been little 
modified since its adoption in 1970. 


to enter any markets they wish. Those seeking to prohibit 
crossownership must make i 


Telephone and cable systems 
separate facilities (at t in the short 
technical differences between cable and telephone opera- 
tions. This is especially true where telephone or cabl 
plant is in place.* In areas of rapid population growth, 
substantial additions to telephone stock and construction 
of new cable systems could be undertaken jointly if costs 
would be lowered by doing so. For example, coaxial 
cable could be used for transmission of both telephone 
and wideband communications.* 


2. Economies 


Even if different transmission equipment is used to 
carry narrowband and wideband communications, some 
economies could be realized in construction by lashing 
together coaxial cable and paired wire.” Such physical 
integration might be costly where separate companies own 


8 While some telephone equipment exists almost everywhere, 
development of new towns or rapid suburban growth may result 
in instances where the existing telephone facilities are totally 
inadequate and substantially new equipment must be constructed. 


® See, for example, Rural Electrification Administration, “The 
Economics of Rural Telephone and CATV Integration,” August 22, 
1977. Most of the advantages cited here, however, relate to the 
lower cost of capital faced by telephone companies. In that article, 
the lower cost of capital was due to subsidies from the federal 
government through the Rural Electrification Administration. 


1© While lashing makes economic sense where the proportion of 
cable and loop plant is known in advance, in practice this decision 
is likely to differ for each use. If so, many of the potential econ- 
omies evaporate. 


45 


each facility. Companies may be 
done to their own facility in the course of 


If cable demands are not taken into account, increased 
costs will result from incorrect spacing, moving electric 
wires, etc. Economies also may be realized through joint 
maintenance. When wires are damaged by storm or acci- 
dents, it may be possible to send one crew to restore both 
telephone and cable service.” Likewise simultaneous re- 
pairs of cable damage in underground conduits may be 
far less costly than separate repairs. 

If cable and telephone services are offered by one com- 
pany, fixed administrative and overhead costs will be 


"A telephone company could take potential cable demands into 
account without crossownership. Regulation may make it unwilling 
or unable to do so. 


“A Study of the Technical and Economic Feasibility of Pro- 
viding Narrowband and Broadband Communications Services in 
Rural Areas: Executive Summary” BNR INC., Palo Alto, Cali- 
fornia, August 1978 argues that telephone repair personnel must 
be retrained before they could undertake such joint repairs. Such 
retraining would be wasteful in areas where specialized crews 
could be fully employed, and where travel costs are low. 


46 


spread more widely. Costs of billing can be reduced, and 
consumer convenience increased, by using a single mail- 
ing. Combined operations might allow hiring of special- 
ists that neither company could afford on its own. Even 
in large systems, division of labor may be increased by 
crossownership.” Finally, in small companies the total 
number of managers might be reduced by joint owner- 
ship, and entrepreneurial skills might be more fully 
employed. 

Some argue that increased telephone involvement in 
cable provision might result in service being extended to 
new areas faster.“ If telephone companies can realize 
the economies discussed above, they may be able to op- 
erate where an independent cable system can not." Tele- 
phone companies already have access to public right-of- 
way [sic] and experience in negotiating with local regula- 
tory boards. To some extent this access represents a 
real social savings since a telephone company will be 
able to avoid costs that the cable company would have 
to endure. On the other hand, if the telephone company 
is awarded a cable franchise through favoritism rather 


13 Large telephone exchanges seem likely to take advantage of 
these economies as they typically specialize very highly. (In gen- 
eral, the availability of consultants willing to work on a part time 
basis will reduce the need to expand in order to increase specializa- 
tion of labor.) 


14 Thus, Commissioner Joseph Fogarty has argued “[i]t is time 
for the Commission to question whether our existing rule and 
waiver standard impose too great a burden on today’s consumers 
in terms of foregoing cable service which can be provided now 
by telephone companies in favor of vague future possibility of 
service by independent operators.” Separate Statements of Joseph 
R. Fogarty in 82 FCC 2d, 254. 


16 Telephone companies also may be able to shift profits from 
regulated telephone operations. This possibility (discussed below) 
raises an entirely different set of issues. A telephone company 
might wish to enter a market even if it is not the lowest cost 
provider of service if entering this market allows it to evade 
regulation. 


47 


than because it will provide the best possible service, the 
result could be inefficient. 


Telephone companies typically have better access to 
capital than do cable companies. Rural telephone com- 


panies, especially cooperatives, have historically been able 
to obtain low cost government loans."* 


Rural Electrification Administration loans and loan 
guarantees are generally made for the purpose of encour- 
aging nationwide telephone service. Neither Congress nor 
the Commission has explicitly determined that nationwide 
rural cable service is in the public interest or that it 
must be subsidized by anyone.” 


Telephone companies also may be able to introduce 
service more rapidly than independent cable companies 
because of their knowledge about consumers demo- 


graphic, financial, or geographic patterns. This type of 
information allows real cost savings, and must, therefore, 


be considered a potential advantage of crossownership.” 


1° Rural Electrification Administration “The Economies of Rural 
Telephone and CATV Integration” August 22, 1977. A low cost 
government loan does not reflect real economic savings. Since 
this is the case, the use of government funds for the provision 
of cable service to rural areas when this service is provided by 
telephone companies is questionable. Therefore, the advantage 
that telephone companies may have in attaining low interest loans 
through the REA cannot be considered to be a real economic 
advantage of telephone company provision of cable service. 


'T Nationwide telephone service is an important goal of the Com- 
mission and Congress. Neither Congress nor the Commission has 
formally determined that universal nationwide availability of cable, 
at the non-compensatory prices that are likely to be required to 
bring this about, is justified. As this report emphasizes, many 
of the services that cable provides can also be provided over other 
media or technologies. Translators can provide rural video cover- 
age at a far lower cost than cable. There thus appears to be no 
reason to assume that nationwide cable availability need be a na- 
tional goal. Congress has, however, provided some funding for 
rural cable systems through REA and the Rural Development Act 
of 1972 Pub. L. No. 92-419, §§ 109 & 118, 86 Stat. 659, 663-4 (1972). 


'* This information could be rold to an independent cable sys- 
tem. Again, the real advantage of allowing the telephone company 


48 


Finally, allowing telephone companies to compete in- 
creases the number of qualified bidders for cable fran- 
chises. While there are already many bidders for most 
non-rural cable systems, telephone companies have ex- 
tensive engineering know-how, some of which could be 
applied to cable." Telephone companies are already 
allowed to operate cable systems outside of their tele- 
phone service areas; therefore some of these economies 
could be gained without any changes in Commission 
policy. Nevertheless, consumers might benefit if telephone 
companies were able to bring specific expertise about 
conditions in their own service areas to cable. 

The advantages of crossownership discussed so far re- 
volve around potential coordination between the cable 
and telephone entities. Far more important advantages 
may result if crossownership leads to technological ad- 
vances in the cable or telephone industries. Likewise, 
crossownership has very high costs if its stifles technologi- 
cal advances. 


3. Technological Progress 


Crossownership could either limit or encourage the de- 
velopment of communications technologies. Technologi- 
cal progress potentially has greater long run significance 


to provide cable service is the avoidance of transactions cost rather 
than the loss of information. 


19 Not all of a telephone company’s engineering experience can 
be easily transferred to cable. In addition to the obvious technical 
differences between narrowband and wideband communications 
channels, the degree of reliability that is typically built into tele- 
phone systems is far higher than that typically required of cable. 
(See “A Study of the Technical and Economic Feasibility of Pro- 
viding Narrowband ard Broadband Communications Services in 
Rural Areas, Executive Summary,” BNR INC., Palo Alto Cali- 
fornia, August 1978.) A one wire system designed to the reli- 
ability standards set for telephone service would be more expensive 
than a coaxial system where less reliability could be tolerated. 
Thus, the advantage of a one-wire system, even where the system 
is to be created de novo, might be minimal or nonexistant. 


49 


for consumer welfare than any of the economies of joint 
ownership that we have considered. 

If crossownership significantly accelerated the develop- 
ment of new technologies or services, this would be a 
powerful argument in favor of dropping the ban. Con- 
versely, if advances would be retarded, this would be a 
strong reason for retaining the ban. A prediction of the 
direction of this effect would be valuable, but such predic- 
tions are difficult to make, and crossownership is likely 
to affect technological advances in more than one way. 

A crossowned system might have more incentives to 
innovate because it would be able to utilize fully any 
new techniques developed in either service.” Independ- 
ent provision might mean that technological advances 
would be under-utilized or even inapplicable (because, 
for example, these advances rely on a “one-wire” type 
system or might have to be shared with another firm). 

The counter-argument is that there will be less innova- 
tion if competitive pressures do not compel the firm to 
seek lower costs and better techniques.”" 

Evidence on the conditions that foster technological 
progress in other industries is ambiguous.” Moreover, 
the evidence that is available does not indicate how local 
market dominance will affect innovation in the presence 
of nationwide competition for those local services. 

To the extent that joint technological progress in the 
telephone and cable areas is embodied in physical Ccapi- 
tal, lease-back arrangements of the sort already described 


* This may be overcome by lease-back agreements. 


1 Rate-of-return regulation may also hamper telephone company 
innovation since the innovating telephone company would not be 
allowed to enjoy the profits that its innovation would allow. 


22 F. M. Scherer /ndustrial Market Structure and Economic Per- 
formance, Second Edition, (Chicago: Rand McNally College Pub- 
lishing Company, 1978) at, 407-438. The markets Scherer dis- 
cusses are not regulated markets. Regulation may have a stifling 
effect on innovation. 


50 


might allow any new economies to be realized. Never- 
theless, where risk and uncertainty of outcome are high, 
such contractually arrangements may be inadequate ve- 
hicles for cooperation between telephone and cable 
companies. 

The crossownership rules do allow waivers for “other 
good cause.” Good cause is defined to include cost 
economies attainable through new technology. (See foot- 
note 4, supra.) Therefore, present rules allow telephone 
companies to reap many of the benefits of technological 
improvements that they can offer cable. 

The existence of potential economies may not be suffi- 
cient to compel cooperation, however. For one thing, the 
cable system may feel that its chances of franchise re- 
newal are better if its owns the cable facility itself. Like- 
wise, the danger of cable rate regulation may be higher 
where telephone company owned facilities are used by 
the cable company.” 

The development of technology is unpredictable. The 
Commission should be prepared to allow crossownership 
for experimental systems that attempt to apply new tech- 
nology to cable. Such a waiver policy would not endan- 
ger the incentives to progress generated in both the tele- 
phone and cable industries by the increasing range of 
competition between these systems, but would allow 


23 Contracting costs are likely to be high if the cable and tele- 
phone companies believe themselves to be supplying essentially the 
same service. Especially since the telephone company is subject 
to rate of return regulation, it may wish to exclude its competitor 
rather than suffer competition. Likewise, if the telephone com- 
pany believes that it may be permitted to enter cable in the future, 
it is less likely to wish to encourage independent cable operation. 
Finally, the costs of reaching an agreement are generally non- 
zero. Even if the telephone and the cable companies wished to 
cooperate and believed that there is no essential conflict between 
their goals, it may still be cheaper for one company to undertake 
both projects and avoid the inevitable differences that combined 
operation will present. 


51 


progress from joint operations when that seems likely to 
occur. 


4. Conclusion 


There are some potential advantages to joint owner- 
ship of telephone and cable facilities. At a minimum, the 
degree of cooperation and coordination between these 
services will be higher where they are operated jointly. 
Moreover, joint ownership may encourage discovery or 
use of new techniques that reduce the costs of service.” 

Our discussion of the potential advantages of cross- 
ownership is necessarily somewhat theoretical. There are 
three reasons for this. First, the crossownership prohibi- 
tion has been strictly enforced;™ thus the data on pos- 
sible economies in urban areas are severely limited. Sec- 
ond, there have been dramatic changes in the nature of 
the cable business over the past several years. Third, 
the existing cost advantages or disadvantages of the tele- 


*4 Some observers believe that improvements in fiber optic com- 
munications technology will ultimately make an integrated wide- 
band delivery system using fiber “loops” to the home the most 
efficient means of delivering voice, data, and video services. (See 
E. J. Claire, C. Richard Patisaul, and J. C. Wyatt, “Broadband 
Fisher-Optic Systems: Designs for Now and Near Future,” Com- 
munications News, September 1978, pp. 72-78 and R. Kachulak, 
“A Rural Integrated Distribution Trial with Fiber Optics,” /EEE 
Communications Magazine, January 1981, p. 36.) Some preliminary 
field trials have already been conducted in foreign countries. Some 
of these are described in the following Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers’ conference record papers: R. J. Mills, “Sub- 
scriber Loop Applications of Fiber Optics,” Electro 1981; P. Chou- 
inard, et. al., “Description and Performance Reviews of the York- 
ville Integrated Service Fiber Optic Trial,” International Com- 
munications Conference, 1979; and M. Treheux and E. LeCoquil, 
“Multi-Services Optical Network,” National Telecommunications 
Conference, 1980. 


2° Furthermore, the 1956 Consent Degree (see section C-4 below) 
has heretofore precluded AT&T, the largest telephone company, 
from provision of cable television services. 


52 


phone company are probably less important than the 
dynamic cost economies that interaction between cable 
and telephone service may be able to offer. While the 
economies from joint construction may be small where 
the telephone plant is already constructed, in the future, 
whenever new telephone facilities are needed or old facili- 
ties must be replaced, far more substantial economies 
may be realized. 

Cost economies need not be proven as a condition for 
crossownership. Rather, the market should be relied on 
unless this will lead to problems that cannot be dealt 
with without government interference. The problems that 
crossownership may entail, and suggested means for deal- 
ing with them, are the subjects of the following sections. 

As we argued above, there is a presumption that firms 
should not be prevented from entering markets. Those 
who wish to argue against crossownership should be ex- 
pected to make a strong case. The fact that economies 
of joint operation may generally be low is not a sufficient 
argument to ban crossownership. Nevertheless, the fol- 
lowing section argues that there are major problems asso- 
ciated with unrestricted crossownership. 


C. Disadvantages of Crossownership 


1. Introduction. 


The disadvantages of crossownership largely derive 
from the fact that telephone companies are regulated ex- 
clusive franchise monopolists in their local area. These 
disadvantages can be classified into four groups. 

First, crossownership may allow a telephone company 
partially to avoid rate-of-return regulation on its tele- 
phone service. It can do so by attributing costs to the 
regulated telephone division and revenues to an unregu- 
lated cable division.” 


26 J. B. Duvall and M. D. Pelcovits discuss this problem in the 
case of private line telecommunications services, which they argue 


53 


Second, cable service can compete with telephone serv- 
ices in the areas of alarm systems, data transmission, 
meter reading, and even plain old telephone service. 
Telephone companies may be able to forestall this facili- 
ties based competition in two-way communications by 
owning the cable system. Crossownership or cooperative 
operations will also allow joint-monopoly profit maximiza- 
tion. 

Third, the size of some telephone companies relative 
to the cable industry could allow one or two telephone 
companies to gain a very large share of the national 
market in cable.™ 


can be deregulated. (“Reforming Regulatory Policy for Private 
Lines Telecommunications Services: Implications for Market Per- 
formance”, Office of Plans and Policy Working Paper Number 4, 
December 1980.) The problem is considerably smaller in that case 
since private line service is a nationwide telephone offering, and 
since there exists an interim cost allocation manual to prevent 
this type of cost-shifting. A major policy difference between the 
use of cost allocation for deregulation of private line services and 
for control of cross-owned cable systems is that private line serv- 
ices are already provided with joint or common facilities. This is 
not the case with cable facilities, but might become the case if 
crossownership is allowed. 


27 Joint-monopoly profit is the profit earned by two firms acting 
as a single monopolist. Such cooperation is likely to lead to greater 
monopoly profits than would competitive behavior. This joint-profit 
maximization is constrained. Alarm systems can be independent 
of both cable, and telephone; XTEN type service or direct satellite 
service like that provided by SBS may eventually offer reasonable 
substitutes for phone or cable data services. Nevertheless, the use 
of a satellite for local transmission is not likely to be effective 
or cheap. Interactive alarm systems are likely to be more reliable 
than are stand-alone systems, and electronic meter reading is 
likely to be cheaper than having meter readers check meters 
several times a day. Therefore some market power is likely to 
remain. 


28 See Comments of the National Cable Television Association, 
Inc. in CC Docket 80-767 (at. 34-39) (1981). 


54 


Fourth, telephone companies control substantial con- 
duit and pole space. Unrestricted control over cable ac- 
cess can give the telephone company a powerful lever 
to gain control of the cable system or to charge mo- 
nopolistic rates for access. Rate or pole price regulation 
can limit exploitation of telephone company monopoly 
power unless crossownership is allowed.” 


2. The Allocation of Costs 


Effective rate-of-return regulation may make it profit- 
able for telephone companies to undertake enterprises 
that would be unprofitable in the absence of regulation. 
If telephone companies arbitrarily allocate costs to regu- 
lated facilities and revenues to unregulated facilities, they 
may partially avoid the rate-of-return limitations that 
regulation attempts to impose. If the telephone company 
bases a large part of its behavior on avoiding regulation, 
the most efficient organization of production is unlikely. 


Telephone regulation determines an allowable rate of 
return and permits the telephone company to earn this 
return on allowed capital, after allowed expenses. As 
long as regulation effectively limits the telephone com- 
pany’s rate of return, the company has an incentive to 
attribute costs to the regulated sector. If cable cross- 
ownership allows regulated telephone companies to shift 


2° Rate regulation gives two motives for crossownership. First, 
even if the industries were non-competitive, crossownership may 
enable the telephone company to attribute cable costs to the tele- 
phone company rate base or telephone companies revenues to the 
cable subsidiary. Second, if the cable system and the telephone 
companies are natural competitors, crossownership allows joint 
profit maximization and joint monopoly pricing. Because the tele- 
phone company supplies a vital commodity to the cable ( pole at- 
tachments), it could charge a high enough price to absorb most 
of the cable profits itself and force the cable to charge the joint 
monopolistic prices to be able to pay for the input. Since it is 
rate regulated, the telephone company can keep these profits only if 
they can be attributed to a cable subsidiary. 


55 


costs, a powerful incentive toward crossownership 
(stronger than and in addition to the incentive to in- 
crease capital discussed by Averch and Johnson™) is 
created.” 


* H. Averch and L. Johnson “Behavior of the Firm Under Regu- 
latory Constraint”, 52 American Economic Rev. 1058-69 (Decem- 
ber 1962). Averch and Johnson discuss distortions caused by rate 
regulation over the entire entity. Thus, if a telephone company 
can claim certain capital expenditures as part of the rate base, 
it may wish to undertake this investment even if it adds nothing 
to sales or to the attractiveness of the output. When part of the 
entity escapes regulation, any costs generated in the unregulated 
sector that can be shifted to the regulated sector represent pure 
profits. 


*! Assume, for example, that both a telephone company and a 
cable system can be supported by a community, that the capital 
stock of the telephone company is $100 million, and that the capital 
cost of a cable company is $50 million. Make the further simpli- 
fying assumption that operating costs are zero for both the tele- 
phone and cable operation (all costs are capital costs), that the 
allowed rate of return is 10 percent, and that a protected telephone 
monopolist would earn 20 percent if rate regulation were totally 
ineffective. In this example, each dollar of cable costs that can 
be attributed to the telephone system will justify a ten cent per 
year increase in allowed telephone revenue, up to the monopoly 
level. If all cable costs can be attributed to the telephone system, 
but all cable revenues can still be attributed to the cable sector, 
the telephone company could raise its telephone price by 50 per- 
cent and earn a 15 percent real rate of return on actual telephone 
capital. This assumes that the regulatory commission is willing 
to allow rate increases and that it believes the telephone company’s 
attribution of cable facility costs to the telephone company rate 
base. If the regulatory commission refuses to grant rate increases 
for political reasons, the incentives for misallocation of costs are 
reduced. Such a regulatory policy is of dubious legal or economic 
value since it may preclude new investment and because it may 
not allow the recovery of real costs. Depending on the ability of 
the telephone company to allocate cable costs to telephone opera- 
tions, very significant increases in apparent telephone revenue 
requirements may be possible without any change in the underly- 
ing costs. When costs can be shifted, the value of the cable sys- 
tem to the telephone company is substantially greater than it would 


56 


When costs can be shifted, rate of return regulation 
may make joint ownership of cable and telephone facili- 
ties profitable to the telephone company even if joint pro- 
vision of cable and telephone service is more costly than 
independent provision. 

This rationale for a crossownership ban is dependent 
on the assumption that rate of return regulation has held 
telephone rates below the monopoly level (though not 
necessarily below the level that could result from compe- 
tition and contestability), and that the regulators respond 
to higher costs by allowing higher rates. If regulators 
ignore reported costs and set rates on other grounds (such 
as a simple inflation adjustment to historical rates), the 
incentive to shift costs would likewise vanish, although 
other problems would develop.” 

Current Commission regulation limits crossownership 
only within the telephone service area.” As long as costs 
can be attributed geographically, the current ban appears 
sufficient to eliminate this danger of crossownership.™ 


be to an independent cable company. The value of a cable system 
to the telephone company will thus equal the sum of the present 
value of cable profits plus the present value extra telephone com- 
pany profits generated through cost-shifting. 


82 In general, inflation type adjustments will bear no necessary 
relationship to changes in costs of telephone inputs. Thus ad- 
justing rates on the basis of inflation may allow excess profits 
or profits that are insufficient to allow the recovery of investments. 
Legally such a strategy is very questionable as it might amount 
to confiscation prohibited under the Fourteenth Amendment. 


83 (21 FCC 2d at 325. (1970) ). 


% This assumes that telephone companies are not able to shift 
costs when they own cable facilities and lease them to independent 
cable operators (which is currently allowed). Since most cable 
operators have chosen to construct their own cable facilities, the 
effectiveness of local regulatory commissions in determining the 
assignment of costs has not been tested. It should be noted that 
the incentives of telephone companies to misstate costs are far 
less when they must lease the cable facilities to an independent 


57 


Such cost shifting will be far harder to control if cable 
and telephone system costs are incurred in one area for 
the same types of equipment, or are to some extent joint 
or common.” 

One of the most difficult aspects of telephone regula- 
tion is the assignment of costs to their causes. Cable 
and telephone systems share a certain amount of capital 
equipment; allocating shared costs between these cap- 
ital accounts on the basis of actual cost causation will be 
difficult or impossible. (See footnote 35 supra.) Main- 
tenance and general overhead costs are difficult to appor- 
tion between systems.” Regulators cannot simply com- 
pare costs facing joint cable telephone systems with costs 
in independent systems in other areas. Both cable and 
telephone facilities differ across regions; special geographic 
or demographic factors may cause substantial differences 
in cost and total costs of com aned systems may differ 
from independent costs. No simple yardstick is available. 


operator than when they can own an unregulated cable subsidiary. 
As long as the cable company is independent, any lease revenues 
fall under rate of return regulation, but if the cable company 
is owned by the telephone company, the cable can be charged low 
rates and show high profits outside of rate regulation. 


8° Joint costs are shared costs that must be borne regardless of 
the proportion of the goods produced (like overhead). They in- 
volve no tradeoff between the goods. Thus their allocation cannot 
be based on supply characteristics alone. Common costs are shared 
costs that involve tradeoffs, and so can be assigned on the basis 
of use without economic distortion. 


** Typically cable and telephone systems share poles or conduit 
space. 


*' Ramsey pricing theory (see, for example, E. E. Zajac Fairness 
or Efficiency: An Introduction to Public Utility Pricing, (Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1978) sets 
price in a way to recover full costs, and is implicitly, therefore, 
an economic theory of shared cost allocation. In practice, however, 
more arbitrary means of allocation must be selected. 


58 


Problems of cost-shifting cannot be ignored since the 
Commission is responsible for ensuring that rates are 
cost-based. The problems of cost-shifting may not be in- 
surmountable. The Commission may be able to deregulate 
ne et te ee See oe ee 


if the Commission were to permit crossownership, it might 
simply have to accept a certain amount of cost-shifting.” 


3. Potential Competition 


Cable and telephone suppliers can already compete in the 
provision of many two-way services. Where cable is inde- 


88 Pelcovits and Duvall make this argument. (See n. 25 supra). 
They are discussing an already regulated service. It might be 
costly to extend regulation to a new area. 


%° See chapter 7, for a discussion of separations policy in the 


of local costs are reflected in the interstate revenue requirements, 
and therefore come under the Commission's jurisdiction. 


59 


pendently owned, the threat of cable entry into two-way 
markets may restrict the ability of the telephone company 
to behave as a monopolist. If the facilities were jointly 
owned, this constraint would not exist. Telephone com- 
panies have other actual competitors and potential com- 
petitors; nevertheless, cable has more potential to provide 
telephone-like services in the near future than does any 
other carrier. 

Cable systems provide competition with the local tele- 
phone company both in two-way services and in access 
to the increasingly competitive interstate telecommunica- 
tions market. In some cities, for example, Satellite Busi- 
ness Systems (SBS) proposes to rely on cable facilities 
for origination and termination of some of its transmis- 
sions.** Without competitive access to the local consumer, 
the potential for interstate competition is limited.” 

The problems of cost-shifting are present in any tele- 
phone company expansion into service areas; in the cable 
area the likelihood that potential competitors will be elim- 
inated is even more serious. Cost-shifting is a result of 
monopoly and of partially effective regulatory control. If 
potential competition or actual competition is prevalent, 
cost-shifting will be highly limited. 

Cable systems are not the only possible competitors for 
local loop type service. The appearance of other entrants 
would reduce the need for cable competition to constrain 
telephone company market power. Some argue that com- 
petition in local loop facilities could develop rapidly, 


*1 See M/A-Com, Inc., Annual Report at 14-16 (1980). See also 
“Belt-Tightening Gotham to Use Manhattan Cable for Data Send- 
ing,” Variety at 42 (July 8, 1981). 


“In this case, the difference in potential damages from high 
levels of AT&T involvement in the provision of cable services (as 
opposed to other telephone companies) becomes important. AT&T 
is the dominant carrier in interstate carriage as well as in local 
service. Because of this, it has more reason to wish to monopolize 


local loop services than would an independent telephone company. 


60 


and that the traditional bottleneck could be circumvented.“ 
If new technologies fulfill their promise, the need for 
ownership restrictions may be eliminated. Nevertheless, 
at present the ability of these new technologies to provide 
competition with the full range of telephone services, if 
they develop at all, remains largely speculative. Cable 
has more immediate prospects for providing some com- 
petitive services, and long run prospects for eliminating 
the “local bottleneck” altogether.* The local monopoly 
held by telephone companies and the ability of cable to 
provide similar services, not any special attributes of cable 
entertainment, makes telephone control over the cable 
medium undesirable. 


4. Special Issues Involving AT&T 


Much of the opposition to cable-telephone crossowner- 
ship is motivated by a fear of AT&T.“ AT&T serves 
most of the larger metropolitan areas; these areas have 
become most attractive for cable systems. AT&T’s sheer 
size, its nationwide operations, and its vertically inte- 
grated nature raise serious concerns about Bell entry into 
new industries.“ 


This Report argues that cable concerns are largely 
local. A telephone company, whether AT&T or the small- 
est independent, has extensive market power in its fran- 


483 See, for example, D. N. Hatfield “Local Distribution—-The 
Next Frontier,” presented before the Ninth Annual Telecommuni- 
cations Policy Research Conference, Annapolis, Maryland, April 
29, 1981. These new technologies include independent cellular 
radio, and microwave radio technology such as XTEN. 


4 Ibid. 
4 See NCTA Comments, supra. 


46 The issues of nationwide cable provision by a single entity 
have already been discussed in Chapter 5 of this report. It was 
argued that nationwide cable coverage by a single entity may be 
undesirable. Nevertheless, the way to deal with that problem is 
not to maintain cable-telephone company crossownership rules, 
but to address the problem of cable concentration directly. 


61 


chise areas. AT&T differs from an independent telephone 
company because AT&T has more extensive capital re- 
sources than any independent telephone company markets 
and because AT&T’s Long Lines division is the dominant 
interstate carrier. Recent interpretation of the 1956 Con- 
sent Decree“ makes it unclear whether AT&T would 
continue to be restraint from entering the cable market.” 
Limits on AT&T may be further modified by Congress. 
The National Cable Television Association (NCTA) has 
argued that under AT&T’s proposed interpretation of the 
decree, Bell would be allowed to enter the cable market.” 

If the consent decree does not prohibit Bell entry into 
cable, the Commission should treat Bell like any other 
telephone company unless it can specify special circum- 
stances that justify the difference in treatment. The size 
differential by itself is not central. Both Bell and inde- 
pendent telephone companies have much the same incen- 
tive to enter cable; protection of their local monopoly 
power. Because cable provides competition to local facili- 
ties, concerns about local monopoly and access to inter- 
state services should be the concerns that guide Com- 


mission policy. 
5. Restricting Access 


The Commission cited the ability and apparent willing- 
ness of telephone companies to deny access to independent 
cab'= companies as one justification for the crossowner- 
ship ban.” 


*7U.S. v. Western Electric et. al., Consent Judgment, January 
24, 1956, U.S. District Court for New Jersey, 18 RRLN3: 1956 
Trade Cases 71, 134. 


** U.S. v. Western Electric Inc., and American Telephone and 
Telegraph Company, U.S. District Court for the District of New 
Jersey Civil No. 17-49, September 5, 1981. 


** NCTA comments, supra, pp. 49-50. 
* 1970 Report and Order (21 F.C.C. 2d) at 308, 323-824. 


62 


Power to deny access takes several forms. Of most im- 
mediate concern is telephone company ownership of poles 
to which cable may be attached and conduit through 
which cable may run. The Commission has authority 
(under the Pole Connection Act) to “regulate the rates, 
terms, and conditions for pole attachments” except where 
a state assumes regulatory responsibility.” In spite of 
this law, cable companies argue that problems of access 


remain substantial.” 


The problem of pole access does not by itself justify 
banning crossownership. If the telephone company were 
allowed to sell access to independent cable companies it 
could, in principle, develop a price schedule that exactly 
exhausted all cable monopoly profits and transfer these 
to the telephone company with no loss in consumer wel- 
fare.* Unless a telephone company believed it was able 
to achieve lower costs through direct ownership, it would 
be content to charge high prices for independent access. 
Where cable and telephone companies offer competitive 
services, however, access pricing could be used to reduce 
the cost of acquiring cable companies (by reducing cable 
profitability and hence the value of the system). The 
telephone company, therefore, would jointly operate cable 
and telephone facilities to maximize total profits. 

The ability of telephone companies to control access 
means that lease-back agreements must be carefully scru- 


51 Cable Connection Act, P.L. 95-234. As of January 28, 1981, 
19 states plus Puerto Rico, had assumed responsibility for regulat- 
ing pole attachments. 


52 Their arguments are three. First, the pole attachment statute 
expires five years after its enaction, i.e., in 1983; second, many 
states have preempted federal authority without providing an ade- 
quate substitute; and third, the enforcement process is suffiicently 
slow that pole access remains a substantial barrier. (See, for ex- 
ample, NCTA Comments supra at 13-14. 


583 See the discussion of vertical integration in Appendix B. 


63 


tinized. Where telephone companies have control over 
access, they may have the incentives and ability to force 
cable systems into lease-back agreements. By doing so, 
they may be able to limit cable competition. 

The pole attachment rules constrain the ability of tele- 
phone companies to abuse control over access. Because of 
this, the Commission should look on lease-back tariffs, 
where both the telephone company and the cable company 
are agreed on the rates and terms, with little reservation. 
With the controls already in place, lease-back would 
enable the telephone system and cable operators to enjoy 
many or all of the benefits of crossownership. The Com- 
mission should not allow telephone companies to force 
lease-back on cable franchise owners; it also should not, 
however, preclude their use. 


6. Conclusion 


The problems involved in cable-telephone crossowner- 
ship are sufficient to overcome the social presumption in 
favor of allowing unrestricted crossownership.™ Cable sys- 


This is not to say that the Commission should not continue 
its rural waiver program. Where cable service would not be other- 
wise provided, or where there will be a serious time lag between 
implementation of cable service by the telephone company and an 
independent cable company, the competitive advantages of inde- 
pendent cable operation are not available. If the Commission is 
willing to allow the state and local governments to worry about 
cost allocation problems (despite the fact that these problems spill 
over into interstate rates), the Commissions waiver process is 
quite reasonable. This is also not to say that the Commission 
must continue to impose its regulations until non-cable technologies 
competitive with local telephone services develop. If cable systems 
do not develop their two-way facilities in competition with local 
loop telephone company facilities but instead concentrate on the 
broadband entertainment market to the exclusion of all else, the 
ban serves little purpose and should be eliminated. The belief 
that cable systems can compete with telephone company appears 
to be justified by recent developments in the cable industry. The 


64 


tems provide a viable substitute to many telephone serv- 
ices. Allowing crossownership could eliminate this grow- 
ing competition. This does not mean that the present ban 
must be continued or if it is continued, that it must 
always be maintained. In particular, increasing competi- 
tion from other substitute services may make it unneces- 
sary. At present three options seem likely: (1) the Com- 
mission can attempt to develop a regulatory policy to en- 
courage competitive provision of services even where the 
facility is owned by a telephone company (the partial 
separations approach discussed below is an example of 
such a policy); (2) the Commission can retain its cur- 
rent ban on crossownership but institute more flexible 
waiver and lease-back arrangements; or (3) the Com- 
mission can retain its present ban, but allow individual 
states to claim jurisdiction over crossownership. 

Development of competition in local distribution would 
reduce the need for crossownership restrictions. The lim- 
ited number of local two-way options is the fundamental 
reason for concern over crossownership. Direct Broad- 
cast Satellite or other video services may eliminate any 
market power over the provision of video services now 
held by cable; nevertheless they provide no competition 
with the telephone company in the local loop. 

This section has argued that a complete elimination of 
the crossownership ban would substantially damage the 
consumer by reducing competition in an already uncom- 
petitive area. The crossownership ban is only one 
means of encouraging competition. Alternative policies 
are discussed below. Although these alternatives are re- 
jected for the present, they may be viable after further 
development of competitive technology. 


next several years will show whether cable actually does have the 
potential to offer viable competition to the telephone company. 
(Naturally this assumes that regulation does not prevent cable 
systems from competing with telephone companies. ) 


65 


The options before the Commission are not all equally 
reversible. If they were, the Commission could afford 
to experiment with one type of restriction and, if it were 
unsuccessful, implement another. In fact, it would be 
far easier for the Commission to reverse itself if it adopted 
a complete ban on crossownership than if it allowed 
crossownership and then telephone companies constructed 
single-wire systems.” 


D. Rely on State and Local Governments. 


The earlier chapters of this report argue that many 
cable concerns are local rather than national. Cable 
companies serve local markets and are directly subject to 
local franchise restrictions. The Commission must justify 
its regulation on the basis of interstate effects. If national 
concerns cannot be demonstrated, the dangers of cross- 
ownership are best left to the local communities or to the 
States. 

Local franchising authorities are affected by many of 
the dangers involved in telephone provision of cable serv- 
ice. Restricted competition for two-way services is likely 
to cause local concern. Nevertheless, these local authori- 
ties cannot internalize all the costs that are imposed on 
consumers by crossownership. Concerns facing the nation 
but not directly affecting local communities include: 


For a discussion of the problems that can develop when a 
decision must be made that may be reversed in one direction only 
(i.e., the Commission can reverse its decision to ban crossowner- 
ship, but would find it difficult to reverse a decision to allow cross- 
ownership), see C. J. Cicchetti and A. M. Freeman III “Option 
Demand and Consumer Surplus: Further Comments,” 85 Quar- 
terly J. of Economics, 528-539 ( 1971): The conclusion of this work 
is that such decisions should only be made when the evidence 
points strongly in favor of the irreversible choice. If the irre- 
versible choice seems only slightly superior, and if the passage 
of time will yield information to make a better choice in the 
future, it should not be adopted. 


66 


The interstate and intrastate toll ratepayers may have 
to bear a substantial part of the cost of cable facilities 
(through the separation and settlements process) if the 
telephone company is able to attribute cable costs to tele- 
phone services. Nationwide rate averaging means that 
states will bear only a small share of any costs that their 
individual misallocations puts into the interstate rate base. 

—The ability of competitive interstate carriers to sur- 
vive or grow is likely to be damaged by maintenance of 
local monopoly. Thus crossownership will affect interstate 
competition. 

Therefore, Commission rules that have the effect of 
limiting local choice are not necessarily arbitrary decisions 
to overrule local tastes. Rather, they may be taken to 
ensure that social costs extending beyond a local area are 
taken into account. 

National policy involvement is conditioned on several 
factors. If all interstate carriers have access to the local 
market at non-discriminatory rates and terms, and if costs 
are allocated properly, state regulation can be relied upon. 
Total reliance on state or local decisions is extreme. 
Although reliance on state or local franchisers would allow 
the Commission to focus on other matters, it would do so 
at high cost. Because cable is a potentially crucial local 
loop competitor, we do not believe that this alternative 
should be chosen at this time. As alternative means of 
access develop, however, the Commission should consider 
transfering the responsibility of crossownership regulation 
to the states. States are concerned about local costs and 
local monopoly abuse. Therefore even after competitive 
technologies are nationally available, state governments 
should retain the authority to ban crossownership if the 
Commission eventually phases out its own rules. 


67 
E. A Regulatory Approach: Partial Separations 


1. Introduction 


The Commission can also deal with problems of cross- 
ownership directly, through regulation. One regulatory 
approach, partial separations, may be a long run means 
of allowing crossownership even if local competition does 
not developed fully. For reasons discussed below, how- 
ever, we do not believe that separations can be relied on 
at this time. In the following subsections the partial sepa- 
rations idea is developed and the limits it would place on 
telephone company behavior are decribed. It is argued 
that rate-of-return or separate subsidiary requirements are 
of little benefit once separations is adopted. Major draw- 
backs of the separations policy are detailed in the final 
subsection. 


2. Definition of Partial Separations in the Cable- 
Telephone Context 


Partial separations is a system that requires that the 
use of most of the cable bandwidth be offered on a “com- 
mon-carrier” basis. This approach deals with monopoly 
control over local facilities by allowing non-discrimintory 
access for all who desire to use cable facilities. Under 
such a policy, a telephone company could not control 
local distribution over cable even if it owned the cable. 
Potential competitors would have some form of access to 
cable facilities despite telephone ownership.” 

The policy is termed “partial” because the telephone 
company is allowed to program some share of total cable 


programming. 


°* This depends on the effectiveness of the separations policy. 
Section F argues that implementation of separations policy is pre- 
mature as it would now be impossible to find a solution that is 
even close to non-discrimination. 


68 


Non-discrimination is the key to an effective sep- 
arations policy. If the Commission cannot enforce non- 
discriminatory access, separations policy will fail.” 


3. The Share of Programming Allowed Under 
Separations 


Under this approach, a telephone company should not 
be allowed to program more than some stated share of 
the total available cable programming. If instead the tele- 
phone company were limited to programming no more 
than some number of total channels, it would have an 
incentive to construct too small a system. On the other 
hand, if the limit were a share of total capacity, the tele- 
phone company might allow much of the cable capacity 
to lie idle. These problems will be averted if the tele- 
phone company is allowed to program 4a well defined 
share of the total used capacity. Such a requirement 
would encourage it to lease to competitive programmers 
in order to program more itself. 

For a separations policy to be successful, no single 
programmer should be able to gain a monopoly position. 
On the other hand, some programming costs can be re- 
duced by being spread over several channels. For this 
reason neither a very high, nor a very low share limit 
(for instance a single channel) would be appropriate. 
A limit in the range 20 to 30 percent for any one carrier 
on a telephone company-owned system appears reason- 
able. This level will allow the company to program a 
number of channels while leaving a substantial share 
available to potential competitors. If the telephone com- 
pany were to gain a dominant position in the cable (say 


57 A separations policy is regulatory rather than the reverse. A 
separations policy will involve more regulation than the present 
ban as a price for eliminating a constraint on telephone company 
behavior. 


58 It would have these incentives because it could thereby ex- 
clude potential users and avoid the purpose of separations policy. 


69 


80 percent), it could treat the system as if it were wholly 
owned from the standpoint of cost-shifting—that is, while 
it would rather control the entire system, it might be able 
to engage in join profit maximization and limit competi- 
tive entry even though competitors have access to some 
small share of capacity. If its share were to fall below 
5 to 10 percent, it might have little incentive to build a 
system since it could not take advantage of any special 
programming advantages that it might have. 

The 20-30 percent limit on telephone company pro- 
gramming is not precise. It is unlikely to make much 
difference whether the highest level is 30 percent or 31 
percent. Nevertheless, the higher the level, the greater 
is the danger from telephone monopoly power. If its al- 
lowed share were high, it could leave several potentially 
profitable video services untapped, and charge monopoly 
prices for two-way services. Because two-way services 
require different equipment and may require the potential 
for a growth in capacity as more customers subscribe, 
the telephone company could probably encourage poten- 
tial competitors to use the limited remaining channels for 
the profitable video alternatives. Setting a lower maxi- 


mum telephone company share of programming would 
limit this problem. 


4. Separations Policy and Cost-Shifting 


Separations policy would not eliminate the danger 
of cost-shifting to avoid telephone rate-of-return regula- 
tion, but it might limit it. Separations involves non- 
discriminatory charges that are independent of the uses to 
which cable channels are put.” Therefore, fully effective 
separations policy would eliminate cost-shifting within 
the cable facility. 

In addition, a separations policy can somewhat limit 
the opportunities for cost-shifting between telephone and 


5® See Chapter 7. 


70 


cable facilities. Potential competition with local loop 
services over cable facilities limits the price that can be 
charged to telephone users. Thus the need for regulatory 
control over telephone rates, and the incentives to shift 
costs would decline.” Although the telephone company 
could increase cable rates to limit this competition, any 
rate increase would tend to force video programmers as 
well as two-way cable users off the cable; this would sub- 
stantially reduce the attractiveness of such a strategy.” 


5. The Separate Subsidiary 


In its recent decisions in Computer II and Cellular 
Radio ™ the Commission relies on a telephone company 
subsidiary with independent management, capital, and 
labor to limit cost-shifting. No such separate subsidiary 
requirement should be applied to a telephone company 
owned cable system. 

We argued in Section I that the most important poten- 
tial advantages of crossownership come from economies 
in joint construction and from increased division of labor. 
Requiring full separation of facilities and eliminating the 
opportunity for increased specialization of labor would 


61 Because a wide range of alternatives to video services exist, the 
demands for cable television channel capacity (at the margin 
where the high demand channels are already being provided) is 
likely to be quite elastic. Thus any increase in the price of channel 
capacity would lead to substantial reduction in television type 
demand and a consequent loss of revenue. That monopoly power 
is highly constrained by elastic demand is a basic economic prin- 
ciple. 


62 See Computer II Final Decision, 77 FCC 2d, 308, Computer II 
Reconsideration, 84 FCC 2d, 1; and Cellular Radio, 78 F.C.C. 2d, 
984. 


71 


make it impossible for a separate subsidiary to achieve 
these economies. Thus the separate subsidiary require- 
ment eliminates the major advantages of allowing cross- 
ownership. On the other hand, a telephone company 
owned separate cable subsidiary that was not subject to 
a separations policy could constrain two-way service com- 
petition by simply not introducing services that an in- 
dependent system would, or by charging monopoly rates. 
Such a subsidiary might also be able to shift some costs 
to the parent telephone company. A separate subsidiary 
solves none of the problems of telephone ownership, but 
does eliminate any potential economies. 

The only area where a separate subsidiary might serve 
a useful function is in programming. The expertise and 
training required for programming are quite different 
from those required of telephone managers. Little reduc- 
tion in division of labor would result from a separate 
programming subsidiary. On the other hand, little would 
be gained. While the regulator could look to see whether 
the subsidiary regularly lost money (implying that it was 
being accorded an unfair advantage against other cable 
programmers), careful auditing could fulfill the same 
purpose, and would be equally necessary under a separate 
subsidiary. Under a separations policy, it would not be 
worthwhile to extend much favoritism to telephone com- 
pany owned programmers. 


6. Need Rate Regulation Be Extended to Telephone 
Company-Owned Cable Systems? 


Telephone companies may be able to evade rate-of- 
return regulation through ownership of cable facilities. 
The crossownership ban prevents this but is not the only 
possible cure. Rate-of-return regulation could be ex- 
tended to telephone company owned cable systems. This 
would limit the scope for telephone cost shifting. Allter- 
natively, a cost manual approach could be used to allo- 


72 


cate costs without the use of rate-regulation,” or rate-of- 
return regulation could be abandoned altogether. 

Many problems of telephone behavior are caused by 
rate-of-return regulation. Removing rate-of-return regu- 
lation from all basic telephone service, however, is beyond 
the scope of this study. Extending rate of return regula- 
tion to cross-owned cable systems (but not to other cable 
systems) would extend the defects of rate regulation to 
a new area,*® although it would reduce, but not elimi- 
nate, the danger of cost-shifting. It would do nothing to 
reduce foreclosure of competition from independent cable. 


3 This is the approach advocated by Duvall and Pelcovits supra, 
in their examination of private line telecommunications services. 
It is important to realize that Duvall and Pelcovits discuss a market 
where costs are already joint or common. 


* The defects of rate-of-return regulation go far beyond the 
staffing costs of regulatory agencies. The costs of regulation in- 
clude those costs, the direct costs imposed on the regulated com- 
panies to satisfy the data and legal requirements of the regulatory 
authority, plus the sometimes substantial costs that society as a 
whole must erdure as entrepreneurs divert their genius into dis- 
covering means of evading rate-of-return regulation rather than 
toward socially productive ends. 

It is a commonplace observation that regulation leads to perverse 
incentives. (See Averch and Johnson, supra. See also Cornell, 
Kelley and Greenhalgh, supra.) Historically, rate regulation prob- 
lems have been compounded by one way risk. That is, if the utility 
overinvested, the plant becomes part of the rate base; underin- 
ventment, reflected in inadequate service, is the cause of strong 
regulatory reaction. The motives are all toward overbuilding— 
toward providing a “gold plated” system. 

It is these fundamental distortions, not the increase in Commis- 
sion workload, that causes the gravest concern about any move to 
spread this form of regulation. 


* Even if rate-of-return regulation were imposed on both cable 
and telephone company services, the telephone company may still 
find some incentive for cross-subsidy between telephone and cable 
facilities because of differences in elasticities of demand between 
the sectors, (see Averch and Johnson supra.) These incentives, how- 
ever, are far less powerful than where cable profit can escape 
regulation altogether. 


73 


In recent years, the Commission has regulated interstate 
telephone services on a service basis after allocating costs 
among the various services. State regulators do not nor- 
mally make the same forms of cost allocation. Telephone 
company ownership and operation of cable facilities would 
require a careful allocation of costs to protect interstate 
ratepayers from paying costs generated by a te 
owned cable facility regardless of whether the cable sys- 
tem is to be rate-of-return regulated. 

Because this form of cost separations will be required 
before rate regulation can be implemented, the potential 
benefits of rate regulation are small. Regulation can im- 
pose high costs on consumers and on taxpayers as well 
as on the regulated entities. Rate regulation, therefore, 
should not be extended to telephone company owned 
cable system. 


F. Problems with the Regulatory Approach 


Several rules are essential to limit the ability of tele- 
phone companies to monopolize the local access market. 
These are: (1) the telephone company must be con- 
strained in the amount of programming that it can offer: 
(2) access to cable must be made available to others, 
including potential two-way competitors, on a non- 
discriminatory basis; and (3) costs must somehow be allo- 
cated between cable facilities and telephone facilities in 
order to limit cost shifting. None of these requirements 
will be easy to ensure. Indeed, some of the requirements 
may be contrary to efficiency. 

It will be very difficult to determine whether non- 
discriminatory access is actually available. While a one- 
way wideband channel tariff could presumably be devised 
in a straightforward way, it is difficult to compare this rate 
with a one-way narrowband channel rate. It will be even 
more difficult to compare one-way with two-way rates. 
Because the telephone company can use its own wire- 
pair facilities for the provision of two-way services, non- 


74 


discrimination between two-way narrowband cable users 
themselves is insufficient to ensure competition on two- 
way cable facilities. 

If two-way cable technology was already used exten- 
sively, and available for comparison, the Commission or 
local regulators could devise some formula to determine 
the relationship between two-way and one-way bandwidth 
rates. Such a formula would have to take into account 
the cost and demand differentials in each case. At pres- 
ent, however, very few cable systems provide two-way 
services to large numbers of customers. There is nothing 
close to a technical industry standard(s), and multiple 
approachs may be developed. 

The Commission cannot easily devise a formula to set 
relative prices for two-way and one-way bandwidth at 
the current state of technology. Attempts to do so could 
preclude some efficient technologies, or could lead to 
wasteful investment in circumventing regulations rather 
than meeting them. 

Over time, cable systems will begin to implement vari- 
ous two-way technologies. Some are already doing so. 
Once the technologies are understood, the Commission 
may be in a position to develop prices that are at least 
relatively non-discriminatory. 

Price discrimination is only one form that discrimina- 
tion might take. The telephone company could also dis- 
criminate against the two-way users by requiring these 
users to use terminal equipment that meets specifications 
far in excess of those needed to protect other users.” 
Similarly, the telephone company could offer faster inter- 
connection to one-way users, or could impose technical 
standards that are difficult for the two-way user to meet. 
Again, these forms of discrimination would be difficult to 
detect. 


* Such a requirement would violate Part 68 of the Commission's 
rules. (47 C.F.R. Part 68). Nevertheless, it would be difficult and 
costly to detect such discrimination. 


75 


Even in the long run separations policy is imperfect. 
Chapter 7 argues that separations policy should not be 
applied to independent cable systems. Part of the reason 
is that separations policy prevents efficient cable pricing. 
This flaw will remain even if the short-run problems with 
separations in a telephone company owned cable system 
are managable. 

Careful regulation can limit discrimination only if the 
technology to be used is understood. The costs of this 
continual regulation, both to the Commission and to 
franchise authorities, would be high. These regulatory 
costs and the possibility of limited regulatory effective- 
ness may make this approach unacceptable even in the 
long run. Nevertheless, while separations policy must be 
rejected at this time, we believe that it should be con- 
sidered as a potentially valuable future Commission pol- 
icy in dealing with cable-telephone crossownership. 


G. A Continued Ban on Crossownership 


We believe that regulatory tools cannot now solve the 
problems involved in crossownership between cable and 
telephone facilities. A continued reliance on the cross- 
ownership restriction is necessary. Under the current ban, 
the cable industry has developed rapidly. Over the past 
several years rapid growth in cable audiences and pro- 
gramming have been made and new two-way services are 
being introduced. Cable has expanded rapidly in both 
urban and rural areas. Moreover, alternative technolo- 
gies such as direct satellite broadcasting and video-disk/ 
tape players substantially increase the probability that 
almost every consumer can find supplemental video facil- 
ities at some reasonable price. A compelling argument 
for retaining the current ban, therefore, is that things 
work quite well under the ban and the potential damage 
may be great under the alternatives. 

Cable is one of the telephone company’s very few po- 
tential competitors in the provision of local loop access. 


76 


No regulatory policy outside of the crossownership pro- 
hibition can eliminate the danger of continued telephone 
control over local loop facilities. On the other hand, fur- 
ther development of competition may reduce the need for 
any regulatory policy except anti-trust measures. Further- 
more, rate regulation gives telephone companies strong 
incentives to engage in cost-shifting. No regulatory policy 
outside of crossownership prohibition or the elimination 
of rate-of-return and entry regulation can completely elim- 
inate this problem. 

Telephone companies are allowed to construct cable 
facilities for lease-back to cable operators. Although a 
telephone company might be able to use this ability to 
shift costs or to restrict cable competition, lease-back and 
waiver standards limit the costs of the ban. The Com- 
mission can, and should, be prepared to allow crossown- 
ership for experimental and innovative systems. More- 
over, the Commission must be prepared to remove the ban 
if alternative forms of local loop competition become more 
generally available.” 

The Commission banned crossownership as the result 
of several concerns. These concerns have not vanished. 
Indeed cable now shows greater promise for becoming a 
competitor in many two-way services than ever before. 
Therefore the ban should be continued. 


H. General Conclusions 


This Chapter has discussed the rationale for ban- 
ning crossownership between cable and telephone systems 
within a service area. A ban has some potentially signifi- 
cant costs, but cooperation between the telephone com- 
pany and the independent cable franchise holder through 


*7 Likewise, the Commission should continue its policy of allow- 
ing crossownership in rural areas where independent cable service 
is not viable. The benefits of competition are small if no potential 
entrants exist. 


77 


lease-back arrangements can avoid many of these costs. 
At the moment the current ban is preferable to Commis- 
sion withdrawal from crossownership regulation. 

We conclude that the arguments against crossowner- 
ship do overcome the presumption that any firm should be 
allowed to enter cable if it wishes. Telephone companies 
are an exception. The twin dangers of cost-shifting and 
foreclosure of competition combine to make unregulated 
crossownership unacceptable. 

If neither complete deregulation nor state or local reg- 
ulation can be relied upon, the Commission’s remaining 
alternatives are to continue the crossownership ban or to 
introduce a regulatory approach that allows crossowner- 
ship but limits abuses through a partial separations policy. 
We were unable to develop a workable regulatory ap- 
proach that addresses the real problems. Although we 
believe that separations policy shows promise as an even- 
tual solution, it cannot be relied upon at this Stage. There- 
fore, we recommend that the crossownership ban be 
retained. 

We conclude that a continued prohibition of telephone 
ownership of cable remains essential. This need not be 
a permanent result. The decision depends critically on 
the nature of competition in the provision of local loop 
services. Cable facilities are currently one of a very few 
ways that the telephone company owned local loop can 
be circumvented. As such, unregulated cable ownership 
provides an important opportunity for continuing tele- 
phone company :oatrol over local distribution.” The 
ban may become redundant with the development of 
XTEN, non-telephone owned cellular radio, direct satel- 
lite communications, or other as yet unforeseen technol- 
ogies. Likewise, if cable remains almost wholly an enter- 
tainment medium, the ban will serve little useful purpose 
and should be eliminated. 


*8 See “Comments of Department of Justice in CC Docket 80- 
767” (Rural Cable-Telco Cross-Ownership) (1981). 


78 


If the Commission retains the existing crossownership 
ban, it should reiterate and amplify its waiver standards. 
Telephone companies that propose technically innovative 
systems should be granted limited experimental waivers, 
even if they cannot demonstrate the current strong cost 
economies specified in the Commission’s Sugar Land de- 
cision. The Commission should not stand in the way of 
innovation. Such a waiver process, and an expanded role 
for lease-back arrangements, can go a long way toward 
achieving the most important advantages of crossowner- 
ship. 

It is possible that some states can develop regulatory 
approaches that will satisfy themselves and the Commis- 
sion. If a State wishes to implement a separations ap- 
proach, the Commission should consider allowing it to 
do so. Because of substantial interstate concerns, the 
Commission cannot automatically accept any proposal. 
It could consider allowing some flexibility, especially after 
several years, when the competitive technologies being 
developed by the cable industry are better understood. 

The basic conclusions developed in this chapter are 
three. 


® The Commission should retain the current cross- 
ownership ban. 


® The Commission should allow lease-back agree- 
ments and rely more fully on the protection of 
independent cable operators offered by the Pole 
Connection Act. 


® The Commission should entertain experimental 
telephone waivers that propose innovative cable 
technologies. 


The information gained in these experiments on the 
development of cable technology and on alternative forms 
of local competition, will be helpful in a future re- 
evaluation of the crossownership ban. 


79 
GAO 


United States General Accounting Office 
Report to Congressional Requesters 


October 1987 


TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS 


Controlling Cross-Subsidy Between 
Regulated and Competitive Services 


[GAO Logo] 


80 


United States 
General Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548 


Resources, Community, and 
Economic Development Division 


B-229035 
October 23, 1987 


The Honorable Edward J. Markey 
Chairman, Subcommittee on 

Telecommunications and Finance 
Committee on Energy and Commerce 
House of Representatives 


The Honorable Mike Synar 
House of Representatives 


The Honorable Timothy E. Wirth 
United States Senate 


In response to your requests, this report evaluates the 
use of accounting controls to prevent cross-subsidization 
between regulated and nonregulated telephone service and 
addresses the resources, motivation, and authority of the 
Federal Communications Commission to police the be- 
havior of the telephone companies if and when they 
enter new competitive businesses. 


As arranged with your offices, unless you publicly an- 
nounce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribu- 
tion of this report until 30 days from the date of this 
letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Chairman, 
Federal Communications Commission; interested congres- 
sional committees and subcommittees; and individual mem- 


81 


bers of the Congress, as well as other interested parties. 
Copies will be made available to others upon request. 


A list of major contributors to this report is included in 
appendix III. 


/s/ J. Dexter Peach 
J. DEXTER PEACH 
Assistant Comptroller General 


82 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


Purpose 


Advances in technology, as well as industry deregulation 
and restructuring, have resulted in telephone companies 
seeking to offer competitive telecommunications services 
in conjunction with their regulated services. The Con- 
gress and telephone industry regulators are currently faced 
with deciding how best to bring new services to the 
public. Both telephone companies and users can poten- 
tially benefit from new competitive services. However, 
without adequate safeguards and regulatory oversight to 
ensure that costs are properly allocated, local telephone 
customers risk subsidizing the competitive services (cross- 
subsidy) through their telephone bills. 


The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) de- 
cided in 1986 to permit greater integration of competitive 
and regulated operations as long as prescribed cost allo- 
cation standards and procedures are followed. Congres- 
sional requesters asked GAO for information on the back- 
ground and rationale for FCC’s actions, as well as FCC’s 
ability to implement the cost allocation procedures to 
control cross-subsidy between companies’ regulated oper- 


ations and their competitive ventures, which are non- 
regulated. 


Background 


In a series of decisions since 1971, FCC has dealt with 
the increasing convergence of computer and telecommuni- 
cations technology by delineating “basic” regulated ser- 
vices and “enhanced” nonregulated services, and setting 
the conditions under which telephone companies could 
offer enhanced services using the regulated telephone net- 
work. FCC has generally required telephone companies 
to offer such services through a structurally separate sub- 
sidiary, to protect telephone customers from helping to 


83 


pay the costs of competitive activities and protect com- 
petitors from unfair competition. 

In 1986, however, FCC determined that separate sub- 
sidiaries were both inefficient and restricted the advance 


tion standards and accounting procedures, (2) company 
cost allocation manuals, and (3) annual certified public 
accountant (CPA) reports attesting that the allocations 
accurately reflect procedures in the cost manuals. FCC 
will oversee the entire process and use its own auditors to 
periodically examine the cost allocations. 


district court’s review of line-of-business restrictions on 
the seven regional Bell Operating Companies set by the 
1984 Consent Decree breaking up the American Tele- 
Phone and Telegraph Company. The court’s September 
1987 decision partially relaxed some of the restrictions, 
meaning some additional integration of regulated and 
competitive services is likely, although not as much as 
FCC, the Bell Operating Companies, and others had 
wanted. 


Results in Brief 


FCC’s actions in Prescribing cost allocation standards and 
requiring cost manuals and annual independent audits 
are all essential steps of an oversight program to ensure 
that telephone rates are not subsidizing competitive ven- 
tures. FCC expects these measures to provide assurance 


84 


to the public that its rules and procedures are being fol- 
lowed consistently and that cost allocations are docu- 
mented and accurately presented. 


However, the unavoidably subjective nature of the cost 
allocation process and FCC’s “public interest” mandate 
require that it remain involved in overseeing the alloca- 
tion process and ultimately deciding whether the com- 
panies’ results are acceptable. FCC plans to audit com- 
pany records periodically, but at existing staffing levels 
these audits will be infrequent. 


The level of oversight FCC is prepared to provide will not, 
in GAO's opinion, provide telephone ratepayers or com- 
petitors positive assurance that FCC cost allocation rules 
and procedures are properly controlling cross-subsidy. 


Principal Findings 
Past Allocation Difficulties 


FCC’s past cost allocation efforts have been difficult and 
time-consuming. Reasons for these difficulties include 
the lack of systematic cost allocation standards and pro- 
cedures, and the inherent subjectivity, and thus arbitrary 
nature of the cost allocation process as applied to tele- 
phone services sharing common equipment. Economics 
and accounting both provide guidance on allocating costs, 
but do not prescribe one single “right” way. Consequently, 
disagreement is understandable among the affected in- 
dustry and consumer interests, making it difficult for FCC 
to arrive at a consensus. In the past FCC justified its 
requirements for separate subsidiaries by citing the “in- 
herent difficulties” in allocating costs. 


FCC’s New Regulatory Approach 


FCC eliminated the separate subsidiary requirement be- 
cause it impeded companies from offering new services 
and therefore imposed costs on the public. FCC deter- 


85 


ulatory controls were needed to prevent telephone com- 
panies from subsidizing their nonregulated services with 


judgment that the telephone company costs are properly 
allocated. 


Limited FCC Oversight 


To make these judgments, FCC’s periodic audits of tele- 
phone companies are crucial, particularly over the next 
few years, when gaining public acceptance is important. 
Other means of oversight—including a new computerized 
data base and access to the CPA’s workpapers—are also 
important as indicators of potential problems that may 
require FCC to examine company records. FCC will have 
access to company books and records, and plans to con- 
duct its own audits, but at its existing level of staff and 
travel resources, these audits will be infrequent. Further, 
its fiscal year 1988 budget request proposed eliminating 
3 of its 15 auditors. 


86 


Recommendation 


GAO recommends that FCC develop a strategy for pro- 
viding greater oversight of telephone companies’ cost allo- 
cations. The key to the strategy is FCC’s commitment to 
allocate sufficient audit staffing and travel funds to permit 
added field audits. 


Agency Comments 


As directed by the requesters, GAO did not obtain official 
comments on a draft of this report. However, GAO dis- 
cussed the factual information in the report with FCC 
officials during the course of the work and incorporated 
their views as appropriate. FCC officials noted that, for 
the past 2 years, they had requested additional auditors, 
but that the requests had not survived the budget review 
process after submission to the Office of Management and 
Budget. 


* * * * * 


87 
Chapter 4 


FCC’s Cost Allocation Rules Will Provide Only 

Limited Assurance That Cross-Subsidy Is 

Being Controlled 

FCC is in the midst of implementing its new cost alloca- 
tion rules and procedures—using accounting controls in- 
stead of separate subsidiaries—thus, it is impossible to 
forecast exactly how well these new controls will work. 
As discussed earlier, there is great concern about the 
growing potential for carriers to subsidize their competi- 
tive activities in the future. Based on our assessment of 
FCC’s progress and plans to date, however, we believe 
FCC will not be able to provide positive assurance that 
carrier costs are being properly allocated and cross- 
subsidy is being controlled. Since FCC’s new regulatory 
program requires more oversight than the structural sepa- 
ration approach, it is essential for public acceptance of 
the program that FCC be able to provide a high degree 
of assurance to ratepayers and carrier competitors that 
cross-subsidies are being properly controlled. 

FCC has stated in its joint cost decision that it is critical 
to oversee how the carriers implement the rules and pro- 
cedures. We concur that oversight is important, especially 
in the first few years when it is essential that the carriers 
implement the new procedures properly, with the benefit 
of timely feedback from FCC. In addition, because FCC 
in recent years has actively promoted deregulation in the 
telecommunications industry, it is essential for FCC to 
provide assurances to the public that it is serious about 
fulfilling its regulatory oversight responsibilities. Whether 
a continued program of intense oversight is necessary in 
later years may depend on proper guidance and direction 
The CPA attestation reports will go a long way toward 
assuring FCC the new procedures are properly imple- 
mented, in particular concerning such aspects as ade- 


88 


quacy of carrier documentation and consistency of ap- 
plication from year to year. However, the unavoidably 
subjective elements contained in (1) the cost allocation 
process, (2) the CPA attestation, and (3) FCC’s man- 
date to determine that rates are “just and reasonable,” 
require ultimately that FCC exercise its own judgment 
that the carriers’ costs are properly allocated. 


FCC’s access to carriers’ books and records is its main 
oversight mechanism in making these judgments. Its 
other means of oversight—tariff review, the ARMIS 
system, the complaints process, and review of CPA attes- 
tation reports—are also important, but these are essen- 
tially indicators of potential problems that may lead FCC 
to audit carriers and ultimately decide if costs are prop- 
erly allocated. 


The basis on which FCC will routinely determine that 
cost allocations are properly preventing cross-subsidies is 
questionable. The absence of complaints or other indi- 
cators of problems may cause FCC to conclude that no 
problems exist, but as we discussed in chapter 3, these 
indicators may not be effective, at least initially. While 
FCC will certainly investigate major problems if they 
are brought to its attention, it is also important for FCC 
to routinely sample carrier books and records to assess 
compliance and also judge the CPAs’ work. We see FCC 
at present with only the ability to do infrequent reviews 
of carrier records, given available audit staff and travel 
funds. Further, FCC’s fiscal year 1988 budget request 
proposed to eliminate three auditor positions. 


Judgment Is an 
Inherent Element of 
FCC’s Cost Allocation 
Rules 


Part of FCC’s past problem with cost allocations, as we 
discussed in chapter 2, has been the inherent subjectivity 
of the cost allocation process. FCC’s new joint cost rules 


89 


are an attempt to deal with the problem by specifying 
procedures and requiring carriers to have cost manuals. 
Together, these serve as objective means against which 
FCC and the CPAs can judge compliance. Still, subjec- 
tive elements will continue to play a major role in the 
entire process, given the difficulty in objectively allocat- 
ing the costs of telephone services sharing common equip- 
ment, coupled with the judgmental aspects of both the 
CPA attestation audit and FCC’s obligation to see that 
rates are “just and reasonable.” 


The public accounting firm, Coopers & Lybrand, in com- 
menting on FCC’s joint cost rules, recognized the value 
of the independent attestation, but concluded that FCC 
still has the major responsibility for evaluating the entire 
process. Coopers & Lybrand stated that 


“The use of independent audits will provide the 
federal regulator with verification that the numerical 
calculations are accurate and data sources are rea- 
sonable, and both reflect the approved cost manual 
procedures. This type of audit is quite far-reaching 
and informative as to compliance with cost alloca- 
tion procedures employed by an individual carrier. 
However, in such audits, the adequacy of the cost 
allocation plan is assumed. The independent audit 
process is not intended to serve as a means to draw 
parallels or to make qualitative or quantitative judg- 
ments on another company’s cost allocation manual 
process. As the [joint cost] Order states, the FCC 
retains the major burden on determining initial com- 
pliance and on the evaluation and monitoring of the 
process as a whole.” ' 


Written comments provided by two other public account- 
ing firms in FCC’s joint cost Proceeding both recognized 


' Assessment of Current Status of FCC Cost Accounting Intia- 
tives: CC Docket 86-111, prepared by Coopers & Lybrand for 
United States Telecommunications Suppliers Assn., Mar. 1987, p. 
17. 


90 


the subjective elements involved in making cost alloca- 
tions. One firm, Price Waterhouse, helped prepare a 
draft cost allocation manual for Southwestern Bell Tele- 
phone Company that was over 100 pages long and con- 
tained specific detailed instructions on how to allocate 
each of Southwestern Bell’s various expenses. Despite 
the detail, however, the manual recognized the subjective 
nature of cost allocations. For example, the manual 
states that “. . . no generally acceptable allocation tech- 
nique has been identified as appropriate in all circum- 
stances.” The manual also discussed allocating general 
overhead expenses (such as officer salaries) on an “in- 
tuitively logical manner.”* Similarly, comments prepared 
by the accounting firm, Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co., 
setting forth its view on cost accounting methodologies, 
stated that “There will always be tradeoffs in the selec- 
tion of an approach, namely precision, reliability, and 
level of information against the cost of implementation.” ° 
In this regard, a paper prepared by an economics con- 
sulting firm discussing FCC’s proposed joint cost rules 
stated that allocation problems are 


“ 


_ caused not by accounting abuses but by the 
arbitrariness of allocations used to divide joint costs, 
the discretion that must be given to the firm to de- 
cide which of several allocators to use, and the 
ability of the regulated firm to choose resources and 
technologies that evade the constraints of the costing 
process.” * 


2 Cost allocation manual prepared by Price Waterhouse, sub- 
mitted with comments of Southwestern Bell Corp. on Docket 86-111, 
June 1986, section 2, p. 10. 


3“Evaluation of Cost Allocation Manuals,” prepared by Peat, 
Marwick, Mitchell & Co., submitted with reply comments of Ameri- 
can Telephone and Telegraph Co., on Docket 86-111, July 1986, p. 
1-8. 


4 Accounting Separations: A Contradiction in Terms, by Cor- 
nell, Pelcovits & Brenner Economists Inc., Mar. 1986, p. 23. 


9] 


The attest examination itself will also require the exer- 
cise of judgment on the part of the CPA. The American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Statement on 
Standards for Attestation Engagements is to be followed 
by CPAs doing attest work. This statement recognizes 
the role that judgment can play in reaching a conclusion. 
It says, 


“Competent persons using the same or similar mea- 
surement and disclosure criteria ordinarily should be 
able to obtain materially similar estimates or mea- 
surements. However, competent persons will not al- 
ways reach the same conclusion because (a) such 
estimates and measurements often require the exer- 
cise of considerable professional judgment and (b) 
a slightly different evaluation of the facts could yield 
a significant difference in the presentation of a par- 
ticular assertion.” * 


The statement also says the CPA should consider “ma- 
teriality” when reporting his conclusion. A CPA’s judg- 
ment of what is material may well differ from that of an 
FCC regulatory auditor. 


The ultimate exercise of judgment occurs when FCC 
carries outs its “public interest” responsibility and deter- 
mines that rates are “just and reasonable.” This concept 
appears to be similar to the concept of “fairness” that 
was mentioned in chapter 3 as being a fundamental 
criterion in any allocation process. FCC defined “just 
and reasonable” in the joint cost order as both (1) 
protecting ratepayers by assuring rates do not subsidize 
nonregulated services and (2) promoting savings to the 
ratepayer from the integration of regulated and non- 
regulated services. 


For example, based on its “public interest” responsibilities 
FCC could require a carrier to adjust its cost allocations 


5 Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements, Ameri- 
can Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Mar. 1986, p. 10. 


92 


if, in its judgment, the result would be more nonregu- 
lated services being offered. In justifying its Computer 
III decision, FCC cited such a service, called Custom 
Calling II, that no carrier had offered while structural 
separation requirements were in effect. 


Assurance Is the Key 
to Acceptance of 
FCC’s New Regulatory 
Program 


It is essential that FCC create public confidence in its 
new regulatory program to ensure both telephone rate- 
payers and firms competing with carriers that a carrier’s 
regulated services do not subsidize its nonregulated ac- 
tivities. Assurance is particularly important over the next 
few years to counter the uncertainty and anxiety that 
will exist over (1) how both the carriers and competitors 
will behave under a new set of regulatory ground rules 
and (2) how effectively FCC will oversee the program. 
As time goes by, the need for assurance may lessen as 
everyone’s comfort level with the program increases. 


The Department of Justice consultant's report, The 
Geodesic Network, discussed both the potential and like- 
lihood of cross-subsidy occurring if carriers entered a 
number of nonregulated telecommunications markets. 
The report generally found moderate to high percentages 
of costs potentially shiftable from nonregulated to regu- 
lated operations. However, the report generally did not 
see any cross-subsidy having much of an immediate im- 
pact on regulated rates because of the small size of the 


nonregulated activities compared with regulated opera- 
tions. 


Cross-subsidy is not a large problem at present but the 
potential is great. Where a firm operates in two markets 
——one is monopolizes and another with many competitors 
—it has an incentive to subsidize the competitive mar- 


93 


kets by undercharging for competitive services and/or 
shifting costs to the captive monopoly market. Cross- 
subsidy has not been a large problem to this point be- 
cause carriers’ relatively small investments in competitive 
markets dilute any impact on telephone rates. The poten- 
tial will become greater in the future for a number of 
reasons. First, carriers are increasingly investing in com- 
petitive ventures. Second, the recent decision by the 
divestiture court relaxed some restrictions on BOCs’ in- 
vestment in competitive areas. Although the BOCs did 
not get all the relief they wanted, the court opened new 
areas e.g., the ability to provide information service trans- 
mission. Third, FCC’s Computer IIT regulatory scheme 
allows monopoly and competitive operations on an inte- 
grated basis making cross-subsidy more difficult to detect. 


The Justice consultant’s report presented a hypothetical 
example of the potential cross-subsidy due to cost shift- 
ing by a carrier offering nonregulated electronic mail 
service.” Two-thirds of the costs of an electronic mail 
operation could be potentially shiftable to similar cost 
categories in regulated operations, the report said. The 
example showed that $200 million, or 11 percent, of a 
carrier’s regulated costs fall into Categories potentially 
shared with an electronic mail operation. If there was 
a 10-percent increase in these $200 million of regulated 
costs due to cross-subsidy, there would be only a 1- 
percent increase in total carrier regulated costs, a small 
impact on regulated rates. However, this same 10-percent 
increase on the regulated side due to cost shifting would 
yield a corresponding decrease of 7 percent in nonregu- 


* Electronic mail service is defined as a computer-based method 
of transmitting information that involves composing messages on 
a computer terminal, transmitting them electronically, and storing 
them in computer storage for later retrieval by a recipient. 


94 


lated costs, a significant impact on competitive opera- 
tions." 

FCC’s requirement that each CPA attestation report pro- 
vide a “positive” level of assurance rather than a “nega- 
tive” level of assurance will provide FCC a greater degree 
of assurance. However, FCC’s own oversight of the cost 
allocation program will provide only a “negative” assur- 
ance that cross-subsidy is not occurring because of the 
limited FCC staff available to examine carrier books and 
records. 


Limited FCC Staffing 
Will Reduce the Level 
of Assurance 


Adequate FCC resources for overseeing and enforcing 
cost allocation rules has been a concern both in past 
FCC actions related to Computer II and also in connec- 
tion with Computer III and the joint cost rules. In the 
Computer II decision and related proceedings, FCC indi- 
cated that among the reasons structural separation was 
preferable to accounting controls alone was that such 
controls were more difficult to implement, and could re- 
quire added staff and more intrusion in monitoring efforts. 
Similar concerns over FCC’s oversight capability were 
raised in June 1986 by several commenters in the joint 
cost proceeding. In particular, the Department of Justice 
recognized the benefits of requiring annual CPA audits 
but still called for a “vigorous” FCC audit program focus- 
ing on both problem areas and randomly selected com- 
panies. Justice comments expressed concern 


“ that at present the Commission does not have 
a sufficient number of auditors to take on the in- 
creased responsibilities resulting from this proceed- 


1 The Geodesic Network, 1987 Report on Competition in the 
Telephone Industry, Consultant’s Report to the U.S. Department 
of Justice, Jan. 1987, pp. 11.16-11.18. 


95 


ing. The failure to devote sufficient resources to the 
audit process will reduce any prophylactic program, 
no matter how sound in theory or principle, to a 
sham that deceives rather than protects ratepayers 
and state regulators. Thus, we cannot stress too 
strongly the importance of the commission allocating 
adequate resources to enforce the accounting rules 
before separate subsidiary requirements are elimi- 
nated.” * 


The North American Telecommunications Association 
said that if FCC is to fulfill its auditing objectives, it 
must immediately seek staff reassignment within FCC 
and pursue additional funding for the auditing functions.® 
In rebuttal, FCC said that it was committed to fulfilling 
this oversight responsibility, but did not provide any 
specifics on its plans to audit carriers. FCC’s Common 
Carrier Bureau staff informed us that they are optimistic 
about preventing cross-subsidy and cited the elements of 
its program to oversee the cost allocations, i.e., CPA 
attestation reports, the ARMIS system, and FCC audits. 


Requests for Increased 
Audit Staff Denied 


Since fiscal year 1983, overall staffing of the Accounting 
and Audits Division has more than doubled, with Audits 
Branch staff increasing by eight auditors in the post- 
divestiture year of 1985. For fiscal year 1987, the Divi- 
sion has approximately 67 persons, including 22 in the 
Audits Branch. Of the 22 staff members, the branch has 
15 persons listed as auditors, while the remainder are in 
management, legal, and support categories. FCC has 
requested additional auditors in its recent budget pro- 


® Comments of the U.S. Department of Justice on Docket 86-111, 
June 1986, p. 36. 


* Comments of the North American Telecommunications Assn., 
on Docket 86-111, June 1986, pp. 38 and 39. 


96 


posals to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 
but increases have not been approved. In fact, FCC's 
fiscal year 1988 congressional budget submission called 
for a decrease of three auditors. 


For fiscal years 1987 and 1988, FCC’s proposals to 
OMB were for an added nine and three auditors, respec- 
tively. However, the FCC congressional budget submis- 
sions asked for no additional auditors in 1987 and the 
reduction of three positions in 1988. The justifications 
for the increases were similar: The Commission is in- 
creasingly relying on auditing to protect ratepayers from 
bearing costs that are not associated with regulated serv- 
ices and to ensure fairness in the marketplace. Other 
factors contribtuing to an increase in audit requirements 
included an increase in the number of regulated carriers 
as a result of the AT&T divestiture, the increased move- 
ment of such regulated companies into unregulated busi- 
nesses, revisions of the manual used in separating costs 
between interstate and intrastate services, the monitoring 
of Computer II and III compliance, the implementation 
of the revised Uniform System of Accounts, and, of 
course, the implementation of the carriers’ cost allocation 
manuals under the joint cost decision’s standards. 


To justify its proposal for the additional auditors for 
1988, FCC’s Common Carrier Bureau said that it had 
identified 256 areas ® in the operations of the major car- 
riers that it had responsibility for auditing on a routine 
basis. The Bureau acknowledged, however, that resources 
were unavailable to perform these audits annually. In- 
stead, according to the Bureau, a more reasonable plan 
would be to spread out the audits in order to control costs 


© FCC identified the 256 areas requiring audit attention in the 
20 operating companies owned by the regional BOCs, the 7 re- 
gional BOCs themselves, and 2 other major independent telephone 
companies—-GTE and United Telecom. The regulatory areas in- 
cluded were USOA, separations process, access charges, joint 
costs, Computer III, and depreciation rates. 


97 


while stil] giving the Commission some assurance that 
Carriers are complying with rules, {ts Proposal was to 
conduct about 32 audits a year, meaning FCC would 
audit each of the 256 areas once every 8 years. FCC also 
calculated that on the average this level of effort would 

it an audit Presence at most of the major carriers 
once every other year. 


only once every 16 years. With the further Staffing reduc- 
tion requested for fiscal 1988, the interval between audits 


the USOA financial reports, separations Process, deprecia- 
tion rates, and access charges. 


98 


spent on audit staff travel in fiscal 1987. FCC had un- 
successfully proposed a $184,000 increase to OMB for 
1987 for the existing and proposed staff. FCC's fiscal 
1988 congressional budget submisison, which is still pend- 
ing, would result in an increase of $35,000 for Common 
Carrier Bureau travel. If approved, FCC officials said 
that the Audits Branch will receive some of this increase. 


Statements by FCC officials regarding staffing have been 
inconsistent. In February 1987, then FCC Chairman 
Fowler defended the proposed FCC cut of three auditors 


before the Senate Appropriations Committee. He said 
that 


“As the regulated telephone companies provide us 
with independent detailed audits of their operations, 
we believe we can eliminate one of the audit teams 
we presently have without adversely affecting our 
regulatory responsibilities.” ” 
Previously, at the December 1986 meeting when the Com- 
misison adopted the joint cost rules, Commissioner Mimi 
Dawson told her fellow commissioners that this effort is 
“an area where we desperately need resources. Without 
this, the strides we've made won't be able to move for- 
ward.” 


Conclusions 


The actions FCC has taken in prescribing cost allocation 
standards, requiring FCC-approved cost manuals, and 
requiring annual CPA attestation reports are essential 
steps in implementing a program of accounting controls 
to guard against cross-subsidy. FCC expects these mea- 
sures to help overcome problems encountered in its past 
cost allocation activities, which we discussed in chapter 2. 
Together, FCC expects these measures to go far towards 


11 Testimony of Mark S. Fowler before the Subcommittee on 
Commerce, Justice, State, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies, 
Senate Committee on Appropriations, Feb. 1987. 


99 


providing assurance that its rules and procedures are be- 
ing followed consistently and that the carriers’ cost alloca- 
tions are adequately documented and accurately prepared. 
However, FCC still has a major role to play in overseeing 
the allocation process and ultimately accepting the car- 
riers’ results, given the subjective nature of the process 
and FCC’s “public interest” mandate. 


FCC is embarking on a new regulatory program designed 
to be less restrictive on carriers’ activities but that para- 
doxically may require a greater degree of FCC oversight. 
FCC has said that it is committed to fulfilling its over- 
sight responsibility, but also has proposed in its congres- 
sional budget submission to reduce its audit staff. We 
share Justice’s concern over the need for adequate re- 
sources to ensure the integrity of the entire program. 


FCC plans to audit carrier records periodically, but at 
existing staffing and auditing levels these audits will be in- 
frequent, conceivably once every 16 years. At this staffing 
level, FCC’s substantive role may be limited to responding 
to complaints or problems brought to its attention, but as 
we noted in chapter 3, the complaints process FCC has 
relied on to oversee carriers in the past may not work 
well due to restrictions on public availability of data on 
carriers’ nonregulated activities. 

Overall, the level of oversight we see FCC prepared to 
provide will not, in our opinion, ultimately provide tele- 
phone ratepayers or carrier competitors positive assurance 
that FCC’s joint cost rules will guard against cross- 
subsidy. Such assurance is important in the future with 
the growth in carriers’ competitive ventures, the loosening 
of restrictions on their entry into more of these ventures, 
and the increased potential for undetected cross-subsidy 
in the absence of structural separation requirements. 


FCC needs to match its stated intent with plans and 
resource commitments to assure that it can perform its 


ea 


100 


oversight role in a timely and thorough fashion. It would 
be a small consolation for a business that tried unsuccess- 
fully to compete with a regulated carrier to learn from 
FCC years later that costs had been misallocated, thus 
hurting its ability to compete. The telephone ratepayers 
need more immediate assurance as well that allocations 
are being done fairly. 


We cannot say exactly how often FCC should audit or 
whether the absence of audits will result in undetected 
cross-subsidy. Certainly the absence of audits increases 
the risk that cross-subsidy will occur. As we noted in 
chapter 3, past FCC audits have not resulted in findings 
of major cost misallocations, so additional resources can- 
not automatically be expected to result in savings to the 
ratepayer. However, as we have pointed out, the poten- 
tial for cross-subsidy is great given the competitive and 
regulatory environment. An aggressive program of carrier 
audits by FCC, building on the annual CPA attestation 
reports, will help create public confidence in the program 
and send a message to carriers that they can expect FCC 
to be closely monitoring their activities, at least initially, 
to make sure they get started properly. 


Recommendation to the Chairman, 
Federal Communications Commission 


We recommend that FCC develop a strategy for provid- 
ing greater levels of oversight and assurance that carriers 
are properly implementing its cost allocation procedures. 
The key to the immediate success of such a strategy or 
plan is FCC’s commitment to allocate sufficient audit 
staff and travel funds, obtained either by reallocation of 
current FCC resources or through additional funding. 


Elements of a successful strategy should include plans for 
periodically examining both carrier records and the work- 
papers supporting the CPA attestation reports. In addi- 
tion, a strategy should incorporate the flexibility to investi- 


it will likely face continued resource constraints 


erage provided by the CPAS, FCC may ultimately be able 
to develop alternative review and audit techniques less 
resource-intensive than its traditional full-scale audits. 
Also, less frequent audits may be needed once the carriers 
have become used to the cost allocation procedures and 
FCC has completed an audit cycle. 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA 
(LICENSOR ) 


AND 


CENTURY MOUNTAIN CORPORATION 
(LICENSEE) 


103 
ARTICLE VIII 
MAKE-READY WORK 


A) Poles, Anchors, Guys 
1) When an application for attachment to a pole, 


2) 


anchor or utilization of an anchor/guy strand 
is submitted by Licensee, a prelicense survey 
will be required to determine the existing ade- 
quacy of the pole, anchor, and/or guy to ac- 
commodate Licensee’s communications _facili- 
ties. Utilization of the existing available ca- 
pacity of an anchor/guy strand, when such utili- 
zation does not result in a reduction of the holding 
capacity below the level normally required by the 
Licensor for safety or other purposes will be 
permitted at the option of the Licensor and upon 
agreement by the Licensee to payment of the 
charges as specified in APPENDIX I. 

The field inspection portion of the prelicense sur- 
vey, which requires the visual inspection of exist- 
ing poles, anchors and guy strands, may be 
performed by the Licensor or Licensee (with 
optional participation by joint user and/or Li- 
censee). The administrative processing portion 
of the prelicense survey, which includes the 
processing of the application, the preparation of 
the make-ready work orders, the coordination of 
work requirements and schedules with joint users 
and other attachees and the random field verifi- 
cation of field inspection results data developed 
and furnished to the Licensor by the Licensee 
will be performed by the Licensor. 


(a) When the Licensor performs any portion of 
the prelicense survey, the Licensor will ad- 


104 


vise in writing of the estimated charges that 
will apply and receive written authorization 
from the Licensee before undertaking any 
portion of the prelicense survey (Appendix 
Ill, Form B-1). 


(b) When the Licensee performs the field in- 
spection portion of the prelicense survey the 
field inspection results data will be furnished 
to the Licensor in a format specified by the 
Licensor and according to standards of ac- 
curacy and completeness satisfactory to the 
Licensor. In view of Licensor’s common car- 
rier obligations to maintain safe adequate 
service, Licensor retains the right to redo the 
field inspection portion of the prelicense sur- 
vey if in the sole judgment of the Licensor 
the data furnished by the Licensee does not 
comply with the performance standards as 
prescribed by the Licensor. The Licensee 
shall pay the Licensor for the total expense 
incurred by the Licensor to redo the field 
inspection. 


3) Licensor reserves the right to refuse to grant a 


4) 


license for attachment to a pole or anchor, or 
utilization of an anchor/guy strand when Li- 
censor determines that the available capacity on 
such pole, anchor and/or guy strand is required 
for its exclusive use or that of a joint user or gov- 
ernmental entity with pole attachment rights and 
that the pole, anchor, or guy strand may not rea- 
sonably be rearranged or replaced to accommo- 
date Licensee’s communication facilities. 


In the event Licensor determines that a pole and or 
anchor to which Licensee desires to attach or 
an anchor ’guy strand which Licensee desires to 
utilize is inadequate or otherwise needs rearrange- 
ment of the existing facilities thereon to accom- 


5) 


105 


modate the Licensee’s communications facilities, 
Licensor will advise the Licensee in writing of the 
estimated make-ready charges that will apply 
(Form B-1). 


Licensee shall have 90 days from the receipt of 
Form B-1 to indicate its written authorization for 
completion of the required make-ready work and 
acceptance of the resulting charges. However, if 
Licensor receives a request from an additional 
licensee for attachment to a pole or anchor, or 
utilization of an anchor/guy strand for which a 
Form B-1 has been sent to an initial licensee, the 
initial licensee must authorize completion of the 
pending make-ready work and resulting charges 
within 15 days after the receipt of written notifi- 
cation from Licensor of the additional attachment 
request or until the end of the aforementioned 90 
days notification period, whichever period of time 
is shorter. 


Make-ready work will be performed by the Li- 
censor following receipt of the required written 
authorization and advance payment from the Li- 
censee. Licensee shall pay the Licensor for all 
make-ready work completed in accordance with 
the provisions of this Agreement and Licensee 
shall make arrangements with the owners of 
other facilities attached to such poles and/or 
anchors regarding reimbursement for any expense 
incurred by them in transferring or rearranging 
their facilities to make such attachment accom- 
modations available. Licensee shall not be en- 
titled to any monies paid to the Licensor for pole, 
anchor or guy strand replacements or for re- 
arrangement of facilities on a pole or anchor by 
reason of the use by the Licensor, joint user, gov- 
ernmental entity or other authorized licensees of 


6) 


7) 


8) 


106 


any additional capacity resulting from such re- 
placement or rearrangement. 


Should Licensor, joint user or governmental entity 
having pole, anchor or anchor/guy strand accom- 
modation rights, for its own service requirements, 
need to attach additional facilities to any number 
of poles or anchors to which Licensee is attached 
or avail itself of the holding capacity of an 
anchor/guy strand being utilized by the Licensee, 
Licensee will either rearrange its facilities on the 
pole or anchor or transfer them to a replacement 
pole or anchor, as determined by Licensor so 
that the additional facilities of Licensor, joint 
user or governmental entity may be accommo- 
dated. The cost of such rearrangement and/or 
transfer will be at the sole expense of the Li- 
censee. If Licensee does not rearrange or trans- 
fer its communications facilities within 60 days 
after receipt of written notice from Licensor re- 
questing such rearrangement or transfer. Licensor 
or joint user may perform or have performed such 
rearrangement or transfer without liability on the 
part of Licensor or joint user and Licensee shall 
be liable for the full costs thereof. 


License applications received by Licensor from 
two or more licensees for attachment to the same 
pole, anchor, or utilization of the same anchor/ 
guy strand will be processed by Licensor in ac- 
cordance with the procedures detailed in AP- 
PENDIX II. 


Whenever it is necessary for Licensor to replace 
its pole to accommodate Licensee’s communica- 
tions facilities, Licensor will grant Licensee the 
option where possible, and where possible and 
acceptable to joint user, to become the owner of 


107 


the pole and its associated guys and/or anchors, 
upon payment of all replacement costs on a fully 
installed basis. This option is subject to the 
further conditions that: 


(a) Licensee grants Licensor and any existing 
joint user or authorized attachee the right to 
attach their respective facilities to such re- 
placement pole and/or associated anchor 
upon the same terms and conditions as set 
forth in this Agreement, and, 


(b) that any governmental entity having attach- 
ment rights to said pole and associated an- 
chor shall be granted similar attachment 
rights under the same terms and conditions 
as apply to the pole being replaced. 


Should Licensee exercise this option and become 
the owner of the pole and associated guy strands 
and/or anchors, it agrees to maintain the pole and 
associated guy strafids and/or anchors in a safe 
and serviceable condition for attachment of Li- 
censor and joint user facilities for as long as 
licensee owns an interest in the pole. 


B) Conduit System 


1) When an application for conduit occupancy is 
submitted by the Licensee a prelicense survey by 
the Licensor will be required to determine the 
availability of the conduit system to accommodate 
Licensee’s communications facilities. Licensor 
will advise the Licensee in writing of the estimated 
charges that will apply for such prelicense survey 
and receive written authorization from the Li- 
censee before undertaking such a survey (Form 
B-1). A representative of the Licensee may ac- 


108 


company the Licensor’s representative on the field 
inspection portion of such prelicense survey. 


2) The Licensor retains the right, in its sole judg- 
ment, to determine the availability of space in a 
conduit system. In the event of the Licensor de- 
termines that rearrangement of the existing fa- 
cilities in the conduct system is required before 
Licensor’s conduct system need, for its own ser- 
vice requirements, any of the conduit capacity 
in writing of the estimated make-ready charges 
that will apply for such rearrangement work 
(Form B-1). 


Licensee shall have 90 days from the receipt of 
Form B-1 to indicate its authorization for com- 
pletion of the required make-ready work and ac- 
ceptance of the resulting charges. 


3) Should Licensor or any governmental entity with 
whom Licensor has -an agreement granting such 
entity priority access to and/or occupancy of 
Licensor’s conduct system need, for its own ser- 
vice requirements, any of the conduit capacity 
occupied by Licensee’s communications facilities, 
and Licensee’s communication facilities can be 
accommodated otherwise in Licensor’s conduit 
system, Licensee shall be required to rearrange 
its communications facilities in the manner des- 
ignated by the Licensor and at the expense of 
Licensee. If Licensee has not so rearranged its 
communications facilities within 60 days of re- 
ceipt of written notice from Licensor, Licensor 
may perform or have performed such rearrange- 
ment without any liability on the part of the 
Licensor and Licensee shall be liable for the full 
costs thereof. 


C) In performing all make-ready work to accommodate 
Licensee’s communications facilities, Licensor will 


A) 


B) 


C) 


D) 


109 


endeavor to include such work in its normal work 
load schedule. 


ARTICLE IX 


CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND 
REMOVAL OF COMMUNICATIONS 
FACILITIES 


Licensee shall, at its own expense, construct and 
maintain its communications facilities on poles and/or 
anchors, and in conduit systems covered by this 
Agreement in a safe condition and in a manner ac- 
ceptable to Licensor, so as not to physically con- 
flict or electrically interfere with the facilities at- 
tached thereon or placed therein by the Licensor, 
joint users, or other authorized licensees. 


Licensor shall specify the point of attachment on 
each pole or anchor to be occupied by Licensee’s 
communications facilities. Where communications 
facilities of more than one licensee are involved. Li- 
censor will attempt to the extent practical, to desig- 
nate the same relative position on each pole or 
anchor for each licensee’s communications facilities. 


Licensee shall notify the Licensor in writing at least 
30 days before adding to, relocating, replacing or 
otherwise modifying its facilities attached to a pole 
and/or anchor where additional space or holding ca- 
pacity may be required on either a temporary or 
permanent basis. 


The Licensee must obtain prior written authorization 
from the Licensor approving of the work and the 
party performing such work before the Licensee shall 
install, remove, or provide maintenance of its com- 
munications facilities in any of Licensor’s conduit 
systems. Licensor shall not withhold such authori- 
zation without good cause. Licensor retains the right 


110 


to specify what, if any, work shall be performed by 
Licensor at Licensee’s expense. 


E) In each instance where Licensee’s communications 
facilities are to be placed in Licensor’s conduit sys- 
tem, Licensor shall designate the particular duct(s) 
to be occupied, the location and manner in which 
Licensee’s communications facilities will enter and 
exit Licensor’s conduit system and the specific loca- 
tion and manner of installation for any associated 
equipment which is permitted by Licensor to occupy 
the conduit system. Licensor reserves the right to 
exclude or limit the type, number and size of Li- 
censee’s communications facilities which may be 
placed in Licensor’s conduit system. 


F) Licensor’s manholes shall be opened only as permitted 
by Licensor’s authorized employees or agents. Li- 
censee shall be responsible for obtaining any neces- 
sary authorization from appropriate authorities to 
open manholes and conduct work operations therein. 
Licensee’s employees, agents or contractors will be 
permitted to enter or work in Licensor’s manholes 
only when an authorized employee or agent or Li- 
censor is present or prior written authorization waiv- 
ing this requirement is granted by the Licensor. Li- 
censor’s said employee or agent shall have the au- 
thority to suspend Licensee’s work operations in and 
around Licensor’s manholes if, in the sole discretion 
of said employee or agent any hazardous conditions 
arise or any unsafe practices are being followed by 
Licensee’s employees, agents, or contractors. Li- 
censee agrees to pay Licensor the charges, as deter- 
mined in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of APPENDIX I, for having Licensor’s employee 
or agent present when Licensee’s work is being done 
in and around Licensor’s manholes. The presence 
of Licensor’s authorized employee or agent shall not 
relieve Licensee of its responsibility to conduct all 


G) 


111 


of its work operations in and around Licensor’s man- 
holes in a safe and workmanlike manner, in accord- 
ance with the terms of this Agreement. 


Licensee, at its expense will remove its communi- 
cations facilities from poles, anchors, or portions of 
a conduit system within 60 days after: 


(1) termination of the license covering such attach- 
ment or conduit occupancy; or 


(2) the date Licensee replaces its existing facilities 
on a pole with the placement of substitute fa- 
cilities on the same pole or another pole, or 
replaces its existing facilities in one duct with 
the placement of substitute facilities in another 
duct. 


Licensee shall remain liable for and pay to the 
Licensor all fees and charges pursuant to provisions 
of this Agreement until all of Licensee’s facilities 
are physically removed from such poles, anchors 
and portions of conduit systems. 


If Licensee fails to remove its facilities within the 
specified period, Licensor shall have the right to 
remove such facilities at Licensee’s expense and with- 
out any liability on the part of the Licensor for dam- 
age to such facilities or without any liability for 
any interruption of Licensee’s services. 


When Licensee’s communications facilities are re- 
moved from a pole, anchor or conduit system, no 
reattachment to the same pole or anchor or replace- 
ment in the same portion of a conduit system shall 
be made until: 


(1) The Licensee has first complied with all of the 
provisions of this Agreement as though no such 
pole or anchor attachment or conduit occu- 
pancy had previously been made, and 


112 


(2) All outstanding charges due Licensor for such 
previous attachment and/or occupancy have 
been paid in full. 


Licensee shall advise Licensor in writing as to the date 
on which the removal of its communications facilities 
from each pole, anchor, and/or portion of conduit sys- 
tem has been completed. 


ARTICLE X 
TERMINATION OF LICENSES 


A) Any license issued under this Agreement shall au- 


tomatically terminate when Licensee ceases to have 
authority to construct and operate its communica- 
tions facilities on public or private property at the 
location of the particular pole, anchor, guy strand 
or portion of conduit system covered by the license. 


B) Licensee may at any time terminate its license with 


A) 


respect to the attachment to a pole or anchor, utili- 
zation of a anchor/guy strand or occupancy of a 
portion of conduit system and remove its com- 
munications facilities by giving Licensor written no- 
tice of such intention (Forms E & F). Once Li- 
censee’s communications facilities have been removed 
they shall not be reattached to such pole or anchor, 
utilize such anchor/guy strand or occupy the same 
portion of a conduit system until Licensee has com- 
plied with all provisions of this Agreement as though 


no previous license has been issued. 
* * * * * 
ARTICLE XX 


TERM OF AGREEMENT 


Unless sooner terminated as herein provided, this 
Agreement shall continue in effect for a term of | 
year from the date hereof, and thereafter until 


113 


either party hereto terminates this agreement by giv- 
ing the other party at least six months prior written 
notice thereof. Such six months notice of termina- 
tion may be given to take effect at the end of the 
original | year period or thereafter. 


B) Termination of this Agreement or any licenses issued 
hereunder shall not affect Licensee’s liabilities and 
obligations incurred hereunder prior to the effective 
date of such termination. 


114 
APPENDIX I 


SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES 


THIS APPENDIX I, effective as of September 1, 1992, 
is an integral part of the License Agreement between 
THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE 
COMPANY OF VIRGINIA (Licensor) and CENTURY 
MOUNTAIN CORPORATION. (Licensee), dated Sep- 
tember 1, 1992 and contains the fees and charges govern- 
ing the use of Licensor’s poles, anchors, guy strands and 
conduit system by Licensee’s communications facilities. 


A) Attachment, Utilization, and Occupancy Fees 


1) General 


a) 


b) 


Attachment, utilization, and occupancy fees 
commence on the first day of the calendar 
month following the date the license is issued 
for such attachment, utilization or occupancy. 
Such fees cease as of the final day of the 
calendar month preceding the month in which 
the attachment or occupancy is physically re- 
moved or the utilization is discontinued. 

A one month minimum charge is applicable 
for all attachment, utilization and occupancy 
accommodations. 


c) Fees shall be payable semi-annually in ad- 


vance on the first day of January and July. 


d) The total attachment, utilization and occu- 


pancy fees due hereunder, shall be based 
upon the number of poles, anchors, guy 
strands and duct feet of conduit for which 
licenses have been issued before the first day 
of December and the first day of June each 
year. Each semi-annual payment shall include 


115 


a proration of the monthly attachment, utili- 
zation and occupancy charges applicable for 
attachments, utilizations or occupancy ini- 
tially authorized by the Licensor during the 
preceding six (6) month period. 


2) Fees 


Pole, Anchor, and/or Anchor/Guy Strand 
Accommodations Semi-Annual Fee 
a) Per pole attached *$2.23 


This fee is developed in accordance with the 
F.C.C. ruling in Winchester TV Cable Com- 
pany vs. The Chesapeake and Potomac Tele- 
phone Company of Virginia, File No. PA-81- 
0045 using historical data from The Chesa- 
peake and Potomac Telephone Company of 
Virginia. However, this ruling is under con- 
sideration by the F.C.C. and this fee may be 
adjusted to conform to any amended ruling. 


Conduit Occupancy Accommodations 


Annual Fee 
b) Per foot of duct occupied 
1.) Northern Virginia* $5.25 
2.) All other areas $3.00 


*Northern Virginia is defined as: 
Arlington, Alexandria, Falls Church, 
McLean, Fairfax and Vienna. 


¢) For the purpose of determining the duct feet 
chargeable the duct considered occupied shall 
be measured from the: 


116 


(i) center to center of adjacent manholes, 
or 


(ii) center of manhole to the end of a duct 
not terminated in a manhole. 


B) Charges 


1) Computation 


Charges for all work performed by the Licensor 
or by its authorized representative in connection 
with the furnishing of pole, anchor, guy strand 
and conduit system accommodations as covered 
by this Agreement shall be based upon the full 
cost, plus 15% of such amount, to the Licensor 
for performance of such work. Such charges will 
apply for, but not be limited to, prelicense survey, 
make-ready work, inspection and removal of 
Licensee’s communications facilities and super- 
vision, at the option of the Licensor, of Licensee 
performed work in and around the immediate 
vicinity of a conduit system and poles. 


2) Pole, anchor and/or guy strand replacements 


The charge for replacement of a pole, anchor or 
guy strand required to accommodate Licensee’s 
communications facilities, in accordance with 
ARTICLE VIII, A)8) shall be based on Licen- 
sor’s fully installed costs less salvage value, if 
any. 


C) Payment Date 


Failure to pay all fees and charges within 30 days 
after presentment of the bill therefore or on the spe- 
cified date, whichever is later, shall constitute a de- 
fault of this Agreement. 


CENTURY MOUNTAIN 
CORPORATION 


By: /s/ [Illegible) 


Its: Senior Vice President 


117 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF 
VIRGINIA 

By: /s/ [Illegible} 


Its: President & C.E.0. 


GAO 


February 1993 


118 


United States General Accounting Office 
Report to Congressional Requesters 


TELECOMMUNICATIONS 


FCC’s Oversight Efforts 
to Control 
CrossSubsidization 


[GAO Logo] 


119 


United States 
General Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548 


Resources, Community, and 
Economic Development Division 


B-229035 
February 3, 1993 


The Honorable Mike Synar 
House of Representatives 


The Honorable Edward J. Markey 
House of Representatives 


Advances in technology and deregulation in the tele- 
communications industry have led to the evolution of com- 
panies (carriers) that provide both regulated and un- 
regulated telecommunications services. Regulated services 
include basic interstate telephone service, and unregulated 
services include technologies, such as voice mail and elec- 
tronic mail, that transmit computerized information over 
telephone lines. If carriers’ costs for these two types of 
services are not properly allocated, customers of regulated 
telephone services (ratepayers ) may be charged for some 
of the costs of the unregulated services. Such improper 
cost allocation is known as cross-subsidization. 


In 1987, we reported that the Federal Communications 
Commisison (FCC) had not assigned enough staff to 
monitor carriers’ cost allocations to protect ratepayers 
from cross-subsidization.' Specifically, we reported that 
at the then existing staffing level, Fcc would be able to 


' Telephone Communications Controlling Cross-Subsidy Between 
Regulated and Competitive Services (GAO /RCED-88-34, Oct. 23. 
1987). 


120 


examine audit areas, such as time reporting and affiliate 
transactions, at the major carriers only once every 16 
years. We recommended that FCC develop a strategy for 
increasing its oversight of carriers’ cost allocations, em- 
phasizing the importance of FCC’s providing enough funds 
for personnel and travel to permit additional on-site 
audits. As requested, this report reviews FCC’s implemen- 
tation of (1) our recommendation to increase on-site 
audits of carriers’ cost allocations and (2) certain ac- 
counting safeguards established after 1987 to protect 
ratepayers from cross-subsidization, including audits of 
carriers’ cost allocations performed for the carriers by 
certified public accounting (CPA) firms, FCC’s reviews of 
these audits, and a computerized system for maintaining 
carriers’ cost and revenue data known as the Automated 
Reporting Management Information System (ARMIS). 


Results in Brief 


While Fcc has submitted budget proposals requesting 
additional auditors several times since 1987, no additional 
positions have been allocated to the on-site audit function. 
For fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993, Foc asked 
the Office of Management and Budget (omB) for aya 
21, and 10 additional auditors, respectively. However, 
omB asked the Congress for only three additional FCC 
auditors for 1990 and 1992 and did not ask for any addi- 
tional auditors for 1991 and 1993. In the 1990 and 1991 
budgets, the Congress approved funds that allowed FCC 
to increase its staffing level, but no additional positions 
were allocated to the on-site audit function. 


In fact, on-site audit staff have declined since 1987, while 
the staff's work load has increased by 35 percent since the 
implementation of FCC’s accounting safeguards. As of 
September 1992, the Fcc staff of 14 auditors could, on 
average, cover the highest-priority audit areas once every 
11 years and all audit areas once every 18 years. This 
level of coverage is inadequate because FCC cannot im- 


121 


pose any fines or penalties more than 3 years after a cost 
misallocation has occurred. Consequently, this staffing 
level cannot provide positive assurance that ratepayers are 
protected from cross-subsidization. Increasing the Fcc 
staffing level, along with the appropriate travel funds, 
would have little or no effect on the federal budget be- 
cause the government would be reimbursed for its on-site 
audits and reviews of CPA audits through fees Fcc is 
authorized to collect from carriers. 


Since 1987, Fcc has established a number of additional 
safeguards that complement its on-site audits. Though 
useful, these safeguards have not detected all cases of 
cross-subsidization. CPA audits have extended Fcc’s audit 
coverage, but FCC auditors have found that they have 
often not been conducted in accordance with FCC guid- 
ance. Also, the FCC audit staffing level has not permitted 
reviews of all cPas’ audit workpapers and reports. Al- 
though aRMis helped Fcc to firmly identify one cross- 
subsidy problem, the system generally does not contain 
sufficiently precise and complete data to generate the cor- 
parisons of carriers’ accounts that would allow "cc to 
readily identify potential cross-subsidy violations. 


FCC auditors, through on-site audits, continue to detect 
instances of cross-subsidy that the other safeguards have 
not identified. For example, Fcc’s on-site audits uncov- 
ered cost misallocations totaling over $300 million that 
neither CPA audits nor Fcc’s reviews of the audits had 
found. While the other safeguards have limitations, Fcc 
is studying ways to make carriers’ cost allocation manuals 
uniform, which should increase the usefulness of the 
ARMIS data. Also, Fcc has required CPA audits to imple- 
ment further changes to improve compliance with Fcc 
guidelines. However, on-site audits have demonstrated 
their effectiveness, and we continue to believe that addi- 
tional on-site audit coverage Is necessary to protect rate- 
Payers interests 


122 


Background 


During the 1960s, telephone and computer technologies 
became increasingly interdependent. Although Fcc had 
regulated traditional interstate telecommunications since 
the 1930s, it did not control the new activities that de- 
livered data-processing services over telephone lines. In 
1980, Fcc issued a decision that created a regulatory 
distinction between basic communications services and “en- 
hanced” services, such as voice mail and electronic mail. 
Under this decision, enhanced services were not regulated 
and “customer premises equipment” (devices located on 
customers’ premises that are used to send or receive in- 
formation over the telephone network) were deregulated. 
(App. I lists common unregulated services.) Data reported 
to FCC by carriers for ARMIS indicate that the market for 
unregulated services currently generates about $3.5 billion 
in annual revenues. 


Early in the development of enhanced services, FCC had 
recognized that carriers might pass on to telephone rate- 
payers costs properly attributable to the carriers’ unregu- 
lated services. To prevent such improper cost shifting, 
FCC initially required carriers to offer unregulated services 
through separate corporate subsidiaries, which were to 
maintain their own financial records, staff, computer equip- 
ment, and facilities. Later, however, FCC substituted non- 
structural requirements for the structural separation re- 
quirements it had imposed on carriers. In 1986, FCC 
applied these requirements to all major carriers, includ- 
ing the seven regional Bell Operating Companies (BOC) 
that were formed after the American Telephone and Tele- 
graph Company (aTaT) divested itself of its local tele- 
phone operating companies in 1984. 


Foc employs several accounting safeguards to look for 
cross-subsidization, including detailed on-site audits of 
carners’ records. For over a decade, Fcc has used on-site 


123 


audits to meet its regulatory responsibilities—-to determine 
whether carriers’ practices and procedures (1) are in com- 
pliance with Fcc standards and (2) are adequate to pre- 
vent cross-subsidization. In addition, on-site audits give 
FCC first-hand knowledge of carriers’ cost allocation sys- 
tems, serve as a check on CPA audits, and enable Fcc to 
follow up on problems identified through other safeguards. 


Since 1987, Fcc has employed a number of accounting 
safeguards, including cost allocation standards prescribed 
by Fcc; cost allocation manuals approved for carriers by 
FCC; annual independent audits performed by cPas; FCC’s 
reviews of these audits; and ARMIS, which FCC uses, among 
other things, to compare similar cost and revenue data 
between carriers. We did not review Fcc’s cost alloca- 
tion standards or carriers’ cost allocation manuals in this 
report. CPA audits are broad reviews performed for car- 
riers in accordance with Fcc guidance, often by the same 
firms that perform carriers’ financial statement audits. Al- 
though CPAs are required to state whether carriers’ cost 
allocation methodologies are consistent with carriers’ cost 
allocation manuals, FCC determines, through its reviews of 
CPAS’ workpapers and reports as well as through on-site 
visits, whether carriers’ practices and procedures are in 
compliance with Fcc standards. (See app. II for a more 
detailed discussion of Fcc’s regulatory actions and safe- 
guards. ) 


The Accounting and Audits Division of rcc’s Common 
Carrier Bureau is responsible for ensuring that telecom- 
munications companies do not improperly allocate their 
costs. Fourteen auditors in the Audits Branch of that 
division are key staff responsible for oversight of carriers’ 
cost allocations. 


124 


FCC Audit Staffing Level Is Not Adequate to Oversee 
Cost Allocations 


In our 1987 report, we concluded that the cost allocation 
standards and procedures that FCC was developing and 
implementing were all essential. We maintained, however, 
that on-site audits were still necessary to protect consumers 
from cross-subsidization not only because cost allocation 
systems were inherently subjective but also because FCC 
had not yet tested the new safeguards. 


At the time of our 1987 review, Fcc’s Audits Branch com- 
prised 22 staff, including 3 supervisors, 2 secretaries, | 
statistician, 1 economist, and 15 auditors. We concluded 
that this staffing level was insufficient to ensure that 
consumers were protected against cross-subsidization, and 
we recommended that FCC increase its oversight through 
more on-site audits. 


Since our previous review, FCC has not expanded its over- 
sight of carriers’ operations through on-site audits. Over 
the past 4 years, FCC has conducted generally about the 
same number of audits annually as we reported in 1987. 
Furthermore, the number of staff available to perform these 
audits has decreased. Although the number of auditors 
in Fcc’s Audits Branch remained stable through fiscal 
year 1988, it dropped to 12 in fiscal years 1989 and 
1990 and then increased to 13 in fiscal year 1991. As of 
September 1992, Fcc’s Audits Branch consisted of 18 staff 
—3 supervisors, 1 secretary, and 14 auditors (see fig. |) 
Meanwhile, the staff's work load has increased by 35 per- 
cent since the implementation of the accounting safe- 
guards. Additional audit areas have been designated for 
on-site review, and FCC has expanded its reviews of CPAs 
workpapers to ensure that the CPA audits meet PCC’s regu 
latory needs. The Audits Branch’s work load will further 
increase as the market for enhanced services grows anc 
the volume of carriers’ unregulated business imcreases 


cn 


RAT 
THT tibet ali Haiti 
aot f 4 call At F Ht " ‘ 
sr tin IK} AHH 4 
4; ; i Heit At if 
A Att le HH 1H 
A iit aii 
fa i Hy THY rit 
iG i Ha 
| ni 


al oh i UAE Hit j Hee ihc 

‘ at 

bel | i ly [: jean att i 

tages if 

| piel aiisjt : 
ail ed hates ye ntl i 

HEH a PRL 


Since 1987, Fcc has implemented a number of accounting 


al! cases of cross-subsidization. Furthermore, as we noted 
in 1987, implementation of the safeguards does not di- 
minish FCC's responsibility for ensuring the appropriate- 
ness of carriers’ cost allocations. Finally, on-site audits 
have detected instances of cross-subsidization that the 
other safeguards have not f . 


audits emphasize detailed testing. CPA audits perform 
more general analyses of cost allocations in such broad 


128 

categories as affiliate transactions, time reporting, cost 
pools, enhanced services, and the uniform system of ac- 
counts, CPA audits are required to provide positive as- 
surance as to whether the carriers’ methodologies for sep- 
arating regulated and unregulated costs are consistent 
with the cost allocation manuals approved for the car- 
riers by FCC. The results of the CPA audits are reported 
to Fcc’s Common Carrier Bureau. 


Although carriers hire CPA firms to perform CPA audits, 
Fcc establishes requirements for the audits through its 
rules and through the guidelines that it develops in re- 
viewing the cpas’ audit workpapers. Fcc’s authority to 
establish audit requirements is derived from regulations 
placed on carriers, which pass these requirements on to 
the CPA auditors. If a CPA audit is not performed in ac- 
cordance with FCC guidelines and industry standards, FCC 
can prohibit a carrier from using that independent audi- 
tor for any future audit. In its rules, FCC has provided 
that cPpas are to follow Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards except when these standards conflict with FCC 
rules. 


In the order setting forth its accounting safeguards— 
known as the Joint Cost Order—rcc has provided that 
it will use CPA audits in its monitoring program but will 
itself make all final decisions regarding compliance. FCC 
will not delegate its responsibilities to the CPAs. As the 
order further states, the CPA audit process is an adjunct 
to, not a replacement for, FCC’s on-site audit program. 


pliance with FCC guidance, as FCC audit staffs reviews 
of 1990 workpapers for 17 audits have demonstrated. 
ecc staff identified at least one problem with 15 of 17 
audits. Subsequently, Fcc staff addressed the weaknesses 
in its guidance to carriers. The following examples il- 
lustrate some of the shortcomings that Fcc audit staff 
found, the steps that they took to correct the shortcom- 


129 


ings, and—in some instances—the importance of their 
monitoring the CPA audits through on-site audits. 


* FCC audit staff have found that cpas’ workpapers have 
not always adequately supported the findings from 
their audits. For example, rcc’s review of a CPA audit 
disclosed that the workpapers did not provide the cal- 
culations and assumptions used to quantify its finding 

effect of the finding on the allocation 
FCC 


support its conclusion and recommendation, nor could 
FCC make its own determination as to the seriousness 
of the finding. Our review of FCc’s reports on 1990 
CPA audits showed that problems with quantifying 
some findings of the audit work occurred in 10 of 17 
audits. FCC audit staff have found that cpas’ testing 


in reviewing a CPA audit of an area for which Fcc had 


problems in 15 of 17 audits. 


* FCC audit staff have found that Cpa auditors have not 
always identified the materiality standards. or the 
amount of cost misallocation that the auditors consider 
sufficiently significant to warrant reporting. To ensure 
consistent and appropriate independent audits, Foc 
guidance requires CPAS to report these standards so 
that FCC can assess the suitability of the standards for 
the carriers. Our review of Fcc’s reports on 1990 cpa 
audits showed that Fcc had found problems with 


previous FCC communications. While recognizing that 
carriers may not have had time to comply with all of the 
new requirements for their 1991 CPA audits, Fcc staff 


expect the requirements to be implemented in the 1992 
audits 


In fiscal year 1993, independent cra audits will cover 
183. or about 62 percent. of the 297 audit arcas that 
roc has designated for all major carners. roc itself will 
perform on-site audits of only 15 audit areas covered Dy 
the cpas. (See fig 2.) Four of these audits will be per 
formed only if the Audits Branch recerves suppiementa: 
travel funds 
Figure Deleted 


Sra Suny 


Esye§s if Ls Ce ee 
Haghige) [i foal "I 
ul : I f 


o 
His Hit p : TE 
Hy HE a! Hatt feseca § it 


132 


data over time and across companies, establish benchmarks 
for comparison, identify disproportionate cost allocations 
indicative of potential cross-subsidization, and target on- 
site audits to carriers whose allocations appeared prob- 
lematic. 


For several reasons, ARMIS has not generated the compari- 
sons that would have allowed Fcc to substitute “com- 
puterized auditing” for some on-site audits. First, ARMIS 
does not break out cost pool data—that is, report regulated 
and unregulated costs for individual subaccounts—because 
cost pools vary from one carrier to another. Therefore, 
only aggregate (and less useful) comparisons are possible. 
In addition, each carrier’s cost allocation manual contains 
different procedures for allocating certain costs, and car- 
riers change these procedures throughout the year with 
rcc’s approval. According to the Chief of Accounting 
Systems of Fcc’s Common Carrier Bureau, FCC is cur- 
rently studying ways to make the cost allocation manuals 
uniform. He also said that if the cost allocation manuals 
had more uniform standards for cost pools and cost allo- 
cation procedures, then the automated reporting system 
could be more useful in identifying possible instances of 
cross-subsidy. 


Despite its limitations, ARMIS did enable Fcc to detect 
“inside wire” misallocations amounting to over $200 mil- 
lion. Charges for time spent by service representatives 
locating trouble with indoor telephone wires were in- 
appropriately allocated to regulated services. After de- 
regulating inside wiring and making homeowners responsi- 
ble for repairs to it, FCC was expecting the regulated 
account balances to decrease. When ARMIS data did not 
reflect the anticipated decrease, FCC auditors made on-site 
visits to determine the extent of the misallocation. Accord- 
ing to FCC officials, this was the only instance in which 
ARMIS data had enabled them to firmly identify a cost 
misallocation for follow-up by Fcc auditors. There have 


133 


been instances in other regulatory areas where ARMIS was 
used to identify problems. 


Through on-site audits, FCC auditors have identified cost 
misallocations that neither Cpa audits nor FCC’s reviews 
of CPAs’ workpapers and audit reports had disclosed. For 
example, FCC auditors have found cases of misallocations 
totaling over $300 million in which carriers charged 
expenses to the regulated side of their businesses and car- 
riers’ affiliates had overcharged regulated carriers for serv- 
ices and supplies. 


On-site audits have enabled Fcc auditors to detect not 
only cost misallocations but also deficiencies in carriers’ 
cost allocation procedures and in cpas’ audit practices and 
procedures. For example, in reviewing one carrier’s 
time reporting, FCC auditors found that for a 3-year 
period the carrier’s employees had not followed the proper 
procedures for allocating their time to regulated and un- 
regulated services. The CPA was aware of the carrier’s 
procedures, but the cpa believed it was in compliance 
with Fcc rules. FCC auditors disagreed and required the 
carrier to make the appropriate changes. Because the 
carrier had not followed Fcc’s procedures and the CPA 
firm had not enforced Fcc’s procedures, about $130 mil- 
lion had been charged erroneously to the regulated services. 
Following the on-site audit, Fcc auditors required the car- 
rier to reallocate the costs that it had improperly charged 
to the regulated services and to revise its procedures to 
conform with Fcc’s policies and procedures. 


Conclusions 


In 1987, we reported that Fcc had insufficient staff to 
ensure that consumers were protected from  cross- 
subsidization. Since that time, FCC's responsibility for 
Overseeing carriers’ cost allocations have continued to 
grow, but the staff resources allocated to this function 
have declined rather than increased. We believe the num- 


134 


ber of FCC auditors remains inadequate to provide a posi- 
tive assurance that ratepayers are protected from cross- 
subsidization. 

Increasing the Fcc staffing level, along with the appropri- 
ate travel funds, would have little or no impact on the 
federal budget because the government would be reim- 
bursed for its on-site audits and reviews of CPA audits 
through fees Fcc is authorized to collect from carriers. 
Given this trend of increasing work load and decreasing 
resources, the potential exists for ratepayers to be more 
vulnerable to inappropriate charges resulting from cross- 
subsidization in the future. Although CPA audits, FCC’S 
reviews of these audits, and ARMIS can give FCC useful 
information for monitoring, they have not identified over 
$300 million in cross-subsidization. Further refinements 
to FCC audit guidance and greater uniformity in reporting 
cost data for ARMIS may improve FCC’s information for 
oversight, but expanded coverage through additional on- 
site audits by FCC would give ratepayers and the Congress 
greater assurance that cross-subsidization is not occurring. 


Recommendation to 
the Chairman, Federal 
Communications 
Commission 


We recommend that the Chairman, FCC, continue to pur- 
sue the Commission’s quest for additional resources to 
improve assurance that cross-subsidization is not taking 
place. 


Matter for 
Congressional 
Consideration 


The Congress may wish to consider authorizing additional 
permanent positions for auditors and the appropriate travel 
funds, recognizing that the funds expended would have 
little or no impact on the federal budget. 


135 


Agency Comments 
and Our Evaluation 


We discussed the information contained in this report with 
the Deputy Chief of Fcc’s Common Carrier Bureau and 
his staff. They generally agreed with the factual informa- 
tion in the report, and we have incorporated their com- 
ments where appropriate . As requested, we did not ob- 
tain written agency comments on a draft of this report. 


The Commission’s position is that all the safeguards 
taken together are an effective deterrent against cross- 
subsidization. However, as pointed out in this report, FCC 
audit staff continue to find significant problems in the audits 
that they have been able to conduct. It is our view that 
the Fcc audit staffing level is not adequate to oversee cost 
allocations, and the additional safeguards FCC employs 
have not been effective in detecting all cases of cross- 
subsidization. Consequently, we continue to believe that 
our recommendation that FCC continue to seek the addi- 
tional resources is valid. 


To update our 1987 report and determine whether Fcc 
had increased its oversight of carriers’ operations as we 
had recommended, we reviewed Fcc’s efforts to obtain 
additional audit staff and examined Fcc’s implementation 
of nonstructural accounting safeguards. We performed our 
work in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards from September 1991 through Septem- 
ber 1992. Appendix III contains further discussion of our 
objectives, scope, and methodology. 


As arranged with your offices, unless you publicly an- 
nounce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution 
of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. 
At that time, we will send copies of this report to interested 
congressional committees and subcommittees: individual 
Members of Congress; the Chairman, Federal Communi- 
cations Commission; the Director, Office of Management 


136 


and Budget; and other interested parties. We will make 
copies available to others on request. 


This work was performed under the direction of Kenneth 
M. Mead, Director, Transportation Issues, who can be 
reached at (202) 275-1000 if you or your staff have any 
questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in 
appendix IV. 


/s/ J. Dexter Peach 
J. DEXTER PEACH 
Assistant Comptroller General 


137 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


C.A. Dkt. No. 92-1751-A 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY 
OF VIRGINIA, ET AL., PLAINTIFFS 


V. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., DEFENDANTS 


AFFIDAVIT OF ROBERT W. LUCKY 
Robert W. Lucky deposes and says: 


1. I am currently Vice President, Applied Research, at 
Bell Communications Research (Bellcore). I have a 
Ph.D in electrical engineering from Purdue University. 
I spent three decades at Bell Labs, where I was respon- 
sible for, among other things, research on the methods 
and technologies for future communications systems, 
including optical fiber technology, data networks, mobile 
communications, image processing, and broadband com- 
munications technologies and services. I have written 
numerous books and articles, and received numerous 
awards, including the Marconi Prize for contributions to 
data communications. In 1993, I was inducted into the 
New Jersey Inventors Hall of Fame at the New Jersey 
Institute of Technology. I have served as President of 
the Communications Society of the IEEE (Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers), and as Vice Presi- 
dent and Executive Vice President of the parent IEEE 
itself. 

2. Most cable systems today are operated in the 
broadcast mode: one centralized transmitter dispatches 


138 


information to thousands of identical receivers. By con- 
trast, voice telephone service is two-way and interactive. 
Any subscriber can communicate personally with any 
other subscriber. 

3. Until very recently, video television signals were 
delivered to households over a form of metal wire called 
“coaxial cable.” Coaxial cable was the best medium avail- 
able for distributing one-way video signals to consumers. 
The broadcast networks deployed by cable companies 
were not suitable for providing two-way voice telephone 
service. Telephone service was provided, instead, over 
“twisted pair” copper wires. Cable and telephone wires 
were physically different. Coaxial cable consisted of a 
metal wire running down the middle of cylindrical metal 
sheath. “Twisted pair” telephone wiring consisted of two 
identical copper wires twisted together in a double helix. 

4. Both telephone companies and cable companies are 
now replacing metal wires with fiber-optic glass cable. 
Signals are translated into digital form (as a series of on- 
off pulses) and transmitted as flashing laser light through 
thin strands of very pure glass. Fiber optic communica- 
tion systems handle video, voice, and data in exactly the 
same way. The information is all digital. It is trans- 
mitted over the same facilities, in the same way, whether 
it represents a rerun of “I Love Lucy,” a phone call on 
Mother’s Day, or a stock quote from Wall Street. 

5. For example, East Buchanan Telephone in Win- 
throp, Towa, has about 600 cable and 1,300 telephone 
subscribers, served over a single backbone network that 
was upgraded to fiber in Spring 1992.' The FCC has like- 
wise permitted GTE to build and maintain an integrated, 
high-capacity test network in Cerritos, California,’ which 


1L. Ellis, What’s Happening Under the Cross-ownership Fence, 
Communications Engineering and Design, Mar. 1993, at 64. 


2 General Telephone Co. of California, 64 Rad. Reg.2d (P & F) 
1156 (Common Carrier Bur. 1988), aff'd, 4 F.C.C. Red 5693 (1989), 


139 


will eventually provide voice, video, and data signals by 
way of fiber, coaxial, and copper wire, to 5,000 homes. 
In the Cascades development community in Loudoun 
County, Virginia, the C&P Telephone Company of Vir- 
ginia is providing transport for video programming of 
third parties using fiber optic technology. Bell Atlantic 
has also announced an agreement to provide fiber-optic 
video transport to almost 12,000 households in Florham 
Park, Madison and Chatham, New Jersey.’ In Dover, 
New Jersey Bell has announced a similar plan to provide 
fibre-optic video transport to approximately 38,000 resi- 
dences, in competition with the incumbent CATV oper- 
ator.* 

6. Even as they deploy glass fiber, both cable com- 
panies and telephone companies are deploying new tech- 
nologies to upgrade the capabilities of their existing metal- 
wire networks. 

7. Recently developed new technologies permit tele- 
phone companies to transport full-motion color video 
programs directly to subscribers over the existing tele- 
phone network. A new technology known as ADSL 


remanded sub nom. National Cable Television Ass'n, Inc. v. FCC, 
914 F.2d 285 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 


* Application, Jn re Application of NEW JERSEY BELL TELE- 
PHONE COMPANY For authority pursuant to Section 214 of the 
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, to construct, operate, 
own, and maintain, advanced fiber optic facilities and equipment 
to provide video dial tone service within a geographically defined 
area in the municipalities of Florham Park Borough, Madison 
Borough, and Chatham Borough, New Jersey, File No. W-P-C 
6838 (F.C.C. Nov. 16, 1992). 


* Application, Jn re Application of NEW JERSEY BELL TELE- 
PHONE COMPANY For authority pursuant to Section 214 of 
the Communications Act of 1984, as amended, to construct, operate, 
own, and maintain, advanced fiber optic facilities and equipment to 
provide video dial tone service within a geographically defined 
area in Dover Township, Ocean County, New Jersey, File No. 
W-P-C 6840 (F.C.C. Dec. 15, 1992). 


140 


(Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) makes possible 
the simultaneous transmission of both voice and video 
signals over existing copper telephone wires. This marks 
a major, and potentially very important advance in tech- 
nology—one that was wholly unforeseen a decade ago. 
ADSL is already being deployed in service trials. Bell 
Atlantic has recently been granted permission by the FCC 
to test ADSL technology in 400 homes in Northern Vir- 
ginia.° 

8. For their part, cable companies are grafting two- 
way voice capabilities on to their networks. A new gen- 
eration of radio phones, much like existing cellular phones 
but smaller and cheaper, is now being licensed by the 
FCC. Cable interests have become leading developers of 
these “personal communications services.” According to 
estimates cited in August 1992 by the FCC, these radio- 
based systems may well provide telephone service to 60 
million American subscribers by the end of the 1990s.” 
For example, a major cable company (Time Warner) re- 
cently made a presentation to financial analysts in which 
it described its plans to deploy a full-service, voice, video, 
and data network." 

9. In sum, the technology of both cable and telephony 
has evolved dramatically in the last decade. A decade 


5 Application, In re Application of THE CHESAPEAKE AND 
POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA For au- 
thority pursuant to Section 214 of the Communications Act of 1934, 
as amended, to construct, operate, own, and maintain, facilities 
and equipment to test a new technology for use in providing video 
dial tone within a geographically defined trial area in Northern 
Virginia, File No. W-P-C 6834 (F.C.C. Oct. 21, 1992). 


*Jn re Commission’s Rules to Establish New Personal Com- 
munications Services, 7 F.C.C. Red 5676, 5697 (1992) (citing 
Market Researchers See Large Demand for PCS in U.S., Microcell 
News, Mar. 25, 1992.). 


7 Time Warner to Build Data Network in Fla., Reuters, Jan. 26, 
1998, Financial Report. 


141 


ago, cable and telephone used different kinds of metal 
wires. Today, both are deploying glass. A decade ago, 
different types of metal-wire network supported different 
types of transmission. Today, new technology permits 
video over existing telephone wires, and voice over a 
combination of radio and cable. 


I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed the 26th day of April, 1993. 


8/ Robert W. Lucky 
RoBert W. Lucky 
Vice President, Applied Research 
Bell Communications Research 
331 Newman Springs Road 
Room 3Z367A 
Red Bank, New Jersey 07701-7040 


142 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
( Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF WILLIAM E. LEE 


1. My name is William E. Lee. I am a Professor in 
the Henry W. Grady College of Journalism and Mass 
Communication at the University of Georgia. I earned a 
Doctorate degree in Mass Communications at the Univer- 
sity of Wisconsin in 1977 and have been on the faculty at 
the University of Georgia since 1977. I have taught 
courses on the structure and practices of the mass media 
and have published extensively on mass communication. 
I have testified as an expert on mass communication at 
seven trials and have provided expert testimony through 
affidavits or depositions in seven other lawsuits. The mat- 
ters set forth and the opinions expressed herein are known 
or personally held by me and if called as a witness, I 
could testify competently to them. 

2. Based on my background in the field of mass com- 
munication, I make three principal points in this affidavit. 
First, the creation, selection, arrangement, packaging and 
provision of video programming for multichannel delivery, 
whether it is performed by a cable company or by Bell 
Atlantic Video Services (“BVS”), involves editorial deci- 
sions that are functionally indistinguishable from those 
involved in newspaper editing. Second, today video com- 
munication is the most important mass medium in Amer- 
ica. Third, the ban against telephone company provision 
of “video programming” at issue in this lawsuit cannot 
be understood or enforced without reference to, and gov- 


143 


ernment scrutiny of, the content of individual programs 
or services. 


[. Editorial Decision-Making By Multichannel Video 
Programmers and Newspapers 


3. Based on my review of the pleadings in this case 
and on discussions with employees of BVS, I have gained 
an understanding of the nature of the services that BVS 
intends to provide. Specifically, BVS intends to provide a 
multichannel package of video programming directly to 
consumers. Although BVS will use the common carrier 
telephone network of The Chesapeake and Potomac Tele- 
phone Company of Virginia (“C&P”) to deliver this pro- 
gramming, BVS itself will not act in any sense as a com- 
mon carrier. Rather, BVS will exercise complete editorial 
discretion over the package of programming it will pro- 
vide, whether BVS decides to create programming of its 
own, or selects, assembles, edits and arranges video pro- 
gramming obtained from others. In this respect, BVS 
will perform the same editorial functions performed by 
cable operators in selecting and packaging the program- 
ming provided over their cable systems. As I will explain 
below, moreover, the editorial functions performed by 
BVS and other multichannel programmers are indistin- 
guishable from those performed by newspapers. 


Multichannel Video Programmers 


4. At the outset, it is important to point out that 
multichannel video programmers exercise editorial discre- 
tion in two separate respects. First, these programmers 
exercise editorial discretion in choosing the programming 
they will provide. Second, once this initial selection is 
made, multichannel programmers exercise editorial dis- 
cretion in arranging and packaging this programming for 
sale to consumers. 1 address each of these functions 
below. 


144 


5. Multichannel video programmers must choose 
among available programming options because of both 
technical and financial constraints. Currently most multi- 
channel video programming is delivered over cable sys- 
tems that have limited channel capacity, and the supply 
of available programming exceeds the capacity of vir- 
tually all cable systems. Even apart from these capacity 
limitations, however, multichannel video programmers 
also face financial constraints on the number and types 
of video programs for which consumers will pay. As a 
result, multichannel programmers must exercise discretion 
to choose among the available programming options. 

6. Multichannel video programmers make program- 
ming decisions based upon two distinct strategies. Some 

ming services, such as broadcast stations, are 
selected because of their appeal to broad segments of the 
audience. Other programming services, like Black Enter- 
tainment Television, are selected because they appeal to 
narrow racial, ethnic, age, or interest groups. Some pro- 
gramming services are identified with particular subjects 
and viewpoints. For example, the Family Channel offers 
a different view on sexual morality than does the Playboy 
at Night service. The interest of audience segments in 
certain topics and viewpoints influences the selection of 
programming. The primary programming options for 
multichannel video programmers are briefly described 
below: 

a. Multichannel video programmers select which 
broadcast stations to carry. The selection of broadcast 
stations is affected by the number and nature of stations 
in the local and adjacent markets, and by whether ( and 
how much) a multichannel provider must pay for “re- 
transmission” rights for a broadcaster's signal. Since the 
most-watched sources on cable are the major network 
(ABC, CBS and NBC) broadcast affiliates, multichannel 
video programmers naturally retransmit the signals of 
local affiliates. However, a multichannel video program- 


145 


mer may wish to carry two affiliates of the same network 
located in adjacent markets. Although the network pro- 
gramming on both stations will be duplicative, the addi- 
tional station is selected because of factors such as audi- 
ence interest in news from the adjacent market. Multi- 
channel video programmers must also determine which 
local independent stations to retransmit. For example, a 
suburban cable system may prefer not to carry an inde- 
pendent television station that broadcasts in a foreign 
language that is of interest only to urban residents. Every 
broadcast signal that is carried reduces the options the 
programmer has for other types of programming. 

b. Multichannel video programmers also select 
among cable programming services such as the 75 plus 
basic cable network, 42 regional networks, 7 pay cable net- 
works, 7 pay-per-view networks, 10 text services, and 11 
audio services. (Attachment A lists the available cable 
programming services.) While some of these services 
seek to reach broad audiences, others are “niche” services 
that appeal to a very limited age or interest group. In 
1991-92, 43% of viewing time in cable households was 
devoted to basic and pay cable services. See Stipulation 8. 
The audience for each service, therefore, represents a very 
small portion (often less than 1%) of the total audience: 
selection of the appropriate mix of services entails the 
identification of small groups whose interests are not 
served by other sources. 

c. Currently, approximately forty-one percent of 
cable systems in the United States carry locally originated 
programming. TV & Cable Factbook, Services Volume at 
1-68 (1993 edition). The types of local programs in- 
clude sports, comedy, children’s, talk, music, and news. 
Because a cable system serves a more limited geographic 
area than the multi-country region served by a television 
station, a cable system is able to provide programming 
more closely tailored to the interests of a particular town. 
For example, one of the most significant recent develop- 
ments in local cable programming is the coverage of local 


146 


news. A broadcast television station’s news necessarily 
focuses on the major city in the television market, such 
as Washington, D.C., or on stories of regional interest, 
but provides little coverage of the many smaller com- 
munities located within the station’s market. A cable sys- 
tem, however, can fill in the news “niches” left untouched 
by broadcast television news. Thus, local cable news is 
merging in places like Long Island, New York and 
Orange County, California that are largely ignored by 
broadcast television news. These cable news operations 
range in size from the twenty-four-hour service in Long 
Island, to daily half-hour newscasts in communities such 
as Ithaca, New York, to brief inserts of local news in 
CNN Headline News. The cost of producing local news 
coverage, however, is a major obstacle to the develop- 
ment of these services. See, e.g., “Local News Stymies 
Many Cable Firms,” Wall Street Journal, June 15, 1991, 
at B1. To control costs, multichannel video programmers 
are entering cooperative arrangements with local broad- 
casters and newspaper publishers. For example, some 
broadcasters prepare coverage of elections just for dis- 
semination on cable. See, e.g., “KYW-TV Election Cov- 
erage: Via Cable Systems,” “Broadcasting, November 
4. 1991, at 48 (describing Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
television station’s arrangement with local cable systems). 
Some multichannel video programmers allow either local 
broadcasters or newspapers to insert a brief summary of 
local news in a cable program service such as Headline 
News or a weather update in the Weather Channel. See, 
e.g., “System Teams Up with Local Paper, Broadcaster,” 
Multichannel News, August 20, 1990, at 14 (describing 
Rock Hill, South Carolina cable system’s arrangement). 

7. In addition, once the multichannel video programmer 
selects the programming it will provide, it must package 
the programming for sale to consumers. In doing so, the 
programmer exercises editorial discretion both in terms 
of determining where particular programming is posi- 
tioned in the channel lineup, and in terms of determining 


147 


which programming to include in particular packages. 
For example, the programmer must decide which pro- 
gramming to include in a “basic” package, in more in- 
clusive packages, and as “premium” services. 

8. In summary, whether deciding to carry material 
produced by others, whether and how to cover local 
events, or how to arrange and package programming for 
sale, multichannel video programmers make choices about 
the programming content offered to subscribers. Such 
choices are affected by audience demographics, audience 
interests, ideology, and technological and financial con- 
straints. The process of editorial choice engaged in by 
multichannel video programmers is no different than that 
engaged in by newspapers. 


Newspapers 


9. As in the case with multichannel video pro- 
grammers, newspaper publishers also face constraints on 
the amount and type of news content included in their 
papers. The most important source of newspaper reve- 
nue is from the sale of advertising space; 78% of a 
newspaper's revenue comes from advertising, with the re- 
maining 22% from subscriptions. The Veronis, Suhler 
& Associates Communications Industry Forecast at 39 
(1992). Consequently, the amount of news and feature 
content is usually determined by the number of advertise- 
ments that have been sold. The typical newshole—the 
space allocated to news and features—is about 40% of 
a newspaper’s content. J. Dominick, The Dynamics of 
Mass Communication at 203 (2nd ed. 1987). On a 
heavy advertising day, the newshole may be only 25% 
of the paper’s contents. D. Pember, Mass Media in 
America at 59 (4th ed. 1983). Newspaper editors, thus. 
must carefully select the newshole content from among 
the available options. 

10. Like multichannel video programmers, contem- 
porary newspapers provide information of interest to a 


148 


general audience as well as information of interest to 
segments of the audience, such as cooking, science, and 
finance. Through readership studies, editors seek to iden- 
tify both the general and special interests of the audience; 
news content is a product designed to be purchased by 
readers. Newspaper editorial costs typically range from 
14 and 22% of total costs. J. Udell, The Economics of 
the American Newspaper at 122 (1978). Because edi- 
tors must stay within a budget, the relative cost of 
various types of content is a factor in selecting material. 
For example, the use of syndicated or news service ma- 
terial may cost less than material written by the news- 
paper’s staff. 

11. The primary newshole options available to a 
newspaper are briefly described below: 

a. With the exceptions of very large circulation 
newspapers, typical newspapers rely upon news services 
such as the Associated Press for national and international 
news. Information from these services can be rewritten 
by the newspaper’s staff, or carried without alteration. 
A 1986 study found that Associated Press member papers 
fill 37% of their newsholes with AP copy. C. Fink, 
Strategic Newspaper Management at 167 (1988). There 
are approximately 142 news and picture services available 
to newspapers. Editor & Publisher International Year- 
book at V-1-6 (1992). 

b. Newspapers also rely upon feature syndicates for 
material such as cartoons, editorial cartoons, sports box 
scores, weather maps, and columnists. This material is 
provided to the newspaper in a form that is ready to 
print, and is generally carried without editing by the 
newspaper. Syndicated material may fill up to 18% of 
the newshole. Since hundreds of newspapers buy from 
a syndiate, the cost to a newspaper for these features 
is relatively low; the cost of hiring a columnist to write 
solely for one newspaper is greater than the cost of buy- 
ing a syndicated column. There are approximately 417 


149 


entities offering syndicated material to newspapers. Edi- 
tor & Publisher International Yearbook at V-7-12 (1992). 

c. Many Sunday newspapers include preprinted in- 
serts such as comics sections, magazines like Parade, and 
television listings such as TV Log. Newspapers make no 
alteration of the content of these sections; the material 
is prepared and printed elsewhere and merely included 
within the newspaper. The choice the newspaper makes 
is whether to have such a section, and if so, which of 
the available services should be selected. A newspaper 
serving a community that is heavily Hispanic may chose 
Vista—The Hispanic Magazine over Parade, but does not 
alter or edit the selected magazine. There are 12 comics 
sections, and 10 magazines available to newspapers. Edi- 
tor & Publisher International Yearbook at V-12-17 
(1992). 

d. Editors may assign reporters to cover local events. 
News policies, such as avoiding negative references about 
major advertisers, influence coverage. See L. Solely & R. 
Craig, “Advertising Pressures on Newspapers,” 21 J. of 
Advertising 1 (1992). The perception of what is news, 
based on analysis of factors such as timeliness, proximity, 
prominence, consequence, and human interest, also de- 
termines what events the newspaper assigns reporters to 
cover. Cost also influences local coverage; some stories, 
such as those involving lengthy investigations, cost more 
to prepare than others. 

12. In summary, like multinational video programmers, 
newspapers frequently carry material prepared by others. 
The newspapers nonetheless exercise editorial discretion 
by determining in the first instance whether the material 
should be published, and also in determining the edi- 
torial arrangement of the content. Whether selecting and 
arranging material provided by others, or deciding how 
to cover local news, newspaper content is affected by 
audience demographics, audience interests. ideology, and 
technological and financial constraints, just as the content 


150 


of a multichannel video programmer’s package of pro- 
gramming is affected by these same factors. 


BVS’s Services 


13. Based on the understanding I have gained of the 
nature of the services BVS intends to offer, it is also clear 
that BVS’s editorial process is comparable to that of 
newspapers and of other multichannel video program- 
mers. It merits noting that my opinion expressed in this 
affidavit is not affected by the content of particular pro- 
grams BVS intends to offer. Instead my opinion is based 
on the kinds of activities in which BVS is currently en- 
gaged. 

14. In preparing its programming plan, BVS con- 
ducted research concerning audience demographics, and 
completed its own proprietary marketing survey of Alex- 
andria residents. In addition, the company acquired re- 
ports of meetings of the Alexandria Cable Television 
Advisory Commission, as well as the results of a survey 
of cable subscribers conducted by Jones Intercable, the 
incumbent cable operator. 

15. Through this research BVS learned that consum- 
ers are interested in specific services not offered by Jones 
Intercable. For example, in 1992 Jones deleted all of the 
Baltimore television stations it carried to make room 
for four cable program services. BVS intends to offer 
those Baltimore stations to its subscribers. BWVS also 
learned of subscriber interest in WGN, a Chicago super- 
station, and as a result intends to offer it to subscribers. 
In response to consumer interest in greater variety, BVS 
will offer more local and adjacent-market broadcast sig- 
nals. basic cable networks, and premium cable networks, 
than does Jones. Finally, BVS found that there was 
significant audience interest in video-on-demand, a service 
that permits consumers to order any one of potentially 
hundreds of programs from a library of stored videos 
for viewing at any time. This is also a service that is not 
offered by Jones. 


151 


16. Although BVS seeks to offer diverse programming, 
the company has established editorial standards govern- 
ing the portrayal of sex and violence. The community ac- 
cepts the level of sex and violence offered on services 
such as HBO. More explicit material, however, will not 
be offered. Based on these standards, the company has 
decided not to carry Spice or Playboy at Night, two 
sexually explicit programming services. The standards 
governing sex and violence will also be used in the selec- 
tion of material to be included in the video library. 
Standards governing other types of content will be de- 
veloped in conjunction with the community as the com- 
pany gains experience with video programming. BVS 
intends to sell advertising time and will have standards 
on advertising content similar to those of local broad- 
casters. 

17. In creating the video library for its video-on- 
demand service, BVS intends to arrange the programming 
it chooses for inclusion into six categories: entertainment, 
living, learning, buying, communication, and informa- 
tion seeking. Each segment is further divided into a 
number of subdivisions. For example, within the enter- 
tainment segment are subdivisions for movies, sports, and 
video games. The video library provides consumers with 
a significant increase in programming options. However, 
“shelf space” within the library is not infinite. Thus, BVS 
must carefully select the programming included in the 
video library to reflect audience interests, community 
standards, and creative judgments. 

18. BVS’s editorial discretion concerning the develop- 
ment of the video library operates at several levels. First, 
the company selected the segments to be included. Sec- 
ond, it selected the specific programming services, or indi- 
vidual programs, to be made available to consumers. 
Third, BVS is arranging Categories, subdivisions, and navi- 
gational aids to guide the consumer in a manner similar 
to that in which a newspaper lays out its sections and 


152 


pages. Fourth, to aid the user, BVS is prioritizing menu 
listings. For example, within a subcategory such as action- 
adventure films, BVS will offer a listing of “top” films, as 
well as a more inclusive listing. Fifth, BSV is packaging 
programs according to themes, and is combining programs 
for “best of” presentations. Thus, while some viewers may 
be interested in all of the episodes of “Cheers,” others may 
prefer BVS’s compilation of what it regards as the best 
episodes. Sixth, reflecting its concern for parental control 
over children’s use of the library, BVS is organizing ma- 
terial according to age categories and is offering parents 
the ability to “lock-out” certain segments, subdivisions, and 
program sources. Seventh, because there is community 
interest in specific types of local programs, BVS will make 
equipment and studios for the production of local pro- 
gramming available; this programming will be archived in 
the video library. 

19. In summary, BVS’s editorial decision-making is the 
same as that of other multichannel video programmers or 
newspapers. The company’s decisions concerning which 
programming services to offer are based on market studies 
that reveal consumer interests unmet by the incumbent 
cable operator. Moreover, the company has adopted stand- 
ards, based on community attitudes, concerning depictions 
of sex and violence. BVS is also exercising editorial 
discretion in the selection and packaging of the video 
library. 


Il. The Significance of Video Programming As A 
Medium of Mass Communication 


20. The importance of video programming as a me- 
dium of mass communication today is beyond dispute. 
Video programming is now the dominant means by which 
people obtain news, information and entertainment. 
Whether one thinks in terms of television coverage of im- 
portant events such as the Watergate hearings, the Gulf 


153 


War or political campaigns, or in terms of video entertain- 
ment including movies such as “Dances With Wolves” that 
combine gripping visual imagery with important social 
messages, video programming communicates messages and 
ideas in a manner that cannot be fully duplicated through 
use of print or audio media alone. Moreover, while these 
are not matters that are subject to any dispute, the im- 
portance of video programming can be illustrated by 
reference to empirical data. 

21. For example, the importance of video program- 
ming as a medium of communication is illustrated by 
comparing the amount of time people spend with various 
media, the amount of money people spend on various 
media, and the amount of money advertisers spend on 
various media. Specifically, Tables I-IV in Attachment B 
reveal that in 1991 consumers spent more time with broad- 
cast and cable television than any other medium, and spent 
more money on cable subscriptions than on the purchase 
of any other media product. While newspapers remain the 
largest single advertising vehicle, in 1991 the total adver- 
tising and consumer expenditures on broadcast and cable 
television, $41.8 billion, exceeded the total advertising and 
consumer expenditures on daily newspapers, $39.6 billion, 
by $2.2 billion. The amount spent on video tape rentals 
and purchases in 1991 exceeded box office revenues by 
$6.1 billion. 

22. It is also important to note a number of trends 
concerning media usage. First, the percentage of adults 
reading newspapers daily has been declining, and was at 
62% in 1991. The Veronis, Suhler & Associates Com- 
munications Industry Forecast at 171 (1992). Second, 
cable penetration as a percentage of television households 
has increased markedly to over 60% today. Accompany- 
ing the increase in cable penetration has been a shift in 
viewing patterns. Broadcast stations’ share of total tele- 
vision viewing has declined from 87% in 1986 to 73.5% 
in 1991. In the same period basic and pay cable services’ 


154 


share of total television viewing has increased from 13% 
to 26.5%. Id. at 77. In households that subscribe to 
cable, moreover, 43% of viewing time was devoted to 
cable-originated programming as of 1991-92. Third, the 
percentage of television households with a VCR has in- 
creased from 37.8% in 1986 to 73.7% in 1991. Id. at 
127. Expenditures on the rental and purchase of pre- 
recorded video tapes have increased from $5 billion in 
1986 to $10.9 billion in 1991. Id. 

23. Television has become the dominant news source 
for most Americans. Television is a main news source for 
66% of Americans, compared to 36% for newspapers 
and 14% for radio. The Roper Organization, America’s 
Watching: Public Attitudes Toward Television at 18 
(1987) (respondents were allowed to mention more than 
one medium as a main news source, thus the percentages 
add up to more than 100). The increasing reliance on 
television news is explained in part by its credibility. 
Since 1961 television has been perceived as the most 
credible news medium, and its lead continues to increase. 
Id. at 5. A February 1993 poll revealed that the Cable 
News Network (CNN) was the most believable news 
source, followed closely by ABC, CBS, and NBC. Times 
Mirror Center for the People and the Press, Times Mirror 
News Interest Index at 1 (March 3, 1993). Daily news- 
papers were considered to be less believable than CNN 
and the major broadcast networks. /d. Significantly, al- 
though NBC News was damaged by the revelation that 
it staged the explosion of a General Motors truck, it was 
still regarded as more believable than daily newspapers. 
Id. 

24. Television is especially important as a means of 
political communication. It has become the dominant 
source of both national and local political news. The 
Roper Organization, America’s Watching: Public Attitudes 
Toward Television at 6-7 (1987). It has altered how 


155 


campaign resources are expended, how campaign organi- 
zations are structured, and how compaigns are conducted. 
Because of the heavy expenditures on television advertis- 
ing by politicians, the costs of campaigning have increased. 
In fact, the largest category of expenditure for House, 
Senate, and Presidential campaigns is for television ad- 
vertising. See, e.g., S. Fritz & D. Morris, Handbook of 
Campaign Spending: Money in the 1990 Congressional 
Races at 53-57 (Cong. Q. 1992). See generally E. Dia- 
mond & S. Bates, The Spot: The Rise of Political Advertis- 
ing on Television (1988 ed.). Nominating conventions 
and campaign activities are organized for television cov- 
erage. Campaign staffs typically include consultants who 
advise the candidate on his or her television image. See 
M. McCubbins, ed., Under the W stchful Eye: Managing 
Presidential Campaigns in the Television Era (1992). 
Although the impact of these developments on voting 
behavior is not clear, the behavior of candidates reveals 
that they regard television as the critical means of culti- 
vating voter awareness. 

25. While providing news and entertainment, television 
functions as a socialization agent by transmitting values, 
presenting role models, and communicating acceptable be- 
haviors. The relative importance of television as a socializ- 
ing agent is underscored by the medium’s pervasiveness 
and accessibility, and by the amount of time people spend 
viewing. Ninety-eight percent of all American homes have 
television and the average home has 2.1 sets. U.S. Dept. 
of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Statistical Abstract of 
the United States 1992 Table 884 (112th ed. 1992). Tele- 
vision is accessible to all income and educational groups. 
In contrast, newspaper consumption requires literacy, and 
increases as education and income levels increase. Id. at 
Table 885. Television’s accessibility is also enhanced by 
its low hourly costs to users; even when cable subscriptions 
are included, total television viewing cost only 6 cents per 
person per hour in 1991. By comparison, newspapers cost 


156 


29 cents per hour, magazines cost 38 cents per hour, and 
books cost 69 cents per hour. The Veronis, Suhler & 
Associates Communications Industry Forecast at 14 
(1992). And as Table I illustrates, people spend more 
time with television than any other medium. No medium 
in our society transmits as many social cues, to as many 
people, as frequently, as does television. 
26. The combination of sight and sound in video pro- 
ing provided by television make it a distinctive com- 
munications medium. Television can depict the real 
world, but it also can create images and sounds that are 
“unreal.” Television’s visual images change rapidly, 
through techniques such as cutting between cameras, Zooms 
and pans; through the use of special effects; and through 
the image manipulation made possible by advances in 
computer technology. Television dialogue may be life-like, 
but the audio portion of television may also include en- 
riching features like musical accompaniment and sound 
effects. These audio and visual techniques sustain in- 
terest in the program, but also convey meaning. For 
example, children quickly learn that a fade or dissolve 
signals a change in time or location. Researchers have 
posited that this combination of visual and auditory com- 
ponents make television distinct from other media. See, 
e.g., A. Huston & J. Wright, “Children’s Processing of 
Television: The Informative Functions of Formal Fea- 
tures,” in J. Bryant & D. Anderson, eds., Children’s Un- 
derstanding of Television (1983). The communicative 
features of the video programming that is provided over 
television are unmatched by print, photographs, or radio. 
27. A multichannel video service, such as that proposed 
by BVS, provides a unique communication environment. 
The programmer may employ distinctive programming 
strategies, such as seeking to reach both broad and narrow 
audience segments. As a result, audience members may 
employ a range of information-seeking strategies, driven 
by general or highly specialized interests. In addition, the 


157 


Proposed video-on-demand feature enables the consumer to 
access an extraordinary range of video information with- 
out the time constraints posed by broadcast station or 
cable channel scheduling. Most importantly, video-on- 
demand permits viewers to more efficiently seek informa- 
tion relevant to them. Video-on-demand transforms the 
customary television-viewing question from “What’s on 
tv?” to “What can / put on tv?” 


Ill. Enforcing the Video Ban Requires Government 
Scrutiny of Program Content 


28. When Congress created the ban on “video pro- 
gramming” in 1984, it defined the subject of its prohibi- 
tion to include video programming “provided by, or gen- 
erally considered comparable to” video programming 
provided by broadcast stations. This prohibition can only 
be understood or enforced by reference to, and govern- 
ment scrutiny of, the content of individual programs or 
services that telephone companies provide. 

29. The very language chosen by Congress emphasizes 
the need for government officials interpreting and enforc- 
ing the ban to exercise their subjective judgment to deter- 
mine if a particular program is forbidden “video pro- 
gramming.” The ban does not apply to all “video images.” 
Nor does its apply to particular technologies, such as 
over-the-air broadcast technologies. Rather, the ban fo- 
cuses on the content of the service being provided. If, in 
the judgment of the appropriate government officials, the 
program would be “generally considered comparable to” 
programming provided by broadcasters, then it is for- 
bidden. If in their subjective judgment the program 
would not be considered comparable, then it is permitted. 

30. In today’s environment of rapidly changing tech- 
nologies, government officials will frequently be called 
upon to exercise their judgment as to what is and what 
is not “video programming.” Unlike 1984, when voice, 


158 


data and video were largely discrete services delivered 
using separate technologies, these services are no longer 
discrete, nor are they delivered using different technologies. 
For example, services available today can mix voice, data, 
text and video together in a variety of combinations. 
These services range from relatively simple videotext serv- 
ices such as airline guides that can be displayed either on 
television or personal computer screens, to complicated 
multi-media services that are fully interactive. But whether 
these services, or other new services that are being or will 
be developed, qualify as “video programming” turns upon 
a subjective view of whether the content of the service is 
“comparable to” programming provided by broadcasters. 

31. Moreover, the concern that the statute will set 
government officials up to act as censors of what is and is 
not permitted is not a speculative one. The scope of the 
ban has been the subject of considerable dispute, and has 
been extensively litigated before the FCC. Without regard 
to whether the FCC’s chosen interpretation of the scope of 
the ban is correct or incorrect, the efforts of the FCC to 
grapple with the problem serve to illustrate the basic point 
that the ban can only be understood through reference to 
the content of particular programs. 

32. Specifically, in its 1992 “Video Dialtone” order, 
the FCC was called upon to address whether some of the 
new services containing video images qualify as “video 
programming.” As an initial matter, however, the Com- 
mission had to determine the appropriate reference point 
for comparing these services to programming provided by 
broadcasters. Based on the legislative history, the Com- 
mission interpreted the statutory language to mean that 
“Congress intended to prohibit only telephone company 
provision of programming comparable to that provided by 
broadcast stations in 1984.” Telephone Company-Cable 
Television Cross-Ownership Rules, 7 FCC Red 5781, 
5820 (1992). See also 130 Cong. Rec. H12235 (daily 
ed. Oct. 11, 1984) (the House notes that the term “video 


159 


programming” refers to programming generally provided 
by a television broadcast station today). 

33. In deference to the subjective nature of the statu- 
tory ban, the FCC adopted what it described as a “severa- 
bility” standard. This standard considers whether a 
particular service is interactive, but does not consider this 
factor to be determinative. According to the FCC, “to the 
extent a service contains severable video images capable of 
being provided as independent video programs comparable 
to those provided by broadcast stations in 1984, that por- 
tion of the programming service will be deemed to consti- 
tute ‘video programming’... .” 7 FCC Red at 5821. 
As a result, telephone companies are permitted to provide 
the underlying technical capabilities that make an inter- 
active service work, but may still be barred from providing 
the actual programming content for the service if, in the 
FCC's subjective opinion, it is comparable to program- 
ming provided by broadcasters. 

34. The Commission elaborated on its “severability” 
test by offering some examples: 


—According to the PCC, a shopping service or 
“video catalogue” that allows consumers to “elec- 
tronically request specific goods and services would 
not constitute prohibited video programming, even if 
lie service incorporated video images. In such a 
case, the video images would not be severable from 
the interactivity.” /d. at 5822. But home shopping 
programs, even those enabling the consumer to order 
a product electronically, would be prohibited if they 
resemble home shopping programs broadcast in 
1984. Id. 

—Likewise, an educational multimedia presenta- 
tion containing video images is generally permissible 
as long as it includes enough textual or graphic infor- 
mation and interactivity that the content demon- 
strably differs from what broadcasters provided in 


160 


1984, but “the simple inclusion of some textual in- 
formation” would not transform a “severable video 
program into a permissible multimedia program.” 
Id. at 5822 n.196. 

—Providing the video programming content for 
interactive pay-per-view and video-on-demand serv- 
ices is prohibited because the programming is sever- 
able from the function of ordering programming; but 
strictly one-way services such as videotext news serv- 
ices, stock market information, on-line airline guides, 
and downloading of video games and computer soft- 
ware are permissible because the content of these 
services is sufficiently different from programming 
provided by broadcasters. Jd. at 5822-23 & n.199. 


35. None of these distinctions between permissible 
and impermissible programming can be maintained by 
reference to technical considerations. For example, there 
is not technological basis for distinguishing one form of 
multimedia tele-shopping from another. Video and audio 
information can be delivered over telephone lines, cable, 
and other media, displayed on a personal computer or a 
television receiver. All formats offer instant ordering 
capability. Consequently, a ban on home-video shopping 
of the kind provided by television in 1984 can be enforced 
only by a highly subjective comparison of the content of 
contemporary programs with programs from 1984. The 
same subjective comparison occurs with other types of 
services, and the need for these subjective comparisons 
will increase. In 1984, a video news program with occa- 
sional text captions was recognizably different from a 
videotext service like NEXIS that was provided over a 
telephone line. But with today’s merging media formats, 
it is possible to deliver text, pictures, sound, and inter- 
active search-and-selection capabilities through a variety 
of delivery systems. In short, the only way the FCC can 
distinguish between impermissible “video programming” 
and permissible programming is to examine the content 


161 


frame by frame, sound bite by sound bite, caption by cap- 


tion, with the kind of programming offered on television 
in 1984. 


S/ Wm. E. Lee 
WILLIAM E. Ler 


[ Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


162 


ATTACHMENT A 
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICES 


AUDIO ONLY 


AEI MUSIC NETWORK 

BIBLE BROADCASTING NETWORK 
CABLE RADIO NETWORK 

DIGITAL CABLE RADIO 

DIGITAL MUSIC EXPRESS 

GALACTIC RADIO 

KLON LOS ANGELES-THE JAZZ NETWORK 
MOODY BROADCASTING NETWORK 
MUTUAL BROADCASTING SYSTEM INC. 
SATELLITE RADIO NETWORK 

WFMT CHICAGO 


CANADIAN 


CATHAY INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION 
FIRST CHOICE—THE MOVIE NETWORK 
MUCHMUSIC NETWORK 

LE RESEAU DES SPORTS 

THE SPORTS NETWORK 

STORYVISION NETWORK 
SUPERCHANNEL 


PAY SERVICES 
CINEMAX 
THE DISNEY CHANNEL 
ENCORE 
HOME BOX OFFICE INC. (HBO) 
THE MOVIE CHANNNEL 
PLAYBOY AT NIGHT 
SHOWTIME NETWORKS INC. 


PAY-PER-VIEW 


ACTION PAY-PER-VIEW 
CABLE VIDEO STORE 
GUEST CINEMA 
REQUEST TELEVISION 
SPICE 

VIEWER’S CHOICE 
VIEWER’S CHOICE II 


163 


REGIONAL PROGRAMMING 


ARIZONA SPORTS PROGRAMMING 
ATLANTA INTERFAITH 

CABLE TV NETWORK OF NEW JERSEY INC. 
ECUMENICAL TV CHANNEL 
EMPIRE SPORTS NETWORK 

HOME SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT 
HOME TEAM SPORTS 

IOWA CABLE NETWORK 

JEWISH TELEVISION NETWORK 
KBL SPORTS NETWORK 

MADISON SQUARE GARDEN NETWORK 
MEADOWS RACING NETWORK 
MIDWEST SPORTS CHANNEL 

NEW ENGLAND CABLE NEWS 

NEW ENGLAND SPORTS NETWORK 
NEW YORK 1 NEWS 

NEWS 12 LONG ISLAND 
NEWSCHANNEL 8 

NIPPON GOLDEN NETWORK 
ORANGE COUNTY NEWSCHANNEL 
PENNARAMA 

PENN NATIONAL RACING ALIVE 
PHILADELPHIA PARK LIVE 

PRIME SPORTS NETWORK 

PRIME TICKET NETWORK 

PRISM 

PRO AM SPORTS SYSTEM 
RTP—-USA 

RURAL ALASKA TELEVISION NETWORK 
SAN DIEGO CABLE SPORTS NETWORK 
SATELLITE SPORTS NETWORK 
SPORTSCHANNEL CHICAGO 
SPORTSCHANNEL FLORIDA 
SPORTSCHANNEL LOS ANGELES 
SPORTSCHANNEL NEW ENGLAND 
SPORTSCHANNEL NEW YORK 
SPORTSCHANNEL OHIO 
SPORTSCHANNEL PACIFIC 
SPORTSCHANNEL PENNSYLVANIA 
SPORTSCHANNEL NETWORK 
SUNSHINE NETWORK 

TSC-THE SPORTS CHANNEL 


eo 


SATELLITE PROGRAMMERS 


ACTS SATELLITE NETWORK 
ALL NEWS CHANNEL 


164 


ALTERNATIVE VIEW NETWORK 

AMERICA’S DISABILITY CHANNEL/THE 
SILENT NETWORK 

AMERICAN MOVIE CLASSICS 

THE ARABIC CHANNEL 

ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION 

BIZNET 

BLACK ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION 

THE BOX 

BRAVO 

CABLE NEWS NETWORK 

CABLE SATELLITE PUBLIC AFFAIRS NETWORK 

C-SPAN 2 

CANCOM 

CNBC 

COKESBURY SATELLITE NETWORK 

COMEDY CENTRAL 

COUNTRY MUSIC TELEVISION 

COURT TV 

DEEP DISH TV NETWORK 

DISCOVERY CHANNEL 

E! ENTERTAINMENT TV 

ESPN INC. 

ETERNAL WORD TV NETWORK 

THE FAMILY CHANNEL 

FAMILYNET 

GALAVISION 

GOLDEN AMERICAN NETWORK 

THE GREEK CHANNEL 

HEADLINE NEWS 

HIT VIDEO USA 

HOME SHOPPING NETWORK 

HOME SHOPPING NETWORK 2 

HSNE 

INTERNATIONAL CHANNEL 

INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION BROADCASTING 

KEYSTONE INSPIRATIONAL NETWORK 

THE KOREAN CHANNEL 

KTLA LOS ANGELES 

KTVT DALLAS 

THE LEARNING CHANNEL 

LIFETIME 

MIND EXTENSION U 

MTV: MUSIC TELEVISION 

NASA SELECT 

THE NASHVILLE NETWORK 

NATIONAL JEWISH TV 

NETLINK USA 


165 


THE NEW INSPIRATIONAL NETWORK 
NICK AT NITE 

NICKELODEON 

NOSTALGIA TELEVISION 

PREVUE GUIDE 

PRIMETIME 24 

PUBLIC INTEREST VIDEO NETWORK 
QVC FASHION CHANNEL 

QVC NETWORK INC. 

RAI-USA 

REUTERS NEWS-VIEW 

RUSSIAN TELEVISION NETWORK INC. 
SCI-FI CHANNEL 

SCOLA 

SHALOM AMERICA 

SHEPHERDS CHAPEL NETWORK 
SPORTSCHANNEL AMERICA 
TELECOLOMBIA 

THE TRAVEL CHANNEL 

TRINITY BROADCASTING NETWORK 
TURNER NETWORK TV 

TV JAPAN 

UNIVISION 

USA NETWORK 

VIDEO HITS ONE (VH-1) 

VISION INTERFAITH SATELLITE NETWORK 
THE WEATHER CHANNEL 

WEB SPORTS WIRE 

WGN-TV/UVI 

WPIX NEW YORK 

WSBK-TV BOSTON 

WTBS ATLANTA 

WWOR-TV NEW YORK 


TEXT SERVICES 


CABLE SPORTSTRACKER 

THE ELECTRONIC PROGRAM GUIDE 
ELECTRONIC PROGRAM GUIDE JR. 
LIFE NEWSVISION 

TMS BUSINESS PLUS 

TMS NEWS PLUS 

TMS SPORTS PLUS 

UPI DATACABLE 

X*PRESS EXECUTIVE 

X*PRESS X*CHANGE 


Source: Television & Cable Factbook, Services Volume at G-65 
(1998 edition). 


166 


ATTACHMENT B 
TABLE I 
Hours Per Person Per Year Using Various Media 
(1991) | 

Medium Hours 
Television (total) 1,515 
Network Affiliated Stations 848 

Independent Stations 265 

Basic Cable 319 

Pay Cable 83 
Radio 1,115 
Recorded Music 219 
Daily Newspapers 169 
Magazines 88 
Books 98 
Home Video 43 
Movies in Theaters 9 
Total 3,256 


Source: The Veronis, Suhler & Associates Communications 
Industry Forecast at 12 (1992). 


167 


TABLE II 
End-User Spending Per Person Per Year 
For Various Media 
(1991) 
Medium Amount ($) 
Cable Television 84.138 
Movie Box Office 23.03 
Home Video 58.56 
Recorded Music 37.57 
Daily Newspapers 49.02 
Books 67.83 
Magazines 33.02 
Total 353.16 


Source: The Veronis, Suhler & Associates Communications 
Industry Forecast at 14 (1992). Broadcast television and 
radio are excluded from this comparison because they are 
supported entirely by advertising. 


TABLE Il 
Advertising Expenditure by Medium 
(1991) 
Medium Amount ($ Mil) 
Television Broadcasting 24,110 
Radio Broadcasting 8,450 
Cable Television 1,985 
Daily Newspapers 30,409 
Magazines 10,635 


Source: The Veronis, Suhler & Associates Communications 
Industry Forecast at 23 (1992). Media that are not sup- 
ported in part by advertising, such as films, recorded music, 
and books are excluded from this comparison. 


168 


TABLE IV 
Gross Media Expenditures 
(1991) 
Industry Segment Amount ($ Mil) 
Television Broadcasting 24,110 
Radio Broadcasting 8,450 
Cable Television 17,780 
Movie Box Office 4,803 
Home Video 10,995 
Recorded Music 7,834 
Daily Newspapers 39,612 
Book Publishing 20,265 
Magazine Publishing 18,335 


Source: The Veronis, Suhler & Associates Communications 
Industry Forecast at 23 (1992). The expenditures included 
for this comparison include both end-user and advertising 
expenditures. 


169 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD A. ALSTON 


1. I am Vice President—Operations & Engineering for 
The Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Company of Vir- 
ginia (“C&P”). I have had extensive experience in net- 
work operations in my career over the past 21 years with 
C&P and with other parts of the former Bell System. 

2. C&P is proposing to enhance its telephone network 
in Alexandria, Virginia to have the capability of carrying 
video programming upon the successful outcome of this 
litigation. 

3. If C&P made these enhancements today, C&P 
would use a fiber optic system supplied by BroadBand 
Technologies, Inc., which carries both telephone calls and 
video signals on an integrated basis. C&P currently is 
using this system to carry the video programming of third 
parties at the Cascades development in Loudoun County, 
Virginia. A sister company of C&P, the New Jersey Bell 
Telephone Company, has announced that it will use this 
system to carry the video programming of third parties 
in several areas in New Jersey. 

4. Using the BroadBand Technologies, Inc. system, 
C&P’s network in Alexandria would have the Capacity to 
provide several hundred channels of video programming 
to its telephone subscribers. 

5. In addition, C&P’s network would have the capa- 
bility to deliver video programs on demand. This will 
allow consumers to select one of potentially hundreds of 


170 


movies or other programs from video libraries to view at 
any given time of the consumer’s choosing. 

6. If permitted by this Court, C&P would make these 
capabilities available to its affiliate, Bell Atlantic Video 
Services Company (“BVS"), so that BVS can provide 
video programming to subscribers in Alexandria. C&P 
would also make these capabilities available for use by 
other video programmers under tariff on a common car- 
rier basis. 

7. In providing these services, C&P will not exercise 
editorial control over the unaffiliated programmers that 
use its network—with the exception of the possible exclu- 
sion of pornography or other offensive material to the 
extent that such exclusion is permitted under common 
carrier regulation. 

8. C&P, to the extent permitted by the FCC, may also 
offer some limited video programming of its own such 
as introductory menus or welcoming screens. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on April 27, 1993. 


/s/ Richard A. Alston 
RICHARD A. ALSTON 


171 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF DR. VIVIAN M. HORNER 


1. I am Director of Bell Atlantic Video Services Com- 
pany (“BVS”) and part of the team that is developing 
video programming for BVS to provide in Alexandria and 
elsewhere. 

2. I have more than thirty years of programming and 
communications experience, primarily in start-up ventures. 
Among other positions, I was formerly Vice President, 
Program Development, of Warner Amex Cable Com- 
munications, where I created several highly-successful 
video programming services, including Pinwheel (a chan- 
nel for preschool children), Sight on Sound (the precur- 
sor of MTV), and Nickelodeon. 

3. If permitted at the end of this case, BVS will 
provide video programming in Alexandria using the C&P 
telephone network. BVS will purchase capacity from 
C&P on the same tariffed terms as offered by C&P to 
others. 

4. BVS will select and package some of its program- 
ming from the numerous cable programming networks 
that are available; it will also select some programming 
from various film libraries and from independent pro- 
ducers. 

5. In addition, some programming may be produced 
exclusively for BVS by producers working under contract 
with BVS or by BVS employees themselves. Bell Atlantic 
has three broadcast-quality television studios located in 


172 


Silver Spring, Philadelphia, and Newark which BVS may 
use to produce programming. 

6. BVSalso will carry broadcast programming. 

7. The programming that BVS will provide in Alex- 
andria is based on a review of audience demographics and 
interests, community standards, and BVS’s and my own 
editorial judgments. BVS will exercise editorial control 
over the programming that it provides. 

8. BVS is currently engaged in discussions with a 
number of suppliers of video programming. No supplier 
that BVS has talked to has refused to supply program- 
ming. To the contrary, suppliers are eager to open up an 
alternative distribution channel. 

9. BVS plans to provide programming that is not 
currently available in Alexandria. For example, BVS 
plans to carry several Spanish language channels such 
as Canal SUR, Galavision/ECO, Telemundo, and Uni- 
vision. According to the 1990 census, 9.7% of Alex- 
andria residents are Hispanic. The Alexandria Public 
Schools offer instruction in English as a second language, 
the largest block of students in these programs speak 
Spanish as their primary language. Jones carries only one 
Spanish language broadcast station (W48AC) and none 
of the other available Spanish language programming. As 
another example, BVS plans to carry WGN, a Chicago 
broadcast superstation that carries Cubs baseball games. 
According to a 1992 survey Jones conducted, Alexandria 
cable subscribers would like to receive WGN. Jones, how- 
ever, does not carry it. 

I declare under penaity of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on 4/28/93. 


/s/ Vivian M. Horner 
Dr. Vivian M. HORNER 


173 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF THOMAS w. HAZLETT 
Thomas W. Hazlett deposes and says: 


1. I am an Associate Professor at the University of 
California, Davis, where I teach economics and public 
policy. During the 1991-1992 academic year I served as 
Chief Economist of the Federal Communications Com- 
misison. During the 1990-1991 academic year I was a 
Visiting Scholar at the Columbia Institute for Tele- 
Information at the Columbia University Graduate School 
of Business. 

2. I received my Ph.D. in economics from UCLA in 
1984 and have taught a variety of courses in micro- 
economics, finance, and public policy at the graduate and 
undergraduate levels. I have researched and written nu- 
merous academic articles on competitive and regulatory 
issues in the cable and broadcast television industries. 
The Appendix to this affidavit includes a list of my pub- 
lications relevant to this affidavit. 


Summary 


3. In this affidavit I explain the fundamental changes 
that have transformed the cable industry in the years 
since the FCC promulgated the CATV ban in 1970 and 
even since 1984, when Congress codified it. The original 
ban dates back to a time when cable was still a fledgling 
industry, thought to be highly susceptible to dominance 
by telephone companies through their control of utility 


174 


poles and other rights-of-way needed for coaxial cable 
used to provide cable service. But today, following the 
passage of the Pole Attachment Act and two decades of 
sheltered growth, the cable industry has become a power- 
ful monopolist in its own right, exercising market power 
over viewers and extracting monopoly profits that reduce 
the general flow of video programming. In these circum- 
stances, permitting entry by the telephone companies can 
only lead to lower prices and increased output (i.e., to 
more consumer choice and additional communication 
services ). 


The Existing Cable Companies Have Monopolized 
Local Video Distribution 


4. Cable television systems generally operate as 
monopolies in the local markets in which they serve. 
These monopolies developed into dominant distributors 
of video programming largely over the last decade. 

5. The cable industry was born in Mahanoy City, 
Pennsylvania in 1948. In the 1950s, the FCC twice 
declined to regulate cable systems as common carriers.’ 

6. In 1970, the FCC decided to shelter the infant 
cable industry from telephone company competition. Ac- 
cordingly, the FCC prohibited telephone companies from 
providing CATV service. The FCC also took steps to 
facilitate cable company access to telephone company poles 
and conduits.’ 

7. Congress followed with the federal Pole Attachment 
Act of 1978.2 This legislation authorized the FCC, in 
combination with state regulation, to regulate the rates 


1See Lucas Powe, Jr., American Broadcasting and the First 
Amendment 218-220 (1987). 


2See generally Siegel, The History of Cable Television Pole 
Attachment Regulation, 6 Comm. and the Law 9 (Dec. 1984). 


Pub. Law No. 95-284, Communications Act Amendments of 
1978 (Feb. 6, 1978), codified in 47 U.S.C. § 224. 


175 


cable companies were charged for pole access.‘ The Com- 
mission established a mathematical formula for determin- 
ing “just and reasonable” attachment rates,® and set up a 
procedure to encourage private resolution of most dis- 
putes.” Access remains, in principle, a matter of contract 
negotiation.’ But mutually satisfactory contracts were soon 
hammered out.* 


8. Cable television developed rapidly in the late 1970s 
and early 1980s. Major cable networks such as ESPN 
(1979), Nickelodeon (1979), and CNN (1980) were 
launched. Cable subscribership began to grow rapidly. 
Table 1. 


9. A further impetus to investment in cable plant and 
in satellite networks was provided by the 1984 Cable 
Act, which deregulated cable rates, fully unleashing the 
industry to compete against broadcast television. Con- 
gress also incorporated into the Act a revised version of 
the FCC’s ban on cable service. 


*“[{T]he Commission shall regulate the rates, terms, and condi- 
tions for pole attachments to provide that such rates, terms, and 
conditions are just and reasonable * * *.” 47 U.S.C § 224(b) (1). 
The Aet also provided that a state would not be considered to be 
regulating pole attachments unless it had issued rules and was 
acting promptly on complaints. /d. at § 224(c) (8). 


® Subpart J. Pole Attachment Complaint Procedures, 47 U.S.C. 
§ 1.1409(c). 


* Id. at § 1.1404. 


* See FCC v. Florida Power Corp., 480 U.S. 245, 251 n.6 (1987). 
“CATV industry representatives” had testified “that access to 
utility poles does not in itself constitute a problem.” §S. Rep. 
No. 580, at 16. 


® National Cable Television Ass’n Vv. FCC, 747 F.2d 1508, 1505, 
1506 & n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1984). See also Telephone Company-Cable 
Television Cross-Ownership Rules, §§ 63.54-63.58, Telco Notice of 
Inquiry, 2 F.C.C. Red 5092, 5093-5094 (1987) (discussing ameliorat- 
ing effect of the Pole Attachment Act). 


176 


10. The growth in distribution plant has also been 
dramatic. In 1970 cable was available to less than 10 
percent of all American television households.’ By 1984 
it passed approximately 72 percent of all television house- 
holds. Cable now passes 96 percent of television house- 
holds. Subscribership to cable increased from less than 7 
percent of all U.S. homes in 1970 to nearly 44 percent 
in 1984. By 1992, about 60 percent of U.S. households 
subscribed.” Programming distributed principally over 
cable systems began in 1972 with HBO. There were four 
national cable networks in existence in 1976. By 1984 
this number had increased to 49 and by 1992 to 78. 
Table 2. 

11. The cable industry benefitted enormously from de- 
regulation. Capital values in the industry grew; average 
selling prices for cable systems rose from an average of 
$948 per subscriber in 1984 to $2,291 per subscriber 
in 1989. Table 3. While macroeconomic factors flattened 
asset values generally in 1990-1992, recent 1993 cable 
transactions indicate that per subscriber transactions are 
again well over $2,000. 

12. It is now clear that by the late 1980s the cable 
industry had acquired substantial market power over the 
local distribution of video programming. The best evi- 
dence of this monopolistic profitability is found in the 
economic “Q-ratios.” In a competitive industry, buyers 
won't pay much more to buy facilities than it would cost 
to build them from scratch. Thus, in a competitive in- 
dustry, the market value of an asset is generally approxi- 
mated by its replacement cost of capital. The Q-ratio 
is an economic measure based on this logic. The ratio 
is defined as: 


Q—Market Value/Replacement Cost of Tangible 
Capital 


* Stip. 17. 
© Stip. 17. 


177 


13. In the cable television industry, Q-ratios have 
been estimated at between 2.5 and 6." These estimates 
are supported by basic facts. The typical cable network 
costs about $619 per subscriber to build.“ Yet investors 
buying cable assets over the past five years have paid 
about $2,000 per subscriber, or about three times the 
price that a highly competitive firm would attract in the 
marketplace. In fact, the average Q-ratio for the firms 
listed on the New York Stock Exchange in February 
1990 was only .85."% A 1990 Brookings Institute study 
of 20 industries over the 1961-1985 time period found 
an average Q-ratio of 1.28 throughout the 25-year time 
frame, and just one industry with a Q-ratio of more than 
2. And, in a study of Q-ratios conducted for the United 
States Telephone Association, Paul MacAvoy estimated 
that Q-ratios for GTE and the seven Regional Bell Op- 
erating Companies (including their cellular holdings ) 
ranged from 1.1 to 1.3, with a weighted average of 
ae 


™ These estimates are summarized in Thomas W. Hazlett, 
Duopolistic Competition in Cable Television: Implications for 
Public Policy, VII Yale J. on Reg. 97-99 (Winter 1990). 


™ Capital costs are derived from a June 1986 Department of 
Justice, Antitrust Division, Economic Analysis Group paper by 
Albert Smiley. This is detailed in Thomas W. Hazlett, Duopolistic 
Competition in Cable Television: Implications for Public Policy, 
VII Yale J. on Reg. 98 (Winter 1990). 


In re Competition, Rate Deregulation and the Commission’s 
Policies Relating to the Provision of Cable Television Service, 5 
F.C.C. Red 4962, 4999 (1990) (MM Dkt. No. 89-600) (hereinafter 
FCC Cable Report). 


Lawrence F. Katz & Lawrence H. Summers, Industry Rents: 
Evidence and Implications, in Brookings Papers on Economic Activ- 
ity: Microeconomics 214 (1989). 


 MacAvoy noted that, excluding cellular holdings, the ratio 
would be closer to 1.0. See FCC Cable Report, 5 F.C.C. Red at 
5074. As the FCC has observed, this ratio “reflects [the telcos’ ] 
status as regulated utilities.” /hid. 


178 


14. When cable companies face competition in their 
service areas, their monopoly power dissipates. Over the 
1988-1992 period, there are twenty-one recorded sales 
transactions for cable companies in competitive (duopolis- 
tic) markets. They average 15-20 percent less on a per 
subscriber basis than contemporaneous sales of cable sys- 
tems in monopoly markets. Table 4. 

15. In response to widespread dissatisfiaction with ris- 
ing cable prices, poor customer service, and complaints 
concerning monopolistic practices, the U.S. Congress en- 
acted a cable re-regulation bill in 1992.” 

16. The likely effects of this bill can be debated.” 
What is abundantly clear, however, is that virtually all the 
major policy discussion about the video distribution in- 
dustry now centers on how to constrain cable’s market 
power. Public concerns about cable's competitive viabil- 


ity have, due to changing market conditions, become en- 
tirely obsolete. 


Head-to-Head Cable Rivalry Lowers Prices 
and Increases Output for Consumers 


17. Compelling evidence of cable’s power to raise rates 
due to a monopoly market structure comes from those 
few communities that have permitted and enjoyed head- 
to-head cable competition. There, prices are reliably 
lower and output (measured by subscribership or num- 
ber of channels offered) is higher. In data released by 
the FCC in February 1993, 46 cable systems in head-to- 


16 Pub. Law No. 102-885 (Oct. 5, 1992), codified in 47 U.S.C. 
§ 521. 


17] have argued elsewhere that the “reregulation” portion of 
the 1992 Act is not likely to be effective, although the rules 
attempting to open up local markets to competition are a step 
in the right direction. See T. Hazlett, In Cable War, Consumers 
Get Snagged, Wall St. J., Oct. 2, 1992 (op-ed page) ; T. Hazlett, 
Cable Reregulation: The Episodes You Didn't See on C-SPAN, 
Regulation Magazine, 1993 (forthcoming). 


179 


head competitive markets were found to have charged 
basic prices of just $0.41 per channel, contrasted to a 
rate of $0.65 per channel on monopoly systems. Cable 
systems that faced competition featured both lower basic 
cable rates and more channels. Table 5. 

18. Several earlier surveys have found similar results. 
In 1990, the FCC surveyed a number of competitive sys- 
tems, and found that their rates were 34 percent below 
monopoly system prices on a per channel basis.“ The 
Commission was led to conclude that “direct competition 
has resulted in reduced per channel rates for cable ser- 
vice.” "" In a 1990 econometric study, Levin & Meisel 
found basic cable prices from 22 percent to 30 percent 
lower for a service which “typically includes more chan- 
nels.” And, while difficult to measure, narrative ac- 
counts strongly suggest that customer service in competi- 
tive markets is also superior.” 

19. Data from Paul Kagan Associates further sup- 
port the price-lowering effect of head-to-head rivalry. In 
an April 1992 survey of 103 systems competing in 50 
separate cable markets and serving 1.13 million house- 
holds (about 2 percent of the U.S. cable total), the aver- 
age revenue per subscriber was $25.08,” while the aver- 
age number of channels offered on basic was 40. The 


% FCC Cable Report, 5 F.C.C. Red 4962, at App. H-2. 
19 Td. at 5014. 


2 Stanford L. Levin & John B. Meisel, Cable Television and 
Telecommunications : Theory, Evidence and Policy, Telecommuni- 
cations Policy, Dec. 1990, at 519-528. 


*1Daniel R. Levine, Behind the Cable Rip-off: It’s Time to Pull 
the Plug on Price-Gouging Monopolies and Get a Little Healthy 
Competition into the Picture, Reader's Digest, June 1992; Mark 
Lewyn & Julie Ampano Lopez, More Choice for Cable TV?, Busi- 
ness Week, May 13, 1991. 


*2 Kagan breaks down the data into “incumbent” and “over- 
builder” categories. The figures used here are equally weighted 
averages of the two. 


180 


average monthly revenue per subscriber for all U.S. cable 
systems in 1992 was $32.12 (Table 1) and the number 
of basic channels offered was under 35 (Table 5), im- 
plying that competitive systems were pricing their total 
service package about 21.9 percent lower, while provid- 
ing greater viewing choices. Table 6. 

20. Incumbent cable companies respond dramatically 
to new competition. When an entrant begins constructing 
a competing system, the incumbent typically cuts sub- 
scriber rates just in those areas (literally, the blocks) 
where the competitor has placed its lines. Prices have 
been dramatically lower in areas where rivalry has been 
in evidence, a sign that prices prior to entry were above 
competitive levels. Telesat Cablevision, for example, en- 
tered the cable market against entrenched competitors 
in Orange County, Florida. In April 1992, the prices 
charged by the two firms against which Telesat competed 
(in different areas of Orange County) were far lower 
than the prices they charged in their monopoly markets. 
Table 7. 

21. In sum, the evidence is overwhelming that a 
monopoly market structure allows cable firms to charge 
consumers higher prices than otherwise. Cable’s Q- 
ratios, prices in cross-sectional studies, prices in time 
series, and system sales prices under competitive vs. mo- 
nopoly market structures all point in exactly the same 
direction: cable firms that face no direct competition 
from head-to-head cable competitors have significant mar- 
ket power which they utilize to raise rates and restrict 
output from competitive levels. 


Jones Intercable Enjoys a Monopoly Position 
in Alexandria, Virginia 


22. Jones Intercable enjoys a market position in Alex- 
andria, Virginia typical of cable franchisees elsewhere in 
the country. As the sole cable television system in the 
city, it enjoys a Q ratio significantly above 1. In fact, 


181 


in an intracompany transfer in 1992, Jones paid $2,134 
per subscriber.” The purchase price is clearly in excess 
of capital replacement costs, particularly considering that 
the density of households is more than twice the national 
average (thus reducing plant investment per subscriber ). 

23. Jones’ rates in Alexandria, where it does not face 
head-to-head cable competition, are significantly higher 
than in Anne Arundel, Maryland, a market in which 
Jones does face a direct cable competitor.“ The monthly 
price of the basic cable package in Alexandria is $24.65, 
and includes 44 channels of programming. In Anne 
Arundel, Jones charges $21.20, and offers subscribers 
either 43 or 53 channels, depending upon where they 
live.” This indicates that prices in the competitive market 
are between 8 percent and 29 percent lower on a per- 
channel basis. Such downward pressure on prices reliably 
expands the consumption of any product. The relative 
cable subscribership rates in Alexandria and Anne Arun- 
del are consistent with this. Cable subscribership in Alex- 
andria is only 57 percent, which is less than the national 
average. In Anne Arundel County, cable subscribership 
is over 70 percent, well above the national average.” 

24. A comparison of the prices Jones charges in Alex- 
andria with national averages compiled by the FCC (see 
Table 4) reveals that Jones charges about 37 percent 
more per channel for basic services in Alexandria than 
do cable companies that face head-to-head competition. 
This despite the fact that the density of households in 


*8 Dean Witter Reynolds, Company Report—Jones Intercable 
Investor, L.P. 4 (Oct. 22, 1992). The report claims that the 
“(p)rice paid for Alexandria Systems seems low.” Ibid. 


** The competitor, United Cable and its predecessors, have com- 
peted with Jones for more than a decade by virtue of each com- 
pany holding a non-exclusive cable franchise. 


*5 Stip. 34. 
26 Stip. 35. 


182 


Alexandria is more than twice the national average, which 
substantially reduces plant investment per subscriber. 


Direct Cable Competition is Financially Viable 

25. Cable monopolies dominate local video markets 
not due to an efficient market structure, which realizes 
scale economies for the benefit of consumers. Quite the 
contrary: cable companies currently charge prices far in 
excess of their average costs, as well as the likely costs 
of competitors. New entrants could charge lower prices 
and still realize profits. Head-to-head cable competition 
is viable in most local cable markets at existing prices, 
and even at prices much reduced from current monopoly 
levels. 

26. Video programming currently available vastly ex- 
ceeds the carrying capacities of existing cable systems. 
There are roughly 80 national programming networks 
currently available.” In total, over 150 channels of cable 
programming are now available.” (There would be an 
even larger number of such services on the market if 
cable were more competitive at the local distribution 
level.) Yet, of the 11,083 cable systems operating nation- 
wide, only 1,152 systems or 10 percent of these systems 
carry more than 53 channels; over half the systems offer 
30-53 channels; the remaining 35 percent offer fewer 
than 30 channels.” 

27. My 1992 financial analysis of “overbuild” com- 
petition in cable sought to gauge the financial viability 
of competition in a typical U.S. cable market. I esti- 
mated expected rates of return for a new competitive 
cable system entering a market already served by one 
cable system, and possessing the following characteristics: 


27 NCTA, Cable Television Developments 7-A (Mar. 1993). 
28 Extra!, Satellite Orbit Magazine, Mar. 1993. 
2° NCTA, Cable Television Developments 10-A (Mar. 19938). 


183 


50,000 homes; density (homes per mile of cable plant) 
of the U.S. average; revenue per subscriber of the U.S. 
average; subscribership of the U.S. average (with no in- 
crease attributable to competition); aerial to underground 
wiring ratio equal to the national average; revenue growth 
of 5 percent per year.” I assumed the firm’s capital costs 
to be those listed as standard in a 1986 paper from the 
U.S. Department of Justice (the quality-adjusted cost of 
physical capital has been declining over time), operating 
costs to be 57.1 percent of revenues (the national aver- 
age), and that the new entrant would garner a 50 percent 
market share but that no additional households would 
subscribe to cable (i.e., the new firm would serve 50 per- 
cent of existing cable customers). Based upon this analy- 
sis, @ new competitor could expect a return of 18 percent 
at average U.S. rate levels existing in 1991. Even allow- 
ing for a 20 percent fall in rates due to competition (and 
a corresponding increase in subscribership of 20 percent), 
a new entrant earns 16 percent. Since the model uses 
conservative assumptions,” and both numbers are above 
the cost of capital, this indicates that the typical cable 


market is financially capable of supporting two rival cable 
firms. 


Direct Cable Competition is Financially Viable 
in Alexandria, Virginia 


28. Alexandria, Virginia is particularly attractive from 
the standpoint of cable competition. The key variable to 
focus on in assessing financial viability is revenue per 
mile of plant: cable entrants must be able to anticipate 


” Thomas W. Hazlett, Teleco Entry Into Video, paper presented 
to the Public Utility Research Conference, University of Florida 
(Apr. 1992). 


*! The cable industry, for instance, anticipates revenue growth 
above 5 percent; competition does increase subscribership, etc. 


184 


sufficient cash flows to sustain their fixed investments, 
largely constituted by laying the transport grid (i.e., 
cables). Alexandria cable consumers now pay an aver- 
age of $34.92 per month, well above the 1992 U.S. aver- 
age of $32.12 (see Table 1). Moreover, the density of 
the market, 244 homes per mile, is two and a half times 
the U.S. average of 93. These two factors combine to 
make this particular market a likely candidate for head- 
to-head cable competition. 

29. The 1990 Annual Report of Jones Intercable says 
virtually as much itself, in describing its Alexandria, Vir- 
ginia market in glowing terms: 

Alexandria, Virginia * * * is a relatively stable, 
affluent community with excellent demographics, in- 
cluding a high rate of employment and one of the 
highest levels of population density in the Washing- 
ton metropolitan area. The current population of 
Alexandria is approximately 112,000, with a median 
household income above the national average at ap- 
proximately $42,600. More than 75 percent of Alex- 
andria residents are employed in white-collar occu- 
pations, with 40 percent of those employed working 
in managerial and professional positions. Histori- 
cally, these demographics have proven to be highly 
favorable for cable subscriptions and penetration 
rates.” 


Telephone Companies are Important Potential 
Competitors in the Cable Market 


30. Competition is economically possible in cable mar- 
kets, but cable companies have proven very adept at 
blocking it. As noted above, favored cable strategies 
include aggressive and highly selective price discrimina- 


32 Jones Intercable, 1990 Annual Report 6 (Dec. 31, 1990). 


, 


185 


tion, exclusive contracts with programmers, and monop- 
olization of the franchising process.“ 

31. In a market occupied by such powerful and ag- 
gressive incumbents, widespread competition must feature 
new entrants which begin with both technical sophistica- 
tion and substantial financial resources. The telephone 
companies are the most likely such competitors. Certainly 
this has been the view of the cable incumbents, which 
have routinely targeted retention of the telco video pro- 
gramming ban as their top legislative priority.” 

32. There are no technical barriers to head-to-head 
competition in the provision of video programming be- 
tween telcos and cable providers. Cable does not utilize 
airwaves that are parcelled out by a regulatory body. 
Competing cables can be laid side by side. In fact, on a 
common carrier network such as C&P has indicated that it 
intends to build, competing video programs can be carried 
on the same wire. 

33. Moreover, the 1978 Pole Attachment Act has 
fulfilled its purpose. U.S. cable markets have been wired 
by independent (non-telco) companies, including the Alex- 
andria, Virginia market. Most utility poles and conduits 
are owned not by telephone companies but by other utili- 
ties,” and these utilities may and do provide cable tele- 


* A litany of abusive practices employed by cable incumbents, 
and their trade associations, to deter competitive entry was de- 
tailed by the largest such competitor, Telesat Cablevision in com- 
ments to the FCC. See Comments of Telesat Cablevision, Inc., In 
re Competition, Rate Deregulation and the Commission’s Policies 
Relating to the Provision of Cable Service, MM Dkt. No. 89-600 
(F.C.C. Mar. 1, 1990). 


** As a leading cable industry analyst, John Mansell, noted in 
1988: “Needless to say, cable’s number one priority is the continu- 
ance of the telco/cable cross ownership bar.” Cable Television 
Franchising, Aug. 31, 1988, at 2. 


* Stip. 23 (“Nationally, electric utilities own more poles than 
telephone companies.”); in Alexandria, Virginia, C&P provides 


186 


vision service themselves,” in competition with cable com- 
panies. Municipalities, which control all public rights 
of way over and under the streets, are likewise permitted 
to operate their own cable systems,” and many do.” None- 
theless, independent cable companies have successfully 
deployed their own cables, even against this class of favor- 
ably positioned potential competitors. 


Competition Against Cable Monopolists Would 
Lower Price, Increase Output, and Increase 
Diversity in Video Programming 


34. There is today no plausible economic scenario 
according to which telco competition against incumbent 
cable monopolists would raise price or reduce the total 
amount of video programming offered to consumers. Com- 
petition reliably lowers prices for cable customers and 
thereby enlists greater numbers of subscribers; this con- 
stitutes an increase in diversity of programming as cable 
subscribers have access to many more video choices than 
non-cable customers. | 


35. In 1970, when the FCC first prohibited telephone 
companies from providing CATV service, cable was an 
infant industry. The FCC assumed (not unreasonably 
at the time) that by sheltering that industry from telco 
competition it could promote the development of a com- 
peting distribution notework. 


2,744 poles and VEPCO, the local electric utility, provides 4,639 
poles. Stip. 24. 


% Stip. 26. 


8? See 47 U.S.C. 583(e) (1), 47 U.S.C. § 541(f). See also Warner 
Cable Communications Inc. v. City of Niceville, 911 F.2d 634, 637 
(11th Cir. 1990) (No. 89-8278). 


88 As of 1992, 63 municipalities provide cable service through 
municipally owned cable systems. Stip. 25. 


187 


36. The new network has since developed, more suc- 
cessfully than the FCC might have imagined in 1970. 
Indeed, the cable industry has passed competitive matur- 
ity: it now monopolizes local video distribution. 

37. As technology advances, the separation of tele- 
phone and video service becomes increasingly artificial. 
The marketplace surely reflects this, as cable companies 
are now actively seeking to provide voice telephone ser- 
vice in competition with existing telephone companies. For 
example, cable companies are rapidly building alliances 
with “competitive access providers” (CAPs), who run in- 
dependent, usually fiber-optic, networks, typically through 
major urban centers, connecting businesses to each other 
and to long distance carriers. Overall, cable interests now 
control over 50 percent of CAP revenues.” At the same 
time, cable companies account for more of the experi- 
mental “personal communications service” (PCS) licenses 
issued by the FCC than all seven Regional Bell com- 
panies combined.“ Jones Lightwave Ltd., an affiliate of 
Jones Intercable, has FCC experimental licenses for PCS 
trials in Alexandria, Virginia, and in Illinois, Florida, 


** The Yankee Group, CAP Market Update: Year of Transition 6 
(Feb. 1992). For a non-exhaustive list of cable-CAP interests, see 
Stip. 49. 


* Office of Engineering and Technology, FCC, PCS Experi- 
mental Applications by Filed Date (Mar. 1, 1998). See also Stip. 
55. The nation’s first coast-to-coast PCS phone call was placed 
through a cable television system in February 1992; many cable 
companies are using FCC experimental licenses to test PCS. The 
cable industry, according to its own publicity, “is well-suited to 
linking PCS radio-relay (cell) sites because cable passes 96 per- 
cent of U.S. homes.” NCTA, Press Information, Cable Television 
Year in Review: 1992, at 3 (Nov. 24, 1992). See also NCTA, 
Cable Television: Bringing Fiber Optics to America 4 (Feb. 1992) 
(“The cable industry’s vision anticipates that additional service 
capabilities will be developed under this design through intercon- 
nection with other communications technologies and services, such 
as Personal Communications Services * * hag ¥ 


188 


and Colorado.** TCI, the nation’s largest cable operator, 
predicts that cable systems will be capable of providing 
telephone service by the mid to late 1990s, using up- 
grades to cable networks that are already being deployed. 

38. With the current baseline of monopoly prevailing 
in the overwhelming number of cable markets, as well 
as in the specific market of Alexandria, Virginia, allowing 
a new entrant to compete cannot lessen consumer choice. 
This is true even if one assumes the worst: after some 
period of intense competition, a telco entrant eventually 
displaces the current monopolist. While highly unlikely 
(and remediable by several alternative means other than 
a blanket ban on video programming by telcos) even this 
worst case entails expanded consumer choice during the 
rivalrous stage, and no lessened choice in settling back 
to a monopolistic Square One. Because of the prevalence 
of sole supplier cable markets, we cannot do worse than 
we presently do. 

39. The only relevant questions, then, are: How 
much will choice improve with new entry? And for how 
long? 

40. The evidence on the first question is unmistakable: 
wherever and whenever competition does come about, 
consumer choices improve dramatically. First, prices fall, 
allowing more consumers to avail themselves of the video 
choices of the new technology. Second, competition sup- 
plies more video programming, more choice, more diver- 
sity. This is revealed in the substantially higher number 


‘1 Stip. 56; FCC Experimental License Nos. 2429-EX-PL-92, 
2430-EX-PL-92, 2431-EX-PL-92, 2482-EX-PL-92. 


42 Joanne Kelley, Tele-Comm Unfurls $2.0 Billion Network Plan, 
Reuters, Apr. 1, 1993. One cable company executive even claims 
that cable companies will soon offer basic cable service free to 
households that would otherwise decline to subscribe in order to 
promote the sale of telephone and other services. Record CAB 
Attendance, Communications Daily, Apr. 8, 1992, at 3 (quoting 
Amos Hostetter, Chairman of Continental Cablevision). 


- 
i 
: 
é 
; 


189 


of program channels which competitive cable systems 
provide. 

41. The cable industry’s argument is that these bene- 
ficial effects will not endure in the long run. That is 
uncompelling in that some competitive period is preferred 
to none. Moreover, both economic theory and real world 
experience indicate that competition can and will endure. 

42. The incumbent cable monopolists have invested in 
long-lived physical plant. Many are upgrading to fiber, 
which will last even longer. In economic jargon, these 
investments are already “sunk.” Once the money has 
been spent, it is largely unsalvageable. Looking forward, 
then, the future cost of these facilities is close to zero. 
New entry by telcos cannot possibly deter competition by 
others when that long term commitment has already been 
made. The only realistic exit from the market, once 
significant costs have been sunk, is via merger—and that 
would take an explicit approval by the antitrust authori- 
ties. 

43. Cable industry reaction to possible telephone 
company entry into video offers powerful testimony to the 
likely long-lived impact of telco-cable competition. Na- 
tionally, the cable industry is quickly upgrading its facili- 
ties, particularly with fiber optic investments, to prepare 
for the possibility of the telephone company competition 
they fear. The cable companies are thus signalling that 
they believe the entry of telcos into the market would 
result in more competition which justifies the sinking of 
durable capital. Indeed, since the filing of the lawsuit of 
which this affidavit is a part, Jones has had informal dis- 
cussions with the City of Alexandria wherein it has of- 
fered to make additional investments in channel capacity 
in Alexandria if it receives a 20-25 year non-exclusive 
franchise.“ 

44. We cannot do any worse than monoply. There 
can be a debate over the magnitude of consumer im- 


#8 Stip. 39. 


190 


provement with new entry, but not of the direction. 
Prices will fali some amount, for some period. Choices 
will increase, by some amount for some time. There is 
simply no dispute: when one begins with monopoly, new 
entry can only increase the amount of consumer choice. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on this 29th day of April, 1993. 


/s/ Thomas W. Hazlett 
Tuomas W. HaZz.etT, Pu.D. 
Associate Professor 
University of California 
Davis, CA 95616-8512 


191 


Table 1. Cable Industry Trends.1 


House Avail- Pene- 
holds ability tration 
Subscrib- Revenue/ (Homes (Sub- 


ing to Total Sub- Passed/scribers/ US TV 
Cable Revenue seriber/ House- Homes House- 


(thou- ($ Month holds) Passed) holds 
Year  =—s sands) ~_—millions) ($) (%) (%) (%) 
1960 750 50 5.56 N/A N/A 1.4 
1970 5,100 845 5.64 <10.0 N/A 6.6 
1980 17,671 2,549 12.02 45.7 66.1 25.2 
1984 37,290 7,800 17.48 72.0 56.5 43.7 
1992 55,200 22,000 $2.12 96.0 62.0 60.0 


Table 2. Cable Network Growth. 


ae Year ' Number of Networks 
1970 0 
1976 4 
1984 49 
1992 78 


'The Kagan Cable TV Financial Databook 18 (June 1989) ; 
NCTA, Cable Television Developments 1-A, 2-A, 8-A (Mar. 1993) ; 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
Dep’t of Commerce, Video Program Distribution and Cable Tele- 
vision: Current Policy Issues and Recommendations 10 (June 
1988); Florence Setzer and Jonathon Levy, FCC, OPP Working 
Paper 26, Broadcast Television in a Multichannel! Marketplace 68 
(June 1991); Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Investor 5 (Feb. 12, 
1993); Stip. 17. 


2Stip. 9; NCTA, Cable Television Developments 7-A (Mar. 
1998). 


192 


Table 3. Sales Price Data for U.S. Cable Systems, 1982-1992.* 


Number of 
Systems Total Price/Home Price/ 
Year Sold Subscribers Passed ($) Subscriber ($) 
1982 212 934,071 486 922 
1984 295 3,023,144 520 948 
1989 379 5,951,853 1,255 2,291 
1990 105 531,207 1,277 2,049 
1991 111 4,528,433 961 1,795 
1992 97 1,876,754 1,023 1,768 
1998 Jan.-Feb. 5 232,000 N/A 2,848 


Table 4. Competitive Cable Systems Sales Prices, 1988-19924 


Price/ 
Sample Sample Size  Price/ Subscriber Price vs. 
Size ($ million Subscriber ($) Monopoly 


Year = ( systems) sales) _($) (U.S. Mean) ¥. @ Jo) 
1988 9 35.905 1,649 1,953 —18.5 
1989 & 170.229 1,886 2,351 —19.7 
1990 2 7.325 1,638 2,047 — 20.0 
1991 1 5,200 1,300 1,569 —17.1 
1992 1 55.500 1,500 1,768 —16.1 


3 Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Investor 13 (Jan. 25, 1993) ; Paul 
Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Investor 6 (Feb. 12, 1993). 


4Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Franchising News Roundup 
(June 28, 1991). Figures for 1992 are from Paul Kagan Assoc., 
Private Cable Investor 1 (Mar. 31, 1993). 


* Prices per subscriber for U.S. average differ from those given 
by Kagan in Table 3, and may be due to different weighting of 
sales data (e.g., by system rather than by subscriber size). 


193 


Table 5. Competitive vs. Monopolistic Cable Rates 
from Current FCC Data.* 


Sample Size Mean Basic Mean Basic Price/ 
__(systems) Price/Month ($) Channels( #) Channel ($) 


Monopoly 296 22.49 34.76 0.65 
Competitive — 19.02 46.59 0.41 


Table 6. Competitive vs. Monopolistic Cable Systems Summary 
Statistics from 1992 Kagan Data.* 


Mean Monthly 
Sample Size Revenue/ Mean Basic Mean Basic Price/ 
(Subscribers)Subscriber/ Monthly Channels Channel 


(millions) Month ($) Rate ($ (#) ($) 
Monopoly 54.89 $2.12 19.08 85 * .55 
Competitive 
(103 systems) 1.13 25.08 17.49 40 44 
Price/ Quality 
Difference vs. 
Monopoly —21.9% —8.8% +143% +19.8% 


* Federal Communications Commission, Release of Data from 
Cable TV System Operators Rate Structure Questionnaire) (Feb. 
24, 1993) ; Communications Daily, Mar. 4, 1993, at 2-8. As defined 
here, “basic cable” includes both Tier 1 (generally known as “lim- 
ited basic”) and Tier 2 (what most consumers call “basic’’). 


* Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Franchising News Roundup 
(June 28, 1991); Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Franchising 4 
(Apr. 30, 1992); NCTA, Cable Television Developments 1-A 
(Mar. 1993). 


* See Table 5. 


194 


Table 7. Monthly Cable Rates in 
Competitive vs. Non-Competitive Areas ($)." 


ATC Cablevision Industries 


Non- Non- 
Com- Com- Com- com- 


_ Service Telesat petitive petitive petitive petitive 


ce nee ees __ eae 


Basic ($) 17.95 18.95 20.70 11.95 18.95 
Additional Outlets ($) 0.00 0.00 4.95 0.00 3.50 
Remote Control ($) 0.00 0.99 4.00 0.00 4.00 
Pay Channel ($) 9.95 8.95 11.60 7.45 10.00 
Installation ($) 0.00 0.00 49.95 0.00 50.00 


7 Paul Kagan Assoc., Cable TV Franchising News Roundup 3 
(Apr. 30, 1992). 


* One-time connection charge. 


195 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


{Caption Omitted in Printing] 


JOINT STIPULATIONS OF FACT 


For purposes, and solely for purposes, of this litigation, 
the parties, through undersigned counsel, hereby stipulate 
to the following facts: 


A. Stipulations Proffered By Plaintiffs ' 


1. The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company 
of Virginia (C&P) is a wholly owned subsidiary of Bell 
Atlantic Corporation. Bell Atlantic is privately owned 
and has over a million shareholders. 

2. C&P is one of the telephone companies in the 
United States that is subject to common carrier regula- 
tion under title II of the Communications Act of 1934 
and also state laws. 

3. Fiber optic technology is capable of providing tele- 
phone service and transmitting video programming on an 
integrated basis directly to subscribers. 

4. In 1984, no telephone company provided transport 
of video programming to subscribers over its telephone 
lines. 

5. C&P carries the video programming of third par- 
ties at the Cascades, a development in Loudoun County, 


' Although the parties proffering each series of stipulations have 
been identified, the parties acknowledge that each stipulation herein 
was subject to negotiation and modification by all parties prior to 
agreement. 


ee ee ewe 


196 


pursuant to the FCC’s Order and Authorization, File No. 
W-P-C-6649 (Jan. 11, 1991). C&P carries the video 
programming of third parties in Northern Virginia pur- 
suant to the FCC’s Order and Authorization, File No. 
W-P-C-6834 (Mar. 25, 1993). 

6. As an information service provider, C&P provides 
its own voice and data messages, and messages of its 
affiliates, to the public. These services include, for ex- 
ample, time of day and weather services, Enhanced 911 
service, and home shopping services. 

7. Bell Atlantic Video Services Company (BVS) is 
an affiliate of C&P, incorporated in Virginia on Septem- 
ber 24¢1992> for the purpose of providing video pro- 
gramming to the public. 

8. In 1991-1992, 43 percent of viewing time in house- 
holds that subscribe to cable was devoted to basic cable 
program networks and pay cable services. 


9. In 1976, there were four national cable video net- 
works in existence; in 1984, there were 49 national cable 
video networks; in 1992, there were 78 national cable 
video networks. In 1984, expenditures by cable systems 
to obtain programming were approximately $1.74 billion; 
in 1992, cable system expenditures to obtain program- 
ming were approximately $3.8 billion. 

10. According to FCC, Office of Plans and Policies, 
Broadcast Television in a Multichannel Marketplace, 
OPP Working Paper No. 26 at 19 (June 1990), the 
average U.S. television household watches television ap- 
proximately seven hours a day. 

11. According to The Veronis, Suhler & Associates 
Communications Industry Forecast at 12 (1992), in 
1991, the average U.S. resident spent 1,515 hours watch- 
ing television, 1,115 hours listening to radio program- 
ming, 43 hours watching prerecorded videos at home, 9 
hours watching theater movies, and 169 hours reading 
daily newspapers. 


197 


12. Statistics compiled by the Census Bureau show 
that 98% of U.S. households had a television set as of 
1991. 

13. Statistics compiled by the FCC and the Census 
Bureau show that 93% of U.S. households subscribed to 
telephone service as of 1991. 

14. According to Sara Fritz & Dwight Morris, Hand- 
book of Campaign Spending: Money in the 1990 Con- 
gressional Races 53, 54 (Congressional Quarterly 1992), 
in the 1990 election, 29 percent of the money spent by 
Congressional candidates went for radio and television 
advertising and media consultants. On average, radio 
and television advertising accounted for 35 percent of the 
money spent by Senate candidates and 23 percent of the 
money spent by House candidates. Congressional candi- 
dates spent about $119 million on broadcast advertising 
in the 1990 election. 

15. NCTA and several of its members filed actions 
claiming that Sections 4 and 5 of the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 vio- 
late their First Amendment rights and that Section 6 
should be set aside as inseverable from Sections 4 and 5. 
See National Cable Television Association, Inc. v. United 
States, Civil Action No. 92-2495 (D.D.C.) and consoli- 
dated actions, Nos. 92-2247, 92-2292, 92-2494. 92-2558. 
One of NCTA’s members has filed an action claiming 
that Sections 3, 7(b)(4)(B) and (C), 9, 10(d), 11. 15. 
19, 24, and 25 of the Cable Television Consumer Pro- 
tection and Competition Act of 1992, and Sections 611 
and 612 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 
1984 violate its First Amendment rights. Time Warner 
Entertainment Corp., L.P. v. FCC, Civil Action No. 
92-2494 (D.D.C.). 

16. In 1986, Jones’s price for basic cable service in 
Alexandria, which included 27 channels of programming, 
was $11.00 per month. 

17. In 1970, according to the FCC in Telephone 
Company-Cable Television C ross-Ownership Rules, 7 


198 


FCC Red 5781, 5848 (1992), and the Census Bureau, 
Statistical Abstract of the United States 1992 at 551, 
Table 884 (112th ed. 1992), cable passed less than 
10% of all television households. In 1976, cable passed 
approximately 33% of all television households. In 1984, 
cable passed approximately 72% of all television house- 
holds. Cable now passes approximately 96% of televi- 
sion households, and approximately 60% of television 
households subscribe. 

18. In Alexandria, Jones Intercable, which is pres- 
ently the sole provider of cable service in Alexandria, 
passes over 90% of all television households, and 57% 
subscribe. 

19. Currently, the supply of available video program- 
ming exceeds the available channel capacity of almost 
all cable systems. 

20. Cable systems presently have an average capacity 
of about 40 channels. In 1992, 88% of cable systems 
had fewer than 54 channels; however, approximately 35 
percent of all subscribers were served by systems with 54 
or more channels. 

21. In Alexandria, Jones Intercable presently has a 
capacity of 51 channels. 

22. In October 1979, C&P entered into an agreement 
with a predecessor to Jones which provided for the place- 
ment of cable facilities on C&P poles and in C&P con- 
duit in Alexandria. This agreement was assigned to 
Jones when it acquired the cable system in 1986. The 
Alexandria cable system Jones acquired had been de- 
ployed sometime prior to Jones’s acquisition; C&P has 
not provided any additional pole attachments for this 
system since 1984; and, since Jones acquired the system 
in 1986, Jones has not asked C&P to provide any new 
pole attachments. 

23. Nationally, electric utilities have more poles than 
do telephone companies. 


199 


24. In Alexandria, C&P currently provides 2744 pole 
attachments to Jones and VEPCO, tle local electric 
utility, provides 4639 pole attachments. 

25. According to the Public Power Directory, there 
are 63 municipally-owned cable television systems in the 
U.S. Of these communities, 38 also have a municipally- 
owned electric system. 

26. Florida Power & Light Co. currently operates a 
cable system in the same locality where it provides elec- 
tric utility service. 

27. According to the Census Bureau, annual cable 
operator revenues in 1970 were $345 million. In 1976, 
annual cable operator revenues from subscriber services 
including advertising were approximately $933 million. 
In 1984, annual cable operator revenues were approxi- 
mately $7.8 billion. In 1992, annual cable operator reve- 
nues were approximately $21.5 billion. 

28. Of the approximately 10,000 communities served 
by cable, as of 1991, 53 communities had more than one 
competing cable system in the same locality. 

29. Some cable systems serving individual communi- 
ties are owned by national or regional chains, known as 
multiple system operators (MSOs). The five largest 
MSOs combined serve 41.4% of all cable subscribers. 

30. According to the Newspaper Association of Amer- 
ica, Facts about Newspapers "92 at 26 (1992): Some 
newspapers serving individual communities are also 
owned by national or regional chains. Daily newspapers 
are published in 1,513 cities. One hundred and thirty- 
three newspaper groups own 1,213 daily newspapers, or 
about 75% of all U.S. daily newspapers. Eighty-two 
groups own five or fewer daily newspapers; 51 groups 
own six or more daily newspapers. There is competition 
between daily newspapers under separate ownership in 
37 cities. In 19 of these 37 cases, the competitors are 
published under joint operating agreements under an ex- 
emption from the antitrust laws. 


200 


31. Some of the companies that operate multiple 
cable systems and their 1991 revenues from all sources 
are: Tele-Communications, Inc. which serves 9.6 million 
cable subscribers and had total revenues of $3.8 billion; 
Time Warner which serves 6.8 million cable subscribers 
and had total revenues of $12 billion; Continental Cable- 
vision which serves 2.8 million cable subscribers and had 
total revenues of $570 million; Comcast which serves 2.8 
million cable subscribers and had total revenues of $720 
million; Cablevision Systems which serves 2 million sub- 
scribers and had total revenues of $603 million; and Cox 
which serves 1.7 million subscribers and had total reve- 
nues of $2.3 billion. 

32. Including its affiliates, Jones Intercable is the 
eighth largest multiple cable system operator in the U.S. 
with 1.5 million cable subscribers. Jones believes that 
it is the world’s largest cable management company. 
Cable management companies operate cable systems they 
do not own. 

33. Jones Intercable currently provides cable service 
in competition with another cable company in Anne 
Arundel County, Maryland. 

34. As of April 1993, Jones charges $24.65 per 
month in Alexandria for a 44-channel package of program- 
ming. In Anne Arundel County, Jones charges $21.20 
for either a 53-channel package of programming in areas 
where its system has been upgraded, or the same amount 
for a 43-channel package where its system has not yet 
been upgraded. 

35. Cable subscribership in Alexandria is approxi- 
mately 57%. Cable subscribership in Anne Arundel 
County is over 70%. 

36. According to an April 1, 1993 FCC News Re- 
lease, the price per channel of programming offered by 
competing cable systems is lower than the price where 
cable systems do not compete. 

37. There are no absolute physical barriers to the 
construction of competing multichannel cable services at- 


201 


tributable to the physical scarcity of the ¢!»ctromagnetic 
spectrum. This is true generally and in Alexandria. 

38. In delivering video programming of third parties 
in Northern Virginia pursuant to the FCC’s Order and 
Authorization, File No. W-P-C-6834 (Mar. 25, 1993), 
C&P does not use the electromagnetic spectrum. 

39. Both before and after this case was filed, Jones 
Intercable has had informal discussions with the City 
of Alexandria and has offered to make additional invest- 
ments in channel capacity in Alexandria if it received 
a 20-25 year nonexclusive franchise. These discussions 
began before this case was filed. 

40. Currently, both coaxial cable and optical fiber 
are used for wireline transmission of cable system video 
signals. Previously, only coaxial cable was used for this 
purpose. In general, multiple lines of coaxial cable or 
fiber optics can be placed next to each other without 
mutual interference to video signals they carry. This 
means competing cable transmission systems can exist 
side-by-side without such interference. 

41. Originally, cable systems were primarily designed 
to provide one-way video signals. The newest cable Sys- 
tem architecture is capable of supporting two-way tele- 
phone and data services. 

42. According to the NCTA, looking solely at sub- 
scriber plant (i.e., not counting connections between ex- 
changes or adjacent cities), in 1991 the regional Bell tele- 
phone companies installed approximately 8685 miles of 
fiber optic cable, while cable companies installed approx- 
imately 6408 miles of fiber optic cable. In a speech at 
the 1992 NCTA annual convention, the President of the 
NCTA stated that “Cable is now installing optical fiber 
at an annual rate that is 74 percent of what the RBOCs 
are doing. And we're gaining fast.” 

43. In a speech at the 1992 NCTA annual convention, 
the President of the NCTA stated that “[t]he biggest tele- 
communications story of the decade may turn out to be 


202 


not telcos’ creating broadband networks, but cable tech- 
nology and architecture proving to be the most efficient 
means of delivering the next generation of communica- 
tions services.” 

44. In September, 1992, Comcast, the fifth largest 
multiple system operator and the current provider of cable 
service and one of the two cellular radio services in 
Philadelphia, placed an international telephone call from 
Philadelphia to London without the use of local wireline 
exchange services at the originating end in the United 
States. 

45. Some cable companies in the U.K. are providing 
integrated video programming and telephone service in 
direct competition with the telephone company in the 
U.K., British Telecom. 

46. In 1990, approximately 30% of the operating rev- 
enue of U.S. local exchange carriers came from the pro- 
vision of “access services,” i.e., services that local tele- 
phone companies provide to long distance companies to —— 
connect local subscribers with the facilities of the long 
distance carriers at the originating and terminating ends 
of long distance calls. 

47. So-called Competitive Access Providers (“CAPs”) 
have entered the interstate access market in recent years, 
serving the needs of large, communications-intensive busi- 
nesses, predominantly in metropolitan centers, that gener- 
ate high volumes of long-distance telephone traffic. CAPs 
generally deploy fiber-optic facilities or, in some cases, 
microwave systems. It is estimated that the CAPs have 
invested hundreds of millions of dollars in their facilities. 

48. Metropolitan Fiber Services, a CAP, competes with 
C&P in portions of Northern Virginia for the provision 
of interstate access services to the types of customers re- 
ferred to in Stipulation 47. 

49. Several members of NCTA have purchased inter- 
ests in companies that provide interstate access services 


203 


in competition with local telephone companies. These in- 
clude, but are not limited to: 


a. TCI and Cox own Teleport, a CAP that provides 
service in New York, New Jersey, and Chicago, 
among other places. Comcast and Continental Cable- 
vision have each agreed to purchase 20% equity 
interests in Teleport subject to regulatory approval. 


b. Comcast owns 54% of Eastern Telelogic, a CAP 
that provides service in Philadelphia. 


c. TCI has applied for authority to acquire Penn 
Access Corporation, a CAP that provides service in 
Pittsburgh. 


d. Affiliates of Jones Intercable presently provide 
CAP services in two U.S. cities. 


50. Southwestern Bell, which provides telephone ser- 
vice in the southwestern United States, has announced 
plans to purchase two cable systems in the Washington 
metropolitan area. 

51. Southwestern Bell currently provides cellular radio 
service in Northern Virginia and the Washington-Baltimore 
metropolitan area. 

52. The FCC licenses wireless telecommunications 
services. In the 1980's, the FCC licensed cellular mobile 
telephone services which overcame the need for wired 
connections between a subscriber and a telephone com- 
pany switching center. The FCC licensed radio spectrum 
to two competing providers in each cellular service area. 
By regulation, one of the two competing providers in- 
itially was the local wireline telephone exchange carrier. 

53. There are now 11 million subscribers in the United 
States to cellular service and their number continues to 
grow. In 1992, the number of cellular subscribers grew 
by over 40 percent. The cellular industry is now convert- 
ing to digital technologies that will expand the carrying 
capacity of their systems several-fold. 


204 


54. The FCC has begun a series of proceedings to 
license additional wireless services. In the Matter of 
Amendment of the Commission's Rules To Establish 
New Personal Communications Services, 7 FCC Red 5676 
(1992); In the Matter of Amendment of the Commis- 
sion’s Rules To Establish New Personal Communications 
Services, 7 FC“ Red 7794 (1992). 

55. The FCC has granted 203 experimental licenses 
for personal communications services (“PCS”) as defined 
in Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Redevelopment of 
Spectrum to Encourage Innovation in the Use of New 
Telecommunications Technologies, CC Dkt. No. 92-9 
(FCC Feb. 7, 1992). Thirty five of these have been 
granted to cable companies. 

56. Jones Lightwave Ltd. is an affiliate of Jones In- 
tercable. Jones Lightwave Ltd. has FCC experimental 
licenses for PCS trials in Alexandria, Virginia, and in 
Illinois, Florida, and Colorado. Experimental License Nos. 
2429-EX-PL-92, 2430-EX-PL-92, 2431-EX-PL-92, 2432- 
EX-PL-92. 

57. The FCC has tentatively decided to grant a pio- 
neer’s preference in /n the Matter of Amendment of the 
Commission’s Rules To Establish New Personal Com- 
munications Services, 7 FCC Red 7794 (1992) to, among 
others, a cable company. 

58. A good cause waiver application that was filed 
in April 1992 by the telephone company serving Bentley- 
ville, Pennsylvania to provide video programming in that 
community, Petition for Waiver and Section 214 Appli- 
cation, In the Matter of The Bentleyville Telephone Co., 
File No. W-P-C-6817 (Apr. 29, 1992), is pending. Heli- 
con, the incumbent cable operator in Bentleyville, filed an 
opposition on June 11, 1992. 

59. An April 1990 good cause waiver application, 
opposed by the NCTA, to provide video programming 
over fiber optics by the telephone company serving 
Ranchos Las Flores, California, Public Notice: Contel of 


205 


California, Inc. Section 214 Application and Request for 
Waiver of the Telco/Cable Cross-Ownership Rules, File 
No. W-P-C-6575 (Mar. 12, 1990), is pending. 

60. In February, 1987, GTE California, Inc., the tele- 
phone company serving Cerritos, California, applied to 
the FCC for authority to construct cable facilities in Cer- 
ritos. That application was granted in July 1989. On the 
NCTA’s petition for review, the D.C. Circuit remanded 
the matter to the Commission for further proceedings in 
September, 1990. National Cable Television Ass'n, Inc. 
v. FCC, 914 F.2d 285 (D.C. Cir. 1990). Thereupon, 
the FCC engaged in an effort to facilitate a voluntary 
settlement among the parties. When no settlement had 
been achieved by June, 1992, the Commission requested 
comments as to what further action it should take, and 
no order has issued. 


61. Approximately 34 million people live in the states 
where Bell Atlantic’s local exchange telephone companies 
provide telephone service. 


62. Some cable companies charge additional fees for 
connecting additional television sets and for additional 
set-top converters that are sometimes needed to decode 
the cable signal. 


63. Since 1978, to the best of the parties’ current 
knowledge, C&P has never terminated an agreement for 
pole attachments or conduit with a company that was 
providing cable service to customers. 

64. Since 1978, to the best of the parties’ current 
knowledge, there has never been a complaint to the FCC 
regarding C&P’s conduit rates. 


65. High-bit-rate digital subscriber line technology 
(HDSL), which is a two-way version of the technology 
used for asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), is 
used in commercial applications for data transmission. 

66. Broadcasters and cable operators do not currently 
provide high-definition television. 


206 


67. BVS is assertedly still in the process of arranging 
to obtain from suppliers the video programming that BVS 
will provide directly to subscribers, and to obtain the right 
to retransmit such programming. 

68. BVS is assertedly still in the process of develop- 
ing the programming that it would seek to have origi- 
nated on its behalf. 


Stipulations Proffered by the Government Defendants * 


69. As used herein, the terms “affiliate” and “affili- 
ated” shall have the same meaning as in 47 U.S.C. §§ 522 
(1), 533(b). Plaintiffs Chesapeake and Potomac Tele- 
phone Company of Virginia (“C&P”) and Bell Atlantic 
Video Services Company (“BVS”) are affiliated with 
each other and with a number of local wireline telephone 
exchange carriers by virtue of their common ownership 
by Bell Atlantic Corporation (“Bell Atlantic”). These 
affiliates provide local wireline telephone exchange serv- 
ice in the District of Columbia, Delaware, nearly all of 
Maryland, and portions of Virginia, West Virginia, Penn- 
sylvania and New Jersey, as indicated below: 


(a) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany provides local wireline telephone exchange and 
exchange access service in the District of Columbia. 


(b) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Maryland provides local wireline telephone 
exchange and exchange access service in nearly all 
of Maryland. 


(c) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Virginia provides local wireline telephone 
exchange and exchange access service in portions of 


2 Although the parties proffering each series of stipulations have 
been identified, the parties acknowledge that each stipulation herein 
was subject to negotiation and modification by all parties prior to 
agreement. 


oe tee 


207 


Virginia, including all of the City of Alexandria, 
Virginia (“Alexandria”). 

(d) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of West Virginia provides local wireline tele- 


phone exchange and exchange access service in por- 
tics * of West Virginia. 


(e) The Diamond State Telephone Company pro- 
vides local wireline telephone exchange and ex- 
change access service in Delaware. 


(f) New Jersey Bell Telephone Company provides 
local wireline telephone exchange and exchange ac- 
cess service in portions of New Jersey. 


(g) The Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania 
provides local wireline telephone exchange and ex- 
change access service in portions of Pennsylvania. 


Other than Telecom Corporation of New Zealand, a 
Bell Atlantic affiliate that provides telephone service in 
New Zealand, no entity with which C&P, BVS or Bell 
Atlantic is affiliated provides local wireline telephone ex- 
change service anywhere outside the above-described 
territory. 

70. C&P currently provides, has sought authority to 
provide, or has announced plans to provide, channels of 
communication to the following unaffiliated entities, in 
the following places, for the purpose of providing video 
programming directly to subscribers: 


(a) C&P provides channels of communication to 
Cablevision of Loudoun in the Cascades develop- 
ment in Loudoun County, Virginia, pursuant to, and 
subject to the conditions of, the FCC’s Order and 
Authorization, File No. W-P-C-6649 (Jan. 11, 
1991). 


(b) C&P provides channels of communication to 
multiple unaffiliated video programmers in portions 


208 


of northern Virginia, pursuant to, and subject to the 
conditions of, the FCC’s Order and Authorization, 
File No. W-P-C-6834 (Mar. 25, 1993). 


71. C&P currently provides pole line attachments to 
69 unaffiliated cable television operators in its territory, 
for the purpose of providing cable service directly to 
their subscribers. 

72. C&P provides conduit to approximately 14 un- 
affiliated cable television operators in its telephone serv- 
ice area, for the purpose of providing cable service 
directly to subscribers. 

73. Bell Atlantic’s local telephone subsidiaries have 
provided, currently provide, have sought authority to pro- 
vide, or have announced plans to provide, channels of 
communication to the following unaffiliated entities, in 
the following places: 


(a) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany provides channels of communication in the 
District of Columbia to District Cablevision, Inc., 
for the purpose of providing cable service directly 
to subscribers. 


(b) The Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania 
previously provided channels of communication in 
Perryopolis, Pennsylvania to the Helicon Group, 
Ltd. for the purpose of providing cable service di- 
rectly to subscribers. 


(c) New Jersey Bell Telephone Company has sought 
authority to provide video dialtone service in Flor- 
ham Park Borough, Madison Borough and Chatham 
Borough, New Jersey to multiple unaffiliated video 
programmers, including Sammons Communications 
of New Jersey, Inc. 


(d) New Jersey Bell Telephone Company has 


sought authority to provide video dialtone service 
in Dover Township, Ocean County, New Jersey to 


209 


multiple unaffiliated video programmers, including 
FurtureVision of America Corporation. 


74. In November 1992, New Jersey Bell, a subsidiary 
of Bell Atlantic, entered into a 10-year agreement with 
FutureVision of America Corp. under which FutureVision 
agreed to use tariffed common carrier video transport 
service provided over New Jersey Bell’s telephone net- 
work to provide video programming within New Jersey 
Bell’s telephone service area. 

75. On December 22, 1992, the New Jersey Board 
of Regulatory Commissioners announced its approval of 
a regulatory reform plan for New Jersey Bell, a subsidi- 
ary of Bell Atlantic, including endorsement of New Jer- 
sey Bell’s plan to accelerate the deployment of broadband 
technology to every home and office in the state by 2010. 
Board approval for this investment was not required. 
During the proceedings before the Board in 1992, New 
Jersey Bell estimated that its total network capital in- 
vestment through the end of the century would be approxi- 
mately $5.3 billion. 

76. There have been discussions between Bell Atlantic 
and one or more video programmers regarding the provi- 
sion of video programming services outside the areas 
where Bell Atlantic’s telephone companies provide tele- 
phone service. 

77. As of 1992, the following Bell Atlantic local tele- 
phone subsidiaries provided pole line attachments to the 
following numbers of unaffiliated cable system operators 
in their telephone service areas: 


(a) New Jersey Bell Telephone Company provides 
pole attachments to approximately 66 unaffiliated 
cable operators in New Jersey. 


(b) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany provides pole attachments for video transport 
facilities that C&P holds legal title to, and that are 


210 


leased to an unaffiliated cable operator in the Dis- 
trict of Columbia. 


(c) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Maryland provides pole attachments to ap- 
proximately 36 unaffiliated cable operators in Mary- 
land 


(d) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of West Virginia provides pole attachments to 
approximately 87 unaffiliated cable operators in 
West Virginia. 


(e) The Diamon® State Telephone Company pro- 
vides pole attachments to approximately 7 unaffili- 
ated cable operators in Delaware. 


(f) The Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania 
provides pole attachments to approximately 148 un- 
affiliated cable operators in Pennsylvania. 


78. As of 1992, the following Bell Atlantic local tele- 
phone subsidiaries provided conduit to the following num- 
ber of unaffiliated cable system operators in their tele- 
phone service areas: 


(a) New Jersey Bell Telephone Company provides 
conduit to approximately 34 unaffiliated cable oper- 
ators in New Jersey. 


(b) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany provides conduit for video transport facilities 
that C&P holds legal title to, and that are leased to 
an unaffiliated cable operator in the District of 
Columbia. 


(c) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Maryland provides conduit to approximately 
8 unaffiliated cable operators in Maryland. 

(d) The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of West Virginia provides conduit to approxi- 
mately 7 unaffiliated cable operators in West Virginia. 


211 


(e) The Diamond State Telephone Company pro- 
vides conduit to two unaffiliated cable operators in 
Delaware. 


(f) The Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania 
provides conduit to approximately 11 unaffiliated 
cable operators in Pennsylvania. 


79. C&P represents that the provisions contained in 
the License Agreement For Pole Attachments And/Or 
Conduit Occupancy dated September 1, 1992 between 
C&P and Century Mountain Corp. are typical of C&P’s 
agreements with cable operators for lease of pole attach- 
ments and conduit space. 

80. Pacific Telesis Corp. either directly or through 
entities with which it is affiliated (including its wholly 
owned subsidiary, Pacific Bell) provides local telephone 
service only in portions of Nevada and California. Pacific 
Telesis has an option to buy a majority interest in Prime 
Cable of Chicago, Inc., which provides cable service in 
Chicago, Illinois. 

81. Southwestern Bell Corp. (“Southwestern”), either 
directly or through entities with which it is affiliated, pro- 
vides local telephone service in Arkansas, Kansas, Mis- 
souri, Oklahoma and Texas. Southwestern has an agree- 
ment with Hauser Communications, Inc. to purchase and 
operate Montgomery County Cablevision (which pro- 
vides cable service in Montgomery County, Maryland ) 
and Arlington Cable Partners (which provides cable serv- 
ice in Arlington County, Virginia). 

82. C-TEC owns Commonwealth Telephone Company 
and C-TEC Cable Systems. As of June 30, 1992, C-TEC 
Cable Systems provided cable service to subscribers 
through 76 cable systems in four states. C-TEC Cable 
Systems provides cable television service outside the areas 
where Commonwealth Telephone Company provides tele- 
phone service. 


212 


83. As of March 15, 1989, and prior to its sale, 
Centel Corp. held 82 percent of the stock of Centel Cable 
TV Co. As of 1989, Centel Cable TV Co. provided cable 
television service to subscribers through 132 cable systems 
in six states outside Centel Corp.’s telephone service area. 
In 1989, Centel exited the cable business by selling its 
cable systems. 

84. According to a February 1993 US West press 
release, US West is taking “a major step toward building 
a new combined video and voice communications net- 
work” and has requested bids for the components of a 
“broadband telecommunications network capable of pro- 
viding video, data and voice communication service.” 
According to US West, the network will have “the ability 
to offer traditional telephone service—basic dial tone, 
caller ID, voice messaging, etc.—as well as the traditional 
services offered by cable TV companies.” The first tech- 
nical trials of this upgraded network will begin November/ 
December 1993 and regular commercial use will begin 
in late 1994. 

85. In January 1993, Pacific Telesis announced a five- 
year plan to spend more than $1 billion to replace all of 
its remaining analog switches in California with state-of- 
the-art digital switches. 

86. In July 1992, Ameritech announced plans to triple 
the amount of fiber optic facilities in its subsidiary tele- 
phone company networks over the next three years, in- 
cluding plans of Michigan Bell to invest $2 billion during 
the next four years in the deployment of advanced facili- 
ties, including fiber optic cable. 

87. If C&P now were to enhance its telephone net- 
work in Alexandria to render it capable of providing video 
programming directly to subscribers, it maintains that it 
would replace its existing copper loop with a fiber optic 
system using coaxial cable drops. C&P also maintains 
that at the time it actually would begin enhancement of 
its network, it would use the optimal technology avail- 


213 


able, which, other than fiber optics, might include asym- 
metric digital subscriber line (“ADSL”) technology. 

88. C&P estimates that the present cost of replacing 
its existing copper loop facilities in Alexandria with the 
fiber optic facilities necessary to provide video program- 
ming and other services to subscribers in Alexandria is 
$50-100 million. 

89. ADSL technology, which was developed in ap- 
proximately 1991, has never been used on a commercial 
basis to provide video programming directly to subscribers. 

90. As far as the parties are aware, ADSL’s capa- 
bility to provide video programming directly to subscrib- 
ers has never been tested under real-world conditions over 
a telephone network, prior to C&P’s test being conducted 
in Northern Virginia pursuant to the FCC’s Order and 
Authorization, File No. W-P-C-6834 (Mar. 25, 1993). 

91. Currently, ADSL technology requires that an 
entire program be digitally coded and compressed before 
it can be made available for viewing by subscribers. 

92. Digital compression and encoding equipment is 
used to prepare video programming for transmission over 
ADSL-equipped copper loops. Currently, C&P has no 
equipment capable of compressing and encoding video 
programming on a real-time basis. This means, for ex- 
ample, that using ADSL, C&P currently could not pro- 
vide live sports or news programs to subscribers at the 
same time such programs would be available to viewers 
of broadcast or non-ADSL dependent cable television. 

93. Currently, one telephone line using ADSL tech- 
nology can deliver only one video signal into the home 
at a time. If more than one television set is hooked up 
to a single ADSL-equipped telephone line, all sets will be 
limited to showing the same program. Additional ADSL 
equipped telephone lines to the home are required in 
order to watch different programs on different sets at the 
same time. With conventional cable technology, a single 
coaxial cable carries multiple channels of programming 


214 


into the home; multiple television sets can show different 


programs. 

94. ADSL technology is not currently capable of pro- 
viding high-definition television. 

95. C&P may or may not charge a fee to subscribers 
for installation of commercial ADSL service. 

96. ADSL transmission technology, the specifications 
for which were developed by Bellcore, is available to 
Regional Bell Operating Companies other than Bell 
Atlantic. 

97. If C&P’s telephone network is enhanced as referred 
to in the Complaint, 4 28, plaintiffs assertedly plan to 
transmit digital voice, data and video signals over the 
network on an integrated basis. Thus, in addition to the 
local telephone exchange and exchange access service now 
already provided, plaintiffs assertedly would use the net- 
work, as enhanced, for the transmission to consumers of 
video programming provided by BVS, the video program- 
ming of unaffiliated program providers, and any non- 
video information services of C&P, BVS and other pro- 
viders. 

98. Coupled with these transmission services, plain- 
tiffs assertedly would provide a means through which con- 
sumers would have access to the video and non-video 
providers on the network and choose the video program- 
ming (or other information services) they wish to use 
at any given time. Plaintiffs assertedly would offer these 
services to BVS, unaffiliated video programmers and 
other information service providers on a tariffed, non- 
discriminatory, basis. 

99. Plaintiffs also assertedly plan to provide consum- 
ers access through the network to enhanced and non 
common carner services. Enhanced services. which could 
be offered cither by plaintiffs or other service providers 
on the network. might offer comsumers advanced program 
search and prewew capatiimes and other functions 


215 


100. If plaintiffs rely on technology other than, or in 
addition to, fiber optics (e.g., ADSL, encrypted broad- 
cast transmission, local or multichannel multipoint dis- 
tribution system, or direct broadcast satellite transmis- 
sion), to provide video programming to subscribers, they 
may or may not provide it in the manner described in 
paragraphs 97-99, above. 

101. C&P’s telephone network currently has no capa- 
bility of providing video programming directly to sub- 
scribers in its telephone service area without the enhance- 
ments referred to in Complaint, 428, with the excep- 
tion of: 


(a) the service now being provided in the Cascades 
Development of Loudoun County, Virginia pursuant 
to, and subject to the conditions of, the FCC’s Order 
and Authorization, File No. W-P-C-6649 (Jan. 11, 
1991); and 


(b) the service now being provided in Northern 
Virginia pursuant to, and subject to the conditions 
of, the FCC’s Order and Authorization, File No. 
W-P-C-6834 (Mar. 25, 1993). 


102. As of this time, plaintiffs have neither received 
nor applied for, nor prepared an application for, authority 
from the FCC, pursuant to section 214 of the Communi- 
cations Act of 1934, to make the enhancements (as 
referred to in the Complaint, € 28) that are necessary to 
render C&P’s telephone network capable of delivering 
video programming directly to subscribers on a commer- 
cial basis, except as noted in paragraph 101(a), above. 

103. As of this time, plaintiffs have neither received 
nor applied for, nor prepared an application for, authori- 
zation from the FOC to provide video programming di- 


rectly to subscribers in Alexandria via (i) encrypted 
Sroeccast transmission. (ui) local multipoint distribution 
ystems. (i) multichannel multipoint distribution «vs 


Hrect broadcast satellite Plaintiffls have 


216 


no agreements with operators of such systems to lease 
excess spectrum capacity that could be used to provide 
video programming to subscribers in C&P’s telephone 
service area. 

104. C&P, BVS and Bell Atlantic do not, either in- 
dividually or collectively, hold or have a pending appli- 
cation or bid for a local cable television franchise in 
Alexandria, Virginia or elsewhere in C&P’s telephone 
service area. 

105. Bell Atlantic is seeking, on behalf of itself and 
its local telephone subsidiaries (such as C&P), a waiver 
of the terms of the consent decree in United States v. 
Western Elec. Co., No. 82-0192 (HHG) (D.D.C.) (also 
known as the “Modification of Final Judgment,” or 
“MFJ”) so as to permit Bell Atlantic and its subsidiaries 
to transport video programming without regard to local 
access and transport area (“LATA”) boundaries. 

106. The Washington, D.C. Metropolitan LATA, in 
which Alexandria is located, encompasses the District of 
Columbia and portions of Virginia and Maryland. 

107. As of this time, plaintiffs have not entered into 
any written contracts to take delivery within the Wash- 
ington, D.C. Metropolitan LATA of programming to be 
provided directly to subscribers that originates outside 
the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan LATA and that would 
have to be delivered by satellite. 

108. Examples of video programming that would origi- 
nate inside the D.C. Metropolitan LATA include: 


—programming stored within the LATA 
—local broadcast programming 
—local origination programming 


—local public, educational or governmental pro 
gramming 


109. Examples of programming that would originate 
outside the D.C. Metropolitan LATA include 


217 


—distant broadcast signals such as WWOR or TBS; 


—satellite cable programming such as ESPN or 
CNN, and pay cable channels such as Home Box 
Office or Cinemax. 


110. Currently, BVS is the only video programmer 
that has committed to use the video transport services to 
be offered commercially over C&P’s telephone network 
in Alexandria. No other programmer has contracted or 
otherwise committed to use C&P’s network in Alexandria. 


111. C&P and BVS have not entered into any written 
contract for the provision of video transport services by 
C&P to BVS. As of this time, C&P has not prepared the 
schedule of tariffs under which it would provide video 
transport services to BVS or others. 

112. BVS currently owns no video programming. 


113. BVS can obtain video programming for distribu- 
tion on C&P’s network, or elsewhere, only by (i) acquir- 
ing, Or acquiring the right to restransmit, programming 
owned or controlled by others, (ii) by contracting with 
persons capable of originating video programming on 
BVS’ behalf, or (iii) producing original video program- 
ming on its own. 

114. As of this time, no supplier of video program- 
ming has entered into a written contract to provide to 
BVS the video programming that BVS will provide di- 
rectly to subscribers or to grant BVS the right to re- 
transmit such programming. 

115. As of this time, no one capable of producing 
original video programming on BVS’ behalf has entered 
into a written contract to do so 

116. As of this time, BVS itself has not produced any 
video programming that it intends to provide to sub- 
scribers 

7. It 8 possible that plaintiffs might have a cogniz 
idie Ownership interest in programmers, other than BVS 


218 


who would provide video programming to subscribers in 
Alexandria over C&P’s network. 

118. C&P would not exercise direct or indirect edi- 
torial control over, or in any way participate in the selec- 
tion or packaging of, the video programming planned to 
be provided over its network, with the exception of: 


(a) video programming supplied by BVS, over 
which BVS will exercise editorial control, and which 
BVS will select and package; 


(b) possibly, video programming provided by video 
programmers in which C&P, BVS or Bell Atlantic 
might have an ownership interest; 


(c) introductory menus, gateways or other such in- 
formation content that C&P, BVS or Bell Atlantic 
might provide; 


(d) the possible exclusion of pornography or other 
offensive material to the extent permitted under com- 
mon carrier regulation. 


119. For the trial service being provided in Northern 
Virginia (see paragraph 101(b), above), C&P is using 
a video storage computer with a capacity to hold 30 
feature-length films. At this time neither plaintiffs nor 
Bell Atlantic have acquired the larger video storage com- 
puter that they intend to use to provide video program- 
ming on a commercial basis. 

120. If C&P’s telephone network were used to provide 
video programming from BVS directly to subscribers, 
BVS’ programming would be transmitted to C&P’s net- 
work, and from there as far as the customer premises, 
via equipment and facilities to be owned by C&P. At 
this time, C&P has not obtained all the facilities and 
equipment that will be used as part of the enhancements 
referred to in the Complaint, € 28. 

121. BVS was incorporated on September 24, 1992 

122. C&P assertedly made its firm decision to pursue 


219 


the possibility of providing video programming directly to 
subscribers in C&P’s telephone service area on September 
14, 1992. 

123. Until the July 25, 1991 decision in United States 
v. Western Elec. Co., 767 F. Supp. 308 (D.D.C. 1991), 
and the October 7, 1991 decision of the D.C. Circuit 
to lift the district court’s stay of its July 25 order, the 
MFJ, §§ I1(D)(1), TV(J), prevented the Regional Bell 
Operating Companies (such as Bell Atlantic) and their 
subsidiaries from providing “information services,” which 
included, inter alia, making available information (such 
as video programming) that may be conveyed via tele- 
communications. See United States v. Western Elec. Co.., 
552 F. Supp. 131, 227, 229 (D.D.C. 1982). 

124. For purposes of summary judgment plaintiffs 
make no claim, and agree that nothing in the record on 
summary judgment shall be admissible for purposes of 
proving, that their business activities, other than the activi 
ties they maintain they would engage in but for 47 U.S 
§ 533(b), have suffered any adverse economic impact 
attributable to section 533(b) 

125. For purposes of summary judgment plaint 
make no claim, and agree that nothing in the record 
summary judgment shall be admissible for purposes 
proving, that the value of their property has been aff 


by 47 U.S.C. § §33(b) except t the exXte 
might be enhanced were they legally permitted 
wise profitably able, t Ngage in ti 
Dy section $33 

26. BVS. which was incorporated Come 
992. has no revenue 

27. C&P’s annual gross 


a ,. : ww? ‘ 


Gross Revenue Net Income 

($000) ($000) 
1980 998,928 138,683 
1981 1,156,078 144,671 
1982 1,293,394 169,257 
1983 1,369,674 193,118 
1984 1,260,152 184,837 
1985 1,370,835 213,349 
1986 1,451,086 204,041 
1987 1,502,474 225,946 
1988 1,544,988 232,167 
1989 1,568,677 202,955 
1990 1,654,598 230,312 
1991 1,715,179 (8,336) 
1992 1,748,717 258,601 


128. The losses reported in 1991 are not attributable 
to 47 U.S.C. § 533(b). Changes in the rules of account- 
ing for benefits (other than pensions) owed to retired 
former employees required that C&P take an after-tax 
charge against its 1991 income in the amount of 
$224,083,000. 

129. Comcast’s September, 1992 telephone call from 
Philadelphia to London used wireline interexchange serv- 
ice from AT&T. 

130. In the aggregate, local exchange carriers, such as 
C&P, still provide the majority of interexchange access 
service. 

131. AT&T is the largest long-distance telephone com- 
pany. According to March, 1993 testimony of its Chair- 
man before Congress, in 1992 AT&T “paid mostly the 
local telephone companies something on the order of $14 
billion to connect with our customers and access costs. 
$19 million were spent accessing customers through alter- 
nate access suppliers. That is, 98.86 percent of our cus- 
tomer access was accessed through local exchange com- 


panies 


221 
Respectfully submitted, 


Wiley R. Wright, Jr. 
WILEY R. WRIGHT, Jr. 
VSB #1006 

HAZEL & THomas, P.C 
510 King Street, Suite 200 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 
(703) 836-8400 


Counsel for The Chesapeake and 
Potomac Telephone Company of 
Virginia and Bell Atlantic Vide: 

Services Company 


STUART E. SCHIFFER 
Acting Ass't Attorney Genera 


RICHARD CULLEN 
United States Aftorne’s 


RICHARD PARKER 
Assistant U.S. Attorne’s 


James J. Gilligan 
THEODORE C. Hirt 
JAMES J. GILLIGAN 
SARAH L. WiLsow 

U.S. Department of Jus: 
Civil Division. Room % 
901 E Street, N.W 
Washington. DC. 20004 


sry c% : ¢ 
‘7 + 7.5” 
Z 4 


( ounse! for Defend 
States of America Fede 
( mmunications © om 


Janet Reno. m her officss 


OI EO Oe 


ay ghd. Nir 


b yapeat 

: tT th; i ile 
° i --- + aati fil iat 

1 Bir 7 it ut (el | 

ee DEE apelin | 

. 7. yf Hite Lint | 


and the later legislation was that telephone company 
provision of cable service in their home markets would 
permit telcos to discriminate against cabie systems in the 
provision of facilities and permit them to gai unfair 
competitive advantage by means of cross subsidizing their 
cable operations with revenues from the telephone opera- 
tions. 


: 


Il. CONGRESSIONAL VERSUS ADMINISTRATIVE JUDG- 
MENT 


that as it may, the key point is that the policy 

did not preclude teleo’s from competing with cable, only from com- 

peting in home markets where was the opportunity for 
c 


225 


summary judgment,’ the FCC has come to the view that 
the statutory restrictions on telco provision of cable serv- 
ice are no long necessary, and it has proposed that Con- 
gress the remove them." The Department of Justice and 
the National Telecommunications and Information Ad- 
ministration (NTIA) are currently of the same mind. If 
this case involved judicial review of its rules, the FCC’s 
views about regulatory policy would be entitled to some 
deference, of course.’ It should go without saying, how- 
ever, that the question before this court is not what the 
FCC reasonably thinks but what it is constitutionally 
acceptable for Congress to think, and Congress has 
chosen to think for itself, declining to repeal its earlier 
assessment of the need for restrictions on telco provision 
of cable services.” 

6. To impose on Congress what the FCC, or the 
Department of Justice or NTIA, deems reasonable in 
regard to regulatory policy is always inappropriate given 
the different standards of judicial review that apply to 


T Plaintiffs’ Memorandum in Support of Their Motion for Sum- 
mary Judgment, pp. 14-17. 


*See Second Report and Order on Telephone Company-Cable 
Television Cross-Ownership Rules, 7 FCC Red 5781 (1992) (here- 
inafter “FCC Second Report on Cross Ownership”). 


* As an aside it is doubtful that the court would owe any defer- 
ence to the views of the Department of Justice or the NTIA since 
neither agency has any regulatory responsibility in this matter. 


In 1992 Congress did revisit other aspects of the 1984 Act— 
see Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act, 
106 Stat. 1460 (1992)—but it did not alter the 1984 restrictions 
on telco provision of cable service, despite the FCC’s recommenda- 
tions, of which Congress was quite fully aware. The FCC's Sec- 
ond Report appeared just prior to enactment of the 1992 Act. but 
the recommendations had been tentatively endorsed by the FCC 
at earlier stages in the rulemaking dating back to the original 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, issued in 1988. See FCC Second 
Report on Cross Ownership, para. 119 


2322385532! SEREERRzEE e E 
et ile Hi a th 
theeale = 4233 el 5 2333 s& gf. ¢ 
iit ae ; fe iE 

Hain tenel ib al 
Bi Morea 
bia sy bel Panay rE sill 
Hd F peededeiee’steg 2282 17] 
Uigigaat lille " Gay TRE 

ue plaippsdea Soasciobaee “Se |' ahi? 


18 Jd. at paras. 141-43. 


227 


Justice antitrust suit and resulting divestiture was the 
perceived inadequacy of FCC regulation to deal with the 
Bell monopoly.* The heart of that monopoly was the 
local exchange network.” The Modified Final Judgment 
(MFJ) dealt with that problem in two basic ways: first, 
it separated the local exchange service from nonlocal 
(interLATA) telephone services; second, it prohibited the 
local exchange companies—the Bell Operating Compa- 
nies (BOCs) from providing competitive information 
services within the local markets where they had monop- 


4 See, e.g., comments of Judge Harold Greene in BARRY G. COLE, 
ED., AFTER THE BREAKUP: ASSESSING THE NEW Post-AT&T Dt- 
VESTITURE Era 45 (COLUMBIA U. PRESS, 1991), P. 45: “It was the 
ineffectiveness of the FCC in coping with the problem of anti- 
competitive activity in the telecommunications industry that led 
to the antitrust suit and hence the decree in the first place.” Judge 
Greene is harsher in his judgments about the FCC performance 
than I am inclined to be, but we agree generally that the regulatory 
track record (of both FCC and state regulatory authorities) in 
controlling anticompetitive conduct by dominant telecommunica- 
tions firms has been, at best, uneven. 


5 As Judge Greene recently explained in United States v. West 
ern Elec. Co., 767 F. Supp. 308, 314-15 (D.D.C. 1991), pet. for 
review pending. : 


“Ijn the instance of the Regional Companies [ Bel] Operating 
Companies], their market power stems from their sti 
almost complete domination over the “last mile” of the tele 
phone network, ie., their monopoly of the local wires and 
switches without which few, if any, competitors can reach 
the ultimate consumers of telephone-based information serv 
ices. In fact, around ninety-nine percent of the traffic to the 
ultimate subscriber must still pass, in the end, through the 
Regional Companies’ loca! loops. This basic circumstance gives 
these companies the ability to exercise market power with 
respect to the information services markets, that is, to raise 
price, to restrict output, or both. The Regional Companies 
would be able to raise price by increasing their competitors 
costs, and they could raise such costa by virtue of the depend 
ence of their rivals’ information services on local networt’ 
access.” 


enn nnn nn EEE EEE EEE 


i 


iin! 


pagan aya 
i nil i! THI 
hele i} 


ih mh al 


: ARH 
! 


add, +H fal i 
Mth aH HAT re tel 


230 


separate subsidiaries." This is an arresting proposal 
given that its Computer III decision recently abandoned 
structural separation as a condition of telco provision of 
competitive services generally.” The Commission did not 
explain why it proposes to retain a regulatory requirement 
for telco-cable video programming that it has rejected for 
other services. Perhaps the subsidization problem in the 
former case is more serious than in the latter, or perhaps 
it is just a matter of the regulatory right hand not at- 
tending to what the left hand is doing. Whatever the 
reason for the FCC’s apparent ambivalence, there is every 
likelihood that the rules promulgated today will be 
changed tomorrow. Computer III decision, which sets 
forth the pertinent federal rules governing the competitive 
relationship between the BOCs and competitive service 
providers like cable television systems, is still pending 
judicial review following an earlier remand from the 
Ninth Circuit. The court of appeals had previously found 
that the Commission’s decision to substitute regulatory 
oversight for structural separation had not been ade- 
quately explained or justified. On remand the Commis- 
sion largely adhered to its earlier decision relying on non- 
structural regulatory controls. Whether or not the court 
accepts the Commission’s second decision one can only 
speculate how long the present rules will remain in effect. 
The structural-separation rules that Computer Ill te- 
placed lasted not much longer than the duration of the 
rulemaking proceedings required to design the replace- 
ment rules. 

10. The question of stability to one side any assess- 
ment of the efficacy of the rules must note their formid- 


19 FCC Second Report on Cross Ownership, para. 141. 


20 Computer III Inquiry, 104 FCC 2d 958 (1986); 2 FCC Red 
2085 (1987): 8 FCC Red 1185 (1988): 4 FCC Red 5927 (1989), 
reversed and remanded sub nom., California v. FCC, 905 F.2d 
1217 (9th Cir. 1990). Computer III Remand Proceeding, 6 FCC 
Red 7571, 7 FCC Red 909 (1992), pets. for review pending. 


231 


able complexity because the complexity of the rules is a 
fair indication of the complexity that the regulators see 
in the underlying problem. The complexity of the FCC’s 
current regulatory scheme is also a guarantee that imple- 
mentation and enforcement will not be easy. A scan of 
the FCC Record—almost any current volume will do— 
will reveal just how complex these rules can be. One 
might begin with a review of Commission rules explain- 
ing its Open Network Architecture (ONA) program and 
related rules, designed to provide conditions of nondis- 
criminatory access by competing service providers to telco 
facilities and basic services." One could take the exist- 
ence of these elaborate rules as evidence that the FCC 
is “on top of the problem,” so to speak. However, that 
inference cannot be drawn without also drawing the in- 
ference that the problem is extraordinarily challenging— 
sufficiently so that reasonable minds (in and out of Con- 
gress) could question whether the FCC is equipped to 
deal with it. The slightest glance at the rules, and the 
Commission’s seemingly endless outpouring of opinions 
explaining them,” will show that monitoring this mare’s 
nest of complex regulations will require close regulatory 
attention. 


21 Under ONA, the BOCs are required to offer an unbundled set 
of ONA services to enhanced service providers based on expected 
market demand, the services’ utility as perceived by enhanced 
service competitors, and technical and costing feasibility. The 
nondiscrimination safeguards consist of Customer Proprietary Net- 
works Information (CPNI) rules, network information disclosure 
rules, and nondiscrimination reporting requirements. Network 
information disclosure rules ensure that independent service pro- 
viders receive access to technical information related to new or 
modified network services affecting the interconnection of en- 
hanced services to the BOC networks. See Filing and Review of 
Open Network Architecture Plans, 4 FCC Red 1 (1988): 5 FCC 
Red 3084 (1990); 5 FCC Red 3108 (1990): 6 FCC Red 7646 
(1991), pet. for review pending. 


#2 The Commission's ONA orders are chronicled in Computer 
III Remand Proceedings, 6 FCC Red. 7571 (1991). 


232 


11. My own experience as a participant in the Com- 
mission’s efforts to wrestle with these problems in the 
mid-1970’s was that regulation achieved only limited suc- 
cess in preventing AT&T from practices that handicapped 
access to iis facilities, and not much more success in 
preventing cross-subsidization of its services. And that 
success, such as it was, was achieved only at a large cost, 
to the agency, to competitors and ultimately to the pub- 
lic. It is difficult to convey a sense of this frustration 
merely by referring to particular controversies over, say, 
access arrangements or competitive pricing disputes.” 
The problem was too pervasive to be captured by any 
single illustration. In part the problem was one of AT&T 
constantly seeking to test if not bend the limits of agency 
standards, the effect of which was to put the Commis- 
sion under a constant burden of surveillance. The prob- 
lem of coping with the sheer volume of information 
(much of it unreliable) and argument (much of it 
rhetoric) was exacerbated by a basic uncertainty as to 
how the standards should be implemented.” 


23 The major issues that come most immediately to my personal 
recollection are the interconnection disputes, that led up to the 
FCC’s equipment registration program, see North Carolina Utili- 
ties Comm’n v. FCC, 552 F.2d 1086 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 434 
U.S. 874 (1977) (affirming FCC’s registration program), the 
Execunet dispute; see MCI Telecommunications v. FCC, 561 F.2d 
365 (D.C. Cir. 1977) (reversing FCC decision); and the disputes 
over competitive service tariffs, such as the Hi-Lo tariff, AT&T 
Co., 58 F.C.C.2d 362 (1976). Despite an abundance of rules and 
rulings these types of disputes were a continuous source of vexa- 
tion to the Commission, and to the parties adversely affected by 
them, until Computer II. 


24 Again, my experience is broadly congruent with Judge Greene’s 
observations: “Beyond the naturally still isolated examples of 
anticompetitive conduct discussed below, there is the overriding 
fact, which experience has validated again and again, that as a 
practical matter it appears to be impossible for regulators to de- 
vise simple rules to govern the many economic, technical, and 
financial circumstances affecting behavior in an area that is char- 


233 


12. The regulatory environment of the 1990's offers a 
replay of the 1970’s. As in the 1970's there is, first, the 
task of ensuring that competitive service providers have 
nondiscriminatory access to basic network services and 
information controlled by the telcos, and, second, that of 
ensuring a “level playing ficld” for all information service 
providers by preventing cross-subsidization by the telcos 
of competitive information services. ONA purports to 
deal with the first task but, as the Ninth Circuit recently 
held, does nothing to prevent the second.” 

13. The cross-subsidization problem was an important 
concern in 1970, and in 1984; it remains one today. My 
experience with the Commission’s efforts to deal with the 
problem in the mid1970’s leads me to challenge the FCC’s 
claim to be able to police this problem with account- 
ing rules” as a means of preventing cross-subsidization. 
The current cost allocation methodology is essentially 
the same (with greater liberalization in the definition of 
cost categories) as that adopted in 1976, when it first 
mandated fully distributed cost allocations.** Whether or 
not fully distributed cost methods are appropriate account- 
ing conventions—as to which there is much dispute— 


acterized by technological change perhaps more than by any other 
factor. Yet unless the rules are quite simple and straightforward, 
the Regional Companies will be able to contend, again and again, 
that any particular rule is not applicable to whatever anticompeti- 
tive practices they may be engaged in, and to tie up enforcement 
almost indefinitely in administrative proceedings and in litigation.” 
767 F. Supp. at 319-20. 


*5 California v. FCC, 90 F.2d 1217, 1234 (9th Cir. 1990). 


26 Separation of Costs of Regulated Telephone Service from 
Costs of Nonregulated Activities, 2 FCC Red 1298, 6288 (1987); 
8 FCC Red 6701 (1988), aff'd sub nom., Southwestern Bell Corp. 
v. FCC, 896 F.2d 1378 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 


27 AT&T Co., 61 F.C.C.2d 587 (1976); 64 F.C.C.2d 959 (1977): 
67 F.C.C.2d 1441 (1978), aff'd sub nom., Aeronautical Radio Inc. v. 
FCC, 642 F.2d 1221 (D.C.Cir. 1980). 


234 


what is important in this context is that, even using the 
costing methodology most restrictive of manipulations 
promoting subsidization, the Commission did not eliminate 
the threat of cross-subsidization in the 1970's. At bottom 
the problem was one of implementation, involving detailed 
scrutiny of cost information supplied by AT&T. The 
Commission was not able to carry out this task effectively. 
It admitted as much by adopting the structural separa- 
tions requirement in Computer 11.” 

14. The reasons why the Commission’s detailed cost 
allocation system, developed after years of proceedings, 
failed to work in practice are not difficult to understand, 
and there is little reason to believe that today’s circum- 
stances differ in any significant manner. First, during the 
1970's, the Bell System often failed to provide the cost 
data required by the Commission’s rules and engaged in 
almost continuous litigation over what those regulations 
required. Second, determinations of the legality of AT&T's 
rates were hung up in administrative proceedings for 
years, with potentially harmful consequences to competi- 
tors and ratepayers. 

15. The FCC’s monitoring problem has not dis- 
appeared. If anything it has increased. Contrary to some 
popular wisdom, the agency's difficulties in monitoring 


28In adopting its price-cap regime for AT&T the Commission 
claimed it would ameliorate the problem of cross subsidization 
by removing the incentive to engage in opportunistic cost shifting. 
Policy and Rules Concerning Rates for Dominant Carriers, 4 
F.C.C. Red 2878, 2924 (1989). That claim was distinctly muted 
when it extended the price cap scheme to local exchange carriers. 
Second Report and Order on Policy and Rules Concerning Rates 
for Dominant Carriers, 5 F.C.C. Red 6786 (1990) (price caps 
for interstate services provided by Bell Operating Companies and 
the GTE Operating Company), aff'd sub nom., National Rural 
Telecom Ass’n v. FCC, 988 F.2d 174 (D.C. Cir. 1993). The claim, 
which is open to dispute in any case, is largely irrelevant to the 
present case since the FCC’s price cap scheme does not apply to 
most of the costs that are affected by the provision of local tele- 
communications services. 


235 


AT&T's responses to the emerging competition in the 
1970’s were only slightly a product of the latter’s huge 
size, or the disparity in resources between the regulator 
and regulated. The main cause of regulatory burden was 
the number of different transactions that had to be moni- 
tored and the number of different players who were enter- 
ing the market. Neither the transactions nor the players 
have diminished in number. The mere increase in the 
number of different regulated entities entails a nontrivial 
increase in regulatory burden. Overseeing one AT&T 
with seven regional divisions is not the same as over- 
seeing seven independent firms, each with distinctive 
services, pricing policies and corporate goals. More im- 
portant than the increased number of regulated entities, 
however, is the greater variety of active services, which in 
turn generates the need for new access arrangements be- 
tween telcos and other independent service providers, 
which in turn generates more regulatory monitoring. 

16. While the burden of the monitoring task has in- 
creased in the post-divestiture era, the FCC’s ability to 
carry that burden has not. A 1987 General Accounting 
Office study of the FCC’s plans and capabilities for con- 
trolling telco cross subsidies between competitive and 
regulated services concluded that the Commission did not 
have the requisite resources to deal with the problem. 
After noting that the elimination of structural separations 
safeguards (under the Computer III decision) put in- 
creased reliance on oversight methods, such as accounting 
audits, the GAO observed that the FCC’s staff was in- 
adequate to perform that oversight. Given agency staff 
levels and inspection schedules it was calculated that the 
major carriers or regional holding companies would be 
subject to audit “only once every 16 years.” ” The situa- 


2° GAO, TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS: CONTROLLING Cross SuUB- 
sIDY BETWEEN REGULATED AND COMPETITIVE SERVICES (Oct. 1987), 
p. 58. 


236 


tion has not improved since the time of the 1987 report: 
in February of this year the GAO revisited the issue and 
found no acceleration in auditing schedules an actual 
decrease in available auditors.” It should not be assumed, 
incidentally, that the slack in agency auditing is made up 
by the audits performed by CPAs hired by the telcos. 
The 1993 GAO report indicates that on-site audits by 
FCC auditors discovered “cases of misallocations total- 
ling over $300 million in which carriers charged expenses 
to the regulated side of the business and carriers’ affiliates 
had overcharged regulated carriers for services and sup- 
plies.” *' If $300 million in misallocated costs are dis- 
covered by an auditing capability that can audit carriers 
“only once very 16 years,” one can only imagine the 
magnitude of misallocations that would be discovered by 
an adequately staffed agency. This is not a small problem, 
and one must doubt that misallocations of this order of 
magnitude can be dismissed as mere bookkeeping error. 


IV. RELIABILITY OF STATE REGULATION 


17. Even assuming a more effective FCC regulatory 
policy than has been witnessed in the past years, the 
problem of guaranteeing fair competition between the 
telcos and cable systems does not rest with the FCC alone, 
as the Ninth Circuit decision in California v. FCC ™ had 
occasion recently to remind the FCC when it overturned 
the agency’s blanket preemption of state regulation of 
intrastate enhanced services. In fact the FCC is not even 
in charge of the larger part of the business that is of 
immediate concern to this case: only 30% of all local 


9% GAO, TELECOMMUNICATIONS: FCC’s OVERSIGHT EFFORTS TO 
CONTROL CROSS-SUBSIDIZATION (Feb. 1993), p. 4. 


31 Jd. at 12. 
82.905 F.2d 1217 (9th Cir. 1990). 


237 


exchange costs are regulated by the FCC; the rest is 
regulated by the states.” 

18. The division of authority between the FCC and 
the state regulators has been hotly contested for many 
years, and it still has not produced clear and stable juris- 
dictional boundaries with respect to the terms and condi- 
tions of competitive access to basic telco services or the 
pricing of telco provision of enhanced services. Sorting 
out regulatory responsibility between state and federal 
regulators has been a vexing problem. In the most ideal 
conditions of harmonious cooperation between state and 
federal regulation defining regulatory boundaries is a 
difficult matter. As it happens, however, telecommunica- 
tions regulation has not been characterized by such 
harmony. Throughout the 1970’s the FCC fought a 
two-front war against AT&T on one front and state regu- 
lators on the other over the key issues of competition. 
In part the conflict between the FCC and state regulators 
was one of regulatory turf, but beneath the turf fight was 
a more basic clash over regulatory policy. The uneasy, 
and uncertain, relationship between federal and state 
regulators increases the uncertainty of regulation gen- 
erally. In all events the unquestionably larger role that 
states now play in the telecommunications field means 
introduces new complexity to the question of how much 
reliance can be placed on regulatory oversight. 

19. It is often remarked that state regulators have 
become more sophisticated and much better endowed with 
the necessary resources since the 1970’s. I have no doubt 
this is true. If my recollection of state regulation during 
that period can be trusted, there was much room for 
improvement. But however much improvement there has 
been it does not alter the fact that regulatory policy 
across the nation is a highly variable, highly unreliable 


%3 Policy and Rules Concerning Rates for Dominant Carriers, 
4 FCC Red 2873, 2882 n.7 (1989) (First Report and Order, adopt- 
ing price caps for AT&T). 


238 


product. A survey of state regulators conducted in Octo- 
ber 1990 offers a glimpse of the problem. Of forty-five 


what more encouraging with 23 states having regulations 
designed to prevent cross subsidization.“ Of course, hav- 
ing programs to deal with the problem is meaningless 
unless the regulators have the resources to implement 
them. The resources are as variable as the programs: 
the 1990 survey found that staff assigned to telephone 
regulation ranged from one (Mississippi) to more than 
250 (New York).” Most of the states fall closer to the 
low than to the high end of this range. 


V. REGULATION, COMPETITION AND SPEECH 


20. It is not the purpose of this affidavit to discuss 
the application of First Amendment standards to eco- 
nomic regulation, but it is pertinent to take note of what 
should be obvious: that any judgment about the con- 
stitutionality of these regulations entails a close examina- 
tion of the government purposes they are intended to 
serve, not simply their incidental effects.” Plaintiffs have 


*% Affidavit of Glen O. Robinson, October 1990, Attachment A, 
in United States v. Western Elec. Co., Civ. Action No. 82-0192. 


35 Jbid. In a number of states it respondents reported that 
agency staff are not assigned by utility. I assume that means 
that a staff member might do electric utility work one month and 
teleo work another. Given the complexity of modern telecommuni- 
cations issues nonspecialized work assignment cannot be explained 
on the assumption that utility regulation is interchangable, so it 
must be taken as a sign that the regulators are underfunded. 


36 See, e.g., FTC v. Superior Court Trial Lawyers Ass'n, 493 U.S. 
411, 428-30 (1990) (upholding antitrust ban on boycott organized 
for communicative purposes) ; FCC v. National Citizens Committee 


tions immune from First Amendment scrutiny, it does 
call forward a more nuanced understanding of regulatory 
impact and regulatory alternatives than is properly ap- 
plied to regulation directed at the message content of 
speech. 

22. Of course, the regulations here do affect only the 
telcos’ “speech.” But this can hardly be a ground for 
special suspicion given that it was only the telcos that 
have posed the threat of anticompetitive conduct. One 
could imagine a similar threat emanating from other 
businesses, as the plaintiffs contend. But the fact that 
other threats can be imagined does not alter the fact 
that, based on historical experience, only the telcos have 


for Broadcasting, 436 U.S. 775, 798-802 (1975) (upholding FCC 
ban on common ownership of newspaper and local broadcast sta- 
tions); United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 376-77 (1968) 
(upholding criminal penalties for burning of draft card for sym- 
bolic purposes). 


587 Sable Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115 (1989). 


provision of cable service is a matter for serious debate, 
the debate is only confused by forcing it into a 


+h 
q 
q 
i 
? 
| 
! 


1 
: 
| 
: 


. 
: 
g 


/s/ Glen O. Robinson 
GLEN O. ROBINSON 


{Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


241 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT . 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT 


DisTRICT OF COLUMBIA, 8.5. 
Bruce M. Owen, being duly sworn, deposes and says: 


. 

1. I am the president of Economists Incorporated, a . 
Washington DC economic consulting firm, and visit- 
ing professor of economics at Stanford University’s 
Washington DC campus, where I teach courses on 


communications. From 1979-1981 I was Ctief 
Economist at the Antitrust Division of the U.S. L'e- 
partment of Justice. Previously I was Chief Econo- 
mist at the White House Office of Telecommunica- 
tions Policy. I testified as an expert on behalf of 
the government in United States v. Western Electric, 
the antitrust lawsuit that led to the dissolution of the 
Bell System in 1984. A copy of my curriculum 
vitae appears as Appendix A to this affidavit. 


3. I believe that the restrictions on telephone company 
provisions of video services (practically, of cable 


242 


television service) were economically justified at the 
time of their adoption by the FCC in 1970, and 
remained justified when the restrictions were codified 
by Congress in 1984. Further, although the condi- 
tions justifying these restrictions are less compelling 
today than in 1984, the restrictions remain sound 
and will continue to be so for some time to come. 
My conclusions are based on, and limited to, the 
economic role of the restrictions in the context of 
United States competition policy. 


_ Restraints on the competitive activities of firms are 
unusual and should be imposed only in abnormal 
and convincing cases. Such restrictions should have 
a sound conceptual basis and be supported by 
empirical evidence that they are necessary to pre- 
serve competition in particular circumstances. I be- 
lieve such restrictions are appropriate in this case, 
however, to prevent likely anticompetitive behavior 
on the part of local telephone companies in cable 
television. This view is based not only on analysis 
of the ability and economic incentives of regulated 
local telephone companies to engage in anticompeti- 
tive behavior but also on the ample evidence that 
local telephone companies have actually engaged in 
monopolistic practices in the past. 


_ lL assume for purposes of my analysis that local tele- 
phone companies now have the ability to offer reg- 
ulated common carrier facilities for the transmission 
of video programming provided by third parties. The 
restriction in § 533(b) applies to the business of 
packaging and marketing programming, not transmit- 
ting it. Thus, if it made economic sense for tele- 
phone companies to provide the underlying trans- 
mission facilities for cable television, they could do 
that now. Indeed, virtually all of the alleged com- 
petitive benefits from telephone company entry into 
video programming that Professor Hazlett discusses 


243 


in his affidavit would flow from video transmission 
competition by telephone companies currently per- 
missible under § 533(b). That is, if telephone com- 
panies provided an alternative competing local trans- 
mission facility for video programming, competing 
program packagers and producers could readily 
enter the market using those facilities to provide 
video services to consumers. [If such facilities-based 
competition made economic sense, it should already 
be occurring and § 533(b) does nothing to prevent 
it. If new technology makes such competition feasi- 
ble in the future, §533(b) will not stand in the 
way.] Moreover, if telephone companies—because 
of their resources and technical know-how—are able 
to provide better services or prices than incumbent 
cable operators, nothing stops telephone companies 
from competing on equal terms with cable operators 
outside their telephone service areas. 


. Telephone companies may claim there is insufficient 
incentive for them to provide underlying video trans- 
misison facilities without the ability also to offer 
video programming services. This is an extraor- 
dinarily dubious claim. For more than one hundred 
years, the business of telephone companies has been 
to provide common carrier telecommunications fa- 
cilities for the use of others. Telephone companies 
do not originate the conversations that give rise to 
a demand for their transmission service. Just as with 
telephone conversations, there are no obvious econo- 
mies of scope or of vertical integration arising from 
both laying fiber optic cable and producing or buy- 
ing and then packaging video programming. Why 
should the cost of providing transmisison service be 
lower because the telephone company provides video 
programming? The case of cable television com- 
panies is distinguishable, because at the time cable 


244 


companies developed there was an insufficient supply 
of video programming for cable television. By in- 
tegrating vertically, cable companies expanded the 
demand for their services. Today, there is a very 
substantial video programming industry already in 
existence and ready to supply service at competitive 
rates. 


. The danger in permitting telephone companies to 
provide video services in competition with other local 
sources of video programming involves sequential 
telephone company encroachment on two related 
activities. First, telephone companies are likely to 
exploit their ability to engage in cross-subsidization 
to eliminate competition in the local transmission of 
video services. Monopolization of underlying facili- 
ties to transmit video services will result in an in- 
crease in the price of local telephone service. Having 
eliminated competing means of access to viewers, 
telephone companies are then likely to displace more 
efficient providers of, and to tend to monopolize, the 
provision of video services as a further means to 
evade the regulatory constraint they face as facilities- 
based common carriers. 


Competition Policy and Regulation 


. Competition has a pivotal role in our private market 
economy, and has long been a central goal of public 
policy. The Supreme Court has characterized our 
national policy of competition as follows: 


Antitrust laws in general, and the Sherman Act 
in particular, are the Magna Carta of free en- 
terprise. They are as important to the preserva- 
vation of economic freedom and our free enter- 
prise system as the Bill of Rights is to the 
protection of our fundamental personal free- 


9. 


10. 


11, 


245 


doms. United States v. Topco Associates, 405 
596 at 611 (1972). 


Competition protects the interests of consumers in 
efficient prices, cost-effective production, and tech- 
nological progress through its effects on the economic 
incentives facing sellers. Competition assures that 
sellers who serve consumer interests survive and pros- 
per; those who do not fail and are replaced by 
others. 


The process of competition sometimes fails, calling 
for public policy responses. Sellers, for example, 
may form cartels, or seek through merger to achieve 
monopolies. In addition, monopolists may attempt 
to exploit their market power in unacceptable ways, 
or to extend it to other markets. These threats to 
the process of competition are regulated through the 
antitrust laws. Many conimunications laws, in fact, 
including § 533(b), are simply industry-specific ap- 
plications of the broader principles underlying the 
antitrust laws. In addition, the pricing and other 
decisions of certain monopolies are regulated directly 
by public utility commissions. 


A familiar problem in competition policy is that of 
“leveraging,” which occurs when a monopolist in one 
market seeks to leverage its market power into a 
second market. Such problems may arise, for ex- 
ample, in the case of tying. See generally, Eastman 
Kodak Company v. Image Technical Services 112 
S.Ct. 2072 (1992). Leveraging is most likely to be 
a problem where circumstances prevent a monopolist 
from exploiting its economic power fully in the pri- 
mary market; in such cases, encroachment upon a 
second market may enable the monopolist to extract 
additional profits from its primary market. Compe- 
tition policy condemns this for two reasons. First, 
customers in the primary market are injured by being 


246 


required to pay more for the monopolist’s goods. 
Second, the monopolist injures competition in the 
second market by displacing more efficient competi- 
tors, and perhaps even by monopolizing the second 
market. Thus, consumers are harmed in both mar- 
kets. 


12. It has been recognized for more than thirty years 
that one species of leveraging exists because classic 
public utility rate regulation creates incentives to 
engage in anticompetitive behavior.’ Traditional 
public utility regulation requires a monopolist to 
price on the basis of the cost of providing service, 
to which is added a fair rate of return on invested 
capital, If the resulting price is less than the monop- 
olist’s profit-maximizing price, such regulation creates 
incentives for the utility to avoid, evade, or ease its 
regulatory constraint. In certain circumstances, this 
evasion can be achieved by invading a second mar- 
ket and displacing more efficient competitors in that 
market. Professor Kahn describes regulated monop- 


olists’ 


. . . tendency to reach out for additional busi- 
ness, inside or outside the sphere of their fran- 
chised public-utility operations, if need be at 
rates below incremental costs... . [T]his kind 
of behavior is most likely to be encountered in 


1 Averch and Johnson, Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory 
Constraint, 52 Amer. Econ. Rev. 1052 (1962). For a fuller develop- 
ment of the theoretical issues raised by cost-of-service-regulated 
monopoly firms participating in competitive activities, see Bren- 
nan, Why Regulated Firms Should Not Be Allowed in Unreg- 
ulated Markets: Understanding the Divestiture in U.S. v. AT&T, 
82 Antitrust Bull. 741 (1987); Brennan, Cross-Subsidization and 
Cost Misallocation by Regulated Monopolists, Journal of Regulatory 
Economics (1990) 37, and Noll and Owen, United States v. AT&T: 
The Economic Issues, in J. Kwoka and L. White, eds., The Anti- 
trust Revolution, (1989, rev. ed. 1993). 


247 


competitive situations, because it is there that 
the elasticity of demand may require unre- 
munerative rates if the regulated company is 
to obtain the business and in this manner to 
increase its rate base. A. Kahn, 2 The Eco- 
nomics of Regulation: Principles and Institu- 
tions 54 (1971) [footnote omitted]. 


13. Invasion of secondary markets helps a regulated 
monopolist evade regulatory constraint by creating 
opportunities to inflate the apparent costs of provid- 
ing its primary monopoly service. If services in the 
second market are provided using common items of 
equipment or personnel, or if the services produced 
in the second market are used in the primary busi- 
ness, Opportunities generally exist to engage in be- 
havior that has the effect of increasing the apparent 
costs of providing the primary monopoly service. 
Professors Laffont and Tirole describe two such 
opportunities: 


i] 
- 
fs 
A 
by 
a 
+ 
é 
v 
. 


A. Accounting arbitrage. The firm engages in 
accounting manipulations. Labor, raw mate- 
rial, and other inputs are imputed to any activ- 
ity for which they are not used. The transfer 
prices for intermediate goods traded between 
divisions is set at the wrong level. 


B. Allocative arbitrage. The general office al- 
locates its effort or attention to those activities 
that face the most powerful incentive schemes 
rather than to minimize total cost. To these 
activities are dedicated the best engineers or in- 
puts. There is no imputation of expenses of one 
activity on another, but rather more attention 
is paid to certain activities. J.-J. Laffont and 
J. Tiorle, A Theory of Incentives in Procure- 
ment and Regulation 188 (1993). 


248 


14. Encroachment on the second market, because it 
generates additional monopoly profits in the first, 
may be profitable even when pricing below cost is 
required in order to make such inroads. This anti- 
competitive “cross-subsidization” may amount to in- 
definite predatory pricing in the competitive market. 
Such predatory pricing is profitable to the regulated 
firm from the outset. (In contrast, in traditional 
predatory pricing, the monopolist must eventually 
raise prices in order to recoup losses and enjoy the 
fruits of its predation. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co v. 
Zenith Radio Corp. 475 U.S. 574 (1986) at 588- 
89.) Similarly, activities, even costly activities, that 
reduce the market share of rivals in the second mar- 
ket by increasing rivals’ own costs, may be profitable. 
In either case the effect is an anticompetitive (i.c., 
injurious to consumers) partial or complete fore- 
closure of the market to competitors. 


15. A second antitrust problem arises when there is a 
vertical relationship between the regulated monopoly 
and the unregulated or less strictly regulated com- 
petitive activity. Two entities are vertically related 
when one supplies a product that is used by the other 
as an input in production. Suppose a firm has a 
regulated monopoly in an “upstream” or input activ- 
ity (for example, transmission facilities for video 
programming) that is essential for an unregulated 
downstream activity (for example, video program- 
ming services).” The vertical relationship affords 


2In the context of video programming services, it is ambiguous 
which activity (programming or transmission) is an “input” be- 
cause it depends on which entity is ultimately offering service to 
the public. If 533(b) were abolished and telephone companies 
offered integrated video programming over their own transmission 
facilities, programming would be an input, and therefore “up- 
stream”, of the final integrated service sold to consumers. Al- 
ternatively, transmission can be regarded as an input for a com- 


16. 


17. 


249 


such a firm opportunities to exercise increased mar- 
ket power in transmission and to realize the resulting 
higher profits in the unregulated activity. By dis- 
criminating against competing packagers of video 
services needing access to its monopoly transmission 
facility, the unregulated vertically-integrated video 
program supplier may be able to sell programming at 
inflated prices to retail customers. Further, in some 
circumstances the integrated monopolist can sell pro- 
gramming to itself at inflated prices in order to earn 
excessive profits. 


The problems described above are quite general; 
they are not limited to telephone companies, or with- 
in telephony to the issue of cable television. For this 
reason, for example, the effects on horizontal com- 
petition to vertical acquisitions in regulated indus- 
tries are a subject of special scrutiny under the Clay- 
ton Act. See United States Department of Justice 
Merger Guidelines, issued June 14, 1984 at § 4.23. 
(The 1984 Guidelines were superseded by the De- 
partment of Justice and Federal Trade Commission 
Horizontal Merger Guidelines issued April 2, 1992. 
However, according to a statement accompanying 
the 1992 Guidelines, various provisions of the 1984 
Guidelines, including § 4.23, remain in effect.) 


For example, the California Public Utilities Com- 
mission not long ago turned down a request by 
Southern California Edison to acquire a neighboring 
electric utility, San Diego Gas and Electric. The 
CPUC concluded that the proposed merger raised 
serious competitive problems because it would facili- 


peting video packager that uses common carrier transmission 
facilities to deliver programs to the public. In this affidavit, I use 
the convention of describing programming as an upstream input 
because I am concerned with the dangers presented by a vertically 
integrated telephone monopolist. 


18. 


19, 


20. 


250 


tate evasion of regulation as contemplated by § 4.23 
of the 1984 Merger Guidelines. Southern California 
Edison and San Diego Gas and Electric, California 
Public Utilities Commisison Decision 91-05-028, Ap- 
plication 88-12-035, (1991) at 79. 


Similarly, the Department of Justice recognized that 
regulated electric utilities might engage in monopoly 
behavior with regard to markets for coal in order to 
evade regulatory constraint. Competition in the Coal 
Industry: Report of the U.S. Department of Justice 
Pursuant to Section 8 of the Federal Coal Leasing 
Amendments Act of 1976 for Fiscal Year 1979 
(1980) at 62ff. 


Where problems such as those described in the ex- 
amples above are found as isolated instances, they 
are treated under the antitrust laws or regulatory 
statutes on a case-by-case basis. Where they are 
pervasive and predictable consequences of regulation 
and industry structure, they are best dealt with 
through prophylactic rules. 


The case of local telephone utility provision of video 
programming services is a particular instance of the 
problem that I have been describing. In traditional 
antitrust leveraging analysis, incursions by telephone 
companies into cable television could be treated as 
simple extensions of monopoly based, for example, 
on the market power of telephone companies over 
“bottlenecks” such as essential inputs required to 
provide cable service; poles and conduit space are 
examples. Modern economic analysis emphasizes as 
the basis for this incursion the opportunity it creates 
for a telephone monopolist to evade regulatory con- 
straint and thus to enjoy a greater fraction of the 
potential unregulated monopoly profits from the pro- 
vision of telephone service. The incentive to engage 


21. 


251 


in anticompetitive conduct in a second market is not 
eliminated by regulation of that market. Differences, 
either in regulatory treatment, e.g., allowed rate or 
return, or in the elasticities of demand in the two 
markets, are generally sufficient to make it profit- 
able for a regulated telephone company to expand in 
order to evade regulation of its telephone profits. 
Thus, while control of essential facilities is an ele- 
ment of the raising-rivals’-costs branch of the theory, 
it is by no means a necessary element. Profitable 
cross-subsidization does not require that the regu- 
lated utility control essential facilities. 


In the next section, I describe in more detail the 
conditions that give rise to concern for competition 
when local telephone companies are permitted to 
enter local markets for video programming. 


Anticompetitive Incentives of Local Telephone Companies 
22. The expansion of a cost-of-service regulated local 


telephone company into the provision of video pro- 
gramming services threatens competition because 
such a combination is likely to allow the telephone 
company to evade the constraint that regulators have 
placed on its exercise of market power. For example, 
by allocating costs for both regulated monopoly tele- 
phone services and video transmission service to the 
regulated telephone operations, the firm may obtain 
regulatory approval for an increase in prices for its 
telephone services. Telephone companies’ use of 
common facilities to provide both telephone service 
and video transmission services distinguishes tele- 
phone companies from, for example, electric utilities 
with regard to the provision of video services. Elec- 
tric utilities would not for the most part provide 
video services on the same facilities used to deliver 
electric power, and hence would have substantially 
less opportunity to engage in cross-subsidization. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


252 


A price increase due to cross-subsidization involves 
an exercise of market power. The firm realizes in- 
creased profits at the expense of consumers. While 
the increased profits actually come from the regu- 
lated activity, from an accounting point of view they 
appear to accrue to the competitive activity. Simi- 
larly, having wholly or partly foreclosed competitors 
for transmission of video programming through such 
cross-subsidization, the regulated telephone company 
can foreclose competing video programming sup- 
pliers from its facilities and earn even higher profits 
on its video offerings. The incentive to foreclose 
competition flows from the constraints regulators 
place on the profits from the underlying transmission 
monopoly. 

As I have already noted, the exercise of additional 
market power in the regulated telephone market, that 
is, evasion of rate regulation, is not the only problem 
that arises from the expansion of regulated monopoly 
telephone firms into competitive activities. This 
cross-subsidization of the competitive activity can 
inflate artificially the regulated telephone company’s 
market share in the competitive market and eliminate 
more efficient competitors there. 


The foreclosure of efficient video transmission com- 
petitors through cross-subsidization is exacerbated to 
the extent that local telephone companies also con- 
trol bottleneck facilities. It is plaintiffs’ contention 
that cable television systems are local monopolies. 
Hazlett Affidavit at 94 4-16. Cross subsidization by 
a telephone company which forecloses competition 
from cable companies would give the telephone com- 
pany a transmission monopoly. The telephone com- 
pany that provided program services would have the 
ability and incentive to discriminate against its video 
programming packager competitors who as a result 


26. 


27. 


28. 


253 


of the transmission monopoly may need access to its 
facilities to reach consumers. 


The early history of cable television involved tele- 
phone companies’ attempts either to deny access to 
cable companies or to charge them exorbitant fees 
for use of telephone facilities. Actual anticompetitive 
behavior on the part of telephone companies against 
cable television companies in the 1960s provided a 
sensible basis for the FCC to prohibit telephone com- 
panies from providing cable television services in 
1970. In addition, the Pole Attachment Act of 
1978, 47 U.S.C. § 224, was a partial response to 
these problems and provided regulatory oversight of 
charges for use of telephone facilities by cable com- 


panies. 


If discrimination such as the’ described succeeds in 
raising rivals’ costs, that will .ncrease prices for video 
programming services above competitive levels, per- 
mitting the regulated telephone company to earn 
above-competitive profits in ‘video programming 
services. Attempts by regulators to control the 
prices and profits telephone companies might earn in 
video programming services do not eliminate the 
incentives on the part of vertically-integrated tele- 
phone companies to exclude more efficient providers 
of video programming services. Due both to likely 
differences in regulatory treatment and in the elas- 
ticities of demand for telephone services versus video 
programming services, telephone companies generally 
will find it profitable for foreclose efficient competi- 
tors. The net effect is to raise costs and prices in 
both markets. 


Finally, telephone companies’ incentives to exclude 
cable companies from the market and to monopolize 
video programming services are magnified because 
cable companies with sophisticated fiber networks pre- 


29. 


254 


sent a potential competitive threat to local monopoly 
telephone services. See Stipulations 43 and 45; Plain- 
tiff's Memorandum at 12; Hazlett Affidavit at { 37. 


The extension of a regulated monopoly into other 
markets may be harmful to competition in a variety 
of circumstances. The particular conditions that give 
rise to this danger in the case of local telephone 
company provision of video services are: 


Market Power: Telephone companies characteristi- 
cally have market power in the provision of local 
telephone services so that, absent regulation, they 
would be able to increase profits by raising telephone 
prices above the competitive or regulated level. 


Regulation: Local telephone companies characteris- 
tically are subject to cost-based regulation that con- 
strains prices to be below the prices that would 
maximize profits and that these firms would charge 
in the absence of regulation. In other words, local 
telephone companies have unexercised market power 
as a result of regulation. As I indicate infra, newer 
forms of regulation such as price caps still leave 
telephone companies with the incentive and ability to 
evade regulatory constraints. 

Common Facilities: Local telephone companies 
have a substantial opportunity to engage in cross- 
subsidization when, as here, both the competitive video 
transmission service and the monopoly service are 
provided on common facilities with common costs. 
Stipulations 87, 88, and 97; Hazlett Affidavit at q 32. 
Common costs mean that cross-subsidization is vir- 
tually impossible to detect and eliminate. It is the 
existence of significant common costs which differen- 
tiates telephone companies from electric utilities. 


Competitive Activity: Local telephone companies 
expanding into program packaging typically would 


255 


face existing and potential providers of video services 
such as cable, wireless cable (MMDS), video rental 
outlets and direct broadcast satellite (DBS) provid- 
ers. Because they would face competition, their ex- 
pansion would reduce the market shares of rivals, 
including ones that may have lower costs or superior 
products. 

Imperfect Regulation: Local telephone companies 
can reasonably expect to be able to obtain approval 
for an increase in their regulated telephone prices 
based on the higher costs that result from cross- 
subsidizing video transmission activities. In other 
words, regulatory agencies are not able to monitor 
the regulated telephone services and video services 
perfectly. 

Vertical Relationship: Local telephone companies 
also have a substantial opportunity to engage in 
cross-subsidization when, as here, the competitive ac- 
tivity (program packaging) will be selling to the 
regulated entity. This “self-dealing” situation invites 
overcharging for input services in order to increase 
the apparent costs and therefore the permitted price 
of the regulated service. Moreover, in order to mini- 
mize the effectiveness of regulators in monitoring 
such transfer pricing, the telephone company will 
have incentives to deny the programming to compet- 
ing distributors. 


History of Anticompetitive Behavior by Telephone 
Companies 


30. Concern on the part of the FCC and the Congress 
with the anticompetitive potential in telephone com- 
pany provision of video services did not arise in a 
vacuum. The 1960s and 1970s were a period of 
great turmoil in telecommunications policy—one in 
which the federal government was promoting with 


31. 


256 


increasing urgency a role for competition. The 
long-standing telephone monopoly was falling into 
disfavor. The government was acutely aware that 
the Bell System opposed this policy. The local tele- 
phone companies owned then by AT&T engaged in 
exactly the practices described above in various 
nascent competitive markets for equipment and serv- 
ice, including anticompetitive activities against cable 
television companies. See United States v. Western 
Electric, Plaintiff's First Statement of Contentions 
and Proof 202, 239 (November 1, 1979). One re- 
sult was the antitrust action that culminated in the 
dissolution of the Bell System. The Bell System was 
dissolved, amid prophylactic restrictions on the abil- 
ity of local telephone companies to enter competitive 
markets, in 1984, the very year that § 533(b) was 
codified. 

Thus, Congress had ample evidence that telephone 
companies respond to the incentives they face and 
engage in anticompetitive behavior. In United States 
v. Western Electric, the government's antitrust suit 
charged that, through inflated prices between verti- 
cal affiliates, cross-subsidization, and discrimination 
against rivals, the Bell System had violated the anti- 
trust laws by (i) charging anticompetitive service and 
equipment prices to the customers of its regulated 
local telephone services, and (ii) using its status as 
a regulated monopoly in local telephone service to 
foreclose competition in and monopolize the poten- 
tially competitive long-distance telephone service and 
telephone equipment markets. The government called 
as witnesses several former Federal Communications 
Commission officials who testified to the ineffective- 
ness of regulation in preventing such abuses. The 
government’s view was that regulators could not 
regulate the Bell System adequately. The Justice 
Department stated at the time that: 


257 


At the heart of the government's case in United 
States v. AT&T was the failure of regulation 
to safeguard competition in the face of the 
powerful incentives and abilities of a firm en- 
gaged in the provision of both regulated mo- 
nopoly and competitive services. Neither of 
these problems [cross-subsidization and discrimi- 
nation] has thus far proven amenable to suc- 
cessful regulatory solution. Indeed, the very 
basis for divestiture is that the anticompetitive 
problems inherent in the joint provision of regu- 
lated monopoly and competitive services are 
otherwise insoluble. U.S. Department of Justice, 
Response to Public Comments on the Proposed 
Modification of Final Judgment, 47 Fed. Reg. 
23, 320-336, May 27, 1982, quoted in United 
States v. Western Elec. Co., Inc., 673 F. Supp. 
525, 568, DDC 1987. 


32. Opinions by the U.S. District Court for the District 
of Columbia on related issues, such as attempts to 
remove line of business restrictions agreed to by the 
Regional Bell operating companies in the consent 
decree in United States v. Western Electric, have up- 
held repeatedly the validity and applicability to pre- 
sent circumstances of the economic theory I have 
articulated, and that was relied upon by the Depart- 
ment of Justice. According to the Court, regulators 
were indeed unable effectively to monitor the be- 
havior of telephone companies: * 


. . . . [T]Jhe Court concluded following the close 
of the Department’s case, and in accordance 
with the arguments presented by the Depart- 
ment, that “the Commission is not and never 
has been capable of effective enforcement of the 


* The quotations below are from United States v. Western Elec- 
trie, 673 F. Supp. 5625 (DDC 1987), footnotes omitted. 


258 


laws governing AT&T's behavior,” and that ac- 
cordingly AT&T had been able to violate the 
antitrust laws in a number of ways over a long 
period of time with respect to interexchange 
(long distance) services and the procurement of 
equipment. ... 673 F. Supp. 531. 


[T]he FCC was unable to prevent or to remedy 
major anticompetitive abuses by the Bell System 
achieved through the activities of its local affili- 
ates. . . . The Department of Justice argued, 
and at the trial it introduced voluminous expert 
testimony and other evidence in support of its 
argument, that the local exchanges are so com- 
plex and so technically dynamic, and that they 
comprehend so many and such complex joint 
and common costs, that regulation could not 
prevent anticompetitive activities... . 673 F. 
Supp. 567-68. 


Further, the Court has noted that the telephone com- 
panies retained the local monopolies that permitted 
leveraging to other, competitive markets and which 
are critical to the economic basis for restricting tele- 
phone company participation in related markets: 


The Court found that, were the Regional Com- 
panies allowed to be present in the interex- 
change market while they also maintained mo- 
nopoly control of the local telephone markets, 
they would be able to pursue precisely the same 
course as had the Bell System: (1) to discrimi- 
nate in a variety of ways against their non- 
monopoly competitors through judicious use of 
the local monopoly; and (2) to “subsidize their 
interexchange prices with profits earned from 
their monopoly services.” 673 F. Supp. 542. .. 
[T]heir monopoly bottlenecks are as solid and 
pervasive as they were when the decree was en- 


259 


tered. It is equally clear that nothing has oc- 
curred to change the decree conclusion that 
those in control of the local bottlenecks have 
the incentive and ability to use their monopoly 
power anticompetitively in the interexchange 
market. .. . 673 F. Supp. 546. 


Moreover, the Court found the telephone companies 
have the power to “raise rivals’ costs,” just as eco- 
nomic theory predicts: 


The manufacturing restriction was based in sub- 
stantial part on evidence presented by the De- 
partment of Justice at the trial of this case in- 
dicating that the Bell System had improperly 
monopolized the market for telecommunications 
equipment, in that its local Operating Com- 
panies purchased such equipment primarily from 
Western Electric Company, the System’s manu- 
facturing affiliate, and “engaged in systematic 
efforts to disadvantage outside suppliers.” 673 
F. Supp. 552 . . . As testimony and other evi- 
dence demonstrated, the Operating Companies 
managed, by one stratagem or other, to purchase 
Western Electric’s products, even when those 
products were more expensive or of lesser qual- 
ity than alternative goods available from un- 
affiliated vendors. 673 F. Supp. 553... The 
Bell System subsidized the prices of its equip- 
ment with the revenues from the Operating 
Companies’ monopoly services. The effect of this 
practice, as with respect to cross-subsidization 
generally, was (1) to permit the Bell Sys- 
tem to undercut other producers of equipment 
(which lacked such a subsidy), and (2) un- 
fairly to burden the consumers with excessive 
rates for the monopoly services they were fur- 
nished by the Operating Companies. . . . 673 
F. Supp. 553-54. 


33. 


260 


In sum, the Court affirmed both the conceptual and 
empirical validity of the very economic theory I have 
articulated in this affidavit, and confirmed that the 
conditions were present to justify a restriction on the 
freedom of regulated local telephone companies to 
enter competitive markets: 


[MJany of the current operations of the Re- 
gional Companies take place in unregulated 
markets. This complex mixture of regulated 
and unregulated activities provides these com- 
panies both with a powerful temptation and 
with ample opportunity to commit anticompeti- 
tive abuses in the competitive markets and to 
subsidize their competitive operations with pro- 
fits earned in the monopoly markets. 673 F. 
Supp. 569. 


The anticompetitive problems associated with tele- 
phone company participation in competitive markets 
did not end with the dissolution of the Bell System 
in 1984. Because the local telephone companies re- 
mained regulated monopolies, they continued to seek 
opportunities to earn greater profits by breaking out 
of their regulatory constraints. For example, an audit 
of BellSouth by a NARUC task force in 1985 found 
cross-subsidies of new, competitive businesses from 
regulated telephone activities. Special Accounting 
Task Force of the Southern Public Service Commis- 
sions, Report on the BellSouth Corporation, (May 16, 
1985) at 11. These practices by BellSouth were 
found to have continued in 1990. A California Pub- 
lic Utilities Commission audit of Pacific Telesis in 
1986 also found cross-subsidies of unregulated busi- 
nesses. California Public Utilities Commission, Audit 
Report on Pacific Telesis, (July 11, 1986) at 15. A 
NYNEX purchasing subsidiary overcharged regulated 
phone operations $118 million between 1984 and 
1988 and was fined $1.4 million by the FCC. FCC, 


261 


Review of Affiliate Transactions Between NY NEX'’s 
LECs and Materiel Enterprises, (1989). US West 
admitted in 1991 to favoring its competitive switching 
offerings in granting access to its local network and 
paid a $10 million fine. Memorandum of the United 
States in Support of Motion and Stipulation for 
Entry of an Enforcement Order, United States v. 
Western Electric Co., Enforcement Order, February 
15, 1991. The Georgia Public Service Commission 
determined that Southern Bell Telephone, a telephone 
company of BellSouth Corporation, used its monopoly 
control of the local exchange market to impede com- 
petition in the voice messaging services market by dis- 
criminatorily denying competitors access to the local 
exchange network, and that “substantial issues of 
predatory pricing and cross-subsidy [had] been raised” 
with regard to the pricing of the service. Order of 
the Commission, In the Matter of the Commission's 
Investigation Into Southern Bell Telephone and Tele- 
graph Company's Provision of MemoryCall Service, 
Docket No. 4000-U, at 67-68 (June 4, 1991). In 
1992, Southern Bell agreed to pay approximately 
$15.2 million to more than 900,000 customers to 
resolve a grand jury investigation into charges that 
Southern Bell, inter alia, had intentionaly overbilled 
customers through the fraudulent sale of optional tele- 
phone services. In accepting the settlement, the grand 
jury issued a report recommending “stricter con- 
trols on the cost allocation procedures . . . to prevent 
the unlawful subsidy of the unregulated side by the 
regulated side.” Press Release, Department of Legal 
Affairs, Florida Office of Statewide Prosecution (Oct. 
9, 1992). A 1992 audit commissioned by the Louisi- 
ana Public Service Commission identified “numerous 
instances where BellSouth affiliate transactions were 
structured to benefit the Company’s nonregulated ac- 


34. 


35. 


262 


tivities.” Report to the Louisiana Public Service Com- 
mission, Ratemaking and Financial Audit of South 
Central Bell Telephone Company, Docket No. U- 
17949, Subdocket A, at ix (Aug. 1992). Indeed, the 
anticompetitive activities of the divested Bell Regional 
companies led the District Court to conclude in 1987: 


The Regional Companies are of course limited 
in the breadth and scope of the anticompetitive 
activities in which they are able to engage inas- 
much as the most effective vehicles for such 
activities are beyond their reach due to the exist- 
ence of the core restrictions of the decree. What 
is startling, however, is given the relative paucity 
of the field available for such acts, in how many 
ways these companies appear nevertheless to 
have managed to discriminate and to cross- 
subisdize. United States v. Western Electric, 
673 F. Supp. 525, 580, footnote omitted. 


Continued Existence of Anticompetitive Threat 


The conditions sufficient to create the significant po- 
tential for anticompetitive harm by the expansion of 
local telephone companies into competitive activities 
still exist today with respect to telephone company 
entry into video programming services. For example, 
despite the emergence of competition for some local 
telephone services, basic local telephone service re- 
tains substantial monopoly characteristics. Stipulation 
131. 


Moreover, the market power of local telephone com- 
panies remains constrained by cost-of-service regula- 
tion. It has been argued that new forms of incentive 
regulation have reduced or eliminated the incentive of 
local telephone companies to engage in anticompeti- 
tive cross-subsidization. This type of regulation typi- 


36. 


263 


cally imposes price caps on regulated services and 
allows carriers greater profits if they are able to reduce 
their costs. If price caps, fixed in real terms, were 
kept in place for a long time, this type of regulation 
would not permit prices to increase if telephone 
companies’ costs increased. In theory, price-cap regu- 
lation applied in that way could reduce or eliminate 
the incentive to shift costs to regulated services be- 
cause those higher costs would no longer be recovered 
in higher prices for monopoly service. See Braeutigam 
and Panzar, Diversification Incentives Under “Price- 
Based” and “Cost-Based” Regulation, 20 RAND Jour- 
nal of Economics 373 (1989). 


In practice, however, telephone price-cap regulation 
does not ignore the profits and costs of the regulated 
firm. Telephone price caps typically are set, and 
periodically reset, on the basis of historical account- 
ing costs. (In contrast, the price caps recently estab- 
lished by the FCC to govern cable television service 
rates are based not on historical costs but on compari- 
sons with the rates charged by cable systems that face 
“effective competition”. Implementation of Sections 
of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation, Report 
and Order, Docket MM-92-266- (released May 3, 
1993), —FCC Red—(1993). Moreover, if profits 
are high, regulators will be under political pressure to 
reduce allowed prices. Conversely, low profits will 
bring pressure on regulators to allow higher prices. In 
other words, accounting costs and profits are likely in 
the real world to affect the price caps, and telephone 
companies are likely to take that into account in 
setting their course of conduct. But once regulatory 
constraints on prices are again tied to costs, they can 
be affected and, therefore, partially evaded by tele- 
phone companies’ behavior. The regulated telephone 


37. 


264 


companies will retain the incentive to shift costs to 
regulated monopoly services and away from competi- 
tive activities. See Braeutigam and Panzar at 389. 
Further, these eventualities are reasonably foreseeable 
and thus likely to affect behavior in the present. 


I conclude that under current conditions the prohibi- 
tion on telephone company provision of cable tele- 
vision services remains necessary to prevent the likely 
monopolization of those services by local telephone 
companies. If the prohibition were removed, I believe 
it is likely that local telephone companies will use 
their regulated telephone revenues to cross-subsidize 
video programming transmission services and use their 
resulting control of essential facilities to discriminate 
against their video programming competitors. My 
conclusions about the risks today from telephone com- 
pany provision of cable television services are echoed 
by the District Court’s warnings in 1987 about tele- 
phone company expansion into related fields: 


The Regional Companies are now requesting 
entry into far broader competitive fields of 
endeavor than any in which they were permitted 
to function during the last three years. Based 
upon their performance during that three-year 
period, it would not be unreasonable to assume 
that cross-subsidization would also take place 
with respect to these new markets, and that it 
would occur on a far wider and more destructive 
scale than heretofore. That is so if only because 
cross-subsidies are much more easily concealed 
where—as between local exchange service and 
interexchange, telecommunications manufactur- 
ing, and information services—there are many 
common costs that can be attributed, almost at 
the companies’ unfettered choice, to any of the 


38. 


265 


various activities, than where cross-subsidization 
is attempted between exchange service and ven- 
tures foreign to telecommunications. United 
States v. Western Electric, 673 F. Supp. 525, 
582-83. 


The Court in 1991 once again affirmed the economic 
theory and the necessary underlying conditions for 
restricting telephone company expansion into competi- 
tive areas: 


In the opinion of the Court, informed by over 
twelve years of experience with evidence in the 
telecommunications field, the most probable con- 
sequences of such entry by the Regional Com- 
panies into the sensitive information services 
market will be the elimination of competition 
from that market and the concentration of the 
sources of information of the American people 
in just a few dominant, collaborative conglom- 
erates, with the captive local telephone monopo- 
lies as their base. Such a development would be 
inimical to the objective of a competitive market, 
the purpose of the antitrust laws, and the eco- 
nomic well-being of the American people. 
United States v. Western Elec. Co., Inc., 767 
F. Supp. 308, 326 (DDC 1991). 


Less Restrictive Alternatives 


Because restrictions on the ability of any firm to 
enter new markets should be avoided whenever pos- 
sible under the very principles that competition policy 
seeks to achieve, it is useful to consider whether there 
is some less restrictive alternative to the ban on tele- 
phone-cable cross-ownership that achieves similar pro- 
tection for competition. For the reasons given below, 
I believe that there is not. 


266 


39. There are two candidates for the role of less re- 
strictive alternative. First, either the antitrust au- 
thorities or regulators can deal with problems of cross- 
subsidy, discrimination and the like on 4 case-by- 
case basis, seeking to impose appropriate sanctions 
when such behavior is discovered. For the very rea- 
sons given above, however, this approach is likely to 
be extremely ineffective. Regulated utilities in gen- 
eral and telephone companies in particular have an 
enormous advantage over regulators, an advantage 
attributable to their control over information about 
costs and technologies. Judge Greene found that reg- 
ulators in fact were unable to control AT&T's anti- 
competitive behavior. Moreover, as indicated above, 
the Bell Regional operating companies have continued 
since divestiture to engage in cross-subsidies and 
other anticompetitive behavior despite regulatory and 
antitrust oversight, and in spite of the fact that their 
incursions into related competitive activities have been 
severely curtailed by the Consent Decree in Western 
Electric. It would not be reasonable or economical of 
judicial resources, nor would it likely be effective in 
preventing anticompetitive abuses, to require repeated 
case-by-case enforcement of antitrust laws against so 
pervasive and likely a pattern of conduct. 


40. Second, there are quasi-structural approaches such as 
that of the “fully separated subsidary”. The idea here 
is to permit monopoly utilities to enter competitive 
businesses, while minimizing the regulator's difficulties 
in monitoring anti-competitive behavior by requiring 
that all the facilities, operations, personnel, books and 
records of the two activities be kept wholly separated. 
This approach might be successful in dealing with ex- 
tensions to businesses that do not require the use of 
common facilities or vertical transactions with local 
telephone service, but it cannot work with respect to 


41. 


42. 


267 


telephone company provision of video programming 
services. Indeed, in two efforts to settle the antitrust 
case that led to the breakup of the old Bell System, 
the government and AT&T negotiated what became 
known as “Quagmire I” and “Quagmire II,” in which 
attempts were made to specify all the behavioral and 
institutional safeguards that would be necessary to 
preserve competition if AT&T were to remain a com- 
bination of regulated local monopolies and competi- 
tive equipment and long distance businesses. These 
attempts failed because both parties realized that the 
concept was unworkable. B. G. Cole, ed., After 
the Breakup: Assessing the New Post-AT&T Divesti- 
ture Era, 8, 22, 37 (1991). 


No amount of accounting separation combined with 
regulation and monitoring can deal effectively with 
the issue of common facilities and common costs that 
would exist if telephone companies provided video 
service in their own service areas. As indicated 
above, plaintiffs intend to offer competitive video 
transmission services and monopoly telephone serv- 
ices over common facilities. Plaintiffs do not plan to 
separate these transmission services from each other 
through separate subsidiaries nor could they. There- 
fore, separate subsidiaries offer no protection from 
anticompetitive cross-subsidization which would re- 
sult in telephone company monopolization of video 
transmission services. 


Another intractable problem with respect to cross 
subsidization by telephone companies of video pro- 
gramming services is improper allocation of the costs 
of financal risk-taking. As Professor Brennan has 
put it, 
Raising capital through borrowing may be a 
source of cross-subsidy. The regulator may 


at 


in Unregulated Markets: Understanding the 
Divestiture in U.S. V AT&T, 32 Antitrust Bull. 
741, 763 (1987). 


abuses by AT&T involved exactly the same issues of 
discrimination in favor of AT&T’s “separate” sub- 
sidiaries, Long Lines (AT&T's interexchange sub- 
sidiary) and Western Electric (AT&T’s manufactur- 
ing subsidiary). Despite regulatory attempts to cur- 
tail these anticompetitive abuses, only divestiture and 
isolation of the monopoly local telephone companies 
from these related competitive activities was sufficent 
to eliminate them. 

Finally, separate subsidiaries could not protect against 
“self-dealing” that could artificially raise video pro- 


45. 


269 


gramming costs. One strategy available to an inte- 
grated telephone company providing video program- 
ming services is to produce or have produced for it 
programming that it does not sell to other distrib- 
utors. This was one strategy AT&T employed with 
Western Electric in selling exclusively to its affiliated 
local telephone companies equipment at inflated 
prices. Indeed, Plaintiffs are contemplating such ex- 
clusive programming for their Alexandria system. 
Horner Affidavit at ¢ 5. With no market transactions 
available to test the reasonableness of the prices 
charged for that programming, separate subsidiaries 
offer no protection from the evasion of regulation 
through the payment of excessive prices to unregu- 
lated program production affiliates. 


Cable Monopolies 


The Plaintiffs in this matter assert with vigor that 
cable television companies are monopolists, and that 
the national policy in favor of competition would be 
advanced by permitting the entry of telephone com- 
panies. Hazlett Affidavit at {4 30-31. There is no 
doubt that cable television companies have market 
power. But so do many firms in the economy; market 
power is a matter of degree. Schurz Communica- 
tions, Inc. v. F.C.C., 982 F.2d 1043 (7th Cir. 
1992) at 1052. 


Plaintiffs’ argument is wrong-headed even if cable 
systems are monopolists. Competition is indeed pro- 
moted when barriers to entry are reduced. But com- 
petition is not promoted when regulated monopolists 
are permitted to leverage their economic power from 
one market to another, regardless of the structure 
of the secondary market. A I have noted above, 
such leveraging in the end generally harms consum- 
ers in both markets. The wisdom of excluding tele- 


47. 


270 


phone companies from the video programming busi- 
ness must be assessed independently of whether cable 
television companies are presently in possession of 
market power. In any event, actual and potential 
technologies such as direct broadcast satellites and 
wireless cable present far more immediate and legiti- 
mate competitive threats to the cable industry than 
telephone technologies. The special threat of tele- 
phone entrants is the ability, not necessarily to pro- 
vide a superior service, but to engage in profitable 
long-term predation and discrimination, regardless of 
the quality of their service. 


Future Considerations 


In the future, conditions may change sufficiently to 
warrant removal of the prohibition of telephone com- 
pany ownership of cable television systems. The 
market for local telephone service is beginning to 
face emerging competition for some business cus- 
tomers because of bypass, cellular, fiber optic ring, 
and other new technologies. DBS or other new de- 
velopments may make it impossible for local tele- 
phone companies to monopolize transmission. It is 
important that the restriction on telephone provision 
of video services be kept in place, however, to ensure 
that the trend toward greater competition for local 
telephone services is not reversed. Significantly, the 
nascent competition that faces telephone companies 
is concentrated in their services to business custom- 
ers. Cable probably is the only serious source of 
potential competition for residential telephone serv- 
ice; as I have noted above, the reverse is not true. 
It would be unwise economically to risk eliminating 
that potential threat by exposing cable television 
competitors today to anticompetitive behavior by 
local telephone companies. In the future, when it is 
possible to conclude with a reasonable degree of 


271 


confidence that the trend toward competition for 
local telephone services cannot be reversed by anti- 
competitive behavior on the part of local 
companies, removal of the prohibition would be ap- 
propriate. 
/s/ Bruce M. Owen 
Bruce M. Owen 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


272 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Virginia) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


REPLY AFFIDAVIT OF ALFRED E. KAHN 


STATE OF New YORK 
COUNTY OF TOMPKINS 


(1) My name is Alfred E. Kahn. I am Robert Julius 
Thorne Professor of Political Economy, Emeritus, at Cor- 
nell University and Special Consultant to National Eco- 
nomic Research Associates, Inc. My business address 
is 308 North Cayuga Street, Ithaca, New York 14850. 

(2) Among the experiences of mine pertinent to my 
submission in this proceeding are that I was Chairman of 
the New York State Public Service Commission between 
1974 and 1977 and of the Civil Aeronautics Board in 
1977-78; I am the author of the two-volume The Eco- 
nomics of Regulation, published originally by John Wiley 
& Sons in 1970 and 1971 and reprinted in 1988 by The 
MIT Press; I have written and testified extensively on the 
subject of telecommunications regulatory policy and pub- 
lished a book and numerous articles on antitrust policy. 
I was a member of the Attorney General’s National Com- 
mittee to Study the Antitrust Laws and the National Com- 
mission for the Review of Antitrust Laws and Proce- 
dures. I have been advisor on telecommunications policy 
to Governor Carey, of New York State, recently com- 
pleted service as a member of the Ohio Blue Ribbon 
Panel on Telecommunications Regulatory Reform, and 
am at present a member of the New York State Tele- 


273 


communications Exchange. I attach a copy of my full 
resumé as an Appendix to this affidavit. 

(3) The purpose of my affidavit is to appraise and re- 
spond to the government’s proffered justification for the 
ban against the plaintiffs providing their video program- 
ming to the public within their telephone service areas— 
namely, that the prohibition is necessary to prevent the 
telephone companies from “cross-subsidizing” cable opera- 
tions with revenues from their monopoly telephone opera- 
tions. The result of such a cross-subsidy, the government 
contends, would be that the cable companies could or 
would be driven out of business, leaving the telephone 
company as the monopoly provider of both cable and 
telephone services. 

(4) This contention of the government of the likely— 
or even possible—effects of a lifting of the ban rests 
on a number of key premises. The most important of 
these are that authorization of the telephone companies 
or their affiliates to create or assemble video program- 
ming for sale to the public, in addition to their present 
ability to carry the signal of others, would materially 
increase the asserted danger of cross-subsidization; that 
regulators would freely permit the recoupment from 
politically-sensitive services such as basic local residential 
service, of costs that could or should have been assigned 
to video; and that the telephone companies would, as a 
result, be able to drive their cable competitors from the 
market. All of these beliefs are in my opinion erroneous. 

(5) The asserted danger of cross-subsidization, as de- 
scribed by both the Department of Justice and the NCTA, 
arises almost exclusively from the fact that the telephone 
network is evolving into a facility capable of carrying 
voice, data and video images. Cable systems too are 
developing these same capabilities. This kind of joint or 
common use is not an evil in itself: on the contrary, 
it is a source of efficiency—a clear exemplification of 
what economists refer to as economies of scope. It does 


274 


increase the importance of the issue, particularly in a 
regulated industry, of how the common costs are to be 
distributed among those several services. This is not a 
new regulatory problem in telephony: regulators have 
long ago developed methods of separating the costs of 
telephone service subject respectively to state and to fed- 
eral regulation. They have also devised and prescribed 
methods of assigning or allocating joint and common costs 
among the various individual services subject to their 
respective jurisdictions. Intervenors have the right to con- 
test these methods in regulatory proceedings and rights 
of appeal if they are not satisfied with the agency’s de- 
terminations. 

(6) As the foregoing discussion makes clear, the dan- 
ger of cross-subsidization typically arises in situations in 
which significant portions of the costs of competitive 
and monopoly services are common to both. If some 
of these costs are improperly shifted from the former to 
the latter and recovered in the charges for the monopoly 
services, this could indeed confer an unfair advantage 
on the telephone company in its competitive markets, 
and could conceivably enable it to drive its competitors 
out of business. The question is whether this hypotheti- 
cal scenario fits the facts and the probabilities associated 
with the legal issue now before this Court. I conclude 
emphatically that it does not. 

(7) First, it cannot be overemphasized that what is at 
issue in this case is the plaintiffs’ authority to engage in 
video programming, not their already acknowledged au- 
thority to provide video transmission. It is difficult to 
conceive that there could be any substantial costs com- 
mon to the transmission of video and other telephone 
signals, on the one side, and the creation and packaging 
of video programming on the other. Numerous authori- 
ties, including the defendants, have actually conceded this 
fact. For example, NCTA, through economist Dr. Owen, 
admits that the defendants’ cross-subsidy scenario requires 


a 
. 
Hd 
_ 
z 
; 
* 
> 
2. 
5 
e 
= 
Pg 
- 
4 
& 
va 
7e 


275 


the presence of common costs’ and that there are no 
substantial costs common to both video transport and 
programming.” And the Department of Justice has con- 
ceded elsewhere that “information services that involve 
primarily the provision of content or the processing of in- 
formation . . . would be likely to share fewer facilities 
or personnel with [telephone company] local exchange 
operations [than transmission services]. . . . [T]he po- 
tential for misallocation of costs in violation of alloca- 
tion regulations is minimal and even more easily detected 
by regulators where there is a relative paucity of joint 
and common costs between telephone exchange opera- 
tions and ventures in the new market.”* The statutory 
ban at issue here applies not to a service that, in the 
words of the Department, involves “primarily the . . . 
content of information”; it applies to a service that in- 
volves only content. There is therefore no rational con- 
nection between the defendants’ cross—subsidy argument 
and the ban against telephone companies providing video 
programming. 

(8) In the interest of a complete response, however, 
I have considered whether, if the prohibition at issue here 
is lifted, the telephone companies might, as Dr. Owen 
contends, be in a position somehow to cross-subsidize 
their video transmission services at the expense of other, 
monopoly services. In my view this is highly unlikely— 
unlikely that they would be permitted, and even if per- 


1E.g., Owen Aff. at 15. 


2 E.g., Owen Aff. at 4 (“there are no obvious economies of scope 
or of vertical integration arising from both laying fiber optic cable 
and producing or buying and then packaging video program- 
ming”) ; see also NCTA Mem. 23, United States v. Western Elec. 
Co. (D.D.C. filed Oct. 17, 1990), (“it may well be, as the Huber 
Report says, that opportunities for cross-subsidization may be few 
in the creation of programming”). 


*Mem. of the United States at 34, United States v. Western 
Electric Co., Inc., (D.D.C. filed Aug. 22, 1990). 


276 


mitted, able to do so. As for the first, 1 am advised 
by counsel that video transmission services are subject 
to federal, not state regulation. The principal other serv- 
ices subject to that jurisdiction are the “access” to or 
interconnection with the local exchange network that 
telephone companies provide to long distance carriers 
such as AT&T for the origination and termination of long 
distance calls. The FCC’s method of regulating these 
charges does not automatically permit raising them when- 
ever the providers’ overall earnings decline; and its cost 
allocation rules, to which I have already referred, pro- 
hibit that kind of cross-subsidization. 

(9) As to the ability of the telephone companies to 
raise their rates for these access services, these charges 
constitute approximately 40% of the long distance car- 
riers’ total operating costs. Entirely apart, then, from 
whether the FCC would permit the requisite increase, 
the resistance on the part of the customers would be in- 
tense, and effective. These are very sophisticated carriers, 
with every incentive to avoid improper cost shifting to 
their injury. And they have the protection, increasingly, 
of competition, and will have it even more in the future, 
as alternative providers of access services have emerged 
to handle the origination and termination of long-distance 
traffic, particularly of large governmental and business in- 
stallations. The recently announced multi-billion dollar 
TimeWarner/US West transaction is premised on the fact 
that cable systems, which now reach 96 percent of all 
households, can be modified to provide this same access 
service, in competition with local telephone companies, for 
small as well as large customers. MCI, similarly, has an- 
nounced its engagement in active negotiations with cable 
companies, with the same purpose in mind. For these 
many reasons I conclude that there is no significant danger 
of successful cross-subsidization even of video transmission 
by telephone services—whether or not the telephone com- 
panies are permitted to engage in video programming. 


277 


(10) Recovery of any such subsidies at the intrastate 
or local level is similarly highly unlikely, and becoming 
increasingly so every day. Entirely apart from the ques- 
tion of the willingness of state regulators to permit it, local 
service is becoming increasingly competitive. NCTA itself 
describes the cable industry as a “serious source of poten- 
tial competition for residential telephone service.” * Fur- 
thermore, the divestiture of AT&T has spawned a host of 
actual and potential competitors previously all part of that 
single corporate entity. Southwestern Bell, for example, 
has acquired cable systems in the Washington area, includ- 
ing Northern Virginia, which position it to provide not 
just video but competitive access services of the type con- 
templated also by the U.S. West/Time Warner transaction. 
Southwestern Bell also provides wireless services in this 
area. AT&T has already purchased a multi-billion dollar 
stake in wireless services competitive or potentially com- 
petitive with the incumbent local telephone companies; and 
the trade journals report that MCI likewise intends to enter 
the local exchange business with wireless technology. The 
FCC is actively promoting expansion of this competition— 
for example, by allocating additional spectrum to new wire- 
less services and requiring the telephone companies to pro- 
vide interconnection with all competitive access providers. 

(11) At least equally important, state regulators have 
historically been very reluctant to raise residential telephone 
rates, for obvious political reasons. Consequently, even if 
the costs of video programming could be misassigned 
to transmission services, and misassigned again over the 
federal-state jurisdictional boundary to local exchange 
services, it is certain that the regulators would resist the 
requisite compensatory price increases. If the state regula- 
tory commissions may be said to have had one overriding 
goal historically, it has been to hold down the price of 
basic residential telephone service; and they have done so 


* Owen Aff. at 31. 


278 


to the point of holding those prices inefficiently low and 
requiring inefficiently high charges for “vertical” or “en- 
hanced” services. Far from permitting cross-subsidization 
of competitive by monopoly services, regulators have typi- 
cally handicapped telephone companies in the competitive 
markets—inefficiently so. 

(12) As the defendants themselves point out,’ the cross- 
subsidization they predict is possible only to the extent a 
telephone company’s services are subject to cost-based, 
rate-of-return regulation. The kind of recoupment they 
posit was never automatic, even under that traditional reg- 
ulatory practice: rates were altered only periodically and 
raised only when achieved rates of return fell outside an 
acceptable range. 

(13) In both 1970, when the FCC first adopted the 
prohibition at issue here, and 1984, when Congress en- 
acted it, telephone companies were in fact universally sub- 
ject to traditional rate-of-return regulation. Today, in 
contrast, the FCC and a majority of state regulators have 
substantially modified that form of regulation in favor of 
price freezes or caps, which fix the price of services rather 
than telephone company profits, or other “incentive” regu- 
latory arrangements that permit company profits to fluctu- 
ate within a wider than traditionally permitted range, with 
or without automatic sharing with ratepayers of profit sur- 
pluses or deficiencies. All of these plans, by further 
weakening any previous assurances of automatic recovery 
from less competitive services of net revenue losses from 
competitive ones, have the effect of weakening any incen- 
tive or ability the telephone companies may previously 
have had to cross-subsidize competitive services at the 
expense of others less subject to competition. Indeed, pre- 
vention of cross-subsidy has been one central, explicit rea- 
son for the adoption of these reforms. The very fact that 
it is the telephone companies themselves that have been 
the principal proponents of these plans further contradicts 


5 E.g., Owens [sic] Aff. at 15. 


279 


the defendants’ contentions that they would respond to 
removal of prohibitions on their entering various competi- 
tive businesses with a strategy of cross-subsidy. Under the 
various forms of incentive regulation, the incurrence of 
“losses” on competitive business would simply decrease 
their profits. Significantly, even NCTA concedes that a 
pure price cap arrangement would “reduce or eliminate the 
incentive to shift costs to regulated services.” ° 

(14) There are some respects in which the arguments 
of the defendants do not rest entirely on the presence of 
common costs, on the one side, and of the opportunity to 
recover the burdens of cross-subsidy via cost-plus regula- 
tion on the other. For example, one of the amici on the 
side of the cable industry argues that the telephone com- 
panies would have an unfair advantage by virtue of their 
ability to “cherry pick personnel” from their telephone op- 
erations for the benefit of their video programming serv- 
ices." But, as the DC Circuit has observed with admirable 
conciseness, “[rJunning a local [telephone] exchange does 
not require reporters, copy editors, joke writers, financial 
analysts, astrologists, or other information-content pro- 
viders” “to which list one might add screen writers, 
Hollywood stars and game show hosts. 

(15) Dr. Owen’s affidavit on behalf of NCTA also 
cites, as an asserted unfair advantage of telephone com- 
panies, their ability to raise capital for the combined en- 
terprise on more favorable terms than their cable competi- 
tors. First of all, the opinion he expresses that the overall 
cost of capital of well-managed cable companies is higher 
than of telephone companies is a mere undocumented 
assertion on his part. In any event, the sufficient response 


* Owen Aff. at 23. 


* Brief of Amici Curiae Consumer Federation of America, et al., 
at 22 (dated May 21, 1993). 


* United States v. Western Electric Co., 900 F. 2d 288, 308 n. 28 
(D.C. Cir. 1990). 


280 


is that nowhere in the economist’s conception of the pre- 
requisites of effective competition or in the antitrust laws, 
to my knowledge, has the mere possible ability of one com- 
pany to raise capital on more favorable terms than another 
been regarded as providing a sufficient basis for excluding 
that company from the opportunity to compete with others 
putatively less advantageously situated in that respect. 
(16) Finally, Dr. Owen’s asserted concern that a tele- 
phone company could engage in “self dealing” by paying 
a programming affiliate inflated prices for its program- 
ming has the facts completely backwards. It is not the 
telephone company that proposes here to purchase pro- 
gramming from an affiliate. It is the programming affiliate 
that would buy video transport service from the telephone 
company, at tariffed rates. And of course the affiliate 
would have every incentive to produce and acquire pro- 
gramming as economically as possible, since it would be in 
the business of offering it to subscribers, for whose patron- 
age it would be competing with the cable companies. 
(17) Finally, I find the ultimate essential component 
of the successful strategy of cross-subsidy and predation 
hypothesized by the defendants in this proceeding—namely 
the permanent removal of competitors—highly improbable 
in the present circumstances. The cable companies have 
installed networks capable of serving 96% of all house- 
holds. That capacity is not going to go away. The mar- 
ginal cost of operating these systems must be relatively 
low, leaving their operators with latitude for price reduc- 
tions more than sufficient to discourage any would-be 
predator. It is the cable companies that are the dominant 
incumbents in the video entertainment market, with access 
or contractual rights to the most popular entertainers and 
shows. Their facilities also have the potential to be up- 
graded to provide two-way communications services, which 
could produce an enormous supplemental revenue stream. 
In the circumstances I find it simply inconceivable that 
they will or could be driven out of business by the mis- 


There is no economic basis for the expectation that 
permitting the telephone companies to provide video pro- 
gramming directly to the public within their service areas 
would put them in a position to deny the cable com- 
panies a fair opportunity to compete or, through cross- 
subsidization, to drive them from the market. 


/s/ Alfred E. Kahn 
ALFRED E. KAHN 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


282 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF PATRICIA S. TICER 


COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA _) 
) to wit: 
City OF ALEXANDRIA ) 


Patricia S. Ticer, being duly sworn, deposes and says 
as follows: 


1. I am the Mayor of the City of Alexandria, Virginia, 
and have held that position since 1991. Prior to that, I 
served as a member of the City Council for 8 years. 

2. On June 26, 1991, I testified before The United 
States House of Representatives, Committee on Energy 
and Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications 
and Finance, on behalf of the National League of Cities 
and the United States Conference of Mayors with respect 
to telephone company provision of cable television serv- 
ices. I testified in favor of telephone company entry into 
the cable market subject to appropriate regulatory safe- 
guards. I continue to believe that competition provided 
by telephone companies is in the public interest and, spe- 
cifically, in the best interests of the residents of the City 
of Alexandria. 

3. If the prohibition contained in Section 533(b) of 
the 1984 Cable Act were removed, and the Chesapeake 
and Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia and Bell 
Atlantic Video Services Company were to make appli- 
cation for a franchise pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 3 of 


283 


the Alexandria City Code, the application would be acted 
upon by the Alexandria City Council, and would receive 
the same consideration as the application of any other 
applicant. 


/s/ Patricia S. Ticer 
Patricia S. TICER 


[Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


284 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF JEAN POOL 


1. I am Senior Vice President, Director of Local 
Market Broadcast for J. Walter Thompson. I manage a 
negotiating unit comprised of 136 specialists located in 
seven major markets across the U.S. We purchase com- 
mercial airtime on radio, television, and local cable sys- 
tems on behalf of J. Walter Thompson clients including 
Bell Atlantic. I am knowledgeable about the practices of 
the cable industry with respect to the selling of airtime. 

2. On May 25, 1993, we made an inquiry to Jones 
Intercable to determine whether it would be possible to 
lease a channel on its cable system in Alexandria, Vir- 
ginia. Jones said it has no channels available for leased 
access in Alexandria. Jones, however, will lease time 
slots, subject to availability, in half hour increments. 

3. Jones Intercable, as is the case with all other 
local cable companies, reserves the right to view proposed 
programming prior to air. This is typically how all broad- 
cast stations operate also. 

4. Based on my experience buying time on cable sys- 
tems, I believe that Bell Atlantic would be unlikely in 
most communities to be able to lease even one channel 
from the local cable operator. Cable systems typically 
are already filled to capacity with programming and are 
unwilling to bump existing programs to make room for 
leased access users. In most instances, therefore, Bell 
Atlantic would be limited to leasing short, individual 


285 


time slots subject to availability and subject to the edi- 
torial preview of the cable operator. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on 6-2-93. 

/s/ Jean Pool 
JEAN POOL 


286 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF ROBERT L. TOWNSEND 


1. My title is Director of Bell Atlantic Video Services 
Company (“BVS”). I have worked in the cable TV Indus- 
try for over a decade. Before joining BVS, from 1989 to 
1992, I was Senior Vice President of a subsidiary of the 
Home Shopping Network, which is a producer of video 
programming sold to cable systems. Prior to that, from 
1981 to 1989, I was Vice President, Sales, Marketing, and 
Programming of New York Times Cable TV. In addi- 
tion, I have served as a member of the board of directors 
of the Cable Television Administration and Marketing 
Society (“CTAM”) and was President of the Northeast 
Region of CTAM. I have substantial experience—from 
the perspectives of both a cable operator and an inde- 
pendent video programmer—in buying and selling video 
programming. 

2. I submit this affidavit in response to the govern- 
ment’s claim that the prohibition in this case does not 
“unduly burden” BVS’s ability to provide video program- 
ming in its telephone affiliates’ service areas. Gov't 
Mem. 66. 

3. The government claims that, despite the prohibi- 
tion, BVS could sell programming to existing television 
networks and could acquire a local television broadcast- 
ing station. Gov't Mem. 66. The Newspaper Association, 
unlike the government, claims that BVS could acquire 
broadcast stations only outside its telephone affiliates’ 


287 


service areas. NAA Mem. 12. On the other hand, the 
Newspaper Association claims that BVS could lease 
channel capacity from existing cable operators. NAA 
Mem. 11. The NCTA claims that BVS could offer pro- 
gramming to existing broadcast television stations, cable 
operators, movie theaters, or video stores. NCTA Mem. 
56. The National Association of Broadcasters claims that 
BVS is barred from all in-region video programming. 
NAB Mem. 32. Despite the differences in these parties’ 
views regarding what is permitted, they all—except for 
the broadcasters—suggest that there exist ample alterna- 
tive means for BVS to distribute its video programming 
even within its telephone affiliates’ service areas. 

4. Assuming for purposes of this affidavit that the 
proposed alternatives are all legally permitted, they in fact 
do not provide BVS a meaningful opportunity to provide 
video programming of the type and in the quantity that 
it seeks to provide. The problems with these alternatives 
are discussed below. 

5. Many of the alternatives would subject BVS’s 
programming to the editorial discretion of the existing 
program distributors. Cable operators and _ television 
broadcast stations have no obligation to purchase BVS’s 
programming. BVS’s ability to get its programming 
shown in any particular geographic area would be entirely 
subject to the whim of cable companies and broadcasters. 

6. NCTA states that BVS could simply create and 
market the “Bell Atlantic Hour” for carriage on local 
cable systems. NCTA Mem. 56. NCTA chose this ex- 
ample very carefully. As described in Jean Pool’s affi- 
davit, the “Bell Atlantic Hour” is near the maximum 
amount of air time that a typical cable system will sell 
to an independent programmer. But even shorter time 
slots can be difficult to arrange if the content of the pro- 
gramming is disagreeable to the cable operator. In No- 
vember 1991, one of Bell Atlantic’s companies, New Jer- 
sey Bell, produced a 30-second commercial advertisement 


288 


regarding a bill pending before the New Jersey legislature. 
Suburban Cable, a large cable operator in Northern New 
Jersey which opposed the bill, initially refused to carry 
the commercial. After a period of negotiation, Suburban 
Cable agreed to carry the commercial but insisted on 
running its own commercial immediately afterward re- 
sponding to New Jersey Bell’s commercial. The result 
was to confuse and adulterate the message New Jersey 
Bell was trying to present. In a subsequent complaint 
proceeding before the New Jersey Board of Regulatory 
Commissioners, Suburban Cable defended its actions as 
“editorial discretion.” Answer to Petition at 3, BRC 
Docket No. CC91121783 (Dec. 20, 1991). 

7. Suburban’s standard term sheet (copy attached) 
provides that “Suburban Cablevision shali have the right 
to approve or disapprove all materials submitted for 
cablecasts” and that its “right of disapproval shall be 
exercised in its sole discretion as to any matter it deems 
objectionable for any reason whatsoever.” Suburban’s 
term sheet is typical. The standard term sheet (copy at- 
tached) currently in use by Mega Advertising, which 
arranges airtime on behalf of cable systems in the Wash- 
ington, D.C. metropolitan area, provides that “[aJll pro- 
grams” are subject to “prior approval.” Programs will 
not be aired if, in Mega Advertising’s “sole discretion,” 
they are “determined to be unsatisfactory, unsuitable or 
contrary to the public interest.” 

8. None of the proposed alternatives would permit 
BVS to provide more than a channel or two of program- 
ming. For example, buying a local broadcast television 
station, as the government suggests, would allow BVS to 
program one channel. Most cable operators today offer 
30 to 53 channels. BVS’s programming plan for Alex- 
andria includes approximately 100 channels. To fit within 
the alternatives, BVS would have to abandon 99% of 
its programming plan. 

9. Moreover, relegating BVS to begging and borrow- 
ing space from the existing program distributors would 


289 


not promote programming diversity. Rather it would 
ensure tnat there is no net increase in the amount of 
programming. Whatever programming BVS would show 
would simply displace other programming. 

10. None of the alternatives would permit BVS to 
offer video on demand service. This service requires the 
technical ability to address individual subscribers and to 
deliver to subscribers specific programs that they order. 
This service also requires a return communication capa- 
bility so that the subscriber can select a video, pause it, 
restart it, and perform other functions to interact with the 
video. To my knowledge, there is no cable system or 
broadcast station in the Bell Atlantic region that em- 
ploys the type of technology needed for this service. Re- 
quiring BVS to provide programming over the existing 
media, therefore, has the effect of barring this new 
service. 

11. Video on demand is qualitatively a different type 
of programming than traditional broadcast or cable. 
From the customer’s perspective, video programming that 
a broadcaster or cable operator has pre-selected is not a 
substitute for programming that the customer selects 
herself. 

12. Finally, the Newspaper Association’s suggestion 
that BVS lease channels from existing cable operators is 
not a viable alternative. Leased access has been available 
since 1984, but programmers have made “scant use of 
the leased access channels.” Report and Order, In the 
Matter of Implementation of Sections of the Cable Tele- 
vision Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
1992, Rate Regulation, MM Docket 92-266, at 318 (re- 
leased May 3, 1993). There have been severe problems 
with leased access arrangements. Among other things, 
cable operators charged high rates, subjected program- 
mers to the cable operators’ editorial control, and pro- 
vided no mechanism for billing subscribers on behalf of 
the leased access programmers. The House Report ac- 


290 


companying the 1992 Cable Act concluded that “leased 
access has not been an effective mechanism for securing 
access for programmers to the cable infrastructure or 
cable subscribers.” H. Rep. No. 102-628 at 39. Pur- 
suant to the 1992 Cable Act, the FCC recently issued 
rules attempting to rectify some of the deficiencies in 
leased access. However, the FCC cautioned that its rules 
are to be “understood as a starting point that will need 
refinement.” Report and Order, MM Docket 92-266, at 
306 (released May 3, 1993). Time Warner has filed a 
First Amendment challenge to the leased access require- 
ments on the ground that they would interfere with its 
“editorial discretion.” Complaint for Declaratory and 
Injunctive Relief at 44-45, Time Warner Entertainment 
Co. v. FCC, No. 92-2494, (D.D.C. filed Nov. 5, 1992). 

13. In any event, leased access would allow only a 
small amount of programming. A cable system the size 
of Jones’s system in Alexandria would be required to make 
available a total of four channels. If multiple program- 
mers seek access to these channels, under the FCC’s rules 
BVS “will only be allowed to lease up to one channel's 
capacity.” Report and Order, MM Docket 92-266, at 
310 (released May 3, 1993). Leased access, therefore, 
involves most of the problems of the other alternatives. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. 


Executed on 6/3/93. 
/s/ Robert L. Townsend 
ROBERT L. TOWNSEND 


291 


SUBURBAN CABLEVISION TERMS AND 
CONDITIONS 


GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS 


Agency and client are both jointly and separately re- 
sponsible for all terms and conditions of this contract. 


* * * * * 


Cablecast Approval 


Suburban Cablevision shall have the right to approve 
or disapprove all material submitted for cablecasts here- 
under and to refuse to permit any individual to partici- 
pate in any cablecast. Suburban Cablevision’s right of 
disapproval shall be exercised in its sole discretion as to 
any matter it deems objectionable for any reason what- 
soever. The Advertiser/Client should submit any ques- 
tionable matter to Suburban Cablevision for a determina- 
tion of the permissibility of its use before contracting any 
obligations or commitments in connection therewith. 

All programs and production material remain the prop- 
erty of Suburban Cablevision unless exempted in this 


agreement. 
* * ok * *x 


CONDITIONS 


The advertiser and its agency, if any, (collectively, “AD- 
VERTISER”) purchasing broadcast time for the an- 
nouncements or programs provided for in this contract 
and such talent as is specified herein. Mega Advertising 
hereby agrees that this contract shall be governed by 
the following terms and conditions: 


* * ** * ** 
5. PROGRAMS AND COMMERCIAL MATERIALS 
ca * * 6 * 


(b) All programs or announcements to be broadcast 
are subject to the prior approval of Mega Advertising, 


292 


and Mega Advertising without restriction or liability re- 
serves the right to refuse to broadcast any program or 
announcement that Mega Advertising, in its sole discre- 
tion, determined to be unsatisfactory, unsuitable or con- 
trary to the public interest. 


* * * * * 


293 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division ) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


SUPPLEMENTAL AFFIDAVIT OF WILLIAM E. LEE 


1. In my affidavit of April 27, 1993 I demonstrated 
that the creation, selection, arrangement, packaging, and 
provision of video programming for multichannel deliv- 
ery, whether performed by a cable company or by Bell 
Atlantic Video Services (“BVS”), involves editorial deci- 
sions that are functionally indistinguishable from those 
involved in newspaper editing. None of the parties chal- 
lenging the plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment have 
disputed that point. However, they have sought to distin- 
guish telephone companies from newspapers, suggesting 
newspaper do not receive government-bestowed benefits 
as telephone companies do. In this supplemental aff- 
davit, I briefly describe the extensive and valuable benefits 
conferred upon newspapers by federal, state, and local 
governments. 

2. In its Memorandum, the United States claims that 
the plaintiffs depend upon federal and state government 
for acquisition and maintenance of their monopoly of 
local telephone service. Mem. of United States at 44. 
See also Mem. of NCTA at 4 & 43 (local telephone com- 
panies are the recipient of a valuable government grant). 
The United States also claims that the plaintiffs depend 
upon government for use of rights-of-way. Mem. of 
United States at 60. The United States argues that the 
print medium “has never enjoyed any remotely similar 
set of government-bestowed benefits.” /d. at 44 n.41. 
In their brief, the Newspaper Association of America 
and the Virginia Press Association make similar claims 
concerning government-conferred monopoly status, but 


294 


add that telephone companies use the electromagnetic 
spectrum as well as public rights-of-way. Brief Amici 
Curiae of NAA and VPA at 23-24. 

3. Among the benefits conferred upon newspapers by 
the government are the following: 

a. Competition between separately owned local daily 
newspapers is exceedingly rare. In 1992, daily news- 
papers were published in 1,513 U.S. cities. Only 37 
cities had two or more separately owned, competing dail- 
ies; 19 of these cities had newspapers published under 
joint-operating agreements which allow papers to merge 
activities such as advertising and printing. Newspaper 
Association of America, Facts About Newspapers 92 at 
26 (1992). In Citizen Publishing Co. v. United States, 
394 US. 131 (1969), a joint-operating agreement was 
found to be a violation of the antitrust laws because it 
involved price fixing and profit pooling, and restricted 
entry into the market. Congress responded by conferring 
upon the newspaper industry one of the few limited ex- 
emptions from the antitrust laws. The Newspaper Preser- 
vation Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1801-1804, permits newspapers 
that maintain separate editorial staffs to combine their 
printing, distribution, advertising, circulation, and busi- 
ness departments. The joint-operating agreements author- 
ized by the Act eliminate advertising competition among 
the jointly operated papers, and create cost savings that 
place actual and potential competitors at a marked dis- 
advantage. Many commentators have criticized the Act 
as being anticompetitive. See, e.g., Flynn, Antitrust and 
the Newspapers: A Comment on S. 1312, 22 Vand. L. 
Rev. 103 (1968); Knox, Antitrust Exemptions for News- 
papers: An Economic Analysis, 1971 Law & Soc. Ord. 
3; Comment, The Newspaper Preservation Act, 32 U. 
Pitt. L. Rev. 347 (1971). As the Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit wrote, Congress was aware of the Act's 
anticompetitive effects, but made a policy determination 
that other considerations, such as preserving editorial di- 


295 


versity, were paramount. Committee for an Independem 
P-l v. Hearst Corp., 704 F.2d 467, 481-82 (9th Cir. 
1983). 

b. Newspapers receive preferential rates and expedited 
delivery from the United States Postal Service. See United 
States Postal Service, Domestic Mail Manual at 371-491 
(1992) (discussing second-class mail policies and pro- 
cedures). This preferential treatment, designed to en- 
courage the circulation of newspapers, originated with 
Benjamin Franklin and has continued to the present. See 
generally W. Fuller, The American Mail: Enlarger of the 
Common Life at 122-27 (1972) (discussing 19th century 
postal laws favoring newspapers). Prior to the reorganiza- 
tion of the Post Office in 1970, rates for mail delivery of 
newspapers were heavily subsidized; second-class mail con- 
tributed only 3% of postal revenues but accounted for 
11% of total postal volume. G. Cullinan, The Post Office 
Department at 240 (1968). The amount of the subsidy 
has been reduced as the reorganized Postal Service at- 
tempts to become self-supporting, but Congress continues 
to appropriate funds to subsidize second-class mail. 
Rambo, “Newspaper and the Postal Service,” Presstime, 
Jan. 1986, at 20. 

c. The importation of newsprint is duty-free. United 
States International Trade Commission, Supplement 1 to 
the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States at 
48-5 (1992). The absence of a duty significantly benefits 
newspaper publishers for two reasons. First, American 
newspapers import as much as 60% of the newsprint they 
use, primarily from Canada. Deutsch, “Bags and Boxes 
Full of Profits,” New York Times, Aug. 14, 1988, at sec. 
3, p. 1. Second, newsprint accounts for as much as 33% 
of the cost of publishing a daily newspaper. C. Fink, 
Strategic Newspaper Management at 78 (1988). This 
is second only to labor in publishing expenses. Jd. at 77- 
78; J. Udell, The Economics of the American Newspaper 
at 118-24 (1978). 


296 


d. Newspaper employees involved in delivery are ex- 
empt from certain provisions of the Fair Labor Standards 
Act, 29 U.S.C. § 213 (d). State labor laws also exempt 
newspaper carriers from collective bargaining, and mini- 
mum-wage and age requirements. See, e.g., West's Rev. 
Code Wash. Ann. § 49.46.010(f) (Supp. 1986); Pa. Stat. 
Ann. tit. 43 § 33.105(3) (Purdon Supp. 1985); Mass. 
Ann. Laws ch. 49 § 69 (Michie/Law Co-op. 1976). Al- 
though the percentage of youth newspaper carriers has 
been declining in recent years, in 1992, youth carriers 
constituted 65.7% of total U.S. daily carriers. Newspaper 
Association of America, Facts About Newspapers 92 at 
25 (1992). 

e. Newspapers are extensive users of the FCC-regulated 
spectrum. First, newspapers today receive information via 
communications satellites. This information includes news 
stories, photographs, and graphics from services such as the 
Associated Press, United Press International, and Reuters. 
Bacon, “Satellites Make Big Impact at Newspapers,” Press- 
time, Aug. 1988, at 6. The use of communications satel- 
lites has also fostered the growth of supplemental news 
services such as Scripps Howard News Service, Los An- 
geles Times-Washington Post News Service, New York 
Times News Service, and Knight-Ridder/Tribune News 
Information Service. W. Agee, P. Ault & E. Emery, /n- 
troduction to Mass Communications at 148 (10th ed. 
1991). Additionally newspapers receive national adver- 
tisements via satellite from the AD/SAT company. /d. 
at 430. Second, newspapers send finshed pages to printing 
plants via terrestial microwave links or communications 
satellites. For example, the Washington Post sends pages 
to printing plants in the District of Columbia and Spring- 
field, Virginia via microwave; the New York Times links 
its New York offices with a printing plant in Edison, New 
Jersey via satellite. National newspapers, such as the Wall 
Street Journal, Christian Science Monitor, USA Today, 


297 


and the New York Times national edition, send pages to 
printing plants, throughout the country via satellite. See, 
e.g. “Nationalizing the New York Times,” Editor & Pub- 
lisher, Jan. 21, 1984, at 36-37 (describing the technology 
used in satellite transmission of newspaper pages). Third, 
newspapers are experimenting with use of the spectrum to 
reach the consumer. For example, Knight-Ridder, one of 
the nation’s largest newspaper chains, is developing a hand- 
held notebook computer designed to receive newspaper 
content via satellite. Reilly, “Publishers Design Electronic 
Newspapers to Keep Control of Information Delivery,” 
Wall Street Journal, Feb. 26, 1993, at B1. 


t. Most states exempt newspapers from sales tax. A 
1986 study of newspaper taxation found only 12 states 
imposing taxes on newspaper circulation. “Six States 
Now Tax Some Form of Advertising, but the Number 
Taxing Newsprint and Ink Declines,” Presstime, Feb. 
1986, at 42. Only two states tax the purchase of mate- 
rials such as ink and newsprint used to produce news- 
papers. /d. 

g. Some states have enacted retraction statutes provid- 
ing special protection for newspapers in defamation ac- 
tions. These statutes preclude the award of a class of 
damages, or mitigate damages. Three of the 33 states 
with retraction statutes apply this protection only to news- 
papers; 8 limit it to newspapers and periodicals; 14 cover 
both print and broadcast media, and 8 cover any defend- 
ant. R. Sack, Libel, Slander, and Related Problems at 
379 (1980). 

h. Newsracks are often placed on city property such 
as sidewalks and the United States Supreme Court re- 
cently noted the importance of this form of distribution. 
City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 61 
U.S.L.W. 4272, 4273 n.10 (U.S. Mar. 24, 1993) (“al- 
most half of the single copy sales of newspapers are now 
distributed through newsracks”). In general, newspaper 


298 


publishers do not pay municipalities a fee for placement 
of newsracks on public property. 

4. As this affidavit reveals, the claim that the news- 
paper industry does not receive valuable and extensive 
benefits from the government is clearly false. Government- 
conferred benefits pervasively affect newspaper publishing 
on a daily basis and increase newspaper profitability. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on June 3, 1993. 


/s/ Wm. E. Lee 
WILLIAM E. LEE 


299 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division} 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF H. R. STALLARD 


1. I am the President and Chief Executive Officer of 
The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company of 
Virginia (“C&P”). I joined the company in 1959 as a 
Staff Assistant-Engineer and had various positions of in- 
creasing responsibility until I was appointed to my present 
position in 1988. This affidavit responds to several mat- 
ters raised by the government, NCTA, and others who 
filed briefs opposing our provision of video programming. 

2. Rate regulation. Bruce Owen’s affidavit claims that 
“local telephone companies characteristically are subject 
to cost-based regulation.” This was true in 1970, but the 
fact is that telephone regulation is moving away from 
cost-based formulas toward priced-based systems that re- 
ward companies if they reduce costs and penalize them if 
costs increase. C&P’s interstate telephone services are 
subject to regulation known as “price caps.” Under a 
formula established by the FCC, C&P’s charges for inter- 
State services may not exceed a specific “cap.” Each 
year, the cap is adjusted by the actual amount of infla- 
tion minus a fixed downward adjustment of 3.3% for 
assumed productivity gains. The resulting formula en- 
sures that prices decrease year after year in real, inflation- 
adjusted terms. 

3. At the state level, C&P is currently regulated 
under an experimental regulatory plan effective in 1989 


300 


which incents the company to avoid rate increases alto- 
gether. Under this Plan, C&P has not increased its basic 
schedule of rates. In fact, C&P has not increased its rate 
schedules since January, 1984, and C&P has actually 
reduced rates significantly since that time. The State 
Corporation Commission is currently evaluating the effec- 
tiveness of its Experimental Plan and is considering modi- 
fication to it. The Virginia General Assembly enacted 
legislation, effective July 1, 1993, that specifically em- 
powers the Commission to adopt new forms of regulation 
which are not cost-based. (A copy of the legislation is 
included in plaintiffs’ document appendix, vol. IV, tab 
52.) The legislation requires that any new form of regu- 
lation provide safeguards to “assure that there is no cross 
subsidization of competitive services of a telephone com- 
pany by monopoly services.” C&P will ask the State 
Corporation Commission under this legislation to modify 
regulation in such a way that C&P’s rates for basic service 
will be capped for a number of years and can be in- 
creased thereafter only at a fraction of the increase in 
the rate of inflation. We will specifically request that 
the Commission adopt this regulatory plan so as to 
decouple the relationship between prices of regulated 
basic services and their costs. 

4. Owen and others claim that C&P will subsidize its 
Alexandria video transport network by raising rates. How- 
ever, as I have stated, the curent [sic] regulatory envi- 
ronment in Virginia will not permit this to happen. More- 
over, when C&P filed this lawsuit, it committed to the 
State Corporation Commission that it will not, in any 
event, seek to increase rates for basic telephone services 
as a result of its investment in Alexandria to enhance 
its telephone network to carry video. (See my letter of 
December 17, 1992, to the Commission and the Decem- 
ber 21, 1992, response from Hon. Preston C. Shannon, 
attached. ) 


301 


5. Owen’s cross subsidy theory would also apply to 
other competitive services that C&P and its affiliates are 
permitted to provide. C&P and its affiliates provide a 
number of information services and a number of other 
services which are competitive with those offered by non- 
regulated or lightly-regulated firms. Yet, nowhere in the 
government's document submission nor in the submis- 
sions of the government’s amici is there any allegation 
that C&P has engaged in cross subsidy. For example, the 
provision of access service from a customer’s location to 
a long distance company’s switch is increasingly competi- 
tive. But C&P is not increasing any of its basic service 
rate schedules to offset competitive losses or to subsidize 
competitive access services. In fact, basic rates have been 
stabilized or decreased. 

6. Transactions between C&P and BVS. Owen claims 
that BVS intends to sell video programming to C&P. 
Such sales allegedly would allow C&P “to increase the 
apparent costs and therefore the permitted price of the 
regulated service.” Owen claims that these sales will 
create “a substantial opportunity to engage in cross- 
subsidization.” Owen, however has the facts back- 
wards. BVS will not be selling programming to C&P; 
instead, C&P will be selling tariffed video transport to 
BVS as well as to other unaffiliated programmers on the 
same terms. BVS’s programming will not be part of 
C&P’s costs of regulated service. 

7. The government claims that there are state law 
obstacles to C&P’s provision of tariffed video transport 
services to BVS. C&P, however, currently provides tar- 
iffed services to various corporate affiliates. For example, 
C&P provides tariffed telephone services to its affiliate, 
Bell Atlantic Mobile, which provides cellular telephone 
service. C&P has neither sought nor obtained approval 
for the provision of these services from the State Cor- 
poration Commission under the statutory provisions the 
government cites. I am advised by counsel that such 
approval is not required for the provision of tariffed 


302 


services to affiliates and, to my knowledge, the State 
Corporation Commission has never required such ap- 
proval. Nor has the fact that some of C&P’s affiliates 
engage in non-telephone businesses, which C&P itself 
might be barred from engaging in, ever presented an 
obstacle to C&P’s provision of tariffed services to them. 

8. Pole attachments. The government alleges that 
“within six months of entering the cable television market, 
C&P could cripple the only competition” by terminating 
its agreements with cable operators respecting pole at- 
tachments. This prediction is not reflected in experience. 
C&P is in competition with cable companies today. None- 
theless, as far back as C&P’s records go, C&P has not 
terminated an agreement for pole attachments or conduit 
with a cable company that was providing cable service 
to customers. 

9. To eliminate any uncertainty about C&P’s willing- 
ness to renew its agreement with Jones Intercable respect- 
ing pole attachments and conduit in Alexandria, C&P has 
offered to extend the agreement for the 20-25 year term 
of Jones’s renewal of its cable franchise. (See the at- 
tached letter from James E. Howerton to Sherry Gilmore 
of Jones Intercable. ) 

10. Franchise. The government and others claim that 
the ban on video programming is justified by the fact that 
telephone companies have franchises to provide telephone 
service. C&P has certificates of convenience and neces- 
sity, issued by the State Corporation Commission, to 
provide local exchange and toll telephone services in 
many areas of the Commonwealth, including the City of 
Alexandria, Virginia. (The Alexandria certificate is in- 
cluded in plaintiffs’ document appendix, vol. IV, tab 53). 
These certificates are not conditioned on C&P or its 
affiliates refraining from providing video programming. 

11. Not all telephone companies have franchises, and 
some telephone companies have franchises that are non- 
exclusive. For example, C&P’s affiliate, The C&P Tele- 


303 


phone Company of Maryland, has no franchise. Another 
of C&P’s affiliates, The Chesapeake and Potomac Tele- 
phone Telephone Company, which provides telephone 
service in the District of Columbia, has a franchise that 
is non-exclusive. 

12. Alleged protection from competition. The govern- 
ment and others also claim that the ban on video pro- 
gramming is justified by the fact that the government is 
supposedly protecting telephone companies from com- 
petition. In fact, the federal government has spent the 
last two decades promoting competition in the telephone 
business, preempting state law where necessary. 

13. In 1970, C&P was the sole provider of telephone 
handsets and other customer telephone equipment in the 
parts of Virginia where it provides telephone service. 
In the late 1970s, the FCC mandated competition for 
equipment. The Bell Companies continue to provide 
telephone equipment but, according to statistics compiled 
by the trade association of equipment suppliers, they col- 
lectively supply only about 10% of U.S. purchases. 

14. In 1970, C&P was the sole provider of pay tele- 
phones in the parts of Virginia where it provides tele- 
phone service. In 1984, the FCC opened up competition 
for pay telephones and preempted conflicting state laws. 
Today, the number of pay telephones provided by com- 
petitors is growing at the rate of 20% per year and the 
number of C&P’s pay telephones is declining. 

15. In 1970, C&P was the sole provider of local tele- 
phone services in the parts of Virginia that it serves. This 
was largely true even in 1984. In 1991, the FCC an- 
nounced that it would promote competition in local 
telephone services used to originate and terminate inter- 
state calls by requiring C&P and other telephone com- 
panies to provide new forms of interconnection with the 
competitive access providers (“CAPs”). Today, C&P 
faces competition from CAPs such as Metropolitan Fiber 
Systems, which provides services in Northern Virginia. 


304 


And in Richmond and in Norfolk, cable companies serv- 
ing those areas are rapidly positioning themselves to pro- 
vide competitive access service. 

16. In 1970, there were virtually no mobile radio 
services in competition with local telephone services. In 
the early 1980s, the FCC began issuing spectrum licenses 
to cellular radio providers. In 1984, 32 systems had been 
licensed, serving some 92,000 subscribers. Today, as the 
parties have stipulated, licenses have been issued nation- 
wide, there are 11,000,000 cellular subscribers, and the 
number of subscribers is growing 40% per year. 

17. The FCC has begun licensing additional radio- 
based telephone service providers. The amount of spec- 
trum to be licensed by the FCC is many times the amount 
allocated to current cellular providers and would be suffi- 
cient to provide telephone service to everyone in the 
Nation. As the parties have stipulated, the FCC has 
granted 203 experimental licenses for personal communi- 
cation services (“PCS”), thirty five of them to cable 
companies. Jones Lightwave, an affiliate of Jones Inter- 
cable, holds an FCC experimental license for a PCS trial 
in Alexandria, Virginia. Permanent PCS licenses may be 
issued within a year. Under a spectrum auction bill 
that passed a House Subcommittee recently, the FCC 
would have 270 days from final passage of the bill to 
begin issuing PCS licenses. The same bill would preempt 
state entry and rate regulation of commercial mobile 
services including cellular service and PCS. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on 6-4-93. 


/s/ H.R. Stallard 
H. R. STALLARD 


305 


A Bell Atlantic Company 
C&P Telephone 
C&P Telephone Company of Virginia 
600 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 
804-772-1591 


Hugh R. Stallard 
President and Chief Executive Officer 


December 17, 1992 


The Honorable Preston C. Shannon 

The Honorable Theodore V. Morrison, Jr. 
The Honorable Hullihen W. Moore 

State Corporation Commission 

Post Office Box 1197 

Richmond, Virginia 23209 


Gentlemen: 


The C&P Telephone Company of Virgninia today an- 
nounced plans to upgrade its telephone distribution net- 
work in Alexandria with fiber cable and associated elec- 
tronics. As you know, C&P has been in the forefront of 
the introduction of new technology. Our announcement 
today expands upon that commitment and is further ex- 
pression of our desire to bring the many benefits of broad- 
band technology to our customers as quickly as economi- 
cally feasible. 

This acceleration of broadband technology will enable 
us to provide hundreds of communications channels, 
making possible the provision of many new services to 
our customers. A service that will be provided is cable 
TV. We will use our affiliate, Bell Atlantic Video Services 
Company (“BVS”), to provide this service. C&P will 
provide transport services on its enhanced distribution 
system on a common carrier and non-discriminatory basis. 
BVS will buy those transport services and provide pro- 


306 


grams to customers. We will provide other channels to 
other programmers and information providers. 


plicable. We believe that the provision is unconstitu- 
tional. It violates the First Amendment right of telephone 
companies to provide video programming as well as the 
First Amendment right of subscribers to receive the video 
programming which C&P and its affiliated programming 
entity would provide. We have filed suit, therefore, in the 
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia 
challenging the constitutionality of the Act. A copy of 
our complaint is enclosed. 

Cable companies are increasingly entering the tele- 
phone business. They fight entry by others into their 
entrenched monopolies, as the enclosed article from The 
Wall Street Journal of September 24, 1992 illustrates. 
We anticipate these companies to react to our suit by 
challenging C&P in a number of forums, including before 
this Commission. 

One claim that we expect is that C&P’s entry into the 
cable business will lead to higher rates for its basic tele- 
phone service. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
C&P has not increased intrastate rate schedules for basic 
telephone service since the beginning of 1984.** We 
have no plans to increase those rates as a result of the 
planned investment. 

The acceleration of the enhancement of our facilities 
in Alexandria is contingent upon our ability to provide 
cable TV and other information services. Those services 
will provide the revenues to support the broadband net- 
work. It is likely that our suit and related appeals will 


*The Act applies whether C&P provides programming directly 
or through an affiliate. 47 U.S.C. § 588(b). 


**In fact, in the intervening nine years, C&P has actually 
decreased those rate schedules. 


307 


take several years, and our present plans are not to pro- 
ceed with the accelerated investment until successful com- 
pletion of the suit. 

When we do undertake this investment, we understand 
that the Commission certainly would scrutinize carefully 
any subsequent proposal to raise basic rates. Let me 
repeat, we have no plans to undertake any such request. 

The way to provide complete assurance that rates for 
basic telephone service will not increase as a result of 
investments to provide transport for programming and 
information services is to decouple the relationship which 
exists under current regulation between costs of telephone 
service (rate base/rate of return regulation) and price of 
service. A number of States have addressed the need for 
a new paradigm for the pricing of telephone service, and 
we hope that Virginia will do likewise in the future. 

If you should have any questions about our lawsuit, 
I would be pleased to meet with you or your staff to 
discuss them. 

/s/ Hugh Stallard 
H. R. STALLARD 
Enclosure. 


308 


Al4. THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, THURSDAY, 
SEPTEMBER 24, 1992 


CAPTIVE AUDIENCE: ESTABLISHED CABLE-TV 
FIRMS SAY THEY WELCOME COMPETITION, 
BUT BEHAVE OTHERWISE 


CaBLE Firms SAY THEY WELCOME COMPETITION BUT 
BEHAVE OTHERWISE 


Some Established Systems Go To Great Lengths to Keep 
Rivals Out of the Game 


A Nasty Battle in Niceville 


By MARK ROBICHAUX 


Staff Reporter of THE WALL SREET JOURNAL 


ELDOW LAKE, Minn.—This farming community has 
many charms: It is clean, friendly and nestled amid tiny 
lakes. And for a while there, residents could get paid for 
receiving cable television. 

That is what happened when Triax Midwest Associates, 
an affiliate of Denver-based Triax Communications Corp., 
faced a challenge to its executive franchise. After years 
of customer complaints that Triax’s service was shoddy 
and its rates too high, the town (pop. 1,200) decided 
to go into the cable business itself. It erected a 180-foot 
antenna across the highway from Triax’s tower and hung 
its cables just under Triax’s on the utility poles. 

The municipal system quickly signed up 60% of the 
subscribers in town at $14.95 a month, beating Triax’s 


309 


price by $1. But last summer, in the middle of a price 
war, Triax matched the city’s rates, then flew in a legion 
of salespeople to go door-to-door, offering Elbow Lake 
citizens a rebate of $100, paid on the spot, if they agreed 
to sign up for a year. The city countered the next day 
with a monthly rate of $5.95. So did Triax. Now the 
town’s system is struggling and faces a yearly loss. It has 
been forced to raise its rates back up to $14.95, and 
nobody knows whether the residents will stay loyal, or go 
for Triax’s discount deals. 


Slow Motion 


Five years after the cable industry was deregulated, 
fewer than 1% of the cable markets in the U.S. are 
served by two or more providers, and rates have risen 
an average of 61% for the most popular service. Allter- 
natives to cable, such as microwave transmission and 
direct-broadcast satellite reception, haven’t materialized 
as full-fledged competitors. Complaints continue to re- 
verberate about what many consumers perceive as cable 
companies’ unregulated monopolies. 

The bill cleared by Congress this week addresses this 
dissatisfaction by reimposing some community control on 
cable companies’ behavior. The cable companies and 
President Bush, who says he will veto the measure, argue 
that the bill could actually raise costs for consumers, 
partly because it would enable broadcasters to obtain 
payments from cable companies for their signals. They 
maintain that competition in the cable market, not regu- 
lation, would serve consumers best. 

But a close look at the few markets where entrenched 
cable companies have been challenged by newcomers sug- 
gests that competition is the last thing that the big cable 
operators want. Beyond simply playing hardball, en- 
trenched cable operators have sought to lock out or 
cripple would-be competitors. They have engaged in dis- 
abling price wars, filed numerous lawsuits and hobbled 


310 


the sale of municipal competitors’ bonds. They have 
vigorously lobbied local and state governments to keep 
their turf exclusive. In New York, an incumbent cable 


Coral, Fla., a city famed for its Arbor Day celebrations, 


planned to destroy 600 to 700 trees to string cable (it 
didn’t actually plan to cut any). 


‘Fruits of Monoply’ 


“The cable industry has tasted the fruits of the monop- 
oly and they'll do whatever they can to drive a potential 
competitor out of town,” charges Gene Kimmelman, exe- 
cutive director of the Consumer Federation of America, 
a consumer lobby group. “They want it both ways: They 
argue they want competition, yet they do everything 
imaginable to block it.” 

The cable industry vigorously defends its behavior, dis- 
missing any notion that its practices are anti-competitive. 
Cable companies say they are simply protecting their 
markets, competing as any prudent business would. The 
big operators feel the threat of competition acutely, be- 
cause they borrowed heavily to buy up cable systems in 


offering discounted prices, to make a reasonable profit. 
In many respects, they argue, cable is a natural monop- 
oly. 

“What do you expect the operators to do—sit there 
like a bump on a log and lose customers?” asks Steve 
Wilkerson, president of the Florida Cable Television As- 
sociation. “Cable operators are going to compete head 
to head to keep their customers. What is so anti- 
competitive about that?” 


311 


Keeping Their Distance 


The big cable operators haven't tried to compete with 
one another; they buy and sell territories, but so far they 
haven't sought to penetrate one another’s markets. Gen- 
erally the challengers are frustrated small-town govern- 
ments and scrappy companies, usually undercapitalized, 
that operate in areas where an incumbent has a reputa- 
tion for giving poor service and increasing its rates. 

More than 130 disenchanted communities are exploring 
the prospect of either inviting competition or starting a 
cable company of their own. One of them is Niceville, 
Fla., a hamlet (formerly known as Boggy) near the end 
of the state panhandle. Niceville has been fighting for 
the better part of a decade to start its own service. 
Warner Cable Communications Inc., a unit of Time 
Warner Inc., so riled the small town with rate rises and 
much-criticized service that angry residents voted to tax 
themselves to construct a $2 million cable system. 

But Time Warmer used the courts to challenge the 
city’s right to build, arguing among other things that by 
operating a system of its own, the government would be 
infringing on Time Warner’s First Amendment right to 
free speech. After hard-fought victories, one in state court 
and another in the U.S. Supreme Court, the town pro- 
ceeded this year to sell the bonds to start construction. 
But a bond-rating agency refused to rate the bonds, de- 
spite Niceville’s respectable credit history. That’s because 
Time Warner filed yet another lawsuit in 1987. This 
one charged the town with “unlawful municipal competi- 
tion,” alleging, among other things, that it misled resi- 
dents about the cable system’s viability. 

Today, seven years and almost $300,000 after start- 
ing its effort, Niceville still hasn’t strung its first inch of 
wire. “They [Time Warner] asserted every constitutional, 
legal and contractual theory I think I’ve ever seen,” says 
Niceville city attorney Gillis Powell Sr.” “It’s been a very 
complicated, very costly, very exhausting experience.” 


312 


James Moore, the attorney representing Warner Com- 
munications, argues that neither Niceville nor any other 
municipality belongs in the cable business. “How can 
the city be a regulator and a competitor at the same 
time?” he demands. 

That is one of the questions the federal reregulation 
bill addresses. The bill would enable local governments 
to regulate rates for basic cable programming based on 
guidelines developed by the Federal Communications 
Commission, and would authorize the FCC to step in 
when local authorities don’t do the job right. 

The legislation is also aimed at encouraging competi- 
tion to entrenched cable operators. It would prohibit ex- 
clusive franchises, requiring cities to consider at least two 
applicants. Local governments could operate a cable 
system without going through the formal franchising 
process. The bill would also require cable operator-owned 
networks that currently sign exclusive contracts, such as 
TNT, to sell programming to all comers. 


The Allentown Example 


There is evidence that on a level playing field, cable 
companies can compete, with attendant benefits for con- 
sumers. In Allentown, Pa., two private cable companies 
started 25 years ago at opposite ends of the town, met 
in the middle and continued to wire over one another’s 
neighborhoods, house by house. The two—Service Elec- 
tric and Twin County Trans Video—both are profitable 
today, and have split the market roughly in half. 

“I’m not exaggerating when I say we have no prob- 
lems whatsoever with cable,” says Joseph Rosenfeld, as 
assistant to the mayor in Allentown. “These companies 
are terrified of people switching. I was watching an 
Eagles game that went out during an electric storm. 
Within half an hour, in the rain, they had the thing 
fixed.” 

Allentown is an exception mainly because it took a 
path that other communties didn’t when cable television 


313 


began: It allowed two operators into its territory. As 
cable spread in the early 1980's, most local governments 
granted a single franchise to a single operator. Running 
two wires along poles or digging up public roads twice 
seemed impractical. In turn, cable operators often had 
to agree to costly concessions levied by city councils, 
which usually included a percentage of gross revenue, 
elaborate public-access studios and state-of-the-art equip- 
ment to televise council meetings. 

Then, in 1984, cable companies argued that they 
needed relief from local governments’ rate restrictions and 
unreasonable demands. Competition from emerging tech- 
nologies would hold rates down, the industry argued. 
Besides, the broadcast networks had a far bigger audience 
than cable, which had wired less than half the country 
at the time. 

So the Cable Act of 1984, which became effective in 
1987, was intended to allow the industry to flourish, and 
at the same time open the door for competition. The 
industry has indeed flourished since deregulation—revenue 
has almost doubled in the past six years to $22 billion— 
but the emerging technologies still are larval, and incum- 
bent cable operators doing battle with newcomers can 
exploit the considerable advantages of having had exclu- 
sive franchises. 

By far the bloodiest cable battleground, even by the 
industry’s sanguinary standards, is in central Florida, 
where Telesat Cablevision Inc. has gone up against some 
of the nation’s most powerful cable operators. The fight 
has taken such a heavy toll that Telesat has canceled 
plans for any further expansion in Florida. Telesat’s 
parent, FPL Group, owner of Florida Power & Light, has 
put Telesat up for sale. 

Telesat, based in Pompano Beach, touched off a price 
war when it marched into central Florida in 1987. It 
Started out wiring apartment buildings, then quickly ex- 
panded to more than a dozen communities serving 52,000 


314 


cable homes, in every market. Telesat met what its presi- 
dent, Harry Cushing, describes as the “scorched-earth 
policy” of entrenched cable companies. 

In the Orlando area, Telesat encountered two of the 
industry’s biggest operators; Cablevision Industries Corp., 
with 1.7 million subscribers nationwide, and Cablevision 
of Central Florida, a division of Time Warner Inc., with 
6.7 million. (The two companies are unrelated: “cable- 
vision” is a name widely used in the industry.) In 1987, 
the year Telesat made its debut in Orange County, Fia., 
Cablevision Industries charged $10.95 a month in its mar- 
kets, and the Time Warner unit $12.95. Telesat came in 
at $9.95. 


[Chart Omitted in Printing] 

Both incumbents quickly cut their rates to $6.50—but 
left prices unchanged in neighborhoods that couldn’t get 
Telesat. William Brown, president of Time Warner’s unit 
there, calls the simultaneous rate drop “coincidence,” 
adding, “there was absolutely no collusion.” 

Between the price wars and the race between companies 
to wire homes, Orange County quickly became a hodge- 
podge of different cable rates for different enclaves. 
Cindy Utter, who lives in one of Orlando's blue-collar 
subdivisions, pays the Time Warner unit $20.70 a month. 
But just down the road, in an area that gets Telesat, her 
neighbors pay Time Warner $13.95 monthly. “It's not 
fair,” Ms. Utter fumes. Counters Time Warner’s Mr. 
Brown: “It’s fair to meet competition wherever it comes 


up. You have to protect your market share short of losing 
money.” 


Homeowners Get Involved 


In 1990, at the behest of embittered residents, the local 
homeowners’ association took the lead in pushing for an 
ordinance that would prevent cable companies from 


315 


charging different prices for cable in the same market. 
“We had a lot of people mad that they were subsidizing 
their neighbor’s cable bill,” says Cheryl Moore, then- 
president of the Orange County Homeowners Association. 

Time Warner orchestrated the industry’s counterattack, 
sparing no effort to make its presence felt by local poli- 
ticians. On the day the Orange County Commission voted 
on the proposed ordinance, big cable trucks surrounded 
the building, and inside, virtually every seat was taken by 
Time Warner employees, who had been given time off 
with pay to attend the meeting. 

They had arrived that morning shortly after 7 a.m., for 
the 9 a.m. showdown. “The residents were forced to 
stand up in the back, and there was no parking for 
blocks,” Mrs. Moore says. “The people were livid.” 
Time Warner’s Mr. Brown says, “We gave employees time 
off and it was voluntary, but I’m pleased we had such a 
terrific turnout.” 

Heated debate ensued as the sides presented conflicting 
economic data. In the end, the ordinance failed, 3-2, 
with three Republican commissioners voting against it. 
The incumbents’ presentation was made by two cable- 
company attorneys active in Republican fund raising. 
“Special interests hit a grand-slam home run and the 
residents lost,” Linda Chapin, a commission member who 
spearheaded the argument for the new ordinance, said at 
the time. Weeks later, during a race for the job of com- 
mission chairman, Time Warner included campaign fliers 
for Ms. Chapin’s (ultimately defeated) opponent in its 
monthly cable bill. 


Level Playing Field? 


Telesat now blames its lower-than-projected cash flow 
and choked-off subscriber growth in Orange County on 
the failure of the ordinance. The company’s 42% pene- 
tration there contrasts sharply with the 61% it achieved 
in nearby Citrus County, which adopted a uniform-pricing 


316 


law. (A similar uniform-pricing provision is included in 
the regulation bill passed by the House and Senate. ) 

In Dade County, Telesat got stopped dead in its tracks 
by a state law known as the “level playing field” act. In 
theory, it was designed to ensure that the second cable 
franchise wouldn’t get more favorable treatment than the 
incumbent. But in the 10 states where such legislation 
has been enacted, many cable newcomers contend it has 
enabled incumbents to manipulate the franchising process. 
Often at the established cable company’s urging, local 
governments hold public hearings and conduct extensive 
studies on the impact of so-called overbuilders. In the 
end, communities frequently end up imposing more bur- 
densome financial obligations and construction schedules 
on second cable systems. Dade County proved no 
exception. 

For instance, a six-month, $100,000 study into the 
feasibility of competition led to one delay after another 
in the processing of Telesat’s application for a franchise. 
At every county meeting, Mr. Cushing, Telesat's president, 
says the incumbents prodded the county to ask for more 
data before taking any action. 

Finally, after 24% years of waiting, Telesat withdrew 
its application. Among other reasons, it cited in its FCC 
filing “no hope of overcoming incumbent opposition with 
close political ties to commissioners.” Later that year, 
the Dade County cable administrator who recommended 
doing a feasibility study was hired by Tele-Communications 
Inc.. owner of Storer Communications Inc., one of the 
incumbent operators, to run its Miami cable operations 
Anthony Bello, the former cable administrator, says any 
suggestion that the two events were related is “poppy- 
cock,” stressing that Tele-Communications had no pend- 
ing business with the county at the time of his job 
negotiations. 

Elsewhere in Florida, even as Telesat toiled to lay 
wire. it found it couldn't get access to popular cable pro- 


317 


gram networks, many of which are at least partly owned 
by the largest cable operators in the country. For in- 


incumbent systems. 

Today, Telsat is Struggling in virtually all its Florida 
markets. Several of its operations have been sold to or 
merged with incumbent operators, some of which charge 
Telesat with being a “green-mailer”—industry jargon for 
4 company that enters a market for the purpose of in- 
ducing a buy-out. Mr. Cushing, Telesat's president. denies 
the charge. “I have a firm belief in the American dream.” 
he says, “but I am disillusioned ” 

The few U.S. communities that have achieved cabie 
competition have emerged as pockets of envy for the rest 
of America’s couch potatoes. 

In Paragould, Ark.. the incumbent Cablevision Systems 
Corp. was determined to be the only game in town When 
the town launched a $3.2 million bond issue to build 
its own cable system, Cablevision filed two lawsuits to 
stop it, and even offered to finance the new system on 
the condition Cablevision be allowed to operate it 

But the town system is up and running, and in the face 
of its first competition ever, once-vilified Cablevision Sys 
tems has become a paragon of service if doesn’t repair 
Outages within one hour. it will give $3 of or a free 
month of Home Box Office And s rates are among the 
lowest in the country. Cablevision charges $9 50 a month 
for 45 channels. the town charges $12 50 

Paragould property owners have two Day an average tax 
~ $3 a month to Gefray the cost of the town’s ow ove 


318 


tem, but many think it’s worth it. Amanda Gramling 
waited for years on the edge of town for cable service 
from incumbent Cablevision. But it wasn’t until the town 
got into the business that both companies—Cablevision 
and the town system—beat a path to her door. “We're 
a lot better informed today, and we have one of the lowest 
rates around,” says Mrs. Gramling, who now tunes into 
the town’s live coverage of the county fair and her second- 
grade daughter’s school plays. “We can thank competition 
for that.” 


319 
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA 


[State Logo] 


STATE CORPORATION COMMISSION 
December 21, 1992 


Mr. Hugh R. Stallard 

President 

C&P Telephone Company of Virginia 
Post Office Box 27241 


Richmond, Virgina 23261 


Dear Hugh: 


Thank you for your December 17 letter and enclosures, 
including copy of the Complaint for Declaratory Judg- 
ment and Injunctive Relief filed by C & P of Virginia 
and Bell Atlantic Video Services Company in U. S. Dis- 
trict Court for the Eastern District of Virginia (Alex- 
andria Division) on December 17, 1992. 

This material was delivered to the Commissioners by 
Mr. Warner Brundage. We appreciate the briefing that 
we received concerning this suit and also your offer to 
keep the Commission fully informed as the matter 
progresses. 

We understand that no part of the litigation expenses 
will be assessed the ratepayers of Virginia and that the 
Company accounts will be maintained so as to ensure 
Virginia ratepayer protection. 

This case will be a landmark one with far-reaching 
implications which, in my opinion, could determine the 
long-range development of the communications industry 
in America. 

With very best wishes, I remain 


320 
Sincerely, 


/s/ Preston C. Shannon 
PRESTON C. SHANNON 


PCS/ch 


cc: Hon. Theodore V. Morrison, Jr. 
Hon. Hullihen Williams Moore 
Mr. Edward C. Addison 


321 
A Bell Atlantic Company 


C&P Telephone 
Legal Department 


C&P Telephone Company of Virginia 
600 East Main Street 
10th Floor—Plaza 
P.O. Box 27241 
Richmond, Virginia 23261 
804-772-1559 
May 7, 1993 
Jones Intercable Inc. 
9697 E. Mineral Avenue 


Englewood, Co. 80112 


Attention: Sherry Gilmore 
Legal Assistant 


Dear Ms. Gilmore. 


I understand that Jones is currently seeking a 20-25 
year renewal of its franchise in the City of Alexandria, 
Virginia. As you know, the current Pole Attachment and 
Conduit Occupancy Agreement between C&P and Jones 
runs from year to year and is renewed each year auto- 
matically. This contract has been in place since 1979 
and, frankly, I do not see or anticipate any reason for 
changing this arrangement. However, if you would be 
interested in a longer term contract to run concurrently 
with the time period of your renewed franchise. C&P 
would be willing to enter into such a contract. 

If you are interested in negotiating a longer term con- 
tract, or have any questions, please call me. 


Very truly yours, 


s James E. Howerton 
James E. HowEeRTON 
Claims Manager 


322 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Al iria Division) 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT OF ROBIN SMITH 


Robin Smith deposes and says: 


1. I am the founder and current President and Chair- 
man of the Board of Video/Action Fund, a public charity 
and independent production company that develops, docu- 
ments, and promotes educational video programs. Prior 
to founding Video/Action Fund, I worked for more than 
fifteen years as a producer and filmmaker. From 1980 to 
1986 I was a producer for two broadcast television net- 
works: NBC, where I worked with the programs “1986” 
and “American Almanac,” and CBS, where I worked 
with the programs-“Sunday Morning With Charles Kuralt” 
and “The CBS Morning News.” I have received a Master 
of Science in Public Communication from Boston Uni- 
versity and a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from Ohio 
University. My resume is attached as Appendix A. 

2. Since its creation in 1990, Video/Action Fund has 
produced such programs as: “Who's Gonna Sing Our 
Song?”—a documentary on a multi-media project in which 
inner-city teenagers explored the history of their neigh- 
borhood through the arts; “Women of Substance”—an 
advocacy video on the barriers facing pregnant and parent- 
ing addicts when they seek treatment; and “Shooting 
Back: Photography By Homeless Children,” which won 
a regional Emmy for outstanding documentary in 199! 


323 


3. Video/Action Fund is one 


screen. 
5. Video Action Fund—like all independent producers 
and media artists—seeks the broadest possible access to 
audiences and will utilize all distribution services avail- 
able to us. Our productions have been shown on both 
broadcast and cable television. We also rely on mail order 
delivery of video cassettes. However, there are barriers 
in the current marketplace that inhibit the ability of non- 
commercial producers to disseminate all of our 

ming. Network show producers and cable broadcasters 
have a limited number of channels and are often looking 
for programming that fits a certain type or subject niche. 
Programming that doesn't “fit in” to existing sched- 
ules and formats is not considered for broadcast or 
distribution. 


324 


6. Independent producers and media artists are pro- 
ducing much more video programming than is currently 
being distributed on existing systems. As long as show 
producers and distributors stand as “gatekeepers” for the 
viewing audience, voices that do not conform to the video 
carriers’ needs will not be heard. 

7. For these reasons, independent producers like Video/ 
Action Fund need and would welcome the development of 
for video and multimedia programming. Bell Atlantic 
Video Services’ ability to package, market, and distribute 
video programming for access on demand presents new 
opportunities for independent producers and media artists 
to reach a much larger audience. 

8. As telephone companies and others deploy new 
distribution alternatives, the existing “gatekeepers” will 
lose their power to limit the public’s access to educational 
and community-oriented programming. Independent pro- 
ducers like Video/Action Fund will gain greater access to 
their audiences. A new genre of programming will 
emerge, utilizing the new interactive technologies in ways 
that are more responsive to the needs of individuals. Busi- 
ness relations and the interface between producers and 
distributors will improve. With more distribution outlets, 
small independent and non-profit producers will gain a 
precious commodity—a platform for diverse voices and 
visions that can be shared with the broadest possible 
audience. 

9. Some parties defending this case have suggested 
that Bell Atlantic already has numerous opportunities to 
provide a forum for the voices of independent producers 
like the Video/Action Fund. They note that the video 
programming ban applies only to in-region programming 
carried over the telephone company’s facilities and they 
cite the exemption for rural areas even within the com- 
pany’s service-area. They also claim that Bell Atlantic 


BE 
5 


i 
Fal 
I 
| 


E 
Hf 
=f 
| 
f 


ste 
Hos 
ifn 
Hib 
i 
iid 
Tuite 


11. The fact that Bell Atlantic might be able to pur- 
chase a cable system outside its region also would not 
increase the number of distribution outlets. The key 
value of Bell Atlantic's proposal to existing producers is 
that Bell Atlantic plans to use existing telephone facili- 
ties to provide new distribution outlets in competition 
with the existing cable provider. This will increase the 
number of channels available and hence increase the de- 
mand for programming from independent producers like 
Video Action Fund. In other words. it is precisely be- 
cause Bell Atlantic plans to provide video programming 
within its service area that its proposal is likely to increase 
the diversity of voices. 

12. Nor would the FCC's recent action allowing tele- 
phone companies to provide a “video dialtone” service be 
of practical assistance to independent producers hike 


326 


Video/Action Fund. Video dialtone in fact offers little 
if any improvement over the existing public access chan- 
nels mandated by most cable operators’ franchises. From 
the perspective of my organization and others similarly 
situated, mere provision of transmission facilities is not 
sufficient. Bell Atlantic would still be forbidden to per- 
form the kinds of packaging, marketing and publicity 
functions that are crucial to the success of smaller pro- 
ducers. As I have already explained, having such services 
available to all providers can make the difference between 
a film that passes unnoticed and a professional production 
that serves to challenge people by adding to the diversity 
of opinion in the public forum. 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of 
the United States of America that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on the 4th day of June, 1993. 


/s/ Robin Smith 
Rosin SMITH 
President 
Video/Action Fund 
3034 QO Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20007 


327 


Appendix A: Resume of Robin Smith 


* * * * 


PRODUCTION CREDITS: 


1993 


1993 


1992 


1992 


1992 


“ART For Eyes” (Vipeo/AcTion FUND) 
Executive Producer of a 30-minute docu- 
mentary on the work of Eve Care, an 
organization which collects and sells Haitian 
art in the United States to fund eye care 
clinics in Haiti. 

“We Are Nor WuHo You THINK We Are” 
(ViDEO/ACTION FUND) Executive Producer 
of a 10-minute advocacy video in collabora- 
tion with THE Women IN Jat AND PRISON 
PROJECT OF THE CORRECTIONAL AsSSOCIA- 
TION OF NEW YorkK, examining the involve- 
ment of women in illegal drug activity from 
the point of view of women serving lengthy 
prison sentences for drug-related crimes. 


“WHO's GONNA SING OuR SONG?” (ViDEO/ 
ACTION FUND) Executive Producer of a 30- 
minute documentary profiling a multimedia 
history and humanities project developed by 
ViDEO/ACTION for sixty teenagers living in 
southeast Washington, D.C. 


“WOMEN OF SUBSTANCE” (VIDEO/ACTION 
FUND) Co-Producer of a 10-minute advocacy 
video exploring the problems encountered by 
addicted pregnant and parenting women seek- 
ing treatment for alcohol and drug abuse. 


“For REAL” (Vipeo ACTION FuND) Execu- 
tive Producer of five point-of-view videos 
addressing attitudes, lifestyles and perceived 
health care options of “at-risk” teenagers for 
use in a community Services Workstation— 


1992 


1991 


1991 


1990 


328 


a demonstration project funded by the Office 
of Disease Prevention and Health Promo- 
tion, Department of Health and Human 
Services. 


“OnE BLocK AT A TIME” (VIDEO/ACTION 
Funp) Executive Producer of a 30-minute 
public service documentary on community- 
based efforts to combat substance abuse- 
related problems in the Washington metro- 
politan area; sponsored by Blue Cross/Blue 
Shield of the National Capitol Area and 
WRC-TV as part of a five year Drug-Free 
Zones Campaign. 


“YOUNG WOMEN’S RESIDENCE” (VIDEO/ 
ACTION FuND) Executive Producer of a 10- 
minute video on a home for sexually and 
emotionally abused teenagers in St. Peters- 
burg, Florida. 


“LOADED” (VIDEO/ACTION FUND) Executive 
Producer of a 30-second public service an- 
nouncement on the dangers of drinking and 
driving. 


“SHOOTING BACK: PHOTOGRAPHY BY HOME- 
LESS CHILDREN” (VIDEO/ACTION FUND) Ex- 
ecutive Producer, Writer and Director of an 
award-winning 30-minute documentary on 
Jim Hubbard’s work with homeless children 
which resulted in an exhibition of photo- 
graphs showing life in the shelters through 
the eyes of children. (Broadcast nationally 
on PBS and The Learning Channel; re- 
cipient of Capitol Regional Emmy, National 
Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, 
and “Silver Apple,” National Educational 
Film and Video Festival; selected to be 
screened at the International Monetary Fund 


1990 


1986-1991 


1989 


1989 


1988 


1988 


329 


and the Council on Foundations Film Fes- 
tival ) 


“Best Buppies!” (VipEo/ACTION FuNpD) 
Executive Producer of a 10-minute profile of 
Anthony K. Shriver’s national non-profit, vol- 
unteer program which introduces college 
students to people with mental retardation in 
an effort to promote friendship and an ap- 
preciation for community service. 


NBC News “Sunpay Topay” Field Pro- 
ducer of feature segments, including profiles 
of controversial photographer ROBERT Map- 
PLETHORPE, television personality MORTON 
Downey, JR., and disabled Vietnam veteran, 
LEN NICHOLLS, who established a clinic for 
amputees in Hanoi. 


“TONY COELHO ON EPILEPsy” Producer 
and Director of a 10-minute video for THE 
COELHO FUND in which the former Con- 
gressman talks about his struggle with 


epilepsy. 
“SEEKING ANSWERS” Producer of a 20- 
minute informational video for THE Na- 


TIONAL LEAGUE OF FAMILIES OF AMERICAN 
PRISONERS AND MISSING IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. 


“THE BEST AMERICA” Producer and Director 
of a 30-minute special for the MICHAEL 
DUKAKIS PRESIDENTAL CAMPAIGN which was 
broadcast election eve simultaneously on all 
three networks. 


“HOMELESS IN AMERICA” Producer and 
Director of an award-winning video for 
TRIANGLE INDUSTRIES and THE MENTAL 
HEALTH ASSOCIATION which documents the 


1987-1989 


1985-1986 


1980-1985 


1979 


330 


plight of homeless individuals and families 
across the country. 


“USA Today on TV” Producer of cover 
stories including “SHOULD Drucs Be LEGaL- 
IZED?,” “FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME CHIL- 
DREN,” “SHOULD MOTHERS OF CRACK BABIES 
BE PROSECUTED FOR CHILD ABUSE?” and 
“DISCRIMINATION AGAINST GAYS IN THE 
MILITARY.” 


NBC News “1986” and “AMERICAN ALMA- 
Nac” Producer of numerous feature segments, 
including “A TickeT Out,” about a musical 
written and performed by inner city kids liv- 
ing in Chicago’s Cabrini Green housing proj- 
ects, and “LEAN ON ME,” an award-winning 
feature on a special program in which victims 
of crimes and tragedies help others in similar 
straits. 


CBS News “SuNpAY Morninc” Producer of 
numerous features, including profiles of JOHN 
THompson, Georgetown’s controversial bas- 
ketball coach; KATHERINE DUNHAM, founder 
of the first black dance company in America; 
and PHILLIPPE PeTiT, high wire artist and 
street performer. 


“He’s ONLY MiIssING” Producer and Director 
of an award-winning half-hour documentary 
film on my father, a USMC aviator missing 
in action in North Vietnam. 


331 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT 


DisTRICT OF COLUMBIA, 58.5. 
Bruce M. Owen, being duly sworn, deposes and says: 


1. I am the president of Economists Incorporated, a 
Washington, DC economic consulting firm, and visit- 
ing professor of economics at Stanford University’s 
Washington campus. I previously submitted an affi- 
davit in this proceeding which summarizes my qualifi- 
cations. 


2. I have reviewed Plaintiffs’ June 5, 1993 filings in this 
matter including the affidavit of their expert, Profes- 
sor Kahn. Plaintiffs and their expert have mischar- | 
acterized my position as to why telephone company 
provision of video programming services in their tele- 
phone service areas raises serious competitive issues. 

I believe, for the reasons given in my earlier affidavit, 
that permitting telephone companies to provide video 
services in competition with other local sources of 
video programming will likely result in anticompeti- 
tive behavior in two related activities. Absent the 
ban on participating in video programming services, 
telephone companies will use their regulated telephone 
revenues to cross-subsidize and monopolize video 
transmission services. Telephone companies will then 
use their control of essential transmission facilities to 
deny access to and discriminate in favor of their pro- 


332 


gramming services affiliates, thereby allowing them to 
exclude competitors and earn above competitive 
profits for video services, as discussed in my earlier 
affidavit at 4 7. 


Plaintiffs and their expert entirely miss the point re- 
garding the relevant cross-subsidy issues raised in this 
matter and the crucial role played by §533(b) in 
preventing anticompetitive abuses. Plaintiffs claim 
“§ 533(b) has nothing to do with preventing cross- 
subsidies, for the simple reason that telephone com- 
panies are already permitted to carry both telephone 
calls and video signals over their phone wires.” 
Plaintiffs’ Reply Memorandum at 33, emphasis in 
original. Similarly, Professor Kahn claims there is 
“no rational connection between the defendants’ cross- 
subsidy argument and the ban against telephone com- 
panies providing video programming” because there 
could not be substantial costs common to the trans- 
mission of video programming and to the creation 
and packaging of video programming. Kahn Affidavit 
at €7, emphasis in original. Both arguments miss 
the mark because they ignore the central function of 
§ 533(b) in curbing telephone companies’ incentives 
to engage in cross-subsidization. 


_ There are undeniably substantial common or joint 
costs involved in the provision of video transmission 
services and the provision of monopoly telephone serv- 
ices. Telephone companies are in a position to cross- 
subsidize video transmission service from monopoly 
revenues. What Plaintiffs and Professor Kahn ignore 
is that telephone companies’ incentive to engage in 
that cross-subsidization is greatly enhanced if tele- 
phone companies are also allowed to exploit monop- 
oply control of video transmission by earning excess 
profits in video programming. Simply put, the re- 
moval of § 533(b) would make a video transmission 
monopoly more valuable to a telephone company. 


333 


This makes it more likely that a telephone company 
will engage in anti-competitive cross-subsidization in 
order to obtain the video transmission monopoly. 
Because § 533(b) denies telephone companies the in- 
centive and ability to discriminate against video pro- 
gramming competitors in order to earn excess profits 
in that activity, §533(b) reduces the incentive to 
cross-subsidize video transmission in the first place. 
If a non-vertically-integrated telephone company dis- 
criminates against users of its video transmission 
service, raising their costs of doing business, it simply 
loses revenues from those customers. But if those 
customers’ lost sales increase the market share and 
unregulated profits of the telephone company’s pro- 
gramming affiliate, there is a net gain for the tele- 
phone company—it benefits from trading regulated, 
low-profit sales for unregulated, high-profit sales. The 
effect of being in the unregulated video programming 
business therefore is to increase the profitability to the 
telephone company of obtaining a monopoly of video 
transmission. Thus, § 533(b) protects competition in 
both video transmission and video programming and 
reduces the incentive for anti-competitive cross- 
subsidization, as I explained in my earlier affidavit at 
44 15, 23 and 27. 


. Notwithstanding its irrelevance to him, Professor Kahn 


doubts whether telephone companies could cross- 
subsidize video transmission services from monopoly 
telephone services. Kahn Affidavit at qq 8-15. I dis- 
agree. Telephone companies retain monopoly power 
over many of their services; there certainly is no sub- 
stitute for residential telephone service today, for ex- 
ample. Professor Kahn asserts that newer “incentive” 
regulatory arrangements have weakened the incentive 
or ability of telephone companies to cross-subsidize 
competitive services from monopoly services. As I 
pointed out at length in my original affidavit in this 


334 


proceeding (see 44 35-36), incentive or price-cap reg- 
ulatory schemes cannot eliminate cross-subsidization 
because they do not sever the relationship between 
prices and costs for regulated services. In practice, 
telephone companies are likely to anticipate that cost- 
based rate reviews will occur at periodic internals; in 
the FCC jurisdiction it is every three years. Professor 
Kahn simply has ignored these arguments. As long 
as the relationship between costs and prices remains, 
shifting costs from competitive activities to monopoly 
activities will be profitable for telephone companies. 
Further, I am puzzled by Professor Kahn’s assertion 
that, because telephone companies themselves allegedly 
have been the principal proponents of these newer 
incentive plans, the new plans therefore must offer 
protection against cross-subsidization. Kahn Affidavit 
at 4 13. This is a non-sequitur. It would be consid- 
erably less naive to draw exactly the opposite inference 
from telephone company support for these new regu- 
latory schemes. 


. Professor Kahn also mistakes the potential cross- 
subsidization involved from misallocating the increased 
costs attributable to risk taking. Kahn Affidavit at 
4 15. I did not claim, as Professor Kahn appears to 
believe, that companies with lower overall costs of 
capital should be excluded from competing against 
companies with higher overall costs of capital. The 
misallocation I was discussing involved passing the 
costs of engaging in risky competitive activities onto 
less risky monopoly services. Telephone companies 
providing only franchise monopoly services have low 
risks and appropriately enjoy low capital costs. Ex- 
panding their activities into competitive areas increases 
their risk and therefore their overall cost of capital. 
In a perfect world, regulators would not permit in- 
creases in the prices charged for monopoly services 


335 


because of the added risks and higher capital costs 
telephone companies take on when they expand into 
competitive activities. In practice, because a single 
firm provides both, the separate costs of capital for 
the two types of service are hidden from 

who can see only the capital costs of the 

whole. Thus, regulators see only the higher overall 
required rate of return that reflects the risky com- 
petitive activity. By allowing telephone companies to 
earn a higher rate of return in monopoly services re- 
flecting-their overall cost of capital, regulators in fact 
are permitting telephone companies to engage in cross- 
subsidization. 

. Professor Kahn alsc mischaracterizes the competitive 
concern involved in “self-dealing”. Kahn Affidavit 
at ¢ 16. He claims there is a important distinction 
in that it is not the telephone company that here pro- 
poses to purchase programming from an affiliate, but 
rather the programming affiliate that would buy video 
transport service from the telephone company. But 
this distinction has no weight. Whichever way the 
telephone company decides to go, telephone company 
provision of video services presents a serious competi- 
tive problem. Under Professor Kahn’s scenario, the 
programming affiliate will still be able to charge 
above-competitive prices because of the handicaps 
faced by its competitors who require access to the 
affiliated monopoly transmission service. Given that 
the telephone company will own the underlying video 
transmission monopoly and will be in a position to 
discriminate against its video affiliate’s competitors, the 
video affiliate will have market power attributable to 
its competitors’ artificially higher costs, which it will 
have every incentive to exercise. That is exactly anal- 
ogous to the local Bell companies’ former discrimina- 
tion in favor of AT&T’s former Long Lines Depart- 


336 


ment, that provided long distance telephone service in 
competition with alternative long distance carriers 
such as MCI. In the long distance market, competi- 
tors such as AT&T or MCI today purchase trans- 
mission services from local telephone companies, just 
as Professor Kahn would have the programming affil- 
iate of C&P purchase local video transmission services 
from itself. Regulators were unable to remedy dis- 
crimination against long distance competitors of AT&T 
when AT&T owned the local companies. This prac- 
tice led to the breakup of AT&T and the continuing 
restrictions on local Bell company provision of inter- 
LATA long distance service. That the long distance 
companies purchase local transmission service to reach 
their customers rather than the local companies pur- 
chasing long distance services makes a difference only 
in the details of the anticompetitive tactics, not in 
their likelihood or magnitude. To ban local telephone 
company provision of interexchange service was the 
only effective remedy. The same ban is needed against 
telephone company provision of video programming 
in order to prevent the same types of competitive 
abuses. 


. Professor Kahn concludes that there is no economic 


basis for the expectation that permitting the telephone 
companies to provide video programming directly to 
the public within their service areas would put them 
in a position to deny other video providers a fair 
opportunity to compete or, through cross-subsidization, 
to drive them from the market. For the reasons put 
forward in this and my earlier affidavit, I disagree. 


's’ Bruce M. Owen 
Bruce M. OWEN 


[ Notarization Omitted in Printing] 


533(b) is unnecessary, anticompetitive, and should be 
lifted. The full text of the documents from which these 
passages have been extracted are included in the Plaintiffs’ 
Document Appendix (“Pl. Doc. App.”). 


A. Federal Communications Commission 


1. Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross-Owner- 
ship Rules, 7 FCC Red 5781 (1992) (Pl. Doc. App.., 
Tab 1). 


—Based on a full administrative record, the FCC 
has recommended that Congress “permit the local 
telephone companies to provide video programming 
directly to subscribers in their telephone service areas, 
subject to appropriate safeguards. We find that such 
an amendment would . . . increas[e] competition 
in the video marketplace, spur{] the investment nec- 
essary to deploy an advanced infrastructure, and in- 
creas[e] the diversity of services made available to 
the public.” Jd. at 5847. 

—According to the FCC, “{t}he original justifica- 
tion for the cross-ownership ban in 1970 was to pre- 
vent local telephone companies from preemptively 
establishing a monopoly position in the provision of 
cable television service and other video services. The 
Commission was concerned that without the cross- 
ownership prohibition, local telephone companies 
would be the first to build cable systems in their com- 
munities and would be able to . . . establish them- 
selves as sole providers of cable service and fore- 
close competition.” Jd. at 5848. 


—— 


338 


—“We conclude that the risks of anticompetitive 
conduct by the local telephone companies in connec- 
tion with the direct provision of video programming 
have been attenuated by the enormous growth of the 
cable industry. ... Rather than a fledgling industry 
unable to compete, the cable industry holds a lead- 
ms Soe Se Se oe ee 
programming to the American public. . Given 
this widely changed competitive situation . . there 
is little threat that the local telephone companies 
could preemptively eliminate competition and monop- 
olize the market for video services.” Id. at 5848-49. 

—The FCC elaborated: “[W]Je agree with those 
parties that argue that permitting local telephone 
companies to directly provide video programming 
will further increase diversity, as they will add an- 
other programming voice to those which now exist. 
. . . [W]e agree with DOJ that vertical integration 
should increase rather than reduce available pro- 
gramming. . . . Most importantly, we find that the 
public will benefit greatly from the resulting in- 
creased competition in the video marketplace... . 
[W]e conclude that the ability of local telephone 
companies to have significant ownership interests in 
video programmers, particularly independent and 
start up services, will further increase competition in 
the video market.” /d. at 5849-50. 


2. Letter from FCC Chairman James H. Quello to 
Hon. Edward J. Markey (Mar. 1, 1993) (Pl. Doc. App., 
Tab 3). 


According to Chairman Quello, “the majority 


in the Commission’s video dialtone order found that 
telephone companies should be permitted to provide 
video programming directly to subscribers as a 
means of increasing competition in the video market- 
place. The Commission has stated that the introduc- 


339 


tion of competition from local telephone companies 
in the video marketplace, subject to the safeguards 
- . » Can be expected to bring consumers lower rates, 
more responsive customer service, and greater choice 
of video programming sources.” Jd. at Att. p. 3. 


3. In re Teleport Communications-New York, 7 FCC 
Red 5986 (1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 17). 


—According to the FCC’s order in this proceed- 
ing, “arguments that the telephone-company-cable 
cross-ownership restriction is no longer necessary are 
well taken. This Commission favors repeal of the 
Statutory cross-ownership restriction, and we are rec- 
ommending to Congress that the prohibition be re- 
pealed, and that traditional local exchange carriers 
be permitted to provide video programming in their 
telephone service areas pursuant to safeguards.” /d. 
at 5988. 


4. Report of the Federal Communications Commission 
Regarding the President's Regulatory Reform Program 
(Apr. 28, 1991) (PI. Doc. App., Tab 2). 


—According to the report: “Chairman Sikes has 
testified that the current statutory ban on telephone 
companies’ providing competitive video services in 
their local service areas should be repealed, and in- 
stead the Commission should be authorized to permit 
local telephone company ownership and operation of 
cable television facilities.” Jd. at 30. 


—The report also quantifies some of the expected 
benefits of competition: “Paving the way for tele- 
phone companies to provide the means for active 
rivalry in local multichannel video markets would 
result in significant price savings for consumers and 
stimulate provision of a range of new information 
services. Current experience with head-to-head com- 
petition in cable markets indicates that rates would 
fall about 20% for the entire video package; if com- 


340 


petition is introduced nationwide, subscribership 
would likely expand by 11.2 million households. 
This implies annual consumer surplus gains (in Year 
5 after the initiation of competition) of $5.36 bil- 
lion, with net social benefits of approximately $750 
million. This does not count the significant gains in 
innovative uses of broadband communications in 
non-entertainment markets such as health care, edu- 
cation, and telecommuting, all of which are very 
likely to follow from enhanced capacity and com- 
petitiveness in the supply of cable television services, 
nor does it include possible technological or macro- 
economic stimulus from the $28 billton investment 
which is anticipated from competitive entry into 
video.” Id. at 16. 


5. Telephone Company-Cable_ Television  Cross- 
Ownership Rules, 3 FCC Red 5849 (1988) (Pl. Doc. 
App., Tab 9). 


-—“The growth and financial success of the cable 
industry lessens the need for a prohibition on tele- 
phone company provision of cable television service 
and we do not believe a ban is now the correct op- 
tion for achieving and preserving a competitive 
broadband marketplace. ... Moreover, the ban also 
has an undesirable effect, in that it excludes a poten- 
tial competitor to a mature cable industry. This is 
especially of concern if less draconian means are 
available by which to ensure against anticompetitive 
conduct by telephone companies.” /d. at 5853. 

-~—‘We believe that the growth of the cable indus- 
try to the point where telephone companies can no 
longer preemptively eliminate cable competition and 
the fact that nonstructural safeguards are available, 
have rendered the cross-ownership ban presumptively 
unnecessary.” Jd. at 5854. 


341 


—“The ban is . . . a restriction on output which 
deprives society of services that otherwise could be 
provided by telephone companies. . . . [C]ompetition 
provided by telephone companies can be expected to 
provide the benefits we have generally associated 
with the provision of competition in the supply of 
communications facilities and services. These bene- 
fits include lower costs and greater choices for con- 
sumers and greater responsiveness to consumer de- 
mand by service providers.” Jd. at 5857. 

—"“[BJecause allowing carriers to provide [video 
programming] subject to safeguards is more likely to 
achieve the Commission’s objective of a fully com- 
petitive marketplace for broadband communications 
. . . We tentatively conclude that the costs of the 
cross-ownership ban exceed the benefits and that the 
public interest would be better served by . . . allow- 
ing telephone companies to provide cable television 
service subject to appropriate safeguards.” /d. at 
5858. 

—“The evidence before us suggests that the pro- 
hibition against telephone companies providing cable 
television service within their telephone service areas 
no longer serves the public interest... . The ban 
directly deprives consumers of video programming 
services telephone companies could provide, prevents 
operation of market incentives and achievement of 
efficiencies that could bring additional services to the 
public, and nonstructural alternatives to the prohibi- 
tion, including accounting safeguards, appear likely 
to control telephone companies’ potential anticom- 
petitive conduct without depriving consumers of tele- 
phone company services.” /d. at 5866. 


B. Department of Justice 


1. Reply Comments of the United States Department 
of Justice, Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross- 


342 


Ownership Rules, CC Dkt 87-266 (Mar. 13, 1992) (PI. 
Doc. App., Tab 6). 


—The Department of Justice has concluded that 
telephone companies “should be allowed to own and 
directly provide video progamming,” and that tele- 
phone company “provision of video programming 
will have procompetitive benefits that outweigh any 
anticompetitive risks involved.” Jd. at 44-45. 

—According to the Department of Justice, remov- 
ing the video programming ban “will allow another 
competitor to enter the video programming market 
_. . inerease the [telephone companies’) willingness 
to take the financial risk of developing broadband 
integrated networks . . . make them more effective 
competitors, and will create an alternative player 
with whom third parties can bargain to carry their 
programming.” /d. 


2. Letter from Attorney General William P. Barr and 
Secretary of Commerce Barbara Hackman Franklin to 
Hon. Edward J. Markey (Apr. 1, 1992). (Pl. Doc. App., 
Tab 19). 


“It has been the Administration’s consistent 
position that competition . . . creates the most sub- 
stantial benefits for consumers and the greatest op- 
portunities for American industry. Television view- 
ers will be best served by removing barriers to entry 
by new firms into the video services marketplace. 
The Administration, therefore, supports removal of 
current legislative prohibitions against telephone 
company provision of video programming, with ap- 
propriate safeguards.” /d. at 1. 


3. Letter from Assistant Attorney General, Antitrust 
Division, James F. Rill and Secretary of Commerce 
Robert A. Mosbacher to Hon. John C. Danforth (Mar. 
13, 1991) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 20). 


od 


343 


—“It has been the Administration’s consistent 
position that competition . . . creates the most sub- 
stantial benefits for consumers and the greatest op- 
portunities for American industry. We think that 
Congress can best serve television viewers by re- 
moving barriers to entry by new firms into the video 
services marketplace. The Administration therefore 
supports removal of current legislative prohibitions 
against telephone company provision of video pro- 
gramming.” 7/d. at 1. 


Department of Commerce 
Commerce Secretaries Robert Mosbacher and Bar- 


bara Franklin have each signed letters that “support ] 
removal of current legislative prohibitions against tele- 
phone company provision of video programming.” See 
supra 1.A.2-3. 

2. National Telecommunications and Information Ad- 
ministration, The NTIA Infrastructure Report, Telecom- 
munications in the Age of Information (Oct. 1991) (PI. 
Doc. App., Tab 4). 


—Based on this in-depth study, the NTIA, the 
branch of the Department of Commerce that is ex- 
pert on telecommunications issues, concluded: “[T]jhe 
likely benefits of LEC [local exchange carrier] entry 
into the video programming business outweigh the 
potential costs of LEC provision of video program- 
ming, which are either overstated or can be effec- 
tively ameliorated by adapting existing regulatory 
safeguards to suit the video programming market- 
place. Such entry would be one important means 
for expanding competition in the provision of video 
programming to the home. LEC provision of video 
programming would offer direct competition to in- 
cumbent cable systems. Moreover, requiring LECs 
to make channel capacity available on a common 
carrier basis would multiply opportunities for entry 


a 


344 


by independent program providers, thereby stimulat- 
ing competition still further.” Jd. at 235. 
—“Repealing the cable-telephone company cross- 
ownership restriction could also promote develop- 
ment of the U.S. telecommunications infrastructure. 
The opportunity to provide programming should in- 
crease LECs’ incentives to construct integrated 
broadband network facilities to carry that program- 
ming to the home. This, in turn, could lead to in- 
troduction of a wide range of innovative voice, data, 
and video services for subscribers.” /d. 
—“Allowing LECs to own, control, and provide 
video programming over their own facilities, subject 
to effective safeguards, could promote infrastructure 
development by increasing their incentives to deploy 
integrated broadband systems and other advanced 
networks. In general, government restrictions that 
have the effect of limiting the uses to which new 
technology can be put tend to be inefficient and anti- 
competitive, and retard investment in that new tech- 
nology. In particular, we believe that the current 
cable/telco crossownership rules are having such an 
effect with respect to investment in broadband public 
network technology.” /d. (emphasis added). 
—“{A]llowing LECs to participate in the video 
services market . . . could provide some assurance 
that LEC broadband distribution facilities will be 
used, in an active and timely fashion, for the dis- 
tribution of video entertainment programming. In 
such an investment environment, the LECs will 
clearly have greater incentives to deploy such [broad- 
band] facilities. Moreover, once those facilities be- 
come established, they could well attract additional, 
unaffiliated program packagers, thus giving LECs fur- 
ther incentives to expand and upgrade their broad- 
band networks. Finally, the availability of broad- 
band facilities will likely spawn new applications— 
video and non-video alike—as entrepreneurs and 


345 


carriers devise new service offerings that will benefit 
the American public.” /d. at 243. 


—"“LEC common carriage of unaffiliated program- 
ming, combined with LEC ability to provide pro- 
gramming, will promote, not hinder, diversity. . . . 
The nondiscriminatory common carrier model for 
LEC participation in the home video market will 
promote diversity by permitting both the LEC and 
unaffiliated video providers to deliver programming 
over LEC transmission facilities.” Jd. at 234. 


3. Comments of NTIA, Telephone Company-Cable 
Television Cross-Ownership Rules, CC Dkt 87-266 (Feb. 
3, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 5). 


—According to NTIA, “the full benefit of LEC 
participation in the video services market will be 
achieved only if the concept of “video dialtone” is 
extended to allow LECs to provide video program- 
ming in their local service areas. Accordingly, we 
urge the Commission to . . . recommend that Con- 
gress repeal the crossownership restriction in its en- 
tirety, subject to competitive safeguards, including 
the requirement that LECs make distribution facili- 
ties available to unaffiliated video programmers on 
a common carrier basis.” /d. at 3. 


—The NTIA elaborated that “although LEC pro- 
vision of video distribution facilities on a common 
carrier basis should help promote competition, di- 
versity, and infrastructure development, LECs may 
have only limited incentives to deploy such facilities 
unless they also have the ability to invest in, and 
offer their customers, video programming. . . . Gov- 
ernment regulations should not preclude such invest- 
ments (and the benefits that they produce) unless 
there are clear anticompetitive effects that cannot be 
addressed by less restrictive measures, such as regu- 
latory safeguards. NTIA therefore urges the Com- 


346 


mission to move promptly to recommend that Con- 
gress repeal the telephone-company cable crossown- 
ership restriction in its entirety.” Id. at 7-8. 


4. Reply of the National Telecommunications and In- 
formation Administration, In re Teleport Communica- 
tions—New York, File No. 13135-CF-TC(3)-92 (May 
27, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 8). 


__“NTIA shares . . . concerns about the con- 
tinuing wisdom of [the video programming] restric- 
tion, and we have repeatedly advocated its elimina- 
tion. Allowing telephone companies to provide video 
programming in their local service areas would sig- 
nificantly increase competition in the video services 
market, which would, in turn, yield lower prices to 
viewers, better service quality, and better program- 
ming diversity. Further, allowing telephone compa- 
nies to participate fully in the video services market 
should also stimulate development of the nation’s 
telecommunications infrastructure, with concomitant 
benefits for all users, residential and business alike.” 
Id. at 3. 


5. Statement of Acting Assistant Secretary of Com- 
merce for Communications and Information Thomas J. 
Sugrue Before the Senate Subcommittee on Communica- 


tions on S.1200 (Feb. 28, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 
15). 


—“{RJemoving a statutory barrier to broader 
telephone company provision of video programming, 
when coupled with safeguards to prevent anticom- 
petitive behavior, . . . would increase competition 
in the video services marketplace. That should lead, 
in turn, to lower prices, better service, and a wider 
range of programming for consumers.” Id. at 1. 

—“I would like to reiterate the Administration’s 
strong support for . . . the proposal to eliminate 
the existing telephone-cable cross-ownership restric- 


347 


tion... . {G)iving local exchange carriers (‘LECs’) 
freedom to participate in the video services market- 
place should both expand competition in the pro- 
vision of such services to the home and create incen- 
tives for LECs to construct advanced broadband fa- 
cilities for the delivery of video to the home, which 
could promote development of our nation’s telecom- 
munications infrastructure. ...” /d. at 5. 

—*“Despite the fact that technology increasingly 
would permit each of these two systems [telephone 
and cable] to offer a full range of services in direct 
competition with the other, despite the fact that this 
country has a strong commitment to competition over 
monopoly as the best economic structure to serve 
our people, we today prohibit, or severely restrict, 
competition between these two systems as a matter 
of public policy. The rationale for government im- 
posed walls between these potential competitors is 
less convincing today than it once might have been. 
It is one thing to regulate when competition is not 
feasible; it is another to affirmatively regulate against 
competition when there are strong indications that 
competitive forces are straining against such regula- 
tions for a chance to emerge.” /d. at 8-9. 


348 


EXCERPTS FROM PRINCIPAL GOVERNMENT 


DOCUMENTS * 


A. Federal Communications Commission 


l. 


Telephone |Company-Cable Television Cross- 


Ownership Rules, 7 FCC Red 5781 (1992) (Pl. Doc. 
App., Tab 1). 


—The FCC’s Order authorizing telephone com- 
panies to provide video dialtone states: “We con- 
clude that existing safeguards against discrimination 
and cross-subsidization in the provision of basic serv- 
ices by the local telephone companies . . . should 
effectively protect against potential anticompetitive 
conduct by local telephone companies providing 
video dialtone.” Id. at 5827. 

_“We further conclude that our existing safe- 
guards with respect to nonregulated services are suf- 
ficient at this time to protect cross-subsidization. . . . 
{T]he Commission presently has in place a comprehen- 
sive system of cost allocation rules and cost account- 
ing safeguards designed to separate non-regulated 
service costs from regulated service costs. In addi- 
tion, we have recently strengthened these cost ac- 
counting safeguards in order to ensure that the Com- 
mission is able to prevent and detect abuses should 
they occur. To the extent that a local telephone 
company provides nonregulated services as part of 
video dialtone, these safeguards will apply fully. . . .” 
Id. at 5828-29 (citations omitted). 

—*As for the provision of enhanced services by 
local telephone companies, we note that in addition 
to the above accounting safeguards designed to pre- 
vent cross-subsidization between regulated and non- 


1 The full text of the documents from which these passages have 
been extracted are included in the Plaintiffs’ Document Appendix 
(“Pl. Doc. App.”’). 


349 


regulated, the [telephone companies] are also subject 
to a comprehensive regulatory framework designed 
to protect against discrimination and other anti- 
competitive conduct. Among these safeguards is our 
ONA [Open Network Architecture] policy, which 
we have concluded constitutes an effective safeguard 
to ensure that independent [enhanced service provid- 
ers] are able to obtain non-discriminatory access to 
basic [telephone company] services. We are not per- 
suaded that there is any functional difference be- 
tween the provision of enhanced services in the con- 
text of video dialtone and the provision of enhanced 
services generally.” /d. at 5829-30 (citations 
omitted ). 

—In recommending repeal of the video program- 
ming ban, the FCC states: “We conclude that the 
risks of anticompetitive conduct by the local tele- 
phone companies in connection with the direct pro- 
vision of video programming have been attenuated 
by the enormous growth of the cable industry... . 
Given this widely changed competitive situation, we 
find it reasonable to conclude that, with appropriate 
safeguards on their entry, there is little threat that 
the local telephone companies could preemptively 
eliminate competition and monopolize the market 
for video programming services.” /d. at 5848-49. 


2. The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company 
of Virginia, W-P-C-6834, Order and Authorization (rel. 
Mar. 25, 1993) (PI. Doc. App., Tab 61). 


—The FCC’s Order authorizing C&P to provide 
video dialtone service states: “{Wle believe that our 
existing safeguards, in conjunction with the require- 
ment that C&P offer non-discriminatory access to the 
basic platform, are adequate to protect against anti- 
competitive conduct by C&P. Among these safe- 
guards are the cost allocation rules and cost ac- 


350 


counting safeguards designed to separate nonregu- 
lated service costs from regulated service costs .. . 
our ONA policy, which we believe constitutes an 
effective safeguard to ensure that independent en- 
hanced service providers are able to obtain non- 
discriminatory access to basic services, and our non- 
discrimination reporting requirements, and network 
disclosure rules. ... We are not persuaded, nor has 
it been shown by commenters, that these safeguards 
are inadequate to protect against cross-subsidization 
and discrimination by C&P.” /d. at 9-10. 


3. Reply Memorandum of FCC, United States v. West- 
ern Electric Co., Inc., C.A. No. 82-0192 (D.D.C. filed 
Jan. 18, 1991) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 74). 


—The FCC’s brief urging removal of the infor- 
mation services restriction states: “The Department 
[of Justice] has concluded that, because of regula- 
tory constraints, ‘it is unlikely that any significant 
cross-subsidization would occur and go undetected 
even where [telephone company] information ser- 
vices share facilities and personnel with regulated tele- 
phone services. .. .” As the Department cogently 
points out, moreover, information services that in- 
volve primarily the content or the processing of in- 
formation rather than transmission . . . would be 
likely to share fewer facilities and personnel with 
regulated telephone service. . . . The potential for 
an undetected misallocation of costs is reduced when 
there are fewer joint and common costs.” /d. at 41 
(citations omitted). 

—“{Tjhe Commission’s decision to implement 
‘price cap’ regulation . . . will complement its regu- 
latory safeguards by displacing the traditional rate- 
making incentives to shift costs from nonregulated 
activities to monopoly services. . . . Under price 
cap regulation, the [telephone companies] no longer 


351 


are able . . . to recover in their rates for regulated 
services any increased costs they have allocated to 
those services. Under price cap regulation, any mis- 
allocation of costs to regulated services, even if un- 
detected, generally would not enable a [telephone 
company] simply to raise its rates for such services 
to cover the misallocated costs and thus to recoup 
revenues to subsidize its nonregulated services.” /d. 
at 43-44 (citations omitted). 


4. Brief of FCC as Amicus Curiae, United States v. 
Western Electric Co., No. 91-5263 (D.C. Cir. filed 
Aug. 31, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 78). 


—On appeal, the FCC reiterated that: “[{RJegula- 
tory safeguards are adequate to minimize the possi- 
bility of unfair competition by the [telephone com- 
panies] as they enter [information] services. More 
importantly in the context of this remanded proceed- 
ing, t.< Justice Department shares the Commission’s 
belief and told the district court so... . The Com- 
mission relies in particular on its Computer III 
regime of nonstructural safeguards (most of which 
now have been implemented) . . . and its joint cost 
rules governing the allocation of costs among regu- 
lated and unregulated services (which have been im- 
plemented and affirmed on review)... . The Com- 
mision believes that its regulatory policies make it 
unlikely that a {telephone company] could get away 
with abuses under current market conditions.” Id. 
at 5-6 (citations omitted). 


5. Computer Ill Remand Proceedings: Bell Operat- 
ing Company Safegaurds and Tier 1 Local Exchange 
Company Safeguards, 6 FCC Red 7571 (“Pl. Doc. App.., 
Tab 76). 


—“[Wle have adopted and implemented a com- 
prehensive regulatory framework that provides an 
effective alternative to structural separation for pro- 


352 


tection against anticompetitive conduct.” Jd. at 
7576. 

—*“{W]e determine that our existing cost account- 
ing safeguards and those proposed in the Notice con- 
stitute a realistic and reliable alternative to struc- 
tural separation to protect against cross-subsidy. . . . 
[A]long with our safeguards against discrimination, 
[these] will permit realization of the public interest 
benefits of integrated provision . . . of basic and en- 
hanced services without creating substantial risks of 
cross-subsidization in comparison to structural separa- 
tion. We also determine that the adoption of price 
cap regulation for the LECs [local exchange car- 
riers] constitutes an effective complement to cost al- 
location, reporting, and enforcement safeguards, to 
reduce . . . incentives to cross-subsidize.” Jd. at 
7577-78. 


6. Testimony and Summary of Statement of Alfred 
C. Sikes Before the House Subcommittee on Economic 
and Commercial Law (Mar. 18, 1992) (PI. Doc. App., 
Tab 11). 


—Then FCC Chairman Sikes testified: “Over the 
past five years, new regulatory approaches have also 
been instituted which go far toward reducing the 
possibility of discriminatory conduct or anticompeti- 
tive cross-subsidization. . . . Price caps reduce the 
likelihood of anticompetitive cost-shifting. .. . It 
should be noted, moreover, that some 36 State ju- 
risdictions—including most of the largest States— 
have adopted their own system of incentives-based 
regulation.” Jd. at 9-10. 

—‘Whatever might have been possible prior to 
the break-up of the unified Bell System, or before we 
instituted a comprehensive package of regulatory 
safeguards, the reality today is that the FCC does 
have effective tools, and has clearly demonstrated 


353 


both the willingness and ability to use them.” /d. 
at 10. 

—The accompanying summary states: “{s}ince 
1987, the FCC has instituted an array of new regula- 
tory safeguards . . . which make anticompetitive 
cost-shifting infeasible.” 


7. Transcript of Hearings Before the Subcommittee on 
Communications on §.1200 (Feb. 28, 1992) (Pl. Doc. 
App., Tab 80). 


—Chairman Sikes testified: “[W]le have .. . 
worked hard to facilitate competition to local ex- 
change carriers, and at present they are competi- 
tively engaged in respect to many of the high-volume 
customers. Now, when you are facing competition, 
you simply cannot do that kind of cost shifting. 
For the most part, these competitive access providers 
probably have lower cost structures to begin with, 
and the thought that . . . local exchange carriers 
can kind of rightfully shift costs of new ventures 
in and still be competitive is just nonsense.” /d. 
at 102. 


8. Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross- 
Ownership Rules, 3 FCC Red 5849 (1988) (Pl. Doc. 
App., Tab 9). 


—In this notice relied on by the government here, 
the FCC concluded that the “ban is presumptively 
unnecessary” because less restrictive “nonstructural 
safeguards are available.” /d. at 5854. “{W)hile 
telephone companies continue to have the ability to 
- « « @ngage in anticompetitive cross subsidies, safe- 
guards perhaps analogous to those devised in Com- 
puter III would avoid the costs to consumers caused 
by a ban and . . . even if such safeguards need to be 
supplemented by additional protective measures, 
those measures could be applied in an individual 
Section 214 proceeding.” /d. at 5860. 


354 


B. The Department of Justice 


1. Reply Comments of the United States Department 
of Justice, Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross- 
Ownership Rules, CC Dkt 87-266 (Mar. 13, 1992) (PI. 
Doc. App., Tab 6). 


—The Department’s brief urging repeal of the 
video programming ban states: “In connection with 
potential discriminatory conduct aimed at other in- 
formation and video gateway service providers, the 
Department believes that video dialtone does not re- 
quire safeguards other than the equal access require- 
ment and other requirements that are generally appli- 
cable to enhanced services. Some information service 
providers will be able to reach consumers through 
cable company facilities as well as through LECs’ 
video dialtone facilities. Thus, the LECs will be un- 
able to discriminate against these providers in any 
meaningful way. With respect to other information 
service providers who will be dependent on the LECs’ 
video dialtone facilities . . . as the Department stated 
to the MFJ court in supporting [Bell telephone com- 
pany] entry into provision of information services, 
the existing safeguards combined with the overall dif- 
ficulty of targeting discrimination against particular 
information service providers are likely to prevent 
serious anticompetitive abuses by the LECs.” /d. at 
18-19 (footnote omitted ). 

—“The Department similarly does not believe that 
additional safeguards are needed to prevent LECs 
from cross-subsidizing competitive elements of vidco 
dialtone by misallocating the costs involved to their 
regulated local telephone services. Again, for the 
same reasons the Department stated to the MFJ court 
in supporting . . . entry into provision of information 
services, cross subsidization in this area is not likely 
to succeed in lessening competition, and price reduc- 


355 


tions are more likely to reflect greater competition 
than predation.” /d. at 19. 

—"“Thus, the Department disagrees with those 
commentators who argue that the Computer III rules 
are inadequate to protect against anticompetitive 
conduct in connection with LEC provision of infor- 
mation services . . . and therefore, will be inadequate 
to protect against anticompetitive conduct in connec- 
tion with the provision of video dialtone.” Jd. at 20 
(footnote omitted ). 

—The Department urged repeal of the video pro- 
gramming ban because: “As discussed by the De- 
partment previously . . . the anticompetitive risks as- 
sociated with [Bell telephone company] provision of 
information services are not sufficient to justify exclu- 
sion of these carriers from an entire line of business, 
given the economic risks of such behavior, structural 
elements of the network, and the Computer III safe- 
guards developed by the Commission. These conclu- 
sions hold true for LEC provision of video program- 
ming as well.” Jd. at 46 (footnote citing Department 
briefs urging removal of the information services 
restriction omitted ). 


2. Memorandum of the United States in Support of 
Motions for Removal of the Information Services Restric- 
tion, United States v. Western Electric Co., Inc., C.A. 
No. 82-0192 (D.D.C, filed Aug. 22, 1990) (Pl. Doc. 
App., Tab 73). 


—“The information services restriction addressed 
a perceived risk that, if the [Bell telephone com- 
panies] were allowed to provide information services, 
they would use their control over the local exchanges 
to impede the development of competitive markets 
for these new services. The belief that this risk 
existed was based on a series of assumptions. First, 
it was assumed that all information service providers 


356 


would depend on access to... ‘pottleneck’ local 
exchange facilities. Second, it was assumed that... 
[telephone companies] would have the practical abil- 
ity as well as the incentive to discriminate against 
their competitors . . . and to cross-subsidize com- 
petitive information service ventures. . . . Finally, 
it was assumed that regulation would not prevent 
such conduct and the .. . conduct would have anti- 
competitive effects. . . . These critical assumptions 
have proved flawed, however. Thus, there is no con- 
tinuing justification for the information services re- 
striction.” Jd. at 14-15. 

—“Regulation . . . effectively constrains . . . dis- 
crimination against information service competitors. 
The [FCC] has developed and implemented detailed 
regulations to prevent discrimination . . . against 
competing providers of unregulated ‘enhanced ser- 
vices,’ i.e., information services.” Jd. at 22. 

“There is no substantial risk that competition 
would be impaired by . . . cross-subsidization. . . . 
Because of regulatory constraints, it is unlikely that 
any significant cross-subsidization would occur and 
go undetected even where... . information services 
share facilities and personnel with regulated tele- 
phone services. Since 1987, the FCC has imple- 
mented its Joint Cost rules and improved its audit- 
ing procedures. The Joint Cost rules . . . govern the 
allocation of costs between regulated and unregu- 
lated .. . activities.” Jd. at 33-34. 

“Moreover, information services that involve 
primarily the provision of content or the processing 
of information rather than transmission would be 
likely to share fewer facilities or personnel with . . . 
local exchange operations than the gateway services 
the Court already has authorized. . . . [T]he poten- 
tial for misallocation of costs in violation of alloca- 
tion regulations is minimal and even more easily de- 


357 


tected by regulators where there is a relative paucity 
of joint and common costs between exchange opera- 
tions and ventures in the new market. Thus, allow- 
ing [telephone companies] to provide currently pro- 
hibited information services should not present any 
significant risk of cross-subsidization.” /d. at 34-35. 


3. Reply of the United States in Support of Motions 
for Removal of the Information Services Restriction, 
United States v. Western Electric Co., Inc., C.A. No. 
82-0192 (D.D.C. filed Jan. 18, 1991) (Pl. Doc. App. 
Tab 75). 


—*“Objectors’ contentions that the [Bell tele- 
phone companies] are likely to impede information 
services competition are unfounded. Regulation .. . 
constrains the [telephone companies] from denying 
information service competitors access to exchange 
services and facilities used by [telephone company] 
information services and from unreasonably discrim- 
inating in the prices, terms and conditions on which 
such access is provided. In addition, the antitrust 
laws prohibit and provide sanctions for anticompeti- 
tive conduct. . . . Further, the [telephone com- 
panies] are unlikely to attempt to lessen competition 
through discrimination against information service 
rivals because the benefits to the [telephone com- 
panies] of discrimination would be uncertain at best 
and the costs likely would be substantial. Substitutes 
... constrain a [telephone company’s] ability to raise 
information service prices by discriminating in the 
provision of its exchange services. . . . Moreover, 
if discrimination were overly broad and affected non- 
rivals, the [telephone company] would lose exchange 
revenues and profits. It would likely be very diffi- 
cult, if not impossible, however, for a telephone com- 
pany! to target discrimination precisely.” Jd. at 4-5. 


358 


—“Finally, there is no merit to objectors’ con- 
tentions that the [telephone companies] would 
lessen information services competition by cross- 
subsidization, predation or strategic entry deterrence. 
Regulation by the Federal Communications Commis- 
sion and the states constrains misallocation of infor- 
mation services costs to regulated exchange ser- 
vices.” Id. at 6. 


4. Brief of Appellee United States of America, United 
States v. Western Electric Co., No. 91-5263 (D.C. Cir. 
filed Oct. 5, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 79). 


—The Department reiterated its views on appeal: 
“The United States also explained why it had con- 
cluded that there would not be a significant risk of 
anticompetitive conduct if the information services 
restriction were removed. Regulation provides one 
important constraint. By 1991 the FCC had imple- 
mented additional safeguards against discrimination 
and misallocation of costs that were not in effect in 
1982 or 1987.” Id. at 25. 

—“In sum, the United States’ analysis of the com- 
petitive risks of removing the decree restriction and 
allowing the [Bell telephone companies] to provide 
information services took into account the combined 
effects of regulation, the variety of telephonic and 
nontelephonic alternatives to many information ser- 
vices, and the practical difficulties of targeting dis- 
crimination. . . . The United States also explained 
that regulation would constrain misallocation of costs 
of . . . information services to regulated exchange 
services and that even if misallocations did occur 
they would not be likely to result in anticompetitive 
predation or increased information services prices.” 
Id. at 28-29 (emphasis in original). 


5. Statement of James F. Rill Before the House Sub- 
committee on Economic and Commercial Law at 16-17 
(Mar. 18, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 13). 


359 


—Then Assistant Attorney General Rill testified: 
“The prophylactic concept of information services 
restrictions has lost its relevance. ... The concern 
that the [Bell telephone companies] could restrict 
access to their networks was removed by the com- 
bined effect of the FCC’s new Computer III1/ONA 
regulatory standards, and the obvious difficulty of 
effectively targeting discrimination without detection. 

. As the Department explained to the court in the 
information services remand proceedings, the costs 
of such discrimination . . . would be substantial, and 
the benefits uncertain. As there had been no evi- 
dence in the AT&T case of anticompetitive practices 
in information services by the old Bell System, there 
was no record of misconduct from which one could 
conclude that any particular anticompetitive be- 
havior was likely to recur.” /d. at 19-20. 

—“In the Department’s view, further safeguards 

. are unnecessary in information services. . 
There is no competitive justification for prohibiting 
the [Bell telephone companies] from providing par- 
ticular types of information services. . . .” Jd. at 
20-21. 


C. Department of Commerce 


1. Comments of NTIA, Telephone Company-Cable 
Television Cross-Ownership Rules, CC Dkt. 87-266 (Feb. 
3, 1992) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 5). 


—‘“Generally speaking, NTIA does not believe 
that LEC provision of programming will necessitate 
the adoption of novel safeguards to prevent anti- 
competitive conduct apart from the requirement that 
LECs offer distribution facilities to unaffiliated pro- 
grammers on a common carrier basis. . . . [T]he 
Commission’s existing accounting and cost alloca- 
tion rules should be sufficient to control cross- 


360 


subsidization, and open network architecture require- 
ments should prevent discriminatory conduct... . 
Id. at 8, n.21 (citation omitted). 


2. Department of Commerce, The NTIA Infrastruc- 
ture Report, Telecommunications in the Age of Informa- 
tion (Oct. 1991) (Pl. Doc. App., Tab 4). 


—“[W]e believe that the concerns. . . . expressed 
about LEC participation in programming either may 
be overstated or can be addressed through FCC safe- 
guards. .. . Well developed safeguards can address 
two of the ‘traditional’ concerns . . . regarding cross- 
subsidization and also discrimination, as evidenced 
by the history of pole attachment access and rates. 
The FCC’s accounting and cost allocation rules can 
adequately control the danger of cross-subsidization 
of a LEC’s programming activities by its regulated 
operations. As we stated in a recent filing with the 
FCC concerning so-called ‘enhanced services,’ those 
rules are extensive and effective in controlling cross 
subsidy. .. .” “The increased use of incentive regu- 
lation of LECs by the FCC and the states also de- 
creases incentives to cross-subsidize.” Jd. at 233 
& n.834. 

—*“Concerns about discrimination, as in the case 
of pole attachments, can be addressed in several ways 
regarding pole attachments specifically. ... [TJhere 
is an elaborate statutory and regulatory mechanism 
in place to address pole attachment disputes... . 
Moreover, this issue should be less serious than in 
the past, since nearly 90 percent of U.S. homes have 
access to cable television today.” Jd. at 233 (foot- 
note omitted ). 


361 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
Alexandria Division 


[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


June 17, 1993 


HEARING ON MOTIONS 


[1] (THEREUPON, the following was heard in open 
court. ) 


THE COURT: Good morning. You may call the 
case and take appearances first. 

THE CLERK: Civil action 90-1751-A. Chesapeake 
and Potomac of Virginia, et al. versus United States of 
America, et al. 

ok K * * * 

[18] [MR. TRIBE:] And the reason, that I begin this 
way is that I think the following context, when the ban 
was first promulgated in 1970 and codified in °84, it’s 
quite plain that the telephone and cable television media 
were distinct. That is, phone companies could not trans- 
mit video programming over their own wires. So the only 
way they could do what the rule prohibits, the only way 
they could provide video programming directly to their 
subscribers would be to buy or build and then operate 
free standing cable systems. 

So, quite naturally, the FCC and Congress thouzht of 
533(b) through this structural paragon you described, 
namely as a fairly standard rule against cross ownership 
of two distinct media facilities albeit outside the broad- 


casting area— 
* x * * x 


- we 


362 


[20] [MR. TRIBE:] In other words, it doesn’t stop you 
from creating a television program. It also doesn’t stop 
you from transmitting somebody else’s programming, that 
of some cable operator. 

THE COURT: But you may not do both. 

MR. TRIBE: What they want to do is both. That's 
what they call vertical integration. 

THE COURT: In your own area? 

MR. TRIBE: Your own area and it’s that function 
which is particularly interesting. 

Now, although this is—that is in Loudoun County 
going on. And indeed this March, C & P obtained au- 
thority for a trial of a service that would provide video 
programming over existing copper wires without using 
fiber optic, something unthinkable not long ago. 

Although it’s going on as recently as last year, Con- 
gress heard testimony and it appears as tab five in the 
defendant’s document appendix, that this sort of thing 
probably wouldn’t be doable until the year 2001. 

Now, accordingly, the 1992 Senate report that the 
NCTA cites at page 13 of the brief, still describes 533(b) 
as a cross ownership rule to enhance competition, page 
47 of that report. And it did so after stating [21] that 
and I now quote from page 18, “telephone networks are 
incapable of carrying video signals to home.” 

That’s what Congress thought in 1992. So still under- 
standably how they look at this is say what this forbids 
is bind the cable company. But as soon as you focus on 
the technology, you see 533(b) in a different light, a 
light that focuses one’s attention on the statutes testing 
unobscured from illusions of technological impossibility. 


* * * * * 
[42] [MS. WILSON:] This is not a situation where 
we have spectrum scarcities. That rationale does not 
apply. ** * 


* * * * * 


363 


[45] THE COURT: Let’s go the other way. The 
other way might be more interesting. Let's suppose it 
says telephone companies can’t send television program- 
ming, but they can send McLehrer—McLehrer, what- 
ever it is, Hour. Would that be—would that be constitu- 
tional? 

MS. WILSON: No, it would not be constitutional, 
but that’s my point. The government is not making those. 

THE COURT: Well, let me go on. I understand. 
Let’s suppose then it says—it says, you may not send 
the news programs and you may not send sitcoms. That 
wouldn't pass muster either, would it? 

MS. WILSON:  That’s right. 

THE COURT: And I guess you can see I can give 
you a list of what's on television in 1984. 

MS. WILSON: The government cannot approve 
whether T.V.—telephone company wants to transmit Mc- 
Neil Lehrer Hour or the Home Shopping Network. * * * 


* * * * * 


[46] THE COURT: I guess I’m not following you. 
Let’s go back to my hypothetical that I gave you. You 
started off and you were clearly correct when you said, 
that the statute would not pass constitutional muster if 
it said phone companies could use video programming 
but not the news programs. 

And then I said, well how about if it said [47] sitcoms 
and news programs and you said no, that wouldn’t pass 
muster. And you also said that it’s. But let’s go on with 
my hypothetical. And I said, well let’s keep adding to 
that list the description of everything that’s on television 
as of 1984, the sitcoms. You go to all dramatic pro- 
grams. 

In other words, you can end up with a list that if you 
—if you got out the T.V. Guide for 1984 you could end 
up with a generic list of all the stuff that’s on television. 


364 


And, why wouldn't that then also not pass muster? It 
wouldn't, would it? 

MS. WILSON: If the government was to highlight all 
the particular programs— 

THE COURT: To say look, you may not—they went 
through all the T.V. Geides for 1984. They listed 
generic, all the things T.V. broadcasters were doing and 
saying instead of vague video programming is what broad- 
casters do they say telephone companies may not do the 
following on— 

MS. WILSON: That was purely content base. [sic] 

THE COURT: So, what's the difference? 

MS. WILSON: The difference is that— 

THE COURT: One says, you have a generic list, 
two or three pages. The other one you have a short 
sentence that summarizes it in terms of what broadcast 
[48] test put on. I don’t see the difference. 


* * we m * 


[50] THE COURT: Do you think Turner would have 
come out the same way if instead of a provision requir- 
ing cable television system operators to carry the video 
signals of certain commercial and noncommercial educa- 
tional television broadcast stations if it prohibited rather 
than permitted? You think it would come out the same 
way? 

MS. WILSON: [m sorry. Could you repeat the 
question. 

THE COURT: Suppose that—do you think Turner 
would come out the same way if instead of a require- 
ment [51] that they carry that required cable television 
system operators to carry video signals of certain com- 
mercial and noncommercial educational broadcast station 
if it forbad it. Wouldn’t it come out differently? 

Isn’t Turner in that sense fundamentally different from 
what we're talking about here? 


* * * * * 


365 


[65] MR. GILLIGAN: They’re also studies that have 
been submitted by the NCTA and Congress received 
testimony on this point that while there may be competi- 
tion in the short term, that in the long-term, it would 
simply have the replacement of one monopoly for [66] 
another. 
* * * * x 

[75] [MR. SOKLER:] * * * In fact, it is allowed to 
speak through the Jones Intercable microphone or any- 
body else’s microphone. 

The problem Congress identified and the reason 553(b) 
[sic] is on the book is that Congress determined that if it 
allowed C & P to speak through its own microphone, 
the risk is far too great that at the end of the day, 
they would have the incentive and the ability to make 
sure that they would be the only microphone. 


* ok * * * 


(91] THE COURT: Let met ask you what could the 
government have done to achieve the goal of diversity 
of view point and avoiding the economic concentration? 
What could they have done. 

MR. TRIBE: Could have repeeled, 533(b) to add 
competition and done it subject to the kinds of regula- 
tions that the government itself says is adequate. 


* * * * * 


[107] [MR. TRIBE:] And, the fact is, that nothing, 
nothing in any act of Congress, at least any that I have 
looked at, not the 1984 Cable Act of which this is a pro- 
vision, not the 1992 act, includes any finding at all 
about why 533(b) is supposedly needed or why less re- 
strictive alternatives would be insufficiently effective. 

THE COURT: So, your view is whether or not one 
gives deference and how much deference one gives is not 
necessary to reach in this case, because they never found 
it. They never came up with something specific enough to 
[108] deserve deference. 


366 


MR. TRIBE: Of course the law itself, | mean you 
can say we will attribute to Congress in every case, what- 
ever findings it takes to meet the requirements of what- 
ever level of scrutiny is applicable, but that would empty 
constitutional review of all significance. 


* * * aE * 


[119] [MR. TRIBE:] The reason I say that is it’s clear 
as I indicated at the outset when I first stood up that as 
recently as 1992, Congress thought that was techno- 
logical impossibility. It thought this was across owner- 
ship ban, a ban on buying the other guy’s microphone. 


a %e 2 * o 


[130] [MR. GILLIGAN:] Again, the—I want to get 
to the sort of unstated premise here of the plaintiff's 
argument about congressional findings. They cite no au- 
thority for the proposition that Congress cannot legislate 
except by reference to specific findings that it issues. 
THE COURT: No, they don’t say that. They say 
that they can do anything they want to, but they’re not 
going to get judicial deference unless they make it un- 
mistakably clear that there are certain findings that sup- 


port it. 
1 * * * cad 


[149] THE COURT: Well, the problem with calling it 
a cross ownership ban is that it isn’t. It’s just that simple. 
They can all cable companies. They're not forbidden 
from owing cable companies. What they are forbidden 
from doing is furnishing video programming. That’s not 
a cross ownership restriction. It’s a restriction on what 
you can do, on what you can speak.. So, I have—I under- 
stand your point, but you don’t— 
* * a Me * 


THE COURT: But, they don’t ban them from being 
[150] in the video. 


* * * * * 


367 


THE COURT: They're even permitted to own a 

cable company. 

ca * * cs * 
[151] THE COURT: So, I think—the only point I 
want to make with you about calling a cross ownership 
is that the judiciary does nothing if it doesn’t look behind 
words like that the executive branch uses. 

You can’t call a duck a duck if it doesn’t walk and 
quack and so forth and fly like a duck. It really doesn’t— 
it isn’t what I would term a classical cross ownership 
provision of which there are others. 


* * * ok * 


[188] [THE COURT] This Court does defer to legis- 
lative judgments. But, it doesn’t defer to speculation. 
It doesn’t defer to post hoc rationalization. I’m more in- 
terested in what they said at the time they passed the act 
than what they said after the act. 


2K * * * * 


368 


IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT 


Record Nos. 93-2340, 93-2341 


THe CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, 
ET AL., PLAINTIFFS-APPELLEES 


V. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., 
DEFENDANTS-APPELLANTS 


and 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC., 
INTERVENOR-DEF ENDANT-APPELLANT 


On Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of Virginia 


ORAL ARGUMENT 
February 7, 1994 


* - ” * * 


369 


[15] THE COURT: I hate to interrupt you so early 
but aren’t you regulating here what was being said by the 
very definition of video programming in the act. It de- 
fines video programming as programming culpable to 
what broadcast TV stations would do. So it seems to me 
that you are regulating what is said. As the District 
Judge said, you can get a look at the TV guide in 1984 
and list everything in there and come up by that with a 


result. 
ca ok ok ok OK 


[44] THE COURT: Are you saying Renton helps you 
or— 

MR. FORREST: Absolutely. 

THE COURT: But isn’t that entirely different. I 
mean, there the same conveyor just moved out of the way 
and he had the same medium, dirty movies and dirty 
books, and presumably the same audience, and here 
you're forcing the telephone company to a different me- 
dium perhaps, to a different point? 


* K * * * 


370 


ADMINISTRATION WHITE PAPER ON 
COMMUNICATIONS ACT REFORMS 


* % * * * 


VI. Cable-Telephone Crossownership 


Although the existing cable-telephone company cross- 
ownership restriction of the 1984 Cable Act may have 
been appropriate when enacted, today it is an unnecessary 
and artificial barrier to competition in the delivery of 
video programming to American consumers and to 
investment in advanced local infrastructure. The Ad- 
ministration’s proposal to remove the current restric- 
tion, coupled with its proposals to promote competition 
in local telephone service, will allow telephone companies 
and cable operators to compete in providing a full range 
of video, voice, and data services to the public. Such 
competition can promote investment that expands con- 
sumer choices and services. 


To ensure that cable firms and telephone companies do 
not harm consumers or competition in providing these 
services, the Administration proposes several safeguards 
specified below, most notably requirements that most tele- 
phone companies and cable operators make tramsmission 
capacity available to unaffiliated video providers on a 
nondiscriminatory basis. In doing so, the Administration 
also seeks to protect diversity and competition in the flow 
of ideas, and to ensure that similarly situated firms are 
regulated similarly. 


The Administration supports the general approach of 
H.R. 3636 to allow LECs to provide video programming 
in their telephone service areas, subject to certain condi- 
tions and safeguards. The Administration would propose 
somewhat different conditions and safeguards, which, 
however, are also designed to protect consumers and com- 
petition and prevent undue control of information content 
and conduit by any one firm. 


371 


Structural Separation: 


* The Administration Supports the approach in H.R. 
3636 of requiring LECs to provide video program- 
ming through a separate affiliate, in order to prevent 
improper Cross-subsidization and discrimination by the 
LEC, 


* H.R. 3636 specifies many of the details of the separa- 
ration requirements. The Administration proposes 
modifying this approach to charge the FCC with 
specifying the required degree of separation, subject 
to two basic requirements from H.R. 3636: 


—A LEC’s video programming affiliate must have sep- 
arate books, records, and accounts; and 


—Any contract or agreement between a LEC and its 
affiliate (1) must be pursuant to regulations adopted 


* The Administration Supports the approach of H.R. 
3636 in Permitting the FCC to modify separation re- 
quirements for small and rural LECs at any time. 
H.R. 3636 would allow the FCC to modify separation 
requirements for other LECs beginning 5 years after 
enactment. The Administration Proposes reducing that 
waiting period to 2 years, to provide greater regulatory 
flexibility in the face of changing conditions. 


N. ondiscriminatory Access Obligations: 


* In order to promote competition and diversity in the 
flow of ideas, H.R. 3636 would require a LEC that 
provides video Programming to subscribers in its ser- 
vice area to establish a “video platform,” based on the 


372 


FCC’s current “video dialtone” rules, and make it 
available to unaffiliated programmers on nondiscrimina- 
tory terms. The Administration supports this general 
approach, with some modifications. 


H.R. 3636, by its terms, would require that the 
rates for the platform be nondiscriminatory. The Ad- 
ministration proposes specifying that LEC provision 
of the video platform will be subject to all requirements 
of Title Il of the Communications Act. 


H.R. 3636 appears to require a LEC to afford non- 
discriminatory access to its video platforms only when 
it carries “affiliated” video programming (i.e., pro- 
gramming in which the LEC has an ownership inter- 
est). The Administration proposes requiring a LEC to 
afford unaffiliated programmers nondiscriminatory ac- 
cess to its video platform whenever the LEC carries 
video programming. 


H.R. 3636 would require the FCC to limit the number 
of channels on a LEC’s video platform that can be 
occupied by its video programming affiliate (that limit 
can be no lower than 25% of the platform’s capacity). 
The Administration proposes to authorize the FCC to 
impose such a limit and give the FCC discretion in 
selecting what the limit should be. 


The Administration proposes to permit the FCC to 
modify any of the foregoing requirements for small 
and rural LECs. H.R. 3636 contains no similar pro- 
vision for small, non-“rural” LECs. 


The Administration supports allowing the FCC to 
modify the definition of “video platform” beginning | 
year after enactment. H.R. 3636 contains no such 
provision. 

The Administration proposes to direct the FCC to 


adopt regulations, within 1 year of enactment, that 
would require cable operators to offer nondiscrimina- 


373 


tory access to channel capacity on their systems for 
unaffiliated programmers, except when technology, 
costs, and market conditions would make such offering 
inappropriate. H.R. 3636 requires that the FCC study 
whether to impose such obligations and report to Con- 
gress within 2 years after enactment. 


Anti-Buyout Provisions: 


To protect competition in the provision of communi- 
cations and information services and to further the flow 
of ideas, the Administration supports limiting a LEC’s 
ability to enter the video services market via acquisi- 
tion of cable systems operating in its telephone service 
area. The Administration proposes to limit cable com- 
panies’ ability to acquire LECs providing local tele- 
phone service in the cable companies’ franchise areas. 
The Administration supports the provisions of H.R. 
3636 permitting in-region acquisitions occurring in 
rural areas and for joint LEC/cable operator use of 
the cable “drop wire.” The Administration proposes 
eliminating the provision of H.R. 3636 that would per- 
mit a LEC/cable acquisition if the number of house- 
holds served by the cable systems acquired constituted 
less than 10% of all households in the telephone service 
areas of the acquiring LEC and its affiliates. 


H.R. 3636 would also authorize the FCC to waive the 
anti-buyout policy at any time under certain conditions. 
The Administration proposes authorizing the FCC to 
change the policy by rule, or to grant waivers on a 
case-by-case basis, beginning 5 years after enactment, 
if it determines that such action would be in the public 
interest. Such acquisitions would, however, remain sub- 
ject to the antitrust laws. 


Franchise Obligations: 


The Administration supports the general approach in 
H.R. 3636 of removing some requirements of the Cable 


374 


Act for the LEC’s video programming affiliate and any 
other user of the LEC’s video platform, while main- 
taining others, such as must carry, retransmission con- 
sent, the provision of public, educational, and govern- 
mental channels, and others designed to protect con- 
sumers. 


* To promote symmetric regulation of similarly-situated 
firms, the Administration proposes to authorize the 
FCC to remove some Cable Act requirements (most 
notably, the requirement to have a cable franchise) for 
cable systems that offer nondiscriminatory access sub- 
stantially similar to that required by LECs by the bill, 
while maintaining the overall Cable Act regulatory 
structure. H.R. 3636 has no comparable provision. 


Rural Exemption: 


* H.R. 3636 states that provisions concerning the video 
programming affiliate, the video platform, provision of 
affiliated programming, and the ban on acquisitions do 
not apply to LECs offering video programming in rural! 
areas. The Administration proposes to authorize the 
FCC to modify those provisions for such LECs. 


aS * * 2K % 


375 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 


Washington 
[FCC Logo] 


OFFICE OF 
THE CHAIRMAN 
Statement of 


Reed E. Hundt 
Chairman 
Federal Communications Commission 


Before the 
Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance 
Committee on Energy and Commerce 


United States House of Representatives 


on 


H.R. 3636, the “National Communications Competition 
and Information Infrastructure Act of 1993” 


and 


H.R. 3626, the “Antitrust Reform Act of 1993” 
and the “Communications Reform Act of 1993” 


January 27, 1994 


* * * * * 


376 


III. Competition In the Multichannel Video Distribution 
Market Entry 


The market for multichannel video distribution is 
dominated today by cable television providers. This mar- 
ket should be opened to more competition. The existing 
prohibition that bars telephone companies from providing 
video programming to customers in their telephone service 
areas should be repealed. It is very appropriate, there- 
fore, that H.R. 3636 would remove this restriction and 
allow telephone companies to compete with cable com- 
panies in providing one-way and interactive video services. 

Direct, facilities-based competition between cable and 
telephone companies will produce substantial benefits for 
the American public. Competition in this market will 
spur the deployment of advanced technologies that are 
capable of delivering the full range of services that cus- 
tomers demand. These services include not only enter- 
tainment services, but also the growing number of educa- 
tional, health, and social services that are accessible over 
broadband technologies. 

In addition, competition in this market can be expected 
to produce the same positive results for consumers that 
we have seen in other markets for telecommunications 
services that have undergone the transformation from 
monopoly to competition: technological and service in- 
novation, lower prices, and responsiveness to consumer 
tastes. Telephone company entry also will expand the 
electronic marketplace of ideas by creating new outlets 
for video service providers. 

As you know, Mr. Chairman, the FCC already has 
taken steps to enhance competition in the multichannel 
video distribution market. Within a few months, U.S. 
consumers will be able to receive programming from a 
Direct Broadcast Satellite service. This service is capable 
of delivering scores of channels of programming directly 
to homes and offices equipped with 18-inch dishes. 


377 


In 1992, the Commission authorized telephone com- 
panies to offer video dialtone service within their operating 
territories through a basic “video platform” that provides 
non-discriminatory access to multiple video programmers. 
Since these rules were enacted, four telephone companies 
have received authorization from the Commission to con- 
struct and operate video dialtone systems for purposes of 
testing technology and evaluating consumer demand for 
the services offered. 

Elimination of the existing cross-ownership restriction 
should stimulate new telephone company investment in 
facilities that are capable of delivering video and ad- 
vanced telecommunications services. Consumers should 
be the beneficiaries of the expanded choices that facilities- 
based competition in this market will foster. 


Safeguards 


Adequate safeguards must be in place to ensure vig- 
orous and effective competition between telephone com- 
panies and cable companies. In a report to Congress in 
1992 that recommended removal of the prohibition 
against telephone company entry into video programming, 
the FCC cautioned that certain restrictions might be 
necessary to prevent potential anticompetitive practices, 
including possibly a requirement that a telephone com- 
pany provide video programming to end users through a 
separate affiliate. H.R. 3636 would impose this restriction 
as an initial requirement and I support that approach. 

The bill also would require a carrier to make avail- 
able up to 75 percent of its capacity to unaffiliated video 
programmers upon request. I share the authors’ concern 
that unaffiliated video programmers must have adequate 
access to the video platform to ensure delivery of their 
video programs and services. I also agree that the Com- 
mission should monitor closely the impact of this require- 
ment during the first two years after enactment. Given 
the pace of change, it might be appropriate to give the 


378 


Commission the authority to modify the reserve require- 
ment if an investigation shows that it is no longer in the 
public interest. Generally, the Commission should have 
the discretion needed to adjust its policies to achieve the 
overall goal of promoting competition. Similarly, while | 
support the bill’s proposal to require the FCC to examine 
whether cable systems should be required to provide non- 
discriminatory access to a video platform (just as tele- 
phone companies would be required to do), the FCC 
might be given the authority to adopt such a require- 
ment, if its investigation shows that such enhanced ac- 
cess to cable systems would be in the public interest. 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to offer one other sug- 
gestion before turning to H.R. 3626. The removal of 
barriers to entry into the local telephone market and the 
video distribution market as proposed by H.R. 3636 
likely will accelerate the trend toward convergence of 
the markets for all telecommunications services. This 
trend suggests that, over time, traditional regulatory dis- 
tinctions between telephone and cable companies will be- 
come increasingly blurred and outdated. It also suggests 
that serious consideration should be given to a third reg- 
ulatory paradigm, one that would permit the FCC to 
regulate these emerging diversified service providers un- 
der a single, integrated system, rather than partially un- 
der Title II and partially under Title VI. As I will dis- 
cuss later in my testimony, the Administration has sug- 
gested a possible third regulatory model to address the 
emergence of this new type of service provider. 

In general, we should aspire not to impose unneces- 
sary or duplicative regulations that increase consumer 
rates and hinder the development of fully competitive 
markets for telephony and video services. I hope this 
Subcommittee, therefore, will consider granting the Com- 
mission the regulatory flexibility necessary to permit it 
to refrain from imposing obligations that would under- 
mine, rather than foster, the continued development of 
competitive markets for telephone and video services. 


379 


The Commission’s exercise of its limited existing for- 
bearance authority under Title II has produced substan- 
tial benefits—the permissive detariffing policy contributed 
to the development of a competitive long distance market 
and more recently to the emergence of competition for 
access services. Moreover, Congress last year recognized 
the importance of broad forbearance authority in facili- 
tating the emergence of competitive telecommunications 
markets when it granted the Commission the discretion 
to forbear from imposing on commercial mobile service 
providers any Title II requirements except those con- 
tained in Sections 201 (non-discrimination), 202 (just 
and reasonable rates) and 208 (resort to complaint 


process ). 
% a 7 x * 


380 
[DoJ Loco] 


DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
STATEMENT OF 


ANNE K. BINGAMAN 
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL 
ANTITRUST DIVISION 


BEFORE THE 


SUBCOMMITTEE ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
AND FINANCE 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE 
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 


CONCERNING 
NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS COMPETITION 
AND INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ACT 
H.R. 3636 
AND 


THE ANTITRUST REFORM ACT 
H.R. 3626 


PRESENTED ON 
JANUARY 27, 1994 


* >* * * * 


381 


The Administration also strongly endorses the provi- 
sions in H.R. 3636 that would permit existing cable and 
telephone companies to offer both video and telephonic 
Services in the same geographic areas. The Administra- 
tion also endorses the general thrust of the provisions in 
the legislation that prohibit telephone and cable television 
companies from acquiring each other within the same ter- 
ritory. It is crucial that public policy promote competi- 
tion between methods for delivering telecommunications 


services. 
* * * ~ * 


382 


TESTIMONY OF LARRY IRVING 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 


ON 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS REFORM LEGISLATION 


BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC 
AND COMMERCIAL LAW 
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 


JANUARY 26, 1994 


* * * * * 


CABLE TELEVISION-TELEPHONE COMPANY 
CROSS-OWNERSHIP 


The Administration supports repeal of the current cable 
television-telephone company cross-ownership restriction 
in the 1984 Cable Act. We believe that telephone com- 
panies should be allowed to provide video services in 
their local exchange ureas, subject to effective safeguards 
to protect consumers and competition. 


* * * * * 


383 


TESTIMONY OF LARRY IRVING 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 


ON 


TELECOMMUNICATIONS REFORM LEGISLATION 


BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND FINANCE 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 


JANUARY 27, 1994 


* * * * * 


The Administration supports repeal of the current 
cable television-telephone company cross-ownership re- 
striction in the 1984 Cable Act. We believe that tele- 
phone companies should be allowed to provide video ser- 
vices in their local exchange areas, subject to effective 
safeguards to protect consumers and competition. The 
Administration is proposing two critical safeguards. 

First, consistent with the approach of H.R. 3636, tele- 
phone companies will be required to make channel ca- 
pacity available to unaffiliated video program providers 
on a nondiscriminatory basis, while providing video pro- 
gramming through separate affiliates. This requirement 
should create market opportunities for competing provid- 
ers of video services, thereby reducing prices and expand- 
ing the diversity of programming and services available 
to telephone viewers. 


384 


Second, the Administration proposes to prohibit tele- 
phone companies from acquiring cable systems located in 
the companies’ local exchange areas for at least five years. 
This will deter premature and potentially anticompetitive 
mergers between telephone companies and their most 
likely competitors, existing cable companies. The Admin- 
istration proposal allows fewer exemptions of telephone 
company buyouts of cable firms than H.R. 3636. How- 
ever, telephone companies operating in rural areas will 
be exempted, because these markets may be unable to 
support more than one carrier. 

The need for this second safeguard may wane in the 
coming years as markets change, so the Administration 
has added to it a flexible element. We propose to au- 
thorize the FCC to begin proceedings that could allow 
such acquisitions five years after the date of legislative 
enactment, if certain conditions, to be established by the 
Commission, are met. An example of such a condition 
might be the presence of sufficient competition in the 
telephone company’s service area in the delivery of tele- 
phone or cable services. 

Of course, any telephone company/cable system acqui- 
sition would be subject to the antitrust laws in the same 
manner as an acquisition in any other industry. 

The Administration’s proposals on the “video platform” 
are similar to those in H.R. 3636, except that the Admin- 
istration’s proposal makes clear that the platform will be 
subject to all requirements of Title II, not simply the re- 
quirement that rates be nondiscriminatory, as H.R. 3636 
appears to contemplate. The Administration proposal 
also requires a carrier to afford nondiscriminatory access 
to the video platform whenever it offers video program- 


ming. 


* * * * * 


385 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


No. 94-1893 


UNITED STATES, FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
JANET RENO, ATTORNEY GENERAL, PETITIONERS 


Vv. 


CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY 
OF VIRGINIA, ET AL. 


ORDER ALLOWING CERTIORARI 
Filed June 26, 1995 


The petition herein for a writ of certiorari to the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit is granted. 
This case is consolidated with No. 94-1900, National 
Cable Television Association, Incorporated v. Bell Atlan- 
tic Corporation, et al. and a total of one hour is allotted 
for oral argument. 


June 26, 1995 


386 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


No. 94-1900 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, 
INCORPORATED, PETITIONER 


v. 


BELL ATLANTIC CORPORATION, ET AL. 


ORDER ALLOWING CERTIORARI 
Filed June 26, 1995 


The petition herein for a writ of certiorari to the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit is granted. 
This case is consolidated with No. 94-1893, United States 
Federal Communications Commission and Janet Reno, 
Attorney General v. Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone 
Company of Virginia, et al. and total of one hour is 
allotted for oral argument. 


June 26, 1995 


WW ov. &. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFrice, 1995 se7147 20095 


