BEST AVAILABLE COPY, 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


A manufacturer's admittedly defective herbicide "conscripted" 
for use by the United States in Vietnam caused injuries to 
veterans of the United States Armed Forces, many of whom 
were themselves conscripted into service, and who were then 
denied— through the judicial creation of legal doctrines 
consistently favorable to the manufacturer—a full and fair 
opportunity to recover damages from the manufacturer for their 
crippling and fatal injuries. 


Is it "obviously right" for this Court, at the request of the 
manufacturer, to now create additional new doctrine requiring 
the United States to indemnify the manufacturer for certain 
costs associated with the manufacturer's avoidance of trial, and 
any substantial liability to those veterans, and their families, 
who were injured as a result of exposure to dioxin in the 
manufacturer's herbicide, when that dioxin was not included in 
the government's design specifications for the herbicide but the 
courts nevertheless deemed the government contractor defense 
applicable to the petitioners? 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CE bi cc sicecececcccccccce i 
ee v 
STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE .. 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE .... 1... cece ccees 3 

EES ee 3 

2. The Petitioners’ Complaint ................. 8 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .................. 10 
acs tw sbcccceccsencees 13 


I. PETITIONERS HAVE ALREADY RECEIVED 
EXCESSIVE BENEFITS FROM THE FEDERAL 
JUDICIARY IN AGENT ORANGE LITIGATION 16 


A. Corporate Negligence Caused The 
EEG. idslecceencecesccces 16 


B. The Product Defect Caused Injury to Veterans 18 


C. The Federal Judiciary Served the Manufacturers’ 
Interests by Forcing a Cheap Global Settlement 
on Unwilling Veterans ................ 20 


Il. THIS COURT SHOULD NOT CREATE NEW LAW 
TO SHIFT THE COST OF THE UNIQUE AGENT 
ORANGE "SETTLEMENT" TO TAXPAYERS . 23 


A. It is Not "Unfair" to Leave the Cost of Defending 


Its Defective Product With Petitioners ...... 23 
B. Petitioners’ Amici Add Only A Scent 

of Impropriety to Their Argument......... 26 
C. No Law Shifts a Contractor's Cost of Defending 

Third Party Tort Claims to Government .... . 28 


PEC Ce Me hes Ge see eeccecesccesce 30 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 
Gee Se SPEND. 6 ho SNe wie 3, 11, passim 


Falkowski v. EEOC, 783 F.2d 252 (D.C. Cir. 1986) ... 28 


Hess v. Port Authority, 8 F.3d 811, cert granted, 
114 $.Ce. 1292 (Mdanoh 21, 1994) ...... ccc ccc neee 7 


In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 
635 F.2d 987 (2d Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 
GOe BH DEEN 6. Sc vic cc bb aeeberdd coves 21, 22 


In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 

597 F.Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984), aff'd, 818 F.2d 

145 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 
CUT 0 oau.ob au4e6 eet beeeen 15 n.1, 22 


In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 
611 F.Supp. 1223 (E.D.N.Y. 1985) aff'd, 818 F.2d 
187 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 


(1988) (summary judgment) ............... 3, 15 n.1 
Ivy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co., 781 F. Supp. 


902 (E.D.N.Y. 1991), aff'd, 996 F.2d 1425 (2d Cir. 
1993), cert. denied, _ U.S. ___ , 114 S.Ct. 1125 


SE DOD hS od eee eee ebedees 1, passim 
Ivy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemical Co., 

ee eo ns ot oe oe bo 88 eee 3 
Joint Eastern and Southern Dist. Asbestos Litig., 

897 F.2d 626 (2d Cir. 1990) .............. 3, 13, 14 
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of America, 

Ss Oo ccc n as esentecees 7 
Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp., 
ee ee 4 


Liteky v. U.S., 114 $.Ct. 1147 (March 7, 1994) ...... 7 


vi 


Overmann v. Syntex (USA) Inc., et al. No. 852-02681 
(Div. 5), Circuit Court, City of St. Louis (Mo. 
September 20, 1991) Toxic Chemicals Litigation 


Reporter 15,015 (November 14, 1991) ............ 19 
Parklane Hosiery Co. Inc. v. Shore, 
Ser es ED a oc oe ee Whe tk kb ae 14, 18 


Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 618 F.Supp. 623 
(E.D.N.Y 1985), aff'd, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987), 
cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988) (settlement) ...... 8 


Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 781 F.Supp. 934 (E.D.N.Y. 
1992) (remanding civilian claims to state court) reh'g 
granted, No. 89-3361, (E.D.N.Y. February 7, 1992), 
modified and aff'd. (March 30, 1992), appeal denied, No. 
92-8008 (2d Cir. May 8, 1992)(mem.), reh'g denied, 
(June 8,1992)(mem.), appeal dismissed, No. 92-7487 (2d 
Cir. June 16, 1992), appeal withdrawn No. 92-7615 (July 
28, 1992)(mem.), cert. denied sub nom. Dow Chem. Co. v. 


SVG, TED Di Cae Clee WS sc seer ivedeces. 17 
Ticor Title Ins. Co. v. Brown, 511 U.S. __, 
S06 BA. Tobe CRs FE, GR Sik ite tee ee eweces 7 


United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 142 (1918) 9, 12 passim 


Statutes and Rules: 
Agent Orange Act of 1991, Public L. No. 102-4, 


is as Cada e es pee e oe hs 000% 27 
Defense Production Act, 50 U.S.C. app. 

§ 2061 (1988 & Supp. V 1993) ........... 9, passim 
Westfall Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2679(c)(Supp. 1 1989) .... 28 
36 U.S.C. § 43 et seq. (1988 & Supp. V 1993) ...... l 


32A CFR Ch. VI, DMS Reg. 1, Dir. 3 §3(b)(3)(1959) . 29 
32A CFR Ch. VI, BDSA Reg. 2 §10(c)(1)(1953) .... 29 


vii 
Miscellaneous: 


Directive from AOCAP Foundation to AO 
Grantees, "Court Issues Ruling in Ivy Case,” 
i Co. cee adh en ees eeesece 27 


GAO, Managing DOE: Tighter Controls Needed Over 
the Department of Energy's Outside Litigation Costs 
(T-RCED-94-264)(July 14, 1994) ............05.. 29 


Hensinger, Agent Orange and Boyle, 6 J. OF CONTEMP. 
HEALTH L. AND POLICY 359, 374 (1990) ........ 15 n.1 


House Government Operations Committee's Twelfth Report, 
The Agent Orange Cover-up: A Case of Flawed Science and 
Political Manipulation, H.R. Rep. No. 672, 101st. Cong. 2d 
EE ce ene S ee hE ESS CRSA DP OWE OS 24 


Cate Jenkins, Ph.D, Affidavit, Recent Scientific Evidence 
Developed After 1984 Supporting a Causal Relationship 
Between Dioxin and Human Health Effects, 
(EPAXSeptember 3, 1991) ............-2200ee 18-19 


National Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Medicine, 
Veterans and Agent Orange: Health Effects of 
Herbicides Used in Vietnam (July 27, 1993) ........ 19 


Schuck, The Role of Judges in Settling Complex Cases: The 
Agent Orange Example, 53 U.CHI. L. REV. 337 (1986) . 23 


Schuck, AGENT ORANGE ON TRIAL: MASS 
TOXIC DISASTERS IN THE COURTS (Harvard 
Th Fe GS Dn sccnccececvccess 22-23 


Warshawsky, Objectivity and Accountability: 
Limits on Judicial Involvement in Settlement 
gg RO ra 23 


7 a - 
y a oa a i 
+) ia , 2 se . se) eS ai" 


ape We: a i= Fe one ae st, 


ts, 04 © yeep Os 


thet) “eh he Ase ase A Re 


Le ease gh bm ae 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


Amicus Agent Orange Coordinating Council ("the Council") 
is a unique coalition of veterans organizations committed to 
obtaining justice for Vietnam veterans exposed to herbicides 
known as Agent Orange. Inspired by the leadership of the 
Council's Chairman, Admiral Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., (USN 
Ret.)—who during the Vietnam War served as Chief of Naval 
Operations, and more recently was the Special Assistant to the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs—twenty-one service organ- 
izations chartered by Congress to represent the interests of 
veterans and their families, and nine non-chartered veterans’ 
organizations, joined together in support of the petitioners to 
this Court in Jvy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co., 781 F. 
Supp. 902 (E.D.N.Y. 1991), aff'd, 996 F.2d. 1425 (2d Cir. 
1993), cert. denied, 114 S.Ct. 1125 (Feb. 22, 1994) ("Jvy"). 
The Brief Amici Curiae of Agent Orange Coordinating 
Council, The American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars of 
the U.S., Disabled American Veterans, Amvets, [et al.] in 
Support of Certiorari, filed therein on January 27, 1994, cited 
the purposes for which Congress chartered some of the 
constituent organizations of the Council, such as "to uphold 
and defend the Constitution,” 36 U.S.C § 43, to promote 
"fidelity to its laws,” §823(a), and "to encourage the doctrine 
of universal liberty, equal rights and full justice to all,” 
§2702(5S); to "stimulate to the highest degree possible the 
interest of the entire Nation in the problems of veterans, their 
widows, and orphans,” and "to foster love for the principles 
which they have supported by blood and valor,” § 57(a). 

This second amicus Brief submitted to this Court by the 
Council is intended to serve these same goals. The specific 
interests of amicus in this case, in light of the considerations 
discussed more fully in the Statement of the Case, are: 

1) to provide a context from the perspective of the injured 

serviceman for understanding this case, which is about the 

legal consequences to defense contractors from furnishing 
defective products that allegedly injure members of the 

Armed Forces; 


2 


2) to assure that the historical record concerning the 
injustice suffered by veterans exposed to Agent Orange is 
not beclouded, in this sole case concerning Agent Orange 
accepted for review by the Court, as a result of legal or 
factual assumptions, or incidental comments, that are not 
fully informed, and sensitive to the concerns and painful 
inequity suffered by the injured veterans; 


3) to express a sense of extreme concern by the injured 
veterans that, while they have been unjustly denied 
—through the invention of a series of novel doctrines of 
law for no apparent reason other than to protect the 
financial welfare of the manufacturers of Agent 
Orange—any substantial remedy against the manufacturers 
whose defective product destroyed their lives, the federal 
judiciary should not compound this injustice by creating 
further doctrine from scant and unpersuasive source 
material that would protect the wrongdoers from any 
financial responsibility whatsoever for the injuries they 
caused veterans and their families; 


4) to protest against the proposition of petitioners that 
United States taxpayers should subsidize the costs of the 
manufacturers’ collusive class action settlement, the 
vehicle by which veterans were denied their due process 
rights in the federal Agent Orange litigation; and 


5) to protect the interests of present and future members 
of the United States Armed Forces, who are the potential 
victims of future such defective products, by supporting 
the United States’ position in this suit that the minimal 
financial deterrent to a manufacturer of defective products 
that injure servicemen should not be nullified by means of 
the taxpayer indemnification of tort litigation expenses that 
is proposed by petitioners in this case. 


3 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


1. The Jvy Case 

In lvy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co., supra, some 
of the possibly 90% of all veterans injured by dioxin con- 
taminant in petitioners’ Agent Orange who suffered their 
injuries only after a May 1984 settlement, and following a 
latency period from the date of exposure that averages 20 
years, filed a class complaint in Texas state court. These 
veterans were absent from, unrepresented in, and ultimately 
disserved by the May 7, 1984 "nuisance value” settlement of 
Agent Orange claims, which is the subject of this casc. 

The /vy plaintiffs argued both constitutional and factual 
reasons why the 1984 settlement could not and did not apply, 
without their knowledge, consent, or adequate representation, 
sO as to extinguish, in advance, their then merely potential 
future claims against the manufacturers of Agent Orange. 
They submitted weighty new evidence that Agent Orange 
was the cause of their injuries and cited authority that this 
Court's definition of the government contractor defense in 
Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988) 
would preclude its application to their case. See Joint 
Eastern and Southern Dist. Asbestos Litig., 897 F.2d 626, 
634-35 & n.8 (2d Cir. 1990); cf. In re Agent Orange Product 
Liability Litigation, 611 F.Supp. 1223 (E.D.N.Y. 1985) aff'd, 
818 F.2d 187 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 
(1988) (summary judgment). 

Ivy was transferred from Texas on questionable grounds, 
see Ivy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemical Co., 901 F.2d 7 (2d 
Cir. 1990), to Judge Weinstein in Brooklyn, N. Y., who then 
denied the veterans discovery or trial on the disputed factual 
issues, found the claims properly removed from state court on 
novel grounds, and dismissed them on grounds that all future 
Agent Orange claims by veterans had been settled by him in 
1984, albeit unbeknownst to the plaintiffs themselves. His 
decisions were upheld by the Second Circuit, which added its 
own factual conclusions contrary to both Judge Weinstein's 


4 


assumptions and to the evidence in the record. 

The Circuit also ignored by misinterpretation plaintiffs’ 
claim that Judge Weinstein's role as sole fiduciary for a $52 
million foundation (the "Agent Orange Class Assistance 
Program") which would lose $10 million if /vy succeeded in 
state court (according to Judge Weinstein's interpretation of 
an indemnity provision), combined with Judge Weinstein's 
express reliance on this potential $10 million loss as a reason 
for denying remand of /vy to Texas, 781 F. Supp. at 911-12, 
915, 918, constituted an obvious judicial conflict of interest 
in violation of Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp.., 
486 U.S. 847 (1988). 

Judge Weinstein's assumption that remand of /vy would 
"consume the $10 million set aside" in his foundation, 781 F. 
Supp. at 918, expressed his judgment that some /vy plaintiffs 
and putative class members would in fact win their claims if 
remanded to state court. The Circuit assumed the contrary by 
ignoring evidence in the record and drawing on literature it 
found outside the record. Mrs. Ivy's Petition to this Court, 
No. 93-860, followed on November 24, 1993. 

Amici in Ivy, cumulatively representing 8 million 
Americans in an unprecedented unanimous effort in this 
Court by all significant official veterans organizations, sought 
to fulfill the statutory goals stated above by impressing upon 
this Court the importance of the /vy Petition. Amici strongly 
urged this Court to restore to Agent Orange victims their 
"fundamental constitutionally derived ... right to have 
grievances adjudged by a jury of one's peers." They criticized 
the "wholesale abandonment" by the federal courts of those 
due process rights that were "systematically denied" to the 
veterans in order to impose upon them the same 1984 
settlement that is the subject of this case. 

Recognizing the flaw in the Circuit's reasoning in imposing 
the settlement on the /vy plaintiffs, amici observed that, 
"(flar from providing ‘full justice,’ the cruel result of that 
settlement has been to restrict Vietnam veterans and their 
dependents to the receipt of nuisance value recoveries of 


5 


approximately $3200 when they suffer total disability or 
when they die as a result of their exposure to products 
manufactured by [Hercules, et al.]." Lesser injuries received 
no compensation at all under the 1984 settlement. 

Amici therefore "advised" this Court, as they felt "duty 
bound" to do, to review and ultimately reverse the "Second 
Circuit's extraordinary disregard of [the veterans'] due process 
rights” and its "usurpation of legislative and judicial powers" 
by imposition of an unwanted "settlement" on the /vy 
petitioners, in a "travesty of justice." The Brief Amici Curiae 
supported the /vy Petition because the federal courts’ 
"decisions ... create a threat to settled law, to constitutional 
values of due process, and to the welfare of thousands of 
severely ill veterans and their families." /d., at 2-6, 20. 

In addition to this strong urging from all of the country's 
oldest, largest, and most deeply respected patriotic 
organizations, the highest group of legal officers in the land, 
by their filing of amicus curiae briefs in this Court, also 
unanimously requested that this Court grant the veterans’ 
Petition for review. The attorneys general of all fifty States, 
in their wholly unprecedented unanimity of support for a 
private party, or any party on Petition for Writ of Certiorari, 
expressed the generals’ firm opinion that the federal courts 
"ad hoc interference" had wrongly deprived Vietnam veterans 
of a chance to present their due process claims in an 
impartial State forum. Brief Amici Curiae of the States of 
Texas (et al.), No. 93-860, 1. 

The pro bono attorneys for the /vy petitioners, led by 
Harvard Law School Professor Lawrence H. Tribe, who is at 
the same time a leading academic and perhaps the foremost 
constitutional litigator of his era, had sought Supreme Court 
review not only of the substantial Due Precess Clause issues 
addressed by the veterans organizations’ amici Brief, but also 
of a "radical All Writs removal doctrine" by which the 
federal courts had acquired jurisdiction over /vy, against the 
strong opposition that the States’ attorneys general expressed, 
in turn, to all three levels of the federal judiciary. 


6 


The "All Writs removal doctrine” applied in /vy was an 
unprecedented interference with states’ rights to control 
claims arising exclusively under state law in state courts 
between state citizens. This doctrine postulated, in Professor 
Tribe's paraphrase, that by using their general equity powers 
"federal judges may circumvent ... seven removal statutes ... 
‘to remove an otherwise unremovable state court case,’ in the 
discretion of the judge, 'when the need arises." Petition for 
Writ of Certiorari, No. 93-860, at pp. i and 25. 

This discretionary removal technique had been used by the 
federal courts in /vy to acquire jurisdiction so as to assure 
that no state court would be able to follow existing law and 
accord to the Agent Orange veterans their constitutional right 
to a jury trial of their claims. This foreclosed any state court 
from putting to the test the federal courts’ erroneous, and 
unenforceable edicts on contested issues of fact which 
underlie their cheap settlement, and which now reappear as 
unsettled issues in this case. These issues are, most 
importantly, the government contractor defense and causation. 
Both questions were kept from a jury by unorthodox 
procedures in the federal courts that conferred enormous 
financial benefits on the manufacturers. 

This Court's denial of certiorari in Ivy had the effect of 
leaving unreviewed the Circuit Court's significant and novel 
rulings of law, and its erroneous assertions of fact that 
cavalierly invaded the province of the jury. This Court's 
denial of certiorari in Ivy consequently left uncorrected one 
of the most profound and, in both money terms and human 
terms, perhaps the greatest injustice at one stroke in the 
history of American jurisprudence. 

Having presented highly substantial legal and constitutional 
claims with their impressive academic and unprecedented 
official legal support, alongside the equally unprecedented 
solidarity of the official veterans service organizations, all as 
described above, the affected Vietnam veterans were 
appalled, shocked, and numbed by the refusal of even four of 
nine judges constituting the highest court of the country for 


7 


which they risked their lives and their health, in one of its 
dirtiest and most difficult wars, to find the time and interest 
to review the substantial legal issues presented by their 
Petition, on matters of life and death to them. 

These deserving, patriotic Americans were left with a 
bitter taste of injustice, not even certain that the law invoked 
by New York federal courts to provide a veneer of legality 
to the injustice done them is the same law that governs every 
other American. This perception of injustice and 
discrimination deepened when the Court within weeks of 
rejecting the Jvy case heard and decided legal issues similar 
to those raised by /vy, in such cases as Ticor Title Ins. Co. v. 
Brown, 511 U.S. __, 114 S.Ct. 1359 (April 11, 1994) 
(certiorari dismissed as improvidently granted, after argument 
was heard, March 1, 1994, on the due process rights of 
absent class members); Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. 
of America, 114 S.Ct. 1673 (argument heard March 1, 1994, 
on the existence of inherent post-dismissal federal jurisdiction 
to enforce settlement agreements); Liteky v. U.S., 114 S.Ct. 
1147 (March 7, 1994) (addressing less persuasive conflict of 
interest recusal of federal judge than presented in /vy). Cf. 
Hess v. Port Authority, 8 F.3d 811, cert granted, 114 S.Ct. 
1292 (March 21, 1994) (governmental immunity). None of 
these cases impressed veterans as being nearly so significant 
as their own case, by any standard of measurement. 

Now veterans perceive as adding an even deeper insult to 
their grave injuries that the Supreme Court has deemed the 
Agent Orange manufacturers’ highly "implausible" claim, see 
Brief for the United States in Opposition (etc.)("Opp.") at 13, 
for indemnification by the United States, which is financially 
worth only a tiny fraction of the veterans’ destroyed claims, 
to be of sufficient import as to occupy space on the Court's 
calendar which no one of the veterans’ numerous petitions 
were deemed to merit. This will be the only Agent Orange 
connected case to be addressed by the Supreme Court out of 
at least 12 petitions over the years. 


8 


Little more than one year ago as many as 250,000 potential 
members of /vy's proposed class of injured Vietnam veterans 
residing throughout the nation, 8 million of their sympathetic 
brethren speaking through their congressionally-chartered 
organizations, and the highest legal officers of all 50 states, 
were denied this precious opportunity for a hearing involving 
the same subject matter and some of the very same issues 
raised by two manufacturers in this case. The difference 
between these two cases is that the veterans in /vy, and 
supporting amici, naively expecting justice to be blind, started 
their analysis from traditional and established principles of 
law, demonstrated wide and deep support for these principles, 
and were then systematically denied the results that the 
unbiased application of those principles would yield. 

By contrast, the two petitioners here frankly appeal to the 
result-oriented jurisprudence they have come to expect in the 
Agent Orange litigation. They start with the result they seek, 
indemnification of settlement expenses, deliver self-interested 
amicus support for that result, and then "search{] for the 
proper legal theory upon which" to base that result. See 
Brief of Petitioners ("Br. Pet.") 16. A further difference is 
that while the thousands of injured United States veterans 
were innocent of any wrongdoing, and happened to be placed 
in harms way as a result of their unrewarded, patriotic service 
to their country, the manufacturers of Agent Orange, 
including petitioners here, were wrongdoers who sold a 
defective product at market rates to the government, and to 
commercial users, and are powerful enough to get away with 
it. 


2. Petitioners’ Complaint 

With this Court's denial of certiorari in /vy, the Agent 
Orange manufacturers reaped the enormous benefit of the 
collusive bargain they struck in Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 
618 F.Supp. 623 (E.D.N.Y 1985), aff'd, 818 F.2d 145 (2d 
Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). This 


9 


settlement in Ryan, imposed on the /vy class against their 
knowledge or will, was purchased by the manufacturers at the 
cost of a $180 million payment to the District Court for 
distribution in the District Judge's discretion. At least $13 
million was distributed to the attorneys who signed the class 
action settlement, $52 million went to the "AOCAP 
Foundation" controlled by the same judge who approved the 
settlement, and a large unknown amount went to pay the 
administrative costs of various consultants and staff hired by 
the judge. Only “nuisance value" amounts were paid from 
the remainder, plus the interest accrued over the ten year pay- 
out period, to the fraction of the injured veterans who had 
death or total disability claims acceptable to the 
administrators of the fund. 

Now petitioners, who shared fully in the windfall benefits 
of this "settlement" of Agent Orange claims against them, 
complain that they should recover from the United States 
their portion of the expenses paid to obtain the immunity 
from liability against all the veterans’ present and future 
claims that their "settlement," as interpreted in the /vy case, 
bought them. Petitioners’ claims are before this Court on 
dismissal of their complaints, as affirmed by the Court of 
Appeals. The question before this Court is whether the 
complaints are sufficient to state a claim, assuming to be true 
all factual statements in the complaints that are not 
inconsistent with any facts established by law. 

The petitioners bring an action for breach of implied 
warranty, which is available under United States v. Spearin, 
248 U.S. 142 (1918), where a defect "in the plans" provided 
by the government created liability to its contractor for 
damage caused by strictly following those plans. Br. Pet. at 
17. The petitioners also claim that a provision in the Defense 
Production Act ("DPA"), 50 U.S.C. app. § 2061, ef seq., 
(1988 & Supp. V 1993) may be read to convey not just an 
immunity against breach of contract claims caused by the 
government's requisition of goods away from prior com- 
mercial commitments, but also to provide the government's 


10 


indemnification of expenses incurred in defending tort claims 
that arise from defects in the goods that predated and lacked 
any causal relationship to the requisition. At bottom, 
petitioners plead that the facts which they portray deserve the 
creation of some doctrine, from the easily distinguishable 
materials they cite, allowing them to recover their costs from 
government. 

Petitioners argue that the government's "specifications were 
defective because they resulted in a product that contained 
dioxin, the substance that the Agent Orange plaintiffs claimed 
caused their injuries." Br. Pet. 26. Petitioners complaints do 
not allege that the government's specifications called for 
dioxin as part of the Agent Orange formulation, or that there 
was no way to make Agent Orange without contamination 
from dioxin. Nor do petitioners claim that the procurement 
officials who purchased petitioners’ Agent Orange either 
knew that petitioners’ Agent Orange did contain dioxin, or 
knew the process for ridding their product of dioxin. Nor do 
they claim that everything in the files, or past reports, of the 
government may be imputed to procurement officials. 

Hercules does describe how it managed to avoid 
contaminating its herbicide with dioxin approximately one 
year after it started production of Agent Orange. Complaint, 
at Joint Appendix ("J.A.") 11-12. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Veterans in /vy fought hard for an unbiased state forum to 
adjudicate the issue of whether they settled for "nuisance 
value," in 1984, claims that did not then exist. Instead, this 
question was answered by federal Judges Weinstein and Van 
Graafeiland in opinions that interfered with state proceedings 
in order to impose the courts’ own result-oriented rulings 
denying veterans their right to a day in court. To support 
their desired result of a cheap global settlement of Agent 
Orange claims, the federal courts opined that the veterans 


11 


could not win their claims anyway, and made summary 
findings, or speculations, concerning key questions of fact, 
that were themselves inconsistent. Their opinions substituted 
the judges’ rationalized policy preferences for established 
rules of law, all to the benefit of the manufacturers. 

The manufacturers now seek to exploit to their own 
further advantage, those inconsistencies that were the 
byproduct of the instrumental, unprincipled approach to 
judging that characterized the Agent Orange litigation. 

Petitioners’ effort to obtain reimbursement for their 
relatively small share of the "nuisance value" payments and 
legal expenses the manufacturers made to secure a collusive 
settlement with class action plaintiffs’ lawyers is unsupported 
by existing law, and is not "an obviously right result.” Br. Pet 
16. It would be an obviously wrong result for federal courts 
to create new doctrine requiring taxpayers to assume 
petitioners’ costs of making a corrupt, collusive settlement by 
which Vietnam veterans were denied an opportunity for a day 
in court against those who caused their injuries. Federal 
courts have provided too many such benefits to petitioners. 

Petitioners should not be allowed to exploit the ambigu- 
ities and inconsistencies created by the unique result-oriented 
procedures in the Agent Orange Litigation to create special 
new doctrine that would circumvent the limitations of 
existing government contract law, for the purpose of again 
rewarding these particular manufacturers with additional 
protection against liability for their own wrongdoing. 

Neither Spearin nor the DPA can be interpreted to 
accord the relief requested by petitioners on the facts 
petitioners have pleaded without doing violence to those 
provisions. Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., supra, 
draws a well-defined boundary between those cases where 
the cloak of governmental responsibility and immunity is cast 
over the conduct of a governmental contractor that damages 
a third party, on the one hand, and those cases where the 
contractor itself must take responsibility for damage which it 
has caused, on the other. This Court's decision in Boyle 


12 


extended sovereign immunity principles to _ protect 
government contractors from third party claims, thereby 
shifting the burden of loss to innocent victims precisely in 
those situations where the government, not the contractor, 
was responsible for the damage due to its exercise of 
discretion to approve a defective design. 

Neither Spearin, the DPA, nor any equitable doctrine 
should impose on the taxpayer a further obligation to 
reimburse the losses of contractors who cannot satisfy Boyle. 
If the government is not held responsible, on the basis of an 
exercise of its discretion to contract for defective design 
specifications, then there is no justification for shifting the 
burden of loss away from the manufacturer, whether to the 
innocent victims, or to the government. A manufacturer 
should be responsible for defects which it introduces in its 
product. This constitutes the only real deterrent to future 
such mass injuries as those suffered by the Agent Orange 
victims. 

Petitioners’ complaints on their face show that they cannot 
satisfy either Boyle or Spearin, because the dioxin is not 
alleged to be part of the government's design specifications. 
See generally, United States' Memorandum, J.A. 34. 
Petitioners’ settlement payment was a measure of petitioners’ 
assessment of their risk from the potential inapplicability of 
the government contractor defense, if not in the present 
certainly in the future. Their settlement was far more a 
purchase of insurance-like protection against future claims 
that would not be barred by this defense, such as those in 
Ivy, than it was a settlement of present claims. If these 
future claims would not have been barred by the government 
contractor defense, petitioner must absorb its own expenses 
in “settling” these claims. Boyle provides the exclusive 
protection for any claims that would have been barred by this 
defense 


13 
ARGUMENT 


Petitioners’ claims fall between two stools. On the one 
side sits the alternative that petitioners’ equitable plea for 
relief against the government could be justified by facts 
showing that the government is responsible for defective 
design specifications that injured veterans. In such 
circumstances, Boyle, or even the broader government 
contractor defense created to immunize petitioners from 
liability in the Agent Orange Litigation, is petitioners’ sole 
remedy for otherwise valid claims against them by third 
parties. Although it is true that the contractor's defense was 
not well defined at the time of the 1984 settlement, all 
versions protected contractors who were not at fault, or in the 
Agent Orange version, even where they were at fault. Joint 
Eastern and Southern District Asbestos Litigation, 897 F.2d 
626, 634-35 & n.8 (2d Cir. 1990). Under facts where the 
government is responsible for a design that injures third 
parties, a government contractor may assert the government's 
sovereign immunity and thereby avoid liability. There is no 
need for an indemnification remedy against the government 
in such circumstances, and none exists. 

On the other stool sits the alternative suggested by facts 
both stated and pregnantly not stated by petitioners. Under 
these facts: petitioners were responsible for the defect which 
caused the veterans’ injuries; Boyle would not have furnished 
a conclusive defense against the veterans’ Agent Orange 
claims; and a jury would have probably found against 
petitioners on that defense and causation, notwithstanding 
judicial statements to the contrary. In such circumstances, 
neither equity nor law would suppor! a government indemnity 
of contractors against liability for their own negligent acts 
that cause injury to third parties. 

To the government it is irrelevant on which of these two 
stools this case rests. For that reason Judge Plager's 
statement, quoted by petitioners, about the ultimate resolution 
of this issue being unknown, Br. Pet. 18, (which itself only 


14 


reflects an insufficient understanding of the underlying facts), 
is irrelevant. Under either of these factual alternatives, 
petitioners’ attempt to obtain indemnification must fail. 
Therefore petitioners’ highly fact-bound argument aims 
squarely between these two stools. 

Between these two stools is the collusive class action 
settlement by which federal courts, speaking out of both sides 
of their mouth about factual issues, ultimately protected 
petitioners from enormous potential liability to veterans 
injured by Agent Orange. Had the veterans not been sold out 
by a collusive class settlement of benefit primarily to 
petitioners and class action lawyers, with the blessing of the 
federal judiciary, they would have presented the contested 
factual issues of causation and of the government contractor 
defense to juries. Juries eventually would have accepted the 
mounting evidence of causation and also rejected the 
applicability of the contractor's defense, as did Judge Oakes 
in Joint Eastern and Southern District Asbestos Litigation, 
897 F.2d at 634-35 & n.8. Offensive collateral estoppel 
would then have stripped petitioners of the defense for 
subsequent claims, see Parklane Hosiery Co. Inc. v. Shore, 
439 U.S. 322 (1979), and the damages for the subsequent 
provable claims would have been enormous. It is with some 
understatement that petitioners state: "the settlement that [the 
manufacturers] accepted was significantly lower than their 
exposure at trial." Br. Pet. 27. Cf id. 19 ("possibility of ... 
billions of dollars"). 

Petitioners avoided a legitimate risk of exposure at trial, 
but now want to reverse the key positions that they took, and 
that the courts adopted, which helped them avoid any 
significant liability, ie., that the veterans lacked evidence 
sufficient to go to a jury on either causation or the 
government contractor defense." Now petitioners claim that 


1 Shortly after issuing its ruling in Boyle, 487 U.S. 500, this 
Court denied a writ of certiorari to review the summary judgment 
against the opt outs from the settled Agent Orange case, which 


15 


their product was defective, that it probably did injure 
veterans, and that a jury may well have ruled against them on 
the government contractor defense. This is closer to the 
truth. But the question is why petitioners should not be 
bound by the federal courts' contrary summary rulings, 
however remote from the facts, that nevertheless served to 
permanently strip the veterans of their rights for the purpose 
of rescuing petitioners from the risk of enormous liability. 

If these rulings denying causation and applying the 
contractor's defense were good enough to inflict one of the 
greatest injustices in the history of the federal judiciary on 
injured Vietnam veterans, they are good enough to estop 
petitioners from questioning them ir this suit. Petitioners 
have sought and embraced the full effect of the settlement, 
even against future claimants. They should not be allowed 
to now reject its factual premises, appealing to the "realities 
of litigation," for the purpose of avoiding even the minimal 
expense associated with obtaining their collusive settlement. 

It would be a perversion of justice to permit petitioners 
to accept the windfall advantage given them by federal courts 
against the veterans, and then, against the government, deny 
the very rulings from which they benefited. 


was based on the government contractor defense. See /n re 
Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 
It has been noted that the Supreme Court's action is significantly 
confusing" because the "two tests are significantly different." 
Mary C. Hensinger, Agent Orange and Boyle, 6 J. OF CONTEMP. 
HEALTH L. AND POLICY 359, 374 (1990). The Court had denied 
the writ to review the contemporaneous settlement case some 
months prior to deciding Boyle. See id., 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). 
Thus the Court had presumably held the summary judgment 
petition in abeyance pending its decision in Boyle. The Court's 
failure to remand for reconsideration in light of Boyle suggests 
that the Court agreed that a jury could not have found agai 
petitioners on the government contractor defense even under the 
more conservative Boyle test. 


16 


I. PETITIONERS HAVE ALREADYRECEIVED 
EXCESSIVE BENEFITS FROM THE FEDERAL 
JUDICIARY IN AGENT ORANGE LITIGATION 


Petitioners’ positions on key issues of fact in this case 
further support the veterans’ evidence that they were the 
victims of an enormous miscarriage of justice systematically 
carried out by the federal judiciary for the benefit of the 
manufacturers of Agent Orange. 


A. Corporate Negligence Caused The Product Defect 

Petitioners admit that their product was defective in that 
it contained dioxin. Br. Pet. 13. Without this allegation they 
could not maintain a breach of warranty claim. 

Moreover, Hercules' Complaint, at J.A. 11-12, describes 
how Hercules, within a year after it started production, 
managed to avoid contaminating its herbicide with dioxin. 
Its excuse for not doing so prior to that date is apparently 
that it did not know about the extraction process. Therefore, 
after 1966 Hercules produced defoliant in accordance with 
government specifications by combining commercially 
available chemicals in certain concentrations. But before that 
date it failed to fully comply with those specifications by also 
including dioxin contaminants in its delivered product. 

Petitioners do not claim that they took reasonable steps to 
determine whether production processes that they used would 
create dioxin as an unwanted byproduct. Nor do they assert 
that the government was the only source of such knowledge, 
or that any existing government information about dioxin 
contamination was secret, or not generally available to 
petitioner upon reasonable inquiry. Instead petitioners admit 
that they may have had less knowledge than other 
manufacturers about dioxin. Br. Pet. 19. 

The same failure of pleading is true of the dioxin 
extraction process, about which petitioners have failed to 
plead any excuse for their lack of timely knowledge. Only 
if the government somehow actively maintained secrecy 


17 


about these two issues, thereby frustrating reasonable efforts 
to acquire the information—obviously not the case here and 
not alleged—could the government be responsible for the 
product defect resulting from petitioners’ own ignorance. 

Since petitioners’ complaints provide no such factual 
allegations, the conclusion remains that the petitioners’ 
negligence in failing to locate an existing extraction process 
for eliminating dioxin from its Agent Orange product prior 
to initiating production caused their product to be defective. 
The complaints show nothing in the government's product 
specifications that either requested or required a product 
containing dioxin. Nowhere do the complaints state facts 
showing that it was impossible to deliver a product consistent 
with the government's specifications that did not contain 
dioxin. 

Petitioners are legally bound by the factual findings on 
this issue against them in Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 781 
F.Supp. 934 (E.D.N.Y. 1992) (remanding civilian claims to 
state court), appeal denied, No. 92-8008 (2d Cir. May 8, 
1992)(mem.), cert. denied sub nom. Dow Chem. Co. v. 
Brown, 113 S.Ct. 599 (1992) ("Brown"). In the Brown case, 
Judge Weinstein held: 


Agent Orange was a mix of pre-existing chemical 
formulae that had long been put to domestic commercial 
use ... The government sought only to buy ready-to-order 
herbicides, not to cause, control or prevent the 
production of the unwanted byproduct, dioxin, which is 
the alleged cause of plaintiffs’ injuries. The necessary 
direct and detailed official control over the acts for 
which the defendants are now being sued is therefore 
lacking. 


781 F.Supp. at 950-51. 

Because petitioners had a full and fair opportunity in 
Brown to prove that the government did have such control 
over petitioners’ production, they would thus be collaterally 
estopped from arguing that the government forced them or 


18 


ordered them, see Br. Pet. 28, to produce a defective product. 
See Parklane Hosiery Co. Inc. v. Shore, 439 U.S. 322 (1979). 
Without such control, by which the government must take 
responsibility for design specifications containing dioxin, 
petitioners can prevail neither on the government contractor 
defense nor its Spearin claim. 


B. The Product Defect Caused Injury to Veterans 

Although it has never been legally established that 
exposure to dioxin caused the various injuries suffered by 
Vietnam veterans, this is more due to the extraordinary 
handling of the veterans’ claims by the federal courts which 
denied the veterans access to a jury on this issue, than to lack 
of evidence. Petitioners are reluctant to directly admit that 
dioxin in their pooduct caused the injuries claimed by 
veterans. Therefore petitioners recruit an amicus who is 
willing to perform that service for them. The financial 
relationship of this amicus to petitioners is discussed below, 
pp. 26-27. In any event, petitioners must and do assume that 
a jury could have found in favor of the veterans even on the 
weak facts presented in 1984. See Br. Pet. 19. Since those 
facts were far weaker than the evidence of injury developed 
after that date, some of which evidence is sketched in the 
amicus brief procured by petitioners, it is crystal clear that 
many claims in the /vy class were sufficient to be submitted 
to a jury on the question of causation. 

This demonstrates once again that the veterans suffered a 
gross injustice from which petitioners greatly benefitted when 
the Second Circuit made erroneous findings of fact, invading 
the province of the jury, in reliance on texts not of record, 
and certainly not sworn to, 996 F.2d at 1437, and at the same 
time chose to totally ignore the sworn testimony on the 
record of the veterans’ expert witness. The veterans’ witness, 
Dr. Cate Jenkins, a scientist with the Environmental 
Protection Agency, in her filed Affidavit of Cate Jenkins, 
Ph.D, (EPA), Recent Scientific Evidence Developed After 
1984 Supporting a Causal Relationship Between Dioxin and 


19 


Human Health Effects, (September 3, 1991), set out some of 
the copious evidence, developed after the date of the 
settlement, associating dioxin with the types of injuries 
suffered by Vietnam veterans. 

Dr. Jenkins’ Affidavit was cited in, and confirmed in 
relevant respects by, the authoritative National Academy of 
Sciences’ Institute of Medicine, Veterans and Agent Orange: 
Health Effects of Herbicides Used in Vietnam (July 27, 
1993). However both studies were entirely ignored by the 
Second Circuit which was intent on finding, on the basis of 
obscure and outdated literature consulted sua sponte, that 
Agent Orange did not injure veterans. The Circuit also 
ignored Overmann v. Syntex (USA) Inc., et al., No. 
852-02681 (Div. 5, Circuit Court, City of St. Louis, Mo. July 
10, 1991) in which a jury awarded a worker's family 
damages for a cancer fatality caused by exposure to Agent 
Orange chemicals. 

Hercules attempts to muddy the issue of causation by 
claiming that "[aJs a result of ... specifications and 
requirements" under the Defense Production Act, Agent 
Orange was packaged without warnings. Complaint, Para. 
20. In briefing this issue on summary judgment in /vy the 
manufacturers were unable to produce any contractual or 
regulatory authority which had in fact precluded warnings of 
some kind, nor did they reveal any efforts by the 
manufacturers to question whether all kinds of warnings were 
precluded. The complaints are deficient in failing to allege 
facts necessary to raise a question whether any government 
limitations on specific warnings caused the veterans’ injuries. 

Similarly Hercules asserts that the government used Agent 
Orange in "unprecedented quantities, concentrations and rates 
of applications." Jd. Para 23. But upon challenge by 
plaintiffs in /vy, the manufacturers were unable to produce 
any scientific evidence whatsoever that any of these factors 
affect the number of injuries otherwise expected on a straight 
line proportional relationship between exposure to increasing 
quantities of dioxin and number of injuries. 


20 


There is no evidence that dioxin is safe at any minimum 
level of exposure, and petitioners make no allegation that it 
is. Each amount of dioxin carries a certain risk of injury 
irrespective of the delivery mechanism, concentration, or rates 
of application. It is both unremarkable and foreseeable that 
the more poison that petitioners produced, the more injuries 
they would cause. Petitioners’ allegations therefore fail to set 
forth a legal or factual claim of causation, beyond mere 
innuendo, that the government's mode of distributing dioxin 
affected in any material way the risk associated with the 
dioxin produced by petitioners. 


C. The Federal Judiciary Served the Manufacturers’ 
Interests by Forcing a Cheap Global Settlement on 
Unwilling Veterans 


Petitioners complain that Judge Weinstein was inconsistent 
in his rulings, and even that they "entered the settlement 
under duress" from him. J.A. 26-27. At bottom this seems 
to be the wrong for which petitioners seek equitable relief, as 
if taxpayers were guarantors of regular procedures in the 
federal courts. Petitioners seem to complain that since they 
were unable to depend upon consistent rulings from the court, 
they were forced by "realities" to settle even though they had 
adequate defenses. 

Judge Weinstein clearly talked out of both sides of his 
mouth in the Agent Orange litigation, as petitioners point out. 
On the one hand he holds that the government contractor 
defense raises questions for the jury, Br. Pet 6; then he 
refuses to give those questions of fact to a jury, as required 
by Boyle. One day Judge Weinstein says that Agent Orange 
claims raise a "possibility of an ultimate liability,” claimed to 
total billions of dollars. Br. Pet 8. Then he dismisses the 
claims, making them valueless, or nearly the same, forces 
their settlement for "nuisance value." 

In Jvy Judge Weinstein again properly assumed that if the 
veterans were allowed to pursue their claims in state court, 


21 


they would recover $10 million, at least. To prevent that 
from happening he invented a new doctrine to justify removal 
of Jvy from state court. The Second Circuit in Jv 
participated in the same pattern, by ignoring both evidence 
before it, and the District Judge's assumption, to deny that the 
veterans could win their claims. This intentionally distorted 
view of the facts rationalized the Circuit Court's denial of the 
veterans’ due process rights. 996 F.2d at 1237. 

This inconsistency in various factual rulings, however, 
was not "ironic[]" as petitioners suggest, Br. Pet. 21, but 
rather calculated. Both courts manipulated the facts for 
instrumental purposes, and systematically denied veterans 
their due process rights in order to prevent the veterans from 
presenting their claims to a jury. The core strategy was to 
make a cheap collusive settlement between the defendant 
manufacturers and the lawyers representing present claimants, 
who admittedly had weak claims, in order to sell out the 
potentially far stronger claims of all future claimants with 
whom the settling lawyers had a conflict of interest. Judge 
Weinstein suggested that there would have been no settlement 
at all if the future claims were not settled at the same time as 
the present claims. 781 F.2d at 919. 

In order to make such a collusive global settlement of 
future claims, the courts had to, among other things, avoid an 
outright dismissal of the earlier and weaker claims. Instead 
the very weakness of those claims was an incentive for the 
lawyers who had brought them to sign a cheap settlement 
agreement sacrificing the future claims, who the settling 
lawyers did not represent, in exchange for money for the 
probably worthless present claims, which they did represent. 
The risk of the court dismissing all present claims and 
leaving these lawyers with no recovery at all from which to 
extract fees provided sufficient incentive for them to agree to 
a collusive sell out of future claims. 

This strategy explains Judge Weinstein's refusal to 
dismiss outright on grounds of the government contractor 
defense prior to settlement. Otherwise the manufacturers 


22 


would have had no apparent reason to put some money on 
the table for these lawyers’ settlement of future claims. If 
Judge Weinstein had dismissed the claims before forcing a 
settlement, it was clear that future Agent Orange claims 
would be brought in state and federal courts around the 
country that would be beyond his reach, and beyond the 
reach of such a global settlement. See Jn re Agent Orange 
Product Liability Litigation, 635 F.2d 987 (2d Cir. 1980), 
cert. denied, 454 U.S. 1128 (1981) (no federal question 
jurisdiction over Agent Orange claims). 

Accordingly, far from disserving petitioner's interests, as 
petitioners now claim, the judicial inconsistencies that 
attended settlement were necessary to protect the manufac- 
turers against future claims. Judge Weinstein had to maintain 
the pretense that he was going to allow the case to proceed 
to trial in order to conclude a settlement of all present and 
future claims. Had he simply dismissed the claims before 
him for lack of sufficient evidence this would not have 
stemmed the flow of cases. Eventually, as Judge Weinstein 
predicted, there would have been evidence supporting future 
claims sufficient to reach a jury. At that point, all of the 
250,000 or more claims on which the statute of limitations 
had not run would become valuable claims, vastly exceeding 
in worth the "nuisance value” global settlement. 

The manufacturers’ and Wall Street's justifiable satisfaction 
with Judge Weinstein's resolution of the Agent Orange 
litigation was reported widely in the popular and scholarly 
press. See Schuck, AGENT ORANGE ON TRIAL: MASS TOXIC 
DISASTERS IN THE COURTS (Harvard U. Press, Cambridge: 
1987) 166. In fairness hearings, see In re Agent Orange 
Product Liability Litigation, 597 F Supp. 746, 764-75 (1984), 
and elsewhere, the class settlement was broadly criticized by 
its nominal beneficiaries for being imposed upon them 
against their will, through lawyers they did not hire and who 
secured their own fees at the cost of selling out the veterans’ 
claims, for too little, too late. E.g. Shuck, supra, at 179 
(noting "overwhelmingly negative views of veterans about 


23 


settlement"). 

Judge Weinstein's role in imposing the settlement has also 
been criticized in academic commentary. For example, 
Professor Schuck, an admirer of Judge Weinstein, discusses 
the "risk of procedural unfairness ... judicial overreaching and 
over-commitment" in the Agent Orange settlement, and 
concludes that, having a "firm commitment to a settlement 
almost entirely of his own creation .... [Judge Weinstein] 
could not fairly act as a judge in what, in a sense had come 
to be his own case." Schuck, The Role of Judges in Settling 
Complex Cases: The Agent Orange Example, 53 U.CHI. L. 
REV. 337, 362 (1986). Another observer concludes from a 
colloquium on the subject, "Judge Weinstein provides us with 
a public example of judicial coercion .... [H]is behavior was 
nothing short of outrageous." Warshawsky, Objectivity and 
Accountability: Limits on Judicial Involvement in Settlement 
1987 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 369, 383, 386. 

As shown above the outrage was against the veterans’ 
interests, not the manufacturers’ as the petitioners here would 
have us believe. 


Il. This Court Should Not Create New Law 
to Shift the Cost of the Unique Agent Orange 
Settlement to Taxpayers 


A. It is Not "Unfair" to Leave the Cost of Defending 
Its Defective Product With Petitioners 
"It simply cannot be the law” is petitioners’ basic premise 
for their plea that this Court should correct the "profoundly 
unfair" result of the Agent Orange settlement. Br. Pet. 16-17. 
Their plea is profoundly misdirected. 

The reason for the anomaly by which, a) the federal 
courts approved the government contractor defense in order 
to support a dismissal and a cheap class action settlement, 
while b) there was ample evidence for a jury to hold against 
petitioners on that defense, is explained above as the product 
of unorthodox result-oriented judicial tactics. In the judge- 


24 


made Agent Orange settlement, petitioners advantageously 
settled claims which by surface appearances they should have 
won on motion for summary judgment, or certainly at trial. 

On deeper analysis, it becomes clear that if the veterans’ 
due process rights had been observed by the federal judiciary, 
and the facts exposed, see House Government Operations 
Committee's Twelfth Report, The Agent Orange Cover-up: A 
Case of Flawed Science and Political Manipulation, H.R. 
Rep. No. 672, 101st. Cong. 2d Sess. (1990), the outcome 
would have differed. If only a fraction of the veterans’ 
claims had reached a jury, petitioners could have lost many 
times their cost of settling the present and, more importantly, 
the anticipated future claims for injuries veterans suffered as 
a result of petitioners’ defective product. 

The trial court could not and did not force settlement terms 
on the petitioners. At worst, petitioners would have had to 
put their defense to a jury. By making an unprecedented 
class action designation for tort claims, however, the District 
Judge acquired direct control over the appointment and fees 
of class counsel, and authority to impose an unwanted 
collusive settlement that was primarily of benefit to the 
defendant manufacturers and the colluding lawyers. Rule 23 
of the Federal Rules conveyed very real powers to impose a 
settlement on "class members," as defined by the judge, 
against which such "members" were powerless once they 
discovered their unwanted status. 

Petitioners seek to characterize their Agent Orange 
settlement expense as if it were an inequity to themselves. 
Arising haplessly from “the realities of litigation,” Br. Pet. 
22, they argue, their loss should now be made good by the 
taxpayers. 

Petitioners admit that their success at trial, had they not 
settled, was "far from certain." Jd. Had due process been 
observed, and—as Judge Weinstein expected in /vy—juries 
found against petitioners on their contractor's defense, and 
awarded damages, petitioners would have had no basis to ask 
this Court to allow recourse against the government for any 


atin 


25 


supposed inequity arising from such "realities of litigation.” 
No arguable authority exists for shifting the cost of third 
party liability claims to the government where the contractor 
cannot satisfy the minimal conditions of any version of the 
government contractor defense. All versions of the defense 
viable in 1984, see Br. Pet. 20-21 & n.6, protected all 
contractors who are not at fault. Similarly the Spearin 
doctrine does and should indemnify only damages for which 
the government's "defective specifications," Br. Pet. 26, not 
the manufacturers’ processes, are at fault. The United States 
is not a liability insurer that implicitly indemnifies damages 
that are legally found to have been caused by the negligence 
of its contractors. 

An enormous gift from the federal judiciary to petitioners 
of a cheap global settlement, that also harnessed all future 
Agent Orange litigation to a single favorably disposed judge, 
prevented a potentially catastrophic loss for petitioners. This 
gift was, in a sense, insurance against any future liability to 
the veterans on account of future injuries, that still have not 
been all counted. The payment petitioners made to the court 
for this insurance can support no greater argument for 
indemnity by the United States than would the loss itself 
against which it provided effective insurance. 

There is no equity or fairness in allowing petitioners to 
retain the benefit of buying their way out of facing a jury on 
a government contractor defense, a defense that had already 
been factually shredded by the Justice Department's pre- 
discovery Memorandum, J.A. 34, and then also provide 
petitioners an indemnification that must be premised on the 
assumption that they would have won this defense. 

Such a rule would also constitute poor public policy in 
that it would remove any deterrent against contractors who 
produce dangerously defective goods for use by the military. 


26 


B. Petitioners’ Amici Add to Their Argument 
Only A Scent of Impropriety 

To lend further superficial support for the appearance of 
injustice petitioners proffer, they have procured the assistance 
of two amicus briefs. Little needs be said of the Chamber of 
Commerce amicus, and its members’ motivation for 
supporting petitioners’ efforts to obtain reimbursement from 
the government for the cost of corporate wrongdoing. Their 
brief is premised on an anecdotal understanding of the fz *ts 
and hence addresses a straw man case, not this one. 

It is necessary, however, to address the brief of the second 
amicus, the National Veterans Legal Services Program 
("NVLSP"), which appears to speak on behalf of veterans. 
This organization is not a chartered veterans service 
organization and does not claim to speak for any such 
organization. It is a group of lawyers who served, not the 
broad interests of Agent Orange victims, but their own 
interests in gaining access to substantial funds made available 
to them from the collusive settlement. 

In its Statement of Interest, NVLSP claims it has been 
involved in obtaining "compensation through ... judicial 
remedies,” for Agent Orange veterans. NVLSP Br. at 2. 
But it has not tried to obtain a fair judicial remedy for the 
veterans’ claims against the manufacturers who caused the 
veterans’ injuries. NVLSP has not been known to criticize 
the 1984 collusive settlement or to seek any alternative 
remedy against the manufacturers of Agent Orange in any 
forum. NVLSP did not even join the amicus brief filed in 
Ivy in support of the injured veterans by virtually every 
significant veterans’ organization in any way interested in 
assisting the victims of Agent Orange. Supra p. 1. 

The failure of NVLSP to seek remedies against those who 
caused the veterans’ injuries is easily explained by the source 
of its funding. NVLSP received a large portion of its 
funding, more than $2.5 million, from a foundation financed 
by petitioners in this case and the other manufacturers of 
Agent Orange. See 781 F. Supp. at 923, 928. As the 


27 


principal beneficiary of this foundation, NVLSP has used this 
funding largely in pursuit of its effort, consistent with its 
position in this case, to divert attention away from the 
manufacturers and have the taxpayers, rather than the 
manufacturers, pay for any injuries caused by the 
manufacturers’ defective product. Due to several doctrines 
that accord the government immunity from suit for such 
injuries, with sole recourse to an administrative tar baby, the 
Department of Veterans Affairs ("VA"), this endeavor of 
NVLSP was destined to be a largely futile exercise for the 
veterans as a whole. The limited gains toward this end have 
been made primarily through legislation commanding the VA 
to provide modest compensation to a few Agent Orange 
victims. Agent Orange Act, Public L. No. 102-4 (1991). 

In exchange for their more than $2.5 million in grants 
from money provided, in part, by petitioners, NVLSP 
subjected itself to the condition that it "may not take a 
position on the [/vy] case or Judge Weinstein's ruling 
[dismissing /vy]. Nor may [NVLSP] express opinions as to 
the causal relationship between agent orange and any specific 
ailment or condition." Directive from AOCAP Foundation to 
AO Grantees, "Court Issues Ruling in Ivy Case," (E.D.N.Y. 
Oct. 4, 1991). By their 10 years’ of paid silence these 
lawyers have sold out the interest of Agent Orange victims 
in obtaining a day in court on their claims against the 
manufacturers of Agent Orange. 

Now, for the first time, NVLSP enters a case involving 
those responsible for producing Agent Orange and the 
injuries it caused. It is not surprising that NVLSP should 
enter such a case, not to support the interests of veterans, but 
rather to support the interests of those who caused the 
veterans injury. Though they kept quiet on instruction about 
the cause of the veterans’ injuries when it might have aided 
the veterans’ quest for justice, they now speak up in this 
forum too late to assist the veterans themselves. 

No veteran will receive an additional penny if the 
petitioners succeed, with NVLSP's help, in recovering from 


28 


respondent the money they provided NVLSP and others in 
connection with the 1984 collusive class action settlement. 


C. No Law Shifts a Contractor's Cost of Defending 
Third Party Tort Claims to Government 

As raw material for fashioning a new doctrine that would 
fill an alleged lacuna in the law, petitioners invoke precedents 
that do not apply to the facts they have pleaded. Petitioners 
thus frankly seek the creation of a new remedy or a judicially 
implied contract provision requiring the government to 
indemnify them under the circumstances of this case. 

It is no surprise that petitioners are unable to find 
supportive law or precedent on point. Their case depends on 
a highly fact-bound revisionist interpretation of the unique 
events surrounding the Agent Orange settlement, the like of 
which has not arisen in over two hundred years of 
government contracting. But the operation of such a new 
rule for this case could not be confined to the facts of Agent 
Orange. 

A fortiori, if petitioners’ settlement of veterans’ claims not 
protected against by petitioners’ contested government 
contractor defense should give rise to an implied contract for 
indemnification of their litigation expenses, every contractor 
who actually wins, rather than settles, a suit in which it raises 
a government contractor defense will also have an implied 
contractual claim against the government for their litigation 
expenses necessary to assert and win the defense. 

Until the Westfall Act was enacted in 1988, the United 
States was not required to assume the cost of defending its 
own employees against third party claims arising out of their 
employment. See Falkowski v. EEOC, 783 F.2d 252 (D.C. 
Cir. 1986). There is no greater reason to imply such a 
requirement with contractors which, as business corporations 
having limited liability, are better able than are individual 
employees to limit, insure against, and externalize costs. 
Contractors also have greater bargaining power to obtain an 
express indemnity provision. 


29 


Where such an indemnity provision was expressly 
provided in the Departmes: of Energy's contracts with 
producers of nuclear materials, administrative experience has 
not been good. The provision opened up opportunities to 
raid the treasury, and for that reason its use has recently been 
discontinued by the DOE. See GAO, Managing DOE: 
Tighter Controls Needed Over the Department of Energy's 
Outside Litigation Costs (T-RCED-94-264)(July 14, 1994). 
Expanding Spearin to create an implied indemnity clause in 
all government contracts for third party tort claims would cast 
across the whole range of government contracts the 
administrative can of worms experienced by the DOE. 

Nothing prevents the government from contracting for 
such a provision in particular circumstances, such as it did in 
the context of the special dangers and urgency of the nuclear 
enterprise. But the Court would be treading on matters 
properly assigned to executive discretion and legislative 
power to now amend all government contracts to add such a 
provision. 

Petitioners’ suggestion that this provision would only 
apply to products requisitioned under the DPA does not make 
sense. First, as the court below held, the DPA framework 
expressly provides immunity from third party contract claims 
that arise from the contractor's forced prioritization of war 
production over existing commercial contracts. Since the 
DPA neither provides an indemnity remedy of any kind, nor 
even extends an immunity from tort claims, it is an 
inappropriate vehicle for such a major change in the law. 
Second, within this framework, the DPA expressly leaves 
manufacturers bargaining power over the "prices and terms 
of sale", and petitioners were therefore free to bargain for an 
indemnity provision. 32A CFR Ch. VI, DMS Reg. 1, Dir. 3 
§3(b)(3)( 1959); id. BDSA Reg. 2 §10(c)(1) (1953). Nothing 
in petitioners’ pleading indicated that they had attempted to 
do so, and were subsequently denied an express indemnity as 
a condition of sale. 


CONCLUSION 


Petitioners posture as victims when in fact they victimized 
veterans twice. First they negligently contaminated their 
herbicide with dioxin, a highly toxic chemical that was not 
included in the design specifications. Second, they procured 
a collusive settlement by which they escaped potentially 
enormous liability to the veterans, with the cooperation of the 
federal judiciary. 

Federal courts justified the settlement with rulings on fact 
issues that, however erroneous, effectively imposed a sell-out 
settlement on unwilling veterans for the benefit of petitioners. 
These courts denied veterans a jury trial on dispositive fact 
issues by dictating that no veteran could win an Agent 
Orange claim. Petitioners, who benefited enormously from 
them, should now be as bound by those rulings as are the 
veterans. If no veteran could win an Agent Orange claim, 
then there was no reason for petitioners to have settled their 
claims, and no grounds to request indemnification from the 
government for that settlement. Petitioners should be 
estopped from arguing otherwise. 

That these rulings were, in fact, part of a series of 
transparent devices to obtain a settlement at a very cheap 
cost, and that without these payments petitioners would have 
been liable for enormous damages does not provide an 
occasion to plead for a new government indemnity. 

For these reasons, the decision of the Court of Appeals for 
the Federal Circuit should be upheld. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Robert M. Hager 
Counsel of Record 
2020 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW « 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 333-0099 
August 18, 1995 


