Wa. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 


Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Respondent. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF 


GREGORY W. HOMER JAMES S, TURNER 
RHONDA D. ORIN ALAN DUMOFF 
ANDERSON KILL OLICK SWANKIN & TURNER 
& OSHINSKY 1424 16th Street, N.W. 

2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Suite 105 
Suite 7500 Washington, D.C. 20036 
Washington, D.C. 20006 (202) 462-8800 
(202) 728-3100 CarTER G. PHILLIPS * 
WALTER S. ROWLAND SIDLEY & AUSTIN 
HERCULES INC. 1722 I Street, N.W. 
Hercules Plaza Suite 900 
Wilmington, Delaware 19894 Washington, D.C. 20006 
(302) 594-5000 (202) 736-8000 

Counsel for Petitioners 
* Counsel of Record 


WiLson - Eres Printing Co.. Inc. - 789-0096 - WasHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


ait 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY: 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


THE SPEARIN CLAIM 


THE DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT CLAIM 


CONCLUSION 


oo - 


10 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
In Re “Agent Orange’ Product Liability Litiga- 
tion, 597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) ............ « 6 
In Re “Agent Orange” Product Liability Litiga- 
tion, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987) 6-7 
Alabama Metal Products, Inc. v. United States, 4 
Cl. Ct. 580 (1984) 10 
California-Pacifie Utilities Co., 194 Ct. Cl. at 720.. 9 
Damanti v. a/s Inger, 314 F.2d 395 (2d Cir. 1963), 
cert. denied, 375 U.S. 834 (1963) 5 
Dynalectron Corp. v. United States, 4 Cl. Ct. 424 
| SE: 10 
Eastern Airlines, Inc. v. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 
582 F.2d 957 (5th Cir. 1976) . 8 


Electro-Methods, Inc. v. United States, 8 Cl. Ct. 

500 (1983), aff'd in part, 728 F.2d 1471 (Fed. 

Cir. 1964) ........... 10 
Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 F.2d 712 (Fed. Cir. 

1988), cert. denied sub nom., Eagle-Picher In- 

dustries v. United States, 491 US. 904 (1989)... 9-10 
Matter of Assumption by Government of Contrac- 

tor Liability to Third Persons—Reconsideration, 

62 Comp. Gen. 361 ... 10 
Space Age Engineering, Inc. v. United States, 4 

Cl. Ct. 789 (1984) ................ 10 
Tankrederiet Gefion A/S v. Hyman-Michaels Co., 

406 F.2d 1039 (6th Cir. 1969) . 4-5 
United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 182 (1918)-....... 2 


STATUTES 
Defense Production Act, Section 707, 50 U.S.C. 


~ 
. 


In THE 
Supreme Comet of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-818 


HERCULES INCORPORATED 
and 
Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
7 Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF 


INTRODUCTION 


From the moment petitioners were ordered to produce 
Agent Orange subject to the enforcement provisions of the 
Defense Production Act, the damages suffered by these 
manufacturers were inescapable. While the government 
would like to pretend otherwise, the following facts must 
be accepted as true at this stage in the litigation: 


(1) pursuant to its authority under the Defense 
Production Act, the government compelled petition- 
ers Wm. T. Thomspon Company (“Thompson”) 
and Hercules Incorporated (“Hercules”) to manu- 


2 


facture Agent Orange in accordance with specifica- 
tions devised by the government; 


(2) the government, but not petitioners, knew that 
Agent Orange manufactured according to the gov- 
ernment’s specifications was potentially dangerous; 


(3) the government’s use of Agent Orange in Viet- 
nam led to petitioners being sued in tort by a class 
of individuals allegedly harmed by exposure to 
Agent Orange; 


(4) Thompson and Hercules entered into a reason- 
able settlement of these tort claims on the eve of a 
trial where they faced enormous potential liability, 
and did so only after petitioners had attempted with- 
out success to have the case dismissed prior to trial 
on the basis of what eventually came to be known 
as the government contractor defense; and 


(5) had Thompson and Hercules followed the 
course suggested by the government, rejected settle- 
ment and faced enormous potential liability at trial, 
the best that could have occurred was that liability 
to the Agent Orange class would have been avoided, 
but the companies still would have faced legal fees 
of a magnitude comparable to the amounts that peti- 
tioners paid out in settlement. 


On this set of facts, the court of appeals held that, as a 
matter of law, petitioners had no remedy against the gov- 
ernment. 


Two issues arising from the court of appeals’ ruling are 
the subject of this petition: first, whether the government 
can use the government contractor defense to tort claims 
to bar breach of contract claims against the United States 
that otherwise would be permissible under United States 
v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918); and, second, whether 
the plain language of the Defense Production Act requires 
the United States to reimburse petitioners for the damages 
they suffered as a consequence of being compelled to 
manufacture Agent Orange. The government’s opposition 


3 


to the petition consists largely of arguments for disposing 
of petitioners’ contract claims on alternative grounds, 
grounds upon which the court of appeals expressly de- 
clined to rely. To the extent that the government defends 
the court of appeals’ actual resolution of the first issue 
posed above, the government’s argument actually supports 
granting the petition. The government’s argument on the 
second issue is a non sequitur and provides no reasoned 
basis for opposing the petition. 


In contrast, petitioners have already demonstrated the 
generalized importance of having these two issues decided 
by this Court. Indeed, the need for this Court’s review in 
this case has now been seconded by the United States 
Chamber of Commerce which has filed an amicus brief 
urging that the petition be granted. 


THE SPEARIN CLAIM 


The court of appeals rested its rejection of the Spearin 
contractual warranty claim asserted by Hercules and 
Thompson on one ground and one ground only: because 
Hercules and Thompson settled with the Agent Orange 
class on the eve of trial instead of continuing to litigate, 
Hercules and Thompson “volunteered” to suffer the dam- 
ages which inevitably flowed from the government’s con- 
scription of their manufacturing facilities. In their peti- 
tion to this Court, Hercules and Thompson demonstrated 
that certiorari should be granted because this ruling by 
the court of appeals conflicts with established contract 
principles and important policy considerations, and will 
create unnecessary confusion and uncertainty through its 
application of tort law concepts and policies to the arena 
of government contracting. 


In opposing the petition, the government itself finds 
little that is defensible in the holding of the court of ap- 
peals. Instead, the government seeks to rely on alterna- 
tive grounds to dispose of petitioners’ Spearin claim, 
grounds which the court of appeals expressly declined to 


4 


rely on as a basis for its decision.’ It is wholly inappro- 
priate for the government to urge that review be denied 
in this case on grounds the court of appeals rejected. 
The United States urged the causation theory which the 
court of appeals adopted below and the United States 
should defend that holding now. 


What little the government does say in defense of the 
court of appeals’ actual ruling on the Spearin claim bol- 
sters the case for granting the petition. The government’s 
argument highlights the split in the circuits as to whether 
“actual liability” to third parties must be demonstrated 
before recovery may be had on a breach of warranty 
claim, or whether “potential liability” is sufficient. 


The government contends that the court of appeals’ 
resolution of the Spearin claim could be upheld on the 
grounds that such a claim would require not merely a 
showing of “potential liability” to the third-party tort 
plaintiffs as petitioners urge, but would necessitate a dem- 
onstration of “actual liability” in tort to the Agent 
Orange plaintiffs. Op. Cert. at pp. 19-20 (emphasis in 
original). In making this argument, the government cites 
to Tankrederiet Gefion A/S v. Hyman-Michaels Co., 406 


1 For example, the government argues that “there is no reason 
for this Court to question the conclusion that petitioners’ implied 
indemnity claim is too implausible to present a genuine issue of 
fact for trial.” Op. Cert. at 18. However, no such “conclusion” is 
to be found anywhere in the court of appeals’ decision. Similarly 
misplaced is the government’s attempts to argue against the grant 
of certiorari on the basis that petitioners would not be able to 
prove a breach of warranty because there is no “credible evidence” 
that Agent Orange actually injured the tort plaintiffs in the Agent 
Orange litigation. Op. Cert. at 14-15. In the first place, proof of 
actual injury to the Agent Orange plaintiffs (as opposed to proof 
of injury to Hercules and Thompson) is completely irrelevant to 
the elements of petitioners’ breach of warranty claims as urged in 
this Court because there was a judicial finding that there was 
sufficient exposure to make settlement reasonable. In any event, 
this was not the basis of the court of appeals’ decision, nor could 
it be in the posture in which the case was decided. 


F.2d 1039, 1042 (6th Cir. 1969), as adopting a “general 
rule” requiring a showing of actual liability. What the 
government flatly ignores is that at least one other circuit 
has rejected this approach and has held that potential 
liability is sufficient, even where a jury subsequently makes 
findings which establish that no actual liability existed. 
Damanti v. a/s Inger, 314 F.2d 395 (2d Cir. 1963), cert. 
denied, 375 U.S. 834 (1963). The existence of this split 
in the circuits on this fundamental question of third party 
liability when applied in the government contracts context 
is a powerful reason for this court to grant the petition.” 


Most of what remains of the government’s argument in 
support of the court of appeals’ resolution of the Spearin 
claim consists of an effort to demonstrate that the under- 
lying settlement in the Agent Orange litigation was not 
reasonable. Indeed, the government goes so far as to 
make the conclusory pronouncement that “petitioners’ set- 
tlement could not have been ‘reasonable.’” Op. Cert. at 
20. Such a contention flies in the face of the government’s 
admissions that the government contractor defense is “fac- 
tual” in nature and that the government actively opposed 
petitioners’ efforts to rely on this defense in the Agent 
Orange litigation. Op. Cert. at p. 4, note 2. 


While it is true that, without the benefits of any fact 
finding, the Federal Circuit impliedly held that the Agent 


2The government also argues that the theory underlying peti- 
tioners’ Spearin claims would “cede to government contractors the 
power to create indirect governmental liability to tort plaintiffs,” 
and would “encourage military contractors to settle meritless prod- 
uct liability suits and then seek to recover the related costs through 
breach of contract claims.” Op. Cert. at p. 18. While this argu- 
ment merely begs the larger question as to who should pay for 
the costs that undeniably were associated with the compelled pro- 
duction of Agent Orange, it does serve to illustrate the important 
ramifications of how that question ultimately is answered. In 
point of fact, the Court of Appeals’ interpretation of the Spearin 
doctrine results in a radical restructuring of the relationship 
between the government and its contractors which warrants the 
attention of this Court. 


6 


Orange settlement was unreasonable, this only exposes 
the fundamental error in the decision below. In particu- 
lar, the Agent Orange settlement already has been de- 
clared reasonable and that finding is not subject to at- 
tack in petitioners’ suit for breach of warranty. Judge 
Weinstein issued a 159-page opinion assessing the reason- 
ableness of the settlement. In Re “Agent Orange” Product 
Liability Litigation, 597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). 
He concluded as follows: 


From the defendants’ point of view the settlement is 
reasonable: First, defending the case would have 
cost more tens of millions of dollars in legal fees 
and expenses plus the time of employees and execu- 
tives who could be doing more productive work. 
Second, though slight, there was a possibility of an 
ultimate liability with claims totalling billions of 
dollars. Third, an ongoing emotional trial would 
have created adverse publicity (whether or not un- 
fair), perhaps causing a spillover effect against de- 
fendants’ other products. Fourth, continued litiga- 
tion and the possibility of an adverse result has a 
negative influence on the financial community, caus- 
ing greater financing expenses as the companies be- 
come less attractive to investors. 


Id. at 857. 


The Agent Orange settlement was also approved as rea- 
sonable at the appellate level in Jn Re “Agent Orange” 
Product Liability Litigation, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 
1987): 


[G]iven the serious nature of many of the various 
ailments and birth defects plaintiffs’ attributed to 
Agent Orange, the understandable sympathy a jury 
would have for the particular plaintiffs, and the large 
number of claimants, 240,000 . . . [the manufac- 
turers of Agent Orange] were exposed potentially to 
billions of dollars in damages if liability was estab- 
lished and millions in attorneys’ fees merely to con- 
tinue the litigation . . . tort law accords juries wide 


7 


discretion, and the existence of any substantial num- 
ber of serious plaintiffs would create a dangerous 
exposure for the chemical companies. 

Id. at 151. 


Finally, the government contends that the elements of 
the government contractor defense and the Spearin claim 
are co-extensive, and argues that one oe « able to 
meet their burden under Spearin here, then they could 
have met the terms of the defense in the underlying tort 
case. The government's fascile logic disguises what is in 
reality yet another attempt to challenge the reasonableness 
of the underlying settlement in the Agent Orange litiga- 
tion. Moreover, while the government argues that the 
government contract defense and the Spearin claim are 
“carefully calibrated” to protect innocent suppliers (Op. 
Cert. at 19 n.10), there exists no exposition by this Court 
of that calibration.* The question is how to apportion 
liability when an innocent contractor is injured as a result 
of the government’s actions in compelling production of a 
potentially dangerous product. Given the interests at the 
heart of these doctrines, the answer should be an inquiry 
into fault. Where the fault is the United States’, then 
liability should rest there as well. 


THE DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT CLAIM 


The Defense Production Act (“DPA” or “Act”), under 
whose authority Hercules and Thompson were compelled 
to manufacture Agent Orange, contains a hold harmless 
provision indemnifying manufacturers from liability “for 
damages or penalties for any act . . . resulting directly or 
indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, or 
order issued pursuant to this Act .. .” DPA Section 707, 
50 U.S.C. § 2157. The plain language of Section 707 


8 Moreover, this “careful calibration” certainly did not exist in 
1984 when the Agent Orange litigation was settled; it could not 
and did not work in this case, leaving petitioners with liability 
so significant that it forced Thompson out of business. 


8 


creates a quid pro quo immunizing manufacturers from 
liability for the conduct they are compelled to perform 
under the Act. See Brief Amicus Curiae of the Chamber 
of Commerce of the United States of America, at p. 9. 


The government’s approach to the analysis is to repeat 
the court of appeals’ conclusion that “Congress did not 
intend Section 707 of the Act to confer an immunity 
broader than the risk imposed by Section 101.” Op. Cert. 
at 22. This response merely begs the question; petitioners 
do not seek an immunity broader than that clearly granted 
by the Act. What is pointedly ignored by the United 
States and the court of appeals is that the authority under 
Section 101 directed at Hercules and Thompson was the 
ability to compel acceptance and performance. The issue 
is whether damages arising from compelled performance 
are covered by the hold harmless provision of the Act. 
The government’s answer is to avoid the plain language 
of the Act by italicizing language authorizing the United 
States to compel priority,‘ thus directing the Court’s atten- 
tion away from the language relevant to this case which 
authorizes the United States to compel acceptance and 
performance of a contract. 


* The government’s statutory construction is so unique it actually 
supports petitioners’ request that certiorari be granted. The gov- 
ernment represents that the second sentence of Section 707 “refers 
specifically to contracts assigned priority under section 101, [which] 
supports the court’s reading of the shield provision.” Op. Cert. at 
22 n.12. No rule of statutory construction allows the sweeping 
language of the first sentence to be limited by specifics which 
follow. See dissenting opinion of Judge Plager, App. 44a-45a. 


The United States also suggests that the “notwithstanding” 
clause in the first sentence of Section 707 creates “an even more 
limited construction.” Op. Cert. at 22 n.12. This language reveals 
quite the opposite, as this clause confers immunities: “notwith- 
standing that any such rule, regulation or order shall thereafter 
be declared by judicial or other competent authority to be invalid.” 
The scope of this hold harmless provision is so sweeping that even 
damages arising from orders held invalid are subject to the protec- 
tions of Section 707. Eastern Airlines, Inc. v. McDonnell Douglas 
Corp., 532 F.2d 957, 997 (6th Cir. 1976). 


9 


The language of the DPA is extremely clear that the 
scope of damages sought to be protected is all-inclusive. 
Congress sought to protect manufacturers compelled to 
perform contracts in emphatic language that “[n]o person 
shall be held liable” for demages resulting “directly or 
indirectly” from such compulsion. 50 U.S.C. § 2157. 
Where compulsion is used to require a private manu- 
facturer to turn production facilities to Government use, 
Congress clearly intended that no harm befall the “com- 
pany as a result. See Brief Amicus Curiae of the Chamber 
of Commerce of the United States of America, at p. 10. 
That is not the case here.* 


The United States questions whether the indemnity pro- 
visions of the DPA could lead to an implied-in-fact agree- 
ment to indemnify.* Petitioner argued below the Govern- 


5 The clear breadth of this proscription against liability also pro- 
vides support for petitioners’ Spearin argument. Where the gov- 
ernment contractor defense and the Spearin claim act in concert, 
an innocent manufacturer should be protected. Where they fail to 
act in concert, as happened in the underlying case here, the ques- 
tion arises as to whether the United States or the manufacturer 
should bear the liubility. Petitioners argue above that fault should 
provide the answer. Congressional intent in enacting the DPA 
also supports the government’s liability in this case. 


6 The United States also argues that even were the scope of the 
Act to be seen as providing indemnity to petitioners, the Anti- 
Deficiency Act would prohibit such a finding. The purpose of the 
Anti-Deficiency Act is to keep an agent or officer of the Government 
from binding the United States to a contractual provision which 
would create a liability which is open-ended or otherwise in excess 
of what Congress appropriated for the matter. California-Pacific 
Utilities Co., 194 Ct. Cl. at 720. If the contract officer had writ- 
ten an indemnity provision under which petitioners now have 
brought an action, then the Anti-Deficiency Act might apply. An 
implied-in-fact indemnity, just as an implied-in-fact warranty, is 
a judicially fashioned remedy which acknowledges the context in 
which a contract arose. As such, it stems from the powers of the 
court rather than from a contract officer. The courts, therefore, 
have authority to enforce such an indemnity without being subject 
to the Anti-Deficiency Act. See Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 F.2d 


10 


ment’s 1) compulsion, 2) control over both specifications 
and production, 3) prohibition against labeling and warn- 
ing, 4) the “hold harmless” provision of the Defense Pro- 
duction Act, 50 U.S.C. § 2157, under which the compul- 
sion was brought, and 5) use of a manufacturer to its 
detriment create a factual context which gives rise to an 
implied-in-fact agreement to indemnify. As noted in 
Space Age Engineering, Inc. v. United States, 4 Cl. Ct. 
739, 742 (1984): 


This court cannot redress the violation of a statute 
or regulation which creates no enforceable rights, 
(citations omitted), but a plaintiff may rely on the 
violation of a statute or regulation to show its 
implied contract for fair consideration has been 
breached. Dynalectron Corp. v. United States, 4 Cl. 
Ct. 424, 428 (1984); see also Alabama Metal Prod- 
ucts, Inc. v. United States, 4 Cl. Ct. 530, 534 
(1984); Electro-Methods, Inc. v. United States, 3 
Cl. Ct. 500, 508 (1983), aff'd in part, 728 F.2d 
1471 at 1475 (Fed. Cir. 1984). 


In sum, the government provides no reason why this 
Court should not determine the breadth of the immunity 
conferred under the Defense Production Act. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, and those stated in both the 
petition and amicus brief filed by the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be 
granted. 


712, 716 (Fed. Cir. 1988), cert. denied sub nom, Eagle-Picher 
Industries v. United States, 491 U.S. 904 (1989). Additionally, 
were Deficiency Act held to apply, indemnification would not be 
barred because of exceptions for hazardous activities and for 
compelled production. See Matter of Assumption by Government 
of Contractor Liability to Third Persons-Reconsideration, 62 Comp. 
Gen. 361 at 365. 


Respectfully submitted, 


GREGORY W. HOMER JAMES S. TURNER 
RHONDA D. ORIN ALAN DUMOFF 
ANDERSON KILL OLICK SWANKIN & TURNER 
& OSHINSKY 1424 16th Street, N.W. 

2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Suite 105 
Suite 7500 Washington, D.C. 20086 
Washington, D.C. 20006 (202) 462-8800 
(202) 728-8100 CARTER G. PHILLIPS * 
WALTER S. ROWLAND SIDLEY & AUSTIN 
HERCULES INC. 1722 I Street, N.W. 
Hercules Plaza Suite 900 
Wilmington, Delaware 19894 Washington, D.C. 20006 
(302) 594-5000 (202) 736-8000 

Counsel for Petitioners 
* Counsel of Record 


Dated: March 15, 1995 


