OR ARGUMENT | FILED 


(4) DEC 7 1995 
No. 95-6 


inten " THE CLERK 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


; 


NORFOLK & WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, 
¥ Petitioner, 


WILLIAM J. HILEs, 


Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial District 


BRIEF OF THE UNITED TRANSPORTATION UNION 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


CLINTON J. MILLEs, ITI ROBERT E. HARRINGTON, JR. 
General Counsel RoBERT B. THOMPSON * 
UNITED TRANSPORTATION PATRICK J. HARRINGTON 
UNION HARRINGTON, THOMPSON, 

14600 Detroit Avenue ACKER & HARRINGTON, LD. 
Cleveland, OH 44107 $10 S. Michigan Avenue 
(216) 228-9400 Suite 2000 

Chicago, IL 60604 

(812) 922-8883 

Counsel for Amicus 


December 7, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .........................c-cc-ccecee-enceeees iii 
STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE.. 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ...W02.0..........:ccccccececcoseeeeee 3 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ......... vaeneaieiinlidiaeas 3 


A. Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act Requires 
Couplers Which Perform as Described by the 
Plain Language of the Act ...00000 3 


B. Prior Rulings of This Court Have Been Consist- 
ent With the Plain Language of Section 2 of the 
I 4 


C. The Same Policy Considerations That Existed 
When Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act Was 
Drafted Still Exist Today ........0.00000000000000000 5 


FE, AS ONE FNL AOR, OS 6 


I. THE COURT SHOULD RE-AFFIRM ITS 
PRIOR DECISIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
CONSISTENT WITH THE PLAIN LAN- 
GUAGE OF SECTION 2 OF THE SAFETY 
IE AE Xeclincticcaciindinatitiistintnterames 6 


II. THE FAILURE OF CARS TO COUPLE AUTO- 
MATICALLY UPON IMPACT WITHOUT THE 
NECESSITY OF INDIVIDUALS TO GO BE- 
TWEEN THE CARS IS A VIOLATION OF 
SECTION 2 OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE 
RIE ES mee NO RIOR RMON CN A TR 10 


A. A Misaligned Drawbar, Which Requires 
Manual Adjustment Between the Cars, Vio- 
lates Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act... 11 


B. The Presence or Absence of a “Defect” Is 
Immaterial Under Section 2 of the Safety 
IE IIE catictten dss niedeaditenssiameininesite tect 14 


ii iii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS—Continued TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page CASES Page 
Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Lewis R.R., 
III. SECTION 2 OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE , 
ACT IS VITAL TO THE RAILROAD EM- 339 US. 96 (1950) . peneqensesneuasncensetnasagas eoceeenasseesens passim 


Atlantic City R.R. v. Parker, 242 U.S. 56 (1916). 9, 10 


cae ai cakes tee oe PERFORM a Carter v. Atlantic & St. Andrews Bay Ry. Co., 338 
a US. 490 (1949) ‘gescim 
. Delk v. St. Louis & San Francisco Ry., 220 US. 
SR EARLE at ENS AC a 18 580 (1911) 13 
Goedel v. Norfolk & W. R.R., ‘18 F.3d 807 (4th 
Cir. 1994) in 14 
Johnaon v. Southern Pacific RR., 196 US. 1 
(1904) 6 
Kansas City S. Ry. v. Cagle, 229 F.2d 12 (10th Cir. 
1955), cert. denied, 351 U.S. 908 (1956) ~~ 11 
Kavorkian v. CSX Transportation, Inc., 33 F.3d 
570 (6th Cir. 1994) . i 14 
Lisek v. Norfolk & W. Rwy. ™ 30 F.3d 823 (7th Cir. 
1994) .. . 14,15 
Metcalfe v. Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Rwy.., 
491 F.2d 892 (10th Cir. 1974) ........ | 12 
O’ Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & E. R. Co., 338 U.S. 384 
(1949) passim 
Reed v. Philadelphia, Bethlehem & N.E.R.R., 939 
F.2d 128 (3rd Cir. 1991) 10,14 
San Antonio, etc. R.R. v. Wagner, 166 3.W. 24, 
aff'd, 241 U.S. 476 (1916) _. _ 9,10 


Schaaf v. Chesapeake & Ohio Ry., 317 N.W.2d 679 
(Mich. Ct. App. 1988), cert. denied, 464 U.S, 848 


(1983) _.. | —' > 
United Transportation Union v. Lewis, 7il F.2d 
233 (D.C. Cir. 19838) - passim 
Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163 (1946) ao 2 
Statutes and Regulations 


Federal Safety Appliance Act, Title 45 U.S.C. Sec- 
tion 2 [currently codified at Title 49 U.S.C. Sec- 
tion 203802(a)(1)(A)] . . ‘passim 
Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970, Title 45 
WB. Bertha GBR, GB COG. ....ccccnccccccecccccccccccccesesee 13 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Miscellaneous 


Accident/Incident Bulletin No. 163, Calendar Year 
1994, U.S. Department of Transportation, Tables 
SS 8) a ee ae ee 

aaa 

Report of the Committee On Interstate And For- 
eign Commerce on S. 1993 To Provide for Fed- 
eral Railroad Safety, Hazardous Materials Con- 
trol and For Other Purposes, June 16, 1970, 
House Report No. 91-1194 200s 

1970 Cong. Rec. 4109 (1970) 0 


Page 3 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToser TERM, 1995 


No. 95-6 


Norrouk & WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


WILLIAM J. HILEs, 


Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial District 


BRIEF OF THE UNITED TRANSPORTATION UNION 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


This brief of the United Transportation Union is filed 
with the consent of the perties, the letters expressing con- 
sent having been filed with the Clerk of the Court. 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF ..MICUS CURIAE 


The United Transportation Union is a voluntary labor 
organization representing railroad transportation em- 
ployees on every major railroad in the United States. On 
a daily basis railroad workers put their own safety at risk, 
and rely on the protection of the Federal Employers Li- 


2 


ability Act and the Federal Safety Appliance Act. These 
Acts are vital to the ability of these workers to safely and 
efficiently perform their duties. The United Transporta- 
tion Union fully supports the arguments presented on 
behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, William J. Hiles, and 
urges this Court to affirm the decision of the Illinois 
Appellate Court below. Although the decision by this 
Court is important to Mr. Hiles, it has even greater sig- 
nificance for the thousands of railroad workers in the 
United States who form the life blood of our railway 
system. 

The language of the Safety Appliance Act, Title 45 
U.S.C. Section 2' and the key judicial opinions inter- 
preting the Act are discussed later in this brief as well as 
the briefs filed by the parties to this Appeal. Lost in the 
debate, however, is any reference to the one, overriding 
issue that prompted Congress to enact the Safety Appli- 
ance Act in 1893. That is, who should bear the risks 
and the burdens of performing certain jobs that are haz- 
ardous, but essential to the operation of a railroad? Con- 
gress conclusively answered this question in 1893 by 
deciding, as a matter of public policy, that the risks and 
burdens of performing certain hazardous operations should 
be borne by the railroad industry, not by those unfortu- 
nate few individuals who happen to be injured while per- 
forming their assigned duties. In 1946, this Court 
specifically recognized and sanctioned the public policy 
decision made by Congress in 1893, finding oa Congress 
created the Safety Appliance Act to equitably allocate the 
inevitable costs of human injury associated with the rail- 
road industry. Uric v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163 (1946). 

Nevertheless, the AAR and its member railroads seek 
to have this Court do for them what they have been un- 


' The Safety Appliance Act (hereinafter SAA) was originally 
codified at Title 45 U.S.C. Sections 1-16. Section 2 is currently 
codified at Title 49 U.S.C. Section 20802(a)(1)(A). For purposes 
of clarity, the citations in this Brief are to the original code 
sections. 


3 


able to persuade Congress to do, that is to effectively re- 
peal Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act or turn it into 
a product liability statute. The AAR brief expresses 
apparent dismay over their claim that its member rail- 
roads spend approximately 4% of their gross revenues 
on “FELA”. Nowhere is it claimed that this expenditure 
is related primarily to coupler cases as opposed to all 
injury claims. In fact, statistics show a human cost. Ac- 
cording to Federal Railroad Administration records, in 
1994 there were 31 rail deaths nationwide. Of those, 2 
deaths were trainmen (a class of employees overwhelm- 
ingly represented by the United Transportation Union) 
killed while adjusting couplers on railcars which were 
moving or moved unexpectedly. Accident/Incident Bulle- 
tin No. 163, Calendar Year 1994, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, Tables 8, 9, 66 and 67. Petitioner not 
only seeks judicial approval of the practice, but seeks to 
eliminate Safety Appliance Act compensation for those 
injuries and deaths. Petitioner would impose a potential 
100% loss of “revenues” to those surviving widows and 
children. Furthermore, suffice it to say that no decision 
of this Court or any court has premised an interpretation 
of the Safety Appliance Act on the claimed economic 
burden of such safety laws upon a defendant. Indeed, if 
such claims had merit, Congress is the body to which 
this concern should be addressed. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Amicus adopts the statement of the case in Respond- 
ent’s brief. 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


A. Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act requires Couplers 
Which Perform as Described by the Plain Language 
of the Act 


The Safety Appliance Act requires railroads to use 
cars which couple automatically upon impact without the 
necessity of railroad employees going between the ends 


4 


of the railroad cars. 45 U.S.C. Section 2. The Act re- 
quires performance on the occasion in question. Peti- 


tioner and the Association of American Railroads con- 


tend that an injured employee must prove a defect in 
order to establish a violation of the Safety Appliance Act 
and that the “properly set” requirement extends to manual 
adjustment of couplers and drawbars between the ends of 
cars. Such an interpretation is directly contrary to United 
States Supreme Court decisions holding that the condition 
of the equipment is immaterial and further is contrary to 
the plain language of the Act because railroad employees 
would be required to go between the ends of railroad 
cars to realign the couplers in order to effectuate a 
coupling. 


The phrase “without the necessity of men going be- 
tween the ends of the cars” is descriptive of the equipment 
and the manner in which that equipment is to perform. 
The statute requires performance—not flawless compo- 
nents. A mechanically perfect coupler which fails to per- 
form as required violates the Act. The absence of a 
defect cannot aid the railroad. Carter v. Atlantic & St. 
Andrews Bay Ry. Co., 338 U.S. 430 (1949). 


B. Prior Rulings of This Court Have Been Consistent With 
the Plain Language of Section 2 of the Safety Appliance 
Act 


The arguments of Petitioner, if adopted, would require 
this Court to overrule or ignore clear, fundamental rul- 
ings in earlier cases arising under Section 2 of the Safety 
Appliance Act, 45 U.S.C. Section 2. [See Affolder v. 
New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. 96, 99 
(1950); Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay Railway 
Co., 338 U.S. 430 (1949); O'Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & 
E.R. Co., 338 U.S. 384 at 390 (1949)] 


The first and most important concept is that the plain 
words of the statute mandate the equipment to perform 
as required. 


5 


Second, the failure to perform as required by the Act 
is the actionable wrong. 


Third, all issues of negligence or fault based analysis 
have been eliminated. 


Fourth, the condition of the equipment, bad or good, 
the absence of a defect, or the fact that it worked on 
other occasions, is immaterial. 


This Court has recognized one defense to the Safety 
Appliance Act. That is, if the failure to couple is caused 
by a knuckle not being properly opened, tie plaintiff's 
claim for damages will be defeated. Affolder v. New 
York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. 96, 99 (1950). 
This defense is consistent with the plain words of the 
Act since the knuckle of the coupler can be opened with- 
out the necessity of men going between the ends of the 
cars. When railroad employees are required to go be- 
tween railroad cars in order to manually re-align a draw- 
bar, they face an entirely different situation than they do 
when it is necessary to open a railroad knuckle in order 
to effectuate a coupling. The pivotal difference between 
these two activities is the fact that the coupler or knuckle 
can be opened or “set” without the need for the employee 
to go between the ends of the cars, while realignment of 
a drawbar requires employees to go between the ends of 
railroad cars. 


C. The Same Policy Considerations That Existed When 
Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act Was Drafted 
Still Exist Today 


Congress has determined that certain railroad activities 
are so hazardous, and so far beyond the control of the 
individual worker, that any employee who is injured or 
killed while engaged in one of these activities should be 
entitled to compensation, regardless of fault. The process 
of preparing to couple and uncouple cars is one of those 
activities. The foundation for this public policy decision 
is basic, fundamental fairness. The Safety Appliance Act, 


6 


unlike the FELA, is not a fault-based statute. It is a per- 
formance only statute. Proof that a coupling mechanism 
was or was not defective is immaterial under the Safety 
Appliance Act. The only question is whether the coupling 
mechanism performed as required by the Act, that is, 
without the necessity of individuals going between the end 
of the cars. Our members, railroad working men and 
women, who are constantly exposed to the risks of the 
coupling process are entitled to no less than the funda- 
mental fairness that the Safety Appliance Act provides as 
evidenced by the plain language of that Act and the clear 
legislative purpose and intei: expressed by Congress. 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE COURT SHOULD RE-AFFIRM ITS PRIOR 
DECISIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN CONSISTENT 
WITH THE PLAIN LANGUAGE OF SECTION 2 
OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE ACT 


As early as 1904, this Court held that the phrase “with- 
out the necessity of men going between the ends of the 
cars” applies equally to coupling and uncoupling. John- 
son v. Southern Pacific R.R., 196 U.S. 1 (1904). Or, 
as the Circuit Court of Appeals in United Transportation 
Union v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 233, 244 (D.C. Gir. 1983) 
stated: “a licit coupler is one which can be coupled and 
uncoupled without men having to go between the ends 
of the cars.” 


This Court “. . . early swept all the issues of negligence 
out of cases under the Safety Appliance Act... A failure 
of equipment to perform as required by the [Safety Ap- 
pliance Act] is in itself an actionable wrong, in no way 
dependent upon negligence and for the proximate results 
of which there is liability—a liability that cannot be es- 
caped by proof of care or diligence . . . The statutory 
liability is not based upon the carrier’s negligence.” 
O'Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & E. R. Co., 338 US. 384 
at 390 (1949). In Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay 
Railway Co., 338 U.S. 430 (1949) the Court stated: 


7 


This Court has repeatedly attempted to make clear 
that this is an absolute duty not based upon negli- 
gence, and that absence of a defect cannot aid the 
railroad if the coupler was properly set and failed to 
couple on the occasion in question . . . The fact the 
coupler functioned properly on other occasions is 
immaterial. 
Id, at 433-434. (Emphasis added). 


Furthermore, under the Safety Appliance Act a plain- 
tiff does not have to prove why the couplers failed to 
couple automatically or that the couplers were defective 
or in bad condition. This Court, referring to the O’Don- 
nell decision, stated in Affolder v. New York, Chicago & 
St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. 96, 99 (1950): 
The plaintiff did not have to show a ‘bad’ condition 
of the coupler; she was entitled to a peremptory in- 
struction that to equip a car with a coupler which 
failed to perform properly “in the switching opera- 
tion was a violation of the Act, which rendered de- 
fendant liable for injuries proximately resulting there- 
from, and that neither evidence of negligence nor of 
diligence and care was to be considered on the ques- 
tion of this liability”. 

Id. at 99, quoting O’Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & E. R. Co., 

338 U.S. 384 at 394 (1949). 


Indeed, in O'Donnell, this Court rejected the opinion 
of the lower court that as a result of the broken coupler 
the “jury may. . . infer that the coupler was defective 
and was furnished in violation of the Act.” O’Donnell, 
338 U.S. at 386-387. Instead, this Court ordered a per- 
emptory instruction that a coupler which broke in the 
switching operation was a violation of the Act. 


In O'Donnell, the defendant railroad also sought to 
avoid liability by arguing that the coupling failed con- 
currently with an emergency stop. The Court noted such 
evidence “might be material on the question of negli- 
gence. But the [Safety Appliance Act] certainly requires 


equipment that will withstand the stress and strain of ail 
ordinary operation, grades, loading, stops and starts, in- 
cluding emergency stops. A defendant cannot escape 
liability for a coupler’s inadequacy by showing too much 
was demanded of it...” /d. at 393 (Emphasis added). 


The O'Donnell Court realized that to permit the rail- 
road any excuses based on the manner or circumstances 
of the coupling operation is to reintroduce negligence into 
the case. It would effectively gut the Safety Apliance Act 
of its “absolute duty”. Likewise, in the case before this 
Court, the Petitioner railroad seeks to excuse its com- 
pliance if the car has been on a curve or if employees 
can attest to its good or non-defective condition. These 
negligence or fault-based excuses are eliminated by the 
Act. The Affolder decision plainly stated: “Nor do we 
think that any question regarding the normal efficiency 
of the couplers is involved in an action under the Safety 
Appliance Acts”. /d. at 98. Petitioner suggests that the 
plain words of the Act be ignored simply because normal 
non-defective drawbars may go out of alignment during 
normal operations. Yet the normal efficiency of this 
equipment is not a consideration under the Act. 


Certain core concepts emerged from this Court’s 1949- 
1950 trio of Section 2 cases, Carter, O'Donnell, and 
Affolder. The statute commands a particular performance 
of the equipment. Failure to perform as required is the 
“actionable wrong.” All issues of negligence or fault- 
based analysis are eliminated. The “condition”. of the 
equipment is immaterial. It makes no difference that the 
coupler worked perfectly before and after the occasion 
in question; whether it was defective or not or in a bad 
or good condition. 


Petitioner's argument and analysis in this case fails 
because it rejects these core concepts. It seeks excuses 
to explain why employees must go between the cars to 
effect a coupling by arguing that “properly set” should 
be construed to include manual alignment between the 


= 


c= 


9 


ends of the cars. However, the term “properly set” was 
defined by the Court in Affolder to mean only that one or 
both of the knuckles are open—an act which can be ac- 
complished without the necessity of the employee being 
between the ends of the cars. The “properly set” defense 
does not apply to adjustments between the ends of the 
cars. This is the only possible conclusion consistent with 
the plain language of the Safety Appliance Act and the 
Court’s decision in Affolder. Indeed, if Petitioner’s posi- 
tion were upheld, there would be no reason to equip cars 
with an operating lever which opens knuckles or un- 
couples cars from outside the cars. The same flawed 
rationale which claims manual preparation of the draw- 
bar between the cars is not a violation, would apply 
equally to manual preparation of the knuckle (to couple 
or uncouple) while between the cars. 


It is important to remember that this Court has ruled 
that Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act is an absolute 
liability statute, not a product liability statute. The de- 
sign and operating characteristics of the coupling mech- 
anism are deliberately left to the railroad industry. As 
the Congressional record relating to the passage of the 
Safety Appliance Act clearly states: 


This bill does not require any particular kind of 
coupler to be adopted by the railroads, except a coup- 
ler which can be coupled and uncoupled without re- 
quiring anybody to go between the cars. 


24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1893) (emphasis added). Section 
2 mandates performance characteristics only, i.e., that 
railcar couplers can be coupled and uncoupled without 
requiring anyone to go between the cars. 


Petitioner’s efforts to buttress its argument by its quo- 
tations from Atlantic City R.R. v. Parker, 242 U.S. 56 
(1916) and San Antonio, etc. R.R. v. Wagner, 166 S.W. 
24, aff'd, 241 U.S. 476 (1916) are misplaced. Petitioner 
draws a conclusion from those cases that a defect or bad 
condition must be present in order for misalignment to 


10 


violate the Safety Appliance Act. Neither case so states. 
More to the point, in Parker, the plaintiff contended that 
“the failure of a coupler to work at any time sustains a 
charge of negligence”. In Wagner, the entire Safety Ap- 
pliance Act analysis is made in the context of negligence 
and negligence per se. 


The O'Donnell court, footnoting the Wagner decision 
as well as several others, stated: 


The arguments and instructions in this case, as well 
as others, and the language of many opinions and 
texts reflect widespread confusion as to the effect to 
be accorded a violation of the federal safety statute. 
[Footnote to Wagner] Part of this confusion is trace- 
able to the diversity of judicial opinion concerning 
the consequences attributed in negligence actions to 
the violation of a statute. 


O'Donnell, 388 U.S. at 389. 


One of the principal themes of the 1949-1950 trio of 
O'Donnell, Carter and Affolder was to wipe away all 
forms of negligence or fault based analysis so prevalent 
and confusing in cases such as Parker and Wagner. 


II. THE FAILURE OF CARS TO COUPLE AUTOMATI- 
CALLY UPON IMPACT WITHOUT THE NECES- 
SITY OF INDIVIDUALS TO GO BETWEEN THE 
CARS IS A VIOLATION OF SECTION 2 OF THE 
SAFETY APPLIANCE ACT 


Until 1991 and the decision in Reed v. Philadelphia, 
Bethlehem & N.E.R.R., 939 F.2d 128 (3rd Cir. 1991), 
it had been almost uniformly held that the failure of a 
coupler to couple automatically upon impact or the need 
to align a drawbar to make a coupling, which resulted in 
an injury to an employee was a violation of Section 2. 


11 


A. A Misaligned Drawbar, Which Requires Manual 
Adjustment Between the Cars, Violates Section 2 
of the Safety Appliance Act 


The early case law as to violations of Section 2 is sum- 
marized in Kansas City S. Ry. v. Cagle, 229 F.2d 12 
(10th Cir. 1955), cert. denied, 351 U.S. 908 (1956). 
In Cagle, the drawbar was misaligned before any coupling 
was attempted. Cagle was injured while attempting to 
manually align the drawbar. The Court of Appeals 
stated: 


Appellant states the question in its brief to be, “Was 
this one fact that the coupler was out of line a non- 
compliance with the Act?” We think the answer to 
this question must be in the affirmative. A great num- 
ber of cases have considered the scope and effect of 
the Coupler Provision of the Federal Safety Appli- 
ance Act. Space prevents even a listing of all the 
cases which have considered these provisions, let 
alone an analysis thereof. Without exception the 
cases have held that operating a car on which the 
drawbar is so far out of line as to prevent automatic 
coupling violated the Act and imposes absolute 
liability. 


Cagle, 229 F.2d at 14 (Emphasis added). 


In Schaaf v. Chesapeake & Ohio Ry., 317 N.W. 2d 
679 (Mich. Ct. App. 1982), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 848 
(1983), a Michigan court in a ruling similar to Hiles and 
other state court decisions stated: 


Defendant fails to cite and our research has not dis- 
covered any case holding that- drawbars must be 
properly aligned before a railroad can be found 
guilty of a violation of the Safety Appliance Act... . 
There is a crucial distinction, however, between a 
coupler and a drawbar. A coupler can be opened 
and closed without the necessity of having someone 
go between any railroad cars. A drawbar, however, 


12 


can only be manually by someone pushing 
it in while s ng between the railroad cars. 


Schaaf, 317 N.W.2d at 681. 


In United Transportation Union v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 
233 (D.C. Cir. 1983), this union sought an order pro- 
hibiting the use of a “hook procedure” claiming that the 
procedure, which required the insertion of the employee's 
arm between the cars, violated the “without the necessity 
of men going between the ends of the cars” phrase of 
Section 2. The decision turned on whether the “without 
the necessity of men going between the ends of the cars” 
was descriptive of the equipment or whether Section 2 
contained an independent prohibition of the act of going 
between the cars. The court ruled the phrase was de- 
scriptive of the equipment and “does not address oper- 
ating procedures”. /d. at 245. Certainly, the act of 
going between the ends of railroad cars could not be pro- 
hibited, otherwise railroad movement would come to a 
grinding halt since there is no other procedure for re- 
aligning drawbars. 


The court in Lewis explained that even though there 
is no separate prohibition for the act of going between the 
cars, the railroad is still liable pursuant to Section 2 for 
injuries which result from the non-performing coupler. 
Liability exists because if the employee must go between 
the cars to effect a coupling then there “has been a failure 
to provide equipment that functions as the Statute com- 
mands”, /d. at 251. In a footnote the Lewis court em- 
phasized: 

At the same time, however, actual failure to couple 
automatically because of a misaligned drawbar or a 
closed coupler is sufficient to establish liability under 
section 2. See Metcalfe v. Atchison, Topeka & 
Santa Fe Rwy., supra, 491 F.2d at 896 and cases 
cited therein. This is because Congress imposed on 
railroads a duty not just to provide proper. equip- 
ment, but also to guarantee its performance. See 


13 


Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 
339 U.S. 96, 70 S.Ct. 509, 94 L.Ed. 683 (1950); 
Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay R.R., 338 U.S. 
430, 70 S.Ct. 226, 94 L.Ed. 236 (1949); Delk v. St. 
Louis & San Francisco Ry., 220 U.S. 580, 31 S.Ct. 
617, 55 L.Ed. 590 (191!). And FRA continues to 
adhere to this view of the railroad’s responsibility. 


Id. at 251, N. 39. 


Thus while the Safety Appliance Act does not address 
or prohibit operating procedures, it requires coupling 
equipment that is proper and guarantees its performance. 
Significantly, the Federal Railroad Administration, the 
regulator of rail safety, adheres to this view of the rail- 
road's responsibility. In short, the FRA has encouraged 
Operating procedures which reduce injuries* and which 
reduce the need for manual coupling between the cars. 
But Lewis and the FRA adhere to the view that employ- 
ees are still entitled to compensation for injuries when 
they occur due to equipment which fails to perform as 
required by the Act. 


Because the drawbar misalignment here required man- 
ual adjustment between the cars, the coupling mechanism 
was in violation of the Act. By 1970, there was substan- 
tial national uniformity that a misaligned drawbar was a 
violation of Section 2 of the Act. At that point, Congress 
reevaluated the entire scope of all Federal rail safety laws. 
The result of that reevaluation was the Federal Railroad 
Safety Act (“FRSA”) of 1970, codified at Title 45 U.S.C. 
Section 421, ef seg. The committees which studied the 
legislation discussed the existing safety statutes, including 
the Safety Appliance Acts, and noted the effectiveness of 
the protections afforded by the Safety Appliance Acts. 


2 Indeed, the FRA, in UTU v. Lewis permitted the hook procedure 
precisely because it increased the likelihood of automatic coupling 
and decreased the need for employees to go between the cars to 
manually adjust the drawbars; the precise activity being performed 
by Respondent Hiles at the time of his injury. 


14 


Report of the Committee On Interstate And Foreign Com- 
merce on S. 1933 To Provide for Federal Railroad Safety, 
Hazardous Materials Control and For Other Purposes, 
June 16, 1970, House Report No. 91-1194. The Secre- 
tary of Transportation proposed repeal of these earlier 
Federal rail statutes such as the Safety Appliance Acts 
and proposed that the Department of Transportation con- 
tinue the protection solely by rezulation under this legisla- 
tion. (i.e. see current FRA reg ilations contained in 49 
C.F.R.) [1970 Cong. Rec. 4109 (1970)]. In fact, there 
are FRA regulations which relate to couplers, their com- 
ponents, as well as many aspects of railroad operations. 


Nevertheless, it was the decision of Congress to retain 
the Safety Appliance Acts. The Congressional Record 
states: “These particular laws have served well. In fact, 
the committee chose to continue them without change.” 
Report of the Committee On Interstate And Foreign Com- 
merce on S. 1933 To Provide for Federal Railroad Safety, 
Hazardous Materials Control and For Other Purposes, 
June 16, 1970, House Report No. 91-1194, page 8 (em- 


phasis added). 


77 
hes 


(4th Cir. 1994), Kavorkian v. CSX sae Bd Inc.., 
33 F.3d 570 (6th Cir. 1994), and Lisek v. Norfolk & 


2. The above cases emphasize the condition of the equip- 
ment (i.e. defects) rather than the performance of the 


15 


equipment. In each of those cases the existence of a bad 


between the cars either because Section 2 does not “ad- 
dress operating procedures” (see United Transportation 


only. However, it is clear that Congress did not mandate 
a specific type or design of coupler—only how it must 
perform. Nowhere does the Record suggest that the pres- 


16 


equipment violates Section 2—not the employee who 
makes the adjustment. 


Ill. SECTION 2 OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE ACT 
IS VITAL TO THE RAILROAD EMPLOYEE’S 
ABILITY TO SAFELY PERFORM HIS OR HER 
DUTIES 


The significant question to be asked at this time is why 
the Court is being asked to “rewrite” an Act of Congress 
that has successfully reduced injuries and protected the 
rights of railroad workers for over a century. The United 
Transportation Union, as amicus curiae, respectfully sub- 
mits that no changes in technology, railroad operating 
procedures, or public policy have occurred at any time 
during the last century which would justify the change in 
the law that has been proposed by the Petitioner in this 
appeal. Hazardous job duties still must be done by in- 
dividual railroad workers. 

The size, weight and overall complexity of railcars and 
trains has increased over the years. Even a slight error 
in the movement of the equipment, or any failure of the 
equipment to perform, can cause devastating injuries or 
death. Every time a railroad employee is required to go 
between two railroad cars to manually realign a drawbar 
in order to effectuate a coupling, that employee is at risk 
of injury or death. This is true regardless of whether the 
cars are “stationary” at the precise moment the employee 
goes between them, because said cars are subject to move- 
ment at any time by simultaneous railroad operations 
being undertaken by other railroad employees. There is 
no way in which it can be guaranteed that railroad cars 
which are stationary when an employee goes between them 
to align a drawbar will remain that way for the duration 
of the time in which the employee must be between the 
cars to complete the task. 

One of the problems of relating drawbar adjustments 
to Congressional remarks in 1893 is this simple question: 
Did drawbars “misalign” in 1893 and if so, was it suffi- 


quaniag sodien of earven Sub 0 came anges Go ye 
drawbar (i.e. cushioning devices that permit it to move 
in and out). The simple fact is that as railroads buil 
bigger (and more profitable ) railcars and equi 


it 
: 


Brief) claim that they are unable to develop “satisfactory” 
technology for self-centering devices that can be activated 
without going between the cars. The AAR does not ex- 
plain what it means by “satisfactory”. Perhaps it is too 
expensive or it is easier to pay injured employees than 
develop satis sctory technology. Of course, if this Court 
agrees with Petitioner, no claims payment need be made 
and the current manually adjusted drawbar will likely be 
elevated to the level of a “satisfactory” technology. 

The Legislative wisdom of Section 2 is that it is as 
flexible as technology. Railroads have the freedom to 
develop any form of coupling apparatus as long as it per- 
forms as required by the Act. In this Court, the Petitioner 
and AAR simply state that they cannot or will not develop 
a coupler or drawbar which can be adjusted without 
individuals going between the cars. 


Thus, this Court is asked to interpret Section 2 con- 
trary to its plain language and contrary to prior rulings 
of this Court, and deny injured railroad workers com- 
pensation for injuries resulting from such non-conforming 
devices. The request is made to this Court by Petitioner 
despite a refusal by Congress to repeal or change Section 
2 in 1970. Petitioner’s position should be clearly rejected. 
The health and welfare of our members and their families 
would be seriously undermined by any other result. 


18 


CONCLUSION 


On the basis of the foregoing, amicus curiae respect- 
fully submits that the judgment of the Appellate Court 


of Illinois in this case be affirmed. 

Respectfully submitted, 
CLINTON J. MILLER, III ROBERT E. HARRINGTON, JR. 
General Counsel ROBERT B. THOMPSON * 
UNITED TRANSPORTATION PATRICK J. HARRINGTON 

UNION HARRINGTON, THOMPSON, 

14600 Detroit Avenue ACKER & HARRINGTON, LTD. 
Cleveland, OH 44107 310 S. Michigan Avenue 
(216) 228-9400 Suite 2000 

Chicago, IL 60604 

(312) 922-8833 

Counsel for Amicus 


December 7, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


