. Supreme Court, U.S. 
“) FILED 


No. 95-6 NOV 8 1995 
: CLERK 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


NorRFOLK & WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, 


7 Petitioner, 


WILLIAM J. HILEs, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial District 


BRIEF OF ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


ROBERT W. BLANCHETTE * 

Vice President-Law and 
General Counsel 

DANIEL SAPHIRE 

General Attorney 

ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN 
RAILROADS 

American Railroads Building 

50 F Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20001 

(202) 639-2505 


Counsel for Amicus 
November 9, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


WILson - Eres Printing Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WasHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SY MeN ecctcnscnsthcslathivnscncsmebphisiasisicmnaioas ii 
TE MII cssiiiselnscninenahuiideciesihieaaamiidaabactnn 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE. ............22ccc.cscecscscscsscsseseees 4 


ARGUMENT ......0. a 4 


I. THE RULING BELOW MISCONSTRUES THE 
PURPOSE OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE 
ACT AND WOULD IMPOSE A TECHNOLOG- 
ICALLY IMPOSSIBLE BURDEN ON RAIL- 
ROADS i 4 


A. Congress Enacted The Safety Appliance Act 
To Ameliorate The Hazard Posed To Rail 
Employees From Going Between Cars Dur- 
ing The Coupling Operation ...........00000.... 5 


B. Drawbars Must Be Realigned From Time To 
Time And The Practice Cannot Be Outlawed.. 9 


CR TS SOE 13 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Page 
Affolder v. N.Y., C. & St. L. R. Co., 389 U.S. 96 
acinar eeeeint hcl ela ceased 8 
Bailey v. Central Vermont Ry., Inc., 319 U.S. 350 
SITIIII cisicssscsietulcdinietinashathasiidenisesnbeiniianiiaenaiiitimmesbeiiiiaas 13 
Clark v. Kentucky & Indiana Terminal R., 728 F.2d 
fs — > = eee 10 
Consolidated Rail Corp. v. Gottshall, 114 S. Ct. 
RECs 11 
Johnson v. Southern Pacific Co., 196 U.S. 1 
a eileieesintibiaieaisenmeiannl 6,7 
Kawvorkian v. CSX Transp., Inc., 33 F.3d 570 (6th 
GI, SEI sc-schntnceiciatiecnnienpnntintondnbitiehinhiadiipgeapitiiniinmaiaes 8, 9, 10 


Lisek v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co., 30 F.3d 823 
(7th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 904 


a aenae ci eeanriniatncia allied inantaenatiinhiddatean 9,12 
O’Donnell v. Elgin, J. & E. R. Co., 338 U.S. 384 

RT REST a ae me eA Cen FOO 3 
Reed v. Philadelphia, Bethlehem & New England 

R., 939 F.2d 128 (3rd Cir. 1991) .......................... 9 
Schneider v. National R. Passenger Corp., 987 

ER SE ee ee 2 
United Transp. Union v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 233 

8,9, 11 
Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163 (1949) 00000... 3,18 

Statutes and Regulations 
8 ES eee 4 
I a Qa 4,6 
49 U.S.C. § 20802(e) ............ sinenieieets ee Ee ne 4 
4 &) ak Se 5 
Miscellaneous 

ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS, CLAIM & 

I I 2 
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS, MANUAL OF 

STANDARDS AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES, Sec- 

tion B, Coupler and Freight Car Draft Compon- 

~ | eeRanieenies eae 10 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS, MANUAL OF 
STANDARDS AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES, Sec- 
tion C-II, Specifications For Design, Fabrication 
and Construction of Freight Cars, M-1001, 
§ 2.1.6 (1994) .............. 

Baker, Why Congress Should ‘Repeal the Federal 
Employers’ Liability Act of 1908, 29 Harv. J. 
On Leos. 79 (winter 1992) . 

CAR AND LOCOMOTIVE CYCLOPEDIA S8-1 (8rd ed. 
LL a ee ee 

GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE, INTERCITY PASSEN- 
GER RAIL: FINANCIAL AND OPERATING CONDI- 
TIONS THREATEN AMTRAK’S LONG TERM VIA- 
BILITY (1995) .. ; 

Letter from J.A. Angold to AAR ‘Coupler. and 
Draft Gear Committee members (Sept. 16, 
ESIGN EE le Se 

Letter from W.A. Faris to C.L. Davidson (Dec. 23, 
1968) . EEE ane a 

Report of the Proceedings of the Twenty-First An- 
nual Convention of the Master Car-Builders’ 
Association, June 14-16, 1887 . 

U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, 1994 ANALYSIS OF 
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION LAWS (1994) 

24 Cong. Rec. 1275 (1898) . ao A 

24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1888) ...................... cece. " 

24 Cong. Rec. 1867 (1898) ............... iieaiien 


Page 


9, 10 


13 


10 


Ne ee ee ee Te a a ee 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToBerR TERM, 1995 


No. 95-6 


NorFo_k & WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


WILLIAM J. HILES, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial District 


BRIEF OF ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER 


This brief of the Association of American Railroads 
is filed with the consent of the parties, the letters ex- 
pressing consent having been filed with the Clerk of the 
Court. 


STATEMENT OF INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


Amicus curiae Association of American Railroads 
(AAR) is an incorporated, nonprofit trade association 
representing the nation’s major freight railroads and 
Amtrak. AAR’s members operate approximately 76 per- 


2 


cent of the rail industry's lire haul mileage and produce 
94 percent of its freight revenues. AAR represents its 
members in proceedings before Congress, the courts and 
administrative agencies in matters of common interest. 


One such matter is the Federal Employers’ Liability 
Act (FELA). In 1908, before enactment of any no-fault 
workers’ compensation statutes in the United States. Con- 
gress structured this tort-based remedy for railroad em- 
ployees injured on the job. Subsequently, every state 
has enacted a workers’ compensation law, under which 
concepts of negligence have been eliminated, leaving the 
railroad industry virtually the only one where work- 
related injuries are compensated under a fault-based 
system.’ 

Each year thousands of claims and lawsuits are asserted 
under FELA against AAR members. In recent years, 
FELA costs have risen to over $1 billion a year, far more 


than is spent by private industry in general in payment 
of compensation to injured employees.” 


'Seamen are covered under FELA by virtue of 46 U.S.C. § 688. 
All other industries in the United States are covered by either 
state or federal no-fault workers’ compensation systems. Unlike 
workers’ compensation, which caps benefits, U.S. CHAMBER oF Com- 
MERCE, 1994 ANALY3IS OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION Laws 22-25, 
Chart VI (1994), FELA does not limit the amount of damages that 
may be collected when a railroad is liable) A FELA verdict will 
be deemed excessive only if it “shocks the judicial conscience.” 
Schneider v. National R. Passenger Corp., 987 F.2d 132, 1387 (2d 
Cir. 1993). ($1.75 million verdict, including over $1 million in 
intangible damages, not excessive). 


* For the past four years, the major railroads have spent between 
$1.2 and 1.3 billion on FELA annually, or nearly 4 per cent of their 
gross revenues. ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS, CLAIM & 
LITIGATION REPORT (Calendar years 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994) 
(“CLaIm & LITIGATION REPORT”). Private industry other than rail- 
roads pays about $0.36 per employee hour worked under state 
workers’ compensation, GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE, INTERCITY 
PASSENGER RAIL: FINANCIAL AND OPERATING CONDITIONS THREATEN 
AMTRACK’S LONG-TERM VIABILITY 59 (1995), whereas railroads 
pay over $2.00. 1994 CLaim & LITIGATION REPORT, at 2-2. 


3 


AAR has a strong interest in this case because the rul- 
ing below would result in a further enlargement of the 
scope of FELA liability. This case concerns the inter- 
pretation of the Safety Appliance Act, an equipment stat- 
ute; under FELA, violation of such a statute can consti- 
tute negligence per se. Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163, 
189 (1949); O'Donnell v. Elgin, J. & E. R. Co., 338 
U.S. 384, 390 (1949).* 


AAR has a long standing expertise in railroad opera- 
tional issues, particularly the issue presented in the case 
at bar, the operation of couplers. For over one hundred 
years, AAR, or its predecessor organizations, have studied 
coupling operations, the means by which individual rail 
cars are linked to form a train. For example, the Master 
Car-Builders’ Association (MCBA), an AAR predeces- 
sor organization, focussed on the issue as early as 1887. 
MCBA concluded then that “[rjailroads have reached a 
point where there is an absolute need for an automatic 
train coupler; . . . The public demands it: safety of the 
trainmen demands it; and the economical operation of 
railroads demands it.” * 


The expertise of the American Railway Association 
(ARA), another AAR predecessor organization, was rec- 
ognized by Congress when it enacted the Safety Appli- 
ance Act in 1893. That law directed ARA to designate 
to the Interstate Commerce Commission the standard 
height of drawbars on freight cars. Act of March 2, 


* Moreover, if such a statute is violated the railroad may not 
introduce evidence that the employee's negligence contributed to 
the injury, which ordinarily would serve to reduce any judgment in 
proportion to the contributory negligence. 45 U.S.C. § 53. 


* See, Report of the Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual 
Convention of the Master Car-Builders’ Association, June 14-16, 
1887, 187, at 195 (Report of the Executive Committee on Auto- 
matic Freight Couplers). The Association was engaged in the 
evaluation and testing of various types of couplers in an effort to 
recommend a particular type for universal use. 


4 


1893, c. 196, § 5, 27 Stat. 531. Congress has continued 
to rely on the expertise of AAR in railroad operational 
issues.” 


In addition to expanding railroad liability, the ruling 
below would make operational demands on railroads that, 
for technological reasons, cannot be met. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Amicus adopts the statement of the case in Petitioner’s 
brief. 
ARGUMENT 


I. THE RULING BELOW MISCONSTRUES THE PUR- 
POSE OF THE SAFETY APPLIANCE ACT AND 
WOULD IMPOSE A TECHNOLOGICALLY IMPOS- 
SIBLE BURDEN ON RAILROADS 


Section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act (SAA) was 
enacted to assure that coupling devices .n rail cars will 
function on contract with each other (or the locomotive) 
so as to avoid the necessity for employees to go between 
moving cars to couple them manually.’ This process is 
called automatic coupling. 


Today, all rail cars are equipped with automatic cou- 
plers. However, even couplers that are in perfect work- 
ing order will from time to time become misaligned due 


* Recently Congress authorized the Secretary of Transportation 
to use AAR’s services in carrving out his duties with regard to 
power and train brakes. 49 U.S.C. § 20302(e). 


*24 Cong. Rec. 1275 (1893). See infra pp. 6-8. Now codified at 
49 U.S.C. § 20302(a), in pertinent part this provision reads: 


[A] railroad carrier may use or allow to be used on any of 
its railroad lines-— 
(1) a vehicle only if it is equipped with— 
(A) couplers coupling automatically by impact, and 
capable of being uncoupled, without the necessity of 
individuals going between the ends of the vehicles; 


5 


to the horizontal play of the drawbar required to permit 
the rounding of curves without derailment.’ 


The court below held that SAA holds a railroad is 
liable as a matter of law if an employee is injured while 
going between rail cars to align a drawbar for coupling. 
Since the court prohibited the railroad from introducing 
evidence that the coupler was not defective, the ruling 
essentially makes misalignment negligence per se. 


The result is contrary to the intent of Congress in both 
SAA and FELA. Moreover, it ignores the realities of 
railroad operations and the state of rail technology. 
To uphold the court below would force railroads to aban- 
don existing technology completely for an alternative that 
does not exist, and that certainly did not exist in 1893 
when SAA was enacted. Congress never intended to pre- 
sent the industry with an operating impossibility. 


A. Congress Enacted The Safety Applicance Act To 
Ameliorate The Hazard Posed To Rail Employees 
From Going Between Cars During The Coupling 


Operation 


For this Court fully to appreciate the error below, some 
historical background is useful. Inherent in the concept 
of a train is that individual railroad cars can be assembled 
together (i.e., coupled) to travel a designated route. At 
the end of the route, the cars can be reassembled in dif- 
ferent configurations for other destinations. In the United 
States, where origins and destinations spanned great dis- 
tances and involved numerous rail companies, the growth 
and success of the technology required ease and uniform- 


7 See infra notes 14-15 and accompanying text. Federal Railroad 
Administration regulations recognize that couplers must contain 
sufficient lateral play to prevent “fouling on curves.” 49 C.F.R. 
Part 215.125. For the purposes of this brief, the terms “couplers,” 
“drawbars” and “knuckles” are used by AAR as they are described 
in the Statement of the Case in Petitioner's Brief. 


6 


ity of such interchange. Obviously then, the efficiency 
of the coupling procedure has always been of critical 
importance. 


As railroads built the nation’s commercial network, 
there was a human toll. In the normal course of opera- 
tions, rail employees were required to go between cars 
and perform coupling operations manually. This re- 
quired standing between two cars as one moved toward the 
other. In the early days, several hundred employees were 
killed each year while coupling cars." 


During the last decade of the Nineteenth Century, Con- 
gress focused its attention on the perils of railroad work, 
and in particular the danger inherent in what was then 
the typical manner in which rail cars were connected. 
The high rate of death and injury resulting from this 
practice led Congress te enact section 2 of SAA, which, 
after a date certain, made it unlawful: 


for any . . . common carrier to haul or permit to 
be hauled or used on its line any car used in moving 
interstate traffic not equipped with couplers coupling 
automatically by impact, and which can be uncoupled 
without the necessity of men going between the ends 
of cars.” 


By this act, Congress sought to change the existing 
practice to the extent it required employees to go between 
rail cars and attempt to couple them as one car moved 
toward the other. As the legislative history explains: 


*24 Cong. Rec. 1275 (1893). The act of coupling alone accounted 
for about 15 per cent of all rail employee fatalities. /d. 


*This Court ruled that the statute should be read as though 
there were a comma after the word “uncoupled” so that the words 
“without the necessity of men going between the ends of cars” 
applies to the acts of both coupling and uncoupling. Johnson v. 
Southern Pacific Co., 196 U.S. 1, 18-19 (1904). For many years 
found at 45 U.S.C. § 2, section 2 has been recodified at 45 U.S.C. 
§ 20302(a). Supra note 6. 


7 


A railroad employee . . . is asked to step inside the 
track, stand up against a car which is not moving, 
and watch the coming of another car, which is being 
pushed steadily up against the car near which he 
stands. 


24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1893). This practice was neces- 
Sitated because, at that time, many rail cars were not 
equipped with couplers that coupled automatically on 
impact. Moreover, even in the case of cars equipped 
with so-called automatic couplers, because of the lack of 
uniformity, coupling generally could not be accomplished 
without requiring an employee to go between the cars: 
automatic couplers that were not compatible still had to 
be coupled manually. 


SAA, therefore, required that rail cars be equipped with 
automatic couplers, and that all couplers be sufficiently 
compatible so they would couple upon impact. Johnson, 
at 16-17." Technology was not an inhibiting factor. 


Section 2 of SAA must be interpreted in the context of its 
original purpose. While it prohibits employees from going 
between cars to effect the actual coupling of cars, it does 
not prohibit other activities, including preparations that 
are necessary to permit cars to be coupled. The statute 
does not prohibit, nor was it intended to prohibit, em- 
ployees from going in between cars to prepare knuckles 
or drawbars for coupling, operations that can and do take 
place while the cars are stationary. As the legislative 
history makes clear, these activities were not what con- 
cerned Congress: 


. . very few people have lost their lives by coupling 
inventions [sic] between cars when they are at a 


' The legislative history explained that “(t]he bill does not 
require any particular kind of coupler to be adopted by the rail- 
roads, except a coupler which can be coupled and uncoupled without 
requiring anybody to go between cars.” 24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1893). 
It was left to the railroads to reach consensus on what type of 
couplers to use to ensure compatibility. 


8 


standstill, but it is the continuous shifting and mov- 
ing of cars in which the brakeman is expected to do 
the work under circumstances of great danger. 


24 Cong. Rec. 1367.” 


This Court has previously recognized that SAA does 
not impose an absolute ban on employees going between 
cars, only a ban on employees going between cars to 
perform the act of coupling the cars. Affolder v. N.Y., 
C. & St. L. R. Co., 339 U.S. 96 (1950)." The same 
conclusion was reached after a comprehensive and care- 
ful review of the legislative history of SAA by the Court 
of Appeals for the District of Columbia in United Tranp. 
Union v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 233 (D.C. Cir. 1983), which 
found “that the scope of Section 2 is confined to the re- 
quirement that railroad cars be ‘equipped’ with automatic 
couplers that can be operated without the necessity of men 
going between the ends of the cars, and . . . that the stat- 
ute does not separately prohibit the act of going between 
cars.” Jd. at 251. The Lewis court pointed out that 


11 Any suggestion that SAA was meant to bar any operation 
requiring employees to go between cars is further belied by the 
explicit recognition by Congress that the connection of air hoses 
(essential for braking), which might require employees to go 
between cars, would continue. 24 Cong. Rec. 1367. 

The most recent decision by a federal court of appeals on this 
issue, Kavorkian v. CSX Transp., Inc., 33 F.3d 570 (6th Cir. 1994), 
also recognized this important point: “Although workers must go 
between the cars to realign even non-defective drawbars, the danger 
in doing so does not come from the situation against which the 
FSAA seeks to safeguard (workers having to go between railroad 
cars moving together); the danger here is outside § 2’s contem.- 
plated scope.” 33 F.3d at 575. 


12 In Affolder, the Court ruled that if the coupler failed to couple 
because the knuckle had not been opened, there would be no viola- 
tion of the act. 339 U.S. at 99. on 


1% The Lewis case did not involve a personal injury suit, but 
rather, a challenge by a rail union to a ruling by the Federal Rail- 
road Administration that a procedure employed by a railroad that 
required employees partially to go between cars did not violate SAA. 


9 


SAA did not address operating procedures, and that if it 
was read as a blanket prohibition against going between 
cars during coupling operations, it would render it im- 
possible to couple cars. Id. at 245. Since the Lewis deci- 
sion, the other federal courts of appeals considering 
the issue have recognized that the purpose of SAA is to 
require that cars be equipped with automatic couplers in 
working order, not to prohibit employees from going be- 
tween cars to perform activities other than coupling. See, 
Kavorkian; Lisek v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co., 30 F.3d 
823 (7th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 904 
(1995); Reed v. Philadelphia, Bethlehem & New Eng- 
land R., 939 F.2d 128 (3d Cir. 1991). . 


B. Drawbars Must Be Realigned From Time To Time 
And The Practice Cannot Be Outlawed 


The decision below ignores a fundamental aspect of 
railroad operations. In order for rail cars to operate on 
curved track there must be some degree of play in the 
coupler unit."* A rigid coupling mechanism would result 
in derailments. Thus, lateral play in drawbars is a fact 
of railroad life. A corollary fact is that coupler units, 
even in working order, may occasionally move out of line 
to the point where they will not couple on impact unless 
realigned.” 


* See, ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS, MANUAL OF STAND- 
ARDS AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES, Section C-II, Specifications For 
Design, Fabrication And Construction of Freight Cars, M-1001, 
§2.1.6 (1994). [“MANUAL OF STANDARDS AND RECOMMENDED 
PRACTICES” | 


' Federal courts that have considered this matter have reached 
the same conclusion. Lisek, supra (“{I]t is uncontested for the 
purposes of this case that nondefective coupling mechanisms can, 
through the normal course of railyard operations, become mis- 
aligned to an extent that they will not couple without preliminary 
realignment.” 30 F.3d at 831); Kavorkian, supra (“|A) drawbar 
frequently becomes misaligned by the normal jarring and vibra- 
tions of the railroad car or when the car is uncoupled on a different 


10 


The railroad industry is constantly alert to technogical 
changes dealing with both interchangeability and the need 
to keep couplers in alignment. In furtherance of this goal, 
AAR has promulgated a set of mechanical rules for 
freight cars, known as the Interchange Rules. The specific 
mechanical standards referenced in the Rules are pub- 
lished by AAR in the “Manual of Standards and Recom- 
mended Practices.” 


Among other things, the Rules prescribe what types 
of couplers may be used to ensure interchangeability 
among cars." In addition, the amount of lateral play 
needed in drawbars so that rail cars of various sizes can 
safely round curves is specified." These specifications are 
derived from mathematical formulae relating to the length 
of cars and track curvature. 


A satisfactory technology to address drawbar misalign- 
ment has yet to emerge. Efforts to develop technology 
that would cause couplers to realign automatically have 
been attempted. Self centering devices for couplers were 
introduced in the mid-1960’s and were used for a time in 


track, to such a degree that coupling can not occur without realign- 
ment.” 33 F.3d at 575). 

In Clark v. Kentucky & Indiana Terminal R., 728 F.2d 307 (6th 
Cir. 1984), the Court opined, in dicta, that the lateral play needed 
to round curves would not cause a drawbar to become misaligned, 
and that a coupler in need of realignment in order to effect coupling 
was necessarily defective. This simply is not factually correct, and 
Kavorkian, acknowledging this point, rejected this aspect of the 
Clark ruling. 33 F.3d at 575. 


16 MANUAL OF STANDARDS AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES, Section 
B, Coupler and Freight Car Draft Components, M-211 (1994). In 
1916, ARA adopted the Type D coupler as a standard. This was the 
first coupler in which parts provided by all manufacturers were 
completely interchangeable. In subsequent years, new designs were 
adopted by ARA, and later AAR. See, CAR AND LOCOMOTIVE CYCLO- 
PEDIA S8-1 (3rd ed. 1974). 


17 MANUAL OF STANDARDS AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES, M-1001. 
supra note 14. 


1] 


limited circumstances." AAR undertook extensive evalua- 
tion of these devices. These investigations revealed prob- 
lems with the devices that were not addressed in a satis- 
factory manner.” As a result, such devices eventually 
fell into disuse and are not used by railroads today. 


Thus, the need for manually realigning drawbars that 
have moved off center is, and will continue to be, an 
integral part of railroad operations. SAA ought not be 
interpreted as converting a common and unavoidable 
practice into a violation of the law.” 


There is no conflict between SAA and the practical 
needs of railroad operations, and this Court should estab- 
lish a rule that is consistent with both. Where an em- 
ployee can show an injury caused by the failure of a 
coupler to couple automatically on impact, and no cause 
other than a defect or malfunction of the coupler can be 
attributed, there would be a violation of SAA, and lia- 
bility would be established. However, where an injury 
occurs when an employee goes between a car to perform 


'* The Lewis court noted this experimental use. 711 F.2d at 235 
n. 5. 


'® See e.g., Letter from J.A. Angold, Director Technical Research 
and Development, Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Co. to 
AAR Coupler and Draft Gear Committee members (Sept. 16, 1968) 
(reporting that an investigation on his railroad revealed that 28 
of 38 of a particular coupler centering device installed were found 
to be inoperative.) ; Letter from W.A. Faris, Asst. Manager Power 
and Equipment-Car to C.L. Davidson, Secretary, AAR Mechanical 
Division (Dec. 23, 1968) (reporting that an investigation on his 
railroad revealed that only 34.8% of the cars with a particular 
coupler centering device installed had operative devices.) (Letters 
are on file at the office of Amicus, 50 F Street, N.W., Washington, 
D.C. 20001.) 


*°To do so would render railroads insurers of their employees’ 
safety in circumstances never contemplated by SAA or FELA. 
As this Court recently reaffirmed, “FELA does not make the em- 
ployer the insurer of the safety of his employees while they are on 
duty. The basis for his liability is his negligence, not the fact that 
injuries occur.” Consolidated Rail Corp. v. Gottshall, 114 S. Ct. 
2396, at 2404 (1994). 


12 


a task preparatory to coupling, or where the railroad can 
show that failure to couple was the result of a cause 
other than a defect in or malfunction of the equipment, 
SAA would not be violated. In this situation, the em- 
ployee could still offer evidence that the injury resulted 
from the carrier’s negligence; however, a ruling of negli- 
gence per se would be inappropriate. 


Whether an unsuccessful attempt to couple had been 
made prior to an injury should not be determinative of 
whether SAA has been violated.”’ Otherwise, two situa- 
tions where a nondefective coupler becomes misaligned 
in the course of normal rail operations could lead to dif- 
ferent results, solely based on an employee's initial estima- 
tion of whether a drawbar is properly aligned. For 
example, where an employee notices a misaligned draw- 
bar, attempts to couple it and is injured, no SAA violation 
would occur, and negligence would need to be shown in 
order to recover. However, a different result would ob- 
tain where an employee does not notice the drawbar is 
misaligned, and attempts, unsuccessfully, to couple the 
cars. If the employee then attempted to align the drawbar 
now perceived to have been misaligned and is injured, a 
finding of an SAA violation, and negligence per se, would 
follow if a failed attempt to couple were determinative. 


By ignoring clear intent of SAA, and the majority of 
federal court decisions, and finding SAA applicable 
in cases where there was no defect in or malfunction of 
the coupling device, the court below has expanded the 
notion of strict liability under FELA and shifted the bal- 
ance in FELA prescribed by Congress.” In expanding 
railroad liability, the court below improperly made a 
public policy decision. An argument can be made that 


“1 The Lisek court questioned whether a prior unsuccessful at- 
tempt at coupling would trigger liability. 30 F.3d at 831, n. 15. 


22 While proof of negligence is a prerequisite for recovery under 
FELA, damages are uncapped. See supra note 1. 


- A 


13 


the rail industry should be treated like all others in that 
strict liability ought to obtain for workplace injuries.” 
However, this is an argument that must be made to the 
Congress. 


CONCLUSION 


On the basis of the foregoing, amicus curiae respect- 
fully submits that the judgment of the Appellate Court of 
Illinois in this case be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


ROBERT W. BLANCHETTE * 

Vice President-Law and 
General Counsel] 

DANIEL SAPHIRE 

General Attorney 

ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN 
RAILROADS 

American Railroads Building 

50 F Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20001 

(202) 639-2505 

Counsel for Amicus 


November 9, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


“ See, Baker, Why Congress Should Repeal the Federal Em- 
ployers’ Liability Act of 1908, 29 Harv. J. on Lecis. 79 (winter 
1992). This Court has questioned the wisdom of FELA but has 
recognized that it is within Congress’ province to make any change. 
See e.g., Bailey v. Central Vermont Ry., Inc., 319 U.S. 350, 354 
(1943); Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. at 196 (Frankfurter, J. con- 
curring in part). 


