i 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


The amicus curiae adopts the statement of the 
question presented by respondents. 


ij 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED ............... 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ...........--.-45- 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............... 


BRIEF OF C. L. GRIMES AS AMICUS CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS ......... 


I. Interest of the Amicus Curiae ....... 


A. The “Delaware Settlement” Is a Major 
Abuse of Class Action Procedure Which 
Should Be Ended by This Court ...... 


B. Three Points Which Amicus Respectfully 
Suggests the Court Bear in Mind in 
Formulating Its Opinion in This Case . 


1. The Court Should Avoid Appearing 
to Give Its Imprimatur to the Propo- 
sition That Breach of Fiduciary Duty 
Claims Under Delaware State Law 
Depend on the Same Facts as Do 
Federal Disclosure Claims ........ 


~> Co WwW 


12 


2. The Court Should Avoid Appearing to 


Pope Its Fe oo meer to the 
ition Merely Objecting to 
a Proposed Class Action Settlement 
on the Ground That It Releases 
Claims That Were Never Pleaded 
Constitutes Issue-Preclusive 
Litigation of the Underlying Facts of 
ei 


. The Court Shou\d Avoid Appearing to 


Give Its Imprimatur to the 
Proposition That a Non-Resident’s 
Tender of Stock in a Delaware 
Corporation Pursuant to a Tender 
Offer Justifies the Delaware Courts in 
Forcing Him Into a Non-Opt-Out 
Class in Which His Federal Rights 
Can Be Released Without His 
DT dws cndcdeedd vebecd o¢ens 


14 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Cases 
Barkan v. Amsted Industries, ivic., 567 A.2d 
1279 (Del. Super. 1989) ................ 15 
Eastman v. Symonds, 108 Mass. 567 (1871) .. 16 
Garr v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc., 22 F.3d 1274 (3d 
eh, Ee Bean bdnedsdcocanontasssstess 4 


Greenfield v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc., 146 F.R.D. 
118 (E.D. Pa. 1993), affd. sub nom. Garr v. 
no pepenente Inc., 22 F.3d 1274 (3d Cir. . 


Grimes v. Vitalink Communications Corp., 17 
F.3d 1553 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 


GPP bieccicacbtiounoceducenneeos passim 
Halyalker gh ty Regents, 72 N.Y. 261, 527 

NE 2d 1292. 53 S.2d 85 (1988) ..... 16 
In re GMC Pick-Up Trucks Fuel Tank Prod. 

Liab. Litig., 55 F.3d 768 (3d Cir. 1995) ... 4 


In re Vitalink Communications 
Shareholders Litigation, (1991-02 Teanntor 


Binder] Feb. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) 1 96,585 
(1991), affd. sub nom. Grimes v. John P. 
McCarthy Profit S Plan, 610 A.2d 
725, cert. fo 113 S. Ct. 179 (1992) ... 2 


James Talcott, Inc. v. Allahabad Bank, Lid., 444 
F.2d 451 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 404 U.S. 
EEE A a SG IES ks GE A Ta He 16 


Kremer v. Chemical Construction Corp., 456 U.S. 
GE anncd suceeceadieneastiiess 16 


v 


Table of Authorities Continued 
Page 


N i sees. Trans-Lux Corp., 925 
DP, PED caceesecencaccees 9 


Polk v. Good, 507 A.2d 531 (Del. Super. 1964) . 15 
Prezant v. De Angelis, 636 A.2d 915 (Del. 1994). 15 1.6 
Pritzker v. Yari, 42 F.3d 53 (1st Cir. 1994).... 19n.9 
Rome v. Archer, 564 A.2d 1089 (Del. Super. 


iidintt ade eee eee die bege ee 15 
Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186 (1977) ...... 18 
Regulations 
Pee 12 
Treatises 


RESTATEMENT, JUDGMENTS 2D § 27 comment d . 16 


ee and Administrative Materials 
Private Under the Federal Securities 


TY, —_ gg 
(i908) ES PEELS A ae Sea 7n.2 
Remarks by Chairman, Arthur Leavitt Secu- 
rities ion Institute, U. of Calif. San 
Diego, January 26,1994 ............... 4 


vi 


Table of Authorities Continued 
Page 


Legal Articles 


Alexander, Do the Merits Matter? A Study o 
Settlements in Securities Class Actions, 
STANFORD L. REV. 497 (1991) ........... 7 


Coffee, Rescuing the Private Attorney General: 
Why the Model of the ras Bounty 
Hunter Is Not Working, 42 MD. L. REV. 215 
IROL ETE Sep RR a ae re 7n.2 


Coffee, Suspect Settlements in Securities 
Litigation, NEW YORK LAW JOURNAL, March 
Se Dh ctdéciseeenesekss 6-7, 9-11 


Coffee, The Unfaithful C. ion: The Plaintiff 
As Monitor in Share Litigation, 48 
LAW & CONTEMP. PrRoss. (Summer 1985) 5. 7n.2 


Coffee, Understanding the Plaintiff's Atto : 
The Implications of Economic a r 
Private Enforcement of Law Through Class 
and Derivative Actions, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 
PE b6006n000 66h660cneenseeeaess 7n.2 


Haudek, The Settlement and Dismissal of 
Stockholders’ Actions—Part II: The Settle- 


ment, 23 Sw. L.J. 765 (1969) ............ 16 
Romano, The Shareholder Suit: Litigation 
Without Foundation ?(unpublished study) . 7 


vii 


Table of Authorities Continued 


Other Articles 


Baron, An Asbestos Settlement With a Hidden 
Ae + ey St. JOURNAL, May 6, 1993, p. 
2S Siete ss cep eabeseededbeose 


Borden, The Shareholder Suit Charade: The 
Wilmington Filers Shake Down 
Corporations in Delaware, and Nobody 
Seems To Mind, AM. LAWYER (Dec. 1989) 
DP avvbdasceddadddevataretesscncesces 


Bowers & Gu Shareholder Suits Beset More 
Small les, WALL ST. JOURNAL, 
March 9, 1994, p. Blcol.5 ............. 


Settles Things Quickly in Mass-I Suits: 
Class-Action Attorney Earns Big Fees in 
Settlements Some Say Are Premature: Heart 
Valves to Orange, WALL ST. JOURNAL, 
June 26, 1992, p.1,col.1............... 


Coffee, The Corruption of the Class Action, 
WALL ST. JOURNAL, Sept. 7, 1994, p. A15 .. 


Coupon Clipping for Lawyers, WALL ST. 
JOURNAL, 


Lambert, Public Interest Law Group Fights 
Some Class Settlements as Unfair, WALL ST. 
JOURNAL, August 17, 1995, p. B4 ........ 


ovember 19, 1993, p. A20, col. 1. 


5,6 


Table of Authorities Continued 


Millions for Us, Pennies for You: Suits on Behalf 

of Investors Enrich Lawyers, But What 

ut Their Clients?, NEW YORK TIMES, 
December 19, 1993, Section 3,p.1....... 


Moses, to Court: Lawyer Given To Fili 
Shareholder Lawsuits Comes Under 
Scrutiny: Critics Say Richard Greenfield 
Abuses Class Action Rules in Quest for Legal 
Fees: Clients With Tiny Holdings, WALL Sr. 
JOURNAL, October 28, 1992, p.l col.8 .... 


Moses, Three Shareholder Lawyers Sanctioned 


—e ST. JOURNAL, February 5, 1993, p. B7, 
col. 


eeeeeoeoeaeeeeaeeaeeeseeee2ee0e 600 eee . 


Page 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1809 


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL Co., LTD., 
and MATSUSHITA HOLDING CORP., 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, et al., 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of als 
for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF OF C. L. GRIMES AS AMICUS CURIAE 
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS 


C.L. Grimes files this brief as amicus curiae pur- 
suant to written consents of the petitioners and 
respondents, which have been lodged with the Clerk. 


Amicus Grimes respectfully urges that the decision 
of the court below in this case be affirmed. It was 
clearly correct and will go far to suppress the “Delaware 
settlement,” a procedure with a history of abuse and 
great potential for further abuse. 

Grimes’s purpose in filing this brief is twofold: to 
emphasize the “Delaware settlement” as an 
misuse of class action procedure which should be put to 
an end, and to invite the Court’s attention to certain 
matters so as to ensure that its opinion affirming the 


decision below will not inadvertently appear to decide 
certain related issues in a way that might undercut the 
result. 


I. INTEREST OF THE AMICUS CURIAE 


Amicus Grimes is active in corporate law reform 
matters, especially in the areas of shareholder 
democracy; corporate governance; executive over- 
compensation; and efforts to suppress the “Delaware 
settlement,” whereby legitimate federal securities 
claims are collusively bargained away by purported 
“class representatives” in Delaware state court. His 
perspective is that of a substantial and serious investor, 
and is distinctly not that of a corporate gadfly, or that 
of the professional plaintiff who holds nominal shares 
so as to serve strike-suit lawyers as a class action 
“representative.”' He was one of the plaintiffs (and 
subsequently one of the petitioners for certiorari in this 
Court) in Grimes v. Vitalink Communications Corp., 17 
F.3d 1553 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 480 (1994) 
(No. 93-2098), which is a prominent case in the relevant 
area of the law and was relied on by petitioners herein 
as presenting a conflict with the decision below in this 
case. He was also an objector to the “Delaware 
settlement” in the corresponding Delaware state 
proceeding and a petitioner for certiorari therein. Jn re 
Vitalink Communications Corporation Shareholders 
Litigation, (1991-92 Transfer Binder] FED. SEC. L. REP. 
(CCH) 9 96,585 (1991), affd. sub nom. Grimes v. John 
P. McCarthy Profit Sharing Plan, 610 A.2d 725, cert. 
denied, 113 S. Ct. 179 (1992) (No. 92-13). 


' For example, in the Vitalink litigation discussed herein, 
Grimes was the owner of 200,000 shares, worth $2.1 million even 
at the tender offer price. 


3 


Il. SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The “Delaware s nt,” under which a 
defendant or potential defendant can buy immunity 
from federal securities liabili ility by procuring a release 
(for nominal consideration plus a generous attorney s 
fee) from a purported “class tative” in a state 
court class action alleging of Delaware law, is an 
abuse which should be ended by this Court. 

In addition, in addressing the questions presented 
by the case at bar, the Court should be aware of several 
Grimes v. Vitalink. These included a holding that a 
federal Exchange Act disclosure action involves the 
same factual issues as does a Delaware state breach of 
fiduciary duty claim, so that disposition of the latter 
produces issue preclusion as to the former; a holding 
te ae 
settlement hearing _Tepresen 
giving away, for an inadequate consideration, valuable 
thereby conducted an issue-precluding “litigation of 
those claims; and a holding that a non-resident 
stockholder in a Delaware corporation who tenders his 
tok in a tate dir tety chee 2 
jurisdiction of Delaware to appoint a non-opt-out « 
representative empowered to release his exclusively 
federal claims. None of these issues needs to be 
addressed in deciding the case at bar, but the Court 
should be aware of them so as to be alert not to give the 

of having given its imprimatur to the Third 
Circuit's disposition of them. 


4 


Ih. ARGUMENT 


A. The “Delaware Settlement” Is a Major Abuse 
of Class Action Procedure Which Should Be 
Ended by This Court. 


Last year, the Chairman of the SEC voiced 
“concerns about private securities litigation and the 
role it plays in the vital process of capital formation.” 
Remarks by Chairman, Arthur Leavitt . . . Securities 
Regulation Institute, U. of Calif. San Diego, January 
26, 1994, at 2. Among “indications that our current 
system is flawed,” he mentioned that “virtually all 
securities class actions are settled for some fraction of 
often fail to reflect the underlying merite of the cases.” 
Id. at 3. He criticized law firms’ “maintaining an 
inventory of shareholders to serve as nominal plaintiffs 
in class action filings,” and expressed his “especiall ] 
interest[ ] in ways to give shareholders greater control 
over their own litigation and curb potential conflicts of 
interest between class action lawyers and the 
shareholders they represent.” Jd. at 6. 

A major target of these strictures is the “Delaware 
settlement,” which has become, like the “Nevada 
divorce,” a classic abuse that brings scorn on the legal 
system. Holding in readiness a stable of clients who 
own stock-often, it seems, in only trivial amounts—in 
nearly every publicly traded company, a relatively small 
number of lawyers scrutinize the business news, and 
immediately upon sighting a transaction that might be 
vulnerable to a claim of breach of duty by a company’s 
directors, file a class action—usually a non-opt-out class 
action in equity—against the company in state court 
under state law. (See the description of various 
practices in Garr v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc., 22 F.3d 1274 
(3d Cir. 1994).) After minimal discovery, the claim is 
settled for a cosmetic consideration and a large 


attorney's fee. The lawyer—nominally, Sor, = the 
a ”~gives in return a general release 

that purports to cover all claims, state and federal, 
arising out of the transaction. The state court approves 


The legal trade press has long regarded the 
“Delawar: settlement” as, quite simply, a scandal. We 
respectfully refer the Court in particular to Borden, The 
Shareholder Suit Charade: The Wilmington Filers 
shake down corporations in Delaware, and no one 
seems to mind, AMERICAN LAWYER (Dec. 1989) 67. 
Rather than quote from the text, we ask the Court’s 
indulgence for our reproducing its first page on the 
following page, on the theory that quoting one picture 
is worth quoting a thousand words: 


a By Anthony Borden | Tia. penen comne tore we 


Legal scholars have likewise expressed dismay over 
the phenomenon. “Much like the production of sausage 
and legislation,” Professor John C. Coffee, Jr., of 
Columbia Law School has written, “the settlement of 
securities litigation is a process that the high-minded 
are best advised not to examine too closely.” Coffee, 
Suspect Settlements in Securities Litigation, NEW YORK 


7 


LAW JOURNAL, March 28, 1991, p. 5 col. 1. At least two 
major studies corroborate what Professor Coffee 
described as the long-available anecdotal evidence that 
“the result can be collusive settlements in which low 
recoveries are exchanged for high plaintiffs’ attorneys 
fees.” Ibid. In one, Professor Roberta Romano of Yale 
studied 83 settlements of stockholder actions and 
confirmed, among other things, that attorneys’ fees 
loomed far larger than plaintiffs’ recoveries. In 
settlements that afforded only structural relief, the 
value of such relief, she concluded, was “incon- 
sequential.” Romano, The Shareholder Suit: Litigation 
Without Foundation?, cited in Coffee, Suspect Settle- 
ments, supra. Another study, by Professor Janet Cooper 
Alexander of Stanford Law School, demonstrated that 
“the strength of the plaintiffs’ case on the merits did 
not appear to be a significant factor in determining the 
outcome.” Alexander, Do the Merits Matter? A Study 
of Settlements in Securities Class Actions, 43 STANFORD 
L. REV. 497, 500 (1991).? 


The general press is likewise well aware of the 
scandal. See, e.g., Coffee, The Corruption of the Class 
Action, WALL ST. JOURNAL, Sept. 7, 1994, p. Al5. 
“Millions for Us, Pennies for You,” trumpeted a 
headline in the New York Times in late 1993, with the 


* See also, e.g., Coffee, Understanding the Plaintiff's Attorney: 
The Implications of Economic Theory for Private Enforcement of 
Law Through Class and Derivative Actions, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 669, 
714-20 (1986); Coffee, The Unfaithful Champion: The Plaintiff As 
Monitor in Shareholder Litigation, 48 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 
(Summer 1985) 5, 26-33; Coffee, Rescuing the Private Attorney 
General: Why the Model of the Lawyer as Bounty Hunter Is Not 
Working, 42 MD. L. REV. 215, 232-33, 239-46 (1983). See also 
Private Litigation Under the Federal Securities Laws: Hearings 
Before the Subcommittee on Securities of the Senate Committee on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, S. HRG. 103-431, 103D 
CONG., Ist SESS. 44-46, 117, 305-307, 416-417, 458, 461-62, 602 
(1993). 


8 


subhead: “Suits on behalf of investors enrich lawyers. 
But what of their clients?” NEW YORK TIMES, December 
19, 1993, Section 3, p. 1. (“[TJhe law firms representing 
these investors can win for settlements of a 
few cents on the dollar for their clients while pocketing 
millions of dollars—even tens of millions—for them- 
selves. .. .’ The only people who make money in these 
are the claimants’ lawyers, and the defendants 
themselves, who shut off a lot of potential liability.’ . 

. “The lawyers’ interest shifts from protecting the 
investor to protecting the deal.’”) See also Moses, Off 
to Court: Lawyer Given To Filing Shareholder 
Lawsuits Comes Under Scrutiny, WALL ST. JOURNAL, 
October 28, 1992, p. 1, col. 8. 


The practice of maintaining a stable of stockholders 
from which plaintiffs could be “pressed into service at 
the drop of certain stock prices” received general 
publicity as a result of Greenfield v. U.S. Healthcare, 
Inc., 146 F.R.D. 118 (E.D. Pa. 1993), affd. sub nom. 
Garr v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc., 22 F.3d 1274 (3d Cir. 
1994). See, e.g., Moses, Three Shareholder Lawyers 
ao. WALL ST. JOURNAL, February 5, 1993, p. 

, col. 1. 


According to an industry newsletter, in 1993 the 
eleven law firms involved in the greatest number of 
settlements of stockholder class-action lawsuits were in 
an average of 18.5 such settlements each, or one every 
three weeks. The top firm was involved in 40 such 
settlements, and the runner-up in 26. Bowers & Gupta, 
Shareholder Suits Beset More Small Companies, WALL 
ST. JOURNAL, March 9, 1994, p. B1 col. 5. 


Adverse public attention to class action settlements 
is not, of course, restricted to securities cases. See, e.g., 
a lead editorial headed “Coupon Clipping for Lawyers” 
in the WALL STREET JOURNAL, November 18, 1993, p. 
A20 col. 1 (“[W]e have a hard time believing the lawyers 
deserve their money for producing a settlement in 


Settlements as Unfair, WALL ST. JOURNAL, August 17, 
1995, p. B4; Baron, An Asbestos Settlement With a 
Hidden Agenda, WALL ST. JOURNAL, May 6, 1993, p. 
Al11, col. 3; Burton, The Litigator: How Stanley Chesley 
Settles Things Quickly in Mass-Injury Suits: Class- 
Action Attorney Earns Big Fees in Settlements Some 
Say = Premature, WALL ST. JOURNAL, June 26, 1992, 
p. 1, col. 1. 


Finally, see generally Judge Becker’s scholarly 
analysis of the potential for abuse of class action 
settlements in In re GMC Pick-Up Trucks Fuel Tank 
Prod. Liab. Litig., 55 F.3d 768 (3d Cir. 1995). 


The key element of the Delaware settlement 
industry is the ability of the purported class 
representative to release all claims, including federal 
ones. Otherwise the indulgence is not plenary; and if it 
is not plenary it will not command much of a price. 
Professor Coffee eloquently summarized the 
implications of this at the time of the first case to bless 
it, Judge Selya’s opinion in Nottingham Partners v. 
Trans-Lux Corp., 905 F 2d 29 (1st Cir. 1991): 


“(F Jor the litigator, the most interesting recent 
development in securities litigation may be the 
appearance of a new technique by which a 
collusive settlement—that is, a non-adversarial 
settlement that maximizes the attorney's interest 
at the expense of the client’s—can be negotiated. 


— the general release issued to the 
defendants in the state court settlement resulted 
in issue preclusion, the consequence was that no 
court, state or federal, could hear plaintiffs’ 


10 


claims of proxy fraud. The seeming paradox in 
Nottingham Partners is that a state court 
settlement can have preclusive effect despite the 
fact that the state court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over the claims thereby barred. 


“While the legal issue of when one court has 
the power to approve the release of claims 
pending in another forum is complex, the 
practical message to plaintiffs’ counsel is much 

simpler: weak derivative and class action claims 
that once would have been routinely dismissed by 
the Delaware Chancery Court now have an 
enhanced settlement value, because they can 
confer immunity with respect to . . . federal 
securities class actions, which often would have 
a significant settlement value. 


“Ironically, the incentives for defendants are 
even clearer: never seek dismissal on the merits 
of a state class action if a companion federal 
class action raising related federal claims is 
possible, but instead reach a settlement in which 
the defendants are given a general release. If 
properly structured to fall within the Notting- 
ham Partners precedent, such a release will 
preclude a federal class action raising federal 
securities claims. 

“This type of settlement can be described as 
‘collusive’ because the parties to the state court 
settlement are effectively depriving absent 
players-the plaintiffs and their attorneys in the 
federal action—of their day in court. The net 
result is effectively both a wealth transfer from 
the federal plaintiffs’ attorneys to the state 
plaintiffs’ attorneys and a reduction in the total 
recovery to the class (because the state plaintiffs’ 
attorneys are settling federal claims that they can 
never win, but can only settle, and should thus 


ll 
ae ae iaen 


“-Alchoughs it fo still premature to predict thet 
Rule 10b-5 actions will become an endangered 


After pointing out that in the companion state case the 
Delaware Supreme Court had held that a non-opt-out 
class was permissible when the action primarily sought 
equitable relief, Professor Coffee observed: 


“... Delaware’s approach poses a major hurdle 
for securities an because it is easily 


.. [E)ven plaintiffs who have filed an earlier 


predictably settle quickly in order to be used as 

a barrier to the federal action.” : 
Coffee, Suspect Settlements in Securities Litigation, 
supra (emphasis added). 

The case at bar is an especially cynical example of 
the use of the “Delaware settlement” to block 
legitimate federal claims, involving as it does the 
attempted revival of a state case already determined to 
be meritless, in order to use its settlement to block a 
pending federal action.* 


: Whether the federal action is filed before or after the state 
action is, of course, irrelevant to the question of the effect of a 
“Delaware settlement” on the federal action. 


12 


B. Three Points Which Amicus Respectfully 
Suggests the Court Bear in Mind in 
Formulating Its Opinion in This Case. 


In Grimes v. Vitalink, supra, Grimes encountered 
several problems in connection with a “Delaware 
settlement” which this Court should be aware of so that 
its opinion in this case will not inadvertently give the 
appearance of approving them. 

That case was an Exchange Act class action brought 
by Grimes and another Vitalink Communications 
Corporation stockholder, G.W. Holbrook, under Rule 
10b-5 and other appropriate provisions, alleging 
inadequate disclosure of the value of Vitalink stock in 
connection with management’s recommendation that a 
tender offer for Vitalink’s shares be accepted. A 
non-opt-out Delaware class action arising out of the 
same transaction (but based on entirely different 
allegations) had been settled for a sweeping release of 
all claims a scant few weeks after its initiation, over 
Grimes’s vigorous objections. The district court for the 
Eastern District of Pennsylvania held that Grimes and 
Holbrook’s federal action was barred by this “Delaware 
settlement,” and the Third Circuit affirmed. 


1. The Court Should Avoid Appearing to Give 
Its Imprimatur to the Proposition That 
Breach of Fiduciary Duty Claims Under 
Delaware State Law Depend on the Same 
Facts as Do Federal Disclosure Claims. 


As noted, the Vitalink litigation involved a tender 
offer for shares of Vitalink. Promptly upon an- 
nouncement of the tender offer, various 
prominent at the Delaware plaintiffs’ bar filed 
purported shareholder class actions (later consolidated) 
charging that Vitalink’s management, by the assurance 
to them of safe jobs with the acquiring company, had 


13 


been induced to accede to the acquisition without 
taking steps to maximize Vitalink’s value in the 
marketplace, thus breaching their fiduciary duties of 
loyalty and care owed to the stockholders under 
Delaware law. 


The Delaware state court action was based 
exclusively on management’s alleged putting of their 
own interests first. It was not an action for breach of 
any duty of disclosure or “candor” and made no 
allegation of that kind. Aside from the basic story of 
the tender offer itself, the Delaware action had no 
factual overlap with a disclosure case such as the 
federal case subsequently filed by Grimes and 
Holbrook.‘ 


Nevertheless, the Third Circuit said that the federal 
case before it depended on the “very same set of facts” 
as had the state case, 17 F.3d at 1564; see also id. at 
1556, so that disposition of the one disposed of the 
other by issue preclusion. That the court could make 
such a statement was inexplicable to us then and 
remains inexplicable today. This was the basis for one 
of the questions presented in Grimes and Holbrook’s 
petition for certiorari.” 

In the case at bar the court below understandably 
proceeded on the erroneous impression that in Grimes 


* The allegations of the consolidated complaint in the Delaware 
action, and of Grimes and Holbrook’s complaint in their federal 
case, are laid side by side in Table 1 at pp. 122a of the Appendix to 
Grimes and Holbrook’s petition for certiorari in No. 93-2098 
(hereinafter “App. in No. 93-2098"). 


* “(D]id the court below err in holding . . . [t]hat a state can 
empower the representative plaintiff in a non-opt-out class action 
to give a release, binding on all class members, of claims based on 
a different set of facts from those on which the class action is 
based?” Petition for Certiorari in No. 93-2098 at ii (Questions 
Presented, No. 3(c)). See also id. at 25-26. 


14 


v. Vitalink the state and federal cases did indeed depend 
on the same set of facts, saying that it would “break 
new ground” for it to give “preclusive effect to a state 
court judgment that extinguishes exclusively federal 
claims that are factually unrelated to the state claims 
pleaded in the class action,” and specifically stating that 
it “need not decide whether to follow Nottingham 
Partners and Grimes in giving preclusive effect to a 
class action settlement that releases exclusively federal 
claims that turn on the same underlying facts as the 
state claims.” 50 F.3d at 664; see also at 668 n.34. 


We respectfully urge the Court to avoid this error in 
any discussion of Grimes v. Vitalink in the present case. 
It would be unfortunate if it could be argued in the 
future that the Court had placed its imprimatur on the 
proposition that the issues involved in a Delaware claim 
for breach of fiduciary duty are so identical with those 
involved in a federal disclosure claim that disposition of 
one can extinguish the other by issue preclusion. 
Circumstances can be imagined in which such a 
proposition could be used to circumvent a holding in 
this case designed to restrict abuse of the “Delaware 
settlement.” 


2. The Court Should Avoid Appearing to Give 
Its Imprimatur to the Proposition That 
Merely Objecting to a Proposed Class Action 
Settlement on the Ground That It Releases 
Claims That Were Never Pleaded Constitutes 
Issue-Preclusive Litigation of the Under- 
lying Facts of Those Claims. 


In the Vitalink litigation, Grimes considered that 
the settlement agreed to by the “representative” 
plaintiffs’ lawyers was inadequate. In return for what 
he considered to be only cost..ctic changes in the tender 
offer (plus a fee to the “representative” plaintiffs’ 
lawyers), the sweeping release would purportedly give 


15 


up all claims—including disclosure claims under state 
law and the disclosure claims under federal law that 
formed the basis for the subsequent federal action, none 
of which had been either advanced or explored by the 

“representative” plaintiffs’ lawyers. He accordingly 


appeared at the settlement hearing to oppose approval 
on this and other grounds.° 


The settlement hearing was held on written 
submissions and oral argument, without formal 
evidence or testimony. This is normal Delaware 
practice. The court does not decide the merits of the 
case or of any other claim that may be discussed in 
evaluating the settlement; rather, it generally evaluates 
the claims, and balances, based on its business 
judgment, its appraisal of what is being received against 
its appraisal of what is being given up. E.g., Barkan v. 
Amsted Industries, Inc., 567 A.2d 1279 (Del. Super. 
1989); Rome v. Archer, 564 A.2d 1089 (Del. Super. 
1989); Polk v. Good, 507 A.2d 531 (Del. Super. 1964). 
The settlement hearing in the Vitalink matter was of 
this nature, see App. in No. 93-2098 at 54a, 59a-85a, 
and indeed the state court was explicit that “it is not 
necessary for the Court to decide the merits of the case.” 
Id. at 60a (emphasis added). 


Nevertheless, the Third Circuit deemed that by so 
appearing and objecting, Grimes had “actually 
litigated” disclosure claims so as to be bound by issue 
preclusion. It said that the state courts “rejected Mr. 


* By way of background, we note that Grimes and the other 
absent class members had been given neither notice of the class 
certification nor a chance to protest its non-opt-out feature; nor, 
just as in the case at bar, was any information ever provided as to 
who the Delaware “representative” plaintiffs were, whether thev 
were really Vitalink stockholders at all, or whether and why they 
were representive of the class—even though Delaware law 
~~ Prezant v. De Angelis, 636 A.2d 915, 923-26 
(Del. 1994). 


16 


Grimes’ disclosure claims,” 17 F.3d at 1558; that 
“Grimes pursue[d] the . . . disclosure claims through the 
Delaware court system,” idbid.; that “the facts that 
litigated during the state court proceeding and were 
conclusively resolved against the objectors,” id. at 1562 
(emphasis added). It held accordingly that this “actual 
litigation” bound Grimes by issue preclusion. 

That the court could make such statements was 
inexplicable to us then and remains inexplicable today. 
“Actual litigation” for issue preclusion purposes 
requires that an issue necessary to the decision be 
raised, submitted for determination, and actually 
determined, with opportunity to present evidence and 
rebut opposing evidence. RESTATEMENT, JUDGMENTS 
2D § 27 comment d; Kremer v. Chemical Construction 
Corp., 456 U.S. 461, 483-84 (1982); Halyalker v. Board 
of Regents, 72 N.Y. 261, 527 N.E.2d 1222, 532 N.Y.S.2d 
85 (1988); James Talcott, Inc. v. Allahabad Bank, Ltd.., 
444 F.2d 451, 459 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 404 U.S. 940 
(1971); Eastman v. Symonds, 108 Mass. 567, 569 
(1871). A class action settlement hearing is not such a 
procedure and “is not the procedural stuff from which 
binding determinations of fact can be drawn.” Haudek, 
The Settlement and Dismissal of Stockholders’ Actions, 
23 Sw. L.J. 765, 809 (1969). This was the basis for 
another of the questions presented in Grimes and 
Holbrook’s petition for certiorari.’ 


’ “At a state court hearing on whether to approve a class action 
settlement, there is no presentation of evidence or decision on the 
merits; the court merely generally evaluates, in the light of its 
business judginent, what the respective sides would give up and 
receive in the settlement. If at such a ing a person does no 
more than argue that the settlement not be 
because it purports to bargain away substantial claims ( 
federal claims which were not, and could not have been, presen 
in the action), has the person thereby ‘actually litigated’ the facts 


17 


In the present case the court below understandably 
proceeded on the erroneous impression that in Grimes 


federal plaintiffs.’” 50 F.3d at 664. 


We respectfully urge the Court to avoid this error in 

cup temeainainiaes. Vitalink in the present case. 
Bs wand ib cathstmnate Of & ened be exnued in the 
future that the Court had placed its imprimatur on the 
proposition that merely opposing a Delaware settlement 
constitutes issue-precluding “actual litigation” of the 
facts of a federal claim. Circumstances can be imagined 
in which such a proposition could be used to circumvent 
a holding in this case designed to restrict abuse of the 
“Delaware settlement.” 


3. The Court Should Avoid Appearing to Give 
Its Imprimatur to the Proposition That a 
Non-Resident’s Tender of Stock in a 
Delaware Corporation Pursuant to a Tender 
Offer Justifies the Delaware Courts in 
Forcing Him Into a Non-Opt-Out Class in 
Which His Federal Rights Can Be Released 
Without His Consent. 


We note finally that in Grimes v. Vitalink, plaintiff 
Holbrook (a Connecticut resident) had not appeared in 
the settlement hearing, so that he could not be charged 
with having “actually litigated” anything and could not 
be held bound by the settlement on any prior 
adjudication theory. The Third Circuit held that he was 


of those claims, so as to be foreclosed by issue preclusion?” 
Petition for Certiorari in No. 93-2098 at i (Questions Presented, 
No. 2). See also id. at 21-23. 


18 


bound anyway, on the ground that the Delaware court 
had personal jurisdiction over him because he had 
tendered his stock in a Delaware corporation “with 
knowledge of his status as a member of the piaintiff 
class in a pending class action lawsuit” containing 
appropriate procedural protections and had thereby 
somehow “invoked the benefits and protections of 
Delaware law.” 17 F.3d at 1559-60. This was un- 
intelligible to us then and remains unintelligible today. 
It was the basis for yet another of the questions 
presented in Grimes and Holbrook’s petition for 
certiorari.* To the extent it is intelligible at all, it is 
plainly inconsistent with Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 
186 (1977), holding that even being a stockholder and 
an active officer or director in a Delaware corporation 
is not a “minimum contact” with Delaware for personal 
jurisdiction purposes. In any event, the question 
whether and when a state court judgment can be held 
to foreclose litigation of an exclusively federal claim is 
not a matter of personal jurisdiction. 


We respectfully urge the Court to keep the 
foregoing in mind in any discussion of Grimes v. 
Vitalink in the present case. It would be unfortunate if 
it could be argued in the future that the Court had 
placed its imprimatur on this puzzling determination as 
to personal jurisdiction, which among other things 
might be deemed to justify forcing a person into a 
non-opt-out settlement class in which such person’s 


* “(Djid the court below err in holding . . . [tjhat if a 
nonresident stockholder in a Delaware corporation sells his stock, 
in New York, to a third party in response to a tender offer, that is 
a sufficient ‘minimum contact’ with Delaware to support personal 
jurisdiction, at least if there is pending some Delaware state 
lawsuit, related to the tender offer, in which a class including the 
stockholder might be certified?” Petition for Certiorari in 
No.93-2098 at i-ii (Questions Presented, No. 3(a)). See also id. at 
24-25. 


19 


exclusively federal rights might be released notwith- 
standing the Court’s decision in the case at bar—and 
ae Sy TAME WH petentlel enlectie! ief in many 
con . 


IV. CONCLUSION 


judgment of the court below and take this opportunity 
to put an end to the abuses of the “Delaware settle- 
ment.” If in doing so the Court has occasion to refer to 
the Third Circuit’s opinion in Grimes v. Vitalink, it 
should be alert not to appear to approve aspects of that 
opinion that might give the “Delaware settlement” 
industry means to circumvent the Court’s decision. 


Respectfully submitted, 


THADDEUS HOLT 
910 16th Street, N.W. 
Suite 400 
Washi n, D.C. 20006 
(202) 9010 


for C. L. Grimes 


September 8, 1995 (Counsel of Record) 


ene Ae. teem in Petaters Yari, 42 F.3d 53, 62 n.7 (1st Cir. 


