No. 94-1809 | 
— RK 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD. 
and MATSUSHITA HOLDING CORPORATION, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, et ai., 
Respondents. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF AND 
BRIEF OF WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION 
AND ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION AS 
AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


DANIEL J. POPEO 

RICHARD A. SAMP 
(Counsel of Record) 

Washington Legal Foundation 

2009 Massachusetts Ave., NW 

Washington, DC 20036 

(202) 588-0302 

Date’ August 3, 1995 


———— 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


~ . 


a) i 


7. 4s 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-1809 


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD. 
and MATSUSHITA HOLDING CORPORATION, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, e ai., 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE BRIEF OF 

WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION AND 

ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION AS 
AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


Pursuant to Rule 37 3 of the Rules of this Court. the 
Washington Lega! Foundation and the Allied Educational! 
Foundation respectfully move for leave to file the attached 
onef as aruct curtee m suppor of Petitioners. Counsel for 
Petihoners has consented to the filing of this bref. Amc: 
Mave fot contacted counse! for Respondent Walter Minton 

‘ounse! for Respondents Lawrence Epstem. eral declined 


2 


to consent to the filing of the brief, thereby necessitating 
the filing of this motion. 


The Washington Legal Foundation (WLF) is a non- 
profit public interest law and policy center with more than 
100,000 supporters nationwide. While WLF engages in 
litigation and the administrative process in a variety of 
areas, WLF devotes a substantial portion of its resources to 
advancing the interests of the free-enterprise system and to 
ensuring that economic development is not impeded by 
excessive litigation. To that end, WLF has appeared 
before this Court as well as other federal and state courts 
in cases affecting the scope of the federal securities laws 
(see, e.g., Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc. , 115 S. Ct. 1447 
(1995)) as well as in cases raising tort reform issues. See, 
e.g., BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, No. 94-896, 
cert. granted, 115 §. Ct. 932 (1995); Honda Motor Co. vy. 
Oberg, 114 S. Ct. 2331 (1994). 


The Allied Educational Foundation (AEF) is a non- 
profit charitable and educational foundation based in 
Englewood, New Jersey. Founded in 1964, AEF is dedi- 
cated to promoting education in diverse areas of study such 
as history, law, and public policy, and has appeared as 
amicus before this Court in a number of cases of interest to 
the business community. 


Amici are concemed by the proliferation of class-action 
lawsuits being filed under the federal securities laws and 
the inhibiting effect that such suits can have on the 
development of new businesses. Amici believe that the 
decision of the Ninth Circuit in this case, if allowed to 
stand, will exacerbate that trend by encouraging the filing 
of multiple class-action suits arising from a single business 
tramsaction. Multiple suits would tax the resources of the 


3 


federal courts, would provide no benefit to aggrieved 
shareholders, and would be a severe economic drain to the 
business community. The only group that stands to benefit 
from the Ninth Circuit's decision is the plaintiffs’ bar, a 
group that has fared well even in the absence of multiple 
class-action suits. 


WLF and AEF seek to file the attached brief because 
of their interest in promoting the welfare of the business 
community and the public at large; they have no direct 
interest in the outcome of this lawsuit or of other suits 
raising similar issues. Because of their lack of direct 
economic interests, amici believe that they can assist the 
Court by providing a perspective that is distinct from that 


of any party. 


For the foregoing reasons, amici curiae WLF and ABF 


respectfully request that they be allowed to particmpate in 
this case by filing the attached brief 


Respectfully submitted 


Dame! J]. Popes 
Richard A. Samp 
(Counsel of Record 
WASHINGTON LEGA! 
FOUNDATION 
2008 Massachusetts Ave WW 
Washington DC DH) 
202) $88-030? 


- 7 


i 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a federal court can withhold full faith and 
credit from a state court final judgment approving a class 
action settlement simply because the settlement released 
federal claims. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I § 1738 REQUIRES THE FEDERAL 
COURTS TO GIVE FULL FAITH AND 
CREDIT TO THE JUDGMENT OF 
THE DELAWARE COURTS .......... 7 


Il. THE DELAWARE JUDGMENT IS NO 
LESS ENTITLED TO FULL FAITH 
AND CREDIT SIMPLY BECAUSE IT 
AROSE IN CONNECTION WITH A 
ED 0065 w:64)6 Wn eee @ e 12 


fil. THE NINTH CIRCUIT'S DECISION 
THREATENS TO DISRUPT CLASS 
ACTION SETTLEMENTS AND TO 
ENCOURAGE MULTIPLE CLASS 
ACTION SUITS ARISING FROM A 
SINGLE SECURITIES LAW 
TRANSACTION 17 


CONCLUSION M 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 
Cases: 


American Surety Co. v. Baldwin, 

ere es dae o's bo ob 6 8d 10 
Davis v. Davis, 

cs co ceeeeneheicees 10 
Durfee v. Duke, 

ee 10-11 
Grimes v. Vitalink Communications Corp.., 

17 F.3d 1553 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 

PE, <n a's 5 Su oo 0 0% 08 4 0 6 4 15 
Hansberry v. Lee, 

ee 14-15 
Kremer v. Chemical Constr. Corp. ., 

ee eee 7-9, 12, 16 
Marrese v. American Academy of Orthopaedic 

Surgeons, 470 U.S. 373 (1985) ....... 8-9, 12, 16 
Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 

339 U.S. 306 (1950) ........ ee 
Murphy v. Gallagher, 

761 F.2d 878 (2d Cir. 1985) 12 
National Super Spuds v. N.Y. Mercantile Exchanee. 

660 F.2d 9 (2d Cir. 1981) 16 
Nottingham Parter v. Trans-Lux Corp.. 

925 F.2d 29 (ist Cir. 1991) 15 
O'Burn v. Shapp. 

70 F_R.D. 549 (ED Pa. 1976) 15 
Parsons Steel, Inc. v. First Alabama 

474 U.S. 518 (1986) 16 
Phillips Petrolewm v. Shutts 

472 U.S. 797 (1985) 13-14. 16 

wzanower v. Touche Ross & C 

426 U.S. 148 (1976 x4 


ee 


iV 


Smith v. Allegheny Corp... 


ogy Pb Fo) Pee a 15 
Treinies v. Sunshine Mining Co.., 
ee a EE ci os oe theese eee eee 10 


Underwriters Nat’l Assurance Co. v. North 
Carolina Life and Accidental Health Ins. 
Gty. Ass’n, 455 U.S. 691 (1982) ....... 10-11, 14 


Constitutional Provisions, Statutes, and Regulations: 


The Full Faith and Credit Act, 


Se Pe i ee passim 
Title VII, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 

BUSS. Fea cscicsvrrrsevvs 2) 
The Williams Act, 82 Stat. 454 (1968) ........ 8-9 
a Res ee ka ad ee eee eee Tee 9 
SEC Rule 14d-10, 17 C.F.R. § 240.14d-10 .. . passim 
oh ee ee ee eae 18 
fe. 8 f Perr urerrreerrir: cre 4 
Miscellaneous: 


J. Alexander, Do the Merits Matter? A Study of 
Settlement in Securities Class Actions, 
43 Stan. L. Rev. 497 (1991) 18 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-1809 


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD 
and MATSUSHITA HOLDING CORPORATION. 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, eé7 ai., 
Respondents 


On Writ of Certiorari to 
the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF OF WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION 
AND ALLIED EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION A» 
AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


INTERESTS OF THE AM/IC/ CLRIAF 


The interests of the aruc curiae are st out ' 
Motion for Leave to File accompanying th 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In the mier e = m\ _ 
reference the Statement as 
ne . rye? 


2 


In brief, this case concerns Matsushita Electric Indus- 
trial Co., Lid.’s ("Matsushita") 1990 acquisition of MCA, 
Inc. through a tender offer of $66 per share of common 
stock. Respondents assert that Matsushita violated federal 
securities law by paying a premium price for shares 
belonging to two senior MCA officials -- MCA founder 
Lew Wasserman and MCA chief operating officer Sidney 
Sheinberg. 


At approximately the same time as the tender offer, 
Matsushita separately acquired the shares of Mr. 
Wasserman in exchange for preferred stock in an entity 
known as MEA Holdings.' Mr. Sheinberg tendered his 1.2 
million shares of MCA common stock in accordance with 
the terms of Matsushita’s public tender offer. However, 
shortly after Matsushita accepted his shares, MCA (not 
Matsushita) paid him $21 million as compensation for his 
agreement to continue working for MCA despite the change 
in corporate control, for relinquishing his right to collect 
salary without performing future services, and for loss of 
a promised stock option bonus. Petition Appendix ("Pet. 
App.") 5la. 


Respondents contend that Matsushita violated federal 
securities law by acquiring the Wasserman and Sheinberg 
shares on terms more favorable to those two insiders than 
were available to other MCA shareholders. Respondents 
contend (and Petitioners deny) that the $21 million payment 
from MCA to Mr. Sheinberg was actually a disguised 


' Matsushita acquired the Wasserman shares in this manner so 
that Mr. Wasserman could avoid recognition of capital gains on his 
shares. The transaction was structured with the intent that the 
preferred stock received by Mr. Wasserman be no more valuable than 
tne tender offer consideration. 


3 


premium on the purchase price of Mr. Sheinberg’s MCA 
stock, designed to induce him to tender his shares. 


The Matsushita tender offer for MCA spawned several 
class-actions lawsuits, purportedly on behalf of a class 
consisting of all MCA shareholders. Three such class 
actions (subsequently consolidated) were filed in the 
Delaware Court of Chancery in September 1990. Plaintiffs 
in the Delaware proceedings raised three claims under 
Delaware law: (1) MCA directors breached their fiduciary 
duty of care by failing to take steps to maximize share- 
holder value upon a change of corporate control; (2) they 
breached their duty of candor by failing to disclose the 
compensation packages offered to MCA officers under the 
terms of the merger agreement; and (3) they breached their 
fiduciary duty of loyalty by making preferential arrange- 
ments for themselves as part of the tender offer. Pet. App. 
35a-36a. 


The instant shareholder lawsuits were filed in the U.S. 
District Court for the Central District of California, begin- 
ning in December 1990. One was filed by Respondent 
Walter Minton in his individual capacity; the other was 
filed by Respondent Lawrence Epstein and six other 
individuals (the "Epstein Respondents"), purportedly on 
behalf of all MCA shareholders at the time of the tender 
offer. The suits (later consolidated) alleged that Matsu- 
shita’s tender offer violated SEC Rule 14d-10, 17 C.F.R. 
§ 240.14d-10, which requires equal consideration for all 


4 


stock purchases made “during a tender offer." 


The district court denied a motion for class certifi- 
cation in April 1991. It granted summary judgment for 
Matsushita and dismissed the federal complaints on April 
15, 1992. Pet. App. 45a-6la. 


While Respondents’ appeals from that dismissal were 
pending, Matsushita entered into a settlement agreement in 
the Delaware class action. In return for release of all 
claims arising out of its acquisition of MCA, Matsushita 
agreed to a $2,000,000 payment to former MCA share- 
holders. The settlement provided all shareholders with the 
right to opt out of the settlement. 


The Delaware Chancery Court certified a class for 
settlement purposes and (pursuant to Del. Ch. Ct. R. 23(e)) 
required that notice of the proposed settlement be sent to 
all former MCA shareholders. The notice made clear that 
shareholders were entitled to opt out of the settlement, and 
that the settlement would release all state and federal claims 
arising out of the MCA tender offer, including the Rule 


> Rule 14d-10 provides in relevant part: 


(a) No bidder shall make a tender offer unless: 
(1) The tender offer is open to all security holders of the 
class of securities subject to the tender offer, and 


(2) The consideration paid to any security holder pursuant 
to the tender offer is the highest consideration paid to any 
other security holder during such tender offer. 


17 C.F.R. § 240.14d-10(a). Matsushita contends that all payments 
made to Mr. Wasserman were made after, not “during,” its tender 
offer for MCA shares. Matsushita Certiorari Petition at 21-24. 


5 


14d-10 claims pending in the California litigation. Pet. 
App. 77a-101a. 


Only 19 of the more than 10,000 shareholders elected 
to opt out of the settlement. Those 19 included Respondent 
Minton but did nor include any of the Epstein Respondents 
other than Respondent Rockford. No named Respondent 
appeared in the Delaware Chancery Court to object to the 
Class settlement. 


The Delaware Chancery Court then examined the 
settlement, determined that it was "fair and reasonable” in 
all respects, and entered a judgment releasing all claims 
(including Rule 14d-10 claims) of those who had not opted 
out of the class. Pet. App. 63a-75a. It specifically found 
that the former MCA shareholders had been adequately 
represented in the Delaware proceedings and that the 
settlement amount was a reasonable approximation of the 
value of the claims being released. Jd. On appeal, the 
Delaware Supreme Court affirmed the Chancery Court 
opinion in September 1993. Pet. App. 76a. 


Only after the Delaware proceedings were concluded 
did the Ninth Circuit issue its decision in this case. On 
February 27, 1995, the Ninth Circuit issued an opinion 
reversing the district court’s grant of summary judgment 
for Matsushita, ordering that summary judgment be entered 
for Respondents with respect to the Wasserman stock 
purchase, and remanding the case to the district court for 
a determination of damages. The Ninth Circuit acknow- 
ledged that the Delaware courts had explicitly released the 
claims being asserted by Respondent but asserted that the 
release was not entitled to full faith and credit because the 
Delaware courts lacked jurisdiction to issue such a release. 
Pet. App. 24a-40a. The Ninth Circuit also rejected the 


6 


reasoning employed by the district court in granting 
summary judgment to Matsushita.’ 


The Court granted Matsushita’s certiorari petition on 
June 19, 1995, to review the Ninth Circuit’s ruling that the 
Delaware settlement decree was not entitled to full faith 
and credit. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The Full Faith and Credit Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1738, 
requires the federal courts to give the same preclusive 
effect to the Delaware judgment as would the Delaware 
courts. The Delaware courts have made abundantly clear 
that they would bar further litigation of Respondents’ Rule 
14d-10 claims. Accordingly, § 1738 requires dismissal of 
those claims in the absence of any evidence that Congress 
intended a partial repeal of § 1738 in connection with 
federal securities law claims. 


The preclusive effect of the Delaware judgment is not 
affected by its status as a class action. Delaware complied 
fully with the requirements of the Due Process Clause 
before purporting to bind absent plaintiffs to its judgment. 
Such compliance is all that is necessary to entitle a class 
action judgment to full faith and credit under § 1738. 


* The Ninth Circuit disagreed with the district court's holding that 
Congress had not intended to permit private enforcement of Rule |4d- 
10. Pet. App. 4a-lla. The Ninth Circuit also disagreed with the 
district court's holding that the Wasserman transaction did not violate 
Rule 14d-10 because it did not occur “during” the tender offer period 
(Pet. App. | la-20a); the Ninth Circuit held that the term "tender offer" 
as used in Rule 14d-10 should not be “interpreted to denote a rigid 
period of time." Pet. App. 15a. 


5 


Adopting the Ninth Circuit's decision in this case is 
likely to have significant adverse effects on litigation in the 
federal courts. It is likely to increase transactional costs 
associated with securities law class actions, increase the 
likelihood that corporations will face multiple class actions 
arising from the same transaction, and decrease the 
willingness of defendants to settle class actions. 


ARGUMENT 


I. § 1738 REQUIRES THE FEDERAL COURTS TO 
GIVE FULL FAITH AND CREDIT TO THE 
JUDGMENT OF THE DELAWARE COURTS 


Respondents do not deny that the Delaware courts 
explicitly released the Rule 14d-10 claims that they are 
pressing in this case, except with respect to those 
shareholders who opted out of the Delaware settlement. 
Nor do they deny that shareholders were given notice that 
the proposed settlement intended to release such claims, 
that shareholders were told that they could opt out of the 
Delaware settlement if they wanted to preserve their Rule 
14d-10 claims, and that the Delaware courts approved the 
settlement only after scrutinizing it for fairness and 
reasonableness and determining that the class was 
adequately represented. Under those circumstances, federal 
law required the Ninth Circuit to give full faith and credit 
to the Delaware court judgment. 


The Full Faith and Credit Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1738, 
"requires federal courts to give the same preclusive effect 
to state court judgments that those judgments would be 
given in the courts of the State from which the judgments 
emerged." Kremer v. Chemical Constr. Corp., 456 U.S. 
461, 466 (1982). In determining whether an earlier state 


judgment bars subsequent litigation in the courts of that 
state, a federal court should "rely in the first instance on 
[that] state[’s] preclusion principles." Marrese v. American 
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 470 U.S. 373, 382 
(1985). If under "state preclusion principles" the earlier 
state judgment would bar subsequent litigation, § 1738 
requires the federal court to enforce those rules “unless a 
later siatute contains an express or implied partial repeal." 
Kremer, 456 U.S. at 468. This approach to enforcement 
of § 1738 is to be followed even in, as here, "a lawsuit 
involving a claim within the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
federal courts." Marrese, 470 U.S. at 381. 


There is no doubt that, under Delaware preclusion 
principles, the Delaware settlement bars subsequent 
litigation of Respondents’ Rule 14d-10 claims. Indeed, the 
settlement agreement explicitly approved by the Delaware 
Chancery Court states as much, and the Delaware Supreme 
Court affirmed the Chancery Court’s decision. Thus. 
under Kremer/Marrese, continued litigation of the Rule 
14d-10 claims is barred by § 1738 in the absence of a later 
statute containing an express of implied partial repeal. 


There is no such partial repeal in this case. 
Respondents have pointed to no language in the Williams 
Act, 82 Stat. 454, that could even arguably qualify as an 
express repeal. With respect to implied repeals, the Court 
made clear in Kremer that it would not lightly find implied 
partial repeals of § 1738 because "‘It is, of course, a 
cardinal principle of statutory construction that repeals by 
implication are not favored.’" Kremer, 456 U.S. at 468 
(quoting Radzanower v. Touche Ross & Co., 426 U.S. 148, 
154 (1976)). Kremer spelled out the limited conditions 
under which the Court was willing to find implied partial 
repeals of § 1738: 


9 


There are, however, “two well-settled categories of 
repeals by implication -- (1) where provisions in the 
two acts are in irreconcilable conflict, the later act to 
the extent of the conflict constitutes an implied repeal 
of the earlier one; and (2) if the later act covers the 
whole subject of the earlier one and is clearly intended 
as a substitute, it will operate similarly as a repeal of 
the earlier act. But, in either case, the intention of the 
legislature to repeal must be clear and manifest." 


Kremer, 456 U.S. at 468 (quoiing Radzanower, 426 U.S. 
at 154). 


The relationship of § 1738 to the Williams Act (the 
source of the Securities and Exchange Commission's 
authority to issue Rule 14d-10) does not fall within either 
of these categories. There is no conflict -- irreconcilable 
or otherwise -- between § 1738 and the Williams Act. Nor 
can it be said that the Williams Act “covers the whole 
subject" of § 1738, since the Williams Act is silent 
regarding the preclusive effect to be given state court 
judgments in subsequent federal court actions. 


It is, of course, true that federal law grants “exclusive 
jurisdiction" to the federal courts to hear claims alleging 
violations of the Williams Act “or the rules and regulations 
thereunder.” 15 U.S.C. § 78aa. But the existence of 
exclusive federal jurisdiction has never been thought to 
create a conflict between § 1738 and the statute granting 
such jurisdiction. Indeed, in Kremer, the Court found no 
conflict between § 1738 and Title VII of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e er seq., while at the 
same time leaving unanswered the issue of whether exclu- 
sive jurisdiction over Title VII claims lies in the federal 
courts. Kremer, 456 U.S. at 479 n.20. See also, Marrese, 


10 


470 U.S. at 380 ("Our decisions indicate that a state court 
judgment may in some circumstances have preclusive effect 
in a subsequent action within the exclusive jurisdiction of 
the federal courts."). A federal statute granting the federal 
courts exclusive jurisdiction over certain types of claims 
may indicate the forum in which such claims are to be tried 
if they are to be tried at all, but is says nothing about 
Congress's intent with respect to whether prior state court 
judgments can have preclusive effect on such claims. 


In refusing to give full faith and credit to the Delaware 
judgment, the Ninth Circuit ignored these well-settled 
principles regarding § 1738. Instead, citing Underwriters 
Nat’l Assurance Co. v. North Carolina Life and Accidental 
Health Ins. Gty. Ass'n, 455 U.S. 691 (1982); and Durfee 
v. Duke, 375 U.S. 106 (1963), the Ninth Circuit held that 
the "general rule” established by Kremer does not apply if 
"the state court ‘did not have jurisdiction over the subject 
matter or the relevant parties.’" Pet. App. 28a (quoting 
Underwriters, 455 U.S. at 704-05). 


The Ninth Circuit has simply misread Underwriters and 
Durfee. Far from countenancing wholesale collateral 
attacks on judgments based on alleged lack of jurisdiction, 
the Court stated categorically in Underwriters: 


This Court has long recognized that "[the] principles 
of res judicata apply to questions of jurisdiction as well 
as to other issues." American Surety Co. v. Baldwin, 
287 U.S. 156, 166 (1932). See also Treinies v. 
Sunshine Mining Co., 308 U.S. 66, 78 (1939); Davis 
v. Davis, 305 U.S. 32 (1938). Any doubt about this 
proposition was definitively laid to rest in Durfee v. 
Duke, supra, at 11, where this Court held that "a judg- 
ment is entitled to full faith and credit -- even as to 


questions of jurisdiction -- when the second court's 
inquiry discloses that those questions have been fully 
and fairly litigated and finally decided in the court 
which rendered the original judgment.” The North 
Carolina courts, therefore, should have determined in 
the first instance whether the Rehabilitation Court [the 
Indiana court whose judgment was being collaterally 
attacked] fully and fairly considered the question of 
subject matter jurisdiction over the North Carolina 
deposit, with respect to pre-rehabilitation claims of the 
parties before it. If the matter was fully considered 
and finally determined in the rehabilitation 
proceedings, the judgment was entitled to full faith and 
credit in the North Carolina courts. 


Underwriters, 455 U.S. at 706-07. 


Respondents do not dispute that the Delaware Chan- 
cery Court notified shareholders that the proposed settle- 
ment would release all Rule 14(d)-10 claims, invited share- 
ae i i 4 7 
7 . and satisfied itself that it did have jurisdiction 

fore entering its judgment. Accordingly, the Ninth 
Circuit is bound by the Delaware court's determination 
regarding jurisdiction. 


The Ninth Circuit, while conceding that the Delaw 
court “determined that it was jurisdictionally eatin 
enter a judgment settling the class action" (Pet. App. 28a 
n.25), based its refusal to grant full faith and credit to the 
Delaware judgment on vague references in Durfee (not 
repeated in Underwriters) to the possibility that there may 
be exceptions to the rule against collateral attack on a state 
court's jurisdictional determinations. The appeals court 
said, “In this case the policy of finality of judgments is 


12 


plainly outweighed by the federal interest in reviewing a 
state court’s exercise of judicial power over claims which 
Congress has vested exclusively in federal courts. Id. 
That assertion not only effectively eviscerates the rule 
against collateral attack but also ignores Marrese’s plain 
statement that “a state court judgment may in some circum- 
stances have preclusive effect in a subsequent action within 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the federal courts." Marrese, 
470 U.S. at 380.* 


In sum, the Ninth Circuit's refusal to give full faith 
and credit to the Delaware judgment was a clear violation 
of § 1738. 


ll. THE DELAWARE JUDGMENT IS NO LESS 
ENTITLED TO FULL FAITH AND CREDIT 
SIMPLY BECAUSE IT AROSE IN CONNECTION 
WITH A CLASS ACTION 


The Delaware Chancery Court’s judgment purported to 
bind a class of all former MCA shareholders. But nothing 
in Marrese or Kremer suggests that a state court judgment 
entered in a class action is any less entitled to full faith and 


* The Second Circuit case cited by the Ninth Circuit in support 
of its assertion actually undercuts the assertion. Applying Kremer, the 
Second Circuit held in Murphy v. Gallagher, 761 F.2d 878, 885 (2d 
Cir. 1985), that the federal securities laws do not expressly or 
impliedly repeal § 1738. Murphy stated that the federal court's 
exclusive jurisdiction over federal security law claims evinced a 
congressional interest in uniform interpretation of those laws (id. ), but 
a holding that a federal securities law claim is barred by a prior state 
court settlement cannot possibly lead to non-uniform interpretation of 
securities law. 


13 


credit under § 1738 than is a judgment entered in a non- 
class action. 


Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Shutts, 472 U.S. 797 (1985), 
sets forth the constitutional limitations on a state court's 
power, in the course of class-action litigation, to adjudicate 
the claim of a plaintiff who has not appeared in the action. 
The Court held that the Due Process Clause demands that, 
if the forum state wishes to bind absent plaintiffs 
concerning "a claim for money damages or similar relief at 


law,” the absent plaintiffs must be afforded the following 
protections: 


The plaintiff must receive notice plus an opportunity to 
be heard and participate in the litigation, whether in 
person or through counsel. The notice must be the 
best practicable, “reasonably calculated, under all the 
circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the 
pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity 
to present their objections." Mullane [v. Central 
Hanover Bank & Trust Co.], 339 U.S. [306,] 314-315 
[1950]. . . . The notice should describe the action and 
the plaintiffs’ rights in it. Additionally, we hold that 
due process requires at a minimum that an absent 
plaintiff be provided with an opportunity to remove 
himself from the class by executing and returning an 
“opt out" or “request for exclusion" form to the court. 
Finally, the Due Process Clause of course requires that 
the named plaintiff at all times adequately represent the 
interests of the absent class members. 


Phillips Petroleum, 472 U.S. at 812-13. 


The Delaware court provided MCA shareholders with 
all the procedural protections demanded by Phillips 


14 


_ The court provided all shareholders (including 
nee with mete of the proceedings (including a 
description of the action and the shareholders rights in it) 
and an opportunity to be heard; it provided oy 
shareholders with an opportunity to opt out of th 
proceedings; and (before it approved the settlement) : 
satisfied itself that the named plaintiffs adequate Ny 
represented the interests of absent shareholders. Given t 
Delaware court’s compliance with all the due proces® 
requirements imposed by Phillips Petroleum, there is 
simply no reason not to apply § 1738 in this case 


ir brief sing review by this Court, the 
1 Sumechets saan asserted the inadeq uacy of 
class representation in the Delaware proceedings. = 
e.g., Epstein Respondents’ Opposition Brief at 21. rey 
asserted the right to raise the adequacy of representation 
issue on collateral review: 


i in Delaware. 
As noted, respondents did not appear in \ 
Since Hansberry v. Lee, 311 U.S. 32 (1940), it has 
been clear that collateral attack on inadequate 
representation is proper in these circumstances. 


Id. at 21 n.21. 


The Epstein Respondents are simply wrong regarding 
their claimed right to raise the adequacy of representation 
issue in the federal courts. Underwriters makes clear that 
if they wanted to allege inadequate representation, they 
should have done so in the Delaware Chancery Court in 
connection with that court’s "full and fair" consideration of 
the issue. Hansberry v. Lee is not to the contrary. Hans- 
berry stands for the limited proposition that a litigant gd 
collaterally attack a prior class action judgment where s 


15 


did not receive adequate notice that the judgment was 
intended to be binding on her. Hansberry, 311 U.S. at 40. 
Federal courts have consistently read Hansberry in this 
limited fashion and have declined to interpret it as 
permitting wholesale collateral attacks on adequacy of 
representation determinations. See, e.g., Smith y. 
Allegheny Corp., 394 F.2d 381, 391 (2d Cir. 1968): 
O'’Burn v. Shapp, 70 F.R.D. 549, 552 (E.D.Pa. 1976). 


The Ninth Circuit was unwilling to concede that a state 
court judgment could ever operate to bar subsequent federal 
court adjudication of an exclusively federal claim. The 
Ninth Circuit nonetheless attempted to distinguish contrary 
decisions from the First and Third Circuits (Nottingham 
Partner v. Trans-Lux Corp., 925 F.2d 29 (ist Cir. 1991); 
Grimes v. Vitalink Communications Corp., 17 F.3d 1553 
(3d Cir.), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 480 (1994)) by asserting 
that in those cases “the state and federal claims arose out 
of the identical factual predicate." Pet. App. 33a. Those 
two Cases are not distinguishable on that basis, because the 
factual overlap between state and federal claims is at least 
as great here as it was in those cases.’ More important, 
however, is the irrelevancy of factual overlap in deter- 


* In this case, the Delaware plaintiffs asserted a claim that the 
defendants breached their fiduciary duty of loyalty by making prefer- 
ential arrangements for themselves as part of the tender offer -- a claim 
based on facts virtually identical to the facts underlying Respondents’ 
Rule 14d-10 claim. The Ninth Circuit attempted to downplay the 
significance of that factual overlap by asserting that the Delaware claim 
had no basis in Delaware law. Pet. App. 36a. We find it remarkable 
that the Ninth Circuit bases its refusal to extend full faith and credit to 
the Delaware judgment on its own interpretation of Delaware law. 
Moreover, the strength or weakness of various claims raised in the 
Delaware and federal actions has no bearing on whether an overlap of 
factual claims actually exists. 


16 


mining whether § 1738 is applicable. One cannot seriously 
dispute the reasonableness of attempting to settle all 
possible shareholder claims arising from the MCA tender 
offer when settling a shareholder class action arising in 
connection with that tender offer. So long as there was any 
reasonable basis for the Delaware court to conclude that it 
had jurisdiction to approve a settlement covering the Rule 
14d-10 claims -- and Marrese, Kremer, and Phillips 
Petroleum suggest that such a conclusion was eminently 
reasonable -- § 1738 required the Ninth Circuit to give full 
faith and credit to the Delaware judgment. 


Indeed, the Ninth Circuit is the only federal appeals 
court that has indicated an unwillingness to apply § 1738 to 
the facts of this case. Contrary to the Ninth Circuit's 
contention, its decision is not supported by the Second 
Circuit’s decision in National Super Spuds v. N.Y. Mercan- 
tile Exchange, 660 F.2d 9 (2d Cir. 1981). National Super 
Spuds stands for the limited proposition that a class action 
may not settle claims which the class representatives do not 
themselves possess. /d. at 16. But that is not a concern in 
this case; the Delaware class representatives possessed 
precisely the same claims -- including the Rule 14d-10 
claim -- as did Respondents. 


In sum, the fact that the Delaware judgment involved 
class claims in no way lessens its entitlement to full faith 
and credit in the federal courts. Rather than seeking to 
challenge the Delaware judgment collaterally, the non- 
opting-out Respondents were required to pursue any 
challenge to the Delaware Chancery Court judgment “by 
way of appeal through the state-court system and certiorari 
from [the U.S. Supreme] Court." Parsons Steel, Inc. v. 
First Alabama Bank, 474 U.S. 518, 525 (1986). 


17 


Il. THE NINTH CIRCUIT’S DECISION THREATENS 
TO DISRUPT CLASS ACTION SETTLEMENTS 
AND TO ENCOURAGE MULTIPLE CLASS 
ACTION SUITS ARISING FROM A SINGLE 
SECURITIES LAW TRANSACTION 


The number of securities law class actions in the 
federal courts has increased significantly in recent years. 
As many securities law class actions were filed between 
1990 and 1993 as were filed during the entire decade of the 
1980s. Testimony of Marc E. Lackritz to the Senate 
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee’s Subcom- 
mittee on Securities (March 2, 1995). The aggregate 
damages sought in all such class actions pending at the end 
of 1993 was nearly $29 billion. Jd. 


There is considerable on-going debate regarding 
whether securities law class actions are an efficient means 
of policing the securities markets and whether the 
transactional costs of such massive litigation exceeds any 
value produced.° Regardless where one comes out on that 
debate, the magnitude of such litigation ought to give one 


pause before adopting a rule of law likely to increase such 
litigation significantly. 


That is precisely the result to be expected if the Court 
affirms the Ninth Circuit's decision. The Ninth Circuit’s 
decision makes it virtually impossible for a corporation to 


6 


In April 6, 1995 testimony before the Subcommittee on 
Securities, both former SEC Chairman Richard C. Breeden and former 
SEC Acting Chairman Charles C. Cox spoke in favor of pending 
legislation to curb perceived excesses in securities law class actions. 


Such legislation received initial approval from both the House and the 
Senate in the spring of 1995. 


18 


negotiate a class action settlement that will settle all claims 
arising from a single transaction. Rather, any state court 
settlement will be subject to attack in the federal courts on 
the ground that it cannot definitively settle all exclusively 
federal claims. Since virtually all securities law claims 
(including those brought under SEC Rule 10b-5) fall within 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the federal courts, the potential 
for multiple lawsuits is apparent. Thus, a business seeking 
to settle all claims would likely need to enter into a federal 
court settlement covering all exclusively federal claims as 
well as one or more state-court settlements covering state- 
law claims. A single federal court settlement may well not 
be sufficient considering that: (1) a federal court is under 
no obligation to exercise pendent jurisdiction over state-law 
claims when an independent basis for jurisdiction over such 
claims is lacking; (2) states can and do assert that certain 
state-law claims can only be raised in state courts; and (3) 
a defendant seeking to settle cannot choose its own forum 
-- if it has only been sued in state court, its ability to 
remove the case to federal court before effecting a 
settlement is quite limited. 


A rule that effectively requires defendants to enter into 
multiple settlements will increase the transaction costs of 
securities law class actions considerably. Recent studies 
have suggested that for every dollar awarded to share- 
holders in securities law class actions, another dollar goes 
toward litigation costs. J. Alexander, Do the Merits 
Matter? A Study of Settlements in Securities Class Actions, 
43 Stan. L. Rev. 497, 573 (1991). If multiple settlements 
are to be required in order to settle all claims arising from 
a single transaction, litigation costs will inevitably consume 
a larger share of funds. 


19 


Alternatively, the Ninth Circuit’s decision could 
decrease the willingness of defendants to settle class claims; 
such settlements obviously are of less value to a defendant 
if they cannot provide the defendant with assurance that he 
can avoid future litigation by entering into a settlement. 


Conversely, individual litigants have little cause for 
complaint if defendants are permitted to settle all class 
claims in a single lawsuit. Under such a system, all class 
members are assured that their claims will not be settled 
except on terms found fair and reasonable by an indepen- 
dent court. If they are unhappy with the class settlement, 
they are free to opt out and pursue their claims 
independently. Their net recoveries are likely to be greater 
when legal fees are minimized due to elimination of 
multiple lawsuits. 


The only group that stands to gain from the Ninth 
Circuit's decision are the lawyers. Indeed, it is clearly the 
lawyers who are driving this litigation. If Respondents 
really had had any strong personal objections to the 
Delaware settlement, one would expect them to have 
expressed those objections to the Delaware court rather 
proceeding with a collateral attack on the settlement in the 
federal courts. Respondents were provided with all the 
options required by Phillips Petroleum when they were 
given a choice between accepting the Delaware settlement 
or opting out of the class and proceeding on their own. 
Nothing in Phillips Petroleum suggests that class members 
are entitled to a third option -- that of opting out of one 
class so that they can organize their own separate class. 


In sum, the Ninth Circuit’s decision has nothing to 
recommend it in terms of public policy. It is likely to lead 
to the filing of multiple class action suits arising from the 


20 


same transaction, and to a decreased willingness of 
defendants to settle such claims. 


CONCLUSION 


Amici curiae Washington Legal Foundation and the 
Allied Educational Foundation respectfully request that the 
Court reverse the decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Daniel J. Popeo 
Richard A. Samp 
(Counsel of Record) 
WASHINGTON LEGAL 
FOUNDATION 
2009 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 588-0302 


Counsel for amici curiae 
August 3, 1995 


Counsel wish to acknowledge the assistance of Catherine 
Clifton, a third-year student at Texas Tech University Law 
School, in preparing this brief. 


* + “4 Ni “ “a 
Be TE PP) ee, ee a nee 


ptt eid PA OR RET SE ee ye 


