IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


HERCULES INCORPORATED 
and 


Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 

. Petitioners, 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONERS 


JEROLD OSHINSKY * JAMES S. TURNER 
GREGORY W. HOMER ALAN DUMOFF 
RHONDA D. ORIN SWANKIN & TURNER 
ANDERSON KILL OLICK 1424 16th Street, N.W. 

& OSHINSKY Suite 105 
2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036 
Suite 7500 (202) 462-8800 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 728-3100 
MICHAEL B. KEEHAN CARTER G. PHILLIPS * 
WALTER S. ROWLAND SIDLEY & AUSTIN 
HERCULES INC. 1722 I Street, N.W. 
Hercules Plaza Suite 900 
Wilmington, Delaware 19894 Washington, D.C. 20006-3795 
(302) 594-5000 (202) 736-8000 

Counsel for Petitioners 
* Counsel of Record 


WILSON - Eras Printine Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ~— 
I. THE GOVERNMENT OFFERS NO PERSUA- 


Il. 


SIVE REASON FOR DISMISSING PETI- 
TIONERS’ SPEARIN CLAIM ON THE REC- 
ORD IN THIS CASE ... ~ 


B. The Government’s Legal Arguments for 
Limiting Spearin Are Inconsistent With the 
Basic Theory of This Court’s Decisions and 
Fundamental Principles of Contract Law.... 


C. Public Policy Would Be Disserved by Limit- 
ing Spearin Unfairly To Deprive Petitioners 
of Their Contractual Remedy for the Injuries 
Inflicted Upon Them by the United States... 


THE GOVERNMENT MISCHARACTERIZES 
PETITIONERS’ DPA ARGUMENT, AND 
CONVENIENTLY IGNORES CRUCIAL PRO- 
EE Ty CHIE Siete recridctcesteceesieicsinensssecocns 


IIIT -cipsiteentissertaeannicanqutpebinnpnsnannetemansmntégrimerenientcaes 


11 


16 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 
(1988) ...... ” passim 
Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975) ........... ities 16 
Diaz Irizarry v. Ennia, N.V., 678 F. Supp. 957 
132 @ eee 7 
Hamilton v. Volkswagen of America, 484 A.2d 
bt Rt A A | ear ae hs eee 18 
Hatzlachh Supply Co. v. United States, 444 U.S. 
yA _, Per et REE Se 2 11 
Helene Curtis Indus. v. United States, 312 F.2d 
A (A Oy ———————————eE passim 
In Re Agent Orange Prod. Liab. Litigation, 597 
F. Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) ............--...-----0++-+--- 10 
In Re Agent Orange Prod. Liab. Litigation, 611 
F. Supp. 1267 (E.D.N.Y. 1985) ...................-.-------- 10 
Kiefer & Kiefer v. RFC, 306 U.S. 381 (1989)........ 12 
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. v. United States, 460 U.S. 
TOD CODED) ni vricecesce dh nciiccssttatiietiltnaeir tli ladenthenwes 12 
Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 F.2d 712 (Fed. Cir. 
1988), cert. denied, 491 U.S. 904 (1989) ............. 13 


Michigan Wisconsin Pipeline Co. v. Williams- 
McWilliams Co., 551 F.2d 945 (5th Cir. 1977)... 18 
Poorvu v. United States, 420 F.2d 998 (Ct. Cl. 


BID oeeeacrvcovesinereceieversneme 8 
Ryan Stevedoring Co. v. Pan-Atlantic Steamship 

Core., TO U.S. TBE CORD cccncecscesssevncccutinmiatatiions 18 
Santisteven v. Dow Chem. Co., 506 F.2d 1216 

CBE Gi. BODE) cencceecnncensccccentnesicemesninnarninnaian 18 
Stencel Aero Eng’g Corp. v. United States, 431 

is 6) |) ne eee 12 
United States v. Johnson, 481 U.S. 681 (1987)... 13 
United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 182 (1918) ........ passim 
United States v. Vertac Chem. Corp., 46 F.3d 803 

COT Cir, BED ceseneecesnnsssssiscsecenicitesstnipsieepaitatmamaianaiiaina 9 
Von Hoffman v. City of Quincy, 71 U.S. 585 

(| ESE ey Se 17 


Weyerhauser Steamship Co. v. Nacirema Operat- 
ing Company, 355 U.S. 563 (1958) ....................... 16,17 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


STATUTES Page 
A sa 11,12 
$1 U.S.C. § 1841(a) (1) (1988 & Supp. V 1998)... 18 
50 U.S.C. § 2071 (a) et seq. (1988)... passim 
MISCELLANEOUS 
8 Corbin on Contracts § 551 (1960)... 17 
Peter H. Schuck, Agent Orange on Trial (enlarged 
a 9 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 851 (1981).. 7 


W. Page Keeton e¢ al., Prosser and Keeton on the 
Law of Torts, $108 (5th ed. 1984) 8 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONERS 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


Agent Orange litigation had they proceeded to trial. 
Accordingly, the court of appeals concluded that the deci- 
sion of petitioners to settle claims potentially worth bil- 
lions of dollars after the denial of their summary judg- 
ment motion and on the eve of trial was a voluntary gift 
to the Agent Orange plaintiffs. 

The best evidence available that the decision below is 
insupportable is the lack of reliance placed upon that 
holding by the United States in urging affirmance. In- 
stead of defending the “causation” holding of the court of 
appeals, the government makes several alternative argu- 
ments as to why petitioners should not be allowed to as- 
sert a claim for breach of warranty or for indemnification 
in the circumstances of this case. These arguments, how- 
ever, plainly do not withstand scrutiny on the record in 
this case and are undermined in significant measure by 
the government’s own concessions. 

Specifically, the government effectively concedes the 
essential elements of both petitioners’ claim for a breach 
of the warranty of specifications recognized by this Court 
in United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918), and 
petitioners’ claim under the superior knowledge doctrine. 
See Helene Curtis Indus. v. United States, 312 F.2d 774 
(Ct. Cl. 1963). First, the government has conceded 


2 
throughout this litigation that it prepared and issued the 
specifications for Agent Orange. Second, the government 
does not dispute that the Agent Orange manufactured by 
petitioners complied with those specifications. 
government does not dispute that the gov..: 


knowledge that the manufacture of Agent Orange pur- 
suant to the government’s specifications would generate 


t 


Having made such key concessions, the government is 
reduced to arguing that petitioners’ warranty claims 
should not be recognized as a matter of public policy. 
However, the government fails to identify any legitimate 
interest or protection of the government that would be 
offended by the recognition of a Spearin claim in the 
circumstances of this case. On the contrary, the public 
interest would be served only if petitioners are permitted 
to assert such a claim here. 

Just as a warranty must be and should be implied 
under Spearin, so too should an indemnification obliga- 
tion be implied as a consequence of petitioners’ compli- 
ance with the government’s orders under the Defense 
Production Act (“DPA”) and the other circumstances 
surrounding the compelled production of Agent Orange. 
Petitioners do not attempt to interpret the DPA’s hold 
harmless language as an affirmative indemnity. Rather, 
petitioners contend that an indemnity should be implied 
from all of the circumstances of this case, including the 
circumstance that petitioners and the government con- 
tracted against the backdrop of the sweeping hold harm- 
less language contained in the DPA. 

Not only does the government’s brief effectively con- 
cede the fundamental legal soundness of the three inter- 
related theories that petitioners rely upon for relief, but 
the government’s brief also shows that summary judg- 
ment was wholly premature in this case because peti- 
tioners’ contract theories necessarily are fact-bound and 
cannot be resolved against petitioners, as was done here, 


3 


without a full factual record developed through discovery. 
Thus, by conceding that there is “the possibility of unfair- 
ness to government contractors in [the] unusual circum- 
stances,” alleged by petitioners, the government concedes 
that it is necessary to have a fully developed factual 
record in order to determine whether this dispute involves 
just such “unusual circumstances.” (Gov. Br. at 21). 

Indeed, if the undisputed facts involving petitioners’ 
compelled production of Agent Orange do not show 
extraordinary “unfairness,” then the concept has no mean- 
ing. Among other things, the President ordered both 
Thompson and Hercules to produce Agent Orange on 
pain of civil and criminal penalties. A direct appeal by 
Thompson’s president to the Department of Defense fell 
on deaf ears. Both Thompson and Hercules eventually 
were ordered to divert all of their relevant resources to 
manufacturing Agent Orange and were never told by the 
government about the hazards of producing the defoliant 
as specified by the United States, even though the gov- 
ernment had long been aware of those hazards. 

When Thompson and Hercules were sued by Vietnam 
veterans exposed to Agent Orange, the government never 
supported the argument that they should be shielded from 
liability. Instead, the government sat by and watched 
petitioners expend millions of dollars, first in litigation 
costs and then in a settlement on the eve of trial to avoid 
even further expense and the risk of ruinous liability. To 
the extent that the government became involved at all in 
petitioners’ efforts to defend themselves in the Agent 
Orange litigation, it was an opponent, first seeking to 
limit discovery on crucial elements of the government 
contractor defense and later claiming that the defense 
was unavailable. At the end of this process, Thompson 
became insolvent; it currently does no business and its 
only real asset is this lawsuit. Hercules, while not in- 
solvent, suffered significant financial losses. The govern- 
ment’s argument that Thompson and Hercules are not 
even entitled to discovery under these “unusual” circum- 


stances is appalling. 


4 


I. THE GOVERNMENT OFFERS NO PERSUASIVE 
REASON FOR DISMISSING PETITIONERS’ 
SPEARIN CLAIM ON THE RECORD IN THIS 
CASE 


A. The Government’s Refusal To Defend the Holding 
Below and the Government’s Concessions Demon- 
strate That Petitioners’ Spearin Claim Is Viable 


According to the court below, because of the govern- 
ment contractor defense, “there can be no serious doubt 
that had the class action Agent Orange litigation pro- 
ceeded to termination, no liability would have been im- 
posed against [petitioners]”. (Pet. App. 23a). Principally 
on this basis, the court of appeals held that the govern- 
ment was not liable for breach of warranty because peti- 
tioners “volunteered” to settle the Agent Orange class 
action rather than go to trial and rely upon the govern- 
ment contractor defense to protect them from any and all 
harm. 


Petitioners demonstrated in their opening brief the 
fundamental error in the court of appeals’ reliance on 
hindsight to justify the dismissal on summary judgment 
of petitioners’ breach of contract claims. (Pet. Br. at 
19-22). In response to that showing, the government 
contradicts itself. Initially, the government purports to 
defend the court of appeals’ ruling by stating that “the 
history of this litigation thus provides solid support for 
the court of appeals’ conclusion that ‘there can be no 
serious doubt that had the class action Agent Orange 
litigation proceeded to termination, no liability would 
have been imposed against [petitioners]’ because of the 
government contractor defense.” (Gov. Br. at 28). 


In the very next paragraph, however, the government 
abandons any pretense of defending the court of appeals’ 


1 At one point, the government goes so far as to suggest that 
“the availability of the defense was clearly the law of the Agent 
Orange tort cases.” (Gov. Br. at 28). Such a suggestion is absurd 
in light of the fact that, at the time petitioners settled in 1984, 
petitioners had failed to obtain summary judgment on the govern- 
ment contractor defense and the court had ruled that the issue 
would be decided by the jury. 


5 


ruling and concedes outright that petitioners had no guar- 
antee in 1984 that the government contractor defense 
would have avoided the imposition of liability. Specifi- 
cally, the government states that “there were legitimate 
questions about [petitioners’] potential tort liability, in- 
cluding . . . the applicability of the government con- 
tractor defense to them in light of their knowledge and 
manufacturing decisions” (Gov. Br. at 29). 

This latter admission by the government accurately 
reflects just how much “doubt” existed in 1984 as to the 
availability of the government contractor defense in the 
Agent Orange litigation. Indeed, just months after peti- 
tioners settled the Agent Orange class action in 1984, the 
government made a similar assessment of the ability of 
the government contractor defense to protect petitioners. 
At that time, the government argued that “there exists 
substantial and convincing evidence that establishes not 
only that there are indeed genuine issues of material fact 
directly bearing on the validity of each and every con- 
tention relating to the government contract defense, but 
also that the defense does not further the policies it pur- 
ports to serve.” (J.A. 36).” 


While the government asserts that any uncertainty in 
the elements of the government contractor defense was 
not “relevant,” that assertion is valid (if at all) only with 
the benefit of hindsight. In 1984, when petitioners de- 
cided to settle, petitioners had no guarantee that this 
Court ultimately would recognize a government contrac- 
tor defense and, if so, what elements it would contain. 
Contrary to the United States’ assertion, this uncertainty 
was quite “relevant” to petitioners at that time, and it 
made their decision to settle eminently reasonable. 


2 Notably, the Brief Amicus Curiae of the Agent Orange Coordi- 
nating Council (“Council Amicus Br.”) in support of the govern- 
ment makes a similar contention: 

Boyle would not have furnished a conclusive defense against 

the veterans’ Agent Orange claims; and a jury would have 

probably found against petitioners on that defense and causa- 

tion, notwithstanding judicial statements to the contrary. 
See Council Amicus Br. at 138. 


——————————————— 


6 


In sum, the court of appeals clearly erred in holding 
that petitioners’ settlement of the Agent Orange litiga- 
tion constituted a voluntary gift to the Vienam veterans 
and this Court could reverse the decision below on this 
basis alone. Because the government is unable to stand 
behind the court of appeals’ reasoning on this point, it 
now seeks to justify that decision by asserting a variety of 
other arguments. Those arguments, however, were not 
the subject of the court of appeals’ ruling and, in any 
event, as demonstrated below, do not withstand analysis. 


B. The Government’s Legal Arguments for Limiting 
Spearin Are Inconsistent With the Basic Theory of 
This Court’s Decisions and Fundamental Principles 

of Contract Law 
The government concedes petitioners’ principal position 
that a Spearin claim provides a remedy to contractors 
who suffer damages as a result of producing products in 
accordance with government specifications. “The proposi- 
tion that the government will bear the cost of . . . difficul- 
culties attributable to errors or latent flaws in its own 
specifications, and not caused by any fault on the part 
of the contractor, is a reasonable estimate of the parties’ 
original mutual intentions.” (Gov. Br. at 17). Accord- 
ing to the government: “[I]f the product’s design was, 
in fact, defective, any losses would properly be the gov- 
ernment’s responsibility.” (Gov. Br. at 22). Otherwise, 
“the result could be substantive unfairness to the con- 

tractor.” (/d.) 


Given these concessions, and the government’s earlier 
admission that it designed the specifications for Agent 
Orange, petitioners at a minimum have stated a prima 
facie claim under Spearin for recovery of their damages 
as a result of the Agent Orange litigation. Nevertheless, 
the government now contends (1) that petitioners’ 
Spearin claim involves non-recoverable post-performance 
damages, which allegedly are outside the scope of the 
Spearin warranty (Gov. Br. at 15-17); and (2) that 
there was insufficient evidence linking the exposure to 
Agent Orange to the injuries allegedly suffered by the 
plaintiffs in the Agent Orange litigation and, therefore, 


7 


petitioners cannot demonstrate that the warranty was 
breached. (Gov. Br. at 31-33). Both arguments are 
predicated on a fundamental misunderstanding of the 
requirements established by this Court in Spearin and 
general contract law principles. 

1. At common law, no particular type or category of 
damages is excluded from recovery in an action for 
breach of contract. In particular, where third-party litiga- 
tion, settlement or liability costs, including attorneys fees, 
are reasonably foreseeable to the breaching party at the 
time of contracting, then they are properly recoverable as 
contract damages: 

The party in breach is liable for the amount of any 
judgment against the injured party together with his 
reasonable expenditures in the litigation, if the party 
in breach had reason to foresee such expenditures 
as the probable result of his breach at the time he 
made the contract .... In furtherance of the 
policy favoring private settlement of disputes, the 
injured party is also allowed to recover the reason- 
able amount of any settlement made to avoid litiga- 
tion, together with the costs of settlement. 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 351 at comment c. 

Under this principle, all foreseeable damages should be 
recoverable under Spearin,-regardless of when the dam- 
ages were incurred or the type of underlying action that 
gave rise to the damages. Of course, foreseeability can- 
not be decided on summary judgment, particularly absent 
a developed factual record. E.g., Diaz Irizarry v. Ennia, 
N.V., 678 F. Supp. 957, 959 (D.P.R. 1988). 

Spearin itself makes clear that the damages for breach 
of a Spearin-type warranty are not limited to costs of 
performance, and instead include “all losses” reasonable 
foreseeable. Spearin, 248 U.S. at 62. Thus, the Court in 
Spearin permitted recovery of post-performance damages 
in the form of lost profits, which clearly are post- 
performance damages. 

Spearin’s progeny likewise have placed no artificial 
temporal limits on the damages that may be recovered 
in a breach of warranty case. Even the government con- 


cedes that the Claims Court allowed recovery for post- 
performance damages in Poorvu v. United States, 420 F.2d 
993 (Ct. Cl. 1970). (Gov. Br. at 15-16). “It would make 
little sense to impose the obligation of an implied warranty 
[under Spearin] and then limit the life of the warranty 
to the period of construction.” Poorvu, 420 F.2d at 1000. 
Under this reasoning, which even the courts below accepted 
(see Pet. App. 17a; 61a), petitioners have stated a claim 
for recovery that requires further proceedings on remand. 

2. The government next argues that petitioners can- 
not prove that the government breached an implied war- 
ranty by providing defective specifications because sup- 
posedly “no court has ever found credible evidence that 
exposure to Agent Orange caused any of the injuries 
complained of by the individual tort plaintiffs.” (Gov. 
Br. at 31-33). As a matter of law, the government’s 
approach is incorrect. To prove breach of warranty under 
Spearin, petitioners need only prove that the government’s 
specifications were defective in some respect and that the 
defect caused petitioners to suffer economic damages. (Pet. 
Br. at 18). Petitioners do not need to prove that the 
defect in the specifications actually caused the injuries 
alleged by the plaintiffs in the Agent Orange litigation. 

The government’s contention confuses the burden of a 
plaintiff in a contract action with the burden of a plain- 
tiff in a tort action. In a product liability tort action, a 
plaintiff alleging injury must prove both a defective specifi- 
cation and causation between the defective specification 
and the alleged personal injury. See W. Page Keeton 
et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts, § 103 
at 713 (Sth ed. 1984). In contrast, a plaintiff in a con- 
tract action need only prove a link between a defect that 
causes a breach of contract and the actual economic dam- 
ages suffered by the contractor. 


There can be little doubt that there exists a triable issue 
of fact as whether the government’s specifications were 
defective. Those specifications inevitably led to the pro- 
duction of dioxin as a byproduct of the manufacture of 
Agent Orange, as the government itself has conceded. 
U.S. Brief in Opp. Cert. at 3, Hercules v. United States, 


9 


Nos. 94-1557 and 94-1800 (June 1995) (“U.S. Br. in 
Opp.”).* See also Peter H. Schuck, Agent Orange on 
Trial, (enlarged ed. 1987) at 23 (stating that dioxin 
“inevitably” accompanied manufacture of 2,4,5-T, a 
herbicide used in the production of Agent Orange). 

Moreover, dioxin is a highly toxic substance that the 
government knew to be potentially harmful at certain 
levels when it compelled petitioners to produce Agent 
Orange. If it were not, the government would have had 
no reason to establish a disability fund for veterans suffer- 
ing from certain diseases associated with dioxin exposure. 
See Brief for the National Veterans Legal Services Pro- 
gram as Amicus Curiae in Support of Petitioners, at 7-9. 

Additional evidence of the government’s recognition of 
dioxin-related hazards lies in the decision of the Environ- 
mental Protection Agency to compel Hercules to remove 
dioxin created by the manufacture of Agent Orange from 
the environment through an expensive remedial plan. See 
United States v. Vertac Chem. Corp., 46 F.3d 803, 806 
(8th Cir. 1995). In its brief in opposition to Hercules’ 
petition for certiorari in that case, the government con- 
tradicted its position here and acknowledged that dioxin 
“is a highly toxic byproduct” that was produced during 
the manufacture of Agent Orange. See U.S. Brief in Opp. 
at 3-4. 


Finally, the government simply is wrong that no court 
has ever found credible evidence that Agent Orange was 
capable of causing harm. For example, in the Agent 
Orange class action itself, Judge Weinstein held that, 
“Agent Orange contained small quantities of dioxin. . . . 
As to the poisonous nature of dioxin and its ability to 


%The government contends erroneously that Hercules subse- 
quently found a way to “eliminate” dioxin as a byproduct. (Gov. 
Br. at 32). In fact, it is impossible to avoid producing dioxin as 
a byproduct of Agent Orange. Hercules merely found a way to 
extract then detectable levels of dioxin from the final product so 
that the Agent Orange that it supplied to the United States no 
longer contained measurable dioxin. Rather, measurable dioxin 
ended up in the manufacturing wastes that became the subject of 
the Vertac case. 


10 


cause harm to mammals, including homo sapiens, there 
is no doubt.” In Re Agent Orange Prod. Liab. Litigation, 
597 F. Supp. 740, 777 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) (emphasis 
added). See also In Re Agent Orange Prod. Liab. Litiga- 
tion, 611 F. Supp. 1267, 1268 (E.D.N.Y. 1985); Coun- 
cil Amicus Br. at 18-20. 

Based on the findings made in the Agent Orange litiga- 
tion, along with the substantial body of evidence sug- 
gesting that dioxin is highly toxic, petitioners have, at a 
minimum, raised a triable issue of fact as to whether the 
government’s specifications for Agent Orange were defec- 
tive in breach of the Spearin warranty. 

Petitioners also are able to show that the defect in the 
specifications gave rise to their damages. This causative 
link is established because petitioners’ decision to settle 
the Agent Orange class action was reasonable, and was 
based on evidence of potential liability to the underlying 
plaintiffs because of the defect in the government’s speci- 
fications. As discussed in petitioners’ opening brief, dam- 
ages in a contract resulting from third-party claims do not 
require a defendant settling those third-party claims to 
prove actual liability in the underlying litigation. Rather, 
a showing of potential liability is sufficient, a point the gov- 
ernment does not dispute. (Pet. Br. at 26-27). Even the 
government does not refute that petitioners were at least 
potentially liable to the plaintiffs in the Agent Orange 
class action, as the court in that action so found in ap- 
proving the settlement entered into by petitioners. Jn Re 
Agent Orange Prod. Liab. Litigation, 597 F. Supp. 
at 777 (“there was a possibility of ultimate liability with 
claims totalling billions of dollars.” ).* 


* Because petitioners are able to meet the elements of Spearin, 
and because the government basically concedes that there is no 
“practical difference” between Spearin and the superior knowledge 
theory, petitioners are able to meet the elements of a superior 
knowledge claim as well. See Helene Curtis v. United States, supra. 


Petitioners have not waived a superior knowledge claim by not 
presenting it in the “Question Presented” section of their petition. 
A superior knowledge claim is fairly included within the broad 
question presented in petitioners’ petition for certiorari. S. Ct. 
Rule 14.1(a). 


S- 


c= 


11 


C. Public Policy Would Be Disserved by Limiting 
Spearin Unfairly To Deprive Petitioners of Their 
Contractual Remedy for the Injuries Inflicted Upon 
Them by the United States 


The government wrongly argues that it would offend 
public policy to permit petitioners to assert a Spearin 
claim. To the contrary, the public interest affirmatively 
supports petitioners’ claim. 

1. The government argues that, even if there were no 
legal or factual impediments to the assertion by petition- 
ers of a Spearin claim, petitioners should not be permitted 
to assert such a breach of contract claim here because its 
assertion would vitiate the government’s immunity from 
tort liability. (Gov. Br. at 18). Any such argument is 
foreclosed by this Court’s previous decisions rejecting the 
contention of any relationship between government tort 
immunity and the proper scope of the remedies available 
for the government’s breach of contract. In Hatzlachh 
Supply Co. v. United States, 444 U.S. 460, 465 (1980), 
this Court held, “The absence of Government tort liability 
has not been thought to bar contractual remedies on 
implied-in-fact contracts, even in those cases also having 
elements of a tort.” Thus, even if the government is 
immune in tort from certain damages, that fact does not 
preclude liability in contract predicated on the same 
underlying circumstances. 


In Hatzlachh, the United States Customs Service had 
seized goods of a merchandise importer for customs vio- 
lations, imposed a penalty, and agreed to return the 
goods. When the goods were returned, however, substan- 
tial merchandise was missing. The importer sued in the 
Claims Court under the Tucker Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1491, 
for the value of the lost merchandise, alleging breach of 
an implied contract of bailment. The Claims Court found 
that the Federal Tort Claims Act barred a tort claim for 
the loss, and accordingly refused to recognize a contract 
claim. This Court reversed, holding that “neither the 
existence of a tort remedy nor the lack of one is relevant 
to determining whether there is an implied-in-fact con- 
tract of bailment upon which the United States is liable 


12 


in the Court of Claims pursuant to its waiver of sovereign 
immunity contained in the Tucker Act.” Id. at 466.° 


Hatzlachh forecloses any argument that liability for 
governmental breach of contract is restricted by reference 
to the policies underlying the government’s immunity to 
tort claims brought by military personnel. Moreover, the 
argument advanced by the government on this point is 
singularly unpersuasive because the specific policies un- 
derlying the government’s tort immunity are not sufficiently 
implicated by recognition of a Spearin claim in the cir- 
cumstances of this case to justify the wholly unfair result 
proposed by the government. See Stencel Aero Eng’g 
Corp. v. United States, 431 U.S. 666, 672-73 (1977). 

Recognition of a Spearin claim here would not implicate 
these rationales because a Spearin claim is based on fed- 
eral common law under the Tucker Act, ensuring na- 
tional uniformity. Second, neither the Tucker Act nor 
the FTCA purports to limit the government's liability for 
damages flowing from a breach of contract in the mili- 
tary context. See Lockheed Aircraft Corp. v. United 
States, 460 U.S. 190 (1983). 

Finally, resolution of petitioners’ Spearin claim does 
not implicate the concern expressed in Stencel regarding 
the adverse effects on military discipline if military per- 
sonnel were permitted to use a tort action effectively to 
countermand the authority of their superiors. Such a 
concern simply is not operative where a suit is brought by 
the manufacturer for breach of warranty based upon a 
failure to apprise the manufacturer of known defects. 


5 See also Kiefer & Kiefer v. RFC, 306 U.S. 381 (1989), where 
this Court held that a contract action was not barred even when 
the government was protected by tort immunity. In so doing, this 
Court stated: 

As to the states, legal irresponsibility was written into the 

Eleventh Amendment; as to the United States, it is derived 

by implication. . .. [B]Jecause the doctrine gives the govern- 

ment a privileged position, it has been appropriately confined. 
Id. at 388 (citations omitted). 


13 


Indeed, recognition of a Spearin claim in these circum- 
stances should require no greater involvement in military 
decisionmaking than this Court has already sanctioned in 
Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500, with 
respect to the government contractor defense. In any 
event, any potential for after-the-fact analysis of military 
decisionmaking, 


standing alone, is not sufficient to war- 
rant an extension of a judicially created doctrine that has 


been extensively criticized. See United States v. Johnson, 
481 U.S. 681, 692-99 (1987) (Scalia, dissenting). 


2. The government’s suggestion that recognition of a 
Spearin claim here may violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, 


31 U.S.C. § 1341(a)(1), also lacks merit. That Act 
does not bar recognition of valid contract claims. The 
court in Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 F.2d 712, 716 
(Fed. Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 491 US. 904 (1989), for 
example, rejected the lower court’s finding that the Anti- 
Deficiency Act barred recovery under an implied con- 
tractual warranty: 
[A] Spearin gd is, if breached, enforceable 
only in the courts. . [CJourts are not required to 
investigate whether program funds are available. In 
the circumstances, we are reluctant to found our 
holding on the Anti-Deficiency Act, and to do so 
would severely hamper the enforcement of Spearin- 
type warranties in the courts. 
Id.; see also Pet. Br. at 40-41. Any other reading of the 
Anti-Deficiency Act would render Spearin a nullity. 


3. In urging the Court to impose the entire burden 
of the Agent Orange settlement on petitioners, the gov- 
ernment seeks to elevate form over substance. The gov- 
ernment contends that there is a conceptual relationship 
between the government contractor defense and a Spearin 
claim which requires the following syllogism: if the gov- 
ernment contractor defense was not available, then a 
Spearin claim ought not to be available or, conversely, 
if a Spearin claim is properly stated here, then the gov- 


14 


ernment contractor defense should have prevailed earlier.* 
The government thus constructs a tidy, theoretical “heads 
it wins; tails petitioners lose” argument. 

The flaw in this purely theoretical approach is that it 
ignores the realities of litigation. The question presented 
here is what happens when theory fails and the govern- 
ment’s contractors suffer real financial loss through no 
fault of their own. The government’s answer is to stick 
its head in the sand and insist that there should have 
been no loss. Petitioners’ response is that they did in 
fact suffer such losses due to the unique circumstances 
of this case. If, as the government argues, the govern- 
ment contractor defense (and petitioners would argue the 
immunity under § 707 of the Defense Production Act as 
well) provides virtually complete protection to contrac- 
tors who otherwise would have a Spearin claim, then the 
government’s future exposure to its contractors would be 
virtually nil. Regardless, petitioners are before this Court 
now with a contract claim that did not fit the govern- 
ment’s theory and the government has not proffered any 
arguments to justify turning a blind eye to petitioners’ 
losses. 

Nor is there any reason to expect that contractors will 
settle underlying actions and pay large amounts to tort 
plaintiffs with the intent to seek reimbursement later 
against the government instead of vigorously defending 
against the tort claims. Contractors would have no obli- 
gation to pay damages if they prevail on the government 
contractor defense. Also, it is far more difficult to assert 
a Spearin claim than to assert a government contractor 
defense, because it is necessary under Spearin, but not 


* The premise of the government’s argument is flawed in any 
event because there is no inevitable linkage between the govern- 
ment contractor defense in Boyle and a Spearin claim. Thus, it is 
possible to lose a Boyle defense and still prevail under Spearin. 
For instance, the doctrines have different elements concerning the 
knowledge of the contractor about hazards associated with the 
product. In any event, the government’s tidy theory is completely 
useless as applied in 1984. 


15 


under the government contractor defense, to prove that 
the specifications were defective, and that they caused 
the contractor to suffer damages. Finally, any contractor 
that expected to continue doing business with the govern- 
ment would be a most reluctant Spearin litigant. 

4. Neither Hercules nor Thompson had manufactured 
defoliants prior to Agent Orange, and neither company 
was aware of the hazards of dioxin. In contrast, the 
record reveals that the government had extensive experi- 
ence with defoliants and was aware both that its specifi- 
cations for Agent Orange would lead to a product con- 
taining dioxin and that dioxin was dangerous to humans. 
The government should have shared its technical knowl- 
edge with petitioners, which might have given them a 
chance to remove this hazardous byproduct or at least 
to insist on appropriate warnings. 

The government contractor defense does not prevent 
irresponsible government action because the availability 
of the defense directly affects only petitioners, aot the 
government. As the government’s conduct in this case 
demonstrates, it is of no consequence to the government 
whether petitioners prevail in their assertion of this 
defense . 

A Spearin claim, however, affects the government di- 
rectly. The possibility of being held liable for damages in 
contract gives the government an incentive to monitor 
more carefully its specifications. Moreover, the posst- 
bility that a Spearin claim may be brought by contractors 
who settle tort claims should give the government an 
incentive to support contractors who assert the govern- 
ment contractor defense to such tort claims, thereby 
rendering the underlying litigation more efficient. 

Moreover, if this Court confirms that a Spearin claim 
is available to contractors who reasonably settle under- 
lying tort claims, that outcome will both be equitable 
to contractors and consistent with the universal rule en- 
couraging settlements. (Pet. Br. at 22). The court of 
appeals’ position that petitioners are not entitled to re- 
covery because they settled voluntarily wrongly functions 


16 


as a penalty for settlement and thereby promotes sense- 
less and expensive litigation.’ 

II. THE GOVERNMENT MISCHARACTERIZES PETI- 
TIONERS’ DPA ARGUMENT, AND CONVEN- 
IENTLY IGNORES CRUCIAL PROVISIONS IN 
THE DPA 

The government depicts petitioners as pressing the 
Court to hold that the Defense Production Act, 50 U.S.C. 
§ 2071(a) et seq., obliges the United States to be re- 
sponsible for the “character of the goods to be provided 
under the DPA contract.” (Gov. Br. at 36). Similarly, 
the government contends that petitioners maintain that 
the protections of the DPA “extend to any legal liability 
that a contractor might otherwise incur ‘by virtue of [its] 
performance of [a DPA] contract.” (Gov. Br. at 36). 
These characterizations distort petitioners’ arguments. 

A. Petitioners’ position is merely that a promise to 
indemnify may be factually implied from the nature of, 
and the totality of the circumstances surrounding, the 
parties’ contractual arrangement.* See, e.g., Weyerhauser 
Steamship Co. v. Nacirema Operating Company, 355 
U.S. 563, 565 (1958). Here, an implied-in-fact indemnifi- 
cation agreement arose out of the circumstances that 
surrounded the coerced contractual arrangement that led 
to petitioners’ production of Agent Orange.° These cir- 
cumstances include the fact that these contracts were 
executed pursuant to the authority of the DPA. Accord- 


7 If, instead of settling, petitioners had pursued the government 
contractor defense to a “successful” conclusion in the Agent Orange 
litigation, petitioners still would have a claim against the govern- 
ment under Spearin for the damages attributable to that litigation, 
i.e., the costs, including attorneys fees, petitioners incurred in 
defending that litigation. Those costs easily could have exceeded 
the amount petitioners chose to pay in settlement. 


8 Petitioners are not suggesting that they posses a private 
right of action under the DPA pursuant to Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 
66 (1975), and its progeny. 


® The government incorrectly argues that Hercules did not ad- 
vance this claim either in the Claims Court or in the court of ap- 
peals; Hercules’ complaint contains DPA allegations. (J.A. 9-10). 


17 


ingly, petitioners contracted to produce Agent Orange 
against the specific backdrop of § 707(a) of the DPA 
which establishes the Congressional intent that man- 
ufacturers be held harmless for any liabilities flowing 
from compliance with an order for production issued 
under the Act. (Pet. Br. at 40-41). 


The reasonable expectations of the parties to a con- 
tract may derive in part from the statutes relevant to the 
contractual obligations undertaken. See Von Hoffman v. 
City of Quincy, 71 U.S. 535, 550 (1867); 3 Corbin on 
Contracts § 551, p. 198 (1960) (“{iJt is always true 
that words and other symbols must be interpreted in the 
light of the surrounding circumstances; and the existing 
statutes and rules of law are always among these circum- 
stances”). Thus, the existence of the DPA’s hold harm- 
less provision shows that an implied-in-fact agreement 
existed between petitioners and the government. In par- 
ticular, if petitioners did suffer significant losses flowing 
from compliance with an order under the Act, both parties 
understood that the government would indemnify them. 

Government compulsion is not the only reason to imply 
an agreement. Here, petitioners produced Agent Orange 
in compliance with government specifications. The gov- 
ernment, but not petitioners, knew that these specifica- 
tions inevitably would result in a product containing 
dioxin. The government, but not petitioners, knew that 
dioxin was highly toxic at certain levels. Finally, the gov- 
ernment, but not petitioners, knew of the manner in 
which Agent Orange would be used in Vietnam and the 
extent to which service personnel would be exposed to 
that substance. 

Taken together, particularly in the context of com- 
pelled production under the DPA, these circumstances 
fully warrant finding an implied agreement to indemnify. 
The courts repeatedly have found an implied duty to 
indemnify where the indemnitee has incurred tort liability 
to a third party injured by a dangerous condition caused 
by the indemnitor and where the indemnitee was free of 
fault. See Weyerhauser, 355 U.S. at 565 (obligation to 


18 

provide stevedoring services on shipowners’ premises in- 
cluded an implied obligation “to perform with reasonable 
safety and to discharge foreseeable damages resulting to 
the shipowner from the [stevedore’s] improper perform- 
ance”); Ryan Stevedoring Co. v. Pan-Atlantic Steamship 
Corp., 350 U.S. 124, 133-134 (1956). See also Hamil- 
ton v. Volkswagen of America, 484 A.2d 1116, 1118 
(N.H. 984) (Souter, J.); Santisteven v. Dow Chem. Co., 
506 F.2d 1216, 1219 (9th Cir. 1974).” 


The government attempts to distinguish this Court's 
holding in Ryan Stevedoring by styling itself as petitioners’ 
“customer,” rather than “supplier.” (Gov. Br. at 41). 
This distinction is irrelevant. The responsibility for the 
production of the defective product lies with the govern- 
ment, whose activist role in compelling the manufacture 
of Agent Orange pursuant to its detailed specifications is 
ill-described by the phrase “customer.” 

The government’s efforts to distinguish Michigan Wis- 
consin Pipeline Co. v. Williams-McWilliams Co., 551 
F.2d 945 (Sth Cir. 1977), which the Government admits 
is “relevant to the issues in this case,” is unavailing. It 
is not distinguishable on grounds that it involved an 
“affirmative misrepresentation.” (Gov. Br. at 42). In 
fact, Michigan Wisconsin involved specifications which 
simply overlooked the addition of a more recent pipeline. 
The failure to document the pipe was an inadvertent 
oversight. Nevertheless, the omission created an implied 
indemnity. 551 F.2d at 948. 


The government also seeks to avoid its reasonable 
obligations under the contracts it imposed upon petitioners 
by its self-serving and unsubstantiated representation that 
it did not intend to indemnify petitioners for the risks it 


1 The power of the Court to read an indemnification provision 
into the contract is not “implied-at-law,” as suggested by the gov- 
ernment. (Gov. Br. at 40, n.28). Indemnities which are implied 
by the circumstances, i.e., implied-in-fact, include those recognized 
in Spearin, Helene Curtis, Weyerhauser, Ryan and similar cases. 
Even the government recognizes in these instances that a court 
which recognizes an implied contract term does not make the im- 
plied term one implied-at-law. (Gov. Br. at 15). 


19 


imposed. (Gov. Br. at 39). The government’s subjective 
intent, however, is irrelevant. Indeed, the government's 
own analysis of Spearin proves as much: “if the govern- 
ment knew more than the contractor about the part of 
the specifications that proves to have been inaccurate, 
then a court may properly infer an agreement between 
the parties that the government would bear any resulting 
increase in the cost of performance.” (Gov. Br. at 15). 
Such an inference is not dependent on subjective intent. 


B. The government concedes that the protections con- 
ferred by § 707 of the DPA are coextensive with the 
risks imposed by the Act. (Gov. Br. at 35). Never- 
theless, the government argues that such protection is 
limited to cases in which the government requires a manu- 
facturer to give priority to a government contract. This 
argument is based upon the government’s failure to quote 
the entire statute. 

The government attempts to support the limitation of 
the DPA’s implied protections to priority through a sleight 
of italics, by selectively highlighting language in the 
Act that establishes the President’s authority to est. blish 
“priority,” and ignoring completely the Act’s language 
that also empowers the President “to allocate materials 
and facilities.” (Gov. Br. at 34). Focusing on the “pri- 
ority” language, however, does not change the fact that 
the actual authority the government exercised against 
petitioners was to “require acceptance and performance,” 
language that the government notably failed to highlight. 
50 U.S.C. § 2071(a). The record makes clear that the 
DPA was used to compel acceptance and performance 
of contracts which otherwise would have been rejected 
outright, not merely delayed. (See e.g., Pet. App. 4a). 

C. The government is simply incorrect that acceptance 
of petitioners’ claim would mean that “the costs of any 
lawsuit brought against a contractor providing a product 
pursuant to the DPA would be passed through to the 
United States through indemnification, regardless of the 
culpability of the contractor.” (Gov. Br. at 41). The 
facts presented by petitioners in this case in support of 


20 

an implied indemnification obligation are unique, both as 
to the level of government cupability in mandating a 
product pursuant to specifications it knew to be defective 
and as to the complete innocence of the contractors and 
their inability to take any steps to defend their interests. 

The government also is incorrect that § 707 should 
not extend to tort liabilities because such liabilities 
already are taken into account by the government contract 
defense. (Gov. Br. at 36). Neither this Court in Boyle, 
nor lower courts which weighed the existence and con- 
tours of the government contractor defense prior to Boyle, 
even discuss the DPA. Conversely, Congress did not 
discuss the government contractor defense when it en- 
acted the DPA. Thus, the existence of the government 
contractor defense should not diminish the protections 
that § 707 of the DPA provides here. 


The petition in this case began with an observation by 
Judge Plager in his dissent concerning the core equities 
of petitioners’ position. It is fitting to end the reply brief 
on the merits by returning to Judge Plager. He observed 
that in this case more than many others “[u]ndue atten- 
tion to trees . . . hides the forest.” (Pet. App. 34a). 
Thus, while petitioners are confident that a fair applica- 
tion of Spearin, Helene Curtis, and the DPA provides 
persuasive independent bases for holding that this case 
should go forward, what makes this case compelling is 
that the various factors that undergird those doctrines all 
coalesce here. Petitioners were compelled under the DPA 
to produce a potentially harmful product in a time of 
national emergency, even though the government had 
superior knowledge about the risks and deliberately chose 
not to share its knowledge with petitioners. Petitioners 
urge the Court to hold that “the law affords substantially 
more justice than the majority” below allowed (id.) and 
to permit petitioners an opportunity to discover and prove 
the federal government's liability on their contract claims. 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the court of appeals should be re- 
versed, and the matter remanded. 


21 


Respectfully submitted, 

JEROLD OSHINSKY * JAMES S. TURNER 
GREGORY W. HOMER ALAN DUMOFF 
RHONDA D. ORIN SWANKIN & TURNER 
ANDERSON KILL OLICK 1424 16th Street, N.W. 

& OSHINSKY Suite 105 
2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036 
Suite 7500 (202) 462-8800 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 728-8100 
MICHAEL B. KEEHAN CARTER G. PHILLIPS * 
WALTER S. ROWLAND SIDLEY & AUSTIN 
HERCULES INC. 1722 I Street, N.W. 
Hercules Plaza Suite 900 
Wilmington, Delaware 19894 Washington, D.C. 20006-8795 
(302) 594-5000 (202) 736-8000 

Counsel for Petitioners 
* Counsel of Record 


Dated: September 29, 1995 


