SEC. 302. CABLE SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE COMPANIES.

    (a) Provisions for Regulation of Cable Service Provided by Telephone 
Companies.--Title VI (47 U.S.C. 521 et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new part:

  ``PART V--VIDEO PROGRAMMING SERVICES PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE COMPANIES

``SEC. 651. <<NOTE: 47 USC 571.>>  REGULATORY TREATMENT OF VIDEO 
            PROGRAMMING SERVICES.

    ``(a) Limitations on Cable Regulation.--
            ``(1) Radio-based systems.--To the extent that a common 
        carrier (or any other person) is providing video programming to 
        subscribers using radio communication, such carrier (or other 
        person) shall be subject to the requirements of title III and 
        section 652, but shall not otherwise be subject to the 
        requirements of this title.
            ``(2) Common carriage of video traffic.--To the extent that 
        a common carrier is providing transmission of video programming 
        on a common carrier basis, such carrier shall be subject to the 
        requirements of title II and section 652,

[[Page 110 STAT. 119]]

        but shall not otherwise be subject to the requirements of this 
        title. This paragraph shall not affect the treatment under 
        section 602(7)(C) of a facility of a common carrier as a cable 
        system.
            ``(3) Cable systems and open video systems.--To the extent 
        that a common carrier is providing video programming to its 
        subscribers in any manner other than that described in 
        paragraphs (1) and (2)--
                    ``(A) such carrier shall be subject to the 
                requirements of this title, unless such programming is 
                provided by means of an open video system for which the 
                Commission has approved a certification under section 
                653; or
                    ``(B) if such programming is provided by means of an 
                open video system for which the Commission has approved 
                a certification under section 653, such carrier shall be 
                subject to the requirements of this part, but shall be 
                subject to parts I through IV of this title only as 
                provided in 653(c).
            ``(4) Election to operate as open video system.--A common 
        carrier that is providing video programming in a manner 
        described in paragraph (1) or (2), or a combination thereof, may 
        elect to provide such programming by means of an open video 
        system that complies with section 653. If the Commission 
        approves such carrier's certification under section 653, such 
        carrier shall be subject to the requirements of this part, but 
        shall be subject to parts I through IV of this title only as 
        provided in 653(c).

    ``(b) Limitations on Interconnection Obligations.--A local exchange 
carrier that provides cable service through an open video system or a 
cable system shall not be required, pursuant to title II of this Act, to 
make capacity available on a nondiscriminatory basis to any other person 
for the provision of cable service directly to subscribers.
    ``(c) Additional Regulatory Relief.--A common carrier shall not be 
required to obtain a certificate under section 214 with respect to the 
establishment or operation of a system for the delivery of video 
programming.

``SEC. 652. <<NOTE: 47 USC 572.>>  PROHIBITION ON BUY OUTS.

    ``(a) Acquisitions by Carriers.--No local exchange carrier or any 
affiliate of such carrier owned by, operated by, controlled by, or under 
common control with such carrier may purchase or otherwise acquire 
directly or indirectly more than a 10 percent financial interest, or any 
management interest, in any cable operator providing cable service 
within the local exchange carrier's telephone service area.
    ``(b) Acquisitions by Cable Operators.--No cable operator or 
affiliate of a cable operator that is owned by, operated by, controlled 
by, or under common ownership with such cable operator may purchase or 
otherwise acquire, directly or indirectly, more than a 10 percent 
financial interest, or any management interest, in any local exchange 
carrier providing telephone exchange service within such cable 
operator's franchise area.
    ``(c) Joint Ventures.--A local exchange carrier and a cable operator 
whose telephone service area and cable franchise area, respectively, are 
in the same market may not enter into any joint venture or partnership 
to provide video programming directly to

[[Page 110 STAT. 120]]

subscribers or to provide telecommunications services within such 
market.
    ``(d) Exceptions.--
            ``(1) Rural systems.--Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b), 
        and (c) of this section, a local exchange carrier (with respect 
        to a cable system located in its telephone service area) and a 
        cable operator (with respect to the facilities of a local 
        exchange carrier used to provide telephone exchange service in 
        its cable franchise area) may obtain a controlling interest in, 
        management interest in, or enter into a joint venture or 
        partnership with the operator of such system or facilities for 
        the use of such system or facilities to the extent that--
                    ``(A) such system or facilities only serve 
                incorporated or unincorporated--
                          ``(i) places or territories that have fewer 
                      than 35,000 inhabitants; and
                          ``(ii) are outside an urbanized area, as 
                      defined by the Bureau of the Census; and
                    ``(B) in the case of a local exchange carrier, such 
                system, in the aggregate with any other system in which 
                such carrier has an interest, serves less than 10 
                percent of the households in the telephone service area 
                of such carrier.
            ``(2) Joint use.--Notwithstanding subsection (c), a local 
        exchange carrier may obtain, with the concurrence of the cable 
        operator on the rates, terms, and conditions, the use of that 
        part of the transmission facilities of a cable system extending 
        from the last multi-user terminal to the premises of the end 
        user, if such use is reasonably limited in scope and duration, 
        as determined by the Commission.
            ``(3) Acquisitions in competitive markets.--Notwithstanding 
        subsections (a) and (c), a local exchange carrier may obtain a 
        controlling interest in, or form a joint venture or other 
        partnership with, or provide financing to, a cable system 
        (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as `the subject cable 
        system'), if--
                    ``(A) the subject cable system operates in a 
                television market that is not in the top 25 markets, and 
                such market has more than 1 cable system operator, and 
                the subject cable system is not the cable system with 
                the most subscribers in such television market;
                    ``(B) the subject cable system and the cable system 
                with the most subscribers in such television market held 
                on May 1, 1995, cable television franchises from the 
                largest municipality in the television market and the 
                boundaries of such franchises were identical on such 
                date;
                    ``(C) the subject cable system is not owned by or 
                under common ownership or control of any one of the 50 
                cable system operators with the most subscribers as such 
                operators existed on May 1, 1995; and
                    ``(D) the system with the most subscribers in the 
                television market is owned by or under common ownership 
                or control of any one of the 10 largest cable system 
                operators as such operators existed on May 1, 1995.
            ``(4) Exempt cable systems.--Subsection (a) does not apply 
        to any cable system if--

[[Page 110 STAT. 121]]

                    ``(A) the cable system serves no more than 17,000 
                cable subscribers, of which no less than 8,000 live 
                within an urban area, and no less than 6,000 live within 
                a nonurbanized area as of June 1, 1995;
                    ``(B) the cable system is not owned by, or under 
                common ownership or control with, any of the 50 largest 
                cable system operators in existence on June 1, 1995; and
                    ``(C) the cable system operates in a television 
                market that was not in the top 100 television markets as 
                of June 1, 1995.
            ``(5) Small cable systems in nonurban areas.--
        Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c), a local exchange 
        carrier with less than $100,000,000 in annual operating revenues 
        (or any affiliate of such carrier owned by, operated by, 
        controlled by, or under common control with such carrier) may 
        purchase or otherwise acquire more than a 10 percent financial 
        interest in, or any management interest in, or enter into a 
        joint venture or partnership with, any cable system within the 
        local exchange carrier's telephone service area that serves no 
        more than 20,000 cable subscribers, if no more than 12,000 of 
        those subscribers live within an urbanized area, as defined by 
        the Bureau of the Census.
            ``(6) Waivers.--The Commission may waive the restrictions of 
        subsections (a), (b), or (c) only if--
                    ``(A) the Commission determines that, because of the 
                nature of the market served by the affected cable system 
                or facilities used to provide telephone exchange 
                service--
                          ``(i) the affected cable operator or local 
                      exchange carrier would be subjected to undue 
                      economic distress by the enforcement of such 
                      provisions;
                          ``(ii) the system or facilities would not be 
                      economically viable if such provisions were 
                      enforced; or
                          ``(iii) the anticompetitive effects of the 
                      proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the 
                      public interest by the probable effect of the 
                      transaction in meeting the convenience and needs 
                      of the community to be served; and
                    ``(B) the local franchising authority approves of 
                such waiver.

    ``(e) Definition of Telephone Service Area.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `telephone service area' when used in connection with 
a common carrier subject in whole or in part to title II of this Act 
means the area within which such carrier provided telephone exchange 
service as of January 1, 1993, but if any common carrier after such date 
transfers its telephone exchange service facilities to another common 
carrier, the area to which such facilities provide telephone exchange 
service shall be treated as part of the telephone service area of the 
acquiring common carrier and not of the selling common carrier.

``SEC. 653. <<NOTE: 47 USC 573.>>  ESTABLISHMENT OF OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS.

    ``(a) Open Video Systems.--
            ``(1) Certificates of compliance.--A local exchange carrier 
        may provide cable service to its cable service subscribers in 
        its telephone service area through an open video system that 
        complies with this section. To the extent permitted by such 
        regulations as the Commission may prescribe consistent

[[Page 110 STAT. 122]]

        with the public interest, convenience, and necessity, an 
        operator of a cable system or any other person may provide video 
        programming through an open video system that complies with this 
        section. An operator of an open video system shall qualify for 
        reduced regulatory burdens under subsection (c) of this section 
        if the operator of such system certifies to the Commission that 
        such carrier complies with the Commission's regulations under 
        subsection (b) and the Commission approves such 
        certification. <<NOTE: Publication.>>  The Commission shall 
        publish notice of the receipt of any such certification and 
        shall act to approve or disapprove any such certification within 
        10 days after receipt of such certification.
            ``(2) Dispute resolution.--The Commission shall have the 
        authority to resolve disputes under this section and the 
        regulations prescribed thereunder. Any such dispute shall be 
        resolved within 180 days after notice of such dispute is 
        submitted to the Commission. At that time or subsequently in a 
        separate damages proceeding, the Commission may, in the case of 
        any violation of this section, require carriage, award damages 
        to any person denied carriage, or any combination of such 
        sanctions. Any aggrieved party may seek any other remedy 
        available under this Act.

    ``(b) Commission Actions.--
            ``(1) Regulations required.--Within 6 months after the date 
        of enactment of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the 
        Commission shall complete all actions necessary (including any 
        reconsideration) to prescribe regulations that--
                    ``(A) except as required pursuant to section 611, 
                614, or 615, prohibit an operator of an open video 
                system from discriminating among video programming 
                providers with regard to carriage on its open video 
                system, and ensure that the rates, terms, and conditions 
                for such carriage are just and reasonable, and are not 
                unjustly or unreasonably discriminatory;
                    ``(B) if demand exceeds the channel capacity of the 
                open video system, prohibit an operator of an open video 
                system and its affiliates from selecting the video 
                programming services for carriage on more than one-third 
                of the activated channel capacity on such system, but 
                nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to limit 
                the number of channels that the carrier and its 
                affiliates may offer to provide directly to subscribers;
                    ``(C) permit an operator of an open video system to 
                carry on only one channel any video programming service 
                that is offered by more than one video programming 
                provider (including the local exchange carrier's video 
                programming affiliate): Provided, That subscribers have 
                ready and immediate access to any such video programming 
                service;
                    ``(D) extend to the distribution of video 
                programming over open video systems the Commission's 
                regulations concerning sports exclusivity (47 C.F.R. 
                76.67), network nonduplication (47 C.F.R. 76.92 et 
                seq.), and syndicated exclusivity (47 C.F.R. 76.151 et 
                seq.); and
                    ``(E)(i) prohibit an operator of an open video 
                system from unreasonably discriminating in favor of the 
                operator or its affiliates with regard to material or 
                information (including advertising) provided by the 
                operator to subscrib

[[Page 110 STAT. 123]]

                ers for the purposes of selecting programming on the 
                open video system, or in the way such material or 
                information is presented to subscribers;
                    ``(ii) require an operator of an open video system 
                to ensure that video programming providers or copyright 
                holders (or both) are able suitably and uniquely to 
                identify their programming services to subscribers;
                    ``(iii) if such identification is transmitted as 
                part of the programming signal, require the carrier to 
                transmit such identification without change or 
                alteration; and
                    ``(iv) prohibit an operator of an open video system 
                from omitting television broadcast stations or other 
                unaffiliated video programming services carried on such 
                system from any navigational device, guide, or menu.
            ``(2) Consumer access.--Subject to the requirements of 
        paragraph (1) and the regulations thereunder, nothing in this 
        section prohibits a common carrier or its affiliate from 
        negotiating mutually agreeable terms and conditions with over-
        the-air broadcast stations and other unaffiliated video 
        programming providers to allow consumer access to their signals 
        on any level or screen of any gateway, menu, or other program 
        guide, whether provided by the carrier or its affiliate.

    ``(c) Reduced Regulatory Burdens for Open Video Systems.--
            ``(1) In general.--Any provision that applies to a cable 
        operator under--
                    ``(A) sections 613 (other than subsection (a) 
                thereof), 616, 623(f), 628, 631, and 634 of this title, 
                shall apply,
                    ``(B) sections 611, 614, and 615 of this title, and 
                section 325 of title III, shall apply in accordance with 
                the regulations prescribed under paragraph (2), and
                    ``(C) sections 612 and 617, and parts III and IV 
                (other than sections 623(f), 628, 631, and 634), of this 
                title shall not apply,
        to any operator of an open video system for which the Commission 
        has approved a certification under this section.
            ``(2) Implementation.--
                    ``(A) Commission action.--In the rulemaking 
                proceeding to prescribe the regulations required by 
                subsection (b)(1), the Commission shall, to the extent 
                possible, impose obligations that are no greater or 
                lesser than the obligations contained in the provisions 
                described in paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection. The 
                Commission shall complete all action (including any 
                reconsideration) to prescribe such regulations no later 
                than 6 months after the date of enactment of the 
                Telecommunications Act of 1996.
                    ``(B) Fees.--An operator of an open video system 
                under this part may be subject to the payment of fees on 
                the gross revenues of the operator for the provision of 
                cable service imposed by a local franchising authority 
                or other governmental entity, in lieu of the franchise 
                fees permitted under section 622. The rate at which such 
                fees are imposed shall not exceed the rate at which 
                franchise fees are imposed on any cable operator 
                transmitting video programming in the franchise area, as 
                determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by 
                the Commission. An operator of an open video system may 
                designate that portion

[[Page 110 STAT. 124]]

                of a subscriber's bill attributable to the fee under 
                this subparagraph as a separate item on the bill.
            ``(3) Regulatory streamlining.--With respect to the 
        establishment and operation of an open video system, the 
        requirements of this section shall apply in lieu of, and not in 
        addition to, the requirements of title II.
            ``(4) Treatment as cable operator.--Nothing in this Act 
        precludes a video programming provider making use of an open 
        video system from being treated as an operator of a cable system 
        for purposes of section 111 of title 17, United States Code.

    ``(d) Definition of Telephone Service Area.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `telephone service area' when used in connection with 
a common carrier subject in whole or in part to title II of this Act 
means the area within which such carrier is offering telephone exchange 
service.''.
    (b) Conforming and Technical Amendments.--
            (1) Repeal.--Subsection (b) of section 613 (47 U.S.C. 
        533(b)) is repealed.
            (2) Definitions.--Section 602 (47 U.S.C. 531) <<NOTE: 47 USC 
        522.>>  is amended--
                    (A) in paragraph (7), by striking ``, or (D)'' and 
                inserting the following: ``, unless the extent of such 
                use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
                (D) an open video system that complies with section 653 
                of this title; or (E)'';
                    (B) by redesignating paragraphs (12) through (19) as 
                paragraphs (13) through (20), respectively; and
                    (C) by inserting after paragraph (11) the following 
                new paragraph:
            ``(12) the term `interactive on-demand services' means a 
        service providing video programming to subscribers over switched 
        networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not 
        include services providing video programming prescheduled by the 
        programming provider;''.
            (3) Termination of video-dialtone regulations.--The 
        Commission's regulations and policies with respect to video 
        dialtone requirements issued in CC Docket No. 87-266 shall cease 
        to be effective on the date of enactment of this Act. This 
        paragraph shall not be construed to require the termination of 
        any video-dialtone system that the Commission has approved 
        before the date of enactment of this Act.

