UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


(Alexandria Division ) 


No. 92-CV-1751 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY 
OF VIRGINIA, ET AL., PLAINTIFFS 


v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ET AL., DEFENDANTS 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


PROCEEDINGS 


‘DATE No. 
12/17/92 1 
2/8/93 3 
2/8/98 4 
2/8/98 5 
2/16/98 8 


COMPLAINT Filing Fee $120.00 Receipt 
#93884 (bonn) 


« - od * * 


MOTION to Intervene as a deft by Natl 
Cable TV (bonn) [Entry date 02/09/93] 


MEMORANDUM by Natl Cable TV in sup- 
port of [3-1] motion to Intervene as a deft 
by Natl Cable TV (bonn) [Entry date 02/ 
09/93] 


ANSWER to Complaint by Natl Cable TV 
(Attorney, James Saunders), (bonn) [En- 
try date 02/09/93] 


ANSWER to Complaint by William Barr, 
FCC, United States (Attorney Richard 
Parker), (bonn) [Entry date 02/18/93] 


(1) 


2 


eee 


DATE 


No. 


PROCEEDINGS 


3/1/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


4/30/93 


5/21/93 


5/24/93 


13 


46 


47 


49 


ORDER this matter comes before the court 
on the motion of the National Cable Televi- 
sion Association, Inc. to intervene as a deft, 
for the reasons stated from the bench: 
NCTA’s motion to intereven [sic] as a right, 
is denied, NCTA’s motion for permissive in- 
tervention, is gratned [sic] subject to the fol- 
lowing conditions (see order for details) the 
parties are futher [sic] directed to submit to 
the court a mutually agreeable briefing sch. 
and culminating in oral argument on either 
5/13/98, 5/20/98 or 5/27/93 ent - filed 
(signed by Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies 
Mailed: yes (rvoi) [Entry date 03/02/93] 
” * 7 - 3° 
MOTION by Chesapeak [sic] & Potomac, 


Bell Atlantic Video for Summary Judgment 
(bonn) 


JOINT stipulation of fact - file by parties. 
(bonn) 


LIST of authenticated documents - filed by 
parties. (bonn) 


AFFIDAVITS and Excerpts from principal 
government documents in support of motion 
for summary judgment - filed by pltfs. 
(bonn) 


CROSS MOTION by Natl Cable TV for 
Summary Judgment (bonn) [Entry date 
05/24/93] 


MOTION by United States, FCC for Sum- 
mary Judgment (bonn) 


3 


——ErerrresssSe eee eee 


DATE No. 


PROCEEDINGS 


6/7/98 


8/24/93 


8/24/93 


9/8/93 


9/8/98 


9/20/93 


77 


97 


102 


110 


OBJECTIONS by Bell Atlantic Video, Chesa- 
peak & Potomac to exhibits filed in connec- 
tion with summary judgment (bonn) 


MEMORANDUM OPINION (signed by 
Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies Mailed: yes 
(rvoi) [Edit date 08/24/93] 


ORDER this matter comes before the court 
on cross-motions for summary judgment, for 
the reasons stated in the accompanying 
memorandum opinion, pltf’s motion for sum- 
mary judgment is gratned, [sic] and defts’ 
and intervenor-defts’ motion for summary 
judgment are denied. Defts are hereby en- 
joined from enforcement of 47 USC 583 ent- 
filed (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis III) Copies 
Mailed: yes (rvoi) 


MOTION for relief from judgment and to 
alter or amend judgment by United States, 
FCC, Janet Reno (bonn) 


MOTION to intervene by Ameritech Cor- 
poration, BellSouth Corporation, GTE Serv- 
ice Corporation, NYNEX Corporation, Pa- 
cific Telesis Group, Rochester Telephone 
Corporation, Southwestern Bell Corporation 
and US West, Inc. (bonn) [Entry date 
09/09/93] 


MOTION for joinder of parties as plitfs by 
Chesapeak & Potomac, Bell Atlantic Video 
(bonn) [Entry date 09/21/93] 


PROCEEDINGS 


DATE No. 
10/7/93 121 
10/7/93 122 


ORDER granting [110-1] motion for joinder 
of parties as plitfs by Chesapeak & Potomac 
Bell Atlantic Video, granting with respect 
to specifying that the order dated 9/8/93 
applies only to Section 533(b) and not to 
the entire Section 533 and denying all 
other aspects of the [99-1] motion for relief 
from judgment and to alter or amend judg- 
ment by United States, FCC, Janet Reno, 
denying [105-1] motion to intervene by 
GTE Virginia and GTE Vantage Inc., deny- 
ing [102-1] motion to intervene by Ameri- 
tech Corporation, BellSouth Corporation, 
GTE Service Corporation, NYNEX Cor- 
poration, Pacific Telesis Group, Rochester 
Telephone Corporation, Southwestern Bell 
Corporation and US West, Inc. - entered & 
filed (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis IIT) Copies 
Mailed: Yes (bonn) 


AMENDED FINAL ORDER that the court’s 
memorandum opinion dated 8/24/93, plitfs’ 
motion for summary judgment is granted, 
and defts’ and intervenor-deft’s motions for 
summary judgment are denied. The court 
declares 47 USC Section 533(b) unconstitu- 
tional both on its face and as applied to 
pitfs. The following parties are joined as 
pitfs: Bell Atlantic Corporation, The Chesa- 
peake and Potomac Telephone Company. 
The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Com- 
pany of Maryland, The Chesapeake and Po- 
tomac Telephone Company of West Virginia, 
The Diamond State Telephone Company, 
New Jersey Bell Telephone Company and 
the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania. 
Defts. are hereby enjoined from enforcement 
of 47 USC Section 533(b) against the above 
named parties. This order supersedes and 


5 


——— ee = 


PROCEEDINGS 


10/15/93 124 


replaces the court’s order dated 8/24/98 - 
entered & filed. (signed by Judge T. S. Ellis 
III) Copies Mailed: Yes (bonn) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL of orders of 10/7/98, 
and 8/24/93 by Janet Reno, FCC, United 
States. Copy of notice mailed to all parties. 
Copy of notice, orders and docket entries 
mailed to USCA. (bonn) [Entry date 10/ 
18/93] 


[Filed Dec. 17, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 
(Alexandria Division) 


Civil Action No. 92-1751-H 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, 
600 East Main Street 
Richmond, Virginia 23219 


and 


BELL ATLANTIC VIDEO SERVICES COMPANY, 
1320 N. Court House Road 
Arlington, Virginia 22201 

PLAINTIFFS 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, 
1919 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20554 


and 


WiLuiaM P. Bark, in his official capacity as 
Attorney General of the United States of America, 
Department of Justice 
10th & Constitution Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20530 

DEFENDANTS 


— 


For All Defendents, Serve: 


Richard Cullen 

United States Attorney for the 
Eastern District of Virginia 
1101 King Street, Suite 502 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 


COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY JUDGMENT 
AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 


1. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 
47 U.S.C. § 533(b) (“Cable Act”), prohibits The Chesa- 
peake & Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia and its 
affiliate, Bell Atlanic Video Services Company, from 
providing video programming— including television shows, 
movies, sports, news, and political reporting and opinions 
—to subscribers in C&P’s telephone service area. This is 
an action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201 and 2202 to 
declare this prohibition unconstitutional and to enjoin the 
defendants from enforcing it. The government defend- 
ants, who bear the burden of justifying this prohibition, 
have stated that the prohibition is not necessary to serve 
any valid governmental purpose and that it should be 
repealed. Congress, however, has failed to repeal the pro- 
hibition, and the defendants have indicated that they will 
continue to enforce it. 


JURISDICTION AND VENUE 


2. This Court has subject matter jurisdiction of this 
controversy under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. 

3. Venue is proper in this judicial district pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. § 1391 (e). 


PARTIES 


4. Plaintiff The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone 
Company of Virginia (“C&P”) is a corporation incor- 
porated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia 


8 


and is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Bell Atlantic Cor- 
poration, a publicly held company with over one million 
shareowners. C&P is in the business of providing tele- 
phone service in, among other places, the City of Alex- 
andria, Virginia, and is a “common carrier” within the 
meaning of section 533(b) of the Cable Act. 

5. Plaintiff Bell Atlantic Video Services Company 
(“BVS”) is a corporation incorporated under the laws of 
the Commonwealth of Virginia and is a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of Bell Atlantic Corporation. BVS was incor- 
porated for the purpose of providing video programming 
in, among other places, the City of Alexandria and is 
affiliated with C&P within the meaning of section 533(b) 
of the Cable Act. 

6. Defendant United States of America is a party to 
this action. 

7. Defendant Federal Communications Commission 
(“FCC”) is a federal agency created by Congress pur- 
suant to the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
§§ 151 et seg.) and is charged with enforcement of sec- 
tion 533(b) and other regulation of cable television pur- 
suant to 47 U.S.C. §§ 401 and 521 ef seq. 

8. Defendant William P. Barr, named in his official 
capacity as Attorney General of the United States of 
America, is charged with enforcement of section 533(b) 
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 401. 


Background 


9. In 1984, Congress passed the Cable Communica- 
tions Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. (“Cable Act”), 
which among other things prohibits telephone companies 
and their affiliates from providing video programming 
within the areas where they provide telephone service. 
Section 533(b) of the Cable Act provides in relevant part 
as follows: 


(b)(1) It shall be unlawful for any common car- 
rier, subject in whole or in part to subchapter II of 


9 


this chapter, to provide video programming directly 
to subscribers in its telephone service area, either 
directly or indirectly through an affiliate owned by, 
operated by, controlled by, or under common control 
with the common carrier. 

(2) It shall be unlawful for any common carrier, 
subject in whole or in part to subchapter II of this 
chapter, to provide channels of communications or 
pole line conduit space, or other rental arrangements, 
to any entity which is directly or indirectly owned by, 
operated by, controlled by, or under common con- 
trol with such common carrier, if such facilities or 
arrangement are to be used for, or in connection 
with, the provision of video programming directly to 
subscribers in the telephone service area of the com- 
mon carrier. 


10. The Cable Act defines “video programming” as 
“programming provided by, or generally considered com- 
parable to programming provided by, a television broad- 
cast station.” 47 U.S.C. § 522(16). 

11. Under section 533(b), it is unlawful for C&P and 
BVS, as affiliates, to provide video programming directly 
to subscribers in areas where C&P provides telephone 
service. It is also unlawful for C&P to provide channels 
of communications to BVS for use in provision of video 
programming in these areas. 


COUNT I 


SECTION 533(b) IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL ON 
ITS FACE UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT 


12. The allegations of paragraphs | through 11 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

13. Video programming is a form of speech protected 
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitu- 
tion. Video programmers own, produce, select, assemble, 


10 


package, and distribute images, ideas, information, opin- 
ions, and entertainment. 

14. The video programming prohibition in section 
533(b) of the Cable Act is, on its face, an unconstitu- 
tional prior restraint on speech. 

15. The prohibition is, on its face, a straightforward 
ban on certain types of constitutionally protected expres- 
sion, The prohibition is directed at speech itself and there- 
fore requires strict scrutiny. 

16. Under the statutory definition of “video program- 
ming,” 47 U.S.C. § 522(16), the applicability of the re- 
striction necessarily turns on the content of telephone 
companies’ speech. Congress has required government 
Officials to decide whether telephone companies are pro- 
viding prohibited speech that is “generally considered 
comparable to” television broadcast programming or 
whether they are providing non-prohibited speech which 
may also involve video images. This statutorily required 
process of official authorization, therefore, involves an 
evaluation of the video images and the context in which 
they are to be presented; a consideration of the impact 
such video images will have upon the viewer; and a deter- 
mination whether such video images will be perceived by 
the general public as a substitute for the forms of video 
speech that have been provided by others over traditional 
cable and broadcasting facilities. All of the foregoing 
involves the government in an investigation of content. 
Consequently, the statutory prohibition is content-based 
and must be subject to strict scrutiny. 

17. Section 533(b) is a speaker-specific restriction on 
protected expression that singles out speech provided by 
telephone companies and imposes a special and targeted 
prohibition on that speech in particular. Strict scrutiny 
is therefore warranted. 

18. Section 533(b) is an audience-specific restriction 
on protected expression that prevents telephone companies 
from providing video programming only to subscribers 


11 


within their telephone service areas. Strict scrutiny is 
therefore warranted. 

19. Section 533(b) violates both the First Amend- 
ment right of telephone companies to provide video pro- 
gramming and the First Amendment right of subscribers 
to receive the video programming which plaintiffs and 
other telephone companies would provide. 

20. The government defendants, which bear the bur- 
den of justifying this infringement of First Amendment 
rights, cannot prove that section 533(b) is necessary to 
serve any compelling governmental interest or even any 
substantial or important governmental interest. 

21. The speech targeted by section 533(b)—television 
shows, movies, sports, news, and political reporting and 
opinions—is not unlawful. 

22. In enacting section 533(b) in 1984, Congress 
stated that it was seeking to prevent the development of 
“local media monopolies.” This objective has not been 
achieved. In 1992, in enacting the Cable Television Con- 
sumer Protection and Competition Act, Congress found 
that “[t]he cable industry has become highly concentrated. 
The potential effects of such concentration are barriers to 
entry for new programmers and a reduction in the number 
of media voices available to consumers.” Congress found 
that “[t]he average monthly cable rate has increased almost 
3 times as much as the Consumer Price Index” since 
1986. “[Mlost cable television subscribers have no oppor- 
tunity to select between competing cable systems. Without 
the presence of another multichannel video programming 
distributor, a cable system faces no local competition. The 
result is undue market power for the cable operator... .” 

23. The government defendants themselves have found 
that section 533(b) is now hindering the objectives it was 
originally intended to promote: 


a. In 1988, defendant FCC tentatively concluded that 
the prohibition “no longer serves the public interest.” In 


12 


1992, on a full administrative record, the FCC found that 
the prohibition should be repealed. Repealing the prohibi- 
tion would “increas[e] competition in the video market- 
place, spur[] the investment necessary to deploy an ad- 
vanced infrastructure, and increas[e] the diversity of serv- 
ices made available to the public.” Separately, the FCC 
reported to the President that introducing competition 
from telephone companies “would result in significant price 
savings for consumers and stimulate provision of a range 
of new information services. Current experience with 
head-to-head competition in cable markets indicates that 
rates would fall about 20% for the entire video package; 
if competition is introduced nationwide, subscribership 
would likely expand by 11.2 million households.” 

b. Defendant Barr in his official capacity as Attorney 
General stated that “[t]elevision viewers will be best served 
by removing barriers to entry by new firms into the video 
services marketplace. The Administration, therefore, sup- 
ports removal of current legislative prohibitions against 
telephone company provision of video programming, with 
appropriate safeguards.” The Department of Justice, act- 
ing under the supervision of defendant Barr, stated that 
telephone companies “should be allowed to own and di- 
rectly provide video programming” because telephone com- 
pany “provision of video programming will have pro- 
competitive benefits that outweigh any anticompetitive 
risks involved.” 

24. The defendants to this action further have con- 
cluded that any valid governmental concerns can be ad- 
dressed by means that do not prohibit telephone com- 
panies and their affiliates from video programming. 

25. Despite their concessions that the video program- 
ming prohibition is not necessary to any governmental 
interest, defendants have indicated that they will continue 
to enforce the prohibition. Consequently, there is an 
actual and justiciable controversy between the parties. 


13 


26. Plaintiffs, as well as consumers who are being 
denied the right to receive video programming which 
plaintiffs and other telephone companies would provide, 
have no adequate or complete remedy at law to redress 
the denial of their First Amendment rights other than by 
seeking the relief sought in this action. Unless defendants 
are enjoined from enforcing section 533(b), plaintiffs and 
consumers will continue to suffer substantial and irrepara- 
ble harm. 

COUNT Il 


SECTION 533(b) IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL AS 
APPLIED UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT 


27. The allegation of paragraphs | through 26 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

28. If permitted to proceed, C&P and BVS will pro- 
vide video programming in the City of Alexandria, Vir- 
ginia. C&P will enhance its telephone network in Alex- 
andria to have the capability of carrying several hundred 
channels of video programming. In addition, C&P’s net- 
work will have the capability to deliver video programs 
on demand, which will allow consumers to select pro- 
grams from video libraries. C&P’s affiliate, BVS, will pro- 
vide some of the video programming on the network, and 
the network will also be available for use by other video 

mmers on a common carrier basis. 

29. Plaintiffs are ready, willing and, but for defend- 
ants’ enforcement of section 533(b), able to provide video 
programming to Alexandria. Consumers in Alexandria 
want to receive this programming. As a result of the 
defendants’ continued enforcement of section 533(b), both 
plaintiffs and consumers will continue to suffer substantial 
and irreparable harm. Plaintiffs have no adequate or com- 
plete remedy at law to redress the denial of First Amend- 
ment rights other than by seeking the relief sought in this 
action. 

30. Although section 533(b)(4) of the Cable Act pro- 
vides that the FCC may in particular circumstances waive 


_— 


14 


the video programming prohibition for “good cause,” this 
waiver provision is inadequate to protect the plaintiffs’ 
and consumers’ right to free speech and is itself a violation 
of the First Amendment. Congress provided no standards 
or time limits by which the FCC must grant or deny a 
“good cause” waiver, but instead admonished the FCC 
that this “waiver authority should be narrowly construed.” 
The FCC itself has not adopted any standards or time 
limits. As a result, the FCC has unbridled discretion in 
determining whether and when, if ever, a “good cause” 
waiver may be granted. 

31. As applied to the facts and circumstances of the 
video programming services that plaintiffs would provide 
in Alexandria, section 533(b) violates plaintiffs’ right of 
free speech under the First Amendment, as well as the 
First Amendment right of consumers in Alexandria to re- 
ceive plaintiffs’ video programming. 


COUNT Ill 


SECTION 533(b) VIOLATES EQUAL PROTECTION 
BOTH ON ITS FACE AND AS APPLIED 


32. The allegations of paragraphs | through 31 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

33. Section 533(b) is a legislative classification that 
interferes with the plaintiffs’ exercise of the fundamental 
right of freedom of speech. Section 533(b) discriminates 
against telephone companies that wish to provide video 
programming while permitting other, similarly situated en- 
tities to engage in this activity. 

34. Section 533(b) does not apply at all to other 
regulated utility companies, including utilities owning poles 
and conduits, that are permitted to provide video program- 
ming in their service areas. 

35. Section 533(b) also does not apply to the cable 
TV companies which Congress found have “undue market 
power.” As interpreted by the FCC, section 533(b) 


f 


15 


applies only in one direction: against telephone companies 
that seek to provide video programming, and not against 
cable TV companies that seek to provide telephone service. 
Cable TV companies and their affiliates are taking ad- 
vantage of this one-sided prohibition by providing long 
distance telephone services, cellular radio services, per- 
sona! communications services, competitive access services, 
aad other telephone services in the same areas where they 

36. Section 533(b)’s discrimination against telephone 
companies is not necessary to serve any compelling gov- 
ernmental interest. 

37. Section 533(b) violates the equal protection prin- 
ciples embodied in the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, both on its face and as applied to 
the video programming that plaintiffs would provide in 
Alexandria. 

38. Plaintiffs have no adequate or complete remedy 
at law to redress the denial of their Fifth Amendment 
rights other than by seeking the relief sought in this 
action. Unless the defendants are enjoined from enforc- 
ing section 533(b), plaintiffs will continue to suffer sub- 
stantial and irreparable harm. 


COUNT IV 


SECTION 533(b) VIOLATES PLAINTIFFS’ RIGHTS 
TO USE THEIR PROPERTY FOR EXPRESSION 


39. The allegations of paragraphs 1 through 38 are 
incorporated herein by reference. 

40. Plaintiffs propose to use the existing C&P tele- 
phone network, together with certain enhancements, to 
provide video programming in Alexandria. 

41. Section 533(b) violates the rights of plaintiffs to 
harness their property's potential for constitutionally pro- 
tected expression, in violation of both the First and Fifth 
Amendments. 


16 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, plaintiffs pray that the Court enter 
an Order: 


1. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act 
is unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable on its face 
as a violation of the right to free speech guaranteed by 
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; 

2. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act 
is unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable under the 
First Amendment to the United States Constitution as 
applied to plaintiffs’ provision of video programming in 
Alexandria; 

3. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act is 
unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable as a violation 
of the right to the equal protection of the laws under the 
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution; 

4. Declaring that section 533(b) of the Cable Act is 
unconstitutional, void, and unenforceable under the First 
and Fifth Amendments to the United States Constitution 
as a violation of plaintiffs’ rights to use their propery 
for expression; 

5. Permanently enjoining defendants from enforcing 
section 533(b) of the Cable Act in any criminal, civil, 
or administrative proceedings; and 

6. Granting plaintiffs such further relief as the Court 
may deem just and equitable. 


THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC 
TELEPHONE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA 
and BELL ATLANTIC VIDEO SERVICES 
ComMPANY, By Counsel 


LAURENCE H. TRIBE /s/ Wiley R. Wright, Jr. 

JONATHAN MASSEY Witey R. Wricnrt, Jr. 

1525 Massachusetts Avenue VSB #1006 

Cambridge, Mass. 02138 Haze. & Tuomas, P.C. 

(617) 495-4621 510 King Street, Suite 200 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 


(703) 836-8400 


ROBERT A. LEVETOWN 
VSB #23654 

1310 N. Court House Road 
llth Floor 

Arlington, Virginia 22201 
(708) 974-3624 

MARK C. HANSEN 
JOHNSON & GIBBS 

1301 K Street, N.W. 
Suite 800 East 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 682-4532 


Dated: December 17, 1992 


17 


JOHN THORNE 
MICHAEL E. GLOVER 
VSB #25033 

1710 H Street, N.W. 


Richmond, Virginia 23261 
(804) 772-1585 


18 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA 


(Caption Omitted in Printing) 


ANSWER 


Defendants United States of America, the Federal Com- 
munications Commission (the “FCC,” or “Commission” ) 
and Stuart M. Gerson, in his capacity as Interim Acting 
Attorney General,’ answer plaintiffs’ Complaint for De- 
claratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief, dated Decem- 
ber 17, 1992 (the “Complaint”), as follows: 


First Defense 
Plaintiffs lack standing to sue. 


Second Defense 


The Court lacks jurisdiction over Count IV of the 
Complaint. 


Third Defense 


Plaintiffs have failed to exhaust their administrative 
remedies. 
Fourth Defense 
The Complaint fails to state claims for which relief can 
be granted. 
Fifth Defense 


The relief sought by plaintiffs is not authorized by law. 


1 Pursuant to Rule 25(d)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Pro- 
cedure, Mr. Gerson, in his official capacity as Interim Acting At- 
torney General, is automatically substituted as a defendant herein 
for William P. Barr. 


19 


Sixth Defense 


The equitable relief sought by plaintiffs is barred be- 
cause they have an adequate remedy at law. 


Seventh Defense 


Defendants respond to the numbered paragraphs in the 
Complaint as follows: 


1. The first sentence of paragraph one states a conclu- 
sion of law to which no response is required. Sentence two 
contains plaintiffs’ characterization of this action, to which 
no response is required. As to sentence three, deny that 
defendants have stated that 47 U.S.C. § 533(b) (“Sec- 
tion 533(b)”) does not “serve any valid governmental 
purpose”; the remainder of sentence three purports to 
characterize Television Company-Cable Television Cross- 
Ownership Rules: Second Report and Order, Recommenda- 
tion to Congress, and Second Further Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking, 7 FCC Red. 5781 (1992) (the “Second 
Report and Order’), the April 1, 1992 letter from former 
Attorney General William P. Barr, and former Commerce 
Secretary Barbara H. Franklin, to Hon. Edward J. Markey, 
Chairman, Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Fi- 
nance, House Committee on Energy and Commerce (the 
“Markey letter”), and Telephone Company-Cable Tele- 
vision Cross-Ownership Rules: Reply Comments of the 
United States Department of Justice, dated March 13, 
1992 (the “Justice Reply Comments’), to all of which 
this Court is respectfully referred for a full and accurate 
statement of their contents. Admit sentence four. 

2-3. Admit. 

4. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowledge 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of the first 
sentence of paragraph four. Admit the second sentence. 

5. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowledge 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of paragraph five. 

6. Admit. 


20 


7. Admit that the Commission is an agency of the 
Federal Government created by 47 U.S.C. § 154, and is 
charged by the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 
§$ 151 et seq., with the enforcement of Section 533(b). 

8. Admit that the Attorney General of the United 
States is charged with the enforcement of Section 533(b) 
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 401 and other statutory provi- 
sions, 

9. As to sentence one, admit that in 1984 Congress 
passed the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. 
§ 521 et seq. The remainder of sentence one states a con- 
clusion of law to which no response is required. Sentence 
two purports to set out the provisions of Section 533(b) 
(1) and (b)(2), to which the Court is respectfully re- 
ferred for a full and accurate statement of its contents. 

10. Paragraph 10 purports to set out the provisions of 
47 U.S.C. § 522(16), to which the Court is respectfully 
referred for a full and accurate statement of its contents. 

11. Paragraph 11 states conclusions of law to which 
no response is required. 

12. Defendants incorporate herein by reference their 
responses to paragraphs 1-11 of the Complaint. 

13. Sentence one states a conclusion of law to which 
no response is required. Plaintiffs’ use of the term “video 
programmers” is too vague and ambiguous for defendants 
to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of sentence two. 

14-21. Paragraph 14-21 state conclusions of law to 
which no response is required. 

22. Sentence one purports to characterize H.R. Rep. 
No. 549, 95th Cong., 2d Sess. (1984), reprinted in 1984 
U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News (“U.S.C.C.A.N.”) 4655, 
to which the Court is respectfully referred for a full and 
accurate statement of its contents. Deny sentence two. 
Sentences 3-8 purport to characterize the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, P.L. 
102-385. 106 Stat. 1460 (the “1992 Act”), § 2, to which 


21 


Act the Court is respectfully referred for a full and ac- 
curate statement of its contents. 

23. Deny sentence one. As to paragraph 23(a): Sen- 
tence one purports to characterize the Commission’s 
tentative decision in Television Company-Cable Television 
Cross-Ownership Rules: Further Notice of Inquiry and 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 3 FCC Rcd. 5849 
(1988), to which the Court is respectfully referred for 
a full and accurate statement of its contents. Sentences 
two and three purport to characterize the Commission’s 
Second Report and Order (see 41, above), to which the 
Court is respectfully referred for a full and accurate state- 
ment of its contents. Sentences four and five purport to 
characterize the Report of the Federal Communications 
Commission Regarding the President's Regulatory Reform 
Program, dated April 28, 1992, to which the Court is 
respectfully referred for a full and accurate statement of 
its contents. 

As to paragraph 23(b): Sentences one and two pur- 
port to characterize the Markey letter (see € 1, above), 
to which the Court is respectfully referred for a full and 
accurate statement of its contents. Sentence three pur- 
ports to characterize the Justice Reply Comments (see 
id.), to which the Court is respectfully referred for a 
full and accurate statement of its contents. 

24. Paragraph 24 purports to characterize the Com- 
mission’s Second Report and Order and the Justice Reply 
Comments, to which the Court is respectfully referred 
for a full and accurate statement of their contents. 

25. As to the first sentence, admit that defendants will 
continue to enforce Section 533(b); otherwise, deny. The 
second sentence states a conclusion of law to which no 
response is required. 

26. Paragraph 26 states conclusions of law to which 
no response is required. 

27. Defendants incorporate herein by reference their 
responses to paragraphs 1-26 of the Complaint 


22 


28. Defendants lack sufficient information or knowl- 
edge to form a belief as to the truth or falsity of para- 
graph 28. 

29. To the extent the first sentence of paragraph 29 
is intended as a statement of fact, defendants lack suffi- 
cient information or knowledge to form a belief as to 


as to the truth or falsity of sentence two. Sentences three 
and four state conclusions of law to which no response 


Deny sentence three Sentence four states a conclusion 
of law to which no response 1s required. 

3]. Paragraph 3! states a conclusion of law to which 
no response ms required 

32 Defendants incorporate hereim by reference their 
responses to peragraphs |-3! of the Complaint 

7334 Paragraphs 33-34 state conclusions of law to 
wtech no response s required 

7S Sentence one states 2 conclusion of law, to which 
mo response s required. and also purports to characterize 
the 1992 Act. §2. w which the Court is respectfully 
-eferred for a full and accurate statement of is contents 
Sentence two states a conclusson of law to which no re- 
spomse s regurred Pliantifis usc of the term “Iclable 
TY companies and ther affiliates” = too vague and 
amimguous for defendants to form a behef as to the truth 
~ fairy of sentence (ree 

38 Paragraphs 3% state concluwons of aw 
«Tec? & "eEDpOMSe & "ogurTrec 

% Defendants mcorporete berem oy reference ther 
“csponmees to paragrapm®s | ‘4 of the ( omptanm 

“) Defemdans lock saficoent miormatheor of tnow 
~<iee w form « belief a w he wuth of falety & pare 
rape + 


23 


41. Paragraph 41 states a conclusion of law to which 
no response is required. 

The remainder of the Complaint is plaintiffs’ prayer for 
relief, to which no response is required, but to the extent 
a response is deemed necessary, defendants deny that 
plaintiffs are entitled to the relief requested therein, or to_ 
any relief whatsoever. 

Defendants specifically deny any and all allegations of 
plaintiffs’ Complaint not otherwise answered herein. 

WHEREFORE, having fully responded to the Com- 
plaint, defendants pray that this action be dismissed and 
that the Court grant such other and further relief as may 
be appropriate. 

Dated: February 12, 1993 


Respectfully submitted, 


STUART M. GERSON 
Assistant Attorney General 


RICHARD CULLEN 
United States Attorney 


RICHARD PARKER 
Assistant U.S. Attorney 


Of Counsel : s/ James J. Gilligan 


Tueopore C. HIRT 
RENEE LIGHT James J. GILLIGAN 
Acting Genera! Counsel! A 
Sus ANN KANTER U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of the Genera! Civil Division, Room 816 
Counsel 901 E Street, N.W. 
Dona LAMPERT Washington, D.C. 20004 
Of Counsel (202) 514-3358 
Geet Crententinns Counsel for Defendants United 


States of America, Federa! 
at — Ww Communications Commission. 
_ = y and Stuart M. Gerson in his 
Washington, D.C. 20654 

official capacity as Interim 
Acting Attorney Genera! 

