Vveurt, Veo, 


evproirnl 
()) FILED 
\ | 


94 S1nov 419% 
No. 
a nt ee li le le 


IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


HERCULES INCORPORATED 
and 
Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
y Petitioners. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


GREGORY W. HOMER JAMES S. TURNER 

RHONDA D. ORIN SWANKIN & TURNER 

ANDERSON KILL OLICK 1424 16th Street, N.W. 
& OSHINSKY Suite 105 

2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036 

Suite 7500 (202) 462-8800 


Washington, D.C. 20006 


CARTER G. PHILLIPS * 
(202) 728-3100 


SIDLEY & AUSTIN 


WALTER S. ROWLAND 1722 I Street, N.W. 
HERCULES INCORPORATED Suite 900 
Hercules Plaza Washington, D.C. 20006-8795 
Wilmington, Delaware 19894 (202) 736-8000 
(302) 594-5000 

Counsel for Petitioners 


* Counsel of Record 


Wiieow - Evrae Prinrise Co., lec. - 769-0086 - Wasnineron, D.C. 20001 


ms 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Judge Plager, in dissenting from the opinion issued by 
the court of appeals, stated the question as starkly as 
possible: 

If the government compels manufacture of a product 
by private companies, a product known to the gov- 
ernment to be potentially dangerous, and the use by 
the government of the product causes the manufac- 
turers to incur liability, may the government claim 
immunity from the consequences of its conduct? 


(App. 34a-35a). 


Subsumed within this larger question are two distinct 
issues of law which should be addressed by this Court: 


I. Whether the government contractor defense to tort 
claims created by this Court in Boyle v. United Tech- 
nologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988), precludes breach 
of contract claims against the United States that otherwise 
are permissible in accordance with United States v. 
Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918). 


2. Whether the government may compel government 
contractors to produce hazardous products (such as 
Agent Orange) pursuant to the Defense Production Act, 
and then avoid all contractual liability for damages suf- 
fered by the contractors when they subsequently are sued 
in tort actions by third parties allegedly harmed by these 


products. 


(i) 


3 All of the parties are listed in the caption, Pursuant to 
Rule 29.1, Petitioners. make the following disclosures: 

1. Hercules Incorporated has no parent company and 
has no subsidiaries or affiliates that are publicly ‘traded. 


2. Wm. T. Thompson Company has no parent com- 
pany and has no subsidiaries or affiliates that are publicly 
traded. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


| Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED. 6.....-.-.-is----esscs---soonsteoeseeees a ll 
PARTIES TO PROCEEDING BELOW ........................ ii 
TATE TE Gi GOT TINO Satins o.no.ccen.-nasscaiedsisccceceeseoeceeeee iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ..................0:...c..cc0-eceseresesoeeee iv 
I, MII - is siecaciegeedtuncsupeemneneereanssseatecesesecsccecorecss 1 
a saeeseane cocannecresanssooeecoooscorevoets 2 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED .................... 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ..............---.-----------00-e0-e0+e0 2 
A. The Compelled Production of Agent Orange...... 2 

B. The Agent Orange Litigation ................................. 4 

C. The Government’s Escape From Accountability.. 7 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION........ 10 


I. THE COURT OF APPEALS’ DETERMINA- 
TION CONFLICTS WITH ESTABLISHED 
CONTRACT PRINCIPLES AND _ IMPOR- 
TANT POLICY CONSIDERATIONS ................. 12 


Il. THE COURT OF APPEALS’ EFFORTS TO 
APPLY CONCEPTS AND POLICIES DEVEL- 
OPED IN TORT LAW TO THE ARENA OF 
GOVERNMENT CONTRACT LAW WILL 
CREATE UNNECESSARY CONFUSION AND 
UNCERTAINTY .................2.20.00--c-ncecerreevereesoecoscoeeee 17 


Ill. THE COURT OF APPEALS IGNORED THE 
PLAIN LANGUAGE OF THE DEFENSE 
PRODUCTION ACT REQUIRING THE GOV- 
ERNMENT TO REIMBURSE PETITIONERS 
FOR THE DAMAGES THEY SUFFERED AS 
A CONSEQUENCE OF MANUFACTURING 
AGENT ORANGE 19 


CONCLUSION 22 


(iii) 


J iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES Page 


In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 
100 F.R.D. 718 (E.D.N.Y. 1983), aff’d, 818 F.2d 
145 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 


CORD nthcsiertuisscliteii cei Rilate tsi et aie 5 
In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 

565 F. Supp. 1263 (E.D.N.Y. 1988) ........ 5 
In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 

580 F. Supp. 690 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) 16 


In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 
611 F. Supp. 1223 (E.D.N.Y. 1985), aff’d, 818 
F.2d 187 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 
ee ee ee 6 
In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 
597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984), aff'd, 818 
F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 


RR Pe eT 3 
Ahern v. Central Pacific Freight Lines, 846 F.2d 
SE Gees Ge CI metittendccenotidie 15 


American Ship Building Co. v. United States, 207 
Ct. Cl. 1002 (1975), rev’d on other grounds, 654 


pase ve. Coe. Ge Bee ii. es 18 
Bird & Sons, Inc. v. United States, 190 Ct. Cl. 426 

EC ee nee ae eS ene 18 
Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 

CIID eikhinticehdihiitietiliasdtilaaatasiitelaiidiae ii ttt passim 
Cardinal Chemical Co. v. Morton International, 

Inc., —— U.S. ——, 118 S. Ct. 1967 (1998) ........ 10 
Damanti v. A/S Inger, 314 F.2d 395 (2d Cir.), 

cert. denied, 375 U.S. 884 (19638) ............ 14 
Gardner v. Brown, 5 F.8d 1456 (Fed. Cir. 1998), 

cert. granted, 114 S. Ct. 1896 (1994) _..... 10 
Ivy v. Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co., 114 

S. Ct. 1125 (1994) 7 
Jae Sup Chung v. Dow Chemical Co., No. C-94- 

25138 (N.D. Cal.) 7 


Janneh v. GAF Corp., 887 F.2d 482 (2d Cir. 
1989), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 865 (1990) .......... 15 
Johns-Manville Corp. v. United States, 13 Cl. Ct. 
72 (1987), vacated on jurisdictional grounds, 
855 F.2d 1571 (Fed. Cir. 1988) 12 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 
Page 
Osborn v. Bank of United States, 22 U.S. 738 
(UBBE) .n.n.aneaenennsecinvecsnecsasscseeceneneesososnesvenseencenenenenense - 15 
Parfait v. Jahncke Service, Inc., 484 F.2d 296 
(5th Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 415 U.S. 957 


(19FA) .n.n.n.ceo-cecececececcsvnereevensesnsesesocesesesersencscsesnsnenesonee 14 
Peter v. United States, 6 Cl. Ct. 768 (1984) -.......... 18 
Ryan Stevedoring Co. v. Pan-Atlantic Steamship 
Corp., 350 U.S. 124 (1956) -.........--------------------- 20 
Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 781 F. Supp. 934 
(E.D.N.Y. 1992) -.....-----------cececeseecseseseessceseceneesseenes 7 
United States v. McInnes, 556 F.2d 436 (9th Cir. 
|, | nnn ee 15 
United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918).......- passim 
STATUTES 
2B U.S.C. § 1254 (1) .....-.-----------ececeneeeeeneenecenseeeseennnnnnnees 2 
28 U.S.C. § 1295 (a) (3B) .....-.-------------c-eceeceeneseseeseenenneneees 10 
50 U.S.C. §§ 2061, et seq. ........--------------eeee-eeneneeneneenennees passim 
Bred, FR Cl. P. GB ....-.-----<00--c---es--noececcesceeeseseeeccsensees states 5 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Peter H. Schuck, Agent Orange on Trial (enlarged 
©. 1987) ........-----en-cn-ce-ceneeneeneennsnesnnsnssenennnnncenennasnsenees 2 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 351, cmt. ¢ 
(1981) .........----nscsneceeesernenenersencnsesosnnsnsnsasesnensssnsnnsnseens 14 


Ye Soi 3 ba * Bru. t ratei © 
> laa, eteets ‘ata 


WAR 


ok , 
ate ME 
PAs | 


~ 
oo 

“s 

> 
x 

” 

bial 
el 
b 


LD er om tee 


) IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 


HERCULES INCORPORATED 
and 
Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
y Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Hercules Incorporated (“Hercules”) and Wm. T. 
Thompson Company (“Thompson”) hereby petition for 
a writ of certiorari to review the judgment and opinion 
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal 
Circuit, entered on May 4, 1994, in the consolidated 
appeals of Hercules Incorporated v. The United States 
and Wm. T. Thompson Company v. The United States. 


= 


2 


Hercules (App. 47a-80a)* is reported at 25 Cl. Ct. 616. 
The opinion of that same court granting the United States’ 
motion for summary judgment against Thompson (App. 
82a-115a) is reported at 26 Cl. Ct. 17. The divided 
opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Federal Circuit affirming the Claims Court ( App. 1a-46a) 
is reported at 24 F.3d 188. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on 
May 4, 1994. Rehearing was denied on July 14, 1994. 
(App. 117a-121a). On September 26, 1994, the Chief 
Justice extended the time for filing a petition for a writ 
of certiorari until November 4, 1994. The jurisdiction of 
this Court is invoked pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


Section 707 of the Defense Production Act, as 
amended, 50 U.S.C. § 2157, provides as follows: 


No person shall be held liable for damages or penal- 
ties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or 
indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, 
or order issued pursuant to this Act. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
A. The Compelled Production of Agent Orange 


This case involves the most recent chapter in the long 
story surrounding the United States’ use of a defoliant 
known as Agent Orange during the Vietnam War. Peti- 
tioners are two chemical companies which, during the 
1960’s, were compelled by the United States under the 
authority of the Defense Production Act, 50 U.S.C. 


’ All citations te “App. ——” refer to the Appendix filed con- 
temporaneously herewith pursuant to United States Supreme Court 
Rule 14(k). | | 


* For a thorough and insightful telling of this story, see Peter 
H. Schuck, Agent Orange om Trial (enlarged ed. 1987) 


er eet p 


Pe ee eee 


3 


§§ 2061, et seqg., to produce and sell Agent Orange to 
the Department of Defense. (Jt. App. 0097-0098).° 
While Hercules and Thompson had some experience in 
producing herbicides for commercial use, neither com- 
pany had ever produced defoliants and neither company 
had any knowledge of the hazards, if any, that might 
accompany the military use of such defoliants. (Jt. App. 
0544, 0546-0548, 0448, 0431, 0432). 


The United States, in contrast, had engaged in years 
of study about the use of defoliants for military applica- 
tions and possessed a wealth of information pertaining to 
the potential hazards associated with the military use of 
such compounds. The United States never disclosed this 
information to petitioners. Instead, the United States 
developed and provided to Hercules and Thompson pre- 
cise specifications for the production of Agent Orange.* 
The United States periodically inspected Hercules’ and 
Thompson’s plants to verify that the composition of the 
Agent Orange produced met these specifications. While 
the United States knew as early as 1959 that the manu- 
facture of Agent Orange according to these specifications 
would produce a highly toxic by-product known as 
“dioxin,” Hercules and Thompson were ignorant of this 
fact when they began manufacturing Agent Orange pur- 
suant to the United States’ specifications. (Jt. App. 0446- 
0447, 0450, 0459, 0465, 0467, 0489). 


All of the Agent Orange produced by Thompson and 
Hercules was provided to the United States under “rated 
orders” pursuant to the Defense Production Act. See /n 
Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 597 F. 
Supp. 740, 844 (E.D.N.Y. 1984), aff'd, 818 F.2d 145 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). 


* All citations t» “Jt. App. ——” refer to the Joint Appendix 
filed in the proceedings before the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit. 


‘These specifications included the requirement that no warning 


4 


Thompson and Hercules would have been subject to civil 
and criminal penalties, as well as mandatory injunctions, 
if they had not complied with the United States’ demands. 
These demands eventually resulted in the virtual takeover 
of Hercules’ and Thompson’s production facilities, despite 
the protestations of both Thompson and Hercules. Indeed, 
in March of 1967 the United States Department of De- 
fense directed Hercules to divert its entire herbicide pro- 
duction capacity to the manufacture of Agent Orange. 
The United States rejected Hercules’ request for some 
relief from the government’s rated orders so that it could 
satisfy its pre-existing commercial commitments. 


Thompson went to great lengths to attempt to avoid 
the compelled production of Agent Orange altogether. 
Among other things, the President of Thompson person- 
ally flew to Washington, D.C. and petitioned the Depart- 
ment of Defense to release Thompson from the rated 
orders so that it would not have to manufacture Agent 
Orange at all. These efforts, however, proved unavailing 
and Thompson was ordered under the Defense Production 
Act to produce Agent Orange. (App. 4a). 


B. The Agent Orange Litigation 


In the late 1970s, Hercules and Thompson, along with 
other Agent Orange manufacturers, were sued in a class 
action by thousands of veterans and others seeking dam- 
ages for health problems resulting from exposure to Agent 
Orange (“Agent Orange Litigation”). The United States 
was brought into the case by the defendant manufacturers 
as a third-party defendant. The Agent Orange plaintiffs 
alleged that Agent Orange produced in accordance with 
government cations contained dioxin as a by- 
product, which was alleged to be one of the most poten- 
tially ‘toxic substances known to man. The. plaintiffs 
sought up to $40 billion in damages. (Jt. App. 0510). 


a 
2 
‘= 


5 


grounds that they were not subject to suit because, in 
manufacturing Agent Orange, they complied in full with 
government specifications, This defense, now known as 
the “government contractor defense,” would subsequently 
be recognized by a sharply divided Court in Boyle v. 
United Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988), 
cert. denied, 488 U.S. 994 (1988) (“Boyle”). Although 
Judge Pratt, the first district judge assigned to the case, 
wrote a decision that granted petitioners’ motion, /n Re 
Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 565 F. Supp. 
1263 (E.D.N.Y. 1983), Judge Weinstein took over the 
Agent Orange litigation and withdrew Judge Pratt’s opin- 
ion before it was entered as a formal judgment.® There- 
after, Judge Weinstein ruled that Hercules and Thompson 
would remain as defendants in the litigation and that the 
viability of the government contractor defense could not 
be determined on summary judgment, but would have 
to be determined by the jury during the trial on liability. 
In Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 100 
F.R.D. 718, 723 (E.D.N.Y. 1983), aff'd, 818 F.2d 145 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). 


Rather than risk a catastrophic judgment and incur 
enormous attorneys’ fees and litigation costs in the proc- 
ess, even if successful, Hercules and Thompson joined the 
rest of the defendant companies in their decision to settle 
the matter. The United States was invited to participate 
in the settlement negotiations, but refused to do so. In 
Re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 597 F. 
Supp. at 879. On May 7, 1984, on the eve of trial, 
Hercules, Thompson, and all of the other defendant com- 
panies settled the Agent Orange class action for a total 
of $180 million to be divided among the defendants on 
a market share basis. Hercules’ share of the settlement 
was $18,772,568. Thompson’s share of the settlement 
was $3,096,597. There is no issue at this point about 
the reasonableness of the amount of the settlement or 


5In the absence of the entry of a formal, judgment, Judge 
Pratt’s decision was, of course, a legal nullity. Fed. R. Civ. P. 58. 


a a. AVF 


6 


petitioners’ contribution thereto. Also, during the litiga- 
ton, Hercules incurred defense costs in excess of $6 mil- 
lion. Thompson incurred defense fees in excess of $3 
million. 


The district court affirmed the Agent Orange settle- 
ment as reasonable and fair to the plaintiff class four 
months later. At that time, the district court held that, 
if Hercules and Thompson had not settled, “there was a 
possibility of an ultimate liability with claims totalling 
billions of dollars.” In Re Agent Orange Product Liability 
Litigation, 597 F. Supp. at 749 (emphasis added). 


Some of the Agent Orange plaintiffs opted out of the 
class action settlement and continued to press their in- 
dividual claims. The petitioners later moved for summary 
judgment against these individuals on various grounds, 
including the government contractor defense. However, 
the United States, which was still a third-party defendant 
in the case, vehemently opposed the assertion of this 
defense, arguing in its brief in opposition to the motion 
for summary judgment that “there exists substantial and 
convincing evidence that establishes not only that there 
are indeed genuine issues of material fact directly bearing 
on the validity of each and every contention relating to 
the government contract defense, but also that the defense 
does not further the policies it purports to serve.” (Jt. 
App. 0664) (emphasis added). Despite the government’s 
opposition, the court awarded summary judgment against 
the plaintiffs who had opted out from the class. In Re 
Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 611 F. Supp. 
1223 (E.D.N.Y. 1985), aff'd, 818 F.2d 187 (2d Cir. 
1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 


_ Even though Hercules and Thompson resolved the 
Agent Orange litigation on comparatively favorable terms, 
the cost of the settlements and the legal fees seriously 
affected the financial status of both Hercules and Thomp- 
son. In fact, Thompson ultimately was forced to cease 
operations due to the threat of future liabilities stemming 


7 


from its manufacture of Agent Orange. Both companies 
continue to defend Agent Orange tort claims at consider- 
able expense.® 


C. The Government’s Escape From Accountability 


On June 8, 1990 and May 7, 1990 respectively, Her- 
cules and Thompson independently commenced actions in 
the United States Claims Court seeking reimbursement 
from the United States for the settlement and defense costs 
they had incurred in connection with the Agent Orange 
litigation. Their complaints set forth several different 
claims for relief based on a contractual breach by the 
government, plus a claim under the Defense Production 
Act based on indemnification. 


Petitioners’ principal contract claim was based on United 
States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918) (“Spearin”). 
Hercules and Thompson each alleged that the government 


6 Indeed, despite the supposed invincibility of the government 
contractor defense, Hercules and other Agent Orange manufactur- 
ers continue to face a wide range of claims stemming from their 
manufacture of Agent Orange for the government. Those claims 
include efforts to have the entire Agent Orange settlement agree- 
ment thrown out and the original class action reinstated, Jvy v. 
Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co., 114 S. Ct. 1125 (1994) (deny- 
ing certiorari in case urging reopening of the Agent Orange liti- 
gation); independent actions by other Vietnam veterans who 
assert that their claims did not arise until after the settlement in 
the Agent Orange litigation, e.g., Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., 781 
F. Supp. 984 (E.D.N.Y. 1992); and claims by civilians allegedly 
exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam who were outside the scope 
of the Agent Orange class as certified by Judge Weinstein, e.g., 
Ryan v. Dow Chemical Co., supra. On May 17, 1994, a group of 
Korean Army veterans who served in Viet Nam moved to inter- 
vene in the original Agent Orange litigation for the purposes of 
participating in the settlement fund. Subsequently, on August 2, 
1994, twenty-four Korean veterans, out of some 320,000 Koreans 
who served in Vietnam, filed suit in federal district court against 
the same Agent Orange defendants seeking damages for personal 
injuries allegedly suffered from exposure to Agent Orange. Jae 
Sup Chung v. Dow Chemical Co., No. C-94-2518 (N.D. Cal. filed 
August 2, 1994). 


8 


breached a contractual warranty of specifications by re- 
quiring them to manufacture a product, pursuant to gov- 
ernment design specifications, that the United States (but 
not petitioners) knew would contain a dangerous by- 
product (dioxin). Those specifications ultimately proved 
to be the basis for veteran plaintiffs’ claims that Agent 
Orange was defective and thereby subjected Hercules and 
Thompson to potential third-party liability of an enormous 
magnitude.” 


The claim for indemnification under the Defense Pro- 
duction Act was predicated on the plain language of 50 
U.S.C. § 2157, which specifically provides that “[n]o 
person shall be held liable for damages or penalties for 
any act or -failure to act resulting directly or indirectly 
from compliance with a rule, regulation, or order issued 
pursuant to this Act.” Because Thompson and Hercules 
had produced Agent Orange under an “order issued pur- 
suant to this Act,” this provision evidenced a clear Con- 
gressional intent to indemnify petitioners against any 
losses they incurred as a result of the Agent Orange 
litigation. 


Prior to any discovery taking place and solely on the 
basis of the pleadings, the Claims Court dismissed the 
complaints of Hercules and Thompson on summary judg- 
ment. The trial court held that all of the claims asserted 
were barred as a matter of law. (App. 47a-115a). 


A divided panel of the Federal Circuit affirmed the 
dismissal on the grounds that the government contractor 
defense would have provided Hercules and Thompson 
with an absolute defense to the claims of the plaintiff class 
in the Agent Orange litigation had that matter been 


Other claims for sellef ervse fvean the Goeveriesint's tireach of 
ne ee ee ee ee 
ing the povential hazards of Agent Orange and dioxin; 


F 
¢: 


9 


litigated to a conclusion. In particular, the Federal Cir- 
cuit held: 


There can be no serious doubt that had the class 
action Agent Orange Litigation proceeded to termi- 
nation, no liability would have been imposed against 
Hercules or Thompson. 


(App. 23a). The court of appeals thus held that the cost 
of settlement incurred by Hercules and Thompson was 
purely voluntary and had nothing to do with any breach 
by the United States of a warranty of specifications.® 


As to the claim for indemnity under the Defense Pro- 
duction Act, the court of appeals concluded that, while 
the plain language of the act grants indemnity as a quid 
pro quo for the action the contractor is compelled to take, 
the ordinary practice of indemnifying against the costs 
of delay arising from requiring priority of performance 
for the government over private customers is the limit of 
the indemnity. Accordingly, costs that arise from com- 
pulsion to accept performance in and of itself are not 
included within the scope of the indemnification. (App. 
28a-33a). 


Judge Plager dissented from the panel’s disposition of 
each of the claims asserted by petitioners, concluding 
that “the law affords substantially more justice than the 
majority concedes.” (App. 34a). After tracing the con- 
voluted and complicated history of “the so-called ‘gov- 
ernment contractor defense,’” Judge Plager observed that 
the majority’s suggestion “that the evolving government 


8 As to petitioners’ claim that the government breached its 
obligation to disclose superior knowledge, the court of appeals 
created a new rule that the doctrine of superior knowledge only 
extends to undisclosed information which increases costs during 
performance of a contract. “cagerciahes: terete aererepanaanasher 


10 


contractor defense would clearly dictate the outcome in 
the original Agent Orange litigation seems to me to be 
unwarranted historical revisionism, out of place in the 
decision before us in this case.” (App. 40a).° Similarly, 
Judge Plager viewed the majority’s conclusion on the 
claim for indemnification under the Defense Production 
Act as “a non sequitur,” and one which “ignores the lan- 
guage of the statute.” (App. 44a). 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION ” 


Judge Plager’s dissent plainly and eloquently states the 
equities involved in petitioners’ effort to recover for the 
losses they suffered as a result of the government’s deci- 
sion to “seize” their companies, and compel them “to 
engage in a dangerous enterprise.” (App. 44a, 46a). It 
cannot seriously be disputed that petitioners were harmed 
by the government’s actions in mandating the manu- 


® As to the majority’s basis for dismissing the superior knowl- 
edge claim asserted by petitioners, Judge Plager commented that 
“(t)here is neither prior authority nor present reason to limit the 
doctrine of superior knowledge to require compensation only for 
the difficulties incurred during performance. . . . if the Govern- 
ment’s incomplete or misleading information, or its particular 
specification of its requirements, imposes losses, now or later, on 
the contractor, then the Government, like any other contractor, 
should not escape responsibility.” (App. 41a, 48a). 


10 The Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction over final deci- 
sions of the United States Court of Federal Claims. See 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1295(a) (3). Accordingly, there will rarely, if ever, be a conflict 
among the Circuits regarding issues raised in cases filed in the 
United States Court of Federal Claims. However, because the 
Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction over the United States 
Court of Federal Claims and certain other federal courts, the 
rules that the Federal Circuit applies are “a matter of special 
importance to the entire Nation.” Cardinal Chemical Co. v. Morton 
International, Inc., —— U.S. ——, 118 8. Ct. 1967, 1971 (1998). 
This Court has not hesitated to grant review in cases involving 
issues of recurring importance to the relationship between the 
federal government and private litigants. See ¢.g., Gardner v. 
Brown, 6 F.3d 1456 (Fed. Cir. 1998), cert. granted, 114 8. Ct. 
1396 (1994). 


11 


facture of a product pursuant to specifications which the 
government supplied and which it knew would result in 
the generation of a dangerous by-product (dioxin). The 
government’s actions led inexorably to the Agent Orange 
litigation, and just as inexorably to the settlement of that 
matter on the eve of trial. The only dispute is whether 
the law provides a means by which this wrong can be 
redressed. 


According to the court of appeals, the law does not 
provide a remedy for Thompson and Hercules because 
petitioners “volunteered” to suffer the damages which 
inevitably flowed from the government’s conscription of 
their manufacturing facilities. The majority engages in 
this “historical revisionism” (App. 40a), to achieve what 
it sees aS a necessary symmetry between tort and contract 
principals: where sovereign immunity would preclude any 
private tort claims against the United States as a result 
of the government’s discretionary activities, then innocent 
manufacturers compelled to assist in those activities must 
also be precluded from redress in contract against the 
United States for the damages the manufacturers suffer 
when those same tort claims are asserted against the 
manufacturers. 


In the name of protecting the government fisc, the 
court of appeals denies petitioners the justice they de- 
serve. The court forces this result by looking past the 
reasonableness of the settlement and conducting an in- 
quiry into the underlying tort. This adventure undermines 
the established policy of encouraging reasonable settle- 
ment of litigation. This decision thus threatens, in the 
long run, to increase the costs of government contracting, 
costs which will ultimately be borne by the United States. 
This decision also threatens to involve the courts in con- 
voluted efforts by the government to bar contract claims 
with tort defenses, creating inappropriate arguments about 
settlements entered with good cause and in good faith. 
The court concludes that Hercules and Thompson must 
bear the crippling costs of redressing the veterans for th. 


12 


government’s acts because it misapprehends Boyle to re- 
quire a result which insulates the government. 


Not only do established contract law principles and 
policies require that petitioners be able to recover against 
the United States the damages they suffered as a result 
of the United States’ breach of its contractual obligations, 
but the explicit language of the Defense Production Act 
establishes that Congress likewise believed the govern- 
ment should be held responsible for these same damages. 


I. THE COURT OF APPEALS’ DETERMINATION 
CONFLICTS WITH ESTABLISHED CONTRACT 
PRINCIPLES AND IMPORTANT POLICY CON- 
SIDERATIONS. 


The court of appeals incorrectly held that Hercules and 
Thompson were barred from suing the government for 
breach of an implied warranty of specifications because 
they settled the Agent Orange litigation. This decision 
is in direct conflict with the contractual right of action 
against the government that this Court established for 


government contractors decades ago in Spearin, 248 U.S. 
132. 


The elements necessary for a contractor to bring a 
claim against the government under Spearin are as fol- 
lows: 


(1) The specifications under the contract are design 
specifications, i.e., they set forth in precise de- 
tails the materials to be employed and the man- 
ner in which the work is to be performed; 


(2) The design specifications were devised and 
drafted by the government; and 

(3) The government had superior knowledge con- 

cerning that part of the design specification 

causing the defect in the product contracted for. 

Johns-Manville Corp. v. United States, 13 Cl. Ct. 72, 

118-120 (1987), vacated on jurisdictional grounds, 855 


13 


F.2d 1571 (Fed. Cir. 1988). Where this showing is 
made, Spearin stands for the proposition that the con- 
tractor can recover damages from the United States for 
harm caused to the contractor by the defective specifica- 
tions. 


Hercules and Thompson both established all of the 
necessary elements for a Spearin claim against the gov- 
ernment. It has been judicially determined in the Agent 
Orange litigation that the government had mandated de- 
sign specifications for Agent Orange; that Hercules and 
Thompson had followed these specifications exactly; that 
the alleged defect in Agent Orange that gave rise to the 
Agent Orange litigation arose directly from the specifica- 
tions; and that this defect was known to the government 
at the time it compelled Hercules and Thompson to pro- 
duce Agent Orange. As damages, Hercules and Thomp- 
son asserted the costs of the Agent Orange litigation set- 
tlements and their legal fees. 


The court of appeals held that a Spearin claim was 
barred because Hercules and Thompson could not prove 
causation between their damages and the breach of war- 
ranty. Specifically, the court held that, had Hercules and 
Thompson pursued the Agent Orange litigation to com- 
pletion, eventually a court would have determined that 
the government contractor defense as later articulated in 
Boyle barred the imposition of tort liability against them. 
Thus, by settling with the class—instead of waiting for 
the jury or the court to absolve them of any liability— 
Hercules and Thompson voluntarily assumed liability for 
which the government was not responsible.” 


Significantly, the court of appeals did not and could not 
cite any legal authority in support of this unprecedented 
decision. Indeed, the court’s holding directly conflicts 


11 Notably, had Hercules and Thompson submitted to trial and 
jost, their combined claim against the Government now could total 
billions of dollars, rather than $24 million. See In Re Agent Orange 
Product Liability Litigation, 597 F. Supp. at 749. 


14 


with established principles of contract law. In particular, 
where a breach by one party to a contract results in 
claims by third persons against the other party to the 
contract, the party sued is not required to litigate the 
third-party c ims to conclusion and lose in order to 
recover damages associated with the third-party claims. 
Rather, “in furtherance of the policy favoring private 
settlement of disputes, the injured party is also allowed 
to recover the reasonable amount of any settlement to 
avoid litigation, together with the costs of settlement.” 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 351, cmt. c (1981). 


This rule allows parties like petitioners, “caught in the 
middle” between personal injury plaintiffs and other par- 
ties responsible for the injuries, to settle the third-party 
claims and then recover in contract the costs of that 
settlement against the other party where they can demon- 
strate 1) they were potentially liable to the third parties 
as a result of the conduct of the other party to the con- 
tract and 2) the settlement was reasonable based on the 
size of the possible recovery and the probability of the 
claimant’s success. Contrary to the holdings below, this 
is a factual inquiry unsuitable for disposition on summary 
judgment. 


For example, in Parfait v. Jahncke Service, Inc., 484 
F.2d 296, 304 (Sth Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 415 USS. 
957 (1974), one company obtained reimbursement from 
another company for the cost of settling a lawsuit brought 
against it by an employee of the second company. Reim- 
bursement was granted on grounds that a showing of the 
first company’s potential liability to the employee was 
enough to justify the settlement. The application of this 
policy is so clear that in Damanti v. A/S Inger, 314 F.2d 


a jury finding that there was no underlying third-party 
liability, on grounds that the shipowner faced potential 
liability at the time that it settled. The decision below 


15 


manifestly conflicts with these decisions concerning the 
proper contract principles that should apply here. 
Moreover, the court of appeals’ decision in this case 
reflects a profound lack of appreciation for the realities 
of litigation which will undermine the strong judicial 
policy favoring settlements. See Janneh v. GAF Corp., 
887 F.2d 432, 435 (2d Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 498 
U.S. 865 (1990) (“Litigants, courts, and Congress view 
settlement as a positive force, indispensable to judicial 
administration.” ); Ahern v. Central Pacific Freight Lines, 
846 F.2d 47, 48 (9th Cir. 1988) (quoting from United 
States v. McInnes, 556 F.2d 436, 441 (9th Cir. 1977) ) 
(“there is an overriding public interest in settling and 
/ quieting litigation”). It is impossible to know whether 
; the government contractor defense would have prevailed 
against the ciass in the Agent Orange litigation had it 
been submitted to the jury after trial. As stated succinctly 
by the dissenting judge below: “I do not know what the 
ultimate decision in the Agent Orange litigation would 
have been on this issue, nor does anyone.” (App. 40a). 
Obviously, it was the existence of that uncertainty at the 
time that legitimately motivated the parties to settle.” To 


ie, 


12 Contrary to the court of appeals’ holding, there are many rea- 
sons why, rightly or wrongly, the government contractor defense 
might have failed, First, the government contractor defense is a 
fact-specific, affirmative defense to liability. Boyle, 487 U.S. at 
514 (“whether the facts establish the conditions for the [govern- 
ment contractor] defense is a question for the jury.”) It does 
not immunize government contractors from being sued in tort 
actions, in the way that sovereign immunity precludes the asser- 
tion of such actions against the Government. See Osborn v. Bank 
of United States, 22 U.S. 738 (1824). There is no guarantee that 
a jury or court would have concluded that the defense applied to 
Hercules and Thompson. 


the test articulated by this Court in Boyle would cer- 


16 


penalize petitioners for their reasonable decision is unfair 
and distorts the litigation process in ways that can only 
Cause a greater drain on scarce judicial resources. 


However, if the court of appeals’ decision is permitted 
to .tand, every time a government contractor with a 
potential Spearin claim against the government is sued by 
a third-party plaintiff, the contractor will face a Hobson’s 
choice. If the government contractor settles tiie third- 
party action, it will face the possibility that a federal 
court will decide in hindsight that it could have avoided 
any liability in the third-party action by litigating to con- 
clusion the government contractor defense. If the govern- 
ment contractor does not settle, it will risk greater ex- 
posure and expense by proceeding to trial on the third- 
party claim. If the contractor prevails in the third-party 
action, no matter what the basis, the government will 
argue that the contractor has suffered no damages from 
any breach of warranty by the government. If the con- 
tractor loses, the government will argue that the con- 
tractor’s failure to establish the government contractor 
defense in the underlying tort ac.ion precludes it from 
establishing the elements of a Spcarin claim against the 
United States. In sum, the decision below severely under- 
mines the Spearin claim without any discussion or even 


eral interests” are involved. 487 U.S. at 505-07, 511-12. The Fed- 
eral Circuit in fact bases its reasoning upon the perils of govern- 
ment liability under state law. Yet the liability petitioners faced 
in federal district court was expressly not based upon state law, but 
a “national consensus law.” See In Re Agent Orange Product Lia- 
bility Litigation, 580 F. Supp. 690 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). Federal inter- 
ests were tested by federal law in this matter, and no preemption 
issue existed in this litigation. Boyle would thus not have insulated 
petitioners. (App. 37a-40a). 

Third, this defense failed Hercules and Thompson when they 
filed their motions for summary judgment against the class and 
the Government itself vehemently opposed the defense on factual 
and policy grounds when Hercules and Thompson later raised it 
against the opt-out plaintiffs in the Agent Orange litigation. 


SOE Rr ee ae. dee 


Se ee 


17 
apparent recognition of that fact. For that reason alone, 
review by this Court is warranted. 

In response to the holding of the court of appeals, 
government contractors will be required either to raise 
their prices to cover costs which will no longer be recov- 
erable in contract from the United States, or refuse con- 
tracts altogether, thereby restricting potential competition 
which will likewise increase costs. This is precisely the 
result which Boyle sought to avoid. Boyle, 487 U.S. at 
507. Given the importance of this issue to the relation- 
ship between the United States and its contractors, the 
Court should grant the petition. 


Il. THE COURT OF APPEALS’ EFFORTS TO APPLY 
CONCEPTS AND POLICIES DEVELOPED IN TORT 
LAW TO THE ARENA OF GOVERNMENT CON- 
TRACT LAW WILL CREATE UNNECESSARY 
CONFUSION AND UNCERTAINTY. 


Established boundaries exist between claims against the 
United States sounding in contract versus those sounding 
in tort. In the area of tort claims as governed by the 
Federal Tort Claims Act, a complex jurisprudence has 
developed around the government’s waiver of sovereign 
immunity and the numerous exceptions and procedural 
and substantive limitations to that waiver. The court of 
appeals’ efforts to import that jurisprudence into the law 
of government contracts under the Tucker Act is funda- 
mentally flawed, constitutes judicial legislation, and threat- 
ens to create untoward confusion and complexity in gov- 
ernment contracting relations as the courts struggle to 
accommodate a linkage between tort and contract prin- 
ciples which should not exist. 


Unlike tort claims against the government where no 
privity exists and an affirmative waiver of sovereign im- 
munity is required, Tucker Act cases arise between par- 
ties in privity; the United States waives its protections 
against parties with whom it enters into contractual rela- 
tions. Where the breach and the damage are within the 

contemplation of the contracting parties, no 


18 


further analysis of sovereign immunity need be made. 
The court in a contract matter simply enforces the agree- 
ment between the parties in the = of established prin- 
ciples of contractlaw. 


A suit which arises primarily from a contractual under- 
taking is not barred merely because the negligence of the 
United States ultimately results in the case developing a 
“tort aspect.” American Ship Building Co. v. United 
States, 207 Ct. Cl. 1002 (1975), rev’d other grounds, 
654 F.2d 75 (Ct. Cl. 1981); Bird & Sons, Inc. v. United 
States, 190 Ct. Cl. 426 (1970). This Court in Boyle 
noted the contract basis of such actions, stating that the 
“liability may be styled one in tort, but it arises out of 
performance of the contract.” 487 U.S. at 505. The 
United States is without question answerable for its con- 
tract breaches, even when the contract involves purchases 
and designs which are protected from tort claims by third 
parties under the same discretionary function exception in 
which Boyle grounded the government contractor defense. 
As recognized by the court in Peter v. United States, 6 
Cl. Ct. 768, 778 (1984): 


The policy considerations that motivate the sovereign 

. do not create an umbrella that shields the Gov- 
ernment from liability for breach of valid contracts 
customarily entered. A multitude of defense con- 
tractors would be surprised to be told that contracts 
for ship construction, aircraft production and muni- 
tions testing were unenforceable because they were 
related to defense and foreign policy goals. 


Where the contractor’s suit against the government is 
for breach of contract, the parties, the injury, and the 
cause of action are different than in third-party tort prac- 
tice. If the contractor makes the necessary showing to 
recover damages under established contract principles, in- 
cluding a showing that the government has breached its 
obligations under the contract and that the contractor. has 
incurred damages stemming from-.a third-party lawsuit 
caused by the government’s ny ae 9 it is simply immaterial 
that the existence of.a tort defense (the government con- 


i9 


tractor defense) might have prevented the contractor from 
being further damaged.” 


Ill, THE COURT OF APPEALS IGNORED THE PLAIN 
LANGUAGE OF THE DEFENSE PRODUCTION 
ACT REQUIRING THE GOVERNMENT TO REIM- 
BURSE PETITIONERS FOR THE DAMAGES THEY 
SUFFERED AS A CONSEQUENCE OF MANUFAC- 
TURING AGENT ORANGE. 


Consistent with the principles discussed above, Con- 
gress itself clearly addressed the issue of how liabilities 
should be allocated when the government and its con- 
tractors face damage claims together as a result of the 
government-compelled actions of the contractor. Con- 
gress not only left the Tucker Act free of exceptions to 
contractual liability based on the government’s discretion- 
ary activities, but Congress also stated unequivocally that 
a contractor compelled to perform a contract by the gov- 
ernment is held harmless for any third-party liabilities 
arising as a result. 


Specifically, the Defense Production Act, under whose 
authority the government compelled petitioners to accept 
and perform the Agent Orange production contracts, au- 
thorizes the President to: 


require that performance under contracts or orders 
(other than contracts of employment) which he 
deems necessary or appropriate to promote the na- 
tional defense shall take priority over performance 
of any other contract or order and, for the purpose 
of assuring such priority, to require acceptance and 
performance of such contracts or orders in prefer- 
ence to other contracts or orders. . . 


50 U.S.C. § 2071(a) (emphasis supplied ). 


18 Indeed, the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) applica- 
ble to cost reimbursement contracts make no distinction between 
the recoverability of a tort-related cost and any other cost in- 
curred in the, course of performing the contract. See FAR 
$§ 28.811-2 and 52.228-7(c). The court of appeals’ ruling below, 
therefore, threatens to undermine rules established in the FAR. 


20 


The indemnity provision of the Defense Production 
Act broadly and plainly provides, inter alia: 


No person shall be held liable for damages or penal- 
ties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or 
indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, 
or order issued pursuant to this Act. ... No person 
shall discriminate against orders or contracts to 
which priority is assigned or for which materials or 
facilities are allocated under Title I of this Act. . 


50 U.S.C. § 2157 (emphasis supplied). 


Petitioners contend that the government’s compulsion 
of Hercules and Thompson to manufacture Agent Orange 
and its control over specifications and production, in con- 
junction with the “hold harmless” provision of the De- 
fense Production Act, create an implied-in-fact agreement 
to indemnify petitioners for the damages they suffered in 
the Agent Orange litigation. The syllogism by which 


14 The court of appeals read the second sentence as narrowly 
limiting the scope of the protections created in the first sentence. 
(App. 3la-32a). No rule of statutory construction allows the 
extremely broad language of the first sentence to be constrained 
to only the particulars that follow. The second sentence in fact 
addresses a different protection. As Judge Plager noted in his 
dissent (App. 44a-45a), the languages of the hold harmless provi- 
sion bars liability for damages without qualification as to type, and 
contains sweeping language barring liability for any damages 
directly or indirectly resulting from compliance with any order 
issued under the Act. No language limits this provision to only 
those orders which happen to involve priority status. 


15 The context in which the government compelled petitioners 
to manufacture Agent Orange constitutes an implied-in-fact agree- 
ment by the government to indemnify petitioners for losses to 
third parties. This indemnity goes to the very heart of the rela- 
tionship the government took on in its treatment of petitioners. 
In Ryan Stevedoring Co. v. Pan-Atlantic Steamship Corp., 350 U.S. 
124, 188 (1956), this Court required an indemnitor to perform. In 
discussing the stevedore’s obligation to handle operations safely, 
the Court concluded that “This obligation is not a quasi-contractual 
obligation implied in law or arising out of a noncontractual relation- 
ship. It is of the essence of petitioner’s stevedoring contract.” 


> ioc n “a ea Na ere 


21 


the Defense Production Act applies here is straightfor- 
ward: the indemnity created in the Act is co-extensive 
with the requirements imposed by the Act (a quid pro 
quo); Thompson and Hercules were required to accept 
and perform a contract; therefore, the indemnity covers 
the risks Thompson and Hercule. incurred by virtue of 
their performance of the contract. 


The court of appeals accepted each premise, agreeing 
that “[llogically, then, the protection afforded by section 
[2157] should correspond to the risk imposed” and 
recognized that Thompson and Hercules were compelled 
under the authority of the Defense Production Act to 
accept contracts they did not want to perform. (App. 
28a). Instead of ending the syllogism by holding the 
United States liable, the court of appeals gymnastically 
leapt over the logical conclusion and instead held no 
indemnity as a matter of law. In an act of judicial legisla- 
tion, the majority accomplished this by limiting the hold 
harmless provision only to those damages that arise from 
the use of Defense Production Act authority to require 
priority in the performance of contracts, and excluding 
from indemnity harms which arise from forcing accept- 
ance of a contract in the first instance. Thompson and 
Hercules were required to accept and perform contracts 
they otherwise would have rejected. Even though “assur- 
ing such priority” is one of the powers conferred by the 
Act, there is nothing in the language of the hold harmless 
provision that arbitrarily limits the quid pro quo in a way 
that exposes a defense contractor to enormous potential 
liability with no means of avoiding the liability either 
before or after it is incurred. This is outrageous and 
should not be countenanced by the Court. 


Given the confusion which surrounds the efforts to 
apply this Court’s reasoning in Boyle to the forced pro- 
duction of Agent Orange, the Defense Production Act 
offers a straightforward legal basis by which the wrong 
done petitioners can be remedied. Co.apelled under the 
authority of this Act to manufacture a defoliant petition- 


22 


ers later discovered was highly toxic, and which resulted 
in one of the largest potential damage exposures ever 
faced, petitioners followed the least damaging course to 
all parties concerned. For these efforts, one has been put 
out of business and the other has suffered severe losses. 
The Defense Production Act states clearly and unequiv- 
ocally that “No person shall be held liable for damages 
to act resulting directly or indirectly from compliance 
with a[n] . . . order issued pursuant to this Act.” This 
Court has the opportunity to end a manifest injustice to 
petitioners, and in so doing set the law on its proper 
course so that further exercises of authority under the 
Defense Production Act will not impose crippling burdens 
on defense contractors forced to protect national security 
interests. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]

GREGORY W. HOMER JAMES S. TURNER 
RHONDA D. ORIN SWANKIN & TURNER 
ANDERSON KILL OLICK 1424 16th Street, N.W. 

& OSHINSKY Suite 105 
2000 Pennsylvania Ave.,N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036 
Suite 7500 (202) 462-8800 
Washington, D.C. 20006 CARTER G. PHILLIPS * 
(202) 728-3100 SIDLEY & AUSTIN 
WALTER S. ROWLAND 1722 I Street, N.W. 
HERCULES INCORPORATED Suite 900 
Hercules Plaza Washington, D.C. 20006-3795 


Wilmington, Delaware 19894 (202) 736-8000 
(302) 594-5000 


* Counsel of Record 


