NorFOLK & WESTERN Ral WAY CoMPANY, 


. Petitioner, 


WILLiaM J. Hizgs, 
Respondent. 


‘On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial) District 


LANCE CALLIS LAWRENCE M. MANN * 

CALLIS, PAPA, HALZ, JENSEN, #ALPER & MANN, P.C. 
JACKSTADT, BAILZY & 400 N. Capitol Street, N.W. 
HALZORAN Suite 851 

1826 Neidringhaus Avenue Washington, D.C. 20001 

P.O. ce (202) 298-9191 

Granite City, Illinois 62040 Counsel for Respondent 

(618) 452-1828 x 

JEANNE SATHEE 

116 S. 6th Street 

Marshall, Illinois 62441 

(217) 826-6380 

December 8, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


Wiueon - Epes Paerrine Co., Inc. - 789-0086 - WasnineTon, D.C. 20001 


>_> - 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether a railroad car on which the drawbar is so mis- 
aligned as to prevent automatic coupling violates Section 
2 of the Safety Appliance Acts (49 U.S.C. § 20302(a) 
(1)(A)). 


(i) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED .................-..--.c--cceseee wees 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .............. ssaiiaieaatatgatiaentnen- <tipane 


FACTS AND BACKGROUND ........... 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .. 


ARGUMENT ..................... 


I. 


Il. 


II. 


THE SAA IS VIOLATED IF A MISALIGNED 
DRAWBAR REQUIRES MANUAL ADJUST- 
MENT AND IT IS NECESSARY TO PLACE 
ONE’S BODY BETWEEN THE ENDS OF 
CARS IN ORDER TO MAKE SUCH ADJUST- 
MENT .. — swe 


THE LEGISLATIVE HISTORY SUPPORTS 
THE STATUTORY PROVISION THAT IT IS 
NOT NECESSARY TO PROVE A DEFECT 
FOR A VIOLATION OF THE SAA 


THE COURT’S ANALYSIS OF THE SAA 
CONFIRMS THAT IT IS NOT NECESSARY 
TO PROVE A DEFECT EXISTS IN THE 
COUPLER TO ESTABLISH A VIOLATION... 


CONCLUSION ............. ierthenevenimmiengatmanisnetintinantedincsctn 


(iii) 


. 10-12 


12-19 


19-27 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 


Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 

‘bet Fo eee 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 20 
Atlantic City R.R. v. Parker, 242 U.S. 56 (1916). 20 
B. & O. R.R. v. Jackson, 353 U.S. 325 (1957)... 6, 18 
Bruce Babbitt, et al. v. Sweet Home Chapter of 

Communities For A Great Oregon, et al., 63 


U.S.L.W. 4665 (U.S. June 27, 1995) .................... 6, 13 
Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bays Ry. Co., 
QR GS ey 9, 11, 23 
Coray v. Southern Pacific Co., 3385 U.S. 520 
I Ee ae nee Ae ee TES Oe 1l 
Gentle v. Western & A. R.R., 305 US. 654 
IITEED unccesdecntnieapndiithaninnestaieiabnathineimtitieinitbisanastiatiain 6,13 
Johnson v. Southern Pacific Co., 196 US. 1 
SS 8, 25 
Myers v. Reading Co., 331 U.S. 469 (1947) ............ 10, 21 
O'Donnell v. Elgin J. & E. Ry. Co., 338 U.S. 384 
ee ere era 5,11 
San Antonio & Arkansas Pass Ry. Co. v. Wagner, 
Wi, Ge GD ccetetceieteientiemeniinin 12, 20 
United Transportation Union v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 
I a ee 7,17 
Statute and Regulations 
aia iteilirisitintiinsitntendaitisutsiininndistimatiltatinititis 2,14 
RS Enea 2 
Oe ee cttiretsennnnnneanimenninntniiaiinie 16 
49 U.S.C. § BOBO] (a) (1) (A) .2-n--enneennccncccceccerecceeeeeeee «1, 
49 C.F.R. Part 218, Subpart B ........... saeihdetetatditheshietiad 16 
Federal Register 
48 Fed. Reg. 45272, 45274 (1983) 0... 19 
49 Fed. Reg. 6495, 6497 (1984) 19 
58 Fed. Reg. 48287, 48292 (1998) ............................... 19 
Legislative Matters 


Automatic Couplers and Power Brakes: Hearings 
Before the Senate Committee on Interstate Com- 
merce on S. 811, S. 893 and S. 1618, 52nd Cong., 

Bab Gee, GHD encnntihinteneemenentionen 6, 12 


v 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 
Page 


H.R. Rep. 1678, 52nd Cong., Ist Sess. (1892). 6,13 
S. Rep. No. 1049, 52nd Cong., Ist Sess. (1892)... 7 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-6 


NorFo_k & WESTERN RAILWAY COMPANY, 
Petitioner, 
v. 
WILLIAM J. HILEs, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
Appellate Court of Illinois 
Fifth Judicial District 


BRIEF FOR RESPONDENT 


FACTS AND BACKGROUND 


The salient facts in this case are unrefuted. In its open- 
ing statement, the railroad conceded that the Respondent 
and his co-worker had to go between the cars in an at- 
tempt to line up the drawbars so that the cars could be 
coupled together (J.A. 12).' The particular car in ques- 
tion couldn’t couple unless they “slued the drawbar over 
and straightened it out.” (J.A. 14). The Respondent was 
attempting to pull the drawbar, while his co-worker was 
pushing on it. (J.A. 17-18). Both persons were be- 
tween the rails and the cars (J.A. 16-18). The railroad 
conceded that manual alignment of a dgawbar requires an 


' The drawbar is a heavy bar located at the ends of rail cars to 
which the cars couple and uncouple. The end of the drawbar is 
known as a knuckle which consists of a clamp mechanism that 
opens and closes to allow the coupling to occur. 


2 


employee to go between the cars to straighten it out. (Pet. 
Br. 3).” 


Railroad cars attach to each other through a coupling 
mechanism which is located at either end of each car. 
The coupling mechanism consists of a drawbar and a 
knuckle that connects with an adjacent car. A pin inside 
the coupler knuckle locks the knuckle in a closed position. 
The adoption of the Federal Safety Appliance Acts (here- 
inafter “SAA”)* prompted the railroads to begin using de- 
vices such as pin lifters and uncoupling levers (which are 
operated from the side of a railroad car to open a knuckle 
for the purpose of separating railroad cars or preparing 
the cars for a coupling). Such devices assist in the open- 
ing of knuckles without the necessity of employees going 
between the railroad cars. In 1893, the time of passage 
of the SAA, these devices were not in widespread use. 
Using a pin lifter or uncoupling lever, the pin can be 
removed and the knuckle can be opened without having 
to step between the rails. If the couplers on both cars 
are set properly so that the drawbar, which rests on a 
pivot to allow the car to round curves without derailing, 
is aligned and at least one of the knuckles is open, the 
two cars will connect automatically upon impact. 


Therefore, two things must occur to effect a coupling.* 
First, the knuckles (drawhead, or coupler) must be open; 


2 The Petitioner (Pet. Br. 6) suggests that the uncoupling of 
the car in question “must have taken place on a curve where the 
drawbars would have remained misaligned when the car stopped.” 
There is no direct evidence in the record that this in fact occurred. 
For purposes of the SAA, it doesn’t matter how the drawbar be- 


came misaligned. 


8 The SAA were originally codified at 45 U.S.C. §§ 1-16. Section 
2 is currently codified at 49 U.S.C. § 20802(a)(1)(A). Wherever 
§ 2 of the SAA is cited in this Brief, it refers to §2 of the Act 
of March 2, 1998, codified at 45 U.S.C. §2 as originally enacted, 
and as codified in 1994. 


4It has been argued that Section 2 of the SAA only mandates 
that cars be uncoupled without the necessity of persons going 


3 


and, secondly, both drawbars must be positioned in line 
with each other. 


It is undisputed that, when a drawbar moves far out of 
alignment, this precludes automatic coupling and then it 
becomes necessary for the employee to go between the 
cars to adjust the drawbar. That is precisely what hap- 
pened in this case. Technology exists, but the railroad 
industry has not adopted an automatic realignment device 
as part of the coupling equipment. As pointed out in the 
Association of American Railroads’ amicus brief at 10-11, 
in the 1960's the railroad industry began using an auto- 
matic realignment device which was not completely suc- 
cessful. However, there is no indication that the industry 
attempted to improve it any further. The freight railroads 
created this overall problem because of the changes in the 
type of equipment being used today. When the SAA was 
enacted, the length of box cars was 40 feet. These rela- 
tively short cars did not develop problems of misaligned 
drawbars because the cars could easily traverse a curve 
with little or no play in the drawbar. However, with 
the increases in car lengths to approximately 90 feet, this 
necessitated the use of longer drawbars. The use of longer 
drawbars has, in turn, resulted in misalignment to occur in 
some situations. However, the industry has not taken any 
effective actions to eliminate the hazard created by the 
use of the longer cars in coupling operations. It should 
be noted that the hazard does not exist in passenger 
service because couplers on many passenger cars are 
equipped with devices which automatically center the 
ys ma and the drawbars on such cars are significantly 

orter. 


The safety issues facing Congress at the time of the 
adoption of the SAA were not that the predominantly 
used link and pin type coupler was defective, nor that 


between the ends of the cars. However, the Court has long held 
that the language also applies to coupling. Johnson v. Southern 
Pacific Co., 196 U.S. 1, 18-19 (1904). 


4 


the intermingling of the various types of couplers were 
dangerous because they were defective. Rather, their 
continued use in railroad operations created an unsafe 
condition that needed to be corrected. Congress intended 
to eliminate the dangers attendant to working between 
cars, and it didn’t matter whether or not the equipment 
was defective. These dangers are what Congress addressed, 
not the type of equipment used to accomplish the man- 
date. If a railroad fails to place Se safety equipment 
on the cars to carry out this goal, then it is liable under 
the SAA. 


How does the Court best carry out Congress’ intent to 
protect the worker who is required to go between rail cars 
to effect a coupling? It should not restrict the reading 
of the statute in such a way that loophole will exists for 
carriers to avoid liability to an injured employee who was 
performing his her work as required by the railroad. 


— OF ARGUMENT 


A. The SAA Is Violated If A Misaligned Drawbar Re- 
quires Manual Adjustment And It Is Necessary To 
Place One’s Body Between The Ends Of Cars In Order 
To Make Such Adjustment 


Throughout the trial, the Petitioner attempted to estab- 
lish that the misalignment of the drawbar was not caused 
by a defect in the equipment (See Pet. Br. 7). The words 
of Section 2 of the SAA do not state that the coupler must 
be defective in order for there to be a violation. This 
conclusion was reached by the Court in Affolder v. New 
York. Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. 96, 99 (1949). 
If the couplers do not couple automatically by impact (for 
whatever reason, whether defective or not), or cannot 
be uncoupled without the necessity of employees going 
between the ends of cars, then Section 2 of the SAA is 
violated. 


5 


Section 2 of the SAA imposes certain absolute duties 
upon railroads to outfit their cars with safe equipment. 


“{A] failure of equipment to perform as required by 
the Safety Appliance Act is in itself an actionable 
wrong, in no way dependent upon negligence and 
for the proximate results of which there is liability— 
a liability that cannot be escaped by proof of care or 
diligence.” 


O'Donnell v. Elgin J. & E. Ry. Co., 338 U.S. 384, 390 
(1949). 


The Court has enunciated two ways in which a plaintiff 
can establish the railroad’s liability for an accident involv- 
ing a coupling mechanism. The first is to provide evi- 
dence that two cars failed to couple automatically upon 
impact. In Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis 
R.R., 339 US., at 98, the Court held that the plaintiff 
could meet his burden under § 2 by showing a failure to 
couple automatically upon impact. The railroad’s duty to 
have couplers which couple automatically upon impact “is 
an absolute one requiring performance ‘on the occasion in 
question.” /d. The plaintiff is not, therefore, required 
“to show a ‘bad condition’ of the coupler.” /d. at 99. Fail- 
ure of the equipment itself is sufficient for liability, and 
there is no need, in addition, to establish a defect. The 
second method of establishing a violation of the SAA is to 
show a defect in the coupling equipment. Although a 
plaintiff is not required to prove that the equipment was 
defective, see Affolder, the evidence that an employee is 
required to step between the cars because of defective 
equipment can establish liability. 


The Court has allowed only one exception to the above 
requirements. It involves a situation where the employee 
does not ensure that the coupler was in the open position 
before impact. In Affolder, the Court stated that liability 
under § 2 “assumes that the coupler was placed in a posi- 
tion to operate on impact.” Jd. at 96. The coupling, 
which may be accomplished without a person going be- 


6 


tween cars, should not be extended to require alignment 
of the drawbar (which cannot be performed without a 
person going completely between the cars) as a pre-condi- 
tion to a violation of § 2. 


B. The Legislative History Supports The Statutory Pro- 
vision That It Is Not Necessary To Prove A Defect 
For A Violation Of The SAA. 


The Court stresses the importance of statutory policy. 
See Bruce Babbitt, et al. v. Sweet Home Chapter of Com- 
munities For a Great Oregon, et al., 63 U.S.L.W. 4665, 
4668 (U.S. June 27, 1995). The Court has made it 
clear that the prime purpose of the SAA is the protection 
of employees from injury or death. See B. & O. R.R. v. 
Jackson, 353 U.S. 325 (1957); Gentle v. Western & A. 
R.R., 305 U.S. 654 (1939). The object of the SAA, be- 
ing remedial and humanitarian, should not be construed 
as to defeat the above purpose. This certainly would re- 
sult if the Petitioner’s views were adopted. 


Throughout the entire deliberations by Congress on the 
SAA, its focus was solely on uniformity of the couplers, 
and the dangerous increase in injuries, if they were not 
automatically uncoupled and coupled. There was abso- 
lutely no suggestion that there be an additional condition 
imposed to first establish a defect before a violation can 
occur. See e.g., Automatic Couplers and Power Brakes: 
Hearings Before the Senate Committee on Interstate Com- 
cerce on S. 811, S. 893 and S. 1618, 52nd. Cong. Ist 
Sess.; S. Rep. No. 1049 (1892). 


The legislative history fortifies the statutory provision 
that it is not necessary to prove a defect for a violation 
of Section 2 of the SAA to occur. Congress, in the auto- 
matic coupler provision, wanted one result—to obviate 
the necessity of persons going between cars for coupling 
and uncoupling. H.R. Rep. 1678, 52nd Cong. Ist Sess. 
3 (1892). There is not one word in the hearings, the 
Congressional reports, nor the Congressional floor debate 


7 


to the effect that the coupler must be defective before a 
violation exists. 


The spokesperson for the railroad industry at the Con- 
gressional hearings in 1892, Mr. H.S. Haines, Vice- 
president of the American Railway Association (prede- 
cesor to the Association of American Railroads) stated 
the problem succinctly: 


It is not a question as to whether we should have a 
uniform coupler or not. The question is whether we 
shall have that kind of a coupler which will protect 
men’s lives and protect them from personal injury, 
and that is the yardstick that is to be applied to all 
proposed legislation. 


S. Rep. No. 1049, 52nd Cong. Ist Sess. 40 (1892). 
Mr. H. S. Haines further testified: 


What the man who manipulates the coupler wants is 
that every coupler . . . shall have what we call the 
release rod, that controls the locking device, so ar- 


ranged that he can stand outside of that car and 
operate it. 


Id. at 41. (Emphasis Added). 
The Senate floor debate adds further clarification: 


This bill does not require any particular kind of 
coupler to be adopted by the railroads, except a 
coupler which can be coupled and uncoupled with- 
out requiring anybody to go between the cars. 


24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1893). 


In United Transportation Union y. Lewis, 711 F2d 
233, 236 fn. 6 (D.C. Cir. 1983), the panel, in which Jus- 
tice Ginsburg was a member, analyzed the legislative 
history and stated that: 


While an action [would lie] for any injuries sustained 
in performing the manual preparation, because cars 
have failed to couple automatically, . . . this does 
not make the coupler “defective” within the mean- 
ing of FRA regulations. . . 


In that case the court recognized that an FRA regula- 
tion may not be violated, but an action could still lie for 
injuries sustained in performing the manual preparation 
because the cars failed to couple automatically. /d. at 
236 fn. 6. Therefore, as reasoned in Lewis, a violation of 
the SAA does not necessarily mean that a FRA regulation 
issued pursuant to the SAA is violated. Also, the court 
said that, although there is no separate prohibition for 
the act of going between the cars, the railroad is still 
liable because if the employee must go between the cars 
to effect a coupling, then “there has been a failure to pro- 
vide equipment that functions as the statute commands.” 
Id. at 251. 


C. This Court’s Analysis Of The SAA Confirms That It 
Is Not Necessary To Prove A Defect Exists In The 
Coupler To Establish A Violation 


The Court has reviewed § 2 of the SAA a limited num- 
ber of times. In each case it upheld the basic purpose of 
the Act, to protect an employee from having to go be- 
tween cars to assist in coupling or uncoupling. As stated 
by this Court on several occasions, the condition of the 
equipment is not the issue. Rather, it is whether the 
couplers performed as required by the SAA. 


The two concepts which emerge from the Court's anal- 
ysis of § 2 of the SAA are: : 


1. If the equipment failed to perform as required 
by the statute, this in and of itself is an action- 


able wrong. 


2. Section 2 mandates that the couplers perform as 
required, and the condition of the coupler is 
irrelevant in determining whether a violation has 
occurred. Any requirement that a coupler must 
be properly set as a precondition to liability rec- 
ognizes that such an act can be accomplished 
outside the cars without the necessity of a person 
going between them. 


9 


In Afjolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 
339 U.S. at 99, the Court held that if a car failed to per- 
form properly in a switching operation, this was a viola- 
tion of the Act. The only way a carrier could avoid li- 
ability is if the coupler had not been properly opened. /d. 
The Court pointed out that the plaintiff did not have to 
show a bad condition of the coupler. /d. at 98. 


In Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay R.R., 338 US. 
430, 433-434 (1949), the Court held that the absence 
of a defect cannot aid the railroad if the coupler was prop- 
erly set and failed to couple. In O'Donnell, 338 U.S. at 
393, the Court said that evidence of defect added noth- 
ing to a claim under SAA, because it was the failure of 
the equipment to perform as Congress mandated which 
was violative of the Act. 


The Petitioner argues that it need not develop tech- 
nology to align drawbars automatically (Pet. Br. 22-23). 
The Court in O’Donnell answered this issue and said: 


A defendant cannot escape liability for a coupler’s 
inadequacy by showing that too much was demanded 
of it, nor by showing that while the coupler broke 
it had been properly manufactured, diligently in- 
spected and showed no visible defect. These circum- 
stances do go to the question of negligence; but, even 
if a railroad should explain away its negligence, that 
is not enough to explain away its liability if it has 
violated the Act. 


338 U.S. at 393-394. 


In addition to O’Donnell, the Court in both Carter and 
A ffolder eliminated all requirements of negligence or fault 
in establishing a violation of the SAA. These cases recog- 
nize that negligence would be improperly introduced into 
the cases if the railroad could defend against a violation 
of the SAA by evidence of alleged reasons why the cou- 
pling would not occur in a particular set of circumstances. 


10 


ARGUMENT 


I. THE SAA IS VIOLATED IF A MISALIGNED 
DRAWBAR REQUIRES MANUAL ADJUSTMENT 
AND IT IS NECESSARY TO PLACE ONE’S BODY 
BETWEEN THE ENDS OF CARS IN ORDER TO 
MAKE SUCH ADJUSTMENT 


Throughout the trial, the Petitioner attempted to estab- 
lish that the misalignment of the drawbar was not caused 
by a defect in the equipment (See Pet. Br. 7). The words 
of Section 2 of the SAA do not state that the coupler 
must be defective in order for there to be a violation. 
This conclusion was reached by the Court in Affolder v. 
New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. at 99. 
If the couplers do not couple automatically by impact 
(for whatever reason, whether defective or not), or can- 
not be uncoupled without the necessity of employees 
going between the ends of cars, then Section 2 of the 
SAA is violated. ; 


Each case cited by the Petitioner in its brief at p. 17 
in support of its position, that a violation of the Safety 
Appliance Acts results from the unlawful use of defective 
equipment, is distinguishable. The straightforward re- 
sponse to those cases is that neither one involved § 2 of 
the SAA. Also, in neither case did the Court state that 
proof of a defect was a condition precedent to establish- 
ing liability. See Myers v. Reading Co., 331 U.S. 469, 
482-483 (1947) where the Court said that a non efficient 
hand brake may be shown either by proving that (1) a 
defect exists, or (2) failure of the equipment to function 
as intended. Clearly, it is permissible for a Plaintiff to 
show a defect in proving a violation of Section 2 of the 
SAA, but it does not follow that the Plaintiff is required 
to prove a defect in order to establish the violation. All 
that is necessary is that the equipment does not function 
as required by the law. 


The railroad argues (Pet. Br. 11-13) that the statute 
does not apply in situations where the cars are stationary 


1! 


and employees attempt to align drawbars before or after 
an attempted coupling occurs. It states that the Act is 
applicable only during the coupling end uncoupling, not 
preparatory thereto. The Court addressed this point in 
Coray v. Southern Pacific Co., 335 U.S. 520 (1949). 
There, the railroad also argued that the power brake law 
was not designed to protect employees from standing 
trains. The Court stated that it did not agree with the 
lower court’s holding that the object of the SAA was not 
to protect employees from standing but from moving 
trains. It said: 


We do not view the Act’s purpose so narrowly. It 
~~ railroads not to run trains with defective 
es. 


Id. at 522 


The SAA imposes certain absolute duties upon rail- 
roads to outfit their cars with safe equipment. 


[A] failure of equipment to perform as required by 
the Safety Appliance Act is in itself an actionable 
wrong, in no way dependent upon negligence and 
for the proximate results of which there is liability— 
a liability that cannot be escaped by proof of care 
or diligence. 
O'Donnell v. Elgin J. & E. Ry. Co., 338 US. at 390. 
“Once the violation is established, only causal relation is 
an issue.” Carte, v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay Ry. Co.., 
338 U.S. 430, 434 (1949). 


The Court has enunciated the way in which a plaintiff 
can establish the railroad’s liability for an accident in- 
volving a coupling mechanism. In Affolder v. New York, 
Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 339 U.S. at 98, the Court said 
that the plaintiff could meet his burden under § 2 by show- 
ing a failure to couple automatically upon impact. The 
railroad’s duty to have couplers which couple automati- 
cally upon impact “is an absolute one requiring perform- 
ance ‘on the occasion in question.”” /d. The plaintiff is 


12 


not, therefore, required “to show a ‘bad condition’ of the 
coupler.” /d. at 99. Failure of the equipment itself is 
sufficient for liability, and there is no need, in addition, 
to establish a defect. Although a plaintiff is not required 
to prove that the equipment was defective see Affolder, 
the evidence that an employee is required to step in be- 
tween the cars because of defective equipment can be a 
means to establish liability. In San Antonio & Arkansas 
Pass Ry. Co. v. Wagner, 241 U.S. 476, 483-84 (1916), 
“evidence of bad repair in the equipment” was sufficient 
to establish liability and thus, the Court stated, “[wle 
need not in this case determine . . . that the failure of 


a coupler to work at any time sustains a charge that the 
Act has been violated.” 


The Court has allowed only one exception to the above 
requirements. It involves a situation where the employee 
does not ensure that the coupler was in the open position 
before impact. In Affolder, the Court stated that liability 
under § 2 “assumes that the coupler was placed in a posi- 
tion to operate on impact.” 99 U.S. at 96. The open 
position of the coupler, which may be accomplished with- 
out a person going between cars, should not be extended 
to require alignment of the drawbar (which cannot be 
performed without a perscn going completely between the 
cars) as a pre-condition to a violation of § 2. 


Il. THE LEGISLATIVE HISTORY SUPPORTS THE 
STATUTORY PROVISION THAT IT IS NOT NEC- 
ESSARY TO PROVE A DEFECT FOR A VIOLA- 
TION OF THE SAA 


Throughout the entire deliberations by Congress on 
Section 2 of the SAA, its focus was solely on uniformity 
of the couplers, and the dangerous increase in injuries, 
if they were not automatically uncoupled and coupled. 
There was absolutely no suggestion that there be an addi- 
tional condition imposed to establish a defect for a viola- 
tion to occur. See Automatic Couplers and Power 
Brakes: Hearings Before the Senate Committee on Inter- 


= 


13 


state Commerce on S. 811, S. 893 and S. 1618, 52nd 
Cong. Ist Sess.; S. Rep. No. 1049 (1892).° 


The Court stresses the i of statutory policy. 
See Bruce Babbitt, et al. v. Sweet Home Chapter of Com- 
munities For A Great Oregon, et al., 63 U.S.L.W. 4665, 
4668 (U.S. June 27, 1995). The Court has made it clear 
that the prime purpose of the SAA is the protection of 
employees from injury or death. See B. & O. R.R. v. 
Jackson, 353 U.S. 325 (1957); Gentle v. Western & A. 
R.R., 305 U.S. 654 (1939). The SAA, being remedial 
and humanitarian, should not be construed as to defeat 
the above purpose. This certainly would result if the 
Petitioner's views were adopted.° 

The legislative history fortifies the statutory provision 
that it is not necessary to prove a defect for a violation of 
Section 2 of the SAA to occur. Congress, in the auto- 
matic coupler provision, wanted one result—to obviate 
the necessity of persons going between cars. H.R. Rep. 
1678, 52nd Cong. Ist Sess. 3 (1892). There is not one 
word in the hearings, the Congressional reports, nor the 
Congressional floor debate to the effect that the coupler 
must be defective before a violation exists. The Petitioner 
undertakes a selective analysis into the legislative history 
in which it ignores the central policy expressed through- 
out the SAA—to protect the worker. 


® The Senate hearings were annexed as part of the Senate Report. 
Therefore, in referring to the Senate hearings, the Senate Report 
will be cited infra. 


*For obvious reasons the Petitioner seeks to have the Court 
impose a restrictive reading upon the statute in question. (Pet. 
Br. 11-12, 14). It argues that the statutory language should be 
limited to the actual moment that the coupling or uncoupling 
occurs, and thereby exclude the process of adjusting a misaligned 
drawbar so that the coupling could actually occur. (Pet. Br. 11-12). 
Respondent submits that if Congress had intended to limit § 2 to 
moving equipment, it would have specifically inserted the word in 
18938 upon passage or in 1994 the most recent codification of the 
SAA. 


14 


Congress was certainly cognizant of the problem and 
wanted to eliminate the possibility of casualties resulting 
from persons placing themselves between ends of cars. 
The following exchange in the Senate hearings between 
the author of the bill, which in part became 45 U.S.C. 
§ 2, and the Chairman of the Senate Interstate Commerce 
Committee illustrates this concern: 

The CHAIRMAN. Suppose your bill, Senate bill 
1618, were passed and becomes a law. Will there be, 
under any circumstances, any necessity for a switch- 
man to go between the cars at all in order to couple 
or uncouple the cars? 

Mr. RODGERS... . The law provides that there 
shall not be. They have to adopt a coupler with such 
details that it will not. 


The CHAIRMAN. Now, if the technical provisions 
of that law are preserved, the railroads in all cases 
will be required to provide such a coupler as will 
obviate the necessity of the switchman going between 
the cars? 

Mr. RODGERS.|\ They will; that is in special 
phraseology: 
Shall be equipped with automatic couplers so con- 
structed as to couple by impact with the next car 
without the necessity of a person going between the 
cars, and so constructed as to be uncoupled without 
the necessity of a person going between the cars. 


. ... There is a number of devices that enable this 
uncoupling to take place from the side of the car and 
it is better that it should be. (Emphasis Added). 


S. Rep. No. 1049, supra at 14. 


Congress was concerned about the hazards of going 
between the ends of the cars to effect coupling or un- 
coupling, even with the already-in-use automatic coupling 
systems. Even the industry spokesperson acknowledged 
that the intent of the legislation was to protect the worker 


15 


from personal injury. /d. at 40. The interpretation in 
recent years by the railroads, and in this litigation, is 
different from what the industry represented to Congress. 


Mr. H. S. Haines, Vice-president of the American Rail- 
way Association (predecessor to the Association of Amer- 
ican Railroads) stated the issue succinctly in testimony 
during the 1892 hearings: 

I understand the tendency of the legislation to be of 
a most laudable character and one in which we are 
entirely in accord, and that is that this committee 
desires to consider the proposed bills before them 
with reference to the safety of the men who use these 
couplers. That is the aspect of the case to which I 
propose to refer—the possibilities of legislation. /t is 
not a question as to whether we have a uni- 
form coupler or not. The question is whether we 
shall have that kind of a coupler which will protect 
men's lives and protect them from personal injury, 
and that is the yardstick that is to be applied to all 
proposed legislation. 


Jd. (Emphasis Added). 
As Mr. H. S. Haines further testified: 


What we all want . . . and what this committee wants 
is a coupler which can be used without danger to the 
life or to the limb of the man who manipulated it. 


What the man who manipulates the coupler wants 
is that every coupler, shall have what we call the re- 
lease rod, that controls the locking device, so ar- 
ranged that he can stand outside of that car and 


operate it. 
Id. at 41. (Emphasis Added). 
The Senate floor debate adds further clarification: 


A railroad employee . . . is asked to step inside the 
track, stand up against a car which is not moving, 


16 


and watch the coming of another car, which is being 
pushed steadily up against the car near which he 
stands. . . . I doubt whether there is a Senator here 
who can stand deliberately and see a long train 
coupled in the way the coupling is now done without 
turning his eyes away as two cars come together 
just before it is the duty of the car-coupler to make 
the connection and then get out of the way... This 
bill does not require any particular kind of coupler 
to be adopted by the railroads, except a coupler 
which can be coupled and uncoupled without requir- 
ing anybody to go hetween the cars. 


24 Cong. Rec. 1280 (1893). (Emphasis Added). 


The couplers today are engineered significantly better 
than existed in 1893 when the SAA was enacted. Con- 
gress at the time was interested in eradicating the loss of 
life and injuries resulting from couplers failing to couple 
automatically for any reason. This is the only way em- 
ployees would be fully protected and certainly what Con- 
gress intended. To carve out an exception to the protec- 
tion of employees 102 years later we submit would be 
unconscionable. 


The railroad argues that all activities of a person going 
between cars is not prohibited by the SAA. (Pet. Br. 12, 
14-17). For example, employees may go between the 
cars and make air connections. (Pet. Br. 14-15). The 
Petitioner fails to recognize that the air hose connection 
may be performed only after the coupling of the cars has 
occurred. There is no risk of train movements after the 
coupling occurs, and therefore it is safe and not prohibited 
for the employee to go between the cars to couple the 
air hoses. Also, the inspection of cars by employees, other 
than train or yard crews, may occur only while there is 
protection against any movement of a car. See 49 U.S.C. 
$ 20131 and 49 C.F.R. Part 218, Subpart B. Moreover, 
it is immaterial that there exist situations whereby em- 
ployees go between cars pursuant to other sections of the 


17 


various railroad safety laws. The issue here is solely 
whether or not an employee may go between cars for 
purposes of the process of coupling and uncoupling. The 
answer clearly is no, irrespective of what an employee 
may do in other types of railroad operations. The rail- 
road states that unless the Federal Railroad Administra- 
tion’s regulations are invalid, the SAA does not bar the 
operation of going between the cars. (Pet. Br. 17). That, 
of course, begs the question whether or not the referred 
to regulations violate the SAA. That issue is not- before 
the Court in this case. The Respondent is unaware of any 
court decision, other than United Transportation Union 
v. Lewis, 711 F.2d 233 (D.C. Cir. 1983), which ana- 
lyzed the legality of a procedure authorized by the Fed- 
eral Railroad Administration whereby an employee was 
required to place at least part of his body between the 
cars. It involved the use of a hook by an employee stand- 
ing outside the ends of cars to open knuckles. It was 
noted there that the device markedly reduced the need for 
manual alignments after failed couplings. In that case the 
court recognized that the FRA regulation may not be vio- 
lated, but an action could still lie for injuries sustained in 
performing the manual preparation, because the cars 
failed to couple automatically. /d. at 236 fn. 6. There- 
fore, as reasoned in Lewis, a violation of the SAA does 
not necessarily mean that a FRA regulation issued pur- 
suant to the SAA is violated. 


In the Lewis case, 711 F.2d at 245-248, the panel, in 
which Justice Ginsburg was a member, provided a de- 
tailed analysis of the legislative history. It concluded that 
there was nothing in the legislative history which might 
demonstrate that Congress also intended to regulate oper- 
ating procedures or make it unlawful for men to go be- 
tween cars. Jd. at 247. Further, the panel focused on the 


House Report which stated: 


It is the judgment of this committee that all cars and 
locomotives should be equipped with automatic 


18 


couplers, obviating the necessity of men going be- 
tween the cars... 


H.R. Rep. No. 1678, supra at 3. 


That court reasoned that obviating the necessity can 
only modify the kind of couplers with which cars and 
locomotives shall be equipped. 711 F.2d at 248. Even 
the court in Lewis acknowledged that the intent of Con- 
gress was to prevent the need for men to go entirely 
between the tracks in order to effect a coupling or un- 
coupling. /d. at 243 fn. 28. 


That decision turned on whether the statement without 
the necessity of men going between the ends of the car 
was descriptive of the equipment, or whether § 2 contained 
an independent prohibition of the act of going between the 
cars. The court held that it was descriptive of the equip- 
ment and does not address operating procedures. /d. at 
245. Nevertheless, the court stated that: 


While an action [would lie] for any injuries sustained 
in performing the manual preparation, because cars 
have feiled to couple automatically, . . . this does 
not make the coupler “defective” within the meaning 
of FRA regulations . . . 


Id. at 236 fn. 6. 


Also, the court said that, although there is no separate 
prohibition for the act of going between the cars, the rail- 
road is still liable because if the employee must go between 
the cars to effect a coupling, then there has been a “failure 
to provide equipment that functions as the statute com- 
mands”. /d. at 251. The court further clarified the above 
statement in footnote 39 at p. 251 as follows: 


At the same time, however, actual failure to couple 
automatically because of a misaligned drawbar or a 
closed coupler is sufficient to establish liability under 
Section 2. See Metcalfe v. Atchison, Topeka & 


19 


Santa Fe Ry., supra, 491 F.2d at 896 and cases 
cited therein. This is because Congress imposed on 
railroads a duty not just to provide proper equip- 
ment, but also to guarantee its performance. See 
Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 
339 U.S. 96, 70 S.Ct. 509, 94 L.Ed. 683 (1950); 
Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay R.R., 338 U.S. 
430, 70 S.Ct. 226, 94 L Ed. 236 (1949); Delk v. 
St. Louis & San Francisco Ry., 220 U.S. 580, 31 
S.Ct. 617, 55 L.Ed. 590 (1911). And FRA con- 
tinues to adhere to this view of the railroad’s respon- 
sibility... .” 


Ill. THE COURT’S ANALYSIS OF THE ‘: A CON- 
FIRMS THAT IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO PROVE 
A DEFECT EXISTS IN THE COUPLER TO ESTAB- 
LISH A VIOLATION 


The Court has reviewed § 2 of the SAA a limited num- 
ber of times. In each case it upheld the basic purpose of 
the Act, to protect an employee from having to go between 
cars to assist in coupling or uncoupling. Section 2 merely 
describes the type of coupler which must be used. That 
is one which performs in such a way that it can be coupled 
and uncoupled without the necessity of persons going be- 
tween the cars. As stated by this Court on several occa- 
sions, the condition of the equipment is not the issue. 
Rather, it is whether the couplers performed as required by 
the SAA. 


7 The Petitioner’s reliance on the FRA’s rulemakings which were 
not issued pursuant to the Safety Appliance Acts is misplaced. 
(See Pet. Br. 15-17). The fact that a railroad complies with one 
FRA regulation does not automatically mean that the railroad has 
complied with a Federal statute covering a different subject matter. 
The FRA regulations referred to by the railroad were promulgated 
pursuant to the Federal Railroad Safety Act, not the SAA. (See 
48 Fed. Reg. 45272, 45274 (1983) ; 49 Fed. Reg. 6495, 6497 (1984) ; 
and 58 Fed. Reg. 43287, 48292 (1993), where the FRA cites its 
authority for issuing the regulations). 


20 


The two concepts which emerge from the Court's 
analysis of § 2 of the SAA are: 


1. If the equipment failed to perform as required 
by the statute, this in and of itself is an action- 
able wrong. 


2. Section 2 mandates that the couplers perform as 
required, and the condition of the coupler is irre- 
levant in determining whether a violation has 
occurred. Any requirement that a coupler must 
be properly set as a precondition to liability rec- 
ognizes that such an act can be accomplished 
outside the cars without the necessity of a person 
going between them. 


In Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R., 
339 U.S. at 99, the Court held that a car which failed 
to perform properly in a switching operation was a viola- 
tion of the Act. The only way a carrier could avoid lia- 
bility is if the coupler had not been properly opened. 
Id. The Court pointed out that the plaintiff did not have 
to show a bad condition of the coupler. Jd. at 98. It 
said: 

In [O'Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern R. Co.,| we 
held that the Plaintiff did not have to show a “bad” 
condition of the coupler; she was entitled to a per- 
emptory instruction that to equip a car with a cou- 
pler which failed to perform properly “in the switch- 
ing operation was a violation of the Act, which 
rendered defendant liable for injuries proximately 
resulting therefrom, and neither evidence of negli- 
gence nor of diligence and care was to be considered 
on the question of this liability.” Further, we said, 
“a failure of equipment to perform as required by the 


Safety Appliance Act is in itself an actionable 
wrong...” Id at 99. 


The Petitioner relies on both Aflantic City R.R. v. 
Parker, 242 U.S. 56 (1916) and San Antonio & A.P.R.R. 
v. Wagner, 241 U.S. 476, to argue that, before there can 


21 


be a violation of the SAA, the railroad should be allowed 
to prove the drawbar was not defective and/or not prop- 
erly adjusted by the crew and, furthermore, it is a jury 
question. (Pet. Br. 19-20).* 


The Wagner case does not support the railroad’s con- 
tention. In Wagner the employee was standing upon the 
foot board of an engine, between the engine and car, 
and was attempting to shove the knuckle of the engine’s 
coupler so as to bring it into proper position to make 
the coupling. He lost his balance, slipped and fell, and 
his left foot was caught between the couplers and crushed. 
The railroad argued that cars must have sufficient lateral 
motion to permit trains to negotiate curves, and that no 
coupler will couple automatically at all times without 
previous adjustment, because of the lateral play neces- 
sary to enable coupled cars to round curves. The Court 
held that the jury could reasonably find that the mis- 
alignment of the drawbar was greater than required to 
permit the rounding of curves, or, if not, that an adjusting 
lever should have been provided.’ 


‘ § It is significant to note that the strategy of the railroad in this 
Court is different from its arguments presented below. In the lower 
courts the railroad argued that the injured employee must show a 
defect or bad condition in order for a misalignment to violate the 
SAA. (See Brief and Appendix of Defendant Norfolk and Western 
Railway Company in the Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth Judicial 
District at pp. 13-14.). Here, the Petitioner is now stating that it 
should be allowed to present a defense that its equipment was non 
defective and not set properly. 


® Regarding Petitioner’s argument that whether or not a viola- 
tion exists is a jury question, obviously depends upon whether or 
not there were sufficient facts for a jury to consider. In this case, 
the Petitioner only offered testimony that the equipment was not 
defective upon examination after the accident. The fact that an 
appliance worked efficiently both before and after the occasion in 
question is irrelevant. See Myers v. Reading Co., 331 U.S. 477, 
483 (1947). Furthermore, in its offer of proof it did not assert, 
and indeed it could not, that the equipment was improperly set by 
the plaintiff. 


22 


In Parker an employee was injured while reaching in 
to straighten a drawbar. There, the railroad’s primary 
defense was that the SAA did not apply to a coupling 
made on a curve because no device existed which could 
align the drawbar from outside the car. The railroad 
further contended that there needs to be a showing of a 
defect in the equipment or of negligence on its part before 
there can be liability under the SAA. The Court specifi- 
cally addressed both points and concluded that, if the 
couplers do not couple automatically by impact, nothing 
else needs to be considered. 


If there was evidence that the railroad failed to fur- 
nish such “couplers coupling automatically by im- 
pact” as the statute requires (Johnson v. Southern 
Pacific Co., 196 U.S., 1, 18, 19), nothing else needs 
to be considered. We are of opinion that there was 
enough evidence to go to the jury upon that point. 
No doubt there are arguments that the jury should 
have decided the other way. Some lateral play must 
be allowed to drawheads, and further, the car was on 
a curve, which of course would tend to throw the 
coupler out of line. But the jury were warranted in 
finding that the curve was so slight as not to affect 
the case and in regarding the track as for this pur- 
pose a straight line. If couplers failed to couple auto- 
matically upon a straight track it at least may be said 
that a jury would be warranted in finding that a lat- 
eral play so great as to prevent coupling was not 
needed, and that, in the absence of any explanation 
believed by them, the failure indicated that the rail- 
road had not fully complied with the law Chicago, 
Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. United States, 
220 U.S. 559, 571. Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific 
Ry. Co. v. Brown, 229 U.S. 317, 320, 321. San 
Antonio & Arkansas Pass Ry. Co. v. Wagner, 241 
U.S. 476, 484. 


Id. at 59. 


23 


Moreover, in Parker the facts indicate that the attempted 
coupling was made on a curve.” Both Parker and 
Wagner were decided on the ground that the failure 
of the coupler to work sustains the claim for negligence 
and/or negligence per se. “If this Act is violated, the 
question of negligence in the general sense of want of 
care is immaterial.” Parker, 241 U.S. at 484. 


The Court, in its 1949-1950 decisions, noted that there 
may be possible confusion from the earlier cases. In 
Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay R.R., 338 US. 
430, 433-434 (1949), the Court held that the absence of 
a defect cannot aid the railroad if the coupler was prop- 
erly set and failed to couple. The railroad argued that 
a coupler which did not function properly should not 
violate the SAA because the plaintiff had not demon- 
strated that a defect existed in the coupler. The Court 
said: 

This Court has repeatedly attempted to make clear 
that this is an absolute duty not based upon negli- 
gence, and that the absence of a ‘defect’ cannot aid 
the railroad if the coupler was properly set and failed 
to couple on the occasion in question. (Emphasis 
Added). 


Regarding proof of negligence, in O'Donnell the Court 
stated: 


The arguments and instruction in this case, as well as 
others, in the language of many opinions and texts 
reflect widespread confusion as to the effect to be 
accorded a violation of the Federal Safety statute. 
[citing Wagner]. Part of this confusion is traceable 
to the diversity of judicial opinion concerning the 


Here, the Petitioner, in an offer of proof, proffered testimony 
only that the car in question was pulled on a curve or slope. (J.A. 
24). That testimony did not state what the attorney for Petitioner 
represented to the judge. The Petitioner has concluded from this 
that the uncoupling “must have taken place on a curve.” (Pet. 
Br. 6). 


24 


consequences attributed in negligence actions to the 
violation of a statute. 


338 U.S. at 389. 


In O'Donnell, 338 U.S. at 393, the Court said that 
evidence of defect added nothing to a claim under SAA, 
because it was the failure of the equipment to perform 
_as Congress mandated which was violative of the Act. 


For reasons set forth at length in our books, the 
Court held that a failure of equipment to perform as 
required by the Safety Appliance Act is in itself an 
actionable wrong, in no way dependent upon negli- 
gence and for the proximate results of which there 
is liability—a liability that cannot be escaped by 
proof of care or diligence [Citations omitted]... . 
The statutory liability is not based upon the carrier’s 
negligence. The duty imposed is an absolute one, 
and the carrier is not excused by any showing of 
care, however assiduous. Brady v. Terminal Rail- 
road Ass'n of St. Louis, 303 U.S. 10, 15. 


Id. at 390-391. 


The Petitioner argues that it need not develop tech- 
nology to align drawbars automatically (Pet. Br. 22-23). 
The Court addressed this point in O'Donnell and said: 


But the Act certainly requires equipment that will 
withstand the stress and strain of all ordinary opera- 
tions, grade, loadings, stops and starts, including 
emergency stops. A defendant cannot escape liabil- 
ity for a coupler’s inadequacy by showing that too 
much was demanded of it, nor by showing that while 
the coupler broke it had been properly manufactured, 
diligently inspected and showed no visible defect. 
These circumstances do go to the question of negli- 
gence; but, even if a railroad should explain away 
its negligence, that is not enough to explain the way 
its liability if it has violated the Act." 


'' This Court noted 388 U.S. at 391 fn. 7, that there are 
circumstances in which a railroad may defend against a failed 


25 


Id. at 393-394; See also Affolder, 339 U.S. at 95-96; 
Carter, 338 U.S. at 433-434. 


In addition to O'Donnell, the Court in both Carter 
and Affolder eliminated all requirements of negligence 
or fault in establishing a violation of the SAA. These 
cases recognize that negligence would be improperly in- 
troduced into the cases if the railroad could defend 
against a violation of the SAA by evidence of alleged 
reasons why the coupling would not occur in a particular 
set of circumstances. 


In Johnson v. Southern Pacific R.R., 196 US. 1 
(1904), a plaintiff in the process of straightening a draw- 
bar, was injured because the couplers on the two cars to 
be joined were not compatible with one another. The 
Court noted: 


The point was that the railroad companies should be 
compelled, respectively, to adopt devices, whatever 
they were, which would act so far uniformly as to 
eliminate the danger consequent on men going be- 
tween the cars. 


Id. at 16-17. 


The risk in coupling and uncoupling was the evil 
sought to be remedied, and that risk was to be obvi- 
ated by the use of couplers actually coupling auto- 
matically. 


Id. at 19. 


coupler because of an intervening and independent cause other than 
its inadequacies or defectiveness. It gave examples of the work of 
a saboteur, or where a coupler failed to hold because it was im- 
oroperly set. The Court discussed the latter situation in Affolder, 
339 U.S. at 96, and it also follows from the reasoning in the above 
quoted portion in O’Donnell that the condition of couplers in ordi- 
nary operations, such as curves, grades, loadings, etc. are not de- 
fenses to a violation of § 2 of the SAA. 


26 


The essential degree of uniformity was secured by 
providing that the couplings must couple automat- 
ically by impact without the necessity of men going 
between the ends of the cars. 


Id. at 20. 


The Petitioner, in its brief, at 21-24 contends that the 
misalignment in the present case was caused by the nor- 
mal movement of the railroad car and not by any defect 
or malfunctioning of the equipment. It offers various 
reasons why a misaligned drawbar occurs in cases where 
the equipment is not defective. For example, it states 
that drawbars often become misaligned by normal jarring 
and vibrations, the drawbars traversing a curved track 
must have some lateral play, and that the proper align- 
ment can only be accomplished by the employee going 
between the rails to move the drawbar manually. (Pet. 
Br. 22). The Petitioner argues that since the above is 
the result of normal train operations, this should not make 
a misalignment a violation of the SAA. The railroad 
contends that it should not be required to develop new 
technology to keep the drawbars in proper alignment. 
We submit this is completely inconsistent with the lan- 
guage of the statute, the intent of Congress, and decisions 
of the Court. Congress did not concern itself with how 
the railroads would comply with the statutory require- 
ment, but only that the employees be protected in the 
coupling and uncoupling operations. An employee can 


"2 As stated by the report of the House Committee on Interstate 
and Foreign Commerce “The demand of railway employees for the 
protection of the law came to us with great force as we recognized 
that they could not to any great extent guard against the casualties 
to which they were exposed ; they must face the danger while others 
determined the conditions under which they labor.” H.R. Rep. 1678 
supra at p. 2. (Emphasis added). Congress intended to, and did, 
eliminate the hazardous burden placed upon the employes in coupling 
and uncoupling operations by the adoption of Section 2. 


27 


open a knuckle without going between cars, but he/she 
cannot align a drawbar without doing so. It was appro- 
priate for the Court in Affolder to conclude that liability 
under the SAA existed so long as the coupler was placed 
in a position to operate, because the equipment permits 
the uncoupling to occur b, use of an uncoupling lever 
without the necessity of an employee going between the 
cars. From the railroad’s argument here, it appears that 
the railroad is suggesting that an uncoupling lever was not 
necessary. We submit that the Court would not have 
imposed the condition that the coupler be placed in an 
open position if the device were not present to prevent 
the employee from going between the cars. The industry 
had an obligation to develop a mechanism for automatic 
realignment of a drawbar, or railroads assume the risk 
that if an employee is injured in the process of attempting 
to manually realign the equipment, the SAA would be 
violated.” 


18 The Respondent agrees with the statement of the Petitioner 
(Pet. Br. 24-25) that it should not make a difference as to the 
railroad’s liability whether or «first there must be a failed 
attempt to couple, rather than relying on the judgment of an em- 
ployee that the drawbar is too slued to couple, and then the em- 
ployee is injured during the process of alignment in each instance. 
In the former example, the requirement to first make an attempt 
at a coupling and fail would be a useless act, and could in fact 
damage equipment. It should be noted that in the lower court, the 
Petitioner argued that a failed coupling or impact must first occur 
before the SAA is violated. See Brief and Appendix of Defendant 
Norfolk and Western Railway Company in the Appellate Court of 
Illinois, Fifth Judicial District at pp. 16-17. 


28 


CONCLUSION 


For all the reasons stated herein, the decision of the 
_ judgment of the Appellate Court of [Illinois should be 


affirmed. 
Respectfully submitted, 
| 

LANCE CALLIS LAWRENCE M. MANN * 
CALLIS, PAPA, HALE, JENSEN, ALPER & MANN, P.C. 

JACKSTADT, BAILEY & 400 N. Capitol Street, N.W. 

HALLORAN Suite 851 
1326 Neidringhaus Avenue Washington, D.C. 20001 
P.O. Box 1326 (202) 298-9191 


Granite City, Illinois 62040 Counsel for Respondent 
(618) 452-1323 

JEANNE SATHRE 

115 S. 6th Street 

Marshall, Illinois 62441 

(217) 826-6330 


December 8, 1995 * Counsel of Record 


