FILED 


(2) 941 8O.9MAY 3-195 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


M ISHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL Co., LTD. AND 
ITA HOLDING CORPORATION, 


HAND DELIVERED Petitioners, 
Vv. 
MAY ~3 1995 Li wrence EPSTEIN, et al., 
Orrive OE THE CLERK Respondents. 


SUPREME COU 


ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL Co., LTD. 
AND MATSUSHITA HOLDING CORPORATION, 
PETITIONERS, 


Vv. 
WALTER MINTON, 
Respondent. 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


APPENDIX TO 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


GEOFFREY C. HAZARD, JR. BARRY R. OSTRAGER 

Of Counsel Counsel of Record 

Trustee Professor of Law SIMPSON THACHER & BARTLETT 
University of Pennsylvania (a partnership which includes 
3400 Chestnut Street professional corporations) 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104 425 Lexington Avenue 

(215) 898-7494 New York, New York 10017 


(212) 455-2000 


Attorneys for Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd. and 
Matsushita Holding Corporation 


Appendix A: 


Appendix B: 


Appendix C: 


Appendix D: 


Appendix E: 
Appendix F: 


Appendix G: 
Appendix H: 


Appendix I: 


Appendix J: 


TABLE OF APPENDICES 


Opinion of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
PT Sec ceesabdontdesvcocedeccccs 


Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 

Law, and Order of the United 

States District Court for the 

Central District of California .......... 


Order of the United States 

Court of Appeals for the Ninth 

Circuit Denying Petition for 

Rehearing and Rejecting Suggestion 

for Rehearing In Banc................ 


- ion, Order and Final Judgment 
of the Delaware Court of Chancery ..... 


Opinion of the Delaware Supreme Court . 


Notice of Settlement to the Delaware 
Dvikbhcieatuvevedsutedwandeekees 


Release Provision of Delaware Settlement 


SEC Rule 14d-10, 17 C.F.R. 
DS PEE 6 ccccncebersccscenevess 


Section 14(d)(7) of the Securities Exchange 
RGR, GD Gee © PEELED cocccccccces 


Pertinent Excerpts From the Stock 
Purchase Agreement filed with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission 
referenced in Kahn v. Virginia Retirement 
an 783 F. Supp: (E.D. Va. 
1992), aff'd, 13 F.3d 110 (4th Cir. 1993), 
cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1834 (1994)..... 


la 


45a 


62a 


63a 
76a 


77a 
102a 


10Sa 


107a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN; JOHN LINDER;: 
JANE ROCKFORD, as trustee of the 
Michael J. Rockford Trust; 

MAURICE KARLIN; RUTH KARLIN; 
BETH ANN KARLIN; BERT P. KARLIN, 


Plaintiffs-Appellants, 


No. 92-55675 
= D.C. No. 
CV 90-6451-R 


MCA, INC.; MATSUSHITA ACQUISITION 
CORPORATION; MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC 
INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD; MATSUSHITA 
HOLDING CORPORATION; LEW 
WASSERMAN; SIDNEY J. SHEINBERG, 


Defendants-Appellees. 


Appeals from the United States District Court 
for the Central District of California 


Manuel L. Real, District Judge, Presiding 


Argued and Submitted 
August 2, 1993—Pasadena, California 
Submission Vacated August 13, 1993 

Reargued and Resubmitted October 12, 1993 


Filed February 27, 1995 


Before: William A. Norris, Charlies Wiggins, 
and Diarmuid F. O’Scanniain, Circuit Judges. 


Opinion by Judge Norris 


ee 


2a 


In 1990, Matsushita Electrical Co. Ltd. (“Matsushita”) 
acquired MCA, Inc. (“MCA”) for $6.1 billion. The acquisition 
was accomplished through a tender offer of $71 per share of 
MCA common stock.! 


Lew Wasserman, MCA's chairman and chief executive 
officer at the time, owned 4,953,927 shares of MCA common 
stock worth $351,728,817 at the tender price of $71 per share. 
His cost basis was 3¢ per share. Rather than tender his shares at 
the tender offer price, Wasserman entered into a separate agree- 
ment with Matsushita, known as the “Capital Contribution and 
Loan Agreement,” pursuant to which Wasserman exchanged his 
shares for preferred stock in a wholly-owned Matsushita subsidi- 
ary called “MEA Holdings.” ? Matsushita agreed to fund MEA 
Holdings by contributing 106% of the tender price multiplied by 
the number of MCA shares Wasserman exchanged. The MEA 
Holdings preferred stock Wasserman received pays a dividend of 
8.75% annually, is secured by letters of credit, and is redeemable 
upon the death of either Wasserman or his wife, but in no event 
earlier than five years from the date of the exchange. Wasserman 
was 77 at the time. It is not disputed that the transaction was 
designed to be a tax-free exchange of Wasserman’s MCA stock 


under Internal Revenue Code § 351(a), 26 U.S.C. § 351(a) 
(1994). 3 


Sidney Sheinberg, MCA's chief operating officer at the time 
of Matsushita's tender offer, owned approximately 1,179,635 
shares of MCA common stock. He tendered these shares pursu- 
ant to Matsushita's $71 per share offer and received in exchange 
consideration worth approximately $83,754,085. Two days after 
Matsushita accepted all tendered shares, Sheinberg received an 


' Tendering shareholders received $66 in cash and $5 worth of stock in 
WWOR.TV., a television station that was spun-off from MCA because of 
legal restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic broadcast stations. 


? Wasserman also received for each of his shares the $5 worth of stock in 
WWOR.TV that all tendering shareholders received. 


> Upon the death of Wasserman or his wife, the basis of all their community 
property, including the Matsushita preferred stock, would “step up” to its 
fair market value. See Internal Revenue Code §§ 1014, 2032. 


Pd 


RT Or ae 


+a 


Bt C08 By rd a ee 


een ee Te 


aa ii ie 


3a 


additional $21 million in cash, ostensibly in exchange for unexer- 
cised MCA stock options. 


These consolidated appeals arise out of actions brought in 
the United States District Court for the Central District of 
California by former MCA shareholders* who tendered their 
shares for the $71 tender price. They claim that Matsushita 
violated SEC Rule 14d-10, 17 C.F.R. § 240.14d-10 (1994), by 
treating Wasserman and Sheinberg differently from other share- 
holders in the tender offer. Rule 14d-10, known as the “all- 
holder, best-price” rule, requires bidders to treat all shareholders 
on equal terms. * 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


4 The consolidated appeals involve two sets of plaintiffs, each of whom filed 
separate complaints. Walter Minton (“Minton”) brought this action in his 
individual capacity. Lawrence Epstein, John Linder, Jane Rockford, Maurice 
Karlin, Ruth Karlin, Beth Karlin, and Bert Karlin (“Epstein plaintiffs’) 
brought suit both individually and on behalf of all MCA shareholders at the 
time of the tender offer. 


5 Plaintiffs also claim that the Wasserman and Sheinberg transactions violated 
SEC Rule 10b-13, 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-13 (1994). The district court dis- 
missed this claim, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), for want of a private 
right of action. On the facts of this case, any relief plaintiffs could obtain 
under Rule 10b-13 is also available under Rule 14d-10. See Field v. Trump, 
850 F.2d 938, 946 n.3 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1012 (1989). We 
therefore do not consider plaintiffs’ Rule 10b-13 claim. 


® Plaintiffs did not seek summary judgment on their claim that the $21 million 
payment to Sheinberg also violated Rule |4d-10. 


4a 


14d-10, we reverse. With respect to plaintiffs’ claim that the 
Sheinberg payment violated Rule 14d-10, we vacate and remand 
for further proceedings to determine whether the $21 million 
Sheinberg payment was in fact a premium paid to encourage 
Sheinberg to tender his shares.’ 


We also reverse the district court’s orders denying the 
Epstein plaintiffs’ motions for class certification and leave to 
amend their complaint. 


During the pendency of these consolidated appeals, the 
Delaware Court of Chancery entered a judgment approving the 
settlement of a state class action that released all claims arising 
out of Matsushita’s tender offer for MCA stock, including the 
Williams Act claims raised in the Epstein class action. Matsu- 
shita argues that the settlement of the Delaware class action 
precludes the federal claims raised in the Epstein action. We 
disagree and hold that the settlement of the Delaware class 
action does not preclude the Epstein class action. 


I. Private Right of Action under Section 14(dX7) 


The SEC’s statutory authority to promulgate Rule 14d-10 
derives from sections 14(d)(6) and 14(d)(7) of the 1968 Wil- 
liams Act Amendments to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 


’ Plaintiffs also argued in the district court and initially on appeal that MCA, 
Wasserman, and Sheinberg themselves should be held liable for aiding and 
abetting Matsushita's alleged violation of Rules 14d-10 and 10b-13. The 
district court dismissed this claim for failure to state a claim. Fed. R. Civ. P. 
12(b)(6). In light of Central Bank v. First Inverstate Bank, 114 S. Ct. 1439 
(1994), the Epstein plaintiffs now concede that the district court's judgment 
dismissing the aiding and abetting claims against MCA, Wasserman, and 
Sheinberg must be affirmed. Plaintiff Walter Minton, however, maintains 
that Wasserman and Sheinberg may stil] be held liable, notwithstanding 
Central Bank, for conspiring to violate Rules 14d-10 and 10b-13. We reject 
Minton’s attempt to avoid Central Bank's restrictions on private aiding and 
abetting actions by using the label “conspiracy.” Nothing in the language of 
Rule 14d-10, which imposes restrictions on the activities of “bidder(s},” or in 
the language of Rule 10b-13, which speaks of “person(s] who make[ } a cash 
tender offer,”” suggests that liability may be imposed upon shareholders who 
are the beneficiaries of a bidder's violation of these rules. We therefore affirm 
the dismissal of plaintiffs’ claims against MCA, Wasserman and Sheinberg. 


ee ea ee 


“ ee ee ee ee 


Sa 


15 U.S.C. § 78n(d)(6), (7) (1981). Matsushita ° makes the 
threshold argument that it cannot be sued by MCA shareholders 
for violating Rule 14d-10 because Congress did not intend sec- 
tions 14(d)(6) and 14(d)(7) to be privately enforceable. '° In 
advancing this argument, Matsushita asks us to create a conflict 


8 In Robertson v. Dean Witter, 749 F.2d 530 (9th Cir. 1984), we held that an 
agency rule contains a private right of action if Congress intended the statute 
under which it was promulgated to be privately enforceable. /d. at $36. While 
the parties agree that Rule 14d-10 was promulgated under sections 14(d)(6) 
and 14(d)(7) of the Williams Act, plaintiffs contend that the SEC also issued 
the Rule to implement section 14(e). Because we hold that Congress intended 
section 14(d)(7) to be privately enforceable, we need not address the relation- 
ship between section 14(e) and Rule 14d-10. 


9 In its brief, Matsushita did not argue that Rule 14d-10 does not contain a 
private right of action. Instead, it argued solely that Rule 10b-13 is not 
privately enforceable. Plaintiffs argue that Matsushita in fact conceded that 
Rule 14d-10 contains a private cause of action by writing that “‘[i]n addition 
to SEC enforcement actions and Rule /4d-]0 claims, stockholders are 
further protected by Rule 10b-S...." Brief of Matsushita at 47 (emphasis 
added). Matsushita, however, denies that it made such a concession. See 
Supplemental Brief of Defendants-Appellants at 11 n.11. In a letter submit- 
ted to the court several months after oral argument, Matsushita stated that 
Rule 14d-10 does not contain a private right of action, citing for support 
Central Bank v. First Interstate Bank, 114 S. Ct. 1439 (1994), and referring 
to portions of its brief that discuss only Rule 10b-13. Nonetheless, because an 
argument concerning whether Rule 14d-10 provides a private right of action 
appears in the Brief of Wasserman and Sheinberg (“Wasserman Brief’), we 
will give Matsushita the benefit of the doubt and treat its 28(j) letter as 
incorporating that portion of the Wasserman Brief by reference. 


10 Section 14(d)(6) provides that when more shares are tendered than a bidder 
is “willing to take up and pay for, the securities taken up shall be taken up as 
nearly as may be pro rata ... according to the number of securities deposited 
by each depositor.” 15 U.S.C. § 78n(d)(6). 


Section 14(d)(7) provides: 


Where any person varies the terms of a tender offer or request or 
invitation for tenders before the expiration thereof by increasing the 
consideration offered to holders of such securities, such person shall pay 
the increased consideration to each security holder whose securities are 
taken up and paid for pursuant to the tender offer or request or 
invitation for tenders whether or not such securities have been taken up 
by such person before the variation of the tender offer or request or 
invitation. 

15 U.S.C. § 78n(d)(7). 


6a 


with the Second and Third Circuits, both of which have held that 
Congress intended to create a private right of action under 
section 14(d)(7). See Polaroid Corp. v. Disney, 862 F.2d 987, 
996 (3d Cir. 1988); Field v. Trump, 850 F.2d 938, 946 (2d Cir. 
1988), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1012 (1989); cf. Pryor v. United 
States Steel Corp., 794 F.2d 52, 57-58 (2d Cir.) (holding that 
section 14(d)(6) also contains a private right of action), cert. 
denied, 479 U.S. 954 (1986). We find the reasoning of the 
Second and Third Circuits to be persuasive. 


In Field and Pryor, the Second Circuit applied the tradi- 
tional four-factor Cort v. Ash test in deciding whether, in enact- 
ing sections 14(d)(6) and 14(d)(7), “Congress intended to create 
... by implication ... a private cause of action.” Pryor, 794 F.2d at 
57 (quoting Touche Ross & Co. v. Redington, 422 U.S. 560, 575 
(1979)). In holding that Congress did intend to create a private 
right of action the Second Circuit reasoned, first, that both 
14(d)(6) and 14(d)(7) “identif[y] [their] beneficiaries and, 
unlike the bulk of federal securities regulation, confer{ Ja sub- 
Stantive right on those beneficiaries."’ Pryor, 794 F.2d at 57 
(cited in Field, 850 F.2d at 946). Second, the court found that a 
private damages remedy was totally consistent with the statutory 
purpose of protecting injured investors and provided a particu- 
larly effective means of enforcing sections 14(d)(6) and 14(d)(7). 
Field, 850 F.2d at 946; Pryor, 794 F.2d at 56, 58. Finally, the 
Second Circuit noted that these claims are not those “tradition- 
ally relegated to state law.” Fields, 850 F.2d at 946; Pryor, 794 
F.2d at 58 


In Polaroid, the Third Circuit relied on Pryor and Field, 
but added that the “ ‘contemporary legal context’ informing 
what Congress perceived itself to be doing when it acted,” sup- 
ported an inference that Congress intended to create a private 
remedy for violations of section 14(d)(7). Polaroid, 862 F.2d at 
995 (quoting Cannon v. Univ. of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 698-99 

1979)) In 1968, when the Williams Act was enacted, various 
iower federal courts had construed section 10(b) of the 1934 Act 
as providing a private cause of action, and the Supreme Court, in 
1 Casey Borak, 377 U.S 426 (1964), had announced a liberal 
policy toward inferring private nmghts of action for securities law 


ot oe ots ewe ie at. eet? ey Slee be 


SE a ee 


~ ed i ee 


7a 


violations generally. See Polaroid, 862 F.2d at 995-96. Because 
Congress enacted the Williams Act in this context, “it is reasona- 
ble to conclude that Congress passed the Williams Act with an 
understanding that courts would construe the Act as creating 
private remedies that would enforce the provisions of the Act 
effectively.” Id. at 996. 


Matsushita argues that we should not follow Pryor, Field, 
and Polaroid because their rationale is inconsistent with our 
decision in In Re Washington Pub. Power Supply Sys. Sec. 
Litig., 823 F.2d 1349 (9th Cir. 1987) (en banc) (hereinafter 
“WPPSS “). We reject this argument. In WPPSS, we held that 
section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 did not create a 
private right of action, id. at 1358, but in doing so we hardly 
sounded the death knell for implied rights of action generally. 
Instead, like the Second and Third Circuits in Pryor, Field, and 
Polaroid, we applied the traditional four-factor Court v. Ash 
test, emphasizing two prongs in particular: whether there is an 
implicit indication, in the statute’s language, legislative history, 
or structure, of legislative intent to create a private remedy, and 
whether such an implication would be consistent with the under- 
lying legislative scheme.'' /d. at 1353. Like the Third Circuit, 
further, we focused on the context in which the statute was 
enacted. See id. at 1357 (looking to “contemporary legal context 
prevailing at the time of any comprehensive reexamination of or 
significant amendment to” the securities laws in evaluating 
whether Congress intended to create private right of action under 
section 17(a) of the 1933 Act). In WPPSS we not only found no 
evidence whatsoever of congressional intent to create a private 
right of action under section 17(a), but we also indicated that 
creating an implied private right of action would frustrate the 
purposes of the legislative scheme. /d. at 1355-56. In Pryor, 
Field, and Polaroid, just the opposite was true. 


'! In fact, in WPPSS we overruled two prior Ninth Circuit cases because of, 
among other reasons, their failure “to apply the Supreme Court's analysis in 
Cort v. Ash.’ WPPSS, 823 F.2d at 1351 


8a 


While we stated in WPPSS that we “will not engraft a 
remedy on a statute, no matter how salutary, that Congress did 
not intend to provide,” id. at 1353 (quoting California v. Sierra 
Club, 451 U.S. 287, 297 (1981)), we made equally clear that “a 
private remedy may be inferred from the plain language of the 
Statute, the statutory structure, or some other source.” /d. The 
principal difference between this case and WPPSS is the clarity 
of the statutory language. In WPPSS, the statute at issue, section 
17(a) of the 1933 Act, states that “[i]t shall be unlawful for any 
person in the offer or sale of any securities ...(1) to employ any 
device, scheme, or artifice to defraud, or (2) to obtain money or 
property by means of any untrue statement of a material fact....” 
15 U.S.C. § 77(q)(a) (1981). Section 14(d)(7), in contrast, spe- 
cifically endows shareholders with the right to receive any 
increased consideration offered to other shareholders. It states 
that whenever any person “varies the terms of a tender offer” by 
“increasing the consideration offered” to some security holders, 
“such person shall pay the increased consideration to each 
security holder whose securities are taken up and paid for pursu- 
—amnt to the tender offer ...." (emphasis added). This language, of 
course, constitutes far more than the “general censure of fraudu- 
lent practices” we found insufficient to create an implied right of 
action in WPPSS, 823 F.2d at 1353. Instead, it is “legislation 
with an unmistakable focus on the benefitted class.” /d. at 1354. 


The structure of section 14(d)(7) also points to Congress’ 
intent to give shareholders the right to sue. If shareholders were 
not permitted to sue for damages for violations of section 
14(d)(7), there would be no way, once a violation has occurred, 
to enforce the express statutory command that a bidder “shall 
pay to each security holder” any increased consideration paid to 
any other security holder.'? Under section 21(d)(1) of the 1934 


'2 Thus section 14(d)(7) stands in sharp contrast with the statute at issue in 
Middlesex County Sewerage Auth. v. Nat'l Sea Clammers Ass'n, 453 U.S. 
1 (1981), where the Court heid that the existence of “elaborate enforcement 
provisions,” including an express citizens suit provision, precluded the infer- 
ence of additional private causes of action. /d. at 14. In contrast, the 
Williams Act itself contained no remedial provisions whatsoever, despite the 
fact that its “sole purpose” was the “protection of investors who are con- 
fronted with a tender offer.” Pryor, 794 F.2d at 56 (quoting Piper v. Chris- 


9a 


Act, the SEC’s authority to enforce the provisions of the 1934 
Act is limited to bringing injunctive actions. 


Finally, the legal context of section 14(d)(7) of the 1968 
Williams Act differed markedly from that of section 17(a) of the 
1933 Act. It was not until 1964 that the Supreme Court 
announced the implied right of action doctrine in J./. Case v. 
Borak, 377 U.S. 426 (1964). Thus, at the time of passage of the 
Williams Act, the Court’s implied right of action jurisprudence 
gave Congress reason to think it need not decide the private right 
of action question itself. 


Matsushita also urges us not to follow Pryor, Field, and 
Polaroid on the ground that these cases are inconsistent with the 
implied cause of action jurisprudence of the Supreme Court as it 
exists today. As Matsushita would have us read the Supreme 
Court's cases, a private right of action would not be recognized 
unless Congress explicitly created one. For example, Matsushita 
asserts that the Supreme Court would not interpret section 
14(d)(7) as creating a damages remedy for MCA shareholders 
because Congress did not say explicitly that all “security holders 
shall have the right to receive’ any increased consideration 
offered to select shareholders. Wasserman Brief at 56. 


Matsushita’s argument that there has been a recent sea 
change in the Court’s implied right of action jurisprudence is 
based on wishful thinking, not case law.'!*The argument is essen- 
tially the same one advanced by Justice Scalia in his concurring 


Craft Indus., 430 U.S. 1, 35 (1977)). Matsushita's reliance on Nat'l Sea 
Clammers in this case is to no avail. 


'3 The cases Matsushita does cite simply hold that courts are reluctant to infer 
causes of action absent an expression of congressional intent. We agree that 
congressional intent is the touchstone of an implied private right of action, 
and that a showing of “the utility of the proposed private right,”’ by itself, is 
insufficient to justify inferring a private cause of action. See Wasserman 
Brief at 53. At the same time, the Court has stated over and over for the last 
fifteen years, in the cases Matsushita cites, that “the failure of Congress 
expressly to consider a private remedy is not inevitably inconsistent with an 
intent on its part to make such a remedy available,’ Transamerica Mort- 
gage Advisors, Inc. v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11, 18 (1979), and that “congres- 
sional intent can be inferred from the language of the statute, the statutory 


10a 


opinion in Thompson v. Thompson, 484 U.S. 174, 188 (1988) 
(Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment), where he urged his 
colleagues to “get out of the business of implied private rights of 
action altogether.” /d. at 192. The problem is that no other 
justice of the Court has yet to endorse the “get out of the 
business” approach to implied causes of action. To the contrary, 
the Court has only recently reaffirmed the vitality of the Cort v. 
Ash test—which the Second and Third Circuits applied in hold- 
ing that section 14(d)(7) is privately enforceable—as an aid in 
“determin[ing}] ‘whether Congress intended to create the private 
remedy asserted’ for the violation of statutory rights.” Wilder v. 
Virginia Hospital Assn., 496 U.S. 498, 508 n.9 (1990) (quoting 
Transamerica Mortgage Advisors, Inc. v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11, 
15-16 (1979)); Suter v. Artist M., 112 S. Ct. 1360, 1370 (1992) 
(applying “the familiar test of Cort v. Ash” in concluding that 
Congress did not intend to make a private remedy available to 
enforce the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act). 
Indeed, in Thompson v. Thompson, the case in which Justice 
Scalia called for an end to implied private rights of action, the 
eight members of the Court who comprised the majority stated 
that the existence of a private right of action does not require 
“evidence that Members of Congress, in enacting the statute, 
actually had in mind the creation of a private cause of action.” 
Thompson, 484 U.S. at 179. Rather, the Court reaffirmed its 
long-standing view that “‘as an implied cause of action doctrine 
suggests,” Congress’ “intent may appear implicitly in the lan- 
guage or structure of the statute, or in the circumstances of its 
enactment.” /d. (internal citation and quotation omitted).'¢ 


structure, or some other source.... Karahalios v. Nat'l Fed. of Fed. 
Employees, Local 1263, 489 U.S. 527, 532-33 (1989) (internal citation and 
quotations omitted). 


'* Moreover, as the Third Circuit stated in Polaroid, the Court has been 
sensitive to the legal context in which Congress legislated. See Franklin v. 
Gwinnett County Pub. Sch., 112 S. Ct. 1028, 1036 (1992) (applying “same 
contextual approach used to justify an implied right of action” to determine 
scope of available remedies); Thompson v. Thompson, 484 U.S. 174, 180 
(1988) (examining context of legislation “with an eye toward determining 
Congress’ perception of the law that it was shaping or reshaping’); Merrill 
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith v. Curran, 456 U.S. 353, 381 (1982) (taking 


lla 


We therefore reject Matsushita’s argument that the ratio- 
nale of Pryor, Field, and Polaroid is inconsistent with Supreme 
Court implied private right of action jurisprudence as it exists 
today.'5 Like the Second and Third Circuits, we believe that the 
statutory language—that a bidder “shall pay the increased con- 
sideration” to a shareholder who was paid less than another 
shareholder—is more than adequate under existing Supreme 
Court case law to support a finding of congressional intent to 
create a private right of action for violations of section 14(d)(7). 


In sum, we hold that in enacting section 14(d)(7) of the 
Williams Act, Congress intended to provide a damage remedy as 
a means of enforcing its command that every security holder who 
tenders his shares be paid any “increased consideration” offered 
to others. 


Il. The Wasserman Transaction 


Captioned the “Equal treatment of securities holders,’ Rule 
14d-10 prohibits a bidder from making a tender offer that is not 
open to all shareholders or that is made to shareholders at 
varying prices.'® The gist of plaintiffs’ claims is that Matsushita 


into account the “contemporary legal context" to determine whether Con- 
gress thought it was creating implied cause of action); Cannon v. University 
of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 698-99 (1979) (same); id. at 718 (Rehnquist, J., 
concurring) (approving implication of private right of action under Title IX 
solely because, at time of passage, the Court's implied right of action 
jurisprudence gave Congress reason to think that it need not decide private 
right of action question itself). 


'S Matsushita also argues that the Supreme Court's recent decision in Central 
Bank v. First Interstate Bank, 114 S. Ct. 1439 (1994), requires federal 
courts to get out of the business of inferring private causes of action from 
statutes. Central Bank, however, is inapposite; it held simply that a private 
right of action is not available for aiding and abetting actions not authorized 
by statute. 


'© Rule 14d-10 provides in relevant part: 
(a) No bidder shall make a tender offer unless: 


(1) The tender offer is open to all security holders of the class of 
securities subject to the tender offer; and 


12a 


violated the antidiscrimination requirements of the Rule by pay- 
ing Wasserman and Sheinberg premiums pursuant to the tender 
offer. 


Negotiations between Matsushita and MCA began in 
August 1990, when a representative of Matsushita telephoned 
MCA’s financial advisor to express interest in acquiring MCA. 
During the course of the talks, Matsushita stressed that it wanted 
Wasserman and Sheinberg to commit their shares to Matsushita 
in advance of the friendly takeover and to remain in MCA's 
employment for five years. On the morning of November 26, 
1990, Matsushita and Wasserman entered into the Capital Con- 
tribution and Loan Agreement, pursuant to which Wasserman 
agreed to exchange his MCA shares for preferred stock in a 
subsidiary Matsushita would create called “‘MEA Holdings.” 


Performance of the Capital Contribution and Loan Agree- 
ment was conditioned on the tender offer in several respects. 
First, neither Matsushita nor Wasserman was obligated to per- 
form the Agreement if any of the conditions of the tender offer 
were not satisfied. See Capital Contribution and Loan Agree- 
ment §7(c), ER 357 Exhibit S at 12. If, for example, Matsushita 
did not acquire 50% of MCA’s common stock as a result of the 


(2) The consideration paid to any security holder pursuant to the 
tender offer is the highest consideration paid to any other security holder 
during such tender offer.... 


(c) Paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall not prohibit the offer of more than 
one type of consideration in a tender offer, Provided, That: 


(1) Security holders are afforded equal right to elect among each of 
the types of consideration offered; and 


(2) The highest consideration of each type paid to any security holder 
is paid to any other security holder receiving that type of consideration. 


The SEC promulgated Rule 14d-10 in 1986, in part to codify its view that 
§14(d)(7) of the Williams Act Amendments to the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 contains an all-holders and a best-price requirement. See SEC 
Release No. 34-22198, 1985 SEC LEXIS 1175 at *2 (July 1, 1985) (stating 
that under Commission's interpretation of §14(d)(7) “(i) a tender offer must 
be extended to all holders of the class of securities which is the subject of the 
tender offer (the ‘all-holders requirement’); and (ii) all such holders must be 
paid the highest consideration offered under the tender offer (the ‘best price 
rule’)”’). 


a 


l3a 


tender offer, the Wasserman deal would be off. Second, the 
timing of performance was tied to the tender offer. The Wasser- 
man exchange was scheduled tc take place “immediately follow- 
ing the time at which shares of MCA Common Stock are 
accepted for payment pursuant to and in accordance with the 
terms of the offer...."/d. §2(a), ER 357 Exhibit S at 4. Third, the 
amount of cash Matsushita was required to contribute in order to 
fund MEA Holdings was dependent upon the tender price, with 
Matsushita agreeing to contribute to MEA Holdings 106% of the 
“highest price paid ... for any shares of MCA Common Stock 
pursuant to the [tender] offer.” /d. at §1(c), ER 357 Exhibit S at 
2. Finally, the redemption value of Wasserman’s preferred stock 
was set as the tender price. /d. Thus if Matsushita increased the 
tender price at the last minute in response to a competitive bid 
for MCA, Matsushita would have been required to increase both 
its funding of MEA Holdings and the amount paid upon the 
redemption of the Wasserman preferred stock. 


Moments after signing the Capital Contribution and Loan 
agreement, Matsushita and MCA announced the $71 per share 
tender offer. Shareholders were given from the time of the 
announcement until 12:01 a.m. on December 29, 1990 to tender 
their shares. The owners of 91% of MCA’s common stock did so, 
and at 12:05 a.m., Matsushita accepted all tendered shares for 
payment. At 1:25 a.m., Matsushita exchanged Wasserman’s 
shares for MEA Holdings preferred stock pursuant to the Capi- 
tal Contribution and Loan Agreement. MCA was merged into 
Matsushita as a wholly owned subsidiary on January 3, 1991. 


Whether the Wasserman transaction violated Rule 14d-10 
depends upon whether Wasserman received greater consideration 
than other MCA shareholders “during such tender offer,” Rule 
14d-10(a)(2), or whether he received a type of consideration not 
offered to other MCA shareholders “in a tender offer.” Rule 14d- 


10(c)."” 


'7 Rule 14d-10(c)(1) provides that “Paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall not 
prohibit the offer of more than one type of consideration in a tender offer, 
Provided, That: (1) Security holders are afforded equal right to elect among 
each of the types of consideration offered{.]"" At oral argument, counsel for 
Wasserman and Sheinberg argued for the first time and without authority 


l4a 


Matsushita argues that the Wasserman transaction falls 
outside the Rule’s ambit because it closed after the tender offer 
period expired. The tender offer period, Matsushita contends, 
ended when it accepted the tendered MCA shares for payment— 
at 12:05 a.m. on December 29, 1990, one hour and 20 minutes 
before Wasserman’s shares were exchanged. In Matsushita's 
view, liability under Rule 14d-10 boils down to a pure question of 
timing: the Rule is simply a “mechanical provision’ concerned 
with “payments to shareholders of a target corporation only 
during a specifically-defined tender offer period.” Brief of Mat- 
sushita at 23 (emphasis in original). Outside that period, Matsu- 
shita insists, “Rule 14d-10 is without effect” because the Rule “‘is 
engaged (or not engaged) depending upon when payment is 
made.” Id. at 23, 35 (emphasis in original). 


Although Matsushita argues that Rule 14d-10 is designed to 
operate only during a “specifically-defined tender offer period,” 
neither the phrase “tender offer period”’ nor a specific time frame 
is to be found in the Rule’s text. To be sure, section (a)(2) of the 
Rule prohibits paying one security holder more than another 


that section (c)(1) cannot be violated. Counsel contended that rather than 
an independent prohibition, section (c)(1) is a “savings clause” designed to 
create an exception to section («)(2) of the Rule. 

We cannot agree. When different types of consideration are offered to 
different holders of the same class of security, it may be difficult for plaintiffs 
to prove that one package was more valuable than the other, as section 
(a)(2) requires. Section (c)(1) obviates the need for plaintiffs to do so. It is a 
prophylactic rule that entitles a court to presume, if a tender offer fails to 
make the type of consideration offered to some security holders available to 
all, that the selectively-offered consideration was “higher consideration’ for 
purposes of section (a)(2). This reading of section (c)(1) is supported by the 
SEC's comments in releasing Rule 144-10, to which we are obliged to give 
substantial deference. See Stinson v. United States, 113 S.Ct. 1913, 1919 
(1993) (agency's interpretation of own regulations must be given “control- 
ling weight unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regula- 
tion”); Leslie Salt Co. v. United States, 896 F.2d 354, 357 (9th Cir. 1990), 
(agency's interpretation of its own regulations is entitled to deference), cert. 
denied, 498 U.S. 1126 (1991). In its release, the SEC stated, under the 
heading “Alternative Types of Consideration,” that “when more than one 
type of consideration is offered ... [sjecurity holders .. must be afforded the 
right to elect among all types of consideration offered.” SEC Release No. 
34-23421, 1986 SEC LEXIS 1179 at *28 (July 11, 1986). 


15a 


“during such tender offer.” But the term “tender offer,”’ as used 
in the federal securities laws, has never been interpreted to 
denote a rigid period of time. On the contrary, in order to prevent 
bidders from circumventing the Williams Act’s requirements, 
Congress, the SEC, and the courts have steadfastly refused to 
give the term a fixed definition. Instead, we have held that “([t)o 
serve the purposes of the Williams Act, there is a need for 
flexibility in fashioning a definition of a tender offer.” SEC v. 
Carter Hawley Hale Stores, Inc., 760 F.2d 945, 950 (9th Cir. 
1985). 


Even if the language of Rule 14d-10(a)(2) were to provide a 
measure of support for Matsushita's timing argument, Matsu- 
shita would still be unable to account for the language of Rule 
14d-10(c), which prohibits a bidder from “offer [ing] ... more 
than one type of consideration in a tender offer’ if shareholders 
are not permitted to choose between the different types of consid- 
eration offered. (Emphasis added). Section (c)(1) makes no 
mention of payment and no mention of timing. Instead, Rule 
14d-10(c)(1) prohibits a bidder such as Matsushita from offering 
a shareholder, such as Wasserman, not only consideration of 
greater value than that offered to other shareholders, but also 
consideration that is different from that offered to other share- 
holders. It endows each shareholder with the “equal right to elect 
among each of the types of consideration offered,” regardless of 
when actual payment is made. 


The administrative history of Rule 14d-10 underscores how 
strained Matsushita's timing argument is. It suggests anything 
but the notion that the SEC intended the Rule to be a mechani- 
cal provision concerned not with discriminatory tender © ~ ’*s, but 
with the timing of payment to favored shareholders. In promul- 
gating Rule 14d-10, the SEC emphasized the need for “equality 
of treatment among all shareholders who tender their shares.” 
Id. at *15 (quoting S. Rep. No. 550, 90th Cong., Ist Sess. 10 
(1967)). It further characterized Rule 14d-10 as a substantive 
provision necessary to achieve the “investor protection purposes 
of the [1934] Exchange Act” and the Williams Act. SEC 
Release No. 34-22198, 1985 SEC LEXIS 1175 at *2 (July 1, 


16a 


1985). At no point in its discussion of the Rule’s purposes did the 
SEC suggest that the Rule's sole focus is the timing of payments. 


Matsushita implicitly acknowledges that Rule 14d-10 does 
not contain a rigid time frame of its own when it urges us to read 
Rule 14d-10 as incorporating, sub silentio, the time frame set out 
in Rule 10b-13, which prohibits side purchases “from the time 
[a] tender offer or exchange offer is publicly announced or 
otherwise made known ... [to security holders] until the expira- 
tion of the period ... during which securities tendered pursuant to 
such tender offer or exchange offer may by the terms of such 
offer be accepted or rejected.” Matsushita justifies fusing ele- 
ments of two separate regulations by asserting that “for purposes 
of the Williams Act and the SEC Rules promulgated thereun- 
der,’ Rule 10b-13 defines the time period of a tender offer. Brief 
of Matsushita at 24. 


Matsushita offers no authority for incorporating Rule 10b- 
13’s time frame into Rule 14d-10. In promulgating the all- 
holders, best-price Rule in 1986, the SEC gave no hint that its 
new regulation would be governed by Rule 10b-13’s time clock. 
Nor does the Williams Act fully incorporate Rule 10b-13's 
timing provisions. Rule 10b-13 prohibits bidders from making 
side deals during a fixed period of time; it does not purport to 
serve as a general definition of when a tender offer begins and 
ends. In fact, in Rule 14d-2, the SEC rejected the notion that 
Rule 10b-13 timing determines when tender offers start for 
purposes of section 14(d)(7) and the rules promulgated 
thereunder.'* 


'§ Under Rule 144-2, a tender offer begins for purposes of section 14(d)(7) not 
from the moment of the offer’s announcement (as under Rule 10b-13), but 
at 12:01 a.m. on the earlier of the date the tender offer is publicly announced 
or sent to securities holders. See Rule 14d-2(a); Rule 14d-2(b)(2)(ii); SEC 
Release No. 34-22198, July 1, 1985, 1985 SEC LEXIS at *10, 13. Matsu- 
shita claims that this provision of Rule 14d-2 does not apply to claims 
asserted under Rule 144-10, as opposed to under section 14(d)(7), but they 
strain to do so. Rule 144-10 was promulgated to codify the all-holders and 
best-price requirements in § 14(d)(7), and the SEC stated when proposing 
the Rule that the § 14(d)(7), and the time frame would carry over to the 
Rule. /d. 


: 
: 
; 
; 
} 
: 
: 


17a 


We therefore reiect Matsushita's timing argument. Indeed, 
if adopted, it would drain Rule 14d-10 of all its force. Under 
Matsushita's reading, even the most blatantly discriminatory 
tender offer—in which large shareholders were paid twice as 
much as small shareholders—would fall outside Rule 14d-10's 
prohibition, so long as the bidder waited a few seconds after it 
accepted all of the tendered shares before paying the favored 
shareholders. Rule 14d-10’s equality requirements, which 
“expressly preclude bidders from discriminating among holders 
of the class of securities that is the subject of the offer, either by 
exclusion from the offer or by payment of different considera- 
tion,” SEC Release No. 34-23421, 1986 SEC LEXIS 1179 at 
*10 (July 11, 1986), cannot be so easily circumvented. 


An inquiry more in keeping with the language and purposes 
of Rule 14d-10 focuses not on when Wasserman was paid, but on 
whether the Wasserman transaction was an integral part of 
Matsushita's tender offer. If it was, Matsushita violated Rule 
14d-10 because it paid him, pursuant to the tender offer, differ- 
ent, and perhaps more valuable consideration than it offered to 
other shareholders.'? 


Matsushita contends that the Wasserman transaction can- 
not be deemed a part of the tender offer because it was merely a 
private exchange of stock, structured to take place after the 
tender offer finished. But Matsushita's assumption that the Was- 
serman transaction was private, rather than a part of the tender 
offer, begs the question. In Field v. Trump, 850 F.2d at 944, the 
Second Circuit held that “[w])hether [an] acquisition of shares in 
a corporation is part of the tender offer for purposes of the Act 
cannot be determined by rubber-stamping the label used by the 


'9 If an ostensibly private agreement that pays a particular shareholder a sum 
greater than the tender price is deemed a part of the tender offer, the tender 
offer does not end, by definition, until that agreement is performed. Perform- 
ance of the agreement, including payment of the shareholder, will therefore 
take place “during the tender offer,” in violation of Rule 14d-10(a)(2). 
Similarly, if one shareholder is offered a different type of consideration than 
other shareholders in a transaction that is determined to be a part of the 
tender offer, the bidder has offered more than one type of consideration “in a 
tender offer’ without affording each shareholder the right to choose the 
package she prefers, in violation of Rule 14d-10(c)(1). 


18a 


acquiror.”” To hold otherwise, the court stated, would render 
“virtually all of the provisions of the Williams Act, including its 
filing and disclosure requirements,” subject to evasion “simply by 
an offeror’s announcement that offers to purchase ... stock were 
private purchases.” /d. Thus, the court observed that because the 
Williams Act and its implementing regulations do not define the 
term “tender offer,” “[c]ourts faced with the question of whether 
purchases of a corporation’s shares are privately negotiated or 
are part of a tender offer have applied a functional test that 
scrutinizes such purchases in the context of various salient char- 
acteristics of tender offers and the purposes of the Williams 
Act.” Id. at 943-44. See also SEC Release No. 34-22198, 1985 
SEC LEXIS 1175, at *7 (July 1, 1985) (“[T)he fact that ... 
different consideration is offered to different holders of the same 
class of securities, does not mean that a tender offer has not been 
made under the Williams Act. Rather, if such a transaction is 
found to be a tender offer, then the tender offer would not have 
been made in compliance with the all-holders requirement”). 


Because the terms of the Wasserman Capital Contribution 
and Loan Agreement were in several material respects condi- 
tioned on the terms of the public tender offer, we can only 
conclude that the Wasserman transaction was an integral part of 
the offer and subject to Rule 14d-10’s requirements. Two facts 
compel this conclusion: first, the redemption value of Wasser- 
man’s preferred stock incorporated the tender offer price by 
reference, and second, the Capital Contribution and Loan Agree- 
ment was conditioned on the tender offer’s success. If the tender 
offer failed, Wasserman would have remained the owner of his 
MCA stock. This is precisely the arrangement Matsushita made 
with its shareholders through its public tender offer: if an ‘insuffi- 
cient number of shares were tendered, each shareholder too 
would have retained ownership of her MCA stock. The deal 
Matsushita made with Wasserman thus differed from the tender 
offer in only one material respect—the type (and possibly the 
value) of consideration provided. Rule 14d-10(c)(1) forbids just 
such a transaction. 


To be sure, the fact that a private purchase of stock and a 
public tender offer are both part of a single plan of acquisition 


ee ee ee ee ee eee 


ee ee es ee 


19a 


does not, by itself, render the purchase a part of a tender offer for 
purposes of Rule 14d-10. Rule 14d-10 does not prohibit transac- 
tions entered into or effected before, or after, a tender offer— 
provided that all material terms of the transaction stand indepen- 
dent of the tender offer. Thus a bidder who purchases shares 
from a particular shareholder before a tender offer begins does 
not violate Rule 14d-10. See, e.g., Kcan v. Virginia Retirement 
Systems, 13 F.3d 110 (4th Cir. 1°93) (bidder's unconditional 
private purchase of target's shares two days before tender offer 
was formally announced did not violate section 14(d)(7) and 
Rule 14d-10), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1834 (1994). 


If, in advance of the tender offer, Wasserman had become 
unconditionally obligated to exchange his MCA shares, the 
transaction would not have violated Rule 14d-10, even if Matsu- 
shita believed that acquiring Wasserman’s shares was a first step 
in acquiring MCA. In such a case, both Wasserman and Matsu- 
shita would have assumed the burdens of their agreement despite 
the risk that an anticipated tender offer would fail, or command a 
different price. But such a course was not followed. Matsushita 
sought to acquire MCA without purchasing the holdings of 
individual shareholders tlock by block and accordingly subject- 
ing itself to the risk that it would end up with a huge 4avestment 
in MCA stock, but without control. The tender offer device is 
designed to avoid this risk, but only if holders of the same 
security are offered precisely the same consideration. 


Matsushita argues, in the alternative, that the summary 
judgment should be affirmed because plaintiffs cannot prove that 
they suffered injury from the Wasserman deal. This argument, 
however, confuses the question of whether Matsushita complied 
with Rule 14d-10 with the question whether plaintiffs may 
recover damages. By paying Wasserman consideration that it 
failed to offer to other shareholders, Matsushita violated Rule 
14d-10(c)(1). It remains to be determined on remand whether 
the preferred stock Wasserman received had a value greater than 
$326,959,182, the value of his 4,953,927 shares at the cash 
tender price of $66 per share.” 


20 Plaintiffs alleged in their complaint that Wasserman received consideration 
of greater value per share than other shareholders. Matsushita did not 


~s 


cording’ se ‘fverwe ‘Se emmary wdgmen 2 favor of 
“se suetra 9 pares sae Ra “Re Samermar “ransactioe 
wnatec Rue <6 6 cwverwe ‘Re fustre' comr’s order denving 
~eer nonce ‘or para summary) udgmen “har ‘he Basse- 
"ar TaReachor Ge sotere Bue 4¢ ) anc remand ‘or ‘urthe- 
Seeding © fe quesmor eteRe” fe comssderanoe ® asse- 
war “Scenes © cachange ‘or ts CA work bed « greater value 
nar ete pean “ce~wec apc { © oe much greater 


ee | 

weme Seseeman Shermer”: enaerec ts WO 4 mares “or 
~ 5 oer share emger once Pursuant © an amended empicy 
7 sue et csecetet worthy wefore Be ender offer was 
es e Sowemper 3. 98) WCA agreed enh Matse 
ee) Stree co pay Seeemmerg FD oor of Ge tender ote 
scoomeied “we Gews after Meteusters accessed aff tenderec 
“ < Sere Seeennerg “soerwec Re crosman ce~mer: 


t DEr"ees Gapeee Ge cuerpo of “he Saernte’g Dey ner 
"art coment he SEetr'vies ¢ cee premuem ow 5S  & 
- of egeet © age Saeete'g © onde ws Mares 
“SSS TSN he Re Seve ees meteed Gemgeed sor? 

=e Sk wees fe 4 ec pver Sheeterg tececer 


“re gee - ee 7 See atgeaee @6066. - 
oe Sas =e ae see ese ages = te 
on eee oF ewer ¢ Cece s age eens or 


ee Se et See ee a ce caetectieee «fe Senee 
* Oks St ee ae oe Sete cee gee Be ae Gere - 


— eee ae eee See eee oc erage 
: ‘ *o © wer eT =f ee ° = =e"? aeee ter bee 
ca - -_ oe eer eer ace oem - Sorc See 


oe ee GGereet Ge cemEEED cectage Geer axe = 


2la 


of hus performance as its chief operating officer and to compen- 
sate Sheinberg for agreeing to amend his employment contract 
with MCA. 


According to the minutes of the MCA Board of Director's 
meeting of November 25, 1990, the day before the tender offer 
*as announced, Wasserman explained that before discussions 
with Matsushita began, he had intended to grant Sheinberg 
opmons for |.000,000 shares of MCA stock. ER 357 Exhibit D. 
He stated. according to the minutes, that when merger negotia- 
‘soms Degan. “there had been a freeze put on further stock option 
grants. and he was therefore unable to propose the Sheinberg 
optmoms at (he next meeting /d at 3]. According to the minutes, 
Wasserman said he believed that it would be unfair to deprive 
Sheumderg of hus legitimate expectations simply because the 
vender offer was nearly finalized /d He recommended that the 
wptions De granted at an exercise price of $50 per share. /d. 


Wasserman also told the Board that Matsushita had 
approved of the Sheimberg options and that it had agreed to give 
Sneumberg cash payments if the transaction went forward, mea- 
surec Dy the dufference between the transaction price” and the 
550 opmon price /¢ at 31-32. Martun Lipton, counsel for MCA. 
*asserman. and Shemberg mm this transaction, told the Board 
nat Sbeunterg s payment would amount to $2! millon and that. 
& “urher commderaton for Matsushita s promuse to pay him this 
em. SbemOerg would De required to waive his mght to severance 
pay @ (he event Matsusheta acquired MCA and to agree to five 
‘cars of communeed emplowment /¢ at 33 The Stock Awards 
“an Commuttee approved the “arrangements” Wasserman pro- 
posed for Shemberg. “sudyect to the Board's approval of the 
proposed merger agreement” /d at 68 


P\aenea®s argue (hat the Shemberg payment was entirely 
ona@rhena epor he success of the tender offer If the tender 
fer nc por succeed « s undisputed that Sheinderg would nor 
‘eve tcervec @e $2 mihom Matsushita powts to no ewdence 
= ‘De "coord mndaceting ‘har the gramt of opuons to Shemberg 
“= anv'Demg Tore ‘han Tyvpothetcal wm the event (hat the tender 
er Qe sot succeed Ar the MCA Board meeting according to 
ne Tuputes Sassermar sated ‘hat if ‘he merger “did sor occur 


22a 


he would present the arrangements to the Board for approval and 
implementation as stock-based awards.” /d. at 32. From this 
record a trier of fact could infer that Wasserman’s statement was 
merely a declaration of future intention, not a binding commit- 
ment to give Sheinberg stock options regardless of the outcome of 
the tender offer. 


Plaintiffs also point to the absence of any evidence even 
suggesting that Sheinberg might be in line for an award of stock 
options before November 25, 1990, the eve of the tender offer. 
Moreover, they cite the deposition testimony of MCA's financial 
advisor, Felix Rohatyn, that he could not recollect any discus- 
sions of a stock option award to Sheinberg until Wasserman 
brought up the matter at the November 25 Board Meeting. ER 
357 Exhibit A at 32. 


Plaintiffs also argue that Matsushita's account of the 
Sheinberg payment is internally inconsistent. If Matsushita is 
correct that Sheinberg owned—prior to the day the tender offer 
was announced—options for 1,000,000 shares of MCA stock, 
each with an exercise price of $50 per share, it is unclear why 
Matsushita would claim that the Sheinberg payment was also 
made in consideration of an agreement to amend his employment 
contract. The $21 million is ostensibly derived from the differ- 
ence between the $50 exercise price and the $71 tender price, 
multiplied by the 1,000,000 option shares. 


We hold that plaintiffs’ circumstantial evidence gives rise to 
a disputed issue of material fact and therefore precludes sum- 
mary judgment for Matsushita on the claim that the $21 million 
payment to Sheinberg violated Rule 14d-10. A trier of fact could 
decide, on the evidence cited by plaintiffs, not to credit Matsu- 
shita’s explanation for the Sheinberg payment. 


Matsushita argues, without controverting any of plaintiffs’ 
evidence, that the Sheinberg payment did not violate Rule 14d- 
10 because (1) the Sheinberg payment was made after Matsu- 
shita accepted the tendered MCA shares, and (2) the payment 
was made by MCA, not Matsushita. 


We rejected Matsushita's timing argument in the context of 
the Wasserman transaction, see Part II, supra, and the fact that 


23a 


Matsushita repeats the argument in defending the Sheinberg 
payment only brings into sharp relief its lack of merit. 


Moreover, Matsushita's assertion that MCA rather than 
Matsushita paid Sheinberg?' begs the question. The central issue 
regarding the legality of the Sheinberg payment, after all, is 
whether it constitutes incentive compensation that MCA wanted 
to give Sheinberg independently of the Matsushita deal, or a 
premium that Matsushita wanted to give Sheinberg as an 
inducement to support the tender offer and tender his own shares. 
The mere fact that MCA cut Sheinberg’s $21 million check just 
before it was formally merged into Matsushita may be a relevant 
fact, but it does not establish as a matter of law that the $21 
million Sheinberg payment did not violate Rule 14d-10. 


Because Matsushita's liability under Rule 14d-10 for the 
Sheinberg payment turns on disputed questions of material fact, 
we vacate the summary judgment for Matsushita on this claim 
and remand for further proceedings. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). 


2! The only authority Matsushita cites for this argument is Kramer v. Time 
Warner, 937 F.2d 767 (2d Cir. 1991). Kramer, however, is inapposite. That 
case involved T:me Incorporated’s two-step acquisition of Warner Commu- 
nications: first a tender offer, then a statutory merger. Time acquired 51% of 
Warner's common stock pursuant to the tender offer and the remaining 49% 
pursuant to the second-step statutory merger 


The Second Circuit held that Rule 144-10 was not violated when Warner 
paid its top executives different consideration than ordinary shareholders 
received im the second-step statutory merger The court reasoned that a 
Statutory merger following a successful tender offer for 51% of a target's 
shares is not a tender offer for purposes of the Williams Act. /d at 779 
Distinguishing Field v. Trump, 850 F.2d at 938 (holding that claim exists 
under Williams Act when offeror withdraws initial tender offer on the same 
evening he privately secures dissident shareholders stock only to then renew 
tender offer next morning), the Second Circuit held: “The claim that the 
Wilhams Act applies to second-step statutory mergers is _ meritiess” /¢ 
The instant case is distinguishable from Kramer for the same reason Field + 
Trump is. Asin Field v Trump. no statutory merger, only a tender offer. is 
involved here 


24a 


IV. The Preclusive Effect of the Settlement of the Delaware 
Class Action 


Before addressing the Epstein plaintiffs’ argument that the 
district court abused its discretion in denying their motion for 
class certification, we consider Matsushita's claim that the 
Epstein class action is barred by the judgment of the Delaware 
Court of Chancery settling the state class action. Although the 
Delaware class action was based exclusively on state law claims, 
the settlement agreement expressly stated that the federal securi- 
ties law claims asserted in the “Epstein action ... are hereby 
compromised, settled, released and discharged with prejudice....” 
In re MCA, Inc. Shareholder Litig., Order and Final J udgment 
(No. 11740) (Feb. 22, 1993), at 3-4. 


Matsushita makes a two-pronged preclusion argument. 
First, it argues that the Delaware judgment releasing the federal 
claims is entitled to preclusive effect as a matter of full faith and 
credit. Second, Matsushita argues that the release of the federal 
claims bars the Epstein action as a matter of contract.22 


A. The Delaware Settlement 


The Delaware class action was filed on September 26, 1990, 
the day the financial press reported that Matsushita was negoti- 
ating to buy MCA. The suit named as defendants MCA and its 
directors, including Wasserman and Sheinberg. The essence of 
the complaint was that MCA'’s directors had breached their 
fiduciary duties by failing to implement a market check mecha- 
nism to maximize shareholder value upon a change of corporate 
control, as required by Revion, Inc. v. MacAndrews & Forbes 
Holdings Inc., 506 A.2d 173, 182 (Del. 1986). 


*2 The settlement agreement permitted state class members to opt out 
Although the Epstein plaintiffs did not opt out. 19 shareholders, including 
plaintiff-appellant Walter Minton, chose to do so. It is undisputed that 
shareholders who opted out may continue to pursue their federal claims 
regardless of the preclusive effect of the Delaware settlement on the Epstein 
class action 


25a 


On December 2, 1990, three days after public disclosure of 
the terms of the tender offer, the Epstein class action was filed in 
the Central District of California. Unlike the state action, the 
Epstein complaint named Matsushita as a defendant and 
claimed that the tender offer violated SEC Rules 14d-10 and 
10b-3. 


On December 4, 1990, the day after the Epstein action was 
filed in the Central District, lead counsel for the Delaware 
plaintiffs transmitted a letter to MCA’s counsel that was to serve 
as the basis of an amended complaint. In that letter, the Dela- 
ware plaintiffs stated their intention to add additional claims 
against all directors. In particular, the complaint was amended to 
allege that MCA was wasting corporate assets by increasing its 
exposure to liability for violations of Rules 10b-13 and 14d-1°. 
that directors Wasserman and Sheinberg had breached their 
fiduciary duties by negotiating preferential deals with Matsu- 
shita, and that MCA failed to make full disclosure of the benefits 
MCA insiders would receive from the takeover. Finally, Matsu- 
shita was added as a defendant and charged with conspiring with 
and aiding and abetting MCA directors in violating Delaware 
law. 


On December 11, 1990, a week after Delaware class coun- 
sel's letter proposing to amend the complaint and add Matsushita 
as a defendant, the defendants reported to the Centra! District 
that they had reached a settlement of the Delaware class action 
“in principle.” On December 14, the amended complaint was 
filed in the Court of Chancery, and on December 17. the parties 
agreed on the terms of a settlement to be submitted to the Vice 
Chancellor for approval. The settlement provided for the pay 
ment of $1,000,000 in fees to class counsel, but no monetary 
benefit for class members. The only arguable benefit to class 
members was a proposed change in the poison pill of the new 
corporation that was to be formed to own MCA's radio station of 
the tender offer succeeded. The Vice Chancellor found the value 
of this poison pill provision to class members to be “illusonary 
See In re MCA Shareholder Litig., Inc. S98 Ald 687 6% 
(1991). Finally, the settlement provided for the release of al 
claims arising out of the tender offer, both state and federa 


26a 


In defending the settlement before the Vice Chancellor on 
January 30, 1991, class counsel argued that the state claims, 
while not frivolous, had little merit. Counsel also argued that the 
federal claims were frivolous and should not be pursued. On 
April 22, 1991, the Vice Chancellor disapproved the proposed 
settlement. He agreed with class counsel that the state law claims 
being compromised were “at best, extremely weak and, there- 
fore, have little or no value.” Jn re MCA, Inc. Shareholder Litig.. 
598 Ald at 694. In particular, he found the state claim of 
preferential treatment for Wasserman and other directors to be 
“weak Decause no such state cause of action existed. /d Under 
Delaware law, the Vice Chancellor noted, “[a] shareholder is not 
profebuted, Dy hus status as a director, from dealing in shares of 
the corporation. and that a director breaches his duty of loyalty 
only of he uses inside information for his personal benefit. /d 
Fundung that the value of the settlement to the class lacked any 
‘Teal monetary benefit.” the Vice Chancellor rejected the settle- 
ment Decause of the “mgnaficant value™ of the federal claims that 
woul Dave been released along with the valueless state claims 
2 at 696, 690 


Despite the Vice Chancellor's opumion that the state claums 
ac 30 Men! and no value. Matsushita and its co-defendants tane 
© actor to dusmuss the Delaware action In fact. the docke! of 
‘ne Cowrt of Chancery reflects ao action of amy kund—ano discov. 
TY 30 TOtsORS. BO settlement or status conferences—uenti after 
‘be Centra: Dustnct swarded summary judgment to the defend. 
ants @ the federal actions @ February. |992. more than « year 
after (he Vice Chancellor disapproved the ongma! Deleware 
<uemen: 


Jn October 12. | 992. after the federal piamts Sled *hew 
yonces of appeal of ‘he summary judgment to the Nomth © ircut 
(De parses (© (he Delaware achon entered into 4 new ettiemen: 
agreement | prowded for (he creation of a $2 milbom settiemen: 
‘waG. showg? © pey sarehoiders "wo w ‘hree cents per share 
afore payment of ‘ees and costs "Like the first eettlomen: 


ment ogee of owe 368) OO ow eee wer eee ke ee 
eeceier © 1290.0) eet © wre eect Ge emcee ciliate & 
=e eee co hl OCU 


27a 


agreement, the second agreement provided for the release of all 
claims arising out of Matsushita's acquisition of MCA, both 
state and federal. Unlike the first agreement, the second settle- 
ment agreement permitted class members to opt out. 


The Vice Chancellor approved the second settlement agree- 
ment, concluding that “it is in the best interests of the class to 
settle this litigation and the terms of the settlement are fair and 
reasonable — although the value of the benefit to the class is 
meager.” Jn re MCA, Inc. Shareholder Litig., 1993 WL 43024, 
at *1 (Del. Ch. Feb. 16, 1993). He approved the second settle- 
ment for the sole reason that the federal claims which he origi- 
nally thought had “significant value,” had been reduced to “min- 
imal economic value” by the summary judgment entered in the 
Central District. The Vice Chancellor uncritically accepted the 
summary judgment as having destroyed the value of the federa! 
claums without considering the fact that the Ninth Circuit 
reviews summary judgments de novo. See TW. Elec. Serv., Inc 
v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 629 (9th Cir 
1987). The Vice Chancellor downgraded the value of the federal! 
claims even as he expressed reluctance to assess the merits of 
those claums because they were “outside the jurisdiction of this 
Court.” Jd at °4 


Odyectors argued that the settlement was collusive because 
the defendants “cut a deal” with the named plaintiffs in the 
Delaware action and their attorneys in order to extinguish the 
claums pending wm the federal litigation /n re MCA. Inc Share. 
noider Ling. WL 43024, at *S The Vice Chancellor acknow!- 
edged that the potential for thus type of abuse “clearly exists in 
‘Ube setting partes have prevousiy proposed a patent!y inade- 
quate settlement @ whech the class would beve recerved oo 
monetary benefit Dut the attorneys would have recerved $! mul 
son w fees /¢ at *4 Nometheless, be refused to make a finding 
” collumor om (he record before hum decause oectors offerec 
so ewdence of any collusme  /¢ at ** 


* “otee Geecribeng Ge eettiemen: oar cee © of Gee member ete 
meade Se Egner meot “Some » te Epes pam i apmeaee 8 lO 
== = © mer © & eee wf be terme: 


28a 


The judgment incorporating the terms of the settlement was 
summarily affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court. /n re 
MCA, Inc. Shareholders Litig., 633 A.2d 370 (Del. 1993). 


B. The Full Faith and Credit Question 


1. The Jurisdiction of State Courts to Release Exclu- 
sively Federal Claims in a Class Settlement 


Matsushita first argues that the Epstein action is precluded 
because the Delaware judgment releasing the federal claims is 
entitled to full faith and credit. As a general rule, the Full Faith 
and Credit Act, 28 U.S.C. §1738, “requires federal courts to give 
the same preclusive effect to state court judgments that those 
judgments would be given in the courts of the State from which 
the judgments emerged.” Kremer v. Chemical Constr. Corp., 
456 U.S. 461, 466 (1982). This rule does not apply, however, if 
the state court “did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter 
or the relevant parties.” Underwriters Nat'l Assurance Co. vy. 
North Carolina Life and Accidental Health Insurance Gty. 
Ass'n, 455 U.S. 691, 704-705 (1982). See also Thomas v. Wash- 
ington Gas Light Co., 448 U.S. 261, 283 (1980); Durfee v. Duke, 
375 U.S. 106, 110 (1963); Grubb v. Public Util. Comm'n, 281 
U.S. 470, 475 (1930); Thompson v. Whitman, 85 U.S. 457, 469 
(1873).%* The Epstein plaintiffs argue that the Delaware class 


2s The Delaware Court of Chancery determined that it was jurisdictionally 
competent to enter a judgment settling the class action. As a general rule, we 
are not at liberty to entertain a collateral attack on a state court's determina- 
tion of its own subject matter jurisdiction See Durfee v. Duke, 375 US. at 
11] As the Supreme Court went on to say in Durfee, however, “the general 
rule of finality of junsdictional determinations is not without excepnons 
Doctrines of federal pre-emption or sovereign immunity may in some con- 
texts be controlling” /d at 114. The Durfee Court concluded that when 
“the policy underlying the doctrine of res judicata is outweighed by the 
policy against permitting the court to act beyond its own jurisdiction.” 
collateral attack on a state court's exercise of jurisdiction is warranted /d at 
14012 


In (has case the policy of finality of judgments is plainly outweighed by the 
federal interest in reviewing a state court's exercise of judicial power over 
clams whsch Congress has vested exclusively im federal courts Sector 
'4(4)(7) of the Wilbams Act. granting exclusive jurisdiction to the federal 
Sourts. embodbes beyond cavil. “a highly important federal pobcy calling for 


29a 


settlement is not entitled to full faith and credit to the extent it 
released federal claims which are beyond the subject matter 
jurisdiction of state courts. 


Matsushita responds that courts have uniformly held that 


a state court class action settlement properly may preclude, 
by release, continued litigation by members of the class of 
all claims—state or federal, whether or not within the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the federal courts—arising out of 
the same subject matter or transaction. 


Supplemental Brief of Matsushita at 13. In other words, Matsu- 
shita reads existing case law as sanctioning the release of exclu- 
sively federal claims in the settlement of state class actions as 
long as the state and federal claims arise out of the same subject 
matter or transaction. We believe Matsushita's argument repre- 
sents an overly expansive reading of the case law. As we read the 
cases, they support only a limited state court power to release 
exclusively federal claims in a class action settlement. 


Of all the cases cited by Matsushita, only two, Grimes v. 
Vitalink Communications Corp., 17 F.3d 1553 (3d Cir.), cert. 
denied, 115 S.Ct. 480 (1994) and Nottingham Partners v. 
Trans-Lux Corp., 925 F.2d 29 (tst Cir. 1991), implicate the 
Supremacy Clause because in each, as here, a state court extin- 
guished exclusively federal claims in settling a state class 
action.** 


unified and comprehensive proceedings in federal court.” Wright 4 Miller 
§ 4428, at 285. See Murphy v. Gallagher, 761 F 2d 878, 885 (2d Cir 1985) 
When Congress has expressly demed state courts jumsdiction over an impor- 
tant area of federal law. and a state court nonetheless exercises judicial 
power over i(. the potenual for disruptung the distmbuuon of governmenia. 
power is great in such a context. the doctrine of federal pre-emption would 
control. and collateral attack om the state court's exercise of jumsdiction 


would be appropriate. See Durfee. 375 US at ii4 


** Matsushita also relies on one case. Abramson » Penwood Investment Corp 
392 F 24 759 (2d Cir 1968), which did not involve a class action We deal 
wrth (hus case im (he secon addressing Matsushita ¢ comtract Dar argumen: 
See wfre cote 32 


30a 


In every other case cited by Matsushita, the state court had 
subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate all the claims that were 
released in the class settlement. Class Plaintiffs v. City of Seat- 
tle, 95S F.2d 1268, 1287-89 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S.Ct. 
408 (1992), for example, did not present the question of the 
preemptive effect of an exclusive federal jurisdiction statute on 
the power of a state court to release exclusively federal claims in 
settling a class action. Rather it involved the settlement of a 
federal class action based upon alleged violations of the federal 
securities laws. Our holding in Class Plaintiffs was that the 
Eleventh Amendment did not bar a federal district court from 
releasing claims against the State of Washington as part of a 
class settlement because the State had waived its sovereign 
immunity by participating in the settlement negotiations and 
consenting to be bound by the settlement agreement. /d. at 1289. 

For the same reason, Jn Re Corrugated Container Antitrust 
Litig., 643 F.2d 196 (Sth Cir. 1981), did not implicate the 
Supremacy Clause because the jurisdictional competence of a 
State court to release exclusively federal claims was not at issue. 
The holding of the Fifth Circuit was that a federal district court, 
in approving a class settlement of federal claims, had jurisdic- 
tional competence to extinguish state claims that were not 
pleaded, but which it had pendent jurisdiction to adjudicate. 643 
F.2d at 221 n.39. 


TBK Partners, Ltd. v. Western Union Corp., 675 F.2d 456 
(2d Cir. 1982), was also not a Supremacy Clause case because it 
too involved the approval of a class action settlement by a federal 
district court. In TBK Partners, the Second Circuit upheld a 
class settlement that extinguished state claims that were not 
pleaded and arguably beyond the jurisdiction of the district court 
to adjudicate. /d at 460. Although not directly on point because 
it was not a preemption case—it did not involve the release of 
exclusively federal claims by a state court—T7TBK Partners is 
useful authority because it announced a principled test for limit- 
ing the preclusive effect of a judgment based upon a class settle- 
ment. Writung for the court, Chief Judge Newman reasoned. 


we see no reason why the judgment upon settlement cannot 
Dar a claim that would have to be based on the identical 


3la 


factual predicate as that underlying the claims in the 
settled class action. We have previously “assume([d] that a 
settlement could properly be framed so as to prevent class 
members from subsequently asserting claims relying on a 
legal theory different from that relied upon in the class 
action complaint but depending [[[][on the very same set 
of facts.” National Super Spuds, Inc. v. New York Mer- 
cantile Exchange, 660 F.2d 9, 18 n.7 (2d Cir. 1981). 


Id. at 460 (emphasis added). Thus the Second Circuit gave 
preclusive effect to the settlement judgment’s release of 
unpleaded state claims because the same facts were “at the core” 
of both the unpleaded state and the pleaded federal claims. /d. 
Had the judgment been based upon an adjudication rather than a 
settlement of the federal claims, the unpleaded state law claims 
would have been barred by the doctrine of issue preclusion 
because they turned on the “very same set of facts.” 


In applying an issue preclusion test to limit the preclusive 
effect of a judgment approving a class settlement, 7BK Partners 
followed Judge Friendly’s reasoning in National Super Spuds: 
““[ijf a judgment after trial cannot extinguish claims not 
asserted in the class action complaint, a judgment approving a 
settlement in such an action ordinarily should not be able to do so 
either.” ' /d. at 462 (quoting National Super Spuds, Inc. v. New 
York Mercantile Exchange, 660 F.2d at 18). Thus, in TBK 
Partners, the Second Circuit upheld the release of unpleaded 
claims in a settlement judgment which would have been barred 
by the issue preclusive effect of a judgment based upon an 
adjudication of the pleaded claims. 


As we read TBK Partners, Matsushita's reliance on it as 
“dispositive” authority for its argument that we should give 
preciusive effect to the Delaware settlement judgment merely 
because the state and federal claims arise out of the same 
transaction is completely misplaced. First, 7BK Partners is not a 
Supremacy Clause case. Second, TBK Partners announced and 
appled an issue preclusion test, not an “arising out of the same 
transaction” test, in defining the limits on a court's power to 


32a 


release claims in a class settlement. As the Second Circuit 
summed up in TBK Partners: 


[w]e therefore conclude that in order to achieve a compre- 
hensive settlement that would prevent relitigation of settled 
questions at the core of a class action, a court may permit 
the release of a claim based on the identical factual predi- 
cate as that underlying the claims in the settled class action 
even though the claim was not presented and might not 
have been presentable in the class action. 


Id. at 460 (emphasis added). 


We now turn to the only two cases cited by Matsushita that 
involved the preclusive effect of a state court judgment approving 
a class action settlement that included a release of exclusively 
federal claims. In both cases TBK’s issue preclusion test was 
applied; in neither case was Matsushita's “arising out of the 
same transaction” test applied. In Nottingham Partners vy. 
Trans-Lux Corp., 925 F.2d at 29, the First Circuit, citing TBK 
Partners, applied an issue preclusion test in holding that the 
release of exclusively federal claims in a state court settlement 
judgment was entitled to preclusive effect. Tracking the reason- 
ing of both TBK Partners and National Super Spuds, the First 
Circuit's rationale was that the federal claims depended on the 
same underlying facts as the state claims — the failure of a 
corporation to disclose allegedly material facts in a proxy state- 
ment. /d at 30-31, 33 


In Grimes v. Vitalink Communications Corp., 17 F.3d at 
1553, the Third Circuit followed the First Circuit's lead in 
‘Nottingham Partners in applying TBK Partners’ issue preclusion 
test. The district court, citing TBK Partners and Nottingham 
Partners, had held “that this federal securities case is barred by 
(ne collateral estoppe! effect of the Delaware judgment [releasing 
those claims as part of a class settlement)..." /d at 1556 The 
Third Circuit affirmed because the “facts that underlie the fed. 
eral non-disclosure claims were actually litigated during the state 
court proceeding and were conclusively resolved against the 
yectors, here the federal plaintiffs.” /d at 1562 


33a 


Thus, the cases cited by Matsushita fail to support its 
contention that we should give preclusive effect to the Delaware 
settlement judgment because the federal claims it released arose 
out of the same transaction as the state claims. Instead, these 
cases stand for a more restrictive limitation on the power of state 
courts to extinguish exclusively federal claims in approving class 
action settlements: a state court may release exclusively federal 
claims that would have been extinguished by the issue preclusive 
effect of an adjudication of the state claims. 


National Super Spuds and TBK Partners together provide 
the doctrinal framework for using issue preclusion in determining 
the limits of judicial authority to release unpleaded claims in 
settling class actions. But though neither National Super Spuds 
nor TBK Partners involved the preemptive effect of an exclusive 
federal jurisdiction statute on the reach of state judicial power in 
settling class actions, both involved the release of unpleaded state 
claims by federal district courts which had or may have had 
pendent jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims. Nonetheless, in 
both cases the Second Circuit recognized the importance of 
limiting judicial authority generally to release unpleaded claims 
in class settlements. 


Nottingham Partners and Grimes, in contrast, did implicate 
the Supremacy Clause because, as in the instant case, exclusively 
federal securities claims were extinguished by a state court 
judgment approving a class settlement. In both cases, the judg- 
ment was given preclusive effect because the state and federa! 
claims arose out of the identical factual predicate. In other 
words, had the judgment followed an adjudication rather than a 
settlement, it would necessarily have resolved the federal! claims 
as 4 matter of issue preclusion. 


In deciding the preclusive effect of the Delaware judgment 
at issue in this case, we need not decide whether to follow 
Nottingham Partners and Grimes in giving preciusive effect to a 
class action settlement that releases exclusively federal claims 
that turn on the same underlying facts as the state claims All we 
need decide today is whether to break new ground in giving 
preciusive effect to a state court judgment that extinguishes 
exclusively federal claims that are factually unrelated to the state 


34a 


claims pleaded in the class action.?” The question of first impres- 
sion confronting us is whether Congress, in denying state courts 
subject matter jurisdiction over 1934 Act claims, intended to 
leave state courts with the power to extinguish exclusively federal 
claims by approving a class action settlement that could not have 
been ex. » ruished by adjudicating the class action. We can imag- 
ine no reason for imputing such an intent to Congress. We 
recognize that Congress could reasonably have been concerned 
about accommodating the interests of state courts in 
“achiev(ing] a comprehensive settlement that would prevent 
relitigation of settled questions at the core of a class action,” 
TBK Partners, 675 F.2d at 462, but that concern would not be 
served by authorizing state courts to settle questions not at the 
core of a class action. 


The very cases Matsushita relies upon counsel against an 
expansive state court power to release exclusively federal claims. 
In applying an issue preclusion test rather than a “same transac- 
tion’’ test, the cases embrace Judge Friendly’s common sense 
reasoning that a court’s jurisdiction to extinguish claims by class 
settlement should not exceed its jurisdiction to extinguish claims 
by adjudication. Ignoring this reasoning, Matsushita asks us to 
impose a “same transaction” test without offering logic or prece- 
dent in support of such a test.28 As we shall now show, the federal 
claims extinguished by the Delaware judgment could not have 
been extinguished by the issue preclusive effect of an adjudica- 
tion of the state claims because, although the federal and state 
claims arose out of the same transaction, they are based upon 
different underlying facts. 


27 See infra part 1V.B.2. 


28 The “arising out of the same transaction” test is, of course, used in claim 
preclusion doctrine. See Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24 (1981). 
However, Matsushita, as it must, expressly disclaims reliance on claim 
preclusion. See Clark v. Watchie, 513 F.2d 994, 997 (9th Cir. 1975) (state 
court judgment can have no claim preclusive effect on exclusively federal 
securities claims). 


35a 


2. The Disparity Between the State and Federal Claims 


Matsushita makes no attempt to argue that any of the 
Williams Act claims of the Epstein plaintiffs share any predicate 
facts in common with the state law claims that formed the basis 
of the Delaware class action. Instead, Matsushita rests its preclu- 
sion argument solely on the fact that the claims arose out of the 
same transaction—Matsushita’s acquisition of MCA. 


The gravamen of the federal class action is that Matsushita 
violated SEC Rules 14d-10 and 10b-13 by offering greater value 
for the stock of Wasserman and Sheinberg than it offered fur the 
stock of other shareholders.*® Thus the legal theory underlying 
the federal clairns is that Matsushita breached a duty to share- 
holders that is imposed on tender offerors by federal securities 
laws. The relevant factual inquiry is whether Wasserman and 
Sheinberg received greater consideration than other MCA share- 
holders during the tender offer, section 14d-10(a)(2), or a type of 
consideration not offered to other MCA shareholders. § 14d- 


10(c)(1). 


The gravamen of the state class action is that MCA direc- 
tors breached their fiduciary duty of care to MCA as imposed by 
Delaware law. First, the Delaware plaintiffs claimed that MCA’s 
directors breached their fiduciary duty by failing to take steps to 
maximize shareholder value upon a change of corporate control 
as required by Revlon, Inc. v. MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings, 
506 A.2d at 182. Plainly, this Revion claim turns on different 
fact issues than the federal securities claims do. The question 
whether the MCA directors took the steps required by Revion to 
assure maximum shareholder value is completely distinct from 
the question whether Matsushita violated the Williams Act by 
extending preferential treatment to some of the shareholders in 
making the tender offer. 


29 Wasserman, Sheinberg, and MCA were also named as defendants and 
charged with aiding and abetting Matsushita. See supra note 7. Because the 
Epstein plaintiffs concede that the district court's dismissal of this claim was 
appropriate, we do not address this claim further. 


36a 


The second state claim was that MCA’s directors breached 
their duty of candor by failing to disclose to the shareholders 
information concerning the merger such as the compensation 
packages MCA officers received under the terms of the merger 
agreement. But whether or not the MCA directors breached their 
fiduciary duty by failing to make disclosures has no bearing on 
whether directors received preferential treatment from Matsu- 
shita in violation of the Williams Act.*° 


The third state claim was that the defendants breached their 
fiduciary duty of loyalty by making preferential arrangements 
for themselves as part of the tender offer, and that Matsushita 
aided and abetted the MCA defendants in this breach. At first 
glance, this claim appears to be at least in the same ball park as 
the Rule 14d-10 claim. However, although this state claim is no 
doubt artfully drafted to resemble the 14d-10 claim, there is in 
fact no Delaware statutory or common law rule that prohibits a 
shareholder from obtaining the best deal for himself as part of a 
change of corporate control.*! Thus, adjudication of the claim 


*© The Delaware plaintiffs also alleged that MCA and Matsushita “subjected 
MCA to potential liability under Rules 14d-7, 14d-10, 10b-13, and 13e-3, ... 
thereby causing MCA to expend and waste corporate assets...."" Amended 
Complaint at 11. There is, to state the obvious, no cause of action in 
Delaware for violating the federal securities laws, and there would thus be 
no issue preclusion if these claims were litigated on the merits in Delaware. 
Indeed, the Delaware Vice Chancellor did not address the settlement value 
of these claims in his opinion. The fact that the lawyers for the Delaware 
plaintiffs inserted such a claim into their amended complaint (not to mention 
that they did so the day after the Epstein action was filed) does little more 
than make readily apparent the extent to which the state suit was structured 
with an eye toward the preclusive effect it might have on the federal claims 
pending in the Central District of California. 


*! In rejecting the first proposed Delaware settlement, the Chancery Court 
observed that a shareholder is only prohibited from negotiating a preferen- 
tial deal for himself if he uses inside information to do so. In re MCA, Inc. 
Shareholder Litig., 598 A.2d at 694. Indeed, as Wasserman and Sheinberg 
rightly observe, under Delaware law, “Wasserman would have been fully 
entitled to have held out for a premium in return for agreeing to sell his own 
MCA shares to Matsushita.” Brief of Wasserman and Sheinberg at 14; see 
also Citron v. Steego Corp., 1988 Del Ch. LEXIS 119, at *21 (Del. Ch. 
Sept. 9, 1988) (Allen, C.) (“Our law does not regard a control premium as a 
corporate asset that must be shared among all shareholders”). Rule 14d-10, 


37a 


would not have raised a question of fact whether Wasserman or 
Sheinberg received preferential treatment from Matsushita. 


In sum, the state and federal claims are completely dispa- 
rate. The only thing they share in common is that they arise out 
of the same transaction, which is the sole nexus Matsushita relies 
upon in arguing that the Delaware judgment’s release of the 
federal claims is entitled to full faith and credit. 


Since the Delaware class action settlement judgment in this 
case attempted to extinguish exclusively federal claims which it 
could not have extinguished through adjudication, we hold that 
the decree exceeds the jurisdiction of the state court and, there- 
fore, is not entitled to full faith and credit. 


C. The Contract Bar Argument 


Matsushita argues that regardless of the “technical res 
judicata effect” of the Delaware judgment, the Epstein plaintiffs 
are barred from litigating their Williams Act claims in federal 
court as a matter of contract. As Matsushita puts it, “just as an 
individual plaintiff may, as a part of a settlement in state court, 
agree to release exclusively federal claims, so, too, may a class 
give such a release as part of a judicially approved class settle- 
ment.” Brief of Matsushita at 20. 


This attempt to equate class settlements with the settlement 
of traditional litigation by individual parties falls short. Matsu- 
shita is correct, of course, that individual plaintiffs may release 
whatever claims they choose in settling traditional non-class 
litigation, whether or not related to the claims asserted in the 
pleadings. Because court approval of ordinary settlements is not 
required, the amount and form of consideration a party is willing 
to give or receive to settle a case is a matter of judicial indiffer- 
ence. Whether the forum court has jurisdiction over the claims a 


in contrast, does prohibit a shareholder from receiving more, or even differ- 
ent, consideration in the course of a tender offer. Unlike Delaware law, it 
does prohibit the payment of control premiums in the course of a tender 
offer. Indeed, Rule 14d-10 was promulgated precisely to prohibit practices 
that Delaware permits. See Polaroid Corp. v. Disney, 862 F.2d 992. 


38a 


party chooses to release in settling traditional litigation is irrele- 
vant. See Green v. Ancora-Citronelle Corp., 577 F.2d 1380, 1383 
(9th Cir. 1978) (an individual litigant who releases exclusively 
federal claims as part of a settlement of a state action may not 
relitigate them in federal court). Indeed, general releases are 
commonly exchanged between individual litigants in settlements. 


However, the settlement of a class action is fundamentally 
different from the settlement of traditional litigation.2? First, 
Matsushita is simply wrong to assert that a “class” may give a 
release as part of a settlement. A class is not an entity that has 
rights; the rights belong to the class members. But class mem- 
bers, unlike individual litigants in traditional lawsuits, are bound 
by the settlement even though they do not individually consent to 
its terms. Instead, consent is given by class representatives, who 
derive authority to represent members not by obtaining their 
consent, but by obtaining a court order designating them the 
representatives. 


Second, class members may only give a release as part of a 
judicially approved settlement. Class representatives lack the 
“power to give a release of the class rights” on their own, absent 


*? Furthermore, class actions are different from derivative actions. such as that 
at issue in Abramson v. Penwood, 392 F.2d 759 (2a Cir. 1968). Matsushita 
relies on Abramson as authority for the proposition that a class action 
settlement may release exclusively federal claims regardless of the limited 
subject matter jurisdiction of the forum court. However, Abramson was not 
a class action. Rather, it involved a shareholder derivative action that 
included the release of exclusively federal claims owned by the real party in 
interest, the corporation. This case is inapposite because of the essential 
difference between a shareholder derivative action and a class action. As 
Judge Friendly pointed out in a later case, there is a 


fundamental difference between derivative suits and class actions. The 
plaintiff in a derivative suit is suing on behalf of a corporation. In a 
derivative suit settlement ... the legal entity whose unpleaded claims are 
being released—the corporation—is a party to the settlement. The 
corporation has the power to release its claims whether asserted in the 
complaint or not. Although there are other considerations that require a 
court to scrutinize carefully the scope of the releases, the court may be 
confident that the parties have the power to make them. 


National Super Spuds, 660 F.2d at 18-19 (emphasis added). 


39a 


judicial approval of the release and entry of a judgment. 
National Super Spuds, 660 F.2d at 18 (quoting Haudek, The 
Settlement and Dismissal of Stockholders’ Action — Part I]: 
The Settlement, 23 Sw.L.J. 765, 773 (1969)). Because class 
actions do not require the active participation of class members, 
class settlements pose a danger not present in traditional litiga- 
tion: that representative plaintiffs and their lawyers will 
“endeavor to obtain a better settlement by sacrificing the claims 
of others at no cost to themselves.” /d. at 19. For this reason, ‘‘a 
court may not delegate to [class] counsel the performance of its 
[own] duty to protect the interests of absent class members.” 
Plummer v. Chemical Bank, 668 F.2d 654, 659 n.4 (2d Cir. 
1982). Instead, in order to protect the rights of absent class 
members, the court must assume a far more active role than it 
typically plays in traditional litigation. A class action, thus, is 
less an individual lawsuit than “a quasi-administrative proceed- 
ing, conducted by the judge.” Shutts v. Phillips Petroleum Co., 
472 U.S. 797, 809 (1985). 


This notwithstanding, Matsushita argues that the failure of 
the Epstein plaintiffs to opt out of the class is sufficient reason to 
bind them contractually to the release of their federal claims. In 
Matsushita's view, the opportunity to opt out changes the essence 
of a class action settlement from an exercise of judicial power 
restrained by jurisdictional limits into an exercise of individual 
consent. This argument fails for two reasons. First, that the class 
members have a right to opt out does not diminish the extent to 
which a class action settlement is an exercise of judicial power. 
Regardless of whether class members are given opt-out rights, 
the court is still required to ensure that representation is ade- 
quate and that the settlement is fair to class members. See, e.z., 
Prezant v. Salton/Maxim Houseware, Inc., 636 A.2d 915 (Del. 
1994). The settlement of the class action is not an act of judicial 
mediation; it is an act of judicial power. Second, the “consent” 
purportedly given by class members in deciding nor to opt out is 
hardly comparable to the consent given by individual plaintiffs in 
deciding to settle their own traditional lawsuits. Because opt-out 
rights are, as the Delaware Supreme Court has observed, “‘infre- 
quently utilized and usually economically impracticable,” Pre- 
zant, 636 A.2d at 924, we would be blind to reality to think that 


40a 


any consent implied by class members in deciding not to opt out 
is comparable to the consent given by individual plaintiffs in 
settling their own lawsuits. 


In sum, we reject Matsushita's effort to equate class settle- 
ments with settlements of individual lawsuits. We believe that a 
state court cannot require passive class members to contractually 
release their exclusively federal claims in order to enjoy the 
benefits of a state class action, when the court has no jurisdic- 
tional power to dispose of those claims either directly or indi- 
rectly through the doctrine of issue preclusion.?3 


D. Conclusion 


We respectfully decline to give full faith and credit to the 
Delaware judgment to the extent that it releases exclusively 
federal claims that depend upon different underlying facts than 
the state claims depend upon. * Accordingly, we hold that the 
Delaware judgment does not preclude the Epstein class action. 


V. Class Certification 


We now turn to the question whether the district court 
abused its discretion in denying the Epstein plaintiffs’ motion for 
class certification. See Six (6) Mexican Workers v. Arizona 
Citrus Growers, 904 F.2d 1301, 1304 (9th Cir. 1990) (class 
certification rulings reviewed for abuse of discretion). The dis- 
trict court gave no explanation for its ruling. 


This case fits the requirements of both Rule 23(a) and Rule 
23(b)(3) like a glove. The questions of Matsushita's liability are 


*3 Whether the release of federal securities claims in this case is a valid 
contract defense to the Epstein class action is a question of federal law. See, 
¢.g., Newton v. Rumery, 480 U.S. 386, 392 (1987). A contract releasing 
federal statutory rights need not be enforced by a federal court if “the 
interest in its enforcement is outweighed in the circumstances by a public 
policy harmed by enforcement of the agreement.” /d. 


** Again, we do not decide whether a state court may release exclusively 
federal claims in a class action settlement judgment when those claims 
depend on the same facts as state law claims before the court. 


4la 


the same for each of the 7,000 shareholders who tendered their 
MCA shares: (1) Did Matsushita violate section 14d-10 in 
acquiring Wasserman’s shares on terms that were different from 
the terms of the tender offer, and (2) Did Matsushita violate 
section 14d-10 in authorizing the post-tender offer payment of 
$21 million to Sheinberg? The claims of every tendering share- 
holder turn on identical facts and law—regardless of the identity 
or circumstances of the particular shareholder. 


Under these circumstances, a class action would plainly be 
“superior to other available methods for the fair and efficient 
adjudication of the controversy,” because the “interest of mem- 
bers of the class in individually controlling the grosecution ... of 
separate actions,” is minimal, while the “desirability ... of con- 
centrating the litigation of claims in the particular forum,” is 
compelling. Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(b)(3). Indeed, it is difficult to imag- 
ine a case where class certification would be more appropriate. 
Without it, thousands of identical complaints by former MCA 
shareholders would have to be filed—the very result the class 
action mechanism was designed to avoid. 


Matsushita argues nonetheless that the ciaims of each MCA 
shareholder do not have enough in common to justify class 
certification because an “indispensable element of each plaintiff's 
claim is that he or she would have elected to take the preferred 
stock [given to Wasserman] if it was offered.” Brief of Matsu- 
shita at 52. Matsushita also argues that each individual share- 
holder's per share damages will vary because whether “the pre- 
ferred stock” that Wasserman received ‘‘could have constituted 
‘higher’ consideration” than the cash all other shareholders 
received ‘would depend on the individual [tax] circumstances of 
each plaintiff.” /d. “Each plaintiff,” it claims, “would be subject 
to cross examination on these issues.” /d. 


These arguments are meritless. In the first place, Matsu- 
shita cites neither law nor logic for the proposition that each 
shareholder is required to prove as an element of a Rule 14d-10 
violation that she would have elected to take the preferred stock 
given to Wasserman had she been offered it. All a shareholder 
needs to prove to recover damages as a result of the Wasserman 


42a 


transaction is that she was not offered the consideration provided 
to Wasserman, and that the consideration Wasserman received 
was worth more than the consideration she received. Since it is 
undisputed that each shareholder (save Wasserman and perhaps 
Sheinberg) received $66 in cash and $5 worth of stock in 
WWOR-TV, each shareholder's per share damages would be 
measured by the same yardstick: the extent to which the value of 
the preferred stock Wasserman received for each of his shares 
was greater than the $66 cash per share other shareholders 
received.** The tax situation of each shareholder has nothing to 
do with it. Furthermore, “the amount of damages is invariably an 
individual question and does not defeat class action treatment.” 
Blackie v. Barrack, 524 F.2d 891, 905 (9th Cir. 1975), cert. 
denied, 429 U.S. 816 (1976). 


In arguing against class certification, Matsushita mentions 
only the Wasserman transaction. It says nothing about why a 
class should not be certified to litigate the claim that Matsushita 
made the $21 million payment to Sheinberg. If plaintiffs prevail 
on their claim that Matsushita violated Rule 14d-10 by paying 
Sheinberg a premium of $21 million for his 1,179,635 shares, the 
damages of each tendering shareholder would simply be $17.80 
per share. 


Finally, Matsushita argues that the named plaintiffs are 
unsuitable to serve as class representatives, citing the district 
court's finding that plaintiff Lawrence Epstein prosecuted this 
action under “false pretenses” because he “deliberately con- 
cealed” from the court that he held his MCA stock in a tax-free 
IRA account. This finding, however, was first proposed by Mat- 
sushita in a motion filed well after the district court denied class 
certification, which means that it could not have informed in any 
way the district court's denial of the Epstein plaintiffs’ motion. 
Moreover, we fail to see why the fact that Epstein held his shares 
in an IRA account should disqualify him from serving as a 
named plaintiff in this case. A shareholder's individual tax cir- 
cumstances, as we have stated, has no relevance to whether 


*5 Recall that Wasserman also received for each of his shares the $5 worth of 
stock in WWOR.-TV. 


43a 


Matsushita violated Rule 14d-10 or how much in damages it 
would owe tendering MCA shareholders if it did. 


The record shows that the performance of the Epstein plain- 
tiffs and their counsel in pursuing this litigation has been exem- 
plary. We see no reason why they should not represent the class 
of MCA shareholders who tendered their shares. The district 
court's order denying class certification is vacated, and the dis- 
trict court is instructed on remand to enter an order certifying 
the class. 


VIL. The Motion to Amend the Complaint 


The Epstein plaintiffs argue that the district court abused its 
discretion in denying their motion to amend their complaint to 
allege that the tender offer documents released to shareholders 
were false and misleading, in violation of section 14(e) of the 
Williams Act.*’ The district court failed to explain why it denied 
the motion. “In the absence of some statement of reasons or 
findings of fact showing bad faith or prejudice, we cannot [on the 
record before us} determine whether it was an abuse of discretion 
to deny” the motion for leave to amend the complaint. United 
States v. Webb, 655 F.2d 977, 980 (9th Cir. 1981). Accordingly, 
we vacate the district court's order denying the motion for leave 
to amend and remand to the district court for reconsideration of 
the motion. 


*© In addition, the record lends no support to the notion that Epstein misbe- 
haved in pursuing this litigation. The district court's finding that he prose- 
cuted this action under false pretenses is clearly erroneous. There is no 
evidence that Epstein intentionally hid the fact that he kept his shares in an 
IRA account. Matsushita deposed Epstein twice, but failed to ask him how 
he held his MCA shares. Further, prior to his second deposition, Epstein 
produced transaction slips which indicated that he held his MCA shares in 
an IRA account. 


*” Plaintiff Walter Minton argues on appeal that the district court abused its 
discretion in denying his motion to amend his complaint to add a section 
14(d)(7) claim. Because there is no material difference between a section 
14(d)(7) and a Rule 144-10 claim, the question whether the district court 
abused its discretion in denying Minton's motion for leave to amend is moot. 


44a 


VII. Conclusion 


1. The district court’s order denying plaintiffs’ motion for 
partial summary judgment against Matsushita on the Wasser- 
man claim is reversed, and the district court is instructed to grant 
such motion. 


2. The district court’s order granting Matsushita's motion 
for summary judgment is vacated. 


3. The district court’s order dismissing plaintiffs’ claims 
against MCA, Wasserman, and Sheinberg for aiding and abet- 
ting is affirmed. 


4. The district court's orders denying the Epstein plaintiffs’ 
motions for class certification and for leave to amend their 
complaint are vacated and remanded. 


ise) 
A 
as) 
& 
a. 
a. 
< 


45a 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 


CENTRAL DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 


‘ 
LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, et al., CASE NO. CV 90-6451-R 
CASE NO. CV 91-0336 R 
Plaintiffs, (Consolidated Cases) 
m SECOND AMENDED 
ORDER AND FINDINGS 
MCA INC. ot a. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Defendants. >GRANTING 
MATSUSHITA 
WALTER MINTON, aaa 
ae JUDGMENT 
Plaintiff, DISMISSING THE 
CONSOLIDATED 
" ACTIONS 
MCA INC., et al., 
Defendants. 
A 


The motion of defendants Matsushita Electric Industrial 
Co., Ltd., Matsushita Holding Corp. and Matsushita Acquisition 
Corp. (the “Matsushita Defendants’) for summary judgment 
dismissing the Epstein plaintiffs’ Consolidated Amended Com- 
plaint and the complaint filed by plaintiff Walter Minton came 
on for hearing on Monday, February 10, 1992 at 10:00 a.m. in 
Courtroom 8 of the above-entitled Court before the Honorable 
Manuel L. Real.* 


After full consideration of the evidence, the points and 
authorities and declarations submitted by the parties, and the 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


46a 


oral argument of counsel, and upon all prior proceedings held 
herein, including the Court’s Order of August 13, 1991 dis- 
missing all claims in this action brought under SEC Rule 10b-13, 
and all claims against defendants MCA Inc. (“MCA”), Lew R. 
Wasserman and Sidney J. Sheinberg, the Court finds that the 
Matsushita Defendants are entitled to summary judgment dis- 
missing with prejudice the Epstein plaintiffs’ Consolidated 
Amended Complaint and the complaint filed by plaintiff Minton 
as a matter of law. 


I. UNCONTROVERTED FACTS 


The Court finds that there is no genuine issue as to the 
following material facts: 


1. Defendant Matsushita Holding Corp. is a Delaware 
corporation formed by Defendant Matsushita Electric Industrial 
Co., Ltd., a Japanese corporation, for the purpose of making a 
tender offer for the common stock of MCA. See Pre-Trial Con- 
ference Order, filed January 27, 1992, Stipulated Fact No. 2. 


2. MCA is a Delaware corporation having its principal 
place of business in Los Angeles, California. See Stipulated Fact 
No. 3. 


3. At all relevant times, Lew R. Wasserman has been the 
Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer 
of MCA. As of November 26, 1990, Mr. Wasserman directly 
owned approximately 4,953,927 shares of MCA common stock. 
Mr. Wasserman’s basis in that stock was approximately 3 cents 
per share. As of September 1990, Mr. Wasserman was 77 years 
of age. See Stipulated Fact No. 4. 


4. Sidney J. Sheinberg is President and Chief Operating 
Officer of MCA. Immediately prior to the tender offer, Mr. 
Sheinberg owned approximately 1,179,635 shares of MCA com- 
mon stock. See Stipulated Fact No. 5. 


5. The several complaints filed by plaintiffs Lawrence 
Epstein, John Linder, Ruth Karlin, Maurice Karlin, Beth Ann 


47a 


Karlin, Bert P. Karlin and Jane Rockford (the “Epstein plain- 
tiffs”), the first of which was filed on December 3, 1990, were 
consolidated in a consolidated amended complaint dated 
April 22, 1991 (the “Epstein action”). The Epstein action was 
consolidated with the complaint filed by plaintiff Walter Minton 
on January 17, 1991, by Order of the Court dated April 23, 
1991. Each of these complaints alleged identical claims under 
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC’’) Rule 10b-13 and 
Rule 14d-10(a)(2), and no other provision of law. 


6. As a result of the Court’s prior rulings denying class 
certification on April 1, 1991 and September 3, 1991, the Epstein 
plaintiffs maintain this action individually, in their own right 
only. 


7. By Order dated August 13, 1991, the Court dismissed 
with prejudice plaintiffs’ claims under SEC Rule 10b-13 on the 
ground that there is no implied private right of action under that 
provision, and dismissed with prejudice all claims asserted 
against MCA and Messrs. Wasserman and Sheinberg for failure 
to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. 


8. On December 9, 1991, after full briefing and a hearing, 
the Court enjoined plaintiffs and their counsel from (1) com- 
mencing litigation arising out of the MCA acquisition against 
any entity and (2) amending the pleadings in any previously-filed 
actions relating to the MCA acquisition to add new parties 
without prior leave of this Court. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


10. On January 27, 1992, after full briefing and a hearing, 
the Court found each of the Epstein plaintiffs and their counsel, 
Roger Kirby of Kaufman, Malchman, Kaufmann & Kirby, in 


48a 


contempt of Court for their continued failure to provide Matsu- 
shita with all discovery ordered to be produced in the Court’s 
Order of November 4, 1991, and awarded sanctions to Matsu- 
shita, in an amount yet to be calculated. 


11. On March 3, 1992, upon Matsushita’s application to 
supplement the record, the Court found that lead plaintiff and 
purported class representative Lawrence Epstein prosecuted this 
action for 15 months under false pretenses. Throughout this 
litigation, the Epstein plaintiffs deliberately concealed the fact 
that the MCA stock owned by Mr. Epstein was held in a tax-free 
IRA account. In depositions, Mr. Epstein testified under oath 
that he initiated this action because Mr. Wasserman was dispos- 
ing of his MCA stock in a “tax free” transaction and Mr. Epstein 
was not. Mr. Epstein also testified that he anticipated paying 
capital gains taxes as a result of his profit on the tender of his 
MCA stock. In fact, Mr. Esptein knew he would not pay capital 
gains tax as a result of Matsushita’s Tender Offer for MCA 
because his MCA stock, and his Tender Offer proceeds, were 
held in a tax-free retirement account. See Prudential-Bache 
Retirement Account Statements, attached as Exhibit C to Decla- 
ration of Barry R. Ostrager, sworn to on February 27, 1992, and 
filed in support of Matsushita Defendants’ Ex Parte Application 
to Supplement the Record. This fact demonstrates that Mr. 
Epstein did not and could not have sustained any injury as a 
result of the Tender Offer, and, if known, would have disqualified 
him as a plaintiff in this action. 


A. The Contribution Agreement 


12. For business reasons, it was important to Matsushita to 
maintain continuity in the management of MCA if Matsushita 
acquired MCA in the Tender Offer. 


13. Prior to 9:30 a.m. on November 26, 1990, Matsushita 
and MCA entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the 
“Merger Agreement”), which provided that Matsushita would 
make a cash tender offer for the outstanding shares of MCA (the 
“Tender Offer”) and that thereafter Matsushita Acquisition 
Corp. would merge with and into MCA. 


49a 


14. Prior to 9:30 a.m. on November 26, 1990, Matsushita 
and Lew R. Wasserman entered into the Capital Contribution 
and Loan Agreement (“Contribution Agreement’), whereby 
Mr. Wasserman committed to exchange his MCA common stock 
for preferred stock in Matsushita Holding Corp. after the expira- 
tion of the Tender Offer, in a capital contribution transaction 
involving the issuance of shares in a new parent company of 
MCA, a transaction that was different from the Tender Offer in 
form and purpose. See Stipulated Fact No. 17. 


15. Subsequently, at 9:42 a.m., e.s.t. on November 26, 
1990, the Tender Offer was publicly announced. See Declaration 
of Gerald Sauer, sworn to on October 14, 1991, Exhibit C. 


16. SEC Rule 14d-10 regulates certain conduct by a tender 
offeror during the tender offer period. See 17 C.F.R. § 240.14d- 
10 (1991). The tender offer period expires when shares may no 
longer be tendered for acceptance pursuant to the tender offer. 
See, e.g., 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-13 (1991). 


17. Pursuant to the terms of the Offer to Purchase, the 
Tender Offer expired—that is, shares could no longer be ten- 
dered for acceptance pursuant to the Tender Offer—at 12:01 
a.m. on December 29, 1990. See Offer to Purchase, at cover 
page, p.5; Complaint, { 32. 


18. The Offer to Purchase bound Matsushita to accept the 
tendered shares for payment if more than 50 percent of the 
outstanding shares of MCA were validly tendered. See Offer to 
Purchase, at 1. 


19. Immediately after 12:01 a.m. on December 29, 1990, 
attorneys for Matsushita telephoned the depositary for the 
Tender Offer (Citibank, N.A.), to ascertain whether more than 
50 percent of the shares had been validly tendered. See Stipu- 
lated Fact No. 19. 


20. The depositary informed Matsushita that ninety-one 
percent of all MCA shares had been tendered and not withdrawn 
by that time. See Stipulated Fact No. 19; Declaration of John G. 
Finley, dated February 25, 1991 (“Finley Decl.”), attached as 


50a 


Exhibit C to the Declaration of Gerald Sauer, dated January 17, 
1992, filed in support of Matsushita's motion for summary judg- 
ment (“Sauer Decl.”’). At this point shares could no longer be 
tendered for acceptance, and the Tender Offer period expired. 


21. At 12:05 a.m. on December 29, 1990, Matsushita 
accepted the tendered shares for payment by telecopying a notice 
of acceptance for payment to the depositary. See Stipulated Fact 
No. 21; Notice of Acceptance, attached as Exhibit D to the 
Sauer Decl. 


22. The Contribution Agreement was consummated at 1:25 
a.m. on December 29, 1990, when Mr. Wasserman exchanged his 
MCA common stock certificates for preferred stock certificates 
in Matsushita Holding Corp. See Stipulated Fact No. 21; Cross 
Receipt, attached as Exhibit E to the Sauer Decl.; Finley 
Decl., { 3. 


23. The value of the preferred stock received by Mr. Was- 
serman in exchange for his MCA common stock was no greater 
than the $66 in cash paid pursuant to the Tender Offer. At best 
the basis of the Wasserman MCA stock would be transferred to 
the stock of Matsushita received by Wasserman under 
§ 368(a)(1)(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. 


24. Plaintiffs Epstein, Linder and Rockford have repre- 
sented to the Court that they would not have elected to receive 
the preferred stock in lieu of $66 in cash, even if Matsushita had 
offered preferred stock as an alternative form of consideration in 
the Tender Offer. See Transcript of hearing dated December 16, 
1991 at 10; Plaintiffs’ Supplemental Memorandum in Opposition 
to Matsushita’s Motion to Compel dated October 29, 1991 at 2. 


25. Plaintiff Epstein received the cash Tender offer proceeds 
tax-free and was able to invest them as he chose. 


B. The Sheinberg Employment Contract 


26. Under Mr. Sheinberg’s employment agreement with 
MCA prior to the Tender Offer, Mr. Sheinberg had the right to 
terminate his employment whenever MCA was acquired by any 


Sla 


entity, and to continue for the remaining years of his employment 
contract to receive his salary of $8 million per year. 


27. On December 31, 1990, MCA paid Mr. Sheinberg $21 
million in consideration for his Amended Employment Agree- 
ment, (the “Sheinberg Employment Contract’’) whereby he 
agreed to continue his employment with MCA for a set term and 
to relinquish certain rights under his prior employment contract, 
including his right to collect salary without performing future 
services. See Sheinberg Employment Contract, attached as 
Exhibit F to the Sauer Decl.; Stipulated Fact No. 18; Declara- 
tion of Theodore N. Mirvis, dated October 11, 1991 (“Mirvis 
Decl."") and attached as Exhibit G to the Sauer Decl. 


28. The $21 million payment was also made to compensate 
Mr. Sheinberg for the loss of a stock option bonus for | million 
shares of MCA promised to him by MCA prior to the Tender 
Offer, and which he would have received but for the Tender 
Offer. See Offer to Purchase, at 25-26; Deposition of Lew Was- 
serman dated June 12, 1991, at 75. 


29. The $21 million payment was made by MCA, not Mat- 
sushita. See Pretrial Order Stipulated Fact No. 18; Mirvis Decl. 
q 2, attached as Exhibit G to the Sauer Decl. 


30. On January 3, 1991, MCA shareholders who had ten- 
dered their shares into the Tender Offer were paid $66 in cash 
per share, plus a stock representing an interest in WWOR-TV, 
which MCA spun off to its shareholders. A short-form merger 
was also completed on January 3, 1991. 


Il. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 


31. By order dated August 13, 1991, the Court dismissed 
with prejudice all claims brought under SEC Rule 10b-13 on the 
ground that no private right of action exists under that provision. 
See Robertson v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 749 F.2d 530 (9th 
Cir. 1984). The Court also dismissed in that Order all claims 
alleged against defendants MCA and Messrs. Wasserman and 
Sheinberg for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be 
granted. 


52a 


A. AS A MATTER OF LAW, THE CAPITAL 
CONTRIBUTION AGREEMENT DID NOT VIOLATE 
RULE 14D-10 


32. Rule 14d-10 is a mechanical provision regulating cer- 
tain payments to shareholders of a target corporation during the 
tender offer period. See 17 C.F.R. 240.14d-10 (1986).*? By its 
own terms, Rule 14d-10 proscribes only payments made to share- 
holders during the tender offer period. Rule 14d-10 does not 
purport to regulate payments to shareholders either prior to the 
commencement of the tender offer period or after the tender offer 
period expires. 


33. The SEC itself and all relevant case law make clear that 
the tender offer rules do not apply to private transactions before 
or after the tender offer period. See SEC Exchange Act Release 
No. 8712 [1969-70 Transfer Binder) Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) 
{ 77,745, at 83,709 (Oct. 8, 1969); see also Priddy v. Edelman, 
679 F. Supp. 1425, 1432 (E.D. Mich. 1988), aff'd, 883 F.2d 438 
(6th Cir. 1989); Brill v. Burlington Northern, Inc., 590 F. Supp. 
893, 900 n.12 (D. Del. 1984). 


34. Injury and damages are essential elements of plaintiffs’ 
claims. The sole theory of injury or damages advanced by plain- 
tiffs was a demand for an additional cash payment equal to the 
tax Mr. Wasserman would have paid if he had received $66 in 
cash for his MCA shares rather than continuing as a shareholder 
in the new parent company of MCA. This theory cannot support 


a finding of injury or damages. 


35. Mr. Wasserman and each of the plaintiffs has his or her 
own unique tax situation and the transactions at issue had unique 
tax consequences for each MCA shareholder. For example, 
plaintiff Epstein’s shares are held in a tax-free Individual Retire- 
ment account. Wasserman’s tax-basis would be transferred pur- 
suant to § 368(A)(1)(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. 


*2 Rule 14d-10 provides, in relevant part, as follows: “(a) No bidder shall make 
a tender offer unless... (2) The consideration paid to any security holder 
pursuant to the tender offer is the highest consideration paid to any other 
security holder during such tender offer.” 17 C.F.R. 240.14d-10 (1991) 
(emphasis added). 


53a 


36. Therefore, plaintiffs cannot prove a violation of Rule 
14d-10 without establishing each of the following insupportable 
propositions: (a) that Mr. Wasserman was paid during the tender 
offer period; (b) assuming Mr. Wasserman was paid during the 
tender offer period, that he received higher consideration than 
the other MCA shareholders received pursuant to the Tender 
Offer; and (c) assuming the above two elements are established, 
that plaintiffs were damaged by not having the option to receive 
the preferred stock. See Priddy, 679 F. Supp. at 1431-32; see 
also Kahn v. Virginia Retirement System, F. Supp. 

, 1992 WL 8939 (E.D. Va. Jan. 23, 1992). Plaintiffs have 
established none of these requirements.** 


1. The Capital Contribution Agreement Was 
Entered Into Before the Tender Offer Commenced 


37. For the purposes of Rule 14d-10, the commencement of 
the tender offer period is defined by Rule 14d-2. Rule 14d-2 
provides that the initial public announcement shall be “deemed” 
to be the commencement of the tender offer unless, within five 
business days of such an announcement, the bidder publishes the 
disclosures required by Rule 14d-6 and Rule 14d-4, namely the 
Schedule 14D-1. See Rule 14d-2(b)(2). If the bidder publishes 
and files its Schedule 14D-1 in accordance with Rules 14d-6 and 
14d-4, then the date of commencement of the tender offer is the 
date of the filing of the Schedule 14D-1 (not the date of the 
initial public announcement). See Rule 14d-2(b)(i). 


38. The parties have stipulated that Matsushita published 
and filed its Schedule 14D-1 on November 30, 1990. Pretrial 
order, dated January 21, 1992, Stipulated Fact No. 16. Accord- 
ingly, under Rule 14d-10, November 30 is the date of the 
commencement of the Tender Offer period. 


39. As the Contribution Agreement was entered into on 
November 26th, the Contribution Agreement was entered into 


53 In addition to the foregoing, to establish a violation of Rule 14d-10, plaintiffs 
must demonstrate that the Matsushita defendants acted with scienter. Cf 
Robertson v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 749 F.2d 530, 539 (9th Cir. 1984). 
Plaintiffs proffered no evidence touching this element of their case. 


S4a 


prior to the November 30 commencement of the Tender Offer 
period. 


2. The Capital Contribution Agreement Was 
Consummated After The Tender Offer Period Expired 


40. For the purposes of the Williams Act and the SEC 
Rules promulgated thereunder, the tender offer period expires 
when shares may no longer be tendered for acceptance pursuant 
to the tender offer. See, e.g., 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-13 (1991) 
(tender offer rules are inoperative after expiration of the period 
when “securities tendered pursuant to such offer may by the 
terms of the offer be accepted or rejected”); Kahn v. Virginia 
Retirement System, F. Supp. , 1992 WL 8939 
(E.D. Va. Jan. 23, 1992) (no violation of Rule 14d-10 where the 
challenged transactions were contracted for prior to the com- 
mencement of the tender offer period and consummated after the 
acceptance for payment of tendered shares); Kramer v. Time- 
Warner, Inc., [1990-91 Transfer Binder] (CCH) { 95,619, at 
97,902 (S.D.N.Y. 1990), aff'd, 937 F.2d 767 (2d Cir. 1991) 
(equivalent tender offer period for Rules 10b-13 and 14d-10).™ 


41. A time-stamped cross-receipt proves (and plaintiffs 
offered no evidence to contradict the fact) that the Contribution 
Agreement was consummated at 1:25 a.m., on December 29, 
1990 when Mr. Wasserman exchanged his MCA stock for pre- 
ferred stock in Matsushita Holding Corp. See Cross Receipt, 
attached as Exhibit E to the accompanying Sauer Decl.; Finley 
Decl., at ¥ 3. As a matter of law, this payment was made after the 
Tender Offer expired.** 


4 Throughout this litigation plaintiffs have relied upon a single case, Field v. 
Trump, 850 F.2d 938 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1012 (1989), 
which plaintiffs misread. Among other differences, the violative payment in 
Field was arguably made during the tender offer period. Field, 850 F.2d at 
942-43. 


55 As provided by the Contribution Agreement, the consummation of the 
Wasserman transaction could only occur following “the time at which shares 
of MCA Common Stock are accepted for payment pursuaut to and in 
accordance with the terms of the Offer.” See Stipulated Fact No. 8; 
Contribution Agreement, § 2(a) (emphasis added). 


5Sa 


42. These facts conclusively establish that the contribution 
Agreement did not violate Rule 14d-10. 


43. No case has ever held that a tender offer extends past 
the last date upon which shares can be tendered in order to 
encompass a private transaction that was consummated thereaf- 
ter. Instead, case law unanimously concludes that the tender 
offer Rules do not preclude private sales of stock so long as the 
technical terms of the Rules are obeyed. See, e.g., Hanson Trust 
PLC v. SCM Corp., 774 F. 2d 47, 60 (2d Cir. 1985) (if tender 
offer not currently pending, “neither the [Williams] Act nor any 
SEC Rule promulgated thereunder prohibits” the purchase of 
“stock of a target company through privately negotiated transac- 
tions’’); Kramer, [1990-91 Transfer Binder] Fed. Sec. L. Rep. 
(CCH) ¥ 95,619, at 97,902 (no Rule 14d-10 violation when 
compensation agreement entered into on same day as tender offer 
announced and consummated after the close of the tender offer 
period); Priddy, 679 F. Supp. at 1432 (when major shareholder 
bought out at higher price after original tender offer withdrawn 
and before successive tender offer commenced, such purchase not 
made “during or pursuant to any tender offer whatsoever’; if 
tender offer not pending, offeror may “purchase shares upon 
whatever other terms may be negotiated, free of the constraints 
of [Rule 14d-10]"); Brill, 590 F. Supp. at 900 n.12 (pre-tender 
offer purchases should not be integrated with purchases made 
pursuant to tender offer) (collecting cases). 


44. Indeed, extension of the tender offer Rules to privately 
negotiated purchases consummated outside the tender offer 
period “would likely have a disruptive effect upon private... 
transactions which was never intended [by Congress].”” Nach- 
man Corp. v. Halfred, Inc., {1973-74 Transfer Binder] Fed. Sec. 
L. Rep. (CCH) { 94,455, at 95,593 (N.D. Ill. 1973). 


3. The Merger Agreement and Contribution 
Agreement are Separate Agreements Entailing 
Independent Obligations Owed to Different Parties 


45. Plaintiffs have argued (with no evidentiary support) 
that the Contribution Agreement was somehow made “pursuant 
to”’ the Tender Offer or that it is “intertwined” with the Tender 


56a 


Offer.** For all purposes relevant to Rule 14d-10, the Contribu- 
tion Agreement and Merger Agreement are separate and 
independent. 


46. It is clear from the operative terms of the two Agree- 
ments that they each create independently enforceable obliga- 
tions. Matsushita was legally obligated to consummate the 
Tender Offer without regard for the Contribution Agreement. 
See Offer to Purchase, § 2, p. 6; see also Lowenschuss v. Kane, 
520 F.2d 255 (2d Cir. 1975). Under the Merger Agreement, as 
long as more than 50 percent of the outstanding shares were 
tendered and the other conditions of the Tender Offer (none of 
which related to Mr. Wasserman) were satisfied, Matsushita was 
fully obligated to pay for all shares tendered regardless of 
whether Mr. Wasserman’s shares were purchased pursuant to the 
Contribution Agreement. See Merger Agreement, at Article 8; 
Declaration of Kaoru Takada, Gated December 26, 1990 and 
filed with the Court on December 27, 1990, at J 3-7. 


47. Moreover, the Contribution Agreement became binding 
on Mr. Wasserman before the Tender Offer was announced. 
Matsushita in fact conditioned the making of the Tender Offer on 
Mr. Wasserman’s separately negotiated, prior commitment set 
forth in the Contribution Agreement to exchange his MCA 
shares for shares in Matsushita Holding Corp. after the expira- 
tion of the Tender Offer. See Declaration of Lew R. Wasserman 
dated December 26, 1990. Thus, Mr. Wasserman alone relin- 
quished the right of every other MCA shareholder to sell into the 
market during the Tender Offer period. 


5© These arguments are irrelevant in any event. Under Rule 14d-10, unless the 
separate transaction in question occurs during the tender offer period, the 
Rule does not regulate it. See Kahn, supra. Therefore, the fact that a 
transaction may be related to a tender offer in certain respects is immaterial 
to the operation of Rule 14d-10 if the separate transaction is neither entered 
into nor consummated during the Tender Offer period. See 17 C.F.R. 
§ 240.14d-10. 


57a 


4. No Case Law Supports Plaintiffs’ Position 
that the Capital Contribution Agreement and 
the Tender Offer Should be Integrated 


48. Plaintiffs invite the Court to ignore the language of 
Rule 14d-10 and the realities of the transactions at issue to fuse 
two separate transactions into a single tender offer transaction. 
Plaintiffs’ argument is entirely inconsistent with relevant case 
law. Throughout this litigation plaintiffs have relied upon a single 
case, which (as this Court has observed) plaintiffs misread. In 
Field v. Trump, 850 F.2d 938 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 489 
U.S. 1912 (1989), the Second Circuit held that there was a 
material issue of fact precluding a motion to dismiss on the issue 
of whether two public tender offers should be integrated as one 
when the offeror “withdrew” the initial public tender offer for a 
period of a few hours to consummate a private transaction at a 
higher price and then commenced a purported “‘second”’ tender 
offer. These facts are clearly distinguishable from this case and 
concern an issue that does not exist here. 


49. Plaintiffs misapply Field to argue that the Court should 
expand the scope of a single uninterrupted public tender offer to 
integrate a private transaction that was entered into and consum- 
mated outside the public tender offer period. Field does not 
support the integration of private transactions that precede or 
follow a public tender offer, and it has never been so construed. 
See, e.g., Kramer v. Time Warner, [1990-91 Transfer Binder] 
Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) ¥ 95,619 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 24, 1990) 
(finding Field “easily distinguishable”) aff'd, 937 F.2d 767 (2d 
Cir. 1991). The tender offer Rules are technical prohibitions 
which must be strictly interpreted “for the accurate guidance of 
those engaged in the complexity of negotiations for corporate 
control.” See Feder v. MacFadden Holdings, Inc., 722 F. Supp. 
68, 70 (S.D.N.Y. 1989).*” 


57 Courts have consistently recognized that parties attempting to structure 
transactions in compliance with the federal securities laws need guidance 
and certainty. See, ¢.g., Pinter v. Dahli, 486 U.S. 622, 652 (1988); City 
Capital Assoc. Lid. Partnership v. Interco, Inc., 860 F.2d 60, 64 (3d Cir. 
1988) (federal securities laws, and Williams Act in particular, are ‘‘an area 
of the law in which predictability is of crucial importance”). Similarly, the 


58a 


50. Rule 14d-10 applies only to “actions taken during 
tender offers,” and is inapplicable to payments (like the payment 
under the Contribution Agreement here) made after the expira- 
tion of the Tender Offer period. Kramer v. Time Warner, supra, 
{ 95,619 at 97,902-903. In Kramer, the Court held that no 
violation of Rule 14d-10 occurred when a compensation agree- 
ment, entered into on the same day as the tender offer was 
announced, permitted management to receive a higher price per 
share after the tender offer period. The Kramer court found that 
““[t)his is simply not a case, like Field, in which a defendant has 
attempted artificially to bifurcate a single transaction in order to 
evade the tender offer rules.” /d. at 97,903; see also Feder, 722 
F. Supp. at 69 (court refuses to integrate two separate tender 
offers and a private purchase, limiting the application of Field to 
purported withdrawals of tender offers). There is no case to the 
contrary. 


5. Plaintiffs Sustained No Damages 


51. Mr. Wasserman did not receive a tax-free deal as plain- 
tiffs contend. Rather, by operation of the Internal Revenue Code, 
Mr. Wasserman’s tax basis in his MCA common stock was 
transferred to the preferred stock in Matsushita Holding Corp. 
he received under the Contribution Agreement, in a transaction 
in which no gain or loss was recognized. Mr. Wasserman received 
only a transfer of tax basis and not any tax benefit. Mr. Wasser- 
man will pay tax on the preferred stock when it is redeemed. 


52. None of the plaintiffs has sustained any legally-cogniza- 
ble injury by virtue of not being offered the preferred stock. For 


Ninth Circwit rejected a definition of tender offer under Rule | 3e-4 and | 3e- 
| that was “vague and difficult to apply” and “offer[ed) little guidance to the 
issuer as to when his conduct will come within the ambit” of the relevant 
rules. SEC v. Carter Hawley Hale Stores, Inc., 760 F.2d 945, 953 (9th Cir. 
1985). Plaintiffs’ approach is “largely subjective and made in hindsight 
based on an ex post facto evaluation” of the facts of a particular case and 
therefore must be rejected. Jd. As the Supreme Court and other federal 
courts have done, this Court rejects plaintiffs’ invitation to “inject uncer- 
tainty into the tender offer process." Schreiber v. Burlington Northern, Inc., 
472 U.S. 1, 12 (1985). 


59a 


example, plaintiff Epstein received the cash Tender Offer pro- 
ceeds tax-free, and was able to invest those proceeds as he chose. 
In addition, the Epstein plaintiffs stipulated that they would not 
have elected to receive the preferred stock received by Mr. 
Wasserman. Thus, Matsushita is entitled to summary judgment 
since plaintiffs cannot prove damages, an essential element of 
their claim. 


B. THE SHEINBERG EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT DID 
NOT VIOLATE RULE 14D-10 


53. Uncontested documentary evidence establishes that the 
$21 million Employment Contract payment was made to Mr. 
Sheinberg on December 31, 1990, two days after the expiration 
of the Tender Offer period. See Stipulated Fact No. 18; Mirvis 
Decl., { 2. The signed and dated checks by which Mr. Sheinberg 
was paid were produced to plaintiffs on June 19, 1991. 


54. Mr. Sheinberg’s Employment Contract payment was 
made by MCA, not Matsushita. It is well settled that payments 
made by the target, as opposed to the bidder cannot constitute a 
Rule 14d-10 violation. See Kramer 937 F.2d at 779; Brill 590 F. 
Supp. at 900. 


55. Moreover it is well settled that employment related 
payments are separate and distinct from tender offer payments. 
See Brill, 590 F. Supp. at 900-901. 


Ill. CONCLUSION 


56. Because plaintiffs have not and cannot “‘set forth spe- 
cific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial,” Ander- 
son v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250 (1986), summary 
judgment is appropriate for defendants on all claims asserted 
under Rule 14d-10. The Court has previously dismissed with 
prejudice plaintiffs’ claims under Rule 10b-13 and all claims 
asserted against MCA and Messrs. Wasserman and Sheinberg. 
Therefore, the Court shall enter fina) judgment dismissing both 
complaints with prejudice. 


60a 


IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND 
DECREED that the motion for summary judgment dismissing 
the Epstein plaintiffs’ Consolidated Amended Complaint and the 
complaint filed by plaintiff Walter Minton is hereby granted with 
prejudice. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND 
DECREED that pursuant to the Order of this Court dated 
December 9, 1991, the above-mentioned plaintiffs and their 
respective counsel, and all persons in active concert or participa- 
tion with any or all of them, and all persons having actual notice 
hereof, are hereby permanently restrained from commencing any 
judicial or administrative proceeding in any forum involving, or 
that would involve, directly or indirectly, by way of claims, 
defenses or counterclaims, any claims that arise out of the same 
transactions or occurrences as the claims in these actions, 
between these parties and from amending the pleadings to add 
new parties in any pending action between these parties arising 
out of Matsushita’s acquisition of MCA, without first seeking 
and obtaining leave of this Court upon proper notice to the 
Matsushita defendants through their counsel in this action. 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND 
DECREED that the Court shall retain jurisdiction over these 
actions: (a) to enforce the above-described permanent injunction; 
(b) to enforce the order of January 27, 1992 finding the Epstein 
plaintiffs and their counsel in contempt of Court and to award 
costs and attorneys’ fees and sanctions to Matsushita by reason 


6la 


of the Epstein plaintiffs’ contempt and (c) to award Matsushita 
its costs in this action as provided by Local Rule 16. 


Dated: April 15, 1992 


/s/ HON. MANUEL L. REAL 
HON. MANUEL L. REAL 
Chief Judge of the United 
States District Court 


Submitted by: 


SIMPSON THACHER & BARTLETT 
(a partnership which includes 
professional corporations) 


By: /s/_ Mary Kay VYSKOCIL 
Mary Kay Vyskocil 


Appendix C 


No. 92-5632 
MCA INC., MATSUSHITA ACQUISITION 

CORPORATION, MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC 
INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD., MATSUSHITA 
HOLDING CORPORATION, LEW WASSERMAN, ORDER 
SIDNEY J. SHEINBERG, 


Defendants — Appellees 


LAWRENCE EPSTEIN, JOHN LINDER; 
JANE ROCKFORD, as trustee of the ‘ 

Michael J. Rockford Trust; No. 92-55675 
MAURICE KARLIN; RUTH KARLIN; 
BETH ANN KARLIN; BERT P. KARLIN, 


Plaintiffs — Appellants, 


v. 


MCA INC.,; MATSUSHITA ACQUISITION 
CORPORATION; MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC 
INDUSTRIAL CO., LTD.; MATSUSHITA 
HOLDING CORPORATION; LEW WASSERMAN, 
SIDNEY J. SHEINBERG, 


Defendants — Appellees. 


4 


Before: NORRIS, WIGGINS, O'SCANNLAIN, Circuit 
Judges 
The panel, as constituted above, has voted unanimously to 


deny the petition for rehearing. Judges Wiggins and O’Scanniain 
have voted to reject the suggestion for a rehearing en banc, and 
Judge Norris has recommended the same. 


The full court has been advised of the suggestion for en banc 
rehearing and no judge of the court has requested a vote on the 


suggestion for rehearing en banc. Fed. R. App. P. 35(b). 


The petition for rehearing is DENIED, and the suggestion 
for a rehearing en banc is REJECTED. 


File stamped April 6, 1995 by Cathy A. Catterson, Clerk, 
Appeals. 


U.S. Court of 


Appendix D 


63a 
In RE MCA, INC. SHAREHOLDERS LITIGATION. 


CIV. A. 11740. 
Court of Chancery of Delaware. 
Feb. 16, 1993. 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 


HARTNETT 

After considering all the circumstances, the Court in its 
business judgment approves the settlement of this class action. 
That has the effect of barring related federal securities law 
claims that have been filed in federal district court in California. 
The settlement is approved because the Court finds, on balance, 
that it is in the best interests of the class to settle this litigation 
and the terms of the settlement are fair and reasonable— 
although the value of the benefit to the class is meager. 


This decision also awards attorneys’ fees to the attorneys for 
plaintiffs in an amount less than that sought. 


This is the second time a proposed settlement of this class 
action has come before this Court. The facts appear in greater 
detail in this Court’s previous opinion in which the initial pro- 
posed settlement was rejected. See, In re MCA, Inc. Sharehold- 
ers Litigation, Del. Ch., 598 A.2d 687 (1991). 


In September of 1990, Matsushita Electrical Industrial Co., 
Ltd. (“Matsushita”) and MCA, Inc. publicly announced that 
they were negotiating a possible acquisition of MCA by Matsu- 
shita. During the next two days, three purported class action 
suits were filed against MCA and its directors. Notwithstanding 
that no acquisition agreement had been reached, the complaints 
alleged that the defendants had breached their fiduciary duty to 


64a 


the shareholders by failing to implement a market check proce- 
dure to ensure that maximum shareholder value was realized. 
These actions were consolidated by an order of this Court dated 
October 2, 1990. 


On November 26, 1990, MCA and Matsushita announced 
that they had entered into a Merger Agreement. Under the 
Merger Agreement, Matsushita agreed to make a cash tender 
offer for all of MCA’s outstanding shares at $66 per share and 
agreed to spin off Pinelands, an MCA subsidiary, which con- 
trolled a television station which Matsushita, under federal law, 
was forbidden to acquire. 


On December 3, 1990, a purported class action was filed in 
the United States District Court for the Central District of 
California as Epstein v. MCA, Inc. et al., No. CV-90-6451-R 
(“the Epstein action’). The Epstein action alleged that the 
tender offer included a special deal for the acquisition of the 
approximately 5 million shares of MCA held by Lew R. Wasser- 
man, MCA’s chairman and CEO. Wasserman had agreed with 
Matsushita to exchange his shares for a special class of preferred 
stock in a Matsushita subsidiary. 


The complaint in the Epstein action alleged that this trans- 
action violated SEC Rule 10b-13, 17 C.F.R. 240.10b-13, that 
prohibits purchases by a tender offeror outside a tender offer 
during the pendency of the offer and also violated the “all 
holders, best price” rule in SEC Rule 14d-10, 17 C.F.R. 
240.14d-10. Four additional purported class actions alleging sim- 
ilar claims were also filed in the California Federal District 
Court and were consolidated by Order of the District Court on 
April 1, 1991. 


The plaintiffs in this Delaware action amended their com- 
plaint on December 14, 1990 to allege that the tender offer 
materials failed to disclose the preferential treatment allegedly 
given to Wasserman. The amended complaint also named Matsu- 
shita as a defendant since it allegedly aided and abetted MCA in 
a breach of fiduciary duty by entering into the transaction with 
Wasserman. The amended complaint did not allege the breaches 
of federal securities laws asserted in Epstein action, however, 


“ eee a ee See 


65a 


because such claims are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
federal courts. 


On December 18, 1990, the parties in this Delaware action 
filed a Stipulation and Agreement of Compromise and Settle- 
ment and this Court provisionally certified the Class pursuant to 
Chancery Rule 23(b)(2) for settlement purposes only. David and 
Andrew Minton (purported shareholders of MCA) entered an 
appearance and objected to the proposed settlement on the sole 
basis that the settlement, if approved, would release the claims 
asserted in the Epstein action without affording the members of 
the class the opportunity to opt out of the class and continue to 
press the claims in the Epstein action. 


This Court held that while the proposed settlement need not 
provide for an opt-out, it could not be approved. This Court 
found that the claims asserted in this Delaware action were “at 
best, extremely weak, and therefore, ha[d) little or no value. It 
further found that the federal securities law claims in the Cali- 
fornia action raised issues that had not been definitively 
addressed by the courts and that those claims therefore clearly 
had arguable merit and, therefore, some value. MCA, 598 A.2d 
at 695. This Court observed that it must carefully scrutinize any 
settlement that would have the effect of barring claims of at least 
arguable merit that were not raised in Delaware litigations but 
were asserted elsewhere, particularly if a proposed settlement 
was of little or no value to the class. /d., (citing Selfe v. Joseph, 
Del. Supr., 501 A.2d 409 (1985)). 


After this Court evaluated the proposed settlement under 
this standard, the settlement was rejected as being unfair to the 
class. Jd. at 696. While the proposed settlement provided for a 
generous payment of up to $1 million in attorneys’ fees, the only 
benefit proposed to be received by the class would have been a 
cosmetic change in a poison pill in Pinelands, a subsidiary of 
MCA. Id. at 695-96. In exchange for this “illusionary’’ benefit, 
the class would surrender any potential benefits from the claims 
in the Epstein action which this Court found to be “the only 
claims which have any substantial merit ...”. /d. at 696. There- 
fore, the proposed settlement was rejected. 


66a 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


The parties in this Delaware action have now submitted a 
second settlement proposal. If this proposed settlement is 
approved, the class will receive $2,000,000 in cash less any award 
of attorneys’ fees. Any class member dissatisfied with the settle- 
ment may opt out of the class. This settlement, like the previous 
proposed settlement, is a “global settlement;” that is, it would 
bar not just the claims asserted in this Delaware action, but all 
related claims such as those asserted in the Epstein action. 


At the settlement hearing, counsel for the plaintiffs in this 
Delaware action reported that 18 class members had opted out of 
the class. In addition, objections to the proposed settlement were 
received from three class members. 


Pamela Minton de Ruiz, daughter of one of the Epstein 
plaintiffs, objected on the basis that the settlement is collusive. 
She argues, without any direct evidence of collusion, that the 
Delaware plaintiffs have colluded with the defendants to settle 
this action and dispose of the supposedly meritorious federal 
claims in exchange for an award of attorneys’ fees and a de 
minimis benefit to the class. She argues that the opt out is 
virtually meaningless because, as a practical matter, “few share- 
holders will avail themselves of it’. She makes this argument 


67a 


despite that her brothers, David and Andrew Minton, as objec- 
tors to the first proposed settlement, strongly argued in favor of 


the same opt-out provision. 


Objector William A. Krupman makes arguments similar to 
those made by Pamela Minton. Objector Marion Minton, wife of 
one of the Epstein plaintiffs, also objects to the adequacy of the 
notice of the settlement given to members of the class because 
Dean Witter apparently delayed transmitting the notice of the 
settlement hearing to the owners of shares held in street name by 
Dean Witter. 


Chancery Rule 23(e) requires that the Court review pro- 
posed settlements of class action suits. The rule is “intended to 
guard against surreptitious buyouts of representative plaintiffs, 
leaving other class members without recourse.”’ Wied v. Valhi, 
Inc., Del.Supr., 466 A.2d 9, 15 (1983), cert. denied, 465 U.S. 
1026 (1984). This Court must be particularly careful in review- 
ing a proposed settlement that has the effect of barring claims of 
at least arguable merit that are not asserted in Delaware but are 
being asserted in another forum. MCA, 598 A.2d at 695; see 
also, John C. Coffee, Jr., “Suspect Settlements In Securities 
Litigation” N.Y.L.J., March 28, 1991, p. 5. This Court’s role in 
reviewing a proposed settlement is to exercise its discretion and 
to “apply its own business judgment in deciding whether the 
settlement is reasonable ...’’. Polk v. Good, Del.Supr., 507 A.2d 
531, 535 (1986). The factors to be considered in making this 
determination include: (1) the probable validity of the claims, (2) 
the apparent difficulties in enforcing the claims through the 
courts, (3) the collectability of any judgment recovered, (4) the 
delay, expense and trouble of litigation, (5) the amount of the 
compromise as compared with the amount and collectability of a 
judgment, and (6) the views of the parties involved, pro and con. 
Id. at 536 (citations omitted). 


Particular attention must be paid to balancing the value of 
all the claims being compromised against the value of the benefit 
to be conferred on the class. MCA, 598 A.2d at 691. After 


68a 


weighing the factors present here, the Court concludes that this 
settlement, notwithstanding that it has meager value to the class, 
should be approved as being in the best interests of the class. 


As noted in the previous opinion in this case, the claims 
brought in this Delaware action were “extremely weak and, 
therefore, have little or no value.” Jd. at 694. At that time, the 
federal claims had not been litigated and raised issues which had 
not been “definitively addressed by the courts.” Jd. at 695. This 
Court therefore was reluctant to approve the settlement that 
would compromise those claims, despite their somewhat limited 
merit, particularly when the benefit to be received in exchange 
was of “illusionary”’ value to the class. Jd. at 696. 


Now, however, there has been a full hearing on the federal 
claims and those claims have been rejected on both legal and 
factual grounds in the U.S. District Court. The Objectors claim 
that these rulings are erroneous and that there is at least a 
chance that they will be reversed in a pending appeal. These 
federal claims, however, obviously now have less economic value 
than they had before their dismissal. 


In determining whether a settlement should be approved, a 
court should not try the merits of the underlying claims. MCA, 
598 A.2d at 691. This principle would seem to be especially 
appropriate where the underlying claims, like the federal claims 
here, are outside the jurisdiction of this Court. 


It is sufficient that the determination of the federal district 
court that the claims lack merit must be accorded substantial 
weight in determining the present settlement value of those 
claims. 


In exchange for surrendering the weak claims asserted in 
this Delaware action and the federal claims which, in light of the 
adverse federal district court decision, now have greatly dimin- 
ished settlement value, the class will receive a $2 million cash 
settlement (less any award of attorneys’ fees). As the objectors 
point out, this amounts to only two to three cents per share. 
While not a munificent recovery, on balance, the Court finds in 
its business judgment that it is adequate (if only barely so) to 
support the proposed settlement. This conclusion is based on the 


69a 


Court’s conclusion that the claims on appeal from the federal 
district court now have minimal economic value and that there is 
a provision to optout of the settlement although only eighteen 
requests for optouts were received from the more than 25,000 
shareholders notified. The availability of the right to opt-out of 
the class protects the ability of class members who find the 
proposed settlement inadequate to continue the district court 
litigation. 


The three objectors assert, without citing any empirical 
evidence, that because, as a practical matter, few small share- 
holders will ever opt-out of a settlement, the proposed settlement 
will in effect destroy the Epstein action as a class action. This 
argument comes from an unexpected source because the Mintons 
(two of the three objectors to this settlement) objected to the first 
proposed settlement solely on the grounds that it did not incorpo- 
rate an opt-out provision. In any case, this Court's role is to 
evaluate the economic value of the settlement in its business 
judgment and not to speculate on why shareholders opt-out of 
class actions. 


The Objectors also argue that this Court should delay its 
ruling until the Ninth Circuit renders its decision on the appeal 
of the Epstein action. This Court is most reluctant to take any 
action that could be construed as attempting to interfere with the 
appellate process in the federal courts. However, as noted above, 
the Ninth Circuit denied the Epstein plaintiffs’ motion for expe- 
dited argument after being advised of the proposed settlement 
hearing in this Court and there is no indication of when that 
court might rule. If this Court rejects the settlement, the $2 
million dollar benefit will vanish. 


The law favors voluntary settlements. /n re Resorts Interna- 
tional Shareholders Litigation Appeals, Del.Supr., 570 A.2d 259, 
265-66 (1990). Unless fair settlements are promptly approved, 
the settlement process will be adversely impacted. Therefore, the 
Objectors’ request that this Court indefinitely delay its review of 
the settlement must be denied. 


Objector Marion Minton also objects to the settlement on 
the basis that many shareholders whose shares were held in 


70a 


“street names” by Dean Witter did not receive timely notice. 
However, the uncontradicted evidence is that the responsibility 
for any delay rests with Dean Witter. A shareholder who holds 
her shares in a “street name” assumes responsibility for any 
delays in notice that are attributable to the delay attendant in 
forwarding notice through the “street name”. Enstar v. Senouf, 
Del.Supr., 535 A.2d 1351, 1354-55 (1987). Nonetheless, as a 
matter of equity, the proposed order implementing this opinion 
shall be amended to provide that any opt-outs received after the 
deadline set forth in the settlement notice but before the date of 
this decision will be effective. 


Finally, the objectors argue that the proposed settlement is 
collusive. They argue that the defendants “cut a deal’’ with the 
plaintiffs and their attorneys in this Delaware action to achieve a 
settlement of the federal claims which plaintiffs and their attor- 
neys in this litigation were unable to assert (but can only settle) 
instead of negotiating with the Epstein plaintiffs and their attor- 
neys whom they allege understand the true fair value of those 
federal claims. 


The potential for this type of abuse clearly exists in repre- 
sentative litigation. See Stepak v. Tracinda Corp., Del. Ch., C.A. 
No. 8457-NC, Allen, C. (Aug. 18, 1989). slip op. at 15-16. And 
when the settling parties have previously proposed a patently 
inadequate settlement in which the class would have received no 
monetary benefit but the attorneys would have received $1 mil- 
lion in fees (as the initial, now-rejected, settlement provided), 
suspicions abound. Suspicion, however, is not enough and the 
objectors have offered no evidence of any collusion. The proposed 
settlement must therefore be approved. 


Plaintiffs’ attorneys have applied for a total of $691,057.68 
in attorneys’ fees and expenses which represents approximately 
35% of the settlement fund of $2 million. 


The law governing the award of attorneys’ fees in corporate 
litigation is well-established in Delaware. Where the efforts of a 
plaintiff on behalf of the stockholders of a corporation result in 


oe = 


~~ ees 


Tla 


the creation of a common fund or the conferring of a corporate 
benefit, the Court may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees. 
Tandycrafts, Inc. v. Initio Partners, Del-Supr., 562 A.2d 1162, 
1164 (1989). 


The factor usually accorded the greatest weight in a discre- 
tionary award of attorney fees is the benefit produced by the 
litigation. I/M of the Appraisal of Shell Oil Co., Del. Ch., C.A. 
No. 8080-NC, Hartnett, V.C. (Oct. 30, 1992); in re Maxxam 
Group, Inc. Stockholders Litigation, Del. Ch., C.A. No. 8636- 
NC, Allen, C. (Apr. 16, 1987), slip op. at 31. “In many, perhaps 
most, cases it will be clear that the entire benefit is directly and 
entirely attributable to the litigation.” /d. However, if the Court 
determines that the benefit was partly caused by the shareholder 
litigation and partly caused by the activities of others the award 
of attorneys’ fees will be reduced. /d. at 31-34; Aaron v. Parsons, 
Del.Supr., 144 A.2d 155 (1958); Dow Jones & Co. v. Shields (In 
re Telerate, Inc. Shareholders Litigation), Del. Ch., C.A. No. 
11, 11S-NC, Hartnett, V.C. (March 4. 1992). 


In this litigation, the defendants’ willingness to create the 
settlement fund seems likely to have been motivated as much by 
their concern as to their potential liability under the federal 
claims as by their concern for liability under the state law claims 
which this Court characterized as “extremely weak”. MCA, 598 
A.2d 694. Therefore, although this Delaware action may be the 
vehicle under which the more meritorious federal claims are 
settled, this does not mean that the Delaware action was entirely 
responsible for the benefits produced. 


Even if this litigation was responsible for the production of 
the entire settlement fund, plaintiffs’ application for 35% of that 
fund is excessive considering the factors set forth in Sugarland 
Industries, Inc. v. Thomas, Del.Supr., 420 A.2d 142 (1980). In 
addition to the value of the benefit, this Court must also consider 
the stage at which the litigation was concluded and the amount 
of work necessary to produce the benefit. I/M of the Appraisal of 
Shell Oil Co., Del. Ch., C.A. No. 8080-NC (Consolidated), 
Hartnett, V.C. (Oct. 30, 1992), slip op. at 19-20 (citing Sugar- 
land Industries, Inc. v. Thomas, Del.Supr., 420 A.2d 142 
(1980)). While plaintiffs’ counsel allegedly expended in excess of 


72a 


3,300 hours in connection with this litigation, in cases in 
shareholder litigation similar to this action, “[t]his Court has 
properly awarded much less than 25% of the benefit, especially 
where cases have been settled long before trial.” Jd. at 20 
(citations omitted). Ultimately, the amount of attorneys’ fees 
that should be awarded is left to the informed discretion of this 
Court. See Tandycrafts, Inc. v. Initio Partners, Del.Supr., 562 
A.2d 1162, 1166 (Chancery Court has “plenary power” over 
allowance of attorneys’ fees). Having considered all the factors 
discussed in Sugarland, especially the meager benefit achieved 
by the litigation, the stage at which the proceeding was ended, 
the time and effort of counsel, the relative complexities of the 
litigation, the contingency factor and the standing and ability of 
counsel—I find that plaintiffs should be awarded a total of 
$250,000 in attorneys’ fees and expenses. 


IV 


The settling parties shall submit an amended proposed 
order. 


73a 


IN THE 
COURT OF CHANCERY OF THE STATE OF 
DELAWARE 


IN AND FOR NEW CASTLE COUNTY 


' 


IN RE MCA INC CONSOLIDATED 
: 
SHAREHOLDERS LITIGATION | @6 mom 
ORDER AND FINAL JUDGMENT 


On this 22 day of February, 1993 a hearing having been 
held before this Court to determine whether the terms of the 
Stipulation of Settlement dated October 22, 1992 (the “Stipula- 
tion”), and the terms and conditions of the settlement proposed 
in the Stipulation (the “Settlement™), and all transactions 
referred to therein or preparatory or incident thereto, are fair, 
reasonable and adequate for the settlement of al! claims asserted 
herein, and whether judgment should be entered in these civil 
actions (the “ Actions”) dismissing the Actions on the merits with 
prejudice as against all of the plaintiffs and all members of the 
Settlement Class certified in this Court's Order dated Octo- 
ber 27, 1992; and the Court having considered all matters sub- 
mitted to it at the hearing and otherwise and the Court having 
rendered its Memorandum Opinion dated February 12, 1993 
approving the Settlement and awarding attorneys fees and 
expenses: 

NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED 
THAT: 


1. The Notice and Summary Notice (as defined in J 4(b) of 
the Stipulation), is hereby determined to have been the best 
practicable notice under the circumstances and in full compli- 
ance with Rule 23 of the Court of Chancery and the require- 
ments of due process and it is hereby further determined that the 
plaintiffs in the Actions, as representatives of the Settlement 
Class, have fairly and adequately protected the interests of the 
Settlement Class and that the maintenance of this action as a 


74a 


class action meets all the requirements of Rule 23(a) and (b)(3) 
of the Court of Chancery. 


2. The Stipulation and the Settlement are approved as fair, 
reasonable and adequate and in the best interests of the plaintiffs 
and the Settlement Class, and the parties are directed to consum- 
mate the Settlement in accordance with the terms and provisions 
of the Stipulation, provided that any additional Requests for 
Exclusion received after the deadline set in paragraph 6 of the 
Hearing Order dated October 7, 1992 but prior to February 12, 
1993 will be effective. 


3. (a) The Actions are hereby dismissed with prejudice on 
the merits as to all defendants in the Actions (regardless of 
whether any such defendant has been served or entered an 
appearance ir any of the Actions) and their respective present 
and former officers, directors, employees, agents, attorneys, 
trators, successors and assigns (including Lazard Freres & Co. 
(financial advisor to MCA), Allen & Co. Inc. (financial advisor 
to Matsushita) and Creative Artists Agency Inc. (advisor to 
Matsushita)) (collectively, the “Released Persons’’), as against 
plaintiffs and all members of the Settlement Class (other than 
those who have validly requested exclusion therefrom) and their 
successors and assigns, whether known or unknown, whether 
directly or in any other capacity, without costs except as provided 
in the Supulation, such dismissal to be subject only to compli- 
ance by the parties with the terms and conditions of the Stupula- 
tion and any Order of this Court with reference to the 
Supulation. 


(b) All claims, mghts and causes of action (state or federal, 
including but not limited to claims arising under the federal 
securities laws, any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, 
or otherwise), whether known or unknown that are, could have 
been or might in the future be asserted by any of the plaintiffs or 
any member of the Settlement Class (other than those who have 
validly requested exclusion therefrom), whether directly, deriva- 
tively, representatively or in any other capacity, against any of 


7Sa 


the Released Persons or against anyone else in connection with or 
that arise now or hereafter out of the Merger Agreement, the 
Tender Offer, the Distribution Agreement, the Capital Contribu- 
tion Agreement, the employee compensation arrangements, the 
ment (except for compliance with the Settlement), or any mat- 
ters, transactions or occurrences referred to in the December 4, 
1990 Claim Letter and the Amended Complaint in the Action, or 
the fiduciary or disclosure obligations of any of the Released 
Persons with respect to any of the foregoing, and including 
Actions, the Second Minton Action and the Second Epstein 
Action (all as defined in the Stipulation) (all of which are 
hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Settled Claims”) are 
hereby compromised, settled, released and discharged with 
prejudice by virtue of the proceedings herein and this Order and 
Final Judgment. 

4. The plaintiffs and all members of the Settlement Class 
(other than those who have validly requested exclusion there- 
from), their successors and assigns, whether acting directly. 
derivatively, representatively or in any other capacity, are hereby 
permanently barred and enjoined from instituting or prosecuting 
any other action in any court of this or any other jurisdiction 
based upon, relating to, or for the purpose of enforcing any of the 
Settled Claims. 

5. Plaintiffs attorneys of record herein are hereby awarded 
the sum of $250,000 in fees and reimbursement of expenses in 
connection with the Actions, which sum the Court finds to be fair 
and reasonable and which shall be paid to plaintiffs’ attorneys 
according to the terms set forth in the Stipulation. Said sum shall 
accrue interest and be paid in accordance with paragraph 8 of 
the Supulation. 


oe eee eee eee eee ee ee 


Appendix E 


76a 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE 


IN RE MCA, INC. 
SHAREHOLDERS LITIGATION 


Before MOORE, WALSH and HOLLAND, Justices. 


ORDER 


This 21st day of September, 1993, the Court having consid- 
ered this matter at oral argument and having concluded that the 
same should be affirmed on the basis of and for the reasons 
assigned by the Court of Chancery in its Opinion dated Febru- 
ary 12, 1993, as confirmed by the Order and Final Judgment of 
February 22, 1993. 


NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that the judg- 
ment of the Court of Chancery be, and the same hereby is, 


AFFIRMED. 
BY THE COURT: 


——EEE—— 


Justice 


Appendix F 


77a 


IN THE 
COURT OF CHANCERY OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE 
IN AND FOR NEW CASTLE COUNTY 


IN RE MCA INC. CA-No 11740" 


SHAREHOLDERS LITIGATION 


ss 


To: All Record Holders And Beneficial Owners Of Common 
Stock Of MCA INC. On Or After September 25, 1990, 
And Their Successors In Interest, Immediate Or Remote. 
All Record Holders Are Requested By The Court To For- 
ward This Notice To Their Beneficial Owners. 


The Notice is given pursuant to Rule 23 of the Court of 
Chancery of the State of Delaware in and for New Castle County 
(the “Court”) and an Order of the Court (the “Hearing Order’) 
entered in the above-captioned consolidated action to inform you 
of these pending lawsuits (the “Delaware Actions”), to advise 
you of a proposed settlement of the Delaware Actions and of your 
rights, among other things, to exclude yourself from the proposed 
settlement, to participate in the hearing on, or to object to, the 
proposed settlement and to give you notice of a hearing to be held 
by the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware in and for 
New Castle County on January 21, 1993, at 12:00 noon to 
determine whether the proposed settlement should be approved 
as fair, reasonable, and adequate and to consider the application 
by plaintiffs’ counsel for attorneys’ fees and costs. 


78a 


NOTICE TO PERSONS HOLDING RECORD 
OWNERSHIP ON BEHALF OF OTHERS 


If you were a record (but not the beneficial) owner of 
common stock of MCA INC. (“MCA” or the “Company”), on 
September 25, 1990, or any time thereafter, through and includ- 
ing January 3, 1991, you should within fourteen (14) days of the 
receipt of this Notice, either (a) forward this Notice to each such 
beneficial owner or (b) mail a list of the names and addresses of 
each such beneficial owner to Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, 425 
Lexington Avenue, New York, New York 10017, (212) 455- 
3849, Attention: Alex Fan, with a request that copies of the 
Notice be mailed to such beneficial owners. If you are a nominee 
holder and wish additional copies of this Notice, additional 
copies of this Notice will be made available to you for this 
purpose upon request directed to the foregoing address or tele- 
phone number. Nominee holders will be reimbursed their reason- 
able costs and expenses incurred in complying with the foregoing 
directives of this paragraph. 


NO OPINION EXPRESSED BY THE 
COURT AS TO THE MERITS 


This Notice is not an expression by the Court as to the 
merits of any claims or defenses asserted by the parties in the 
Delaware Actions. 


BACKGROUND AND DESCRIPTION OF THE ACTIONS 


The following is a summary of certain of the facts and 
procedural history underlying the instant litigation and the Set- 
tlement. A more detailed summary of the background of the 
transactions in question appears in the Offer to Purchase dated 
November 30, 1990 and the Solicitation/Recommendation 
Statement of MCA INC. which were mailed on or about Novem- 
ber 30, 1990 to holders of record of common stock of MCA. 
Copies of the Offer to Purchase and MCA’s Recommendation 
are contained in the Tender Offer Statement Pursuant to Section 


79a 


14(d)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act and the Schedule 14D-9 
Pursuant to Section 14(d)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act, 
respectively, which schedules are on file at the Securities and 
Exchange Commission in Washington, D.C. 


On September 25, 1990, it was reported in the financial 
press that MCA was discussing a possible acquisition of MCA by 
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd. (““Matsushita’’). 


On September 26, 1990 and September 27, 1990, three 
putative class actions, brought on behalf of all public sharehold- 
ers of MCA, were filed in the Court of Chancery, entitled Lazar, 
et al. v. MCA INC., et al., No. 11740 (filed Sept. 26, 1990) (the 
“Lazar Action”); Stepak, et al. v. MCA INC., et al., No. 11741 
(filed Sept. 26, 1990); and Naphtali, et al. v. MCA INC., et al., 
No. 11747 (filed Sept. 27, 1990) (collectively, unless otherwise 
indicated, the “Delaware Actions”). The Delaware Actions 
sought, among other things, an order directing MCA to take all 
appropriate steps to effectively expose MCA to the marketplace 
in an effort to obtain a transaction which would yield the greatest 
value for the stockholders of the Company. Named as defendants 
in the Delaware Actions were MCA and its directors: Lew R. 
Wasserman (‘‘Wasserman”), Thomas V. Jones, Robert S. 
Strauss, Thomas Wertheimer, Howard H. Baker, Jr., Thomas P. 
Pollack, Felix G. Rohatyn, Signey J. Sheinberg (“Sheinberg’’), 
Howard P. Allen, Mary Gardiner Jones, and Charles S. Paul. 
Upon consent of all parties, and by Stipulation and Order dated 
October 2, 1990, the Court consolidated the Delaware Actions 
under the Caption Jn Re MCA INC. Shareholders Litigation, 
Consolidated C.A. No. 11740; designated the Complaint in the 
Lazar Action as the Complaint in the Delaware Actions; and 
appointed as co-lead counsel the firms of Milberg Weiss Bershad 
Specthrie & Lerach; Abbey & Ellis; Berger & Montague; and 
Wolf, Popper, Ross, Wolf & Jones (“Plaintiffs’ Lead Counsel’’). 


On September 26, 1990, a putative class action, brought on 
behalf of all public shareholders of MCA, was filed in the 
Superior Court of California, entitled Lazar, et al. v. MCA INC., 
et al., No. BCO11305, and on October 2, 1990, a stockholders’ 
derivative action, brought on behalf of MCA, was filed in the 


80a 


Superior Court of California, entitled MCA INC., derivatively 
by Robert Silverstein v. Lew R. Wasserman, et al., Case No. 
BCO011572 (collectively, the “California State Actions”). The 
California State Actions (which were ultimately dismissed with- 
out prejudice on September 4, 1991), asserted substantially simm- 
lar claims and sought substantially similar relief as the claims 
asserted and the relief sought in the Delaware Actions. 


On November 26, 1990, MCA and Matsushita announced 
that they had entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger 
(the “Merger” and the “Merger Agreement”). Pursuant to the 
Merger Agreement, Matsushita Acquisition Corp. (“Matsushita 
Acquisition’), an indirectly wholly-owned subsidiary of Matsu- 
shita, agreed, among other things, to make a tender offer for all 
outstanding shares of MCA common stock at $66 per share (the 
“Tender Offer”). Following successful completion of the Tender 
Offer, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger 
Agreement and the Delaware General Corporation Law, Matsu- 
shita Acquisition Corp. merged with and into MCA, effective 
January 3, 1991. The Merger consideration was the same price 
per share paid in the Tender Offer. 


Pursuant to a Capital Contribution and Loan Agreement 
(the “Capital Contribution Agreement”) between Lew R. Was- 
serman, Matsushita, and Matsushita Holding Corp. (“Matsu- 
shita Holding”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Matsushita, Was- 
serman agreed to and did contribute, following the acceptance 
for payment of MCA shares in the Tender Offer, 4,953,927 
shares of MCA common stock in exchange for preferred stock im 
Matsushita Holding. The Preferred stock received by Wasser- 
man had an aggregate liquidation preference equal to $66 multi- 
plied by the number of shares of common stock contributed by 
Wasserman. The Preferred Stock provides for the payment of an 
annual cumulative 8.75% dividend. 


MCA also entered into certain employee compensation 
arrangements (as described in the Solicitation/ Recommendation 
Statement of MCA filed on November 30, 1990 on SEC Sched- 
ule 14D-9). Matsushita further entered into agreements with 


Sidney J. Sheinberg and David Geffen (the “Tender Agree- 
ments”) providing for such individuals to tender their MCA 
shares into the Tender Offer. 


MCA and an MCA subsidiary which held MCA's broad- 
casting assets simultaneously entered into a separate Distribution 
Agreement pursuant to which ownership of MCA's broadcasting 
assets were spun-off 100% to the MCA shareholders. The con- 
summation of the Tender Offer for MCA's shares was condi- 
tioned upon MCA's broadcasting assets having been spun-off. 
The material terms of the above-mentioned agreements have 
been publicly available since November 30, 1990 and are further 
described in the Offer to Purchase and MCA's Recommenda- 
tions referred to above. 


Following public announcement of the Merger Agreement, 
counsel for plaintiffs in the Delaware Actions informed counse! 
for defendants that they intended to seek preliminary injunctive 
relief against consummation of the Merger Agreement, and they 
imitially undertook to state the bases for such injunction motion 
and describe the claims against the Merger Agreement in writing 
by December 4, 1990, and later to file an amended complaint. 


By letter dated November 27, 1990, the Delaware Chancery 
( tvieed plaintiffs thet the: Satan Ge antiat 
injunctive relief would be heard on December 20, 1990. The 
hearing date was subsequently changed to December 18, 1990. 


By letter to defendants counsel dated December 4, 1990 
(sometimes referred to as the “December 4, 1990, Claim Let- 
ter”), pursuant to a stipulated procedure submitted to the Court. 
co-lead counsel for plaintiffs in the Delaware Actions set forth 
nary injunction. These claims advanced by plaintiffs included. 
among other things, the claims that (1) defendants failed to fulfill 
their duty to maximize shareholder value and had failed to 
obtain fair value in the Merger Agreement; (ii) defendants had 
breached their duty of making fair and full disclosures concern- 
ing the Merger Agreement, including, among other things, fail- 
ing to disclose maternal facts concerning the compensation and 


1 


82a 


bonus payments to certain individuals contemplated in the 
Merger Agreement, and that defendants allegedly intended to 
retain control over WWOR-TV following spin-off of MCA’s 
broadcast assets to shareholders, (iii) defendants breached their 
duty of candor by failing to disclose material information con- 
cerning the operating segments of MCA that was provided to 
Matsushita; (iv) defendants breached their fiduciary duties by 
according “preferential treatment” to defendant Lew R. Wasser- 
man in connection with the Tender Offer, in that “Mr. Wasser- 
connection with the transaction whereby he . . . exchange(d) 
stock for stock and avoid[ed] costly capital gains taxes to which 
all other stockholders [were] subject”; and (v) defendants vio- 
lated SEC Rule 13e-3 because Mr. Wasserman’s receipt of pre- 
ferred stock allegedly established that the transaction was a 
“going-private” transaction under SEC Rule | 3e-3 of the Securi- 
ties Exchange Act of 1934, and defendants allegedly failed to 
comply with the requirements of SEC Rule | 3e-3 governing such 
transactions. The December 4 Claim Letter stated that plaintiffs’ 
counsel intended to consider whether to modify and/or suppie- 
ment the claims and legal theories contained in the Ciaim Letter 
as discovery and briefing proceeded. 


On December 3, 1990, a putative class action complaint 
entitled Epstein v. MCA INC. et al No. CV-90-6451-R, 
brought on behalf of a class of all shareholders of MCA, was filed 
in the United States District Court for the Central District of 
California (the “Federal District Court”) (hereinafter, the 
“Epstein Action”). The complaint in the Epstein Action, as 
amended on December 6, 1990, alleged that the arrangements 
whereby defendant Wasserman exchanged his MCA stock for 
preferred stock in Matsushita Holding pursuant to the Capital 
Contribution Agreement (i) violated SEC Rule 10b-13 because 
it allegedly entailed a purchase of MCA stock by Matsushita 
outside the Tender Offer during the Tender Offer period, and (ii) 
violated SEC Rule 14d-10 because the preferred stock received 
by Wasserman allegedly was different or greater consideration 
than that made available to public shareholders in the Tender 
Offer. The complaint was subsequently amended to include a 


83a 


similar claim under SEC rules 10b-13 and 14d-10 that a pay- 
ment to defendant Sheinberg, which defendants asserted was a 
bonus payment derived from the level of incentive compensation 
that had been expected to be awarded to Sheinberg in the 
additional consideration for his MCA shares. The complaint 
sought preliminary and permanent injunctive relief and mone- 
tary damages. The Epstein Action complaint, as subsequently 
amended, named as defendants MCA, Matsushita, Matsushita 
Acquisition, Matsushita Holding, Wasserman and Sheinberg. 


In or around the beginning of December 1990, plaintiffs’ 
counsel in the Delaware Actions obtained extensive document 
thereafter took the depositions of certain defendants (including 
defendants Wasserman, Sheinberg and Howard P. Allen). 


Commencing on or about November 29, 1990, counsel for 
defendants and counsel! for plaintiffs engaged in discussions con- 
cerning possible settlement of the dispute between the parties. 
Thereafter, a meeting was held between counsel for the parties 
and settlement negotiations began in earnest. During those set- 
tlement discussions, which continued through December |!, 
1 ¥90, plaintiffs sought to enhance the terms of the transaction 
and im particular, sought improvements in the terms of the 
shareholder rights plan of the spin-off company with a view 
towards increasing the value of the shares of the spin-off com- 
pany to be distributed to MCA shareholders. 


Following these negotiations, on December 11, 1990, an 
agreement in principle between the parties hereto was reached 
providing (as further described below) for the compromise, 
release and settlement of the claims asserted in the Delaware 
Actions, the California State Actions, and the Epstein Action 
(hereinafter, the “Initial Proposed Settlement’). 


On December 11, 1990, the Federal District Court was 
advised of the existence of the Initial Proposed Settlement and 
set December 28, 1990, as the date for a hearing on a motion for 


oabaD and dash be aubaeeh, Gumed Oe Goal & 
Epstein Action stated that his chent in Epstein, a member of the 


An amended consolidated complaint (the “Amended Com- 
plaint™”) in the Delaware Actions was filed on December 14, 
1990, which encompassed the claims set forth in the December 4, 
1990, Claim Letter. The defendants in the Amended Complaint 
are MCA, Matsushita, Matsushita Holdings, Matsushita Acqui- 
sition, Wasserman, Sheinberg, Thomas P. Pollack, Thomas 
Wertheimer, Charles S. Paul, Hoard H. Baker, Robert S. 
Strauss, Felix G. Rohatyn, Thomas V. Jones, Howard P. Allen 
and Mary Gardiner Jones, all of whom are alleged to have 
participated in the wrongs alleged in the Amended Complaint. 
The claims alleged in the Amended Complaint are, inter alia, 
that (i) the individual defendants breached their fiduciary duty 
to MCA's shareholders by failing to adopt methods calculated to 
obtain the highest per share value in the sale of MCA, including 
their alleged failure to use “market check’ mechanisms to assure 
the fairness of the acquisition terms, (ii) the individual defend- 
ants breached their fiduciary duty to MCA's shareholders by 
failing to obtain a fair price per share in the sale of MCA; (iii) 
the individual defendants treated Matsushita as a preferred 
bidder, in alleged violation of their fiduciary duty; (iv) the indi- 
vidual defendants, MCA and Matsushita entered into allegedly 
ment of defendant Wasserman’s MCA's stock holdings, specifi- 
cally with respect to the transaction by which he exchanged his 
MCA stock for preferred stock of a Matsushita subsidiary pursu- 
ant to the Capital Contribution Agreement, and that the purpose 
of such preferential treatment was to allow defendant Wasser- 
man to avoid tax liability on the sale of his MCA stock, which 
other MCA stockholders will not be able to avoid; (v) the disclo- 
sures made by defendants in connection with the Tender Offer, 


85a 


including without limitation the disclosures contained in Matsu- 
shita’s Offer to Purchase and Schedule 14D-1, and the disclo- 
sures contained in MCA's Schedule 14D-9, were deficient and 
omissions and misrepresentations with respect to the disclosure 
of the arrangement concerning receipt of preferred stock by 
defendant Wasserman pursuant to the Capital Contribution 
Agreement, and with respect to arrangements regarding benefits 
and compensation for members of MCA management; (vi) that 
the MCA board was allegedly not composed of a majority of 
directors without conflicts of interest with respect to the Merger 
Agreement; (vii) that the individual defendants allegedly 
intended to retain effective control over MCA's broadcasting 
assets after the spin-off of such assets, and that defendants— 
through adoption of an overly restrictive “poison pill” sharehold- 
ers rights plan—intended to prevent the emergence of market 
forces which could result in a sale of the spin-off company at a 
price representing maximum value for shareholders; (viii) that 
defendants breached their duty of candor by failing to disclose 
certain allegedly material information concerning the operating 
segments of MCA, which information was allegedly provided to 
Matsushita; (ix) that defendants failed to disclose, in violation of 
their duty of candor, certain prior market contacts between 
MCA and other potential purchasers and other materia! infor- 
mation required to be disclosed pursuant to SEC Rule 1 3e-3; (x) 


that the arrangements for employee compensation, including 
certain employment agreements, bonus payments, and payments 
with respect to options, violated defendants’ fiduciary duties and 
were not fully and fairly disclosed; and (xi) the individual 
defendants agreed in the Merger Agreement to treatment of 
MCA's Yosemite assets that was allegedly not in the best inter- 
ests of MCA’s shareholders. The Amended Complaint seeks 


predominantly equitable relief, or, alternatively, damages. 


On December 17, 1990, a Stipulation of Settlement was 
executed between counsel for the parties to the Delaware Actions 
reflecting the terms of the Initial Proposed Settlement (hereinaf- 
ter, the “Initial Stipulation”). Pursuant to the Initial Stipulation: 


86a 


1. MCA agreed, inter alia, to cause its wholly-owned 
subsidiary holding its broadcast assets, which by the terms 
of a Distribution Agreement entered into simultaneously 
with the Merger Agreement was to be spun-off to MCA 
shareholders pro rata prior to Matsushita's purchase of 
shares pursuant to the Tender Offer (the “Spin-off Com- 
pany”), to adopt a common stock shareholder rights plan 
that provided, inter alia, that, if a fully financed cash tender 
offer for all of the shares of Spin-off Company common 
stock was commenced and held open for at least 60 days, 
then the rights would be automatically redeemed at the 
redemption price of one cent per share immediately prior the 
closing of such offer, provided that at least 667% of the 
outstanding shares of Spin-off Company common stock were 
tendered into such offer and not withdrawn; that the “flip- 
in” threshold under such Rights Plan would be 15%; and 
that these provisions would not be amended for a period of 
at least one year from the adoption of the plan; and 


2. Subject to Court approval, all claims and causes of 
action asserted in the Delaware Actions, the California 
State Actions, and the Epstein Action, including all claims 
arising under Delaware common law and the federal securi- 
ties laws (including the federal securities laws claims 
asserted in the Epstein Action), would be settled, released 


3. Counsel for the parties agreed to request the Court 
to enter an order providing that the Delaware Actions may 
proceed for settlement purposes as a class action, pursuant 
to Chancery Court Rules 23(b)(1) and (b)(2), on behalf of 
all holders of MCA common stock from September 25, 
1996, and their successors in interest, immediate or remote 
(excluding defendants and members of their immediate 
families) (hereinafter, the “Initial Settlement Class”). 


the common shares of the Spin-Off (which 

was named Pinelands, Inc.) were acquired at a cash price of $18.1 184 per 
Inc. HC Communications Inc. pursuant to an Agree- 

ment and Plan of Merger dated as of May 7, 1992. 


87a 


On December 18, 1990, this Court entered an Order which, 
among other things, provisionally certified the Initial Settlement 
Class pursuant to Rules 23(b)(1) and (2) of the Court of Chan- 
cery; scheduled a hearing for January 30, 1991, to determine 
whether the Initial Settlement embodied in the Initia! Stipula- 
tion was fair, reasonable and adequate and should be approved 
by the Court; and provided for the mailing of notice of the Initial 
Settlement to members of the Initial Settlement Class. 


On December 28, 1990 she Federal District Court denied 
the Epstein plaintiff's motion for summary judgment. No appeal 
therefrom was sought to be taken. The Tender Offer expired as 
scheduled on December 29, 1990, with virtually all of the MCA 
common shares having been tendered. A second-step cash merger 
was then consummated on January 3, 1991, by which MCA 
became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Matsushita. 


On January 23, 1991, David Minton and Andrew Minton 
(purported shareholders of MCA), served a Notice of Intent to 
Appear and Object to the Initial Proposed Settlement (hereinaf- 
ter, the “Objection” and the “Objectors”). In principal part, the 
erly purported to release and discharge the claims asserted in the 
Epstein Action without affording members of the putative class 
the opportunity to opt out of the class and thus not be bound by 
the proposed release of the federal securities claims contained in 
the Initial Stipulation and that the claims asserted in the Epstein 

On January 30, 1991, a hearing was held before ihis Court 
in accordance with the December 18, 1990, Order during which 
the Court heard and considered, inter alia: (i) plaintiffs’ applica- 
tion for final approval of the Initial Proposed Settlement; (ii) the 
arguments pursuant to the Objection; and (iii) plaintiffs’ coun- 
sels’ application for attorneys’ fees and reimbursement of 
expenses. 

On April 22, 1991, this Court rendered its decision and 
order (the “Decision and Order”) with respect to plaintiffs’ 
application for final approval of the Initial Proposed Settlement 
and the arguments raised by the Objectors. Pursuant to the 
Decision and Order, the Court ruled, inter alia, that certification 


88a 


of the Initial Settlement Class pursuant to Chancery Court Rule 
23(b)(2) was appropriate, and that contrary to the arguments 
raised by the Objectors, no opportunity to opt out by members of 
the Initial Settlement Class was required. However, the Court 
rejected plaintiffs’ application for final approval of the Initial 
Proposed Settlement, concluding in this regard that the benefits 
to be conferred pursuant to the Initial Proposed Settlement were 
not sufficient consideration of the release and dismissal of the 
claims asserted in the Delaware Actions and the federal claims 
asserted in the Epstein Action. The Court stated in its Decision 
and Order, inter alia, that the state law claims proposed to be 
settled had “‘little or no merit and therefore no value’’; that the 
value of the Initial Proposed Settlement was “also minimal”; and 
that the federal claims asserted in the Epstein Action “have at 
least arguable merit and therefore significant value.” As to such 
federal claims, the Court found that the issues raised by such 
claims had “not yet been definitively addressed by the courts” 
and therefore the claims had “arguable merit.” the Court con- 
cluded “that it would be unfair to bar the federal claims and 
therefore the settlement cannot be approved in its present form.” 


During December 1990 and January 1991, four purported 
class actions, brought on behalf of MCA shareholders, were filed 
in the Federal District Court, entitled Linder v. MCA INC. et al., 
No. CV-90-6744-KN (filed on December 18, !990) (the “Linder 
Action”); Rockford v. MCA INC., et al., No. CV-90-6744-JMI 
(filed on December 18, 1990) (the “Rockford Action”); Karlin, 
et al. v. MCA INC., et al., No. CV-90-6775-R) (filed Decem- 
ber 18, 1990) (the “Karlin Action”); and Minton v. MCA INC., 
et al., No. CV-91-0336-R (filed on January 17, 1991 (the “Min- 
ton Action’). The Linder Action, the Rockford Action, the 
Karlin Action and the Minton Action assert substantially similar 
claims and seek substantially similar relief as the claims asserted 
and the relief sought in the Epstein Action. Unless otherwise 
indicated, the Epstein Action, the Linder Action, the Rockford 
Action, the Karlin Action and the Minton Action—all of which 
were consolidated by the Federal District Court on April 1, 
1991—are collectively referred to herein as the “California Fed- 
eral Actions”, and the plaintiffs in the California Federal Actions 
are hereinafter referred to as the “Federal Plaintiffs.” 


89a 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


90a 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


Plaintiffs in the California Federal Actions have appealed 
the Federal District Court’s dismissals of their actions to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The 
Federal Plaintiffs have also appealed the denials of their motions 
for class certification and other rulings made by the Federal 
District Court, including the contempt ruling referred to above. 


On October 30, 1991, David and Andrew Minton, children 
of plaintiff Walter Minton, filed a putative class action complaint 
in the Federal District Court, entitled Minton, et al. v. MCA 
INC., et al., No. CV-91-5914-R (hereinafter, the “Second Min- 
ton Action’). The complaint in the Second Minton Action, as 
amended on December 9, 1991, sought monetary damages for 
alleged violation of SEC Rules 10b-13 and 14d-10 and Section 
14(d)(7) of the Williams Act. The amended complaint alleged 
that the arrangements whereby defendant Wasserman 
exchanged his MCA stock for preferred stock in Matsushita 


9la 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


On November 4, 1991, a putative class action, allegedly 
brought on behalf of all shareholders of MCA as of the close of 
trading on November 23, 1990, was commenced against Lazard 
Freres & Co. (“Lazard’’) in the Supreme Court of the State of 
New York, County of New York, entitled Epstein v. Lazard 
Freres & Co., No. 31127/91 (hereinafter, the “Second Epstein 
Action”). The complaint in the Second Epstein Action alleged 
that Lazard, which served as financial advisor to MCA in con- 
nection with its acquisition by Matsushita, was negligent and 
breached a fiduciary duty in its advice to MCA concerning the 
fairness of the transaction price, and that Lazard had a conflict 
of interest with respect to its MCA engagement. The complaint 
seeks damages, and alleges that the difference between the value 
paid to the shareholders in the acquisition and “fair value” 
represents “damages of no less than approximately $250 million 
and possibly as much as $1.2 billion.” 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


92a 


the entry of judgment in favor of the defendants and against the 
plaintiffs in the California Federal Actions. 


From and after this Court’s Decision and Order declining to 
approve the Initial Proposed Settlement, counsel for the parties 
in the Delaware Actions continued to discuss a possible alterna- 
tive resolution of the Delaware Actions. In or around Febru- 
ary 1992, following the Federal District Court’s decision to 
dismiss the remaining claim in the California Federal Actions, 
these discussions developed into negotiations in earnest regarding 
an alternative settlement of the Delaware Actions. On June 18, 
1992, counsel for the parties arrived at an agreement in principle 
to settle the Delaware Actions, subject to the execution of a 
formal Stipulation of Settlement and Court approval thereof. 


CLASS ACTION DETERMINATION 


The Hearing Order provides that the Delaware Actions 
shall and may be maintained as a class action, for purposes of 
settlement only, by the plaintiffs as class representatives and by 
their counsel as class counsel, pursuant to Chancery Rules 23(a) 
and (b)(3), on behalf of a class consisting of all holders of MCA 
common stock on and after September 25, 1990, and their 
successors in interest, immediate or remote, through and includ- 
ing effectuation of the Merger on January 3, 1991 (excluding 
defendants and their immediate families) (hereinafter, the “Set- 
tlement Class” and the “Class Period”). The Hearing Order also 
provides that members of the Settlement Class may exclude 
themselves from the Settlement Class if they so desire, as further 
described below under the heading “Right to Request 
Exclusion.” 


THE SETTLEMENT 


Pursuant to the proposed Settlement, defendants have 
agreed that, in consideration for the dismissal of the Delaware 
Actions and the release and settlement of the Settled Claims (as 
defined below), defendants will deposit $2,000,000 (plus interest 
as described below) into a settlement fund (the ‘Settlement 
Fund’’) to be distributed pro rata to those members of the 


93a 


Settlement Class whose shares of MCA common stock were 
purchased pursuant to the Tender Offer or were cashed out or 
converted pursuant to the Merger, as reflected on the records of 
MCA’'s transfer agent, such monies to be deposited at such time 
as the Settlement shall become final in accordance with its terms. 
According to MCA’s records of stockholders, and subject to 
reduction by the number of shares of MCA common stock 
formerly held by persons who file valid Requests for Exclusion 
from the Settlement Class (as described below), distribution of 
the Settlement Fund would be pro-rated among the former 
holders of approximately 78 million MCA shares. The Settle- 
ment also provides that beginning on the next business day after 
an Order and Final Judgment is entered by the Court of Chan- 
cery, the Settlement Fund shall accrue interest at a compound 
rate of 3% per annum and continue to earn interest at such rate 
until the Settlement Fund is fully and finally distributed pursu- 
ant to the terms of the Stipulation. 


In consideration of the foregoing, pursuant to the proposed 
Settlement plaintiffs in the Delaware Actions have agreed to 
dismiss, release, and discharge the Settled Claims (as defined 
below) against the Released Persons (as defined below). Thus, 
the Stipulation provides that, if the Settlement is approved by the 
Court, all claims, rights and causes of action (state or federal, 
including but not limited to claims arising under the federal 
securities laws, the rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, 
or otherwise), whether known or unknown that are, could have 
been or might in the future be asserted by any of the plaintiffs or 
any member of the Settlement Class, whether directly, deriva- 
tively, representatively or in any other capacity, against any of 
the named defendants in the Delaware Actions (regardless of 
whether such defendant has been served or entered an appear- 
ance in any of the actions) and their respective present and 
former officers, directors, employees, agents, attorneys, financial 
advisors, commercial bank lenders, investment bankers, repre- 
sentatives, trustees, affiliates, associates, parents, subsidiaries, 
general and limited partners and partnerships, heirs, executors, 
administrators, successors, and assigns, including without limita- 
tion Lazard (financial advisor to MCA), Allen & Co. Inc. (finan- 
cial advisor to Matsushita) and Creative Artists Agency Inc. 


94a 


(advisor to Matsushita) (the “Released Persons’), or agamst 
anyone else in connection with or that arise now or hereafter out 
of the Merger Agreement, the Tender Offer, the Distribution 
Agreement, the Capital Contribution Agreement, the employee 
compensation arrangements, the Tender Agreements, the Initial 
Proposed Settlement, this Settlement (except for compliance 
with the Settlement), or any matters, transactions or occurrences 
referred to in the December 4, 1990, claim letter or the Amended 
Complaint in the Delaware Actions, or the fiduciary or disclosure 
obligations of any of the Released Persons with respect to any of 
the foregoing, and including without limitation the claims 
asserted in the California Federal Actions, the Second Minton 
Action and the Second Epstein Action (all of which are hereinaf- 
ter collectively referred to as the “Settled Claims’’), shall be 
compromised, settled, released and discharged with prejudice. 


REASONS FOR SETTLEMENT 


Plaintiffs’ attorneys in the Delaware Actions represent that 
as a result of extensive investigation of the facts and examination 
of applicable law, including depositions and review of thousands 
of pages of documents relating to the transactions complained of, 
plaintiffs and their attorneys have concluded that it is desirable 
and in the best interests of the members of the Settlement Class 
to settle the litigation upon the terms and conditions set forth in 
the Stipulation of Settlement. In reaching their conclusion to 
settle the Delaware Actions on the terms negotiated, these plain- 
tiffs and their attorneys have concluded that the terms and 
conditions of the proposed Settlement are fair, reasonable and 
adequate, and have agreed to settle the Delaware Actions, pursu- 
ant to the terms and provisions of the Stipulation, after consider- 
ing (i) the substantial monetary benefits that former MCA 
shareholders will receive pursuant to the Settlement; (ii) the 
Court’s evaluation of the claims asserted in the Delaware Actions 
as reflected in the Decision and Order; (iii) the attendant risks 
and delays of continued litigation; (iv) uncertainties relating to 
proof of the allegations asserted in the Delaware Actions; (v) the 
Federal District Court’s disposition of the federal securities 


. Claims asserted in the California Federal Actions and the Second 


95a 


Minton Action, (vi) the impact of principles of res judicata on 
the viability of the Second Epstein Action in light of the Federa! 
District Court's disposition of the California Federal Actions, 
including the decision of the New York Court to dismiss the 
Second Epstein Action with prejudice om res judicata grounds. 
and (vii) the fact that the present Settlement provides a mecha- 
nism for members of the Settlement Class to exclude themselves 
from the Settlement Class should they so desire and thereby not 
to be precluded by the Settlement from individually seeking to 
pursue the claims alleged in the Delaware Actions, the California 
Federal Actions, the Second Minton Action, the Second Epstein 
Action or any other claims relating to the events at issue in the 
Delaware Actions. 


DEFENDANTS’ DENIAL OF LIABILITY 


Defendants vigorously deny all liability with respect to the 
facts and claims alleged in the Delaware Actions, but consider it 
desirable that they be settled and dismissed because such settle- 
ment and dismissal would: (i) avoid the substantial burden, 
expense, inconvemience and distraction of continued litigation. 
and (ii) put the Settled Claims to rest. 


NOTICE OF HEARING 


Notice is hereby given that a hearing will be held before the 
Court in the Public Building, 11th and King Streets, Wilming- 
ton, Delaware 19801, on January 21, 1993 at 12:00 noon (the 
“Hearing™) (or at such adjourned time as the Court may, with- 
out further notice, direct) to determine (a) the fairness, reasona- 
bleness, and adequacy of the terms of the Stipulation of Settle- 
ment, and (b) whether an order and final judgment should be 
entered approving the proposed settlement and compromise and 
dismissing on the merits and with prejudice the Delaware 
Actions against the defendants and to hear plaintiffs’ application 
for an order allowing payment to plaintiffs in the Delaware 
Actions for reasonabie attorneys’ fees and expenses in connection 
with the Delaware Actions, as more fully described below under 
the heading “Attorneys’ Fees and Expenses.” 


96a 


The Court has reserved the right to adjourn the Hearing 
from time to time at such hearing or any adjournment thereof, by 
announcement at the Hearing or any adjournment thereof. The 
Court has also reserved the right to approve the Stipulation of 
Settlement, with or without modifications, and to enter its final 
judgment dismissing the Delaware Actions as to defendants on 
the merits and with prejudice and to approve the payments of 
plaintiffs’ attorneys’ fees and expenses without further notice of 
any kind. 


RIGHT TO REQUEST EXCLUSION 


All members of the Settlement Class have the option of 
excluding themselves from the Settlement Class by mailing a 
tumely and valid Request for Exclusion postmarked no later than 
twenty (20) days prior to the Settlement Hearing to In re MCA 
INC. Shareholders Litigation, P.O. Box 92, Wilmington, DE 
19899. 


As set forth above, the Settlement provides for the release 
and discharge as to members of the Settlement Class of the 
clams alleged in the Delaware Actions, as well as those alleged 
in the California Federal Actions, the Second Minton Action and 
the Second Epstein Action. By filing a valid Request for Exclu- 
sion, a member of the Settlement Class will not be precluded by 
the Settlement from individually seeking to pursue the claims 
alleged in the Delaware Actions, the California Federal Actions, 
the Second Minton Action and the Second Epstein Action, or 
any other claim relating to the events at issue in the Delaware 
Actions. Accordingly, any member of the Settlement Class who 
1s considering whether to exercise his or her right of exclusion as 
descned herein may wish to consider the status of these proceed- 
ings and the Federal District Court's disposition of the claims 
asserted in the California Federal Actions and the Second Min- 
ton Action. See “Background and Description of the Actions.” 
Actions and the Second Minton Action, you are referred to the 
documents filed with the United States District Court for the 
Central District of California, 312 North Spring Los Angeles, 


97a 


California 90012. For further information concerning the Second 
Epstein Action, you are referred to the documents filed with the 
Supreme Court for the State of New York, County of New York. 
60 Centre Street, New York, New York 10007. 


A Request for Exclusion must set forth the following infor- 
mation with respect to the person or entity requesting exclusion 
name, address, social security or taxpayer identification number. 
the amount of all MCA common stock you owed during the Class 
Period (i.¢., the number of shares held or purchased on Septem- 
ber 25, 1990 to January 3, 1991, the date of each purchase or 
sale (if any), during such period and the number of shares in any 
such transaction. All Requests for Exclusion must be signed by 
or on behalf of the person or entity so requesting exclusion. 


If a Request for Exclusion does not include al) of the 
foregoing information, it shall not be a valid Request for Exclu- 
sion and the person or entity filing an invalid Request for Exciu- 
sion shall be a member of the Settlement Class. Al! persons who 
properly file Requests for Exclusion from the Settlement Class 
shall not be members of the Settlement Class and shall have no 
rights with respect to the settlement and no interest in the 
Settlement Fund 


RIGHT TO APPEAR 


Any person who has not requested exclusion from the Settie- 
ment Class who objects to the Stipulation, the Settlement, the 
judgment to be entered herein, or the award of attorneys’ fees 
and expenses to plaintiffs’ counsel, or who otherwise wishes to be 
heard, may appear in person or by his attorney at the Hearing 
and present any evidence or argument thai may be proper and 
relevant. However, no such person shall be heard and no papers 
briefs, pleadings or other documents submitted by any perso. 
shall be received and considered by the Court (unless the Court 
im its discretion shall thereafter otherwise direct, upon applica- 
tion of such person and for good cause shown), unless no later 
than twenty (20) days prior to the Hearing directed herein to be 
held on January 21, 1993, at 12:00 noon, such person shall file 


hil 


ii 


98a 


with the Register in Chancery and, before such filing, shall serve 
upon. 
Joseph A. Rosenthal, Esq. 
ROSENTHAL, MONHAIT, 
GROSS & GODDESS, P.A. 
First Federal Plaza 
P.O. Box 1070 
Wilmington, Delaware 19899 


On Behalf Of All Plaintiffs 


Martin P. Tully, Esq. 

MORRIS, NICHOLS, ARSHT & 
TUNNELL 

1201 North Market Street 

P.O. Box 1347 

Wilmington, Delaware 10900 


On Behalf Of Defendant MCA INC. 
And The Individual Defendants 


-and- 


R. Franklin Balotti, Esq. 
RICHARDS, LAYTON 

& FINGER 

One Rodney Square 

P.O. Box 551 

Wilmington, Delaware 19899 


On Behalf Of Defendants Matsushita 
Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.. Matsu- 
(a) notice of intention to appear; (b) a detailed statement of such 
person's specific objections to any matter before the Court; (c) 
proof of membership in the Settlement Class; and (d) the 
grounds for such objections and any reasons why such person 


99a 


desires to appear and to be heard, as well as all documents or 
writings which such person desires this Court to consider. 


Uniess the Court otherwise directs, no person shall be enti- 
tled to object to the approval of the Stipulation of Settlement, the 
Settlement, the judgment to be entered herein, or the award of 
attorneys’ fees and expenses to plaintiffs’ counsel, or otherwise to 
be heard, except by serving and filing written objections as 
described above. Any person who fails to object in the manner 
prescribed above shall be deemed to have waived such objections 
and shall be forever barred from raising such objection in this or 
any other action or proceeding. 


ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND EXPENSES 


Plaintiffs’ counsel in the Delaware Actions will jointly apply 
to the Court at or subsequent to the Hearing for an award of 
attorneys’ fees in the amount of $575,000, plus reimbursement of 
expenses. Plaintiffs’ counsel also intend to apply to the Court of 
Chancery for provision that any award of attorneys’ fees and 
disbursements with respect to such fee application shall accrue 
interest at the same interest rate earned by the Settlement Fund 
through and including the date of payment as more fully 
described under the heading “The Settlement.” Defendants have 
agreed not to take any position with regard to either application. 
Any amount awarded by the Court for attorneys’ fees and/or 
disbursements will be paid out of the Settlement Fund of $2.0 
million (plus accrued interest) and will accordingly reduce the 
amount of payments to eligible class members out of the Settle- 
ment Fund. 


CONDITIONS OF THE SETTLEMENT 


The Stipulation provides that the parties have the option to 
withdraw from the Settlement in the event that (a) the Order 
and Final Judgment called for in the Stipulation is not entered 

' salty in the § ied thessin (inciadine such modi6- 
cations thereto as may be ordered by the Court with the consent 
of the parties), (b) the Settlement is not approved by the Court, 


100a 


or (c) such order is reversed or substantially modified upon 
appeal. In addition, the Stipulation provides that defendants 
have the option to withdraw from the Settlement in the event 
that there is excluded from the Settlement Class (through the 
filing of valid Requests for Exclusion) persons who held in excess 
of that number of MCA common shares which plaintiff and 
defendants have agreed upon (which number; is to be kept confi- 
dential by the parties to the Stipulation). In the event any option 
to withdraw from the Settlement is exercised by any party 
thereto (as provided for in the Stipulation), or if the Stipulation 
of Settlement and the Settlement are not approved by the Court 
or shall not become effective for any reason whatsoever, the 
Stipulation of Settlement, the Settlement provided therein 
(including any modification thereto made with the consent of the 
parties), and any actions taken in connection therewith will be 
terminated and will become void and have no further force and 
effect, except for the obligation of MCA to pay for any expenses 
incurred in connection with this Notice and the administration of 
the Settlement in the event that the Settlement is not approved. 


SCOPE OF THIS NOTICE 
AND FURTHER INFORMATION 


The foregoing description of the Court's Hearing Order, the 
Delaware Actions, the terms of the Stipulation of Settlement and 
other matters described herein are only summaries. For the full 
details of the Delaware Actions, and the terms and conditions of 
the Settlement, you are referred to the Stipulation of Settlement, 
the Decision and Order of the Court described herein and the 
other documents on file with the Court in the Delaware Actions. 
These documents may be examined by you or your attorney 
during regular business hours of each business day at the office of 
the Register in Chancery, Public Building, 1ith and King 
Streets, Wilmington, Delaware 19801. 


Questions or communications concerning the Settlement 
may be directed to the Lead Counsel for the plaintiffs, by 
contacting Milberg Weiss Bershad Specitnrie & Lerach, One 


10la 


Pennsylvania Plaza, New York, New York 10119-0165, (212) 
594-5300. 
Dated: Wilmington, Delaware 

October 27, 1992 


John D. Kelly, III, Register 
In Chancery, Court Of Chan- 
cery Of The State of Dela- 
ware In And For New Castle 
County 


Appendix G 


yo ; a *. 


102a 


Release Language of the Court Approved Stipulation and 
Agreement of Compromise of the Delaware Class Action (the 
“Delaware Settlement”): 


1. The Delaware Settlement release provided as follows: 


NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS STIPULATED AND 
AGREED, subject to the approval of this Court, pursuant to 
Rule 23 of the Court of Chancery Rules, by and between defend- 
ants hereto and the plaintiffs for themselves and for the Settle- 
ment Class . . . that all claims, rights and causes of action (state 
or federal, including but not limited to claims arising under the 
federal securities laws, and any rules or regulations promulgated 
thereunder, or otherwise), whether known or unknown that are, 
could have been or might in the future be asserted by any of the 
plaintiffs or any member of the Settlement Class, whether 
directly, derivatively, representatively or in any other capacity, 
against any of the named defendants in the Delaware Actions 
[including the Matsushita Defendants-Appellees] (regardless of 
whether such defendant has been served or entered an appear- 
ance in any of the actions) and their respective present and 
former officers, directors, employees, agents, attorneys, financial 
advisors, commercial bank lender, investment bankers, repre- 
sentatives, trustees, affiliates, associates, parents, subsidiaries, 
general and limited partners and partnership, heirs, executors, 
administrators, successors, and assigns including without limita- 
tion Lazard (financial advisor to MCA), Allen & Co. Inc. (finan- 
cial advisor to Matsushita) and Creative Artists Agency Inc. 
(advisor to Matsushita) or against anyone else (collectively, the 
“Released Persons”) in connection with or that arise now or 
hereafter out of the Merger Agreement, the Tender Offer, the 
Distribution Agreement, the Capital Contribution Agreement, 
the employee compensation arrangements, the Tender Agree- 
ments, the Initial Proposed Settlement, this Settlement (except 
for compliance with the Settlement), or any matters, transactions 
or occurrences referred to in the December 4, 1990, Claim Letter 
and the Complaint in the Delaware Actions or the fiduciary or 
disclosure obligations of any of the Released Persons with respect 
to any of the foregoing. and including without limitation the 
clanms asserted in the Califorma Federa!] Actions all of 


103a 


which are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Settled 
Claims’’), shall be compromised, settled, released and discharged 
with prejudice... . 


A 22-23. 


2. The Delaware settlement defined the California Federal 
Actions as follows: 


On December 3, 1990, a putative class action complaint 
entitled Epstein v. MCA INC., et al., No. CV-90-6451-R, 
brought on behalf of a class of all shareholders of MCA, was filed 
in the United States District Court for the Central District of 
California (the “Federal District Court’) (hereinafter, the 
“Epstein Action”). The complaint in the Epstein Action, as 
amended on December 6, 1990, alleged that the arrangements 
whereby defendant Wasserman exchanged his MCA stock for 
preferred stock in Matsushita Holding Corp. pursuant to the 
Capital Contribution Agreement (i) violated SEC Rule 10b-13 
because it allegedly entailed a purchase of MCA stock by Matsu- 
shita outside the Tender Offer during the Tender Offer period, 
and (ii) violated SEC Rule 14d-10 because the preferred stock 
received by Wasserman allegedly was different or greater consid- 
eration than that made available to public shareholders in the 
Tender Offer. The complaint was subsequently amended to 
include a similar claim under SEC Rules 10b-13 and 14d-10 that 
a payment to defendant Sheinberg, which defendants asserted 
was a bonus payment derived from the level of incentive compen- 
sation that had been expected to be awarded to Sheinberg in the 
ordinary course but for the acquisition, allegedly constituted 
additional consideration for his MCA shares. The complaint 
sought preliminary and permanent injunctive relief and mone- 
tary damages. The Epstein Action complaint, as subsequently 
amended, named as defendants MCA, Matsushita, Matsushita 
Acquisition, Matsushita Holding, and Wasserman and 
Sheinberg 


104a 


During December 1990 and January 1991, four purported 
class actions, brought on behalf of MCA shareholders, were filed 
in the Federal District Court, entitled Linder v. MCA INC., et 
al., No. CV-90-6744-KN (filed on December 18, 1990) (the 
“Linder Action”); Rockford v. MCA INC., et al., No. CV-90- 
6744-JMI (filed on December 18, 1990) (the “Rockford 
Action”); Karlin, et al. v. MCA INC., et al., No. CV-90-6775-R 
(filed December 18, 1990) (the “Karlin Action”); and Minton v. 
MCA INC., et al., No. CV-91-0336-R (filed on January 17, 
1991) (the “Minton Action”). The Linder Action, the Rockford 
Action, the Karlin Action and the Minton Action assert substan- 
tially similar claims and seek substantially similar relief as the 
claims asserted and the relief sought in the Epstein Action. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the Epstein Action, the Linder 
Action, the Rockford Action, the Karlin Action and the Minton 
Action—all of which were consolidated by the Federal District 
Court on April 1, 1991—are collectively referred to herein as the 
California Federal Actions, and the plaintiffs in the California 
Federal Actions are hereinafter referred to as the “Federal 
Plaintiffs”... . 


A 6-7, 14-15. 


3. The Delaware Settlement also expressly stated that these 
actions were on appeal in this Court. See A 17-18. 


Appendix H 


10Sa 
SEC Rule 144-10, 17 C_F._R. § 240.14d-10: 
§ 240.14d-10 Equal treatment of security holders. 


(a) No bidder shall make a tender offer unless: 
(1) The tender offer is open to all security holders 
of the class of securities subject to the tender offer, 
and 
(2) The consideration paid to any security holder 
pursuant to the tender offer is the highest consider- 
ation paid to any other security holder during such 
tender offer. 


i 


(b) Paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall not: 
(1) Affect dissemination under Rule 144-4 
(§ 240.14d-4); or 
. (2) Prohibit a bidder from making a tender offer 
excluding all security holders in a state where the 


aD ie si = bidder is prohibited from making the tender offer 
: by administrative or judicial action pursuant to a 
; State statute after a good faith effort by the bidder 

to comply with such statute. 


| Paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall not prohibit 
: | the offer of more than one type of consideration in a 

. tender offer, Provided, That: 
\ (1) Security holders are afforded equal right to 
| elect among each of the types of consideration 

Es offered; and 
» (2) The highest consideration of each type paid to 
any security holder is paid to any other security 
. holder receiving that type of consideration. 


If the offer and sale of securities constituting con- 
: sideration offered in a tender offer is prohibited by 
- the appropriate authority of a state after a good 
faith effort by the bidder to register or qualify the 
offer and sale of such securities in such state: 
(1) The bidder may offer security holders in such 
state an alternative form of consideration: and 
(2) Paragraph (c) of this section shall not operate 


(e) 


106a 


to require the bidder to offer or pay the alternative 
form of consideration to security holders in any 
other state. 


This section shall not apply to any tender offer with 
respect to which the Commission, upon written 
request or upon its own motion, either uncondition- 
ally or on specified terms and conditions, deter- 
mines that compliance with this section is not nec- 
essary Of appropriate in the public interest or for 
the protection of investors. 


Appendix | 


107a 


Section 14(d\(7) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
15 U.S.C. § 78n(dX7): 
Where any person varies the terms of a tender offer or 
request or invitation for tenders before the expiration thereof 
increasing the consideration offered to holders of such securities, 


Appendix J 


Pertinent Excerpts From the Stock Purchase Agreement filed 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission referenced in Kahn 
v. Virginia Retirement System, 783 F. Supp. 266 (E.D. Va. 1992), 
aff'd, 13 F.3d 110 (4th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1834 
(1994): 


STOCK PURCHASE AGREEMENT BETWEEN NORTH- 
ERN VENTURES HOLDING CORP., RICHMOND- 
WASHINGTON COMPANY AND VIRGINIA RETIRE- 
MENT SYSTEM (submitted as exhibit to SEC Schedule 14D-1 
filed August 30, 1991 by Virginia Retirement System and Sys- 
tem Holdings, Inc.) 


Shares of Capital Stock of RF&P Corporation 
Dated as of August 28, 1991 


VRS and System Holdings, Inc, a Virginia corporation 
(“SHI”) and a wholly-owned Subsidiary of VRS, are also enter- 
ing into an agreement with RF&P pursuant to which SHI 
intends to offer to purchase all of the outstanding capital stock of 
RF&P held by all shareholders of RF&P other than VRS and 
the corporate affiliates of CSXT (the “Offer”). SHI’s obligation 
to consummate the Offer is conditioned upon the satisfaction of 
all conditions to closing under this Agreement and the Asset 
Purchase Agreement. 


p. 2. 


The obligation of VRS to consummate the transactions 
contemplated by this Agreement shall be subject, to the extent 
not waived, to the following conditions . . . 

6.9 The Offer. All conditions to the obligations of SHI to 
commence the Offer and to accept for payment the shares of 
capital stock of RF&P pursuant thereto shall have been satis- 
fied or waived and SHI shall have accepted for payment the 
shares of capital stock validly tendered pursuant to the Offer. 


p. 11-12 (emphasis added). 


