7 


Py 


r ‘ * © : 
c OG . , ” * a: ‘ 
Le er base 1, fa 
om , ay 7 4 
an \ ; 


la 


APPENDIX 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


92-5124 


HERCULES INCORPORATED, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


92-5138 


Wm. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


DECIDED: May 4, 1994 


Before PLAGER, CLEVENGER, and SCHALL, Circuit 
Judges. 
SCHALL, Circuit Judge. 


In these consolidated appeals, Hercules Incorporated 
(Hercules) and Wm. T. Thompson Company (Thomp- 


2a 


son), respectively, appeal the April 2 and April 22, 1992 
judgments of the United States Claims Court.’ In those 
judgments, the court dismissed Hercules’ and Thompson’s 
complaints after granting the motions of the United States 
for summary judgment.* Hercules and Thompson, who 
are chemical manufacturers, had. sought to recover the 
sums they contributed to a fund established in connec- 
tion with the settlement of a district court class action 
tort suit brought against them and other companies by 
and on behalf of individuals who were exposed to a de- 
foliant known as “Agent Orange” during the Vietnam 
War. Hercules and Thompson also had sought to recover 
the attorney fees and expenses incurred in that litigation.’ 


1The Federal Courts Administration Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 
102-572, §902(a), 106 Stat. 4506, 4516, changed the name of the 
United States Claims Court to the “United States Court of Federal 
Claims.” Unless the context requires otherwise, we refer to the trial 
court by the name which it had while this matter was pending 
before it. 


2 Hercules, Inc. v. United States, 25 Cl. Ct. 616 (1992); Wm. 
T. Thompson Co. v. United States, 26 Cl. Ct. 17 (1992). 


* Throughout this opinion, we will cite to the following four 
district court decisions in what we refer to as the “Agent Orange 


litigation”: 
i. In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 506 F. Supp. 762 


(E.D.N.Y. 1980) (decision certifying Fed. R. Civ. P. 
23(b) (3) class of plaintiffs) ; 

ii. In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 565 F. Supp. 
1263 (E.D.N.Y. 1988) (decision granting summary judg- 
ment in favor of defendant chemical manufacturers—sub- 
sequently reconsidered after the case was transferred to 
another district judge) ; 

iii. In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 597 F. Supp. 740 
(E.D.N.Y. 1984) (decision approving settlement agree- 
ment between class action plaintiffs and defendant chemical 
manufacturers) ; and 


iv. In od. “Agent Oragnge” Prod. Liab. Litig., 611 F. Supp. 


1223 (E.D.N.Y. 1985) (decision granting summary judg- 
ment in favor of defendant chemical manufacturers against 


plaintiffs who had opted-out of the class action). 


3a 


Finding no error in the Claims Court’s decisions, we 
affirm the judgments. 


BACKGROUND 


The following facts are not in dispute: 
A. Historical 

In the mid to late 1960s, Hercules and Thompson were 
members of a group of chemical companies that manu- 
factured Agent Orange for the United States military. 
Agent Orange is a blend of equal parts of 2,4-Dichloro- 
phenoxyacetic Acid (2,4-D) and 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxy- 
acetic Acid (2,4,5-T), both of which are phenoxy herbi- 
cides. Hercules, Inc. v. United States, 25 Cl. Ct. 616, 
618 (1992). Depending on its method of production, 
Agent Orange may contain varying amounts of 2,3,7,8 
Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin), an extremely toxic 
substance. Id. The military used Agent Orange during 
the Vietnam War to defoliate large areas of forest so that 
Viet Cong and North Vietnamese troops could not hide 
beneath the foliage from view of aircraft. The military 
mixed the Agent Orange produced by the various chem- 
ical companies and stored the mixture in large drums. 
Id. at 619. During the relevant period, the government 
and the military had considerable knowledge of hazards 
associated with 2,4,5-T and dioxin. In re “Agent Orange” 
Prod. Liab. Litig., 565 F. Supp. 1263, 1266 (E.D.N.Y. 
1983). 


Hercules began producing phenoxy herbicides contain- 
ing 2,4,5-T in 1961. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 619. It 
produced Agent Orange for the government between 
May 8, 1964, and May 20, 1968, pursuant to fifteen sep- 
arate contracts. Id. The military supplied the formula 
and specifications for manufacturing Agent Orange, with 
which Hercules complied. Jd. In its complaint in the 
Claims Court; Hercules alleged that it manufactured and 
supplied Agent Orange pursuant to the Defense Produc- 


~~ 
- 


4a 


tion Act of 1950, 50 U.S.C. app. § 2061-2170 (1964) 
(hereinafter, DPA).* In 1965, Hercules learned of the 
health risks associated with 2,4,5-T and changed its 
method of production to eliminate dioxin from its prod- 
uct. Id.; In re “Agent Orange”, 565 F. Supp. at 1274. 
From 1966 to 1970, Hercules’ product was not measur- 
ably contaminated with dioxin. Id. 


Thompson produced phenoxy herbicides containing 
2,4,5-T and 2,4-D in the 1950s and 1960s. Thompson, 
however, originally declined to bid on the government’s 
solicitation to chemical manufacturers for the production 
of Agent Orange. Wm. T. Thompson Co. v. United 
States, 26 Cl. Ct. 17, 20 (1992). In due course, how- 
ever, the government invoked the DPA and required 
Thompson to supply Agent Orange pursuant to two con- 
tracts dated April 19, 1967, and May 24, 1968. In re 
“Agent Orange”, 565 F. Supp. at 1272. Between Sep- 
tember 1967 and January 1969, Thompson supplied 
Agent Orange to the military. Id. There is no evidence 
that Thompson was aware of the health risks associated 
with Agent Orange. Id. at 12773. As in the case of Her- 
cules, the government provided the formula and specifica- 
tions for Agent Orange without any input from Thomp- 
son. 


B. The Agent Orange Litigation 


Starting in 1979, numerous tort actions were filed by 
Vietnam veterans and their families against the various 
chemical manufacturers who produced Agent Orange for 
the government, including Hercules and Thompson. The 
tort actions alleged that the veterans’ exposure to dioxin 
contained in Agent Orange produced by the chemical 


“The DPA authorizes the President, inter alia, to require accept- 
ance and performance of contracts which he deems necessary or 
appropriate to promote the national defense in preference to other 
contracts. 50 U.S.C. app. § 2071. The pertinent parts of the statute 
are discussed below. 


Sa 


companies had caused various health problems for the 
plaintiffs, such as cancer, miscarriages, and birth defects. 
The Judicial Panel on Multi-District Litigation consoli- 
dated these tort actions in the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of New York, under the 
heading MDL No. 381. The court certified a class com- 
prising all veterans claiming injuries who had served in 
or near Vietnam between 1961 and 1972, pursuant to 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3). The certified class also in- 
cluded the veterans’ spouses, parents, and children (born 
before January 1, 1984) directly or derivatively injured 
as a result of the veterans’ exposure. Jn re “Agent 
Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 506 F. Supp. 762, 787-92 
(E.D.N.Y. 1980). Plaintiffs were allowed to “opt out” 
of the Rule 23(b)(3) class by May 1, 1984. Id. As 
discussed below, nearly 300 of the plaintiffs opted out. 


Hercules and Thompson, along with several other de- 
fendant manufacturers, moved for summary judgment in 
the district court on the ground that, because of their 
status as governiment contractors, the government contrac- 
tor defense shielded them from liability for any injuries 
to the veterans or their families allegedly caused by ex- 
posure to Agent Orange. In re “Agent Orange”, 565 F. 
Supp. at 1265.° In a previous pretrial order, the district 
court had defined the contours of the government con- 
tractor defense as follows: 


[A] defendant in this case will be entitled to judg- 
ment dismissing all claims against it based on that 
defendant’s having supplied “Agent Orange” to the 
government pursuant to a contract, if the defendant 


proves: 
1. That the government established the specifica- 
tions for “Agent Orange”; 


5The district court used the term “government contract de- 
fense.” Id. 


6a 


2. That the “Agent Orange” manufactured by 
the defendant met the government’s specifications in 
all material respects; and 


3. That the government knew as much or more 
than the defendant about the hazards to people that 
accompanied use of “Agent Orange.” 


Id. (quoting In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab., 534 F. 
Supp. 1046, 1055 (E.D.N.Y. 1982) ). 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


With respect to Hercules, the district court concluded 
that because its “product was dioxin-free, Hercules had 
no knowledge of harm from dioxin contamination caused 
by its product and thus did not know more than the 
government about hazards associated with the use of its 
product.” Id. at 1274. 


In Thompson’s case, the district court concluded that 
although the evidence established that Thompson may 
have had “knowledge of possible health hazards related 
to the manufacture of Agent Orange[, the evidence did 
not establish] knowledge in Thompson of hazards to 
users.” Id. at 1273 (emphasis supplied). In contrast, the 
district court believed that “it [was] clear by 1967, when 
Thompson first contracted to manufacture Agent Orange, 
the government had a significant amount of knowledge 
about dioxin . . . and its association with . . . health 
problems.” Id. 


Ta 


Hercules’ and Thompson’s victory in the district court 
proved to be short-lived, however. After summary judg- 
ment was entered in their favor and in favor of the other 
two Agent Orange manufacturers—but before a judgment 
of dismissal was entered—the case was transferred to an- 
other judge in the Eastern District of New York. In 
November of 1983, the transferee judge reconsidered the 
issue and denied the summary judgment motions of Her- 
cules and Thompson. See In re “Agent Orange” Prod. 
Liab. Litig., 597 F. Supp. 740, 753 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). 


On May 7, 1984, the date that trial would have begun 
in the class action suit, the parties reached 2 settlement. 
The settlement called for the creation of a $180 million 
settlement fund, with each defendant contributing to the 
fund in proportion to its percentage of the total volume 
of Agent Orange produced, with a factor for the level of 
dioxin in the particular manufacturer’s product. In re 
“Agent Orange”, 597 F. Supp. at 748. Hercules’ share 
of the settlement was about ten percent, valued at 
$18,772,568. Thompson’s share was around two percent, 
amounting to $3,096,597. In its opinion approving the 
settlement, the district court noted that the plaintiffs 
would have had extreme difficulty proving that their in- 
juries resulted from exposure to dioxin present in the 
Agent Orange. In re “Agent Orange”, 597 F. Supp. at 
782. 


Upon settlement of the class action, the defendant 
manufacturers, including Hercules and Thompson, moved 
for summary judgment against the nearly 300 plaintiffs 
who had opted-out of the class action suit. These opt-out 
plaintiffs were those who had voluntarily chosen not to be 
part of the certified Rule 23(b)(3) class, and who con- 
sequently did not share in the $18C million settlement 
fund. In support of the summary judgment motion, the 
defendant manufacturers argued that they were entitled 


to judgment 
because of each plaintiff's conceded inability to iden- 
tify the individual manufacturer of the Agent Orange 


8a 


to which a given veteran was exposed, inapplicability 
of any alternative theory of liability that would over- 
come that inability, the government contract defense, 
and inability of any plaintiff to prove that his or her 
injuries were caused by Agent Orange. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


The United States Court of Appeals for the Second 
Circuit affirmed both the settlement with the Rule 23(b) 
(3) class, In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig. MDL 
No. 381, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987), and the grant 
of summary judgment in favor of the defendant manu- 
facturers against the opt-out plaintiffs. In re “Agent 
Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d 187 (2d Cir. 
1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). The Court 


of Appeals affirmed the grant of summary judgment 


tary contractor defense” by the Second Circuit), and did 
ad- 


not address the other grounds for summary judgment 
vanced by the district court. Id, at 189. 


9a 


C. The Claims Court Proceedings 


In 1990, Hercules and Thompson each brought an 
action in the Claims Court against the United States, 
seeking (i) indemnification for their respective contribu- 
tions to the settlement fund in the 1984 class action 
settlement, and (ii) legal fees and expenses incurred in 
the Agent Orange litigation. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 620. 
The actions were grounded in Hercules’ and Thompson’s 
respective contracts with the government for the produc- 
tion of Agent Orange. 


Hercules’ complaint, filed June 8, 1990, asserted that 
it was entitled to recover from the government under any 
one of the following four theories: 


1. Superior Knowledge—The government allegedly 
breached an implied-in-fact contractual obligation by 
withholding from Hercules the government’s superior 
knowledge concerning the unprecedented military use of 
Agent Orange by the government and the possible health 
risks attendant with such use. 


2. Good Faith—The government allegedly breached 
an implied-in-fact contractual obligation to exercise good 
faith and not increase Hercules[’] costs by using Agent 
Orange in Southeast Asia in an unprecedented military 
manner that failed to avoid potential health risks. 


3. “Reverse” Warranty—The government allegedly 
breached an implied-in-fact contractual obligation to ex- 
ercise due care in using Hercules’ Agent Orange. Specifi- 
cally, Hercules alleged that the government had a duty 
to use the Agent Orange it purchased from Hercules in 
a manner reasonably calculated to avoid potential health 
risks and to take adequate precautions and safeguards or 
provide identification of active ingredients and adequate 
warnings and instructions concerning the proper use of 
and exposure to Agent Orange. 


4. Implied Warranty of Specifications—The govern- 
ment allegedly breached an implied-in-fact contractual 


10a 


obligation “to establish specifications and requirements for 
Agent Orange sufficient to make Agent Orange adequate 
and suitable for the unprecedented intended and actual 
military use to which it was put in Southeast Asia. 


Under each of its different theories of liability, Hercules 
alleged that the government’s breach of its contractual 
obligations caused Hercules to sustain increased expenses 
of performance and incur substantial money damages in 
connection with the Agent Orange cases and that Her- 
cules was entitled to contractual indemnification therefor. 


Thompson’s complaint, filed May 7, 1990, and 
amended October 23, 1990, asserted that it was entitled 
to recover against the government under any one of three 
contractual theories, two of which were substantially iden- 
tical to two of Hercules’ theories of liability: superior 
knowledge by the government, and an implied warranty 
o! specifications. As a third alternative theory of liability, 
Thompson contended that the goverment breached an 
implied-in-fact contractual obligation to indemnify Thomp- 
son for losses arising from its compelled production of 
Agent Orange under the DPA. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


tion‘and were not connected to contract the 
could not be expanded to encompass their claims. Id 


lla 


faith theory could not withstand summary judgment be- 
cause it was “another performance-related doctrine” that 
could not be extended to matters occurring “at some dis- 
tant point in the future” after contract performance. 
Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 623. 


With regard to Hercules’ reverse warranty argument, 
the Claims Court held that such an implied-in-fact reverse 
warranty never arose because the circumstances surround- 
ing the sale of Agent Orange could not support a factual 
inference that Hercules and the government had “actually 
come to a meeting of the minds and taken upon them- 
selves [the] corresponding obligations and liabilities” of 
the alleged reverse warranty. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 624. 


Turning to the warranty of specifications theory, the 
Claims Court held that even assuming that such a war- 
ranty arose, the plaintiff-manufacturers had failed to 
prove “that this warranty was breached by the Govern- 
ment and that this breach caused [them] to suffer the 
type of damages recoverable in contract.” Hercules, 25 
Cl. Ct. at 625-26; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 25. 
Addressing first the portion of the damages claim which 
consisted of the payments into the settlement fund, the 
court set forth two separate reasons that it believed pre- 
venied Hercules and Thompson from proving that they 
were “actually subjected to tort liability by third parties 
because of [their] manufacture of Agent Orange for the 
Government’s military use.” Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 626; 
Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 26. “First,” the Claims 
Court stated, “dioxin has never been scientifically proven 
to cause the injuries that veterans alleged, and second, 
the (plaintiff-manufacturers were] protected from liability 
to the veterans in any event under the Government con- 
tractor defense... .” Id. 


Regarding the type of damages sought, the Claims 
Court, citing Hadley v. Baxendale, 9 Ex. 341, 156 Eng. 
Rep. 145 (1854), and Northern Helex Co. v. United 
States, 524 F.2d 707, 721 (Ct. Cl. 1975), cert. denied, 


12a 


429 U.S. 866 (1976), stated that “it is axiomatic that 

. . » damages [arising from contract breaches] are limited 

to those that were reasonably foreseeable at the time the 

parties formed the contract.” Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 

627-28; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 27-28. 

From this proposition, the court reasoned that 

[t]he facts may support an implied warranty of speci- 
fication, but they cannot be stretched so far as to 
support the theory that the parties came to a meeting 
of the minds that there would be an indemnification 
agreement between them if the implied warranty of 
specification was alleged, but never proven, to be 
violated. 


Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 627; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. 
Ct. at 28. 


The Claims Court also held that 


there was no breach of the warranty of specification 
based on the manufacturer’s tort liability to third 
parties supposedly injured by the product because 
the manufacturer, under the circumstances alleged, 
was protected from liability by the Government con- 
tractor defense. 


Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 628; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. 
at 28. We read this latter statement as a holding by the 
Claims Court that, assuming the existence of an implied 
warranty of specifications, Hercules and Thompson could 
not establish that the damages which they incurred— 
their payments into the Agent Orange settlement fund— 
flowed from a breach of that warranty, because the gov- 
ernment contractor defense protected them against those 
damages and they incurred those damages as a result of 
their decision to settle the litigation in the face of that 
protection. 

As far as the claims for attorney’s fees were concerned, 
the Claims Court held that Hercules and Thompson could 
not recover such fees because they represented the kind 


. toe’ be doh ae a ae ke ‘ ae MS ok 
ea ee Pee te ee ee a 


13a 


of remote and consequential damages not normally 
awarded in contract cases. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 627-28; 
Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 27-28, both citing Kania 
v. United States, 650 F.2d 264, 269 (Ct. Cl.), cert. 
denied, 454 U.S. 895 (1981). 


In the case of Hercules’ and Thompson’s assertions 
that they were entitled to contract indemnification, the 
Claims Court noted that their respective contracts con- 
tained no provision expressly providing for indemnifica- 
tion. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 633; Wm. T. Thompson, 
26 Cl. Ct. at 28. In Thompson’s case, the court rejected 
the contention that an implied-in-fact contract indemnifi- 
cation term arose from section 707 of the DPA,° because 
that section merely “excuses a Government contractor’s 
breach of its other, non-Government contracts which were 
adversely affected by the priority given to the Govern- 
ment’s procurement demands under the DPA.” Wm. T. 
Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 29. In addition, in the case 
of both Hercules and Thompson, the court held that, 
even assuming that an implied-in-fact contractual obliga- 
tion to indemnify existed, the provision would be unen- 
forceable as violative of the Anti-Deficiency Act, 31 
U.S.C. § 1341 (1988). Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 634; 
Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 29. 


®In pertinent part, section 707 of the DPA states: 
No person shall be held liable for damages or penalties for 
any act or failure to act resulting directly or indirectly from 
compliance with a rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant 
to this Act.... 


50 U.S.C. app. § 2157 (1964). 


7In pertinent part, the Anti-Deficiency Act states that officers or 

employees of the United States may not: 
(A) make or authorize an expenditure or obligation exceed- 
ing an amount available in an appropriation or fund for the 
expenditure or obligation; or 
(B) involve [the] government in a contract or obligation for 
the payment of money before an appropriation is made unless 
authorized by law. 

$1 U.S.C. § 1841 (1988). 


14a 


Finally, the Claims Court held that the policies under- 
lying the government contractor defense provided a “sep- 
arate and independent” basis for denial of all claims 
against the government by Hercules and Thompson. Her- 
cules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 631; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. 
at 33. 

DISCUSSION 


A. Standard of Review 


A trial court may award summary judgment where 
there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the 
moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of 
law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); RUSCC 56(c); Mingus 
Constructors, Inc. v. United States, 812 F.2d 1387, 1390 
(Fed. Cir. 1987). In reviewing a grant of summary 
judgment by the trial court, we determine for ourselves 
whether the standards for summary judgment have been 
met and we are not bound by the trial court’s ruling 
that there are no genuine issues of material fact in the 
case. Id. 


B. Appellants’ Contentions 


On appeal, Hercules contends that because disputed 
issues of material fact exist, the Claims Court committed 
reversible error by granting summary judgment with re- 
spect to its contractual claims based upon the theories 
of superior knowledge, reverse warranty, and an implied 
warranty of specifications. Thompson also contends that 
the existence of disputed material facts precluded sum- 
mary judgment with respect to its contractual claims 
based upon the theories of superior knowledge and an 
implied warranty of specifications. Thompson further con- 
tends that the Claims Court erred as a matter of law in 
holding (i) that an implied-in-fact contractual obligation 
for indemnity did not arise under the DPA, and (ii) 


15a 


that the government contractor defense provided a “sep- 
arate and independent” basis for denial of their claims. 


We have carefully considered all of appellants’ argu- 
ments on appeal. Having found no errors of law, nor 
any genuine issues of material fact, we conclude that 
the Claims Court correctly decided each of the contract 
based claims asserted by Hercules and Thompson. We 
affirm the judgments of the Claims Court on that basis 
and do not reach the issue of whether the government 
contractor defense would provide a “separate and inde- 
pendent” basis for the court’s decision. As will be seen, 
however, the presence of the government contractor de- 
fense is dispositive of two of the contract based claims 
asserted on appeal. We consider below each of the con- 
tract based claims. 


C. Analysis 
1. Superior Knowledge 


Hercules and Thompson each argue that because the 
government had superior knowledge of the dangers asso- 
ciated with dioxin, it had a contractual obligation to 
inform them of such dangers. Because the government 
failed to do so, they contend, the government breached 
its contractual obligation. 


The doctrine of superior knowledge is generally ap- 

plied to situations where (1) a contractor under- 

takes to perform without vital knowledge of a fact 

that affects performance costs or duration, (2) the 

government was aware the contractor had no knowl- 

edge of and had no reason to obtain such informa- 

tion, (3) any contract specification supplied misled 

the contractor or did not put it on notice to inquire, 

and (4) the government failed to provide the rele- 
vant information. | 

. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. United States, 654 F.2d 75, 

79 (Ct. Cl. 1981). Thus, a claim under the doctrine 


16a 


of superior knowledge is tenable where the government 
fails to provide a contractor with vital knowledge in the 
government’s possession which bears upon the costs of 
the contractor’s performance under the contract at issue. 
That was not the case here. 


Hercules and Thompson each argue that summary judg- 
ment on this point was improperly granted because dis- 
puted factual issues remain concerning whether the type 
of damages they suffered were “foreseeable” within the 
meaning of Hadley v. Baxendale. Hercules further argues 
that a disputed factual issue exists regarding the relative 
levels of knowledge about the hazards of Agent Orange. 
These alleged disputed issues, however, are immaterial 
to our decision. Even assuming, arguendo, that (i) Her- 
cules’ and Thompson’s damages were foreseeable, and 
(ii) the government had superior knowledge of the haz- 
ards associated with dioxin, such foreseeability and knowl- 
edge had no bearing on Hercules’ and Thompson’s per- 
formance under the contract—i.e., production costs or 
manufacturing times. Put another way, nothing the gov- 
ernment did or failed to do had any impact upon Her- 
cules’ and Thompson’s production of Agent Orange. As 
the Claims Court noted, the cases cited for the superior 
knowledge doctrine concern the withholding of superior 
knowledge that makes it more difficult to perform under 
the terms of the contract at issue. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. 
at 622-23; Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. Ct. at 22-23. See, 
e.g., Helene Curtis Indus., Inc. v. United States, 312 F.2d 
774 (Ct. Cl. 1963). We decline to accept Hercules’ and 
Thompson’s invitation to extend the doctrine of superior 
knowledge to encompass their claims for post-performance 
settlement and litigation expenses, because those expenses 
were not incurred during the performance of the under- 
lying contracts. 


2. The Implied Warranty of Specifications 


Both Hercules and Thompson argue for recovery based 
upon a theory of an implied warranty of specifications, 


“4 


Ce DETER Oa et, See ee ieee rs Ce eee! 


17a 


as set forth in United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 
(1918), and its progeny. Spearin stands for the proposi- 
tion that when the government includes detailed specifi- 
cations in a contract, it impliedly warrants that (i) if 
the contractor follows those specifications, the resultant 
product will not be defective or unsafe, and (ii) if the 
resultant product proves defective or unsafe, the con- 
tractor will not be liable for the consequences. Spearin, 
248 U.S. at 136-37. As with any contract-based claim, 
however, to recover for a breach of warranty, a plaintiff 
must allege and prove (1) that a valid warranty existed, 
(2) the warranty was breached, and (3) plaintiff's dam- 
ages were caused by the breach. San Carlos Irrig. and 
Drainage Dist. v. United States, 877 F.2d 957, 959 (Fed. 
Cir. 1989); accord Wunderlich Contracting Co. v. United 
States, 351 F.2d 956, 968 (Ct. Cl. 1965) (stating that 
a plaintiff asserting a claim for breach of an implied 
warranty of specifications has the “burden of establishing 
the fundamental facts of liability, causation, and resultant 
injury.”). Unlike the superior knowledge doctrine, dis- 
cussed above, the implied warranty of specifications covers 
problems arising after performance of the underlying con- 
tract. See Poorvu v. United States, 420 F.2d 993 (Ct. 
Cl. 1970). 


In the present case, Hercules and Thompson argue that 
because the government supplied the specifications and 
formula for Agent Orange, the government is liable for 
their injuries by reason of the breach of an implied 
warranty of specifications, even though the alleged harm 
(i.e., costs incurred in the Agent Orange litigation) 
occurred several years after completion of the Agent 
Orange production contracts. Both Hercules and Thomp- 
son contend that summary judgment was improperly 
granted because various factual issues remain in dispute 
with regard to their claims, including (i) whether an 
implied warranty arose out of the contracts, (ii) whether 
the type of damages sought were “reasonably foreseeable” 
at the time the contracts were formed, (iii) whether, 


eee 2 


18a 


leaving aside the government contractor defense, Hercules 
and Thompson faced potential liability in the Agent 
Orange litigation, (iv) whether the government knew that 
Hercules and Thompson faced potential liability, (v) 
whether the government’s defective specifications gave rise 
to their alleged potential liability, and (vi) whether the 
class action settlement constituted reasonable conduct in 
light of the potential liability. 


We need not, however, resolve the above factual issues 
because a necessary element of appellants’ breach of war- 
ranty claims—i.e., causation—is lacking. As noted above, 
to make out a prima facie case of breach of an implied 
warranty of specifications, Hercules and Tl ompson must 
show not only that the facts support an impued warranty, 
but also that the warranty was breached and that their 
damages were caused by the breach. San Carlos, 877 
F.2d at 959. As seen above, as far as damages to the 
extent of contributions to the Agent Orange settlement 
fund are concerned, the Claims Court held that Hercules’ 
and Thompson’s claims failed because (i) the absence 
of scientific evidence regarding the consequences of dioxin 
exposure precluded a finding that the warranty was 
breached, (ii) even assuming the existence of an implied 
warranty of specifications, the warranty would not include 
the kind of indemnity sought here, and (iii) the avail- 
ability of the government contractor defense precluded a 
finding that their damages were caused by the alleged 
breach. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 626-28; Wm. T. Thomp- 
son, 26 Cl. Ct. at 26-28. We agree with the Claims Court 
that the record from the Agent Orange litigation is sparse 
with respect to scientific proof that the veterans’ injuries 
were caused by dioxin. We also agree with the Claims 
the facts would have to be stretched to support 
the theory that, under an implied warranty or specifica- 
tions, Hercules and Thompson would be entitled to 
recover from the government their contributions to the 


: 
F 


NE ER TT eet er | eke ye ee RD ae eee Meee ae be 


19a 


Agent Orange settlement fund.* However, we prefer to 
rest our decision on the third ground articulated by the 
court: Hercules and Thompson cannot prove that their 
damages were caused by the government’s alleged breach 
of an implied warranty of specifications because they 


8 This view is based on the rationale underlying the Supreme 
Court’s decisions in Feres v. United States, 340 U.S. 135 (1950), 
and Stencel Aero Eng’g Corp. v. United States, 431 U.S. 666 
(1977). In Feres, 340 U.S. 135 (1950), the Supreme Court held 
that the United States may not be sued in tort for injuries in- 
curred by a serviceperson while on active duty. The Supreme 
Court had occasion in Stencel Aero to explicate the Feres decision 
in the context of service-related injuries allegedly caused by the 
actions of a government contractor. In Stencel Aero, an injured 
serviceman sued the manufacturer of his malfunctioning fighter 
plane on a product liability theory. Stencel Aero Engineering Corp. 
(Stencel Aero), the manufacturer, cross-claimed against the gov- 
ernment for indemnity, claiming that any malfunction of its 
product was caused by defective, government-supplied specifica- 
tions and components. Holding that the considerations relevant in 
Feres controlled the outcome of the case before it, the Supreme 
Court upheld the district court’s grant of summary judgment for 
both the government and Stencel Aero against the serviceman. as 
well as the dismissal of Stencel Aero’s cross<laim against the 
government. The Court reasoned that to allow an injured service- 
person to circumvent the Feres doctrine by suing a government 
contractor, who would then sue the government for indemnity. 
would have the same deleterious results as allowing tort suits 
directly against the government in the military context. Stencei 
Aero, 431 U.S. at 673. Thus, the Supreme Court determined that 
“[tlo permit [the serviceperson] to proceed . . . here would be to 
judicially admit at the back door that which has been legislatively 
turned away at the front door.” Jd. (citations omitted). 


Neither Hercules nor Thompson has asserted that any provisions 
of their respective contracts support the argument that the govern- 
ment agreed to indemnify them for third party tort claims. Absent 
any express provision, such an agreement to indemnify would have 
to be implied-in-fact. See Lopes v. A.C. & S., Inc. 858 F.2d T12. 
714-15 (Fed. Cir. 1988). In view of the Feres-Stencel Aero 
trine, it is difficult to envision the circumstances 
court could find an implied-in-fact agreement on 
government to provide the kind of indemnity for 
and Thompson argue. 


under 
the of 
which 


20a 


were protected from liability to the Agent Orange plain- 
tiffs by the government contractor defense. 


The Supreme Court explained the government con- 
tractor defense in Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 
487 U.S. 500 (1988). In Boyle, a serviceman was killed 
during a training exercise due to an alleged design defect 
in his aircraft. Boyle’s personal representative (Boyle) 
brought a diversity action in federal district court against 
the government contractor that had manufactured the air- 
craft, but did not sue the government. Boyle alleged, 
inter alia, under Virginia tort law, that the contractor 
had defectively designed the aircraft’s emergency escape- 
hatch system. The contractor contended that it had man- 
ufactured the escape-hatch system in accordance with 
government-supplied specifications as required by the con- 
tract, and therefore was not liable to Boyle. The jury 
returned a general verdict for Boyle, and the district 
court denied the contractor’s motion for judgment not- 
withstanding the verdict. The United States Court of 
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed and remanded 
with directions that judgment be entered for the con- 
tractor. The Fourth Circuit found, as a matter of federal 
law, that the contractor could not be held liable for the 
allegedly cefective design because it had satisfied the 
requirements of the government contractor defense. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


Zila 


487 U.S. at 506.° In cases where the government’s interest 
is implicated, the Supreme Court continued, federal law 
will displace state law if there is a significant conflict 
between a federal policy and the operation of state law. 
Id. at 507. Looking to the discretionary function excep- 
tion to the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 1346(b), 2671-268 (1988) (hereinafter, FTCA)”, 
the Court reasoned that such a significant conflict was 
present under the circumstances, because to allow Boyle’s 
suit against the contractor would constitute judicial 
second-guessing of decisions that Congress intended to be 
within the discretion of the U.S. military. Jd. at 511.” 
To further define the contours of the government con- 
tractor defense, the Supreme Court in Boyle set forth the 
following three-part test: 


® The Court explained: 
The imposition of liability on Government contractors will 
directly affect the terms of Government contracts: either the 
contractor will decline to manufacture the design specified by 
the Government, or it will raise its price. Either way, the 
interests of the United States will be directly affected. 


Boyle, 487 U.S. at 507. 


10In relevant part, the discretionary function exception to the 

FTCA states that the limited waiver of sovereign immunity in 
the FTCA does not extend to 

[a]ny claim . . . based upon the exercise or performance or 

the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or 

duty on the part of a federal agency or an employee of the 

Government, whether or not the discretion involved be abused. 


28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) (1988). 


11 The Court stated: 

We think that the selection of the appropriate design for 
military equipment to be used by our Armed Forces is assur- 
edly a discretionary function within the meaning of this 
provision. It often involves not merely engineering analysis 
but judgment as to the balancing of many technical, military, 
and even social considerations, including specifically the trade- 
off between greater safety and greater combat effectiveness. 
And we are further. of the view that permitting “second- 


22a 


Liability for design defects in military equipment 
cannot be imposed, pursuant to state law, when 
(1) the United States approved reasonably precise 
specifications; (2) the equipment conformed to those 
specifications; and (3) the supplier warned the 
United States about the dangers in the use of the 
equipment that were known to the supplier but not 
to the United States. 


Id. at 512. A contractor who satisfies this test is immune 
to tort liability under state law for defects in products 
manufactured for the government in accordance with 
government-supplied specifications. 


As seen above, prior to Boyle, the district court and 
the Second Circuit each concluded that the government 
contractor defense operated to shield Hercules and 
Thompson. See In re “Agent Orange”, 565 F. Supp. at 
1273-74 (1983 decision initially granting summary judg- 
ment in favor of Hercules and Thompson and two other 
Agent Orange manufacturers); In re “Agent Orange”, 
611 F. Supp. at 1263 (1985 decision granting all the 
manufacturers summary judgment against the opt-out 


guessing” of these judgments, see United States v. Varig 
Airlines, 467 U.S. 797, 814 (1984), through state tort suits 
against contractors would produce the same effect sought to 
be avoided by the FTCA exemption. The financial burden of 
judgments against the contractors would ultimately be passed 
through, substantially if not totally, to the United States 
itself, since defense contractors will predictably raise their 
prices to cover, or to insure against, contingent liability for 
the Government-ordered designs. To put the point differently: 
It makes little sense to insulate the Government against 
financial liability for the judgment that a particular feature 
of military equipment is necessary when the Government pro- 
duces the equipment itself, but not when it contracts for the 
production. In sum, we are of the view that state law which 
holds Government contractors liable for design defects in mili- 
tary equipment does in some circumstances present a “signifi- 
cant conflict” with federal policy and must be displaced. 


Boyle, 487 U.S. at 511-12 (footnote omitted). 


23a: 


plaintiffs following the Agent Orange litigation settle- 
ment); and Jn re “Agent Orange,” 818 F.2d at 189 (1987 
court of appeals decision affirming summary judgment 
against the opt-out plaintiffs). Thus, Hercules and 
Thompson successfully argued on three separate occasions 
that the government contractor defense shielded them 
from liability for the veterans’ tort claims. Consequently, 
there can be no serious doubt that had the class action 
Agent Orange litigation proceeded to termination, no 
liability would have been imposed against Hercules or 
Thompson. 


Because the government contractor defense provided 
a complete defense to the veterans’ tort claims, it cannot 
be said that the damages asserted by Hercules and Thomp- 
son were caused by the government, as the Claims Court 
recognized. As far as their contributions to the settlement 
fund are concerned ($18,772,568 in the case of Hercules 
and $3,096,597 in the case of Thompson), it was appel- 
lants’ voluntary decision to enter into the settlement that 
led to those damages. The government did nothing to 
encourage or compel Hercules and Thompson to settle. 
It was appellants’ decision to forego litigating the issue 
of the government contractor defense to completion that 
caused them to incur the monetary injury of the contribu- 
tion to the settlement fund. 


Based upon the theory of an implied warranty of speci- 
fications, Hercules and Thompson also contend that they 
are entitled to recover the attorney’s fees which they 
incurred in the Agent Orange litigation. As seen above, 
in rejecting this element of appellants’ claims, the Claims 
Court relied upon Kania v. United States, 650 F.2d at 
269. In that case, Eugene Kania brought an action in 
one of this court’s predecessors, the Court of Claims, in 
which he alleged that the government had breached a 
contract pursuant to which it had agreed not to prosecute 
him in return for his testimony before a federal grand 
jury. After he testified in the grand jury, Kania was 


24a 


indicted for various offenses. He was successful, how- 
ever, in his efforts to have the indictment dismissed, based 
upon his purported agreement with the government. 
After the dismissal, he sued in the Court of Claims seek- 
ing to recover the expenses incurred in defending against 
the government’s charges. The Court of Claims held that 
it was without jurisdiction because, whatever arrangement 
existed between Kania and the government, “there was 
no contract sufficient to satisy this court’s jurisdictional 
requirements.” Kania, 650 F.2d at 269. The court 
then went on to state: 


Should this be in error, we must now add that 
jurisdiction to award counsel fees and other litigation 
expenses as an element of breach damages would be 
extremely dubious. It is the kind of consequential 
damages not normally awarded in contract breach 
cases. William Green Construction Co. v. United 
States, 201 Ct. Cl. 616, 477 F.2d 930 (1973), 
cert. denied, 417 U.S. 909, 94 S. Ct. 2606, 41 
L.Ed.2d 213 (1974). Courts do not, in awarding 
breach damages, follow through the remote indirect 
consequences of the breach as distinguished from 
those directly in contemplation when the contract 
was made. Northern Helex Co. v. United States, 207 
Ct. Cl. 862, 524 F.2d 707 (1975), cert. denied, 429 
U.S. 866, 97 S. Ct. 176, 50 L.Ed.2d 146 (1976). 


In light of Kania, even assuming the existence of an 
implied warranty of specifications in this case, such a 
warranty could not be construed to encompass a warranty 
by the government that Hercules and Thompson would 
not have to pay to defend themselves against tort claims 
that lacked merit because a legal doctrine, such as the gov- 
ernment contractor defense, provided a defense to them. 
In the Claims Court, Hercules and Thompson alleged no 
facts suggesting that such a warranty—which would have 
to exist in order for Hercules and Thompson to recover 
their attorney’s fees from the Agent Orange litigation— 
was “directly in contemplation” when Hercules and 


25a 


Thompson entered into their respective contracts with the 
government. Kania, 650 F.2d at 269. 


3. Reverse Warranty 


Hercules argues that the government had an implied- 
in-fact contractual obligation to use the Agent Orange 
produced by it in a manner so as to avoid potential risks 
to servicemen and the subsequent tort suits against appel- 
lants. A material issue of fact exists, Hercules asserts, as 
to whether this obligation arose when the government or- 
dered Hercules to package Agent Orange in drums 
marked only with an orange band, thus precluding Her- 
cules from applying the extensive warnings and instruc- 
tions normally placed on its commercial herbicides. Ac- 
cording to Hercules, because it was not permitted to place 
adequate warnings on the Agent Orange containers, the 
government thereby warranted to Hercules that the gov- 
ernment’s use of the product would take into account the 
absence of warnings and instructions designed to assure 
the product’s safe use. Alternatively, Hercules asserts that 
a material issue of fact exists as to whether the govern- 
ment’s mixing of Hercules’ dioxin-free Agent Orange with 
dioxin-tainted Agent Orange imposed potential liability 
on Hercules that otherwise would not have existed. In so 
mixing, Hercules argues, the government assumed obliga- 
tions that properly include compensating it for liabiliites 
incurred as a result of such conduct. Hercules further 
contends that courts have recognized the existence of an 
implied-in-fact warranty running from the purchaser to 
the seller where the purchaser has engaged in conduct 
which warrants the imposition of a duty to exercise due 
care in using a seller’s product. The Claims Court char- 
acterized Hercules’ claim as being based on a “reverse 
warranty” theory. Hercules, 25 Cl. Ct. at 624. 


Irrespective of the name used to identify the theory 
advanced by Hercules, we rejected a similar claim in 
Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 F.2d 712 (Fed. Cir. 


26a 


1988), aff'g 649 F. Supp. 149 (W.D. Wash. 1986). In 
Lopez, a civilian employee exposed to asbestos at a naval 
shipyard brought an action in the United States District 
Court for the Western District of Washington against sev- 
eral manufacturers who had supplied the asbestos pur- 
suant to a government contract. Upon settling the em- 
ployee’s claim, the asbestos manufacturers filed third-party 
complaints in the district court, based in part on the 
Little Tucker Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1346, seeking to recover 
their settlement payments and litigation expenses from 
the government. The manufacturers’ Tucker Act claims 
were based on the theory that in specifying asbestos, the 
government impliedly warranted to the asbestos manufac- 
turers that its use of their product would not expose the 
manufacturers to unforeseen defective product liabilities to 
persons who might be injured by exposure to the asbestos. 
Lopez, 858 F.2d at 714. In dismissing the Tucker Act 
claims, the district court held that such claims were barred 
by operation of the Anti-Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C. 
§ 1341. Lopez, 649 F. Supp. at 159. As an alternative 
basis, the district court dismissed the manufacturers’ 
claims for lack of jurisdiction, noting that jurisdiction 
under the Tucker Act extends only to claims arising out 
of express or implied-in-fact contracts, and not to claims 
arising out of implied-in-law contracts. Jd. The district 
court concluded that no express contract term existed and 
that, as a matter of law, the vendor/vendee relationship 
between the manufacturers and the government, standing 
alone, did not create an implied-in-fact agreement by the 
government to indemnify the manufacturers for injuries 
resulting from the use of the asbestos purchased under 
the contract. Jd. at 160. We affirmed the district court’s 
dismissal of the manufacturers’ Tucker Act claims on the 
grounds that the Tucker Act did not provide for claims 
based on contracts implied-in-law, and that an implied-in- 
fact warranty running from the government to the manu- 
facturers was a “bizarre and novel” theory that could not 
be inferred from the circumstances of the case. Lopez, 


27a. 


858 F.2d at 714-15, 716-17." Although the Lopez deci- 
sion did not go so far as to hold that a claim for breach 
of reverse warranty could never be brought under the 
Tucker Act, it made clear that any such warranty would 
have to be either express or implied-in-fact, rather than 
implied-in-law. Jd. at 716. 


Hercules has not alleged an express reverse warranty. 
Beyond that, we are hard-pressed to see how the circum- 
stances of this case could support an inference that Her- 
cules and the government came “to a meeting of the 
minds and [took] upon themselves [the] corresponding 
obligations and liabilities” that would accompany a war- 
ranty running from the purchaser to the seller. Hercules, 
25 Cl. Ct. at 624 (citing Hirschmann v. United States, 
11 Cl. Ct. 338, 342 (1986)). We prefer, however, to 
rest our decision on this point on the government con- 
tractor defense. Even assuming that an implied-in-fact 
reverse warranty could be found and could be said to 
have been breached, Hercules’ claim fails for the same 
reason that Hercules’ and Thompson’s claims based upon 
an implied warranty of specifications fail. Specifically, in 
view of the government contractor defense, Hercules could 
not prove that its damages were caused by the breach of 
such a warranty. Rather, Hercules’ damages were the 
result of its decision to enter into the settlement with the 
Agent Orange plaintiffs."* 


2 Because of our doubts regarding the conclusion that the 
Anti-Deficiency Act barred the manufacturers’ Tucker Act claims, 
we chose not to rest our decision in Lopez on that ground. 


In view of the Feres-Stencel Aero doctrine, it is difficult to 
envision the circumstances under which a court could find on the 
part of the government the kind of implied-in-fact reverse warranty 
for which Hercules argues. See supra note 8. 


Just as it did in connection with the implied warranty of 
specifications theory, the rationale of Kania bars Hercules’ claim 
under a theory of reverse warranty for the recovery of attorney fees 
and expenses incurred in the Agent Orange litigation. 


28a 


4. Implied-in-fact Contractual Obligation to In- 
demnify 


The government used the authority provided in section 
101 of the DPA, 50 U.S.C. app. § 2071(a) (1964), to 
require both Hercules and Thompson to enter into con- 
tracts to produce Agent Orange for the Vietnam War 
effort. Based upon this fact, Thompson, but not Hercules, 
argued in the Claims Court that, pursuant to section 707 
of the DPA, 50 U.S.C. app. § 2157 (1964), it was en- 
titled to be indemnified by the government for its con- 
tribution to the Agent Orange settlement fund and for 
the expenses which it incurred in the Agent Orange litiga- 
tion. The Claims Court rejected this argument. In so 
doing, it relied upon the reasoning of the district court in 
the Agent Orange litigation. Wm. T. Thompson, 26 Cl. 
Ct. at 28. There, in approving the 1984 settlement, the 
district court rejected the contention of the defendants 
that the Agent Orange plaintiffs were barred from assert- 
ing any claims against them because they were immunized 
from suit under section 707 of the DPA. In re “Agent 
Orange,” 597 F. Supp. at 844. The district court held 
that section 707, which states in part that “[n]Jo person 
shall be held liable for damages or penalties for any act 
or failure to act resulting directly or indirectly from com- 
pliance with a rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant 
to this Act,” did not provide the immunity asserted by 
the Agent Orange defendants. 597 F. Supp. at 844-45. 
The district court stated: 


the protection afforded by section 707 should cor- 
respond to the risk imposed, viz., the possible need 
for the contractor to break its contracts with third 
parties or the increased risk to employees or users 
posed by the speeded up production. 


597 F. Supp. at 845. 


On appeal, Thompson contends that under the circum- 
stances of the compelled production here, section 707 of 


29a 


the DPA operated to create an implied-in-fact obligation 
on the part of the government to indemnify Thompson 
for the damages it incurred: its contribution to the Agent 
Orange settlement fund and the expenses which it incurred 
in the Agent Orange litigation. Thompson argues that 
the Claims Court erred in accepting the reasoning of the 
district court. Specifically, Thompson contends that be- 
cause section 101 of the DPA authorizes the President 
to compel contract performance as well as contract ac- 
ceptance, the “risk imposed” is not limited to breach of 
contract actions arising out of preference given to DPA 
contracts, but rather extends to possible tort suits by third 
parties arising from subsequent use of the product pro- 
duced under the DPA contract. 


We disagree. As did the district court in Agent Orange 
litigation and the Claims Court in this suit, we read sec- 
tion 707 of the DPA as providing a defense for a DPA 
contractor against a suit by a non-government customer 
in the event that the DPA contractor is forced to breach 
another contract to fulfill the government’s requirements. 
Section 707 does not provide the kind of protection as- 
serted by Thompson.” 


In interpreting a statute, we first turn to its language. 
VE Holding Co. v. Johnson Gas Appliance Co., 917 
F.2d 1574, 1579 (Fed. Cir. 1990) (citing Mallard v. 
United States Dist. Court for S. Dist. of Iowa, 490 U.S. 
296, 300-01 (1989)), cert. denied, 111 S. Ct. 1315 
(1991). Accordingly, we begin our analysis with the 
pertinent statutory provisions: sections 101 and 707 of 
the DPA. Section 101(a) of the DPA states: 


The President is hereby authorized (1) to require 
that performance under contracts or orders (other 


15 The circumstances of this case do not require us to address 
the holding of the district court that “the protection afforded by 
section 707” serves to protect DPA contractors against “the in- 
creased risk to employees or users posed by . . . speeded up pro- 
duction.” In re “Agent Orange”, 597 F. Supp. at 845. 


30a 


than contracts of employment) which he deems 
necessary or appropriate to promote the national 
defense shall take priority over performance under 
any other contract or order, and, for the purpose of 
assuring such priority, to require acceptance and 
performance of such contracts or orders in pref- 
erence to other contracts or orders by any person he 
finds capable of their performance, and (2) to allo- 
cate materials and facilities in such manner, upon 
such conditions, and to such extent as he shall deem 
necessary or appropriate to promote the national 
defense. 


50 U.S.C. app. § 2071(a) (1964) (emphasis supplied). 
Section 707 of the DPA states as follows: 


No person shall be held liable for damages or penal- 
ties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or 
indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, 
or order issued pursuant to this Act, notwithstanding 
that any such rule, regulation, or order shall there- 
after be declared by judicial or other competent au- 
thority to be invalid. No person shall discriminate 
against orders or contracts to which priority is as- 
signed or for which materials or facilities are allo- 
cated under title I of this Act or under any rule, 
regulation, or order issued thereunder, by charging 
higher prices or by imposing different terms and 
conditions for such orders or contre cts than for other 
generally comparable orders or contracts, or in any 
other manner. 


50 U.S.C. app. § 2157 (1964). 


The language of section 101(a) makes it clear that 
the purpose of the statute is to authorize the President 
to dictate that preference be given to government con- 
tracts which are necessary to promote the national de- 
fense. Indeed, section 101 is titled “Priority in contracts 
and orders.” Although Thompson correctly observes that 


3la 


the statute authorizes the President to compel both con- 
tract performance and contract acceptance, section 101 
(a) expressly states that the granting of such authority is 
“for the purpose of assuring . . . priority.” Significantly, 
section 101(a) does not mention either the specific nature 
of performance under a DPA contract, or the subsequent 
use of goods produced under such a contract. Therefore, 
we conclude that, while the risk imposed by section 101 
(a) does include the possible need of a contractor to 
break its contracts with third parties in order to give 
preference to a DPA contract, it does not include the risk 
that the product produced under the DPA contract will 
be inherently unsafe to users. 


Once a contractor has been compelled to accept a 
national defense contract under section 101(a), section 
707 acts to shield the contractor from liability resulting 
from compliance with that section. At issue in this case is 
the nature of the liability against which the contractor is 
shielded. 


As noted above, in complying with DPA section 
101(a) a contractor may have to re-prioritize its out- 
standing contracts in order to give the required preference 
to a compelled DPA contract. It stands to reason that 
the protection provided by DPA section 707 extends only 
to shield a contractor from breach of contract liability 
arising as a consequence of such re-prioritization. First, 
it is a settled rule of statutory interpretation that separate 
provisions of a statute are to be construed and interpreted 
together and in light of each other to ascertain the true 
legislative intent. This court has explained: 


When the legislative purpose is incorporated in a 
complex piece of legislation, such as those establish- 
ing a major regulatory or entitlement program, the 
meaning of any particular phrase or provision can- 
not be securely known simply by taking the words 
out of context and treating them as self-evident. This 
rather straightforward homily is captured in the more 


32a 


pretentious proposition that parts of a statute in pari 
materia must be construed together. 


Amendola v. Secretary, Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., 
989 F.2d 1180, 1182 (Fed. Cir. 1993); accord Ambas- 
sador Div. of Florsheim Shoe v. United States, 748 F.2d 
1560, 1565 (Fed. Cir. 1984) (stating that where two 
statutory provisions are enacted in pari materia, a legis- 
lative intent to have the provisions “work harmoniously 
together” is to be inferred). To hold that section 707 
protects contractors against a risk which is greater than 
that created by the statute with which it operates would 
violate this rule. 


Furthermore, the language of section 707 itself sup- 
ports the conclusion that the section does not extend the 
kind of indemnity asserted by Hercules. The second sen- 
tence of section 707, which prohibits discrimination 
“against contracts to which priority is assigned .. . ,” re- 
inforces the view that the immunity from suit provided 
by section 707 does not extend to tort suits in which it 
is alleged that the item produced by the DPA contractor 
is inherently unsafe to users. Rather, we conclude that 
to the extent relevant here, the intended protection of 
section 707 is analogous to that provided under the 
common-law doctrine of impossibility of performance, 
which excuses delay or nonperformance of a contract 
when the agreed upon performance has been rendered 
“commercially impracticable” by an unforeseen super- 
vening event not within the contemplation of the parties 
at the time the contract was formed. Eastern Air Lines, 
Inc. v. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 532 F.2d 957, 997 
(Sth Cir. 1976) (“[DPA section 707] is simply declara- 
tory of the common law [doctrine of impossibility].”) 
(quoting United States v. Texas Construction Company, 
224 F.2d 289, 293 (Sth Cir. 1955)). We also agree with 
the district court, see In re “Agent Orange,” 597 F. Supp. 
at 845, that if Congress had intended section 707 to 
impose upon the government the kind of liability asserted 


33a 


by Thompson, it would have said so in clear and un- 
equivocal terms. See, e.g., United States v. International 
Business Machs. Corp., 892 F.2d 1006, 1009 (Fed. Cir. 
1988) (“Had Congress intended to make the exemptions 
permanent, it knew how: it could and we believe would 
have used words of futurity. . . .”). 


In sum, the protection afforded by section 707 of the 
DPA extends no further than the risk imposed by section 
101(a) of the DPA. Accordingly, invocation of the DPA 
by the government for the production of Agent Orange 
did not give rise to an implied-in-fact contractual obliga- 
tion on tie part of the government to indemnify Thomp- 
son for its contribution to the Agent Orange settlement 
fund or for the expenses which Thompson incurred in the 
Agent Orange litigation. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the judgments of the Claims 
Court are affirmed. 


~ 


34a 


PLAGER, Circuit Judge, dissenting. 


The story of the litigation stemming from our Gov- 
ernment’s use of Agent Orange during the Vietnam War 
is long and complex. See PETER H. SCHUCK, AGENT 
ORANGE ON TRIAL: MASS TOXIC DISASTERS IN 
THE COURTS (enlarged ed., 1987). It may be that it is 
best to put this chapter of our nation’s history behind 
us, and to bury the issues with the dead. Appellants, by 
bringing this suit, do not allow us that peace. Be that 
as it may, as a court of law we are obliged to give appel- 
lants whatever justice the law affords. I believe the law 
affords substantially more justice than the majority con- 
cedes. 


The background of this particular case is set forth in 
some detail by the majority. Undue attention to trees, 
however, often hides the forest. Appellants, the Hercules 
and Thompson chemical companies, manufactured Agent 
Orange pursuant to contracts made by and with the Gov- 
ernment. Indeed, both Hercules and Thompson allege 
that the contracts were for a product which they did not 
choose to make, and which they were compelled to pro- 
duce under penalty of law. The companies, along with 
others, were sued some years back by veterans and their 
families (collectively “the Agent Orange plaintiffs”) for 
injuries caused by exposure to Agent Orange when the 
Government used the defoliant in pursuit of its war in 
Vietnam; appellants claim that the Government should 
indemnify them for the financial losses they sustained in 
the settlement of the Agent Orange litigation. 


Appellants present a host of arguments founded in gov- 
ernment contract law, each of which a majority of this 
panel rejects. The many points of government contract 
law raised in this case and so finely parsed, however, 
should not be allowed to obscure the fundamental ques- 
tion: if the Government compels manufacture of a prod- 
uct by private companies, a product known to the Gov- 
ernment to be potentially dangerous, and the use by the 


35a 


Government of the product causes the manufacturers to 
incur liability, may the Government claim immunity from 
the consequences of its conduct? I think not. 


1. 


The answer the Government gives, and the majority 
accepts, to this question is that there was no liability for 
the manufacturers to incur—the manufacturers could not 
have been held liable for the injuries sustained by the 
Agent Orange plaintiffs because the manufacturers were 
totally protected by a doctrine known as the government 
contractor defense. Slip op. at 23. The majority con- 
cludes from this that the over twenty million dollars paid 
to the Agent Orange plaintiffs by Hercules and Thompson 
resulted from a “voluntary decision” by the companies. 
Slip op. at 27. 


I find that reasoning unpersuasive. While there no 
doubt are civic-minded individuals in the upper ranks 
of both companies, and perhaps even among their law- 
yers, the notion that these manufacturers voluntarily 
made a twenty million dollar contribution to the veterans 
of the Vietnam War and their families out of the good- 
ness of their hearts seems rather far fetched, and might 
even raise questions about their fiduciary obligations to 
their shareholders.” 


The trial judge who presided over the settlement, an 
experienced and well-respected jurist, must have believed 
there was at least some ground upon which liability could 
be found. This was not a case in which the parties came 
to the judge with an agreed settlement, one which the 
judge without further exploration approved. As _ the 
record shows, two trial judges shared this case. The first 


1If the companies’ lawyers advised that the making of the con- 
tribution was necessary, when the law so clearly provided an 
absolute and airtight defense to liability, there might be a mal- 
practice issue as well. 


36a 


held that, under the government contractor defense as a 
matter of law, neither Hercules nor Thompson were lia- 
ble for the veterans’ claimed injuries. Jn re “Agent 
Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 565 F. Supp. 1263 (E.D.N.Y. 
1983). However, before an order to dismiss was entered 
by this judge, a second judge assumed the case.” The 
second judge rescinded the first judge’s summary judg- 
ment for the manufacturers, and denied the motion to 
dismiss. Im re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 580 
F. Supp. 1242 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). This judge must have 
believed that there was a valid and ongoing “case or 
controversy,” or the court could not have retained juris- 
diction over these defendants. This same judge presided 
over the extensive settlement negotiations conducted in his 
courthouse. Jn re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 611 
F. Supp. 1396 (E.D.N.Y. 1985); see also Schuck, supra, 
at 143 et seq. We must assume that this trial judge acted 
in good faith in a belief that the manufacturers might 
not be able to escape all liability. It ill behooves the 
Government, or this court, years later to question 
whether the trial judge properly understood the law of 
the case before him. 
| 


The majority concludes that, despite what the trial 


judge may have believed, the Government had no lia- 


bility to these contractors because of the government 
contractor defense as explicated in Boyle v. United Tech- 
nologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988). In the majority’s 
view, Boyle disposes of appellants’ implied warranty of 
specifications theory because the Supreme Court in Boyle 
in effect immunizes contractors such as these from all 
liability in situations such as that in the original Agent 
Orange plaintiffs’ suit. There are at least two problems 
with this reasoning. 


2 Judge George C. Pratt, the judge originally assigned to these 
cases, was elevated to the Court of Appeals, and his responsibilities 
as the trial judge were reassigned to Chief Judge Jack Weinstein. 


37a 


For one, Boyle was decided in 1988, some four years 
after the settlement that is the subject of this suit.’ Yet 
the issue as the majority poses it is not whether years 
later the substantive law of the case might have been 
found (or might have changed?) to favor the companies, 
but whether at the time of the settlement the companies 
simply gave away money to the plaintiffs, or whether they 
settled under a reasonable apprehension of legal com- 
pulsion in order to minimize their (and the Govern- 
ment’s) potential liability. 


The second reason why Boyle is inapposite to this case 
that the issue and holding in Boyle turned on a question 
of federal preemption, an issue not in this case. The 
question in Boyle is, in a suit on behalf of a deceased 
military officer against the manufacturer of a product 
purchased by the military and alleged to have caused 
the death, a suit which was brought under the substan- 
tive law of a particular state, may the Government's 
manufacturer be held liable under state tort law. The 
Supreme Court answered no. The suit was brought in 
Federal Court as a diversity suit with a state cause of 
action. Although the Government was not the named 
defendant, the Supreme Court viewed the case as impli- 
cating the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), the statute 
in which Congress waived the Government’s immunity 
from tort liability. See 28 U.S.C. § 1346(b). The Su- 
preme Court decided that the discretionary function ex- 
emption of the FTCA applied—the design of the escape 
hatch of the airplane was an exercise of federal discre- 
tion, and therefore state law was displaced. See 28 U.S.C. 
§ 2680(a). 


In the Agent Orange litigation, suit was brought by the 
plaintiffs not as a state tort action under the FTCA, but 
as a federal law action based on certain federal statutes 


®*The Agent Orange plaintiffs filed their original suit in July 
1978; after extensive pretrial proceedings, trial was set for May 7, 
1984. The case was settled that day. 


38a 


and on case law recognizing, even after Erie,‘ a limited 
scope for federal common law.* Jurisdiction was alleged, 
not in diversity, but under “the common law and/or the 
statutory laws of the United States of America,” as a 
federal question case under 28 U.S.C. § 1331.* The orig- 
inal trial judge held that substantial federal interests were 
affected by the litigation, and that federal common law 
provided both the substantive measure of liability and the 
basis for jurisdiction." 

The Second Circuit on appeal reversed the trial judge’s 
ruling on jurisdiction, and held the case was properly 
in federal court, but on diversity of citizenship jurisdic- 
tion.* On remand the second trial judge ruled that this 
did not necessarily affect the substantive law of the case. 
In an exhaustive opinion he ruled that, as a choice of 
law rule, the substantive law of the case remained one 
of federal law: a federal or national consensus common 
law.° Thus the preemption rule—whether federal law 
supercedes state substantive law in these cases—which 
was the concern in Boyle has no applicability to the 
Agent Orange litigation, a litigation in which federal law 
defined the substantive standard to be applied. 


The difficulty the majority has in finding a satisfactory 
rationale for the outcome it supports is understandable. 
The so-called “government contractor defense” is a label 


* Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins, 8304 U.S. 64 (1988). 


® See, e.g., Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States, 318 U.S. 868 
(1948). 


*In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 506 F. Supp. 787, 740 
(E.D.N.Y. 1979). 


1 Id. at 744. 


Sin re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 685 F.2d 987 (2d 
Cir. 1980). 


*In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 680 F. Supp. 690 
(E.D.N.Y. 1984). 


39a 


hung on a group of issues which first found expression in 
Feres v. United States, 340 U.S. 135 (1950). In that 
case the Supreme Court was called upon to decide 
whether the general waiver of tort immunity contained 
in the Federal Tort Claims Act gave military personnel 
the right to sue the Federal Government under routine 
tort theories in state courts. The Court held that, for a 
variety of policy reasons, the Act did not apply to in- 
juries incident to military service; military personnel could 
not sue their employer in state courts. 


Later, in Stencel Aero Engineering Corp. v. United 
States, 431 U.S. 666 (1977), the Court extended Feres 
and held that neither the Government nor the manufac- 
turer were liable to a military pilot for alleged negligence 
in the design and construction of an airplane’s life sup- 
port system. However, the Court in Stencel revisited the 
policy arguments on which Feres stood, and revised its 
rationale for the result. Thus began a series of cases in 
which the Court has tried to find a reasoned basis for 
the military exception rule,” culminating in United States 
v. Johnson, in which four members of the Court were 
of the view that Feres had been wrongly decided,” and 
finally Boyle, with a different rationale altogether, keyed 
to the language of the FTCA itself.” 


10 See, e.g., United States v. Shearer, 473 U.S. 52 (1985). 


11 United States v. Johnson, 481 U.S. 681, 692 (1987) (Justice 
Scalia, with whom Justices Brennan, Marshall, and Stevens joined, 
dissenting) . 


12 Although the question of government liability to military 
personnel would seem of direct interest to only a smal] segment 
of the legal profession, the Feres-Stencel-Boyle cases have gener- 
ated their share of academic attention, largely critical. One of the 
most recent and exhaustive reviews is David E. Seidelson, From 
Feres v. United States to Boyle v. United Technologies Corp.: An 
Examination of Supreme Court Jurisprudence and a Couple of 
Suggestions, 82 Duq. L. Rev. 219 (1994). See also Michael D. 
Green and Richard A. Matasar, The Supreme Court and the Prod- 


40a 


In light of this history, to suggest that the evolving 
government contractor defense would clearly dictate the 
outcome in the original Agent Orange litigation seems 
to me to be unwarranted historical revisionism, out of 
place in the decision before us in this case. I do not 
know what the ultimate decision in the Agent Orange 
litigation would have been on this issue, nor does any- 
one."* Since I find unpersuasive the majority’s defense 
of the trial judge’s summary judgment on this point, and 
since I believe there are a number of unresolved fact and 
law issues, I would return the case to the Court of Fed- 
eral Claims with instructions to hold a full trial on the 
issues. 


ucts Liability Crisis: Lessons from Boyle’s Government Contractor 
Defense, 63 S. Cal. L. Rev. 687 (1990); Barry Kellman, Judicial 
Abdication of Military Tort Accountability: But Who is to Guard 
the Guards Themselves?, 1989 Duke L. J. 1597; John Paul Stevens, 
Is Justice Irrelevant?, 87 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1121 (1993). 


8 In its 1987 opinion upholding both the settlement in the origi- 
nal litigation and Judge Weinstein’s later dismissal of the ‘opt-out’ 
cases, the Second Circuit had to walk a tight line. In effect, the 
court had to find a cause of action for the one (in support of the 
trial judge’s denial of the motion to dismiss the original defend- 
ants), but not for the other (in support of the grant of the 
motion to dismiss regarding the opt-outs). The Second Circuit 
opined that “in the light of hindsight, some 15 to 20 years after 
the fact, the weight of present scientific evidence does not establish 
that personnel in Vietnam were injured by Agent Orange, and 
there cannot have been a breach of an earlier duty to inform the 
government of known hazards.” In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. 
Litig., 818 F.2d 145, 174 (2d Cir. 1987). In like vein the court 
thought that “defendants clearly did not breach any duty to inform 
the government of hazards relating to Agent Orange,” and thus 
were protected by the ‘military contractor defense.’ Jd. at 178. To 
the extent those conclusions were invoked as a rationale for affirm- 


4la 


3. 


A few remaining observations about the trees. The 
majority has also rejected appellants’ theory of govern- 
ment liability under the doctrine of superior knowledge. 
If the Government’s knowledge is superior to that of the 
contractor, the Government may incur liability if it fails 
to disclose information required by the contractor. There 
are “instances in which the defendant [the Government] 
is clearly under such an affirmative obligation and can- 
not remain silent.” Helene Curtis Indus., Inc. v. United 
States, 312 F.2d 774, 778 (Ct. Cl. 1963). The Govern- 
ment had more knowledge of the potential harm caused 
by Agent Orange than did appellants, who had not par- 
ticipated in the devolopment of, had little experience 
with, and were relatively ignorant regarding the health 
hazards posed by, Agent Orange. Thus appellants con- 
tend that the Government is responsible for the harms 
caused to the Agent Orange plaintiffs, and that conse- 
quently the Government should pay appellants’ share of 
the settlement fund. 


The majority disagrees. It understands American Ship 
Building Co. v. United States, 654 F.2d 75 (Ct. Cl. 
1981), to require that the Government divulge informa- 
tion only when the contractor’s ignorance would hinder 
the contractor’s performance of the contract. In this case, 
the costs imposed on the appellants are the result of a 
settlement reached long after performance had ceased. 
The majority therefore holds that appellants cannot re- 
cover under the doctrine of superior knowledge because 
the damages arose after performance. 


There is neither prior authority nor present reason to 
limit the doctrine of superior knowledge to require com- 
pensation only for difficulties incurred during perform- 
ance. 

The doctrine of superior knowledge is generally 
applied to situations where (1) a contractor under- 
takes to perform without vital knowledge of a fact 


42a 


that affects performance costs or duration, (2) the 
government was aware the contractor had no knowl- 
edge of and had no reason to obtain such informa- 
tion, (3) any contract specification supplied misled 
the contractor, or did not put it on notice to inquire, 
and (4) the government failed to provide the rele- 
vant information. See, e.g. Helene Curtis Indus- 
tries, Inc. v. United States, 160 Ct. Cl. 437, 312 
F.2d 774 (1963). 


American Ship, 654 F.2d at 79 (emphasis supplied). 
Contrary to the majority’s deployment of the case, noth- 
ing in American Ship confines the doctrine of superior 
knowledge to information regarding the performance of 
contracts. American Ship merely notes that the doctrine 
has generally been invoked in cases in which the con- 
tractor’s performance was hindered because of the Gov- 
ernment’s failure to divulge information. 


The majority differentiates the doctrine of superior 
knowledge from the doctrine of implied warranty of spe- 
cification, announced in United States v. Spearin, 248 
U.S. 132 (1918). The majority acknowledges that, un- 
der the latter doctrine, government liability is not limited 
to contract performance, but extends to later losses as 
well. Slip op. at 20. Spearin requires that “if the con- 
tractor is bound to build according to plans and speci- 
fications prepared by the owner, the contractor will not be 
responsible for the consequences of defects in the plans 
and specifications.” Id., 248 U.S. at 136. The theory is 
that the author of a plan detailed enough to comprise 


43a 


Helene Curtis, which is in turn founded on Spearin. The 
doctrines of superior knowledge and the implied warranty 
of specification are thus different expressions of a single 
principle. Both doctrines ultimately rest upon general 
contract law. If the Government’s incomplete or mislead- 
ing information, or its particular specification of its re- 
quirements, imposes losses, now or later, on the con- 
tractor, then the Government, like any other contractor, 
should not escape responsibility. That responsibility may 
well extend beyond the period of performance of the 
contract; there is no reason to hold that the doctrine of 
superior knowledge makes the Government responsible 
only for hinderances to performance of the contract. 


Finally, as noted earlier, the Government compelled 
appellants to produce Agent Orange under the authority 
granted by the Defense Production Act (DPA), 50 U.S.C. 
app. §§ 2061 et seq. (1964). The DPA requires manu- 
facturers to accept contracts deemed necessary to the 
national defense, and further requires manufacturers to 
give such contracts absolute priority over other obliga- 
tions. 50 U.S.C. app. § 2071(a) (1964). 


The DPA also includes a “hold harmless” provision, 
50 U.S.C. app. § 2157 (1964), that states: 


No person shall be held liable for damages or penal- 
ties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or 
indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, 
or order issued pursuant to this Act... 


The Court of Federal Claims rejected Thompson's argu- 
ment that § 2157 immunizes the manufacturers from lia- 
bility for any eventual use of the defoliant.“ It held that 
the provision should be read narrowly, to apply only to 


4 Interestingly, both Hercules and Thompson alleged in their 
complaints that they had been compelled under the Defense Pro- 
duction Act to manufacture Agent Orange, but only Thompson 
briefed on appeal the question of whether the ‘hold harmless’ clause 
of the Act applied. 


44a 


liability caused by giving the Government its claimed 
priority for production. Thompson argues that even if 
that is so, the provision at least supports the conclusion 
that there is an implied-in-fact obligation on the part of 
the Government to indemnify Thompson for the dam- 
ages incurred. The majority agrees with the trial court's 
reading of the provision, and concludes that the immunity 
—like the common-law doctrine of impossibility of per- 
formance—extends only to contract breaches required by 
the Government’s imposition. From that, the majority 
concludes that the Government is immune from the claims 
of the manufacturers. 


I have three problems with the majority’s reading of 
the DPA: First, the majority’s conclusion is a non 
sequitur: that the Act grants manufacturers immunity 
against third parties on contractual claims does not sug- 
gest, much less require, that the Act grants the Govern- 
ment immunity against manufacturers who suffer other 
losses. 


Second, although justice may be blind, judges should 
take some cognizance of practical realities. A statute 
that gives the Government the authority to force private 
manufacturers to accept contracts and to place such con- 
tracts before their other obligations gives the Government 
substantial operational control over those enterprises. Un- 
der the DPA, the Government in effect can seize the 
company. Congress recognized that reality, and speci- 
fied a hold harmless clause in the Act. 


Third, the majority ignores the language of the statute. 
The majority argues that “if Congress had intended {the 
statute] to impose upon the government the kind of lia- 
bility asserted by Thompson, it would have said so in 
clear and unequivocal terms.” Slip Op. at 38. The Agent 


passage of the Defense Production Act. We should 
expect Congress to have specifically described a liability 


45a 


problem arising from a judiical process of which they 
could have had scant idea. Yet if Congress intended to 
limit the sweeping scope of the hold harmless provision 
to contract performance only, Congress could have writ- 
ten, for example, “No person shall be held liable for 
breach of contractual obligations caused by any act or 
failure to act, etc.” That is not the language of the stat- 
ute. It is difficult to imagine more “clear and unequi- 
vocal” terms than that actually used by Congress: “No 
person shall be held liable for damages or penalties for 
any act or failure to act resulting directly or indirectly 
from compliance with a rule, regulation, or order issued 
pursuant to this Act . . .” 50 U.S.C. app. § 2157 (1964). 
The law as well as the circumstances support the Gov- 
ernment’s liability. 
4. 


Over the past several years the parties to this litigation 
and the courts have expended much effort phrasing the 
issues presented by this case in terms of government con- 
tract law. As the preceding discussion suggests, however, 
the conceptual grammar of government contract law may 
be inadequate to the task. Because the relationship be- 
tween appellants and the Government was never arms- 
length, any discussion of that relationship in doctrinal 
terms that presume freedom of contract is incoherent. 


The twenty million dollars or so at stake in this liti- 
gation may be small potatoes to the Federal Government, 
and we do not know how much the money means to the 
financial health of appellants. But if there ever is a 
case in which we can fairly say, it is not the money, it 
is the principle that matters, this is the case. At the core 
of this litigation is the way in which our nation distributes 
the burden of its military activity among its citizens. In 
wartime, that burden is inevitably distributed unevenly. 
We cleave to the Constitution, however, in spite of un- 
fairness. The Constitution provides an apt analogy— 
the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment is “designed 


should be borne by , 
United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49 (1960). The q 
this cons is whether thi publle dhaaidl anp-fen @he-dem- 
ages that the federal judiciary has attributed to the use of 
Agent Orange in Vietnam, or whether appellants alone 
should bear the burden. 


The Government took away appellants’ control over 
their businesses. By assuming control, the Government 
deprived appellants of their ability to conduct themselves 
prudently, and instead forced appellants to engage in a 
dangerous enterprise, the manufacture of Agent Orange. 
In exposing appellants to risk, the Government incurred 
an obligation to make appellants whole should the danger 
come to pass. The danger of the Government’s use of 
Agent Orange is now clear, or as clear as our law can 
make it. Equally clear is the Government's obligation to 
indemnify appellants. No amount of niggling at doctrine 
can obscure that simple truth. 


I respectfully dissent. 


47a 
IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-496C 
(Filed: Apr 2 1992) 


HERCULES INCORPORATED 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES 


Contracts; Agent Orange; implied-in-fact 
contract terms; Government contractor defense; 
indemnification. 


OPINION 
Yock, Judge. 


This contractual dispute is before the Court on the 
defendant’s motion for summary judgment, filed pursuant 
to USCC Rule 56.’ For the reasons stated herein, the 
defendant’s motion for summary judgment is granted, and 
plaintiff's complaint will be dismissed. 


_ Facts 


Plaintiff, Hercules Incorporated (Hercules), was a 
manufacturer in the mid to late 1960’s of a product 
known as Agent Orange, which was used for military 
purposes by the United States Government as a defoliant 


1 Defendant has, in the alternative, moved to dismiss, pursuant 
to USCC Rule 12. 


48a 

during the Vietnam War. Years later, Vietnam veterans 
and their families, alleging that exposure to Agent Orange 
caused death, injuries, and birth defects, sued all the 
Agent Orange manufacturers, including Hercules. This 
multi-district product liability tort suit was settled before 
trial, In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig. (herein- 
after “Settlement Opinion”), 597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D. 
N.Y. 1984), affd, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. 
denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988), and Hercules was re- 
quired to pay some $18 million of the total settlement 
amount. The instant contract suit was brought by Her- 
cules in an attempt to recover from the United States 
Government the costs it incurred in defending and set- 
tling the suit in the district court. 


The following facts are essentially uncontroverted: 
Agent Orange is a mixture of two phenoxy herbicides, 
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4-D), and 2,4,5-Tri- 
chlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4,5-T) in a 50/50 blend. 
Depending on the process utilized, when 2,4,5-T is pro- 
duced, it may contain varying amounts of 2,3,7,8-Tetra- 
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin), a toxic substance, al- 
though not a key ingredient of either Agent Orange or 
2,4,5-T.? 


As one court noted, “the government and the military 
had a considerable amount of knowledge about 2,4,5-T, 
about dioxin, and about the hazards associated with both.” 
In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig. (hereinafter 
“Agent Orange”), 565 F. Supp. 1263, 1266 (E.D. N.Y. 
1983). This knowledge extended back into the 1950's, 
and the level of knowledge increased rapidly during the 
mid to late 1960’s. Much of the Government’s knowl- 
edge was classified and not shared with the chemical com- 
panies. Id. at 267-68. However, some of the bigger 
chemical companies that were producing Agent Orange 

? While it has not been proven scientifically or legally, the Vietnam 
veterans believed that exposure to Agent Orange caused cancer and 


birth defects, and this was allegedly caused by the dioxin present 
in this defoliant. 


49a 


for the military, including Hercules, did develop a con- 
siderable amount of knowledge about the dangers asso- 
ciated with the production of 2,4,5-T and the dioxin con- 
tained therein during this same time frame. 


Hercules began producing phenoxy herbicides that con- 
tained 2,4,5-T by itself, or in a mixture with 2,4-D in 
1961,° the same year the Government began to use a 
variety of phenoxy herbicides in Southeasi Asia to de- 
foliate trees and plant life to eliminate possible hiding 
places for the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese 
troops.* 


As the Vietnam War progressed, the military needed 
greater amounts of Agent Orange, which Hercules sup- 
plied to the Government through fifteen contracts between 
May 8, 1964, and May 20, 1968. These contracts speci- 
fied the formula for producing Agent Orange, and Her- 
cules, which apparently provided no input to the Govern- 
ment with respect to either developing or modifying these 
specifications, complied with the specifications. In early 
1965, during a meeting called by Dow Chemical Com- 
pany, Hercules was notified of industrial health problems 
associated with the production of 2,4,5-T, and, later that 
year, it modified its process of production to eliminate the 
dioxin contamination. Agent Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 
1269, 1274.° Thereafter, from 1966 through 1970, Her- 


3 Reasor-Hill Corporation, which was purchased by Hercules in 
1961, produced herbicides containing 2,4,5-T or 2,4-D beginning in 
the early 1950’s. 


4The defoliant Agent Orange and Hercules’ commercial herbi- 
cides were of different concentrations and were applied differently. 
Agent Orange contained roughly twice as much 2,4,5-T per gallon 
as the typical Hercules herbicide. Also, the Government used Agent 
Orange undiluted and sprayed at a rate of 3 gallons per acre, as 
compared to the dilution of Hercules’ herbicide at a ratio of 100 
to 1, sprayed at a rate of 1 gallon per acre. 


5 The Government was not invited to that meeting, and there was 
evidence that Dow feared Government intervention into, and control 
of, the entire herbicide industry. Agent Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 
1269. 


50a 


cules’ product contained no measurable dioxin. Id. How- 
ever, the Government mixed the dioxin-free Agent Orange 
produced by Hercules with the dioxin-contaminated Agent 
Orange produced by other manufacturers, and these mix- 
tures were sprayed by the military in the Southeast Asia 
war zone. 


Some ten years later, starting in 1979, Vietnam vet- 
erans, or their estates, began filing negligence and strict 
liability tort actions against the chemical companies that 
produced Agent Orange for the Government. According 
to these plaintiffs, in view of the toxicity of dioxin, ex- 
posure to the Agent Orange that contained dioxin caused 
cancer, miscarriages, and birth defects. These actions 
were consolidated in the Eastern District of New York 
under the heading MDL No. 381. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


On May 7, 1984, the date trial was to begin, the 
parties reached a settlement, and a $180 million settle- 
ment fund was created. Settlement Opinion, 597 F. Supp. 
at 748. The district court judge, weighing the potential 
costs as well as the uncertainties associated with trial for 
both sides, found that the p:oposed settlement was fair, 
reasonable, and adequate. However, he did note that 
plaintiffs had never produced any persuasive evidence 
showing a causal relationship between the exposure to 
small quantities of dioxin found in Agent Orange and the 


> ‘ 
io oa 


5la 


claimed injuries. Id., 597 F. Supp. at 782-95. The dis- 
trict court’s settlement opinion was affirmed, and the 
appeals court noted that it was “essentially a settlement 
at nuisance value,” based on the “grave weaknesses in 
plaintiffs’ case,” since “the weight of present scientific 
evidence does not establish that personnel in Vietnam 
were injured by Agent Orange * * *.” In re “Agent 
Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d 145, 171, 174 (2d 
Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). 


Hercules’ share of the settlement was $18,772,568, 
which it paid into the settlement fund in 1984. Accord- 
ing to Hercules, it also spent over $6 million in legal fees 
during the Agent Orange litigation. 


Nearly 300 plaintiffs had previously opted out of the 
class action suit, and thus were not bound by the May, 
1984 settlement. Hercules and other Agent Orange man- 
ufacturers successfully moved for summary judgment 
against these remaining plaintiffs. In re “Agent Orange” 
Prod. Liab. Litig. (hereinafter “Opt-out Opinion’), 611 
F. Supp. 1223 (E.D. N.Y. 1985), aff'd, 818 F.2d 187 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 
The district court judge found that (1) plaintiffs failed to 
present credible evidence as to causation, and that (2) 
the plaintiffs’ claims were barred by the Government con- 
tractor defense.* Jd., 611 F. Supp. at 1229, 1258-63. 
The appeals court affirmed, based upon the Government 
contractor defense, and also agreed that “the weight of 
present scientific evidence does not establish that Agent 
Orange injured personnel in Vietnam * * *.” In re 
“Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d 187, 190 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 


The plaintiff filed its complaint with this Court on 
June 8, 1990. In this suit, plaintiff seeks contractual in- 


. ©The court also found that no individual plaintiff could prove 
which defendant chemical company had manufactured the Agent 


Orange to which he allegedly had been exposed. 


52a 


demnification from the Government of the amounts plain- 
tiff paid in settlement of the veterans’ class action suit, 
legal fees, expenses, and costs in connection with defend- 
ing all of the Agent Orange suits brought against it and 
“all other financial and consequential damages caused by 
the defendant’s breach of its contractual warranties and 
duties.” In response, the Government filed a motion for 
summary judgment on January 8, 1991, seeking dismissal 
of the plaintiff's contract suit as a matter of law. The 
plaintiff opposes the motion and asserts that the matter 
should move forward to trial. 


Discussion 


“Summary judgment is appropriate when there are no 
genuine issues of material fact in dispute and the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” GAF 
Corp. v. United States, 91 Cl. Ct. 490, 496 (1990), 
aff'd, 932 F.2d 947 (Fed. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 117 
L. Ed. 2d 131 (1992). The substantive law involved in 
the suit determines which facts are material, and only 
disputes over material facts, those which might affect 
the outcome of the suit under the governing law, may 
properly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Ander- 
son v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). 
Disputes over facts that are not relevant under the con- 
trolling law will not prevent the entry of summary judg- 
ment. Id. The moving party, in this case the defendant, 
has the burden of establishing that there are no genuine 
issues of material fact, Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 
U.S. 317, 321 (1986), and that it is entitled to judgment 
as a matter of law. GAF Corp., 19 Cl. Ct. at 496. For 
the following reasons, this Court finds that the Govern- 
ment has met its burden of establishing that there are no 
genuine material issues of fact in dispute and that it is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 


In its complaint, the plaintiff has alleged that it is 
entitled to contractual indemnification from the Govern- 


53a 


ment under four counts. All four of the counts are based 
on alleged breaches of implied-in-fact contract obligations. 
Plaintiff submits that it produced Agent Orange in the 
1960’s under written contracts with the Government that 
contained detailed design specifications that were devel- 
oped solely by the Government. It contends further that 
it had no part in the development of the specifications, 
that it manufactured the Agent Orange to the exact speci- 
fications ordered by the Government, and that it had 
little, if any, knowledge about the potential hazards that 
were inherent in the product as produced and used by 
the Go ernment. Given these factual circumstances, the 
plaintifi argues that it is entitled to indemnification in 
contract for the losses it incurred in defending against and 
settling the tort suits brought by the Vietnam veterans 
and their families against the manufacturers of Agent 
Orange. Hercules believes it is only equitable and fair 
that the Government assume the obligation and be allo- 
cated these risks because it ordered the production of 
| Agent Orange to its own specifications, completely con- 
trolled the use (or misuse) of the product, and never 
shared any information about potential hazards in the 
product with the manufacturer. In short, if anyone was 
negligent here, it was the Government and the financial 
liability should, therefore, be borne by it and not by the 
innocent manufacturers of Agent Orange. The plaintiff, 
therefore, contends that it is entitled to be indemnified 
by the Government for the costs it incurred under any one 
of four implied-in-fact contractual theories. 


The plaintiff's first theory involves the matter of the 
Government’s alleged superior knowledge. Here, the plain- 
tiff asserts that there was an implied-in-fact obligation 
on the part of the Government to reveal its superior 
knowledge concerning the unprecedented military use of 
Agent Orange by the Government so as to not increase 
the plaintiff's cost of performance under the contract. 


The second theory alleged is a straight forward duty 
on the part of the Government “to exercise good faith 


Sa 


and not increase Hercules costs by using Agent Orange 
in Southeast Asia in an unprecedented military manner 
that failed to avoid potential health risks, including by 
not taking adequate precautions and safeguards or pro- 
viding * * * adequate warnings * * *.” (Emphasis 
added. ) 


The third theory alleged by the plaintiff would place 
a duty on the Government to use the plaintiffs product 
after production in a way that would avoid potential 
health risks and thus avoid harming the plaintiff. This 
is the so-called reverse warranty obligation on the part 
of the Government. 


Fourth and finally, the plaintiff alleges a warranty of 
specification theory. This theory is based upon an alleged 
Governmental breach of its implied-in-fact contractual 
obligation “to establish specifications and requirements for 
Agent Orange sufficient to make Agent Orange adequate 
and suitable for the unprecedented intended and actual 
military use to which it was put in Southeast Asia * * *.” 


The defendant, for its part, opposes each one of the 
plaintiffs four breach of implied-in-fact contract argu- 
ments on factual as well as legal grounds. In addition, 
the defendant asserts that the rationale surrounding the 
Government contractor defense supplies an independent 
legal basis for finding in its favor. Finally, although not 
pressed by the Government, since the plaintiff's contrac- 
tual theories are all based on the concept of contractual 
indemnification, that matter also will be discussed in the 
concluding section of this opinion. 


After full consideration of the parties’ briefs and oral 
arguments, it is evident to the Court that only the plain- 
tiffs fourth claim regarding the warranty of specification 
has any potential vitality. The first three claims bear 
superficial resemblance to viable implied-in-fact contract 
theories, but, upon closer inspection, they do not meet 
the requirements established in the appropriate preceden- 


55a 


tial case law. However, in the interests of completeness, 
this Court will discuss each of the plaintiff's four contrac- 
tual claims and defendant’s responses to them. 


A. Plaintiff's Implied-In-Fact Contract Claims. 
1. The first three claims. 


There is a line of cases which allows Government 
contractors to recover from the Government the unex- 
pected increased costs of performance of a contract if the 
Government, at the time the contract was formed, had 
superior knowledge regarding difficulties in production 
which were not apparent and were not otherwise known 
by the contractor. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. United 
States, 228 Ct. Cl. 220, 654 F.2d 75 (1981); Hardeman- 
Monier-Hutcherson v. United States, 198 Ct. Cl. 472, 
458 F.2d 1364 (1972); J.A. Jones Constr. Co. v. United 
States, 182 Ct. Cl. 615, 390 F.2d 886 (1968); Helene 
Curtis Indus., Inc. v. United States, 160 Ct. Cl. 437, 312 
F.2d 774 (1963); J.F. Shea Co. v. United States, 4 Cl. 
Ct. 46 (1983). 


From this precedent, the plaintiff argues that the Gov- 
ernment is liable to the manufacturers of Agent Orange 
for their costs in defending and settling the suits brought 
against them by Vietnam veterans. This is because the 
Government allegedly knew more about the hazards of 
dioxin contained in the Agent Orange than did the her- 
bicide manufacturers, and the Government breached its 
duty (contractual obligation) to reveal this superior 
knowledge to the plaintiff. 


The defendant counters that the plaintiff and its prede- 
cessor were experienced manufacturers of 2,4,5-T, and 
they continued to manufacture 2,4,5-T commercial prod- 
ucts the entire time the plaintiff was supplying Agent 
Orange to the United States. Also, they complied with 
the general reporting and registration requirements of the 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, 7 


56a 


U.S.C. §§ 135 et seq. (1964) (FIFRA).” In view of 
this, the Government could reasonably assume that the 
plaintiff had tested its products as required by FIFRA 
and would be aware of potential hazards associated with 
2,4,5-T. 


While the determination of how much knowledge both 
the plaintiff and the Government had about the hazards 
of dioxin and Agent Orange is fact-intensive and not suit- 
able for summary judgment, this Court believes it is not 
necessary to reach a decision on this factual issue. In 
analyzing these cases, it is clear to this Court that the 
doctrine of superior knowledge covers only unexpected 
costs in the performance of the contract. None of the 
cases cited by the plaintiff involving the doctrine of su- 
perior knowledge extend the doctrine beyond the produc- 
tion of the item contracted for, be it disinfectant powder 
(Helene Curtis) or the construction of a dock in Aus- 
tralia (Hardeman—Monier—Hutcherson. In all of the 
cases cited above, the Government knew about some non- 
obvious obstacle that anyone would encounter in trying 
to produce the contracted-for item. For example, in 
Helene Curtis, it was a new substance that needed grind- 
ing in order to mix properly into the disinfectant powder, 
and, in Hardeman—Monier—Hutcherson, it was severe 
weather conditions and water currents that made the dock 
much more difficult to construct. 


The common thread is that, in all of these cases, the 
contractor had to spend more time or money on produc- 
tion than it anticipated when entering into the contract 
with the Government because of latent difficulties in the 


7In addition to the general reporting and registration require- 
ments imposed by FIFRA, 7 U.S.C, §135a, the act also requires 
manufacturers to test products prior to marketing them. Spe- 
cifically, 7 C.F.R. § 162.106 (1949) requires that the manufacturer 
have the product thoroughly tested by experimenters, and if it is 
“likely to cause injury to human beings, or desirable plants or 
animals, ite limitations from these standpoints should be determined 
and adequate cautions placed on the label.” 


57a 


manufacturing or construction process. Also, the Gov- 
ernment, at the time of contract formation, had knowl- 
edge of the latent problems that would raise performance 
costs and did not divulge this knowledge to the contrac- 
tors. Thus, citing to Helene Curtis, the United States 
Court of Claims in American Ship Bldg. Co., 228 Ct. Cl. 
at 225, 654 F.2d at 79, stated that the four factors of 
the superior knowledge doctrine were: 


[W]here (1) a contractor undertakes to perform 
without vital knowledge of a fact that affects per- 
formance costs or duration, (2) the government was 
aware the contractor had no knowledge of and had 
no reason to obtain such information, (3) any con- 
tract specification supplied misled the contractor, or 
did not put it on notice to inquire, and (4) the gov- 
ernment failed to provide the relevant information. 


To satisfy the requirements of the doctrine, the vital 
knowledge, which the Government possesses and the con- 
tractor does not, must be a fact that affects performance 
costs or duration of perjormance. In the case at hand, 
plaintiff does not claim that it had any unforseen prob- 
lems in the manufacture of the Agent Orange which 
increased the costs of production or caused a delay in 
performance. Thus, the superior knowledge doctrine does 
not apply to plaintiff's claim and does not entitle it to 
recover costs that were not connected to actual perform- 
ance under the contract, which was for the manufacture 
of the Agent Orange to the detailed Government specifi- 
cations. See generally, Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc. 858 
F.2d 712, 717-18 (Fed. Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 491 
U.S. 904 (1989). Prior case precedent simply does not 
allow the expansion of the doctrine of superior knowledge 
to be extended as far as the plaintiff apparently wants it 
to stretch. The time frame that the courts have found 
appropriate to review has always been the period of per- 
formance only—not some indefinite time stretching well 
into the future. 


58a 


In its second and closely related theory, the plaintiff 
argues that, under basic contract principles, the Govern- 
ment had a duty to act in good faith and not increase the 
plaintiff's contract costs. Petrofsky v. United States, 222 
Ct. Cl. 450, 616 F.2d 494 (1980), cert. denied, 450 
U.S. 968 (1981); Commerce Int'l Co. v. United States, 
167 Ct. Cl. 529, 338 F.2d 81 (1964). According to 
the plaintiff, the defendant breached this duty by failing 
to use Agent Orange in a safe manner and avoid poten- 
tial health risks because the Government did not provide 
identification of the defoliant’s active ingredients or give 
warnings concerning its proper use. Based on the Gov- 
ernment’s alleged failure to carry out these measures, 
plaintiff claims it is therefore entitled to reimbursement 
for the costs of the Agent Orange litigation as increased 
costs of performance. 


The Government submits that there was no increase in 
the cost of performance since plaintiff fully performed the 
supply contracts at the agreed price. Also, the defendant 
avers there was no defect in the specification which could 
give rise to a claim of this type. 


The Court finds that the Government has not breached 
its duty to act in good faith not to increase the cost of 
performance for basically the same reasons as discussed 
in the superior knowledge section above. This is another 
performance-related doctrine that will not be extended 
as a matter of law to assigning liability to a contracting 
party for matters that occur at some distant point in the 
future. The shoe simply does not fit. It is true that this 
Court has held that it is conceivable that third-party 
liabilities could be considered costs of performance at the 
time of entering the contracts. Johns-Manville Corp. v. 
United States, 13 Cl. Ct. 72, 161 (1987), vacated on 
jurisdictional grounds, 855 F.2d 1571 (Fed. Cir. 1988). 
However, we agree that: 


Judicial recognition has not been extended to the no- 
tion that a supply item produced according to speci- 


59a 


fications in a satisfactory manner, yet causing dam- 
ages due to its use, can be the basis of a claim to 
recover damages as a cost of performance. , 


GAF Corp., 19 Cl. Ct. at 503. With this in mind, the 
Court will not further extend the outer limits of the 
plaintiff's good faith costs of performance implied-in-fact 
contract theory. 


In its third theory, the plaintiff has likewise argued 
that the Government had a duty to exercise due care in 
using the plaintiff's product in order to avoid harming 
the plaintiff. According to the plaintiff, the Government 
breached this duty by mixing plaintiff's allegedly dioxin- 
free product with the dioxin-contaminated products of 
other manufacturers. Also, plaintiff avers that the Gov- 
ernment again breached this duty by failing to provide 
adequate warning labels about the hazards of Agent 
Orange and forbidding the plaintiff to do so. Thus, 
plaintiff argues that, by mixing plaintiff's product with 
contaminated products and prohibiting warning labels, the 
Government subjected plaintiff to potential liability that 
did not exist previously. 


As an aside, it is noted that the plaintiff continually 
refers to the Government as having various “duties” 
running to the plaintiff. It should also be noted in this 
connection that the Court has contract jurisdiction, and 
the concept of “duty” arises primarily in tort analysis. 
The Court, however, does not have jurisdiction over mat- 
ters sounding in tort. 28 U.S.C. § 1491(a)(1) (1988). 
Aetna Casualty and Sur. Co. v. United States, 228 Ct. Cl. 
146, 655 F.2d 1047 (1981). Although the plaintiff's 
arguments come perilously close to a jurisdictional block, 
the plaintiff's claims will be viewed as allegations of con- 
tractual obligations on the part of the Government to 
perform, or refrain from performing, in a certain way. 


As the defendant has pointed out, the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lopez re- 
jected a claim similar to the plaintiff's, calling it “bizarre 


60a 


and novel.” As _ the court in Lopez has stated: “an im- 
plied warranty relating to the use by the buyer after de- 
livery, and warranting it would not harm the seller is 
novel, and no reason is shown why anyone could have so 
supposed at the date of sale by any inference “om the 
circumstances.” Jd., 858 F.2d at 716. Defendant deems 
this a reverse warranty claim, and this seems an accurate 
portrayal. 


Looking to the guidance of the Federal Circuit in 
Lopez, it is clear that this reverse warranty theory must 
be considered to be a contract implied-in-fact, if it exists 
at all. To establish a contract implied-in-fact, there must 
be factual circumstances which indicate that the parties 
have actually come to a meeting of the minds and taken 
upon themselves corresponding obligations and liabilities. 
Hirschmann vy. United States, 11 Cl. Ct. 338, 342 
(1986). Such a factual inference is not supported by 
any of the circumstances surrounding the sale of the 
Agent Orange by plaintiff to the Government. 


While plaintiff may believe it is fairer to allocate the 
liability to the user of the product, this type of reverse 
warranty, based on fairness of risk allocation, is cogniza- 
ble only as a quasi-contract implied-at-law, Santisteven v. 
Dow Chem. Co., 506 F.2d 1216, 1219 (9th Cir. 1974). 
This Court is without jurisdiction to consider implied-in- 
law contracts. United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206, 
218 (1983); Lopez, 858 F.2d at 714-15; Hirschmann, 
11 CL. Ct. at 342. 


2. The plaintiff's warranty of specification claim. 


In United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132, 136-37 
(1918), the Supreme Court held that the inclusion of 


6la 


warranty of specification has been recognized in many 
cases since Spearin. See e.g., Ordnance Research, Inc. v. 
United States, 221 Ct. Cl. 641, 609 F.2d 462 (1979); 
Hol-Gar Mfg. Corp. v. United States, 175 Ct. Cl. 518, 
360 F.2d 634 (1966); Blount Bros. Corp. v. United 
States, 872 F.2d 1003 (Fed. Cir. 1989). 


In Spearin, the defect became apparent due to dam- 
age that occurred during the performance of the contract. 
Spearin, 248 U.S. at 134-35. However, the warranty of 
specification is not limited to the time of performance, 
according to the holding in Poorvu v. United States, 190 
Ct. Cl. 640, 420 F.2d 993 (1970). In that case, the 
defect in the specified construction method did not begin 
to manifest itself until some four years after the comple- 
tion of the building, and the United States Court of 
Claims determined that the Spearin warranty of specifica- 
tion still operated to place the liability for the damage on 
the Government, which had dictated the construction 
specifications. Poorvu, 190 Ct. Cl. at 651, 420 F.2d at 
1000. 


Plaintiff argues that an implied-in-fact warranty of spe- 
cification arose in this case because the Government sup- 
plied detailed specifications for Agent Orange to Hercules, 
and the plaintiff manufactured the defoliant in accord- 
ance with these detailed specifications. The warranty of 
specification means that the Government impliedly war- 
ranted that the item made to the precise specification 
would be safe and free from defects. Plaintiff claims that 
the Government breached this warranty because the plain- 
tiff was subjected to tort suits by third parties who 
claimed they were injured by the Agent Orange the 
plaintiff manufactured. 


The Government contends that plaintiffs claim is 
nearly identical to claims made by the asbestos mane- 
facturers that, based on contract theories, attempted to 
recover from the United States costs they incurred as a 
result of suits brought by shipyard workers who were 


62a 


exposed to asbestos dust from using insulating products. 
The asbestos manufacturers made these products in ac- 
cordance with military specifications and sold them to the 
United States during the World War II era and thereafter. 
Accordingly, the defendant relies on two asbestos-related 
cases, Lopez and GAF Corp., for its defensive position. 
The Government contends that these cases bar the plain- 
tiffs warranty of specification claim on the grounds that 
the factual circumstances of this case do not support 
finding an implied-in-fact agreement, a meeting of the 
minds, and this Court lacks jurisdiction over contracts 
that are implied at law. Lopez, 858 F.2d at 714-15; GAF 
Corp., 932 F.2d at 950. 


For a warranty to be implied in fact, the plaintiff must 
demonstrate that “the circumstances strongly supported 
a factual inference that a warranty was implied.” Lopez, 
858 F.2d at 715. Such an inference arises only when the 
Government specifications told the contractor “just how 
to do the job”, Jd. at 716, and not when they merely 
specified some certain characteristic in the contracted-for 
product. GAF Corp., 932 F.2d at 950. With respect to 
the claims of breach of warranty of specification, the 
Court agrees with the plaintiff that the underlying bases 
of the decisions in Lopez and GAF Corp. were that the 
asbestos companies knew about the dangers of their prod- 
ucts before entering into the contracts with the Govern- 
ment and that the products manufactured under the Gov- 
ernment contracts did not differ materially from those 
already sold commercially. Thus, there was no basis for 
finding a factual inference that the specifications consti- 
tuted an “extensive Government intrusion into the as- 
bestos production process which might suggest that the 
Government intended to warrant the product's safety.” 
GAF Corp., 932 F.2d at 950. 


Plaintiff argues that, in this case, there exists the ex- 


634 


tiff alleges that it is unlike the asbestos manufacturers 
because it knew less than the Government did about the 
defoliant, and Agent Orange differed materially from the 
products plaintiff sold commercially. 


However, even assuming that a warranty of specifica- 
iion arose from the Government’s detailed specifications 
for Agent Orange, there must be more than the mere 
existence of a warranty to entitle the plaintiff to recover 
against the Government. Plaintiff must also show that 
this warranty was breached by the Government and that 
this breach caused plaintiff to suffer the type of damages 
recoverable in contract. It is on these requirements, 
breach and contract damages, that the plaintiff has failed 
to state a case that can withstand the Government’s sum- 
mary judgment motion. 


Turning again to Spearin and its progeny, the implied 
warranty of specification was breached when the product, 
made in accordance with the detailed specification created 
by the Government, was inadequate, and the inadequacy 
clearly caused some damage. In Spearin, the sewer was 
inadequate due to a problem with a blocked sewer pipe 
in the existing system; the new pipe broke, and the 
sewer overflowed and damaged the dry dock that the 
contractor was building for the Government. /d., 248 
U.S. at 134. In Poorvu, the parking area for a building 
was constructed with inadequate support below it, in 
accordance with the Government's specifications. This 
caused the parking area to settle and put pressure on 
water pipes that were located beneath it. These pipes 
broke, and the water spilling from them saturated the 
ground under the building, which then weakened the sup- 
port under the building, causing it to settle severely into 
the ground. /d., 190 Ct. Cl. at 646-47, 420 F.2d at 997. 


In these cases, it is clear that the specification was 


64a 


termining first, whether or not some damage had occurred, 
and second, whether or not the specification written by 
the Government was defective. If these two circumstances 
were present, the courts then determined which party 
should bear the risk of the faulty specification causing 
the damage. The implied warranty of specification is 
the method by which the court can allocate the risk of the 
faulty specification to the Government, which created the 
specification, rather than to the contractor, who actually 
built the defective item that caused the damage. See JOHN 
C. Crpinic, Jr. & RALPH C. NASH, JR., ADMINISTRATION 
OF GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS 199-202 (2d ed. 1985). 
As stated in Spearin, 248 U.S. at 136, “if the contractor 
is bound -to build according to plans and specifications 
prepared by the owner, the contractor will not be re- 
sponsible for the consequences of defects in the plans 
and specifications.” Also, the court held in Poorvu that 
“the government must answer for damage incurred be- 
cause of inadequate plans it has furnished.” J/d., 190 
Ct. Cl. at 651, 420 F.2d at 1000. 


In this case, plaintiff asserts that the Government de- 
signed faulty specifications for Agent Orange because 
dioxin contaminated the specified defoliant product. The 
damage plaintiff claims as a result of the faulty specifica- 
tion is, however, the settlement costs it incurred when 
veterans claimed they were injured by the dioxin in the 
Agent Orange used for military purposes in Vietnam. 
Thus, the plaintiff claims that the Government breached 
the warranty by subjecting the chemical manufacturer 
to tort liability running to third parties who were injured 
by the Government’s use of the Agent Orange manu- 
factured by the plaintiff. However, for several reasons, 
the plaintiff cannot prove that it was actually subjected 
to tort liability by third parties because of its manufac- 
ture of Agent Orange for the Government’s military use. 
First, dioxin has never been scientifically proven to cause 
the injuries that the veterans alleged, and second, the 
plaintiff was protected from liability to the veterans in 


65a 


any event under the Government contractor defense, 
which is discussed later in this opinion. Thus, to the 
extent that the warranty of specification does exist in this 
case, there has been no breach of the implied warranty 
of specification because the alleged defect in the herbicide 
has never been proven, and the plaintiff would not have 
been liable to third parties even if the specifications had 
been defective due to the Government contractor defense. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


As for damages arising from contract breaches, it is 
axiomatic that such damages are limited to those that 
were reasonably foreseeable at the time the parties formed 
the contract. Hadley v. Baxendale, 9 Ex. 341, 156 Eng. 
Rep. 145 (1854). In Northern Helex Co. v. United 
States, 207 Ct. Cl. 862, 888, 524 F.2d 707, 721 (1975), 
cert. denied, 429 U.S. 866 (1976), the court reviewed 
the rules governing damages for breach of contract and 


66a 


concluded that the authorities support denial of claims 
where “costs are too remote, speculative, and consequen- 
tial to be compensable as damages.” In this case, it is 
apparent that the costs (damages) plaintiff incurred by 
defending and settling a lawsuit brought by veterans, who 
were never able to prove that the plaintiff's product in- 
jured them, were not reasonably foreseeable at the time 
the contract was formed between the Government and the 
plaintiff. 


Plaintiff urges that there is a strong judicial policy 
favoring settlements and the fact that it settled the under- 
lying case, rather than litigating the issue of its liability 
to the veterans, should not count against plaintiff in its 
attempt to recover from the Government for breach of 
warranty. It is true that settlements are encouraged. 
See e.g., Ahern v. Central Pac. Freight Lines, 846 F.2d 
47, 48 (9th Cir. 1988); Janneh v. GAF Corp., 887 F.2d 
432, 435 (2d Cir. 1989). However, the cases plaintiff 
cites regarding the recovery of settlements paid to third 
parties involve indemnification agreements, either implied- 
in-fact or implied at law. Travelers Ins. Co. v. United 
States, 493 F.2d 881 (3d Cir. 1974); Parfait v. Jahncke 
Serv., Inc., 484 F.2d 296 (Sth Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 
415 U.S. 957 (1974). As noted earlier, this Court does 
not have jurisdiction over contracts implied at law. United 
States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. at 218. As for an implied- 
in-fact contract, the factual circumstances do not support 
one because it simply was not foreseeable to the parties 
that the Agent Orange class action settlement would come 
to pass more than a decade after the contracts to supply 
the defoliant were formed. The facts may support an 
implied warranty of specifications, but they cannot be 
stretched so far as to support the theory that the parties 
came to a meeting of the minds that there would be an 
indemnification agreement between them if the implied 
warranty:of specification was: alleged, ‘but’ never proven, 
to be violated. 


tae OP ee Le gn- eae 8 > ea 


67a 


As for plaintiffs claim of attorney fees, the court in 
Kania v. United States, 227 Ct. Cl. 458, 467, 650 F.2d 
264, 269, cert. denied, 454 U.S. 895 (1981), noted that 
“jurisdiction to award counsel fees and other litigation 
expenses as an element of breach damages would be ex- 
tremely dubious. It is the kind of consequential damages 
not normally awarded in contract breach cases.” Also see 
Alyeska Pipeline Serv. Co. v. Wilderness Soc’y, 421 USS. 
240 (1975). Overall, “[cJourts do not, in awarding 
breach damages, follow through the remote indirect con- 
sequences of the breach as distinguished from those di- 
rectly in contemplation when the contract was made.” 
Kania, 227 Ct. Cl. at 467, 650 F.2d at 269. Thus, plain- 
tiff cannot support a contention that it suffered compen- 
sable damages to the amount of its legal fees and costs 
as a result of the Government’s alleged breach of the 
implied warranty of specification. 


Finally, the question remains as to whether plaintiff 
could ever have been found liable to third parties, even if 
causation between Agent Orange and veterans’ injuries 
had been proven. The Government contractor defense 
would certainly present a serious obstacle to a manu- 
facturer’s liability to military service personnel for defects 
in products made to Government specifications for mili- 
tary applications. See Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 
487 U.S. 500 (1988); Stencel Aero Eng’g Corp. v. United 
States, 431 U.S. 666 (1977); and Feres v. United States, 
340 U.S. 135 (1950). The Government contractor de- 
fense will be discussed more fully in a later section of 
this opinion, but its impact on any liability the plaintiff 
would have to third parties must be noted at this junc- 
ture. The plaintiff asserts, in its arguments involving 
superior knowledge, that it manufactured the product to 
detailed specifications and lacked the knowledge it alleges 
the Government had regarding the hazards of Agent 
Orange. If this is true, then the plaintiff would avoid 
liability to third parties based on the Government con- 
tractor defense. Boyle, 487 U.S. at 512. The plaintiff had 


68a 


an absolute defense. Plaintiff was well aware of this 
strong defense before it agreed to settle the claims of the 
veterans because, in 1983, it was granted summary judg- 
ment in its favor on the basis of the Government con- 
tractor defense, Agent Orange, 565 F.Supp. at 1275, 
even though plaintiff was later brought back into the case. 
Thus, in addition to the reasons already discussed above, 
there was no breach of the warranty of specification based 
on the manufacturer’s tort liability to third parties sup- 
posedly injured by the product because the manufacturer, 
under the circumstances alleged, was protected from lia- 
bility by the Government contractor defense. 


After consideration of all of the plaintiff's contractual 
arguments, it is apparent that most of the theories plain- 
tiff advanced do not apply to hold the Government liable 
for the amount paid in connection with the settlement 
of the class action suit. The warranty of specification 
might apply to the Government based on the detailed 
specification for the production of Agent Orange. How- 
ever, plaintiff has failed to come forth with the required 
quantum of proof regarding the breach of this warranty 
and the contract damages flowing therefrom. Thus, the 
moving party is entitled to summary judgment because 
the nonmoving party, the plaintiff, has “failed to make 
a sufficient showing on an essential element of [its] case 
with respect to which [it] has the burden of proof.” 
Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. at 323. 


B. The Government Contractor Defense 


Even if this Court is in error when it finds no breach 
and no damages as a matter of law in this case, the 
plaintiff would still not be able to recover in this action 
because of the Government contractor defense and the 
law in regard to contract indemnification. Defendant 
alleges that, regardless of the resolution of the contractual 
issues in this matter, the Government contractor defense 
provides a separate and independent basis for a denial of 


“en a. “o> ' 


Pare Se. eae Se 


SS aes Se eae ee 


69a 


plaintiff's claims. Based on the policies underlying the 
Government contractor defense, the defendant states that 
the plaintiff cannot be allowed to recover indirectly 
through this contract suit for reimbursement what the 
veterans could not recover directly against the Govern- 
ment under the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. 
§ 2671-80 (1988) (FTCA), i.e., tort damages from the 
Government payable to military personnel for injuries 
allegedly sustained while serving on active duty. 


Plaintiff counters that the Government contractor de- 
fense was not settled law at the time of the settlement 
with the veterans in the class action suit, so there was 
the possibility that it might have been held liable to the 
veterans for billions of dollars. Thus, their decision to 
settle was very reasonable in the face of the possibility 
of massive liability. Also, plaintiff argues that the Gov- 
ernment, in a brief it filed, argued against the application 
of the Government contractor defense to shield the herbi- 
cide manufacturers from liability, and thus it is estopped 
from urging its application here. 


While the Government contractor defense is certainly 
important to the resolution of the issues in this case, 
both parties have neglected to consider crucial matters 
in support of their respective arguments. What is pri- 
marily at issue in this case is the Government's liability 
to the plaintiff under these circumstances, not just the 
plaintiff's liability to the veterans. Fortunately, this issue 
has already been considered by the Supreme Court in 
Stencel, and this Court will follow its clear guidance in 
the instant case. 


In Stencel, a serviceman, who was injured when the ejec- 
tion system of his fighter aircraft malfunctioned, brought a 
product liability damage action against the manufacturer, 
Stencel, and the United States. Stencel cross-claimed 
against the Government for indemnity claiming that any 
malfunction in the system was due to faulty Government 
specifications and components. Based on the earlier Feres 


7a 


case, the Supreme Court upheld the district court’s grant 
of summary judgment for both the Government and 
Stencel against the serviceman and also upheld the dis- 
missal of Stencel’s cross-claim against the Government. 


In the Feres case, the Supreme Court held that an on- 
duty serviceman who is injured due to the negligence of 
Government officials may not recover against the United 
States under the FTCA. Id., 340 U.S. at 146. The 
Supreme Court in Stencel reviewed the Feres decision and 
concluded that it rested on three factors. First, the Su- 
preme Court found that the relationship between the 
Government and its military personnel is distinctively 
federal in character, and, thus, it would not make sense 
to have the liability of the Government to an injured 
serviceman depend on the law of the place where the 
injury occurred. Second, the Supreme Court determined 
that the statutory compensation scheme, which provides 
pensions and medical services to injured servicemen with- 
out regard to any negligence by the Government, stands 
as a legal substitute for allowing the Government to be 
sued in tort for negligence. Third and finally, the Su- 
preme Court concluded that military discipline and the 
relationship between a soldier and his superiors, which 
has no counterpart in civilian affairs, might be distorted 
by the imposition of tort liability. Stencel, 431 U.S. at 
671-72. 


In the case of the contractor suing the Government, 
the Supreme Court determined that the same factors 
were relevant and that it must “consider the impact of 
these factors where, as here, the suit against the Govern- 
ment is not brought by the serviceman himself, but by a 
third party seeking indemnity for any damages it may be 
required to pay the serviceman.” Id., 431 U.S. at 672. 
The first factor, the application of federal rather than state 
law, and the third factor, the effect of tort liability on mil- 
itary discipline, operated with equal force in suits by the 
serviceman and suits by the contractor. Id., 431 U.S. at 
672-73. The second factor, the existence of the military 


Tila 


compensation scheme, the Supreme Court found more 
difficult to apply in the case of the contractor suing to 
recover funds it had paid the serviceman. However, - it 
concluded that the compensation scheme served the dual 
purpose of providing an efficient remedy for the injured 
serviceman and also protected the Government through 
its limitation of liability provisions which provide an 
upper limit on the Government’s liability for service- 
connected injuries. /d., 431 U.S. at 673. Thus, in Stencel, 
431 U.S. at 673, the Supreme Court determined that: 


To permit petitioner’s claim would circumvent this 
limitation, thereby frustrating one of the essential 
features of the Veterans’ Benefits Act. As we stated 
in a somewhat different context concerning the Tort 
Claims Act: “To permit [petitioner] to proceed... 
here would be to judicially admit at the back door 
that which has been legislatively turned away at the 
front door. We do not believe that the [Federal Tort 
Claims] Act permits such a result.” [Citations 
omitted, alterations and omissions in original. ] 


Therefore, the contractor was not allowed to recover 
from the Government where the underlying claim for 
which the contractor was seeking indemnity was made by 
an injured serviceman. In conclusion, the Court observed 
that “[s]ince the relationship between the United States 
and [the contractor] is based on a commercial contract, 
there is no basis for a claim of unfairness in this result.” 
Id., 431 U.S. at 674. 


The situation analyzed in Stencel, a contractor seeking 
indemnity from the United States for claims made by an 
injured serviceman, is analogous to plaintiff's claim in 
this case. Plaintiff in this action is seeking repayment 
from the Government of amounts it paid to injured mili- 
tary service personnel based on the Government's pro- 
of specifications for the product which allegedly 
the military service personnel. While in its later 
briefs plaintiff has shied away from its request for con- 


if 


72a 


tractual indemnification, perhaps to avoid the application 
of the Stencel case, it is clear that indemnity is what 
plaintiff seeks regardless of the title plaintiff applies to it. 
BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY 769 (6th ed. 1990) defines 
indemnity as “reimbursement.” Reimbursement of the 
amounts it paid in settlement and legal fees is what plain- 
tiff requests here, and, thus, the strictures of the Stencel 
case apply and foreclose plaintiff's claim that the Gov- 
ernment must reimburse it for its costs and fees in con- 
nection with the Agent Orange litigation. This suit by 
the plaintiff is a “back door” attempt to recover from 
the Government what the Feres doctrine blocked at the 
front door; that is, damages for injuries suffered by serv- 
icepersons- in the line of duty. Accordingly, the rationale 
of Stencel requires this Court to deny the plaintiff's claim. 


The reasoning of Feres and Stencel was later amplified 
and extended by the Supreme Court in Boyle v. United 
Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988), which in- 
volved an action between private parties but implicated 
the Federal Government’s interests. In Boyle, a United 
States Marine co-pilot was killed when his helicopter 
crashed into the water during a training exercise. Al- 
though the Marine survived the impact, he was unable to 
escape from the submerged helicopter and drowned. 
Based on state tort law, the Marine co-pilot’s estate sued 
the Government contractor that built the helicopter, 
claiming that the escape hatch was designed negligently 
because it opened outwards and was unusable when the 
helicopter was under water, due to the pressure of the 
water outside the submerged craft. The Government con- 
tractor (United Technologies) contended that it made the 
escape hatch to the precise specifications required by its 
contract with the Government and therefore was not li- 
able under state tort law. 


Even though it was a state law tort suit between pri- 
vate parties, the Supreme Court found that “the Federal 
Government’s interest in the procurement of equipment 


73a 


is implicated by suits such as the present one—even 
though the dispute is one between private parties.” Id., 
487 U.S. at 506. Thus, federal law could possibly apply. 
However, for federal law to displace state tort law, there 
must be a significant conflict between a federal policy and 
the operation of the state tort law. Id., 487 U.S. at 507. 
Looking at the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 2671-80 (1988) (FTCA), the Supreme Court iden- 
tified a provision that suggested the outlines of a sig- 
nificant conflict between federal interests and state tort 
law in the area of Government procurement. While the 
FTCA authorized suits against the Government for harm 
caused by the negligent or wrongful conduct of Govern- 
ment employees in certain circumstances, it specifically 
excepted from consent to suit any claims based on the 
exercise of a discretionary function by a federal agency 
or employee, 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) (1988). Boyle, 487 
U.S. at 511. The Court determined that: 


[T]he selection of the appropriate design for military 
equipment to be used by our Armed Forces is as- 
suredly a discretionary function within the meaning 
of this provision. If often involves not merely en- 
gineering analysis but judgment as to the balancing 
of many technical, military, and even social consid- 
erations, including specifically the trade-off between 
greater safety and greater combat effectiveness. And 
we are further of the view that permitting “second- 
guessing” of these judgments * * * through state 
tort suits against contractors would produce the same 
effect sought to be avoided by the FTCA exemption. 
[Citations omitted. ] 


Id. Thus, the state law, which would hold the Govern- 
ment contractor liable for design defects in military equip- 
ment, is displaced by the federal policy and law of de- 
ferring to military discretion in the procurement of mili- 
tary equipment embodied in the FTCA. 


The Supreme Court in Boyle adopted a three-part test 
to determine when, to avoid conflict with the discretionary 


14a 


function exception, displacement of state law is appropri- 
ate. It stated: 


Liability for design defects in military equipment 
cannot be imposed, pursuant to state law, when (1) 
the United States approved reasonably precise speci- 
fications; (2) the equipment conformed to those 
specifications; and (3) the supplier warned the 
United States about the dangers in the use of the 
equipment that were known to the supplier but not 
to the United States. 


Id., 487 U.S. at 512. If the contractor satisfies this test, 
then it is not subject to tort liability under state law 
for defects in equipment it manufactured for the military 
in conformance with precise specifications provided by the 
Government. This is because such liability would infringe 
on the discretionary function exception to the FTCA by 
allowing a state court to second-guess indirectly the Gov- 
ernment’s judgment in the selection of the appropriate 
design for military equipment. 


The defendant argues here that the plaintiff's Tucker 
Act claim for contractual damages, just like a state court 
tort suit, is an attempt to have the judiciary second-guess 
the Government’s decision to procure and employ Agent 
Orange. The defendant claims that this flies in the face 
of the Government contractor defense and the discretion- 
ary function exception and that it does violence to the 
policy of Government discretion in military procurement 
which these doctrines protect. Thus, based on the poli- 
cies underlying the Government contractor defense, the 
defendant contends that the plaintiff is barred from re- 
covery on its Tucker Act claim. 


The Government contractor defense is important to the 
instant case for two reasons. First, its underlying policies, 
as expressed in Boyle, are to protect the discretion of the 
Government in ing military equipment, as man- 
dated by the discretionary function exception to the 
FTCA. Therefore, this Court: must determine whether 


75a 


these policies apply equally to suits by contractors against 
the Government as they do to suits by injured military 
personnel against the contractor, which Boyle addressed 
specifically. Second, this Court must consider whether 
the Government contractor defense operated in the suits 
plaintiff faced and provided plaintiff with such a strong 
defense that it is without grounds to claim that it was 
actually in grave danger of being held liable to third 
parties in tort for injuries stemming from the product it 
produced for the Government. 


This Court agrees with the defendant’s argument that 
the policies supporting the Boyle decision apply with 
equal force to an attempt by a Government contractor 
to sue the Government directly. The Supreme Court in 
Boyle was concerned with preserving the discretion of 
the military in choosing the appropriate design for mili- 
tary equipment because this choice involves balancing 
many conflicting considerations, including the trade-off 
between safety and combat effectiveness. IJd., 487 U.S. 
at 511. The exact same discretion and balancing by the 
Government is implicated in the case at issue. The Gov- 
ernment procured Agent Orange to serve military needs 
in Vietnam. The product was designed and used to save 
American soldiers’ lives by eliminating possible hiding 
places for the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese troops. 
Trade-offs between the effectiveness of Agent Orange 
and its safety were a necessary part of the Government's 
procurement and design activities. This Court agrees 
with Chief Judge Weinstein, who found that “[t]he in- 
formation available makes it clear that the government 
would have concluded that the beneficial saving of Amer- 
ican soldiers’ lives by defoliating the Vietnamese jungles 
far outweighed any minimal risks to our own or allied 
troops posed by exposure to Agent Orange.” Opt-Out 
Opinion, 611 F. Supp. at 1263-64. As another court has 
noted, “[i]t is this sort of balancing which the Boyle de- 
fense protects, by providing for contractor immunity 
where state tort law would hold the contractors liable for 


76a 


injuries resulting from the government’s design deficien- 
cies.” In re Aircraft Crash Litig., 752 F. Supp. 1326, 
1370 (S.D. Ohio 1990), aff'd without op., 935 F.2d 
269 (6th Cir. 1991). Thus, this Court will heed the 
warning in Boyle, 487 U.S. at 511, and not second-guess 
military procurement decisions made by the Government 
in the guise of allowing the plaintiff contractor to re- 
cover from the Government payments made to injured 
service persons. Also, this Court will not restructure the 
United States’ immunity and consent to tort suits, which 
is specified by the FTCA and its exception for discre- 
tionary functions, through the vehicle of a contract claim 
based on tort damages, especially in light of the expansion 
of immunity clearly manifested in Boyle. Lopez, 858 
F.2d at 718. 


Plaintiff submits that Boyle was several years subse- 
quent to the settlement in this case in 1984, and that, in 
1984, the application of the Government contractor de- 
fense was at best, uncertain. In effect, plaintiff argues 
that Boyle created a new doctrine and that it should not 
be applied retroactively. This raises the second reason 
for consideration of the Government contractor defense; 
namely, its availability to the plaintiff as a defense in the 
state tort suits it faced. The defendant contends that the 
plaintiff would never have been required to pay the vet- 
erans for their alleged injuries because, as a Government 
contractor, the plaintiff was completely protected by the 
Government contractor defense. The Government notes 
that plaintiff was, in fact, granted summary judgment 
earlier against the opt-out claimants in view of the Gov- 
ernment contractor defense in the district court, Opt-Out 
Opinion, 611 F. Supp. at 1263-64. Also, the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed 
on this basis, because “[s]ubjecting military contractors 
to full tort liability would inject the judicial branch into 
political and military decisions that are beyond its con- 
stitutional authority and constitutional competence.” In 
re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d at 191. 


T7a 


Plaintiff argues that it is unfair to retroactively apply 
Boyle, which was decided in 1988, to the issues plaintiff 
faced at the time of the settlement in 1984. However, 
this Court is not applying Boyle retroactively. The Gov- 
ernment contractor defense existed long before Boyle. 
See Yearsley v. W.A. Ross Constr. Co., 309 U.S. 18 
(1940). Instead, using Boyle as a guide, this Court is 
applying the holdings of Feres (1950) and Stencel 
(1977), as discussed earlier, and the discretionary func- 
tion exception to the FTCA, to the issues presented in this 
case. Feres, Stencel, and the FTCA were all operative 
at the time of the settlement in 1984 and would have 
barred a military contractor’s tort liability to injured mili- 
tary service personnel. In fact, the defense was fully dis- 
cussed by Judge Pratt in his 1983 decision, which 
granted the plaintiff's motion for summary judgment and 
allowed the plaintiff to be removed from the Settlement 
case based on the operation of the Government con- 
tractor defense. Agent Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 1265. 
Thus, the later decision in Boyle did not chart a new 
course for Government contractors. It merely enunciated 
and clarified the Government contractor defense which 
already existed. 


As a final note, plaintiff also argues that the Govern- 
ment has taken inconsistent positions, by opposing the 
Government contractor defense in the district court and 
supporting it in this case. Plaintiff claims that the Govern- 
ment should be be estopped from asserting a different 
position in this case than it took in the earlier case in 
which it filed the brief. However, plaintiff has not argued 
this point fully, and it should suffice to note that under 
Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond, 496 U.S. 
414 (1990), it is unlikely that estoppel will be found 
against the Government without a showing of fraud or 
affirmative misconduct by the Government. Heckler v. 
Community Health Serv., 467 U.S. 51, 67 (1984); 
Schweiker v. Hansen, 450 U.S. 785, 788-89 (1981); 
Jana, Inc. v. United States, 936 F.2d 1265, 1270 (Fed. 


ee ee = ee 


78a 


Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 116 L. Ed. 2d 775 (1992); 
Bolt v. United States, 944 F.2d 603, 609 (9th Cir. 
1991); Portmann v. United States, 674 F.2d 1155, 1164 
(7th Cir. 1982); People’s Bank & Trust Co. v. United 
States, 7 Cl. Ct. 665, 668-69 (1985). No such fraud 
or affirmative misconduct has been shown or even alleged 
here, and, thus, this Court finds no grounds for estoppel. 


C. Contract Indemnification 


Plaintiff asserts in all four of its contractual claims that 
it is entitled to “contractual indemnification.” The exact 
bases for these claims are unclear, and it appears that 
these claims are actually allegations made for the purpose 
of proving damages due to the breach of the warranty 
of specification which have already been addressed. Nev- 
ertheless, plaintiff's indemnification claims will be resolved 
separately. 


For contractual indemnification to exist and to be ac- 
tionable in this Court, it must arise from an express or 
implied-in-fact contract term involved here. There is, 
of course, no express contract indemnification term. How- 
ever, even if this Court were to assume, which it does not, 
that such an implied-in-fact contract term arose from the 
dealings between the parties, the term itself could not op- 
erate to bind the Government. It is clear that the United 
States cannot be bound by a contract, or a term within 2 
contract, into which its agents were without the legal 
authority to enter. Federal Crop Ins. Corp. v. Merrill, 
332 U.S. 380, 384 (1947). This principal applies re- 
gardless of whether or not the contract is express or im- 
plied. Sutton v. United States, 256 U.S. 575, 580 (1921). 
However, the plaintiff cannot show that the agent of the 
Government had the authority to enter a binding indemni- 
fication agreement because, for indemnity to exist, there 
must be either a prior appropriation to cover the possible 
costs of indemnity and/or a statutory exception to this 
rule permitting such payments. See Matter of: Assump- 
tion by Government of Contractor Liability to Third Per- 


79a 


sons—Reconsideration, 62 Comp. Gen. 361 (1983). 
This is because an unfunded or unexcepted indemnifica- 
tion term would violate the Anti-Deficiency Act, 31 
U.S.C. § 1341 (1988), which bars a federal agency from 
entering into a contract for future payments in excess 
of an existing appropriation. The Act states, in pertinent 
part, that officers or employees of the United States may 
not: 


(A) make or authorize an expenditure or obliga- 
tion exceeding an amount available in an appropria- 
tion or fund for the expenditure or obligation; or 


(B) involve [the] government in a contract or ob- 
ligation for the payment of money before an ap- 
propriation is made unless authorized by law. 


31 U.S.C. § 1341 (1988). 


Thus, in California-Pacific Util. Co. v. United States, 
194 Ct. Cl. 703 (1971), the Court of Claims dismissed 
an indemnification claim brought by a utility company 
seeking to recover amounts paid in settlement to a federal 
employee injured by one of its electric poles. The Court 
stated that: 


The United States Supreme Court, the Court of 
Claims, and the Comptroller General have consist- 
ently held that absent an express provision in an 
appropriation for reimbursement adequate to make 
such payment, [the Anti-Deficiency Act] proscribes 
indemnification on the grounds that it would con- 
stitute the obligation of funds not yet appropriated. 


Id., 194 Ct. Cl. at 715. 


In the present case, plaintiff presents no appropriation 
or statutory exemption which would authorize indemnifi- 
cation in this case. Thus, even if an implied indemnifica- 
tion agreement existed, it would be unenforceable under 
the Anti-Deficiency Act. Therefore, the plaintiff has no 
grounds for recovery on any contractual indemnification 


theory. 


80a 


In final summary, the plaintiff has failed to convince 
this Court that it can recover on any one of its four 
implied-in-fact contract theories. Further, even if any 
one of its four contract theories could be found to be 
factually supportable, the plaintiff would still lose this 
lawsuit because of the application of the Government 
contractor defense to the undisputed facts and/or the ap- 
plication of the Anti-Deficiency Act bar to any recovery 
in indemnification by contract. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated above, the defendant’s motion 


for summary judgment is granted, and the complaint is 
to be dismissed. 


Costs to the prevailing party. 


8la 
IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-496 C 
HERCULES INCORPORATED 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES 


JUDGMENT 


Filed Apr. 2, 1992 
Pursuant to the opinion of April 2, 1992, 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this date, pur- 
suant to Rule 58, that the complaint is dismissed. Costs 
to the prevailing party. 

Davip A. LAMPEN 
Clerk of Court 


April 2, 1992 By: /s/ Linda A. Elgin 
Deputy Clerk 


NOTE: As to appeal, 60 days from this date, see 
RUSCC 72, re number of copies and listing of all plain- 
tiffs. Filing fee is $105.00. 


82a 
IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-391C 
(Filed: Apr. 22, 1992) 


Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
a Missouri Corporation 


Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES 


Contracts; Agent Orange; implied-in-fact con- 
tract terms; Government contractor defense; in- 
demnification; Defense Production Act of 1950, 
50 U.S.C. app. §§ 2061, 2157 (1988). 


OPINION 
Yock, Judge. 


This contractual dispute is before the Court on the 
parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment, filed pur- 
suant to USCC Rule 56.’ For the reasons stated herein, 
the defendant’s motion for summary judgment is granted, 
and the plaintiff's complaint will be dismissed. 


Facts 


Plaintiff, Wm. T. Thompson Company (Thompson), 
was a manufacturer in the mid to late 1960's of a prod- 


1 Defendant has, in the alternative, moved to dismiss pursuant 
to USCC Rule 12. 7 | 


5 a 
: DS : . Swi 
PEAS, ee eee ere Ce 7 ae. ery 


83a 


uct known as Agent Orange, which was used for military 
purposes by the United States Government as a defoliant 
during the Vietnam War. Years later, Vietnam veterans 
and their families, alleging that exposure to Agent Orange 
caused death, injuries, and birth defects, sued all the 
Agent Orange manufacturers, including Thompson. This 
multi-district product liability tort suit was settled before 
trial, In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig. (hereinaf- 
ter “Settlement Opinion”), 597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D. N.Y. 
1984), aff'd, 818 F.2d 145 (2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 
484 U.S. 1004 (1988), and Thompson was required to 
pay $3,096,597.22 of the total settlement amount. The 
instant contract suit was brought by Thompson in an at- 
tempt to recover from the United States Government the 
costs it incurred in defending and settling the suit in the 
district court. 


The following facts are essentially uncontroverted: 
Agent Orange is a mixture of two phenoxy herbicides, 
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4-D), and 2,4,5-Tri- 
chlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4,5-T) in a 50/50 blend. 
Depending on the process utilized, when 2,4,5-T is pro- 
duced, it may contain varying amounts of 2,3,7,8 Tetrach- 
lorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin), a toxic substance, although 
not a key ingredient of either Agent Orange or 2,4,5-T.* 


As one court noted, “the government and the military 
had a considerable amount of knowledge about 2,4,5-T, 
about dioxin, and about the hazards associated with both.” 
In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig. (hereinafter 
“Agent Orange”), 565 F. Supp. 1263, 1266 (E.D. N.Y. 
1983). This knowledge extended back into the 1950's, 
and the level of knowledge increased rapidly during the 
mid to late 1960’s. Much of the Government’s knowledge 
was classified and not shared with the chemical com- 


2 While it has not been proven scientifically or legally, the Viet- 
nam veterans believed that exposure to Agent Orange caused 
cancer and birth defects, and these were allegedly caused by the 
dioxin present in this defoliant. 


84a 


panies. Jd. at 1267-68. However, some of the bigger 
chemical companies that were producing Agent Orange 
for the military did develop a considerable amount of 
knowledge about the dangers associated with the produc- 
tion of 2,4,5-T and the dioxin contained therein during 
this same time frame. 


Thompson began producing phenoxy herbicides that 
contained 2,4,5-T by itself, or in a mixture with 2,4-D, 
in the early 1950’s and continued to market these her- 
bicides in the early 1960’s. In 1961, the Government 
began to use a variety of phenoxy herbicides in Southeast 
Asia to defoliate trees and plant life to eliminate possible 
hiding places for the Viet Cong and the North Vietna- 
mese troops.® 


As the Vietnam War progressed, the military needed 
greater amounts of Agent Orange, but Thompson declined 
to bid for the contracts. As summarized by another court, 
the Government was not deterred, and: 


Acting under appropriate statutory authority, The 
Defense Production Act of 1950, Sept. 8, 1950, ch. 
932, 64 Stat. 798, amended, June 30, 1966, 80 Stat. 
235 (current version at 50 U.S.C. App. §§ 2061 ef 
seq.) however, the government required Thompson 
to supply Agent Orange pursuant to two contracts 
dated April 19, 1967 and May 24, 1968. It sup- 
plied 333,685 gallons between September 1967 and 
January 1969. As reflected in test results, the dioxin 
content of its product ranged from .1 to .3 [parts per 
million]. 


2 The defoliant Agent Orange and Thompson’s commercial her- 
bicides were of different concentrations and were applied differ- 
ently. Agent Orange contained roughly two or four times as much 
2,4,5,-T per gallon as most of the Thompson herbicides. Also, the 
Government used Agent Orange undiluted and sprayed at a rate 
of 3 gallons per acre, as compared to the dilution of Thompson’s 
herbicide at a ratio of 100 to 1, sprayed at a rate of 1 gallon per 
acre. 


85a 


Agent Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 1272. The two contracts 
specified the formula for producing Agent Orange, and 
Thompson provided no input to the Government: with 
respect to either the development or modification of the 
specifications, and the company strictly complied with the 
specifications. Regarding the possible hazards to users 
of Agent Orange, it appears that “the government’s level 
of knowledge greatly exceeded that of Thompson in 
1967.” Id. at 1273. In March of 1967, the Government 
ordered Thompson to accelerate production of Agent 
Orange, and Thompson complied.‘ Thompson’s total pro- 
duction was approximately two percent of all of the Agent 
Orange manufactured for use in Vietnam. 


Some years later, starting in 1979, Vietnam veterans. 
or their estates, began filing negligence and strict liability 
tort actions against the chemical companies that produced 
Agent Orange for the Government. According to these 
plaintiffs, in view of the toxicity of dioxin, exposure to 
the Agent Orange that contained dioxin caused cancer. 
miscarriages, and birth defects. These actions were con- 
solidated in the Eastern District of New York under the 
heading MDL No. 381. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


* Plaintiff alleges that the Government’s method for accelerating 


production, increasing the temperature during processing, caused 
an increase in the amount of dioxin contamination. 


86a 


On May 7, 1984, the date trial was to begin, the par- 
ties reached a settlement, and a $180 million settlement 
fund was created. Settlement Opinion, 597 F. Supp. at 
748. The district court judge weighing the potential 
costs as well as the uncertainties essociated with trial for 
both sides, found that the proposed settlement was fair, 
reasonable, and adequate. However, he did note that 
plaintiffs had never produced any persuasive evidence 
showing a causal relationship between the exposure to 
small quantities of dioxin found in Agent Orange and 
the claimed injuries. Jd., 597 F. Supp. at 782-95. The 
district court’s settlement opinion was affirmed, and the 
appeals court noted that it was “essentially a settlement 
at nuisance value,” based on the “grave weaknesses in 
plaintiffs’ case,” since “the weight of present scientific 
evidence does not establish that personnel in Vietnam 
were injured by Agent Orange * * *.” In re “Agent 
Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d 145, 171, 174 (2d 
Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1004 (1988). 


Thompson’s share of the settlement was $3,096,597.22, 
which it paid into the settlement fund in June, 1984. 
According to Thompson, it also spent approximately $3 
million in legal fees during the Agent Orange litigation. 


Nearly 300 plaintiffs had previously opted out of the 
class action suit and thus were not bound by the May, 
1984 settlement. Thompson and other Agent Orange 
manufacturers successfully moved for summary judgment 
against these remaining plaintiffs. In re “Agent Orange” 
Prod. Liab. Litig. (hereinafter “Opt-out Opinion”), 611 
F. Supp. 1223 (E.D. N.Y. 1985), affd, 818 F.2d 187 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 
The district court judge found that (1) plaintiffs failed to 
present credible evidence as to causation, and that (2) 
the plaintiffs’ claims were barred by the Government 
contractor defense.’ Jd., 611 F. Supp. at 1229, 1258-63. 


87a 


The appeals court affirmed, based upon the Government 
contractor defense, and also agreed that “the weight of 
present scientific evidence does not establish that Agent 
Orange injured personnel in Vietnam * * *.” Jn re 
“Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d 187, 190 
(2d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 487 U.S. 1234 (1988). 


The plaintiff filed its complaint with this Court on 
May 7, 1990 and amended it on October 23, 1990. 
According to Thompson, the Government breached its 
duty to disclose its superior knowledge regarding the 
health risks of Agent Orange. Additionally, Thompson 
submits that the Government violated its implied warranty 
that the Agent Orange it required Thompson to manu- 
facture based on detailed specifications would be safe and 
free from defects. Finally, Thompson alleges that the 
Government breached an implied contractual duty to in- 
demnify Thompson for losses arising from the Gov- 
ernment’s requirement that Thompson produce Agent 
Orange.* The Government filed a Motion To Dismiss or, 
in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment on November 
20, 1990, seeking dismissal of the suit as a matter of law. 
Thompson filed a Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment 
on February 19, 1991, on the grounds that the law and 
the uncontested material facts dictate a finding that the 
United States Government is liable to Thompson. 


Discussion 


“Summary judgment is appropriate when there are no 
genuine issues of material fact in dispute and the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” GAF 
Corp. v. United States, 19 Cl. Ct. 490, 496 (1990). 
aff'd, 932 F.2d 947 (Fed. Cir. 1991), cert. denied. 117 
L. Ed. 2d 131 (1992). The substantive law involved 


* While plaintiff's amended complaint included a constitutional 
taking claim, the defendant is correct in noting that, since plain- 
tiff has made no further mention of this claim, it must be con- 
sidered abandoned. Thus, it will be dismissed. 


in the suit de.ermines which facts are material, and only 
disputes over material facts, those which might affect the 
outcome of the suit under the governing law, may prop- 
erly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Anderson 
v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). Dis- 
putes over facts that are not relevant under the controlling 
law will not prevent the entry of summary judgment. /d. 
The moving party, in this case the defendant, has the bur- 
den of establishing that there are no genuine issues of 
material fact, Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 321 
(1986), and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter 
of law. GAF Corp., 19 Cl. Ct. at 496. For the follow- 
ing reasons, this Court finds that the Government has 
met its burden of establishing that there are no genuine 
material issues of fact in dispute and that it is entitled 
to judgment as a matter of law. 


In its complaint, the plaintiff has alleged that it is en- 
titled to reimbursement from the Government under three 
counts. All three counts are based on alleged breaches 
of implied-in-fact contract obligations. Plaintiff submits 
that it produced Agent Orange in the 1960’s under written 
contracts with the Government that contained detailed 
design specifications developed solely by the Government. 
[t contends further that it had no part in the development 
of the specifications, that it manufactured the Agent 
Orange to the exact specifications ordered by the Gov- 
ernment, and that it had little, if any, knowledge about 
the potential hazards that were inherent in the product 
as produced and used by the Government. Given these 
factual circumstances, the plaintiff argues that it is en- 
titled to indemnification in contract for the losses it in- 
curred in defending against and settling the tort suits 
brought by the Vietnam veterans and their families against 
the manufacturers of Agent Orange. Thompson believes 
it is only equitable and fair that the Government assume 
the obligation and be allocated these risks because it or- 
dered the production of Agent Orange to its own specifi- 
cations, completely controlled the use (or misuse) of the 


89a 


product, and never shared any information about potential 
hazards in the product with the manufacturer. In short, 
if anyone was negligent here, it was the Government and 
the financial liability should, therefore, be borne by it and 
not by the innocent manufacturers of Agent Orange. The 
plaintiff, therefore, contends that it is entitled to be in- 
demnified by the Government for the costs it incurred 
under any one of three contractual theories. 


The plaintiff's first theory involves the matter of the 
Government's alleged superior knowledge. Here, the plain- 
tiff asserts that there was an implied-in-fact obligation 
on the part of the Government to reveal its superior 
knowledge concerning the nature and possible health 
risks of Agent Orange so as to not increase the plaintiff's 
cost of performance under the contract. 


Second, the plaintiff alleges a warranty of specification 
theory. This theory is based upon an alleged Govern- 
mental breach of its implied-in-fact contractual obliga- 
tion that the Agent Orange it required Thompson to 
manufacture would be safe and free from defects. 


Third and finally, the plaintiff alleges that the Govern- 
ment was bound by an implied-in-fact contractual duty 
to indemnify Thompson for losses due to the Gov- 
ernment’s requirement that Thomspon produce Agent 
Orange. 


The defendant, for its part, opposes each one of the 
plaintiff's three breach of implied-in-fact contract argu- 
ments on factual as well as legal grounds. In addition, 
the defendant asserts that the rationale surrounding the 
Government contractor defense supplies an independent 
legal basis for finding in its favor. 


After full consideration of the parties’ briefs and oral 
arguments, it is evident to the Court that only the plain- 
tiff's second claim regarding the warranty of specification 
has any potential vitality. The other two claims bear 
superficial resemblance to viable implied-in-fact contract 


90a 
theories, but, upon closer inspection, they do not meet 
the requirements established in the appropriate prece- 
dential case law. However, in the interest of complete- 


ness, this Court will discuss each of the plaintiff's three 
contractual claims and defendant’s responses to them. 


A. Plaintiff's Implied-In-Fact Contract Claims. 


1. Doctrine of Superior Knowledge 


There is a line of cases which allows Government con- 
tractors to recover from the Government the unexpected 
increased costs of performance of a contract if the Gov- 
ernment, at the time the contract was formed, had su- 
perior. knowledge regarding difficulties in production 
which were not apparent and were not otherwise known 
by the contractor. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. United 
States, 228 Ct. Cl. 220, 654 F.2d 75 (1981); Hardeman- 
Monier-Hutcherson v. United States, 198 Ct. Cl. 472, 
458 F.2d 1364 (1972); J.A. Jones Constr. Co. v. United 
States, 182 Ct. Cl. 615, 390 F.2d 886 (1968); Helene 
Curtis Indus., Inc. v. United States, 160 Ct. Cl. 437, 312 
F.2d 774 (1963); J.F. Shea Co. v. United States, 4 Cl. 


Ct. 46 (1983). 


From this precedent, the plaintiff argues that the Gov- 
ernment is liable to the manufacturers of Agent Orange 
for their costs in defending and settling the suits brought 
against them by Vietnam veterans. This is because the 
Government allegedly knew more about the hazards of 
dioxin contained in the Agent Orange than did the herbi- 
cide manufacturers, and the Government breached its 
duty (contractual obligation) to reveal this superior 


perienced of 2,4,5-T through its commercial 

products. Also, it complied with the general reporting 

eS icleaan hn the Federal Insecticide, 
and 3 


E 
$ 
re) 
“ 
g 


9la 


(1964) (FIFRA).” In view of this, the Government 
could reasonably assume that the plaintiff had tested its 
products as required by FIFRA and would be aware of 
potential hazards associated with 2,4,5-T. 


While the determination of how much knowledge both 
the plaintiff and the Government had about the hazards 
of dioxin and Agent Orange is fact-intensive and not 
suitable for summary judgment, this Court believes it is 
not necessary to reach a decision on this factual issue. 
In analyzing these cases, it is clear to this Court that the 
doctrine of superior knowledge covers only unexpected 
costs in the performance of the contract. None of the 
cases cited by the plaintiff involving the doctrine of su- 
perior knowledge extend the doctrine beyond the produc- 
tion of the item contracted for, be it disinfectant powder 
(Helene Curtis) or the construction of a dock in Australia 
( Hardeman-Monier-Hutcherson). In all of the cases cited 
above, the Government knew about some nonobvious 
obstacles that anyone would encounter in trying to pro- 
duce the contracted-for item. For example, in Helene 
Curtis, it was a new substance that needed grinding in 
order to mix properly into the disinfectant powder, and, 
in Hardeman-Monier-Hutcherson, it was severe weather 
conditions and water currents that made the dock much 
more difficult to construct. 


92a 


ernment, at the time of contract formation, had knowl- 
edge of the latent problems that would raise performance 
costs and did not divulge this knowledge to the con- 
tractors. Thus, citing to Helene Curtis, the United States 
Court of Claims in American Ship Bldg. Co., 228 Ct. Cl. 
at 225, 654 F.2d at 79, stated that the four factors of 
the superior knowledge doctrine were: 


[W]here (1) a contractor undertakes to perform 
without vital knowledge of a fact that affects per- 
formance costs or duration, (2) the government was 
aware the contractor had no knowledge of and had 
no reason to obtain such information, (3) any con- 
tract specification supplied misled the contractor, or 
did not put it on notice to inquire, and (4) the 
government failed to provide the relevant informa- 
tion. 


To satisfy the requirements of the doctrine, the vital 
knowledge, which the Government possesses and the con- 
tractor does not, must be a fact that affects performance 
costs or duration of performance. In the case at hand, 
plaintiff does not claim that it had any unforseen prob- 
lems in the manufacture of the Agent Orange which 
increased the costs of production or caused a delay in 
performance. Thus, the superior knowledge doctrine does 
not apply to plaintiff's claim and does not entitle it to 
recover costs that were not connected to actual perform- 
ance under the contract, which was for the manufacture 
of the Agent Orange to the detailed Government speci- 
fication. See generally, Lopez v. A.C. & S., Inc., 858 
F.2d 712, 717-18 (Fed. Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 491 
U.S. 904 (1989). Prior case precedent simply does not 
allow the expansion of the doctrine of superior knowl- 
edge to be extended as far as the plaintiff apparently 
wants it to stretch. The time frame that the courts have 
found appropriate to review has always been the period 
of performance only—not some indefinite time stretching 
well into the future. 


93a 


2. Warranty of Specification. 


In United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132, 136-37 
(1918), the Supreme Court held that the inclusion of de- 
tailed specifications in a contract prepared by the Govern- 
ment imported a warranty that, if the specifications were 
followed, the resulting product would be adequate, and 
the contractor would not be responsible for the conse- 
quences of defects in the specifications. This implied war- 
ranty of specification has been recognized in many cases 
since Spearin. See e.g., Ordnance Research, Inc. v. 
United States, 221 Ct. Cl. 641, 609 F.2d 462 (1979); 
Hol-Gar Mfg. Corp. v. United States, 175 Ct. Cl. 518, 
360 F.2d 634 (1966); Blount Bros. Corp. v. United 
States, 872 F.2d 1003 (Fed. Cir. 1989). 


In Spearin, the defect became apparent due to damage 
that occurred during the performance of the contract. 
Spearin, 248 U.S. at 134-35. However, the warranty of 
specification is not limited to the time of performance, 
according to the holding in Poorvu v. United States, 190 
Ct. Cl. 640, 420 F.2d 993 (1970). In that case, the de- 
fect in the specified construction method did not begin to 
manifest itself until some four years after the completion 
of the building, and the United States Court of Claims 
determined that the Spearin warranty of specification still 
operated to place the liability for the damage on the 
Government, which had dictated the construction specifi- 
cations. Poorvu, 190 Ct. Cl. at 651, 420 F.2d at 1000. 


Plaintiff argues that an implied-in-fact warranty of 
specification arose in this case because the Government 
supplied detailed specifications for Agent Orange to 
Thompson, and the plaintiff manufactured the defoliant 
in accordance with these detailed specifications. The war- 
ranty of specification means that the Government im- 
pliedly warranted that the item made to the precise speci- 
fication would be safe and free from defects. Plaintiff 
claims that the Government breached this warranty be- 
cause the plaintiff was subjected to tort suits by third 


94a 


parties who claimed they were injured by the Agent 
Orange the plaintiff manufactured. 


The Government contends that plaintiff’s claim is nearly 
identical to claims made by the asbestos manufacturers 
that, based on contract theories, attempted to recover from 
the United States costs they incurred as a result of suits 
brought by shipyard workers who were exposed to as- 
bestos dust from using insulating products. The asbestos 
manufacturers made these products in accordance with 
military specifications and sold them to the United 
States during the World War II era and thereafter. Ac- 
cordingly, the defendant relies on two asbestos-related 
cases, Lopez and GAF Corp., for its defensive position. 
The Government contends that these cases bar the plain- 
tiff's warranty of specification claim on the grounds that 
the factual circumstances of this case do not support 
finding an implied-in-fact agreement, a meeting of the 
minds, and this Court lacks jurisdiction over contracts 
that are implied at law. Lopez, 858 F.2d at 714-15; 
GAF Corp., 932 F.2d at 950. 


For a warranty to be implied in fact, the plaintiff must 
demonstrate that “the circumstances strongly supported 
a factual inference that a warranty was implied.” Lopez, 
858 F.2d at 715. Such an inference arises only when the 
Government specifications told the contractor “just how 
to do the job,” 7d. at 716, and not when they merely 
specified some certain characteristic in the contracted-for 
product. GAF Corp., 932 F.2d at 950. With respect to 
the claims of breach of warranty of specification, the 
Court agrees with the plaintiff that the underlying bases 
of the decisions in Lopez and GAF Corp. were that the 
asbestos companies knew about the dangers of their prod- 
ucts before entering into the contracts with the Govern- 
ment and that the products manufactured under the Gov- 
ernment contracts did not differ materially from those al- 
ready sold commercially. Thus, there was no basis for 
finding a factual inference that the specifications constituted 
an “extensive Government intrusion into the asbestos fro- 


95a 


duction process which might suggest that the Government 
intended to warrant the product’s safety.” GAF Corp., 
932 F.2d at 950. 


Plaintiff argues that, in this case, there exists the ex- 
tensive Government intrusion into the Agent Orange pro- 
duction process that suggests that the Government in- 
tended to warrant the product’s safety. Also, the plain- 
tiff alleges that it is unlike the asbestos manufacturers 
because it knew less than the Government did about the 
defoliant, and Agent Orange differed materially from the 
products plaintiff sold commercially. 


However, even assuming that a warranty of specifica- 
tion arose from the Government’s detailed specifications 
for Agent Orange, there must be more than the mere ex- 
istence of a warranty to entitle the plaintiff to recover 
against the Government. Plaintiff must also show that 
this warranty was breached by the Government and that 
this breach caused plaintiff to suffer the type of damages 
recoverable in contract. It is on these requirements, 
breach and contract damages, that the plaintiff has failed 
to state a case that can withstand the Government’s sum- 
mary judgment motion. 


Turning again to Spearin and its progeny, the implied 
warranty of specification was breached when the product, 
made in accordance with the detailed specification created 
by the Government, was inadequate, and the inadequacy 
clearly caused some damage. In Spearin, the sewer was 
inadequate due to a problem with a blocked sewer pipe 
in the existing system; the new pipe broke, and the sewer 
overflowed and damaged the dry dock that the contractor 
was building for the Government. /d., 248 U.S. at 134. 
In Poorvu, the parking area for a building was con- 
structed with inadequate support below it, in accordance 
with the Government’s specifications. This caused the 
parking area to settle and put pressure on water pipes 
that were located beneath it. These pipes broke, and the 
water spilling from them saturated the ground under the 
building, which then weakened the support under the 


96a 


building, causing it to settle severely into the ground. 
Id., 190 Ct. Cl. at 646-47, 420 F.2d at 997. 


In these cases, it is clear that the specification was in- 
adequate, and the resulting defect in the finished product 
caused obvious and direct damage. The courts in these 
cases appeared to analyze these situations by determining 
first, whether or not some damage had occurred, and sec- 
ond, whether or not the specification written by the Gov- 
ernment was defective. If these two circumstances were 
present, the courts then determined which party should 
bear the risk of the faulty specification causing the dam- 
age. The implied warranty of specification is the method 
by which the court can allocate the risk of the faulty 
specification to the Government, which created the speci- 
fication, rather than to the contractor, who actually built 
the defective item that caused the damage. See JoHN C. 
CIBINIC, JR. & RALPH C. NASH, JR., ADMINISTRATION OF 
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS 199-202 (2d ed. 1985). As 
stated in Spearin, 248 U.S. at 136, “if the contractor is 
bound to build according to plans and specifications pre- 
pared by the owner, the contractor will not be responsible 
for the consequences of defects in the plans and specifica- 
tions.” Also, the court held in Poorvu that “the govern- 
ment must answer for damage incurred because of inade- 
quate plans it has furnished.” Jd., 190 Ct. Cl. at 651, 420 
F.2d at 1000. 


In this case, plaintiff asserts that the Government de- 
signed faulty specifications for Agent Orange because 
dioxin contaminated the specified defoliant product. The 
damage plaintiff claims as a result of the faulty specifica- 
tion is, however, the settlement costs it incurred when 
veterans claimed they were injured by the dioxin in the 
Agent Orange used for military purposes in Vietnam. 
Thus, the plaintiff claims that the Government breached 
the warranty by subjecting the chemical manufacturer to 
tort liability running to third parties who were injured by 
the Government’s use of the Agent Orange manufactured 


97a 


by the plaintiff. However, for several reasons, the plaintiff 
cannot prove that it was actually subjected to tort liability 
by third parties because of its manufacture of Agent 
Orange for the Government’s military use. First, dioxin 
has never been scientifically proven to cause the injuries 
that the veterans alleged, and second, the plaintiff was 
protected from liability to the veterans in any event under 
the Government contractor defense, which is discussed 
later in this opinion. Thus, to the extent that the warranty 
of specification does exist in this case, there has been no 
breach of the implied warranty of specification because 
the alleged defect in the herbicide has never been proven, 
and the plaintiff would not have been liable to third parties 
even if the specifications had been defective due to the 
Government contractor defense. 


[Supreme Court procedural metadata omitted from this copy.]


98a 


As for damages arising from contract breaches, it is 
axiomatic that such damages are limited to those that 
were reasonably foreseeable at the time the parties formed 
the contract. Hadley v. Baxendale, 9 Ex. 341, 156 Eng. 
Rep. 145 (1854). In Northern Helex Co. v. United 
States, 207 Ct. Cl. 862, 888, 524 F.2d 707, 721 (1975), 
cert. denied, 429 U.S. 866 (1976), the court reviewed the 
rules governing damages for breach of contract and con- 
cluded that the authorities support denial of claims where 
“costs are too remote, speculative, and consequential to be 
compensable as damages.” In this case, it is apparent that 
the costs (damages) plaintiff incurred by defending and 
settling a lawsuit brought by veterans, who were never able 
to prove that the plaintiff's product injured them, were not 
reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was formed 
between the Government and the plaintiff. 


Plaintiff urges that there is a strong judicial policy 
favoring settlements and the fact that it settled the under- 
lying case, rather than litigating the issue of its liability to 
the veterans, should not count against plaintiff in its at- 
tempt to recover from the Government for breach of war- 
ranty. It is true that settkements are encouraged. See e.g., 
Ahern v. Central Pac. Freight Lines, 846 F.2d 47, 48 
(9th Cir. 1988); Janneh v. GAF Corp., 887 F.2d 432, 
435 (2d Cir. 1989). However, the cases plaintiff cites 
regarding the recovery of settlements paid to third parties 
involve indemnification agreements, either implied-in-fact 
or implied-at-law. Travelers Ins. Co. v. United States, 
493 F.2d 881 (3d Cir. 1974); Parfait v. Jahncke Serv., 
Inc., 484 F.2d 296 (Sth Cir. 1973), cert. denied, 415 
U.S. 957 (1974). This Court does not have jurisdiction 
over contracts implied at law. United States v. Mitchell, 
463 U.S. 206, 218 (1983). As for an implied-in-fact con- 
tract, the factual circumstances do not support one be- 
cause it simply was not foreseeable to the parties that the 
Agent Orange class action settlement would come to pass 
more than a decade after the contracts to supply the de- 
foliant were formed. The facts may support an implied 


99a 


warranty of specification, but they cannot be stretched so 
far as to support the theory that the parties came to a 
meeting of the minds that there would be an indemnifica- 
tion agreement between them if the implied warranty of 
specification was alleged, but never proven, to be violated. 


As for plaintiff's claim of attorney fees, the court in 
Kania v. United States, 227 Ct. Cl. 458, 467, 650 F.2d 
264, 269, cert. denied, 454 U.S. 895 (1981), noted that 
“jurisdiction to award counsel fees and other litigation ex- 
penses as an element of breach damages would be ex- 
tremely dubious. It is the kind of consequential damages 
not normally awarded in contract breach cases.” Also see 
Alyeska Pipeline Serv. Co. v. Wilderness Soc’y, 421 U.S. 
240 (1975). Overall, “[clourts do not, in awarding 
breach damages, follow through the remote indirect con- 
sequences of the breach as distinguished from those di- 
rectly in contemplation when the contract was made.” 
Kania, 227 Ct. Cl. at 467, 650 F.2d at 269. Thus, 
plaintiff cannot support a contention that it suffered com- 
pensable damages to the amount of its legal fees and costs 
as a result of the Government’s alleged breach of the im- 
plied warranty of specification. 


Finally, the question remains as to whether plaintiff 
could ever have been found liable to third parties, even 
if causation between Agent Orange and veterans’ injuries 
had been proven. The Government contractor defense 
would certainly present a serious obstacle to a manu- 
facturer’s liability to military service personnel for defects 
in products made to Government specifications for mili- 
tary applications. See Boyle v. United Technologies 
Corp., 487 U.S. 500 (1988); Stencel Aero Eng’g Corp. 
v. United States, 431 U.S. 666 (1977); and Feres v. 
United States, 340 U.S. 135 (1950). The Government 
contractor defense will be discussed more fully in a later 
section of this opinion, but its impact on any liability the 
plaintiff would have to third parties must be noted at this 
juncture. The plaintiff asserts, in its arguments involving 


100a 


superior knowledge, that it manufactured the product to 
detailed specifications and lacked the knowledge it alleges 
the Government had regarding the hazards of Agent 
Orange. If this is true, then the plaintiff would avoid 
liability to third parties based on the Government con- 
tractor defense. Boyle, 487 U.S. at 512. The plaintiff 
had an absolute defense. Plaintiff was well aware of this 
strong defense before it agreed to settle the claims of the 
veterans because, in 1983, it was granted summary judg- 
ment in its favor on the basis of the Government con- 
tractor defense, Agent Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 1275, 
even though plaintiff was later brought back into the case. 
Thus, in addition to the reasons already discussed above, 
there was no breach of the warranty of specification based 
on the manufacturer’s tort liability to third parties sup- 
posedly injured by the product because the manufacturer, 
under the circumstances alleged, was protected from li- 
ability by the Government contractor defense. 


3. Contract Indemnification. 


For contractual indemnification to exist and to be ac- 
tionable in this Court, it must arise from an express or 
implied-in-fact contract term. As noted earlier, this Court 
has no jurisdiction over contracts or contract terms which 
are implied at law. United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 
at 218. While there was no express indemnification term 
in the procurement contract, plaintiff claims there is an 
implied-in-fact contract indemnification term springing from 
section 2157 of the Defense Production Act of 1950, 50 
U.S.C. app. §§ 2061 et seg. (1964) (DPA), and the fact 
that the Government compelled plaintiff to manufacture 
Agent Orange. Section 2157 of the DPA provided that: 


No person shall be held liable for damages or pen- 
alties for any act or failure to act resulting directly 
or indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, 
or order issued pursuant to this Act * * *. 


10la 


Based on this section, plaintiff argues that an implied-in- 
fact indemnification term arose in the procurement con- 
tract between the plaintiff and the Government in regard 
to its Agent Orange contracts. 


Plaintiff and the other chemical manufacturers also 
raised section 2157 as a defense in the district court suit 
brought by the veterans. However, Chief Judge Wein- 
stein explained that section 2157 of the DPA was enacted 
as a quid pro quo to 50 U.S.C. app. § 2071, which au- 
thorizes the President to require that performance of con- 
tracts under the DPA take priority over other contracts 
currently binding the manufacturer. Settlement Opinion, 
597 F. Supp. at 844. Thus, the court concluded that, 


Logically, then, the protection afforded by section 
[2157] should correspond to the risk imposed, viz., 
the possible need for the contractor to break its con- 
tracts with third parties or the increased risk to em- 
ployees or users posed by speeded-up production. 
Except in rare instances there is no logical connec- 
tion between the compulsion of section [2071] and 
the risk of injuries to those using or exposed to the 
contractor’s product; the risk is something that all 
government contractors have in common and is al- 
ready taken into account in the government contract 
defense. 


Id. at 845. 


This Court agrees with the district court and finds that 
the DPA does not create an implied-in-fact contract term 
which would indemnify the plaintiff for any tort suits 
brought by users of the product the plaintiff made for the 
Government under the DPA. Instead, section 2157 pro- 
vides the Government contractor with a defense. This 
defense excuses the Government contractor’s breach of 
its other, non-Government contracts which were adversely 
affected by the priority given to the Government’s procure- 
ment demands under the DPA. See e.g., Eastern Air 
Lines, Inc. v. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 532 F.2d 957, 


102a 


997 (Sth Cir. 1976). It does not create an indemnifica- 
tion agreement between the Government contractor and 
the Government to cover tort damages suffered by users 
of the product procured under the DPA. Settlement Opin- 
ion, 597 F. Supp. at 845. 


However, even if this Court were to assume, which it 
does not, that such an implied-in-fact contract term arose 
from the dealings between the parties alone, the term 
itself could not operate to bind the Government. It is 
clear that the United States cannot be bound by a con- 
tract, or a term within a contract, into which its agents 
were without the legal authority to enter. Federal Crop 
Ins. Corp. v. Merrill, 332 U.S. 380, 384 (1947). This 
principal applies regardless of whether or not the con- 
tract is express or implied. Sutton v. United States, 256 
U.S. 575, 580 (1921). However, the plaintiff cannot 
show that the agent of the Government had the authority 
to enter a binding indemnification agreement because, for 
indemnity to exist, there must be either a prior appropria- 
tion to cover the possible costs of indemnity and/or a 
statutory exception to this rule permitting such payments. 
See Matter of: Assumption by Government of Contractor 
Liability to Third Persons—Reconsideration, 62 Comp. 
Gen. 361 (1983). This is because an unfunded or un- 
excepted indemnification term would violate the Anti- 
Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C. § 1341 (1988), which bars a 
federal agency from entering into a contract for future 
payments in excess of an existing appropriation. The 
Anti-Deficiency Act states, in pertinent part, that officers 
or employees of the United States may not: 


(A) make or authorize an expenditure or obligation 
exceeding an amount available in an appropriation 
or fund for the expenditure or obligation; or 


(B) involve [the] government in a contract or obli- 
gation for the payment of money before an appro- 
priation is made unless authorized by law. 


31 U.S.C. § 1341 (1988). 


103a 


Thus, in California-Pacific Util. Co. v. United States, 
194 Ct. Cl. 703 (1971), the United States Court of 
Claims dismissed an indemnification claim brought by a 
utility company seeking to recover amounts paid in settle- 
ment to a federal employee injured by one of its electric 
poles. The Court stated that: 


The United States Supreme Court, the Court of 
Claims, and the Comptroller General have consist- 
ently held that absent an express provision in an 
appropriation for reimbursement adequate to make 
such payment, [the Anti-Deficiency Act] proscribes 
indemnification on the grounds that it would consti- 
tute the obligation of funds not yet appropriated. 


Id., 194 Ct. Cl. at 715. 


In the present case, plaintiff presents no appropriation 
or statutory exemption * which would authorize indem- 
nification in this case. Thus, even if an implied indem- 
nification agreement existed, it would be unenforceable 
under the Anti-Deficiency Act. Therefore, the plaintiff 
has no grounds for recovery on any contractual indem- 
nification theory. 


After consideration of all of the plaintiff's contractual 
arguments, it is apparent that most of the theories plain- 
tiff advanced do not apply to hold the Government liable 
for the amount paid in connection with the settlement of 
the class action suit. The warranty of specification might 
apply to the Government based on the detailed specifica- 
tion for the production of Agent Orange. However, plain- 
tiff has failed to come forth with the required quantum 
of proof regarding the breach of this warranty and the 
contract damages flowing therefrom. Thus, the moving 


8 As earlier stated, section 2157 of the DPA does not create a 
contractual indemnification agreement between Thompson and the 
Government, but only a defense. Such a defense is to be utilized 
by the Government contractor in the event the DPA contracts 
have placed the contractor in breach of its other non-Government 
contractual commitments. 


104a 


party is entitled to summary judgment because the non- 
moving party, the plaintiff, has “failed to make a sufficient 
showing on an essential element of [its] case with respect 
to which [it] has the burden of proof.” Celotex v. Catrett, 
477 US. at 323. 


B. The Government Contractor Defense 


Even if this Court is in error when it finds no breach 
and no damages as a matter of law in this case, the plain- 
tiff would still not be able to recover in this action be- 
cause of the Government contractor defense. The defend- 
ant alleges that, regardless of the resolution of the con- 
tractual issues in this matter, the Government contractor 
defense provides a separate and independent basis for a 
denial of the plaintiff's claims. Based on the policies 
underlying the Government contractor defense, the de- 
fendant states that the plaintiff cannot be allowed to re- 
cover indirectly through this contract suit for reimburse- 
ment what the veterans could not recover directly against 
the Government under the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 
U.S.C. § 2671-80 (1988) (FTCA), Le., tort damages 
from the Government payable to military personnel for 
injuries allegedly sustained while serving on active duty. 


Plaintiff counters that the Government contractor de- 
fense was not settled law at the time of the settlement 
with the veterans in the class action suit, so there was 
the possibility that it might have been held liable to the 
veterans for billions of dollars. Thus, their decision to 
settle was very reasonable in the face of the possibility 
of massive liability. Also, the plaintiff asserts that the 
Government, in a brief it filed in the Opt-out Opinion in 
the district court action, argued against the application 
of the Government contractor defense to shield the herbi- 
cide manufacturers from liability, and thus the Govern- 
ment should be estopped from urging its application here. 


While the Government contractor defense is certainly 
important to the resolution of the issues in this case, both 


105a 


parties have neglected to consider crucial matters in sup- 
port of their respective arguments. What is primarily at 
issue in this case is the Government's liability to the plain- 
tiff under these circumstances, not just the plaintiff's lia- 
bility to the veterans. Fortunately, this issue has already 
been considered by the Supreme Court in Stencel, and 
this Court will follow its clear guidance in the instant 
case. 


In Stencel, a serviceman, who was injured when the 
ejection system of his fighter aircraft malfunctioned, 
brought a product liability damage action against the 
manufacturer, Stencel, and the United States. Stencel 
cross-claimed against the Government for indemnity 
claiming that any malfunction in the system was due to 
faulty Government specifications and components. Based 
on the earlier Feres case, the Supreme Court upheld the 
district court’s grant of summary judgment for both the 
Government and Stencel against the serviceman and also 
upheld the dismissal of Stencel’s cross-claim against the 
Government. 


In the Feres case, the Supreme Court held that an on- 
duty serviceman who is injured due to the negligence of 
Government officials may not recover against the United 
States under the FTCA. 7/d., 340 U.S. at 146. The Su- 
preme Court in Stencel reviewed the Feres decision and 
concluded that it rested on three factors. First, the Su- 
preme Court found that the relationship between the Gov- 
ernment and its military personnel is distinctively federal 
in character, and, thus, it would not make sense to have 
the liability of the Government to an injured serviceman 
depend on the law  f the place where the injury occurred. 
Second, the Supreme Court determined that the statutory 
compensation scheme, which provides pensions and medi- 
cal services to injured servicemen without regard to any 
negligence by the Government, stands as a legal substitute 
for allowing the Government to be sued in tort for negli- 
gence. Third and finally, the Supreme Court concluded 
that military discipline and the relationship between a 


106a 


soldier and his superiors, which has no counterpart in 
civilian affairs, might be distorted by the imposition of 
tort liability. Stencel, 431 U.S. at 671-72. 


In the case of the contractor suing the Government, the 
Supreme Court determined that the same factors were 
relevant and that it must “consider the impact of these 
factors where, as here, the suit against the Government 
is not brought by the serviceman himself, but by a third 
party seeking indemnity for any damages it may be re- 
quired to pay the serviceman.” /d., 431 U.S. at 672. The 
first factor, the application of federal rather than state law, 
and the third factor, the effect of tort liability on military 
discipline, operated with equal force in suits by the serv- 
iceman and suits by the contractor. Id., 431 U.S. at 672- 
73. The second factor, the existence of the military com- 
pensation scheme, the Supreme Court found more difficult 
to apply in the case of the contractor suing to recover 
funds it had paid to the serviceman. However, it con- 
cluded that the compensation scheme served the dual pur- 
pose of providing an efficient remedy for the injured serv- 
iceman and also protected the Government through its 
limitation of liability provisions which provide an upper 
limit on the Government’s liability for service-connected 
injuries. Id., 431 U.S. at 673. Thus, in Stencel, 431 US. 
at 673, the Supreme Court determined that: 


To permit petitioner’s claim would circumvent this 
limitation, thereby frustrating one of the essential 
features of the Veterans’ Benefits Act. As we stated 
in a somewhat different context concerning the Tort 
Claims Act: “To permit [petitioner] to proceed .. . 
here would be to judicially admit at the back door 
that which has been legislatively turned away at the 
front door. We do not believe that the [Federal 
Tort Claims] Act permits such a result.” [Citations 
omitted, alterations and omissions in original. ] 


Therefore, the contractor was not allowed to recover from 
the Government where the underlying claim for which the 


107a 


contractor was seeking indemnity was made by an injured 
serviceman. In conclusion, the Court observed that 
“[slince the relationship between the United States and 
[the contractor] is based on a commercial contract, there 


is no basis for a claim of unfairness in this result.” Jd., 
431 U.S. at 674. 


The situation analyzed in Stencel, a contractor seeking 
indemnity from the United States for claims made by an 
injured serviceman, is analogous to plaintiff's claim in 
this case. Plaintiff in this action is seeking repayment 
from the Government of amounts it paid to injured mili- 
tary service personnel based on the Government’s provi- 
sion of specifications for the product which a) egedly 
harmed the military service personnel. BLACK’s LAW 
DICTIONARY 769 (6th ed. 1990) defines indemnity as 
“reimbursement.” Reimbursement of the amounts it paid 
in settlement and legal fees is what plaintiff requests here, 
and, thus, the strictures of the Stencel case apply and fore- 
close plaintiff's claim that the Government must reimburse 
it for its costs and fees in connection with the Agent 
Orange litigation. This suit by the plaintiff is a “back 
door” attempt to recover from the Government what the 
Feres doctrine blocked at the front door: that is, damages 
for injuries suffered by servicepersons in the line of duty. 
Accordingly, the rationale of Stencel requires this Court 
to deny the plaintiff’s claim. 


The reasoning of Feres and Stencel was later amplified 
and extended by the Supreme Court in Boyle v. United 
Technologies Corp., 487 U.S. 500 ( 1988), which involved 
an action between private parties but implicated the Fed- 
eral Government’s interests. In Boyle, a United States 
Marine co-pilot was killed when his helicopter crashed 
into the water during a training exercise. Although the 
Marine survived the impact, he was unable to escape from 
the submerged helicopter and drowned. Based on state 
tort law, the Mairne co-pilot’s estate sued the Government 
contractor that built the helicopter, claiming that the 
escape hatch was designed negligently because it opened 


108a 


outwards and was unusable when the helicopter was 
under water, due to the pressure of the water outside the 
submerged craft. The Government contractor (United 
Technologies) contended that it made the escape hatch 
to the precise specifications required by its contract with 
the Government and therefore was not liable under state 
tort law. 


Even though it was a state law tort suit between pri- 
vate parties, the Supreme Court found that “the Federal 
Government’s interest in the procurement of equipment 
is implicated by suits such as the present one—even 
though the dispute is one between private parties.” /d., 
487 U.S. at 506. Thus, federal law could possibly apply. 
However, for federal law to displace state tort law, there 
must be a significant conflict between a federal policy and 
the opeation of the state tort law. Id., 487 U.S. at 507. 
Looking at the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 2671-80 (1988) (FTCA), the Supreme Court indenti- 
fied a provision that suggested the outlines of a significant 
conflict between federal interests and state tort law in the 
area of Government procurement. While the FTCA au- 
thorized suits against the Government for harm caused 
by the negligent or wrongful conduct of Government em- 
ployees in certain circumstances, it specifically excepted 
from consent to suit any claims based on the exercise of 
a discretionary function by a federal agency or employee, 
28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) (1988). Boyle, 487 U.S. at 511. 
The Court determined that: 


[T]he selection of the appropriate design for military 
equipment to be used by our Armed Forces is as- 
suredly a discretionary function within the meaning 
of this provision. It often involves not merely engi- 
neering analysis but judgment as to the balancing of 
many technical, military, and even social considera- 
tions, including specifically the trade-off between 
greater safety and greater combat effectiveness. And 
we are further of the view that permitting “second- 
guessing” of these judgments * * * through state 


109a 


tort suits against contractors would produce the same 
effect sought to be avoided by the FTCA exemption. 
{Citations omitted. ] 


Id. Thus, the state law, which would hold the Govern- 
ment contractor liable for design defects in military equip- 
ment, is displaced by the federal policy and law of defer- 
ring to military discretion in the procurement of military 
equipment embodied in the FTCA. 


The Supreme Court in Boyle adopted a three-part test 
to determine when, to avoid conflict with the discretionary 
function exception, displacement of state law is appro- 
priate. It stated: 


Liability for design defects in military equipment 
cannot be imposed, pursuant to state law, when (1) 
the United States approved reasonably precise specifi- 
cations; (2) the equipment conformed to those spec- 
ifications; and (3) the supplier warned the United 
States about the dangers in the use of the equipment 
that were known to the supplier but not to the 
United States. 


Id., 487 U.S. at 512. If the contractor satisfies this test, 
then it is not subject to tort liability under state law for 
defects in equipment it manufactured for the military in 
conformance with precise specifications provided by the 
Government. This is because such liability would infringe 
on the discretionary function exception to the FTCA by 
allowing a state court to second-guess indirectly the Gov- 
ernment’s judgment in the selection of the appropriate 
désign for military equipment. 


Relying on the Government contractor defense, the de- 
fendant argues here that the plaintiff's Tucker Act claim 
for contractual damages, just like a state court tort suit, 
is an attempt to have the judiciary second-guess the Gov- 
ernment’s decision to procure and employ Agent Orange. 
The defendant claims that this flies in the face of the 
Government contractor defense and the discretionary 
function exception and that it does violence to the policy 


110a 


of Government discretion in military procurement which 
these doctrines protect. Thus, based on the policies under- 
lying the Government contractor defense, the defendant 
contends that the plaintiff is barred from recovery on its 
Tucker Act claim. 


The Government contractor defense is important to the 
instant case for two reasons. First, its underlying policies, 
as expressed in Boyle, are to protect the discretion of the 
Government in procuring military equipment, as man- 
dated by the discretionary function exception to the 
FTCA. Therefore, this Court must determine whether 
these policies apply equally to suits by contractors against 
the Government as they do to suits by injured military 
personnel against the contactor, which Boyle addressed 
specifically. Second, this Court must consider whether 
the Government contractor defense operated in the suits 
plaintiff faced and provided plaintiff with such a strong 
defense that it is without grounds to claim that it was 
actually in grave danger of being held liable to third par- 
ties in tort for injuries stemming from the product it pro- 
duced for the Government. 


This Court agrees with the defendant’s argument that 
the policies supporting the Boyle decision apply with 
equal force to an attempt by a Government contractor to 
sue the Government directly. The Supreme Court in 
Boyle was concerned with preserving the discretion of the 
military in choosing the appropriate design for military 
equipment because this choice involves balancing many 
conflicting considerations, including the trade-off between 
safety and combat effectiveness. /d., 487 U.S. at 511. 
This exact same discretion and balancing by the Govern- 
ment is implicated in the case at issue. 


The Government procured Agent Orange to serve mili- 
tary needs in Vietnam. The product was designed and 
used to save American soldiers’ lives by eliminating pos- 
sible hiding places for the Viet Cong and North Viet- 
namese troops. Trade-offs between the effectiveness of 


lila 


Agent Orange and its safety were a necessary part of the 
Government’s procurement and design activities. This 
Court agrees with Chief Judge Weinstein, who found that 
“[t]he information available makes it clear that the gov- 
ernment would have concluded that the beneficial saving 
of American soldiers’ lives by defoliating the Vietnamese 
jungles far outweighed any minimal risks to our own or 
allied troops posed by exposure to Agent Orange.” Opt- 
Out Opinion, 611 F. Supp. at 1263-64. As another court 
has noted, “[iJt is this sort of balancing which the Boyle 
defense protects, by providing for contractor immunity 
where state tort law would hold the contractors liable for 
injuries resulting from the government’s design deficien- 
cies.” In re Aircraft Crash Litig., 752 F. Supp. 1326 
1370 (S.D. Ohio 1990), aff'd without op., 935 F.2d 269 
(6th Cir. 1991). Thus, this Court will heed the warning 
in Boyle, 487 U.S. at 511, and not second-guess military 
procurement decisions made by the Government in the 
guise of allowing the plaintiff contractor to recover from 
the Government payments made to injured service per- 
sons. Also, this Court will not restructure the United 
States’ immunity and consent to tort suits, which are 
specified by the FTCA and its exception for discretionary 
functions, through the vehicle of a contract claim based 
on tort damages, especially in light of the expansion of 
immunity clearly manifested in Boyle. Lopez, 858 F.2d 
at 718. 


Plaintiff argues that the Government contractor defense 
would not have applied to shield it from liability if the 
veterans’ suit had not been settled because the unwanted 
dioxin which contaminated the Agent Orange was not a 
part of the Agent Orange policy considerations which are 
protected by the discretionary function exception. Plain- 
tiff admits that the decision to use Agent Orange was a 
discretionary governmental decision but alleges that the 
use of design specifications which resulted in contamina- 
tion was not a policy level determination protected by the 
discretionary function exception. Plaintiff claims this type 


112a 


of parsing a decision into bits that are either discretionary 
or nondiscretionary is supported by the holding in United 
States v. Gaubert, USS. , 111 S. Ct. 1267 
(1991). However, it is clear that Boyle has already de- 
cided that the procurement of military equipment, when 
the United States Government approved reasonably pre- 
cise specifications, is subject to the discretionary function 
exception. /d., 487 U.S. at 512. This is the first prong 
of the Boyle test, and, along with the second prong, it as- 
sures that “the suit is within the area where the policy of 
the ‘discretionary function’ would be frustrated—i.e., they 
assure that the design feature in question was considered 
by the Government officer, and not merely by the con- 
tractor itself.” Jd. Therefore, since Boyle clearly holds 
that the procurement of military equipment by the Gov- 
ernment under reasonably precise specifications is a dis- 
cretionary function, there is no need to apply the more 
general analysis of a discretionary function in Gaubert. 
Plaintiff has repeatedly urged that the Government 
created the precise specifications, that it followed these 
specifications exactly, and that it was unaware of any 
hazards which the Government may have known about. 
Thus, by plaintiff's own factual assertions, it is evident 
that the procurement of Agent Orange, even though con- 
taminated by dioxin, was a discretionary function of the 
Government. 


Plaintiff submits that Boyle was several years subse- 
quent to the settlement in this case in 1984, and that, in 
1984, the application of the Government contractor de- 
fense was, at best, uncertain. In effect, plaintiff argues 
that Boyle created a new doctrine and that it should not 
be applied retroactively. This raises the second reason 
for consideration of the Government contractor defense; 
namely, its availability to the plaintiff as a defense in the 
state tort suits it faced. The defendant contends that the 
plaintiff would never have been required to pay the vet- 
erans for their alleged injuries because, as a Government 
contractor, the plaintiff was completely protected by the 


113a 


Government contractor defense. The Government notes 
that plaintiff was, in fact, granted summary judgment ear- 
lier against the opt-out claimants in view of the Govern- 
ment contractor defense in the district court. Opt-out 
Opinion, 611 F. Supp. at 1263-64. Also, the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed 
on this basis, because “{s]ubjecting military contractors 
to full tort liability would inject the judicial branch into 
political and military decisions that are beyond its con- 
stitutional authority and constitutional competence.” In 
re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 818 F.2d at 191. 


Plaintiff argues that it is unfair to retroactively apply 
Boyle, which was decided in 1988, to the issues plaintiff 
faced at the time of the settlement in 1984. However, 
this Court is not applying Boyle retroactively. The Gov- 
ernment contractor defense existed long before Boyle. See 
Yearsley v. W.A. Ross Constr. Co., 309 US. 18 (1940). 
Instead, using Boyle as a guide, this Court is applying the 
holdings of Feres (1950) and Stencel (1977), as dis- 
cussed earlier, and the discretionary function exception to 
the FTCA, to the issues presented in this case. Feres. 
Stencel, and the FTCA were all operative at the time of 
the settlement in 1984 and would have barred a military 
contractor’s tort liability to injured military service per- 
sonnel. In fact, the defense was fully discussed by Judge 
Pratt in his 1983 decision, which granted the plaintiff's 
motion for summary judgment and allowed the plaintiff 
to be removed from the class action suit based on the op- 
eration of the Government contractor defense. Agent 
Orange, 565 F. Supp. at 1265. Thus, the later decision 
in Boyle did not chart a new course for Government con- 
tractors. It merely enunciated and clarified the Govern- 
ment contractor defense which already existed. 


As a final note, plaintiff also argues that the Govern- 
ment has taken inconsistent positions, by opposing the 
Government contractor defense in the district court and 
supporting it in this case. Plaintiff claims that the Gov- 
ernment should be estopped from asserting a different 


1l4a 


position in this case than it took in the earlier case in 
which it filed the brief. Under Office of Personnel Man- 
agement v. Richmond, 496 U.S. 414 (1990), it is unlikely 
that estoppel will be found against the Government with- 
out a showing of fraud or affirmative misconduct by the 
Government. Heckler v. Community Health Serv., Inc., 
467 U.S. 51, 67 (1984); Schweiker v. Hansen, 450 U.S. 
785, 788-89 (1981); Jana, Inc. v. United States, 936 
F.2d 1265, 1270 (Fed. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 116 
L. Ed. 2d 775 (1992); Bolt v. United States, 944 F.2d 
603, 609 (9th Cir. 1991); Portmann v. United States, 
674 F.2d 1155, 1164 (7th Cir. 1982); People’s Bank & 
Trust Co. v. United States, 7 Cl. Ct. 665, 668-69 (1985). 
No fraud has been shown or even alleged here, but plain- 
tiff does claim affirmative misconduct on the part of the 
Government. However, even if plaintiff were able to meet 
the extremely stringent standard necessary to prove af- 
firmative misconduct, see e.g., Immigration & Naturaliza- 
tion Serv. v. Miranda, 459 U.S. 14, 17-18 (1982), plain- 
tiff's estoppel argument still fails on more basic grounds. 
Even assuming that the Government is ever subject to 
estoppel, a party cannot prevail without at least showing 
that the traditional elements of estoppel are present. Lyng 
v. Payne, 476 U.S. 926, 935 (1986). Plaintiff's claim 
does not meet the basic elements of traditional estoppel, 
which arises when “one person makes a definite misrepre- 
sentation of fact to another person having reason to be- 
lieve that the other will rely upon it and the other in 
reasonable reliance upon it does an act” which changes 
his position for the worse. Heckler v. Community Health 
Serv., Inc., 467 U.S. at 59 (quoting RESTATEMENT 
(SECOND) OF TorTs § 894(1) (1979)). In this case, 
the plaintiff did not rely on the assertions in the Govern- 
ment’s brief either in its decision to settle or in its de- 
fense in the opt-out cases for which the brief was filed. 
The assertions in the Government’s brief did not affect 
the plaintiff's settlement decision because the brief in ques- 
tion was filed in another case on August 31, 1984, sev- 
eral months after the decision to settle was announced in 


ilSa 


the class action suit, which occurred on May 7, 1984. 
Settlement Opinion, 597 F. Supp. at 748. Also, in the 
opt-out cases, the plaintiff must have pressed the Govern- 
ment contractor defense regardless of the Government's 
brief because the plaintiff received summary judgment 
against the opt-out claimants based in part on the opera- 
tion of the Government contractor defense. Opt-out 
Opinion, 611 F. Supp. at 1263. Thus, plaintiff cannot 
establish its reliance on the assertions of the Government, 
and so it fails to meet the traditional and basic require- 
ments of estoppel. 


In final summary, the plaintiff has failed to convince 
this Court that it can recover on any one of its implied- 
in-fact contract theories. Further, even if any one of its 
three contract theories could be found to be factually sup- 
portable, the plaintiff would still lose this lawsuit because 
of the application of the Government contractor defense 
to the undisputed facts. 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated above, the defendant’s motion 
for summary judgment is granted, and the complaint is to 
be dismissed. 


No costs. 


116a 


[Filed Apr. 22, 1992] 


IN THE UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT 


No. 90-391 C 


Won. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
A MISSOURI CORPORATION 


V. 


THE UNITED STATES 


JUDGMENT 


Pursuant to the opinion of April 22, 1992, granting 
defendant’s motion for summary judgment, 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this date, pursu- 
ant to Rule 58, that the complaint is dismissed. No costs. 


Davip A. LAMPEN 
Clerk of Court 


April 22, 1992 By: /s’ Linda A. Elkins 
Deputy Clerk 


NOTE: As to appeal, 60 days from this date, see RUSCC 
72, re number of copies and listing of all plaintiffs. Filing 
fee is $105.00. 


117a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


92-5124 


HERCULES INCORPORATED. 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


ORDER 
[Filed Jul. 7, 1994] 


A combined petition for rehearing and suggestion for 
rehearing in banc having been filed by the APPELLANT, 
and a response thereto having been invited by the court 
and filed by the APPELLEE, and the petition for rehear- 
ing having been referred to the panel that heard the ap- 
peal, and thereafier the suggestion for rehearing in banc 
and response having been referred to the circuit judges 
who are in regular active service, 


UPON CONSIDERATION THEREOF, it is 


ORDERED that the petition for rehearing be, and the 
same hereby is, DENIED and it is further 


ORDERED that the suggestion for rehearing in banc 
be, and the same hereby is, DECLINED. 


The mandate of the court will issue on July 14, 1994. 


Dated: 


FoR THE COURT, 


FRANCIS X. GINDHART 
Clerk 


By /s/ Diane M. Frye 
DIANE M. FRYE 
Chief Deputy Clerk 
July 7, 1994 


119a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


2-5138 
Wm. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 


V. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


ee eee 


ORDER 


[Filed Jul. 7, 1994] 


A combined petition for rehearing and suggestion for 
rehearing in banc having been filed by the APPELLANT, 
and a response thereto having been invited by the court 
and filed by the APPELLEE, and the petition for re- 
hearing having been referred to the panel that heard the 
appeal, and thereafter the suggestion for rehearing in banc 
and response having been referred to the circuit judges 
who are in regular active service, 


UPON CONSIDERATION THEREOF, it is 


ORDERED that the petition for rehearing be, and the 
same hereby is, DENIED and it is further 


ORDERED that the suggestion for rehearing in banc 
be, and the same hereby is, DECLINED. 


The mandate of the court will issue on July 14, 1994. 


“— 
- 
12¢ 5 
For THE € ‘OURT; | a 
,-77 2 : 77 
> 4, \ 7 rr * : ‘ 9s 
i .» & “ 


Dated: July 7, 1994 


. 
a ‘ . © Ty ; a\ 
, ‘ ° .* 4 
- P; ~ ‘ . . 
ee oe. 
b ool.’ 


O27 bye Gh 


= 


+ > StReraees ae 
BOL Sf vit TAM“ AM A SA Ce 


12la 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT 


92-5124 


HERCULES INCORPORATED, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


92-5138 


Wan. T. THOMPSON COMPANY, 
Plaintiff-A ppellant, 
Vv. 


THE UNITED STATES, 
Defendant-A ppellee. 


JUDGMENT 


ON APPEAL from the United States Court of Federal 
Claims in CASE NO(S). 90-496C and 90-391C 


This CAUSE having been heard and considered, it is 
ORDERED and ADJUDGED: AFFIRMED 


ENTERED BY ORDER 
OF THE COURT 


/s/ Francis X. Gindhart 
FRANCIS X. GINDHART 
Clerk 


DATED May 4, 1994 
ISSUED AS A MANDATE: July 14, 1994 


