“gupeme Court, US | 
FILLED 


(1) | MUN 19 1996 


No, 94-818 | oFFicz oF THE CLERK 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


HERCULES, INCORPORATED, 
and 


Wma. T. THOMPSON COMPANY 


w. Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE 
NATIONAL VETERANS LEGAL SERVICES PROGRAM 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


GERSHON M. RATNER 
NATIONAL VETERANS LEGAL 
SERVICES PROGRAM 
2001 S Street, N.W., Ste. 610 
Washington, D.C. 20009 
June 19, 1995 (202) 265-8305 


WILSON - Eras Printing Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WASHINGTON, D.C. 20001 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


# £ ¢ yy 3 = 
~# i : 
: > 32 . * 
\ s > - . . - ¢ 
Soe acts : Z 
te a hoe Yaa : } Z 2 wee 
: wre AD ® - : ies y 
. ~ i . , 
‘ ty bed 
“ ’ rs , 
wa ; . 
2 . p! ~~ ° “ 
ptt Pte 25 ise 
. . ~ 7 
Rai i Pt : ; 
~ . - . ¢ 2 
. ae . 3 1° 
s » ~ _ q 
* ad * —_ ° ? - io 
eer. RY Ie ae g~¥ 
; borage Mey 
* , 7 4 . 
Sey 
j 
: » 
2 tt 4 a . 


% 


BO ae Bee 


at 


a ee 
ve 


> %, , 


: * 
es a 
at 5 ® 4 


: ee | Tit AT. a ah K 
FOTN Ate at Pe ree st Ae, OPS ee re te ee ae 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
Amicus curiae will address only the following question: 


Whether credible scientific evidence now exists support- 
ing an association between exposure to dioxin (which was 
contained in Agent Orange sprayed in Vietnam) and 
various cancers and other diseases suffered by Vietnam 
veterans. 


(i) 


te re 


> _ 


: 7 PP ac 
od : a= gal ee a ee 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTION PRESENTED oooi.......c:ccccsssssccccsssssseeesssecesee 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .........-.---ccccsscccccscesscccccoooees 
INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAB ...ccccccccccccscssoooeeeeooe- 


INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGU- 


I. CREDIBLE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE SUP- 
PORTS FINDING AN ASSOCIATION BE- 
TWEEN EXPOSURE TO DIOXIN (WHICH 
WAS CONTAINED IN AGENT ORANGE 
SPRAYED IN VIETNAM) AND VARIOUS 
CANCERS AND OTHER DISEASES SUF- 
FERED BY VIETNAM VETERANS................. 


ce 


(iii) 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. Litig., 597 F. 
Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) ................2.2000..2.00.--. 4,9 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 113 
FS SF fF  =—«_—_ See Jenbtitileestieil 6 
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 
BB U.B.C.. 6 ABAD G) (BR) CRBBE ) 2nncnrcccccccceseccscesccsesss 7,8 


Agent Orange Act of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-4, 
105 Stat. 11 (codified as amended at 38 U.S.C. 
I  aitichincinitinipnstenaiintienntntiintegtasdhetedibiinge 

56 Fed. Reg. 51,651 €1901)...................--.-.-.--0cccs-eeeeee- 

8 eT SS | reese 

58. Fed. Reg. 50,528 (1998)..........................2.0---cccceceeeee 

59 Fed. Reg. 5,161 (1994) (proposed rule) (codi- 
fied at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309. (1994)-) 


OTHER AUTHORITIES 


Committee to Review the Health Effects in Viet- 
nam Veterans of Exposure to Herbicides, Insti- 
tute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences, 
Veterans and Agent Orange: Health Effects of 
Herbicides Used in Vietnam (1994) ................... 4,5, 6,7 
Peter H. Schuck, Agent Orange on Trial: Mass 
Tozic Disasters in the Courts (1986) .................. 8 


ooo Cl 


oo 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-818 


HERCULES, INCORPORATED, 
and 


Wo. T. THOMPSON COMPANY 
Petitioners, 


Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE 
NATIONAL VETERANS LEGAL SERVICES PROGRAM 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


This brief amicus curiae is filed with the consent of the 
parties, as provided for in the Rules of this Court. 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


The National Veterans Legal Services Program 
(“NVLSP”) is a non-profit, tax-exempt organization that 
serves as a national support center in the area of veterans 
law, including disability compensation cases. The NVLSP 
regularly represents veterans before the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals and in various other federal 
courts. The NVLSP also publishes informational materials 


2 


for veterans and their advocates and conducts training 
events for veterans advocates. The services of the NVLSP 
are provided to individual veterans and classes thereof, 
national veterans service organizations, state and county 
veterans offices, community-based veterans organizations, 
volunteer attorneys, private bar attorneys, legal services 
attorneys, and other veterans advocates nationwide. The 
NVLSP has assisted and continues to assist Vietnam 
veterans in obtaining compensation through administra- 
tive and judicial means for health problems resulting 
from exposure to Agent Orange. 


INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


From 1962 to 1971, millions of gallons of defoliant, 
including principally “Agent Orange,”’ were sprayed 
over Vietnam in support of military operations. Pro- 
duced in accordance with government specifications, 
Agent Orange contained dioxin, one of the most toxic 
substances known to science. Since the war, many 
American veterans who were exposed to Agent Orange 
while serving their country have suffered, and continue 


to suffer, from an array of physical illnesses, diseases, and 
death. 


In its Brief For the United States in Opposition, the 
government argued that one ground for upholding the 
Federal Circuit’s decision is that there is no credible 
evidence to support the claim that Agent Orange caused 
any health problems in veterans exposed to it (Resp’t 
Br. in Opp’n to Cert. 11, 14-15) (“Resp’t Br.”). Absent 
evidence supporting causation, the United States asserts, 
petitioners would not have been liable to the veteran 
class members had the case gone to trial. /d. at 11, 14- 


1 Agent Orange is a 50/50 blend of 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic 
Acid (2,4-D) and 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4,5-T). The 
chemical processes of making 2,4,5-T necessarily create some 
amount of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (“dioxin”). 


3 


15. Therefore, petitioners’ costs of settling the class ac- 
tion were not caused by any alleged dangers of Agent 
Orange, but rather by petitioners’ voluntary decision to 
settle the class action. /d. at 7-8. 


The NVLSP objects to the United States’ suggestion 
that there is no credible evidence that Agent Orange 
caused any health problems to Vietnam veterans. The 
government ignores substantial, credible scientific and 
medical evidence that supports an association between 
dioxin exposure and certain cancers and other serious 
diseases suffered by many Vietnam veterans. After re- 
viewing a vast amount of this evidence, the National 
Academy of Sciences (NAS) so found. Even the Secre- 
tary of Veterans Affairs, who commissioned the NAS’s 
exhaustive review, has concluded that the credible scien- 
tific evidence in favor of an association between exposure 
to dioxin and certain diseases is equal to or outweighs 
the credible evidence against such an association. 


ARGUMENT 


I. CREDIBLE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE SUPPORTS 
FINDING AN ASSOCIATION BETWEEN EXPO- 
SURE TO DIOXIN (WHICH WAS CONTAINED IN 
AGENT ORANGE SPRAYED IN VIETNAM) AND 
VARIOUS CANCERS AND OTHER DISEASES SUF- 
FERED BY VIETNAM VETERANS. 


The government argued in its Brief For the United 
States in Opposition that one ground for upholding the 
Federal Circuit’s decision in favor of the government is 
that there is no credible evidence to support the claim 
that Agent Orange caused any health problems in veterans 
exposed to it (Resp’t Br. 11, 14-15). The government 
relies in part on this purported absence of causation evi- 
dence to support its argument that petitioners would not 
have been liable to the veteran class members had the case 
gone to trial and, therefore, the petitioners’ costs of settling 
the Agent Orange Litigation ° were not caused by the gov- 


4 


ernment but rather by the petitioners’ voluntary decision 
to settle. According to the government, petitioners’ chances 
of facing actual liability in the Agent Orange Litigation 
were sO remote as to “necessarily imply[] that petitioners’ 
settlement could not have been ‘reasonable.’” (Resp’t 
Br. 20). 


The United States’ assertion of an “absence of scien- 
tific evidence regarding the consequences of dioxin expo- 
sure” (Resp’t Br. 11) flies in the face of the now available 
scientific evidence, the conclusions of the National Acad- 
emy of Sciences (NAS), and the findings of the Secretary 
of Veterans Affairs. Credible scientific evidence supports 
finding that it is more likely than not that dioxin causes 
various diseases in human beings. Numerous Vietnam 
veterans suffer from these diseases. 


Between 1962 and 1971, the United States military 
sprayed approximately 11.2 million gallons of Agent 
Orange over approximately 3.6 million acres in Vietnam. 
These large-scale spraying operations spread herbicides 
to defoliate potential ambush areas and to destroy the 
enemy’s crops. From the first reports of the use of the 
chemicals in 1964, groups of scientists, including the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
banded together to oppose the use of the chemicals. See 
Committee to Review the Health Effects in Vietnam Vet- 
erans of Exposure to Herbicides, Institute of Medicine, 
National Academy of Sciences, Veterans and Agent 
Orange: Health Effects of Herbicides Used in Vietnam 
29 (1994) (“NAS Report”). In 1969, the first scientific 
report found that one of the primary chemicals in Agent 
Orange caused birth defects in laboratory animals. See 
id. at 30 (citing Bionetics Research Laboratories, Evalu- 


* Agent Orange Litigation refers to the class action brought by 
Vietnam veterans against the United States and various herbicide 
manufacturers including the petitioners. See In re “Agent Orange” 
Prod. Liab. Litig., 597 F. Supp. 740 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). 


5 


ation of Carcinogenic, Teratogenic and Mutagenic Activi- 
ties of Selected Pesticides and Industrial Chemicals 
(1968) ). In response, the United States Army suspended 
use of Agent Orange in 1970 and all herbicide spraying 
operations in 1971. 


After years of struggle within the scientific community 
and in the Agent Orange Litigation, Congress recognized 
a need for an objective scientific appraisal of the 
association between the increased risk of disease and 
exposure to Agent Orange and the other herbicides used 
in support of military operations in Vietnam. Accord- 
ingly, Congress required the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
to agree to a review of the issue by the NAS. See Agent 
Orange Act of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-4, § 3, 105 Stat. 
11, 13-15 (codified as amended at 38 U.S.C. § 1116 
(1991)). The NAS committee was charged with evaluat- 
ing the strength of the scientific evidence as to an asso- 
ciation between human exposure to the herbicides and 
suspect diseases. 

Created by an Act of Congress, the NAS is a non- 
governmental, non-profit society of distinguished scholars 
with a mandate to advise the federal government on press- 
ing scientific and technical issues. Its members are elected 
by their peers from universities and the private sector, 
and the members serve without compensation. For its 
Agent Orange committee, the NAS gathered a group of 
eminent professionals, all of whom had no conflicts of 
interest, and nore of whom had taken public positions on 
the potential health effects of herbicides. See NAS Report 
at vii, 764-70. 


In preparation for its report, the NAS committee con- 
ducted an exhaustive review of the available evidence— 
reading 6,420 abstracts, performing detailed review and 
analysis of 230 epidemiological studies, holding three 
formal public hearings, and consulting with outside ex- 
perts. See NAS Report at xi-xiii, 735-56. In assessing 
the relative validity of studies, the NAS critiqued the 


6 


methods of its peers and based its conclusion that there was 
a “positive association” between herbicide exposure and 
five specific diseases only on studies that eliminated chance, 
bias, and confounding with reasonable confidence. Cf. 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 113 S. Ct. 
2786, 2795-99 (1993) (proposing similar criteria). In 
this process, the committee considered several factors for 
each possible association including its statistical strength, 
dose-response relation, temporal relation between exposure 
and onset, consistency across studies, specificity, and bio- 
logic plausibility." See NAS Report at 238-40. While 
there is much more credible evidence favoring an associ- 
ation between dioxin exposure and illness as to some 
diseases than to others, the NAS Report demonstrates, 
at a minimum, the existence of a material issue of fact 
with respect to a number of diseases. 


Based on this extensive review, the NAS committee 
concluded that “sufficient evidence” exists to find a “posi- 
tive association” between exposure to Agent Orange and 
the onset of three cancers: soft tissue sarcoma,* non- 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma,” and Hodgkin’s disease.* See id. at 
6-10, 475-501, 525-64, 572-74. The committee also found 
“sufficient evidence” of a “positive association” between 


* Animal studies demonstrate the plausible biological mechanism 
of dioxin’s actions. These studies establish that dioxin “interacts 
with an intracellular protein called the Ah receptor [and that) this 
interaction appears to play a role in a number of health effects 
observed in animals. Because humans also have intracellular pro- 
teins identified as Ah receptors, [the] interactions [of dioxin] and 
[the Ah] receptors could play a role in human health effects.” 
NAS Report at 3. 

4A diverse group of malignant neoplasms (tumors) in the areas 
within and between organs. See id. at 782. 

5 A diverse group of malignant lymphomas, that is, tumors de- 
rived from cells in the lymph nodes, without the giant Reed- 
Sternberg cells characteristic of Hodgkin’s disease. See id. at 781. 

*A malignant lymphoma characterized by progressive enlarge- 
ment of the lymph nodes, liver, and spleen, and by progressive 
anemia. See id. at 780. 


7 


Agent Orange and two severe skin conditions: chloracne ” 
and porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT).* See id. at 6-10, 
672-83. Moreover, the committee found evidence “sug- 
gestive” * of an association between the herbicides used in 
Vietnam and respiratory cancers (lung, larynx, and 
trachea), prostate cancer, and multiple myeloma.” See 
id. at 6-10, 460-75, 512-22, 574-76. 


The NAS’s conclusions following its exhaustive review 
and analysis of the scientific evidence concerning the 
toxicity of Agent Orange illustrate the genuine dispute 
that exists as to the causal relationship between exposure 
to Agent Orange and veterans’ health problems. After the 
NAS Report, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), 
which had resisted acknowledging the dangers of Agent 
Orange, reviewed the NAS Report and “all other sound 
medical and scientific information.” 38 U.S.C. § 1116(b) 
(2) (1991). The VA concluded that the credible evi- 
dence in favor of an association between herbicide ex- 
posure and disease is at least as strong as the credible 
evidence against such an association as to all five diseases 
for which the NAS has found “sufficient evidence,” and 
four of the five diseases for which the NAS has found 
“suggestive evidence.” In making this determination, the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs was required to consider 


7 An acne-like eruption, evident shortly after exposure, which 
produces persistent comedones, keratin cysts, and inflamed papules 
causing hyperpigmentation and lesions often resulting in a char- 
acteristic scarring pattern. See id. at 779. 


* An uncommon disorder of porphyrin metabolism manifested in 
thinning and blistering of skin in sun-exposed areas in addition 
to excess skin pigmentation and excessive hair growth. The com- 
mittee limited its finding to genetically susceptible persons. See 
id. at 781. 


* For this latter category of cancers, the committee could not con- 
fidently eliminate possible chance, bias, or confounding. See id. 
at 6, 674-75. 


1° Cancer of specific bone marrow cells characterized by tumors 
in the marrow of various bones; more specifically, a malignant 


proliferation of plasma cells derived from B lymphocytes. See id. 
at 781. 


8 


whether the results were “statistically significant, . . . cap- 
able of replication, and [could] withstand peer review.” 
38 U.S.C. § 1116(b)(2) (1991). 


In 1991, the VA concluded that a positive association 
exists between exposure to Agent Orange and the subse- 
quent development of soft tissue sarcoma and reaffirmed 
its earlier determination of such an association with chlor- 
acne. See 56 Fed. Reg. 51,651 (1991) (sarcoma); 56 
Fed. Reg. 52,473 (1991) (chloracne). Although the VA 
had initially denied an association between herbicide ex- 
posure and PCT, after the NAS study, the VA found 
credible evidence of such a linkage. Compare 56 Fed. 
Reg. 52,473-74 (1991) (denying association with PCT) 
with 58 Fed. Reg. 50,528-29 (1993) (finding credible 
evidence of such an association). Similarly, the VA has 
found associations with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 
Hodgkin’s disease, as well as with respiratory (lung, 
larynx, and trachea) cancers and multiple myeloma. See 
59 Fed. Reg. 5,161-62 (1994) (proposed rule) (codified 
at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (1994)). The NAS Report has 
thus altered the “one principle firmly embedded in [the 
VA’s] bureaucratic mind” that “any problems suffered 
by veterans exposed to Agent Orange . . . were not, with 
the exception of chloracne, caused by the herbicide.” 
Peier H. Schuck, Agent Orange on Trial: Mass Toxic 
Disasters in the Courts 24 (1986). 


Moreover, the VA has not merely made formalistic 
findings of a positive association between dioxin exposure 
and those diseases but, pursuant to the Agent Orange Act 
of 1991, has granted presumptive service connection to 
Vietnam veterans for these diseases. As a practical matter, 
this means that Vietnam veterans suffering from any of 
those diseases are presumptively entitled to VA disability 
compensation, or their families to VA death benefits if the 
veteran died from these diseases. The number of veterans 
receiving such compensation has dramatically increased 
in the last two years as a result of the newly added 
diseases, so that according to the VA Compensation and 


9 


Pension Service, as of February 1, 1995, approximately 
2,300 veterans receive YA compensation for Agent 
Orange related diseases."' In addition, the number of 
latent cases is, of course, unknown—it took almost 40 
years for solid tissue cancers to develop in atomic bomb 
victims in Japan. See In re “Agent Orange” Prod. Liab. 
Litig., 597 F. Supp. 740, 795 (E.D.N.Y. 1984). 


CONCLUSION 


Contrary to the government's suggestion, substantial, 
credible scientific evidence now exists which supports an 
association between exposure to dioxin and certain can- 
cers and other diseases. The evidence has indeed been 
sufficient to compel the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to 
grant presumptive service connection and corresponding 
VA benefits to Vietnam veterans solely on that basis, 
pursuant to the Agent Orange Act of 1991. 


Respectfully submitted, 


GERSHON M. RATNER 
NATIONAL VETERANS LEGAL 
SERVICES PROGRAM 
2001 S Street, N.W., Ste. 610 
Washington, D.C. 20009 
June 19, 1995 (202) 265-8305 


11 Information provided by facsimile to Gershon M. Ratner by 
Steven Thornberry, VA Compensation and Pension Service, Feb. 
6, 1995. 


