No. 94-226 


Supreme Court of c Hind ag 


October 9 1994 


THE FLORIDA BAR, 
Petitioner, 
vs. 


G. STEWART McHENRY; WENT FOR IT, INC.; and JOHN T. 
BLAKELY, 


Respondents. 


On Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit 


RESPONDENTS’ BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 


BRUCE S. ROGOW 
Counsel of Record 
BRUCE S. ROGOW, P.A. 
2441 Southwest 28th Avenue 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33312 
(305) 767-8909 


BEVERLY A. POHL 


Suite 200 
350 Southeast Second Street 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY) seer 


Attorneys for Respondents 


5604 
OD (600) 3 APPEAL + (600) 5 APPEAL + (600) BRIEF 21 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


I. Whether a state bar association rule which prohibits 
truthful, non-misleading targeted direct maii lawyer advertising 
for 30 days after a personal injury or accident conflicts with 
Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass’n, 486 U.S. 466 (1988)? 


II. Whether a state bar association rule which prohibits 
truthful, non-misleading targeted direct mail personal injury 
lawyer advertising for 30 days after a personal injury or accident is 
content-based, and therefore an invalid time, place, and manner 
restriction on protected commercial speech? 


ii 
LIST OF PARTIES 


G. Stewart McHenry, Plaintiff below and named by Petitioner 
as a Respondent in this Court, was not a party to the proceedings in 
the Eleventh Circuit and should not be named in this proceeding. 
Rule 12.4, R.S.Ct. There is no continuing case or controversy 
between The Florida Bar and Mr. McHenry; his claims against The 
Florida Bar became moot upon his disbarment during the district 
court proceedings. (See Petition for Writ of Certiorari, p. 5, and 
App. 19-20, 34-35). 


EE 


EE 


Summary ofthe Argument .......... ...........45. 


Reasons for Denyingthe Writ ...................... 


I. 


The decision below is consistent with, and was 
mandated by, this Court’s decision in Shapero v. 
Kentucky BarAssociation. ..............+.+. 


A 30-day ban on truthful, non-misleading targeted 
direct mail personal injury lawyer advertising is 
content-based, and is not a permissible time, place, 
and manner regulation-of speech. ............. 


The decision below applies commercial speech 
principles in a way which does not conflict with 
permissible restrictions on speech in selected 
Sib odb sededceeecacctecces 


Contents 
Page 
GSE os cccescccvaccusesaeamomednce leik 11 
TABLE OF CITATIONS 
Cases Cited: 
Board of Trustees of the State University of New York v. 
Fu EE gnc vadckadkesec sdkbcotusein 8 
City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 
SEE as 0440 005 hi odneeeeuts aru eunek es 8 
Ciark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 
POG hvdcbicdddauncdédscddcdseeetinis en, 6,7 
Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S.Ct. 1792 (1993) ............. 8 
Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass'n, 486 U.S. 466 (1988) .... 
00 occ deeeeeheaeeesésoner ede du keno’ i, 2,3,4,5,6,9, 10 
United States Constitution Cited: 
ee eee ec oe ok 8 
Rules Cited: 
Florida Bar: 
PUREE 0g dd0cdbodencctbeece bansboudntieere. 9 


HIP gusecededea<encacesecd snus y 


Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(a) .. 


PTET bccoccc ccs 


Supreme Court Rule 10 


Supreme Court Rule 12.4 


eee eeeeeneeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 


J ee 


No. 94-226 


In the 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 


THE FLORIDA BAR, 


vs. 


G. STEWART McHENRY; WENT FOR IT, INC. and JOHN T. 
BLAKELY, 


Respondents. 


On Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit 


RESPONDENTS’ BRIEF IN OPPOSITION 


DECISIONS BELOW 


The district court and court of appeals decisions in this case 
are cited incorrectly in the Petition for Writ of Certiorari, at page 1. 
The decision below is reported at 21 F.3d 1038 (11th Cir. 1994). 
The district court decision is reported at 808 F. Supp. 1543 (M.D. 
Fla. 1992). 


2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Petitioner's Statement of the Case fails to present an accurate 


description of the proceedings below. Therefore Respondents 
submit this summary of the district court and Eleventh Circuit 


proceedings. 


The Florida Bar devotes the first two pages of its Statement of 
the Case to a survey it conducted in 1987, five years prior to the 
initiation of this action in the district court. That survey played no 
substantive role in this case. 


The Florida Bar survey, in its entirety, is not part of the record 
in this case. Only a “Summary of the Record” of the survey was 
before the district court, and most of that summary is irrelevant to 
the issues in this case. Only two sections of the summary pertain to 
direct mail advertising — a 1987 attitude and opinion poll 
(Magid’s “two telephone surveys of Florida adults”), and a 
compilation of anecdotal personal opinions on lawyer advertising. 
Both submissions lack any indicia of scientific reliability and 
provided no constitutional guidance to the courts below. Neither 
the district court nor the court of appeals commented on either 
“survey.” The Petition’s reliance on those unpublished materials 
distorts The Bar’s description of this case. 


Petitioner’s presentation of the procedural history of this case 
also misleads by featuring the report and recommendation of the 
Magistrate Judge on the parties’ cross-motions for summary 
judgment (Pet. at 5, Pet. App.1-17; see also, Pet. at 10). The 
Magistrate’s recommendations were rejected by the district court 
and by the Eleventh Circuit. (Pet. App. 22-29; 30-46). 


The district court found that Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass’n, 
486 U.S. 466 (1988), which upheld the constitutionality of targeted 
direct mail lawyer advertising, was controlling and dispositive: 


3 


“The substantial interests which Defendants allege were dealt with 
in Shapero.” (Pet. App. 23). The district court also rejected The 
Florida Bar’s argument that the challenged Rules were sustainable 
as time, place, and manner regulations, finding that the Rules were 
not “content neutral.” (Pet. App. 26-27). The court granted 
summary judgment to the challengers: 


The challenged rules substantially impair 
and impede the availability of truthful and 
relevant information which can make a 
positive contribution to consumers in need of 
legal services. This Court holds that as a matter 
of law, the Florida Bar's thirty-day ban on 
personal injury and wrongful death targeted 
direct mail lawyer advertising violates the 
First, Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the 
United States Constitution. 


(Pet. App. 29). 


The Eleventh Circuit affirmed, holding that neither of The 
Bar's asserted state interests (protecting traumatized persons who 
are unable to make an objective evaluation of a personalized 
solicitation from a lawyer; protecting personal privacy of injured 
persons and their families) justified a 30-day ban on “otherwise 
constitutionally protected direct mail advertising by attorneys.” 
(Pet. App. 37). Relying on Shapero’s guidance that “([t}he relevant 
inquiry is the mode of communication,” (Pet. App. 40, citing 
Shapero at 474, 108 S. Ct. at 1922) (emphasis in original), the 
Eleventh Circuit found that targeted direct mail 
“possesses limited potential for overreaching. ...” The court 
below also found that Shapero had considered and rejected The 
Bar's argument that a direct mail letter impermissibly invades the 
privacy of the recipient. (Pet. App. 43-44). Finally, like the district 
court, the Eleventh Circuit found that the challenged rules were 


4 


“unambiguously content-based,” and thus were not subject to a 
time, place, and manner analysis. (Pet. App. 44-45). 


Respondents have no objection to the remainder of 
Petitioner’s Statement of the Case. 


SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 


Certiorari should be denied because the decision below is 
consistent with this Court’s decision in Shapero v. Kentucky Bar 
Ass'n, 486 U.S. 466 (1988). Shapero upheld the constitutionality 
of truthful, non-misleading targeted direct mail Jawyer 
advertising. The challenged rules of The Floride Bar, which 
impose a 30-day ban on such advertising, violate lawyers’ First 
Amendment commercial speech rights as defined in Shapero. 
Petitioner’s complete failure to distinguish or even to address 
Shapero is surprising and revealing. Shapero shuts the door on The 
Bar’s argument.' 


Moreover, the challenged rules are content-based restrictions 
on speech, and as such may not be upheld as reasonable time, place, 
and manner regulations, even if Shapero were not controlling. 


Petitioner’s invitation to the Court to use the narrow issues in 
this case as a springboard to “revisit the entire question of states’ 
authority to regulate attorney solicitation” (Pet. at 10) is unwise 
and unwarranted. The Bar’s suggestion that targeted direct mail 
lawyer advertising somehow jeopardizes “a stable democracy,” 
id., elevates hyperbole over principled reasons for review. 


1. Petitioner's only reference to Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass'n, (Pet. at 7), 
is to “the comments of Justices O'Conner [sic], Rehnquist and Scalia.” Those 
comments were contained in a dissenting opinion, a fact omitted from 
Petitioner's reference. 


| 


og 


In the absence of any conflict with this Court’s commercial 
speech decisions, and in the absence of any important but answered 
question of law raised by the decision below, the Petition for 
Certiorari should be denied. 


REASONS FOR DENYING THE WRIT 
1 


THE DECISION BELOW IS CONSISTENT WITH, 
AND WAS MANDATED BY, THIS COURT’S DECISION 
IN SHAPERO V. KENTUCKY BAR ASSOCIATION. 


This Court’s jurisdiction to review decisions of the courts of 
appeals is tied to those cases which involve substantial conflict 
with this Court’s decisions or important questions of law which 
this Court has never addressed. Rule 10, R.S.Ct. This case, in 
contrast, presents a decision of the Eleventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals which, like the district court, declared a Florida Bar rule 
unconstitutional based on the specific teachings of Shapero v. 
Kentucky Bar Ass'n, 486 U.S. 466 (1988). 


Shapero examined the advertising medium of targeted direct 
mail advertising and found it to be essentially incapable of 
inflicting the wounds on the public now claimed by The Florida 
Bar: 


The relevant inquiry is not whether there exist 
potential clients whose “condition” makes 
them susceptible to undue influence, but 
whether the mode of communication poses a 
serious danger that lawyers will exploit any 
such susceptibility. 


6 


In assessing the potential for overreaching and 
undue influence, the mode of communication 
makes all the difference. 


. + *# 


In short, both types of written solicitation 
[print advertising and targeted direct mail] 
“conve[y] information about legal services [by 
means] that [are] more conducive to reflection 
and the exercise of choice on the part of the 
consumer than is personal solicitation by an 
attorney.” Zauderer, 471 U.S. at 642. 


Shapero, 486 U.S. at 474-76 (emphasis supplied). 


The challenged Rules attempted to do that which Shapero 
forbade — stop delivery of truthful, non-misleading targeted direct 
mail lawyer advertising. Rarely does a state regulation so patently 
violate established federal constitutional law. The decision below 
was correct, presented no conflict with Shapero, and certiorari 
should be denied. 


A 30-DAY BAN ON TRUTHFUL, NON-MISLEADING 
TARGETED DIRECT MAIL PERSONAL INJURY 
LAWYER ADVERTISING IS CONTENT-BASED, AND IS 
NOT A PERMISSIBLE TIME, PLACE, AND ARNER 
REGULATION OF SPEECH. 


It is undisputed that only content-neutral restrictions on 
speech can be upheld on time, place, and manner grounds. (Pet. 15; 
Pet. App. 44; both citing Clark v. Community for Creative Non- 
Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 294 (1984). Petitioner seeks review of the 


7 


decision below which found the 30-day ban on personal injury 
targeted direct mail lawyer advertising to be “unambiguously 
content-based,” (Pet. App. 44, see also, district court decision at 
Pet. App. 26). The Florida Bar asserts that the 30-day Rule “has 
nothing to do with content,” (Pet. 16 n.4) and should be upheld as a 
reasonable time, place, and manner regulation. 


Both the plain words of the Rule, and the published Comment 
to the Rule, belie The Florida Bar’s claim of content-neutrality. 
According to the Rule, a communication is prohibited only if it 
“concerns an action for personal injury or wrongful death or 
otherwise relates to an accident or disaster . . .” and if it is sent less 
than 30 days after the accident. (Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(a); Pet. 2) 
(emphasis supplied). The Comment to the Rule explains, in 
relevant part: 


This rule allows targeted mail solicitation of 
potential plaintiffs or claimants in personal 
injury and wrongful death causes of action or 
other causes of action that relate to an accident, 
disaster, death, or injury, but only if mailed at 
least 30 days after the incident. 


Thus, the Rule regulates targeted direct mail advertisements 
for specified causes of action, not specified recipients as the Bar 
claims. (See Pet. 16 n.4). Clearly, if a targeted direct mail lawyer 
advertisement letter which does not relate to an accident, disaster, 
death or injury is sent to the victim within 30 days, that letter — 
based on its content — would not violate Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(a). 
Thus, the courts below correctly concluded that the challenged 
rules are content-based, and may not be justified as reasonable 
time, place, and manner regulations. Certiorari should be denied 
because the decision below is consistent with established law. 


8 
Il. 


THE DECISION BELOW APPLIES COMMERCIAL 
SPEECH PRINCIPLES IN A WAY WHICH DOES NOT 
CONFLICT WITH PERMISSIBLE RESTRICTIONS ON 
SPEECH IN SELECTED PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS. 


Petitioner’s primary argument in support of certiorari review 
is that Florida lawyers, as part of the “institution” of the 
administration of justice, should be subject to greater restrictions 
on commercial speech than those permitted by this Court’s 
commercial speech precedents. (Pet. 9). The Florida Bar twists the 
cases and suggests that the court below has misapplied the law, and 
restricted the State's right to regulate speech. Of course the State’s 
“right” is a limited one, since the First Amendment is a restraint 
upon governmental power, not a license to regulate. The 
regulation of speech requires the State to justify its restrictions. 
See Board of Trustees of the State University of New York v. Fox, 
492 U.S. 469, 480 (1989); City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, 
Inc., 113 S. Ct. 1505, 1510 n.12 (1993). 


It is well established that “[t)he party seeking 
to uphold a restriction on commercial speech 
carries the burden of justifying it.” ... This 
burden is not satisfied by mere speculation or 
conjecture; rather, a governmental body 
seeking to sustain a restriction on commercial 
speech must demonstrate that the harms it 
recites are real and that its restriction will in 
fact alleviate them to a material degree. 


Edenfield v. Fane, 113 S. Ct. 1792, 1800 (1993) (citations omitted) 
(emphasis supplied). Having twice been told that it failed to meet 
that burden, Petitioner’s new argument is that its right to regulate 
has been unfairly restrained. 


9 


That approach attempts to liken lawyers to prisoners, 
schoolchildren, members of the armed forces, and public 
employees, all of whom, by virtue of their status in public 
institutions, are subject to greater restrictions on speech than could 
be imposed upon the general public. (Pet. at 8). Assuming 
arguendo that private lawyers are part of the “institution” of the 
administration of justice, the flaw in the argument is that there are a 
host of existing rules and regulations which do limit lawyers’ 
ability to engage in “pure” speech as well as commercial speech, if 
that speech is deemed harmful to the administration of justice.” 
However, this Court has already decided, in Shapero, that 
commercial speech in the form of a truthful, non-misleading 
targeted direct mail letter advertisement, has a limited potential for 
harm. 


[T]argeted, direct mail solicitation generally 
— “poses much less risk of overreaching or 
undue influence” than does in-person 
solicitation.... Unlike the potential client 
with a badgering advocate breathing down his 
Se ee are 
an advertisement ... can ‘effectively avoid 


2. See e.g., R. Regulating Fla. Bar 4-1.6 (“A lawyer shall not reveal 
information relating to representation of a client . . .”); Rule 4-3.5 (limiting a 
lawyer's communication with a judge, juror, or other decision-maker); Rule 4- 
3.6 (limiting permissible extrajudicial statements pertaining to a case); Rule 4- 
3.7 (a lawyer may not serve as an advocate and a material witness); Rule 4-4.2 
(limiting a lawyer's communication with persons represented by other counsel); 
Rules 4-7.1, 4-7.2 (limiting, inter alia, a statements that may be made in a 
lawyer's advertisement; precluding testimonials, dramatizations, multiple 
voices in electronic advertisements); Rule 4-7.4 (precluding in-person 
solicitation of prospective clients and regulating the contents of targeted direct 
mail solicitations); Rule 4-7.6 (limiting the ability of a lawyer to advertise that he 
or she is a “specialist”); and Rule 4-7.7 (regulating firm names, permissible 
letterheads). 


10 


further bombardment of [his] sensibilities 
simply by averting [his] eyes.’ ” 


Shapero, 108 S. Ct. at 1922-23 (citations omitted). 
Petitioner baldly asserts that: 


the state must be given the latitude to regulate 
types of expression which are exercised within 
the context of certain fundamental public 
institutions when such expression is 
reasonably determined by the state to have an — 
adverse impact upon the overall mission of the 
institution. 


(Pet. at 9). Nothing in this record demonstrates any adverse impact 
upon the overall mission of the institution. Nor is there any support 
for the State’s notion that “[t]he states have been hamstrung” by 
this Court’s decisions. (Pet. at 10). This case was decided on 
summary judgment. (Pet. App. 18-29). The undisputed facts left 
only one question of law to be answered: was a 30-day ban on 
truthful, non-misleading targeted direct mail personal injury 
lawyer advertising consitutional? Guidance to the answer was 
provided by this Court’s decision in Shapero. The decision below, 
and the district court decision, properly applied Shapero to the 
undisputed facts of this case. The Florida Bar’s suggestion that 
Shapero and its progeny now need revisiting to preserve “a stable 
democracy” (Pet. at 10) substitutes rhetoric for principled reasons 
for certiorari review. 


11 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the Petition for Writ of Certiorari 
should be denied. 


Respectfully submitted, 


BRUCE S. ROGOW 

Counsel of Record 

BRUCE S. ROGOW, P.A. 

2441 Southwest 28th Avenue 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33312 
(305) 767-8909 


BEVERLY A. POHL 
Suite 200 

350 Southeast Second Street 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33301 
(305) 767-8909 


Attorneys for Respondents 


