Court, U.S. 


| Supreme 
(\) FILED 


94 226 AUS - 319% 
* —FRFIGE OF JHE CLERK 


N 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 


¢ 


THE FLORIDA BAR, 


Petitioner, 
VS. 


G. STEWART McHENRY; WENT FOR IT, INC.; 
and JOHN T. BLAKELY, 


Respondents. 


¢ 


Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Eleventh Circuit 


¢ 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


¢ 


Barry RICHARD 

GREENBERG, TRAURIG, HOFFMAN, 
Lirorr, Rosen & Quenrte ., P.A. 

101 E. College Avenue 

Post Office Drawer 1838 

Tallahassee, FL 32302 

904/222-6891 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


r 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


I 


Whether the limits placed upon state authority by the 
decision below extend beyond any heretofore recognized 
by this court and provide lawyers with a greater degree 
of insulation from regulation of commercial solicitation 
than other groups. 


II 


Whether the challenged rules are narrowly tailored to 
serve substantial governmental interests and do not vio- 
late the First Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion. 


III 


Whether Rules 4-7.4(b) and 4-7.8(a), Rules Regulating the 
Florida Bar, are valid time, place or manner restrictions. 


ii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ........... i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ......vccccsccsnsecsecses iii 
LOWER COURT REPORTS AND OPINIONS....... 1 
JURISDICTIONAL GROUNDS ..............--.00e- 1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION AND RULES 
INVOLVED ....cccsccccsscvcscavenseneennnnanEE 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE......cccccccccsccscses 3 
ARGUMENT .....ccscscccsccusscesecuces ann 6 


I THE LIMITS PLACED UPON STATE 
AUTHORITY BY THE DECISION BELOW 
EXTEND BEYOND ANY HERETOFORE REC- 
OGNIZED BY THIS COURT AND PROVIDE 
LAWYERS WITH A GREATER DEGREE OF 
INSULATION FROM REGULATION OF 
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION THAN 
OTHER GROUPS .....ccseenensseseien eee 6 


Il THE CHALLENGED RULES ARE NAR- 
ROWLY TAILORED TO SERVE SUBSTAN- 
TIAL GOVERNMENTAL INTERESTS AND 
DO NOT VIOLATE THE FIRST AMEND- 
MENT TO THE UNITED STATES CONSTITU- 
THROWN ... cn cccccccsscncndee cue pase 11 


Iii THE CHALLENGED RULES ARE VALID TIME, 
PLACE OR MANNER RESTRICTIONS......... 15 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page 


CASES 


Bates v. State of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350, 97 S.Ct. 2691, 
Be Geta OW CEOTT Pe cise sccccvcccees 6, 9, 10, 11, 20 


Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 109 S.Ct. 
3028, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1989)...........cceeeceeees 11 


Central Hudson Gas v. Public Service Comm'n, 447 
U.S. 557, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980) ..7, 11 


Clark v. Community for Creative Non-violence, 468 U.S. 


288, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984)........ 15, 17 
Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 

ee eee caw s ceccseesocees 12, 13 
Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503, 106 S.Ct. 1310, 

Tee kd bce cee ence ceces 8 
Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 

108 S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592 (1988)................ 8 
Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 104 S.Ct. 3194, 82 

EE EE 8 
Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77, 69 S.Ct. 448 (1949)...12, 13 
Matter of Anis, 599 A.2d 1265 (N.J. 1992)............ 14 


Members of City Counsel v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 
466 U.S. 806, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 80 L.Ed.2d 772 


ee ec ce ccecvicocccnece 12, 13 
Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association, 436 U.S. 447, 
98 S.Ct. 1912, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978)............... 11 


Peel v. Attorney Registration and Disciplinary 
Comm'n, 496 U.S. 91, 110 S.Ct. 2281, 110 L.Ed.2d 
UE EEEE Ce CER CECh eek dveesecccesccccccccces 7 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 107 S.Ct. 2891, 
SF CBG De Fee Gee ee ccc ceccesastesesdstenéanseds 8 
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 
S.Ce. FES, GP Le BP CR ons va vccecscccaces 18 
Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass'n, 486 U.S. 466, 108 
S.Ct. 1916, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988) .............66.. 7 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 78, 109 S.Ct. 
2746, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989).. ............ 16, 17, 18 
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 471 U.S. 
626, 105 S.Ct. 2265, 85 L.Ed.2d 652 (1985).......... 7 


OTHER AUTHORITIES 
Rule 4-7.4(b), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar... 2, 4, 18 


Rule 4-7.8(a), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar ...... 4 
2B UDA... D TR oo 0b n00bs cviccncesuniscscepecune 1 
3B UB. © TAGS bc ceaccetdsvrcacevantiassenneeene 4 


Amendment I, United States Constitution ...1, 5, 8, 17, 19 


Amendment XIV, Section 1, United States Consti- 
ON odccbccvaceusucdéctetsvisenstasseeese Lo 


LOWER COURT REPORTS AND OPINIONS 


Report and Recommendation of U.S. Magistrate 
Judge, Case No. 92-370-CIV-T-17A (M.D. Fla., August 5, 
1992) [App. 1] 


Order on Report and Recommendation, Case No. 
92-370-CIV-T-17A (M.D. Fla., August 5, 1992) [App. 18]. 


McHenry v. The Florida Bar, 
1994) [App. 30] 


F.2d 2258 (11th Cir. 


JURISDICTIONAL GROUNDS 


This is a petition to review a decision of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit entered 
on May 10, 1994. This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 
28 U.S.C., § 1254(1). 


o 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION AND 
RULES INVOLVED 


Amendment I, United States Constitution: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an estab- 
lishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exer- 
cise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, 
or of the press; or the right of the people peace- 
ably to assemble, and to petition the Govern- 
ment for a redress of grievances. 


Amendment XIV, Section 1, United States Constitution: 


All persons born or naturalized in the United 
States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State 
wherein they reside. No State shall make or 


enforce any law which shall abridge the privi- 
leges or immunities of citizens of the United 
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of 
life, liberty, or property, without due process of 
law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdic- 
tion the equal protection of the laws. 


RULE 4-7.4(b), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar: 


(b) Written Communication. 


(1) A lawyer shall not send, or knowingly permit 
to be sent, on the lawyer’s behalf or on behalf of 
the lawyer’s firm or partner, an associate, or any 
other lawyer affiliated with the lawyer or the law- 
yer’s firm, a written communication to a prospec- 
tive client for the purpose of obtaining professional 
employment if: 


(A) the written communication concerns an 
action for personal injury or wrongful death or 
otherwise relates to an accident or disaster 
involving the person to whom the communica- 
tion is addressed or a relative of that person, 
unless the accident or disaster occurred more 
than 30 days prior to the mailing of the commu- 
nication. 


RULE 4-7.8(a), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar: 


(a) When Lawyers May Accept Referrals. A 
lawyer shall not accept referrals from a lawyer 
referral service unless the service: 


(1) engages in no communication with the 
public and in no direct contact with prospective 
clients in a manner that would violate the Rules 
of Professional Conduct if the communication or 
contact were made by the lawyer; 


¢ 


. ak 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In 1987, ten years after this Court first held that 
attorneys had a constitutional right to advertise, The 
Florida Bar began a two-year study of lawyer advertising 
and solicitation. Among other things, the study included 
hearings throughout the state, a review of public com- 
mentary regarding attorney advertising, and a survey by 
a public opinion polling organization retained by the Bar 
to compile statistics on public attitudes toward attorney 
advertising and solicitation. The complete record of infor- 
mation compiled in the study was submitted to the Flor- 
ida Supreme Court, along with a summary of the 
information, as part of a petition to amend the Rules 
Regulating The Florida Bar with respect to advertising 
and solicitation.! 


The survey found that Florida adults have negative 
feelings about direct-mail advertising by attorneys. “They 
perceive this advertising to have minimal informational 
content and to contain messages that appeal to the emo- 
tions rather than to reason, especially of gullible or upset 
people.” The summary includes the results of a survey of 
recipients of direct-mail attorney solicitation. The sum- 
mary concludes that 56% of such recipients believe that 
contacting persons concerning accidents and similar 
events is a violation of privacy. The study found that a 
broad spectrum of the Florida news media, historically 
the most vigorous advocates of unfettered speech, had 


1 The Florida Bar: Petition te Amend the Rules Regulating the 
Florida Bar-Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 451 (Fla. 1990). A copy 
of the summary which was before the Supreme Court at the time 
it adopted the new rules was introduced in the trial Court. 


strongly condemned attorney advertising in general, and 
solicitation of recent accident victims or the families of 
victims in particular. 


In February, 1991, the Florida Supreme Court 
adopted amendments to the advertising rules. Among t.ie 
rules adopted were Rule 4-7.4(b) and Rule 4-7.8(a), Rules 
Regulating the Florida Bar. The Florida Bar: Petition to 
Amend the Rules Regulating The Florida Bar — Advertising 
Issues, supra. Rule 4-7.4 prohibited lawyers from sending 
a written solicitation relating to an accident or disaster to 
the victim of such accident or disaster, or a relative of 
such victim, within thirty days after the accident or disas- 
ter. Rule 4-7.8 prohibits a lawyer from accepting a referral 
from a referral service which fails to comply with the 
rules regulating attorney communciations. 


In March, 1992, G. Stewart McHenry and his wholly 
owned corporation, Went For It, Inc., filed this action in 
the Middle District of Florida, challenging Rules 4-7.4, 
and 4-7.8 Rules Regulating the Florida Bar, as being in 
derogation of the plaintiffs’ free speech rights under the 
First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Juris- 
diction of the District Court was invoked to review a 
question arising under the United States Constitution 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C., § 1331. 


The Complaint alleged that McHenry had sent direct 
mail advertising letters concerning an action for personal 
injury to targeted accident victims within 30 days of the 
accident and wished to continue such practice in the 
future. Went For It, Inc. alleged that it wished to conduct 
business in Florida as a lawyer referral business, and that 
it desired to contact accident victims and their families by 


| 


mail within 30 days of an accident and to refer interested 
persons to personal injury attorneys in Florida. 


On October 24, 1992, McHenry was disbarred by the 
Florida Supreme Court for conduct unrelated to the issues 
raised in this action.2 McHenry’s case was thereby ren- 
dered moot and the action continued on the claim of Went 
For It, Inc. The parties all filed motions for summary 
judgment which were submitted to Magistrate Judge 
Charles Wilson for consideration. Judge Wilson received 
briefs and heard oral argument, and issued his Report and 
Recommendation. He found that Rule 4-7.4 served a sub- 
stantial governmental interest and was narrowly tailored 
to achieve its desired objective. Judge Wilson additionally 
found that the provision was a reasonable time, place or 
manner restriction and concluded that it did not violate 
the United States Constitution. He recommended that 
summary judgment be entered for the Bar. [App. 1] 


The District Judge rejected the recommendation of 
Judge Wilson and held, as a matter of law, that the chal- 
lenged rule violates the First, Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution. The Court 
granted summary judgment for the plaintiff. [App. 18] 


The decision was appealed to the Eleventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals. After filing of the Notice of Appeal, the 
appellees moved, without objection, to add John T. 
Blakely as a plaintiff based upon identical allegations to 


2 McHenry, who had previously been publicly repri- 
manded twice, was disbarred for engaging in sexual miscon- 
duct in the presence of clients. The Florida Bar v. McHenry, 605 
So.2d 459 (Fla. 1992). 


those that had been made by McHenry. The case was 
temporarily remanded to the trial court for consideration 
of the motion and Blakely was added on December 17, 
1993. On May 10, 1994, the Eleventh Circuit, while 
expressing dissatisfaction at what it perceived to be the 
necessary result, affirmed. [App. 30] 


¢ 


ARGUMENT 


I 


THE LIMITS PLACED UPON STATE AUTHORITY BY 
THE DECISION BELOW EXTEND BEYOND ANY 
HERETOFORE RECOGNIZED BY THIS COURT AND 
PROVIDE LAWYERS WITH A GREATER DEGREE OF 
INSULATION FROM REGULATION OF COMMER- 
CIAL SOLICITATION THAN OTHER GROUPS. 


In its opinion affirming the District Court decision, 
the Eleventh Circuit expressed dissatisfaction with what 
it perceived to be the result required by this Court’s line 
of decisions in Bates v. State of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350, 97 
S.Ct. 2691, 53 L.Ed.2d 810 (1977) and the cases that fol- 
lowed. The Circuit Court stated: 


Justice Powell predicted in Bates that recogniz- 
ing First Amendment protections for attorney 
advertising would “effect profound changes in 
the practice of law, viewed for centuries as a 
learned profession.” 433 U.S. at 389, 97 S.Ct. at 
2712 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissent- 
ing in part.) That prediction has proven true. 
Unfortunately, the resulting changes have not 
necessarily been for the better. We are disturbed 
that Bates and its progeny require the decision 
we reach today. 


Id. at 2265. [App. 45-46] The concerns voiced by the 
Eleventh Circuit echo the comments of Justices O’Conner, 
Rehnquist and Scalia in Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass'n, 486 
U.S. 466, 108 S.Ct. 1916, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988) and Peel v. 
Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Comm'n, 496 U.S. 91, 
110 S.Ct. 2281, 110 L.Ed.2d 83 (1990). 


The Eleventh Circuit, as other circuits, has acknowl- 
edged this Court’s statement that states may regulate 
lawyer commercial solicitation “in the service of a sub- 
stantial governmental interest,” and “through means that 
directly advance that interest.” Zauderer v. Office of Disci- 
plinary Counsel, 471 U.S. 626, 638, 105 S.Ct. 2265, 85 
L.Ed.2d 652 (1985). Nevertheless, it has become clear that 
the lower federal courts perceive this Court’s opinions to 
be such that, in practical effect, they leave no room for 
state regulation of lawyer solicitation which is not in- 
person or deceptive. If that perception is incorrect, it is 
important that the Court clarify the true boundaries of 
state authority. If the perception is accurate, the Court is 
respectfully urged to revisit the issue in order to avoid 
placing lawyers in a privileged class, beyond the bounds 
of regulation available for other groups. This Court has 
held that, “The Constitution . . . accords a lesser protec- 
tion to commercial speech than to other constitutionally 
guaranteed expression.” Central Hudson Gas v. Public Ser- 
vice Comm'n, 447 U.S. 557, 563, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 65 L.Ed.2d 
341 (1980). However, as noted under this Point and Point 
II below, the Eleventh Circuit opinion would accord law- 
yer commercial solicitation a greater degree of protection 
in certain respects than even political and ideological 
speech. 


This Court has consistently held that the exercise of 
First Amendment freedoms, including speech, is subject 
to reasonable limitations when the nature of such exercise 
is detrimental to, or inconsistent with, the mission of the 
public institution within which the freedom is exercised. 
Thus, the Court has upheld such limitations in the fields 
of public employment, Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 
384, 107 S.Ct. 2891, 97 L.Ed.2d 315 (1987) [“The deter- 
mination of whether a public employer has properly dis- 
charged an employee for engaging in speech requires ‘a 
balance between the interests of the employee, as a citi- 
zen, in commenting upon matters of public concern and 
the interest of the State, as an employer, in promoting the 
efficiency of the public services it performs through its 
employees.’ ”], penal institutions, Hudson v. Palmer, 468 
U.S. 517, 523, 104 S.Ct. 3194, 82 L.Ed.2d 393 (1984) [Pris- 
oners “retain those First Amendment rights of speech 
‘not inconsistent with . . . the legitimate penological 
objectives of the corrections system.’ ”], the armed forces, 
Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503, 507, 106 S.Ct. 1310, 89 
L.Ed.2d 478 (1986) [“The military need not encourage 
debate or tolerate protest to the extent that such tolerance 
is required of the civilian state by the First Amendment; 
to accomplish its mission the military must foster instinc- 
tive obedience, unity, commitment, and esprit de corps.” ], 
and educational institutions, Hazelwood School District v. 
Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 266, 108 S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592 
(1988) [“A school need not tolerate student speech that is 
inconsistent with its ‘basic educational mission’ . . . even 
though the government could not censor similar speech 
outside the school.” } 


, os 


_ ORE Turret 


The basic theme underlying all of the foregoing deci- 
sions is that the state must be given the latitude to 
regulate types of expression which are excercised within 
the context of certain fundamental public institutions 
when such expression is reasonably determined by the 
state to have an adverse impact upon the overall mission 
of the institution. Significantly, all of the above decisions 
involved the exercise of political, ideological or religious 
expression, the most highly revered of all free speech 
rights. It is indisputable that the administration of justice 
is at least as fundamental a mission as those involved in 
the cited cases. Attorneys who engage in commercial 
solicitation do so within the context of, and with potential 
adverse impact upon, our system of justice. Nevertheless, 
this Court’s decisions regarding attorney commercial 
solicitation, at least as interpreted by the Eleventh and 
other circuits, have not accorded the states nearly the 
degree of deference provided in connection with the 
administration of other public functions. 


This Court’s opinion in Bates v. State of Arizona, 
supra, rested upon the presumption that attorney adver- 
tising would serve “individual and societal interests in 
assuring informed and reliable decisionmaking,” and its 
finding of “the postulated connection between advertis- 
ing and the erosion of true professionalism to be severely 
strained.” Id. at U.S. 364, 368. The Court questioned the 
assertion that advertising would diminish attorneys’ rep- 
utations in the community, noting that, “Bankers and 
engineers advertise, and yet these professions are not 
regarded as undignified.” Id. at U.S. 369. In the seventeen 
years since the Bates decision, the development of attor- 
ney advertising, as suggested in the opinion below, has 


10 


not been as favorable as the Bates Court anticipated. One 
need only open the yellow pages of any major city tele- 
phone directory to realize that the great bulk of attorney 
advertising provides citizens with little or no useful 
information, and is far less professional than that 
engaged in by bankers, engineers and most other profes- 
sionals. Studies such as that performed by The Florida 
Bar indicate that such advertising has resulted in a nega- 
tive perception of, and loss of confidence in the legal 
profession. In his Report and Recommendation, the Mag- 
istrate Judge found: 


The Bar’s two-year study of lawyer advertising 
and solicitation conducted preliminarily to the 
implementation of its advertising rule discloses 
that Florida adults, generally, have negative feel- 
ings about direct-mail advertising by attorneys. 
The public feels that attorneys who participate in 
direct-mail advertising sacrifice professionalism to 
promote their own pecuniary self-interest. Florida 
adults believe that direct-mail advertising pro- 
motes frivolous and unwarranted lawsuits, result- 
ing in higher legal costs and belittling the legal 
profession. 


[App. 6] It cannot be doubted that maintenance of public 
confidence in all elements of the judicial system is essen- 
tial to a stable democracy. The states have been ham- 
strung, however, by the perception by lower federal 
courts that this Court’s decisions leave little or no room 
for states to judge the impact of attorney advertising 
upon the judicial system and to act accordingly. 


While the Court is encouraged to revisit the entire 
question of states’ authority to regulate attorney solicita- 
tion, it is not necessary to do so in order to reverse the 


erm 


11 


lower Court decision. As Points II and III below illustrate, 
the lower Court’s reluctant striking of the challenged 
rules was not necessitated by this Court’s holdings. 


II 


THE CHALLENGED RULES ARE NARROWLY TAI- 
LORED TO SERVE SUBSTANTIAL GOVERNMENTAL 
INTERESTS AND DO NOT VIOLATE THE FIRST 
AMENDMENT TO THE UNITED STATES CONSTITU- 
TION. 


Attorney advertising falls within the scope of com- 
mercial speech which this Court has afforded “a limited 
measure of protection, commensurate with its subordi- 
nate position in the scale of First Amendment values” 
and is subject to “modes of regulation that might be 
impermissible in the realm of non-commercial expres- 
sion.” Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350, 97 S.Ct. 
2691, 53 L.Ed.2d 810 (1977); Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar 
Association, 436 U.S. 447, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 1918, 56 L.Ed.2d 
444 (1978). Although regulation of constitutionally pro- 
tected commercial speech does not have to meet the least 
restrictive means test, the Court has held that such regu- 
lation must directly advance a substantial governmental 
interest and be narrowly tailored to fit the governmental 
objective. Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public 
Service Comm'n, 447 U.S. 557, 566, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 2351, 65 
L.Ed.2d (1980); Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 109 
S.Ct. 3028, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1989). 


The State has a substantial interest in protecting the 
personal privacy and tranquility of persons who were 
themselves, or whose loved ones were, recent victims of 


12 


personal injury or death. This Court has recognized in a 
variety of areas that the State has a substantial interest in 
preserving the quality of life of its citizens. Indeed, that 
interest has been so substantial as to justify restrictions 
upon political and ideological speech. Thus, the Court 
has upheld ordinances prohibiting the posting of election 
signs on public property, Members of City Counsel v. Tax- 
payers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 806, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 2129, 80 
L.Ed.2d 772 (1984), [“It is well settled that the state may 
legitimately exercise its police powers to advance esthetic 
values.”], prohibiting the use on public streets of sound 
trucks emitting loud noises, Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77, 
69 S.Ct. 448, 454 (1949), [“The preferred position of free- 
dom of speech in a society that cherishes liberty for all 
does not require legislators to be insensible to claims by 
citizens to comfort and convenience.”], and prohibiting 
ideological picketing directed at the residence of an indi- 
vidual. Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 
L.Ed.2d 420 (1988). 


In Frisby, the Court upheld a law which was passed 
for the purpose of prohibiting anti-abortion picketing 
outside the residence of a doctor accused of performing 
abortions. The court stated: 


The State’s interest in protecting the well-being, 
tranquility, and privacy of the home is certainly 
of the highest order in a free and civilized soci- 
ety. 


* * * 


One important aspect of residential privacy is 
protection of the unwilling listener. Although in 
many locations, we expect individuals simply to 
avoid speech they do not want to hear [citations 


13 


omitted] the home is different. That we are often 
‘captives’ outside the sanctuary of the home and 
subject to objectionable speech . . . does not 
mean we must be captives everywhere. 


Id. at 2502. In a comment significantly descriptive of 
direct-mail solicitation, the Court noted that, “The type of 
picketers banned by the . . . ordinance generally do not 
seek to disseminate a message to the general public, but 
to intrude upon the targeted residence, and to do so in an 
especially offensive way.” Id. at 2503. The Court’s focus 
on the distinction between picketing directed at the gen- 
eral public and picketing directed at a specific individual 
is directly analogous to the distinction between mass 
media advertising and direct-mail solicitation. The 
Court’s concern over “residential privacy” is also applica- 
ble to direct-mail solicitation since it is primarily directed 
to persons in their homes.* 


The communication which is the subject matter of the 
challenged rules is no less an intrusion on personal pri- 
vacy and tranquility and no less offensive than the elec- 
tion signs in Taxpayers for Vincent, the sound trucks in 
Kovacs, or the picketing in Frisby. To the contrary, in an 
important respect it is more intrusive and offensive 
because it involves a much more personal matter and it is 


3 A statistical analysis by The Florida Bar of direct-mail 
adver\ising submissions from April, 1991 through March, 1992 
indicates that a minimum of 87% were sent to residential 
addresses. The actual figure is probably close to 100% since the 
source of the names and addresses of most accident victims is 
the Department of Motor Vehicles [R. 15], and Florida law 
requires that drivers list their residence addresses with the 
Department. § 322.08, Fla. Stat. 


14 


knowingly and intentionally directed at persons who are 
most vulnerable. In Matter of Anis, 599 A.2d 1265 (N.J. 
1992), the Supreme Court of New Jersey described such 
conduct in its analysis of a restriction similar to Florida’s: 


Nothiag in the Constitution . . . requires us to 
countenance solicitation that intrudes upon vic- 
tims or their families in the initial throes of their 
grief .... What we are talking about here .. . is 
conduct that is patently offensive to the com- 
mon sensibilities of the community because it 
intrudes upon the private grief of victims or 
their families, serves only to compound their 
sorrow and solicits representation of them at a 
moment of their extreme vulnerability. 


+ * * 


The non-intrusive nature of the communication 
in Shapero is what commended the solicitation to 
commerciai speech protection. [citation omitted] 
In contrast, the form of solicitation at issue here 
is so universaily condemned that its intrusive- 
ness can hardly be disputed. 


* * * 


We have no doubt, then, that the commercial 
speech guaranees of the First Amendment do 
not protect attorney conduct that is universally 
regarded as deplorable and beneath common 
decency because of its intrusion upon the spe- 
cial vulnerability and private grief of victims or 
their families. 


Id. at 1270. The lower court decision leaves us with an 
indefensible legal doctrine which holds that the State has 
a sufficiently substantial interest in protecting the “com- 
fort and convenience” of its citizens from loud noise or 


15 


their “esthetic” sensibilities from political signs, but does 
not have a sufficiently substantial interest to protect 
them, in times of deep personal trauma, from crass com- 
merical intrusion upon their private grief and residential 
tranquility “that is universally regarded as deplorable 
and beneath common decency.” 


Ill 


THE CHALLENGED RULES ARE VALID TIME, PLACE 
OR MANNER RESTRICTIONS. 


While commercial speech is given only a “subordi- 
nate position in the scale of First Amendment values,” 
political and ideological speech sit at the very top of the 
scale. Nevertheless, even these most highly protected 
forms of speech are subject to reasonable time, place and 
manner restrictions: 


Expression, whether oral or written or symbol- 
ized by conduct, is subject to reasonable time, 
place, or manner restrictions. We have often 
noted that restrictions of this kind are valid 
provided that they are justified without refer- 
ence to the content of the regulated speech, that 
they are narrowly tailored to serve a significant 
governmental interest, and that they leave open 
ample alternative channels for communication 
of the information. 


Clark v. Community or Creative Non-violence, 468 U.S. 288, 
104 S.Ct. 3065, 3069, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984). The lower 
court concluded that the challenged rules are not valid 


16 


time, place or manner restrictions because the thirty-day 
ban was not content-neutral.4 


The Court’s conclusion is not consistent with this 
Court’s interpretation of “content-neutral”: 


The principal inquiry in determining content- 
neutrality, in speech cases generally and in time, 
place, or manner cases in particular, is whether 
the government has adopted a regulation of 
speech because of disagreement with the mes- 
sage it conveys. [citation omitted] The govern- 
ment’s purpose is the controlling consideration. 
A regulation that serves purposes unrelated to 
the content of expression is deemed neutral, 
even if it has an incidental effect on some 
speakers or messages but not others. [citation 
omitted] Government regulation of expressive 
activity is content-neutral so long as it is “justi- 
fied without reference to the content of the regu- 
lated speech.” 


Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 78, 109 S.Ct. 2746, 
2754, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989) [emphasis by Court]. Thus, 
this Court has established that the mere fact that the 
content of a communication must be referred to in order 


4 Petitioner does not concede that the challenged rule 
requires reference to content in the first place. While the word- 
ing of the rule appears to focus on the content of the letter, in 
practical effect, it has nothing to do with content. Its application 
is based upon the nature of the intended recipient as an accident 
victim or family of a victim. It is not necessary for the Bar to 
review the content of a letter in order to determine whether or 
not the rule is applicable. The Bar need only determine the 
source of the list of recipients of the letter. 


\ 17 


to determine whether the speech is subject to the regula- 
tion does not render it content-based. The question is 
whether the challenged regulation is “justified without 
reference to the content of the regulated speech.” In Ward, 
the city attempted to regulate the volume of amplified 
music played in a public park. The case arose out of a 
concert sponsored by a group dedicated to the promotion 
of anti-racist views. The Court of Appeals struck the 
regulation, holding that the city had failed to prove that 
its regulation was the least restrictive means of regulating 
the volume. This Court agreed that music is a form of 
expression which is protected under the First Amend- 
ment and that the area in which the music was being 
played was a public forum, “in which the government's 
right to regulate expression is subject to the protections of 
the First Amendment.” Id. at S.Ct. 2746. Nevertheless, the 
Court reversed. The state interest recognized in Ward as 
being sufficiently compelling has particular bearing on 
the case at bar: 


The principal justification for the sound- 
amplification guideline is the city’s desire to 
control noise levels at Bandshell events in order 
to retain the character of Sheep Meadow and its 
more sedate activities, and to avoid undue 
intrusion into residential areas and other areas 
of the park. This justification for the guideline 
‘has nothing to do with content’ [citation omit- 
ted] and it satisfies the requirement that time, 
place, or manner regulations be content neutral. 


Id. at S.Ct. 2754. 


18 


The regulation in the case at bar meets the Supreme 
Court’s definition of content-neutral because it is “justi- 
fied without reference to the content of the regulated 
speech.” The regulation is not intended to prohibit the 
message (solicitation of business), but, like the regulation 
in Ward, to avoid undue intrusion into the personal pri- 
vacy of individuals during a particularly trying period. 
The regulation is limited to letters directed at victims of 
accidents or personal injury because that is the primary 
group which the state perceives to be in need of protec- 
tion, not because of the content of the message. If the ban 
applied to all direct-mail solicitation the Court below 
would then undoubtedly have concluded that the regula- 
tion was overbroad because it would have reached solic- 
itation that the state has no substantial interest in 
regulating. 


The challenged rules also fall within the scope of the 
doctrine upon which this Court upheld the ordinance in 
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 925, 
89 L.Ed.2d 29 (1986). The ordinance prohibited adult 
motion picture theaters from locating within 1,000 feet of 
any residential zone, church, park or school. Like rule 
4-7.4(b), the Renton ordinance required reference to the 
content of the motion pictures shown to determine 
whether the regulation was applicable to a particular 
theater. Nevertheless, the Court upheld the ordinance 
based upon the fact that it was “aimed not at the content 
of the films shown at ‘adult motion picture theaters,’ but 
rather at the secondary effects of such theaters on the 
surrounding community.” Id. at U.S. 46. Similarly, the 


19 


challenged rule is not aimed at the content of the mes- 
sage, but at the secondary effects upon the legal profes- 
sion, and ultimately upon our system of justice, 
occasioned by the public’s reaction to the particular type 
of advertising. 


The Court is also urged to consider that opinions like 
the one below often place undue emphasis on the content 
review element of the time, place or manner test as 
though it stands alone. The content review question is, in 
most cases, logically intertwined with the other two ele- 
ments. If the regulation is narrowly drawn and there are 
truly ample alternative avenues of the same communica- 
tion left open, it follows that it is highly unlikely that the 
regulation was directed at the content of the message. 


The challenged Florida rules leave ample alternative 
means of communication. The rules are extremely narrow, 
applying only during a short 30-day period and only to 
one particular form of communication. Lawyers are free 
to communicate the same message by direct-mail at any 
time more than 30 days from the date of the accident or 
disaster and are free to communicate the same message 
by any other advertising mode during the 30-day hiatus. 
The Comments to Rule 4-7.4, as adopted by the Florida 
Supreme Court, makes specific reference to the alterna- 
tive means of advertising available to lawyers pursuant 
to Rule 4-7.4, including “billboards and other signs, 
radio, television and recorded messages the public may 
access by dialing a telephone number”. 


In its initial opinion recognizing that attorney adver- 
tising was entitled to First Amendment protection, this 
Court expressly noted, “that there may be reasonable 


20 


restrictions on the time, place and manner of advertis- 
ing.” Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra at 97 S.Ct. 2709. It 
is difficult to conceive of a type of attorney solicitation 
regulation that would qualify under the time, place and 
manner doctrine if the challenged rules do not. The rules 
are both reasonable commercial speech restrictions and 
time, place and manner regulations, and are entitled to be 
upheld on either basis. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Barry RICHARD 

GREENBERG, TRAURIG, HOFFMAN, 
Lirorr, Rosen & QueENTEL, P.A. 

101 E. College Avenue 

Post Office Drawer 1838 

Tallahassee, FL 32302 

904/222-6891 


App. 1 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
MIDDLE DISTRICT OF FLORIDA 
TAMPA DIVISION 


G. STEWART McHENRY, and 
WENT FOR IT, INC., a Florida 
corporation, 


Plaintiff, 
Vv. CASE NO. 92-370-CIV-T-17A 


THE FLORIDA BAR and SUSAN 

V. BLOEMENDAAL, in her official 
capacity as Assistant Staff Counsel of 
The Florida Bar, 


Defendants. 


REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION 


THIS CAUSE is before the Court upon Plaintiffs’ 
Motion For Summary Judgment (Doc. 10) and Defen- 
dants’ Motion For Summary Judgment (Doc. 14).! The 
Court having considered all documents of record and the 
argument of counsel at the April 27, 1992 hearing, recom- 
mends that Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment be 
denied and that the Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
Judgment be granted to the extent, and for the reasons, 
set forth below. 


1 United States Judge Elizabeth A. Kovachevich specifically 
referred these motions to the undersigned for report and recom- 
mendation. (Doc. 11) 


App. 2 


Factual and Procedural Background 


This dispute focuses upon a lawyer advertising rule 
that went into effect on April 1, 1991. Rule 4-7.4, Direct 
contact with prospective clients, prohibits direct mail adver- 
tising of legal services relating to actions for personal 
injury or wrongful death until more than thirty days have 
elapsed from the accident or disaster mentioned in the 
written communication.? The prohibition of Rule 4-7.4 is 
imputed to lawyer referral services in Rule 4-7.8.% 


2 Rule 4-7.4 provides in pertinent part: 
(b) Written communication. 

(1) A lawyer shall not send, or knowingly per- 
mit to be sent, on behalf of himself, his firm, his 
partner, an associate or any other lawyer affiliated 
with him or his firm, a written communication to a 
prospective client for the purpose of obtaining profes- 
sional employment if: 

a. The written communication concerns an 
action for personal injury or wrongful death or other- 
wise relates to an accident or disaster involving the 
person to whom the communication is addressed or a 
relative of that person, unless the accident or disaster 
occurred more than thirty days prior to the mailing of 
the communication. 


> Rule 4-7.8 provides in pertinent part: 

4-7.8 Lawyer referral services. 
(a) A lawyer shall not accept referrals from a lawyer 
referral service unless the service: 
(1) Engages in no communication with the public 
and in no direct contact with prospective clients in a 
manner that would violate the Rules of Professional 
Conduct if the communication or contact were made 
by the lawyer; 
(b) A “lawyer referral service” is any person, group 
of persons, association, organization, or entity that 
receives a fee or charge for referring or causing the 


App. 3 


Plaintiff G. Stewart McHenry has sent direct mail 
advertising letters for legal services relating to actions for 
personal injury to targeted accident victims within thirty 
days of their accidents, and wants to continue this prac- 
tice in the future. Plaintiff Went for It, Inc. wishes to 
contact accident victims and their families by mail within 
thirty days of their accidents and refer them to personal 
injury attorneys in Florida. 


When Defendants The Florida Bar and Susan V. Bloe- 
mendaa! threatened Plaintiff G. Stewart McHenry with 
disciplinary action for violating Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)a, Plain- 
tiffs filed this action for declaratory and injunctive relief 
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 1988, and 28 U.S.C. 
§§ 2201 and 2202. Plaintiffs seek a declaration that 1) Rule 
4-7.4(b)(1)a of the Rules Regulating The Florida Bar, 
imposing a thirty-day ban on certain direct mail lawyer 
advertising, violates the First, Fifth, and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States; 
and 2) Rule 4-7.8, which effectively imposes the thirty- 
day ban on lawyer referral services wishing to do busi- 
ness with Florida attorneys, similarly violates the First, 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. 


The Plaintiffs originally filed a motion for prelimi- 
nary injunction requesting that the Court enjoin the 
Defendants from enforcing the challenged rules. How- 
ever, after counsel conferred, the Plaintiffs withdrew their 
motion for preliminary injunction and the parties filed 


direct or indirect referral of a potential client to a 
lawyer drawn from a specific group or panel of law- 
yers. 


App. 4 


cross motions for summary judgment. Oral argument on 
the motions was held on April 27, 1992. 


Standard of Review 


This circuit holds that summary judgment should 
only be entered when the moving party has sustained its 
burden of showing the absence of a genuine issue as to 
any material fact when all the evidence is viewed in the 
light most favorable to the non-moving party. Sweat v. 
Miller Brewing Co., 708 F.2d 655 (11th Cir. 1983). All doubt 
as to the existence of a genuine issue of material fact must 
be resolved against the moving party. Hayden v. First Nat'l 
Bank of Mt. Pleasant, 595 F.2d 994, 996-97 (5th Cir. 1979)4, 
quoting Gross v. Southern R.R. Co., 414 F.2d 292 (5th Cir. 
1969). Factual disputes preclude summary judgment. 


The parties have stipulated that there are no genuine 
issues of material fact in this case. The Court, upon 
consideration of the matter, agrees. Summary judgment is 
therefore appropriate here. 


ISSUE 


The specific issue to be resolved is whether, as a 
matter of law, the Florida Bar’s thirty-day ban on tar- 
geted, direct mail lawyer advertising violates the First, 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. 


4 The case law of the Fifth Circuit prior to September 30, 
1981 has been adopted as precedent in this judicial circuit. 
Bonner v. City of Prichard, 661 F.2d 1206 (11th Cir. 1981) (en banc). 


App. 5 


DISCUSSION 


In Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977), the 
Supreme Court decided that advertising by lawyers was a 
form of commercial speech entitled to First Amendment 
protection. Attorney advertising falls within the scope of 
commercial speech which the Supreme Court has 
afforded “a limited measure of protection, commensurate 
with its subordinate position in the scale of First Amend- 
ment values” and is subject to “modes of regulation that 
might be impermissible in the realm of non-commercial 
expression.” Ojtralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 447, 
456 (1978). 


A lawyer’s constitutional right to engage in targeted, 
direct mail advertising was unequivocally established by 
the Supreme Court in Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Association, 
486 U.S. 466 (1988). In Shapero, the Court held that states 
may not impose an absolute ban on targeted, direct-mail 
solicitation by attorneys but could enact less restrictive 
measures to prevent deceptive and abusive advertise- 
ments. Id., at 476-478. Commercial speech which is not 
misleading and which does not concern unlawful activ- 
ities may be restricted if the restriction serves a substan- 
tial governmental interest and is imposed through means 
that directly advance that interest. Id. at 472. “Since state 
regulation of commercial speech ‘may extend only as far 
as the interest it serves .. . state rules that are designed to 
prevent the ‘potential for deception and confusion- 

. may be no broader than reasonably necessary to 
prevent the perceived evil.” Id. (citations omitted). 


App. 6 


In Peel v. Attorney Regulation and Disciplinary Commis- 
sion, 496 U.S. 91 (1990), the Court again declined to allow 
a total ban on direct-mail attorney solicitation but 
allowed more limited regulations, ruling that “a total ban 
is unconstitutional, but such a ruling ‘does not neces- 
sarily preclude less restrictive regulations of [such] com- 
mercial speech. Id. at 110, n.17. 


Time, place and manner of limitations of the nature 
of those involved in this case are valid provided that they 
not only are narrowly tailored to serve a significant gov- 
ernment interest, but are “content-neutral” and “leave 
open ample alternative channels of communication.” 
Perry Education Association v. Perry Local Educator's Ass‘n, 
460 U.S. 37, 45 (1983). 


The first inquiry is whether there is a substantial 
governmental interest sought to be regulated by the 
thirty day ban. The Florida Bar’s two-year study of law- 
yer advertising and solicitation conducted preliminarily 
to the implementation of its advertising rule discloses 
that Florida adults, generally, have negative feelings 
about direct-mail advertising by attorneys. The public 
feels that attorneys who participate in direct-mail adver- 
tising sacrifice professionalism to promote their own 
pecuniary self-interest. Florida adults believe that direct- 
mail advertising promotes frivolous and unwarranted 
lawsuits, resulting in higher legal costs and belittling the 
legal profession. The Florida Bar asserts that restraints on 
attorney advertising play a significant role in preserving 
the legal profession as a genuine profession rather than 
as a trade association. 


App. 7 


The Bar further asserts that its thirty-day ban is nec- 
essary to serve two substantial interests: First, to protect 
individuals in a “sensitized state” who have recently 
suffered injury or lost loved ones, from undue influence, 
intimidation and over-reaching by lawyers using direct- 
mail solicitation; and second, to protect the “personal 
privacy and tranquility of persons who are themselves, or 
whose loved ones, were recent victims of personal injury 
or wrongful death.” Defendant’s memo at 5-7. These 
interests are supported by the summary of the record on 
the Florida Bar’s petition to the Florida Supreme Court To 
Amend The Rules Regulating Lawyer Advertising 
attached to the affidavit of John Griffin (Doc. 15). 


There is a substantial governmental interest to be 
served by enacting rules regulating targeted direct-mail 
advertising. State bar associations have the inherent 
authority to police the ethical standards of the profession 
within its area of authority. The regulations are intended 
to guard the public against misleading and abusive solic- 
itation. Admittedly, the majority opinion in Shapero dis- 
tinguishes targeted, direct mail solicitation from in- 
person solicitation, finding that the former “poses much 
less risk of over-reaching or undue influence’ than does 
in-person solicitation”. Shapero, 486 U.S. at 475, quoting 
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel at Supreme Court 
of Ohio, 471 U.S. 626, 642 (1985). “Unlike the potential 
client with a badgering advocate breathing down his 


neck, the recipient of a letter . . . can ‘effectively avoid 
further bombardment of [his] sensibilities simply by 
averting [his] eyes . . . a letter like a printed advertise- 


ment (but unlike a lawyer), can readily be put in a drawer 
to be considered later, ignored, or discarded.” Shapero, 


App. 8 


466 U.S. at 475 (citations omitted). Yet, Shapero recognizes 
that while misleading and deceiving communications 
may be avoided by other forms of regulation, targeted 
direct mail solicitation still presents lawyers “with oppor- 
tunities for isolated abuses or mistakes, although such 
instances does not justify a total ban on that mode of 
protected commercial speech.” Shapero at 476. Shapero, 
therefore leaves the door open to state regulation of such 
advertisements through less restrictive measures to pre- 
vent abuse, such as requiring that a personalized letter 
bear a label identifying it as an advertisement or a state- 
ment informing the recipient how to report an inaccurate 
or misleading letter.° Shapero at 477-478. 


Even truthful, non-deceptive advertisement is of 
such concern as to warrant regulation for the benefit of 
the public. In upholding the discipline of an attorney for 
sending a solicitation letter to the family of a person who 
had died in an airline crash two weeks before, the 
Supreme Court of New Jersey stated in the matter of 
Anis, 599 A.2d 1265 (N.J. 1992): 


Nothing in the Constitution . . . requires us to 
countenance solicitation that intrudes upon the 
victims or their families in the initial throes of 
their grief . . . What we are talking about 
here . . . is conduct that is patently offensive to 


° Various other restrictions on targeted direct mail advertis- 
ing are imposed within the Florida Bar’s rule. For example, Rule 
4-7.4(b)(2)(a), provides that each letter and envelope must be 
marked on the outside in red as an “advertisement.” Rule 
4-7.4(b)(1)(f) precludes the mailing of an advertisement letter 
when the lawyer knows or should have known of a particular 
victim’s inability to make reasoned decisions. 


App. 9 


the common sensibilities of the community 
because it intrudes upon the private grief of 
victims or their families, serves only to com- 
pound their sorrow and solicits representations 
of them at a moment of their extreme vul- 
nerability. 


Id. at 1270-71. 


Similarly, the Florida Bar has the same governmental 
interest: 


There is a potential for abuse inherent in direct 
solicitation by a lawyer of prospective clients 
known to need legal services. It subjects the lay 
person to the private importuning of a trained 
advocate, in a direct interpersonal encounter. A 
prospective client often feels overwhelmed by 
the situation giving rise to the need for legal 
services and may have an impaired capacity for 
reason, judgment and protective self-interest. 
Furthermore, the lawyer seeking the retainer is 
faced with a conflict stemming from the law- 
yer’s own interest, which may color the advice 
and representation offered to vulnerable pros- 
pect. 


The situation is therefore fraught with the possi- 
bility of undue influence, intimidation, and 
over-reaching. This potential for abuse inherent 
in direct solicitation of prospective clients justi- 
fies the thirty day restriction, particularly since 
lawyer advertising permitted under Rule 4-7.2 
offers an alternative means of communicating 
necessary information to those who may be in 
need of legal services. 


App. 10 


The Florida Bar: Petition To Amend The Rules Regulating The 
Florida Bar-Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 451, 468 (Fla. 
1990). 


Having established that the thirty day ban furthers a 
substantial governmental interest, the next inquiry is 
whether it is “narrowly tailored to achieve the desired 
objective. Plaintiff argues that a thirty-day ban is, in 
effect, an absolute ban since it will deprive accident vic- 
tims of information at a time when it is most useful to 
them. Plaintiff argues that a thirty day ban travels farther 
than is necessary to protect vulnerable potential clients 
from the exertion of undue influence by the soliciting 
lawyer. As stated in Shapero, a letter, like a printed adver- 
tisement (but unlike a lawyer), can readily be put in a 
drawer to be considered later, ignored, or discarded. 


Shapero, however, cannot be read to preclude the 
implementation of a reasonable time restriction on direct- 
mail targeted advertising. All that Shapero provides is that 
a state may not absolutely ban such advertisements. A 
total ban is unlawful under Shapero. A thirty-day ban is 
not a total ban, it is a partial ban, which Shapero does not 
make unlawful. Discretion is vested in state bar associa- 
tions to fashion restrictions sufficient to control the possi- 
bility of abuses or mistakes by the advertising lawyer. 
Although no mention is made of time restrictions, the 
opinion in Shapero suggests the possibility of other regu- 
lations such as requiring the lawyer to file any solicitation 
with a state agency, giving the state ample opportunity to 
supervise mailings and penalize actual abuses. Shapero at 
476. In In Re: R.M.J., 455 U.S. 191 (1982), Justice Powell, 
writing for the majority, states: 


App. 11 


Truthful advertising relating to lawful activities 
is entitled to the protections of the First Amend- 
ment. But when the particular content or 
method of the advertising suggest that it is 
inherently misleading or when experience has 
proved that in fact such advertising is subject to 
abuse, the states may impose appropriate 
restrictions . . . Even when a communication is 
not misleading, the state retains some authority 
to regulate. But the state must assert a substan- 
tial interest and the interference with speech 
must be in proportion to the interest served.” 


Id. at 203. 


Although the Supreme Court has ruled that the First 
Amendment protects lawyer advertising and that states 
may not ban targeted direct-mail advertising, the Court 
has nonetheless recognized the considerable latitude 
accorded to the states in the context of state regulation of 
professional standards for attorneys, as long as the regu- 
lations are reasonable. “Our cases have repeatedly stated 
that government restrictions upon commercial speech 
may be no more broad or no more expansive than ‘neces- 
sary’ to serve its substantial interests. (citations omitted). 
Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 476 (1989). 


The narrowly tailored standard does not require that 
there be “ ‘no conceivable alternative’. Rather, the Court 
requires ‘only that the regulation not ‘burden substan- 
tially more speech than is necessary to further the gov- 
ernment’s legitimate interest.” Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 
U.S. at 478 quoting Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 
781, 799 (1989). “And we have been to loathe to second- 
guess the Government's judgment to that effect.” Board of 
Trustees v. Fox at 478. Quoting Shapero, the Court in Fox 


App. 12 


noted that almost all of the restrictions determined to be 
violative of the First Amendment have been “substan- 
tially excessive, disregarding ‘far less restrictive and 
more precise means’ ”. Fox at 469. The Supreme Court 
states that in its decisions upholding the regulation of 
commercial speech, “it [is] ‘up to the [states] to decide 
that point, so long as its judgment was reasonable.” Fox at 
479. More particularly, the Court in Fox stated: 


What our decision require [sic] is a ‘fit’ between 
the [states] ends and the means chosen to 
accomplish those ends’ .. . a fit that is not 
necessarily perfect, but reasonable; that repre- 
sents not necessarily the single best disposition 
but one whose scope is ‘in proportion to the 


interest served . . . that employs not necessarily 
the least restrictive means but, as we have put in 
the other context . . . a means narrowly tailored 


to achieve the desired objective. Within those 
bounds we leave it to governmental decision- 
makers to judge what manner of regulation 
may best be employed. (emphasis supplied) 


Board of Trustees v. Fox at 480. 


Although the state bears the burden of justifying its 
restrictions, it must affirmatively establish the reasonable 
fit required. Zauderer, 471 U.S. at 647. Fox further recog- 
nizes the difficulty of establishing at which point state 
bar restrictions on lawyer advertising are sufficiently nar- 
rowly tailored to comply with First Amendment require- 
ments, ultimately recognizing that regulatory authorities 
must be vested with “needed leeway” in the commercial 


App. 13 


speech field which is “traditionally subject to govern- 
mental regulation”. Board of Trustees v. Fox, at 481, quot- 
ing Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association, supra, 436 U.S. at 
455-456. 


Although the Florida Bar’s Petition to amend the 
rules regulating lawyer advertising does not specifically 
tie the thirty-day time period to a perceived time within 
which the dissipation of the desensitized state of the 
accident victim takes place, the Supreme Court has never 
held a state “to the burden of demonstrating empirically 
the objective effects on the regulations at issue. See Munro 
v. Socialist Worker's Party, 479 U.S. 189, 195 (1986). In 
Munro the Supreme Court considered a challenge to a 
state’s provision precluding the solicitation of votes 
within 100 feet of the entrance to a polling place as 
violative of the First Amendment. Although the issue was 
considered within the context of political expression 
rather than commercial speech, the Court’s analysis is 
helpful in resolving the issue at bar. The Court did not 
require proof that the boundary be perfectly tailored to 
deal with voter intimidation and election fraud. Rather, 
the Court stated that the legislature, in that instance, 
“should be permitted to respond to potential deficien- 
cies . . . with foresight rather than reactively, provided 
that the response is reasonable and does not significantly 
impinge on constitutionally protected rights.” Id. at 
195-196. 


The constitutionality of a time restriction on targeted 
direct-mail advertising in this case is an issue of first 
impression. However, the New Jersey Supreme Court in 
Anis suggests that a reasonable time restriction would 
withstand scrutiny in that state, stating: 


App. 14 


Would a truthful solicitation letter sent fifteen or 
thirty days after a tragic loss reach people when 
they are no longer emotionally weak or vulner- 
able? We cannot say with certainty since our 
assumptions in such cases are largely 
untested .. . hence, we attempt no permanent 
bright-line rule in this opinion. We hereby refer 
the issue to our committee on attorney advertis- 
ing to conduct the type of informational hearing 
that might best inform us how we might draw a 
clearer line of vulnerability. In such a hearing 
process, the committee might invite comments 
from the public or public organizations con- 
cerned with the delivery of legal services .. . 
pending the suggested hearing process, and in 
order to New Jersey attorneys reasonable 
interim guidance . . . we shall not impose disci- 
pline for truthful letters of solicitation sent more 
than two weeks after such a disaster occurs and 
loss becomes known. 


In effect, the New Jersey Supreme Court approved a two- 
week ban on targeted, direct-mail advertising by mem- 
bers of the New Jersey Bar. 


It is not within the province of the courts to deter- 
mine the length of the ban on targeted direct-mail adver- 
tising by the states, so long as the time is reasonable. 
Therefore, the Florida Bar should be permitted discretion 
to fashion restrictions on advertising as permitted by 
Shapero so long as the restrictions do not significantly 
impinge on constitutional rights. This Court should not 
fashion the time restriction itself, but only review the 
restriction to determine whether or not it infringes upon 
the First Amendment. 


App. 15 


Restrictions on commercial speech must not only be 
narrowly tailored to serve a significant governmental 
interest, but must leave open ample alternatives for com- 
munication. United States v. Grace, 461 U.S. 171, 177 
(1983). See also Ward v. Rock Against Racism, supra, at 791 
(1989). The Florida Bar thirty-day ban obviously leaves 
open the alternatives of television, radio, newspaper and 
yellow page advertisement in the telephone book for 
lawyers seeking to provide the public with knowledge 
about the availability of their services, without a time 
restriction.® 


Clearly, the restriction at issue here is content neutral 
since it restricts not what the lawyer says, but the mode 
of communication. 


Plaintiff’s argument that the thirty-day rule is an 
unreasonable classification in violation of the equal pro- 
tection clause of the United States Constitution is equally 
without merit. The argument is based upon plaintiff’s 
contention that the regulation is over-inclusive or under- 
inclusive since it fails to distinguish between accident 
victims who suffer minor injuries as opposed to those 
who suffer major injuries and are in a more sensitized or 
vulnerable state. Plaintiff, however, is unable to point the 
Court to any authority to support its position that a 
regulation is unconstitutional because it is over or under 
inclusive. As stated in United States R.R. Retirement Board 


6 The comments to Florida Bar Rule 4-7.4 makes reference 
to alternative means of advertising available to lawyers includ- 
ing “billboards and other signs, radio, television and recorded 
messages the public may access by dialing a telephone number.” 


App. 16 App. 17 

v. Fritz, 449 U.S. 166, 175 (1980), quoting Dandridge v. Respectfully submitted on this 5th day of August, 
Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 485-86 (1990): 1992. 

In the area of economics and social welfare, a /s/ Charles R. Wilson 

State does not violate the Equal Protection CHARLES R. WILSON 

Clause merely because the classifications made UNITED STATES 

by its laws are imperfect. If the classification has MAGISTRATE JUDGE 

some ‘reasonable basis’ it does not offend the 

Constitution simply because the classification ‘is Copies furnished to: 


not made with mathematical nicety or because 
in practice it results in some inequality.’ (citation 
omitted) ‘The problems of government are prac- 
tical ones and may justify, if they do not require, 
rough accommodations —- illogical, it may be, 
and unscientific.” 


Counsel of Record 


The Constitution does not require states to devise regula- 
tions of this nature in such a fashion that would accom- 
modate every conceivable circumstance. 


CONCLUSION 


This Court is unable to conclude that the thirty-day 
ban on targeted-direct mail lawyer advertising is so far 
afield that it escapes the boundaries of constitutional 
unacceptability. Accordingly, | recommend that the 
Defendant’s Motion For Summary Judgment (Doc. 14) 
be GRANTED and that the Plaintiff’s Motion For Sum- 
mary Judgment (Doc. 10) be DENIED. 


ae 


App. 18 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
MIDDLE DISTRICT OF FLORIDA 
TAMPA DIVISION 


G. STEWART McHENRY, and 
WENT FOR IT, INC., a Florida 
Corporation, 


Plaintiffs, 
v. CASE NO. 92-370-CIV-T-17A 


THE FLORIDA BAR and SUSAN (Filed Dec. 14, 1992) 
V. BLOEMENDAAL, in her 

official capacity as 

Assistant Staff Counsel of 

The Florida Bar, 


Defendants. 


/ 


ORDER ON REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION 


This cause came to be heard before the Honorable 
Charles R. Wilson, United States Magistrate Judge, upon 
Plaintiffs’ Motion For Summary Judgment and Defen- 
dants’ Cross-Motion For Summary Judgment. Judge 
Wilson had the authority to hear this motion pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1), and Rule 72 of the Federal Rules of 
Civil Procedure. 


After considering all documents of record and the 
arguments of counsel at the April 27, 1992, hearing and 
being otherwise fully advised on the premises, Judge 
Wilson recommended that Plaintiffs’ Motion For Sum- 
mary Judgment be denied and that Defendants’ Motion 
For Summary Judgment be granted. Judge Wilson found 
that as a matter of law, Florida Bar Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)a, 


ee 


a. en TAS 


App. 19 


which imposes a thirty-day ban on personal injury and 
wrongful death targeted direct mail lawyer advertising, 
and Rule 4-7.8, which effectively imposes the same ban 
on lawyer referral services in Florida, do not violate the 
First, Fifth, or Fourteenth Amendments of the United 
States Constitution. 


This Court has reviewed the findings of fact set out 
in the Report and Recommendation. With respect to these 
dispositive motions, this Court must make a de novo 
determination in accordance with the rules; after review 
of the specific written objections by the litigants. 28 
U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)C; Rule 72(b), Fed. R. Civ. P.; United 
Steelworkers of Am., AFL-CIO v. New Jersey Zinc Co., Inc., 
828 F.2d 1001, 1005 (3d Cir. 1987); Hantz v. Shiley, Inc., a 
Div. of Pfizer, Inc., 766 F.Supp. 258 (D.N.J. 1991). 


Factual and Procedural Background 


This case focuses on the amendments to Florida Bar 
rules regulating lawyer advertising, which became effec- 
tive April 1, 1991. Rule 4-7.4 prohibits direct mail advert- 
ing [sic] of legal services relating to actions for personal 
injury or wrongful death until more than thirty days have 
elapsed from the accident or disaster mentioned in the 
written communication. The consequence of Rule 4-7.4 is 
imputed to lawyer referral services through Rule 4-7.8. 


This cause of action was originally brought by both 
G. Stewart McHenry! and Went For It, Inc. On October 


1 Plaintiff, G. Stewart McHenry, as a member of the Florida 
Bar had sent direct mail advertisements for legal services to 


App. 20 


24, 1992, G. Stewart McHenry was disbarred by the Flor- 
ida Supreme Court which caused his cause of action 
against the Defendants to become moot. However, this 
does not moot the entire case. There remains a case and 
controversy between the corporate Plaintiff, Went For It, 
Inc., and Defendants. Plaintiff, Went For It, Inc., desires to 
conduct business in the State of Florida as a lawyer 
referral service, utilizing direct mail advertising targeted 
at personal injury victims and their families. — 


Plaintiff originally filed a motion for a preliminary 
injunction requesting that the Court enjoin Defendants 
from enforcing the challenged rules. However, after coun- 
sel conferred, Plaintiff withdrew its motion for prelimi- 
nary injunction, and both parties filed cross motions for 
summary judgment. 


Standard of Review 


Summary judgment should only be entered when the 
moving party has sustained its burden of showing the 
absence of a genuine issue as to any material fact when 
all the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to 
the non-moving party. Sweat v. Miller Brewing Co., 708 
F.2d 655 (11th Cir. 1983). “ ‘[A]ll doubt as to the existence 
of a genuine issue of material fact must be resolved 
against the party moving for summary judgment.’ ” Hay- 
den v. First Nat'l Bank of Mount Pleasant, Texas, 595 F.2d 


personal injury victims in the past. He wanted to continue direct 
mail solicitation to personal injury victims, after the Florida Bar 
passed the disputed rules. 


a pee ee ee eee 


= owes 


App. 21 


655 (5th Cir. 1979)?, quoting Gross v. Southern R.R. Co., 414 
F.2d 292 (5th Cir. 1969). Factual disputes preclude sum- 
mary judgment. 


The parties in the case at bar have stipulated that 
there are no genuine issues of material fact in this case. 
Upon review of the record the Court agrees that summary 
judgment is appropriate. 


ISSUE 


Whether, as a matter of law, the Florida Bar’s thirty- 
day ban, on personal injury and wrongful death targeted 
direct mail lawyer advertising, violates the First, Fifth, 
and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Consti- 
tution. 


DISCUSSION 


Justice Stevens’ opinion in Peel v. Attorney Registra- 
tion and Disciplinary Commission of Illinois, 496 U.S. 91, 110 
S.Ct. 2281, 110 L.Ed.2d 83 (1990), reaffirmed the court's 
resolve to provide First Amendment protection to attor- 
ney targeted mail advertising, stating: 


Whether the inherent character of a statement 
places it beyond the protection of the First 
Amendment is a question of law over which 
Members of this court should exercise de novo 
review. (citation omitted). That the judgment 
below is by a State Supreme Court exercising 


2 The Eleventh Circuit adopted as precedent all case law of 
the Fifth Circuit prior to September 30, 1981. Bonner v. City of 
Prichard, Ala., 661 F.2d 1206 (11th Cir. 1981) (en banc). 


App. 22 


review over the actions of its State Bar Commis- 
sion does not insulate it from our review for 
constitutional infirmity. (citation omitted). The 
Commission’s authority is necessarily con- 
strained by the First Amendment to the Federal 
Constitution, and specifically by the principle 
that disclosure of truthful, relevant information 
is more likely to make a positive contribution to 
decision making [sic] than is concealment of 
such information. (citation omitted). 


Id. at 108. Furthermore, the court noted that, “A principal 
reason why consumers do not consult lawyers is because 
they do not know how to find a lawyer able to assist them 
with their particular problems. [Federal Trade Commis- 
sion, “Staff Report on Improving Consumer Access to 
Legal Services: The Case for Removing Restrictions of 
Truthful Advertising” (1984)]. Id. at 110. 


A. Substantial Government Interest Test 


Defendants justify the thirty day ban on targeted 
mail advertising by citing to comments on Rule 4-7.4, as 
follows: 


There is a potential for abuse inherent in direct 
solicitation by a lawyer of prospective clients 
known to need legal services. It subjects the lay 
person to the private importuning of a trained 
advocate, in a direct interpersonal encounter. A 
prospective client often feels overwhelmed by 
the situation giving rise to the need for legal! 
services and may have an impaired capacity for 
reason, judgment, and protective self-interest. 
Furthermore, the lawyer seeking the retainer is 


—— a. 
Ao Np Dt AE ee cao eae ALY 


oe Pat ee oS 


| 


App. 23 


faced with a conflict stemming from the law- 
yer’s own interest, which may color the advice 
and representation offered the vulnerable pros- 
pect. 


The situation is therefore fraught with the 
possibility of undue influence, intimidation, arid 
overreaching. This potential for abuse inherent 
in direct solicitation of prospective clients justi- 
fies the thirty-day restriction, particularly since 
lawyer advertising permitted under rule 4-7.2 
offers an alternative means of communicating 
necessary information to those who may be in 
need of legal services. 


This restriction is reasonably required by 
the sensitized state of the potential clients, who 
may be either injured or grieving the loss of a 
family member, and the abuses which experi- 
ence has shown exist in this type of solicitation. 
(emphasis added). 


The Florida Bar: Petition to Amend Rules Regulating The 
Florida Bar Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 451, 468 (Fla. 
1990). 


The Court in Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass‘n, 486 U.S. 
466, 108 S.Ct. 1916, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988), established 
that truthful straightforward direct mail lawyer advertis- 
ing is constitutionally protected commercial speech and 
that the state must have a substantial interest that is 
directly advanced by any infringement of that commer- 
cial speech. The substantial interests which Defendants 
allege were dealt with in Shapero. Defendants’, and the 
Florida Supreme Court's, use of the words “direct inter- 
personal encounter” to describe targeted mail advertising 


App. 24 


by lawyers is a strained interpretation. Justice Brennan 
made it clear that a letter, unlike a “badgering advocate,” 
can be avoided merely by placing it in a drawer to be 
considered later, ignored or discarded. Id. at 476-7. The 
concern for potential clients feeling overwhelmed was 
considered by that court: 


The relevant inquiry is not whether there exist 
potential clients whose “condition” makes them 
susceptible to undue influence, but whether the 
mode of communication poses a serious danger 
that lawyers will exploit any such susceptibility. 


Id. at 474. Lastly, concerns of deliberate overreaching by 
lawyer advertising is precluded by Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(f) 
which was not challenged.° 


The Shapero court found that a targeted l« tter conveys 
information about legal services in a manner that is more 
conducive to the reader reflecting and making an 
informed choice as a consumer. Id. at 476. Furthermore, 
the court stated that: 

[T]he First Amendment does not permit a ban 


on certain speech merely because it is more 
efficient; the State may not constitutionally ban 


3 Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(f) provides in pertinent part: 
(b) Written communication. 

(1) A lawyer shall not send, or knowingly permit to be 
sent, on behalf of himself, his firm, his partner, an associate or 
any other lawyer affiliated with him or his firm, a written com- 
munication to a prospective client for the purpose of obtaining 
professional employment of: . . . 

(f) The lawyer knows or reasonably should 
know that the physical, emotional, or mental state of 
the person makes it unlikely that the person would 
exercise reasonable judgment in employing a lawyer. 


Seu. fe ditties 


App. 25 


a particular letter on the theory that to mail it 
only to those whom it would most interest is 
somehow inherently objectionable. 


Id. at 473-4. For these reasons, this Court has determined 
that the concerns expressed above by Defendants do not 
justify a prophylactic rule prohibiting targeted direct mail 
advertising to personal injury and wrongful death vic- 
tims for thirty days. 


Defendants argue that the thirty day period of pro- 
hibited targeted advertising does not constitute a ban. 
They assert that Peel gave authority for such a rule, since 
the proscription is merely a limited regulation. (Defen- 
dants’ Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment, page 6, cit- 
ing to Peel, at 110, n. 17). The footnote which Defendants 
cite as authority for the thirty day ban was referring to 
disclosure requirements and screening of advertisements 
to “ensure that the information is presented in a non- 
misleading [sic] manner.” Peel, at 110-111. The fault in 
Defendants’ logic is that waiting thirty days will not 
affect whether the targeted letter is misleading any more 
than if the ban were not in effect. Therefore the limitation 
is not narrowly tailored in a manner that advances the 
substantial government interest which Defendants assert. 


B. Time, Place and Manner Restriction 


Defendants further argue that the thirty day ban is a 
valid time, place, and manner restriction by equating 
personal injury and wrongful death targeted lawyer 
advertising to prohibited political and ideological speech. 
They argued that direct mail advertising “is no less an 
intrusion on personal privacy and tranquility and no less 


App. 26 


offensive than the election signs in Taxpayers for Vincent,4 
the sound trucks in Kovacs,5 or the picketing in Frisby.”°® 


Defendants’ strained analogies are not persuasive, 
primarily because they are all examples where the par- 
ties, subjected to such speech, could not “avoid further 
bombardment of [their] sensibilities simply by averting 
[their] eyes.” Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass‘n, 436 U.S. 447, 
465, n. 25, 98 S.Ct. 1925, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978) [quoting 
Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15, 21, 91 S.Ct. 1780, 29 
L.Ed.2d 284 (1971)]. This is not the case with targeted 
lawyer letters which are clearly marked in red as “adver- 
tisement” (See, Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)f.(2)a.) and can be dis- 
carded by the recipient without any fear of legal recourse 
or filed away until a consumer desires to read the letter. 


Furthermore, this is not a valid time, place, and man- 
ner restriction because it is the content of the advertise- 
ment which is banned for thirty days. In Simon & 
Schuster, Inc. v. New York Crime Victims Board, the court 
held: “Regulations which permit the Government to dis- 
criminate on the basis of the content of the message 
cannot be tolerated under the First Amendment,” 112 
S.Ct. 501, 508, 116 L.Ed.2d 476, 60 U.S.L.W. 4029 (1991) 


4 Members of City Council of City of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers 
for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 80 L.Ed.2d 772 (1984), 
(prohibiting the posting of election signs on public property). 

5 Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77, 69 S.Ct. 448, 93 L.Ed. 513 
(1949), (prohibiting the use on public streets of sound trucks 
emitting loud noises). 

6 Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 L.Ed.2d 
420 (1988), (prohibited anti-abortion picketing outside of resi- 
dence of a doctor accused of performing abortions). 


App. 27 


[quoting Regan v. Time Inc., 468 U.S. 641, 648-49, 104 S.Ct. 
3262, 82 L.Ed.2d 487 (1984)]. Although the case at bar 
does not receive the heightened protection of political 
speech, the restrictions placed on direct mail advertising 
must be narrowly tailored in a manner that advances the 
substantial government interest of protecting recipients 
from misleading advertisements. The same family mem- 
bers in a wrongful death case, which the thirty day ban 
alleges to protect, may be contacted the next day by a 
probate attorney. Thus, it is the content which Defendants 
wish to restrict for thirty days, and this cannot be permit- 
ted under the auspices of a time, place and manner 
restriction. 


Defendants argue that bar rules “leave open ample 
alternative channels for communication of the informa- 
tion.” [Defendants’ Cross Motion for Summary Judgment, 
page 11; citing to Clark v. Community for Creative Non- 
Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 
(1984)]. However, this Court need not address that issue, 
because the thirty day ban on targeted lawyer advertising 
is not content neutral and cannot be upheld as a valid 
time, place and manner restriction. 


C. In re Anis 


Defendants next assert that the New Jersey Supreme 
Court addressed the issue before this court in In re Anis, 
599 A.2d 1265, 126 N.J. 448 (N.J.1992). That case involved 
a solicitation letter sent by Mr. Anis to the family of a 
victim of the disaster on December 21, 1988, involving 
Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Id. at 
1267. However, this case is distinguishable in that Mr. 


App. 28 


Anis engaged in false and misleading advertising. He 
failed to indicate a range of his fees, misrepresented what 
other lawyers would charge, and misrepresented his pro- 
fessional experience in litigating aircraft accidents. Id. at 
1271-72. Furthermore, he admitted to sending the letter 
without knowing whether the victim’s body had been 
identified, which is a violation of a New Jersey rule 
similar to Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(f). Id. at 1270. The New Jersey 
Supreme Court decided “not [to] impose discipline for 
truthful letters of solicitation sent more than two weeks 
after such a disaster occurs and [the] loss becomes 
known.” Id. at 1271. The New Jersey Supreme Court used 
this as interim guidance pending a hearing process by 
their bar. Id. at 1271. The New Jersey Court explained: 


We realize that there may be other cases in 
which it will be more difficult to draw the line 
of ethical propriety. Would a truthful solicitation 
letter sent fifteen or thirty days after a tragic 
loss reach people when they are no longer emo- 
tionally weak or vulnerable? We cannot say with 
certainty, since our assumptions in such cases 
are largely untested. It may be that there are 
degrees of loss or suffering. Common sense tells 
us that the mildly-injured survivors of an over- 
turned-bus incident might be less vulnerable 
than the Lockerbie families. Hence, we attempt 
no permanent brightline [sic] rule in this opin- 
ion. 


ld. at 1271. None of the foregoing egregious conduct is 
present in this case and in contradistinction the Florida 
Supreme Court enacted such a bright-line. As a result, 
this Court does not find In re Anis to be persuasive 


_— 


eee Ce ee wae 


eee ee ee ee ee eee eS Oe): ee ge re ee 


; 
: 
; 
; 


App. 29 


authority in upholding the Florida Bar’s thirty day ban 
on target direct mail advertising. 


Conclusion 


The challenged rules substantially impair and 
impede the availability of truthful and relevant informa- 
tion which can make a positive contribution to consumers 
in need of such legal services. This Court holds that as a 
matter of law, the Florida Bar’s thirty-day ban on per- 
sonal injury and wrongful death targeted direct mail 
lawyer advertising violates the First, Fifth, and Four- 
teenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. 
Accordingly, it is 


ORDERED that the Report and Recommendation be 
rejected by this Court; Plaintiff's Motion for Summary 
Judgment be granted; Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
Judgment be denied; and the Clerk of the Court be 
directed to enter judgment for Plaintiff in accord with 
this order. 


DONE and ORDERED in chambers, in Tampa, Flor- 
ida on this 14th day of December, 1992. 


/s/ Elizbeth A. Kovachevich 
ELIZABETH A. KOVACHEVICH 
United States District Judge 


Copies furnished to: 
All parties and course! of record. 


App. 30 


G. Stewart McHENRY, Went For It, 
Inc., a Florida Corporation, John 
T. Blakely, Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


Vv. 


THE FLORIDA BAR, Susan V. 
Bloemendaal, Defendants-Appellants. 


No. 93-2069. 


United States Court of Appeals, 
Eleventh Circuit. 


May 10, 1994. 


Lawyer and lawyer referral service brought suit chal- 
lenging constitutional validity of Florida Bar rule prohib- 
iting lawyers from using direct mail to solicit personal 
injury or wrongful death clients within 30 days of acci- 
dent. The United States District Court for the Middle 
District of Florida, No. 92-370-CIV-T-17A, Elizabeth A. 
Kovachevich, J., 808 F.Supp. 1543, ruled that 30-day ban 
on such advertising violated the First Amendment. Flor- 
ida Bar appealed. The Court of Appeals, Black, Circuit 
Judge, held that: (1) rule could not be justified by state’s 
interest in protecting persons traumatized by recent 
injury, or by state’s interest in protecting personal privacy 
and tranquility of persons affected by personal injury or 
death, and (2) rule was not a valid time, place, and 
manner restriction, since it was not content-neutral either 
on its face or as applied. 


Affirmed. 


Appeal from the United States District Court for the 
Middle District of Florida. 


App. 31 


Before BLACK, Circuit Judge, DYER, Senior Circuit 
Judge, and ALAIMO%, Senior District Judge. 


BLACK, Circuit Judge: 


The question in this appeal is whether The Florida 
Bar’s thirty-day ban on direct mail lawyer advertising 
soliciting personal injury and wrongful death clients vio- 
lates commercial speech protections afforded attorney 
advertising under the First Amendment. The district 
court ruled that it does. We affirm. 


I. 


Subject to approval by the Florida Supreme Court, 
The Florida Bar (Bar) promulgates rules that regulate the 
manner in which Florida lawyers may contact prospec- 
tive clients for the purpose of obtaining professional 
employment. See R. Regulating Fla. Bar 4-7.1 to -7.7 
(Kules). The Rules generally prohibit lawyers from in- 
person, telephone, telegraph, or facsimile solicitation of 
prospective clients with whom the lawyer has no family 
or prior professional relationship. Id. at 4-7.4(a).! The 


* Honorable Anthony A. Alaimo, Senior U.S. District Judge for 
the Southern District of Georgia, sitting by designation. 


1 Rule 4-7.4, Direct Contact with Prospective Clients, reads 
in pertinent part: 

(a) Solicitation. A lawyer shall not solicit pro- 
fessional employment from a prospective client with 
whom the lawyer has no family or prior professional 
relationship, in person or otherwise, when a signifi- 
cant motive for the lawyer’s doing so is the lawyer’s 
pecuniary gain. ... The term “solicit” includes contact 
in person, by telephone, telegraph, or facsimile, or by 


App. 32 


Rules permit direct mail solicitation of prospective clients 
except under certain conditions, id. at 4-7.4(b)(1), and 
provide specific requirements that must be followed 
when lawyers solicit clients through the mail, id. at 
4-7.4(b)(2). Client solicitation rules apply indirectly to 
lawyer referral services through the Bar’s prohibition on 
lawyers accepting referrals from services that contact 
potential clients in a manner that would violate the Rules 
if the contact was made by a Jawyer. Id. at 4-7.8(a)(1).? 


Appellee McHenry, a member of The Florida Bar when 
he filed this suit, regularly solicited personal injury and 
wrongful death clients via direct mail before being disbarred 
for acts unrelated to the facts of this case. New rules regard- 
ing client solicitation by mail took effect in January 1991,4 


other communication directed to a specific recipient 
and includes any written form of communication 
directed to a specific recipient and not meeting the 
requirements of subdivision (b) of this rule. 


2 Rule 4-7.8, Lawyer Referral Services, reads in pertinent 
part: 
(a) When Lawyers May Accept Referrals. A 
lawyer shall not accept referrals from a lawyer refer- 
ral service unless the service: 

(1) engages in no communication with the 
public and in no direct contact with prospective 
clients in a manner that would violate the Rules 
of Professional Conduct if the communication or 
contact were made by the lawyer. 


3 The Florida Bar v. McHenry, 605 So.2d 459 (Fla.1992). 


4 The Florida Bar: Petition to Amend the Rules Regulating The 
Florida Bar — Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 451, 460 (Fla.1990) (Petition 
~ Advertising Issues). The Bar petitioned the Florida Supreme Court 
to amend the rules regulating attorney advertising. The Court 
approved the Bar’s proposed rules with certain modifications. Id. 


App. 33 


including a new rule that prohibits lawyers from using direct 
mail to solicit personal injury or wrongful death clients 
“unless the accident or disaster [for which representation is 
sought] occurred more than 30 days prior to the mailing of 
the communication.” Id. at 4-7.4(b)(1)(A).5 McHenry and 
Went For It, Inc. (WFI), a lawyer referral service owned by 
McHenry, sued the Bar to enjoin enforcement of Rule 
4-7.4(b)(1)(A), asserting that, but for its prohibition, they 
would send such letters within thirty days of an accident or 
disaster.© 


> The Bar originally proposed to the Florida Supreme Court 
a total prohibition of all direct mail advertising target to poten- 
tial personal injury or wrongful death clients. Petition — Advertis- 
ing Issues, 571 So.2d at 459. The Court disapproved the proposal, 
acknowledging that United States Supreme Court precedent 
prohibited such a ban. Id. The Florida Supreme Court held, 
however, that it could constitutionally “restrict [such advertis- 
ing] by directing that any mail advertising pertaining to per- 
sonal injury and wrongful death claims shall be mailed no 
earlier than thirty days after the incident which precipitated the 
claim.” Id. The Court modified the Bar’s proposal and instituted 
the thirty-day ban. Id. 


© Appellees do not challenge any other Bar rules regarding 
client solicitation by mail. We presume, without deciding the 
constitutional validity of any other rules, that the letters they 
propose to send will comply with all other regulations estab- 
lished in Rule 4-7.4(b), including: 

(1) no letters will be sent to persons known to be 
represented by another attorney in the matter; 

(2) no letters will be sent to persons who have 
made it known to the sender that they do not want to 
receive such communication; 

(3) no letters will subject the recipient to coercion, 
duress, fraud, overreaching, harassment, intimida- 
tion or undue influence; 


App. 34 


McHenry’s suit became moot when he was disbarred. 
WFI continued as a plaintiff because it alleged injury in 
fact from the indirect application of the thirty-day ban to 


(4) no letters will contain false, deceptive, or 
unfair statements or claims; 

(5) no letters will be sent if the sender knows or 
reasonably should know that the physical, emotional 
or mental state of the recipient makes it unlikely that 
the recipient would exercise reasonable judgment in 
employing a lawyer; 

(6) the face of every envelope will be marked in 
red with the word “advertisement,” and every page 
of any letter sent will be similarly marked; 

(7) a copy of the letter and envelope will be sent 
to the designated committee of the Bar and retained 
by the sender as required; 

(8) letters will be sent by regular U.S. mail only, 
not by any other means; 

(9) letters will contain no reference suggesting 
that the letter has been approved by the Bar; 

(10) the appropriate statement of qualifications 
will accompany each letter sent; 

(11) the first sentence of the letter will be “If you 
have already retained a lawyer for this matter, please 
disregard this letter”; 

(12) the letter will look like a letter, not a pleading 
or other legal document; 

(13) if the matter will be handled by a lawyer 
other than the lawyer sending the letter, a statement 
to that effect will be included; 

(14) the letter will disclose how the sender 
obtained information about the recipient’s involve- 
ment in the accident or disaster that prompted the 
letter; and 

(15) the nature of the recipient’s legal problem 
will not be revealed on the outside of the envelope. 


App. 35 


it through Rule 4-7.8(a)(1).? WFI maintains that the thirty- 
day ban is an unconstitutional restriction on commercial 
speech in violation of the First Amendment. The Bar 
submits that the ban serves substantial governmental 
interests that justify the restriction on speech. In addition, 
the Bar maintains that the ban is a content-neutral time, 
place, and manner restriction on speech. 


All parties agreed that there were no genuine issues 
of material fact for trial and submitted cross motions for 
summary judgment. The district court referred the case to 
a magistrate judge, who found that the thirty-day ban on 
direct mail solicitation of personal injury and wrongful 
death clients withstood constitutional scrutiny and rec- 
ommended that summary judgment be granted in favor 
of the Bar. On review of the magistrate judge’s report and 
recommendation, the district court disagreed. It held that 
the ban violated constitutional protections of free speech 


7 The Washington Legal Foundation and The Allied Educa- 
tional Foundation submitted an amici curiae brief to this Court 
asserting that WFI lacked standing independent of McHenry to 
maintain this suit in the district court. The Bar and WFI both 
maintain that jurisdiction is proper despite the mootness of 
McHenry’s claim. We are persuaded that WFI alone has stand- 
ing to bring this claim. See Cone Corp. v. Florida Dep’t of Transp., 
921 F.2d 1190, 1204 (11th Cir.), cert. denied, _. U.S. __, 111 S.Ct. 
2238, 114 L.Ed.2d 479 (1991). In addition, on limited remand 
from this Court, the district court granted WFI’s unopposed 
motion to add Appellee Blakely, a member of The Florida Bar, as 
a party Plaintiff. Blakely asserts that, but for Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(A), 
he would engage in direct mail solicitation of clients during the 
thirty-day period. Thus, even if WFI lacked standing, Appellee 
Blakely has standing to challenge the thirty-day ban on direct 
mail advertising. 


App. 36 


and granted summary judgment in favor of WFI. 808 
F.Supp. 1543. 


Il. 


In 1977, the Supreme Court first ruled that states 
could not prohibit certain truthful advertising by lawyers 
concerning the availability and price of legal services. 
Bates v. State Bar, 433 U.S. 350, 384, 97 S.Ct. 2691, 2709, 53 
L.Ed.2d 810 (1977). Subsequently, the Supreme Court has 
held that states may ban completely a lawyer’s in-person 
solicitation of clients to prevent the potential for over- 
reaching, undue influence, and intimidation on members 
of the public that is present when “a professional trained 
in the art of persuasion, personally solicits an unsophisti- 
cated, injured, or distressed lay person.” Ohralik v. Ohio 
State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 447, 464-68, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 
1923-25, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978). States may not, however, 
ban outright the use of direct mail by attorneys to solicit 
clients known to be in need of legal services. Shapero v. 
Kentucky Bar Ass‘n, 486 U.S. 466, 473, 108 S.Ct. 1916, 
1921-22, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988). 


Today, “[lJawyer advertising is in the category of 
constitutionally protected commercial speech.” Id. at 472, 
108 S.Ct. at 1921. As such, lawyer advertising “that is not 
false or deceptive and does not concern unlawful activ- 
ities . . . may be restricted only in the service of a 
substantial governmental interest, and only through 
means that directly advance that interest.” Zauderer v. 
Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 471 U.S. 626, 638, 105 S.Ct. 
2265, 2275, 85 L.Ed.2d 652 (1985). In further defining the 
connection between the means chosen to advance the 


App. 37 


government interest in regulating commercial speech and 
the interest itself, the Supreme Court has explained that 
the means must simply fit: 


a fit that is not necessarily perfect, but reason- 
able; that represents not necessarily the single 
best disposition but one whose scope is in pro- 
portion to the interest served; that employs not 


necessarily the least restrictive means but... a 
means narrowly tailored to achieve the desired 
objective. 


Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 480, 109 S.Ct. 3028, 
3035, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1989) (citation and internal quota- 
tion omitted). Because there is no suggestion that Appel- 
lee’s proposed direct mail solicitations will be false or 
deceptive, the Bar must demonstrate that its thirty-day 
ban serves a substantial government interest and is nar- 
rowly tailored to achieve that interest. 


The Bar submits that two substantial governmental 
interests are served by the thirty-day ban: (1) protecting 
persons traumatized by recent injury to themselves or 
members of their family who are likely to be in a state of 
mind which inhibits objective evaluation of a person- 
alized solicitation from a lawyer, and (2) protecting the 
personal privacy and tranquility of persons who were 
themselves, or whose loved ones were, recent victims of 
personal injury or death. We conclude that neither of 
these asserted interests justifies a thirty-day ban on other- 
wise constitutionally protected direct mail advertising by 
attorneys. 


App. 38 


A. 


In Shapero, the Supreme Court rejected the assertion 
that a state could ban truthful, direct mail solicitation of 
persons overwhelmed by legal troubles because their 
capacity to exercise good judgment in selecting a lawyer 
was assertedly impaired. 486 U.S. at 474, 108 S.Ct. at 1922. 
In that case, the Kentucky Bar Association denied 
approval of a truthful letter that an attorney proposed to 
send to potential clients he learned had a foreclosure suit 
filed against them. Id. at 469, 108 S.Ct. at 1919. The court 
first noted that Kentucky could not constitutionally pro- 
hibit the attorney from sending a nearly identical letter, 
suggesting his services if the need should ever arise, to 
an at-large audience not known to need representation. 
Id. at 473, 108 S.Ct. at 1921. Turning to the targeted nature 
of the solicitation, the Court explained that “the First 
Amendment does not permit a ban on certain speech 
merely because it is more efficient.” Id. at 473, 108 S.Ct. at 
1922. 


The Court further recognized that persons over- 
whelmed to the degree that their capacity for good judg- 
ment is impaired would have the same impairment 
whether evaluating an attorney’s newspaper advertise- 
ment, a general solicitation letter, or a targeted solicita- 
tion letter. Id. The Court thus concluded that “(t]he 
relevant inquiry is not whether there exist potential cli- 
ents whose ‘condition’ makes them susceptible to undue 
influence, but whether the mode of communication poses 
a serious danger that lawyers will exploit any such sus- 
ceptibility.” Id. Targeted direct mail advertising, the mode 
of communication in Shapero and in this case, “ ‘poses 
much less risk of overreaching or undue influence’ than 


App. 39 


does in-person solicitation.” Id. (quoting Zauderer, 471 
U.S. at 642, 105 S.Ct. at 2277). 


As the Court pointed out, a letter does not present 
the coercive force of the personal presence of a trained 
advocate’ or the ‘pressure on the potential client for an 
immediate yes-or-no answer to the offer of representa- 
tion.’ ” Id. Letter recipients cam merely avert their eyes to 
avoid bombardment of their sensibilities, put the letter in 
a drawer to consider or ignore later, or simply throw the 
letter away.® Id. 486 U.S. at 475-76, 108 S.Ct. at 1923. 
Given the greatly reduced potential for coercion pre- 
sented by a letter, the Court held that Kentucky’s total 
ban on direct mail advertising was an unconstitutional 
restriction on commercial speech. I/d. 


While all the potential clients targeted in Shapero 
were assertedly unable to exercise unimpaired judgment 
due to the overwhelming nature of pending foreclosure 
litigation, some of the potential clients in this case are 
assertedly overwhelmed by different circumstances, such 
as injury to themselves or family members, or even the 
loss of a loved one.? The cause of the potential client’s 


8 These recipient responses become even more likely, and 
the potential for undue influence is even further reduced, when 
the letter bears the inscription “advertising material” in red on 
the envelope and on each internal page, as required in Florida. 
See R. Regulating Fla. Bar 4-7.4(b)(2)(A). 


? We note that, although all the potential clients in Shapero 
faced legal difficulties of the same magnitude (a foreclosure 
suit), some of the potential clients targeted by Appellees in this 
case will suffer from relatively minor injuries, while others no 
doubt will have injuries that are more severe. Nevertheless, the 
Bar rule applies equally to solicitations within thirty-days of a 


App. 40 


assertedly impaired judgment, however, is inconsequen- 
tial to our inquiry under Shapero. The relevant inquiry is 
the mode of communication. Id. at 474, 108 S.Ct. at 1922. A 
letter, especially a letter marked “advertising material” in 
red, possesses limited potential for overreaching, whether 
the potential client is overwhelmed by pending litigation, 
personal injury, or grief. See id. 


In addition, the Bar notes that, while the ban held 
unconstitutional in Shapero was total, the ban under Rule 
4-7.4(b)(1)(A) lasts for only thirty days. We find nothing 
in Shapero to suggest that states may impose such a 
moratorium on direct mail solicitation. The Bar main- 
tains, nonetheless, that its thirty-day ban is justified by 
the assertedly heightened sensitivities of some potential 
recipients in the immediate aftermath of a tragedy.'° Even 
if Shapero could be read to support restrictions based 
upon the letter recipient’s sensitivity, we are not per- 
suaded that the heightened sensitivity of some potential 
recipients justifies a prophylactic rule such as this.'! This 


simple slip and fall or of accidents that result in severe injuries 
or fatalities. 


10 The potential clients in Shapero were all persons against 
whom a foreclosure suit had been filed. In Kentucky, a defen- 
dant must file an answer within twenty days after service of a 
summons. Ky.R.Civ.P. 12.01. Given this time constraint, 
Shapero’s letters would have needed to reach the intended 
recipients quickly, certainly within twenty days, or the letters’ 
effectiveness would likely be lost entirely. Thus, in Shapero, the 
Court approved direct mail solicitations that would be sent to 
recipients shortly after the event that triggered the potential 
need for legal representation. 


11 We note that Bar Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(F) also appears 
designed to serve the state’s interest in protecting potential 


App. 41 


is especially true considering that the period immediately 
following an accident or disaster may well be the time 
when the need for legal advice is most pressing.!2 “|T]he 
State may not constitutionally ban a particular letter on 
the theory that to mail it only to those whom it would 
most interest is somehow inherently objectionable.” 
Shapero, 486 U.S. at 473, 108 S.Ct. at 1922. We conclude, 
therefore, that the Bar’s first asserted substantial interest 
fails, under Shapero, to justify the thirty-day ban on attor- 
ney direct mail solicitation of potential personal injury 
and wrongful death clients. 


letter recipients with heightened sensitivities. That Rule pro- 
hibits direct mail solicitation of potential clients when “the law- 
yer knows or reasonably should know that the physical, 
emotional, or mental state of the person makes it unlikely that 
the person would exercise reasonable judgment in employing a 
lawyer.” R. 4-7.4(b)(1)(F). This case does not present a challenge 
to Rule 4-7.4(b)(1)(F) and we make no comment concerning its 
legality. We mention it only to demonstrate the difference 
between a prophylactic rule like the thirty-day ban and a more 
narrowly tailored approach. 


12 Justice Shaw of the Florida Supreme Court noted that, 
This ban will effectively deprive many accident vic- 
tims of information concerning the availability of pro- 
fessional legal assistance precisely when they need it 
most — during the initial period following a serious 
accident when they are confronted with an unintellig- 
ible legal tangle and demands to waive or compro- 
mise their rights. It is during this time that informed 
decisionmaking is crucial. 
Petition — Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d at 474 (Shaw, C.J., concur- 
ring in part and dissenting in part). 


App. 42 


B. 


The Bar also asserts that the thirty-day ban serves a 
substantial state interest by protecting the personal pri- 
vacy and tranquility of persons who were themselves, or 
whose loved ones were, recent victims of personal injury 
or death. We recognize that the intrusion of Appellee’s 
letters upon grief-stricken recipients may be offensive. 
We also appreciate the Bar’s attempt to protect an indi- 
vidual’s personal privacy, and to preserve the integrity of 
the legal profession, by eliminating offensive solicitations 
such as these.!> We are persuaded, however, that under 
Supreme Court precedent this asserted interest cannot 
justify a thirty-day ban on certain targeted solicitations 
and cannot overcome the protections afforded commer- 
cial speech under the First Amendment. 


'3 The Supreme Court addressed concerns about offensive 


lawyer advertising in Zauderer, a case that involved truthful ° 


newspaper advertising for potential Dalkon Shield litigation 
clients. There, the Supreme Court noted that states acting 
through their bar associations do have a substantial interest in 
ensuring that “attorneys behave with dignity and decorum in 
the courtroom.” 471 U.S. at 647, 105 S.Ct. at 2280. Nonetheless, 
the Court was uncertain that a state’s “desire that attorneys 
maintain their dignity in their communications with the public 
is an interest substantial enough to justify the abridgment of 
[attorneys’] First Amendment rights.” Id. The Court explained 
that, even if that state interest could be considered substantial, it 
was “unpersuaded that the undignified behavior would tend to 
recur so often as to warrant a prophylactic rule” barring all 
solicitation of legal employment. Id. Moreover, “the mere possi- 
bility that some members of the population might find advertis- 
ing embarrassing or offensive cannot justify suppressing it.” Id. 
(citing Carey v. Population Servs. Int'l, 431 U.S. 678, 701, 97 S.Ct. 
2010, 2024, 52 L.Ed.2d 675 (1977)). 


App. 43 


The Bar maintains that Appellee’s targeted letters 
will invade the recipients’ personal privacy and disturb 
the tranquility of their homes. As the Supreme Court 
noted in Shapero, “a targeted letter [does not] invade the 
recipient’s privacy any more than does a substantively 
identical letter mailed at large. The invasion, 1f any, 
occurs when the lawyer discovers the recipient’s legal 
affairs, not when he confronts the recipient with the 
discovery.” 486 U.S. at 476, 108 S.Ct. at 1923. Similarly, 
the invasion of the potential client’s privacy in this case 
occurs when the lawyer learns of the accident or tragedy 
with which the potential client is involved. In many 
cases, this invasion of privacy will involve no more than 
reading the newspaper. 


Nonetheless, the Bar urges that we focus our inquiry 
on the fact that the solicitation letters in this case will 
enter into and intrude upon the tranquility of a potential 
client’s home, a place traditionally afforded great protec- 
tion. See Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 483, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 
2502, 101 L.Ed.2d 420 (1988) (“The State’s interest in 
protecting the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the 
home is certainly of the highest order in a free and 
civilized society.”). It equates the “invasion” created by 
the client solicitation letters in this case with that of the 
anti-abortion protesters banned from a doctor’s front 
lawn in Frisby, and with the unavoidable loud noise 
blasted at homes from sound trucks in Kovacs v. Cooper, 
336 U.S. 77, 69 S.Ct. 448, 93 L.Ed. 513 (1949). We decline 
to place the invasion of an envelope stamped “advertisng 
material” in red in such a category. See Shapero, 486 U.S. 
at 476, 108 S.Ct. at 1923. We also note that virtually all 
direct mail advertising, and most advertising of other 


App. 44 


varieties, “invades” the tranquility of the recipients’ 
home, yet is protected by the First Amendment. We con- 
clude, therefore, that the Bar’s thirty-day ban on attor- 
neys’ direct mail solicitation of potential personal injury 
and wrongful death clients is not justified by its asserted 
interest in protecting the recipients’ privacy or the tran- 
quility of their homes. 


Ill. 


The Bar alternatively maintains that we should 
uphold the thirty-day ban on direct mail solicitation of 
personal injury and wrongful death clients as a reason- 
able time, place, and manner restriction on speech. States 
may place restrictions on the time, place, and manner of 
constitutionally protected communication if they do so: 
(1) without regard to the content of the communication, 
(2) in a manner narrowly tailored to serve a significant 
governmental interest, and (3) leaving open alternative 
channels for communication. Clark v. Community for Cre- 
ative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 294, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 3069, 
82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984). We conclude that the Bar’s Rule 
fails to meet the first element of the test described in 
Clark. 


On its face the thirty-day Rule is unambiguously 
content-based. It applies only to letters that “concern{] an 
action for personal injury or wrongful death.” R. 
4-7.4(b)(1)(A). It is, then, the subject matter of the letter, a 
solicitation for a certain type of representation, that trig- 
gers application of the Rule. 


The Bar nevertheless maintains that the Rule has 
nothing to do with the content of the proposed letter. 


App. 45 


Rather, it asserts that application of the Rule is based 
upon the nature of the intended recipient as an accident 
victim or family member. Indeed, the Bar claims that it 
does not need to review the content of a letter in order to 
determine whether or not the rule is applicable - it need 
only determine the source of the list of recipients of the 
letter. As the district court noted, however, letters solicit- 
ing the same potential client under identical circum- 
stances for probate representation or any other purpose 
are permitted. The source of the list of recipients for the 
probate attorney’s letter could be identical to that of the 
wrongful death attorney’s letter, yet only the wrongful 
death solicitation would be banned under the Rule. 


We conclude that the Bar would necessarily need to 
examine the content of the letter to determine whether 
the Rule applied to the attorney in question. Application 
of the rule, therefore, depends on the content of the letter. 
The Bar’s assertion that the Rule is not designed to sup- 
press the content of the letter is unavailing. The Rule is 
not content-neutral, either on its face or as applied. 
Accordingly, it is not a reasonable time, place, and man- 
ner restriction on speech. 


IV. 


Justice Powell predicted in Bates that recognizing 
First Amendment protections for attorney advertising 
would “effect profound changes in the practice of law, 
viewed for centuries as a learned profession.” 433 U.S. at 
389, 97 S.Ct. at 2712 (Powell, J., concurring in part and 
dissenting in part). That prediction has proven true. 
Unfortunately, the resulting changes have not necessarily 


App. 46 


been for the better. We are disturbed that Bates and its 
progeny require the decision we reach today. We are 
forced to recognize that there are members of our profes- 
sion who would mail solicitation letters to persons in 
grief, and we find The Florida Bar’s attempt to regulate 
such intrusions entirely understandable. Although the 
Bar may not formally restrict such behavior, an attorney’s 
conscience, self-respect, and respect for the profession 
should dictate self-restraint in this area. To preserve the 
law as a learned profession demands as much. 


For the foregoing reasons, the district court’s grant of 
summary judgment in favor of Went For It, Inc. is 


AFFIRMED. 


