-~, 
(: 


No. 94-226 


In The 3 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
+ 


THE FLORIDA BAR, 


Petitioner, 
Vs. 


G. STEWART MCHENRY; WENT FOR IT, INC.; 
and JOHN T. BLAKELY, 


Respondents. 


° 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Eleventh Circuit 
+ 


PETITIONER’S BRIEF ON THE MERITS 
+ 


BARRY RICHARD 

GREENBERG, TRAURIG, HOFFMAN, 
Liporr, Rosen & Quenrte-, P.A. 

101 E. College Avenue 

Post Office Drawer 1838 

Tallahassee, FL 32302 

904/222-6891 

Counsel of Record 


WILLIAM F. Brews, President 
The Florida Bar 


JoHN A. DeVautt III, 
President-Elect 
The Florida Bar 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


BE 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


I 


WHETHER THE COURT SHOULD RETURN TO THE 
STATES A REASONABLE RANGE OF AUTHORITY TO 
DETERMINE WHETHER ATTORNEY ADVERTISING 
ADVERSELY AFFECTS THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUS- 
TICE, AND TO REGULATE IT ACCORDINGLY. 


II 


WHETHER THE LIMITS PLACED UPON STATE 
AUTHORITY BY THE DECISION BELOW EXTEND 
BEYOND ANY HERETOFORE RECOGNIZED BY THIS 
COURT AND ESTABLISH ATTORNEY ADVERTISING 
AS A PRIVILEGED CLASS OF COMMERCIAL SOLIC- 
ITATION WITH A GREATER DEGREE OF INSULATION 
FROM REGULATION THAN OTHER CLASSES. 


A. Whether the challenged rules meet the 
requirements for valid commercial regulations 
because they are narrowly tailored to serve sub- 
stantial governmental interests. 


B. Whether the challenged rules are valid time, 
place or manner regulations. 


Ie, eee eee CNP ee mess ee 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ........... i 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES . ....00cscesiiccccccsensaces iii 
LOWER COURT REPORTS AND OPINIONS ....... 1 


JURISDICTIONAL GROUNDS ............-0022005: 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND RULES 


INVOLVED) 2... cc ccccdesnccscwesccctaske eee heenee 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE..............seeeeeees 
ARGUMENT ....ccocesescescssesecundebenenenuenen 


I 


II 


THE COURT SHOULD RETURN TO THE 
STATES A REASONABLE RANGE OF AUTHOR- 
ITY TO DETERMINE WHETHER ATTORNEY 
ADVERTISING ADVERSELY AFFECTS THE 
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, AND TO REG- 
ULATE IT ACCORDINGLY.............--2-405- 


THE LIMITS PLACED UPON STATE AUTHOR- 
ITY BY THE DECISION BELOW EXTEND 
BEYOND ANY HERETOFORE RECOGNIZED BY 
THIS COURT AND ESTABLISH ATTORNEY 
ADVERTISING AS A PRIVILEGED CLASS OF 
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION WITH A 
GREATER DEGREE OF INSULATION FROM 
REGULATION THAN OTHER CLASSES........ 


A. The challenged rules meet the requirements 
for valid commercial lations because 
they are narrowly tailored to serve substan- 
tial governmental interests ................- 


B. The challenged rules are valid time, place or 
manner restrictions. ...........-+++sseeeeees 


CONCLUSION . oc ccvccctvotstcesss cases snecemwens 


24 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


\ Page 
CASES 
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350, 97 S.Ct. 
ee  .  n passim 
Bethel School District v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 106 
S.Ct. 3159, 92 L.Ed.2d 549 (1986).................. 20 
Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 109 S.Ct. 
RS 25 
Central Hudson Gas v. Public Service Comm'n, 447 U.S. 
557, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980)........ 24, 25 


Clark v. Community for Creative Non-violence, 468 
U.S. 288, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984) .... 29 


Cohen v. Hurley, 366 U.S. 117, 81 S.Ct. 954, 6 


Ecce sense ascccccccccssccesccccs 17 
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 103 S.Ct. 1684, 75 
eer cae cesewereccescccccccecces 18 


Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 
472 U.S. 749, 105 S.Ct. 2939, 86 L.Ed.2d 593 


IRMEMEERGRS RoGScceesccccccccecccccccccscs 18 
Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 

ACh rhb essbcesocccccccccccces 26, 27 
Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 773, 95 S.Ct. 

Gey OO Betettaes O72 (1975).... 2... cc ccccccccsene 17 
Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503, 106 S.Ct. 1310, 

MG Sin secesescccccccscecccccces 16 


Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 
108 S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592 (1988).... 16, 20, 21, 22 


Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 104 S.Ct. 3194, 82 


CE eee 16 
In re R.M.J., 455 U.S. 191, 102 S.Ct. 929, 71 L.Ed.2d 
TT REIGGERGs busses ebsdecccccsccecccccecs 10 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page Page 


Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77, 69 S.Ct. 448 (1949) .... 26 Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 78, 109 S.Ct. 


2746, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989)................... 30, 31 


Matter of Anis, 599 A.2d 1265 (N.J. 1992)............ 27 
, Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 471 U.S. 
McHenry v. The Florida Bar, 21 F.3d 2258 (11th Cir. 626, 105 S.Ct. 2265, 85 L.Ed.2d 652 (1985)..10, 13, 15 
BIDE. a av ccccccdavcdposweahesaeeheniyh ma eGbhess 1, 14 
Members of City Counsel v. Taxpayers for Vincent, OTHER AUTHORITIES 
we 806, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 80 L.Ed.2d 772 i Rule 4-7.4(b), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar. ... .passim 
Rule 4-7.8(a), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar... 2, 4, 34 
Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association, 436 U.S. 447, 98 
S.Ct. 1912, 56 L-Ed.2d 444 (1978) ...... 12, 17, 19, 22, 25 es Le Siri chs wSvensrebbeobovesseeees 27 
Pickering v. Board of Education, 319 U.S. 563, 88 Sy SE EEE bee cwievdieccccceccscoesccccceses 1 
S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 (1968).................. 18 ee ch odacseghuddhen ed secssecsscose 4 
Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 197 S.Ct. 2891, Amendment I, United States Constitution ............ 1 
ee I ors ree 16, 18 
Amendment XIV, Section 1, United States Consti- 
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 PE vce ccddvenwcaspeversvetdececeseuccccceccccces 2 
SCL. SES, GP Ean Bet En hc Fenn 6606 best <' 32 
Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass’n, 486 U.S. 466, 108 
S.Ct. 1916, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988) ......... 11, 13, 15 
The Florida Bar v. McHenry, 605 So.2d 459 (Fla. 
BOGE. 6 oc cv cccesedecesaccnbhadeteheasamateeedess a> 5 


The Florida Bar: Petition to Amend the Rules Regulat- 
ing the Florida Bar — Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 


GSi Ge WM 8o ss cnsntacdensouns teaeeatennted« 3, 4 
Theard v. United States, 354 U.S. 278, 77 S.Ct. 1274, 

1 L.GBe AOG8 Ca he hkcdartscddekssadsiotis:. 22 
Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Commu School 

Dist., 395 U.S. 503, 89 S.Ct. 733, 21 731 


CR9GB)....¢onqnssccksd tncdbcctanveues bairesnawnene ..20 


LOWER COURT REPORTS AND OPINIONS 


Report and Recommendation of U.S. Magistrate 
Judge, Case No. 92-370-CIV-T-17A (M.D. Fla., August 5, 
1992) [App. 1].? 


Order on Recommendation, Case No. 92-370-CIV- 
T-17A (M.D. Fla., August 5, 1992) [App. 18]. 


McHenry v. The Florida Bar, 21 F.3d 2258 (11th Cir. 
1994) [App. 30]. 


JURISDICTIONAL GROUNDS 


This case is before the Court on writ of certiorari to 
review a decision of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eleventh Circuit entered on May 10, 1994. This 
Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C., § 1254(1). 


e 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
AND RULES INVOLVED 


Amendment I, United States Constitution: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an estab- 
lishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exer- 
cise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, 
or of the press; or the right of the people peacea- 
bly to assemble, and to petition the Government 
for a redress of grievances. 


1 The parties have agreed that there are no relevant docu- 
ments other than those included in the Appendix to the Petition 
for Certiorari. Consequently, no Joint Appendix is being filed 
and all references are to the original Appendix. 


Amendment XIV, Section 1, United States Constitution: 


All persons born or naturalized in the United 
States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State 
wherein they reside. No State shall make or 
enforce any law which shall abridge the privi- 
leges or immunities of citizens of the United 
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of 
life, liberty, or property, without due process of 
law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdic- 
tion the equal protection of the laws. 


RULE 4-7.4 (b), Rules Regulating The Florida Bar: 


(b) Written Communication. 


(1) A lawyer shall not send, or knowingly permit 
to be sent, on the lawyer’s behalf or on behalf of 
the lawyer’s firm or partner, an associate, or any 
other lawyer affiliated with the lawyer or the law- 
yer’s firm, a written communication to a prospec- 
tive client for the purpose of obtaining professional 
employment if: 


(A) the written communication concerns an 
action for personal injury or wrongful death or 
otherwise relates to an accident or disaster 
involving the person to whom the communica- 
tion is addressed or a relative of that person, 
unless the accident or disaster occurred more 
than 30 days prior to the mailing of the commu- 
nication. 


RULE 4-7.8(a), Rules Regulating the Florida Bar: 


(a) When Lawyers May Accept Referrals. A 
lawyer shall not accept referrals from a lawyer 
referral service unless the service: 


. s 2h? Sea oS. ile oe 
git Wabe eee ae Le ee ae ee 


(1) engages in no communication with the 
public and in no direct contact with prospective 
clients in a manner that would violate the Rules 
of Professional Conduct if the communication or 
contact were made by the lawyer; 


+ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In 1987, ten years after this Court first held that 
attorneys had a constitutional right to advertise, The 
Florida Bar began a two-year study of lawyer advertising 
and solicitation. Among other things, the study included 
hearings throughout the state, a review of public com- 
mentary regarding attorney advertising, and a survey by 
a public opinion polling organization retained by the Bar 
to compile statistics on public attitudes toward attorney 
advertising and solicitation. The complete record of infor- 
mation compiled in the study was submitted to the Flor- 
ida Supreme Court, along with a summary of the 
information, as part of a petition to amend the Rules 
Regulating The Florida Bar with respect to advertising 
and solicitation.? 


The survey found that Florida adults have negative 
feelings about advertising by attorneys, that the public 
feels that attorneys who participate in direct-mail adver- 
tising sacrifice professionalism to promote their own 
pecuniary self-interest, and that direct-mail advertising 


2 The Florida Bar: Petition to Amend the Rules Regulating the 
Florida Bar — Advertising Issues, 571 So.2d 451 (Fla. 1990). A copy 
of the summary which was before the Supreme Court at the time 
it adopted the new rules was introduced in the trial Court. 


promotes frivolous and unwarranted lawsuits, resulting 
in higher legal costs and belittling the legal profession. 
[App. 6] The study found that a broad spectrum of the 
Florida news media, historically the most vigorous advo- 
cates of unfettered speech, had strongly condemned 
attorney advertising in general, and solicitation of recent 
accident victims or the families of victims in particular. 


In February, 1991, the Florida Supreme Court 
adopted amendments to the advertising rules. Among the 
rules adopted were Rule 4-7.4(b) and Rule 4-7.8(a), Rules 
Regulating the Florida Bar. The Florida Bar: Petition to 
Amend the Rules Regulating The Florida Bar — Advertising 
Issues, supra. Rule 4-7.4 prohibited lawyers from sending 
a written solicitation relating to an accident or disaster to 
the victim of such accident or disaster, or a relative of 
such victim, within 30 days after such accident or disas- 
ter. Rule 4-7.8 prohibits a lawyer from accepting a referral 
from a referral service which fails to comply with the 
rules regulating attorney communications. 


In March, 1992, G. Stewart McHenry and his wholly 
owned corporation, Went For It, Inc., filed this action in 
the Middle District of Florida, challenging Rules 4-7.4 
and 4-7.8 as being in derogation of the plaintiffs’ free 
speech rights under the First Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. Jurisdiction of the District Court was 
invoked to review a question arising under the United 
States Constitution pursuant to 28 U.S.C., § 1331. 


The Complaint alleged that McHenry had sent direct 
mail advertising letters concerning an action for personal 
injury to targeted accident victims within 30 days of the 
accident and wished to continue such practice in the 


future. Went For It, Inc. alleged that it wished to conduct 
business in Florida as a lawyer referral business, and that 
it desired to contact accident victims and their families by 
mail within 30 days of an accident and to refer interested 
persons to personal injury attorneys in Florida. 


On October 24, 1992 McHenry was disbarred by the 
Florida Supreme Court for conduct unrelated to the 
issues raised in this action.* McHenry’s case was thereby 
rendered moot and the action continued on the claim of 
Went For It, Inc. Both parties filed motions for summary 
judgment which were submitted to Magistrate Judge 
Charles Wilson for consideration. Judge Wilson received 
briefs and heard oral argument, and issued his Report 
and Recommendation. He found that Rule 4-7.4 served a 
substantial governmental interest and was narrowly tai- 
lored to achieve its desired objective. Judge Wilson addi- 
tionally found that the provision was a reasonable time, 
place or manner restriction and concluded that it did not 
violate the United States Constitution. He recommended 
that summary judgment be entered for the Bar. 


The District Judge rejected the recommendation of 
Judge Wilson and held, as a matter of law, that the 
challenged rule violates the First, Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution. The 
Court granted summary judgment for the plaintiff. 


3 McHenry, who had previously been publicly repri- 
manded twice, was disbarred for engaging in sexual miscon- 
duct in the presence of clients. The Florida Bar v. McHenry, 605 
So.2d 459 (Fla. 1992). 


- as ee ee Ee * 
Base ai cae Cow oe SS Lee MN ‘ 
ee ea eee ee 


The decision was appealed to the Eleventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals. After filing of the Notice of Appeal, the 
appellees moved, without objection, to add John T. 
Blakely as a plaintiff based upon identical allegations to 
those that had been made by McHenry. The case was 
temporarily remanded to the trial court for consideration 
of the motion and Blakely was added on December 17, 
1993. On May 10, 1994, the Eleventh Circuit, while 
expressing dissatisfaction at what it perceived to be the 
necessary result, affirmed. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 
I 


The Court’s decision in Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 
433 U.S. 350, 97 S. Ct. 2691, 53 L.Ed.2d 810 (1977), as 
predicted by its dissenting justices, has lead to a signifi- 
cant reduction in the States’ ability to regulate attorney 
commercial solicitation. Decisions following Bates have 
been interpreted by lower Federal courts to effectively 
limit State regulation to in-person solicitation and decep- 
tive advertising. The result, also predicted, has been a 
profound change in the professional image of the legal 
profession. Bates and its progeny have deprived States of 
the ability to judge the impact of such change on the 
administration of justice and to act accordingly. The 
Court imposed such limitations upon State authority by 
comparing the provision of legal services to the sale of 
commercial products and by rejecting, as a matter of law, 
all asserted State interests. In so doing, the Court disre- 
garded an analytical framework which it historically had 


applied to allow States greater latitude to regulate even 
political and ideological speech. 


The Court has recognized that speech is subject to 
reasonable limitations when the nature of the speech is 
detrimental to, or inconsistent with, the mission of the 
public institution within which the expression is exer- 
cised. Such limitations have been upheld in the fields of 
public employment, education, law enforcement, and the 
military. In each of these fields, the Court has largely 
deferred to the States in the determination of whether 
such speech adversely affects the institutional mission, 
and the appropriate level of regulation. The State has a 
substantial interest in maintaining the professionalism of 
the bar and public confidence in the administration of 
justice. The Court should return to the States the range of 
authority necessary to determine whether attorney com- 
mercial solicitation adversely affects those interests and, 
if so, to regulate it accordingly. 


Bates recognized that attorney commercial solicita- 
tion implicates First Amendment concerns because of the 
public’s interest in receiving useful information regarding 
the availability of legal services, not because of the indi- 
vidual attorney’s interest in pecuniary gain. A lawyer’s 
financial interest has been expressly found by this Court 
to be only marginally affected with First Amendment 
concerns. Attorney commercial solicitation is an instru- 
ment of the system of justice designed to increase public 
access to legal services. A lawyer should not be accorded 
a constitutional right to appropriate that instrument to 
his or her own pecuniary interest without regard for the 
impact on the system as a whole. 


II 
A 


While the Court is urged to revisit the underlying 
premise of Bates, it is not necessary to do so in order to 
uphold the challenged Florida rules. The Eleventh Circuit 
misconstrued this Court’s holdings and accorded lawyer 
commercial solicitation a greater degree of protection 
than even political and ideological speech. 


This Court has recognized that the State has a sub- 
stantial enough interest in preserving the quality of life of 
its citizens to justify significant restrictions upon speech, 
including political and ideological speech, in the interests 
of esthetics, public comfort and convenience, and resi- 
dential privacy. The State has at least as substantial an 
interest in protecting the personal privacy and tranquility 
of its citizens from crass commercial intrusion by attor- 
neys upon their personal grief in times of trauma. 


The Court has long recognized that even political and 
ideological speech is subject to reasonable time, place or 
manner restrictions, and the Bates-related decisions 
expressly noted that attorney advertising was not outside 
the scope of such restrictions. The challenged Florida 
rules are valid time, place or manner regulations. Con- 
trary to the lower Court’s conclusion, the rules are con- 
tent-neutral as this Court has construed that term. The 
rules leave ample alternative means of communication 
and are narrowly tailored to serve the State interest. 


S 


Te _ Sl 


ARGUMENT 


THE COURT SHOULD RETURN TO THE STATES A 
REASONABLE RANGE OF AUTHORITY TO DETER- 
MINE WHETHER ATTORNEY ADVERTISING 
ADVERSELY AFFECTS THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
JUSTICE, AND TO REGULATE IT ACCORDINGLY. 


On June 27, 1977 the majority of this Court thrust 
aside centuries of Anglo-American law defining the role 
of the lawyer in our system of justice. The Court held in 
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra, that States are constitu- 
tionally barred from prohibiting attorney advertising, 
including fee amounts for routine legal services. The 
majority opinion characterized the decision as a limited 
one. In his partial dissent, however, Justice Powell, joined 
by Justice Stewart, predicted that the result would be far 
from limited: 


Although the Court appears to note some reser- 
vations (mentioned below), it is clear that within 
undefined limits today’s decision will effect pro- 
found changes in the practice of law, viewed for 
centuries as a learned profession. The super- 
visory power of the courts over members of the 
bar, as officers of the courts, and the authority of 
the respective States to oversee the regulation of 
the profession have been weakened. Although 
the Court’s opinion professes to be framed nar- 
rowly, and its reach is subject to future clarifica- 
tion, the holding is explicit and expansive with 
respect to advertising of undefined “routine 
legal services.” 


10 


Judge Powell’s prediction proved prophetic. Bates 
was followed by a series of decisions increasingly nar- 
rowing the permissible scope of State regulation of law- 
yer advertising. In In re R.M.J., 455 U.S. 191, 102 S.Ct. 929, 
71 L.Ed.2d 64 (1982), the Court struck down a Missouri 
rule which prohibited the listing in an attorney’s adver- 
tising of jurisdictions in which the attorney was admitted 
and areas of practice not approved by the bar, and the 
mailing of announcement cards to persons other than 
lawyers, clients, former clients, personal friends and rela- 
tives. The Court expressed concern over the inclusion in 
the advertisements of a reference in all capital letters to 
membership in the Bar of the Supreme Court of the 
United States, which the Court found to be “relatively 
uninformative” and in “bad taste.” Nevertheless, the 
Court declared the regulation unconstitutional. Id. at U.S. 
205. The Court’s analysis revolved around a single ques- 
tion: Was the advertising deceptive or inherently mislead- 
ing? 


The Court further restricted States’ regulatory 
authority in Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel, 471 
U.S. 626, 105 S.Ct. 2265, 85 L.Ed.2d 652 (1985). The attor- 
ney had been disciplined in connection with an advertise- 
ment which appeared in 36 Ohio newspapers soliciting 
legal business from women who had suffered injuries 
resulting from their use of Dalkon Shield contraceptive 
devices. The advertisement contained a drawing of a 
Dalkon Shield and informed the reader that the law firm 
represented clients in such cases and would handle cases 
on a contingent basis, and that it should not be assumed 
that it was too late to file a law suit. The Court struck 
down Ohio’s rules which forbade the solicitation or 


11 


acceptance of legal employment resulting from advertise- 
ments containing information or advice regarding a spec- 
ific legal problem, and which prohibited the use of 
illustrations in attorney advertisements. Again, the Court 
focused upon the question of whether the particular 
advertisements were deceptive or whether the mode of 
advertising was inherently misleading. 


In Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Association, 486 U.S. 466, 
108 S.Ct. 1916, 100 L.Ed.2d 475 (1988) the Court expanded 
the constitutional prohibition against regulation of prob- 
lem-specific advertising by holding that “targeted” 
direct-mail solicitation was constitutionally protected. 
The petitioner had applied for, and been denied, permis- 
sion to send a letter to potential clients who had been 
sued in foreclosure actions. The letter warned recipients 
that they might be about to lose their home and urged: 


Call NOW, don’t wait. It may surprise you what 
I may be able to do for you. Just call and tell me 
that you got this letter. Remember it is FREE, 
there is NO charge for calling. 


Id. at U.S. 469. As in the cases which preceded Shapero, 
the Court applied the same constitutional standard as 
would be applied to the advertising of any commercial 
product. In addition to once again declaring that the State 
could only prohibit attorney advertisements that were 
misleading, the Court barred the State from attempting to 
regulate the format of an attorney advertisement: 


The pitch or style of a letter’s type and its 
inclusion of subjective predictions of client satis- 
faction might catch the recipient’s attention 
more than would a bland statement of purely 
objective facts in small type. But a truthful and 


12 


nondeceptive letter, no matter how big its type 
and how much it speculates can never “shout at 
the recipient” or “grasp him by the lapels,” as 
can a lawyer engaging in face-to-face solicita- 
tion. The letter simply presents no comparable 
risk of overreaching. And so long as the First 
Amendment protects the right to solicit legal 
business, the State may claim no substantial 
interest in restricting truthful and nondeceptive 
lawyer solicitations to those least likely to be 
read by the recipient. 


Id. at 478-479.4 Thus, the majority of the Court5 had 
elevated to constitutional level a lawyer’s right to engage 
in used car type commercial appeals, complete with over- 
sized text, loss-leader offers of “FREE” consultations, and 
promises of customer satisfaction. 


In each of the above cases, the Court recognized that 
the State retained the power to regulate non-deceptive 
attorney advertising, provided that such regulation 
directly advanced a substantial governmental interest. 
However, the Court consistently rejected asserted govern- 
mental interests as being insufficient to justify the regula- 
tion at issue. The Court found insufficient the State’s 


4 The Court’s comment regarding face-to-face solicitation 
was a reference to Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association, 436 U.S. 
447, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 56 L.Ed.2d 444 (1978), in which the Court held 
that Ohio could prohibit lawyers from engaging in face-to-face 
solicitation. 

5 Justices Rehnquist, O’Connor and Scalia dissented from 
the entire opinion. Justices White and Stevens dissented from 
the portion of the opinion denying the State the authority to 
regulate the pitch and style of the letter and the subjective 
predictions of client satisfaction. 


13 


interest in avoiding the adverse effects of advertising 
upon professionalism, the administration of justice, and 
the quality of legal services [Bates, supra at U.S. 368-377; 
Zauderer, supra at U.S. 647], the inherently misleading 
nature of attorney advertising [Bates, supra at U.S. 372], 
the difficulties of enforcing restrictions upon deceptive 
lawyer advertising [Bates, supra at U.S. 379], the desir- 
ability of avoiding the encouragement of litigation 
[Zauderer, supra at U.S. 642], and the potential for abuse 
of vulnerable individuals. [Shapero, supra at U.S. 474-476]. 
Each of these State interests was rejected as a matter of 
law. The Court thereby foreclosed the ability of States 
even to weigh the impact of such interests upon the 
administration of justice. The effect of the above line of 
decisions has been to leave lower Federal courts, includ- 
ing the Eleventh Circuit in this case, with the perception 
that, with the exception of in-person solicitation, States 
are limited to reviewing attorney advertising, on a case- 
by-case basis, for evidence of deception. 


In its opinion affirming the District Court decision, 
the Eleventh Circuit expressed dissatisfaction with what 
it perceived to be the result required by this Court's line 
of decisions in Bates and the cases that followed. The 
Circuit Court stated: 


Justice Powell predicted in Bates that recogniz- 
ing First Amendment protections for attorney 
advertising would “effect profound changes in 
the practice of law, viewed for centuries as a 
learned profession.” 433 U.S. at 389, 97 S.Ct. at 
2712 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissent- 
ing in part.) That prediction has proven true. 
Unfortunately, the resulting changes have not 
necessarily been for the better. We are disturbed 


14 


that Bates and its progeny require the decision 
we reach today. 

McHenry v. The Florida Bar, 21 F.3d 2258, 2265 (11th Cir. 
1994). This Court’s opinion in Bates rested upon the pre- 
sumption that attorney advertising would serve “individ- 
ual and societal interests in assuring informed and 
reliable decisionmaking,” and its finding of “the postu- 
lated connection between advertising and the erosion of 
true professionalism to be severely strained.” Id. at U.S. 
364, 368. The Court questioned the assertion that adver- 
tising would diminish attorneys’ reputations in the com- 
munity, noting that, “Bankers and engineers advertise, 
and yet these professions are not regarded as undig- 
nified.” Id. at U.S. 369. In the seventeen years since the 
Bates decision, the development of attorney advertising, 
as suggested in the opinion below, has not been as favor- 
able as the Bates Court anticipated. One need only open 
the yellow pages of any major city telephone directory to 
realize that the great bulk of attorney advertising pro- 
vides citizens with little or no useful information, and is 
far less professional than that engaged in by bankers, 
engineers and most other professionals. Studies such as 
that performed by The Florida Bar indicate that such 
advertising has resulted in a negative perception of, and 
loss of confidence in the legal profession. In his Report 
and Recommendation, the Magistrate Judge found: 


The Bar’s two-year study of lawyer advertising 
and solicitation conducted preliminarily to the 
implementation of its advertising rule discloses 
that Florida adults, generally, have negative 
feelings about direct-mail advertising by attor- 
neys. The public feels that attorneys who partic- 
ipate in direct-mail advertising sacrifice 
professionalism to promote their own pecuniary 


15 


self-interest. Florida adults believe that direct- 
mail advertising promotes frivolous and unwar- 
ranted lawsuits, resulting in higher legal costs 
and belittling the legal profession. 


[Appendix to Petition for Certiorari, p. 6] 


In her dissenting opinion in Shapero, Justice O’Con- 
nor, joined by Justices Rehnquist and Scalia, suggested 
that the time has come to reexamine the Bates premise: 


I agree with the Court that the reasoning in 
Zauderer supports the conclusion reached today. 
That decision, however, was itself the culmina- 
tion of a line of cases built on defective reason- 
ing. As today’s decision illustrates, the Court 
has been unable or unwilling to restrain the 
logic of the underlying analysis within reason- 
able bounds. The resulting interference with 
important and valid public policies is so 
destructive that I believe the analytical frame- 
work itself should now be reexamined. 


Judge O’Connor identified the erroneous reasoning 
which she had referred to as “a defective analogy 
between professional services and standardized con- 
sumer products.” Id. at U.S. 480. The Court is respectfully 
urged to consider that the consumer product analogy has, 
indeed, proved problematic, and that there is a more 
appropriate analytical framework within which to judge 
the attorney advertising issue. 


This Court has historically recognized that the exer- 
cise of free expression is subject to reasonable limitations 
when the nature of such exercise is detrimental to, or 
inconsistent with, the mission of the public institution 
within which the expression is exercised. Thus, the Court 


ey 


16 


has upheld such limitations in public employment, 
Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 384, 107 S.Ct. 2891, 97 
L.Ed.2d 315 (1987) [“The determination of whether a 
public employer has properly discharged an employee for 
engaging in speech requires ‘a balance between the inter- 
ests of the employee, as a citizen, in commenting upon 
matters of public concern and the interest of the State, as 
an employer, in promoting the efficiency of the public 
services it performs through its employees.’ ”], penal 
institutions, Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 523, 104 S.Ct. 
3194, 82 L.Ed.2d 393 (1984) [Prisoners “retain those First 
Amendment rights of speech ‘not inconsistent with 
... the legitimate penological objectives of the corrections 
system.’ ”], the armed forces, Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 
U.S. 503, 507, 106 S.Ct. 1310, 89 L.Ed.2d 478 (1986) [“The 
military need not encourage debate or tolerate protest to 
the extent that such tolerance is required of the civilian 
state by the First Amendment; to accomplish its mission 
the military must foster instinctive obedience, unity, com- 
mitment, and esprit de corps.”], and educational institu- 
tions, Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 
266, 108 S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592(1988) [“A school need 
not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent with its 
‘basic educational mission’ . . . even though the govern- 
ment could not censor similar speech outside the school.” 


The basic theme underlying all of the foregoing deci- 
sions is that the State must be given the latitude to 
regulate types of expression which are excercised within 
the context of certain fundamental public institutions 
when such expression plays an integral role in, or could 
have an adverse effect upon, the mission of such institu- 
tion. Significantly, all of the above decisions involved the 


; — P <n aha te op ee ee 
td he er oo Uk fort Sie cO Se Wee ali) U2 ee le ee 


17 


exercise of political, ideological or religious expression, 
the most highly revered of all free speech rights. 


It cannot be denied that the State has a substantial 
interest in the administration of justice. This Court has 
long recognized that such interest extends to the regula- 
tion of lawyers. The Court has noted that, “The interest of 
the States in regulating lawyers is especially great since 
lawyers are essential to the primary government function 
of administering justice, and have historically been ‘offi- 
cers of the courts,’ ” Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 
773, 792, 95 S.Ct. 2004, 44 L.Ed.2d 572 (1975), and that the 
States’ interest in disciplining lawyers is “incident to 
their broader responsibility for keeping the administra- 
tion of justice and the standards of professional conduct 
unsullied.” Cohen v. Hurley, 366 U.S. 117, 123, 81 S.Ct. 954, 
6 L.Ed.2d 156 (1961). One year after Bates, the Court, in a 
unanimous decision in Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Associa- 
tion, supra at U.S. 460, acknowledged the States’ substan- 
tial interest in regulating attorneys in general and 
attorney solicitation in particular: 


The state interests implicated in this case 
are particulary strong. In addition to its general 
interest in protecting consumers and regulating 
commercial transactions, the State bears a spe- 
cial responsibility for maintaining standards 
among members of the licensed professions. 


* * * 


While lawyers act in part as “self-employed 
businessmen,” they also act “as trusted agents 
of their clients, and as assistants to the court in 
the search of a just solution to disputes.” 


18 


Two separate aspects of the institutional speech cases 
have particular application to a State’s interest in regulat- 
ing attorney advertising. In a series of cases involving 
discipline or discharge of public employees for engaging 
in certain speech, the Court has established a weighing 
test: 

The determination whether a public employer 

has properly discharged an employee for engag- 

ing in speech requires “a balance between the 

interests of the employee, as a citizen, in com- 

menting upon matters of public concern and the 
interest of the State, as an employer, in promot- 

ing the efficiency of the public services it per- 

forms through its employees.”® 


Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 384, 107 S.Ct. 2891, 97 
L.Ed.2d 315 (1987) citing Pickering v. Board of Education, 
supra; and Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 140, 103 S.Ct. 
1684, 75 L.Ed.2d 708 (1983). When the speech involves a 
matter of public concern, the employee’s interest in 
engaging in the particular speech must be weighed 
against the interest of the State, as an employer, in fulfill- 
ing the mission of the agency. When the speech does not 
involve a matter of public concern, it is not beyond the 
reach of the First Amendment, but it is entitled to a 
substantially lesser degree of protection. In either case, 
the Court has extended considerable deference to the 


6 “Matters of public concern” has been defined as matters 
as to which “free and open debate is vital to informed decision- 
making by the electorate,” Pickering v. Board of Education, 319 
U.S. 563, 571-572, 88 S.Ct. 1731, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 (1968), and 
matters as to which debate must “be uninhibited, robust, and 
wide-open.” Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 
472 U.S. 749, 755, 105 S.Ct. 2939, 86 L.Ed.2d 593 (1985). 


19 


State in the determination of whether the speech has an 
unduly adverse effect upon the ability of the public 
employer to fulfill its essential mission. 


While lawyers are not public employees, the analogy 
is valid. As “officers of the court” lawyers perform an 
essential role in the administration of justice. Courts have 
always recognized that a lawyer’s speech within the 
courtroom is subject to considerable judicial oversight in 
order to protect the integrity and efficiency of the judicial 
process. The fact that advertising the availability of legal 
services takes place outside the courtroom is of little 
consquence in this context. Such advertising deals solely 
with an essential aspect of the judicial process and is 
inextricably tied to the administration of the public func- 
tion. To the extent that it may adversely affect the mission 
of the judicial system, the State has no less interest in its 
regulation than it does in any public employment situa- 
tion. An attorney’s exercise of speech in the form of a 
commercial solicitation does not involve a matter of pub- 
lic concern. The State’s interest in maintaining the profes- 
sionalism of the members of the bar, on the other hand, is 
substantial. The public’s perception of, and confidence in, 
its system of justice and those who administer it is critical 
to the stability of a democratic society.” 


7 In Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, supra at U.S. 460-461, the 
Court noted that: 
While the Court in Bates determined that truthful, 
restrained advertising of the prices of “routine” legal 
services would not have an adverse effect on the pro- 
fessionalism of lawyers, this was only because it 
found “the postulated connection between advertis- 
ing and the erosion of true professionalism to be serv- 
erly strained. [citation omitted] The Bates Court did 


Pt a itn FN Se tet Ae na Ss PTE oy 


; 
rece 


20 


The States have been hamstrung by the perception of 
lower Federal courts that this Court’s decisions leave 
little or no room for States to judge the impact of attorney 
advertising upon the judicial system and to act accord- 
ingly. The State should be accorded the same degree of 
deference in judging the impact of attorney advertising 
upon the administration of justice as it is accorded in the 
public employee sphere. 


The second aspect of the institutional speech cases 
which applies in the attorney advertising setting is 
reflected in Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, supra. 
The Court had previously held that students in public 
schools do not “shed their constitutional rights to free- 
dom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate.” 
Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School Dist., 
395 U.S. 503, 511, 89 S.Ct. 733, 21 L.Ed.2d 731 (1969). 
Nevertheless, the Court in Hazelwood upheld the right of 
the school to excise material from the school newspaper. 
As in the public employee cases, the Court, citing its 
decision in Bethel School District v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 106 
S.Ct. 3159, 92 L.Ed.2d 549 (1986), held that, “A school 
need not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent with 
its “basic educational mission [citation omitted] even 
though the government could not censor similar speech 
outside the school.” Id. at U.S. 266. In addition to resting 
its decision upon this general principle, the Court went 
further and discussed the nature of the forum in which 
the speech was being exercised. The Court distinguished 
between “a student’s personal expression that happens to 


not question a State’s interest in maintaining high 
standards among licensed professionals. 


21 


occur on the school premises” and speech that occurs in 
“school-sponsored publications, theatrical productions, 
and other expressive activities that students, parents, and 
members of the public might reasonably perceive to bear 
the imprimatur of the school.” Hazelwood, supra at U.S. 
271. The Court found that the State had significant inter- 
ests that justified its control over the exercise of speech 
within these forums: 


Educators are entitled to exercise greater control 
over this second form of student expression to 
assure that participants learn whatever lessons 
the activity is designed to teach * * * and that the 
views of the individual speaker are not erro- 
neously attributed to the school. * * * A school 
must be able to set high standards for the stu- 
dent speech that is disseminated under its aus- 
pices * * * and may refuse to disseminate student 
speech that does not meet those standards. 


Id. at 271-272. 


Again, there is a material analogy to attorney 
advertising. The Bates Court did not apply First 
Amendment protection to attorney advertising because of 
the attorney’s interest in pecuniary gain. It did so because 
of such advertising’s potential to inform the public “of 
the availability, nature, and prices” of legal services. It 
concluded that “such speech serves individual and 
societal interests in assuring informed and reliable 
decisionmaking.” Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra at 
U.S. 364. The lawyer’s pecuniary interest in the 
advertising was of little moment in the constitutional 


oy Sah) 2 RNs i er ee 


22 


analysis.® Just as the school newspaper is primarily an 
instrument of the educational system designed to further 
its mission of providing education, attorney advertising 
is primarily an instrument of the judicial system designed 
to further its mission of making legal services accessible. 


The Court in Hazelwood also recognized the right of 
the State to regulate activities that “members of the pub- 
lic might reasonably perceive to bear the imprimatur of 
the school” in order to assure that “the views of the 
individual speaker are not erroneously attributed to the 
school.” Id. at U.S. 271. Similarly, the public might reason- 
ably perceive attorney advertising to bear the imprimatur 
of the entire judicial system. It is perhaps in this respect 
that the analogy of legal services and commercial prod- 
ucts is most defective. Unlike a common commercial 
product, the services which a lawyer sells exist only 
within the realm of a fundamental public function. Unlike 
the seller of a commercial product, the lawyer is able to 
offer his or her services only because he or she has been 
cloaked with the mantle of the State as a person with the 
skill and high character traits to be entrusted with the 
performance of a critical constitutional function. In Theard 
v. United States, 354 U.S. 278, 281, 77 S.Ct. 1274, 1 L.Ed.2d 
1342 (1957), this Court discussed the philosophical basis 
for control by the courts over a lawyer’s professional life: 


8 The Bates Court later stated that, “A lawyer’s procure- 
ment of remunerative employment is a subject only marginally 
affected with First Amendment concerns.” Ohralik v. Ohio State 
Bar Association, supra at U.S. 459. 


23 


The court’s control over a lawyer’s professional 
life derives from his relation to the respon- 
sibilities of a court. The matter was compen- 
diously put by Mr. Justice Cardozo while Chief 
Judge of the New York Court of Appeals. “Mem- 
bership in the bar is a privilege burdened with 
conditions.” (Matter of Rouss, 221 N.Y. 81, 84, 
116 N.E. 782, 783). The appellant was received 
into that ancient fellowship for something more 
than private gain. He became an officer of the 
court, and, like the court itself, an instrument or 
agency to advance the ends of justice. 


Attorney advertising is primarily an instrument to serve 
the administration of justice and its use has potential 
impact upon the entire legal profession and judicial sys- 
tem. An attorney, having been granted the privilege of 
serving that system, should not be heard to claim a 
constitutional right to appropriate such instrument to his 
or her own pecuniary interest without regard for its 
impact upon the system as a whole. 


In their partial dissent in Bates, Justices Powell and 
Stewart commented: 


[T]he Court’s imposition of hard and fast consti- 
tutional rules as to price advertising is neither 
required by precedent nor likely to serve the 
public interest. One of the great virtues of feder- 
alism is the opportunity it affords for experi- 
mentation and innovation, with freedom to 
discard or amend that which proves unsuccess- 
ful or detrimental to the public good. The con- 
stitutionalizing - indeed the affirmative 
encouraging — of competitive price advertising 
of specified legal services will substantially 


24 


inhibit the experimentation that has been under- 
way and also will limit the control heretofore 
exercised over lawyers by the respective States. 


Bates at U.S. 403. The Court is respectfully urged to return 
to the States the latitude to weigh the value to the public 
of attorney commercial solicitation against the adverse 
effects of such solicitation and to engage in the “experi- 
mentation and innovation” which is the proper realm of 
the States. 


II 


THE LIMITS PLACED UPON STATE AUTHORITY BY 
THE DECISION BELOW EXTEND BEYOND ANY 
HERETOFORE RECOGNIZED BY THIS COURT AND 
ESTABLISH ATTORNEY ADVERTISING AS A PRIVI- 
LEGED CLASS OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION 
WITH A GREATER DEGREE OF INSULATION FROM 
REGULATION THAN OTHER CLASSES. 


While the Court is urged to revisit the premise of 
Bates, it is not necessary to do so in order to reverse the 
opinion below. This Court has held that, “The Constitu- 
tion . . . accords a lesser protection to commercial speech 
than to other constitutionally guaranteed expression.” 
Central Hudson Gas v. Public Service Comm'n, 447 U.S. 557, 
563, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980), and that attor- 
ney commercial solicitation is only “marginally affected 
with First Amendment concerns.” Bates, supra. Neverthe- 
less, the Eleventh Circuit opinion would accord lawyer 
commercial solicitation a greater degree of protection in 
certain respects than even political and ideological 


speech. 


25 


A. The challenged rules meet the requirements for 
valid commercial regulations because they are 
narrowly tailored to serve substantial govern- 
mental interests. 


Attorney advertising falls within the scope of com- 
mercial speech which this Court has given “a limited 
measure of protection, commensurate with its subordi- 
nate position in the scale of First Amendment values” 
and is subject to “modes of regulation that might be 
impermissible in the realm of non-commercial expres- 
sion.” Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350, 97 S.Ct. 
2691, 53 L.Ed.2d 810 (1977); Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar 
Association, 436 U.S. 447, 98 S.Ct. 1912, 1918, 56 L.Ed.2d 
444 (1978). Although regulation of commercial speech 
does not have to meet the least restrictive means test, the 
Court has held that such regulation must directly 
advance a substantial governmental interest and be nar- 
rowly tailored to fit the governmental objective. Central 
Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm'n, 447 
U.S. 557, 566, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 2351, 65 L.Ed.2d (1980); 
Board of Trustees v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 109 S.Ct. 3028, 106 
L.Ed.2d 388 (1989). 


The State has a substantial interest in protecting the 
personal privacy and tranquility of persons who were 
themselves, or whose loved ones were, recent victims of 
personal injury or death. This Court has recognized in a 
variety of areas that the State has a substantial interest in 
preserving the quality of life of its citizens. Indeed, that 
interest has been so substantial as to justify restrictions 
upon political and ideological speech. The Court has 
upheld ordinances prohibiting the posting of election 


PX 


26 


signs on public property, Members of City Counsel v. Tax- 
payers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 806, 104 S.Ct. 2118, 2129, 80 


L.Ed.2d 772 (1984), [“It is well settled that the state may 
legitimately exercise its police powers to advance esthetic 
values.”], prohibiting the use on public streets of sound 
trucks emitting loud noises, Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77, 
69 S.Ct. 448, 454 (1949), [“The preferred position of free- 
dom of speech in a society that cherishes liberty for all 
does not require legislators to be insensible to claims by 
citizens to comfort and convenience.”], and prohibiting 
ideological picketing directed at the residence of an indi- 
vidual. Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 
L.Ed.2d 420 (1988). 


In Frisby, the Court upheld a law which was passed 
for the purpose of prohibiting anti-abortion picketing 
outside the residence of a doctor accused of performing 
abortions. The Court stated: 


The State’s interest in protecting the well-being, 
tranquility, and privacy of the home is certainly 
of the highest order in a free and civilized soci- 
ety. 


+ * * 


One important aspect of residential privacy is 
protection of the unwilling listener. Although in 
many locations, we expect individuals simply to 
avoid speech they do not want to hear [citations 
omitted] the home is different. That we are often 
“captives” outside the sanctuary of the home 


and subject to objectionable speech . . . does not 
mean we must be captives everywhere. 


Id. at 2502. In a comment significantly descriptive of 
direct-mail solicitation, the Court noted that, “The type of 


27 


picketers banned by the . . . ordinance generally do not 
seek to disseminate a message to the general public, but 
to intrude upon the targeted residence, and to do so in an 
especially offensive way.” Id. at 2503. The Court's focus 
on the distinction between picketing directed at the gen- 
eral public and picketing directed at a specific individual 
is directly analogous to the distinction between mass 
media advertising and direct-mail solicitation. The 
Court’s concern over “residential privacy” is also applica- 
ble to much of the attorney direct-mail solicitation since it 
is generally directed to persons in their homes.? 


The communication which is the subject matter of the 
challenged rules is no less an intrusion on personal pri- 
vacy and tranquility and no less offensive than the elec- 
tion signs in Taxpayers for Vincent, the sound trucks in 
Kovacs, or the picketing in Frisby. To the contrary, in an 
important respect it is more intrusive and offensive 
because it involves a much more personal matter and it is 
knowingly and intentionally directed at persons who are 
most vulnerable. In Matter of Anis, 599 A. 2d 1265, 1270 
(N.J. 1992), the Supreme Court of New Jersey described 
such conduct in its analysis of a restriction similar to 
Florida’s: 


° A statistical analysis by The Florida Bar of direct-mail 
advertising submissions from April, 1991 through March, 1992 
indicates that a minimum of 87% were sent to residential 
addresses. The actual figure is probably close to 100% since the 
source of the names and addresses of most accident victims is 
the Department of Motor Vehicles [R. 15], and Florida law 

that drivers list their residence addresses with the 


Department. § 322.08, Fla. Stat. 


28 


Nothing in the Constitution . . . requires us to 
countenance solicitation that intrudes upon vic- 
tims or their families in the initial throes of their 
grief... . What we are talking about here . . . is 
conduct that is patently offensive to the com- 
mon sensibilities of the community because it 
intrudes upon the private grief of victims or 
their families, serves only to compound their 
sorrow and solicits representation of them at a 
moment of their extreme vulnerability. 


* * * 


The non-intrusive nature of the communication 
in Shapero is what commended the solicitation to 
commercial speech protection. [citation omit- 
ted]. In contrast, the form of solicitation at issue 
here is so universally condemned that its intru- 
siveness can hardly be disputed. 


* * * 


We have no doubt, then, that the commercial 
speech guarantees of the First Amendment do 
not protect attorney conduct that is universally 
regarded as deplorable and beneath common 
decency because of its intrusion upon the spe- 
cial vulnerability and private grief of victims or 
their families. 


The lower court decision leaves us with an indefensible 
legal doctrine which holds that the State has a sufficiently 
substantial interest in protecting the “comfort and conve- 
nience” of its citizens from loud noise or their “esthetic” 
sensibilities from political signs, but does not have a 
sufficiently substantial interest to protect them in times of 
deep personal trauma from crass commerical intrusion 
upon their private grief and residential tranquility “that 


29 


is universally regarded as deplorable and beneath com- 
mon decency.” 


B. The challenged rules are valid time, place or 
manner restrictions. 


While commercial speech is given only a “subordi- 
nate position in the scale of First Amendment values,” 
political and ideological speech sit at the very top of the 
scale. Nevertheless, even these most highly protected 
forms of speech are subject to reasonable time, place and 
manner restrictions: 


Expression, whether oral or written or symbol- 
ized by conduct, is subject to reasonable time, 
place, or manner restrictions. We have often 
noted that restrictions of this kind are valid 
provided that they are justified without refer- 
ence to the content of the regulated speech, that 
they are narrowly tailored to serve a significant 
governmental interest, and that they leave open 
ample alternative channels for communication 
of the information. 


Clark v. Community for Creative Non-violence, 468 U.S. 288, 
104 S.Ct. 3065, 3069, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984). The lower 
Court concluded that the challenged rules are not valid 
time, place or manner restrictions because the 30-day ban 
was not content-neutral.!° The Court’s conclusion is not 


10 Petitioner does not concede that the challenged rule 
requires reference to content in the first place. While the word- 
ing of the rule appears to focus on the content of the letter, in 
practical effect, it has nothing to do with content. Its application 
is based upon the nature of the intended recipient as an accident 


30 


consistent with this Court’s interpretation of “content- 
neutral:” 


The principal inquiry in determining content- 
neutrality, in speech cases generally and in time, 
place, or manner cases in particular, is whether 
the government has adopted a regulation of 
speech because of disagreement with the mes- 
sage it conveys. [citation omitted] The govern- 
ment’s purpose is the controlling consideration. 
A regulation that serves purposes unrelated to 
the content of expression is deemed neutral, 
even if it has an incidental effect on some 
speakers or messages but not others. [citation 
omitted] Government regulation of expressive 
activity is content-neutral so long as it is “justi- 
fied without reference to the content of the regu- 
lated speech.” 


Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 78, 109 S.Ct. 2746, 
2754, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989) [emphasis by Court]. 


This Court has established that the mere fact that the 
content of a communication must be referred to in order 
to determine whether the speech is subject to the regula- 
tion does not render it content-based. The question is 
whether the challenged regulation is “justified without 
reference to the content of the regulated speech.” In Ward, 
the city attempted to regulate the volume of amplified 
music played in a public park. The case arose out of a 
concert sponsored by a group dedicated to the promotion 


victim or family of a victim. It is not necessary for the Bar to 
review the content of a letter in order to determine whether or 
not the rule is applicable. The Bar need only determine the 
source of the list of recipients of the letter. 


31 


of anti-racis: views. The Court of Appeals struck the 
regulation, holding that the city had failed to prove that 
its regulation was the least restrictive means of regulating 
the volume. This Court agreed that music is a form of 
expression and communication which is protected under 
the First Amendment and that the area in which the 
music was being played was a public forum, “in which 
the government’s right to regulate expression is subject to 
the protections of the First Amendment.” Id. at S.Ct. 2746. 
Nevertheless, the Court reversed. The State interest rec- 
ognized in Ward as being sufficiently compelling has 
particular bearing on the case at bar: 


The principal justification for the sound- 
amplification guideline is the city’s desire to 
control noise levels at Bandshell events in order 
to retain the character of Sheep Meadow and its 
more sedate activities, and to avoid undue 
intrusion into residential areas and other areas 
of the park. This justification for the guideline 
“has nothing to do with content” [citation omit- 
ted] and it satisfies the requirement that time, 
place, or manner regulations be content neutral. 


Id. at S.Ct. 2754. 


The regulation in the case at bar meets the Supreme 
Court’s definition of content-neutral because it is “justi- 
fied without reference to the content of the regulated 
speech.” The regulation is not intended to prohibit the 
message (solicitation of business), but, like the regulation 
in Ward, to avoid undue intrusion into the personal pri- 
vacy of individuals during a particularly trying period, 
and to protect the bar and from the public perception that 


LB Tee en es Se ee 


32 


it is unprofessional and driven solely by pecuniary inter- 
ests. The regulation is limited to letters directed at vic- 
tims of accidents or personal injury because that is the 
primary group which the State perceives to be in need of 
protection, not because of the content of the message. If 
the ban applied to all direct-mail solicitation, the Court 
below would undoubtedly have concluded that the regu- 
lation was overbroad because it would have reached 
solicitation that the State has no substantial interest in 
regulating. 


The challenged rules also fall within the scope of the 
doctrine upon which this Court upheld the ordinance in 
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 925, 
89 L.Ed.2d 29 (1986). The ordinance prohibited adult 
motion picture theaters from locating within 1,000 feet of 
any residential zone, church, park or school. Like Rule 
4-7.4(b), the Renton ordinance required reference to the 
content of the motion pictures shown to determine 
whether the regulation was applicable to a particular 
theater. Nevertheless, the Court upheld the ordinance 
based upon the fact that it was “aimed not at the content 
of the films shown at ‘adult motion picture theaters,’ but 
rather at the secondary effects of such theaters on the 
surrounding community.” Id. at U.S. 46. Similarly, the 
challenged rule is not aimed at the content of the mes- 
sage, but at the secondary effects upon the legal profes- 
sion, and ultimately upon our system of justice, 
occasioned by the public’s reaction to the particular type 
of advertising. 


The Court is also urged to consider that the opinion 
below places undue emphasis on the first element of the 
time, place and manner test, content review, as though it 


y ee eee ee ee ee ee 
ban aie tie ies = . wey 


33 


stands alone. The content review question is, in most 
cases, logically intertwined with the other two elements. 
If the regulation is narrowly drawn and there are truly 
ample alternative avenues of the same communication 
left open, it follows that it is highly unlikely that the 
regulation was directed at the content of the message. 


The challenged Florida rules leave ample alternative 
means of communication. The rules are extremely narrow, 
applying only during a 30-day period and only to one 
particular form of communication. Lawyers are free to 
communicate the same message by direct-mail at any 
time more than 30 days from the date of the accident or 
disaster and are free to communicate the same message 
by any other advertising mode during the 30-day delay. 
The Comments to Rule 4-7.4, as adopted by the Florida 
Supreme Court, make specific reference to the alternative 
means of advertising available to lawyers pursuant to 
Rule 4-7.4, including “billboards and other signs, radio, 
television and recorded messages the public may access 
by dialing a telephone number.” 


In Bates, this Court expressly noted, “that there may 
be reasonable restrictions on the time, place and manner 
of advertising.” Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra at 97 
S.Ct. 2709. Surely the Court was not referring only to 
restrictions on attorney advertising through use of loud- 
speakers or signs on public property. It is difficult to 
conceive of a type of attorney solicitation regulation that 
would qualify under the time, place or manner doctrine if 


the challenged rules do not. 


. " 4 : “— -. ae" aie 
Re en ee eee ee mT a i eee ES wane 


34 


The challenged rules are both reasonable commercial 
speech restrictions and time, place and manner regula- 
tions, and are entitled to be upheld on either basis. 


+ 


CONCLUSION 


The Court is respectfully urged to reverse the deci- 
sion below and declare Rules 4-7.4(b) and 4-7.8(a), Rules 
Regulating the Florida Bar, valid. In addition, the Court is 
urged to revisit the Bates premise and broaden the discre- 
tion of the States in the regulation of attorney commercial 
solicitation. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Barry RICHARD 

GREENBERG, TRAURIG, HOFFMAN, 
Liporr, Rosen & Quenrtet, P.A. 

101 E. College Avenue 

Post Office Drawer 1838 

Tallahassee, FL 32302 

904/222-6891 

Counsel of Record 


WriuraM F. Btiews, President 
The Florida Bar 


Joun A. DeVautrt III, 
President-Elect 
The Florida Bar 


