106 STAT. 1460      PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992

                    Public Law 102-385
                    102d Congress

                                        An Act

Oct 5 1992          '^° amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer protection
       '               and to promote increased competition in the cable television and related markets,

   [S. 12]            and for other purposes.

Cable Television         Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
                    the United States of America in Congress assembled.
Consumer
Protection and      SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

of 1992.                 This Act may be cited as the "Cable Television Consumer
Business and        Protection and Competition Act of 1992".

industry.           SEC. 2. FINDINGS; POUCY; DEFINITIONS.
47 u s e 609 note.
                         (a) FINDINGS.--The Congress finds and declares the following:
                              (1) Pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of

                         1984, rates for cable television services have been deregulated
                         in approximately 97 percent of £dl franchises since December
                         29, 1986. Since rate deregulation, monthly rates for the lowest
                         priced basic cable service have increased by 40 percent or
                         more for 28 percent of cable television subscribers. Although
                         the average number of basic channels has increased from about
                         24 to 30, average monthly rates have increased by 29 percent
                         during the same period. The average monthly cable rate has
                         increased almost 3 times as much as the Consumer Price Index
                         since rate deregulation.

                              (2) For a variety of reasons, including local franchising
                         requirements and the extraordinary expense of constructing
                         more than one cable television system to serve a particular
                         geographic area, most cable television subscribers have no
                         opportunity to select between competing cable systems. Without
                         the presence of another multichannel video programming dis-
                         tributor, a cable system faces no local competition. The result
                         is \indue market power for the cable operator as compared
                         to that of consiuners and video programmers.

                              (3) There has been a substsintial increase in the penetration
                         of cable television systems over the past decade. Nearly
                         56,000,000 households, over 60 percent of the households with
                         televisions, subscribe to cable television, and this percentage
                         is almost certain to increase. As a result of this growth, the
                         cable television industry has become a dominant nationwide
                         video medium.

                              (4) The cable industry has become highly concentrated.
                         The potential effects of such concentration are barriers to entry
                         for new programmers and a reduction in the number of media
                         voices available to consumers.

                              (5) The cable industry has become vertically integrated;
                         cable operators and cable programmers often have common
                         ownersnip. As a result, cable operators have the incentive and
                         ability to favor their affiliated programmers. This coiild make
                         it more difficult for noncable-affiliated programmers to secure
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1461

carriage on cable systems. Vertically integrated program suppli-
ers also have the incentive and ability to favor their adQSliated
cable operators over nonaffiliated cable operators and program-
ming distributors using other technologies.

     (6) There is a substantial governmental and First Amend-
ment interest in promoting a diversity of views provided
through multiple technology media.

     (7) There is a substantial governmental and First Amend-
ment interest in ensuring that cable subscribers have access
to local noncommercial educational stations which Congress
has authorized, as expressed in section 396(aX5) of the Commu-
nications Act of 1934. The distribution of imique non-
commercial, educational programming services advances that
interest.

     (8) The Federal Government has a substEintigJ interest
in making all nonduplicative loccd public television services
available on cable systems because--

          (A) public television provides educational and informa-
     tional programming to the Nation's citizens, thereby
     advancing the Government's compelling interest in educat-
     ing its citizens;

          (B) pubHc television is a local community institution,
     supported through loced tax dollars and voluntary citizen
     contributions in excess of $10,800,000,000 since 1972, that
     provides public service programming that is responsive
     to the needs and interests of the local commimity;

          (C) the Federal Government, in recognition of public
     television's integral role in serving the educational Eind
     informational needs of local communities, has invested
     more than $3,000,000,000 in public broadcasting since
     1969; and

          (D) absent carriage requirements there is a substantial
     likelihood that citizens, who have supported local public
     television services, will be deprived of those services.
     (9) The Federal Government has a substantial interest
in having cable systems carry the signals of local commercial
television stations because the carriage of such signals is nec-
essary to serve the goals contained in section 307(b) of the
Communications Act of 1934 of providing a fair, efficient, and
equitable distribution of broadcast services.

     (10) A primary objective and benefit of our Nation's system
of regulation of television broadcasting is the local origination
of programming. There is a substemtial governmental interest
in ensuring its continuation.

     (11) Broadcast television stations continue to be an impor-
tant source of local news and public affairs programming and
other local broadcast services critical to an informed electorate.

     (12) Broadcast television programming is supported by rev-
enues generated from advertising broadcast over stations. Such
progrsunming is otherwise free to those who own television
sets and do not require cable transmission to receive broadcast
signals. There is a substantial governmental interest in promot-
ing the continued availability of such free television program-
ming, especially for viewers who are unable to afford other
means of receiving programming.
106 STAT. 1462  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                     (13) As a result of the growth of cable television, there
                has been a marked shift in market share from broadcast tele-
                vision to cable television services.

                     (14) Cable television systems and broadcast television sta-
                tions increasingly compete for television advertising revenues.
                As the proportion of households subscribing to cable television
                increases, proportionately more advertising revenues will be
                reallocated from broadcast to cable television systems.

                     (15) A cable television system which carries the signal
                of a local television broadcaster is assisting the broadcaster
                to increase its viewership, and thereby attract additional
                advertising revenues that otherwise might be earned by the
                cable system operator. As a result, there is an economic incen-
                tive for cable systems to terminate the retransmission of the
                broadcast signal, refuse to carry new signals, or reposition
                a broadcast signal to a disadvantageous channel position. There
                is a substantial likelihood that absent the reimposition of such
                a requirement, additional local broadcast signals will be deleted,
                repositioned, or not carried.

                     (16) As a result of the economic incentive that cable systems
                have to delete, reposition, or not carry local broadcast signals,
                coupled with the absence of a requirement that such systems
                cany local broadcast signals, the economic viability of free
                local broadcast television and its ability to originate quality
                local programming will be seriously jeopardized.

                     (17) Consumers who subscribe to cable television often
                do so to obtain local broadcast signals which they otherwise
                would not be able to receive, or to obtain improved signals.
                Most subscribers to cable television systems do not or cannot
                maintain antennas to receive broadcast television services, do
                not have input selector switches to convert from a cable to
                antenna reception system, or cannot otherwise receive broad-
                cast television services. The regulatory system created by the
                Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 was premised upon
                the continued existence of mandatory carriage obligations for
                cable systems, ensuring that local stations would be protected
                from anticompetitive conduct by cable systems.

                     (18) Cable television systems often are the single most
                efficient distribution system for television programming. A Gov-
                ernment mandate for a substantial societal investment in alter-
                native distribution systems for cable subscribers, such as the
                "A/B" input selector antenna system, is not an enduring or
                feasible method of distribution and is not in the public interest.

                     (19) At the same time, broadcast programming that is
                carried remains the most popular programming on cable sys-
                tems, and a substantial portion of the benefits for which con-
                sumers pay cable systems is derived from carriage of the signals
                of network affiliates, independent television stations, and public
                television stations. Also cable programming placed on channels
                adjacent to popular off-the-air signals obtains a larger audience
                than on other channel positions. Cable systems, therefore,
                obtain great benefits from local broadcast signals which, until
                now, they have been able to obtain without the consent of
                the broadcaster or any copyright liability. This has resulted
                in an effective subsidy of the development of cable systems
                by local broadcasters. While at one time, when cable systems
                did not attempt to compete with local broadcasters for program-
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1463

     ming, audience, and advertising, this subsidy may have been          47 use 522.
     appropriate, it is so no longer and results in a competitive
     imbalance between the 2 industries.

          (20) The Cable Communications PoUcy Act of 1984, in
     its amendments to the Communications Act of 1934, limited
     the regulatory authority of franchising authorities over cable
     operators. Franchising authorities are finding it difficult luider
     the current regulatory scheme to deny reneweds to cable sys-
     tems that are not adequately serving cable subscribers.

          (21) Cable systems should be encouraged to carry low-
     power television stations licensed to the communities served
     by those systems where the low-power station creates and
     broadcasts, as a substantial part of its programming day, local
     programming.
     (b) STATEMENT OF POLICY.--It is the policy of the Congress
in this Act to--

          (1) promote the availability to the public of a diversity
     of views and information through cable television and other
     video distribution media;

          (2) rely on the marketplace, to the maximmn extent fea-
     sible, to achieve that availability;

          (3) ensure that cable operators continue to expand, where
     economically justified, their capacity and the programs offered
     over their cable systems;

          (4) where cable television systems are not subject to effec-
     tive competition, ensure that consumer interests are protected
     in receipt of cable service; and

          (5) ensure that cable television operators do not have xmdue
     market power vis-a-vis video programmers and consimiers.

      (c) DEFINITIONS.--Section 602 of the Communications Act of

1934 (47 U.S.C. 531) is amended--
          (1) by redesignating paragraph (16) as paragraph (19);
          (2) by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (15);
          (3) by redesignating paragraphs (11) through (15) as para-

     graphs (13) through (17), respectively;
          (4) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (10) as para-

     graphs (2) through (11), respectively;
          (5) by inserting before paragraph (2) (as so redesignated)

     the following new paragraph:
          "(1) the term 'activated channels* means those channels

     engineered at the headend of a cable system for the provision
     of services generally available to residential subscribers of the
     cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are
     provided, including any channel designated for public, edu-
     cational, or governmental use;";

          (6) by inserting after paragraph (11) (as so redesignated)
     the following new paragraph:

          "(12) the term 'multichannel video programming distribu-
     tor' means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable operator,
     a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broad-
     cast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite pro-
     gram distributor, who makes available for purchase, by sub-
     scribers or customers, multiple cheumels of video program-
     ming;"; and

          (7) by inserting after paragraph (17) (as so redesignated)
     the following new paragraph:
106 STAT. 1464  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

          "(18) the term 'usable activated channels' means activated
     channels of a cable system, except those channels whose use
     for the distribution of broadcast signals would conflict with
     technical and safety regulations as determined by the Commis-
     sion; and".

SEC. 3. REGULATION OF RATES.

     (a) AMENDMENT.--Section 623 of the Communications Act of
1934 (47 U.S.C. 543) is amended to read as follows:

"SEC. 623. REGULATION OF RATES.

      "(a) COMPETITION PREFERENCE; LOCAL AND FEDERAL REGULA-
TION.--

          "(1) IN GENERAL.--No Federal agency or State may regulate
     the rates for the provision of cable service except to the extent
     provided under this section and section 612. Any franchising
     authority may regulate the rates for the provision of cable
     service, or any other communications service provided over
     a cable system to cable subscribers, but only to the extent
     provided imder this section. No Federsd agency. State, or fran-
     chising authority may regulate the rates for cable service of
     a cable system that is owned or operated by a local government
     or franchising authority within whose jurisdiction that cable
     system is located and that is the only cable system located
     within such jurisdiction.

          "(2) PREFERENCE FOR COMPETITION.--If the Commission
     finds that a cable system is subject to effective competition,
     the rates for the provision of cable service by such system
     shall not be subject to regulation by the Commission or by
     a State or franchising authority under this section. If the Com-
     mission finds that a cable system is not subject to effective
     competition--

               "(A) the rates for the provision of basic cable service
          shall be subject to regulation by a franchising authority,
          or by the Commission if the Commission exercises jurisdic-
          tion pursuant to paragraph (6), in accordance with the
          regulations prescribed by the Commission imder subsection
          (b); and

               "(B) the rates for cable programming services shall
          be subject to regulation by the Commission imder sub-
          section (c).
          "(3) QUALIFICATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY.--A fran-
     chising authority that seeks to exercise the regulatory jurisdic-
     tion permitted under para^aph (2)(A) shall file with the Com-
     mission a written certification that--

               "(A) the franchising authority will adopt and admin-
          ister regulations with respect to the rates subject to regula-
          tion under this section that are consistent with the regula-
          tions prescribed by the Commission under subsection (b);

               "(B) the franchising authority has the legal authority
          to adopt, and the personnel to administer, such regulations;
          and

               "(C) procedural laws and regulations applicable to rate
          regulation proceedings by such authority provide a reason-
          able opportunity for consideration of the views of interested
          parties.
          "(4) APPROVAL BY COMMISSION.--^A certification filed by a
     franchising authority under paragraph (3) shall be effective
PUBUC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992  106 STAT. 1465

     30 days after the date on which it is filed unless the Commission
     finds, after notice to the authority and a reasonable opportunity
     for the authority to comment, that--

               "(A) the fi'anchising authority has adopted or is admin-
          istering regulations with respect to the rates subject to
          regulation under this section that are not consistent with
          the regulations prescribed by the Commission under sub-
          section (b);

               "(B) the firanchising authority does not have the legal
          authority to adopt, or the personnel to administer, such
          regulations; or

               "(C) procedural laws and regulations appUcable to rate
          regulation proceedings by such authority do not provide
          a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views
          of interested parties.
     If the Commission disapproves a fi'anchising authority's cer-
     tification, the Commission shall notify the fi'anchising authority
     of any revisions or modifications necessary to obtam approval.
          **(5) REVOCATION OF JURISDICTION.--Upon petition by a
     cable operator or other interested party, the Commission shall
     review the reg^ulation of cable system rates by a fi'anchising
     authority under this subsection. A copy of the petition shall
     be provided to the firanchising authority by the person filing
     the petition. If the Commission finds that the firanchising
     authority has acted inconsistently with, the requirements of
     this subsection, the Commission shall grant appropriate relief.
     If the Commission, after the fi'anchising authority has had
     a reasonable opportunity to comment, determines that the State
     and local laws and regulations are not in conformance with
     the regulations prescribed by the Commission under subsection
     (b), the Commission shall revoke the jurisdiction of such author-
     ity.

            "(6) EXERCISE OF JURISDICTION BY COMMISSION.--If the

     Commission disapproves a fi'anchising authority's certification
     under paragraph (4), or revokes such authority's jurisdiction
     under paragraph (5), the Commission shall exercise the fi'an-
     chising aumority's regulatory jurisdiction under paragraph
     (2)(A) until the franchising authority has (;[uaUfied to exercise
     that jurisdiction by filing a new certification that meets the
     requirements of paragraph (3). Such new certification shcdl
     be efiective upon approved by the Commission. The Commission
     shall act to approve or disapprove any such new certification
     within 90 days after the date it is filed.

      "(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIC SERVICE TIER RATE REGULA-

TIONS.--

          "(1) COMMISSION OBLIGATION TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The Com-
     mission shall, by regulation, ensure that the rates for the
     basic service tier are reasonable. Such regulations shall be
     designed to achieve the goal of protecting subscribers of any
     cable system that is not subject to efiective competition from
     rates for the basic service tier that exceed the rates that would
     be charged for the basic service tier if such cable system were
     subject to efTective competition.

          "(2) COMMISSION REGULATIONS.--Within 180 days after the
     date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection
     and Competition Act of 1992, the Commission shall prescribe,
     and periodically thereafi^er revise, regulations to carry out its
106 STAT. 1466  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

obligations under paragraph (1). In prescribing such regula-
tions, the Commission--

          "(A) shall seek to reduce the administrative burdens
     on subscribers, cable operators, franchising authorities, and
     the Commission;

          "(B) may adopt formulas or other mechanisms and
     procedures in complying with the requirements of subpara-
     graph (A); and

          "(C) shall take into account the following factors:
               **(i) the rates for cable systems, u any, that are

          subject to effective competition;
               "(ii) the direct costs (if any) of obtaining, transmit-

          ting, and otherwise providing signsils carried on the
          basic service tier, including signals and services carried
          on the basic service tier pursuant to paragraph (7)(B),
          and changes in such costs;

               "(iii) only such portion of the joint and common
          costs (if any) of obtaining, transmitting, and otherwise
          providing such signals as is determined, in accordance
          with regulations prescribed by the Commission, to be
          reasonably and properly allocable to the basic service
          tier, and changes in such costs;

               "(iv) the revenues (if any) received by a cable
          operator from advertising from programming that is
          carried as part of the basic service tier or from other
          consideration obtained in connection with the basic
          service tier;

               "(v) the reasonably and properly allocable portion
          of any amoimt assessed as a franchise fee, tax, or
          charge of any kind imposed by any State or local
          authority on the transactions between cable operators
          and cable subscribers or any other fee, tax, or assess-
          ment of general appUcabihty imposed by a govern-
          mental entity applied against cable operators or cable
          subscribers;

               "(vi) any amount required, in accordance with
          paragraph (4), to satisfy franchise requirements to sup-
          port public, educational, or governmental channels or
          the use of such channels or any other services required
          under the franchise; and

               "(vii) a reasonable profit, as defined by the Com-
          mission consistent with the Commission's obUgations
          to subscribers under paragraph (1).
     **(3) EQUIPMENT.--^The regulations prescribed by the Com-
mission under this subsection shall include standards to estab-
lish, on the basis of actual cost, the price or rate for--
          ''(A) installation and lease of the equipment used by
     subscribers to receive the basic service tier, including a
     converter box and a remote control imit and, if requested
     by the subscriber, such addressable converter box or other
     equipment as is required to access programming described
     in paragraph (8); and
          ''(B) installation and monthly use of connections for
     additional television receivers.
     "(4) COSTS OF FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.--The regulations
prescribed by the Commission under this subsection shall
mclude standards to identify costs attributable to satisfying
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1467

franchise requirements to support public, educational, and gov-
ernmental channels or the use of such channels or any otiier
services required under the franchise.

      "(5) iMPLEMEhPTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.--The regulations

prescribed by the Commission under this subsection shall
include additional standards, guidelines, and procedures con-
cerning the implementation and enforcement of such regula-
tions, which shall include--

          "(A) procedures by which cable operators may imple-
     ment and franchising authorities may enforce the regula-
     tions prescribed by tiie Commission under this subsection;

          "(B) procedures for the expeditious resolution of dis-
     putes between cable operators and franchising authorities
     concerning the administration of such regulations;

          "(C) standards and procedures to prevent imreasonable
     charges for changes in the subscriber's selection of services
     or equipment subject to regulation imder this section, which
     standards shall require that charges for changing the serv-
     ice tier selected shall be based on the cost of such change
     and shall not exceed nominal amoiuits when the system's
     configuration permits changes in service tier selection to
     be effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal
     or by other similarly simple method; and

          "(D) standards and procedures to assure that subscrib-
     ers receive notice of the availabihty of the basic service
     tier required under this section.
     "(6) NOTICE.--^The procedures prescribed by the Commis-
sion pursuant to paragraph (5)(A) shall require a cable operator
to provide 30 days' advance notice to a franchising authority
of any increase proposed in the price to be charged for the
basic service tier.

      "(7) COMPONENTS OP BASIC TIER SUBJECT TO RATE REGULA-

TION.--

          "(A) MINIMUM CONTENTS.--Each cable operator of a
     cable sjTstem shall provide its subscribers a separately
     available basic service tier to which subscription is required
     for access to any other tier of service. Such basic service
     tier shaU, at a minimum, consist of the following:

               "(i) All signals ceuried in fidfillment of the require-
          ments of sections 614 and 615.

               "(ii) Any public, educational, and governmental
          access programming required by the franchise of the
          cable S3rstem to be provided to subscribers.

               "(iii) Any signal of any television broadcast station
          that is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber,
          except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by
          a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such
          station.
          "(B) PERMITTED ADDITIONS TO BASIC TIER.--A cable
     operator may add additioned video programming signals
     or services to the basic service tier. Any such additional
     signals or services provided on the basic service tier shall
     be provided to subscribers at rates determined under the
     regulations prescribed by the Commission under this sub-
     section.

       "(8) BUY-THROUGH OF OTHER TIERS PROHIBITED.--
106 STAT. 1468  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                          "(A) PROHIBITION.--^A cable operator may not require
                     the subscription to any tier other than the basic service
                     tier required by paragraph (7) as a condition of access
                     to video programming offered on a per channel or per
                     program basis. A cable operator may not discriminate
                     between subscribers to the basic service tier £ind other
                     subscribers with regard to the rates charged for video pro-
                     gramming offered on a per channel or per program basis.

                          "(B) EXCEPTION; LIMITATION.--The prohibition in sub-
                     paragraph (A) shall not apply to a cable system that, by
                     reason of the lack of addressable converter boxes or other
                     technological limitations, does not permit the operator to
                     offer programming on a per channel or per program basis
                     in the same manner required by subparagraph (A). This
                     subparagraph shall not be available to any cable operator
                     after--

                               "(i) the technology utiUzed by the cable system
                          is modified or improved in a way tiiat eliminates such
                          technological limitation; or

                               **(ii) 10 years after the date of enactment of the
                          Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
                          Act of 1992, subject to subparagraph (C).
                          "(C) WAIVER.--^If, in any proceeding initiated at the
                     request of any cable operator, the Commission determines
                     that compliance with the requirements of subparagraph
                     (A) would require the cable operator to increase its rates,
                     the Commission may, to the extent consistent with the
                     public interest, grant such cable operator a waiver from
                     such requirements for such specified period as the Commis-
                     sion determines reasonable and appropriate.

                "(c) REGULATION OF UNREASONABLE RATES.--

                     "(1) COMMISSION REGULATIONS.--Within 180 days after the
                date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection
                and Competition Act of 1992, the Commission shall, by regula-
                tion, estabhsh the following:

                          "(A) criteria prescribed in accordance with paragraph
                     (2) for identifying, in individual cases, rates for cable pro-
                     gramming services that are unreasonable;

                          "(B) fair and expeditious procedures for the receipt,
                     consideration, and resolution of complaints firom any sub-
                     scriber, fi*anchising authority, or other relevant State or
                     local government entity alleging that a rate for cable pro-
                     gramming services charged by a cable operator violates
                     the criteria prescribed under subparagraph (A), which pro-
                     cedures shsQl include the minimimi showing that shall
                     be required for a complaint to obtain Commission consider-
                     ation and resolution of whether the rate in question is
                     unreasonable; and

                          "(C) the procedures to be used to reduce rates for
                     cable programming services that are determined by the
                     Commission to be unreasonable and to refund such portion
                     of tiie rates or charges that were paid by subscribers after
                     the filing of such complaint and that are determined to
                     be unreasonable.
                     "(2) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.--In estabUshing the cri-
                teria for determining in individual cases whether rates for
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1469

     cable programming services are unreasonable under paragraph
     (1)(A), the Commission shall consider, among other factors--

               "(A) the rates for similarly situated cable systems offer-
          ing comparable cable programming services, taking into
          account similarities in facilities, regulatory and govern-
          mental costs, the number of subscribers, and other relevant
          factors;

               "(B) the rates for cable systems, if any, that are subject
          to effective competition;

               "(C) the history of the rates for cable programming
          services of the system, including the relationship of such
          rates to changes in general consumer prices;

               "(D) the rates, as a whole, for cJl the cable program-
          ming, cable equipment, and cable services provided by the
          system, other than programming provided on a per channel
          or per program basis;

               "(E) capit£d and operating costs of the cable system,
          including the quality and costs of the customer service
          provided by the cable system; and

               "(F) the revenues (if any) received by a cable operator
          from advertising from programming that is carried as part
          of the service for which a rate is being established, and
          changes in such revenues, or from other consideration
          obtained in connection with the cable programming services
          concerned.

            "(3) LIMITATION ON COMPLAINTS CONCERNING EXISTING

     RATES.--Except during the 180-day period following the effec-
     tive date of the regulations prescribed by the Commission under
     paragraph (1), the procedures established under subparagraph
     (B) of such paragraph shall be available only with respect
     to complaints fQed within a reasonable period of time following
     a change in rates that is initiated after that effective date,
     including a change in rates that results from a change in
     that system's service tiers.

     "(d) UNIFORM RATE STRUCTURE REQUIRED.--A cable operator
shall have a rate structure, for the provision of cable service, that
is uniform 'throughout the geographic area in which cable service
is provided over its cable system.

      "(e) DISCRIMINATION; SERVICES FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED.--

Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting any Federal
agency, State, or a franchising authority from--

          "(1) prohibiting discrimination among subscribers and
     potential subscribers to cable service, except that no Federal
     agency. State, or franchising authority may prohibit a cable
     operator from offering reasonable discounts to senior citizens
     or other economically disadvantaged group discounts; or

          "(2) requiring and regulating the installation or rental of
     equipment which facilitates the reception of cable service by
     hearing impaired individuals.
     "(f) NEGATIVE OPTION BILLING PROHIBITED.--A cable operator
shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that
the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. For pur-
poses of this subsection, a subscriber's failure to reftise a cable
operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment shall not
be deemed to be an affirmative request for such service or equip-
ment.
106 STAT. 1470  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

     "(g) COLLECTION OF INFORMATION.--The Commission shall, by
regulation, require cable operators to file with the Commission
or a franchising authority, as appropriate, within one year after
the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992 and annually thereafter, such finemcial
information as may be needed for purposes of administering and
enforcing this section.

     "(h) PREVENTION OF EVASIONS.--Within 180 days after the date
of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, the Commission shall, by regulation, estab-
Ush standards, guidelines, and procedures to prevent evasions,
including evasions that result from retiering, of the requirements
of this section and shall, thereafter, periodically review and revise
such standards, guidelines, and procedures.

     "(i) SMALL SYSTEM BURDENS.--In developing and prescribing
regulations pursuant to this section, the Commission shall design
such regulations to reduce the administrative burdens and cost
of compliance for cable systems that have 1,000 or fewer subscribers,

     "(j) RATE REGULATION AGREEMENTS.--During the term of an
agreement made before July 1, 1990, by a franchising authority
and a cable operator providing for the regulation of basic cable
service rates, where there was not effective competition under Com-
mission rules in eftiect on that date, nothing in this section (or
the regulations thereimder) shall abridge the ability of such fran-
chising authority to regulate rates in accordance with such an
agreement.

     "(k) REPORTS ON AVERAGE PRICES.--The Commission shall
annually pubUsh statistical reports on the average rates for basic
cable service and other cable progreimming, and for converter boxes,
remote control units, and other equipment, of--

          "(1) cable systems that the Commission has foimd are
     subject to effective competition under subsection (a)(2), com-
     pared with

          "(2) cable systems that the Commission has found are
     not subject to such effective competition.
     "(1) DEFINITIONS.--^As used in this section--

          "(1) The term 'effective competition* means that--
               "(A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the

          franchise area subscribe to the cable service of a cable
          system;

               "(B) the franchise area is--
                     "(i) served by at least two unaffiliated multi-

               channel video programming distributors each of which
               offers comparable video programming to at least 50
               percent of the households in the franchise area; and

                     "(ii) the nimiber of households subscribing to pro-
               gramming services offered by multichannel video pro-
               gramming distributors other than the largest multi-
               channel video programming distributor exceeds 15 per-
               cent of the households in the franchise area; or
               "(C) a multichannel video programming distributor
          operated by the franchising authority for that franchise
          area offers video progrsimming to at least 50 percent of
          the households in tnat franchise area.
          "(2) The term 'cable programming service' means any video
     programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service
     tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1471

     the receipt of such video programming, other than (A) video         47 use 543 note,
     programming carried on the basic service tier, and (B) video
     programming offered on a per channel or per program basis.",         47 USC 534.
     (b) EFFECTIVE DATE.--The amendment made by subsection (a)
shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this
Act, except that the authoritjr of the Federal Communications Com-
mission to prescribe regulations is effective on such date of enact-
ment.

SEC. 4. CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCLU. TELEVISION SIGNALS.

     Part II of title VI of the Commimications Act of 1934 is amended
by inserting after section 613 (47 U.S.C. 533) the following new
section:

«SEC. 614. CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION SIGNALS.

     "(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS.--Each cable operator shall carry,
on the cable system of that operator, the signals of local commercial
television stations and qualified low power stations as provided
by this section. Carriage of additional broadcast television signals
on such system shall be at the discretion of such operator, subject
to section 325(b).

      "(b) SIGNALS REQUIRED.--

          "(1) IN GENERAL.--(A) A cable operator of a cable system
     with 12 or fewer usable activated channels shall carry the
     signals of at least three local commercial television stations,
     except that if such a system has 300 or fewer subscribers,
     it shall not be subject to any requirements under this section
     so long as such system does not delete from carriage by that
     system any signal of a broadcast television station.

          "(B) A cable operator of a cable system with more than
     12 usable activated channels shall carry the signals of local
     commercial television stations, up to one-third of the aggregate
     number of usable activated channels of such system.

          "(2) SELECTION OF SIGNALS.--Whenever the number of local
     commercial television stations exceeds the maximum number
     of signeds a cable system is required to carry under paragraph
     (1), the cable operator shall have discretion in selecting which
     such stations shall be carried on its cable system, except that--

               "(A) under no circumstances shall a cable operator
          carry a qusilified low power station in Ueu of a local com-
          mercial television station; and

               "(B) if the cable operator elects to carry an affiliate
          of a broadcast network (as such term is defined by the
          Commission by regulation), such cable operator shall carry
          the affiliate of such broadcast network wnose city of license
          reference point, as defined in section 76.53 of title 47,
          Code of Federal Regulations (in effect on January 1, 1991),
          or any successor regulation thereto, is closest to the prin-
          cipal headend of the cable system.
          "(3) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED.--(A) A cable operator shall
     carry in its entirety, on the cable system of that operator,
     the primary video, accompanying audio, and line 21 closed
     caption transmission of each of the local commercial television
     stations carried on the cable system and, to the extent tech-
     nically feasible, program-related material carried in the vertical
     blanking interval or on subcarriers. Retransmission of other
     material in the vertical blanking internal or other nonprogram-
     related material (including teletext and other subscription and
106 STAT. 1472  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                advertiser-supported information services) shsdl be at the dis-
                cretion of the cable operator. Where appropriate and feasible,
                operators may delete signal enhsincements, such as ghost-can-
                celing, from the broadcast signal and employ such enhance-
                ments at the system headend or headends.

                     "(B) The cable operator shall carry the entirety of the
                program schedule of any television station carried on the cable
                system imless carriage of specific programming is prohibited,
                and other programming authorized to be substituted, under
                section 76.67 or subpart F of part 76 of title 47, Code of
                Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1991), or any
                successor regulations thereto.

                       "(4) SIGNAL QUALITY.--

                              "(A) NONDEGRADATION; TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS.--

                     The signals of local commercial television stations that
                      a cable operator carries shall be carried without material
                      degradation. The Commission shall adopt carriage stand-
                      ards to ensure that, to the extent technically feasible, the
                      quality of signal processing and carriage provided by a
                      cable system for the carriage of local commercial television
                      stations will be no less than that provided by the system
                     for carriage of any other t3T)e of signal.

                           "(B) ADVANCED TELEVISION.--At such time as the Com-
                      mission prescribes modifications of the standards for tele-
                     vision broadcast signals, the Commission shall initiate a
                      proceeding to establish £iny changes in the signal ceuriage
                      requirements of cable television systems necessary to
                      ensure cable carriage of such broadcast signals of local
                      commercial television stations which have been changed
                     to conform with such modified standards.
                      "(5) DUPLICATION NOT REQUIRED.--Notwithstanding para-
                graph (1), a cable operator shall not be required to carry the
                signal of any local commercial television station that substan-
                tially duplicates the signal of another local commercial tele-
                vision station which is carried on its cable system, or to carry
                the signals of more than one local commercial television station
                affiliated with a particular broadcast network (as such term
                is defined by regulation). If a cable operator elects to carry
                on its cable system a signal which substantially dupHcates
                the signal of another local commercial television station carried
                on the cable system, or to carry on its system the signals
                of more than one local commercial television station affiliated
                with a particular broadcast network, all such signals shall
                be counted toward the number of signals the operator is
                required to carry under paragraph (1).

                      "(6) CHANNEL POSITIONING.--Each signal carried in fiilfill-
                ment of the carriage obligations of a cable operator imder
                this section shall be carried on the cable system channel num-
                ber on which the local commercial television station is broadcast
                over the air, or on the channel on which it was carried on
                July 19, 1985, or on the channel on which it was carried
                on January 1, 1992, at the election of the station, or on such
                other channel nimiber as is mutually agreed upon by the station
                and the cable operator. Any dispute regarding the positioning
                of a loc^ commercial television station shall be resolved by
                the Commission.
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1473

     "(7) SIGNAL AVAILABILITY.--Signals carried in fulfillment
of the requirements of this section shall be provided to every
subscriber of a cable system. Such signals shall be viewable
via cable on all television receivers of a subscriber which are
connected to a cable system by a cable operator or for which
a cable operator provides a connection. If a cable operator
authorizes subscribers to install additional receiver connections,
but does not provide the subscriber with such connections,
or with the equipment and materials for such connections,
the operator shall notify such subscribers of all broadcast sta-
tions carried on the cable system which cannot be viewed
via cable without a converter box and shall offer to sell or
lease such a converter box to such subscribers at rates in
accordance with section 623(b)(3).

     "(8) IDENTIFICATION OP SIGNALS CARRIED.--A cable operator
shall identify, upon request by any person, the signals carried
on its system in fulfillment of the requirements of this section.

     "(9) NOTIFICATION.--^A cable operator shall provide written
notice to a local commercigJ television station at least 30 days
prior to either deleting from carriage or repositioning that
station. No deletion or repositioning of a local commercial tele-
vision station shall occur during a period in which major tele-
vision ratings services measure the size of audiences of local
television stations. The notification provisions of this paragraph
shall not be used to undermine or evade the channel positioning
or carriage requirements imposed upon cable operators under
this section.

      "(10) COMPENSATION FOR CARRIAGE.--A cable operator shall
not accept or request monetary pajrment or other valuable
consideration in exchange either for carriage of local commercial
television stations in mlfiUment of the requirements of this
section or for the channel positioning rights provided to such
stations xinder this section, except that--

           "(A) any such station may be required to bear the
      costs associated with delivering a good quality signal or
      a baseband video signal to the principal headend of the
      cable system;

           "(B) a cable operator may accept payments from sta-
      tions which would be considered distant signals under sec-
      tion 111 of title 17, United States Code, as indemnification
      for any increased copyright liability resulting from carriage
      of such signal; and

           "(C) a cable operator may continue to accept monetary
      payment or other valuable consideration in exchange for
      carriage or channel positioning of the signal of any local
      commercial television station csirried in fulfillment of the
      requirements of this section, through, but not beyond, the
      date of expiration of an agreement thereon between a cable
      operator and a local commercial television station entered
      into prior to June 26, 1990.

"(c) Low POWER STATION CARRIAGE OBLIGATION.--

      "(1) REQUIREMENT.--If there are not sufficient signals of
full power local commercial television stations to fill the chan-
nels set aside under subsection (b)--

            "(A) a cable operator of a cable system with a capacity
      of 35 or fewer usable activated channels shall be required
      to carry one qualified low power station; and
106 STAT. 1474  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                 "(B) a cable operator of a cable system with a capacity
           of more than 35 usable activated channels shall be required
           to carry two qualified low power stations.

              "(2) U S E OF PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, OR GOVERNMENTAL

     CHANNELS.--^A cable operator required to carry more than one
     signal of a qualified low power station under this subsection
     may do so, subject to approval by the firanchising authority
     pursuant to section 611, by placing such additional station
     on pubhc, educational, or governmental channels not in use
     for their designated purposes.

      "(d) REMEDIES.--

              "(1) COMPLAINTS BY BROADCAST STATIONS.--Whenever a

     local commercial television station believes that a cable operator
     has failed to meet its obUgations under this section, such station
     shaU n o t ^ the operator, in writing, of the alleged failure
     and identify its reasons for believing that the cable operator
     is obligated to carry the signal of such station or has otherwise
     failed to comply with the channel positioning or repositioning
     or other requirements of this section. The cable operator shall,
     within 30 days of such written notification, respond in writing
     to such notification and either commence to carry the signal
     of such station in accordance with the terms requested or
     state its reasons for believing that it is not obligated to carry
     such signal or is in compliance with the channel positioning
     and repositioning and other requirements of this section. A
     local commercial television station that is denied carriage or
     channel positioning or repositioning in accordance with this
     section by a cable operator may obtain review of such denial
     by filing a complednt with the Commission. Such complaint
     shall allege the manner in which such cable operator has failed
     to meet its obligations and the basis for such allegations.

           "(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND.--The Commission shall
     afford such cable operator an opportimity to present data and
     arguments to establish that there has been no failure to meet
     its obligations under this section.

           "(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL.--Within 120 days after
     the date a complaint is filed, the Commission shall determine
     whether the cable operator has met its obligations under this
     section. If the Commission determines that the cable operator
     has failed to meet such obligations, the Commission shall order
     the cable operator to reposition the complaining station or,
     in the case of an obligation to carry a station, to commence
     carriage of the station and to continue such carriage for at
     least 12 months. If the Commission determines that the cable
     operator has fiilly met the requirements of this section, it
     shall dismiss the complaint.

     "(e) INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH RULES ABOLISHED.--NO cable
operator shall be required--

           "(1) to provide or make available any input selector switch
     as defined in section 76.5(mm) of title 47, Code of Federal
     Regulations, or any comparable device; or

           "(2) to provide information to subscribers about input selec-
     tor switches or comparable devices.
     "(f) REGULATIONS BY COMMISSION.--Within 180 days after the
date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall, following
a rulemaking proceeding, issue regulations implementing the
requirements imposed by this section. Such implementing regula-
PUBLIC LAW 102-386--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1475

tions shall include necessary revisions to update section 76.51 of
title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

      *'(g) SALES PRESENTATIONS AND PROGRAM LENGTH COMMER-
CIALS.--

          "(1) CARRIAGE PENDING PROCEEDING.--Pending the outcome
     of the proceeding under paragraph (2), nothing in this Act
     shall require a cable operator to carry on any tier, or prohibit
     a cable operator from carrying on any tier, the signal of any
     commercial television station or video programming service that
     is predominantly utiUzed for the transmission of sales presen-
     tations or program length commercials.

            "(2) PROCEEDING CONCERNING CERTAIN STATIONS.--Within

     270 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Com-
     mission, notwithstanding prior proceedings to determine
     whether broadcast television stations that are predominantly
     utiHzed for the transmission of sales presentations or program
     length commercials are serving the pubUc interest, convenience,
     and necessity, shall complete a proceeding in accordance with
     this paragraph to determine whether broadcast television sta-
     tions that are predominantly utihzed for the transmission of
     sales presentations or program length commercials are serving
     the public interest, convenience, and necessity. In conducting
     such proceeding, the Commission shall provide appropriate
     notice and opportunity for public comment. The Commission
     shall consider the viewing of such stations, the level of compet-
     ing demands for the spectrum allocated to such stations, and
     the role of such stations in providing competition to
     nonbroadcast services offering similar programming. In the
     event that the Commission concludes that one or more of such
     stations are serving the public interest, convenience, and neces-
     sity, the Commission shall qualify such stations as local com-
     mercial television stations for purposes of subsection (a). In
     the event that the Commission concludes that one or more
     of such stations are not serving the pubhc interest, convenience,
     and necessity, the Commission shall allow the licensees of
     such stations a reasonable period within which to provide dif-
     ferent programming, and shall not deny such stations a renewal
     expectancy solely because their programming consisted pre-
     dominantly of sales presentations or program length commer-
     cials.

      "(h) DEFINITIONS.--

             "(1) LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION.--

                "(A) IN GENERAL.--For purposes of this section, the
          term local commercial television station' means any full
          power television broadcast station, other than a qualified
          noncommercial educational television station within the
          meaning of section 615(1)(1), licensed and operating on
           a channel regularly assigned to its community by the Com-
          mission that, with respect to a particular cable system,
          is within the same television market as the cable system.

                "(B) EXCLUSIONS.--The term local commercial tele-
          vision station' shall not include--

                     "(i) low power television stations, television trans-
                lator stations, and passive r^eaters which operate
                pursuant to part 74 of title 47, Code of Federal Regula-
                tions, or any successor regulations thereto;
106 STAT. 1476  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                     "(ii) a television broadcast station that would be
                considered a distant signal under section 111 of title
                17, United States Code, if such station does not agree
                to indemnify the cable operator for any increased copy-
                right liabiUty resulting from carriage on the cable sys-
                tem; or

                     "(iii) a television broadcast station that does not
                deUver to the principal headend of a cable system
                either a signal level of -45dBm for UHF signals or
                -49dBm for VHF signals at the input terminals of
                the signal processing equipment, if such station does
                not agree to be responsible for the costs of deUvering
                to the cable system a signal of good quaUty or a
                baseband video signal.

                     "(C) MARKET DETERMINATIONS.--<i) For purposes of this
                section, a broadcasting station's market shall be determined
                in the manner provided in section 73.3555(d)(3)(i) of title
                47, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on May 1,
                1991, except that, following a written request, the Commis-
                sion may, with respect to a particular television broadcast
                station, include additional communities within its television
                market or exclude communities from such station's tele-
                vision market to better effectuate the purposes of this
                section. In considering such requests, the Commission may
                determine that particular communities are part of more
                than one television market.

                     "(ii) In considering requests filed pursusint to clause
                (i), the Commission shall afford particular attention to
                the value of localism by taking into account such factors
                as--

                     "(I) whether the station, or other stations located
                in the same area, have been historiccdly ceirried on
                the cable system or systems within such community;

                     "(II) whether the television station provides cov-
                erage or other local service to such commiuiity;

                     "(III) whether any other television station that
                is ehgible to be carried by a cable system in such
                community in fiilfQlment of the requirements of this
                section provides news coverage of issues of concern
                to such commxinity or provides carriage or coverage
                of sporting and other events of interest to the commu-
                nity; £ind

                "(IV) evidence of viewing patterns in cable £ind
                noncable households within the areas served by the
                cable system or systems in such community,
                "(iii) A cable operator shall not delete from carriage
                the signal of a commercial television station during the
                pendency of any proceeding pursuant to this subparagraph.
^               "(iv) In the rulemciking proceeding required by sub-

                     section (f), the Commission shall provide for expedited con-
                     sideration of requests filed imder this subparagraph.
                     "(2) QUALIFIED LOW POWER STATION.--The term 'qualified
                low power station' means any television broadcast station con-
                forming to the rules established for Low Power Television Sta-
                tions contained in part 74 of title 47, Code of Federal Regula-
                tions, only if--
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1477

               ''(A) such station broadcasts for at least the minimum     47 USC 535.
          number of hours of operation required by the Commission
          for television broadcast stations under part 73 of title 47,
          Code of Federal Regulations;

               "(B) such station meets all obUgations and require-
          ments applicable to television broadcast stations under part
          73 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, with respect
          to the broadcast of nonentertainment programming; pro-
          gramming and rates involving political candidates, election
          issues, controversial issues oi public importance, editorials,
          and personal attacks; programming for children; and equal
          emplo3rment opportunity; and the Commission determines
          that me provision of such programming by such station
          would address local news and informational needs which
          are not being adequately served by full power television
          broadcast stations because of the geographic distance of
          such full power stations from the low power station's com-
          munity of license;

               "(C) such station compUes with interference regulations
          consistent with its secondary status pursuant to part 74
          of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations;

               "(D) such station is located no more them 35 miles
          from the cable system's headend, and dehvers to the prin-
          cipal headend of the cable system an over-the-air signal
          of good quality, as determined by the Commission;

                "(E) the community of license of such station and the
          franchise area of the cable system are both located outside
          of the largest 160 Metropolitan Statistical Areeis, ranked
          by population, as determined by the Office of Management
          and Budget on June 30, 1990, and the population of such
          community of Ucense on such date did not exceed 35,000;
          and

                "(F) there is no full power television broadcast station
          Ucensed to any community within the coimty or other politi-
          cal subdivision (of a State) served by the cable system.
     Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to change the
     secondary status of any low power station as provided in psirt
     74 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on
     the date of enactment of this section.".

SEC. 6. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL STATIONS.

     Part II of title VI of the Commimications Act of 1934 (47
U.S.C. 531 et seq.) is further amended by inserting after section
614 (as added by section 4 of this Act) the following new section:

«SEC. 615. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELE-
                   VISION.

     "(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS.--In addition to the carriage
requirements set forth in section 614, each cable operator of a
cable system shall carry the signals of qualified noncommercial
educational television stations in accordance with the provisions
of this section.

      "(b) REQUIREMENTS TO CARRY QUALIFIED STATIONS.--
             "(1) GENERAL REQUIREMENT TO CARRY EACH QUALIFIED STA-

     TION.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) and subsection (e),
     each cable operator shall carry, on the cable system of that
     cable operator, any qualified local noncommercial educational
     television station requesting carriage.
106 STAT. 1478  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992

          "(2)(A) SYSTEMS WITH 12 OR FEWER CHANNELS.--Not-
     withstanding paragraph (1), a cable operator of a cable system
     with 12 or fewer usable activated channels shall be reqxiired
     to carry the signal of one quahfied local noncommercial edu-
     cationaJ television station; except that a cable operator of such
     a system shall comply with subsection (c) and may, in its
     discretion, carry the signals of other qualified noncommercial
     educational television stations.

          "(B) In the case of a cable system described in subparagraph
     (A) which operates beyond the presence of any qualified local
     noncommercial educational television station--

               "(i) the cable operator shall import and carry on that
          system the signsd of one qualified noncommercial edu-
          cational television station;

               **(ii) the selection for carriage of such a signal shall
          be at the election of the cable operator; and

               "(iii) in order to satisfy the requirements for carriage
          specified in this subsection, the cable operator of the system
          shall not be required to remove any other programming
          service actually provided to subscribers on March 29, 1990;
          except that such cable operator shall use the first channel
          available to satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
          "(3) SYSTEMS WITH 13 TO 36 CHANNELS.--(A) Subject to
     subsection (c), a cable operator of a cable system with 13
     to 36 usable activated channels--

               "(i) shall carry the signal of at least one qualified
          local noncommercial educational television station but shall
          not be required to carry the signals of more than three
          such stations, and

               **(ii) may, in its discretion, carry additional such sta-
          tions.
          ''(B) In the case of a cable system described in this para-
     graph which operates beyond the presence of any qualified
     local noncommercial educational television station, the cable
     operator shall import and carry on that system the signal
     of at least one qualified noncommercial educational television
     station to comply with subparagraph (A)(i).
          "(C) The cable operator of a cable system described in
     this paragraph which carries the signal of a qualified local
     noncommercial educational station af^ated with a State pubUc
     television network shall not be required to carry the signal
     of any additionalqualified local noncommercial educational tele-
     vision stations afinliated with the same network if the program-
     ming of such additionsd stations is substantially duplicated
     by me programming of the qualified local noncommercial edu-
     cational television station receiving carriage.

          "(D) A cable operator of a system described in this para-
     graph which increases the usable activated channel capacity
     of the system to more than 36 channels on or after March
     29, 1990, shall, in accordsince with the other provisions of
     this section, carry the signal of each qualified local non-
     commercial educational television station requesting carriage,
     subject to subsection (e).

      "(c) CONTINUED CARRIAGE OP EXISTING STATIONS.--Not-

withstanding any other provision of this section, all cable operators
shall continue to provide carriage to all qualified local non-
commercial educationed television stations whose signals were car-
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1479

ried on their systems as of March 29, 1990. The requirements
of this subsection may be waived with respect to a particular
cable operator and a particular such station, upon the written
consent of the cable operator and the station.

     "(d) PLACEMENT OF ADDITIONAL SIGNALS.--A cable operator
required to add the signals of quahfied local noncommercial edu-
cational television stations to a cable system luider this section
may do so, subject to approval by the franchising authority pursuant
to section 611, by placing such additional stations on pubhc, edu-
cational, or governmental channels not in use for their designated
purposes.

     "(e) SYSTEMS WITH MORE THAN 36 CHANNELS.--A cable opera-
tor of a cable system with a capacity of more than 36 usable
activated channels which is required to carry the signals of three
quahfied local noncommercial educational television stations shall
not be required to carry the signals of additional such stations
the programming of which substantially duplicates the progrsun-
ming broadcast by another quahfied local noncommercial edu-
cational television station requesting carriage. Substantial duplica-
tion shall be defined by the Commission in a manner that promotes
access to distinctive noncommercial educational television services.

     "(f) WAIVER OF NONDUPLICATION RIGHTS.--A qualified local non-
commercial educational television station whose signal is carried
by a cable operator shall not assert any network nonduphcation
rights it may have pursuant to section 76.92 of title 47, Code
of Federal Regulations, to require the deletion of programs aired
on other qualified local noncommercial educational television sta-
tions whose signals are carried by that cable operator.

      "(g) CONDITIONS OF CARRIAGE.--

          "(1) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED.--^A cable operator shall
     retransmit in its entirety the primary video, accompan3dng
     audio, and line 21 closed caption transmission of each qualified
     local noncommercial educational television station whose signal
     is carried on the cable system, and, to the extent technically
     feasible, program-related material csuried in the vertical blank-
     ing interval, or on subcarriers, that may be necessary for receipt
     of programming by handicapped persons or for educational
     or language purposes. Retransmission of other material in the
     vertical blarJdng interval or on subcarriers shall be within
     the discretion of the cable operator.

          "(2) BANDWIDTH AND TECHNICAL QUALITY.--A cable operator
     shall provide each quahfied local noncommercial educational
     television station whose signsd is carried in accordance with
     this section with bandwidth and technical capacity equivalent
     to that provided to commercial television broadcast stations
     carried on the cable system and shall carry the signal of each
     qualified local noncommercial educational television station
     without material degradation.

          "(3) CHANGES IN CARRLVGE.--The signal of a qualified local
     noncommercial educational television station shall not be repo-
     sitioned by a cable operator unless the cable operator, at least
     30 days in advance of such repositioning, has provided written
     notice to the station and all subscribers of the cable system.
     For purposes of this paragraph, repositioning includes (A)
     assignment of a qualified local noncommercial educational tele-
     vision station to a cable system channel number different fi*om
     the cable system channel number to which the station was
106 STAT. 1480  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992

       assigned as of March 29, 1990, and (B) deletion of the station
       from the cable system. The notification provisions of this para-
       graph shall not be used to undermine or evade the channel
       positioning or carriage requirements imposed upon cable opera-
       tors under this section.

               "(4) GOOD QUALITY SIGNAL REQUIRED.--Notwithstanding

      the other provisions of this section, a cable operator shall
       not be required to carry the signal of any (]^ualified local non-
       commercial educational television station which does not deUver
       to the cable system's principal headend a signal of good quaUty
       or a baseband video signal, as may be defined by me Commis-
       sion.

            **(5) CHANNEL POSITIONING.--Each signal carried in fulfill-
       ment of the carriage obligations of a cable operator under
      this section shall be carrieaf on the cable S3rstem channel num-
       ber on which the qualified local noncommercial educational
       television station is broadcast over the air, or on the channel
       on which it was carried on July 19, 1985, at the election
. o f the station, or on such otiier channel number as is mutually
       agreed upon by the station and the cable operator. Any dispute
      regarding the positioning of a qualified local noncommercial
       educational television station shsQl be resolved by the Commis-
       sion.
       "(h) AVAILABILITY OP SIGNALS.--Signals carried in fiilfillment
 of the carriage obligations of a cable operator under this section
 shall be available to every subscriber as part of the cable system's
 lowest priced service tier that includes the retransmission of local
 commercial television broadcast signals.

        "(i) PAYMENT FOR CARRIAGE PROHIBITED.--

            "(1) IN GENERAL.--^A cable operator shall not accept mone-
      tary pa3rment or other valuable consideration in exchange for
       carriage of the signal of any quaUfied local noncommercial
       educational television station carried in fulfillment of the
      requirements of this section, except that such a station may
       be required to bear the cost associated with deUvering a good
       quaUty signal or a baseband video signal to the principal
      headend of the cable system.

            "(2) DISTANT SIGNAL EXCEPTION.--Notwithstanding the pro-
      visions of this section, a cable operator shall not be required
       to add the signal of a qualified local noncommercial educational
       television station not already carried under the provision of
       subsection (c), where such signed would be considered a distant
       signal for copyright purposes unless such station indemnifies
       the cable operator for any increased copyright costs resulting
       from carriage of such signal.

        **(j) REMEDIES.--

            "(1) COMPLAINT.--^Whenever a qualified local non-
       commercial educational television station beUeves that a cable
       operator of a cable system has failed to comply with the signal
       carriage requirements of this section, the station may file a
       complaint with the Commission. Such complaint shall allege
       the manner in which such cable operator has failed to comply
       with such requirements and state the basis for such allegations.

            "(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND.--The Commission shall
       afford such cable operator an opportunity to present data,
       views, and arguments to estabUsh that the cable operator has
       complied with the signal carriage requirements of this section.
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1481

          "(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL.--Within 120 days after
     the date a complaint is filed under this subsection, the Commis-
     sion shall determine whether the cable operator has complied
     with the requirements of this section. If the Commission deter-
     mines that the cable operator has failed to comply with such
     requirements, the Commission shall state with psirticularity
     the basis for such findings and order the cable operator to
     take such remedial action as is necessary to meet such require-
     ments. If the Commission determines that the cable operator
     has fiiUy complied with such requirements, the Commission
     shall dismiss the complaint.

     "(k) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS.--A cable operator shall iden-
tify, upon request by any person, those signals carried in fulfillment
of the requirements of this section.

     "(1) DEFINITIONS.--For purposes of this section--

            "(1) QUALIFIED NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION

     STATION.--The term 'qualified noncommercial educational tele-
     vision station' means any television broadcast station which--

               "(A)(i) imder the rules and regulations of the Commis-
          sion in effect on March 29, 1990, is licensed by the Commis-
          sion as a noncommercial educational television broadcast
          station and which is owned and operated by a public
          agency, nonprofit foundation, corporation, or association;
          and

               "(ii) has as its licensee an entity which is eligible
          to receive a community service grant, or any successor
          grant thereto, fi-om the Corporation for Public Broadcast-
          ing, or any successor organization thereto, on the basis
          of the formula set forth in section 396(k)(6)(B); or

               "(B) is owned and operated by a mimicipality and
          transmits predominantly noncommercigd programs for edu-
          cational purposes.
     Such term includes (I) the translator of any noncommercial
     educational television station with five watts or higher power
     serving the fi-anchise area, (II) a fiill-service station or trans-
     lator if such station or translator is licensed to a channel
     reserved for noncommercial educational use pursuant to section
     73.606 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor
     regulations thereto, and (III) such stations and translators
     operating on channels not so reserved as the Commission deter-
     mines are qualified as noncommercial educational stations.

             "(2) QUALIFIED LOCAL NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELE-

     VISION STATION.--The term 'qualified local noncommercial edu-
     cational television station' means a qualified noncommercial
     educational television station--

               "(A) which is licensed to a principal community whose
          reference point, as defined in section 76.53 of title 47,
          Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on March 29,
          1990), or £uiy successor regulations thereto, is within 50
          miles of the principal headend of the cable system; or

               "(B) whose Grade B service contour, as defined in
          section 73.683(a) of such title (as in effect on March 29,
          1990), or any successor regulations thereto, encompasses
          the principal headend of the cable system.".
106 STAT. 1482  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

Regulations.  SEC. 6. RETRANSMISSION CONSENT FOR CABLE SYSTEMS.

                   Section 325 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
              325) is amended--

                         (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections
                   (c) and (d), respectively; and

                         (2) by inserting immediately after subsection (a) the fol-
                   lowing new subsection:
                   "(b)(1) Following the date that is one yesir after the date of
              enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Com-
              petition Act of 1992, no cable system or other multichannel video
              programming distributor shall retransmit the signal of a broadcast-
              ing station, or any part thereof, except--

                         "(A) with the express authority of the originating station;
                   or

                         "(B) pursuant to section 614, in the case of a station elect-
                   ing, in accordance with this subsection, to assert the right
                   to carriage under such section.
                   "(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to--

                         "(A) retransmission of the signal of a noncommercial broad-
                   casting station;

                         "(B) retransmission directly to a home sateUite antenna
                   of the signal of a broadcasting station that is not owned or
                   operated by, or affiliated with, a broadcasting network, if such
                   signal was retransmitted by a satellite carrier on May 1, 1991;

                         "(C) retransmission of the signal of a broadcasting station
                   that is owned or operated by, or affiUated with, a broadcasting
                   network directly to a home satellite antenna, if the household
                   receiving the signal is an unserved household; or

                         "(D) retransmission by a cable operator or other multi-
                   channel video programming distributor of the signal of a
                   superstation if such signal was obtained from a satellite carrier
                   and the originating station was a superstation on May 1, 1991.
              For purposes of this paragraph, the terms 'satellite carrier',
              'superstation', and 'unserved household' have the meanings given
              those terms, respectively, in section 119(d) of title 17, United States
              Code, as in effect on the date of enactment of the Cable Television
              Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
                   "(3)(A) Within 45 days after the date of enactment of the

              Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
              the Commission shaU commence a rulemaking proceeding to estab-
              lish regulations to govern the exercise by television broadcast sta-
              tions of the right to grant retransmission consent under this sub-
              section and of the right to signal carriage under section 614, and
              such other regulations as are necessary to administer the limita-
              tions contained in paragraph (2). The Commission shall consider
              in such proceeding the impact that the grant of retransmission
              consent by television stations may have on the rates for the basic
              service tier and shall ensure that the regulations prescribed imder
              this subsection do not conflict with the Commission's obligation
              under section 623(b)(1) to ensure that the rates for the basic service
              tier are reasonable. Such rulemaking proceeding shall be completed
              within 180 days after the date of enactment of the Cable Television
              Consumer Protection £ind Competition Act of 1992.

                   "(B) The regulations required by subparagraph (A) shall require
              that television stations, within one year after the date of enactment
              of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
              of 1992 £uid every three years thereafter, make an election between
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1483

the right to grsmt retransmission consent under this subsection
and the right to signal carriage under section 614. If there is
more than one cable system which services the same geographic
area, a station's election shall apply to all such cable systems.

     "(4) If an originating television station elects imder paragraph
(3XB) to exercise its right to grant retransmission consent under
this subsection with respect to a cable system, the provisions of
section 614 shall not apply to the carriage of the signal of such
station by such cable system.

     "(5) The exercise by a television broadcast station of the right
to grant retransmission consent under this subsection shall not
interfere with or supersede the rights under section 614 or 615
of any station electing to assert the right to signal carriage under
that section.

     "(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as modifying
the compulsory cop3ndght license established in section 111 of title
17, United States Code, or as affecting existing or future video
programming licensing agreements between broadcasting stations
and video progrsimmers.".

SEC. 7. AWARD OF FRANCHISES; PROMOTION OF COMPETITION.

      (a) ADDITIONAL COMPETITIVE FRANCHISES.--

          (1) AMENDMENT.--Section 621(a)(1) of the Commimications
     Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 541(a)(1)) is amended by inserting before
     the period at the end the following: "; except that a franchising
     authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not
     unreasonably reftise to awsird an additional competitive fran-
     chise. Any applicant whose apphcation for a second franchise
     has been denied by a final decision of the franchising authority
     may appeal such final decision pursuant to the provisions of
     section 635 for failure to comply with this subsection".

          (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Section 635(a) of the Com-
     munications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 555(a)) is amended by
     inserting "621(a)(1)," after "section".
     (b) FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.--Section 621(a) of the Commu-
nications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 541(a)) is amended by adding
at the end the following new paragraph:
     "(4) In awarding a franchise, thefrginchisingauthority--

          "(A) shall allow the applicant's cable system a reasonable
     period of time to become capable of providing cable service
     to all households in the franchise area;

          "(B) may require adequate assurance that the cable opera-
     tor will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental
     access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support; and

          "(C) may require adequate assurance that the cable opera-
     tor has the financial, technical, or legal qualifications to provide
     cable service.".

      (c) MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES PERMITTED TO OPERATE SYS-

TEMS.--Section 621 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
541) is amended--

          (1) by inserting "and subsection (f)" before the comma in
     subsection (b)(1); and

          (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
     "(f) No provision of this Act shall be construed to--

          "(1) prohibit a local or municipal authority that is also,
     or is affiliated with, a franchising authority from operating
     as a multichannel video programming distributor in the fran-
106 STAT. 1484  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

     chise area, notwithstanding the granting of one or more fran-
     chises by such franchising authority; or

          "(2) require such local or municipal authority to secure
     a franchise to operate as a multichannel video programming
     distributor.".

SEC. 8. CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE.

     Section 632 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
552) is amended to read as follows:

''SEC. 632. CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE.

     "(a) FRANCHISING AUTHORITY ENFORCEMENT.--A franchising
authority may establish and enforce--

          "(1) customer service requirements of the cable operator;
     and

          "(2) construction schedules and other construction-related
     requirements, including construction-related performance
     requirements, of the cable operator.
     "(b) COMMISSION STANDARDS.--The Commission shall, within
180 days of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992, estabUsh standards by which cable
operators may fulfill their customer service requirements. Such
standgirds shall include, at a minimum, requirements governing--

          "(1) cable system office hours and telephone availability;
          "(2) installations, outages, and service calls; and
          "(3) communications between the cable operator and the
     subscriber (including standards governing bills and refunds).

      "(c) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
AGREEMENTS.--

          "(1) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS.--Nothing in this title
     shall be construed to prohibit any State or any franchising
     authority from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection
     law, to the extent not specifically preempted by this title.

            "(2) CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENT AGREEMENTS.--Noth-

     ing in this section shall be construed to preclude a franchising
     authority and a cable operator from agreeing to customer serv-
     ice requirements that exceed the standards established by the
     Commission under subsection (b). Nothing in this title shall
     be construed to prevent the establishment or enforcement of
     any municipal law or regulation, or any State law, concerning
     customer service that imposes customer service requirements
     that exceed the standards set by the Commission under this
     section, or that addresses matters not addressed by the stand-
     ards set by the Commission under this section.".

SEC. 9. LEASED COMMERCIAL ACCESS.

     (a) PURPOSE.--Section 612(a) of the Communications Act of
1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(a)) is amended by inserting "to promote com-
petition in the delivery of diverse sources of video programming
and" after "purpose of this section is".

      (b) COMMISSION RULES ON MAXIMUM REASONABLE RATES AND

OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS.--Section 612(c) of such Act (47
U.S.C. 532(c)) is amended--

          (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting "and with rules prescribed
     by the Commission under paragraph (4)" after "purpose of
     this section"; and

          (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
     "(4)(A) The Commission shall have the authority to--
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1485

          "(i) determine the maximum reasonable rates that a cable       Regulations.
     operator may establish pursuant to p£u*agraph (1) for commer-
     cial use of designated channel capacity, including the rate
     charged for the billing of rates to subscribers and for the
     collection of revenue from subscribers by the cable operator
     for such use;

          "(ii) establish reasonable terms and conditions for such
     use, including those for billing and collection; and

          "(iii) estabUsh procedures for the expedited resolution of
     disputes concerning rates or carriage imder this section.
     "(B) Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this para-
graph, the Commission shall estabUsh rules for determining maxi-
mum reasonable rates imder subparagraph (A)(i), for establishing
terms and conditions under subparagraph (AXii), and for providing
procedures under subparagraph (AXiii).".

      (c) ACCESS FOR QUALITY MINORITY PROGRAMMING SOURCES AND

QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMING SOURCES.--Section 612 of

such Act (47 U.S.C. 532) is amended by adding at the end thereof
the following new subsection:

     "(i)(l) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and
(c), a cable operator required by this section to designate channel
capacity for commercial use may use any such channel capacity
for the provision of programming from a qualified minority program-
ming source or from any qualified educational programming source,
whether or not such source is £iftiUated with the cable operator.
The channel capacity used to provide programming from a qualified
minority programming source or from any qualified educational
programming source pursuant to this subsection may not exceed
33 percent of the channel capacity designated pursuant to this
section. No programming provided over a cable system on July
1, 1990, may qualify as minority programming or educational pro-
gramming on that cable system under this subsection.

     "(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term 'qualified minority
programming source' means a programming source which devotes
substantially all of its programming to coverage of minority view-
points, or to programming directed at members of minority groups,
and which is over 50 percent minority-owned, as the term 'minority
is defined in section 309(i)(3)(C)(ii).

     "(3) For purposes of this subsection, the term 'qualified edu-
cational programming source' means a programming source which
devotes substantially sdl of its programming to educationed or
instructional programming that promotes pubUc understanding of
mathematics, the sciences, the humanities, and the arts and has
a dociunented annual expenditure on programming exceeding
$15,000,000. The annual expenditure on programming means all
annual costs incurred by the programming source to produce or
acquire programs which are scheduled to be televised, and specifi-
cally excludes marketing, promotion, satelUte transmission and
operational costs, and general administrative costs.

     "(4) Nothing in this subsection shall substitute for the require-
ments to carry qualified noncommercial educational television sta-
tions as specified imder section 615..".

     (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Paragraph (5) of section 612(b)
of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(b)) is amended
to read as follows:
106 STAT. 1486    PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

Regulations.           "(5) For the purposes of this section, the term 'commercial
47 use 531 note,  use' means the provision of video programming, whether or not
                  for profit.".

                  SEC. 10. CHILDREN^ PROTECTION FROM INDECENT PROGRAMMING
                                    ON LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS.

                       (a) AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.--Section 612(h) of the Communica-
                  tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(h)) is amended--

                            (1) by inserting "or the cable operator" after "fi-anchising
                       authority'; and

                            (2) bv adding at the end thereof the following: 'This sub-
                       section snedl permit a cable operator to enforce prospectively
                       a written and published policy of prohibiting programming
                       that the cable operator reasonably beueves descrioes or depicts
                       sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive
                       manner as measured by contemporary community standards.".
                       (b) COMMISSION REGULATIONS.--Section 612 of the Communica-
                  tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532) is amended by inserting after
                  subsection (i) (as added by section 9(c) of this Act) the foUowing
                  new subsection:
                       "(jXl) Within 120 days following the date of the enactment
                  of this subsection, the Commission shall promulgate regulations
                  designed to limit the access of children to indecent programming,
                  as defined by Commission regulations, and which cable operators
                  have not voluntarily^ prohibited under subsection (h) by--

                            "(A) requiring cable operators to place on a single channel
                       all indecent programs, as identified by program providers,
                       intended for carriage on channels designated for commercial
                       use under this section;

                            "(B) requiring cable operators to block such single channel
                       unless the subscriber requests access to such channel in writing;
                       and

                            "(C) requiring programmers to inform cable operators if
                       the program would be indecent as defined by Commission regu-
                       lations.
                       "(2) Cable operators shall comply with the regulations promul-
                  gated pursuant to paragraph (1).".
                       (c) PROHIBITS SYSTEM USE.--Within 180 days following the
                  date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Commimications
                  Commission shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary
                  to enable a cable operator of a cable system to prohibit the use,
                  on such system, of any channel capacity of any ptuDlic, educational,
                  or governmental access facility for any programming which contains
                  obscene material, sexually expUcit conduct, or material soliciting
                  or promoting unlawfiil conduct.
                       (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Section 638 of the Communica-
                  tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 558) is amended by striking the
                  period at the end and inserting the following: "unless the program
                  mvolves obscene material.".

                  SEC. 11. LIMITATIONS ON OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, AND UTILIZATION.

                       (a) CROSS-OWNERSHIP.--Section 613(a) of the Communications
                  Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 533(a)) is amended--

                            (1) by inserting "(1)" immediately after "(a)"; and
                            (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
                       "(2) It shall be unlawfiil for a cable operator to hold a hcense
                  for multichannel multipoint distribution service, or to offer satellite
                  master antenna television service separate and apart fi*om any
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1487

franchised cable service, in any portion of the franchise area served
by that cable operator's cable system. The Commission--

          "(A) shall waive the requirements of this paragraph for
     all existing multichannel multipoint distribution services £ind
     satelUte master antenna television services which are owned
     by a cable operator on the date of enactment of this paragraph;
     and

          "(B) may waive the requirements of this peiragraph to
     the extent the Commission determines is necessary to ensure
     that all significant portions of a franchise area are able to
     obtain video programming.".

      (b) CLARIFICATION OF LOCAL AUTHORITY TO REGULATE OWNER-

SHIP.--Section 613(d) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
533(d)) is amended--

          (1) by stnking "any media" and inserting "any other media";
     and

          (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: "Nothing
     in this section shall be construed to prevent any State or
     franchising authority from prohibiting the ownership or control
     of a cable system in a jiuisdiction by any person (1) because
     of such person's ownership or control of any other cable system
     in such jurisdiction; or (2) in circumstances in which the State
     or franchising authority determines that the acquisition of such
     a cable system may eliminate or reduce competition in the
     delivery of cable service in such jurisdiction.".
     (c) COMMISSION REGULATIONS.--Section 613 of the Communica-
tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 533) is amended--

          (1) by redesignating subsections (f) and (g) as subsections
     (g) and (h), respectively; and

          (2) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new sub-
     section:
     "(f)(1) In order to enhance effective competition, the Commission
shall, within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, con-
duct a proceeding--

          "(A) to prescribe rules and regulations estabhshing reason-
     able limits on the number of cable subscribers a person is
     authorized to reach through cable systems owned by such per-
     son, or in which such person has an attributable interest;

          "(B) to prescribe rules and regulations establishing reason-
     able limits on the number of channels on a cable system that
     can be occupied by a video programmer in which a cable opera-
     tor has an attributable interest; and

          "(C) to consider the necessity and appropriateness of impos-
     ing limitations on the degree to which multichannel video pro-
     gramming distributors may engage in the creation or production
     of video programming.
     "(2) In prescribing rules and regulations under paragraph (1),
the Commission shall, among other public interest objectives--

          "(A) ensure that no cable operator or group of cable opera-
     tors can unfairly impede, either because of the size of any
     individual operator or because of joint actions by a group of
     operators of sufficient size, the flow of video programming
     from the video programmer to the consumer;

          "(B) ensure that cable operators affiliated with video pro-
     grammers do not favor such programmers in determining car-
     riage on their cable systems or do not unreasonably restrict
106 STAT. 1488  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992

47 u s e 536.       tihe flow of the video programming of such programmers to
                    other video distributors;

                         "(C) take particular account of the market structure, owner-
                    ship patterns, and other relationships of the cable television
                    industry, including the nature and market power of the local
                    franchise, the joint ownership of cable systems and video pro-
                    grammers, and the various types of non-equity controlling
                    interests;

                         ''(D) account for any efficiencies and other benefits that
                    might be gained through increased ownership or control;

                         "(E) make such rules and regulations reflect the dynamic
                    nature of the communications marketplace;

                         "(F) not impose limitations which would bar cable operators
                    fi*om serving previously unserved rural areas; and

                         ''(G) not impose limitations which would impsur the develop-
                    ment of diverse and high qucdity video programming.".

               SEC. 12. REGULATION OF CARRIAGE AGREEMENTS.

                    Part II of title VI ofthe Communications Act of 1934 is amended
               by inserting after section 615 (as added by section 5 of this Act)
               the following new section:

               «SEC. 616. REGULATION OF CARRIAGE AGREEMENTS.

                    **(a) REGULATIONS.--^Within one year after the date of enactment
               of this section, the Commission shall estabhsh regulations governing
               program carriage agreements and related practices between cable
               operators or other multichannel video programming distributors
               and video programming vendors. Such regulations shs^--

                         "(1) include provisions designed to prevent a cable operator
                    or otiier multichannel video programming distributor from
                    requiring a financial interest in a program service as a condition
                    for carriage on one or more of such operator's systems;

                         "(2) include provisions designed to prohibit a cable operator
                    or other multichannel video programming distributor fi*om
                    coercing a video programming vendor to provide, and from
                    retaUating against such a vendor for failing to provide, exclusive
                    rights against other multichannel video programming distribu-
                    tors £is a condition of carriage on a system;

                         "(3) contain provisions designed to prevent a multichannel
                    video programming distributor from engaging in conduct the
                    effect of which is to unreasonably restrain tiie ability of an
                    unciffiUated video programming vendor to compete fairly by
                    discriminating in video programming distribution on the basis
                    of affOiation or nonafiiUation of vendors ui the selection, terms,
                    or conditions for carriage of video programming provided by
                    such vendors;

                         "(4) provide for expedited review of any complaints made
                    by a video progrsimming vendor pursuant to this section;

                         **(5) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for
                    violations of this subsection, including carriage; and

                         "(6) provide penalties to be assessed against any person
                    filuig a fnvolous complaint pursuant to this section.
                    "(b) DEFINITION.--^As used in this section, the term Video pro-
               gramming vendor* means a person engaged in the production, cre-
               ation, or wholesale distribution of video programming for sale.".
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5,1992  106 STAT. 1489

SEC. 13. SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS.

     Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is further
amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:

·«EC. 617. SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS.                                     47 USC 537.

     "(a) 3-YEAR HOLDING PERIOD REQUIRED.--Except as provided
in this section, no cable operator may sell or otherwise transfer
ownership in a cable system within a 36-month period following
either the acquisition or initial construction of such system by
such operator.

     "(b) TREATMENT OF MULTIPLE TRANSFERS.--In the case of a
sale of multiple systems, if the terms of the sale require the buyer
to subsequently transfer ownership of one or more such systems
to one or more third parties, such transfers shall be considered
a part of the initial transaction.

     "(c) EXCEPTIONS.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to--
          "(1) any transfer of ownership interest m any cable system

     which is not subject to Federal income tax UabiUiy;
          "(2) any sale required by operation of any law or any

     act of any Federal agency, any State or political subdivision
     thereof, or any franchising authority; or

          "(3) any sale, assignment, or transfer, to one or more pur-
     chasers, assignees, or transferees controlled by, controUing, or
     under common control with, the seller, assignor, or transferor.
     "(d) WAIVER AUTHORITY.--^The Commission may, consistent
with the pubUc interest, waive the requirement of subsection (a),
except that, if the franchise requires franchise authority approval
of a transfer, the Commission shall not waive such requirements
imless the franchise authority has approved the transfer. The Com-
mission shall use its authority under this subsection to permit
appropriate transfers in the cases of default, foreclosure, or other
financial distress.

      "(e) LIMITATION ON DURATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY

POWER TO DISAPPROVE TRANSFERS.--In the case of any sale or
transfer of ownership of any cable system after the 36-month period
following acquisition of such system, a franchising authority shall,
if the francnise requires franchising authority approval of a sale
or transfer, have 120 dajrs to act upon any request for approval
of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such
information as is required ia accordance with Commission regula-
tions and by the franchising authority. If the franchising authority
fails to render a final decision on the request within 120 days,
such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party
and the franchising authority agree to an extension of time.".

SEC. 14. SUBSCRIBER BILL ITEMIZATION.

     Section 622(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
542(c)) is amended to read as follows:

     "(c) Each cable operator may identify, consistent with the regu-
lations prescribed by the Commission pursuant to section 623,
as a separate line item on each regular bill of each subscriber,
each of me following:

          "(1) The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise
     fee and the identity of the franchising authority to which the
     fee is paid.

          "(2) The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any
     requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise

59-194 O--93 20:QL3(Pt. 2)
106 STAT. 1490  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

Regulations.       agreement to support public, educational, or govemment£il
                   channels or the use of such channels.

                        "(3) The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge
                   of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the
                   transaction between the operator and the subscriber.".

              SEC. 15. NOTICE TO CABLE SUBSCRIBERS ON UNSOUCITED SEXUALLY
                                EXPUCIT PROGRAMS.

                   Section 624(d) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
              544(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new p£ira-
              graph:

                   "(3)(A) If a cable operator provides a premium channel without
              charge to cable subscribers who do not subscribe to such premium
              channel, the cable operator shall, not later than 30 days before
              such premium channel is provided without charge--

                        "(i) notify all cable subscribers that the cable operator
                   plans to provide a premium channel without charge;

                        "(ii) notify all cable subscribers when tiie cable operator
                   pl£ins to offer a premium channel without charge;

                        "(iii) notify all cable subscribers that they have a right
                   to request that the channel canying the premium channel
                   be blocked; and

                        "(iv) block the channel canying the premium channel upon
                   the request of a subscriber.
                   "(B) For the purpose of this section, the term 'premium channel'
              shall mean any pay service offered on a per channel or per program
              basis, which offers movies rated by the Motion Picture Association
              of America as X, NC-17, or R.".

              SEC. 16. TECHNICAL STANDARDS; EMERGENCY ANNOUNCEMENTS;
                                PROGRAMMING CHANGES; HOME WIRING.

                   (a) TECHNICAL STANDARDS.--Section 624(e) of the Commxmica-
              tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(e)) is amended to read as follows:

                   "(e) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable
              Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the
              Commission shaU prescribe regulations which estabUsh minimum
              technical standards relating to cable systems' technical operation
              and signsil quality. The Commission shall update such standards
              periodically to reflect improvements in technology. A franchising
              authority may require as part of a franchise (including a modifica-
              tion, renewal, or transfer thereof) provisions for the enforcement
              of the standards prescribed imder this subsection. A franchising
              authority may apply to the Commission for a waiver to impose
              standards that are more stringent than the standards prescribed
              by the Commission under this subsection.".

                   (b) EMERGENCY ANNOUNCEMENTS.--Section 624 of such Act (47
              U.S.C. 544) is amended by adding at the end the following new
              subsection:

                   "(g) Notwithstanding any such rule, regulation, or order, each
              cable operator shall comply with such standards as the Commission
              shall prescribe to ensure that viewers of video programming on
              cable systems are afforded the same emergency ii5brmation as
              is afforded by the emergency broadcasting system pursuant to Com-
              mission regulations in subpart G of part 73, title 47, Code of
              Federal Regulations.".

                   (c) PROGRAMMING CHANGES.--Section 624 of such Act (47 U.S.C.
              544) is fruther amended--
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1491

          (1) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ", except as provided  Regulations,
     in subsection (h)," after *it)ut may not"; and
                                                                        47 USC 544a.
          (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
     "(h) A franchising authority may require a cable operator to
do any one or more of the following:

          "(1) Provide 30 days' advance written notice of any change
     in channel assignment or in the video programming service
     provided over any such channel.

          "(2) Inform subscribers, via written notice, that comments
     on programming and channel position changes are being
     recorded by a designated office of the franchising authority.'.
     (d) HOME WIRING.--Section 624 of such Act (47 U.S.C. 544)
is further amended by adding at the end the following new sub-
section:
     "(i) Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this sub-
section, the Commission shall prescribe rules concerning the dis-
position, after a subscriber to a cable system terminates service,
of any cable installed by the cable operator within the premises
of such subscriber.".

SEC. 17. CONSUMER ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT COMPATIBILnY.

     The Commimications Act of 1934 is amended by adding after
section 624 (47 U.S.C. 544) the following new section:

"SEC. 624A. CONSUMER ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT COMPATIBILITY.

     "(a) FINDINGS.--The Congress finds t h a l ^
          "(1) new and recent models of television receivers and

     video cassette recorders ofben contain premimn features and
     functions that are disabled or inhibited because of cable scram-
     bling, encoding, or encryption technologies £ind devices, includ-
     ing converter boxes and remote control devices required by
     cable operators to receive programming;

          "(2) if these problems are allowed to persist, consumers
     will be less likely to purchase, and electronics equipment manu-
     facturers will be less likely to develop, manufacture, or offer
     for sale, television receivers and video cassette recorders with
     new and innovative features and functions; and

          "(3) cable operators should use technologies that will pre-
     vent signal thefts while permitting consumers to benefit from
     such features and functions in such receivers and recorders.

      "(b) COMPATIBLE INTERFACES.--

          "(1) REPORT; REGULATIONS.--Within 1 year after the date
     of enactment of this section, the Commission, in consultation
     with representatives of the cable industry and the consiuner
     electromcs industry, shall report to Congress on means of assur-
     ing compatibiHty between televisions and video cassette record-
     ers and cable systems, consistent with the need to prevent
     theft of cable service, so that cable subscribers will be able
     to enjoy the full benefit of both the programming available
     on cable systems and the functions available on their televisions
     and video cassette recorders. Within 180 days after the date
     of submission of the report required by this subsection, the
     Commission shall issue such regulations as are necessary to
     assure such compatibility.

          "(2) SCRAMBLING AND ENCRYPTION.--In issuing the regula-
     tions referred to in paragraph (1), the Commission shall deter-
     mine whether and, if so, under what circumstances to permit
     cable systems to scramble or encrypt signals or to restrict
106 STAT. 1492  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                cable systems in the manner in which they encrypt or scramble
                signals, except that the Commission shall not limit the use
                of scrambling or encryption technology where the use of such
                technology does not interfere with the functions of subscribers'
                television receivers or video cassette recorders,

                "(c) RULEMAKING REQUIREMENTS.--

                     "(1) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.--In prescribing the regu-
                lations required by this section, the Commission shall
                consider--

                          "(A) the costs and benefits to consumers of imposing
                     compatibility requirements on cable operators and tele-
                     vision manufacturers in a manner that, while providing
                     effective protection against theft or unauthorized reception
                     of cable service, will minimize interference with or nul-
                     lification of the special fimctions of subscribers' television
                     receivers or video cassette recorders, including functions
                     that permit the subscriber--

                               "(i) to watch a program on one channel while
                          simultaneously using a video cassette recorder to tape
                          a program on another channel;

                               "(ii) to use a video cassette recorder to tape two
                          consecutive programs that appear on different chan-
                          nels; and

                               "(iii) to use advanced television picture generation
                          and display features; and
                          "(B) the need for cable operators to protect the integrity
                     of the signals transmitted by the cable operator against
                     theft or to protect such signals against imauthorized recep-
                     tion.
                     "(2) REGULATIONS REQUIRED.--The regulations prescribed
                by the Commission under this section shall include such regula-
                tions as are necessary--
                          *XA) to specify the technical requirements with which
                     a television receiver or video cassette recorder must comply
                     in order to be sold as 'cable compatible' or 'cable ready*;
                          "(B) to require cable operators offering channels whose
                     reception requires a converter box--

                               "(i) to notify subscribers that they may be unable
                          to benefit fi'om the special fimctions of their television
                          receivers and video cassette recorders, including fimc-
                          tions that permit subscribers--

                                     "(I) to watch a program on one channel while
                               simultaneously using a video cassette recorder to
                               tape a program on another channel;

                                     "(II) to use a video cassette recorder to tape
                               two consecutive programs that appear on different
                                channels; £md

                                     "(III) to use advanced television picture gen-
                                eration and display features; and
                               "(ii) to the extent technically and economically fea-
                          sible, to offer subscribers the option of having all other
                          channels delivered directly to the subscribers* tele-
                          vision receivers or video cassette recorders without
                          passing through the converter box;
                          "(C) to promote the commercial availabiUty,fi-omcable
                     operators and retail vendors that are not affiliated with
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--CKJT. 5,1992  106 STAT. 1493

          cable systems, of converter boxes and of remote control
          devices compatible with converter boxes;

               "(D) to require a cable operator who offers subscribers
          the option of renting a remote control unit--

                    "(i) to notify subscribers that they may purchase
               a commercially available remote control device from
               any soiirce that sells such devices rather than renting
               it from the cable operator; and

                    "(ii) to specify the t3T)es of remote control units
               that are compatible with the converter box suppKed
               by the cable operator; and
               "(E) to prohibit a cable operator from taking any action
          that prevents or in any way disables the converter box
          supplied by the cable operator from operating compatibly
          with commercially available remote control units.
     "(d) REVIEW OF REGULATIONS.--The Commission shall periodi-
cally review and, if necessary, modify the regulations issued pursu-
ant to this section in hght of any actions taken in response to
such regulations and to reflect improvements and changes in cable
systems, television receivers, video cassette recorders, and similar
technology.".

SEC. 18. FRANCHISE RENEWAL.

     (a) COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.--Section 626(a) of the
Commimications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(a)) is amended to
read as follows:

     "SEC. 626. (a)(1) A franchising authority may, on its own ini-
tiative during the 6-month period which begins with the 36th month
before the franchise expiration, commence a proceeding which
affords the public in the franchise area appropriate notice and
participation for the purpose of (A) identifying the future cable-
related community needs and interests, and (B) reviewing the per-
formsuice of the cable operator under the franchise during the
then current frguichise term. If the cable operator submits, during
such 6-month period, a written renewal notice requesting the com-
mencement of such a proceeding, the franchising authority shall
commence such a proceeding not later than 6 months after the
date such notice is submitted.

     "(2) The cable operator may not invoke the renewal procedures
set forth in subsections (b) through (g) unless--

          "(A) such a proceeding is requested by the cable operator
     by timely submission of such notice; or

          "(B) such a proceeding is commenced by the franchising
     authority on its own initiative.".
     (b) PROCEEDING ON RENEWAL PROPOSAL.--Section 626(c)(1) of
the Commimications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)) is amended--

          (1) by inserting "pursuant to subsection (b)" after "renewal
     of a franchise"; and

          (2) by striking "completion of any proceedings under sub-
     section (a)" and inserting the following: "date of the submission
     of the cable operator's proposal pursuant to subsection (b)".
     (c) REVIEW CRITERIA.--Section 626(c)(1)(B) of the Commimica-
tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)(B)) is amended by striking
"mix, quality, or level" and inserting "mix or quality".
     (d) CORRECTION OF FAILURES.--Section 626(d) of the Commu-
nications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(d)) is amended--
106 STAT. 1494  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

47 u s e 548.            (1) by inserting "that has been submitted in comphance
                    with subsection (b)" after "Any denial of a proposal for renew^";
                    and

                         (2) by striking "or has effectively acquiesced" and inserting
                    "or the cable operator gives written notice of a failure or inabil-
                    ity to cure and the franchising authority fails to object within
                    a reasonable time after receipt of such notice".
                    (e) HARMLESS ERROR.-- Section 626(e)(2)(A) of the Communica-
               tions Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(e)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting
               after "franchising authority" the following: ", other than harmless
               error,".

                     (f) CONFLICT BETWEEN REVOCATION AND RENEWAL PROCEED-

               INGS.--Section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
               546) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:

                    "(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through
               (h), £iny lawful action to revoke a cable operator's franchise for
               cause shall not be negated by the subsequent initiation of renewal
               proceedings by the cable operator imder this section.".

               SEC. 19. DEVELOPMENT OF COMPETITION AND DIVERSITY IN VIDEO
                                 PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTION.

                    Part III of title VI of the Commimications Act of 1934 is
               amended by inserting after section 627 (47 U.S.C. 547) the following
               new section:

               '^EC. 628. DEVELOPMENT OF COMPETITION AND DIVERSITY IN VIDEO
                                 PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTION.

                    "(a) PURPOSE.--^The purpose of this section is to promote the
               pubUc interest, convenience, and necessity by increasing competition
               and diversity in the multichannel video programming market, to
               increase the availability of satellite cable programming and satellite
               broadcast programming to persons in rural and other areas not
               currently able to receive such programming, and to spur the devel-
               opment of communications tecmiologies.

                    "(b) PROHIBITION.--It shall be imlawful for a cable operator,
               a satellite cable programming vendor in which a cable operator
               has an attributable interest, or a satellite broadcast programming
               vendor to engage in unfsdr methods of competition or unfair or
               deceptive acts or practices, the purpose or effect of which is to
               hinder significantly or to prevent any multichannel video program-
               ming distributor from providing satelUte cable programming or
               satellite broadcast programming to subscribers or consumers.

                     "(c) REGULATIONS REQUIRED.--

                         "(1) PROCEEDING REQUIRED.--Within 180 dajrs after the
                    date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall, in
                    order to promote the public interest, convenience, £uid necessity
                    by increasing competition and diversity in the multichannel
                    video programming market and the continuing development
                    of communications technologies, prescribe regulations to specify
                    particular conduct that is prohibited by subsection (b).

                         "(2) MINIMUM CONTENTS OF REGULATIONS.--The regulations
                    to be promulgated under this section shall--

                              "(A) establish effective safeguards to prevent a cable
                         operator which has an attributable interest in a satellite
                         cable programming vendor or a satellite broadcast program-
                         ming vendor from unduly or improperly influencing the
                         decision of such vendor to sell, or the prices, terms, and
                         conditions of sale of, satelUte cable programming or satellite
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1495

broadcast programming to any unaffiliated multichannel
video programming distributor;

     "(B) prohibit discrimination by a satellite cable pro-
gramming vendor in which a cable operator has an attrib-
utable interest or by a satellite broadcast programming
vendor in the prices, terms, and conditions of sale or deliv-
ery of satellite cable programming or satellite broadcast
programming among or between cable systems, cable opera-
tors, or other multichannel video programming distributors,
or their agents or bujdng groups; except that such a sat-
ellite cable programming vendor in which a cable operator
has an attributable interest or such a satellite broadcast
programming vendor shall not be prohibited from--

           "(i) imposing reasonable requirements for credit-
     worthiness, offering of service, and financial stability
      and standards regarding character and technical qual-
     ity;

           "(ii) establishing different prices, terms, and condi-
     tions to take into account actual and reasonable dif-
      ferences in the cost of creation, sale, delivery, or trans-
      mission of satellite cable programming or satellite
      broadcast programming;

           "(iii) establishing different prices, terms, and condi-
      tions which take into account economies of scale, cost
      savings, or other direct and legitimate economic bene-
      fits reasonably attributable to the number of subscrib-
      ers served by the distributor; or

           "(iv) entering into an exclusive contract that is
      permitted under subparagraph (D);
      "(C) prohibit practices, understandings, arrangements,
and activities, including exclusive contracts for satellite
cable programming or satellite broadcast programming
between a cable operator and a satellite cable programming
vendor or satellite broadcast programming vendor, that
prevent a multichannel video programming distributor
from obtaining such programming from any satellite cable
programming vendor in which a cable operator has an
attributable interest or any satellite broadcast program-
ming vendor in which a cable operator has an attributable
interest for distribution to persons in areas not served
by a cable operator as of the date of enactment of this
section; and

      "(D) with respect to distribution to persons in areas
served by a cable operator, prohibit exclusive contracts
for satellite cable programming or satellite broadcast pro-
gramming between a cable operator and a satellite cable
programming vendor in which a cable operator has an
attributable interest or a satellite broadcast programming
vendor in which a cable operator has an attributable
interest, unless the Commission determines (in accordance
with paragraph (4)) that such contract is in the public
interest.

"(3) LIMITATIONS.--

      "(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS.--Nothing in this section
shall require any person who is engaged in the national
or regional distribution of video programming to make
such programming available in any geographic area beyond
106 STAT. 1496  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

Regulations.             which such programming has been authorized or licensed
                         for distribution.

                                   "(B) APPLICABILITY TO SATELLITE RETRANSMISSIONS.--

                         Nothing in this section shall apply (i) to t h e signal of
                         any broadcast affiliate of a national television network
                         or other television signal that is retransmitted by satellite
                         but that is not satelHte broadcast programming, or (ii)
                         to any internal satellite communication of any broadcast
                         network or cable network that is not satellite broadcast
                         programming.

                           "(4) PUBLIC INTEREST DETERMINATIONS ON EXCLUSIVE CON-

                   TRACTS.--In determining whether an exclusive contract is in
                   the public interest for purposes of paragraph (2)(D), the Com-
                   mission shall consider each of the following factors with respect
                   to the effect of such contract on the distribution of video pro-
                   gramming in areas that are served by a cable operator:

                               "(A) the effect of such exclusive contract on the develop-
                         ment of competition in local and national multichannel
                         video programming distribution markets;

                               "(B) the effect of such exclusive contract on competition
                         from multichannel video programming distribution tech-
                         nologies other than cable;

                               "(C) the effect of such exclusive contract on the attrac-
                         tion of capital investment in the production and distribution
                         of new satellite cable programming;

                               "(D) the effect of such exclusive contract on diversity
                         of programming in the multichannel video programming
                         distribution market; and

                               "(E) the duration of the exclusive contract.
                         "(5) SUNSET PROVISION.--^The prohibition required by para-
                   graph (2)(D) shall cease to be effective 10 years after the
                   date of enactment of this section, xmless the Commission finds,
                   in a proceeding conducted during the last year of such 10-
                   year period, that such prohibition continues to be necessary
                   to preserve and protect competition and diversity in the dis-
                   tribution of video programming.

                   "(d) ADJUDICATORY PROCEEDING.--Any multichannel video pro-
              gramming distributor aggrieved by conduct that it alleges con-
              stitutes a violation of subsection (b), or the regulations of t h e
              Commission xmder subsection (c), may commence an adjudicatory
              proceeding at the Commission.

                     "(e) REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.--

                         "(1) REMEDIES AUTHORIZED.--^Upon completion of such adju-
                   dicatory proceeding, the Commission shall have the power to
                   order appropriate remedies, including, if necessary, the power
                   to establish prices, terms, and conditions of sale of programming
                   to the aggrieved multichannel video programming distributor.

                            "(2) ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.--The remedies provided in

                   paragraph (1) are in addition to and not in lieu of the remedies
                   available under title V or any other provision of this Act.
                   "(f) PROCEDURES.--^The Commission shall prescribe regulations

              to implement this section. TTie Commission's regulations shall--
                         "(1) provide for an expedited review of any complaints

                   made pursuant to this section;
                         "(2) establish procedures for the Commission to collect such

                   data, including the right to obtain copies of all contracts £ind
                   docximents reflecting arrangements and understandings alleged
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--CKTT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1497

     to violate this section, as the Commission requires to carry
     out this section; and

          "(3) provide for penalties to be assessed against any person
     filing a frivolous complaint pursuant to this section.
     **(g) REPORTS.--The Commission shall, beginning not later than
18 months after promulgation of the regulations required by sub-
section (c), annually report to Congress on the status of competition
in the market for the delivery of video programming.

     "(h) EXEMPTIONS FOR PRIOR Co>fTRACTS.--

          "(1) IN GENERAL.--^Nothing in this section shall affect any
     contract tiiat grants exclusive distribution rights to any person
     with respect to satellite cable programming and that was
     entered into on or before June 1, 1990, except that the provi-
     sions of subsection (c)(2)(C) shsdl apply for distribution to per-
     sons in areas not served by a cable operator.

          "(2) LIMITATION ON RENEWALS.--^A contract that was
     entered into on or before June 1, 1990, but that is renewed
     or extended after the date of enactment of this section shall
     not be exempt imder paragraph (1).
     "(i) DEFINITIONS.--^As used in this section:

          "(1) The term 'satelUte cable programming* has the meaning
     provided under section 705 of this Act, except that such term
     does not include satellite broadcast programming.

          "(2) The term 'satellite cable programming vendor' means
     a person engaged in the production, creation, or wholesale
     distribution for sale of satelUte cable programming, but does
     not include a sateUite broadcast programming vendor.

          "(3) The term 'satellite broadcast programming* means
     broadcast video programming when such programming is
     retransmitted by satellite and the entity retransmitting such
     progr£unming is not the broadcaster or an entity performing
     such retransmission on behalf of and Avith the specific consent
     of the broadcaster.

          "(4) The term 'satelUte broadcast programming vendor'
     mesins a fixed service satellite carrier that provides service
     pursuant to section 119 of title 17, United States Code, with
     respect to satelUte broadcast programming.".

SEC. 20. CUSTOMER PRIVACY RIGHTS.

     (a) DEFINITIONS.--Section 631(a)(2) of the Communications Act
of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 551(a)(2)) is amended to read as foUows:

     "(2) For purposes of this section, other than subsection (h)--
          "(A) the term 'personaUy identifiable information' does not

     include any record of aggregate data which does not identify
     particular persons;

          **(B) the term 'other service' includes any wire or radio
     communications service provided using any of the faciUties
     of a cable operator that are used in the provision of cable
     service; and

          "(C) the term 'cable operator* includes, in addition to per-
     sons within the definition of cable operator in section 602,
     any person who (i) is owned or controUed by, or under common
     ownership or control with, a cable operator, and (ii) provides
     any wire or radio communications service.".
     (b) ADDITIONAL ACTIONS REQUIRED.--Section 631(cXl) of the
Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 551(cXl)) is amended by
inserting immediately before tiie period at the end the following:
106 STAT. 1498      PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

47 use 553.         "and shall take such actions as are necessary to prevent unauthor-
                    ized access to such information by a person other tiian the sub-
Minorities.         scriber or cable operator".
Women.
47 u s e 554 note.  SEC. 21. THEFT OF CABLE SERVICE.

Regulations.             Section 633(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
                    533(b)) is amended--

                              (1) in paragraph (2)--
                                   (A) by striking "$25,000" and inserting "$50,000";
                                   (B) by striking "1 year" and inserting 2 years";
                                   (C) by striking "$50,000" and inserting "$100,000"; and
                                   (D) by striking "2 years" and inserting "5 years"; and

                              (2) by adding at me end thereof the following new para-
                         graph:
                         "(3) For purposes of all penalties and remedies established
                    for violations of subsection (a)(1), the prohibited activity established
                    herein as it applies to each such device shall be deemed a separate
                    violation.".

                    SEC. 22. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.

                         (a) FINDINGS.--^The Congress finds and declares that--
                              (1) despite the existence of regulations governing equal

                         emplo5nnent opportxinity, females and minorities are not
                         emplo3red in significant numbers in positions of management
                         authority in the cable and broadcast television industries;

                              (2) increased numbers of females and minorities in posi-
                         tions of management authority in the cable and broadcast tele-
                         vision industries advances the Nation's poHcy favoring diversity
                         in the expression of views in the electronic media; and

                              (3) rigorous enforcement of equal employment opportimity
                         rules and regulations is required in order to effectively deter
                         racial and gender discrimination.
                         (b) STANDARDS.--Section 634(d)(1) of the Communications Act
                    of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 554(d)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
                         "(d)(1) Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment
                    of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
                    of 1992, and after notice and opportunity for hearing, the Commis-
                    sion shall prescribe revisions in the rules under this section in
                    order to implement the amendments made to this section by such
                    Act. Such revisions shall be designed to promote equality of employ-
                    ment opportunities for females and minorities in each of the job
                    categories itemized in paragraph (3).".

                          (c) CONTENTS OF ANNUAL STATISTICAL REPORTS.--Section

                    634(d)(3) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 554(d)(3))
                    is amended to read as follows:

                         "(3)(A) Such rules also shall reqiiire an entity specified in
                    subsection (a) with more than 5 full-time employees to file with
                    the Commission an annual statistical report identifying by race,
                    sex, and job title the number of employees in each of the following
                    full-time and pgirt-time job categories:

                              "(i) Corporate officers.
                              "(ii) Greneral Manager.
                              "(iii) Chief Technician.
                              "(iv) Comptroller.
                              "(v) General Seiles Msinager.
                              "(vi) Production Manager.
                              "(vii) Managers.
                              "(viii) Professionals.
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1499

          "(ix) Technicians.
          "(x) Sales Personnel.
          "(xi) Office and Clerical Personnel.
          "(xii) Skilled Craftspersons.
          "(xiii) Semiskilled Operatives.
          **(xiv) Unskilled Laborers.
          "(xv) Service Workers.
     "(B) The report required by subparagraph (A) shall be made
on separate forms, provided by the Commission, for ftdl-time and
part-time employees. The Commission's rules shall sufficiently
define the job categories listed in clauses (i) through (vi) of such
subparagraph so as to ensure that only employees who are principal
decisionmakers and who have supervisory authority are reported
for such categories. The Commission shall adopt rules that define
the job categories listed in clauses (vii) through (xv) in a manner
that is consistent with the Commission policies in effect on Jime
1, 1990. The Commission shall prescribe the method by which
entities shall be required to compute £ind report the number of
minorities and women in the job categories listed in clauses (i)
through (x) and the number of minorities euid women in the job
categories listed in clauses (i) through (xv) in proportion to the
total number of qualified minorities and women in the relevant
labor market. The report shall include information on hiring, pro-
motion, and recruitment practices necessary for the Commission
to evaluate the efforts of entities to comply with the provisions
of paragraph (2) of this subsection. The report shall be available
for public inspection at the entit^s central location and at every
location where 5 or more full-time employees are regularly assigned
to work. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting
the Commission from collecting or continuing to collect statisticsd
or other emplo3nnent information in a manner that it deems appro-
priate to carry out this section.".

     (d) PENALTIES.--Section 634(f)(2) of such Act (47 U.S.C.
554(f)(2)) is amended by striking "$200" and mserting "$500".

     (e) APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.--Section 634(h)(1) of such
Act (47 U.S.C. 554(h)(1)) is sunended by inserting before the period
the following: "and any multichsmnel video programming distribu-
tor".

      (f) BROADCASTING EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.--Part I

of title III of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by
inserting sifter section 333 (47 U.S.C. 333) the following new section:

"SEC. 334. LIMITATION ON REVISION OF EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPOR-             47 USC 334.
                  TUNTTY REGULATIONS.

     "(a) LIMITATION.--Except as specifically provided in this section,
the Commission shall not revise--

          "(1) the regulations concerning equal emplojnnent oppor-
     timity as in effect on September 1, 1992 (47 C.F.R. 73.2080)
     as such regulations apply to television broadcast station licens-
     ees and permittees; or

          "(2) the forms used by such licensees and permittees to
     report pertinent emplo3maent data to the Commission.
     "(b) MIDTERM REVIEW.--^The Commission shall revise the regu-
lations described in subsection (a) to require a midterm review
of television broadcast station licensees' emplo3nnent practices and
to require the Commission to inform such licensees of necessary
106 STAT. 1500    PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

47 use 544 note.  improvements in recruitment practices identified as a consequence
                  of such review.
47 u s e 555a.
                       *'(c) AUTHORITY T O MAKE TECHNICAL REVISIONS.--The Commis-
                  sion may revise the regulations described in subsection (a) to make
                  nonsubstsuitive technical or clerical revisions in such regulations
                  as necessary to reflect changes in technology, terminology, or Com-
                  mission organization.".

                       (g) STUDY AND REPORT REQUIRED.--Not later than 2 years
                  after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall
                  submit to the Congress a report pursuant to a proceeding to review
                  and obtain public comment on the effect and operation of the
                  amendments made by this section. In conducting such review, the
                  Commission shall consider the effectiveness of its procedures, regu-
                  lations, policies, standards, and guidelines in promoting equality
                  of emplo5maent opportmiity and promotion opportunity, and particu-
                  larly the effectiveness of its procedures, regulations, policies, stand-
                  ards, and guidelines in promoting the congressional policy favoring
                  increased employment opportunity for women and minorities in
                  positions of management authority. The Commission shall forward
                  to the Congress such legislative recommendations to improve equal
                  employment opportimity in the broadcasting and cable industries
                  as it deems necesssiry.

                  SEC. 23. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

                       Section 635 of the Commimications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
                  555) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:

                       "(c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any civil
                  action challenging the constitutionaJity of section 614 or 615 of
                  this Act or any provision thereof shall be heard by a district comt
                  of three judges convened pursuant to the provisions of section
                  2284 of title 28, United States Code.

                       "(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, £in interlocu-
                  tory or final judgment, decree, or order of the court of three judges
                  in an action under paragraph (1) holding section 614 or 615 of
                  this Act or any provision thereof unconstitutional shall be
                  reviewable as a matter of right by direct appeal to the Supreme
                  Court. Any such appeal shall be filed not more thsm 20 days
                  after entry of such judgment, decree, or order.".

                  SEC. 24. LIMITATION ON FRANCHISING AUTHORITY LIABILITY.

                       (a) AMENDMENT.--Part IV of title VI of the Communications
                  Act of 1934 is amended by inserting after section 635 (47 U.S.C.
                  555) the following new section:

                  "SEC. 635A. UMirATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY LIABILITY.

                       "(a) SUITS FOR DAMAGES PROHIBITED.--In any court proceeding
                  pending on or initiated ^ e r the date of enactment of this section
                  involving any claim against a franchising authority or other govern-
                  mental entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of such
                  authority or entity, arising from the regulation of cable service
                  or from a decision of approval or disapproval with respect to a
                  grant, renew^, transfer, or amendment of a franchise, any reUef,
                  to the extent such reUef is required by any other provision of
                  Federal, State, or locsd law, shedl be limited to injimctive relief
                  and declaratory relief.

                        "(b) EXCEPTION FOR COMPLETED CASES.--The Hmitation con-
                  tained in subsection (a) shall not apply to actions that, prior to
                  such violation, have been determined by a final order of a court
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1501

of binding jurisdiction, no longer subject to appeal, to be in violation  47 USC 335.
of a cable operator's rights.

     "(c) DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS PERMITTED.--Nothing in this sec-
tion shall be construed as limiting the relief authorized with respect
to any clsdm against a franchising authority or other governmental
entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of such authority
or entity, to the extent such claim involves discrimination on the
basis of race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, or handicap.

     "(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.--Nothing in this section shall
be construed as creating or authorizing hability of any kind, under
any law, for any action or failure to act relating to cable service
or the granting of a franchise by any franchising authority or
other governmental entity, or any official, member, employee, or
agent of such authority or entity.".

      (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Section 635(b) of the Commu-
nications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 555(b)) is amended by inserting
"and with the provisions of subsection (a)" after "subsection (a) .

SEC. 25. DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE OBUGATIONS.

     (a) AMENDMENT.--Part I of title III of the Communications
Act of 1934 is further amended by inserting after section 334
(as added by section 22(f) of this Act) the following new section:

«SEC. 335. DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.

       "(a) PROCEEDING REQUIRED TO REVIEW DBS RESPONSIBIL-

ITIES.--^The Commission shall, within 180 days after the date of
enactment of this section, initiate a rulemaking proceeding to
impose, on providers of direct broadcast satellite service, pubUc
interest or other requirements for providing video programming.
Any regulations prescribed pursuant to such rulemaking shall, at
a minimum, apply the access to broadcast time requirement of
section 312(a)(7) and the use of facilities requirements of section
315 to providers of direct broadcast satellite service providing video
programming. Such proceeding also shall examine the opportimities
that the establishment of direct broadcast satellite service provides
for the principle of localism imder this Act, and the methods by
which such principle may be served through technological and other
developments in, or regulation of, such service.

       "(b) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS FOR NONCOMMERCIAL, EDU-

CATIONAL, AND INFORMATIONAL PROGRAMMING.--

           "(1) CHANNEL CAPACITY REQUIRED.--The Commission shall
      require, as a condition of any provision, initial authorization,
      or authorization renewal for a provider of direct broadcast
      satellite service providing video programming, that the provider
      of such service reserve a portion of its channel capacity, equal
      to not less th£in 4 percent nor more than 7 percent, exclusively
      for noncommercial programming of an educational or informa-
      tional nature.

              "(2) U S E OF UNUSED CHAJJNEL CAPACITY.--A provider of

      such service may utilize for any purpose any unused channel
      capacity required to be reserved under this subsection pending
      the actual use of such channel capacity for noncommerci^
      programming of an educational or informational nature.

              "(3) PRICES, TERMS, AND CONDITIONS; EDITORIAL CONTROL.--

      A provider of direct broadcast satellite service shall meet the
      requirements of this subsection by making chemnel capacity
      available to national educational programming suppliers, upon
      reasonable prices, terms, and conditions, as determined by the
106 STAT. 1502      PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                         Commission under paragraph (4). The provider of direct broad-
                         cast satellite service shall not exercise any editorial control
                         over any video programming provided pursuant to this sub-
                         section.

                              "(4) LIMITATIONS.--In determining reasonable prices imder
                         paragraph (3)--

                                   "(A) the Commission shall take into account the non-
                              profit character of the programming provider and any Fed-
                              eral fimds used to support such programming;

                                   "(B) the Commission shall not permit such prices to
                              exceed, for any channel made available under this sub-
                              section, 50 percent of the total direct costs of making such
                              channel available; and

                                   "(C) in the calcvdation of total direct costs, the Commis-
                              sion shall exclude--

                                        "(i) marketing costs, general administrative costs,
                                   and similar overhead costs of the provider of direct
                                   broadcast satellite service; and

                                        "(ii) the revenue that such provider might have
                                   obtained by making such channel available to a com-
                                   mercial provider of video programming.
                              "(5) DEFINITIONS.--For purposes of this subsection--
                                   "(A) The term 'provider of direct broadcast satellite
                              service' means--

                                        "(i) a licensee for a Ku-band satellite system under
                                   part 100 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
                                   or

                                        "(ii) any distributor who controls a minimum num-
                                   ber of channels (as specified by Commission regulation)
                                   using a Ku-band fixed service satelUte system for the
                                   provision of video programming directly to the home
                                   and licensed under part 25 of title 47 of the Code
                                   of Federal Regulations.

                                   "(B) The term 'national educational programming sup-
                              plier' includes any qualified noncommercial educational tel-
                              evision station, other public telecommunications entities,
                              and public or private educational institutions.",
                         (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT.--Section 331 of such Act as added
                    by Public Law 97-259 (47 U.S.C. 332) is redesignated as section
                    332.

47 u s e 521 note.  SEC. 26. SPORTS PROGRAMMING MIGRATION STUDY AND REPORT.

                         (a) STUDY REQUIRED.--^The Federal Commxinications Commis-
                    sion shall conduct an ongoing study on the carriage of local, regional,
                    and national sports progrsimming by broadcast stations, cable pro-
                    gramming networks, and pay-per-view services. The study shall
                    investigate and analyze, on a sport-by-sport basis, trends in the
                    migration of such programming from carriage by broadcast stations
                    to carriage over cable programming networks and pay-per-view
                    systems, including the economic causes and the economic and social
                    consequences of such trends.

                         (b) REPORT ON STUDY.--The Federal Communications Commis-
                    sion shall, on or before July 1, 1993, and July 1, 1994, submit
                    an interim and a finsil report, respectively, on the results of the
                    study required by subsection (a) to the Committee on Energy and
                    Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee
                    on Commerce, Science, £ind Transportation of the Senate. Such
PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992  106 STAT. 1503

reports shall include a statement of the results, on a sport-by-                                                        47 USC 521 note.
sport basis, of the analysis of the trends required by subsection                                                       47 USC 325 note.
(a) and such legislative or regulatory recommendations as the Com-
mission considers appropriate.

       (c) ANfALYSis OF PRECLUSIVE CONTRACTS REQUIRED.--

           (1) ANALYSIS REQUIRED.--In conducting the study required
     by subsection (a), the Commission shall analyze the extent
     to which preclusive contracts between college athletic con-
     ferences and video programming vendors have artificially and
     unfairly restricted the supply of the sporting events of local
     colleges for broadcast on local television stations. In conducting
     such analysis, the Commission shall consult with the Attorney
     General to determine whether and to what extent such pre-
     clusive contracts are prohibited by existing statutes. The reports
     required by subsection (b) shall include separate statements
     of the results of the analysis required by this subsection,
     together with such recommendations for legislation as the Com-
     mission considers necessary and appropriate.

           (2) DEFINITION.--For purposes of the subsection, the term
     "preclusive contract" includes any contract that prohibits--

                 (A) the live broadcast by a local television station of
           a sporting event of a local college team that is not carried,
           on a live basis, by any cable system within the local commu-
           nity served by such local television station; or

                 (B) the delayed broadcast by a local television station
           of a sporting event of a local college team that is not
           carried, on a live or delayed basis, by any cable system
           within the local community served by such local television
           station.

SEC. 27. APPLICABILITY OF ANTITRUST LAWS.

      Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act
shall be construed to alter or restrict in any manner the applicability
of any Federal or State antitrust law.

SEC. 28. EFFECTIVE DATE.

      Except where otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of
this Act and the amendments made thereby shall take effect 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act.

                                                                                                      THOMAS S. FOLEY

                                                       Speaker of the House of Representatives.

                                                                                                        ROBERT C. BYRD

                                                             President of the Senate pro tempore.

                         IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES,

                                                October 5 (legislative day, September 30), 1992.

  The Senate having proceeded to reconsider the bill (S. 12) entitled "An Act to £imend
the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer protection and to
promote increased competition in the cable television and related markets, and for
other purposes", returned by the President of the United States with his objections, to
the Senate, in which it originated, it was

  Resolved, That the said bill pass, two-thirds of the Senators present having voted in
the affirmative.

                                                                                                  WALTER J. STEWART

                                                                                               Secretary.
106 STAT. 1504  PUBLIC LAW 102-385--OCT. 5, 1992

                         I certify that this Act originated in the Senate.

                                                                                                  WALTER J. STEWART

                                                                                                  Secretary.

                       IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, U.S.,

                                                                                          October 5, 1992.

  The House of Representatives having proceeded to reconsider the bill (S. 12) entitled
"An Act to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer
protection and to promote increased competition in the cable television and related
markets, and for other purposes", returned by the President of the United States with
his objections, to the Senate, in which it originated, it was

  Resolved, That the said bill pass, two-thirds of the House of Representatives
agreeing to pass the same.

                                                                                  DoNNALD K. ANDERSON
                                                                                                       Clerk.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--S. 12 (H.R. 4850):

HOUSE REPORTS: Nos. 102-628 accompanying H.R. 4850 (Comm. on Energy and
                           Commerce) and 102-862 (Comm. of Conference).

SENATE REPORTS: No. 102-92 (Comm. on Commerce, Science, and Transportation).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 138 (1992):

        Jan. 27, 29-31, considered and passed Senate.
        July 23, H.R. 4850 considered and passed House; S. 12, amended, passed in lieu.
        Sept. 17, House agreed to conference report.
        Sept. 21, 22, Senate considered and agreed to conference report.
WEEKLY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, Vol. 28 (1992):
        Oct. 3, Veto message.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 138 (1992):
        Oct. 5, Senate and House overrode veto.
