93-9017 


No. 93- 


FILED 


——— 19985 


IN THE 


OFFICE OF THE CLERK 


Supreme Court of the Gnited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE KIRYAS JOEL VILLAGE 
SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Petitioner, 
Vv. 


Louis GRUMET and ALBERT W. HAwk, 


Respondents. 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the New York Court of Appeals 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


NATHAN LEWIN 

(Counsel of Record) 

LisA D. BURGET 

MILLER, CassiDy, LARROCA 
& LEWIN 

2555 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 293-6400 


Attorneys for Petitioner 


PRESS OF BYRON S. ADAMS, WASHINGTON, D.C. (202) 347-8203 


(i) 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether a statute that creates a public school 
district in order to educate disabled children, with boundaries 
that are coterminous with a lawfully incorporated 
municipality whose residents all share a common religious 
faith, is unconstitutional on its face, regardless of how it is 
administered, on the ground that such statute has the 
“primary effect" of advancing religion within the meaning of 
Lemon v. Kurtaman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971). 


2. Whether Lemon and the “primary effect" test 
should be overruled and replaced with a standard that permits 
a State to enact legislation addressing the secular needs of a 
community sharing a common religious faith. 


(ii) 
LIST OF PARTIES 


The Board of Education of the Monroe-Woodbury 
Central School District was an appellant below and is filing 
a separate petition for a writ of certiorari. 


The Attorney General of the State of New York 


appeared below in support of appellants and _ the 
constitutionality of Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 pursuant 


to New York Executive Law § 71. The Attorney General is 
also filing a separate petition for a writ of certiorari. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED .........ceeeee. (i) 
DEES Sa geeovcccecccoccees (ii) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .........eeeeee-, (v) 
~~~ Seeeeeecececcecccccccces l 
Ditches ee geen ceecececceccecccs 2 

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED ............00 00s 2 
DUPE EE cc bGGeesceccecccccccecs 3 
1. The Village of Kiryas Joel .............4.. 3 

2. The Dispute Over the Education of Disabled 

Children Living in Kiryas Joel ............ 4 
3. The Enactment of Chapter 748 ............ 5 
4. The Constitutional Challenge ............. 7 
5. The Divided Appellate Division Decision ...... 7 
6. The Divided Court of Appeals Decision ...... 8 


7. This Court’s Stay of the Decision Below ...... 9 


(iv) 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........ 10 
1. The Decision Below Misunderstands the "Primary 
Effect" Prong of Lemon v. Kurtyman ....... 10 
(a) The rationale of the court below ....... 10 


(b) Misapplication of this Court’s decisions ... 10 


(c) Composition of the school board ....... 12 
(d) Accommodation to religious needs ...... 12 
(e) Violation of the Free Exercise Clause .... 14 
2. The Decision Below Conflicts With This 
Court's Decision in Wolman v. Walter ...... 15 
3. This Case Should Be the Vehicle for 
Overruling Lemon v. Kurtygman ........... 16 
GEES Cccoceececessdbetesdetes 17 


(v) 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Page(s) 

CASES: 
Aguilar v. Felton, 473 U.S. 402 (1985) ........ 4, 15 
Board of Education of the Monroe- Woodbury 

Central School District v. Wieder, 

72 N.Y.2d 174, 531 N.Y.S.2d 

PPT Ct ee eheobenacecesecoeseoeéus 5 
Corporation of the Presiding Bishop v. Amos 

Gy ees ED She aedns Gombe cee eee 14 
Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 

DT cheb ebn das 6 Ohh bcos habene se 13, 14 
Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Commission, 

Gy ae PED 6 6 604-60 whb wees cc eene 12 
Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union 

Free School District, 113 S. Ct. 2141 (1993) ..... 16 
Lee v. Weisman, 112 S. Ct. 2649 (1992) ......... 13 
Lemon v. Kurtonan, 403 U.S. 602 (1971) ..... passim 
Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668 (1984) ......... 12 


McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 618 (1978) ......... 14 


(vi) 


School District of Grand Rapids 

v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373 (1985) .......... 10, 11, 15 
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972) ........ 13 
Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977) ....... 5, 15 
Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306 (1952) ......... 12 


STATUTES, REGULATIONS AND RULES: 


Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 .......... passim 
20 U.S.C. §§ 1400(c), 1401(a)(18), 1412 ......... a 
Bp Ge OT ccc cc cbc ec tere etcecesses 2 
New York Education Law § 4401 ef seq. .......... 4 
DS OPeee POPE, ccccciccccetocecccess 4 


OTHER AUTHORITIES: 


The Federalist No. 51 (H. Lodge ed. 1908) ....... 16 


- Oe etee | cee ee 


No. 93- 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
October Term, 1993 


BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
KIRYAS JOEL VILLAGE SCHOOL DISTRICT, 


Petitioner, 
v. 


LOUIS GRUMET and ALBERT W. HAWK, 


Respondents, 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE NEW YORK COURT OF APPEALS 


The petitioner Board of Education of the Kiryas Joel 
Village School District respectfully requests that a writ of 
certiorari issue to review the judgment and opinion of the 
New York Court of Appeals, entered in the above-entitled 
proceeding on July 6, 1993. 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The majority, concurring and dissenting opinions of 
the New York Court of Appeals (Appendix A, pp. 1a-60a, 
infra) are reported at 81 N. Y.2d 518, 601 N.Y.S.2d 61, 618 


2 


N.E.2d 94. The majority and dissenting opinions of the 
Appellate Division, Third Department (Appendix B, pp. 61a- 
Qla, infra) are reported at 187 A.D.2d 16, 592 N.Y.S.2d 
123. The opinion of the Supreme Court, Albany County 
(Appendix C, pp. 92a-101a, infra) is reported at 151 Misc.2d 
60, 579 N.Y.S.2d 1004. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the New York Court of Appeals was 
entered on July 6, 1993. On July 26, 1993, this Court 
stayed the decision of the New York Court of Appeals 
pending the filing and disposition of a petition for a writ of 
certiorari. The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 
U.S.C. § 1257. 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


1. The First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution provides, in relevant part: “Congress shall 
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or 
prohibiting the free exercise thereof." 


2. Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 (entitled "AN 
ACT to establish a separate school district in and for the 
village of Kiryas Joel, Orange county") provides: 


Section 1. The territory of the village of Kiryas Joel in the 
town of Monroe, Orange county, on the date when this act 
shall take effect, shall be and hereby is constituted a separate 
school district, and shall be known as the Kiryas Joel village 
school district and shall have and enjoy all the powers and 


3 


duties of a union free school district under the provisions of 
the education law. 


§ 2. Such district shall be under the control of a board of 
education, which shall be composed of from five to nine 
members elected by the qualified voters of the village of 
Kiryas Joel, said members to serve for terms not exceeding 
five years. 


§ 3. This act shall take effect on the first day of July next 
succeeding the date on which it shall have become a law. 


STATEMENT 


1. The Village of Kiryas Joel 


The Village of Kiryas Joel is located in Orange 
County, New York. The residents of the village are Satmar 
Hasidic Jews -- devoutly religious people who believe in 
maintaining an insular community where religious ritual is 
scrupulously followed, where Yiddish, rather than English, 
is frequently spoken, where distinctive dress and appearance 
are the norm, where television is excluded, and where -- in 
general -- children receive their education in private boys’ 
and girls’ religious schools rather than in secular public 
schools. 


The land making up the village is owned by private 
individuals, and not by any religious institution or entity. 
The village’s inhabitants have voluntarily chosen to live in 
geographic proximity to each other so as to facilitate the 
exercise of their shared religious beliefs and preserve their 
unique culture and way of life. No one is excluded from the 
village on the grounds of race or religion. Thus far, 


4 


however, only members of the Satmar community have 
chosen to live in Kiryas Joel. 


The village has operated as a lawful municipality 
since March 1977, when it was carved out of the Town of 
Monroe and issued a Certificate of Incorporation by the State 
of New York pursuant to Article 2 of New York’s Village 
Law. 


2. The Dispute Over the Education of 
Disabled Children Living in Kiryas Joel 


Before passage of Chapter 748 in 1989, the Village of 
Kiryas Joel was under the jurisdiction of the Monroe- 
Woodbury Central School District ("Monroe-Woodbury"). 
The non-disabled children of the village all attended private 
religious schools in Kiryas Joel. Federal and state law 
required, however, that Monroe-Woodbury provide a "free 
appropriate public education” to all children within its 
jurisdiction needing special education services (20 U.S.C. §§ 
1400(c), 1401(a)(18), 1412; New York Education Law § 
4401 et seqg.; 8 NYCRR § 200 et Seq.). 


Prior to this Court’s 5-4 decision in Aguilar v. Felton, 
473 U.S. 402 (1985), the disabled children of Kiryas Joel 
received education services from Monroe-Woodbury public- 
school personnel in an annex to one of the religious schools. 
That program was terminated because of the Aguilar 
decision, and some Satmar parents initially enrolled their 
disabled children in classes in the Monroe-Woodbury public 
schools. The Kiryas Joel parents found, however, that the 


5 


children were traumatized by their experiences in attending 
the Monroe-Woodbury schools outside the village. ' 


Monroe-Woodbury refused to provide services for the 
disabled Satmar children at any site other than the regular 
public schools located outside Kiryas Joel. In 1985, Monroe- 
Woodbury initiated a lawsuit in state court requesting a 
declaratory judgment that it lacked statutory authority to 
provide such services elsewhere. The Satmar parents 
counterclaimed, arguing that Monroe-Woodbury had to 
provide the services at a “neutral site" in the village. The 
New York Court of Appeals ultimately ruled that neither side 
was correct, but, citing this Court’s decision in Wolman v. 
Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977), observed that "[iJt may well be 
that certain of the services in controversy could be furnished 
to [the Satmar children] at neutral sites if [Monroe- 
Woodbury] determined to do so." Board of Educazion of the 
Monroe-Woodbury Central School District v. Wieder, 72 
N.Y.2d 174, 189 n.3, 531 N.Y.S.2d 889, 897 n.3 (1988). 


3. The Enactment of Chapter 748 


Monroe-Woodbury continued to refuse to provide the 
required special education services at a location within the 


' Although the questions presented by this petition do not depend on the 
details of the Satmar Hasidic credo, we disagree with the proposition that 
there is a religious tenet prescribing separatism. Compare pp. 14a, 15a, 
infra (“separatist tenets"). The Satmar community lives together in order 
religious values. But, unlike, for example, separation of schoolchildren 
by gender (which is followed strictly in the religious schools, but not in 
the Kiryas Joel public school), separatism is not a religiously mandated 
practice. 


6 


village. The New York Legislature then passed Chapter 748 
of the Laws of 1989, declaring that the Village of Kiryas Joel 
"shall be and hereby is constituted a separate school district 
. . . and shall have and enjoy all the powers and duties of a 
union free school district under the provisions of the 
education law." The legislation was supported by a 
unanimous vote of the Monroe-Woodbury Board of 
Education, which sent a letter to Governor Cuomo urging 
him to sign the bill because “it will allow for the proper 
education of the Kiryas Joel handicapped children” and “will 
serve to reduce community tension and lead to productive 
relationships." 3 R. 689-90. # 


On July 24, 1989, the Governor approved Chapter 
748, stating that he had been advised by his counsel that it is 
facially constitutional. He warned that “this new school 
district must take pains to avoid conduct that violates the 
separation of church and state because then a constitutional 
problem would arise in the application of this law." 1 R. 
111. 


A seven-member board of education was elected. On 
July 1, 1990, as provided in the statute, the Kiryas Joel 
Village School District officially became operational. Since 
that time,. the district has been an unqualified success. 
Indeed, no challenge has been made to Chapter 748 as 


applied. 


The district’s one school is currently providing totally 
secular special education services to approximately 200 
disabled children who would otherwise have no schooling 
whatever. The district’s Superintendent is not Hasidic. He 


¥ *_ R. __” represents the printed record filed in the New York Court 
of Appeals. 


Peed 


7 


served for twenty years in the New York City public school 
system, where he gained expertise in the highly specialized 
area of bilingual-bicultural special education. The teachers 
and therapists, all of whom live outside the village, teach a 
secular curriculum of subjects such as reading, writing, 
arithmetic, music and physical education to mixed classes of 
boys and girls. This secular education is totally different 
from the religious indoctrination provided in the gender- 
segregated private religious schools located in Kiryas Joel. 


4. The Constitutional Challenge 


Respondents brought this action in January 1990, 
challenging Chapter 748 as facially invalid under the 
Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution and 
Article XI, § 3, of the New York State Constitution. There 
was no discovery or other factual inquiry. On cross-motions 
for summary judgment, the Supreme Court, Albany County, 
held that Chapter 748 violated all three prongs of Lemon v. 
Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971), and was therefore facially 
unconstitutional under both the federal and state constitutions 


(p. 92a, infra). 
5. The Divided Appellate Division Decision 


The Appellate Division, Third Department, affirmed 
that decision over a dissent by Justice Levine, ” on the 
ground that Chapter 748 had the primary effect of advancing 
religion and therefore violated both the federal and state 
constitutions (p. 61a, infra). The Appellate Division 
majority reasoned that because "religion played a role in the 


* On August 12, 1993, Justice Levine was nominated by the Governor 
to the New York Court of Appeals. He was confirmed on September 7, 
1993. 


8 


dispute” between the Kiryas Joel parents and Monroe- 
Woodbury (p. 71a, infra), the creation of a school district 
coterminous with the Village of Kiryas Joel to resolve that 
dispute created a "symbolic union between church and state" 
that “is significantly likely to be perceived by adherents of 
the Satmarer Hasidim as an endorsement, and by 
nonadherents as a disapproval, of their individual religious 
beliefs" (p. 70a, infra). 


Justice Levine’s dissent concluded that Chapter 748 
on its face passes all three prongs of the Lemon test. Justice 
Levine found that the reason given by the Satmar parents for 
not using the Monroe-Woodbury facilities was secular, not 
religious (pp. 77a-78a, infra). He also concluded that, even 
assuming the Satmar parents had declined to send their 
children to school outside of the village for religious reasons, 
the State’s accommodation of their religious beliefs did not 
have the primary effect of advancing religion (pp. 84a-88a, 


infra). 
6. The Divided Court of Appeals Decision 


The New York Court of Appeals, by a 4-to-2 vote, 
affirmed the Appellate Division’s conclusion that Chapter 
748 violates Lemon’s “primary effect" prong. The court 
modified the Appellate Division decision, however, to the 
extent that it relied on the New York State Constitution in 
striking down Chapter 748 (pp. 16a-17a, infra). By 
explicitly disclaiming any reliance on the New York 
Constitution, the Court of Appeals left only a clearly framed 
federal constitutional question for this Court to consider. 


The majority reasoned that Chapter 748 has the 
primary effect of advancing religion because “the statute not 
only authorizes a religious community to dictate where 


9 


secular public educational services shall be provided to the 
children of the community, but also ‘creates the type of 
symbolic impact that is impermissible under the second prong 
of the Lemon test’" (p. 12a, infra (quoting 187 A.D.2d at 22, 
592 N.Y.S.2d at 127)). The majority relied on its conclusion 
that “only Hasidic children will attend the public schools in 
the newly established school district, and only members of 
the Hasidic sect will likely serve on the school board" (p. 
12a, infra). 


The dissent by Judge Bellacosa found that any 
"incidental, ‘attenuated’ benefit to the minority Satmar 
viewpoint supports this State’s rich pluralistic tradition and 
does not diminish, but rather enhances, the common good" 
(p. Sla, infra). Judge Bellacosa reasoned that “the 
establishment of a union free school district geographically 
identical to an incorporated municipality, in the context of 
the constitutional and statutory guarantees of public 
education, neutral religious rights and nondiscrimination 
provided by both Federal and State law, should not be 
stigmatized as aid to a particular denomination, simply 
because the inhabitants of that municipality are predominantly 
or even exclusively members of that denomination" (p. 56a, 


infra). 


7. This Court’s Stay of the Decision Belov. 


On July 26, 1993, this Court issued an Order staying 
the judgment of the Court of Appeals pending the timely 
filing and disposition by this Court of a petition for a writ of 
certiorari. 


10 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


1. The Decision Below Misunderstands the 
"Primary Effect" Prong of Lemon v. Kurtgnan. 


As a result of the challenged New York statute, 
approximately 200 disabled children receive a wholly secular 
education from an ethnically 2nd religiously heterogeneous 
faculty in a building that has no religious symbols or 
significance. There is not a scintilla of evidence that Chapter 
748 has been used in any way to inculcate religious doctrine 
or to convey religious teaching. Indeed, there is no factual 
record whatever since the respondents’ constitutional 
challenge was to the facial validity of Chapter 748. 


(a) The rationale of the court below — The 
majority of the court below found Chapter 748 
unconstitutional because it determined that the creation of this 
particular school district "is sufficiently likely to be perceived 
by the Satmarer Hasidim as an endorsement of their religious 
choices, or by nonadherents as a disapproval, of their 
individual religious choices” (p. 12a, infra). In the 
majority’s view, the mere enactment of the law created the 
kind of "symbolic union of church and state” that was found 
to be constitutionally impermissible in School District of 
Grand Rapids v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373, 390 (1985). 


(b)  Misapplication of this Court’s decisions — 
This was a gross distortion of the "primary effect” prong and 


of the "symbolic union of church and state” interpretation 
given to that prong in this Court’s Grand Rapids decision. 
This Court held in Grand Rapids that the “symbolic union" 
of day-in-day-out instruction by public-school personnel on 
the premises of a pervasively sectarian parochial school 


1] 


would give “children of tender years" the impression of “a 
union between church and state." 473 U.S. at 390. 


That continuing “symbolic union" is totally different 
from the transitory inference of cooperation between church 
and state on which the majority below relied. Nor is the 
perception conveyed to adult Satmar Hasidim or to adult 
“nonadherents" the same as the daily impression of 
schoolchildren who see, before their eyes, a “symbolic 


"symbolic" representation of public policy only during the 
period when the legislation is new and when its opponents, 
such as the respondents in this case, keep it in the forefront 
of public attention. Once the controversy is over, all that 
remains is a secular public school located in Kiryas Joel, 

a secular education to disabled children. And, 
unlike Grand Rapids v. Ball, the children who attend the 

school in Kiryas Joel see only a public school 
providing a secular education, not “a symbolic union of 


Ss Gis Get ped Loum ws Kurtzman. # 


a “religious” condition and alleviating it is not an endorsement of 
religion. Likewise, Chapter 748 does not endorse Satmar religion merely 
because the secular need it met (the children's need to be educated within 
the village) would not have existed but for the religion of their parents. 


12 


(c) Composition of the school board — The fact 
that the school board may reflect the religious and ethnic 
characteristics of the voters of the village is surely not an 
ipso facve violation of the Establishment Clause. If it were, 
other legislative districts where Catholics, Mormons, or Jews 
predominate would be constitutionally suspect. Under the 
Equal Protection Clause, the same might be true of districts 
where white citizens reside in overwhelming numbers. The 
fact that elected representatives of a district will, by and 
large, mirror their constituencies is not a reason to invalidate 
the district. By the same token, the fact that Kiryas Joel's 
residents will elect Satmar Hasidim to public office does not 
turn their official acts into governmental endorsement of 
religion. 


(d) Accommodation to religious needs — Chapter 
748 has, at most, the effect of accommodating the needs of 
a community of devoutly religious people. The statute does 
no more than ameliorate a burden that results from the free 
exercise of religion. Without Chapter 748, a community that 
has chosen to live together to preserve its religious heritage 
and practices will be unable to educate its disabled children 
to live in the modern world. This Court has repeatedly 
approved of accommodations to religious observance as 
consistent with the Establishment Clause. See Hobbie v. 
Unemployment Appeals Commission, 480 U.S. 136, 144-45 
(1987) ("The government may (and sometimes must) 
accommodate religious practices and . . . may do so without 
violating the Establishment Clause."); Lynch v. Donnelly, 
465 U.S. 668, 673 (1984) ("[The Constitution] affirmatively 
mandates accommodation, not merely tolerance, of all 
religions . . ."); Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306, 314 
(1952) (accommodation by the government of the religious 
beliefs of its citizens “follows the best of our traditions”). 
The New York Court of Appeals ignored this principle in 


13 


holding that “the legislature may not treat the Satmarer 
community as separate, distinct and entitled to special 
accommodation” (p. 16a, infra). Indeed, this Court in 
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972), upheld the right 
of the Amish religious sect to be exempted from certain 


expected to be solicitous of that value in its legislation as 
well,” pointing to the number of States that have made an 
exception to their drug laws for sacramental peyote use. /d. 
See also Lee v. Weisman, 112 S. Ct. 2649, 2676-2677 (1992) 
(Souter, J., concurring). The New York Legislature was not 
acting unconstitutionally when it was similarly solicitous of 
the needs of another minority religious group. 


If the rationale of the decision below were correct, no 
law could ever be enacted to accommodate the religious 
principles of a minority. Exempting sacramental peyote use 
from a general prohibition against the possession of drugs, 
for example, would constitute a “symbolic union between 
church and state” in the same manner as does the legislation 
that has been challenged in this case. And the legislative 


14 


exemption that was sustained against constitutional challenge 
in Corporation of the Presiding Bishop v. Amos, 483 U.S. 
327 (1987), benefited only religious entities and, under the 
reasoning of the court below, amounted to a “symbolic union 
between church and state” in the same way as did Chapter 
748. Rejection of that claim in Amos requires its rejection in 
this case. 


(e) Violation of the Free Exercise Clause — 
Finally, the expectation of the majority below that “onl 
members of the Hasidic sect will likely serve on the school 
board” (p. 12a, infra) is an impermissible reason for striking 
down the statute. In this regard, the decision below 
conflicts, in principle, with McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 618 
(1978), where this Court held that a state law disqualifying 
clergy from legislative office violated the Free Exercise 
Clause. The McDaniel Court’s conclusion that “the 
American experience provides no persuasive support for the 
fear that clergymen in public office will be less careful of 
anti-establishment interests or less faithful to their oaths of 
civil office than their unordained counterparts” (435 U.S. at 
629) applies even more forcefully to individuals who are not 
even clergy but are devoutly religious laymen. In fact, 
operation of the Kiryas Joel public school under the current 
school board has not been challenged in this purely facial 
attack on Chapter 748. The effect of the New York court's 
decision is to deprive the residents of Kiryas Joel of the right 
to self-governance simply because all adhere to the same 
faith. That is tantamount to imposing: special disabilities on 
the basis of religious views or religious status. Employment 
Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 877 (1990). 


15 


2. The Decision Below Conflicts With 
This Court’s Decision in Wolman v. Walter. 


The decision below also conflicts with this Court’s 
decision in Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977). In that 
case, this Court considered various forms of “state aid to 
pupils in church-related elementary and secondary schools" 
(433 U.S. at 232) and concluded that “providing therapeutic 
and remedial services at a neutral site off the premises of the 
non-public schools will not have the impermissible effect of 
advancing religion” (433 U.S. at 248). The Court found no 
constitutional infirmity arising from the “fact that a unit on 
a neutral site may . . . serve only sectarian pupils” because 
the dangers to be avoided by the Establishment Clause arise 
"from the nature of the institution, not from the nature of the 
pupils.” 433 U.S. at 247-48. See also School District of 
Grand Rapids v. Ball, 473 U.S. 373, 391 & n.10 (1985) 
(reaffirming Wolman and the “neutral site" rule); Aguilar v. 
Felton, 473 U.S. 402, 426 (1985) (O’Connor, J., dissenting) 
("Our Establishment Clause decisions have not barred 
remedial assistance to parochial school children, but rather 
remedial assistance on the premises of the parochial 
school."). 


The New York Court of Appeals majority premised 
its finding of an impermissible “symbolic union" in part on 
its assumption that “only Hasidic children will attend the 
public schools in the newly established school district” 
(p. 12a, infra). This stated reason squarely conflicts with the 
holding in Wolman, that only the “nature of the institution" 
and not “the nature of the pupils” can lead to a finding of 
unconstitutionality. 


16 


3. This Case Should Be the Vehicle 
for Overruling Lemon v. Kurtgnan. 


If the distinctions we have previously discussed 
between this case and the rulings that have followed Lemon 
v. Kurtynan, 403 U.S. 602 (1971), are not deemed 
persuasive, a writ of certiorari should nonetheless be granted 
so that the full Court may render an authoritative ruling on 
the continued vitality of the Lemon v. Kurtznan precedent. 


A majority of the members of this Court have, in 
their own opinions or in joining the opinions of others, 
expressed the view that the three-pronged test of Lemon v. 
Kurtzman is erroneous and/or unworkable. See Lamb's 
Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, 113 
S. Ct. 2141, 2149-2150 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in the 
judgment) (collecting cases). So long as the Lemon vy. 
Kurtzman precedent remains the law, however, it creates 
great uncertainty for the lower courts. Application of its 
three-pronged test -- and particularly the open-ended 
“primary effect" prong -- diverts attention from other real 
evils at which the Establishment Clause was directed. The 
consequence is that courts erroneously strike down wholly 
benign actions by governmental bodies that demonstrate 
tolerance for all strands of America’s diverse society and 
permit the “multiplicity of sects" that James Madison 
encouraged. The Federalist No. 51, p. 326 (H. Lodge ed. 
1908). 7 


This Court should resoive, once and for all, whether 
Lemon v. Kurtynan will be retained as the beacon by which 
legislatures and lower courts are to be guided to a safe shore. 
By granting a writ of certiorari in this case and inviting the 
parties and amici to present argument on the continued 


17 


viability of Lemon v. Kurtynan, as well as to suggest 
potential substitutes for the Lemon v. Kurtynan standard, the 
Court will be able to give full attention to an issue of great 
importance to the Nation and arrive at a suitable and correct 
resolution. 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, the writ of certiorari 
should be granted. 


Respectfully submitted, 


NATHAN LEWIN 

(Counsel of Record) 

LISA D. BURGET 

MILLER, CASSIDY, LARROCA 
& LEWIN 

2555 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 293-6400 


September 1993 Attorneys for Petitioner 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX A 


STATE OF NEW YORK 
COURT OF APPEALS 


3 No. 120 
Louis Grumet, &c., et al., 


Respondents, OPINION 


Vv This opinion is uncorrected and 


Board of Education of the Kiryas subject to revision before 
Joel Village School District, publication in the New York Reports. 
et al., . 


Appellants. 


Nathan Lewin, for appellant BOE Kiryas Joel 

Village. 

Lawrence W. Reich, for appellant BOE 

Monroe-Woodbury. 

Julie S. Mereson, for Attorney General. 

Jay Worona, for respondents. 

American Jewish Congress; New York State 
United Teachers; Committee for Public Education and 
Religious Liberty; and Anti-Defamation League, amici 
curiae. 


No. 120 


SMITH, J.: 


Plaintiffs, citizen taxpayers of this State, maintained 
this action against defendants Board of Education of the 
Kiryas Joel Village School District and Board of Education 
of the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District, 
challenging the enactment of Chapter 748 of the Laws of 
1989. That statute established a separate public school 
district in and for the Satmarer Hasidic Village of Kiryas 
Joel, Orange County. ' Plaintiffs alleged that Chapter 748 
of the Laws of 1989 violates the establishment clause of the 
First Amendment of the Federal Constitution. Supreme 
Court granted plaintiffs’ summary judgment motion, 
concluding, inter alia, that Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 
has the effect of advancing the religious beliefs of the 
Satmarer Hasidim inhabitants of the village of Kiryas Joel. 
The Appellate Division affirmed, determining that the 
challenged statute violates the second prong of the test in 
Lemon v. Kurtynan, 403 US 602 (187 AD2d 16). 


' Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989, provides, in part: 


$1. The territory of the village of Kiryas Joel in the Town of 
Monroe, Orange county, on the date when this act shall take effect, shall 
be and hereby is constituted a separate school district, and shall be known 
as the Kiryas Joel village school district and shall have and enjoy all the 
powers and duties of a union free school district under the provisions of 
the education law. 


§2. Such district shall be under the control of the board of 
education, which shall be composed of from five to nine members elected 
by the qualified voters of the village of Kiryas Joel, said members to 
serve for terms not exceeding five years. 


No. 120 


Defendants appeal as of right from the order of the Appellate 
Division which finally determines an action that directly 
involves the construction of the Federal Constitution (CPLR 
5601[b][1]). The issue before us is whether Chapter 748 of 
the Laws of 1989, entitled "AN ACT to establish a separate 
school district in and for the village of Kiryas Joel, Orange 
county", violates the establishment clause of the First 
Amendment of the Federal Constitution. We now modify the 
order of the Appellate Division, agreeing that the statute 
violates the establishment clause of the First Amendment of 
the Federal Constitution. 


I. 


The Village of Kiryas Joel was formed by, and is 
composed almost entirely of members of the Satmarer 
Hasidic Sect. In addition to separation from the outside 
community, separation of the sexes is observed within the 
village. Yiddish is the principal language of Kiryas Joel. 
No television, radio, or English language publications are 
generally used. There is a male and female dress code. For 
the most part, the children are educated in religiously 
affiliated schools. The boys attend the United Talmudic 
Academy and are educated in the Torah. The girls attend 
Bais Rochel and are instructed on what they will need to 
function as adult women (see, Board of Educ. v. Wieder, 72 
NY2d 174, 179-180). These differences have led to a series 
of court cases involving the Satmarer Hasidim. ” 


. (See, e.g., Parents’ Assn v. Quinones, 803 F2d 1235 [the Second 
Circuit preliminarily enjoined implementation of a plan by the New York 
City Board of Education to provide federally funded remedial education 


No. 120 


Prior to the decision of the United States Supreme 
Court in Aguilar v Felton (473 US 402 [1985]), the 
handicapped children living in Kiryas Joel received special 
education services from Monroe-Woodbury Central School 
District personnel in an annex to one of the Kiryas Joel 
religious schools. In Aguilar, the United States Supreme 
Court considered whether a program under Title I of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 authorizing 
the use of federal funds to pay salaries of public employees 
who teach in parochial schools violated the Establishment 
Clause of the First Amendment. Concluding that such a 
program was unconstitutional, the Court stated: “We have 
long recognized that underlying the Establishment Clause is 
‘the objective * * * to prevent, as far as possible, the 
intrusion of either [church or state] into the precincts of the 
other * * *’ Lemon v Kurtynan, supra, at 614 [and] * * * 
the scope and duration of [the] Title I program would require 
a permanent and pervasive state presence in the sectarian 
schools receiving aid" (id. at 412-413). In response to the 
Aguilar decision, the Monroe-Woodbury Central School 
District stopped providing the special education programs at 
the religious school annex. For some time thereafter, some 


for handicapped girls from Beth Rochel school by closing off nine 
classrooms of a public school, and dedicating them to the use of the 
Hasidic girls}; Bollenbach v Board of Educ., 659 F Supp 1450 [The 
District Court found that the deployment of only male bus drivers to the 
all-boys United Talmudic Academy had the primary effect of advancing 
religious beliefs]; Board of Educ v. Wieder, 72 NY2d 174 [This Court 
concluded that Education Law § 3602-c neither compels the Board of 
Education of the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District to nor 
prohibits the Board from providing private school handicapped children 
with special services at the private schools or at a neutral site]). 


Sa 
No. 120 


of the handicapped Satmarer Hasidic children attended special 
education classes held at the Monroe-Woodbury public 
schools. However, allegedly because of the “panic, fear and 
trauma [the children] suffered in leaving their own 
community and being with people whose ways were so 
different from theirs,” the parents stopped sending them to 
programs offered at the public schools (Board of Educ. v 
Wieder, 72 NY2d at 181, supra). 


In Board of Educ. v. Wieder, supra, this Court 
construed Education Law § 3602-c’ to authorize special 
education services to private school handicapped children and 
afford them an option of dual enrollment in public schools. 
We concluded that section 3602-c neither compels boards of 
education to make special education services available to 
private school handicapped children only in regular public 
school classes and programs, nor renders them powerless to 
provide otherwise (id. at 187). 


> Education Law § 3602-c{2] provides, in part: 


Boards of education of all school districts of the state shall 
furnish services to pupils who are residents of this state and who attend 
nonpublic schools located in such school districts, upon the written 
request of the parent, guardian or person legally having custody of any 
such pupil. 

Section 3602-<(1)(a) defines “services” as “instruction in the areas of 
gifted pupils, occupational and vocational education and education for 
students with handicapping conditions * * *.° 


No. 120 


Thereafter, the Legislature enacted Chapter 748 of the 
Laws of 1989, which created a new union free school 
district, the Kiryas Joel Village School District, in the 
incorporated village of Kiryas Joel in the town of Monroe, 
Orange County. The newly established Kiryas Joel Village 
School District was coterminous with the Satmarer Hasidic 
community of Kiryas Joel, and was created within the 
boundaries of the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District. 
Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 also established a board of 
education, composed of five to nine members elected by the 
voters of the village, that would serve for a period not to 
exceed five years. Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 
represents “an effort to resolve a longstanding conflict 
between the Monroe-Woodbury School District and the 
village of Kiryas Joel, whose population are all members of 
the same religious sect" (Governor’s Approval Mem, Bill 
Jacket, L 1989, ch 748). 


Plaintiffs Louis Grumet and Albert Hawk commenced 
this action individually, as citizen taxpayers, and as 
Executive Director of the New York State School Boards 
Association, Inc. and President of the New York State 
School Boards Association, Inc., respectively, against the 
New York State Education Department and various State 
officials, alleging, inter alia, that Chapter 748 of the Laws 
of 1989 violates the establishment clause of the First 
Amendment of the Federal Constitution. The Board of 
Education of the Kiryas Joel Village School District and the 
Board of Education of the Monroe-Woodbury Central School 
District intervened as defendants. The parties stipulated to 
a discontinuance of the action as to the State officials, but, 


Ta 
No. 120 


pursuant to Executive Law § 71, the State Attorney General 
continued to appear in this action in support of the 
constitutionality of Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989. Both 
parties sought summary judgment. On their motion, 
plaintiffs asserted that Chapter 748 violates the Federal 
constitutional provisions prescribing separation of church and 
state. Defendants sought a judgment declaring the facial 
constitutionality of the statute. 


Supreme Court granted plaintiffs’ summary judgment 
motion, concluding that the statute is unconstitutional because 
it "was enacted to meet exclusive religious needs and has the 
effect of advancing, protecting and fostering the religious 
beliefs of the inhabitants of the school district{, and] * * * 
fosters excessive entanglements with religion” (Gnwnet v 
Board of Educ. of the Kiryas Joel Vil. School Dist., Sup Ct, 
Albany County, January 22, 1992, Kahn, J. Index No. 1054- 
90). The Appellate Division affirmed, concluding that 
Chapter 748 of the laws of 1989 “authorizes a religious 
community to dictate where secular public educational 
services shall be provided to the children of the community 
[and] * * * creates the type of symbolic impact that is 
impermissible under the second prong of the Lemon test" 
(187 AD2d 16, 22). 


The prior courts concluded that plaintiffs fulfill the 
requirement for citizen-taxpayer status contained in State 
Finance Law § 123-a and, therefore, have standing to 
maintain this action. That conclusion is not contested on this 
anneal. 


No. 120 


Il. 


Before this Court, defendants maintain that, based on 
Lemon v Kurtzman, supra, Chapter 748 is constitutionally 
valid on its face. 


The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment 
states that “Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion” (US Const Ist Amend). The First 
Amendment is made applicable to the states by the 
Fourteenth Amendment (see, Everson v Board of Educ. , 330 
US 1; Murdock v Pennsylvania, 319 US 105). It is said that 
the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment means at 
least that “[nJeither a state nor the Federal Government * * 
* can pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions, or 
prefer one religion over another" (Everson, 330 US 1, 15, 
supra). As such, Federal and State governments “must 
maintain a course of neutrality among religions, and between 
religion and non-religion” (Grand Rapids School Dist. v Ball, 
473 US 373, 382). 


In Lemon v Kurtzman, supra, the United States 
Supreme Court articulated a three-part test for evaluating the 
constitutionality .of governmental actions under the 
Establishment Clause. The Court stated: 


Every analysis in this area must begin with 
consideration of the cumulative criteria 
developed by the Court over many years. 
Three such tests may be gleaned from our 
cases. First, the statute must have a secular 


No. 120 


legislative purpose; second, its principal or 
primary effect must be one that neither 
advances nor inhibits religion, Board of 
Education v Allen, 392 US 236, 243 (1968); 
finally, the statute must not foster “an 
excessive government entanglement with 
religion * * *" Walz{ v Tax Commission, 397 
US 664, 674] (id. at 612-613). 


The United States Supreme Court has “particularly 
relied on Lemon in every case involving the sensitive 
relationship between government and religion in the 
education of our children” (Grand Rapids School Dist. v 
Ball, 473 US 373, 383, supra). Recently, the Court adhered 
to the Lemon test in Lamb’s Chapel v Center Moriches Union 
Free School Dist., ___ US ___, 61 USLW 4549. 
Moreover, the Court has applied Lemon in considering 
whether prior courts were correct in concluding, on a motion 
for summary judgment, whether a_ statute was 
unconstitutional on its face (see, Bowen v Kendrick, 487 US 
589, 602). Likewise, we have applied the Lemon test to 
statutes or regulations relating to the education of children, 
where such statutes or regulations are challenged as violating 
the Establishment Clause (see, New York State School Bads. 
Assn v Sobol, 799 NY2d 333; Matter of Klein [Harnett], 78 
NY2d 662). Thus, we apply the Lemon test to examine 
whether the prior courts were correct in concluding that 
Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 is unconstitutional on its 
face. 


10a 
No. 120 


Ill. 


While both parties have briefed the first prong of the 
Lemon test, and the Supreme Court found a violation of that 
prong, the Appellate Division relied exclusively on the 
second prong and found it violated by the statute here. 
Because we conclude that the second prong of Lemon has 
been clearly violated, we do not address the first prong. 


As stated, the second prong of Lemon requires that 
the principal or primary effect of legislation be one that 
neither advances nor inhibits religion. Thus, we consider 
whether the principal or primary effect of the challenged 
Statute advances or inhibits religion. It is clear that the 
prohibition against state involvement in religion is not limited 
to direct and funded efforts to indoctrinate citizens in specific 
religious beliefs but includes a close identification of the 
responsibilities of government and religion (see, Grand 
Rapids School Dist. v Ball, 473 US 373, 389). In that case, 
the Supreme Court stated the following: 


Our cases have recognized that the 
Establishment Clause guards against more 
than direct, state-funded efforts to indoctrinate 
youngsters in specific religious beliefs. 
Government promotes religion as effectively 
when it fosters a close identification of its 
powers and responsibilities with those of any - 
- or all -- religious denominations as when it 
attempts to inculcate specific religious 
doctrines. If this identification conveys a 


lla 
No. 120 


message of government endorsement or 


disapproval of religion, a core purpose of the 
Establishment Clause is violated (id.). 


In considering whether the principal or primary effect 
of the challenged statute advances or inhibits religion, the 
concern is “whether the symbolic union of church and state 
effected by the challenged governmental action is sufficiently 
likely to be perceived by adherents of the controlling 
denomination as an endorsement, and by nonadherents as a 
disapproval, of their individual religious choices" (id. at 
390). An inquiry into this kind of effect "must be conducted 
with particular care when many of the citizens perceiving the 
governmental message are children in their formative years 
[since t]he symbolism of a union between church and state is 
most likely to influence children of tender years" (id.). 
Context determines whether a particular governmental action 
is likely to be perceived as an endorsement of religion (See, 
Allegheny County v Greater Pittsburgh Am. Civ. Liberties 
Union, 492 US 573, 595-597, supra). Governmental action 
“endorses” religion if it favors, prefers, or promotes it (see, 
Edwards v Aguillard, 482 US 578, 593, supra; Wallace v 
Jaffree, 472 US 38, 59-60, supra, Lynch v Donnelly, 465 US 
668, 691, supra). 


Defendants assert that "[t]he relevant issue is whether 
an objective observer, acquainted with the text, legislative 
history, and implementation of the [challenged] statute would 
perceive it as [the State’s endorsement of the Satmarer 
Hasidic faith)" (Wallace v Jaffree, 472 US 38, 76, supra 
[O’Connor, J., concurring]). However, as the dissent 
acknowledges, “the Supreme Court has not adopted Justice 


12a 
No. 120 


O’Connor’s [objective observer] nuance for detecting an 
[impermissible] endorsement" of religion by the State 
(dissent, at p. 11). We agree with the majority of the 
Appellate Division that the statute not only authorizes a 
religious community to dictate where secular public 
educational services shall be provided to the children of the 
community, but also “creates the type of symbolic impact 
that is impermissible under the second prong of the Lemon 
test” (187 AD2d, at 22, supra). 


Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 created a new union 
free school district, the Kiryas Joel Village School District, 
coterminous with the incorporated village of Kiryas Joel in 
the town of Monroe, Orange County. This new school 
district was created within the Monroe-Woodbury Central 
School District. The statute also established a board of 
education, composed of five to nine members elected by the 
voters of the village, that would serve for a period not to 
exceed five years. The residents of the village of Kiryas Joel 
are almost exclusively of the Satmarer Hasidic religious sect. 
Thus, only Hasidic children will attend the public schools in 
the newly established school district, and only members of 
the Hasidic sect will likely serve on the school board. We 
conclude that this symbolic union of church and state effected 


by the establishment of the Kiryas Joel village school district . 


under Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 is sufficiently likely 
to be perceived by the Satmarer Hasidim as an endorsement 
of their religious choices, or by nonadherents as a 
disapproval, of their individual religious choices. Thus, the 
principal or primary effect of Chapter 748 of the Laws of 
1989 is to advance religious beliefs. 


13a 
No. 120 


The dissent’s attempt to analogize this case to the 
recent Supreme Court case of Zobrest v Catalina Foothills 
School Dist, US , 61 USLW 4641, supra, is 
unavailing. In Zobrest, the petitioners, a deaf child and his 
parents, commenced the action challenging the school 
district’s refusal to provide a sign language interpreter to 
accompany the child to classes at a Roman Catholic high 
school. The petitioners alleged that the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and the free exercise 
clause of the First Amendment to the Federal Constitution 
required the school district to provide the interpreter, and 
that the establishment clause did not bar such relief. 
Concluding that the establishment clause did not bar religious 
groups from receiving general, “neutral” governmental 
benefits such as a sign language interpreter, the Supreme 
Court held: : 


The service at issue in this case is part of a 
general government program that distributes 
benefits neutrally to any child qualifying as 
"handicapped" under the IDEA, without 
regard to the “sectarian-nonsectarian, or 
public-nonpublic nature" of the school the 
child attends. By according parents freedom 
to select a school of their choice, the statute 
ensures that a government-paid interpreter will 
be present in a sectarian school only as a 
result of the private decision of individual 
parents. In other words, because the IDEA 
creates no financial incentive for parents to 
choose a sectarian school, an interpreter’s 
presence there cannot be attributed to state 


l4a 
No. 120 


decisionmaking * * *. When the government 
offers a neutral service on the premises of a 
sectarian school as part of a general program 
that “is in no way skewed towards religion,” 
* * * it follows under prior decisions that 
provision of that service does not offend the 
Establishment Clause (slip opn, at 7-8). 


We disagree with the dissent’s assertion that "no 
message of endorsement for Satmar theology or its particular 
separatist tenets * * * can fairly be inferred" (dissent, at p. 
13) from a statute that creates a new school district within an 
existing school district and establishes a board of education, 
composed entirely of residents of the village of Kiryas Joel 
who are almost exclusively of the Satmarer Hasidic religious 
sect. Here, unlike in Zobrest, supra, the statute creating a 
school district and establishing a board of education 
coterminous with the Satmarer Hasidic village of Kiryas Joel 
cannot be viewed as part of a general government program. 
Rather, as stated, the statute represents an effort to resolve 
a longstanding conflict between the Monroe-Woodbury 
Schoo! District and the village of Kiryas Joel, whose 
population are all members of the same religious sect. Thus, 
it cannot be said that by the creation of the Kiryas Joel 
Village School District, the government is offering “a neutral 
service * * * as part of a general program that ‘is in no way 
skewed towards religion.’” 


The United States Supreme Court case of Wolman v 
Walter (433 US 229) is inapposite. There the Court held that 
"considerations of safety, distance and the adequacy of 
accommodations" could justify a public school’s provision of 


1Sa 
No. 120 


remedial services in mobile units located on neutral sites near 
nonpublic school premises (see, Wolman v Walter, 433 US, 
at 247, n 14, supra). Contrary to the assertion by the 
dissent, the legislation at issue in this case does not effect a 
"unit on a neutral site” serving only sectarian pupils (see, 
dissent, at p. 15). Rather, the statute creates an entirely new 
school district coterminous with the Satmarer Hasidic 
community of Kiryas Joel and establishes a school board 
composed of members elected by the voters of the village. 
This goes beyond any directive by the Supreme Court or this 
Court for the provision of special services to handicapped 
children at a neutral site (see, Wolman v Walter, 433 US 
229, 248, supra; Board of Educ v Wieder, 72 NY2d 174, 
188, supra). 


Because special services are already available to the 
handicapped children of Kiryas Joel, the primary effect of 
Chapter 748 is not to provide those services, but to yield to 
the demands of a religious community whose separatist tenets 
create a tension between the needs of its handicapped 
children and the need to adhere to certain religious practices. 
Regardless of any beneficent purpose behind the legislation, 
the primary effect of such an extensive effort to 
accommodate the desire to insulate the Satmarer Hasidic 
students inescapably conveys a message of governmental 
endorsement of religion. Thus a “core purpose of the 
Establishment Clause is violated" (see, Grand Rapids School 
Dist. v Ball, 473 US 373, 389, supra). 


Our conclusion does not, as the dissent declares, 
"drap[e] a drastic, new disability over the shoulders of young 
pupils solely on account of the religious beliefs of their 


16a 
No. 120 


community,” nor does it “penalize and encumber religious 
uniqueness” (see, dissent, at 20-21). Special services are 
made available to the Satmarer student within the Monroe- 
Woodbury school district. Our decision does not impose any 
additional burdens on the students within Kiryas Joel; it 
simply determines that the legislature may not treat the 
Satmarer community as separate, distinct and entitled to 
special accommodation. 


IV. 


The Supreme Court has noted that "[iJf a statute 
violates any of [the three Lemon] principles, it must be struck 
down under the Establishment Clause" (Stone v Graham, 449 
US 39, 40-41). Thus, our conclusion that Chapter 748 of the 
Laws of 1989 violates the second principle of Lemon makes 
it unnecessary for us to comment on whether the statute 
violates the first and third principles or to address appellants’ 
remaining contentions. 


Without any separate analysis, the trial court declared 
the statute unconstitutional under article XI, section 3 of the 
State Constitution, suggesting that the provision is a 
“counterpart” to the Establishment Clause. The Appellate 
Division affirmed on both State and Federal Constitutional 
grounds, although its discussion, like the trial court’s, was 
limited to the Establishment Clause. Moreover, in this Court 
the First Amendment is the subject of the parties’ focus. In 
these circumstances, we do not reach the State constitutional 
issue, which is based on a provision significantly different 
from the Establishment Clause, both in text and history (see, 


17a 
No. 120 


Judd v Board of Educ., 278 NY 200) and we modify the 
Appellate Division order accordingly. 


Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division 
should be modified, with costs to plaintiffs, in accordance 
with the opinion herein and, as so modified, affirmed. 


18a 


Grumet v Kiryas Joel 


No. 120 


KAYE, CHIEF JUDGE (concurring): 


Applying the three-pronged Lemon v Kurtznan (403 
US 602) test, the Court concludes that creation of the Kiryas 
Joel Village School District violates the Establishment 
Clause. While I agree that the Laws of 1989, chapter 748 
breaches Lemon’s second prong, and thus join the Court’s 
Opinion, I do not believe that Lemon supplies the preferred 
analytical framework for this case. Rather, in my view, 
legislation that singles out a particular religious group for 
special benefits or burdens should be evaluated under a strict 
scrutiny test, requiring that the law be closely fitted to a 
compelling State interest. 


The law at issue is precisely the sort of legislation that 
should be strictly scrutinized, because it provides a particular 
religious sect with an extraordinary benefit: its own public 
school system. Although I am willing to assume that the law 
is addressed to a compelling governmental interest--providing 
special education and related services to disabled children 
who would otherwise go without such assistance--the law is 


19a 
No. 120-con 


not closely fitted to that purpose, as far more moderate 
measures were available to satisfy that purpose. 
Accordingly, irrespective of the Lemon test, ' I believe the 
law violates the Establishment Clause. 


I. 


My analysis begins with the recognition that, 
factually, this case is unlike prior Supreme Court cases 
involving the relationship between religion and education. 
Prior cases generally fall into two broad categories: public 
aid to parochial schools or students, ? and religious activities 


' The Lemon test has been criticized by many of the Supreme Court 
Justices in their individual opinions (see, Lamb's Chapel v Center 
Moriches Union Free School Dist. , US , 61 USLW 4549, 
4553 (Scalia, J., concurring] [collecting cases]). Indeed, the test was not 
even invoked by the majority in Zobrest v Catalina Foothills School Dist. 
( US , 61 USLW 4641), the Court's most recent 


? Zobrest v Catalina Foothills School Dist. ( US ) (sign 
language interpreter for parochial school student); Aguilar v Felton (473 
US 402) (public school instructors teaching on premises of parochial 
schools); Witters v Washington Dept. of Services for the Blind (474 US 
418) (aid to blind student attending sectarian college); Grand Rapids 
School Dist v Ball (473 US 373) (similar); New York v Cathedral 
Academy (434 US 125) (reimbursement for recordkeeping and testing); 
Wolman v Walter (433 US 229) (textbooks, diagnostic services, remedial 
education, standardized tests, field trip transportation); Roemer v Board 
of Public Works (426 US 736) (grants to private colleges); Meek v 
Pittenger (421 US 349) (textbooks, instructional materials and various on- 
site services); Committee for Public Education v Nyquist (413 US 756) 
(funds for maintenance and repair, tuition reimbursement and tax benefits 
to parents); Levitt v Committee for Public Education (413 US 472) (funds 
for testing); Hunt v McNair (413 US 734) (revenue bonds for sectarian- 
affiliated universities); Tilson v Richardson (403 US 672) (federal 


20a 
No. 120-con 


within public schools’ (see, Committee for Public 
Education v Nyquist, 413 US 756, 772 [identifying 
categories]). This case falls into neither category: the law 
does not provide aid to a parochial school, and it does not 
prescribe religious practices for a public school. 


This case also differs from previous Establishment 
Clause education cases in a more fundamental respect. 
Chapter 748 is not one of the myriad “governmental 
programs that neutrally provide benefits to a broad class of 
citizens defined without reference to religion” (Zobrest v 
Catalina Foothills School Dist, ____ US ; , 61 
USLW 4641, 4644). Rather, the legislation was specifically 
designed to benefit Satmar Hasidim, who refuse to send their 
disabled children to integrated Monroe-Woodbury public 


construction grants); Lemon v Kurtzman (403 US 602) (teachers’ salaries, 
textbooks, instructional materials); Earley v DiCenso (403 US 602) 
(salary supplements); Board of Educ. v Allen (392 US 236) (textbooks); 
Everson v Board of Education (330 US 1) (bus transportation). 


> Lee v Weisman (112 S Ct 2649) (prayer at graduation ceremony); 
Edwards v Aguillard (482 US 578) (statute prohibiting teaching of 
evolution unless accompanied by instruction in theory of “creation 
science"); Wallace v Jaffree (472 US 38) (period of silence for 
"meditation or voluntary prayer"); Stone v Graham (449 US 39) (posting 
of Ten Commandments); Abington School Dist v Schempp (374 US 203) 
(prayer and Bible reading at beginning of each school day); Engel v Vitale 
(370 US 421) (prayer); Epperson v Arkansas (394 US 97) (statute barring 
theory of evolution); Illinois ex rel. McCollum v Board of Educ. (333 US 
203) (religious instruction by sectarian teachers); see also, Lamb's Chapel 
v Center Moriches Union Free School Dist. (__ US , 61 USLW 
4549) (use of school premises by religious group); Board of Educ. v 
Mergens (496 US 226) (same); Widmar v Vincent (454 US 263) (same); 
Zorach v Clauson (343 US 306) (students released from public school 
classes for religious instruction). 


2la 
No. 120-con 


schools. That the law is not part of a neutral, generally 
applicable program of state aid but instead was intended to 
benefit one religious group distinguishes this case, and calls 
for a different analysis. 


The Religion Clauses of the First Amendment protect 
fundamental liberties and therefore apply to the States 
through Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause 
(Cantwell v Connecticut, 310 US 296, 303). Although the 
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment has 
been a bulwark against arbitrary government distinctions 
based on race (Loving v Virginia, 388 US 1, 11), gender 
(Craig v Boren, 429 US 190, 197-199), national origin 
(Hernandez v Texas, 347 US 475, 479), alienage (Graham v 
Richardson, 403 US 365, 371-372) and illegitimacy (Trimble 
v Gordon, 430 US 762, 766), it has not been necessary to 
identify religion as a suspect classification for equal 
protection purposes; classifications along religious lines are 
strictly scrutinized in any event. “Just as we subject to the 
most exacting scrutiny laws that make classifications based 
on race, * * * or on the content of speech, * * * so too we 
strictly scrutinize governmental classifications based on 
religion" (Employment Div., Dept of Human Resources of 
Oregon v Smith, 494 US 872, 886 n2 [citations omitted]; see, 
3 Rotunda and Nowak, Treatise on Constitutional Law § 
18.40, at 491-494 [2d ed. 1992]). 


"The clearest command of the Establishment Clause 
is that one religious denomination cannot be officially 
preferred over another." (Larson v Valente, 456 US 228, 
244.) It is thus axiomatic that the government “must 
maintain a course of neutrality among religions” (Grand 
Rapids School Dist. v Ball, 473 US 373, 382; see also, 
Epperson v Arkansas, 393 US 97, 104 ["The First 


22a 
No. 120-con 


Amendment mandates government neutrality between religion 
and religion"]; Zorach v Clauson, 343 US 306, 314 
("government must be neutral when it comes to competition 
between sects"]). 


The State is in the greatest danger of straying from its 
required course of neutrality when it selects a particular 
religious sect for special privileges or burdens. ““The Court 
must survey meticulously the circumstances of governmental 
categories to eliminate, as it were, religious gerrymanders’" 
(Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v City of Hialeah, 

US , , 61 USLW 4587, 4591, quoting Walz v Tax 
Commission, 397 US at 696 [Harlan, J., concurring]). Laws 
intentionally designed to hamper a group’s religious practices 
violate the Free Exercise Clause unless they are narrowly 
tailored to a compelling government interest (see, Church of 
the Lukwmi Babalu Aye, ____ US at ___, 61 USLW at 
4594). By the same token, a law affording a benefit to one 
religious group violates the Establishment Clause if it too is 
not narrowly tailored to a compelling government interest. ‘ 


Larson v Valente (456 US 228) is a recent application 
of strict scrutiny to strike down a law under the 
Establishment Clause. In that case, a Minnesota statute 


* A “benefit” addressed to one religious group may be related to Free 
Exercise values, and thus would not be constitutionally objectionable if 
sufficiently tailored. For example, a state may choose to exempt from 
criminal drug laws the possession of peyote by those whose religious 
beliefs mandate sacramental use of that drug (see, Employmen: Div., 
Oregon Dept. of Human Resources v Smith, 494 US at 890). But if the 
exemption is too broad -— permitting, for instance, members of the 
affected religious group to also possess and traffic in heroin and cocaine, 
that could, in my view, violate the Establishment Clause. 


23a 
No. 120-con 


imposed certain reporting requirements on charities but 
exempted religious organizations receiving more than half 
their contributions from members. The Court concluded that 
the Lemon test is intended “to apply to laws affording a 
uniform benefit to ail religions" (456 US at 252; see also, 
Corporation of the Presiding Bishop v Amos, 483 US 327, 
339), but that when a law expresses “a denominational 
preference, our precedents demand that we treat the law as 
suspect and that we apply strict scrutiny in adjudging its 
constitutionality.” (456 US at 246; see also, Smith, 494 US 
at 886 n2; County of Allegheny v ACLU, 492 US 573, 608- 
609; Lynch v Donnelly, 465 US 668, 687 n13.) 


The Larson Court determined that the distinction 
between religious groups was a legislatively-sanctioned 
denominational preference, and thus the law was invalid 
unless it was justified by a “compelling governmental 
interest" and was “closely fitted to further that interest" (456 
US at 247). The Court assumed that the statute was 
addressed to a compelling governmental interest--to protect 
citizens against abusive solicitation practices--but concluded 
that it was not "closely fitted” to those interests and therefore 
violated the Establishment Clause (456 US at 248-251). 


Larson is of course distinguishable from the present 
case in that the Minnesota statute discriminated among 
religions while here the law is aimed simply at one religion. 
In my view, however, that distinction does not necessarily 
alter the analysis. A forbidden denominational preference 
can result from a grant of benefits to one religious group as 
readily as discrimination among sects. In either case, the 
specter of official favoritism looms large, and the legislation 
should be carefully scrutinized. 


24a 
No. 120-con 


Il. 


The creation of the carved-out school district is 
precisely the type of legislation that should be subjected to 
strict scrutiny. Although the law does not, on its face, make 
reference to the Satmar Hasidic sect, "[flacial neutrality is 
not determinative” (Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v City 
of Hialeah, ___ US at___, 61 USLW at 4590). No one 
disputes that the purpose of the law was to create a new 
school district to provide disabled children of the Satmar 
faith with special education services in a segregated 
environment. Accordingly, in these circumstances the 
coterminality of the school district and the Village is of no 
moment (see dissent at 7): the law was “an effort to resolve 
a longstanding conflict between the Monroe-Woodbury 
School District and the village of Kiryas Joel, whose 
population are all members of the same religious sect." 
(Governor’s Mem, 1989 McKinney’s Session Laws of NY, 
at 2429 [emphasis added]). Without doubt, the law was 
designed to confer a benefit on a particular religious group. 


Plainly this special interest legislation cannot be 
equated with the statutory scheme in Zobrest v Foothills 
School Dist. (___ US ___, 61 USLW 4641) (see dissent at 
10, 12, 16-17). There, a parochial school student sought a 
sign language interpreter as “part of a general government 
program that distributes benefits neutrally to any child 
qualifying as ‘handicapped’ under the IDEA, without regard 
to the ‘sectarian-nonsectarian, or public-nonpublic nature’ of 
the school the child attends” (___ USat__—«, 61 USLWaat 
4644). Thus, the law was entirely neutral in relation to 
individual religions. Here, by contrast, the State engaged in 
de jure segregation for the benefit one religious group. 
Establishment of a public school district intentionally 


ae» oe 


ee ate ee ee ee ee 


a ee i Ral ele 


25a 
No. 120-con 


segregated along religious lines is a classic example of 
government action that must be “survey[ed] meticulously." 


Turning then to the required strict scrutiny, I assume, 
for sake of analysis, that the “intractable problem" 
(Governor’s Mem approving L 1989, ch 748, 1989 
McKinney’s Sesskis Laws of NY, at 2429) of delivering 
special education services to Satmar children presented a 
compelling, secular government interest. Indeed, if 
protecting citizens against abusive solicitation practices may 
be considered a compelling (see, Larson v Valente, 456 US 
at 248), surely the provision of special education services 
qualifies. 


Nevertheless, in my view the statute violates the 
Establishment Clause because the legislative response plainly 
went further than necessary to resolve the problem. While 
defendants and the dissent characterize the new school 
district simply as a “neutral site" for the delivery of special 
services (see, Wolman v Walter, 433 US 229, 248), this 
legislation, establishing an entirely new and separate school 
district, is significantly broader. Interestingly, although the 
dissent stresses that only a facial challenge is presented, it 
relies on how the statute has been implemented--for example, 
that the new district presently provides only special education 
services. On this facial challenge, the Court must consider 
the full scope of the statute, which creates a new school 
district vested with "all the powers and duties of a union free 
School district" (L 1989, ch 748, emphasis added). 


The impact of the Legislature’s remarkable action of 
carving out a new school district coterminous with a religious 
enclave must not be assessed in a vacuum but measured 
against history. For almost 40 years, ever since the 


26a 
No. 120-con 


landmark decision in Brown v Board of Education (347 US 
483), government-sponsored segregation efforts have been 
unlawful (see, e.g., United States v Scotland Neck City Board 
of Educ., 407 US 484, 489-490 [carving out new schooi 
district from existing one impermissible because it impedes 
desegregation]; compare, Education Law § 2590-b[3][a][iv] 
("heterogeneity of pupil population” a criterion in creating 
local school districts]; Mississippi Univ. for Women v Hogan, 
458 US 718 [gender-based admissions policy 
unconstitutional]). Against this historical backdrop, the 
"symbolic impact" (Grand Rapids School Dist. v Ball, 473 
US at 390, supra) of creating a new school district to serve 
the needs of a particular religious group cannot be 
underestimated. 


The law’s overbreadth, however, goes beyond 
symbolism. The impasse between Monroe-Woodbury and 
the Satmarer concerned only special education services for 
disabled children. Nevertheless, the Legislature responded 
by creating a new public school district vested with ail the 
powers of a union free school district, which are vast. ° 


> "The board of education of a union free school district, in addition to 
having in all respects the superintendence, management, and control of 
the educational affairs of the district, is given numerous more specific 
duties and powers. Thus, it is empowered and duty-bound to adopt 
bylaws and rules for its government as proper in the discharge of its 
duties; establish rules and regulations concerning the order and discipline 
of the schools; provide fuel, furniture, apparatus, and other necessaries 
for the use of the schools; prescribe courses of study; regulate the 
admission of pupils and their transfer between classes or departments; 
provide milk, transportation, and medical inspection of schoolchildren; 
provide home-teaching or special classes for handicapped and delinquent 
children; provide, maintain, and operate, under prescribed circumstances, 
cafeteria or restaurant service and other accommodations for teachers and 


27a 
No. 120-con 


Thus, for example, there is no legal impediment to the new 
district’s operation of a public school program for non- 
disabled children if it chose to do so. Manifestly, the 
delegation of such power to the new district demonstrates 
that the legislation exceeded the problem that engendered it. 


Perhaps the best evidence that the Legislature’s 
resolution was not closely fitted to the problem was the 
availability of more moderate measures to accomplish its goal 
(see, Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, ___USat__, 61 


other employees, pupils, and the elderly; and prescribe, and, when 
authorized, furnish, textbooks to be used in the schools. It is also 
authorized to purchase property and construct school buildings and 
facilities thereon; take and hold possession of school property; lease 
premises, and lease-purchase instructional equipment, for school 
purposes; sell and exchange school property; insure school property; sue 
to recover damages, and offer monetary rewards for information leading 
to the arrest and conviction of persons, for vandalism of such property; 
provide, where authorized, for lighting, janitorial care, and supervision 
of highway underpasses; alter former schoolhouses for use as public 
libraries; and explore, develop, and produce natural gas for district 
purposes. It is authorized to appoint teachers and librarians and to raise 
by tax on the property of the district any moneys required to pay the 
salaries of teachers employed, and also to appoint committees to visit 
schools and departments under its supervision and report on their 
condition. Likewise the board is empowered to discharge district debts 
or other obligations. It has prescribed powers and duties with respect to 
self-insurance by the district, accident insurance of pupils, insurance 
against personal injuries incurred by school volunteers, and group 
insurance and workers’ compensation coverage of teachers and other 
employees, and may, when authorized, withhold from employees’ salaries 
sums to be paid to specified credit unions. Finally, the board possesses 
all the powers, and is subject to all the duties, of trustees of common 
school districts, and has all the immunities and privileges enjoyed by the 
trustees of academies in this state.” (94 NY Jur 2d, Schools, Universities, 
and Colleges, § 99, at 152-157 [1991] [citations omitted]. ) 


28a 
No. 120-con 


USLW at 4592). Accepting the parents’ stated reasons for 
not sending their children to the public schools--psychological 
harm to the children from being thrust into a strange 
environment-- then presumably the parents would be satisfied 
with a program directed to mitigating that trauma, without 
necessarily segregating the children. 


Even if some sort of separate educational services 
were the only viable alternative, that could have been 
achieved without carving out a whole new school district. 
The Legislature could have, for example, enacted a law 
providing that the Monroe-Woodbury School District should 
furnish special education services to these children at sites 
not physically or educationally associated with their parochial 
schools. That would have satisfied the parents, and would 
supersede any residual claim by the District that New York 
statutory law precludes that action. 


Such narrowly-tailored legislation would not, in my 
view, offend the Establishment Clause. In Wolman v Walter 
(433 US 229, 248), the Supreme Court held that “providing 
therapeutic and remedial services at a neutral site off the 
premises of the nonpublic schools will not have the 
impermissible effect of advancing religion.” The Court had 
struck down previous efforts to provide remedial services on 
the premises of parochial schools (see, Meek v Pittenger, 421 
US 349, 367-372), but as the Court explained in Wolman, the 
"dangers in Meek arose from the nature of the institution, not 
from the nature of the pupils” (Wolman v Walter, 433 US at 
247-248; see also, Grand Rapids School Dist. v Ball, 473 US 
373, 386-389; Aguilar v Felton, 473 US 402, 412). In the 
present circumstances, a law providing special education 
services to Satmar children at neutral sites can be considered 


29a 
No. 120-con 


closely fitted to a compelling government interest. Creating 
a new public school district cannot. 


The foregoing analysis is consistent with, and indeed 
substantially overlaps, Lemon’s second prong. The 
government may not make religion relevant to a person’s 
political standing in the community (Lynch v Donnelly, 465 
US 668, 687 [O’Connor, J., concurring]). If the 
government’s response to a problem affecting a religious 
group is broader than reasonably necessary, it presents at 
least the perception of official favoritism or endorsement of 
that religion, in violation of Lemon’s second prong (see, 
County of Allegheny v American Civil Liberties Union, 492 
US 573, 592-594). By carving out a fully-empowered, 
whole new school district in these circumstances, the 
Legislature has also transgressed Lemon. 


Il. 


This Court’s decision returns the parties to square 
one. It is ironic that in the wake of the Legislature’s creation 
of a new school district for the Satmar, Monroe-Woodbury 
now argues that the “provision of secular instructional 
services to students of the same faith at a neutral site is 
constitutionally permissible.” This approach by Monroe- 
Woodbury could well obviate the need for any further 
legislative intervention. 


30a 


Grumet v Kiryas Joel 


No. 120 


HANCOCK, J. (concurring): 


I join in Judge Smith’s opinion that Chapter 748 has 
a primary effect of advancing religion and for that reason 
violates the Establishment Clause. I agree with the majority 
that it is, therefore, unnecessary to decide whether Chapter 
748 also violates the first or purpose test of Lemon v 
Kurtzman (403 US 602). However, if the Court were 
addressing that issue, I would hold -- as Supreme Court and, 
in my view, the Appellate Division majority do -- that the 
Statute also violates the first Lemon test (see, Wallace v 
Jaffree, 472 US 38, 56, 64 [Powell, J., concurring], 75 


a et 01 al 


3la 
No. 120-con 


[O’Connor, J., concurring]).' As the Appellate Division 
majority pointed out: 


The challenged statute, therefore, was 
designed * * * to provide * * * [special 
education] services within the Village so that 
the children would remain subject to the 
language, lifestyle and environment created by 
the community of Satmarer Hasidim and avoid 
mixing with children whose language, lifestyle 
and environment are not the product of that 
religion. The dissent finds a secular purpose 
for the statute in that it would provide the 
handicapped children of the Village with the 
publicly supported, secular special educational 


' That the purpose of Chapter 748 was to obviate religious objections of the 
Satmarers seems plain from any reasonable analysis of the statute's intent from 
its wording and the statutory scheme. This is borne out by the legislative history 
and the record. See, for example, Memorandum to Governor Cuomo from 
Assemblymen Silver urging approval, stating that the bill provides "a mechanism 
through which [Satmar] students will not have to sacrifice their religious 
traditions in order to receive the servcies which are available to handicapped 
students through out the state” (emphasis added); approval memorandum of 
Assembly sponsor Joseph Lentol stating that the “Hasidic jewish community 
hold{s] firmly to its religious tenets” (emphasis added); affidavit of Professor 
Israel Rubin (the author of the book “Sanmar, An Island In The City” quoted in 
Board of Education v Wieder, 72 NY2d 174, 180) to the effect that “[rJeligion 
and its preservation in the form interpreted and practiced in Satmarer occupies a 
central place in virtually all matters of importance”, that the Satmar schools "* 
* * are meant to serve primarily as a bastion against undesirable acculturation”, 
that “[bJasically it is religion which underlies the practice of gender segregation” 
and that the “private schools are, of course, among the places where gender 
segregation is strictly observed"; excerpts from book the “Extraordinary Groups” 
by Kephart and Zellner (St. Martin's Press 1991) — ¢.g., “The ethnocentric 
attitude that they alone are capable of upholding the Torah solidifies the Hasidic 
belief that all other groups are inferior” and “The goal of the [Satmar] community 
is social isolation”. 


32a 
No. 120-con 


services they need and to which they are 
entitled, but as previously noted those services 
were already available to all of the 
handicapped children of the Monroe- 
Woodbury District, including the handicapped 
children of the Village. Thus, the only 
secular need for the statute recognized by the 
dissent did not, in fact, exist (Grumet v Board 
of Education, 187 AD2d 16, 21 [emphasis 
added]). 


Chapter 748 creates a special union free school 
district solely for the Village of Kiryas Joel so that its 
residents, almost all of whom are of the Satmarer Hasidic 
faith, may receive separate educational services for their 
handicapped children at public expense in place of the 
services which are already available to them as residents of 
the Monroe-Woodbury School District. Obviously, the 
purpose of Chapter 748 could not have been to meet the need 
of the residents of Kiryas Joel for special education services; 
such services were already available to them under State law 
as to all other residents of the Monroe-Woodbury School 
District. What is involved here is a special act of legislative 
and executive grace which makes available to the Kiryas Joel 
residents public education services to which they would not 
otherwise be entitled (contrast, Zobrest v Catalina Foothills 
School District, ___ US , SCt__, 1993 WL 
209636 [where any child qualifying under a general 
government program for deaf children was entitled to 
benefits as a matter of right “without regard to the ‘sectarian- 
nonsectarian, or public-nonpublic nature’ of the school the 
child attends” (id., 1993 WL 209636, at p 5)]). In sum, 
Chapter 748 was enacted solely as an accommodation, not as 
the fulfillment of an entitlement. 


33a 
No. 120-con 


Was the purpose of this accommodation anything 
other than religious? Unquestionably, the accommodation 
was to meet a requirement peculiar to the residents of Kiryas 
Joel -- that their children be permitted to associate only with 
children of the Satmar Hasidic sect. As I read the record, 
there is no dispute: (1) that the mandate of a separate and 
isolated existence is an important tenet in the Satmar Hasidic 
religious doctrine and inherent in the Satmar culture and way 
of life; or (2) that it is particularly important that this 
requirement of separation be strictly observed in the 
upbringing and education of Satmar children. 


Creating the special School District which 
encompasses only the Village of Kiryas Joel achieved this 
accommodation; special education could be furnished to the 
children of Kiryas Joel through their own exclusive program 
inside the village limits where the children would mix only 
with the children of the Satmar faith. That a statute which 
is clearly intended to meet the special religious requirements 
of a particular sect is a statute having a religious purpose 
seems self-evident. If more is needed, it may be found in the 
record and the Legislative history of Chapter 748 (see, Bill 
Jacket, ch 748, L 1989; see also, Lentol Memorandum and 
Silver Memorandum, supra, n 1), and, indeed, in our prior 
decision concerning the special education for the children of 
this very village (Board of Education v Wieder, 72 NY2d 
174, 179-180). 


It is argued, however, that the legislative purpose of 
Chapter 748 was to obviate the emotional and psychological 
trauma of the children upon being taken from the isolation of 
their unique community and placed with other children whose 
ways are different from theirs, and that, thus, the statute has 
a secular purpose. But, there is nothing in the statute or its 


34a 
No. 120-con 


legislative history suggesting that the enactment of Chapter 
748 was related to the psychological stress of the children or 
prompted by anything other than the well-meaning desire to 
comply with the religious requirement of keeping the 
Satmarer children separate from other children, concededly 
the cause of whatever emotional or psychological effect the 
children may have suffered. Indeed, the Appellate Division 
noted: 


The record, however, contains uncontradicted 
evidence of a direct link between the 
language, lifestyle and environment of the 
community's children and the religious tenets, 
practices and beliefs of the community. Based 
upon similar evidence and in a similar 
procedural posture, the Court of Appeals had 
little difficulty finding such a connection. 
"*With an apparent over-all goal that children 
Should continue to live by the religious 
standards of their parents, ‘Satmarer want 
their school to serve primarily as a ‘bastion 
against undesirable acculturation, as a training 
ground for Torah knowledge in the case of 
boys, and, in the case of girls, as a place to 
gather knowledge they will need as adult 
women’" (Board of Education v Wieder, 
supra, at 180 [emphasis added]) ([Grwner, 
supra, at 23, [emphasis added]). 


The question is not whether some legislative solution 
for prescribing psychological services for the Satmar children 
could be devised that would have a secular purpose and thus 
meet the first Lemon test. We are concerned only with the 
legal question of the purpose of the specific legislation before 


35a 
No. 120-con 


us. Chapter 748 establishes what amounts to a private school 
to furnish special education services at public expense to the 
residents of Kiryas Joel in order to accommodate their 
religiously mandated requirement of separation for their 
children. It does so through the extraordinary means of 
creating within an existing school district another co-existing 
district designed only to include a village whose residents are 
almost exclusively of a particular religious sect. 


If a statute does not have a clearly secular purpose, it 
fails the first or “purpose” test of Lemon (see, Wallace v 
Jaffree, 472 US 38, 56). Justice Powell’s explanation of the 
first Lemon test in his Wallace concurrence is especially apt 
here: 


The first inquiry under Lemon is whether the 
challenged statute has a ‘secular legislative 
purpose.’ Lemon v Kurtynan, supra, at 612. 
As Justice O’Connor recognizes, this secular 
purpose must be ‘sincere’; a law will not pass 
constitutional muster if the secular purpose 
articulated by the legislature is merely a 
‘sham.’ Post, at 75 (concurring in judgment). 
In Stone v Graham, 449 U.S. 39 (1980) (per 
curiam), for example, we held that a statute 
requiring the posting of the Ten 
Commandments in public schools violated the 
Establishment Clause, even though the 
Kentucky Legislature asserted that its goal was 
educational (Wallace, supra, at 64 [Powell J., 
concurring]). 


No. 120-con 


But for the Satmarers’ religious mandate of 
separation, no statute and no governmental expenditures for 
special education services for the residents of Kiryas Joel 
would have been necessary. In short, the accommodation of 
the Satmarers’ religious requirements “‘was and is the law’s 
[only] reason for existence’” (Wallace, supra, at 75 
[O’Connor J., concurring], quoting Epperson v Arkansas, 
393 U.S. 97, 108). 


Realistically, can the legisiative creation of the Kiryas 
Joel School District to make special additional educational 
services available in order to obviate the religious objections 
of its residents have a purpose other than religious? As a 
matter of common sense -- given the wording of the statute, 
its apparent intent and the absence of any reference to other 
than a religious purpose in the legislative history -- the 
answer must be no. 


Assuming, however, that Chapter 748 can be 
construed as having a clearly secular purpose (see, Wallace, 
supra at 56), I believe that, in its effect, it cannot be 
anything but a government action which unequivocally 
endorses religion in violation of the second Lemon test (see, 
Wallace, at 69 [O’Connor J., concurring]). Not only have 
the legislative and executive branches of government acted 
for the special benefit of a particular religious sect in creating 
the Kiryas Joel School District, but their action entails state 
aid which will relieve the private Talmudic academies and 
the residents of the Kiryas Joel Village of the financial 
burdens of providing required special education for the 


37a 
No. 120-con 


Satmarer children. ? Thus, Chapter 748 -- like the money 
grants for maintenance and repair, the tuition reimbursement 
grants, and the income tax benefits struck down in Committee 
For Public Education v Nyquist (413 U.S. 758) -- constitutes 
the sort of state financial assistance for sectarian education 
which has the effect of furthering the religious mission in 
contravention of the second Lemon test (see, School Dist. of 
Grand Rapids v Ball, 473 US 373, 393-395; Meek v 
Pittenger, 421 US 349, 364-366; Aguilar v Felton, 473 U.S. 
402, 422 [O’Connor J. dissenting]). As the Supreme Court 
recently stated in regard to its holdings in Meek and Ball: 


? The Budget Report on the Bill which was later enacted as Chapter 748 contains 
the following: 


Based on local wealth data provided by the Monroe- 
Woodbury school district, and assuming that the 100 special! 
education pupils in the Kiryas Joel school district will be 
placed in programs qualifying for the high cost component of 
excess cost aid, we estimate a new Kiryas Joel school district 
budget of about $1.3 million and new State aid of about 
$400 ,000-450,000. This would leave a local tax bill of about 
$900,000. Since Monroe-Woodbury attributes about $1.4 
million of its tax base to the Village of Kiryas Joel, is appears 
that the Village's tax payers will benefit from both new State 
Aid and lower, local property taxes as a result of the creation 
of the new district. Also based on data supplied by Monroe- 
Woodbury (and current data available from the Stcte 
Education Department), we estimate that the loss of property 
and income wealth attributed to the Village of Kiryas Joel will 
make Monroe-Woodbury poorer to the extent that it will 
receive operating aid on a formula basis rather than on save- 
harmless, due to its then lower wealth, would not occur until 
the 1991-92 school year, we project such State aid increases 
would amount to 1.4 million [emphasis added]. 


38a 


No. 120-con 


[T]he programs in Meek and Ball -- through 
direct grants of government aid -- relieved 
sectarian schools of costs they otherwise 
would have borne in educating their students. 
See Witters [v Washington Dept of Services 
for the Blind, 474 US 481] at 487 ("[T]Jhe 
State may not grant aid to a religious school, 
whether cash or in kind, where the effect of 
the aid is ‘that of a direct subsidy to the 
religious school’ from the State") (quoting 
Ball, supra, at 394). For example, the 
religious schools in Meek received teaching 
material and equipment from the State, 
relieving them of an otherwise necessary cost 
of performing their educational function. 421 
U.S., at 365-366. “Substantial aid to the 
educational function of such schools," we 
explained, “necessarily results in aid to the 
sectarian school enterprise as a whole,” and 
therefore brings about “the direct and 
substantial advancement of religious activity.” 
Id., at 366. So, too, was the case in Ball: 
The programs challenged there, which 
provided teachers in addition to instructional 
equipment and material, "in effect subsidize[d] 
the religious functions of the parochial schools 


39a 
No. 120-con 


by taking over a substantial portion of their 
responsibility for teaching secular subjects.” 
473 U.S., at 397. “This kind of direct aid,” 
we determined, “is indistinguishable from the 
provision of a direct cash subsidy to the 
religious school." Id., at 395. (Zobrest v 
Catalina Foothills School District, supra, 
1993 WL 209636, at 6). 


40a 


Grumet v Kiryas Joel BOE 
No. 120 


BELLACOSA, J. (dissenting): 


This case arises from a community's search for 
special education services on behalf of approximately 200 
handicapped children who, as Satmarer Hasidic Jews, reside 
with their families in the Village of Kiryas Joel in Orange 
County, New York. A decade of controversy of virtually 
epic proportions is reflected in litigation at various levels of 
State and Federal courts and in unsuccessful efforts by 
various protagonists to forge a local, secular, public 
education program for the pupils with special needs of the 
Village of Kiryas Joel. The State of New York in 1989 
enacted a law which held the promise of a Solomon-like 
solution. 


Although invested with a presumption of 
constitutionality, that statute is judicially nullified as a 
violation, on its face, of the Establishment Clause of the First 
Amendment of the United States Constitution. Because I 
believe that the Court has erected a reverse presumption of 
unconstitutionality and because I agree with Justice Levine, 
dissenting at the Appellate Division, that the law is not 
facially defective, I respectfully dissent and vote to reserve. 


L 


Since 1977, the Village of Kiryas Joel has been an 
incorporated (since 1977) municipality in the Town of 
Monroe, Orange County, New York, populated by Satmarer 
Hasidic Jews. The lifestyle of the community -- including 


4la 
No. 120-dis 


distinctive dress, language, and customs -- was described by 
this Court in Board of Education v Wieder (72 NY2d 174, 
179-180). Before the legislation at issue, all school children 
of the Village, for public education purposes, were within the 
jurisdiction of the Monroe-Woodbury School District. Those 
pupils in the Village without special needs, however, receive 
their schooling in Satmarer Hasidim parochial schools. They 
are not involved in this litigation. 


The challenged legislation evolved out of a series of 
court cases involving disputes between the residents of the 
Village and the Board of Education of the Monroe-Woodbury 
School District (which is now aligned as a party in this 
lawsuit with the Kiryas Joel Board of Education) concerning 
the provision only of special education services to the 
handicapped children of the Village. In 1988, when Board 
of Education v Wieder (id.) was decided by this Court, the 
Monroe-Woodbury School District had offered the Village’s 
handicapped students the special education services to which 
they were entitled under Federal and State law only at the 
District’s public schools. The Satmarer Hasidic residents of 
the Village demanded a neutral site within the Village. This 
Court held that the courts could not mandate that the location 
of the services be either the District’s public schools or a 
neutral site within the village, though this Court also 
unanimously urged that efforts be undertaken by the 
protagonists to secure a neutral site and solution (Board of 
Education v Wieder, 72 NY2d, supra, at 189 fn 3). 


Both sides nevertheless persisted in their diametrically 
opposed positions, and the "true subjects of this controversy" 
(id., at 179), the handicapped Satmarer children, received no 
special education. The Satmarer Hasidim removed their 
special-needs children from the Monroe-Woodbury School 


42a 
No. 120-dis 


District’s public schools, after an experimental effort and 
period, because they felt that the District’s failure to 
accommodate their distinct language and cultural needs had 
a “major adverse effect on [their special-needs children’s] 
educational progress” and on the children’s psychological and 
emotional well-being. Ultimately, the New York State 
Legislature acted to end the long standoff. 


Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 established “a 
separate school district in and for the Village of Kiryas Joel, 
Orange County”. The statute granted the new school district 
the powers of a union free school district under the State 
Education Law, and provided that the district shall be 
controlled by a board of education, elected by the qualified 
voters of the Village. The Monroe-Woodbury Board of 
Education unanimously supported the legislation, urging the 
Governor to sign the bill "because it will allow for the proper 
education of the Kiryas Joel handicapped children. The 
creation of a separate school district will serve to reduce 
community tension and lead to productive relationships.” 
Governor Cuomo approved the legislation, effective July 1, 
1990, commenting in the official Approval Message that 
"[m]y Counsel [] advises that the bill is, on its face, 
constitutional. I am persuaded by my Counsel’s view. * * * 
[T]his bill is a good faith effort to solve this unique problem" 
(Approval Message of the Governor, 1989 NY Legis Ann at 
325). 


The new school district operates a public school 
which provides education only to the district’s children with 
special needs. Under the statute, the district must operate in 
a secular manner. The superintendent of the school, who is 
not Hasidic, served for twenty years in the New York City 
public school system, where he acquired expertise in the area 


FS a Smad! ee her tee 


FPN ey a SRE 10 Ty Poe ERS Bit 


43a 
No. 120-dis 


of bilingual, bicultural, special education for handicapped 
children. The teachers and therapists, all of whom live 
outside the Village, teach mixed classes of boys and girls a 
wholly secular curriculum of subjects, such as reading, 
writing, arithmetic, music and physical education. The 
Statute requires the school to comply with all State laws, 
rules and regulations affecting public education, including a 
prohibition against any form of discrimination. 


IL. 


The New York State School Boards Association 
("NYSSBA") and two of its officers instituted this action in 
January 1990 against the New York State Education 
Department and various State officials, seeking a declaration 
of unconstitutionality of the statute. The Kiryas Joel and 
Monroe-Woodbury Boards of Education intervened as 
defendants. Although the parties stipulated to a 
discontinuance of the action as to the defendant State 
officials, the Attorney General has continued to defend the 
constitutionality of Chapter 748 (see, Executive Law §71). 
The organizational plaintiffs (NYSSBA and Messrs. Grumet 
and Hawk, in their capacities as NYSSBA officers) were 
ultimately found to lack standing to challenge the statute, an 
aspect of the case not before us. However, the two named 
individuals remain as taxpayers-plaintiffs-respondents. 


Plaintiffs moved and defendants cross-moved for 
summary judgment on facial grounds only, inasmuch as no 
discovery or any other factual inquiry in this case has been 
undertaken. Supreme Court, Albany County, held that 
Chapter 748, on its face, violated all three prongs of Lemon 
v Kurtzman (403 US 602) and therefore violated the principle 
of separation of church and state. The Appellate Division 


a 


44a 
No. 120-dis 


affirmed, holding that Chapter 748, on its face, violates at 
least the second prong of the Lemon test because its primary 
effect is the advancement of religion. This Court also strikes 
the law down on only prong two, the primary effect aspect 
of Lemon, although the Concurrences advance newly refined 
additional bases for invalidation. 


Plaintiffs press their argument before this Court that 
Chapter 748 violates all three prongs of the Lemon test. 
Although defendants-appellants proffered a secular purpose 
for the legislation, plaintiffs characterize it as a "sham" 
(Supreme Court referred to it as a "camouflage [of] secular 
garments"). Plaintiffs allege that the purpose of the statute 
is to cater to the “religious separatist tenets” of the Satmar 
Hasidim. They also argue that Chapter 748 has the primary 
effect of advancing the religious tenets of the Satmar 
Hasidim, because the statute allows them to maintain their 
separatism. Finally, they urge that it constitutes a State 
endorsement of religion. 


Defendants-appellants reject plaintiffs’ claims on the 
ground that plaintiffs have not met their heavy burden of 
rebutting the presumptive facial constitutionality of Chapter 
748 of the Laws of 1989 beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Defendants also demonstrate, to the contrary, that the statute 
should survive facial scrutiny on all three branches of the 
Lemon test and urge that it should not be struck down 
‘without evidentiary development and as-applied analysis. 


IL. 


No one disputes that the Legislature has the 
fundamental power to create a union free school district 
within the boundaries of a previously existing school district 


45a 
No. 120-dis 


to facilitate the provision of public education to a particular 
group of students (see, e.g., Town of Greenburgh, UFSD 
No. 13, Chapter 559 of the Laws of 1972; Town of Mt. 
Pleasant UFSD, Chapter 843 of the Laws of 1970; Granada 
School District Act, Chapter 92 of the Laws of 1972). 
Plaintiffs concede that approximately 20 such school districts 
have been created by acts of the Legislature. 


Nevertheless, plaintiffs predicate their challenge, to 
what is otherwise an entirely secular act of public education 
administration effected by the other two Branches of State 
government, on their sectarian interpretation of the unique, 
overlapping cultural and religious characteristics of the 
population of the Village of Kiryas Joel and its identical 
geographical boundaries with the new School District. They 
assert that the citizens of Kiryas Joel are exclusively 
Satmarer Hasidim and will remain as such. However, no 
claim is made of any alleged restrictive covenants among the 
Village’s property owners, or of any alleged irregularity in 
the conduct of municipal or school district elections, or of 
any exclusion of non-Hasidim in any respects of governance, 
employment or availment of educational services. Indeed, 
there is no showing that non-Satmarer Hasidim students are 
precluded from attending and taking advantage of this special 
education program. What plaintiffs assert, in sum, substance 
and effect, is that because the municipality and school district 
share identical borders and frame an enclave currently 
populated only by Satmarer Hasidim, the very existence of 
the public school district by authorization of the Legislature 
and Executive constitutes, on its face, an establishment of 
religion prohibited by the United States Constitution. The 
logical and inexorable extension of this canon would dictate 
the extinguishment of the Village itself for the identical 
infirmity. 


46a 
No. 120-dis 


IV. 


To evaluate plaintiffs’ claims under the currently 
prevailing Lemon test, the Court must examine the purpose 
and effects of the legislation, as well as the possibility of 
government entanglement resulting from the legislation (see, 
NYS School Bds. Assn. v Sobol, 79 NY2d 333, 338-339). 
While many personal expressions of the Justices of the 
United States Supreme Court question the vitality of Lemon 
(see, Lamb’s Chapel v Center Moriches UFSD, et al, ___ 
S Ct___, 61 USLW 4549, 4553-4554 [decided 6-7-93], 
Scalia, J., concurring), the institutional postulate of that 
Court remains unchanged -- Lemon controls (id. , at 4552 and 
n 7, White, J., Opn of the Court). However, the analysis in 
an Establishment Clause case, decided nine days later, 
abstains from discussion of the Lemon test (see, Zobrest v 
Catalina Foothills School District, _.§_=«S§ Ct ___, 61 
USLW 4641 [decided 6-16-93]). 


The first Lemon prong -- that “the statute must have 
secular purpose” (Lemon v Kurtynan, supra, at 612) -- is 
breached only if the enactment was “motivated wholly by [a 
religious] purpose" (Bowen v Kendrick, 487 US 589, 602 
[emphasis added]; see, Wallace v Jaffree, 472 US 38, 56). 
Chapter 748 was enacted for the stated purpose of allowing 
only handicapped pupils of the Village of Kiryas Joel to 
receive a publicly supported, secular special education to 
which they are entitled (see, Governor’s Mem 1989 Legis 
Ann, at 324-325). This objective satisfies the secular 
purpose prong of the Lemon test. 


Next, in considering the facial attack, the Court seems 
satisfied that a third-prong violation, excessive entanglement, 
has not been demonstrated. The Kiryas Joel public school 


47a 
No. 120-dis 


established for this Village is not a “pervasively sectarian 
environment" of the type which generally raises the 
entanglement problem (see, ¢.g., Aguilar v Felton, 473 US 
402; Meek v Pittinger, 421 US 349). The education program 
is exclusively and thoroughly nonsectarian; the staff is 
secular; all regulatory monitoring is of the traditionally- 
accepted educational variety and is designed to assure that the 
secular staff adheres to the State-approved secular curriculum 
(see generally, Grumet v Board of Education of the Kiryas 
Joel Village School District, 187 AD2d 16, 36-37 [Levine, 
J., dissenting]). 


The Court’s dispositive analysis turns ultimately on 
only the second Lemon prong, the “effects” test. Defendants 
contend that the educational services offered by Monroe- 
Woodbury School District prior to the enactment of Chapter 
748 were inadequate, because the services did not 
accommodate “the distinct language and cultural needs of the 
handicapped children" in the Village, and the primary effect 
of the legislation is to remedy that problem. In bold 
dichotomy, plaintiffs’ central argument that the primary 
effect of the statute involves “the State in sponsorship of 
Satmar separatist precepts” is adopted by the Court, contrary, 
in my view, to the spirit of the holding and analysis of 
Zobrest. The primary effect benefits the handicapped 
students in a secular manner; only an “attenuated” effect 
reaches the religion of their community. 


As initially articulated, the effects prong demands of 
legislation that “its principal or primary effect must be one 
that neither advances nor inhibits religion" (Lemon v 
Kurtynan, supra, at 612). In subsequent application, the 
Supreme Court has augmented this restriction to require that 
any nonsecular effect be remote, indirect and incidental. 


48a 
No. 120-dis 


Courts attempting to apply the “effects” test must also 
grapple with the related subsidiary concern of whether the 
governmental action constitutes an “endorsement” of religion. 
As Justice Kennedy recently observed, however, the Supreme 
Court’s unsettled jurisprudence in the area of possible 
government “endorsement” of religion leaves this sub-branch 
of the Lemon test somewhat suspect (see, Lamb’s Chapel v 
Center Moriches UFSD, et al, _ = =SsSCt__, 61 USLW 
4549, 4553 [decided 6-7-93] [Kennedy, J., concurring], 
Supra). 


The Supreme Court has used “endorsement” as a 
factor for assessing whether an impermissible purpose or 
effect infects a challenged law (see, e.g., Grand Rapids 
School Dist. v Ball, 473 US 373, 389); however, the 
meaning of “endorsement” is not “self-revealing” (compare, 
Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v City of Hialeah, 
—__._ § Ct ___, 61 USLW 4587, 4598 [Souter, J., 
concurring}). 


Unraveling whether a particular governmental action 
runs afoul of this test is a tricky and complicated process. 
Justice O'Connor initially proposed the "no endorsement” 
test in Lynch v Donnelly (465 US 668, 691-693 [O’Connor, 
J., concurring}). Its protean -- and controversial -- nature is 
evidenced by the fact that in that case she found that a 
municipality’s display of a Christmas creche was not an 
endorsement of religion. In her view, the printing of “In 
God We Trust” on coins and the opening of court sessions 
with "God save the United States and this Honorable Court" 
were also not constitutionally offending endorsements (id. , at 
693). 


49a 
No. 120-dis 


Justice O’Connor in Wallace v Jaffree (472 US 38, 
supra) offered an “objective observer” refinement to the 
endorsement factor. Much like the reasonable person 
embodied in the negligence standard, the so-called objective 
observer is expected to form a perception on the basis of 
familiarity with “the text, legislative history, and 
implementation of the statute" as to whether a particular State 
action constitutes an endorsement of religion or of a 
particular religious belief (id., at 76). Moreover, any 
objective observer would presumably also be “acquainted 
with the Free Exercise Clause and the values it promotes” 
(id., at 83). Thus, the objective observer should be aware of 
the overlap and tension between the Establishment and Free 
Exercise Clauses, and the permissibility of accommodation 
to Free Exercise concerns (id.). To be sure, the Supreme 
Court has not yet adopted Justice O’Connor’s nuance for 
detecting an alleged endorsement, but neither has it otherwise 
clarified the method and criteria for unveiling an 
impermissible endorsement (see, e.g., Smith, Symbols, 
Perceptions, and Doctrinal Illusions: Establishment 
Neutrality and the "No Enforcement” Test, 86 Mich L Rev 
266). 


Reasonable minds may differ as to whether the 
actuality or the symbolism of the State’s facilitation of 
publicly-administered special education to handicapped pupils 
of an incorporated municipality is an endorsement of the 
children’s or their parents’ religion. To allow for no 
reasonable doubt on a facial review and to decide this case as 
a forbidden establishment of a religion is at least arguable. 
“Objective observers” could not, in my view, so definitively 
conclude or perceive this situation as an establishment of a 
religion, without inspiring some inquiry as to whether their 
views perhaps suffered from a predisposed hostility to 


50a 
No. 120-dis 


religion in the constitutional debate sense. Truly objective 
observers should be able to conscientiously accept this 
legislation as secular, neutral and benign within the 
reasonable doubt spectrum (see, Tribe, American 
Constitutional Law, 1176, 1187-1190, 1221). For 
comparative analysis, as an example, one might view the 
direct aid to the handicapped pupil in a parochial school in 
Zobrest as the scaling of the wall of separation; yet, it was 
held constitutional under a broadly applicable analysis. In 
contrast, in this case the State stayed safely off and away 
from the forbidden wall by aiding a group of handicapped 
pupils in a specially created public school; yet, the Court 
here declares the legislative act unconstitutional. I find this 
perplexing, to say the least. 


This Court has said that "[g]overnmental action 
‘endorses’ religion if it favors, prefers, or promotes it" 
(Majority opn, at 11; see also, New York State School Bds. 
Assn v Sobol, supra, 79 NY2d, at 339). In applying that 
Proposition at face value, the Court concludes that Satmarer 
Hasidism is impermissibly favored, preferred or promoted by 
Chapter 748. I disagree because context is key (see, New 
York State School Bds. Assn. y Sobol, supra). Here, no 
message of endorsement for Satmar theology or its particular 
separatist tenets need necessarily or can fairly be inferred, 
either by objective third parties or by the protagonists 
themselves. On the other hand, it can fairly be said that the 
People of the State of New York, as a whole, gain a 
compelling benefit in the compromise solution achieved here. 
The New York commonweal is primarily advanced. It 
should not be forgotten or overlooked that the long- 
simmering, underlying dispute spilled over the borders of the 
Village into the broader surrounding community, and resulted 
in a complete impasse. The legislation, judicially dissolved 


Sla 
No. 120-dis 


in this case, was the negotiated denouement at the highest 
policy level available in a democracy, the State Legislature. 
As Professor Tribe has noted, “[lJeaving room for 
legislatures to craft religious accommodations recognizes that 
they may be in a better position than courts to decide when 
the advantages of strict neutrality are overstated" (Tribe, 
American Constitutional Law §14-7, at 1195 [2d ed] 
{emphasis added]). Former Justice Brennan emphasized this 
important nuance by observing that “even when the 
government is not compelled to do so by the Free Exercise 
Clause, it may to some extent act to facilitate the 
opportunities of individuals to practice their religion” (Marsh 
v Chambers, 463 US 783, 812 [Brennan, J., dissenting]). 


The incidental, “attenuated” benefit to the minority 
Satmar viewpoint supports this State’s rich pluralistic 
tradition and does not diminish, but rather enhances, the 
common good. I conclude that the incidental benefit to the 
Satmar Hasidim citizens does not render the State’s 
legislative solution facially impermissible because: 


[i]t does not follow, of course, that 
government policies with secular objectives 
may not incidentally benefit religion. The 
nonsectarian aims of government and the 
interests of religious groups often overlap, and 
this Court has never required that public 
authorities refrain from implementing 
reasonable measures to advance legitimate 
secular goals merely because they would 
thereby relieve religious groups of costs they 
would otherwise incur. See, Mueller v Allen, 
436 US 388, 393, 103 S Ct 3062, 3065, 77 


52a 
No. 120-dis 


L.Ed.2d 721 [1983]. (Texas Monthly, Inc. v 
Bullock, 489 US 1, 10.) 


The unmistakable reality of this case is that the 
stricken legislation tried to create a secular public school for 
pupils with special education needs. The Majority concludes 
that the effort fails. Yet, the new public school district 
offers programs and services at odds with many basic 
precepts of Satmarer Hasidism. Secularism itself is 
antithetical to Hasidism, yet secularism is the quid pro quo 
imposed by the State for these Village residents to avail 
themselves in this way of State-regulated special educational 
services for their handicapped youngsters. Though the 
Legislature bent over backwards, as a last resort, to address 
the legitimate special education needs of the Satmarer 
students, it did not bend to the theology of their families or 
community (see generally, Tribe, American Constitutional 
Law §14-7, at 1195 [2d ed]). For its effort, the Legislature 
and Executive and the citizens who sought recourse through 
the democratic process are deemed religious gerrymanderers 
and educational segregationists (see, Concurring Opn, Kaye, 
Ch.J., at 5, 11; contrast, Mtr. of Wolpoff v Cuomo, 80 NY2d 
70, 78-80). 


On the other hand, there has been substantial 
approbation from the surrounding and affected non-Satmarer 
community for the fairness and equity of the State providing 
a secular solution for what had previously proved to be an 
intractable local dispute. Indeed, defendant-intervenor- 
appellant Board of Education of the Monroe-Woodbury 
Central School District has not regarded the legislation as a 
repudiation of the secular educational principles for which it 
previously and steadfastly fought as litigant against the 


53a 
No. 120-dis 


Satmarer Hasidim, or as an approval of the separatist tenets 
of the Satmar. Although it was unable to achieve a solution 
on its own, its present amity is noteworthy (Board of 
Education v Wieder, 72 NY2d 174, supra). 


As the Supreme Court noted in Wolman, "[t]he fact 
that a unit on a neutral site on occasion may serve only 
sectarian pupils does not provoke the same concerns that 
troubled the Court in Meek [v Pittinger]" (Wolman v Walter, 
433 US 229, 247). “The purpose of the program is to aid 
school children * * * * Certainly the Establishment Clause 
should not be seen as foreclosing a practical response to the 
logistical difficulties of extending needed and desired aid to 
all the children of the community” (id., at n 14). The United 
States Supreme Court built on those comments in Zobrest v 
Catalina Foothills School District ( Sct, 6l 
USLW 4641 [decided 6-16-93], supra) by observing that "we 
have consistently held that government programs that 
neutrally provide benefits to a broad class of citizens defined 
without reference to religion are not readily subject to an 
Establishment Clause challenge just because sectarian 
institutions may also receive an attenuated financial benefit" 
(id., at 4643, Rehnquist, Ch.J., Opn of the Court). That is 
the substantive effect of this legislation. This Court, 
nevertheless, objects as to the form selected and prescribed 
by this State’s Legislature and Executive. 


In fact, Board of Education v Wieder (72 NY2d 174, 
supra) aspirationally urged the provision of services 
separately to the handicapped students of Kiryas Joel, if 
Monroe-Woodbury School District could find a way to do so 
(id., at 189, fn 3). Wolman was offered as authority and a 
guidepost of significant promise for the Legislature in 
promulgating its ultimate substantive results (id.). Ironically, 


54a 
No. 120-dis 


the Legislature’s action is criticized as radical and not 
sufficiently tailored (Concurring Opn, Kaye, Ch.J., at 1, 11- 
12). 


I conclude that strong and sufficient authority and 
analysis, past and immediate, support the view that the 
principal or primary effect of the challenged legislation does 
not advance religion in this unique context, and that no 
endorsement of religion may be fairly inferred. 


Vv. 


This latest litigation reaches this Court by appeal as 
of right on constitutional grounds from the affirmance of 
summary judgment granted to plaintiffs in the Supreme Court 
declaring Chapter 748 facially unconstitutional. In that 
procedural framework, of course, disputed inferences or 
factual issues must be viewed in the light most favorable to 
defendants and challenges on an as-applied basis should await 
a future day of reckoning. Undeniably, a sharp Sword of 
Damocles hangs over the officials charged with 
implementation of this statute. As Governor Cuomo 
observed, “[o]f course this new school district must take 
pains to avoid conduct that violates the separation of church 
and state * * * * I believe they will be true to their 
commitment" (Approval Message of the Governor, 1989 NY 
Legis Ann at 325, supra). 


The concerns about the degree under which this new 
school district actually operates within the direction and 
control of elected community leaders who share a particular 
religious persuasion are issues of applied fact, not law. A 
similar fact mix is presented as to whether the creation of 
such a school is rooted solely in the religious preferences of 


55a 


No. 120-dis 


the Satmar or in their cultural, essentially secular, needs and 
rights, which are entitled to an enlightened and permissible 
societal accommodation. The needs, at least as emphasized 
by defendants, stem from the additional emotional impacts on 
Satmarer handicapped students. Defendants note that if these 
Students -- already special -- are compelled to leave the 
Village and attend special education instruction in the 
Monroe-Woodbury public schools, they are met with a 
negative and hostile environment in which their language, 
customs and appearances are regarded as oddities, at best. 
Justice Levine sagely observed in dissent at the Appellate 
Division that deeply troubling concerns persist as to whether 
the courts are able, even in trial, to delve into, trace and 
ascertain the “true” Satmar theology and precepts (Grumet v 
Bd. of Education of the Kiryas Joel Village School Dist. : 
supra, 187 AD2d, at 29 [Levine, J., dissenting]; see also, 
Tribe, American Constitutional Law §14-11, at 1231 (2d 
ed]). The bottom procedural line is that this Court has 
plainly disfavored summary disposition when faced with 
similarly sensitive and complicated questions of fact (see, 
Ware v Valley Stream High School, 75 NY2d 114, 131). 


VL. 


Notably, the record in this case documents sharp 
contrasts between the manner in which the secular special 
educational services are provided in the Kiryas Joel public 
school and the distinctive religious lifestyle of the Village. 
English is the language of instruction within the school; 
Yiddish is the medium of communication within the Village. 
In contrast to the method of education at the sectarian schools 
in the Village, male and female students at the public special 
education school are grouped together for instructional 
Purposes at the special school; instructional materials are not 


56a 
No. 120-dis 


based upon the sex of the student being instructed; female 
employees are not prohibited from exercising authority over 
male employees; the physical appearance of the building is 
secular, including the significant absence of mezuzahs on the 
doorposts; and the dress of the employees is secular in 
appearance. The democratically-elected Board of Trustees of 
the Kiryas Joel Village School District has strained to create 
a nonsectarian educational environment which is faithful to 
the secular command of the statute. Plainly, this effort is 
indicative of the secular compromise the Hasidim community 
was willing to absorb to allow the special education needs of 
their children to be met within a public, neutral, 
nondenominational setting. 


The judicial nullification of this latest phase of the 
long-standing tug-of-war prompts the larger question whether 
control over a public school may ever be placed in the hands 
of secularly-elected individuals who have a common set of 
religious beliefs. Does a forbidden “symbolic union” always 
and automatically emerge? The three Opinions of the 
Majority suggest so, but I emphatically think not. It is 
important and fundamental to understand that the 
establishment of a union free school district geographically 
identical to an incorporated municipality, in the context of 
the constitutional and statutory guarantees of public 
education, neutral religious rights and nondiscrimination 
provided by both Federal and State law, should not be 
stigmatized as aid to a particular denomination, simply 
because the inhabitants of that municipality are predominantly 
or even exclusively members of that denomination. 


For the Court to reject the Legislature’s answer with 
a blunt "No” deprives the citizens of Kiryas Joel of certain 
educational prerogatives in contravention of their fundamental 


57a 
No. 120-dis 


right to self-governance. Their free exercise of religion is 
also inextricably implicated and compromised, simply 
because they have chosen to live and believe in a particular 
way together in an incorporated village. This dogmatic "No" 
at the end of a long, difficult odyssey once against strips the 
special-needs children of their protected public education 
rights. In effect, their Free Exercise rights are burdened by 
draping a drastic, new disability over the shoulders of young 
pupils solely on account of the religious beliefs of their 
community (see, Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v 
City of Hialeah, __ SCt__, 61 USLW 4587 [Scalia, J., 
concurring], supra; see also, McDaniel v Paty, 435 US 618). 


The facile notion that the cultural, psychological and 
secular differences of the special-needs children of Kiryas 
Joel cannot be classified as anything but religious in nature 
should be rejected as alien to our most cherished traditions 
and values. The cultural disposition and circumstances of 
handicapped Satmarer children should not disqualify them 
from government attention on the bare conclusion that their 
different-ness is derived solely from their religious beliefs 
and, therefore, is constitutionally inseparable from their 
religiosity. A culturally diverse Nation, which proclaims 
itself under a banner, E Pluribus Unum, should not tolerate 
such a self-contradiction, for to penalize and encumber 
religious uniqueness in this way, in effect, strikes the "E 
Pluribus” and leaves only the "Unum." 


As Justice Levine cogently cautioned in his dissent at 
the Appellate Division: 


In effect, the majority is saying that the State 
may not respond to a bona fide secular 
interest of the Satmarer Hasidim, i.e., the 


58a 
No. 120-dis 


psychological and emotional vulnerabilities of 
their handicapped children, because the culture 
bringing about the insecurities of these 
youngsters was "molded" by Satmar religious 
precepts. In a real sense, then, the majority 
is thus holding that merely because of some 
link between their religion and a legitimate 
secular need, the Satmarer are disqualified 
from receiving from the State the purely 
secular services to meet that secular need 
(Grumet v Board of Education of the Kiryas 
Joel Village School District, supra, 187 AD2d 
at 29 [Levine, J., dissenting]). 


Courts have no choice but to enter the struggle to 
examine the evidence and demarcate between a religious 
practice and the secular cultural consequences of that practice 
in a pluralistic society after the Legislature has persevered in 
doing so. If the courts refuse to do so and insist instead on 
overturning legislation, such as that at issue here, because it 
is asserted to be nothing more, on its face, than a forbidden 
accommodation to the exercise of religious "separatism," 
then frank confrontation with the values and rights under the 
Free Exercise Clause becomes unavoidable. Without a 
doubt, the two clauses -- Establishment and Free Exercise -- 
are in some historical and modern natural tension, and the 
overlap of the clauses may be said to create a “zone of 
permissible accommodation" (Tribe, American Constitutional 
Law §14-7, at 1194 [2d ed]; see also, Ware v Valley Stream 
High School District, 75 NY2d 114, supra). Justice Souter 
(with Justices Stevens and O’Connor joining) recently 
reiterated this principle in the concurring Opinion in Lee v 
Weisman ( US __, 112 S Ct 2649): 


59a 
No. 120-dis 


That government must remain neutral in 
matters of religion does not foreclose it from 
ever taking religion into account. The State 
may “accommodate” the free exercise of 
religion by relieving people from generally 
applicable rules that interfere with their 
religious callings. See, e.g., Corporation of 
Presiding Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of 
Latter-Day Saints v Amos, 483 US 327 
[1987]; see also, Sherbert v Verner, 374 US 
398 [1963]. Contrary to the views of some, 
such accommodation does not necessarily 
signify an official endorsement of religious 
observance over disbelief (Lee v Weisman, 
supra, at 2676-2677). 


Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989 could be viewed as 
a reasonable accommodation of the Satmarer’s free exercise 
of religion because it alleviates, as a last resort, their lack of 
choice in either having to forego the substantial benefits of 
publicly supported special educational services for their 
handicapped children or having to abandon their religious 
principles. That accommodation in these circumstances, on 
a facial attack and analysis, is supportable as a permissible 
deference to the historical and evolved predominance of Free 
Exercise protection in First Amendment constitutional 
adjudication. 


I would therefore reverse and not declare Chapter 748 
unconstitutional on its face. The judicial nullification of the 
democratic prerogatives and solution for this intracable 
Town-wide controversy is not justified. Instead, it seems to 
spring from a reflexive veneration of a symbolic metaphor 
that sacrifices concededly-necessary special education 


60a 
No. 120-dis 


services of a small group of handicapped pupils. A real wall 
of separation thus arises and solidifies to a mythic height and 
density. 


ee eke ee 


Order modified, with costs to plaintiffs, in accordance with 
the opinion herein and, as so modified, affirmed. Opinion 
by Judge Smith. Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Simons and 
Hancock concur, Chief Judge Kaye and Judge Hancock in 
separate concurring opinions. Judge Bellacosa dissents and 
votes to reverse in an opinion in which Judge Titone concurs. 


Decided July 6, 1993 


6la 


APPENDIX B 


Supreme Court - Appellate Division 
Third Judicial Department 


=e 


Decided and Entered: December 31, 1992 65398 


LOUIS GRUMET, Individually 
and as Executive Director 
of the New York State School 
Boards Association Inc.., 


et al., 
Respondents, 
v. OPINION AND ORDER 


BOARD OF EDUCATION OF 
THE KIRYAS JOEL VILLAGE 
SCHOOL DISTRICT et al., 

Appellants. 


Calendar Date: September 15, 1992 


Before: Levine, J.P., Mercure, Mahoney, Casey and 
Harvey, JJ. 


62a 
65398 


Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin (Lisa Burget and 
George Shebitz of counsel), Washington, D.C., for Board of 
Education of the Kiryas Joel Village School District, 
appellant. 


Ingerman, Smith, Greenberg, Gross, Richmond, 
Heidelberger, Reich & Scricca (Lawrence W. Reich of 
counsel), Northport, for Board of Education of the Monroe- 
Woodbury Central School District, appellant. 


Jay Worona, New York State School Boards 
Association, Albany, respondent. 


Robert Abrams, Attroney-General (Julie S. Mereson 
of counsel), Albany, pursuant to Executive Law § 71. 


Bernard F. Ashe (Gerard John De Wolf of counsel), 
Albany, for New York State United Teachers, amicus curiae. 


Marc D. Stern, New York City, for American Jewish 
Congress, amicus curiae. 


Stanley Geller (Lisa Thurau of counsel), New York 
City, for Committee for Public Education and Religious 
Liberty, amicus curiae. 


65398 


Casey, J. 


Appeal from a judgment of the Supreme Court (Kahn, 
J.), entered February 10, 1992 in Albany County, which, 


inter alia, granted plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment 
and declared the Laws of 1989 (ch 748) unconstitutional. 


The Laws of 1989 (ch 748) (hereinafter chapter 748) 
created a new school district, the Kiryas Joel Village School 
District (hereinafter the Village District), consisting of the 
territory of the Village of Kiryas Joel (hereinafter the 
Village), a community of Satmarer Hasidim located wholly 
within the boundaries of the Monroe-Woodbury Central 
School District (hereinafter the Monroe-Woodbury District) 
in Orange County. The statute reflects a political solution to 
a lengthy dispute between the Monroe-Woodbury District and 
the residents of the Village, most of whose children attend 
private religiously affiliated schools within the Village, 
concerning the provision of special educational services to 
the Village’s handicapped children. 


Despite earlier efforts at accommodating the 
undisputed needs of the Village’s handicapped children, 
resolution of the dispute, which centered on where the 
services had to be offered, was sought by way of litigation. 
The Court of Appeals ultimately held that the Monroe- 
Woodbury District “is neither compelled to make services 
available to private school handicapped children only in 
regular public school classes and programs, nor without 
authority to provide otherwise” (Board of Educ. of Monroe- 
Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, 72 NY2d 174, 187). 
The court also rejected the Villagers’ claim that the services 
had to be provided within their private schools or at a neutral 
site (id., at 187-189). Unfortunately, the dispute was not 


64a 
65398 


resolved, for the Monroe-Woodbury District continued to 
offer the services at its public schools and the Villagers 
refused to permit their children to attend the public schools. 
The creation of the Village District, which could establish its 
own public school to provide the services within the Village, 
was viewed as "a good faith effort to solve this unique 
problem" (Governor’s Mem, 1989 McKinney’s Session Laws 
of NY, at 2430). : 


Plaintiffs, the New York State School Boards 
Association (hereinafter the Association) and two officers of 
the Association, commenced this action against several State 
officials, including the Commissioner of Education and the 
Comptroller, seeking a judgment declaring chapter 748 
unconstitutional. The two school districts moved to intervene 
as defendants and their motions were granted. Thereafter, 
the parties stipulated to the discontinuance of the action as to 
the State officials, although the Attorney-General continued 
to defend the constitutionality of the statute pursuant to 
Executive Law § 71. The parties cross-moved for summary 
judgment and Supreme Court declared the statute 
unconstitutional, resulting in this appeal. 


The preliminary issue to be addressed is the question 
of standing. Defendants maintain that the Association and its 
officers, in their capacity as representatives of the 
Association, do not have standing to maintain this action. 
We agree. There is nothing in the record to establish that 
the Association itself is a citizen-taxpayer within the meaning 
of State Finance Law article 7-A and there is no claim that 
the Association has sustained any injury in fact. 
Accordingly, the Association does not have standing in its 
own right to maintain this action (see, Matter of Otsego 2000 
v Planning Bd. of Town of Otsego, 171 AD2d 258, 269, iv 


65a 
65398 


denied 79 NY2d 753). Nor has it been shown that the 
Association meets the three requirements for associational or 
organizational standing (Society of Plastics Indus. v County 
of Suffolk, 77 NY2d 761, 775). As units of municipal 
government, the Association’s member school boards do not 
have the substantive right to raise constitutional challenges to 
a State statute, particularly in the absence of any claim that 
compliance with the statute will force one or more of the 
member school boards to violate a constitutional proscription 
(see, Matter of Jeter v Ellenville Cent. School Dist., 41 
NY2d 283, 287). The only two school districts that might 
arguably have standing, the Monroe-Woodbury District and 
the Village District, are parties to this action and the 
Association clearly does not represent their interests. We 
conclude, therefore, that the Association and the officers of 
the Association lack standing to maintain this action. We 
note that plaintiffs’ reliance on New York State School Bds. 
Assn. v Sobol (168 AD2d 188, affd 79 NY2d 333) is 
misplaced, for the issue of the Association’s standing to 
maintain that action was neither raised nor decided. 


The two individual plaintiffs, Louis Grumet and 
Albert W. Hawk, are named as party plaintiffs individually, 
as well as in their capacity as officers of the Association. In 
their individual capacity, each clearly meets the definition of 
citizen-taxpayer contained in State Finance Law § 123-a and, 
therefore, they have statutory standing to maintain an action 
for declaratory or injunctive relief to prevent the 
unconstitutional disbursement of State funds (State Finance 
Law § 123-b [1]). It is undisputed that the Village District 
created by chapter 748 will receive State funding and, 
therefore, the constitutionality of that statute can be 
challenged in a citizen-taxpayer action (see, Matter of Cario 
v Sobol, 157 AD2d 172, 175). The fact that the action was 


66a 
65398 


discontinued as to the State officials when the two school 
districts intervened as party defendants does not alter this 
conclusion, for the expenditure of State funds remains an 
issue and the Attorney-General continues to appear in the 
action pursuant to Executive Law § 71. 


Turning to the merits, we agree with Supreme Court 
that chapter 748 violates the Establishment Clause of the US 
Constitution and NY Constitution, article XI, § 3. The 
tripartite analysis under the Establishment Clause introduced 
in Lemon v Kurtznan (403 US 602, 612), which the United 
States Supreme Court declined to reconsider in Lee v 
Weisman (__ US__,, __, 112 SCt 2649, 2655), requires: 
"[flirst, the statute must have a secular legislative purpose; 
second, its principal or primary effect must be one that 
neither advances nor inhibits religion * * * [and third], the 
Statute must not foster ‘an excessive governmental 
entanglement with religion’" (Lemon v Kurtynan, supra, at 
612-613, quoting Walz v Tax Commn., 397 US 664, 668 
[citation omitted]). 


According to defendants, the statute has the secular 
purpose of providing special educational services to 
handicapped children who are not receiving those services. 
This argument ignores two undisputed facts: the handicapped 
children of the Village were already entitled to receive those 
services pursuant to existing Federal and State law (see, 20 
USC § 1400 et seq.; Education Law § 4401 ef seq.), and 
those services were actually available to the Village children 
from the Monroe-Woodbury District, within which the 
Village was located. The only reason that the children did not 
receive the services is their parents’ refusal to let them attend 
the public schools of the Monroe-Woodbury District where 
the services were available. The stated reason for this 


67a 
65398 


refusal is the fear and trauma allegedly sustained by the 
children upon leaving the language, lifestyle and environment 
of the Village and mixing with others (Board of Educ. of 
Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, 72 NY2d 
174, 188, supra). The challenged statute, therefore, was 
designed not merely to provide special educational services 
to the handicapped children of the Village, but to provide 
those services within the Village so that the children would 
remain subject to the language, lifestyle and environment 
created by the community of Satmarer Hasidim and avoid 
mixing with children whose language, lifestyle and 
environment are not the product of that religion. The dissent 
finds a secular purpose for the statute in that it would provide 
the handicapped children of the Village with the publicly 
supported, secular special educational services they need ai) 
to which they are entitled, but as previously noted those 
services were already available to all of the handicapped 
children of the Monroe-Woodbury District, including the 
handicapped children of the Village. Thus, the only secular 
need for the statute recognized by the dissent did not, in fact, 
exist. 


Assuming that the statute can be viewed as having a 
secular purpose, the second guideline of the Lemon test 
requires that the principal or primary effect must not advance 
religion. The Court of Appeals recently explained: 


A particular concern under the "effects" prong 
is "whether the symbolic union of church and 
state effected by the challenged governmental 
action is sufficiently likely to be perceived by 
adherents of the controlling denominations as 
an endorsement, and by the nonadherents as a 
disapproval, of their individual religious 


68a 
65398 


choices" * * *. Context determines whether 
particular governmental action is likely to be 
perceived as an endorsement of religion * * *. 
Governmental action “endorses” religion if it 
favors, prefers, or promotes it * * * (New 
York State School Bds. Assn. v Sobol, 79 
NY2d 333, 339-340, quoting School Dist. of 
City of Grand Rapids v Ball, 473 US 373, 390 
[citations omitted]). 


Defendants claim that the creation of a school district 
to provide educational services should be treated no 
differently than the creation of a village to provide municipal 
services, such as police and fire protection. The Supreme 
Court, however, has recognized that the relationship between 
government and religion in the education of children is a 
sensitive one and that government’s activities in this area can 
have a magnified impact, creating “an all-too-ready 
opportunity for divisive rifts along religious lines in the body 
politic" (School Dist. of City of Grand Rapids v Ball, supra, 
at 383). 


Defendants also contend that the provision of 
educational services to sectarian students and the segregation 
of those students from others who are not of that sect are 
incidental benefits which do not offend the Constitution (see, 
Mueller v Allen, 463 US 388, 393; Wolman v Walter, 433 
US 229, 247-248). Considering the entire context in which 
the statute was enacted, we conclude that the statute not only 
authorizes a religious community to dictate where secular 
public educational services shall be provided to children of 
the community, it creates the type of symbolic impact that is 
impermissible under the second prong of the Lemon test. 


69a 
65398 


As previously noted, the educational services which 
the statute was intended to provide were already available to 
the Village children at public schools within the school 
district where they resided but outside the boundaries of the 
Village. If those services were inadequate or inappropriate, 
as defendants now suggest, existing remedies were available 
for the parents to pursue (see, Education Law § 4404). 
Instead, the parents claimed that the service had to be 
provided within the private schools in the Village or at a 
neutral site within the Village. When this claim proved 
unsuccessful (see, Board of Educ. of Monroe-Woodbury 
Cent. School Dist. v. Wieder, supra), the parents continued 
to refuse the services available at the public schools of the 
Monroe-Woodbury District. 


Chapter 748 created a school district coterminous with 
the Village, which is inhabited by residents who are almost 
exclusively of one religious sect. The school board is 
controlled by members of that sect and the children who 
attend the public school established by the district are all of 
that sect. The services provided by the school were already 
available to the children of the Village, but their parents 
refused to permit them to mix with other students whose 
language, lifestyle and environment were not the product of 
the same religious sect. As a result of the statute, the 
services which were otherwise available at the public schools 
of the Monroe-Woodbury District are now provided by a 
public school that is controlled by and located within the 
religious community, and the children of the community who 
attend that school are effectively segregated from children of 
other religions. Regardless of whether the public school 
operated by the Village District is a neutral site, and 
regardless of how scrupulous the district is in maintaining the 
secular nature of the educational services offered at the 


70a 
65398 


school, we are of the view that the symbolic union between 
church and state effected by the creation of a school district 
coterminous with a religious enclave to provide within that 
enclave educational services that were already available 
elsewhere is significantly likely to be perceived by adherents 
of the Satmarer Hasidim as an endorsement, and by 
nonadherents as a disapproval, of their individual religious 
beliefs (see, School Dist. of City of Grand Rapids v Ball, 
supra, at 389-392). 


We emphasize that it is not the location of the public 
school in the religious community and the provision of public 
educational services to sectarian students that we find 
offensive to the Establishment Clause (see, Board of Educ. 
of Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, supra, at 
189 n 3). The impermissible effect is the symbolic impact of 
creating a new school district coterminous with a religious 
community to provide euucational services that were already 
available in an effort to resolve a dispute between the 
religious community and the school district within which the 
community was formerly located, a dispute based upon the 
language, lifestyle and environment of the community’s 
children created by the religious tenets, practices and beliefs 
of the community. 


The dissent asserts that we are foreclosed from 
considering whether the religious tenets, practices and beliefs 
of the community played a role in the Village’s refusal to 
accept the special educational services offered by the 
Monroe-Woodbury District. The record, however, contains 
uncontradicted evidence of a direct link between the 
language, lifestyle and environment of the community’s 
children and the religious tenets, practices and beliefs of the 
community. Based upon similar evidence and in a similar 


Tla 
65398 


procedural posture, the Court of Appeals had little difficulty 
finding such a connection. "With an apparent over-all goal 
that children should continue to live by the religious 
standards of their parents, ‘Satmarer want their school to 
serve primarily as a bastion against undesirable acculturation, 
as a training ground for Torah knowledge in the case of 
boys, and, in the case of girls, as a place to gather 
knowledge they will need as adult women’ * * *" (Board of 
Educ. of Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, 
supra at 180 [emphasis supplied, citation omitted]). The 
stated reason for the Satmarer parents’ refusal of the services 
offered by the Monroe-Woodbury District was the emotional 
toll on the Satmarer children allegedly sustained upon 
"leaving their own community and being with people whose 
ways were so different from theirs” (id., at 181). Because 
the “ways” of the Satmarer children were molded by the 
religious standards of their parents (id., at 180), there can be 
little doubt that, in fact, religion played a role in the dispute, 
which we have considered as one of several factors in our 
decision. Contrary to the dissent’s interpretation, our 
holding, which concerns only the validity of the statute that 
created a new school district coterminous with a religious 
community to provide secular services that were already 
available to the community, has no bearing on whether the 
Satmarer are somehow “disqualified” from receiving those 
services. It is noteworthy that although the dissent asserts 
that we must ignore these undisputed facts, the dissent’s "fair 
and comprehensive analysis by an objective observer" 
encompasses a search both within and without the record to 
support the theory that the statute’s creation of a school 
district coterminous with a religious community to provide 
services to that community which were already available is 
not relevant in determining whether the particular 


72a 
65398 


governmental action is likely to be perceived as an 
endorsement of religion. 


Finding that the Satmarer’s handicapped children have 
“special psychological vulnerabilities * * * to exposure to the 
outside world", the dissent is apparently of the view that the 
special educational services offered by the Monroe-Woodbury 
District were not “protective” of these "special psychological 
vulnerabilities". Pursuant to Federal and State Law, 
handicapped children are entitled to an appropriate special 
education program and placement, and a parent who finds the 
placement unacceptable can seek review (Matter of Northeast 
Cent. School Dist. v Sobol, 79 NY2d 598, 603). If, as the 
dissent assumes, the services offered by the Monroe- 
Woodbury District were inappropriate as not “protective” of 
the Satmarer children’s “special psychological 
vulnerabilities", the parents had an available administrative 
remedy to review the proposed placements pursuant to 
Education Law § 4402 and, if necessary, judicial review of 
the determination produced by the administrative appeal. 
This review process could have addressed all of the parents’ 
secular concerns. The dissent’s suggestion that the creation 
of a new school district was the appropriate remedy to 
address the Satmarer parent’s claim that the services offered 
by the Monroe-Woodbury District were inappropriate for the 
special needs of their children is less than compelling. 


The dissent’s alternative argument, that the creation 
of a new school district might constitute "a valid alleviation 
of a burden on the Satmarer’s religious precepts", is 
premised on "the majority’s assumption that segregated 
education of their young is an integral part of Satmar 
religious precepts". We have made no such “assumption”. 
We have merely recognized that uncontradicted evidence in 


73a 
65398 


this record and in the prior litigation establishes a direct link 
between the Satmarer parents’ refusal to accept the services 
of the Monroe-Woodbury District and the religious tenets, 
practices and beliefs of the community which have molded 
the language, lifestyle and environment of the community’s 
children, resulting in an alleged emotional toll when the 
children leave the community and are with people whose 
ways are so different from theirs. The Satmarer themselves 
do not claim that they refused the services of the Monroe- 
Woodbury District because segregated education of their 
young is an integral part of Satmarer precepts and we have 
not made such an assumption. By going beyond the stated 
position of the Satmarer, the dissent has disregarded its own 
limitation on the scope of review of the facial validity of 
chapter 748. 


Having concluded that even if chapter 748 has a 
secular purpose its principal or primary effect advances 
religion, we see no need to consider the third prong of the 
Lemon test. Although we have concluded that the 
Association and its officers lacked standing to maintain this 
action, we see no need to modify Supreme Court's 
declaratory judgment, which did not grant any specific relief 
to the Association or its officers. The individual plaintiffs 
have standing to maintain this action as citizen-taxpayers and 
Supreme Court granted the appropriate declaratory relief. Its 
judgment should, therefore, be affirmed. 


Mercure, Mahoney and Harvey, JJ., concur. 
Levine, J.P. (dissenting). 


In my view, it was error for Supreme Court to have 
granted summary judgment declaring the legislation under 


74a 
65398 


review here (L 1989, ch 748) (hereinafter chapter 748) 
creating the Kiryas Joel Village School District (hereinafter 
the Village District), encompassing the territory of the 
Village of Kiryas Joel (hereinafter the Village) itself, to be 
facially invalid as a violation of the Establishment Clause of 
the 1st Amendment to the US Constitution or of article XI, 
§ 3 of the NY Constitution. 


I find the distinction, for Establishment Clause 
purposes, between a law’s facial invalidity and invalidity as 
applied to be far from clear in the case law (see, Bowen v 
Kendrick, 487 US 589, 601-602; id., at 627-628 [Blackmun, 
J., dissenting]). What is clear, however, is that, in deciding 
that this case was ripe for a determination of the statute’s 
facial invalidity on a motion for summary judgment, Supreme 
Court and the majority of this court have relied upon 
extrinsic evidence sharply disputed by the Village District 
and have ignored evidence submitted by the Village District 
showing its religiously neutral implementation of the statute, 
a factor I believe is relevant on the statute’s validity both 
facially and as applied. Moreover, I think the statute is 
sustainable on a facial challenge even under the majority’s 
factual assumptions, as a limited, permissible accommodation 
to the values represented by the Free Exercise Clause of the 
lst Amendment on behalf of the Satmarer Hassidim 
inhabiting the Village. I would, therefore, reverse, declare 
the statute facially valid and remit for trial of the disputed 
factual issues to determine whether the statute is valid as 
applied. Clearly, plaintiffs have raised a challenge to the 
validity of the statute as applied in the second amended 
complaint and the submissions on their motion for summary 
judgment. Thus, I would give the Satmarer Hassidim their 
day in court to establish that the statute can be and has been 
implemented in a way that sufficiently separates the Village 


75a 
65398 


District’s provision of special educational services for their 


handicapped children from their religious precepts and 
practices to avoid conflict with the Establishment Clause. 


The invalidity of a statute under the Establishment 
Clause, facially or as applied, is to be determined by whether 
it contravenes one or more of the three elements of the test 
announced in Lemon v Kurtynan (403 US 602, 612) and 
recently left standing by the United States Supreme Court in 
Lee v Weisman ( US , , 112 SCt 2649, 2655). 
Under Lemon, to avoid violating the Establishment Clause a 
statute must have a secular legislative purpose, its principal 
or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor 
inhibits religion, and it must not foster excessive 
governmental entanglement with religion. 


Regarding the “purpose” prong of the Lemon test, the 
legislative history of chapter 748 recites that it was enacted 
to break the impasse between the members of the Satmar 
Hassidic sect, who comprise the vast majority of the 
inhabitants of the Village, and the Monroe-Woodbury Central 
School District (hereinafter the Monroe-Woodbury District), 
whose territory contained the Village, over the public 
provision of special educational services for the handicapped 
children of the Village. As is more fully described in the 
Court of Appeals’ decision in the previous litigation 
involving this dispute (see, Board of Educ. of Monroe- 
Woodbury Cent. School Dist v. Wieder, 72 NY2d 174), the 
Monroe-Woodbury District had taken the position that special 
educational services would only be offered at fully integrated 
public schools located outside the Village, whereas the 
Satmarer parents insisted that their handicapped children 
should be provided these services in the Village, either at the 
parochial schools where all of the nonhandicapped Satmarer 


76a 
65398 


children are educated, or at a neutral site. When the prior 
litigation failed to resolve the dispute (see, id.), chapter 748 
was enacted for the stated purpose of ensuring that the 
handicapped children of the Satmarer Hassidim would receive 
the publicly supported, secular special educational services 
they need and to which they are entitled, at a neutral site in 
the Village (see, Governor’s Mem, 1989 Legis Ann, at 324- 
325). 


The foregoing secular purpose is sufficient to comply 
with the purpose facet of the Lemon test, which is only 
breached if the enactment was “motivated wholly by [a 
religious] purpose" (Bowen v Kendrick, 487 US 589, 602, 
supra [emphasis supplied]; see, Wallace v Jaffree, 472 US 
38, 56). Thus, the apprehension expressed in the majority’s 
decision as to some additional, or perhaps ulterior, religion- 
based motive underlying the enactment of chapter 748 would 
not serve to render it invalid in this respect. Moreover, in 
determining the legislative purpose for Establishment Clause 
analysis, “a court has no license to psychoanalyze the 
legislators * * *. If a legislature expresses a plausible 
secular purpose * * * then courts should generally defer to 
that stated intent * * *" (Wallace v Jaffree, supra, at 74-75 
[O’Connor, J., concurring] [citations omitted]). 


The ultimate ground for the majority’s invalidation of 
chapter 748, however, is its conclusion that the primary or 
principal effect of the legislation is to advance religion. | 
disagree. It bears emphasis that we are reviewing a 
determination that chapter 748 is facially invalid, made by 
Supreme Court in granting plaintiffs’ motion for summary 
judgment. In deciding upon the facial validity of the statute, 
particularly on cross motions for summary judgment, I 
believe that this court should not be looking for ulterior 


Tla 
65398 


motives for the enactment. Rather, we are bound to look at 
chapter 748 as a response to the stated position of the Satmar 
sect, expressed uot only in sworn affidavits here but 
consistently throughout the dispute over special educational 
services for its handicapped children (see, Board of Educ. of 
Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, 72 NY2d 
174, 180 n 2, 189, supra). As repeatedly stated, the motive 
for the Satmarer parents’ refusal to accept the special 
educational services for their handicapped children offered by 
the Monroe-Woodbury District was not religious, but was to 
trauma caused by exposure to integrated classes outside the 
Village that were inadequately addressed by the professional 
staff of the Monroe-Woodbury District. 


Thus, on summary judgment the majority seems 
erroneously to be relying upon a description of Satmar 
religious precepts on educating the sect’s nonhandicapped 
children contained in the affidavit of Israel Rubin, Ph.D.., 
submitted by plaintiffs, as establishing a religion-based 
motivation for the refusal of the Satmarer Hassidim to accept 
the special educational services offered by the Monroe- 
Woodbury District. Such a sectarian basis for their refusal, 
however, appears to be directly contradicted by the affidavit 
of the School Board President of the Village District 
submitted in the instant case as to the reason why the 
Monroe-Woodbury District’s offer of such services was 
refused. That affidavit states: 


Monroe-Woodbury has_ refused to 
accommodate the distinct language and 
cultural needs of the handicapped children in 
[the Village] by providing their education at a 
neutral site in their locality. * * * Because 


78a 
65398 


Monroe-Woodbury’s_ restrictions on the 
educational services for the handicapped 
children from [the Village] would have a 
major adverse effect on their educational 
progress, the handicapped children in [the 
Village] were not able to receive the special 
educational services they needed from the 
public educational system. 


The foregoing secular basis for the refusal to accept the 
services provided by the Monroe-Woodbury District was the 
same position asserted by the Satmarer Hassidim in the 
Board of Educ. of Monroe Woodbury Cent. School Dist v 
Wieder (supra) litigation. Indeed, the reason why the Court 
of Appeals in that case refused to entertain a belated claim 
that providing such special educational services at a neutral 
site in the Village was mandated under the Free Exercise 
Clause was that the Satmarer "in their submissions to the 
trial court insisted that, as a class, they should be exempted 
from public school placements only for nonreligious reasons 
- most particularly because of the emotional impact on the 
children of traveling out of Kiryas Joel" (id., at 189 
{emphasis in original]). And, in the same decision, after 
quoting from a treatise describing Satmar religious precepts 
on the education of children authored by the person whose 
affidavit the majority relies upon here, the Court of Appeals 
added in a footnote that the members of the Satmar sect in 
that case never conceded the accuracy of that description. 
"Indeed, in their submissions, they make no reference to 
their religious beliefs or practices, only their life-style and 
environment” (id., at 180 n 2). 


While I am not able to discern with complete 
confidence why the majority rejects the foregoing religious- 


79a 
65398 


neutral explanation by the Satmarer for their refusal to accept 
the special educational services of the Monroe-Woodbury 
District, the majority’s rationale seems to be based on either 
one of two propositions. The first of these is that the 
Satmarer’s explanation is disingenuous, i.e., that segregated 
education of even its handicapped children is in fact at the 
core of the Satmar sect’s religious beliefs. That proposition, 
however, is clearly contested by the Village District and, 
thus, cannot properly form the basis for granting plaintiffs’ 
motion for summary judgment. Beyond that procedural 
barrier to adopting this proposition, it has grave 
constitutional implications because it entangles a state civil 
court in factfinding on what is true Satmar religious doctrine 
on educating handicapped children (see, Tribe, American 
Constitutional Law § 1411, at 1231 [2d ed]). 


Alternatively, the majority’s decision may be read as 
concluding that the Satmarer’s professed secular explanation 
for rejecting the Monroe-Woodbury District’s offer of 
services is, nonetheless, religion based, because the 
Satmarer’s cloistered lifestyle and cultural outlook are 
derived from their religious beliefs. This, too, has grave 
constitutional implications under both religion clauses of the 
lst Amendment. In effect, the majority is saying that the 
State may not respond to a bona fide secular interest of the 
Satmarer Hassidim, i.e., the psychological and emotional 
vulnerabilities of their handicapped children, because the 
culture bringing about the insecurities of these youngsters 
was “molded” by Satmar religious precepts. In a real sense, 
then, the majority is thus holding that merely because of 
some link between their religion and a legitimate secular 
need, the Satmarer are disqualified from receiving from the 
State the purely secular services to meet that secular need. 
The case law simply does not support such a rigidly 


80a 
65398 


impenetrable wall between church and state as is implicit in 
this aspect of the majority’s decision. Indeed, such a holding 
conflicts with the United States Supreme Court's decisions 
that a state does not violate the Establishment Clause by 
commemorating the secular, cultural aspects of the 
Christmas/Chanukah holiday season, despite its religious 
origins (see, Allegheny County v Greater Pittsburgh 
American Civ. Liberties Union, 492 US 573, 617-620; 
Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 US 668). Thus, in my view, the 
alleged motivations of the Satmarer Hassidim for refusing 
fully integrated special educational services outside the 
Village cannot be the basis for a determination of a facial 
invalidity of the statute on a summary judgment motion. 


Furthermore, in resolving doubts regarding the facial 
validity of a statute, a court may properly look to how it has 
been interpreted and applied by the governmental agency 
charged with enforcing it. (see, Ehlert v United States, 402 
US 99, 105-107; see also, Grayned v City of Rockford, 408 
US 104, 110-111). Therefore, for summary judgment 
purposes, the sworn submissions of the Village District on 
the manner in which chapter 748 has been implemented 
should also be accepted as true. Summarized, the Village 
District’s proof is that the provision of special educational 
services under chapter 748 takes place at a site distinctly and 
physically separate from the Village parochial schools and, 
indeed, from any other place of religious observance. 
Additionally, the services being provided are distinctly 
secular as to content, professional staff and physical 
surroundings. 


In the absence of a religious purpose for creation of 
the Village District as a substitute for the Monroe-Woodbury 
District, the provision of purely secular special educational 


8la 
65398 


services to the Satmarer handicapped children in an 
atmosphere that is not only not “pervasively sectarian", but 
actually totally devoid of religious influences, appears to be 
virtually indistinguishable from the provision of therapeutic 
and remedial services to isolated groups of parochial school 
students upheld by seven justices of the United State Supreme 
Court in Wolman v. Walter (433 US 229, 244-248). In 
Wolman, the Supreme Court specifically rejected the notion 
that the provision of secular therapeutic and remedial services 
to school children at a neutral site is suspect, as having the 
effect of advancing religion, merely because the recipients of 
the services were separate groups composed exclusively of 
parochial school students (id.). 


If not virtually the same as in Wolman v Walter 
(supra), the fact pattern which we are bound to accept in the 
present procedural posture of the case is far closer to 
Wolman than it is to Parents’ Assn. of P.S. 16 v Quinones 
(803 F2d 1235), the case most heavily relied upon by 
Supreme Court in granting summary judgment in this case. 
In Parents’ Assn. of P.S. 16, the challenged program of 
remedial instruction for the Satmarer paroch ' school 
children at the premises of a New York City public school 
not only ethnically segregated the children, it virtually 
replicated the educational practices of the Satmar parochial 
school by gender segregation for teachers and students, the 
use of Yiddish as the primary language of instruction and 
adoption of a reading instruction method employed only in 
the parochial school (id., at 1237). Additionally, in Parents’ 
Assn. of P.S. 16, the court accepted factual assertions 
regarding Satmar religious precepts on education and relied 
on factual concessions of public educational authorities that 
are in dispute here and, thus, should be disregarded on 
summary judgment in the litigation at hand. 


82a 
65398 


Despite the similarity between the instant case and 
Wolman v Walter (supra), as premised on the only facts 
which this court should properly consider, the majority holds 
nonetheless that the statutory creation of the Village District 
has the primary effect of advancing religion because it will 
be perceived as a symbolic state endorsement of Satmar 
Hassidism. As I read the majority decision, this conclusion 
is based upon three factors: (1) the creation of a school 
district coterminous with a "religious enclave", (2) the 
preexisting availability of special educational services for 
Satmarer handicapped children provided by the Monroe- 
Woodbury District outside the Village, and (3) that the true 
basis for the Satmarer’s refusal to accept the integrated 
special educational services for their handicapped children 
outside the Village was the conflict which fully integrated 
schooling would present to their fundamental religious 
beliefs, or with cultural values inseparable from their 
religious beliefs. 


As to the majority’s supposition that the Satmarer’s 
refusal to accept the special education services offered by the 
Monroe-Woodbury District was religion based, I shall not 
repeat the reasons for my strong conviction that, on a facial 
challenge, and particularly on a motion for summary 
judgment in that context, we are not permitted to go behind 
the publicly stated and sworn to position of the Satmarer 
Hassidim of a nonreligious motivation for the refusal. 


At first blush, the two other factors relied upon by the 
majority might well be instinctively perceived as establishing 
that the State too readily acceded to the Satmarer’s "dictates" 
and, in some sense, thereby symbolically endorsed the sect’s 
religious tenets. However, the question of whether a 
statute's primary effect is to aid religion by reason of being 


83a 
65398 


perceived as a State endorsement of some religious 
denomination, or of religion in general, is not to be answered 
by an uncritical reaction to some superficial or selective 
presentation of the facts or circumstances concerning the 
legislation in question. Justice O’Connor, the original 
Proponent of the perception of endorsement approach to 
adjudging the principal effects of religion-related legislation 
(see, Lynch v Donnelly, 465 US 668, 691-692, supra 
[O’Connor, J., concurring]), has stated that "[tJhe relevant 
issue is whether an objective observer, acquainted with the 
text, legislative history, and implementation of the Statute, 
would perceive [the statute] as a state endorsement" (Wallace 
v Jaffree, 472 US 38, 76 supra [O’Connor, J. concurring] 
[emphasis supplied]). 


A fair and comprehensive analysis by an objective 
observer would have to take into account (1) the professed 
lack of religious motive of the Satmarer Hassidim for the 
creation of the Village District previously described, (2) that, 
uncontrovertably, the Satmarer would have been content had 
the Monroe-Woodbury District provided educational services 
at a neutral site in the Village, thus obviating many of the 
features of the creation of the Village District relied upon by 
plaintiffs to show symbolic endorsement of religion, (3) that, 
although the elected Board of Education of the Village 
District is likely to be entirely composed of Satmarer 
Hassidim, the Board lacks autonomy in appointing a 
Superintendent of Schools (see, Education Law § 1711 [3)) 
and the Superintendent is the official controlling the 
administration of the program (see, Education Law § 1711 


84a 
65398 


(5]), ' and (4) that the implementation of chapter 748 has 
resulted in the appointment of a highly qualified professional, 
not a member of the Satmar sect, as Superintendent of 
Schools, who is administering the program with autonomy to 
provide purely secular special educational services in an 
atmosphere completely divorced from and in significant 
respects inconsistent with the precepts of the Satmar sect. 


I think that the foregoing facts and circumstances 
would attenuate, in the eyes of an objective observer, the 
significance of the creation of a school district coterminous 
with the Village territory and the availability of special 
educational services outside the Village as indicia of a State 
endorsement of Satmar religious precepts. Both factors were 
merely collateral to the Satmarer’s stated objective of 
obtaining purely secular special educational services for the 
sect’s handicapped children and their willingness to accept 
those services in a truly nonsectarian atmosphere, so long as 
it was protective of the special psychological vulnerabilities 
of those children to exposure to the outside world. These 
are, in my opinion, the only inferences that can fairly be 
drawn from the evidence contained in the Village District’s 
submissions, and they are insufficient to demonstrate a 
symbolic link between Church and State, as a matter of law 
(see, Bowen v Kendrick, 487 US 589, 613, supra). 


Even if I were to agree with the majority, however, 
that the Satmar sect’s refusal to accept the Monroe- 


' Moreover, the Board of Education's ability to interject religion into the 
services provided to the children appears to be weak and improbable in 
light of the dominant supervisory and programatic regulatory role of the 
State Department of Education over special educational services for 
handicapped children (see, Education Law § 4403; 8 NYCRR part 200). 


85a 
65398 


Woodbury District’s integrated special educational services 
for its handicapped children was based upon fundamental 
religious beliefs or upon cultural values inseparable from its 
religious beliefs, I would nonetheless hold that the 
accommodation of the State to those values and beliefs by the 
enactment of chapter 748 did not have the primary effect of 
advancing religion. Rather, the statute survives a facial 
challenge because its principal effect would then be to lift a 
substantial burden on the sect’s free exercise of religion. 
The legitimacy of the right of an insular religious sect, under 
the Free Exercise Clause of the ist Amendment, to prevent 
exposure of their children to the worldly influences and 
inconsistent secular values of the public school system was 
recognized in Wisconsin v Yoder (406 US 205, 218-219). 
Moreover, a state may constitutionally relieve a substantial 
governmental burden on a sect’s exercise of its religion even 
when the burden falls short of an actual violation of the Free 
Exercise Clause (see, Texas Monthly v Bullock, 489 US 1, 
18-19 n 8; Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of 
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v Amos, 483 US 327, 334). 


Here, the Monroe-Woodbury District had previously 
provided special educational services for Satmarer 
handicapped children at an annex to the sect’s private 
parochial school for girls in the Village (see, Board of Educ. 
of Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Weider, 72 NY2d 
174, 180, supra). In 1985, however, the Monroe-Woodbury 
District resolved that such services would only be offered in 
integrated classes at public schools outside the Village (id.). 
Thus, under the majority’s assumption that segregated 
education of their young is an integral part of Satmar 
religious precepts, the Satmarer Hassidim were placed in the 
dilemma of either having to forego the substantial benefits of 
publicly supported educational services for their handicapped 


86a 
65398 


children or availing themselves of those benefits at the price 
of foregoing their religious convictions regarding the manner 
of educating their children. Unquestionably, a governmental 
decision that forces a religious observer "to choose between 
following the precepts of her religion and forfeiting benefits, 
on the one hand, and abandoning one of the precepts of her 
religion in order to [obtain the benefits] * * * puts the same 
kind of burden upon the free exercise of religion as would a 
fine imposed against [her] for her [religious practice]" 
(Sherbert v Verner, 374 US 398, 404; see, Hobbie v 
Unemployment Appeals Commn., 480 US 136, 140-141). 


I am conscious of the danger that an unduly broad 
application of an accommodation to free exercise values 
rationale to uphold any governmental benefit to religion 
could ultimately result in the Free Exercise Clause 
swallowing up the Establishment Clause (see, Corporation of 
Presiding Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day 
Saints v Amos, supra, at 347 [O’Connor, J., concurring]; 
Note, The Free Exercise Boundaries of Permissible 
Accommodation Under the Establishment Clause, 99 Yale L 
J 1127, 1138-1139). It cannot be said at this procedural 
stage in the action, however, that chapter 748 crosses the line 
from a valid alleviation of a burden on the Satmarer’s 
religious precepts in separately educating their handicapped 
children to an invalid advancement of religion by promoting 
the Satmar sect’s ability to inculcate its religious values in 
educating those children. First, undoubtedly, the loss of 
remedial and rehabilitative educational services for Satmarer 
handicapped children is a discernible, substantial burden (see, 
Lee v Weisman, US__,___, 112 SCt 2649, 2677-2678 
[Souter, J., concurring], supra). Second, the accommodation 
to Satmar religious educational practices is minimal, as 
compared to the practices in their parochial schools in the 


87a 
65398 


Village and to the accommodations described in Parents’ 
Assn. of P.S. 16 v Quinones (803 F2d 1235, supra). The 
court in Parents’ Assn. of P.S. 16 took pains to suggest that 
a constitutionally valid, minimal zccommodation to Satmar 
religious beliefs could have been devised in providing 
remedial services to the sect’s parochial school students by 
emphasizing that "in the circumstances of the present case, 
it is difficult to believe that the City cannot devise 
alternatives for making its remedial services available to the 
Beth Rachel students in a way that neither requires them to 
disregard their religious beliefs nor appears to endorse those 
beliefs” (id., at 1242). Third, the Satmarer Hassidim had 
attempted to obtain an acceptable accommodation to their 
religious beliefs in a less symbolically promotional manner 
by countersuing in Board of Educ. of Monroe-Woodbury 
Cent. School Dist v Weider (supra) to compel the existing 
public school system to provide special educational services 
to their handicapped children at a neutral site in the Village. 
When that attempt was unsuccessfull (see, id.) the statutory 
creation of the Village District became the only viable 
remaining means to accommodate Satmar practices regarding 
the separate education of the sect’s children, a factor 
weighing in favor of the validity of the legislation (see, 
Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 14-15, at 1285-1286 
[2d ed]). Fourth, the statute gives the Satmarer Hassidim no 
greater advantage in exercising their religious educational 
practices than they enjoyed prior to the Monroe-Woodbury 
District’s decision to withdraw its special educational services 
from a site in the Village, an additional factor favoring 
validity (see, Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of 
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v Amos, supra, at 337). 


Where, as here, the challenged statute promotes Free 
Exercise values by alleviating a substantial government- 


88a 
65398 


imposed burden on a religious observance, the symbolism of 
a governmental endorsement is entitled to relatively little 
weight in determining whether the statute’s pri:>ary effect is 
to advance religion. As Justice O’Connor observed in 
Wallace v Jaffree (472 US 38, 83): 


It is disingenuous to look for a purely secular 
purpose when the manifest objective of a 
statute is to facilitate the free exercise of 
religion by lifting a government-imposed 
burden. Instead, the Court should simply 
acknowledge that the religious purpose of such 
a statute is legitimated by the Free Exercise 
Clause. I would also go further. In assessing 
the effect of such a statute -- that is, in 
determining whether the statute conveys the 
message of endorsement of religion or a 
particular religious belief -- courts should 
assume that the ‘objective observer,’ * * * is 
acquainted with the Free Exercise Clause and 
the values it promotes. Thus individual 
perceptions, or resentment that a religious 
observer is exempted from a particular 
government requirement, would be entitled to 
little weight if the Free Exercise Clause 


strongly supported the exemption. 


It follows from the foregoing that the statute facially passes 
the effects prong of the Lemon test, whether or not one 
agrees with the majority view that the statute represents an 
accommodation to the Satmarer’s religious beliefs and 
practices. 


89a 
65398 


Turning then to the remaining prongs of the Lemon 
Establishment Clause test, i.e., whether the creation of the 
Village District leads to an excessive government 
entanglement with religion, I find that for purposes of a 
facial challenge a violation of that standard has also not been 
demonstrated. In aid to education cases under the 
Establishment Clause, the risk of excessive entanglement has 
been found to arise in three forms of potential, mutual 
church-state intrusiveness: (1) the need for intense 
surveillance of a publicly supported secular educational 
program conducted under the auspices of religious 
authorities, to insure the absence of any religious 
indoctrination, (2) dual and overlapping administration of the 
religious and secular parts of the educational program, 
necessitating a close, continuing relationship between secular 
and religious educational and administrative staff, and (3) 
political divisiveness, for example, from budgetary 
competition between secular and religious programs (see, 
Lemon v Kurtynan, 403 US 602, 623, supra; Aguilar v 
Felton, 473 US 402, 413-414). As pointed out in Bowen v 
Kendrick (487 US 589, supra), however, typically a finding 
of excessive entanglement in educational aid cases has 

“rested * * * on the undisputed fact that the elementary and 
secondary schools receiving aid were ‘pervasively sectarian’ 
and had ‘as a substantial purpose the inculcation of religious 
values’" (id., at 616, quoting Aguilar v Felton, supra, at 411, 
quoting Committee for Public Educ. & Religious Liberty v 
Nyquist, 413 US 756, 768 [emphasis supplied]). The 
existence of a pervasively sectarian institutional setting for 
the Village District’s programs, having a substantial purpose 
of religious indoctrination, certainly is not an “undisputed 
fact" here. Any monitoring of the program that occurs here 
would be exclusively of secular, not sectarian, professional 
staff. Furthermore, without the presence of religious 


90a 
65398 


educators or administrators participating in any of the 
programs conducted on premises by the Village District, the 
possibility of entanglements from necessary secular/sectarian 
working relationships is speculative and remste. Such 
factors have been held sufficient to sustain the validity of aid 
to education legislation under the excessive entanglement 
prong of the Lemon test (see, Bowen v Kendrick, supra, at 
616-617; Wolman v Walter, 433 US 229, 248, supra; Roemer 
v Board of Pub. Works of Maryland, 426 US 736, 762). The 
potential for political divisiveness as a result of the creation 
of the Village District also seems remote. The Satmarer 
handicapped children are entitled to publicly financed special 
educational services according to their needs irrespective of 
where they are provided or who provides them. The threat 
of political divisiveness is belied by the fact that the Monroe- 
Woodbury District, the political subdivision most directly 
affected financially by the carving out of the Village District, 
has consistently supported the position of the Village District 
in the instant action. 


Based upon all the foregoing reasons, I have 
concluded that chapter 748 is not facially invalid under the 
Establishment Clause of the Ist Amendment. I would also 
hold it valid facially under article XI, § 3 of the NY 
Constitution, inasmuch as there is utterly nothing in the 
language of the statute or its legislative history establishing 
that the Village District is controlled by the Satmar sect. 
Accordingly, I would reverse Supreme Court’s judgment, 
grant defendants partial summary judgment declaring chapter 
748 facially valid, and remit to Supreme Court for trial on 
the outstanding issues of fact necessary to resolve the validity 
of the statute as applied. 


costs. 


9la 
65398 


ORDERED that the judgment is affirmed, without 


ENTER: 


Michael J. Novack 
Clerk 


92a 
APPENDIX C 


STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF ALBANY 


SUPREME COURT 


LOUIS GRUMET, Individually and as Executive Director of 
the New York State School Boards Association, Inc.; 
ALBERT W. HAWK, Individually and as President of the 
New York State School Boards Association, Inc., and the 
NEW YORK STATE SCHOOL BOARDS ASSOCIATION, 
INC., 


Plaintiffs, 
~against- 


NEW YORK STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT; 
THOMAS SOBOL, as Commissioner of the New York State 
Education Department; NEW YORK STATE BOARD OF 
REGENTS; EDWARD V. REGAN, as New York State 
Comptroller; EMANUEL AXELROD, as District 
Superintendent of Orange-Ulster BOCES; BOARD OF 
EDUCATION OF THE KIRYAS JOEL VILLAGE 
SCHOOL DISTRICT; BOARD OF EDUCATION OF THE 
MONROE-WOODBURY CENTRAL SCHOOL DISTRICT, 


Defendants. 


93a 
Supreme Court - Request for Judicial Intervention 


March 7, 1990-August 14, 1991 - RJI 0190 021649 Index 
No. 1054-90 


JUSTICE LAWRENCE E. KAHN, Presiding 


APPEARANCES: New York State School Boards 
Association Legal Department 
Attorney for plaintiffs 
Jay Worona, Esq. (General Counsel) 
Cynthia Plumb Fletcher, Esq. 
(of Counsel) 
Pilar Sokol, Esq. 
119 Washington Avenue 
Albany, New York 12210 
465-3474 


Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin 
Attorneys for KIRYAS JOEL 
VILLAGE SCHOOL DIST. 

David G. Webbert, Esq. (of Counsel) 
2555 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
(202) 293-6400 


Parisi, DeLorenzo, Gordon, 
Pasquariello & Weiskopf, P.C. 
Eric A. Tepper, Esq. (of Counsel) 

(Local Counsel) 

Attorneys for KIRYAS JOEL 
VILLAGE SCHOOL DIST. 

210 Nott Terrace 

Schenectady, New York 12307 

374-8494 


94a 
APPEARANCES: (continued) 


Hon. Robert Abrams, Attorney General 
Attorney for NEW YORK STATE 
Mary Ellen Clerkin, Esq. 
(of Counsel) 
The Capitol 
Albany, New York 12224 
473-6288 


Ingerman, Smith, Greenberg, Gross, 
Richmond, Heidelberger 
& Reich, Esqs. 

Attorneys for MONROE-WOODBURY 
Lawrence W. Reich, Esq. 

(of Counsel) 

167 Main Street 

Northport, New York 11768 

(516) 261-8834 


New York State United Teachers 
Amicus Curiae 
Gerard John DeWolf, Senior 

Counsel 

159 Wolf Road 

Box 15-008 

Albany, New York 12212-5008 

459-5400 


KAHN, J. 


This litigation challenges the constitutionality of 
Chapter 748 of the Laws of 1989, which created the Kiryas 
Joel Village School District. While presenting issues which 
are new and distinct, it continues years of litigation, which 
in one form or another, all emanate from attempts to obtain 
public funding for special education programs for children of 
the Satmar Hasidic Sect. Much of the history of the 
relationship between the present litigants has been 
documented by the Court of Appeals in Board of Educ. of 
Monroe-Woodbury Cent. School Dist. v Wieder, (72 NY2d 
174). Therein, the issue to be determined was whether 
special services to the handicapped children of the Village of 
Kiryas Joel were statutorily required to be provided in the 
public schools or in religiously affiliated private schools. 
Ultimately, the court determined that the applicable 
provisions of the Education Law did not require the Board of 
Education of the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District 
to offer such services only in regular public school classes. 
The court also rejected the contention that such services must 
be provided to non-public school children on the premises of 
the schools they normally attend. In its previous decision, 
the Court of Appeals set forth relevant background 
information, stating that: 


"Kiryas Joel is a community of Hasidic Jews. 
Apart from separation from the outside 
community, separation of the sexes is 
observed within the Village. Yiddish is the 
principle language of Kiryas Joel; television, 
radio and English language publications are 
not in general use. The dress and appearance 
of the Hasidim are distinctive--the boys, for 


96a 


example, wear long side curls, head coverings 
and special garments, and both males and 
females follow a prescribed dress code. 
Education is also different: Satmar children 
generally do not attend public schools, but 
attend their own religiously affiliated schools 
within Kiryas Joel." (p. 179 and 180). 


In an acknowledged attempt to compromise the 
Ongoing dispute, the challenged statute created a school 
district whose boundaries are literally contiguous with the 
incorporated Village of Kiryas Joel, and provided for the 
election of trustees with the powers and duties of trustees of 
a union free school district. A Board of Education was 
thereafter elected and the school properties within the 
boundaries of the new district were transferred off the rolls 
of the Monroe-Woodbury School District, effective July 1, 
1990. The only “public” school within the new District 
provides educational services for handicapped children. 


The instant declaratory judgment action was 
commenced on or about January 19, 1990 and challenges the 
creation of the school district on constitutional grounds, 
asserting that it violates the principles of separation of church 
and state. Plaintiffs also assert that the legislation violates 
equal protection guarantees. Originally, the New York State 
Department of Education and other state officials, including 
the Comptroller, were named as defendants. Motions to 
intervene were made by the Board of Education of the 
Monroe-Woodbury School District and the Board of 
Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District. Those 
motions were granted by the court and a second amended 
complaint was served. By so-ordered stipulation, the action 
was discontinued against the State defendants with the 
recognition that the Attorney General would continue to 


97a 


appear in support of the constitutionality of the statute 
(Executive Law, section 1). Presently, plaintiffs have moved 
for summary judgment seeking a declaration that Chapter 748 
is unconstitutional. The Attorney General and the party- 
defendants have all cross-moved for summary judgment 
seeking a declaration of constitutionality. 


The legislation which has generated the present 
controversy is straightforward. It provides that: 


"The territory of the Village of Kiryas Joel in 
the Town of Monroe, Orange County, on the 
date when this act shall take effect, shall be 
and hereby is constituted a separate school 
district, and shall be known as the Kiryas Joel 
Village School District and shall have and 
enjoy all of the powers and duties of a union 
free school district under the provisions of the 
Education Law." 


Section (2) of the legislation provides for the newly 
created District to be under the control of a Board of 
Education composed of between five and nine members 
elected by the qualified voters of the Village of Kiryas Joel. 
Finally, the bill provides that the terms of members of the 
school board shall not exceed five years. Plaintiffs assert 
that this act violates the Establishment Clause of the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and its New 
York State counterpart (Article XI, section 3). 


Plaintiffs, individually, have standing to maintain this 
litigation. It is without doubt that encouraging individual 
citizen taxpayers “to take an active, aggressive interest in his 
State . . . [is] the classical means for effective scrutiny of 
legislative and executive action." (Boryszewski v Brydges, 37 


98a 


NY2d 361, 364). “[A] citizen or taxpayer has the right to 
challenge in the courts, as unconstitutional, acts of 
government... ." (Wein v Carey, 41 NY2d 498, 500-501). 
Further, with respect to the New York State School Boards 
Association, said Association has very recently litigated 
similar questions, as a party plaintiff, without any question 
by either the other litigants or the judiciary concerning its 
standing to maintain the action. (New York State School 
Boards Ass’n v Sobol, N.Y.A.D. 3 Dept. 570 N.Y.S. 29, 
716). Accordingly, the Appellate Division was satisfied that 
said Association had standing to litigate the issues before it. 
In this regard, the Appellate Division has determined that the 
issue of standing must be decided as a threshold issue before 
deciding constitutional challenges. (See: County of 
Rensselaer v Regan, A.D. 3 Dept., December 31, 1991). 


Turning to the merits, the Court of Appeals has 
recognized that "[w]hile the principle of separation of Church 
and State is deep-rooted, . . . [t]here is no litmus test for 
determining which services may be rendered by a public 
body to parochial school students and which may not... ." 
(Board of Educ. v Wieder, supra, p 189, footnote 3). In 
illustrating that principle, the court cited Wolman v Walter, 
(433 US 229), indicating that the decision had “so many 
categories and splintered votes that it can only read with a 
scorecard.” (Ibid). 


The leading and most-oft cited case upon the issues of 
separation of Church and State is Lemon v Kurtynan, (403 
US 602, 91 S.Ct. 2105, 29 L.Ed. 2d 745). Therein, the 
Supreme Court wrote that “[jJudicial caveats against 
entanglement must recognize that the line of separation, far 
from being a “wall,” is a blurred, indistinct and variable 
barrier depending on all the circumstances of a particular 
relationship." (p 164). The Court determined that 


99a 


legislation, such as that challenged herein does not violate the 
Establishment Clause if it has a secular purpose, has the 
principal or primary effect of neither advancing nor 
inhibiting religion, and does not foster an excessive 
entanglement with religion. Legislation which gives the 
appearance of providing a significant symbolic benefit to 
religion “by reason of the power conferred" (Larkin v 
Grendal’s Den, S.Ct. 505, 511, 74 L.Ed 2d 297), will not 
pass constitutional muster. 


In applying the three-pronged test of Lemon, (supra), 
it becomes evident that the challenged statute violates all 
three. First, it has a sectarian rather than a secular purpose. 
There is no doubt that the legislation was an attempt by the 
Executive and Legislature to accommodate the sectarian 
wishes of the citizens of Kiryas Joel by taking the 
extraordinary measure of creating a governmental unit to 
meet their parochial needs. 


The statute rather than serving a legitimate 
governmental end, was enacted to meet exclusive religious 
needs and has the effect of advancing, protecting and 
fostering the religious beliefs of the inhabitants of the school 
district. 


The residents of the Village of Kiryas Joel have 
unequivocably refused and rejected any attempts to provide 
for the education of handicapped pupils from the Village at 
a neutral site previously offered by the Monroe-Woodbury 
School District. The present site can hardly be described as 
neutral. Rather, it lies squarely within the borders of a 
religious community, whose articulated goal is to remain 
segregated from the rest of society. Labeling the Village as 
a “union free public school district" cannot alter reality. 


100a 


The Village of Kiryas Joel and the coterminous school 
district is an enclave of segregated individuals who share 
common religious beliefs which shape the social, political 
and familial mores of their lives from cradle to grave. “We 
want to be separate. It’s intentional." (Parents Association 
of P.S. 16, et al v Quinones, 803 F.2d 1235, 1238). In fact, 
this school district was created solely and exclusively to meet 
religious needs. Such a law clearly violates the establishment 
of religion clause of both the State and Federal Constitution. 
The establishment of a governmental unit, in this case, a 
school district, constitutes a most direct affront to the 
establishment clause. The legislation is an attempt to 
camouflage, with secular garments, a religious community as 
a public school district. 

Said legislation also fosters excessive entanglements 
with religion. As the Commissioner of Education, Thomas 
Sobol, states in his affidavit, the Kiryas Joel Village School 
District is a dependent school district within the Orange- 
Ulster supervisory district and is a component district of the 
Orange-Ulster Board of Cooperative Educational Services. 
His affidavit also makes it clear that Boards of Education of 
dependent school districts may not appoint their own 
superintendents without express recommendation of the 
Executive Officer of the Supervisory District. Further, the 
Commissioner’s affidavit outlines the extent to which the 
State Education Department must take special steps to 
monitor the newly created school district to ensure that public 
funds are not expended to further religious purposes. He 
concludes that his staff “in its monitoring capacity is 
unavoidably entangled in matters of religion.” (Sobol 
affidavit, par. 12). 


The intent of the Legislature and Executive to be 
responsive to the citizens of Kiryas Joel is laudatory and 


10la 


reflects the political process straining to meet the parochial 
needs of a religious group. However, their action violates 
the First Amendment which prohibits legislation which 
promotes the establishment of religion. The Satmar Hasidic 
sect enjoys religious freedom as guaranteed by the very First 
Amendment that they are now seeking to circumvent. This 
short range accomplishment could in the long run, jeopardize 
the very religious freedom that they now enjoy. 


The strength of our democracy is that a multitude of 
religious, ethnic and racial groups can live side by side with 
respect for each other. The uniqueness of religious values, 
as observed by the Satmar Sect, is especially to be admired 
as non-conformity becomes increasingly more difficult to 
sustain, however, laws cannot be enacted to advance and 
endorse such parochial needs in violation of our deep-rooted 
principle of separation of Church and State. 


For the reasons hereinabove set forth, plaintiffs’ 
motion for summary judgment shall be granted. The cross- 
motion by the Attorney General and the party-defendants for 
summary judgment, seeking a declaration of constitutionality 
shall be denied. Plaintiff shall be directed to submit an order 
and judgment which declares that Chapter 748 of the Laws 
of 1989 violates the Establishment Clause of the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and its New 
York State counterpart, Article XI, section (3). All papers 
are being returned to counsel for plaintiff, who shall submit 
an order in conformance herewith, with a copy of this 
decision annexed. 


DATED: January 22, 1992 


Albany, New York 


