                              LEATHERS v.MEDLOCK

                                            Syllabus

   LEATHERS, COMMISSIONER OF REVENUES OF
                ARKANSAS v. MEDLOCK ET AL.

       CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF ARKANSAS

       No. 90-29. Argued January 9, 1991-Decided April 16, 1991*

Arkansas' Gross Receipts Act imposes a tax on receipts from the sale of all
   tangible personal property and specified services, but expressly ex-
   empts, inter alia, certain receipts from newspaper and magazine sales.
   In 1987, Act 188 amended the Gross Receipts Act to impose the tax on
   cable television. Petitioners in No. 90-38, a cable television subscriber,
   a cable operator, and a cable trade organization (cable petitioners),
   brought this class action in the State Chancery Court, contending that
   their expressive rights under the First Amendment and their rights
   under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment were
   violated by the extension of the tax to cable services, the exemption from
   the tax of newspapers and magazines, and the exclusion from the list
   of services subject to the tax of scrambled satellite broadcast tele-
   vision services to home dish-antennae owners. In 1989, shortly after
   the Chancery Court upheld the constitutionality of Act 188, Arkansas
   adopted Act 769, which extended the tax to, among other things, all tele-
   vision services to paying customers. On appeal, the State Supreme
   Court held that the tax was not invalid after the passage of Act 769 be-
   cause the Constitution does not prohibit the differential taxation of dif-
   ferent media. However, believing that the First Amendment does pro-
   hibit discriminatory taxation among members of the same medium, and
   that cable and scrambled satellite television services were "substantially
   the same," the Supreme Court held that the tax was unconstitutional for
   the period during which it applied to cable but not satellite broadcast
   services.

Held:
      1. Arkansas' extension of its generally applicable sales tax to cable tel-

   evision services alone, or to cable and satellite services, while exempting
   the print media, does not violate the First Amendment. Pp. 444-453.

         (a) Although cable television, which provides news, information,
   and entertainment to its subscribers, is engaged in "speech" and is part
   of the "press" in much of its operation, the fact that it is taxed differently
   from other media does not by itself raise First Amendment concerns.

   *Together with No. 90-38, Medlock et al. v. Leathers, Commissioner
of Revenues of Arkansas, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Syllabus            499 U. S.

   The Arkansas tax presents none of the First Amendment difficulties that
   have led this Court to strike down differential taxation of speakers.
   See, e. g., Grosjean v. American Press Co., 297 U. S. 233; Minneapolis
   Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U. S. 575;
   Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U. S. 221. It is a tax
   of general applicability covering all tangible personal property and a
   broad range of services and, thus, does not single out the press and
   thereby threaten to hinder it as a watchdog of government activity.
   Furthermore, there is no indication that Arkansas has targeted cable
   television in a purposeful attempt to interfere with its First Amendment
   activities, nor is the tax structured so as to raise suspicion that it was
   intended to do so. Arkansas has not selected a small group of speakers
   to bear fully the burden of the tax, since, even if the State Supreme
   Court's finding that cable and satellite television are the same medium is
   accepted, Act 188 extended the tax uniformly to the approximately 100
   cable systems then operating in the State. Finally, the tax is not content
   based, since there is nothing in the statute's language that refers to the
   content of mass media communications, and since the record contains no
   evidence that the variety of programming cable television offers subscrib-
   ers differs systematically in its message from that communicated by sat-
   ellite broadcast programming, newspapers, or magazines. Pp. 444-449.

         (b) Thus, cable petitioners can prevail only if the Arkansas tax
   scheme presents "an additional basis" for concluding that the State has
   violated their First Amendment rights. See Arkansas Writers',supra,
   at 233. This Court's decisions do not support their argument that such a
   basis exists here because the tax discriminates among media and dis-
   criminated for a time within a medium. Taken together, cases such as
   Regan v. Taxationwith Representationof Wash., 461 U. S. 540, Mabee
   v. White Plains Publishing Co., 327 U. S. 178, and Oklahoma Press
   PublishingCo. v. Walling, 327 U. S. 186, establish that differential tax-
   ation of speakers, even members of the press, does not implicate the
   First Amendment unless the tax is directed at, or presents the danger of

   suppressing, particular ideas. Nothing about Arkansas' choice to ex-
   clude or exempt certain media from its tax has ever suggested an inter-
   est in censoring the expressive activities of cable television. Nor does
   anything in the record indicate that this broad-based, content-neutral
   tax is likely to stifle the free exchange of ideas. Pp. 449-453.

      2. The question whether Arkansas' temporary tax distinction between
   cable and satellite services violated the Equal Protection Clause must be
   addressed by the State Supreme Court on remand. P. 453.

301 Ark. 483, 785 S. W. 2d 202, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and
   remanded.
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

   O'CONNOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST,
C. J., and WHITE, STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, and SOUTER, JJ., joined.
MARSHALL, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which BLACKMUN, J., joined,
post, p. 454.

   William E. Keadle argued the cause for petitioner in
No. 90-29 and respondents in No. 90-38. With him on the

briefs was Larry D. Vaught.
   Eugene G. Sayre argued the cause and filed briefs for peti-

tioners in No. 90-38 and respondents in No. 90-29.t

   JUSTICE O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
   These consolidated cases require us to consider the con-
stitutionality of a state sales tax that excludes or exempts
certain segments of the media but not others.

                                     I

   Arkansas' Gross Receipts Act imposes a 4% tax on receipts
from the sale of all tangible personal property and specified
services. Ark. Code Ann. §§ 26-52-301, 26-52-302 (1987
and Supp. 1989). The Act exempts from the tax certain sales
of goods and services. §26-52-401 (Supp. 1989). Counties

   tBriefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for Dow Jones &
Co., Inc., by Richard J. Tofel and Robert D. Sack; for the Indiana Cable
Television Association Inc. by D. CraigMartin;and for the National Cable
Television Association, Inc., by H. Bartow FarrIII, RichardG. Taranto,
Brenda L. Fox, and Michael S. Schooler.

   Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed for the City of Los
Angeles, California, et al., by Larrine S. Holbrooke, William R. Malone,

Edward J. Perez, and Barry A. Lindahl; and for the City of New York et
al. by Robert Alan Garrett.

   Briefs of amici curiae were filed for Cablevision Industries Corp. et al.
by Brent N. Rushforth; for the California Cable Television Association by
FrankW. Lloyd III, DianeB. Burstein,and Alan J. Gardner;for Century
Communications Corp. et al. by John P. Cole, Jr., and Wesley R. Heppler;
for the Competitive Cable Association et al. by Harold R. Farrow, Sol
Schildhause, and Robert M. Bramson; for Greater Media Cablevision,
Inc., by Robert H. Louis and Salvatore M. DeBunda; and for the National
Association of Broadcasters et al. by Jack N. Goodman and James J.
Popham.
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

within Arkansas impose a 1% tax on all goods and services
subject to taxation under the Gross Receipts Act, §§ 26-74-
307, 26-74-222 (1987 and Supp. 1989), and cities may impose
a further Y2% or 1% tax on these items, § 26-75-307 (1987).

   The Gross Receipts Act expressly exempts receipts from

subscription and over-the-counter newspaper sales and sub-
scription magazine sales. See 8H 26-52-401(4), (14) (Supp.
1989); Revenue Policy Statement 1988-1 (Mar. 10, 1988), re-
printed in CCH Ark. Tax Rep. 69-415. Before 1987, the
Act did not list among those services subject to the sales tax
either cable television' or scrambled satellite broadcast tele-
vision services to home dish-antennae owners. 2 See §26-
52-301 (1987). In 1987, Arkansas adopted Act 188, which
amended the Gross Receipts Act to impose the sales tax on
cable television. 1987 Ark. Gen. Acts, No. 188, § 1.

   Daniel L. Medlock, a cable television subscriber, Commu-
nity Communications Co., a cable television operator, and the
Arkansas Cable Television Association, Inc., a trade orga-
nization composed of approximately 80 cable operators with
systems throughout the State (cable petitioners), brought
this class action in the Arkansas Chancery Court to challenge

the extension of the sales tax to cable television services.
Cable petitioners contended that their expressive activities
are protected by the First Amendment and are comparable
to those of newspapers, magazines, and scrambled satellite
broadcast television. They argued that Arkansas' sales tax-

   'Cable systems receive television, radio, or other signals through anten-
nae located at their so-called "headends." Information gathered in this
way, as well as any other material that the system operator wishes to trans-
mit, is then conducted through cables strung over utility poles and through
underground conduits to subscribers. See generally D. Brenner, M. Price,
& M. Meyerson, Cable Television and Other Nonbroadcast Video: Law and
Policy § 1.03 (1989).

   'Satellite television broadcast services transmit over-the-air "scram-
bled" signals directly to the satellite dishes of subscribers, who must pay
for the right to view the signals. See generally A. Easton & S. Easton,
The Complete Sourcebook of Home Satellite TV 57-66 (1988).
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

ation of cable services, and exemption or exclusion from the
tax of newspapers, magazines, and satellite broadcast serv-
ices, violated their constitutional rights under the First
Amendment and under the Equal Protection Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment.

   The Chancery Court granted cable petitioners' motion for a
preliminary injunction, requiring Arkansas to place in escrow
the challenged sales taxes and to keep records identifying col-
lections of the taxes. Both sides introduced extensive testi-
mony and documentary evidence at the hearing on this mo-
tion and at the subsequent trial. Following the trial, the
Chancery Court concluded that cable television's necessary
use of public rights-of-way distinguishes it for constitutional
purposes from other media. It therefore upheld the con-
stitutionality of Act 188, dissolved its preliminary injunction,
and ordered all funds collected in escrow released.

   In 1989, shortly after the Chancery Court issued its deci-
sion, Arkansas adopted Act 769, which extended the sales
tax to "all other distribution of television, video or radio serv-
ices with or without the use of wires provided to subscribers
or paying customers or users." 1989 Ark. Gen. Acts, No.
769, § 1. On appeal to the Arkansas Supreme Court, cable
petitioners again challenged the State's sales tax on the
ground that, notwithstanding Act 769, it continued uncon-
stitutionally to discriminate against cable television. The
Supreme Court rejected the claim that the tax was invalid
after the passage of Act 769, holding that the Constitution
does not prohibit the differential taxation of different media.
Medlock v. Pledger,301 Ark. 483, 487, 785 S. W. 2d 202, 204
(1990). The court believed, however, that the First Amend-
ment prohibits discriminatory taxation among members of
the same medium. On the record before it, the court found
that cable television services and satellite broadcast serv-
ices to home dish-antennae owners were "substantially the
same." Ibid. The State Supreme Court rejected the Chan-
cery Court's conclusion that cable television's use of public
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

rights-of-way justified its differential sales tax treatment, ex-
plaining that cable operators already paid franchise fees for
that right. Id., at 485, 785 S. W. 2d, at 203. It therefore
held that Arkansas' sales tax was unconstitutional under the
First Amendment for the period during which cable televi-

sion, but not satellite broadcast services, were subject to the
tax. Id., at 487; 785 S. W. 2d, at 204.

   Both cable petitioners and the Arkansas Commissioner of
Revenues petitioned this Court for certiorari. We consoli-
dated these petitions and granted certiorari, Pledger v.
Medlock, 498 U. S. 809 (1990), in order to resolve the ques-
tion, left open in Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland,
481 U. S. 221, 233 (1987), whether the First Amendment pre-
vents a State from imposing its sales tax on only selected seg-
ments of the media.

                                       II

   Cable television provides to its subscribers news, informa-
tion, and entertainment. It is engaged in "speech" under
the First Amendment, and is, in much of its operation, part
of the "press." See Los Angeles v. Preferred Communica-
tions, Inc., 476 U. S. 488, 494 (1986). That it is taxed
differently from other media does not by itself, however,
raise First Amendment concerns. Our cases have held that
a tax that discriminates among speakers is constitutionally

suspect only in certain circumstances.
   In Grosjean v. American Press Co., 297 U. S. 233 (1936),

the Court considered a First Amendment challenge to a Loui-
siana law that singled out publications with weekly circula-

tions above 20,000 for a 2% tax on gross receipts from ad-
vertising. The tax fell exclusively on 13 newspapers. Four
other daily newspapers and 120 weekly newspapers with
weekly circulations of less than 20,000 were not taxed. The
Court discussed at length the pre-First Amendment English
and American tradition of taxes imposed exclusively on the
press. This invidious form of censorship was intended to

curtail the circulation of newspapers and thereby prevent the
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

people from acquiring knowledge of government activities.
Id., at 246-251. The Court held that the tax at issue in
Grosjean was of this type and was therefore unconstitutional.
Id., at 250.

   In Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r
of Revenue, 460 U. S. 575 (1983), we noted that it was un-
clear whether the result in Grosjean depended on our percep-
tion in that case that the State had imposed the tax with the
intent to penalize a selected group of newspapers or whether
the structure of the tax was sufficient to invalidate it. See
460 U. S., at 580 (citing cases and commentary). Minneapo-
lis Starresolved any doubts about whether direct evidence of
improper censorial motive is required in order to invalidate a
differential tax on First Amendment grounds: "Illicit legisla-
tive intent is not the sine qua non of a violation of the First
Amendment." Id., at 592.

   At issue in Minneapolis Star was a Minnesota special use
tax on the cost of paper and ink consumed in the production
of publications. The tax exempted the first $100,000 worth
of paper and ink consumed annually. Eleven publishers,
producing only 14 of the State's 388 paid circulation newspa-
pers, incurred liability under the tax in its first year of opera-
tion. The Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. (Star Tribune)
was responsible for roughly two-thirds of the total revenue
raised by the tax. The following year, 13 publishers, pro-
ducing only 16 of the State's 374 paid circulation papers, paid
the tax. Again, the Star Tribune bore roughly two-thirds of
the tax's burden. We found no evidence of impermissible
legislative motive in the case apart from the structure of the
tax itself.

   We nevertheless held the Minnesota tax unconstitutional
for two reasons. First, the tax singled out the press for spe-
cial treatment. We noted that the general applicability of
any burdensome tax law helps to ensure that it will be met
with widespread opposition. When such a law applies only
to a single constituency, however, it is insulated from this po-
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

litical constraint. See id., at 585. Given "the basic assump-
tion of our political system that the press will often serve as
an important restraint on government," we feared that the
threat of exclusive taxation of the press could operate "as ef-
fectively as a censor to check critical comment." Ibid. "Dif-
ferential taxation of the press, then, places such a burden on
the interests protected by the First Amendment," that it is
presumptively unconstitutional. Ibid.

   Beyond singling out the press, the Minnesota tax targeted
a small group of newspapers -those so large that they re-
mained subject to the tax despite its exemption for the first
$100,000 of ink and paper consumed annually. The tax thus
resembled a penalty for certain newspapers. Once again,
the scheme appeared to have such potential for abuse that we
concluded that it violated the First Amendment: "[W]hen the
exemption selects such a narrowly defined group to bear the
full burden of the tax, the tax begins to resemble more a pen-
alty for a few of the largest newspapers than an attempt to
favor struggling smaller enterprises." Id., at 592.

   Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U. S. 221
(1987), reaffirmed the rule that selective taxation of the press
through the narrow targeting of individual members offends
the First Amendment. In that case, Arkansas Writers'
Project sought a refund of state taxes it had paid on sales of
the Arkansas Times, a general interest magazine, under Ar-
kansas' Gross Receipts Act of 1941. Exempt from the sales
tax were receipts from sales of religious, professional, trade
and sports magazines. See id., at 224-226. We held that
Arkansas' magazine exemption, which meant that only "a few
Arkansas magazines pay any sales tax," operated in much the
same way as did the $100,000 exemption in Minneapolis Star
and therefore suffered from the same type of discrimination
identified in that case. Id., at 229. Moreover, the basis on
which the tax differentiated among magazines depended en-
tirely on their content. Ibid.
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

   These cases demonstrate that differential taxation of First
Amendment speakers is constitutionally suspect when it
threatens to suppress the expression of particular ideas or
viewpoints. Absent a compelling justification, the govern-
ment may not exercise its taxing power to single out the
press. See Grosjean, 297 U. S., at 244-249; Minneapolis
Star, 460 U. S., at 585. The press plays a unique role as a
check on government abuse, and a tax limited to the press
raises concerns about censorship of critical information and
opinion. A tax is also suspect if it targets a small group of
speakers. See id., at 575; Arkansas Writers', 481 U. S., at
229. Again, the fear is censorship of particular ideas or
viewpoints. Finally, for reasons that are obvious, a tax will
trigger heightened scrutiny under the First Amendment if it
discriminates on the basis of the content of taxpayer speech.
See id., at 229-231.

   The Arkansas tax at issue here presents none of these
types of discrimination. The Arkansas sales tax is a tax of
general applicability. It applies to receipts from the sale of
all tangible personal property and a broad range of services,
unless within a group of specific exemptions. Among the
services on which the tax is imposed are natural gas, electric-
ity, water, ice, and steam utility services; telephone, tele-
communications, and telegraph service; the furnishing of
rooms by hotels, apartment hotels, lodging houses, and tour-
ist camps; alteration, addition, cleaning, refinishing, replace-
ment, and repair services; printing of all kinds; tickets for ad-
mission to places of amusement or athletic, entertainment, or
recreational events; and fees for the privilege of having ac-
cess to, or use of, amusement, entertainment, athletic, or
recreational facilities. See Ark. Code Ann. §26-52-301
(Supp. 1989). The tax does not single out the press and does
not therefore threaten to hinder the press as a watchdog of
government activity. Cf. Minneapolis Star, supra, at 585.
We have said repeatedly that a State may impose on the
press a generally applicable tax. See Jimmy Swaggart Min-
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

istries v. Board of Equalizationof Cal., 493 U. S. 378, 387-
388 (1990); Arkansas Writers', supra, at 229; Minneapolis
Star, supra, at 586, and n. 9.

   Furthermore, there is no indication in these cases that Ar-
kansas has targeted cable television in a purposeful attempt
to interfere with its First Amendment activities. Nor is the
tax one that is structured so as to raise suspicion that it was
intended to do so. Unlike the taxes involved in Grosjean
and Minneapolis Star, the Arkansas tax has not selected a
narrow group to bear fully the burden of the tax.

   The tax is also structurally dissimilar to the tax involved in
Arkansas Writers'. In that case, only "a few" Arkansas
magazines paid the State's sales tax. See Arkansas Writ-
ers', 481 U. S., at 229, and n. 4. Arkansas Writers' Project
maintained before the Court that the Arkansas Times was
the only Arkansas publication that paid sales tax. The Com-
missioner contended that two additional periodicals also paid
the tax. We responded that, "[wihether there are three Ar-
kansas magazines paying tax or only one, the burden of the
tax clearly falls on a limited group of publishers." Id., at
229, n. 4. In contrast, Act 188 extended Arkansas' sales tax
uniformly to the approximately 100 cable systems then op-
erating in the State. See App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 90-
38, p. 12a. While none of the seven scrambled satellite
broadcast services then available in Arkansas, Tr. 12 (Aug.
19, 1987), was taxed until Act 769 became effective, Arkan-
sas' extension of its sales tax to cable television hardly
resembles a "penalty for a few." See Minneapolis Star,
supra, at 592; Arkansas Writers', supra, at 229, and n. 4.

   The danger from a tax scheme that targets a small number
of speakers is the danger of censorship; a tax on a small num-

ber of speakers runs the risk of affecting only a limited range
of views. The risk is similar to that from content-based
regulation: It will distort the market for ideas. "The con-
stitutional right of free expression is ...intended to remove

governmental restraints from the arena of public discussion,
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

putting the decision as to what views shall be voiced largely
into the hands of each of us . . . in the belief that no
other approach would comport with the premise of individual
dignity and choice upon which our political system rests."
Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15, 24 (1971). There is no
comparable danger from a tax on the services provided by
a large number of cable operators offering a wide variety
of programming throughout the State. That the Arkansas
Supreme Court found cable and satellite television to be the
same medium does not change this conclusion. Even if we
accept this finding, the fact remains that the tax affected ap-
proximately 100 suppliers of cable television services. This
is not a tax structure that resembles a penalty for particular
speakers or particular ideas.

   Finally, Arkansas' sales tax is not content based. There is
nothing in the language of the statute that refers to the con-
tent of mass media communications. Moreover, the record
establishes that cable television offers subscribers a variety
of programming that presents a mixture of news, infor-
mation, and entertainment. It contains no evidence, nor is
it contended, that this material differs systematically in its
message from that communicated by satellite broadcast pro-
gramming, newspapers, or magazines.

   Because the Arkansas sales tax presents none of the First
Amendment difficulties that have led us to strike down dif-
ferential taxation in the past, cable petitioners can prevail
only if the Arkansas tax scheme presents "an additional
basis" for concluding that the State has violated petitioners'
First Amendment rights. See Arkansas Writers', supra, at
233. Petitioners argue that such a basis exists here: Arkan-
sas' tax discriminates among media and, if the Arkansas Su-
preme Court's conclusion regarding cable and satellite televi-
sion is accepted, discriminated for a time within a medium.
Petitioners argue that such intermedia and intramedia dis-
crimination, even in the absence of any evidence of intent to
suppress speech or of any effect on the expression of particu-
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

lar ideas, violates the First Amendment. Our cases do not
support such a rule.

   Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Wash., 461
U. S. 540 (1983), stands for the proposition that a tax scheme
that discriminates among speakers does not implicate the
First Amendment unless it discriminates on the basis of
ideas. In that case, we considered provisions of the Internal
Revenue Code that discriminated between contributions to
lobbying organizations. One section of the Code conferred

tax-exempt status on certain nonprofit organizations that did
not engage in lobbying activities. Contributions to those

organizations were deductible. Another section of the Code
conferred tax-exempt status on certain other nonprofit orga-
nizations that did lobby, but contributions to them were not
deductible. Taxpayers contributing to veterans' organiza-
tions were, however, permitted to deduct their contributions
regardless of those organizations' lobbying activities.

   The tax distinction between these lobbying organizations
did not trigger heightened scrutiny under the First Amend-
ment. Id., at 546-551. We explained that a legislature is
not required to subsidize First Amendment rights through a

tax exemption or tax deduction.' Id., at 546. For this
proposition, we relied on Cammarano v. United States, 358
U. S. 498 (1959). In Cammarano, the Court considered an
Internal Revenue regulation that denied a tax deduction for
money spent by businesses on publicity programs directed at
pending state legislation. The Court held that the regula-
tion did not violate the First Amendment because it did not
discriminate on the basis of who was spending the money on

   Certain amici in support of cable petitioners argue that Regan is dis-
tinguishable from these cases because the petitioners in Regan were com-
plaining that their contributions to lobbying organizations should be tax de-
ductible, while cable petitioners complain that sales of their services should
be tax exempt. This is a distinction without a difference. As we ex-
plained in Regan, "[b]oth tax exemptions and tax deductibility are a form
of subsidy that is administered through the tax system." 461 U. S.,

at 544.
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

publicity or what the person or business was advocating.
The regulation was therefore "plainly not "'aimed at the sup-
pression of dangerous ideas."'" Id., at 513, quoting Speiser
v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513, 519 (1958).

   Regan, while similar to Cammarano, presented the addi-
tional fact that Congress had chosen to exempt from taxes
contributions to veterans' organizations, while not exempting
other contributions. This did not change the analysis. In-
herent in the power to tax is the power to discriminate in tax-
ation. "Legislatures have especially broad latitude in creat-
ing classifications and distinctions in tax statutes." Regan,
supra, at 547. See also Madden v. Kentucky, 309 U. S. 83,
87-88 (1940); New York Rapid Transit Corp. v. City of New
York, 303 U. S. 573, 578 (1938); Magoun v. Illinois Trust &
Savings Bank, 170 U. S. 283, 294 (1898).

   Cammaranoestablished that the government need not ex-
empt speech from a generally applicable tax. Regan estab-
lished that a tax scheme does not become suspect simply
because it exempts only some speech. Regan reiterated in
the First Amendment context the strong presumption in
favor of duly enacted taxation schemes. In so doing, the
Court quoted the rule announced more than 40 years earlier
in Madden, an equal protection case:

      "'The broad discretion as to classification possessed by
      a legislature in the field of taxation has long been recog-
      nized .... [Tihe passage of time has only served to un-
      derscore the wisdom of that recognition of the large area
      of discretion which is needed by a legislature in formulat-
      ing sound tax policies. Traditionally classification has
      been a device for fitting tax programs to local needs and
      usages in order to achieve an equitable distribution of
      the tax burden. It has, because of this, been pointed
      out that in taxation, even more than in other fields, leg-
      islatures possess the greatest freedom in classification.
      Since the members of a legislature necessarily enjoy a
      familiarity with local conditions which this Court can-
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

Opinion of the Court  499 U. S.

      not have, the presumption of constitutionality can be
      overcome only by the most explicit demonstration that
      a classification is a hostile and oppressive discrimina-
      tion against particular persons and classes."' Madden,
      supra, at 87-88 (footnotes omitted), quoted in Regan,
     461 U. S., at 547-548.

   On the record in Regan, there appeared no such "hostile
and oppressive discrimination." We explained that "[t]he
case would be different if Congress were to discriminate in-
vidiously in its subsidies in such a way as to aim at the sup-
pression of dangerous ideas." Id., at 548 (internal quotation
marks omitted). But that was not the case. The exemption
for contributions to veterans' organizations applied without
reference to the content of the speech involved; it was not
intended to suppress any ideas; and there was no demonstra-
tion that it had that effect. Ibid. Under these circum-
stances, the selection of the veterans' organizations for a tax
preference was "obviously a matter of policy and discretion."
Id., at 549 (internal quotation marks omitted).

  That a differential burden on speakers is insufficient by
itself to raise First Amendment concerns is evident as well
from Mabee v. White Plains Publishing Co., 327 U. S. 178
(1946), and Oklahoma Press Publishing Co. v. Walling, 327
U. S. 186 (1946). Those cases do not involve taxation, but
they do involve government action that places differential
burdens on members of the press. The Fair Labor Stand-
ards Act of 1938, 52 Stat. 1060, as amended, 29 U. S. C. §201
et seq., applies generally to newspapers as to other busi-
nesses, but it exempts from its requirements certain small
papers. § 213(a)(8). Publishers of larger daily newspapers
argued that the differential burden thereby placed on them
violates the First Amendment. The Court upheld the ex-
emption because there was no indication that the government
had singled out the press for special treatment, Walling,
supra, at 194, or that the exemption was a "'deliberate and
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  Opinion of the Court

calculated device"' to penalize a certain group of newspapers,
Mabee, supra, at 184, quoting Grosjean, 297 U. S., at 250.

   Taken together, Regan, Mabee, and Oklahoma Press es-
tablish that differential taxation of speakers, even members
of the press, does not implicate the First Amendment unless
the tax is directed at, or presents the danger of suppress-
ing, particular ideas. That was the case in Grosjean,Minne-
apolis Star, and Arkansas Writers', but it is not the case
here. The Arkansas Legislature has chosen simply to ex-
clude or exempt certain media from a generally applicable
tax. Nothing about that choice has ever suggested an in-
terest in censoring the expressive activities of cable tele-
vision. Nor does anything in this record indicate that Ar-
kansas' broad-based, content-neutral sales tax is likely to
stifle the free exchange of ideas. We conclude that the
State's extension of its generally applicable sales tax to cable
television services alone, or to cable and satellite services,
while exempting the print media, does not violate the First
Amendment.

   Before the Arkansas Chancery Court, cable petitioners
contended that the State's tax distinction between cable and
other media violated the Equal Protection Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment as well as the First Amendment.
App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 90-38, p. 21a. The Chancery
Court rejected both claims, and cable petitioners challenged
these holdings before the Arkansas Supreme Court. That
court did not reach the equal protection question as to the
State's temporary tax distinction between cable and satellite
services because it disallowed that distinction on First
Amendment grounds. We leave it to the Arkansas Supreme
Court to address this question on remand.

   For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Arkansas
Supreme Court is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and
the cases are remanded for further proceedings not inconsist-
ent with this opinion.

                                                            It is so ordered.
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

   JUSTICE MARSHALL, with whom JUSTICE BLACKMUN
joins, dissenting.

   This Court has long recognized that the freedom of the
press prohibits government from using the tax power to dis-

criminate against individual members of the media or against
the media as a whole. See Grosjean v. American Press Co.,
297 U. S. 233 (1936); Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v.
Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U. S.575 (1983); Arkan-
sas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U. S. 221 (1987).
The Framers of the First Amendment, we have explained,
specifically intended to prevent government from using dis-
parate tax burdens to impair the untrammeled dissemination
of information. We granted certiorari in this case to con-
sider whether the obligation not to discriminate against indi-
vidual members of the press prohibits the State from taxing
one information medium-cable television-more heavily
than others. The majority's answer to this question-that
the State is free to discriminate between otherwise like-
situated media so long as the more heavily taxed medium is
not too "small" in number-is no answer at all, for it fails to
explain which media actors are entitled to equal tax treat-
ment. Indeed, the majority so adamantly proclaims the ir-
relevance of this problem that its analysis calls into question
whether any general obligation to treat media actors even-
handedly survives today's decision. Because I believe the
majority has unwisely cut back on the principles that inform
our selective-taxation precedents, and because I believe that
the First Amendment prohibits the State from singling out a
particular information medium for heavier tax burdens than
are borne by like-situated media, I dissent.

                                        I

                                       A

   Our decisions on selective taxation establish a nondiscrimi-
nation principle for like-situated members of the press.
Under this principle, "differential treatment, unless justified
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

by some special characteristic of the press, . . .is presump-
tively unconstitutional," and must be struck down "unless the
State asserts a counterbalancing interest of compelling im-
portance that it cannot achieve without differential taxation."
Minneapolis Star, supra, at 585.

   The nondiscrimination principle is an instance of govern-
ment's general First Amendment obligation not to interfere
with the press as an institution. As the Court explained in
Grosjean,the purpose of the Free Press Clause "was to pre-
serve an untrammeled press as a vital source of public in-
formation." 297 U. S., at 250. Reviewing both the histori-
cal abuses associated with England's infamous "'taxes on
knowledge"' and the debates surrounding ratification of the
Constitution, see id., at 246-250; Minneapolis Star, 460
U. S., at 583-586, and nn. 6-7, our decisions have recognized
that the Framers viewed selective taxation as a distinctively
potent "means of abridging the freedom of the press," id., at

586, n. 7.
   We previously have applied the nondiscrimination principle

in two contexts. First, we have held that this principle pro-
hibits the State from imposing on the media tax burdens not
borne by like-situated nonmedia enterprises. Thus, in Min-
neapolis Star, we struck down a use tax that applied to the
ink and paper used in newspaper production but not to any
other item used as a component of a good to be sold at retail.
See id., at 578, 581-582. Second, we have held that the non-
discrimination principle prohibits the State from taxing indi-
vidual members of the press unequally. Thus, as an alterna-
tive ground in Minneapolis Star, we concluded that the
State's use tax violated the First Amendment because it ex-
empted the first $100,000 worth of ink and paper consumed
and thus effectively singled out large publishers for a dispro-
portionate tax burden. See id., at 591-592. Similarly, in
Arkansas Writers' Project, we concluded that selective ex-
emptions for certain periodicals rendered unconstitutional
the application of a general sales tax to the remaining
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

periodicals "because [the tax] [was] not evenly applied to all
magazines." See 481 U. S., at 229 (emphasis added); see
also Grosjean v. American Press Co., supra (tax applied
only to newspapers that meet circulation threshold uncon-
stitutionally discriminates against more widely circulated
newspapers).

   Before today, however, we had not addressed whether the
nondiscrimination principle prohibits the State from singling
out a particular information medium for tax burdens not
borne by other media. Grosjean and Minneapolis Star both
invalidated tax schemes that discriminated between different
members of a single medium, namely, newspapers. Simi-
larly, Arkansas Writers' Project invalidated a general sales
tax because it "treat[ed] some magazines less favorably than
others," 481 U. S., at 229, leaving open the question whether
less favorable tax treatment of magazines than of newspapers
furnished an additional ground for invalidating the scheme,
see id., at 233. This case squarely presents the question
whether the State may discriminate between distinct in-
formation media, for under Arkansas' general sales tax
scheme, cable operators pay a sales tax on their subscription
fees that is not paid by newspaper or magazine companies on
their subscription fees or by television or radio broadcasters
on their advertising revenues.' In my view, the principles

   'Subject to various exemptions, Arkansas law imposes a 4% tax on
the receipts from sales of all tangible personal property and of specified
services. Ark. Code Ann. §§ 26-52-301, 26-52-302, 26-52-401 (1987 and
Supp. 1989). Cable television service is expressly included in the tax.
See § 26-52-301(3)(D)(i) (Supp. 1989). Proceeds from the sale of newspa-
pers, § 26-52-401(4) (Supp. 1989), and from the sale of magazines by sub-
scription, §26-52-401(14) (Supp. 1989); Revenue Policy Statement 1988-1
(Mar. 10, 1988), reprinted in CCH Ark. Tax Rep. 69-415, are expressly
exempted, as are the proceeds from the sale of advertising in newspapers
and other publications, §26-52-401(13) (Supp. 1989). Proceeds from the
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

that animate our selective-taxation cases clearly condemn
this form of discrimination.

                                       B

   Although cable television transmits information by distinc-
tive means, the information service provided by cable does
not differ significantly from the information services pro-
vided by Arkansas' newspapers, magazines, television broad-
casters, and radio stations. This Court has recognized that
cable operators exercise the same core press function of
"communication of ideas as do the traditional enterprises of
newspaper and book publishers, public speakers, and pam-
phleteers," Los Angeles v. PreferredCommunications, Inc.,
476 U. S. 488, 494 (1986), and that "[clable operators now
share with broadcasters a significant amount of editorial dis-
cretion regarding what their programming will include," FCC
v. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U. S. 689, 707 (1979). See also
ante, at 444 (acknowledging that cable television is "part of
the 'press' "). In addition, the cable-service providers in this
case put on extensive and unrebutted proof at trial designed
to show that consumers regard the news, sports, and enter-
tainment features provided by cable as largely interchange-
able with the services provided by other members of the

sale of advertising for broadcast radio and television services are not in-
cluded in the tax.

   Insofar as the Arkansas Supreme Court found that cable and scrambled
satellite television are a single medium, 301 Ark. 483, 487, 785 S. W. 2d
202, 204-205 (1990), this case also involves a straightforward application of
Arkansas Writers' Project and Minneapolis Star in resolving the cable op-
erators' constitutional challenge to the taxes that they paid prior to 1989,
the year in which Arkansas amended its sales tax to include the subscrip-
tion fees collected by scrambled-satellite television. I would affirm on
that basis the Arkansas Supreme Court's conclusion that the pre-1989 ver-
sion of the Arkansas sales tax violated the First Amendment by imposing
on cable a tax burden not borne by its scrambled-satellite television.
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

print and electronic media. See App. 81-85, 100-101, 108,
115, 133-137, 165-170. See generally Competition, Rate De-
regulationand the Commission's Policies Relating to Provi-
sion of Cable Television Service, 5 FCC Record 4962, 4967
(1990) (discussing competition between cable and other forms

of television).
   Because cable competes with members of the print and

electronic media in the larger information market, the power
to discriminate between these media triggers the central con-
cern underlying the nondiscrimination principle: the risk of
covert censorship. The nondiscrimination principle protects
the press from censorship prophylactically, condemning any
selective-taxation scheme that presents the "potential for
abuse" by the State, Minneapolis Star, 460 U. S., at 592
(emphasis added), independent of any actual "evidence of an
improper censorial motive," Arkansas Writers' Project,
supra, at 228; see Minneapolis Star, supra, at 592 ("Illicit
legislative intent is not the sine qua non of a violation of the
First Amendment"). The power to discriminate among like-
situated media presents such a risk. By imposing tax bur-
dens that disadvantage one information medium relative to
another, the State can favor those media that it likes and
punish those that it dislikes.

   Inflicting a competitive disadvantage on a disfavored me-
dium violates the First Amendment "command that the gov-
ernment ... shall not impede the free flow of ideas." Asso-
ciated Press v. United States, 326 U. S. 1, 20 (1945). We
have previously recognized that differential taxation within
an information medium distorts the marketplace of ideas by
imposing on some speakers costs not borne by their competi-
tors. See Grosjean,297 U. S., at 241, 244-245 (noting com-
petitive disadvantage arising from differential tax based on
newspaper circulation). Differential taxation across differ-
ent media likewise "limit[s] the circulation of information to
which the public is entitled," id., at 250, where, as here, the
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

relevant media compete in the same information market. By
taxing cable television more heavily relative to its social cost
than newspapers, magazines, broadcast television and radio,
Arkansas distorts consumer preferences for particular in-
formation formats, and thereby impairs "the widest possible
dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic
sources." Associated Press v. United States, supra, at 20.

   Because the power selectively to tax cable operators trig-
gers the concerns that underlie the nondiscrimination princi-
ple, the State bears the burden of demonstrating that "dif-
ferential treatment" of cable television is justified by some
"special characteristic" of that particular information medium

or by some other "counterbalancing interest of compelling im-
portance that [the State] cannot achieve without differential
taxation." Minneapolis Star, supra, at 585 (footnote omit-
ted). The State has failed to make such a showing in this
case. As the Arkansas Supreme Court found, the amount
collected from the cable operators pursuant to the state sales
tax does not correspond to any social cost peculiar to cable-
television service, see 301 Ark. 483, 485, 785 S. W. 2d 202,
203 (1990); indeed, cable operators in Arkansas must pay a
franchise fee expressly designed to defray the cost associated
with cable's unique exploitation of public rights of way. See
ibid. The only justification that the State asserts for taxing
cable operators more heavily than newspapers, magazines,
television broadcasters and radio stations is its interest in
raising revenue. See Brief for Respondents in No. 90-38,
p. 9. This interest is not sufficiently compelling to overcome
the presumption of unconstitutionality under the nondis-
crimination principle. See Arkansas Writers' Project, 481
U. S., at 231-232; Minneapolis Star, supra, at 586.2

  2J need not consider what, if any, state interests might justify selective

taxation of cable television, since the State has advanced no interest other
than revenue enhancement. I also do not dispute that the unique charac-
teristics of cable may justify special regulatory treatment of that medium.
See Los Angeles v. Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 U. S. 488, 496
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

                                       II

   The majority is undisturbed by Arkansas' discriminatory
tax regime. According to the majority, the power to single
out cable for heavier tax burdens presents no realistic threat
of governmental abuse. The majority also dismisses the no-
tion that the State has any general obligation to treat mem-
bers of the press evenhandedly. Neither of these conclu-
sions is supportable.

                                       A

   The majority dismisses the risk of governmental abuse
under the Arkansas tax scheme on the ground that the num-
ber of media actors exposed to the tax is "large." Ante,
at 449. According to the majority, where a tax is generally
applicable to nonmedia enterprises, the selective application
of that tax to different segments of the media offends the
First Amendment only if the tax is limited to "a small number
of speakers," ante, at 448, for it is only under those cir-
cumstances that selective taxation "resembles a penalty for
particular speakers or particular ideas," ante, at 449. The
selective sales tax at issue in Arkansas Writers' Project, the
majority points out, applied to no more than three magazines.
See ante, at 448. The tax at issue here, "[iun contrast,"
applies "uniformly to the approximately 100 cable systems"
in operation in Arkansas. Ibid. (emphasis added). In my
view, this analysis is overly simplistic and is unresponsive to
the concerns that inform our selective-taxation precedents.

   To start, the majority's approach provides no meaningful
guidance on the intermedia scope of the nondiscrimination
principle. From the majority's discussion, we can infer that
three is a sufficiently "small" number of affected actors to

(1986) (BLACKMUN, J., concurring); cf. Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v.
FCC, 395 U. S. 367, 386-401 (1969). I conclude only that the State is not
free to burden cable with a selective tax absent a clear nexus between the
tax and a "special characteristic" of cable television service or a "counter-
balancing interest of compelling importance." Minneapolis Star, 460
U. S., at 585.
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

trigger First Amendment problems and that one hundred is
too "large" to do so. But the majority fails to pinpoint
the magic number between three and one hundred actors
above which discriminatory taxation can be accomplished
with impunity. Would the result in this case be different if
Arkansas had only 50 cable-service providers? Or 25? The
suggestion that the First Amendment prohibits selective tax-
ation that "resembles a penalty" is no more helpful. A test
that turns on whether a selective tax "penalizes" a particular
medium presupposes some baseline establishing that medi-
um's entitlement to equality of treatment with other media.
The majority never develops any theory of the State's obliga-
tion to treat like-situated media equally, except to say that
the State must avoid discriminating against too "small" a
number of media actors.

   In addition, the majority's focus on absolute numbers fails
to reflect the concerns that inform the nondiscrimination
principle. The theory underlying the majority's "small ver-
sus large" test is that "a tax on the services provided by a
large number of cable operators offering a wide variety of
programming throughout the State," ante, at 449, poses no
"risk of affecting only a limited range of views," ante, at 448.
This assumption is unfounded. The record in this case fur-
nishes ample support for the conclusion that the State's cable
operators make unique contributions to the information mar-
ket. See, e. g., App. 82 (testimony of cable operator that he
offers "certain religious programming" that "people demand
 ...because they otherwise could not have access to it"); id.,
at 138 (cable offers Spanish-language information network);
id., at 150 (cable broadcast of local city council meetings).
The majority offers no reason to believe that programs like
these are duplicated by other media. Thus, to the extent
that selective taxation makes it harder for Arkansas' 100
cable operators to compete with Arkansas' 500 newspapers,
magazines, and broadcast television and radio stations, see 1
Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media 67-68
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

(123d ed. 1991), Arkansas' discriminatory tax does "risk...
affecting only a limited range of views," and may well "dis-
tort the market for ideas" in a manner akin to direct "content-
based regulation." Ante, at 448.1

   The majority also mistakenly assesses the impact of Arkan-
sas' discriminatory tax as if the State's 100 cable operators
comprised 100 additional actors in a statewide information
market. In fact, most communities are serviced by only a
single cable operator. See generally 1 Gale Directory,
supra, at 69-91. Thus, in any given locale, Arkansas' dis-
criminatory tax may disadvantage a single actor, a "small"
number even under the majority's calculus.

   Even more important, the majority's focus on absolute
numbers ignores the potential for abuse inherent in the
State's power to discriminate based on medium identity. So
long as the disproportionately taxed medium is sufficiently
"large," nothing in the majority's test prevents the State
from singling out a particular medium for higher taxes, either
because the State does not like the character of the services
that the medium provides or because the State simply wishes
to confer an advantage upon the medium's competitors.

   Indeed, the facts of this case highlight the potential for
governmental abuse inherent in the power to discriminate
among like-situated media based on their identities. Before
this litigation began, most receipts generated by the media-
including newspaper sales, certain magazine subscription
fees, print and electronic media advertising revenues, and
cable television and scrambled-satellite television subscrip-
tion fees -were either expressly exempted from, or not ex-
pressly included in, the Arkansas sales tax. See Ark. Code

  IEven if it did happen to apply neutrally across the range of viewpoints

expressed in the Arkansas information market, Arkansas' discriminatory
tax would still raise First Amendment problems. "It hardly answers one
person's objection to a restriction on his speech that another person, out-
side his control, may speak for him." Regan v. Taxation with Representa-
tion of Washington, 461 U. S. 540, 553 (1983) (BLACKMUN, J., concurring).
     LEATHERS v.MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

Ann. §§84-1903, 84-1904(f), (j), (1947 and Supp. 1985); see
also Arkansas Writers' Project, 481 U. S., at 224-225. Ef-
fective July 1, 1987, however, the legislature expanded the
tax base to include cable television subscription fees. See
App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 90-38, p. 16a. Cable operators
then filed this suit, protesting the discriminatory treatment
in general and the absence of any tax on scrambled-satellite
television-cable's closest rival-in particular. While the
case was pending on appeal to the Arkansas Supreme Court,
the Arkansas legislature again amended the sales tax, this
time extending the tax to the subscription fees paid for
scrambled-satellite television. 301 Ark., at 484, 785 S.W.
2d, at 203. Of course, for all we know, the legislature's ini-
tial decision selectively to tax cable may have been prompted
by a similar plea from traditional broadcast media to curtail
competition from the emerging cable industry. If the legis-
lature did indeed respond to such importunings, the tax
would implicate government censorship as surely as if the
government itself disapproved of the new competitors.

   As I have noted, however, our precedents do not require
"evidence of an improper censorial motive," Arkansas Writ-
ers' Project, supra, at 228, before we may find that a dis-
criminatory tax violates the Free Press Clause; it is enough
that the application of a tax offers the "potentialfor abuse,"
Minneapolis Star, 460 U. S., at 592 (emphasis added). That
potential is surely present when the legislature may, at will,
include or exclude various media sectors from a general tax.

                                       B

   The majority, however, does not flinch at the prospect of
intermedia discrimination. Purporting to draw on Regan v.
Taxation With Representation of Washington, 461 U. S.540
(1983)-a decision dealing with the tax-deductibility of lobby-
ing expenditures -the majority embraces "the proposition
that a tax scheme that discriminates among speakers does
not implicate the First Amendment unless it discriminates on
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

the basis of ideas." Ante, at 450 (emphasis added). "[T]he
power to discriminate in taxation," the majority insists, is
"[i]nherent in the power to tax." Ante, at 451.

   Read for all they are worth, these propositions would
essentially annihilate the nondiscrimination principle, at
least as it applies to tax differentials between individual
members of the press. If Minneapolis Star, Arkansas Writ-
ers' Project, and Grosjean stand for anything, it is that the
"power to tax" does not include "the power to discriminate"
when the press is involved. Nor is it the case under these
decisions that a tax regime that singles out individual mem-
bers of the press implicates the First Amendment only when
it is "directed at, or presents the danger of suppressing, par-
ticularideas." Ante, at 453 (emphasis added). Even when
structured in a manner that is content neutral, a scheme that
imposes differential burdens on like-situated members of the
press violates the First Amendment because it poses the risk
that the State might abuse this power. See Minneapolis
Star, supra, at 592.

   At a minimum, the majority incorrectly conflates our cases

on selective taxation of the press and our cases on the selec-
tive taxation (or subsidization) of speech generally. Regan
holds that the government does not invariably violate the
Free Speech Clause when it selectively subsidizes one group

of speakers according to content-neutral criteria. This
power, when exercised with appropriate restraint, inheres in
government's legitimate authority to tap the energy of ex-
pressive activity to promote the public welfare. See Buck-

ley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 90-97 (1976).
   But our cases on the selective taxation of the press strike a

different posture. Although the Free Press Clause does not
guarantee the press a preferred position over other speakers,
the Free Press Clause does "protec[t] [members of press]
from invidious discrimination." L. Tribe, American Con-
stitutional Law § 12-20, p. 963 (2d ed. 1988). Selective tax-
ation is precisely that. In light of the Framers' specific in-
     LEATHERS v. MEDLOCK

439  MARSHALL, J., dissenting

tent "to preserve an untrammeled press as a vital source of
public information," Grosjean, 297 U. S., at 250; see Minne-
apolis Star, supra, at 585, n. 7, our precedents recognize
that the Free Press Clause imposes a special obligation on
government to avoid disrupting the integrity of the informa-
tion market. As Justice Stewart explained:

      "IT]he Free Press guarantee is, in essence, a structural
      provision of the Constitution. Most of the other provi-
      sions in the Bill of Rights protect specific liberties or spe-
      cific rights of individuals: freedom of speech, freedom of
      worship, the right to counsel, the privilege against com-
      pulsory self-incrimination, to name a few. In contrast,
      the Free Press Clause extends protection to an institu-
      tion." Stewart, "Or of the Press," 26 Hastings L. J.
      631, 633 (1975) (emphasis in original).

   Because they distort the competitive forces that animate
this institution, tax differentials that fail to correspond to the
social cost associated with different information media, and
that are justified by nothing more than the State's desire for
revenue, violate government's obligation of evenhandedness.
Clearly, this is true of disproportionate taxation of cable tele-
vision. Under the First Amendment, government simply
has no business interfering with the process by which citi-
zens' preferences for information formats evolve.

   4The majority's reliance on Mabee v. White Plains PublishingCo., 327
U. S. 178 (1946), and Oklahoma Press Publishing Co. v. Walling, 327
U. S. 186 (1946), is also misplaced. At issue in those cases was a provision
that exempted small newspapers with primarily local distribution from the
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA). In upholding the provision,
the Court noted that the exemption promoted a legitimate interest in plac-
ing the exempted papers "on a parity with other small town enterprises"
that also were not subject to regulation under the FLSA. Mabee, supra,
at 184; see also Oklahoma Press, supra, at 194. In Minneapolis Star, we
distinguished these cases on the ground that, unlike the FLSA exemption,
Minnesota's discrimination between large and small newspapers did not
derive from, or correspond to, any general state policy to benefit small
businesses. See 460 U. S., at 592, and n. 16. Similarly, Arkansas' dis-
OCTOBER TERM, 1990

MARSHALL, J., dissenting  499 U. S.

   Today's decision unwisely discards these teachings. I
dissent.

crimination against cable operators derives not from any general, legiti-
mate state policy unrelated to speech but rather from the simple decision of
state officials to treat one information medium differently from all others.
Thus, like the schemes in Arkansas Writers' Project and Minneapolis

Star, but unlike the scheme at issue in Mabee and Oklahoma Press, the
Arkansas tax scheme must be supported by a compelling interest to sur-
vive First Amendment scrutiny. Cf. United States v. O'Brien, 391 U. S.
367, 377 (1968).
