(| DEC ~3 993 
OFFICE OF THE CLERK 


93-880/"7T i | 


No. 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1993 
« 


JUDY MADSEN, ED MARTIN, and SHIRLEY HOBBs, 
Petitioners, 


ws 


WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER, INC., 
AWARE WOMEN CENTER FOR CHOICE, INC., 
EPOC CLINIC, INC., and CENTRAL FLORIDA 

WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION, INC., 
Respondents. 


° 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
Supreme Court of Florida 


e 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


o 


Christopher J. Weiss Mathew D. Staver 
Two South Orange Avenue (Counsel of Record) 
Orlando, FL 32802 Jeffery T. Kipi 
(407) 843-4421 Frederick H. Nelson 
Michael D. Rouse 
Liberty Counsel 
1900 Summit Tower Blvd. 
Suite 540 


Orlando, FL 32810 
(407) 875-0077 
Counsel for the Petitioners 


i 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


1. Whether a state court injunction placing a thirty-six-foot 
buffer zone around an abortion clinic which prohibits peaceful pro- 
life speech in a traditional public forum is an unconstitutional 
content-based restriction on free speech and association. 


2. Whether a state court injunction creating a consent 
requirement before speech is permitted within a three-hundred-foot 
buffer zone around an abortion clinic and residential areas is a 
reasonable time, place, and manner restriction or an 
unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech. 


3. Whether a state court injunction prohibiting named 
demonstrators and those acting "in concert" from expressing 
peaceful speech within several designated buffer zones violates the 
First Amendment’s protection of freedom of speech and 
association. 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 
AND RULE 29.1 STATEMENT 


In addition to the Petitioners listed in the caption i 
Rescue, Patrick Mahoney, Randall Terry, Bruce Cadie Ses 
Rescue America, and Operation Goliath were listed as parties in 
the Supreme Court of Florida, but did not present oral argument 
None of the Petitioners are active corporations. | 


The Respondents are all incorporated in Flori 
rida and 
have parent or subsidiary companies. ites 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ........... i 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS AND 
PEE oc cc ccc cece ccceeesceeccs il 
EE Se iii 
ED «occ cccceccccececcccce vi 
~~~ EE Te cs sce cccccceeccecccecs 2 
STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION ................ 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION ATISSUE.......... 2 
ST ATeeret Ge Tee CASE 4... cc eee 3 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT ........... 10 


THE FLORIDA SUPREME COURT’S OPINION, 
THAT THE INJUNCTION IS NOT CONTENT-BASED 
AND DOES NOT VIOLATE FIRST AMENDMENT 
FREE SPEECH RIGHTS, IS IN DIRECT CONFLICT 
WITH THE OPINION OF THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT WHICH FOUND THE _ IDENTICAL 
INJUNCTION WAS CONTENT-BASED AND DID 
VIOLATE THE FIRST AMENDMENT ......... 11 


iV Vv 


Il. E. City of Melbourne’s Response to Women’s Health 
Center’s Emergency Motion to Enforce 
THE FLORIDA SUPREME COURT'S OPINION IS IN Injunctive Order, November 10, 1993 ....... E-1 


DIRECT CONFLICT WITH THE JUDGMENT OF 
THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT, AND 
SEVERAL FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND STATE 
GED 6 coe ebeckh tee béeupne cenees 4ae< 15 


~- A a se ee ta 


A. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In Direct 
Conflict With The Judgment Of The United States 
DE ae cous wn desesaeavuetes 15 


B. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In Direct 
Conflict With The Judgments Of The Fourth, Fifth, 
Eighth and Tenth Circuit Courts of Appeals .... 25 


C. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In 
Direct Conflict With The Judgment Of Several 


i ere ag Cue ae Dares oo 28 
SR AIRE ERT Hs rE Teves TT o 30 
APPENDICES: 


A. Operation Rescue v. Women's Health Center, Inc., 
No. 81,905 (Fla. Oct. 28, 1993), Opinion .... A-l 


B. Women's Health Center, Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 
No. 91-2811-CA-16-K (Fla. Cir. Ct. Oct. 25, 1993), 
Amended Permanent Injunction ........... B-| 


C. Cheffer v. McGregor, No. 93-2407 
(1ith Cir. Oct. 20, 1993) (1993 WL 416820), 
GED bb a wile wins © pase neues ee en ence C-1 


D. Women’s Health Center’s Emergency Motion to Enforce 
Injunctive Order, November 6, 1993 ........ D-1 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
PAGE 


CASES: 
Alexander v. United States, 113 S.Ct. 2766 (1993) ...... 24 


Boffard v. Barnes, 264 N.J. Super. 11, 624 A.2d 1 
(App. Div. 1993), cert. granted, 627 A.2d 1150 (N.J. 1993) 11 


Braxton v. United States, 111 S.Ct. 1854 (1991) ....... 12 


Bray v. Alexandria Woman's Health Clinic, 
eh ee ee 2 16 


Cannon v. City and County of Denver, 
ee 28 


Charles Dowd Box Co. v. Courtney, 82 S.Ct. 519 (1962) .. 11 


Cheffer v. McGregor, No. 93-2407 


(11th Cir. Oct. 20, 1993) (1993 WL 416820) ...... passim 
Citizens Against Rent Control Coalition for Fair Housing v. 

Berkley, 454 U.S. 290 (1981) ................. 19, 24 
De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353 (1937) ......... 20, 21 
Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474 (1988) ............. 21 
Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169 (1972) .............. 24 


Horizon Health Center v. Felicissimo, 263 N.J. Super. 200, 
622 A.2d 891 (App. Div. 1993), cert. granted, 
FF RE a Ae ee 11 


Macheskey v. Bizzell, 414 F.2d 283 (Sth Cir. 1969) ...... 8 


eee er > 


eee pe Pm le 


Vii 


Mississippi Woman’s Medical Clinic v. McMillan, 
866 F.2d 788 (Sth Cir. 1989) ................ passim 


Murray v. Lawson, 264 N.J. Super. 17, 624 A.2d 3 
(App. Div. 1993), cert. granted, 627 A.2d 1149 (N.J. 1993) 10 


NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449 (1958) 20 
NAACP vy. Claiborne Hardware, 458 U.S. 886 (1982) . passim 


National Organization for Women v. Operation Rescue, 


914 F.2d 582 (4th Cir. 1990) .............. 16, 25, 26 
Northeast Woman's Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 

PP TE cccsenbeseseovecsnecs 21 
Noto v. United States, 367 U.S. 290 (1961) ........ 19, 23 


O.B.G.Y.N. Ass'n. v. Birthright of Brooklyn and Queens, Inc.., 
64 A.D.2d 894, 407 N.Y.S.2d 903 (1978) ........... 16 


Organization For A Better Austin v. Keefe, 


GE EE diese ewes ete crete ewes 24 
Parkmed Co. v. Pro-Life Counseiing, Inc., 

91 A.D.2d 551, 457 N.Y.S.2d 27 (1982) ......... 29, 30 
Perry Education Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 

460 U.S. 37, 103 S.Ct. 948, 74 L.Ed 2d 794 (1983) ..... 6 
Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts, Inc. v. 

Operation Rescue, 406 Mass. 701, 

SPREE ov cb ecerccescecseces 16, 29 


Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, Inc. v. 
Operation Rescue National, No. 93-CV-4266 (Colo. Dist. Ct. 
1993), appeal filed, No. 93-CA-1613 (Colo. Ct. App. 1993) 11 


Viii 


Planned Parenthood Shasta-Diablo, Inc. v. Williams, 
12 Cal. App. 4th 1817, 16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 540, review granted, 
851 P.2d 774, 19 Cal. Rptr. 2d 492 (Cal. 1993) ....... 10 


Plumbers, Steamfitters, Refrigeration, Petroleum Fitters 
and Apprentices of Local 298, A. F. of L., v. 


County of Door, 79 S.Ct. 844 (1959) .............., 12 
Portland Feminist Women’s Health Center v. 

Advocates for Life, Inc., 859 F.2d 681 (9th Cir. 1988) ... 14 
Scales v. United States, 367 U.S. 203 (1961) ......... 20 
State of California v. Taylor, 77 §.Ct. 1037 (1957)... ... 12 
Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516 (1945) ............ 19 
United Food & Commercial Workers International Union v. 

IBP, Inc., 857 F.2d 422 (8th Cir. 1988) .......... 27, 28 
Watts v. United States, 394 U.S. 705 (1969) .......... 21 


Woman's Health Center of Duluth v. Operation Rescue, 

No. CO-93-601157 (Minn. Dist. Ct. 1993), appeal filed, 

No. C9-93-1776 (Min. Ct. App. 1993) ............. 11 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS: 


as I I Patch oe eek eae vac 5 2 


Ps ED 8 av ke SS Ge ee + oe eA ee 2 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1993 
¢ 


JuDY MADSEN, ED MARTIN, and SHIRLEY HOBBs, 


Petitioners, 
v. 


WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER, INC., 
AWARE WOMEN CENTER FOR CHOICE, INC., 
EPOC CLINIC, INC., and CENTRAL FLORIDA 

WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION, INC., 


Respondents. 


® 


Petition for Writ of Certiorari to the 
Supreme Court of Florida 


-% 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


¢ 


Judy Madsen, Ed Martin and Shirley Hobbs respectfully 
petition for a writ of certiorari to review the judgment of the 


Supreme Court of Florida. 


2 
OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Supreme Court of Florida is not yet 
reported, but is reproduced as Appendix A. Operation Rescue v. 
Women’s Health Center, Inc., No. 81,905 (Fla. Oct. 28, 1993). 


The opinion of the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida 
granting the Amended Permanent Injunction challenged herein was 
not reported, but is reproduced as Appendix B. Women’s Health 
Center, Inc. v. Operation Rescue, No. 91-2811-CA-16-K (Fla. 
Cir. Ct. Oct. 25, 1993). 


STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION 


The opinion of the Supreme Court of Florida was entered on 
October 28, 1993. The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 
28 U.S.C. 1257(a). 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION 
AND INJUNCTION AT ISSUE 


This case involves the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, which provides: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment 
of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the 
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition 
the Government for redress of grievances. 


U.S. Const. amend. I. 


This case presents constitutional challenges to the Eighteenth 
Judicial Circuit of Florida’s Amended Permanent Injunction 


—— Ok ee 


A A EE A i ct al ee a 


reproduced as Appendix B.' 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
A. The Decision of the Supreme Court of Florida 


This case challenges the constitutionality of an Amended 
Permanent Injunction (hereinafter “Injunction") (App. B) entered 
on April 8, 1993 by the Honorable Robert B. McGregor, Circuit 
Judge in the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida, against the 
Petitioners, and those acting "in concert" with the Petitioners. 


The Respondents in this case are all abortion businesses 
located in Central Florida. The Petitioners named in the 
challenged Injunction are opposed to abortion. Certain individuals 
demonstrated outside the Respondents’ clinics and expressed their 
opposition to abortion. Petitioners Madsen, Martin and Hobbs 
were not associated with those protesters blocking the clinics or 
with Operation Rescue. Respondents requested injunctive relief 
enjoining the Petitioners and others from trespassing, blocking or 
obstructing ingress into or egress from the Respondents’ abortion 
facilities. 


On October 21, 1991, Women’s Health Center, Inc., Aware 
Woman Center For Choice, Inc. ,* EPOC Clinic, Inc., and Central 
Florida Women’s Health Organization, Inc. (hereinafter 
"Respondents") filed a Verified Petition for Injunction in the 


' On April 15, 1993, the Florida circuit court entered a Modification 
of the Amended Permanent Injunction. The only provisions modified 
from the Amended Permanent Injunction entered April 8, 1993 concern 
the procedures for enforcement of the Amended Permanent Injunction by 
law enforcement personnel. 


? The challenged Injunction only applies to the Aware Woman Center 
for Choice, Inc. located at the corner of U.S. Hwy. | and Dixie Way in 
Melbourne, Florida. 


4 


Circuit Court of the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit in and for 
Seminole County, Florida seeking a permanent injunction against 
Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue America, Operation Goliath, 
Ed Martin, Bruce Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy 
Madsen and Shirley Hobbs (Judy Madsen, Ed Martin and Shirley 
Hobbs are hereinafter “Petitioners"). 


On October 25, 1991, the Respondents filed a Verified 
Motion for Temporary Restraining Order (hereinafter "TRO"). 
The court entered an Order granting the TRO on October 25, 
1991. On December 6, 1991, the Petitioners filed a Motion to 
Dissolve the TRO. The Respondents then filed a Motion for 
Permanent Injunction on December 31, 1991. The Petitioners filed 
an Answer to the Verified Petition for Injunction on January 15, 
1992. In their Answer, the Petitioners raised as an affirmative 
defense the Petitioners’ rights of free speech and assembly under 
the United States Constitution. On January 27, 1992, the court 
denied the Petitioners’ Motion to Dissolve the TRO. 


On July 13, 1992, the court entered an Order requiring the 
parties to submit a stipulation of issues and facts and memorandum 
of law within thirty days. The court indicated that it would base 
its ruling upon the factual stipulation, affidavits filed by the 
parties, and the memoranda of law. On September 30, 1992, the 
court entered an Order granting a Permanent Injunction against the 
Petitioners. The Order stated: 


A. [Petitioners], OPERATION RESCUE, OPERATION 
RESCUE AMERICA, OPERATION GOLIATH, Ed 
Martin, Bruce Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy 
Madsen, and Shirley Hobbs,’ are hereby enjoined from: 


1) trespassing on, sitting in, blocking, impeding or 


* The Permanent Injunction entered on September 30, 1993 did not 
address those acting "in concert" and was therefore limited to those 
named in that injunction. 


5 


which abortions are performed in Brevard and Seminole 
County, Florida; and, 


2) physically abusing persons entering, leaving, 
working or using any services of any facility at which 
abortions are performed in Brevard and Seminole 
County, Florida; and, 


3) attempting or directing others to take any of the 
actions described in Paragraphs | and 2 above. 


B. Nothing in the Court’s Order should be construed to 
limit [Petitioners’] exercise of their legitimate First 
Amendment rights, such as, but not limited to, carrying 
signs, singing, and praying, in a manner which does not 
violate 1), 2), and 3) above; 


C. This Court retains jurisdiction for determination of 
any costs to be imposed upon [Petitioners].‘ 


On March 22, 1993, the Respondents moved for a 
modification of the Permanent Injunction. From March 31, 1993 
through April 2, 1993 the court conducted an evidentiary trial on 
the Respondents’ Motion for Sanctions and Modification of the 
Permanent Injunction recited above. The Aware Woman Center 
For Choice, Inc. (hereinafter "Clinic") was the only facility in 
question at the evidentiary hearing. On April 8, 1993, following 
the evidentiary proceedings, Judge McGregor entered the Amended 
Permanent Injunction (App. B) which is the subject of this Petition 
for Writ of Certiorari. 


The undersigned counsel filing this Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari filed the first Notice of Appeal challenging the Amended 


* The Permanent Injunction entered September 30, 1993 is not 
challenged. 


6 


Permanent Injunction. On April 27, 1993, the Fifth District Court 
of Appeal of Florida entered an Order granting the Petitioners’ 
Motion to Expedite the Appeal filed by the undersigned counsel. 
Subsequent to the action of the undersigned counsel, a second 
group of petitioners filed their own separate appeal. On June 4, 
1993, a motion to consolidate the separate appeals was filed with 
the Fifth District Court of Appeal. 


The Petitioners’ briefs argued that the Injunction was content- 
based, created a complete ban on pro-life speech in a traditional 
public forum, and created vague and overbroad restrictions on 
freedom of speech and association in violation of the Petitioners’ 
First Amendment rights. On June 9, 1993, the Supreme Court of 
Florida accepted certification of the case from the Fifth District 
Court of Appeal as a matter of great public importance. On 
August 31, 1993, the undersigned counsel presented oral 
argument, and on October 28, 1993, the Florida Supreme Court 
issued its opinion, cight days after the Eleventh Circuit Court of 
Appeal’s decision in Cheffer v. McGregor, No. 93-2407 (1 1th Cir. 
Oct. 20, 1993) (1993 WL 416820). 


The Supreme Court of Florida, in Operation Rescue v. 
Women's Health Center, Inc., No. 81,905 (Fla. Oct. 28, 1993) 
(App. A), concluded that the challenged Injunction was content 
neutral and therefore not subject to strict scrutiny as required in 
Perry Education Ass’n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 460 U.S. 
37, 103 S.Ct. 948, 74 L.Ed 2d 794 (1983). Although the court 
agreed that the Injunction encompassed a traditional public forum-- 
public sidewalks, public streets, and public right-of-ways--the court 
concluded that the Injunction was content neutral and allowed time, 
place, and manner restrictions on free speech. The court 
maintained that the Injunction regulated not what the Petitioners 
might speak, but when, where, and how the Petitioners were to 


speak. 


The court concluded that the Injunction only banned the 
Petitioners from entering the thirty-six-foot and three-hundred-foot 


7 


buffer zones. The court noted that the Injunction could have been 
narrowed, but declined to quibble over a few feet or over purely 
symbolic matters. 


The court also discounted any challenge that the Injunction 
did not leave open ample alternative means of communication. 
Noting that speech was permitted outside the buffer zones and 
other public areas surrounding the Clinic, the court concluded that 
the Petitioners’ message could be conveyed outside the buffer 
zones. In addition, because the court concluded that the Injunction 
was content neutral, it further determined that prior restraint 
challenges would not apply. 


Finally, the court rejected any challenge based on vagueness 
or overbreadth. The court stated that “sounds or images 
observable to or within earshot of the patients inside the Clinic" 
was sufficiently specific to give proper notice of what would be 
considered illegal under the Injunction. As to overbreadth, the 
court stated that the phrase “in active concert or participation" 
would create no danger that the Injunction would be unfairly 
enforced. 


In its summary, the court recognized without comment the 
case of Cheffer, wherein the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Eleventh Circuit ruled that the same Injunction violated free 


speech.° 


> The Appellees in Cheffer filed a Suggestion of Rehearing En Banc 
on November 9, 1993 on which the Eleventh Circuit has not ruled. 
Petitioners’ Madsen, Martin and Hobbs desired to await the Eleventh 
Circuit’s decision on the Appellees’ motion for rehearing before 
submitting this Petition for Writ of Certiorari. However, on November 
24, 1993, a petition was filed in this Court by other parties in the Florida 
court. In order to avoid prejudice to the Respondents and allow them an 
opportunity to respond fully to any petitions before this Court, 
Petitioners’ Madsen, Martin and Hobbs file this petition. 


8 


B. The Decision of the United States Eleventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals 


At the same time the Injunction was being challenged on the 
state level, a federal challenge was concurrently prosecuted in the 
case of Cheffer v. McGregor, No. 93-2407 (11th Cir. Oct. 20, 
1993) (1993 WL 416820).° On April 13, 1993, Ms. Myrna 
Cheffer, represented by the same undersigned counsel for the 
Petitioners herein, filed a Complaint for Injunctive and Declaratory 
Relief, a Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order, and Motion 
for a Preliminary Injunction in the United States District Court for 
the Middle District of Florida challenging specific provisions of the 
Injunction. Cheffer also requested declaratory judgement to 
determine the constitutionality of certain provisions of the 
Injunction and whether the challenged provisions violated Cheffer’s 
free speech and freedom of religion rights guaranteed under the 
First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. Although Ms. Cheffer was not a party in the state 
court Injunction, she feared arrest because the Injunction had been 
applied to anyone expressing a pro-life view through the phrase "in 
concert."’ 


On April 14, 1993, the District Court denied Cheffer’s 
Motion for Temporary Restraining Order and Motion for 


* A similar strategy was taken in the case of Macheskey v. Bizzell, 
414 F.2d 283 (Sth Cir. 1969), wherein several state court defendants filed 
for injunctive relief in federal court against a state court injunction. In 
Macheskey, the state's injunction created a total ban on all picketing 
within a three-hundred-foot buffer zone around several businesses. In 
both Cheffer and Macheskey, the federal court provided protection aguinst 
a state court’s injunctive order which was overbroad and prohibited 
peaceful picketing within a traditional public forum. 


”On April 12, 1993, Judge McGregor, addressing about fifty people 
who were arrested on April 10, 1993, two days after the Injunction was 
entered, stated that the Injunction applied to anyone with a pro-life belief. 


9 


Preliminary Injunction, holding that Cheffer failed to show that the 
balance of equities favored Cheffer in compelling the court to 
enjoin enforcement of the state court Injunction. On April 16, 
1993, Cheffer filed a Notice of Appeal to the Eleventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals. The undersigned counsel presented oral 
argument before the Eleventh Circuit on June 30, 1993. 


On October 20, 1993, the Eleventh Circuit entered an Order 
vacating the District Court’s Order denying Cheffer’s Motion for 
Temporary Restraining Order and Cheffer’s Motion for 
Preliminary Injunction and remanded the case to the District Court 
for a new decision in light of Cheffer’s First Amendment rights. 


In Cheffer, the Eleventh Circuit held that the Injunction was 
a viewpoint-based restriction on free speech in a traditional public 
forum. The court stated: 


The order enjoins Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue 
America, Operation Goliath, their officers, agents, 
members, employees and servants, and Ed Martin, 
Bruce Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy 
Madsen, and Shirley Hobbs, and all persons acting in 
concert or participation with them or on their behalf... 
Such a restric:.on is no more viewpoint-neutral than one 
restricting the speech of "the Republican party, the state 
Republican party, George Bush, Bob Dole, Jack Kemp 
and all persons acting in concert or participation with 
them or on their behalf." 


1993 WL 416820 at 6 (App. C-11-12). 


The court noted that a viewpoint-specific restriction in a 
traditional public forum is unconstitutional unless it is necessary to 
serve a compelling state interest and it is narrowly drawn to 
achieve that end. In this instance, the court concluded that the 
Injunction did not meet either test. In sum, the court concluded: 
"The practical effect of this section of the Injunction was to assure 


10 


that while ‘pro-life’ speakers would be arrested, ‘pro-choice’ 
demonstrators would not." /d. (App. C-12). 


The court noted tha: women were not prevented from 
obtaining abortions at the Clinic. The Cheffer court reasoned that 
the two rights which collided in this case were between an actual 
prohibition of speech and a potential hinderance of abortion rights. 
The court stated that should the lower federal court issue an Order 
barring enforcement of the Injunction, “it would promote only 
speech and expressive conduct, not assault, trespass, or destruction 
of property.” 1993 WL 416820 at 6 (App. C-13). 


Finally, the court declined to entertain an argument that the 
speech in this case was disruptive, discourteous, or offensive. 
Noting this Court’s tradition of protecting First Amendment rights, 
Cheffer reaffirmed that "the fact that society may find speech 
offensive is not a sufficient reason for suppressing it. Indeed, if 
it is the speaker’s opinion that gives offense, that consequence is 
a reason for according it constitutional protection." Jd. (App. C- 
14). To punctuate the point, the court affirmed that "[w]e protect 
much that offends in the name of free speech--we cannot refuse 
such protection to those who find abortion morally reprehensible." 
Id. (App. C-14). 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


This case presents stark conflicts between the Supreme Court 
of Florida, the Eleventh Circuit, and the decisions of this Court 
and numerous other federal and state courts. On the same identical 
issue within the same jurisidiction comes two conflicting opinions. 
The City of Melbourne, Florida, is confused as to which ruling to 
follow.* The scope and importance of the ruling in this case is 
enormous, reaching far beyond the state of Florida, and will create 
a precedent which allows other states to impose broad restrictions 


* See Appendices D and E. 


11 


on the peaceful expression of speech within a traditional public 
forum. Presently, several courts are attempting to resolve the 
questions presented in this Petition for Writ of Certiorari.? The 
Florida court summarily dismissed the reasoning of the Eleventh 
Circuit Court of Appeals’ unanimous decision interpreting the 
identical language within the identical Injunction. The Florida 
court also refused to follow this Court’s precedent and allowed an 
Injunction to stand which prohibits the peaceful expression of 
speech. A writ of certiorari should be issued to resolve these 
conflicts and provide direction for the people and courts of our 
nation. 


THE FLORIDA SUPREME COURT’S OPINION, THAT THE 
INJUNCTION IS NOT CONTENT-BASED AND DOES NOT 
VIOLATE FIRST AMENDMENT FREE SPEECH RIGHTS, 
IS IN DIRECT CONFLICT WITH THE OPINION OF THE 
ELEVENTH CIRCUIT COURT WHICH FOUND THE 
IDENTICAL INJUNCTION WAS CONTENT-BASED AND 
DID VIOLATE THE FIRST AMENDMENT. 


The Florida Supreme Court’s opinion is in direct conflict with 


° E.g., Planned Parenthood Shasta-Diablo, Inc. v. Williams, 12 Cal. 
App. 4th 1817, 16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 540, review granted, 851 P.2d 774, 19 
Cal. Rptr. 2d 492 (Cal. 1993); Murray v. Lawson, 264 N.J. Super. 17, 
624 A.2d 3 (App. Div. 1993), cert. granted, 627 A.2d 1149 (N.J. 1993); 
Boffard v. Barnes, 264 N.J. Super. 11, 624 A.2d 1 (App. Div. 1993), 
cert. granted, 627 A.2d 1150 (N.J. 1993); Horizon Health Center v. 
Felicissimo, 263 N.J. Super. 200, 622 A.2d 891 (App. Div. 1993), cert. 
granted, No. 36,728 (N.J. 1993); Planned Parenthood of the Rocky 
Mountains, Inc. v. Operation Rescue National, No. 93-CV-4266 (Colo. 
Dist. Ct. 1993), appeal filed, No. 93-CA-1613 (Colo. Ct. App. 1993); 
Woman's Health Center of Duluth v. Operation Rescue, No. CO-93- 
601157 (Minn. Dist. Ct. 1993), appeal filed, No. C9-93-1776 (Min. Ct. 
App. 1993). 


12 


the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision in Cheffer v. 
McGregor, No. 93-2407 (llth Cir. Oct. 20, 1993) (1993 WL 
416820). Although both courts interpreted the same language 
within the same Injunction, the two courts came to diametrically 
opposite decisions. As stated by this Court in Charles Dowd Box 
Co. v. Courtney, 82 S.Ct. 519, 526 (1962), “‘diversities and 
conflicts’ may occur, no less among the courts of the eleven 
federal circuits, than among the courts of the several States... . 
To resolve and accommodate such diversities and conflicts is one 
of the traditional functions of this Court." Moreover, this Court 
stated in Braxton v. United States, 111 S.Ct. 1854, 1857 (1991), 
that a “principal purpose for which we use our certiorari 
jurisdiction . . . is to resolve conflicts among the Circuit Courts of 
Appeals and state courts... ." See also Plumbers, Steamfitters, 
Refrigeration, Petroleum Fitters and Apprentices of Local 298, A. 
F. of L., et al. v. County of Door, 79 S.Ct. 844 (1959); State of 
California v. Taylor, 77 §.Ct. 1037 (1957). 


Initially, both courts recognized the Injunction affected a 
traditional public forum. Both courts agreed that if the Injunction 
was content-based it must satisfy the strict scrutiny standard. The 
two courts conflicted in that the federal decision utilized the higher 
standard of strict scrutiny while the Florida court applied a lesser 
standard under the content neutral analysis. 


In both the state and federal cases, the same Injunction was 
applied to persons who neither violated the original September 30, 
1992 Injunction, nor in any way attempted to block access to any 
clinic or act in an unlawful manner. Petitioners Madsen, Martin 
and Hobbs never participated in any disruptive activities or 
violated any laws. Likewise, Ms. Cheffer has never engaged in 
disruptive or illegal behavior. 


Both the state and federal cases were brought by the same 
undersigned counsel. In both courts, the same evidence was 
presented and the same arguments were presented challenging the 
same language in the same Injunction. In Cheffer, the federal 


13 


court recognized that the content-based language in the Injunction 
proscribed protected free speech activities in a traditional public 
forum. The court noted that: 


Judge McGregor’s Amended Permanent Injunction, by 
operating on persons not befcre this court, serves as a 
statute of local effect regulating picketing by antiabortion 
speakers. As a viewpoint-based restriction operating in 
a traditional public forum (the public streets and 
sidewalks around the Clinic), it is subject to a most 
stringent review. 


1993 WL 416820 at 5 (App. C-10). 


The Cheffer court noted that a viewpoint-specific restriction 
in a traditional public forum is unconstitutional unless it is 
necessary to serve a compelling state interest and it is narrowly 
drawn to achieve that end. In this instance, the court concluded 
that the Injunction did not meet either test. The court concluded: 
"The practical effect of [the "in concert"] section of the injunction 
was to assure that while ‘pro-life’ speakers would be arrested, 
‘pro-choice’ demonstrators would not." /d. at 6 (App. C-12). 


In direct conflict with the Florida Supreme court's opinion, 
the Cheffer court held that the Injunction was only applied to those 
with a pro-life view. “This is apparently precisely what occurred. 
Several of those arrested testified (at a preliminary hearing 
convened by Judge McGregor as provided for in the Injunction) 
that they were designated for arrest by Clinic workers and police 
officers because they were perceived to be ‘pro-life’." /d. at 6 
n.11 (App. C-12). The court found that 


Judge McGregor accepted this interpretation of the intent 
of the injunction and explained (to the arrestees): "[T}he 
injunction did not pertain to those on the other side of 
the issue, because the word in concert with means in 
concert with those who had taken a certain position in 


14 


respect to the Clinic, adverse to the Clinic. If you are 
saying that is selective basis that the pro-choice were not 
arrested when pro-life was arrested, that’s the basis of 
that selection." 


Id. (App. C-12). 


In contrast, the Florida court held that the Injunction was 
content neutral and simply created time, place and manner 
restrictions in a traditional public forum. Relying in part on the 
Ninth Circuit’s opinion in Portland Feminist Women’s Health 
Center v. Advocates for Life, Inc., 859 F.2d 681 (9th Cir. 1988), 
the Florida court stated: "The restrictions make no mention 
whatsoever of abortion or any other political or social issue; they 
address only the volume, timing, location, and violent or harassing 
nature of Operation Rescue’s expressive activity." Slip op. at 16. 
However, the Cheffer court specifically rejected such reasoning. 
In reviewing the Ninth Circuit’s opinion in Portland, the Cheffer 
court noted that: 


The [Ninth Circuit] argued the preliminary injunction is 
not a content-based restriction of expression. It refers 
not at all to the specific viewpoints that the advocates 
press, nor even to the general issues raised at their 
demonstrations. . . Therefore, we apply to the 
preliminary injunction the rules regarding the 
constitutionality of ‘time, place, and manner’ regulations 
of speech. 


1993 WL 416820 at 6 n.10 (App. C-11). 


Rejecting Portiand, the Cheffer court concluded: "We do not find 
this reasoning at all persuasive.” Jd. (App. C-11). 


The Florida Supreme court’s opinion is in direct opposition 
to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision ruling on the 
same identical language in the challenged Injunction. This conflict 


15 


has created confusion as to which ruling is controlling. The City 
of Melbourne has refused to enforce the Injunction." A writ of 
certiorari should be issued to resolve this conflict. 


THE FLORIDA SUPREME COURT’S OPINION IS IN 
DIRECT CONFLICT WITH THE JUDGMENT OF THE 
UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT, AND SEVERAL 
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND STATE COURTS. 


A. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In Direct 
Conflict With The Judgment Of The United States 
Supreme Court. 


The Florida court’s primary flaw is that it failed to distinguish 
the Petitioners’ peaceful acts from other organizations and persons. 
Following from the example in the lower Florida court, the Florida 
Supreme court declined to separate the Petitioners’ peaceful protest 
from those other persons alleged to have committed unlawful acts. 
For this reason, the Florida court’s opinion is in direct conflict 
with this Court’s judgment in NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware, 458 
U.S. 886 (1982)." 


The Florida Supreme Court’s opinion was that the Injunction 
merely restrained speech when joined with unlawful conduct. On 


See Appendices D and E. The Florida Supreme Court directs 
enforcement officials to apply the Injunction; the Eleventh Circuit 
demands they must not. 


'! The Florida Supreme court refused to recognized the Petitioners’ 
arguments based on Claiborne Hardware, 458 U.S. 886 (1982). The 
Florida court considered Claiborne Hardware only as it related to the 
issue of damages. The Florida court expressly rejected any First 
Amendment arguments based on this Court’s decision in Claiborne 
Hardware. 


16 


the face of the Injunction it is clear that lawful conduct and 
protected speech are also prohibited. The Injunction proscribes 
peaceful demonstrations and speech “or other sounds or images 
observable to or within earshot of the patients inside the Clinic." 
Thus, if a pro-life demonstrator can be seen or heard inside the 
Clinic, regardless of where the demonstrator is located or what 
type of activity and speech is taking place, the pro-life person is 
subject to immediate arrest without notice. In Claiborne 
Hardware, this Court held that in the context of protected speech 
or activities, the courts may “restrain only unlawful conduct and 
the persons responsible for conduct of that character." 458 U.S. 
at 924 n.67 (emphasis supplied). '? 


The facts in Claiborne Hardware are quite similar to the case 
before this Court. In March 1966, several hundred black persons 
implemented a boycott of white merchants following racial abuses 
in Claiborne County, Mississippi. The business merchants sued 
for injunctive relief against the demonstrators and Charles Evers, 
a leader of the movement, who "sought to persuade others to join 


* Historically, numerous federal and state courts have noted the 
distinction between prohibited illegal conduct and lawful speech protected 
under the First Amendment. E.g., National Organization for Women v. 
Operation Rescue, 914 F.2d 582, 586 (4th Cir. 1990) (per curium) 
(affirming refusal to enjoin free speech surrounding abortion clinic that 
tended to “intimidate, harass, or disturb patients” in light of serious threat 
to First Amendment protections), vacated on other grounds sub nom. 
Bray v. Alexandria Woman's Health Clinic, 113 §.Ct. 753 (1993): 
Mississippi Woman's Medical Clinic v. McMillan, 866 F .2d 788 (Sth Cir. 
1989) (affirming lower court’s denial of injunction enjoining pro-life 
demonstrations outside abortion clinics); Planned Parenthood League of 
Massachusetts, Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 406 Mass. 701, 550 N.E.2d 
1361 (1990) (upholding injunction but limiting effect to prohibit only 
illegal activity, but not protected First Amendment activity); O.B.G. ¥.N. 
Ass'n. v. Birthright of Brooklyn and Queens, Inc., 64 A.D.2d 894, 407 
N.Y .S.2d 903 (1978) (reversing injunction in part which restricted lawful 
free speech expression). 


an: dm Antenatal —_ 


17 


the boycott through pressure and the ‘threat’ of social ostracism." 
Id. at 909-10. Mr. Evers and other active members of the boycott 
furthered their cause by seeking to “embarrass” non-participants 
and “coerce them into action" and conformity. /d. at 910. 


Additionally, the lower Mississippi court found that some 
defendants, acting for all others, became involved in “acts of 
physical force and violence" against potential customers and used 
"{iJntimidation, threats, social ostracism, vilification, and 
traduction” to achieve their desired results. /d. at 894. "In two 
cases, shots were fired at a house; in a third, a brick was thrown 
through a windshield; . . . and a group of young blacks apparently 
pulled down the overalls of an elderly brick mason known as 
‘Preacher White’ and spanked him for not observing the boycott." 
Id. at 904-05. 


Momentum was added to the boycott following the 
assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. on April 4, 1968 and 
"[t]ension in the community neared a breaking point" on April 18, 
1969 after the shooting of a local black man. /d. at 901-02. 
Nevertheless, coinciding with the escalation in activities was the 
continuous “uniformly peaceful and orderly" picketing of the 
white-owned businesses which often involved small children and 
occurred “primarily on weekends." /d. at 903. 


The Mississippi Supreme Court upheld the permanent 
injunction entered below which 


permanently enjoined [the demonstrators] from stationing 
‘store watchers’ at the [merchants’] business premises, 
from ‘persuading’ any person to withhold his patronage 
from [the merchants]; from ‘using demeaning and 
obscene language to or about any person’. . . ; [and] 
from ‘picketing or patrolling’ the premises of any of the 
[merchants]... . 


Id. at 893. 


18 


The Supreme Court of Mississippi approved the injunction on 
the theory that the "petitioners had agreed to use force, violence, 
and ‘threats’ to effectuate the boycott." Jd. at 895. The court 
reasoned that "[i]f any of these factors--force, violence, or threats-- 
is present, then the entire boycott is illegal regardless of whether 
it is primary, secondary, economical, political, social or other." 
Id. at 895. 


This Court reversed the Supreme Court of Mississippi and 
dissolved the injunction reasoning that every element of the boycott 
was “a form of speech or conduct that is ordinarily entitled to 
protection under the First and Fourteenth Amendments." /d. at 
907. This Court emphasized that “precision of regulation” is 
demanded when “conduct occurs in the context of constitutionally 
protected activity." /d. at 916. This Court declared that the 
injunction "must be dissolved" or “modified to restrain only 
unlawful conduct and the persons responsible for conduct of that 
character." Jd. at 924 n.67 (emphasis supplied). 


The Supreme Court of Florida’s decision is in direct conflict 
with this Court’s judgment in Claiborne Hardware because the 
Injunction broadly prohibits all demonstrating within the designated 
buffer zones, including peaceful picketing and speech. The Florida 
court declined to recognize that the Injunction proscribes both 
lawful and unlawful speech or activity by the language prohibiting 
the peaceful display of "images observable to" persons inside the 
Clinic.’ In application, the Injunction eviscerates the Petitioners’ 
First Amendment right to peacefully picket. As stated in 


'> Applying this language, the clinic personnel become the enforcers 
of the Injunction with the use of a simple photograph. When a person 
standing within the clinic takes the picture of a pro-life person standing 
outside the clinic, the pro-life person outside the clinic is in violation of 
the Injunction. In this circumstance, the Injunction reaches beyond the 
thirty-six-foot buffer zone and out into the far reaches of the camera’s 
lens and indiscriminately prosecutes without regard to the activity’s 
peaceful nature. 


19 


Claiborne Hardware, some individuals did more than assemble 
peacefully, but “[o]ther elements of the [demonstration] . . . also 
involved activities ordinarily safeguarded by the First 
Amendment." /d. at 909. 


Although the Florida court attempts to associate the 
Petitioners with numerous unlawful acts and actors,’ the 
Respondents’ stipulation clearly reveals their agreement that 
Petitioners Judy Madsen, Ed Martin and Shirley Hobbs have never 
blocked access to the Clinic. The Florida court ignores this crucial 
fact and repeatedly claims that "Operation Rescue" (apparently 
referring to one or another of the named organizations or come 
unknown individual) committed some unlawful or onerous act. 


The Florida Supreme court’s decision is also in conflict with 
the principles of free speech and association established by this 
Court. "The established elements of speech, assembly, 
association, and petition, ‘though not identical, are inseparable." 
Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 530 (1945). "[T]he practice of 
persons sharing common views banding together to achieve a 
common end is deeply embedded in the American political 
process." Citizens Against Rent Control Coalition for Fair 
Housing v. Berkley, 454 U.S. 290, 294 (1981). In emphasizing 
the importance of free association to guarantee the right to be 
heard, Justice Harlan wrote: 


'* The Florida courts repeatedly characterized Operation Rescue as a 
radical, violent gang roaming the counties seeking opportunities to inflict 
harm and incite fear in others. Even if this were true, it is improper to 
affiliate Petitioners Madsen, Martin and Hobbs with this activity when the 
Respondents admit these Petitioners never violated any laws or blocked 
any clinic. 


'S In light of the Florida court’s continued assertion that the Injunction 
addresses only those acting "in concert,” this Court should perceive that 
the Injunction is indeed content-based and therefore unconstitutional 
because it does not satisfy a strict scrutiny standard. 


20 


Effective advocacy of both public and private points of 
view, particularly controversial ones, is undeniably 
enhanced by group association, as this Court has more 
than once recognized by remarking upon the close nexus 
between the freedoms of speech and assembly. 


NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 460 (1958). 


As did the Supreme Court of Mississippi in Claiborne 
Hardware, the Supreme Court of Florida claims the Injunction is 
required to protect various state interests which were jeopardized 
by activity at the Clinic. However, as this Court stated in 
Claiborne Hardware, "[t}he right to associate does not lose all 
constitutional protection merely because some members of the 
group may have participated in conduct or advocated doctrine that 
itself is not protected." Jd. at 908. This Court stated that a 
"blanket prohibition of association with a group having both legal 
and illegal aims’ would present ‘a real danger that legitimate 
political expression or association would be impaired.’" Scales v. 
United States, 367 U.S. 203, 229 (1961). 


In De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353 (1937), this Court 
unanimously held that “peaceful assembly for lawful discussion 
cannot be made a crime." /d. at 365. The Florida Supreme court 
concluded that the Injunction was necessary because the 
"[Petitioners] never sought to obey the [September 30, 1992] 
injunction" and continued in unlawful activity such as attempting 
to block ingress and egress to the Clinic;'® pushing literature into 
the windows of passing cars;'’ picketing residences of Clinic 


° The Florida circuit court based this corclusion on the assertion that 
unnamed and unknown persons, who were acting "in concert” with the 
named Petitioners, violated the September 30, 1992 injunction. 


'’ The Melbourne Police Chief admitted the least drastic means to 


restrict this activity is enforcement of the Florida traffic regulations 
related to literature distribution into moving vehicles. 


21 


personnel;'* and inciting fear through threat and intimidation 
while quoting the statement, "I pray that God strikes you dead 
now!""? 


However, the Respondents clearly stipulated that Judy 
Madsen, Ed Martin and Shirley Hobbs never physically blocked 
access to any abortion clinic. Moreover, the September 30, 1992 
Injunction did not even address distribution of literature into 
moving vehicles or residential picketing. The Florida court 
continually confused and misconstrued the association of the 
Petitioners with other organizations.” From _ this 


‘8 In Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474 (1988), this Court carved out 
for the unwilling listener a residential privacy exception allowing some 
limitation on First Amendment free speech. However, this Court 
acknowledged the constitutionality of residential picketing. The Florida 
court’s reliance on Northeast Woman's Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 939 
F.2d 57 (3d Cir. 1991), is in error because the Injunction sub judice 
prohibits “approaching . . . the residence . . . of any ‘owners or agents 
of the clinic.” Because the names and addresses of clinic personnel are 
not available, this creates a restriction on a pro-life person's ability to 
walk through any and all residential neighborhoods without fear of 
violating the Injunction. 


9 In Watts v. Unived States, 394 U.S. 705 (1969), the petitioner was 
convicted of willfully making a threat to take the life of the President. 
He stated: "If they ever make me carry a rifle the first man I want to get 
in my sights is L.B.J." Jd. at 706. This Court reversed the conviction 
and agreed that "the statement, taken in context, was ‘a kind of very 
crude offensive method of stating a political opposition to the President. 
Id. at 708. 


% The Florida courts mistakenly associated the “Petitioners” as 
working "in concert" with Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue National, 
IMPACT, Rescue America, Operation Rescue America National, and 
Operation Goliath. Although the Florida courts concluded that the 
Petitioners before this Court were associated with "Operation Rescue, 
and frequently cite to that organization, no evidence was ever presented 


22 


misinterpretation, the Florida court launched into accusations of 
events performed by unnamed and unknown individuals and 
attributed all such occurrences to the Petitioners before this Court. 
In actuality, the Respondents agreed in the lower Florida court that 
there was considerable difficulty in determining the actors and their 
relation to one another or any other association. 


The Florida Supreme court’s true error is that it imputed the 
conduct of individuals acting alone to the Petitioners. Rather than 
examine the lower Florida court’s record and separate those known 
to have acted unlawfully from the Petitioners and their peaceful 
speech, the Florida Supreme court’s opinion routinely designates 
anyone performing an act which is perceived as associated with 
pro-life belief as "acting in concert" with other organizations. 


The Florida court’s sentiment that the Injunction only 
proscribes the activities of those “acting in concert" with the 
Petitioners begs for the conclusion that the Injunction is content- 
based. In fact, Judge McGregor, in applying the Injunction, stated 
that when he issued the Injunction he intended it to only prohibit 


pro-life speech. 


The Florida court simply confused the Petitioners before this 
Court with other unnamed and unknown individuals. Rather than 
make an attempt to determine who actually violated the law, the 
Florida court amassed all persons with a pro-life belief into one 
organization regardless of whether that person had ever committed 
any unlawful act. Because the Injunction prohibits pro-life 
expression, such as singing, chanting, images observable or sounds 
within earshot, it is clearly content-based. Prohibition of unlawful 
activities is objective, but a complete ban prohibiting expression 
causes the Petitioners to be lumped together with alleged unlawful 
acts of others. This Court has clearly stated that "[flor liability to 
be imposed by reason of association alone, it is necessary to 


linking the Petitioners to that group in any way. 


23 


establish that the group itself possessed unlawful goals and that the 
individual held a specific intent to further those illegal aims." 
Claiborne Hardware, 458 U.S. at 920. 


The Injunction clearly prohibits the association and free 
expression of pro-life, but not pro-choice, demonstrators. As 
stated by the Eleventh Circuit in Cheffer: "The practical effect of 
[the "in concert"] section of the injunction was to assure that while 
‘pro-life’ speakers would be arrested, ‘pro-choice’ demonstrators 
would not." 1993 WL 416820 at 6 (App. C-12). The Injunction 
is content-based and imputes the unlawful acts of other unnamed 
and unknown individuals to the "Petitioners" and all others acting 
"in concert." As this Court stated in Noto v. United States, 367 
U.S. 290 (1961), intent to act unlawfully 


must be judged ‘according to the strictest law,’ for 
‘otherwise there is danger that one in sympathy with the 
legitimate aims of . . . an organization, but not 
specifically intending to accomplish them by resort to 
violence, might be punished for his adherence to lawful 
and constitutionally protected purposes, because of other 
and unprotected purposes which he does not necessarily 
share. 


367 U.S. 290, 299-300 (1961). 


Such a content-based Injunction is clearly unconstitutional 
because it creates unlawful class distinctions’ and then prevents 
that class from exercising its right to associate or peacefully 
express its political views. As stated by this Court in Citizens 
Against Rent Control: “There are, of course, some activities, legal 
if engaged by one, yet illegal if performed in concert with others, 


?! The specific classification is directed at those individuals who hold 
to a pro-life view. The Injunction specifically prohibits sidewalk 
counseling, singing, and would also prohibit prayer. 


24 


but political expression is not one of them.” 454 U.S. at 296. 
"[T]he Court has consistently disapproved governmental sanctions 
or denying rights and privileges solely because of a citizen’s 
association with an unpopular organization." Healy v. James, 408 
U.S. 169, 185-86 (1972). 


The Florida court's decision also conflicts with this Court’s 
precedent regarding prior restraints on free speech. The Florida 
court held that the doctrine of prior restraints does not apply unless 
an injunction addresses content-based restrictions on speech. The 
Florida court’s holding is in direct conflict with the precedent set 
by this Court. 


In Organization For A Better Austin v. Keefe, 402 U.S. 415, 
417 (1971), this Court held that an injunction which prohibited the 
distribution of “leaflets or literature of any kind, and from 
picketing” was an unconstitutional prior restraint. “Any prior 
restraint on expression” carries with it a “‘heavy presumption’ 
against its constitutional validity." Jd. at 419. This Court's 
decision in Keefe was reaffirmed in the recent case of Alexander 
v. United States, 113 S.Ct. 2766 (1993). In Alexander, this Court 
reasoned that “permanent injunctions are classic examples of prior 
restraints." /d. at 2771. The Florida Court refused to follow this 
Court's teaching in Keefe and Alexander and allowed an Injunction 
banning pro-life speech within a traditional public forum to stand. 
By requiring consent before speech is allowed within the three- 
hundred-foot buffer zones, the Injunction creates a prior restraint 
on peaceful free speech. Rather than recognize the Injunction as 
a classic example of a prior restraint, the Florida Supreme Court 


held the Injunction was content neutral and refused to apply the 
doctrine of prior restraint. 


The Florida Supreme Court expressly declined to separate the 
Petitioners’ peaceful protest from those other persons alleged to 
have committed unlawful acts. Therefore, the Florida court's 
opinion is in direct conflict with this Court’s judgment in 
Claiborne Hardware and numerous other decisions of this Court 


25 


protecting free speech and association. For this reason, a writ of 
certiorari should be issued to resolve this conflict. 


B. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In Direct 
Conflict With The Judgments Of The Fourth, Fifth, 
Eighth and Tenth Circuit Courts of Appeals. 


The Florida Supreme Court’s decision is in direct conflict 
with the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals’ opinion in National 
Organization for Women v. Operation Rescue, 914 F.2d 582 (4th 
Cir. 1990), which held that an injunction prohibiting blockading or 
obstructing ingress or egress of abortion clinics could nm” be 
broadened in scope to prohibit intimidation, harassi...«, or 
disturbance of clinics’ patients or potential patients. The Fourth 
Circuit Court of Appeals held that such an overbroad scope would 
risk enjoining activities clearly protected by the First Amendment. 
Id. at 586. The court further noted that the pro-life demonstrators 
also sought to “persuade women not to seek the services of 
abortion clinics and to ‘impress upon members of society the 
moral rightness and intensity of their opposition to abortion. “ | Id. 
The Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court’s decision to limit 
the injunction in a manner that would not interfere with protected 
First Amendment activity. 


In contrast, the Florida Supreme court upheld the challenged 
Injunction partly based on its reasoning that broader restraint was 
necessary to protect the Clinic’s patients from harassment and 
intimidation. As stated by the Fourth Circuit, such a broad scope 
within an injunctive order clearly violates the First Amendment. 
The Respondents repeatedly stipulated that the Petitioners never 
blocked access or obstructed ingress or egress of the Clinic. 
Rather, the Petitioners sought to persuade women not to seek the 
services of the Clinic due to the Petitioners’ belief that abortion is 
morally improper. As stated by the Fourth Circuit, persons are 
clearly protected under the First Amendment when expressing 
speech which attempts to persuade others and seeks to impress 
upon members of society" the moral rightness and intensity of 


26 


opposition to abortion. Jd. at 586. The Florida Supreme court’s 
decision is in conflict with the Fourth Circuit’s opinion because it 
approves an overbroad Injunction which prohibits peaceful speech 
which attempts to persuade others. 


The Florida Supreme Court’s decision is in direct conflict 
with the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals’ opinion in Mississippi 
Women's Medical Clinic v. McMillan, 866 F.2d 788 (Sth Cir. 
1989). - McMillan, the Fifth Circuit denied an abortion clinic’s 
request for an injunction which would ibit lif 
within a five-hundred-foot buffer zone oe ime te 
clinic had requested that the court impose time, place, and manner 
restrictions upon the pro-life demonstrators. The court refused to 
grant the injunction, noting that women were not denied the right 
to receive an abortion at the clinic. The Fifth Circuit agreed with 
the district court’s decision that "granting the injunction would be 
substantially more likely to infringe on First Amendment rights 
than denying the injunction would be to result in a denial of 


privacy rights." Jd. at 795. The Fifth Circuit concluded that the 
clinic was truly arguing 


that potential patients are being denied a supposed right 
not to hear speech that they do not wish to hear. Such 
a right, in a public forum, would be a most unusual one. 
To argue any other theory of the case--such as that 
women are being denied the substantive right to an 
abortion because of the ‘atmosphere created,’ (despite 
the fact that women are receiving abortions and that no 


one is being restrained)--would be to eviscerate the First 
Amendment. 


McMillan, 866 F.2d at 794. 


The McMillan decision mirrors the reasoning in Cheffer. As 
in McMillan, the Cheffer court noted that "there is no indication in 
the record that women were actually prevented from obtaining 
abortions at the Aware Woman Center for Choice. The clash here 


27 


is between an actual prohibition of speech and a potential 
hindrance to the free exercise of abortion rights." 1993 WL 
416820 at 6 (App. C-13). The Cheffer court stated that should the 
lower federal court issue an Order barring enforcement of the 
Injunction, “it would promote only speech and expressive 
conduct, not assault, trespass, or destruction of property." /d. 
(App. C-13). 


The McMillan decision reaffirmed the importance of 
protected, peaceful First Amendment speech in a traditional public 
forum. In conclusion, the Fifth Circuit held that "in a polity 
where the people are sovereign, informed choice enhances 
responsible decision-making. Neither we nor the clinic can cut off 
the peaceful communication of information, distasteful to some so 
it be." Jd. at 795. The Florida Supreme court seriously erred in 
upholding an Injunction which fails to recognize the right of 
peaceful First Amendment speech. The Florida court's decision is 
in direct conflict with the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. 


The Florida Supreme Court's decision is in direct conflict 
with the Eighth Circuit’s opinion in United Food & Commercial 
Workers International Union v. IBP, Inc., 857 F.2d 422 (8th Cir. 
1988). In /JBP, several unions brought a declaratory action to have 
provisions of a state mass picketing statute declared 
unconstitutional. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals held that 
the statute which prohibited more than two picketers within fifty 
feet of an entrance to the named premises was overbroad and 
violated the demonstrators’ First Amendment rights. In light of 
the statute’s overbroad application to protected First Amendment 
activities, the Eighth Circuit held the statute unconstitutional. In 
contrast with /BP, the Florida Supreme court’s decision allows an 
Injunction to stand which on its face and in application prohibits 
protected First Amendment activity. Therefore, because the 
challenged Injunction creates a ban on all pro-life speech within the 
buffer zone surrounding the Clinic, the Injunction 
unconstitutionally violates the Petitioners’ First Amendment right 
to peaceful protest in a traditional public form. 


28 


| The Florida Supreme Court's decision is in direct conflict 
with the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals’ opinion in Cannon v. 
City and County of Denver, 998 F.2d 867 (10th Cir. 1993). In 
Cannon, numerous pro-life demonstrators were arrested for 
carrying signs on a sidewalk in front of an abortion clinic reading, 
"The Killing Place". The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed 
the lower court and held that the right of the protestors to picket 
on the public sidewalk in front of the clinic was a “clearly 
established constitutional right." /d. at 874. The court further 
noted that signs reading, "The Killing Place", were not "fighting 
words" and were not likely to provoke a violent reaction. The 
court held that such expressive activity was clearly protected by the 
F irst Amendment and the protestors possessed a constitutional right 
to picket on public sidewalks without fear of arrest. 


In contrast, the Florida Supreme court's decision prohibits 
peaceful pro-life demonstrations on a public sidewalk and public 
right-of-ways which have traditionally been held open for free 
exercise of expressive activities and association. In light of the 
Injunction’s overbroad application in prohibiting pro-life activities 
within the sidewalk and right-of-ways surrounding the Clinic, the 
Florida Supreme court’s decision to uphold the Injunction is in 
direct conflict with the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Cannon. 


The Florida Supreme court’s decision is in direct conflict with 
the Fourth, Fifth, Eighth and Tenth Circuit Courts of Appeals. A 
writ of certiorari should be granted to resolve these conflicts. 


C. The Florida Supreme Court’s Opinion Is In Direct 
Conflict With The Judgment Of Several State Courts. 


The Florida Supreme court's decision to uphold an absolute 
ban on free speech within a traditional public forum is in direct 
conflict with other state courts. In Planned Parenthood League of 
Massachusetts, Inc. v. Operation Rescue, et al., 406 Mass. 701 
550 N.E.2d 1361 (Mass. 1990), the Supreme Court of 
Massachusetts followed this Court’s precedent set in NAACP vy. 


29 


Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886 (1982), noting: "When 
issuing an injunction, a judge must differentiate between legal and 
illegal expressive activity, and must carefully tailor the injunction 
to avoid unconstitutionally infringing on activity protected by the 
First Amendment." /d. at 1369. In Planned Parenthood, the 
court stated that an injunction can be issued to prevent illegal 
blocking of ingress or egress of the clinic property. However, the 
court further noted that other activities by the pro-life 
demonstrators were protected by the First Amendment. "Clearly, 
some of the defendants’ activities at the protest, such as singing 
and chanting on public sidewalks, are protected, expressive 
activity." /d. In contrast with the Massachusetts court, the 
Florida Supreme court declined to follow this Court’s ruling in 
Claiborne Hardware. Therefore, the Florida court’s opinion is in 
direct conflict with the Supreme Court of Massachusetts. 


The Florida Supreme court's decision is in direct conflict with 
Parkmed Co. v. Pro-Life Counseling, Inc., 91 A.D.2d 551, 457 
N.Y.S.2d 27 (1982). In Parkmed, the Supreme Court, Appellate 
Division of New York, modified the injunctive order of the lower 
court which prohibited peaceful free expression in a quasi-public 
area. The court ruled that “the injunction, in precluding the 
defendant's ‘from demonstrating, picketing and in any interfering 

_. onthe . . . plaza area and on its steps’ was overly broad and 
unnecessarily restricted peaceful picketing and demonsirating in a 
quasi-public area." Parkmed, 91 A.D.2d at 552. Although the 
court recognized that reasonable time, place, and manner 
regulations can be applied to protect significant governmental 
interests, such regulations cannot regulate the content of speech 
and must leave open reasonable alternative means of 
communication. The court further held that: "A sufficiently clear 
standard must be set so that the parties are apprised of the type and 
degree of conduct restrained and a distinction is drawn between 
that conduct and lawful, peaceful demonstration so that the affected 
party is given a clear choice." /d. 


In contrast with the New York court's reasoning in Parkmed, 


30 


the Florida Supreme court upheld an Injunction allowing a 
complete ban on lawful conduct and peaceful speech within a 
traditional public forum. In Parkmed, the New York court held 
that a complete ban of peaceful, nonviolent picketing and 
demonstrating in a public forum was unconstitutional. Therefore, 
the Florida Supreme Court’s decision is in direct conflict with the 
New York court. 


The Florida Supreme court’s decision is in direct conflict with 


several state courts. A writ of certiorari should be granted to 
resolve these conflicts. 


CONCLUSION 
In light of the reasons stated above, the Petitioners 


respectfully request this Court to issue a writ of certiorari to 
review the judgment and opinion of the Supreme Court of Florida. 


Respectfully Submitted, 


Christopher J. Weiss Mathew D. Staver 

Two South Orange Avenue (Counsel of Record) 

Orlando, FL 32802 Jeffery T. Kipi 

(407) 843-4421 Frederick H. Nelson 
Michael D. Rouse 
Liberty Counsel 
1900 Summit Tower Blvd. 
Suite 540 


Orlando, FL 32810 
(407) 875-0077 
Counsel for the Petitioners 


December 3, 1993 


APPENDICES 


A-1 
APPENDIX A 


SUPREME COURT OF FLORIDA 


No. 81,905 


OPERATION RESCUE, OPERATION RESCUE AMERICA, 
OPERATION GOLIATH, ED MARTIN, BRUCE CADLE, 
SHIRLEY HOBBS, JUDY MADSEN, ET AL., 

Appellants, 


V. 


WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER, INC., ET AL., 
Appellees. 


Oct. 28, 1993. 


Mathew D. Staver and Jeffery T. Kipi, Liberty Counsel, attorneys 
for Appellants Martin, Madsen, and Hobbs. 

Talbot D’Alemberte and Susan A. England, attorneys for 
Appellees. 


PER CURIAM. 


We have for review a trial court order imposing an 
amended permanent injunction. The order has been certified by 
the district court as passing on an issue of great public importance 
requiring immediate resolution by this Court. We have jurisdiction. 
Art. V, § 3(b)(5), Fla. Const. We approve the order. 


A-2 
I. FACTS 


Women’s Health Center (Health Center) filed suit against 
Operation Rescue and others (Operation Rescue) seeking an 
injunction prohibiting that organization from engaging in certain 
activities against the Aware Woman Center for Choice (Clinic) in 
Melbourne, its patients, and staff. The court entered an order on 
October 25, 1991, granting a temporary injunction that imposed a 
number of restrictions.' Pursuant to the Health Center’s request 
for permanent relief, the court directed the parties to submit a 
stipulation of issues and facts, which the parties did.2 The court 


' The temporary injunction embraced the following restrictions: 


1. All Respondents, the officers, directors, a i 
. . » agents, representatives of 
Respondents, and all other persons, known and unknown, acting on behalf of any 
Respondents, or in concert with them, in any manner or by any means, are 
hereby enjoined and restrained from: 


a) trespassing on, sitting on, blocking, or obstructing ingress into or egress 
from any facility in which abortions are performed or family planning services 
are provided in the County of Brevard and Seminole, and surrounding counties 
State of Florida, of any person seeking access to or leaving those facilities; 


b) physically abusing persons entering, leavi i i 

busin; , ing, working at or using a 
services at any facility in which abortions are performed or family yn doe 
services are provided, in the County of Brevard and Semi rroundi 
counties, State of Florida; aise = 


Cc) attempting or directing others to take any of the acti i i 
PO ok y actions described in 


2. Nothing in this Court's Order should be construed to limi sponde 
is limit Re nts’ 
exercise of their legitimate First Amendment rights, such as, but not limited to 


carrying signs, singing, and praying, in a ma ; 1 
ee ying nner which does not violate a), b) 


* The parties’ stipulation included the following: 


2. Operation Rescue America, Ed Martin, Judy Madsen and Shirley Hobbs 
are active in an organization known as “Operation Rescue America.” In other 


A-3 


subsequently granted long-term relief, entering a permanent 
injunction nearly a year later, on September 30, 1992, based on a 
number of findings of fact’ and imposing several general 


areas of the United States, this effort has been directed towards closing down 
abortion clinics throughout the country to save unborn children. Respondents 
desire is to close down “abortion mills” by various means. Operation Rescue 
America, Ed Martin, Judy Madsen and Shirley Hobbs well understand that 
peacefully blocking access to the facilities might constitute a trespass that is 
punishable by criminal penalties. They feel a violation of such a criminal statute 
is justified by their belief that protection of the unborn may merit breaking the 
criminal trespass laws. 


6. Respondents have passed out flyers in the Central Florida area stating their 
desire to close down abortion clinics in this area. One of the flyers states that the 
demonstrations will be held in the Central Florida area. 


7. Respondent Ed Martin has made statements that his desire is to close all 
abortion clinics in the Central Florida area. Ed Martin has stated to members of 
press that he would love to shut down all abortion clinics. Ed Martin has issued 
a press release which states that “the spirit of [massive anti-abortion 
demonstrations in] Wichita comes to Florida.” 


3 The trial court made the following findings of fact: 


2. Respondents are individuals and organizations, acting in concert, who have 
planned a nationwide campaign, which they call “OPERATION RESCUE" 
(hereinafter, "OPERATION"), directed towards closing down abortion clinics and 
providers throughout the country. Respondents’ own literature states that their 
intention is to "Physically close down abortion mills” by encircling them with 
thousands of protesters and blocking access to the facilities. Operation Goliath is 
dedicated to similar principles. 


- 


5. Ed Martin and Pat Mahoney have stated an intent to prevent persons from 
obtaining abortions in the Brevard and Seminole County area by blocking access 
to clinics. 


6. Respondents have passed out flyers in the Central Florida area stating an 


A-4 


restrictions.‘ 


Nearly six months later, after taking evidence and listening 
to extensive live testimony in a three-day evidentiary hearing, the 
trial court determined its prior restrictions had proved insufficient 
"to protect the health, safety and rights of women in Brevard and 
Seminole County, Florida, and surrounding counties seeking access 
to [medical and counseling] services." Accordingly, the court on 


intent to close down abortion clinics in this area. 


7. Respondent, Pat Mahoney. was a leader in the Wichita, Kansas protests. 
Respondents, Ed Martin and Pat Mahoney, have made statements that there will 
be or may be a blocking of the entrance to an abortion clinic in the Central 
Florida area. Pat Mahoney and Martin have stated to members of the press that 
they intend to shut down a clinic, and have issued a press release which states 
that “the spirit of Wichita comes to Florida." The press release also contained 
information that the Reverend Ed Martin of Ocala announces an “Operation 
Rescue" for Central Florida. 


8. Literature obtained from Rescue America states that their members should 
ignore the law of the State and the police officers who remove them from their 
blockading positions. 


* The permanent injunction contained the following general restrictions: 


A. Respondents, OPERATION RESCUE . . . are hereby enjoined 
from: 

|. trespassing on, sitting in, blocking, impeding or obstructing ingress 
into or egress from any facility at which abortions are performed in Brevard and 
Seminole County, Florida; 

2. physically abusing persons entering, leaving, working or using any 
services of any facility at which abortions are performed in Brevard and Seminole 
County, Florida; and, 


3. attempting or directing others to take any of the actions described in 
Paragraphs | and 2 above. 


B. Nothing in this Court's Order should be construed to limit 
Respondents’ exercise of their legitimate First Amendment rights, such as, but 
not limited to, carrying signs, singing, and praying, in a manner which does not 
violate [paragraphs] 1, 2, and 3 above... . 


A-5 


April 8, 1993, amended its prior order, concluding that Operation 
Rescue was engaging in actions that “impede and obstruct both 
staff and patients from entering the clinic” based on the following 
findings of fact: 


A. That despite the injunction of September 30, 1992, 
there has been interference with ingress to the petitioners’ facility 
known as the Aware Woman Clinic located on the northwest 
corner of U.S. Highway One and Dixie Way in the City of 
Melbourne, Brevard County, Florida. The interference to ingress 
has taken the form of persons on the paved portions of Dixie Way, 
some standing without any obvious relationship to others; some 
moving about, again without any obvious relationship to others, 
some holding signs, some not; some approaching, apparently 
trying to communicate with the occupants of motor vehicles 
moving on the paved surface; some marching in a circular picket 
line that traversed the entrance driveways to the two parking lots 
of the petitioners and the short section of sidewalk joining the two 
parking lots and then entering the paved portion of the north lane 
of Dixie Way and returning in the opposite direction. Other 
persons would be standing, kneeling and sitting on the unpaved 
shoulders of the public right-of-way. As vehicular traffic 
approached the area it would, in response to the congestion, slow 
down. If the destination of such traffic was either of the two 
parking lots of the petitioners, such traffic slowed even more, 
sometimes having to momentarily hesitate or stop until persons in 
the driveway moved out of the way. 


B. The number of people on any one day would vary from 
a handful to a crowd of four hundred .. . . The frequency with 
which persons would appear at this location would range from 
once a week to three times a week with the largest gatherings 
usually on Saturdays. 


C. Associated with such gatherings would be noise 
emanating from singing, chanting, whistling, loudspeakers . . . and 
occasional bullhorns . .. . 


A-6 


E. As traffic slowed on Dixie Way and began its turn into 
the clinic’s driveway, the vehicle would be approached by persons 
designated by the respondents as sidewalk counselors attempting to 
get the attention of the vehicles’ occupants to give them 
anti-abortion literature and to urge them not to use the clinic’s 
services. Such so-called sidewalk counselors were assisted in 
accomplishing their approach to the vehicle by the hesitation or 
momentary stopping caused by the time needed for the picket line 
to open up before the vehicle could enter the parking lot. 


The court noted that in addition to activities outside the 
Clinic, Operation Rescue had implemented a "blockade" of the 
Clinic’s telephone system, jamming its lines with multiple 
simultaneous calls and making it impossible for Clinic staff to 
summon emergency medical aid: 


2... . [RJepeated, nearly simultaneous, multiple telephone 
calls are made to the clinic, jamming its telephone lines. The 
jamming of the clinic’s telephone system, makes it impossible for 
clinic staff to summon an ambulance to transfer any patient to the 
hospital should an emergency arise. 


Further, Operation Rescue had approached the private 
residences of Clinic patients, employees, and staff, at times 
confronting employees’ young children home alone while their 
parents worked: 


G. On other occasions since the entry of the injunction on 
September 30, 1992, the respondent, Cadle, and others in concert 
with him approached the private residences or temporary lodging 
places of clinic employees. These approaches included not only 
direct communication with the occupants (sometimes the "home 
alone," minor children of the occupants), but also Carrying signs, 
walking up and down on the sidewalk or street in front of the 
residence, shouting at passers-by, contacting (ringing doorbells of) 
neighbors, and providing literature identifying the clinic employee 
as a "baby killer." 


A-7 


H. On one occasion the respondent, Cadle, with others 
went to the vicinity of the motel where staff physician was 
temporarily staying and demonstrated. While respondent, Cadle, 
remained outside just off the premises of the motel, others went 
upon the premises of the motel, some entering the motel lobby, 
yelling “child murderer" and “baby killer” 


1. That license tag numbers of the clinic’s patients are 
recorded by the respondents or persons in concert with them and 
then are traced through state records to obtain the home address of 
such persons who are subsequently contacted by the respondents. 


And finally, Operation Rescue had threatened violence 
against Clinic patients, employees, and staff: 


F. .. . On one occasion the communication to a clinic staff 
person took the form of an attempt to invoke the wrath of God by 
shouting, "I pray that God strikes you dead now!" 


J. On another occasion the doctor was followed as he left 
the clinic by a person associated with the respondents who 
communicated his anger to the doctor by pretending to shoot him 
from the adjoining vehicle. As a result of the foregoing 
demonstrations and activities, and after a physician similarly 
employed was killed by an antiabortionist at a clinic in North 
Florida, this doctor terminated his employment with the clinic. 


3. That patients and staff are sometimes followed in a 
stalking manner when they leave the clinic, giving such persons a 
feeling of great apprehension. 


A-8 


The doctor who ultimately terminated his employment with 
the Clinic as the result of Operation Rescue’s tactics testified at the 
evidentiary hearing concerning the adverse medical impact of those 
tactics on Clinic patients: 


I. . . As a result of patients having to run such a gauntlet, 
the patients manifested a higher level of anxiety and hypertension 
causing those patients to need a higher level of sedation to undergo 
the surgical procedures, thereby increasing the risk associated with 
such procedures. The doctor also testified that the noise of 
singing, chanting, shouting and yelling could be heard through the 
walls of the clinic and caused stress in the patients during surgical 
procedures and while recuperating in the recovery rooms. The 
doctor also testified that he observed some patients turn away from 
the crowd in the driveway to return at a later date. He testified 


that such delay in undergoing the procedures also increased the 
risk associated therewith. 


Based on Operation Rescue's continued "interference with 
ingress to the [Clinic]," the trial court amended the general 
prohibitions of the permanent injunction to prohibit Operation 
Rescue from engaging in the following specific acts: 


(1) At all times on all days, from entering the premises and 
property of the Aware Woman Center for Choice . . 


(2) At all times on all days, from blocking, impeding, 
inhibiting, or in any other manner obstructing or interfering with 
access to, ingress into and egress from any building or parking lot 
of the Clinic. 


(3) At all times on all days, from congregating, picketing, 
patrolling, demonstrating or entering that portion of public 
right-of-way or private property within thirty-six (36) feet of the 
property line of the Clinic . . . . An exception to the 36 foot 
buffer zone is the area immediately adjacent to the Clinic on the 
east... . The respondents must remain at least five (5) feet from 


A-9 
the Clinic’s east line... . 


(4) During the hours of 7:30 a.m. through noon, on 
Mondays through Saturdays, during surgical procedures and 
recovery periods, from singing, chanting, whistling, shouting, 
yelling, use of bullhorns, auto horns, sound amplification 
equipment or other sounds or images observable to or within 
earshot of the patients inside the Clinic. 


(5) At all times on all days, in an area within 
three-hundred (300) feet of the Clinic, from physically approaching 
any person seeking the services of the Clinic unless such person 
indicates a desire to communicate by approaching or by inquiring 
of the respondents... . 


(6) At all times on all days, from approaching, 
congregating, picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or using 
bullhorns or other sound amplification equipment within 
three-hundred (300) feet of the residence of any of the petitioners 
employees, staff, owners or agents, or blocking or attempting to 
block, barricade, or in any other manner, temporarily or 
otherwise, obstruct the entrances, exits or driveways of the 
residences of any of the petitioners’ employees, staff, owners or 
agents. The respondents and those acting in concert with them are 
prohibited from inhibiting or impeding or attempting to impede, 
temporarily or otherwise, the free ingress or egress of persons to 
any street that provides the sole access to the streets on which 


those residences are located. 


(7) At all times on ail days, from physically abusing. 
grabbing, intimidating, harassing, touching, pushing, shoving, 
crowding or assaulting persons entering or leaving, working at or 
using services at the petitioners’ Clinic or trying to gain access to, 
or leave, any of the homes of owners, staff or patients of the 
Clinic. 


(8) At all times on all days, from harassing, intimidating 


A-10 


or physically abusing, assaulting or threatening any present or 
former doctor, health care professional, or other staff member, 
employee or volunteer who assists in providing services at the 
petitioners’ Clinic. 


a. Law enforcement officers and Southern Bell Telephone 
Company are authorized, upon request of the Clinic owners to 
place a trap on the telephone lines of the Aware Woman Center in 


order to identify those persons engaged in a phone blockade and 
jamming of the Clinic’s phone lines. . . . 


Operation Rescue appealed the order granting the amended 
permanent injunction and the Fifth District Court of Appeal 
certified the trial court’s order as passing on a matter of great 
public importance requiring immediate resolution by this Court. 


Il. LEGAL ISSUES 


Operation Rescue challenges the propriety of only the 
amended permanent injunction, raising numerous issues under the 
United States Constitution: The amended injunction violates 
freedom of speech, freedom of association, equal protection, and 
the free exercise of religion.’ 


A. Standard of Review 


In order for a permanent injunction to issue in a 
proceeding such as this, the petitioner must initially satisfy certain 
technical requirements: 


First, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the 
court’s exercise of equity jurisdiction is proper. 
[In other words, the plaintiff must show that he or 


* Although Operation Rescue notes in its brief that the right to free speech is 
also protected by the Florida Constitution, Operation Rescue makes no separate 
argument under the Florida charter. 


A- ll 


she has no adequate legal remedy; the threatened 
injury is real, no’ «nagined; and no equitable 
defenses control.} Second, the plaintiff must 
actually succeed on the merits of [his or her] 
claims. Third, the plaintiff must show that the 
balance of equities tips in favor of injunctive 
relief. 


If an injunction should issue, the court has 
wide discretion in fashioning an appropriate 
remedy. But this discretion is constrained by 
precautionary considerations. The injunction that 
issues may not be drawn to enjoin all conceivable 
breaches of the law; it must instead be carefully 
tailored to remedy only the specific harms shown. 
It may be no broader than is necessary to restrain 
the unlawful conduct. The injunction, as drafted, 
should constitute “the least intrusive remedy that 
will still be effective." 


Northeast Women's Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 665 F. Supp. 
1147, 1152-53 (E.D.Pa. 1987) (citations omitted), affirmed in part, 
868 F.2d 1342 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 110 S.Ct. 261, 107 
L.Ed.2d 210 (1989). 


Where an injunction is issued and challenged, Florida’s 
appellate courts possess express authority to review the order. Fla. 
R.App. P. 9.130(a)(3)(B). The scope of review, however, is 
limited. As a general rule, trial court orders are clothed with a 
presumption of correctness and will remain undisturbed unless the 
petitioning party can show reversible error. Applegate v. Barnett 
Bank, 377 So. 2d 1150 (Fla. 1979). To the extent it rests on 
factual matters, an order imposing a permanent injunction lies 
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be affirmed 
absent a showing of abuse of discretion. See, e.g., Bailey v. 
Christo, 453 So. 2d 1134 (Fla. 1st DCA 1984), review denied, 
461 So. 2d 113 (Fla. 1985). This is particularly true where the 


A-12 


order relies on live testimony or other evidence that the trial court 
is singularly well-suited to evaluate. Abuse of discretion, of 
course, is judged by the general "reasonableness" standard: 


In reviewing a true discretionary act, the 
appellate court must fully recognize the superior 
vantage point of the trial judge and should apply 
the "reasonableness" test to determine whether the 
trial judge abused his discretion. If reasonable 
men could differ as to the propriety of the action 
taken by the trial court, then the action is not 
unreasonable and there can be no finding of an 
abuse of discretion. The discretionary ruling of 
the trial judge should be disturbed only when his 
decision fails to satisfy this test of reasonableness. 


Canakaris v. Canakaris, 382 So. 2d 1197, 1203 (Fla. 1980). To 
the extent it rests on purely legal matters, an order imposing an 
injunction is subject to full, or de novo, review on appeal. In the 
present case, Operation Rescue does not seriously question the 
technical validity of the amended injunction or the factual findings 
on which it is based. Our own review of the record shows that the 
order meets the "reasonableness" test for technical validity and that 
competent, substantial evidence supports the court’s factual 
findings. Accordingly, we take as true the trial court's facts for 
purposes of evaluating Operation Rescue’s constitutional claims. 


B. Free Speech 


Operation Rescue claims that the amended injunction 
violates the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment of the 
United States Constitution because it completely bans religious 
speech in a traditional public forum, is not the least restrictive 
means of achieving the government interest, does not leave open 
ample alternative means of communication, and constitutes an 
impermissible prior restraint on free speech. 


A- 13 


The present amended injunction undeniably operates at the 
core of the First Amendment because it regulates picketing and 
other activities on an issue of public concern and courts "have 
traditionally subjected [such] restrictions on public issue 
[expression] to careful scrutiny." Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 
479, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 L.Ed.2d 420 (1988). Nonetheless, 
"[e]ven protected speech is not equally permissible in all places 
and at all times. Nothing in the Constitution requires the 
Government freely to grant access to all who wish to exercise their 
right to free speech on every type of Government property without 
regard to the nature of the property or to the disruption that might 
be caused by the speaker’s activities." Cornelius v. NAACP Legal 
Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 799-800, 105 
S.Ct. 3439, 87 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985). 


1. Traditional public forum 


To determine whether or to what extent limits may be 
placed on protected speech, the United States Supreme Court has 
generally focused on the place, or "forum," where the citizen seeks 
to speak. Perry Education Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 
460 U.S. 37, 103 S.Ct. 948, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983). The federal 
Court has identified three types of First Amendment fora, "the 
traditional public forum, the public forum created by government 
designation, and the nonpublic forum,” and has tailored an analysis 
for each. Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 802. 


The forum at issue in the present case consists of public 
streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way, which--as the present parties 
agree--constitute a traditional public forum. See Frisby, 487 U.S. 
at 480. The relevant inquiry in such a case is multi-step and 
depends initially on whether the restriction is content-based or 
content-neutral: 


In places which by long tradition or by 
government fiat have been devoted to assembly 
and debate, the rights of the State to limit 


A-14 


expressive activity are sharply circumscribed. At 
one end of the spectrum are streets and parks 
which "have immemorially been held in trust for 
the use of the public and, time out of mind, have 
been used for purposes. of assembly, 
communicating thoughts between citizens, and 
discussing public questions." In these 
quintessential public forums, the government may 
not prohibit all communicative activity. For the 
State to enforce a content-based exclusion it must 
show that its regulation is necessary to serve a 
compelling state interest and that it is narrowly 
drawn to achieve that end. The State may also 
enforce regulations of time, place and manner of 
expression which are content-neutral, are narrowly 
tailored to serve a significant government interest, 
and leave open ample alternative channels of 
communication. 


Perry, 460 U.S. at 45 (quoting Hague v. Committee for Indus. 
Org., 307 U.S. 496, 515, 59 S.Ct. 954, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939). 


2. Content-newtral 


| Operation Rescue claims that the time, place, and manner 
restrictions at issue here are content-based and thus subject to the 
more stringent test noted above in Perry. We disagree. The 
restrictions regulate when, where, and how Operation Rescue may 
speak, not what it may say. The restrictions make no mention 
whatsoever of abortion or any other political or social issue; they 
address only the volume, timing, location, and violent or harassing 
nature of Operation Rescue’s expressive activity. 


In fact, the injunction could apply equally to 
protests which supported abortion as well as to 
protests which opposed abortion, or indeed, to 
protests supporting or opposing any other cause. 


A- 15 


It is true that this injunction applies only to [these 
particular abortion opponents], but that is because 
it is only those persons who the Center has proved 
have created and are continuing to create a threat 
of violence and intimidation. 


Northeast Women’s Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 939 F.2d 57, 63 
(3rd Cir. 1991). Because the restrictions are content-neutral, we 
proceed to decide whether they are "narrowly-tailored to serve a 
significant government interest, and leave open ample alternative 
channels of communication." Perry, 460 U.S. at 45. 


3. Government interests 


Operation Rescue claims that no significant government 
interest is implicated. We disagree. Numerous government 
interests, all of which rise to the level of "significant" or higher, 
are apparent. Our state has a strong interest in protecting the 
constitutional rights, both state and federal, express and implied, 
of all Florida’s citizens, including its women. A woman’s freedom 
to seek lawful medical or counseling services in connection with 
her pregnancy constitutes a clear personal right under both our 
state and federal constitutions. See Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 
93 S.Ct. 705, 35 L.Ed.2d 147 (1973); In re T.W., 551 So.2d 
1186, 1193 (Fla. 1989). Our state also has strong interests in 
ensuring the public safety and order, in promoting the free flow of 
traffic on public streets and sidewalks, and in protecting property 
rights of all Florida’s citizens. 


The United States Supreme Court delineated an additional 
government interest in Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 
2495, 101 L.Ed.2d 420 (1988), wherein the Court addressed the 
issue of picketers demonstrating outside the home of an abortion 
clinic doctor in violation of a city ordinance banning all residential 
picketing. The Court, in upholding the ordinance, noted that "the 
protection of residential privacy" constitutes "a significant 
government interest” and that "[o}ne important aspect of residential 


A - 16 
privacy is protection of the unwilling listener." /d. at 484. 


Although in many locations, we expect individuals 
simply to avoid speech they do not want to hear, 
the home is different. "That we are often captives 
outside the sanctuary of the home and subject to 
objectionable speech . . . does not mean we must 
be captives everywhere." Instead, a special 
benefit of the privacy all citizens enjoy within 
their own walls, which the State may legislate to 
protect, is an ability to avoid intrusions. Thus, we 
have repeatedly held that individuals are not 
required to welcome unwanted speech into their 
own homes and that the government may protect 
this freedom. 


Id. at 484-85 (citations omitted) (quoting Rowan v. United States 
Post Office Dep’t, 397 U.S. 728, 738, 90 S.Ct. 1484, 25 L.Ed.2d 
736 (1970)). We conclude that the reasoning underlying this 
government interest in residential privacy applies even more 
convincingly to the state interest in ensuring medical privacy. 
Florida citizens are entitled to both unimpeded access to licensed 
medical facilities and freedom from unwanted confrontations and 
communications when undergoing lawful medical treatment, 
particularly where the effect of such confrontations is to place the 
patient’s health and safety in jeopardy. 


4. Narrowly tailored 


Operation Rescue contends that the restrictions are not 
narrowly tailored, but rather operate as a complete ban on all 
religious and pro-life picketing outside the Clinic and homes of 
Clinic workers. We disagree. In sum, the amended injunction 
bans Operation Rescue from entering or blocking access to the 
Clinic, demonstrating within five feet of Clinic property on one 
side of the Clinic and thirty-six feet on the other three sides, 
making loud noises during surgery hours, approaching Clinic 


A-17 


patients within three hundred feet of Clinic property unless invited, 
demonstrating within three hundred feet of the homes of Clinic 
workers, or engaging in violent or threatening acts against Clinic 
workers or patients. The trial court found as a factual matter that 
each of these restrictions is necessary to counteract specific abuses 
Operation Rescue fomented after entry of the permanent injunction 
nearly six months earlier. As noted above, competent, substantial 
evidence supports all the trial court’s factual findings, including its 
determination that Operation Rescue engaged in impermissible 
activities, and Operation Rescue does not now contend otherwise. 


The type of focused picketing banned from the buffer zone 
around the Clinic and residences differs fundamentally from the 
type of generally disseminated communication that cannot be 
completely banned in public places, such as nandbilling and 
solicitation. Here, the picketing is directed at particular Clinic 
workers and patients, not the public at large. The United States 
Supreme Court has noted the difference between targeted and 
general picketing and described the invidious effect of this type of 
targeted picketing by those opposed to abortion: 


The type of picketers [i.e., abortion opponents 
outside a doctor's home] banned by the 
[restriction] generally do not seek to disseminate 
a message to the general public, but to intrude 
upon the targeted resident, and to do so in an 
especially offensive way. Moreover, even if some 
such picketers have a broader communicative 
purpose, their activity nonetheless inherently and 
offensively intrudes on residential privacy. The 
devastating effect of targeted picketing on the quiet 
enjoyment of the home is beyond doubt... . 


The First Amendment permits the government to 
prohibit offensive speech as intrusive when the 


A- 18 


"captive" audience cannot avoid the objectionable 
speech. The target of the focused picketing 
banned by the [restriction] is just such a "captive." 
The resident is figuratively, and perhaps literally, 
trapped within the home, and because of the 
unique and subtle impact of such picketing is left 
with no ready means of avoiding the unwanted 
speech. Thus, the "evil" of targeted residential 
picketing, "the very presence of an unwelcome 
visitor at the home, is created by the medium of 
expression itself." Accordingly, the [restriction’s] 
complete ban of that particular medium of 
expression is narrowly tailored. 


Frisby, 487 U.S. at 486-88 (citations omitted). The above 
reasoning applies with even greater force where the object of 
targeted picketing is the medical patient seeking treatment, rather 
than the home-dweller. While targeted picketing of the home 
threatens the psychological well-being of the "captive" resident, 
targeted picketing of the hospital or clinic threatens not only the 
psychological but the physical well-being of the patient held 
“captive” by medical circumstance. This is amply demonstrated 
by the trial court’s findings in the present case. 


We note that while the trial court might perhaps have 
achieved its goal through use of a slightly narrower buffer zone 
around the Clinic and workers’ residences, or perhaps by allowing 
a solitary picketer within the buffer zone as a symbolic gesture,° 
this Court will not sit as trier-of-fact and make incremental 
changes in the trial court’s order, particularly where the 
restrictions were necessitated by clear abuse. In short, we "decline 
to entertain quibbling over a few feet" or over purely symbolic 
matters. Portland Feminist Women’s Health Center v. Advocates 


° But see Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 487, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 L.Ed.2d 
420 (1988) ("But the actual size of the group is irrelevant; even a solitary picket 
can invade residential privacy.") 


A-19 


for Life, Inc., 859 P.2d 681, 686 (9h Cir. 1988). The 
amendments accordingly are sufficiently narrowly tailored to 
protect significant government interests. 


5. Alternative means of communication 


As its last point under the Perry standard, Operation 
Rescue claims that the restrictions do not leave open ample 
alternative means of communication. We point out, however, that 
Operation Rescue may at all times engage in expressive activity in 
the vicinity of the Clinic. In fact, Operation Rescue is entirely 
free to do the following at any time on any day: place an 
unrestricted number of picketers along the south edge of Dixie 
Way and both the east and west edge of U.S. 1; engage in 
singing, chanting, and whistling, as long as it cannot be heard 
inside the Clinic during the designated times; engage in “sidewalk 
counseling” of any Clinic patient who invites contact outside the 
five-foot and thirty-six-foot buffer zones; and picket in the 
neighborhoods of Clinic workers outside the three-hundred-foot 
buffer zone. Dixie Way is only twenty-one feet wide in the area 
of the Clinic and for all practical purposes Operation Rescue will 
be able to convey its message just as effectively from the south 
side of the road as the north. In fact, on the south side, its 
picketers will be in closer proximity to all eastbound traffic and 
will thus be better-positioned to deliver their message to those 
drivers and passengers. The only thing Operation Rescue will be 
unable to do from the south side that it could otherwise do from 
the north is block ingress to and egress from the Clinic. The 
amended injunction thus leaves open ample alternative means of 
communication for those who object to the Clinic's activities. 


6. Prior restraint 


As its last point under the Free Speech Clause, Operation 
Rescue claims that the injunction operates as an unconstitutional 
prior restraint on protected speech. The doctrine of prior restraint 
applies to content-based restrictions on speech prior to its 


A - 20 


occurrence. See Northeast Women’s Center, Inc. v. McMona l 
939 F.2d 57 (3rd Cir. 1991); Planned Parenthood iar 
Massachusetts, Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 550 N.E. 2d 136] 


(Mass. 1990). As explained above, however, the present 
injunction is content-neutral. 


C. Vagueness and Overbreadth 


Operation Rescue claims that the following restrictions are 
both unconstitutionally vague and overbroad: the ban on "sounds 
or images observable to or within earshot of the patients inside the 
Clinic, the ban on "physically approaching any person seeking the 
services of the Clinic" within three hundred feet of the Clinic, and 


the ban on demonstrating within three hundred feet of workers’ 
residences. 


| The United States Supreme Court has explained the 
doctrine of “vagueness”: 


It is a basic principle of due process that 
an enactment is void for vagueness if its 
prohibitions are not clearly defined. Vague laws 
offend several important values. First, because we 
assume that man is free to steer between lawful 
and unlawful conduct, we insist that laws give the 
person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable 
opportunity to know what is prohibited, so that he 
may act accordingly. Vague laws may trap the 
innocent by not providing fair warning. Second, 
if arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement is to 
be prevented, laws must provide explicit standards 
for those who apply them. A vague law 
impermissibly delegates basic policy matters to 
policemen, judges, and juries for resolution on an 
ad hoc and subjective basis, with the attendant 
dangers of arbitrary and discriminatory 
application. Third, but related, where a vague 


A-2l 


statute "abut[s] upon sensitive areas of basic First 
Amendment freedoms," it “operates to inhibit the 
exercise of those freedoms." Uncertain meanings 
inevitably lead citizens to “ ‘steer far wider of the 
unlawful zone’. . . than if the boundaries of the 
forbidden areas were clearly marked.” 


Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-09, 92 S.Ct. 
2294, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972) (footnotes omitted). In sum, a 
government restriction is vague if it “either forbids or requires the 
doing of an act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence 
must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its 
application." Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 
385, 391, 46 S.Ct. 126, 70 L.Ed. 322 (1926). 


We conclude that the ban on "sounds or images observable 
to or within earshot of the patients inside the Clinic” is sufficiently 
specific to put Operation Rescue on notice that loud noises may not 
be made and signs depicting patients’ names or other images may 
not be displayed from ladders above the Clinic fence in such a 
manner that they would be observable to patients within the Clinic 
during surgery and recovery periods. See Northeast Women’s 
Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 939 F.2d 57, 72 (3rd Cir. 1991) 
(injunction containing identical ban on “sounds or images 
observable to or within earshot of patients inside the Center" 
upheld). Similarly, the restrictions concerning “physically 
approaching" Clinic patients and demonstrating within three 
hundred feet of workers’ homes are constitutionally sound. Each 
restriction was fashioned to combat a specific abuse and each 
provides reasonable notice that those particular abuses will no 
longer be tolerated. “Condemned to the use of words, we can 
never expect mathematical certainty from our language. The 
words of the [ban] are marked by “flexibility and reasonable 
breadth, rather than meticulous specificity," [and] we think it is 
clear what the [ban] as a whole prohibits." Grayned, 408 U.S. at 
110 (citations and footnotes omitted). “We thus are unable to 
disagree with the [trial] court’s conclusion that the terms of the 


A-22 


[ban] are not so indefinite that men of common intelligence must 
necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application. " 
Medlin v. Palmer, 874 F.2d 1085, 1091 (Sth Cir. 1989). 


As to overbreadth, the United States Supreme Court has 
noted that "[a] clear and precise enactment may nevertheless be 
‘overbroad’ if in its reach it prohibits constitutionally protected 
conduct. ... The crucial question, then, is whether the [ban] 
sweeps within its prohibitions what may not be punished under the 
First ... Amendment[ ]." 408 U.S. at 114-15. Operation Rescue 
claims that the above restrictions are overbroad in that they ban 
protected activities and reach individuals and groups not 
responsible for disruptive conduct. We have discussed the first 
concern already and have concluded that the amended injunction 
is narrowly tailored to achieve its purpose. As to the second, we 
note that the injunction tracks the language of Florida Rule of Civil 
Procedure 1.160(c), which provides that "[e]very injunction shall 
. . . be binding on the parties to the action, their officers, agents, 
servants, employees, and attorneys and on those persons in active 
concert or participation with them who receive actual notice of the 
injunction." Given this limitation on the injunction’s reach, we 
find no danger that the ban will be unfairly enforced against 
persons who have no notice or knowledge of the injunction’s 
existence. See Portland Feminist Women's Health Center vy. 
Advocates for Life, Inc., 859 F.2d 681 (9th Cir. 1988).’ 


Ill. CONCLUSION 


Richard Grayned was convicted for participating in a 
demonstration in 1969 outside West Senior High School in 
Rockford, Illinois, protesting the school’s lack of 
African-American programs. The city ordinance under which he 
was convicted forbade any “noise or diversion which disturbs or 
tends to disturb the peace or good order of such school session or 


” We find the remainder of Operation Rescue’s constitutional claims to be 
without merit. 


A - 23 


class thereof." Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 
107-08, 92 S.Ct. 2294, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972). Ina key case on 
First Amendment rights, the United States Supreme Court upheld 
the conviction and ordinance, with Justice Marshall writing for the 


Court: 


The nature of a place, “the pattern of its normal 
activities, dictate the kinds of regulations of time, 
place, and manner that are reasonable." Although 
a silent vigil may not unduly interfere with a 
public library, making a speech in the reading 
room almost certainly would. That same speech 
should be perfectly appropriate in a park. The 
crucial question is whether the manner of 
expression is basically incompatible with the 
norma! activity of a particular place at a particular 
time. 


Id. at 116 (citation and footnote omitted). Justice Marshall went 
on to note that “schools could hardly tolerate boisterous 
demonstrators who drown out classroom conversation, make 
studying impossible, block entrances, or incite children to leave the 
schoolhouse." /d. at 119. In other words, the First Amendment 
must yield when protected speech substantially interferes with the 
normal functioning of a public or private place. 


This rule is particularly apt in the present case, where 
demonstrators’ tactics have impaired the functioning not of a 
school but a licensed medical facility and have placed in jeopardy 
the health, safety, and rights of Florida women. Operation Rescue 
has formally stipulated that its program is “directed towards 
closing down abortion clinics." This philosophy and the 
organization’s past tactics are clearly "incompatible with the 
normal activity of [this] particular place." Grayned, 408 U.S. at 


A -24 
116.° 


We hold the restrictions contained in the amended 
permanent injunction constitutional in light of the medical services 
provided at the Clinic and Operation Rescue’s past conduct. While 
the First Amendment confers on each citizen a powerful right to 
express oneself, it gives the picketer no boon to jeopardize the 
health, safety, and rights of others. No citizen has a right to insert 
a foot in the hospital or clinic door and insist on being 
heard--while purposefully blocking the door to those in genuine 
need of medical services. No picketer can force speech into the 
captive ear of the unwilling and disabled. 


Our holding is consistent with the vast weight of both 
federal and state caselaw, wherein courts have upheld virtually all 
the present restrictions under similar circumstances.’ 


* Operation Rescue's reliance on NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 
U.S. 886, 102 S.Ct. 3409, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1215 (1982), to support its Free Speech 
claims is misplaced. There, the United States Supreme Court ruled that the First 
Amendment bars Mississippi courts from imposing damages liability in favor of 
white merchants against individuals and civil rights organizations for lost earnings 
stemming from a black boycott of white businesses during the 1960's. Although 
State courts had originally granted injunctive relief to the merchants, the 
injunction issue became moot when the boycott was voluntarily lifted and was not 
addressed at all by the federal Court. The propriety of the injunction in the 
present case, on the other hand, is the sole issue before this Court--no party even 
claims that the Health Center is entitled to damages for Operation Rescue's 
actions. 


” See, e.g., Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 101 L. Ed. 2d 
420 (1988) (ordinance imposing blanket ban on targeted residential picketing 
constitutional where abortion opponents had demonstrated outside doctor's home); 
Northeast Women's Center, Inc. v. McMonagle, 939 F.2d 57 (3rd Cir. 1991) 
(injunction containing language virtually identical to that in the present case held 
constitutional where read as creating 500 foot buffer zone around clinic and 
workers’ homes); Medlin v. Palmer, 874 F.2d 1085 (Sth Cir. 1989) (ordinance 
banning use of bullhorns and loudspeakers within 150 feet of medical clinic 
upheld against challenge by abortion opponents); Portland Feminist Women's 
Health Center v. Advocates for Life, Inc., 859 F.2d 681 (9th Cir. 1988) 


A - 25 


Based on the foregoing, we approve the trial court’s order 
imposing the amended permanent injunction. A full copy of the 
amended injunction is appended to this opinion." 


It is so ordered. 


BARKETT, C.J., and OVERTON, McDONALD, SHAW, 
GRIMES, KOGAN and HARDING, JJ., concur. 


NOT FINAL UNTIL TIME EXPIRES TO FILE REHEARING, 
AND IF FILED, DETERMINED. 


(injunction limiting picketing outside abortion clinic upheld when read as banning 
noise that “substantially interferes with the provision of medical services within 
the Clinic, including counseling"); Hirsh v. City of Atlanta, 40\ S.E.2d 530 
(Ga.) (injunction limiting demonstrations outside abortion clinic upheld), cert. 
denied, 112 S.Ct. 75, 116 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1991); Planned Parenthood v. 
Operation Rescue, 550 N.E.2d 1361 (Mass. 1990) (injunction linuting 
demonstrations outside abortion clinic upheld); Bering v. Share, 721 P.2d 918 
(Wash. 1986) (injunction limiting demonstrations outside abortion clinic upheld), 
cert, dismissed, 479 U.S. 1050, 107 S.Ct. 940, 93 L. Ed. 2d 990 (1987). 


' We recognize that a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Eleventh Circuit has recently ruled that the federal district court erred in denying 
an abortion opponent's request for relief from the above injunction. See Cheffer 
v. McGregor, No. 93-2407 (11th Cir. Oct. 20, 1993). 


B- 1 
APPENDIX B 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT 
OF THE EIGHTEENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT 
IN AND FOR SEMINOLE COUNTY, FLORIDA 


CASE NO.: 91-2811-CA-16-K 


WOMEN’S HEALTH CENTER, INC., 
AWARE WOMAN CENTER FOR 
CHOICE, INC., ET AL., 

Petitioners, 


VS. 


OPERATION RESCUE, OPERATION 
RESCUE AMERICA, OPERATION 
GOLIATH, ED MARTIN, BRUCE CADLE, 
SHIRLEY HOBBS, JUDY MADSEN, ET AL., 

Respondents. 


April 8, 1993 


AMENDED PERMANENT INJUNCTION 


THIS CAUSE came before the court for hearing on the 
motion of petitioners for sanctions and modification of the 
permanent injunction entered by this court, (The Honorable 
Wallace H. Hall), dated September 30, 1992, and the court having 
taken three days of testimony and having carefully considered the 
evidence and the legal arguments makes the following findings: 


A. That despite the injunction of September 30, 1992, 


B-2 


there has been interference with ingress to the petitioners’ facility 
known as the Aware Woman Clinic located on the northwest 
corner of U.S. Highway One and Dixie Way in the City of 
Melbourne, Brevard County, Florida. The interference to ingress 
has taken the form of persons on the paved portions of Dixie Way, 
some standing without any obvious relationship to others; some 
moving about, again without any obvious relationship to others: 
some holding signs, some not; some approaching, apparentiy 
trying to communicate with the occupants of motor vehicles 
moving on the paved surface; some marching in a circular picket 
line that traversed the entrance driveways to the two parking lots 
of the petitioners and the short section of sidewalk joining the two 
parking lots and then entering the paved portion of the north lane 
of Dixie Way and returning in the opposite direction. (See 
drawing attached.) Other persons would be standing, kneeling and 
sitting on the unpaved shoulders of the public right-of-way. As 
vehicular traffic approached the area it would, in response to the 
congestion, slow down. If the destination of such traffic was 
either of the two parking lots of the petitioners, such traffic slowed 
even more, sometimes having to momentarily hesitate or stop until 
persons in the driveway moved out of the way. 


B. The number of people on any one day would vary from 
a handful to a crowd of four hundred. The composition of the 
crowd would include some of the named respondents in this cause: 
some persons who were loosely associated with the respondents’ 
organizations, Operation Rescue and Operation Goliath; some who 
were present in support of the clinic (pro-choice); some law 
enforcement officers engaging in crowd and traffic control (from 
five officers on light days to as many as fifty officers on other 
days); and some representatives of the print and television media. 
The frequency with which persons would appear at this location 
would range from once a week to three times a week with the 
largest gatherings usually on Saturdays. 


C. Associated with such gatherings would be noise 
emanating from singing, chanting, whistling, loudspeakers on the 


B - 3 


exterior of the clinic broadcasting music, individual portable radios 
(boom boxes), and occasional bullhorns. Individuals of the 
partisan groups would shout and yell at each other, frequently 
approaching so closely as to be in each other’s face trying to out- 


sound the other, cccasionally using boom boxes at full volume as 
an assist. 


the opposition. On at least one occasion in order to give more 
room for people, the police barricaded the north lane of Dixie Way 


so that two-way vehicular traffic was confined to the single south 
lane. 


E. As traffic slowed on Dixie Way and began its turn into 
the clinic’s driveway, the vehicle would be approached by persons 
designated by the respondents as sidewalk counselors attempting to 
get the attention of the vehicles’ occupants to give them anti- 
abortion literature and to urge them not to use the clinic’s services. 
Such so-called sidewalk counselors were assisted in accomplishing 
their approach to the vehicle by the hesitation or momentary 
stopping caused by the time needed for the picket line to open up 
before the vehicle could enter the parking lot. 


F. The clinic has fences on its west and north side, and 
persons would occasionally place a ladder on the outside of the 
fence and position themselves at an elevation above the fence and 
attempt to communicate by shouting at persons (staff and patients) 
entering the clinic. On one occasion the communication to a clinic 
Staff person took the form of an attempt to invoke the wrath of 
God by shouting, "I pray that God strikes you dead now!" 


el dee Ne eee 


Mh eB os Eee 


B-4 


G. On other occasions since the entry of the injunction on 
September 30, 1992, the respondent, Cadle, and others in concert 
with him approached the private residences or temporary lodging 
places of clinic employees. These approaches included not only 
direct communication with the occupants (sometimes the "home 
alone", minor children of the occupants), but also carrying signs, 
walking up and down on the sidewalk or street in front of the 
residence, shouting at passers-by, contacting (ringing doorbells of) 
neighbors, and providing literature identifying the clinic employee 
as a “baby killer." 


H. On one occasion the respondent, Cadle, with others 
went to the vicinity of the motel where a staff physician was 
temporarily staying and demonstrated. While respondent, Cadle, 
remained outside just off the premises of the motel, others went 
upon the premises of the motel, some entering the motel lobby, 
yelling “child murderer" and “baby killer." The doctor testified 
that as a result of such activity his departure for *he clinic was 
delayed by one-half hour. 


I. The same staff physician testified that on one occasion 
while he was attempting to enter the parking lot of the clinic, he 
had to stop his vehicle and remained stopped while respondent, 
Cadle, and others took their time to get out of the way and while 
doing so were yelling and screaming at the doctor, "Baby killer" - 
“We don’t want you here in Melbourne." This physician also 
testified that he witnessed the demonstrators running along side of 
and in front of patients’ vehicles, pushing pamphlets in car 
windows to persons who had not indicated any interest in such 
literature. As a result of patients having to run such a gauntlet, 
the patients manifested a higher level of anxiety and hypertension 
causing those patients to need a higher level of sedation to undergo 
the surgical procedures, thereby increasing the risk associated with 
such procedures. The doctor also testified that the noise of 
singing, chanting, shouting and yelling could be heard through the 


_ walls of the clinic and caused stress in the patients during surgical 
+ procedures and while recuperating in the recovery rooms. The 


B-5 


doctor also testified that he observed some patients turn away from 
the crowd in the driveway to return at a later date. He testified that 


such delay in undergoing the procedures also increased the risk 
associated therewith. 


J. On another occasion the doctor was followed as he left 
the clinic by a person associated with the respondents who 
communicated his anger to the doctor by pretending to shoot him 
from the adjoining vehicle. As a result of the foregoing 
demonstrations and activities, and after a physician similarly 
employed was killed by an antiabortionist at a clinic in North 
Florida, this doctor terminated his employment with the clinic. 


K. Further the testimony of witnesses shows: 


1. That license tag numbers of the clinics patients 
are recorded by the respondents or persons in concert with them 
and then are traced through state records to obtain the home 


address of such persons who are subsequently contacted by the 
respondents. 


2. That on occasion repeated, nearly simultaneous. 
multiple telephone calls are made to the clinic, jamming its 
telephone lines. The jamming of the clinic’s telephone system, 
makes it impossible for clinic staff to summon an ambulance to 
transfer any patient to the hospital should an emergency arise. 


| 3. That patients and staff are sometimes followed 
in a stalking manner when they leave the clinic, giving such 
persons a feeling of great apprehension. 


Conclusions 


A. That the actions of the respondents and those in concert 
with them in the street and driveway approaches to the clinic of the 
plaintiffs continue to impede and obstruct both staff and patients 
from entering the clinic. The paved surfaces of the public right-of- 


i ei Nees eee eee Eh i ie i ee en ok cree 


B-6 
way must be kept open for the free flow of vehicular traffic. 


B. That the noise associated with the demonstrations 
impermissibly interferes with the operation of the clinic and the 
well-being of its patients and should be limited and restrained. 


C. That the actions of the respondents and those acting in 
concert with them directed at the residences (including the 
temporary motel residence) of the clinic staff is impermissible 
conduct and should be limited and restrained. A person’s home is 
his last place of refuge and his right of privacy therein should be 
protected. A place of business, not involved in the controversy of 
others, should not be subjected to demonstrations that interfere 
with business customers. 


D. That the actions of the respondents and those acting in 
concert with them in respect to interfering with the telephone 
service of the clinic is impermissible and should be restrained. 


E. That the uninvited contacts, shadowing and stalking by 
the respondents and those acting in concert with them of the clinic 
staff and patients are impermissible conduct and should be 
restrained. 


F. That the rights of the respondents to demonstrate, speak 
and make known their views should be recognized and protected. 


It is, therefore 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the respondents, 
Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue America, Operation Goliath, 
their officers, agents, members, employees and servants, and Ed 
Martin, Bruce Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy Madsen, 
and Shirley Hobbs, and all persons acting in concert or 
participation with them, or on their behalf, with notice in any 
manner or by means of this order (hereinafter referred to generally 
as respondents) are permanently enjoined from engaging in the 


following: 


(1) At all times on all days, from entering the premises and 
property of the Aware Woman Center for Choice, Inc. Clinic 
(hereinafter Clinic) located at the northwest corner of U.S. 


Highway One and Dixie Way in Melbourne, Brevard County, 
Florida. 


(2) At all times on all days, from blocking, impeding, 
inhibiting, or in any other manner obstructing or interfering with 


access tO, ingress into and egress from any building or parking lot 
of the Clinic. 


(3) At all times on all days, from congregating, picketing, 
patrolling, demonstrating or entering that portion of public right-- 
of-way or private Property within thirty-six (36) feet of the 
property line of the Clinic. The 36 foot buffer on the south side 
of the Clinic is demarcated by the south edge of paved surface of 
Dixie Way. It is the intent of the court that the respondents may 
use, subject to other restrictions contained herein, the unpaved 
portion (the shoulder) on the south side of Dixie Way. A drawing 
is attached hereto showing the various areas and lines. An 
exception to the 36 foot buffer zone is the area immediately 
adjacent to the Clinic on the east, lying in the right-of-way of U.S. 
Highway One. This area is composed of a flat shoulder area rising 
up an embankment to the easterly property line of the Clinic. The 
respondents may enter the shoulder area of U.S. Highway One, 
but may not go up the embankment and must remain at least five 
(5) feet from the Clinic’s east line. Another exception to the 36 
foot buffer zone relates to the record title owners of the property 
to the north and west of the Clinic. The prohibition against entry 
into the 36 foot buffer zone does not apply to such persons and 
their invitees. The other prohibitions contained herein do apply, 
if such owners and their invitees are acting in concert with the 
respondents. Another exception to the 36 foot buffer zone relates 
to the area of the pedestrian crosswalk near the area where Dixie 
Way enters into U.S. Highway One. The testimony before the 


Court revealed that such crosswalk is not presently marked by 
customary white lines. It is the request of this court, in order to 
assist the parties in complying with this injunction, that the City of 
Melbourne establish a crosswalk area at ate oy —~. 
Way in customary manner by applying painted lines on , 

of ie pavement. Until such lines are applied, the respondents 
may use an area of the paved surface of Dixie Way asa crosswalk, 
but must confine their use of such area to a strip of pavement eight 
(8) feet wide, running directly from the south edge of Dixie Way 
to the north edge thereof, the westerly line of such strip being 
coextensive with the western right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 
One. (See drawing attached.) After painted lines are applied, the 
respondents must not enter any portion of the paved surface of 
Dixie Way outside of the crosswalk within the 36 foot buffer zone. 
The respondents use of the crosswalk must be limited to the 
prompt crossing of the street. The crosswalk may not be used as 
an area of picketing, congregating or demonstrating. The 
respondents use of the crosswalk must not inhibit or impede the 
free flow of traffic on Dixie Way, and no stopping or hesitation in 
the crosswalk shall be allowed. 


(4) During the hours of 7:30.a.m. through noon, on 
Mondays through Saturdays, during surgical procedures and 
recovery periods, from singing, chanting, whistling, shouting, 
yelling, use of bullhorns, auto horns, sound amplification 
equipment or other sounds or images observable to or within 
earshot of the patients inside the Clinic. 


(5) At all times on all days, in an area within three- 
hundred (300) feet of the Clinic, from physically approaching any 
person seeking the services of the Clinic unless such person 
indicates a desire to communicate by approaching or by inquiring 
of the respondents. In the event of such invitation, the respondents 
may engage in communications consisting of conversation of a 
non-threatening nature and by the delivery of literature within the 
three-hundred (300) foot area but in no event within the 36 foot 
buffer zone. Should any individual decline such communication. 


B-9 


otherwise known as “sidewalk counseling", that person shall have 
the absolute right to leave or walk away and the respondents shall 
not accompany such person, encircle, surround, harass, threaten 
or physically or verbally abuse those individuals who choose not 
to communicate with them. 


(6) At all times on all days, from approaching, 
congregating, picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or using 
bullhorns or other sound amplification equipment within three- 
hundred (300) feet of the residence of any of the petitioners’ 
employees, staff, owners or agents, or blocking or attempting to 
block, barricade, or in any other manner, temporarily or 
otherwise, obstruct the entrances, exits or driveways of the 
residences of any of the petitioners’ employees, staff, owners or 
agents. The respondents and those acting in concert with them are 
prohibited from inhibiting or impeding or attempting to impede, 
temporarily or otherwise, the free ingress or egress of persons to 
any street that provides the sole access to the street on which those 
residences are located. 


(7) At all times on all days, from physically abusing, 
grabbing, intimidating, harassing, touching, pushing, shoving, 
crowding or assaulting persons entering or leaving, working at or 
using services at the petitioners’ Clinic or trying to gain access to, 
or leave, any of the homes of owners, staff or patients of the 
Clinic (unless permitted by “invited contact” as defined on page 10 
of this order). 


(8) At all times on all days, from harassing, intimidating 
or physically abusing, assaulting or threatening any present or 
former doctor, health care professional, or other staff member, 
employee or volunteer who assists in providing services at the 
petitioners’ Clinic. 


| (9) At all times on all days, from encouraging, inciting, or 
securing other persons to commit any of the prohibited acts listed 
herein. 


B- 10 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that nothing herein shall 
restrict duly constituted law enforcement authorities from providing 
traffic control and regulation and measures necessary to insure 
public safety and the protection of both public and private 
property. 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that any City of 
Melbourne police officer or other person authorized to serve 
process may serve a copy of this order on any individual who may 
not have otherwise received notice of the order. Such officer may 
read the operative prohibitory language of this order to any 
individual who is without notice of this order, and such service or 
oral notice shall subject the person so served or noticed to the 
sanctions provided for herein for failure to comply herewith. If 
the authorities of the City of Melbourne determine that it would 
assist them in enforcing this order to erect in the public right-of- 
way a notice that the use of the area specified herein as a buffer 
zone is subject to court order, they are authorized to do so. Such 
signs may contain the following language or words of similar 
import: "WARNING. Demonstrations and picketing in this area 
are limited by court order. Violators of this court order are 
subject to arrest. See Amended Permanent Injunction dated April 
8, 1993, filed in Case No. 91-2811-CA-16-K, Circuit Court, 18th 
Judicial Circuit, Seminole County, FL. Copies of the Amended 
Permanent Injunction are posted at Brevard County Branch 
Courthouse, 50 S. Neiman Ave., Melbourne, FL; Sarno Complex, 
1515 Sarno Road, Melbourne, FL; and Melbourne City Hall, 900 
E. Strawbridge Ave., Melbourne, FL." 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that, in order to provide 
for the protection of the owners, staff and patients of the Clinic 
and to prevent the further disruption of the operation of the Clinic, 
the court hereby enters the following additional orders: 


a. Law enforcement officers and Southern Bell Telephone 
Company are authorized, upon request of the Clinic owners to 
place a trap on the telephone lines of the Aware Woman Center in 


order to identify those persons engaged in a phone blockade and 
jamming of the Clinic’s phone lines. 


b. Law enforcement authorities, pursuant to the protective 
provisions of the court’s order, are authorized to arrest those 
persons who appear to be in willful and intentional disobedience of 
this injunction. Upon such arrest the person so arrested shall be 
admitted to bail upon the posting of a $500 cash or surety bond, 
which bond will be returnable before the undersigned judge at his 
chambers, Room N327, Seminole County Courthouse, 301 N. 
Park Avenue, Sanford, FL at 8:30 a.m. on the seventh (7th) day 
after arrest exclusive of weekends and holidays. Any county or 
circuit judge in Brevard County is authorized to modify, upward 
or downward, the dollar amount and the return date of such bond 
upon good cause being shown. In the event of arrest and no bond 
being posted, the person arrested shall be promptly transferred to 
the Seminole County jail and the undersigned judge shall be 
immediately notified by the arresting officer and Seminole County 
jailer of such confinement. Such arrested persons shall be brought 
before the undersigned judge not later than 8:30 a.m. of the day 
following his confinement in the Seminole County jail. 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that at all times on all 
days, respondents shall have the right to congregate, demonstrate 
and freely express themselves outside the Clinic buffer zone 
subject to the noise limitations on the days of surgical procedures 
Set Out in paragraph 4 of this order and subject also to all other 
provisions of this order and any other restraining orders and 
injunctions that may have been issued by other courts. 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that at all times on all 
days, respondents will have the right of invited contact with 
persons protected hereby so long as it is outside of the Clinic 
buffer zone. “Invited contact” is defined as conduct by the person 
sought to be contacted which affirmatively indicates a desire to 
engage in conversation or to receive literature. Such affirmative 
indication may include where the person sought to be contacted 


B- 12 


physically approaches the respondent, or where such person 
extends his or her hand to receive literature, or speaks words 
indicating a positive interest in what the respondent is saying. 
Such invited contact by a person protected hereby as it relates to 
a contact at such persons residence is limited to conduct 
transmitted by the resident to a respondent at a distance from and 
at a time prior to the contact and shall not include the uninvited 
ringing of a doorbell or knock on a door. Any invited contact may 
be canceled by such person by words spoken that indicate a desire 
to end the contact, such as "stop", "withdraw", “back off", “get 
away”, “leave me alone” or words or actions of similar import. 
Where such desire to end the contact is made known to a 
respondent, he/she must immediately terminate the contact and 
leave the presence of the person protected hereby. 


ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the permanent 
injunction of this court issued September 30, 1992, shall remain in 
full force and effect as to all persons and entities and places 
mentioned therein except as hereby modified. 


Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a drawing which 
shows the Clinic buffer zone referred to in this order. 


DONE AND ORDERED in Sanford, Seminole County, 
F'orida this &th day of April, 1993. 


/s/ Robert B. McGregor 
ROBERT B. MCGREGOR, Circuit Judge 


Copies furnished to: 


Talbot D’Alemberte, 215 S. Monroe St., Suite 601, Tallahassee, 
FL 32301 

Kathy Patrick, 1100 Louisiana, Suite 3400, Houston, TX 77002 
Jerri A. Blair, 351 W. Alfred St., Tavares, FL 32778 


B- 13 


Christopher J. Weiss, Two S. Orange Ave., Orlando, FL 32802 
Sheila Rae Eschenberg, 221 Avenida De Paz. Indiatlantic, FL 
32903 

Bruce Cadle, 701 Andrew St., N.E., Palm Bay, FL 32905 
Patrick Mahoney, 1345 N.E. Fourth Court, Boca Raton, FL 
33432 and at 613 Second Street, N.E.. Washington, DC 20002 
Randall Terry, RR2, Box 196, Harpursville, NY 13787-9536 


by /s/ Doris D. Brady 
Judicial Assistant 


Date: April 8, 1993 


be 
ie 7 i ‘ 
Avraaraa uv4rad OF) 


cl 6 
. , 


! 

! 

E 
af 

g 


| spy 1k 


ham Bing 

5 wewavns 
ganydg a0. Uh 

490% Hangs 7 


IWO- LHDIY : 
NY wil Q 30 |: 
943 HAMS” 


SP SXHHHASA 


— 


“NN ioe 13™ 


hone 
smn 


ie 
VIVO 


| 
| 
(Q3A¥e) L101 ONDNEVE sen hawedos HAV OW 
L834 NYROM Sovey 


(GBAVe) 1957 
TNDOWYd Leva 
NYWOM SvM¥ 


~* 
™ 


ae hatwydowdg Hanos 
{ONY Av 30- vor wm wil 


at BNO! BIBGINY SBivoianT 


C-1 
APPENDIX C 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-2407 


MYRNA CHEFFER, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 


V. 


ROBERT McGREGOR, ET AL., 
Defendants-Appellees. 


APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
MIDDLE DISTRICT OF FLORIDA 
(Hon. G. Kendall Sharp, U.S. District Judge) 


Before 
TJOFLAT, Chief Judge, 


DUBINA, Circuit Judge, 
PAINE’, Senior District Judge. 


October 20, 1993 


Mathew D. Staver and Jeffery T. Kipi, Liberty Counsel, Attorneys 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 


' Honorable James C. Paine, Senior U.S. District Judge for the Southern 
District of Florida, sitting by designation. 


C-2 


James L. Reinman, Gayle Smith Swedmark, and Gerald B. 
Curington, Attorneys for Defendants-Appellees. 


TJOFLAT, Chief Judge: 


Myrna Cheffer appeals from the district court’s denial of 
her motion for a preliminary injunction preventing the enforcement 
of a state court injunction that regulates antiabortion speech at an 
abortion clinic. Because the district court mistook the legal 
significance of the state court injunction, and therefore erred in its 
application of the law to the merits of Cheffer’s motion, we vacate 
and remand. 


Perhaps few Americans are content with the current legal 
status of abortion in America. Many see a woman’s ability to 
choose abortion as a part of her fundamental constitutional right of 
self-determination that is ill-protected by the wavering 
jurisprudence of the Supreme Court. Many others see the 1.4 
million abortions each year as an American Holocaust permitted by 
the moral vacillation of the government. This case arises out of 
the clash of these opposing beliefs, and governmental attempts to 
restrict their free expression. The Aware Woman Center for 
Choice is a corporation that operates an abortion clinic in a 
residential neighborhood in Melbourne, Florida. Operation Rescue 
is a major antiabortion organization known for picketing abortion 
clinics such as the Aware Woman Center. The Honorable Robert 
McGregor is a Florida Circuit Judge. Judge McGregor’s docket 
includes the case Aware Woman Center for Choice v. Operation 
Rescue, No. 91-2811-CA-16-K, which concerns the conflict that 
arose when Operation Rescue and others began an aggressive 
campaign of picketing against the abortion clinic. On April 8, 


C-3 


1993, Judge McGregor issued an Amended Permanent Injunction! 
in which he enjoined certain activities of Operation Rescue and 
others in a court-drawn "buffer zone" surrounding the abortion 
clinic. The injunction, which was (to say the least) legislative in 
tone, was directed at Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue 
America, Operation Goliath, their officers, agents, members, 
employees and servants, and Ed Martin, Bruce Cadle, Pat 
Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy Madsen, and Shirley Hobbs, and 
all persons acting in concert or participation with them, or on their 
behalf, with notice in any manner or by any means of this order. 
This group (collectively "Operation Rescue" or “the state court 
defendants") was enjoined (1) At ali times on all days, from 
entering the premises and property of the Aware Woman Center 
for Choice, Inc. Clinic (hereinafter Clinic) located at the northwest 
corner of U.S. Highway One and Dixie Way in Melbourne, 
Brevard County, Florida. (2) At all times on all days, from 
blocking, impeding, inhibiting, or in any other manner obstructing 
or interfering with access to, ingress into and egress from any 
building or parking lot of the Clinic. (3) At all times on all days, 
from congregating, picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or entering 
that portion of public right-of-way or private property within 
thirty-six (36) feet of the property line of the Clinic.... It is the 
intent of the court that the [defendants] may use, subject to other 
restrictions contained herein, the unpaved portion (the shoulder) on 
the south side of Dixie Way . . . . (4) During the hours of 7:30 
a.m. through noon, on Mondays through Saturdays, during 
surgical procedures and recovery periods, from singing, chanting, 
whistling, shouting, yelling, use of bullhorns, auto horns, sound 
amplification equipment or other sounds or images observable to 
or within earshot of the patients inside the Clinic. (5) At all times 
on all days, in an area within three-hundred (300) feet of the 
Clinic, from physically approaching any person seeking the 


' Circuit Judge Wallace H. Hall had entered a prior injunction on September 
30, 1992. In the Amended Permanent Injunction, Judge McGregor found that the 
prior injunction had not prevented “interference with ingress to . . . the Aware 
Woman Clinic.” 


C-4 


services of the Clinic unless such person indicates a desire to 
communicate by approaching or by inquiring of the [defendants]. 
In the event of such invitation, the [defendants] may engage in 
communications consisting of conversation of a nonthreatening 
nature and by the delivery of literature within the three-hundred 
(300) foot area but in no event within the 36 foot buffer zone. 
Should any individual decline such communication, otherwise 
known as "sidewalk counseling", that person shall have the 
absolute right to leave or walk away and the [defendants] shall not 
accompany such person, encircle, surround, harass, threaten or 
physically or verbally abuse those individuals who choose not to 
communicate with them. (6) At all times on all days, from 
approaching, congregating, picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or 
using bullhorns or other sound amplification equipment within 
three-hundred (300) feet of the residence of any of the petitioners’ 
employees, staff, owners or agents, or biocking or attempting to 
block, barricade, or in any other manner, temporarily or 
otherwise, obstruct the entrances, exits or driveways of the 
residences of any of the petitioners’ employees, staff, owners or 
agents. A map attached to the injunction indicated a “buffer zone" 
to be established around the boundaries of the clinic property. The 
buffer zone included a public sidewalk in front of the clinic as well 
as a public street and adjacent right-of-way. 


On its face, the injunction appears to "criminalize" various 
acts of peaceful protest, including the mere penetration of the 
buffer zone by anyone acting "in concert" with those named in the 
injunction. It purports to provide the following enforcement 
mechanism: Law enforcement authorities, pursuant to the 
protective provisions of the court’s order, are authorized to arrest 
those persons who appear to be in willful and intentional 
disobedience of this injunction. Upon such arrest the person so 
arrested shall be admitted to bail upon the posting of a $500 cash 


or surety bond .. . . In the event of arrest and no bond being 
posted, the person arrested shall be promptly transferred to the 
Seminole County jail . . . . Such arrested persons shall be brought 


before the undersigned judge not later than 8:30 am of the day 


C-5 


following his confinement in the Seminole County jail.’ The local 
police understood the injunction to require them to arrest “pro-life” 
individuals who violated the buffer zone. On April 11, 1993, 
approximately 50 apparently “pro-life” individuals were arrested 
for entering the buffer zone. Myrna Cheffer was not among them. 
Nevertheless, she filed this suit in federal district court seeking to 
enjoin enforcement of the state court injunction.’ 


Cheffer claimed that the injunction acted as a prior 
restraint on her free speech rights, and that the threat of arrest 
chilled her ability to exercise these rights. She sought a temporary 
restraining order as well as both preliminary and permanent 
injunctions to block the state court injunction. The district court 
denied the motions for a temporary restraining order and a 
preliminary injunction, finding that the balance of equities did not 
weigh in Cheffer’s favor. The court deferred ruling on the motion 
for a permanent injunction. Cheffer now appeals. 


We review a denial of an application for a preliminary 
injunction for abuse of discretion, adopting the district court’s 
findings of fact unless clearly erroneous, but reviewing 
jurisdictional issues de novo. Lucero v. Operation Rescue of 
Birmingham, 954 F.2d 624, 627 (11th Cir. 1992). We consider 
the questions of standing and abstention in part II, then turn, in 
part III, to the merits of the case. 


An injunction is an extraordinary remedy that operates only 


* It is obvious to us that Judge McGregor did not intend the Amended 
Permanent Injunction to be enforced through the civil contempt process. See 
Blalock v. United States, 844 F.2d 1546, 1558-60 (11th Cir. 1988) (contrasting 
civil and criminal contempt). The injunction clearly attempts to circumvent a 
civil contempt process that the judge considered too cumbersome. 


* An appeal of the injunction is currently before the Florida Supreme Court. 


C-6 


on the parties before the court. Legislation operates more broadly, 
extending to all actors within the legislature’s territorial 
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, when Judge McGregor issued the 
Amended Permanent Injunction in the state case, he, in effect, 
created a criminal statute prohibiting “pro-life” free speech activity 
in a certain geographical location. Had he merely enjoined the 
defendants in the state suit from certain actions, Cheffer would 
have suffered no injury--she would be free to engage in peaceful 
speech activity on the sidewalk in front of the clinic. But by 
extending the injunction to nonparties and by attaching criminal 
penalties to activities otherwise protected by the Constitution, 
Judge McGregor crafted a law that seems to apply to Cheffer, who 
is neither a party nor an agent of any party.‘ It is this unusual 
characteristic of the injunction that seems to have misled the 
district court. We refuse to prefer form over substance; the 
injunction has all the attributes of a criminal statute and we will 
treat it accordingly. 


A. 


Although she was neither a party to the state suit nor one 
of those arrested for violating the buffer zone, Cheffer does not 
lack standing to bring this case. A plaintiff in federal court must 
satisfy the “case or controversy" requirement of Article III of the 
Constitution by showing that she has suffered an injury-in-fact that 
would be corrected by favorable decision in the lawsuit. Valley 
Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of 
Church & State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 471-72, 102 S.Ct. 752, 78, 
70 L.Ed.2d 700 (1982). [AJt an irreducible minimum, Art. III 
requires the party who invokes the court’s authority to "show that 
he personally has suffered some actual or threatened injury as a 


* Although we may be permitted our doubts as to the legitimacy of the 
injunction under Plorida law (because, for one thing, it serves as a criminal 
sanction under the cloak of a civil injunction and thus may constitute an abuse of 
process), we assume, for the sake of argument, that Judge McGregor did not 
overstep his authority in crafting the order. 


C-7 


result of the putatively illegal conduct of the defendant,” and that 
the injury “fairly can be traced to the challenged action" and "is 
likely to be redressed by a favorable decision." /d. (citations 
omitted) (quoting Gladstone, Realtors v. Village of Bellwood, 441 
U.S. 91, 99, 99 S.Ct. 1601, 1608, 60 L.Ed.2d 66 (1979), and 
Simon v. Eastern Ky. Welfare Rights Org., 426 U.S. 26, 38, 41, 
96 S.Ct. 1917, 1924, 1925, 48 L.Ed.2d 450 (1976)). Thus, a 
plaintiff who has not been prosecuted under a criminal statute does 
not normally have standing to challenge the statute's 
constitutionality. See Boyle v. Landry, 401 U.S. 77, 91 S.Ct. 758, 
27 L.Ed.2d 696 (1971) (finding that plaintiffs who had neither 
been prosecuted nor specifically threatened with prosecution did 
not have standing). 


Standing requirements to challenge speech restrictions, 
however, are less strict. “[I}n the First Amendment context, 
{litigants . . . are permitted to challenge a statute not because their _ 
own rights of free expression are violated, but because of a judicial 
prediction or assumption that the statute’s very existence may 
cause others not before the court to refrain from constitutionally 
protected speech or expression." Virginia v. American Booksellers 
Assoc., Inc., 484 U.S. 383, 392-93, 108 S.Ct. 636, 643, 98 
L.Ed.2d 782 (1988) (internal quotations omitted); see also 
Secretary of State of Maryland v. Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 
U.S. 947, 956-57, 104 S.Ct. 2839, 2846-47, 81 L.Ed.2d 786 
(1984); Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 612, 93 S.Ct. 
2908, 2916, 37 L.Ed.2d 830 (1973).° We conclude that Cheffer 
has standing to challenge the restrictions placed on her free speech 
by the Amended Permanent Injunction. 


Neither does the abstention doctrine block Cheffer’s suit. 
The Supreme Court has directed that federal courts should not 


* Under this rule of standing, it is unimportant that Cheffer has alleged that 
she intends to exercise her own rights to free speech. 


C-8 


intervene in ongoing state proceedings "when the moving party has 
an adequate remedy at law and will not suffer irreparable injury if 
denied equitable relief." See Younger v. Harris, 401 U.S. 37, 
43-44, 91 S.Ct. 746, 750, 27 L.Ed.2d 669 (1971).° 


As we have noted before, the initial inquiry in determining 
whether a federal court shouid abstain when asked to enjoin an 
ongoing state civil proceeding is whether an important 
governmental interest of the state is implicated by that civil action 
so that such an injunction would be an offense to the State’s 
interest . . . likely to be every bit as great as it would be were this 
a criminal proceeding. First Alabama Bank v. Parsons Steel, Inc., 
825 F.2d 1475, 1483 (1lth Cir. 1987) (internal quotations 
omitted), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1060, 108 S.Ct. 1015, 98 
L.Ed.2d 980 (1988). It appears that important state interests, 
including the enforceability of state court injunctions, are involved 
in the present case. 


Younger abstention is only appropriate, however, when the 
federal constitutional claims at issue can be raised by the federal 
plaintiff in an ongoing state court proceeding. Ohio Civil Rights 
Comm'n v. Dayton Christian Schools, Inc., 477 U.S. 619, 106 
S.Ct. 2718, 91 L.Ed.2d 512 (1986) (holding that Younger applies 
"so long as in the course of [the state] proceedings the federal 


* Younger itself expressed a fundamental “public policy against federal 
interference with state criminal prosecutions,” 401 U.S. at 43, 91 S.Ct. at 750, 
but later cases have extended this deference to some state civil actions. In 
general, “[t}he policies underlying Younger are fully applicable to noncriminal 
judicial proceedings when important state interests are involved.” Middlesex 
County Ethics Comm. v. Garden State Bar Assoc., 457 U.S. 423, 431, 102 S.Ct. 
2515, 2521, 73 L. Ed. 2d 116 (1982); see Pennzoil Co. v. Texaco, Inc., 481 
U.S. 1, 107 S.Ct. 1519, 95 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1987). In particular, the Supreme 
Court extended the doctrine to cover the civil contempt process in Juidice v. Vail, 
430 U.S. 327, 97 S.Ct. 1211, 51 L. Ed. 2d 376 (1977). The issue to be resolved 
is whether “the State's interests in the proceeding are so important that exercise 
of the federal judicial power would disregard the comity between the States and 
the National Government.” Pennzoil, 481 U.S. at 11, 107 S.Ct. at 1526. 


c-9 


plaintiff would have a full and fair opportunity to litigate his 
constitutional claim"); see also Juidice, 430 U.S. at 337, 97 S.Ct. 
at 1218. In the instant case, Cheffer has no remedy in state court 
except to subject herself to a criminal contempt citation (which she 
probably could not resist on the ground that the underlying 
injunction is unconstitutional, see In re Novak, 932 F.2d 1397, 
1401-02 (llth Cir.1991)). The Younger abstention doctrine 
therefore is inapplicable’ and the district court has jurisdiction to 
hear Cheffer’s claim.* 


Ill. 


It is against this backdrop, then, that the district court must 
consider the four prerequisites to preliminary injunctive relief. 
Cheffer had “the burden of proving: (1) a substantial likelihood of 
success on the merits; (2) a substantial threat of irreparable injury; 
(3) [her] own injury outweighs the injury to [the clinic); and (4) 
the injunction would not disserve the public interest." Tally-Ho, 
Inc. v. Coast Community College Dist., 889 F.2d 1018, 1022 (11th 
Cir.1990); Lucero, 954 F.2d at 627. The district court denied the 
motion for a preliminary injunction because it determined that 
Cheffer had not demonstrated that the balance of equities weighed 
in her favor. We conclude that the district court’s 
misunderstanding of the legal significance of the injunction 
improperly colored its analysis. We must, therefore, vacate the 
order and remand the matter to the district court for further 


’ The defendants do not claim that the abstention doctrines require Cheffer 
to submit to arrest in order to be able to challenge the restriction in state court. 


* Cheffer argues that the issuance of a preliminary injunction in the free 
speech context turns solely on whether the challenged action is unconstitutional. 
In other words, she suggests that “Once a violation of the First Amendment is 
established, preliminary injunctive relief is mandated." She relies, for this 
proposition, on Gold Coast Publications, Inc. v. Corrigan, 798 F.Supp. 1558 
(S.D. Fla. 1992). While we agree that it is unlikely that an unconstitutional 
restriction would fail to warrant an injunction, we prefer that the district court 


C-10 
consideration of the plaintiff's motion for a preliminary injunction. 


A. 


The district court must first consider whether Cheffer 
demonstrated a substantial likelihood of success on the merits. 
When reduced to its essentials, Judge McGregor’s Amended 
Permanent Injunction, by operating on persons not before the 
court, serves as a statute of local effect regulating picketing by 
antiabortion speakers. As a viewpoint-based restriction operating 
in a traditional public forum (the public streets and sidewalks 
around the clinic), it is subject to a most stringent review: In 
places which by long tradition or by government fiat have been 
devoted to assembly and debate, the rights of the State to limit 
expressive activity are sharply circumscribed. At one end of the 
spectrum are streets and parks which “have immemorially been 
held in trust for the use of the public and, time out of mind, have 
been used for purposes of assembly, communicating thoughts 
between citizens, and discussing public questions." Hague v. C/O, 
307 U.S. 496, 515, 59 S.Ct. 954, 963, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939). In 
these quintessential public forums, the government may not 
prohibit all communicative activity. For the State to enforce a 
content-based exclusion it must show that its regulation is 
necessary to serve a compelling state interest and that it is 
narrowly drawn to achieve that end. Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 
455, 461, 100 S.Ct. 2286, 2290, 65 L.Ed.2d 263 (1980). Perry 
Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 45, 
103 S.Ct. 948, 954-55, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983). That the clinic is 
in a residential neighborhood does not remove the characterization 
of the adjoining streets and sidewalks as traditional public fora. 
Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 479, 108 S.Ct. 2495, 2500, 101 
L.Ed.2d 420 (1988) ("[OJur decisions identifying public streets and 
sidewalks as traditional public fora are not accidental invocations 
of a ‘cliche,’ but recognition that ‘[wJherever the title of streets 
and parks may rest, they have immemorially been held in trust for 


C-1l 
the use of the public.’ " (citations omitted)).’ 


That the speech restrictions at issue here are 
viewpoint-based cannot seriously be doubted." The order enjoins 
Operation Rescue, Operation Rescue America, Operation Goliath, 
their officers, agents, members, employees and servants, and Ed 
Martin, Bruce Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy Madsen, 
and Shirley Hobbs, and all persons acting in concert or 
participation with them or on their behalf. . . . Such a restriction 
is nO More viewpoint-neutral than one restricting the speech of "the 
Republican Party, the state Republican Party, George Bush, Bob 


* In any case, the forum issue is not dispositive since the restriction is not 
viewpoint neutral. Even a nonpublic forum can only be regulated in a neutral 
fashion: Control over access to a nonpublic forum can be based on subject matter 
and speaker identity so long as the distinctions drawn are reasonable in ught of 
the purpose served by the forum and are viewpoint neutral. Although a speaker 
may be excluded from a nonpublic forum if he wishes to address a topic not 
encompassed within the purpose of the forum, or if he is not a member of the 
class of speakers for whose especial benefit the forum was created, the 
government violates the First Amendment when it denies access to a speaker 
solely to suppress the point of view he espouses on an otherwise includible 
subject. Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788, 
806, 105 S.Ct. 3439, 3451, 87 L. Ed. 2d 567 (1985) (citations omitted). A 
restriction on “pro-life” speech would not even be permissible in the context of 
a nonpublic forum. 


'° We note that the Ninth Circuit reached a different result on similar facts 
in Portland Feminist Women's Health Center v. Advocates for Life, Inc., 859 
F.2d 681 (9th Cir. 1988). There an injunction against “demonstrating or 
distributing literature ...; shouting, screaming, chanting, or yelling” by 
antiabortion organizations and those acting in concert was deemed to be 
content-neutral and thus a reasonable time, place, or manner restriction on 
speech. id. at 684, 686. The court argued The preliminary injunction is not a 
content-based restriction of expression. It refers not at all to the specific 
viewpoints that the advocates press, nor even to the general issues raised at their 
demonstrations. Rather, it focuses exclusively on the location and manner of 
expression. It protects the clinic from loudness and physical intimidation, not 
som content of speech. Therefore, we apply to the preliminary injunction the 
rules regarding the constitutionality of “time, place, and manner” regulations of 
speech. Jd. at 686. We do not find this reasoning at all persuasive. 


C-12 


Dole, Jack Kemp and all persons acting in concert or participation 
with them or on their behalf." The practical effect of this section 
of the injunction was to assure that while "pro-life" speakers would 
be arrested, "pro-choice" demonstrators would not.'! 


A viewpoint-specific restriction in a traditional public 
forum is unconstitutional unless (1) it is necessary to serve a 
compelling state interest and (2) it is narrowly drawn to achieve 
that end. See Carey, 447 U.S. at 461-62, 100 S.Ct. at 2290. The 
state court injunction does not seem to be either. 


The second inquiry concerns the threat of irreparable 
injury faced by the plaintiff. The Supreme Court has noted that 
"(t]he loss of First Amendment freedoms, for even minimal 
periods of time, unquestionably constitutes irreparable injury." 
Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 373, 96 S.Ct. 2673, 2690, 49 
L.Ed.2d 547 (1976); see New York Times Co. v. United States, 
403 U.S. 713, 91 S.Ct. 2140, 29 L.Ed.2d 822 (1971). 


c. 
The third inquiry is into the relative injury to Cheffer and 


to the clinic. The district court concluded that Cheffer did not 
carry her burden as to this point. 


'' This is apparently precisely what occurred. Several of those arrested 
testified (at a preliminary hearing convened by Judge McGregor as provided for 
in the injunction) that they were designated for arrest by clinic workers and police 
officers because they were perceived to be “pro-life.” Judge McGregor accepted 
this interpretation of the intent of the injunction and explained (to the arrestees): 
[T]he injunction did not pertain to those on the other side of the issue, because 
the word in concert with means in concert with those who had taken a certain 
position in respect to the clinic, adverse to the clinic. If you are saying that is 
selective basis that the pro-choice were not arrested when pro-life was arrested, 
that’s the basis of that selection. 


C - 13 


It is difficult indeed to weigh the relative value of different 
constitutional rights. Our sister circuit described a similar abortion 
protest case as a “clash . . . between constitutional rights defined 
by the Supreme Court: an old one tracing its roots to the speech 
clause of the First Amendment and before, and a new one 
stemming from Roe v. Wade." Mississippi Women’s Medical 
Clinic v. McMillan, 866 F.2d 788, 791 (Sth Cir. 1989). We note, 
however, that in the instant case there is no indication in the 
record that women were actually prevented from obtaining 
abortions at the Aware Woman Center for Choice. The clash here 
is between an actual prohibition of speech and a potential 
hinderance to the free exercise of abortion rights.'2 Should the 
district court issue an injunction barring the state court from 
enforcing its injunction as a criminal statute, it would promote only 
speech and expressive conduct, not assault, trespass, or destruction 


of property. 
D. 


Finally, the district court must consider whether the 
issuance of the federal injunction would disserve the public 
interest. The importance of "the principle that debate on public 
issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open" suggests that 
the issuance of the injunction would be no disservice at all. 


It is tempting, of course, to entertain the argument that the 
speech in this case is disruptive, discourteous, and offensive, but 
that is irrelevant. The Supreme Court recently reminded us As 


In the Amended Permanent Injunction the state circuit court recites a 
variety of inconveniences (e.g., "As vehicular traffic approached the [clinic] area 
it would, in response to the congestion, slow down. If the destination of such 
traffic was either of the two parking lots of the [clinic], such traffic slowed even 
more, sometimes having to momentarily hesitate or stop until persons in the 
driveway moved out of the way."). (Emphasis added). Those apparently isolated 
incidents which were more intrusive (e.g. “stalking") are, for the most part, 
already tortious or criminal. 


C-14 


we have often had occasion to repeat, "[T]he fact that society may 
find speech offensive is not a sufficient reason for suppressing it. 
Indeed, if it is the speaker’s opinion that gives offense, that 
consequence is a reason for according it constitutional protection." 
Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 55, 108 S.Ct. 
876, 882, 99 L.Ed.2d 41 (1988) (quoting FCC v. Pacifica 
Foundation, 438 U.S. 726, 745, 98 S.Ct. 3026, 3038, 57 
L.Ed.2d 1073 (1978)). “If there is a bedrock principle underlying 
the First Amendment, it is that the Government may not prohibit 
the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea 
itself offensive or disagreeable." United States v. Eichman, 496 
U.S. 310, 319, 110 S.Ct. 2404, 2410, 110 L.Ed.2d 287 (1990) 
(quoting Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 414, 109 S.Ct. 2533, 
2544, 105 L.Ed.2d 342 (1989)). Simon & Schuster v. New York 
Crime Victims Bd., --- U.S. ----, ----, 112 S.Ct. 501, 509, 116 
L.Ed.2d 476 (1991). We protect much that offends in the name 
of free speech--we cannot refuse such protection to those who find 
abortion morally reprehensible. 


IV. 


The district court treated the state court injunction as an 
ordinary injunction when it had the effect of a criminal statute. 
Consequently, the order of the district court was founded on a 
mistake of law. We vacate the order, and remand for further 
consideration of the issuance of a preliminary injunction in light of 
this opinion. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 
PAINE, District Judge, dissenting: 


I would remand this case with instructions to the district 
court to enjoin enforcement of the state court’s Amended 
Permanent Injunction against Myrna Cheffer ("Cheffer"), a person 
shown not to be acting in concert with the respondents in the state 
case. 


C-15 


The central facts of this matter concern the harassment of 
the function or undertakings of the Aware Woman Center for 
Choice, an abortion clinic. Prior restraint of the constitutional 
right of free speech by Cheffer is a concomitant issue adequately 
treated by the district court order. The strong remand suggested 
by the majority, bottomed on free speech, provides an imprecise 
emphasis. 


The Amended Permanent Injunction details a factual 
background omitted by the majority opinion. On September 30, 
1992, Judge Wallace H. Hall had entered an injunction against 
Respondents, three pro-life organizations and six individual pro-life 
activists, prohibiting interference with ingress to the Aware 
Woman Center. On April 8, 1993, following a three-day 
evidentiary hearing on Petitioners’ motion to modify the 
injunction, Judge Robert McGregor found, in summary, that: A. 
Despite the previous injunction, persons continued to interfere with 
ingress to the clinic, by standing on the paved portions of Dixie 
Highway, standing, kneeling, and sitting on the unpaved portions 
of the road, approaching moving vehicles on the paved surface, 
and marching in a picket line that traversed the entrance driveways 
to the facility’s two parking lots. Cars approaching the area were 
forced to slow down, particularly those wishing to enter the 
parking lots. B. Crowds of up to 400 people would gather at the 
clinic one to three times per week. The crowds included, not only 
the named Respondents, but other pro-life demonstrators, 
pro-choice demonstrators, up to 50 law enforcement officers 
engaging in crowd and traffic control, and media representatives. 
C. The gatherings would feature singing, chanting, whistling, 
music, and bullhorns. Pro-life and pro-choice groups would shout 
and yell at each other, often competing to make the most noise. 
D. The police were sometimes forced to erect barricades to 
separate the rival groups and permit traffic flow. The pro-life 
demonstrators would generally remain in the public right of way, 
while their pro-choice counterparts occupied private property on 
the clinic’s lawn and parking lot. E. Vehicles slowing to enter the 
clinic’s driveway would be approached by persons designated by 


Sitti =“ 


C - 16 


Respondents as "sidewalk counselors," who attempted to hand 
anti-abortion literature to the occupants and discourage their use of 
the clinic. F. The clinic has fences on its west and north sides. 
Persons would occasionally climb a ladder above the fences to 
shout at staff and patients entering the facility. On one occasion 
a demonstrator yelled to a clinic staffer, "I pray that God strikes 
you dead now!" G. Since the entry of the previous injunction, 
Respondent Bruce Cadle and others in concert with him have 
approached the private residences or temporary lodging places of 
clinic employees, to confront the occupants (including minor 
children), picket, shout at passers-by, contact neighbors, and hand 
out literature identifying the employee as a “baby killer." H. On 
one occasion, Cadle and others demonstrated outside a motel 
where a staff physician was staying. While Cadle remained 
outside, his cohorts entered the motel lobby, yelling “child 
murderer" and "baby killer." The disturbance delayed the doctor’s 
departure for the clinic by one-half hour. I. The same physician 
was once delayed outside the clinic while Cadle and others stood 
in front of his car, screaming “baby killer--we don’t want you here 
in Melbourne." This physician further witnessed demonstrators 
running alongside, and in front of, patients’ vehicles, pushing 
pamphlets in car windows to persons who had not indicated any 
interest therein. Patients experiencing this confrontation 
manifested a higher level of anxiety and hypertension, requiring a 
heavier sedation, and its associated medical risks, to undergo the 
surgical procedure. The noise of singing, chanting, and shouting 
also caused stress to patients during the surgery and recuperation. 
In addition, the doctor observed prospective patients turn away 
from the crowd in the clinic’s driveway to return at a later date, 
which only increases the risk associated with the procedure. J. 
While driving home one evening, the same physician was followed 
by a person associated with Respondents, who pretended to shoot 
him from an adjoining vehicle. As a result of these activities, and 
the shooting of a physician in North Florida by an anti-abortionist, 
the physician terminated his employment with the clinic. K. 
Respondents or persons in concert with them recorded the license 
plate numbers of clinic patients, obtained their home addresses, 


C-17 


and contacted the patients. On occasion, multiple telephone calls 
have been placed to the clinic, jamming their telephone lines and 
making it impossible to summon an ambulance for a medical 
emergency. Patients and staff are sometimes followed in a stalking 
manner when they leave the clinic, causing them great 
apprehension. Judge McGregor thereupon entered the Amended 
Permanent Injunction against Respondents, Operation Rescue, 
Operation Rescue America, Operation Goliath, Ed Martin, Bruce 
Cadle, Pat Mahoney, Randall Terry, Judy Madsen, Shirley Hobbs, 
and all persons acting on behalf of or "in concert with" them,' the 
prohibitions of which are summarized by the majority. 


This federal proceeding involves the constitutional 
challenge of Cheffer, a pro-life activist who claims that she is not 
working in concert with the named Respondents, wishes to engage 
in peaceful "sidewalk counseling" near the clinic, but fears arrest 
because (i) 50 similarly independent pro-life demonstrators were 
arrested on April 10, 1993, and (ii) Judge McGregor commented, 
during their initial appearances, that he considered any pro-life 
demonstrator to be acting in concert with the named Respondents 
for purposes of the Amended Permanent Injunction. On April 13, 
1993, Cheffer filed a Verified Complaint for Declaratory Judgment 
and Preliminary and Permanent Injunctive Relief, Motion for 
Temporary Restraining Order, Motion for Preliminary Injunction 
and Permanent Injunction, with supporting affidavits and 
memoranda of law, seeking to prevent enforcement of the 
Amended Permanent Injunction against her. The next day, the 
district court denied the requests for a temporary restraining order 


' Florida Rule of Civil Procedure 1.610(c), like Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 65(d), provides that “[e]very injunction ... shall be binding on the 
parties to the action, their officers, agents, servants, employees, and attorneys 
and on those persons in active concert or participation with them who receive 
actual notice of the injunction.” These procedural rules are derived from the 
common law doctrine that "defendants may not nullify a decree by carrying out 
prohibited acts through aiders and abettors, although they were not parties to the 
original proceeding.” Regal Knitwear Co. v. NLRB, 324 U.S. 9, 14, 65 S.Ct. 
478, 481, 89 L. Ed. 661 (1945). 


C- 18 


and preliminary injunction "[b]Jased on a review of the case file 
and the relevant law," without conducting an evidentiary hearing 
or permitting further briefing. 


The majority concludes that "the district court mistook the 

legal significance of the state court injunction... ." Based upon 
a provision authorizing the arrest of willful violators, and the 
subsequent arrest of persons who claim no association to the state 
court litigation, the majority, in the name of "substance over 
form,” but without citation of legal precedent, elects to treat the 
Amended Permanent Injunction as a criminal statute and remands 
the case so that the district court may do the same.* This Court 
has, however, previously affirmed an arrest, detention, and 
conviction pursuant to a civil injunction that expressly provided: 
"Anyone having notice of this order who violates any of the terms 
thereof shall be subject to arrest, prosecution and punishment by 
imprisonment or fine, or both, for criminal contempt . 
United States v. Hall, 472 F.2d 261, 263-64 (Sth Cir. 1972) 
(emphasis added).’ Furthermore, this Court has analyzed an 
injunction purportedly directed at "all persons who are residents of 
Colquitt County, Georgia” as "impermissibly broad,” narrowed its 
application to the parties, then affirmed the injunction as modified. 
Harrington v. Colquitt County Bd. of Educ., 449 F.2d 161 (Sth 
Cir. 1971). The majority’s unprecedented decision to assume an 
impossibility--that a state court judge has passed legislation--skews 
its analysis. 


This improper analytical framework affects the threshold 
question whether Cheffer, as a supposed stranger to the litigation, 
has standing to attack the Amended Permanent Injunction. 


? In so doing, the majority manages to read Judge McGregor’s mind, 
determining that he “considered [the civil contempt process] too cumbersome.” 


* The Eleventh Circuit, in the en banc decision Bonner v. City of Prichard, 


661 F.2d 1206, 1209 (11th Cir. 1981), adopted as precedent decisions of the 
former Fifth Circuit rendered prior to October 1, 1981. 


C-19 


Because the majority has deemed the order an act of legislation, it 
invokes the substantial overbreadth doctrine, which permits First 
Amendment litigants "to challenge a statute not because their own 
rights of free expression are violated, but because of a judicial 
prediction or assumption that the statute’s very existence may 
cause others not before the court to refrain from constitutionally 
protected speech or expression." Virginia v. American Booksellers 
Assoc., Inc., 484 U.S. 383, 392-93, 108 S.Ct. 636, 643, 98 
L.Ed.2d 782 (1988); see also Massachusetts v. Oakes, --- U.S. 
wnnn, oone = ===, 109 S.Ct. 2633, 2637-38, 105 L.Ed.2d 493 (1989). 
Under this analysis, Cheffer’s own intention to speak is considered 
by the majority to be "unimportant." 


The substantial overbreadth doctrine, however, has no 
application to injunctions, which bind only the parties and do not 
chill the conduct of others. United States v. Local 560 (1.B.T.), 
974 F.2d 315, 344 n. 16 (3rd Cir. 1992). A non-party ordinarily 
lacks standing to assert the free speech constitutional rights of 
parties subject to an injunction. Radio & Television News Ass'n 
v. United States Dist. Court, 781 F.2d 1443, 1448 (9th Cir. 1986); 
see generally Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Envtl. Study Group, 
Inc., 438 U.S. 59, 80-81, 98 S.Ct. 2620, 2634-35, 57 L.Ed.2d 
595 (1978) (discussing third-party standing). Cheffer’s standing 
hinges entirely on her intention to speak and the "credible threat" 
of prosecution posed by Judge McGregor’s statements regarding 
his interpretation of the injunction. Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 
352, 355 n.3, 103 S.Ct. 1855, 1858 n.3, 75 L.Ed.2d 903 (1983); 
see also Steffel v. Thompson, 415 U.S. 452, 459-60, 94 S.Ct. 
1209, 1215-16, 39 L.Ed.2d 505 (1974). Cheffer has proven a 
sufficient connection to the state court injunction to confer 
standing. 


A review of Younger v. Harris, 401 U.S. 37, 41-43, 46, 
91 S.Ct. 746, 749- 50, 751, 27 L.Ed.2d 669 (1971), and its 
progeny leads to the conclusion that abstention is inappropriate 
here, because Cheffer is not a party to the state case, nor are her 
interests “intertwined” with those of the parties. See Hicks v. 


ee ny, tm yl 


C - 20 


Miranda, 422 U.S. 332, 348-49, 95 S.Ct. 2281, 2291-92, 45 
L.Ed.2d 223 (1975); Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922, 
928-29, 95 S.Ct. 2561, 2566-67, 45 L.Ed.2d 648 (1975). 


The majority opinion directs that the district court’s order 
be vacated, remanding the case for application of the four-part test 
for preliminary injunctive relief.‘ But further proceedings below 
are unwarranted. Only different instructions to the district court 
are needed. When the Amended Permanent Injunction is properly 
viewed as an injunction, it becomes clear that the state court lacks 
the power to reach Cheffer. "“[C]ourts . . . may not grant an 
injunction so broad as to make punishable the conduct of persons 
who act independently and whose rights have not been adjudged 
according to law." Regal Knitwear Co. v. NLRB, 324 U.S. 9, 13, 
65 S.Ct. 478, 481, 89 L.Ed. 661 (1945).° Given the “credible 
threat” of prosecution posed by Judge McGregor’s comments, see 
Kolender, 461 U.S. at 355 n.3, 103 S.Ct. at 1858 n.3, Cheffer is 
entitled to an order prohibiting enforcement of the Amended 


* The implication that the district court did not examine the request for 
preliminary injunction in light of (a) the likelihood of success on the merits, (b) 
irreparable injury, (c) relative injury to Cheffer and the clinic, and (d) whether 
issuance of the federal injunction would disserve the public interest is not 
supported by the record. The district court's order makes note of these 
requirements and concludes that the burden of proof was not met as to items (c) 
and (d). 


* In United States v. Hall, 472 F.2d 261, 264-65 (Sth Cir. 1972), this Court 
held that an injunction against obstructing school children's access to class could 
be applied to a non-party acting independently of the parties, because his conduct 
interfered with the plaintiff children’s right to attend school and the defendant 
school board's duty to provide schooling. But this holding was clearly affected 
by the non-party’s prior notice of the injunction and statement to police that he 
specifically intended to violate it. See 472 F.2d at 267 (“Rather than challenge 
(the injunction] by the orderly processes of law, he resorted to conscious, willful 
defiance."). Under the instant circumstances, Cheffer should be bound by the 
Amended Permanent Injunction only if she acted in concert with the named state 
Intigaats. 


C -21 


Permanent Injunction against her.° 


* Nothing in this dissent, or the majority opinion for that matter, would 
prevent entry of a separate injunction against Cheffer if she harasses, intimidates, 
or otherwise abridges the rights of clinic patients or staff employees. 


D-1 
APPENDIX D 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF FLORIDA 


OPERATION RESCUE, 
et al., 
Appellants, 


vs. CASE NO. 81,905 


WOMEN’S HEALTH 
CENTER, INC., et al., 
Appellees. 


District Court of Appeal, 
Fifth District - No. 93-969 


i i i i i ee ed 


APPELLEES’ EMERGENCY MOTION TO REQUIRE 
ENFORCEMENT OF INJUNCTIVE ORDER AND FOR 
SANCTIONS AND ALTERNATIVE EMERGENCY MOTION 
FOR ORDER ON MANDATE DIRECTING CITY TO 
ENFORCE VALID COURT ORDER 


Pursuant to the Court’s inherent authority and the Article 
V, Section 3(b)(7) power of the Court to issue “all writs necessary 
to the complete exercise of its jurisdiction," the Appellees seek an 
emergency order directed to the City of Melbourne, Florida and 
recite the following facts: 


1. The City of Melbourne has not provided adequate 
protection to the Aware Woman Center for Choice, Inc. 
("Clinic"), a lawful business providing licensed health care in the 
city and has failed to protect the rights of ingress and egress of the 
employees and patients of that health care facility. 


2. This failure of the City to provide protection 
necessitated the legal action taken by the Clinic which resulted in 
a temporary injunction issued on October 25, 1991 and a 


D-2 


permanent injunction dated September 30, 1992. These injunctions 
protected the ingress and egress of the Clinic’s personnel and 
patients. 


3. The City’s indifferent attitude toward the 1991 and 1992 
injunctions and the rights of the Clinic, its employees and its 
patients allowed the groups which have sought to unlawfully 
interfere with the Clinic’s business to continue to disrupt the 
operation of the Clinic. Indeed, as the record in this case and the 
findings of the trial judge demonstrate, the interference with the 
Clinic operation actually increased in early 1993. 


4. The Clinic, faced with an escalating pattern of 
intimidation and harassment, and with continued blocking of 
ingress and egress, returned to Court once more and obtained yet 
another injunction on April 8, 1993. This injunction order (which 
was the subject of this appeal) was obtained on testimony which 
clearly demonstrated the continued pattern of disruption of the 
Clinic and activities which were inconsistent with public safety. 
One of the important witnesses called to testify was Capt. Allgeyer 
of the City of Melbourne’s police department and he testified that 
it would aid the Melbourne Police to have a clear court order 
marking out the areas where demonstrators could exercise their 
free speech rights without interfering with the Clinic operation and 
the patients’ travel to and from the Clinic. 


5. This third injunctive order has now been affirmed by 
this Court in a decision dated October 28, 1993 and there can be 
no doubt that it is an effective and enforceable order. 


6. The City of Melbourne is refusing to enforce the order. 


7. The Clinic has contacted the City Attorney and sought 
the enforcement of the court order. In a letter to the City 
Attorney, the Clinic’s counsel has pointed out that the Attorney 
General of Florida has given an opinion which states that the April 
1993 injunctive order is to be enforced, that the press reports that 


D - 3 


legal scholars and even opposing counsel in this case have stated 
their view that the order is in full force. (A copy of the letter and 
exhibits sent to the City Attorney are attached as Exhibit | to this 
motion. ) 


8. The Clinic is being subjected to new harassment 
contrary to a valid court order. The affidavits, attached as Exhibit 
2 to this motion, state the facts of this continuing disruption in 
violation of the April 1993 order and the earlier 1991 and 1992 
orders. 


9. The Appellees are without any adequate remedy to 
secure the protection to which they are entitled by law and by the 
specific court orders. 


10. The Appellees have had to go to additional expense to 
obtain enforcement of these orders, including consultation with the 
Attorney General, contacts with City officials and the filing of 
these papers. The Appellees have incurred costs solely because of 
the improper refusal of the City of Melbourne to enforce a court 
order. 


Therefore, the Appellees seek the following relief: 


1. The Court is requested to issue an emergency rule to 
show cause to the City of Melbourne to explain why it has not 
enforced a lawful injunction which has been affirmed by this 
Court; 


2. Alternatively, the Court is requested to issue an 
emergency mandate to include directions to the City of Melbourne 
(and all other jurisdictions having police powers which are 
necessary to the enforcement of the injunctive order) to provide the 
protection for the Clinic, its personnel and its patients which has 
been ordered by the trial court and affirmed by this Court; 


3. The Court is requested to order the City of Melbourne 


D-4 


to immediately take action to fully enforce the April 1993 
injunctive order until there is a court order relieving the City from 
that burden; 


4. The Court is requested to award attorney fees, costs and 
expenses to the Appellee as sanctions for the City’s unreasonable 
refusal to follow a valid court order; and 


5. The Court is requested to take such other action as may 
be necessary to fully protect the Clinic, its employees and patients 
and such action as is necessary in the interests of 
justice. 


/s/ Talbot D’Alemberte 
TALBOT D’ALEMBERTE 
Florida Bar No. 017529 
215 S. Monroe St., Ste 601 
Tallahassee, Florida 32301 
(904) 222-2300 


SUSAN A. ENGLAND 
Florida Bar No. 186080 
2805 Lakeview Drive 
Fern Park, Florida 32730 
(407) 339-4600 


COUNSEL FOR PLAINTIFFS 


CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 


I HEREBY CERTIFY that a copy of the foregoing has 
been furnished by U.S. mail this 6th day of November, 1993, to 
the following: 


Christopher J. Weiss 
Two S. Orange Avenue 


Orlando, Florida 32802 


Keith Tucci 
Post Office Box 100037 
Palm Bay, FL 32910 


Bruce Cadle 
701 Andrew Street, N.E. 


Peter Antonacci 

Gerald B. Curington 
Office of Attorney General 
The Capitol, Plaza Level 
Tallahassee, Florida 32399 


D - 6 


/s/ 


Talbot D’ Alemberte 
TALBOT D’ALEMBERTE 


Palm Bay, Florida 32905 


Patrick Mahoney 

1345 N.E. Fourth Court 
Boca Raton, Florida 33432 
and at: 

613 Second Street, N.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20002 


Randall Terry 
Rural Route 2, Box 196 
Harpursville, New York 13787-9536 


James L. Reinman 

Reinman, Harrell, Graham, Mitchell & Wattwood, P.A. 
1825 S. Riverview Drive 

Melbourne, Florida 32901 


George Paulk 
1980 N. Atlantic Avenue, Suite 603 
Cocoa Beach, Florida 32931. 


Mathew D. Staver and Jeffery T. Kipi 
1900 Summit Tower Bivd., Suite 540 
Orlando, FL 32810 


John Tanner and Jay A. Sekulow 
630 North Wild Olive Ave., Suite A 
Daytona Beach, FL 32118 


E- 1 
APPENDIX E 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF FLORIDA 


OPERATION RESCUE, 
et al., 

Appellants, 
vs. CASE NO. 81,905 
WOMEN’S HEALTH 


CENTER, INC., 
ET AL., 


District Court of Appeal, 
Fifth District No. 93-969 
Appellees. 


ee 


CITY OF MELBOURNE’S RESPONSE TO 
EMERGENCY MOTIONS 


The City of Melbourne, Florida, [hereinafter "the City"} 
responds to the emergency motions filed by the Aware Woman 
Center for Choice, Inc. [hereinafter “the Clinic"], and states: 


1. The City objects to any orders entered against it, 
particularly to orders imposing sanctions of attorney’s fees and 
costs, because the City has never been a party to this action. (In 
fact, the City sought to intervene and to seek clarification of its 
duty regarding the McGregor injunction, and the Clinic opposed 
intervention by the City. The Circuit Court denied the City’s 
Motion To Intervene and to Clarify Amended Permanent 
Injunction.) 


It would be unjust to impose such severe sanctions against 
the City when the City has not had the opportunity to defend itself 
and has not had the opportunity to correct some of the inaccurate 
facts upon which the Clinic would have this Court impose 


judgment. 


2. The City specifically objects to the Clinic’s allegations 
that the City has failed to provide the Clinic protection and that the 
City has had an indifferent attitude toward the injunctions. To the 
contrary, throughout the eight-year history of the controversy 
surrounding the Clinic, the City has consistently and even-handedly 
endeavored to keep the peace by balancing the rights of the Clinic 
and its patients with the constitutional dictates of the first 
amendment. Specifically, the City would show as follows: 


A. The City has always been conscientious in enforcing 
applicable state laws at the Clinic site. 


B. Contrary to the Clinic’s unfounded allegations, the City 
has conscientiously enforced the terms of the injunctions 
and has arrested 144 people for violations of the 
injunctions. 


C. The City’s conscientious and consistent enforcement of 
the injunctions continued up until receipt of the opinion 
from the llth Circuit Court of Appeals that cast serious 
doubt on the constitutionality of the McGregor injunction. 


D. Although the City ceased to enforce the McGregor 
injunction upon receipt of the llth Circuit opinion, the City 
continues vigorously to enforce applicable state laws at the 
Clinic site. 


3. Unlike the present cause, in which the City has never 
been a party, the City is a party in Cheffer v. McGregor, No. 93- 
2407, 1993 U.S. App. LEXIS 27209 (llth Cir. Oct. 20, 1993). As 
this Court is aware, in that case a third party independently 
challenged the enforcement of the McGregor injunction. The Ith 
Circuit’s opinion in an interlocutory appeal has cast serious doubt 
about the validity of the injunction. Particularly alarming were the 
llth Circuit’s observations during oral argument that enforcement 


E-3 


of the injunction could subject the law enforcement authorities to 
liability for false arrest. 


Those observations, as well as the strong statements in the 
opinion itself, raise deep concerns about whether continued 
enforcement of the injunction would subject the City to potential 
liability for federal civil rights violations and to liability for 
warrantless arrests. Until this issue is finally resolved by the 
federal courts, the City has continued its vigorous enforcement of 
state laws, but has ceased enforcing the injunction to avoid 
exposure to liability. 


4. A further concern is that the McGregor injunction 
merely authorizes the City to enforce the injunction and fails to 
order or to require enforcement. The City fears that the lack of a 
clear mandate in the injunction will subject the City to further 
liability if the City elects to enforce an injunction of questionable 
validity. 


5. Throughout this controversy, the City has taken the 
position that it is inappropriate for the City to scrutinize the merits 
of, or to judge the lawfulness of, the McGregor injunction. This 
is in keeping with the principle that law enforcement authorities 
charged with the duty of executing court orders must not be called 
upon to answer for the legality of decisions which they are 
powerless to control. See, e.g., Turney v. O'Toole, 898 F.2d 
1470 (10th Cir. 1990). Thus, the City committed itself to 
enforcing the injunction without question and without hesitation 
until directed to do otherwise by a court of law. It appears, 
however, that the Ilth Circuit’s strong opinion doubting the 
lawfulness of the injunction likewise casts doubt as to whether the 
City would be immune from furthEr enforcement of an order that 
has been so seriously questioned. This Court should decline to 
force the City into such potential legal exposure until such time as 
the apparent conflict between the opinions of this Court and the 
llth Circuit has been resolved. 


E-4 


6. In addition, the Clinic’s emergency motions are directed 
only to the City, although the McGregor injunction authorizes all 
law enforcement authorities to arrest those in violation of the 
injunction. It would be enormously unfair for this Court to grant 
the relief requested by the Clinic as to the City of Melbourne and 
to allow the other law enforcement authorities to escape both the 
legal liability and the other burdens imposed by an order of this 
Court. Indeed, the Clinic’s harsh portrayal of the City in the 
emergency motions is particularly unjust in that no other law 
enforcement authority has ever even attempted to enforce the 
injunctions, and it is the City alone that has undertaken the task. 


7. Finally, there is no authority for the imposition of the 
attorney’s fees and costs sanctions requested by the Clinic against 
the City, who is an innocent non-party law enforcement agency, 
who throughout merely attempted in good faith to follow the law 
as it best understood it. 


WHEREFORE, the City respectfully requests this Court to 
deny each and every request of the Clinic in its emergency 
motions. 


Respectfully requested, 

REINMAN, HARRELL, GRAHAM, 
MITCHELL & WATTWOOD, P.A. 
1825 S. Riverview Drive 
Melbourne, Florida 32901 
Telephone: (407) 724-4450 


/s/ James L. Reinman 
JAMES L. REINMAN 
Florida Bar No. 183537 


Attorneys for Appellee 


E-5 E-6 


CEKTIFICATE OF SERVICE Mathew D. Staver and Jeffery T. Kipi 
1900 Summit Tower Blvd., Suite 540 
| HEREBY CERTIFY that a true and correct copy of the Orlando, Florida 32810 


foregoing City of Melbourne’s Response to Emergency Motion has 
been furnished by U. S. Mail, postage prepaid, this 9th day of 
November, 1993, to the following: 


John Tanner and Jay A. Sekulow 
630 North Wild Olive Ave., Suite A 


Talbot D’ Alemberte 
215 South Monroe Street, Suite 601 
Tallahassee, Florida 32301 


Christopher J. Weiss 
Two S. Orange Avenue 
Orlando, Florida 32802 


Keith Tucci 
Post Office Box 1000037 
Palm Bay, Florida 32910 


Bruce Cadle 
701 Andrew Street, N.E. 
Palm Bay, Florida 32905 


Patrick Mahoney 

1345 N.E. Fourth Court 
Boca Raton, Florida 

and at: 

613 Second Street, N.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20002 


Randall Terry 
Rural Route 2, Box 196 
Harpursville, New York 13787-9536 


George Paulk 
1980 N. Atlantic Avenue, Suite 603 
Cocoa Beach, Florida 32931 


Daytona Beach, Florida 32118 


Peter Antonacci 

Gerald B. Curington 
Office of Attorney General 
The Capitol, Plaza Level 
Tallahassee, Florida 32399 


REINMAN, HARRELL, GRAHAM, 
MITCHELL & WATTWOOD, P.A. 
1825 S. Riverview Drive 
Melbourne, Florida 32901 
Telephone: (407) 724-4450 


/s/ James L. Reinman 
JAMES L. REINMAN 
Florida Bar No. 183537 


Attorneys for City of Melbourne 


