- 


| fuprems Cour, Ui. 


Pit. «. 2 
Ye-44 1 
0. 2S 4 WUL 2 1953 


IN THE 


a ‘* fr, ,s 
tee, iw jak BS 


—_ >= oe | + ~~ 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., ef al... 


Appellants, 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, et al., 


Appellees. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia 


JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT 


ROBERT D. JOFFE 

STUART W. GOLD 

STEPHEN S. MADSEN 
CRAVATH, SWAINE & MOORE 
Worldwide Plaza 
825 Eighth Avenue 
New York, NY 10019 
(212) 474-1000 


BRIAN CONBOY 

THEODORE C. WHITEHOUSE 
WILLKIE Farr & GALLAGHER 
Three Lafayette Center 
1155 21st St. N.W. 
Suite 600 
Washington, D.C. 20036-3384 


Counsel for Time Warner 


Entertainment Company, L.P. 


H. BARTOW Fark, III * 

JOEL I. KLEIN 
KLEIN, FARR, SMITH & 

TARANTO 

2445 M Street, N.W. 
Suite 225 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
(202) 775-0184 

Counsel for National Cable 
Television Association, Inc. 


Bruce D. SOKLER 

PETER KIMM, JR. 

Grecory A. LEWIs 
MINTZ, LEVIN, COHN, FERRIS 

GLOVSKY AND POPEO 

701 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Suite 900 
Washington, D.C. 20004-2608 
(202) 434-7300 


Counsel for Turner Broadcasting 
System, Inc., et al. 


* Counsel of Record 


(Additiona] Counsel Listed on Inside Cover) 


eos 
Wiisonm - Evrae Puintine Co.. inc. - 789-0096 - Wasrinctomn DOC 20001 


ALBERT G. LAUBER 

PETER VAN N. LocKWwoop 
CAPLIN & DRYSDALE 
One Thomas Circle, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 320-8000 

Counsel for Discovery 
Communications, Inc. and the 
Learning Channel, Inc. 


JOHN P. CoLe, Jr. 

JOHN D. SEIVER 

JOHN DAVIDSON THOMAS 
COLE, Raywip & LRAVERMAN 


1919 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 659-9750 


Counsel for Daniels 
Cablevision, Inc. 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether Congress, consistent with the First Amend- 
ment. may require that operators of cable contig 
tems devote channels to programmers favored y “d 
gress—i.e., local broadcast ee pen 
preferences of the operators and regardless of the e 
on other, unfavored programmers. 


(i) 


il ili 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS National Council of Semior Citizens 


Plaintifis: ” National Rura! Telecommunications (¢ ooperative 
Office of Communication of the United Church of 
Atlanta Interfaith Broadcasters. Inc. Christ 


Arts & Entertainment Network 
Black Entertainment Television, Inc. 


Paging Associates, Inc. 
The Public Broadcasting Service 


a 


Daniels Cablevision, Inc. Sherjan Broadcasting Co., Inc 
Discovery Communications, Inc. Triplett & Associates, Inc 

E! Entertainment Television, Inc. TV 14, Inc. 

Hearst ABC-Viacom Entertainment Services TV 58 St. Louis, Inc 
International Family Entertainment, Inc. United States of America 
The Learning Channel, Inc. | Zantech, Inc. 


National Cable Satellite Corporation 
National! Cable Television Association, Inc. 
National Interfaith Cable Coalition, Inc. 
QVC Network 

Time Warmer Entertainment Company, L.P. 
The Travel Channel, Inc. 

Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. 

USA Network 


Defendants: 


Association of America’s Public Television Stations 

Association of Independent Television Stations, Inc. 

Community Broadcasters Association 

Consumer Federation of America 

The Corporation for Public Broadcasting 

Sandra Engle 

Federal Communications Commission 

The International Association of Machinists and 
Aerospace Workers, AFL-CIO 

International Broadcasting Network 

The International Television Broadcasting, Inc. 

Morningstar Communications 

Nationa] Association of Broadcasters 


* Appellants’ Rule 29.1 disclosure statements are set forth in the 
Appendix to this Jurisdictiona! Statement at 1lla-17a. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTION PRESENTED ............................0..0..0..<-.. i 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 0. ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ...000 vi 
Ey Se TC 2 
JURISDICTION ee 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVI- 
SIONS — 2 
STATEMENT sensnsneineesccenmunmiee 2 


THE QUESTIONS ARE SUBSTANTIAL : 11 


CONCLUSION ; sarentenativcininneataatnemanitananantmite 29 


(v) 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 


Associated Press v. United States, 326 U.S. 1 
ES ee ee a eee 
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) . es 
Burson v. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. 1846 (1992) ae 
Century Communications Corp. v. FCC, 835 F.2d 

292 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 
1032 (1988) . sneen 
Church of the Lukumi Babalu Ave. tne.‘ v. . Cite of 
Hialeah, 61 U.S.L.W. 4587 (U.S. June 11, 1993) 
Rae Se ES Soe ee he cee 
City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 
I A 
City of Lakewood v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co.., 
486 U.S. 750 (1988) . Re SS Se Tae 
City of Los Angeles v. Preferred Communications, 
we ee 
Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., 111 S. Ct 2518 
ERE REPS Sat ee ae ae 
Columbia Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. Democratic 
Nat'l Comm., 412 U.S. 94 (1973) ......................... 
FCC wv. Midwest Video Corp., 440 U.S. 689 
EE RE an ae eo ne 
Harper & Row, Publishers, Ine. v. Nation Enters., 
471 U.S. 589 (1985) 
Home Boz Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 F.2d 9 (D.C. 
Cir.), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 829 (1977) _._._.. 
Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson, 348 U.S. 495 
(1952) : 
a vw. FCC, 958 F.2d $82 (D.C. Cir. 


U.S. 829 (1978) 


rm ee mm e ee 


Leathers v. Medlock, 111 S. Ct. 1438 (1991) .12, 14, 


Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547 
(1990) ....... 
Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. . Tornillo, 418 ‘U. 'S. 
241 (1974) . 
Minneapolis Star é Tribune Co. v. ‘Minnesota 
Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U.S. 575 (1983) ......... 


emmemnnennecssnsene podinens 17, 


..6, 9, 


17, 


14 


17 


Vil 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963) ....... 95 
NA. Pv. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886 
REESE eee eR ae ne ncn RRS aT 24 
National Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 319 
U.S. 190 (1943) .. me 11 
Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. : v. Public. Utils. ‘Comm’? n, 
Nee cmuciiieiduaniaiis 17 
Quincy Cable TV, Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434 
(D.C. Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1169 
eect cia ane aad 3,4,5 
Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 
ra ionenienin 23 
Riley v. National Fed'n of ‘the Blind ‘of North 
Carolina, Inc., 487 U.S. 781 (1988) —..............12, 17,19 
Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. _ FCC, 
492 U.S. 115 (1989) . —_— 24, 25 
Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 4 420 U. S. 
I eae ile 22 
Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 113 8. Ct. 
I a ae iceasianieas 28 
Walters v. National Ass'n of Radiation Survive: ors, 
A 24 


Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 US. 781 
REE ES ae ee ene 21 
Zauderer v. Office of ‘Disciplinary Counsel of Su- 


preme Court, 471 U.S. 62€ (1985) . i as 17 
Statutory & Congressional Materials 
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 _............. 7 
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Com- 
petition Act of 1992, § 23, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et 
_oe9. nistemmnieenend EE eae ee ee ee passim 
BO es 21 
Pub. L. No. 102-356 § 16(a), 106 Stat. 954, Aug. 
26, 1992, to be codified at 47 U.S.C. § 303 ..._.._... 21 
H.R. Rep. No. 628, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1992) ..6, 21, 26 
S. Rep. No. 92, 102d Cong., 1st Sess. (1991) ....... 21, 26 


viii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Other Matenals Page 


FCC Mass Media Bureau, Cable System Broadcast 
Signal Carriage Survey Report (Sept. 1, 1988) 
(filed by NAB as Attachment B to Affirmation 
Of Jack IN. GeOORAD) .ceccc-.ccccccsccrcemscccscsces+seeenee- 26 
In the Matter of the Implementation of the Cable 
Television Consumer Protection and Competi- 
tion Act of 1992 (Broadcast Signal Carriage 
Issues) Docket No. 92-259, released March 29, 


7 
1993 ; 
P. Areeda & H. Hovenkamp, Antitrust Law (199 ; 
Supp.) anil a 


IN THE 
Suprene Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1993 


No. 


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., ef al., 


. Appellants, 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, ef al., 
Appellees. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Columbia 


JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT 


Appellants, operators of cable television systems and 
suppliers of programming for cable television systems, 
appeal from the judgment of a three-judge district court 
holding that various provisions of the Cable Television 
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 
U.S.C. §§ 531 ef seq.)—in particular, those provisions 
compelling cable systems to devote more than one-third of 
their channels to the programming of commercial and 
noncommercial broadcast stations (47 U.S.C. §§ 534, 
535)—do not violate appellants’ rights to freedom of 
speech and freedom of the press under the First Amend- 
ment.’ 


1 Plaintiffs in five civil actions consolidated by the court below— 
including both cable operators and cable programmers—have joined 
in filing this Jurisdictiona! Statement. In doing so, the parties do 
not intend to waive their right to file separate briefs on the merits. 


“ 
OPINION BELOW 


The opinion of the three-judge United States District 
Court for the Distnmct of Columbia 1s reported at 819 
2) 


F. Supp. 32. It is reprinted in the Appendix to this Juris- 
dictional Statement at 1la-72a. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the district court was entered on 
April 8, 1993. Timely notices of appeal were filed in the 
district court on May 3, 1993. See J.S. App. 73a-8 1a. 


This Court has appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 28 
U.S.C. § 1253, which provides that “[e]xcept as other- 
wise provided by law, any party may appeal to the Su- 
preme Court from an order granting or denying . . . an 
interlocutory or permanent injuncuon in any civil action 

. . required by any Act of Congress to be heard and 
determined by a district court of three judges.” Section 
23 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992, 47 U.S.C. §555(c)(1), re- 
quires that challenges to sections 4 and 5 of the Act “be 
heard by a district court of three judges convened pur- 
suant to [28 U.S.C. § 2284].” 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


The First Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion provides in pertinent part: “Congress shall make no 
law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
A 


Relevant provisions of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 are reprinted in 
the Appendix to this Jurisdictional Statement at 82a-] 10a. 


STATEMENT 


Appellants brought this action before a three-judge dis- 
trict court seeking to enjoin enforcement of vanous pro- 
visions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act of 1992 (“the 1992 Cable Act”), 47 
U.S.C. §§ 531 et seq. Appellants’ pnncipal challenge was 


~ 
4 


directed at the so-called “must-carry” provisions, 47 
U.S.C. §§ 534, 535, which require that cable operators 
carry the programming of commercial and noncommer- 
cial broadcast stations. Appellants contended that the 
provisions violated appellants’ rights to freedom of speech 
and of the press under the First Amendment. The dis- 
trict court, by a 2-1] vote, upheld the provisions. 


l.a. Cable television is a medium for providing pro- 
gramming to television viewers. As one court of appeals 
has explained, a cable system, in addition to original pro- 
gramming, “offers local over-the-air broadcast signals 
captured by a strategically located master antenna, dis- 
tant broadcast signals, which are often imported via 
satellite, and non-broadcast signals transmitted exclu- 
sively to cable systems by satellite or microwave relay. 
The cable operator converts the signal received from these 
or other sources into an electronic impulse and delivers 
it to subscribers’ homes over a coaxial cable.” Quincy 
Cable TV, Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434, 1438-39 (D.C. 
Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1169 (1986). 


Cable television is not subject to the physica] limita- 
tions that have placed a finite upper limit on the number 
of broadcast stations possible in each local community: 
most, if not virtually all, communities have the room— 
on utility poles or below ground—to accommodate the 
construction of additional cable systems. See Home Box 
Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 F.2d 9, 45 (D.C. Cir.) (per 
curiam), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 829 (1977) (cable oper- 
ators not subject to physical scarcity as are broadcasters). 
Each cable operator, however. has limited capacity within 
its own system. For this and other reasons, cable opera- 
tors must exercise editorial discretion in choosing what 
programming to include and what programming to leave 
out. tailoring their program mix to meet viewer interests. 
In addition, cable operators must choose the channel posi- 
tion to be assigned to each programmer carried on the 
system and the terms on which that programmer will be 
offered to subscribers in an attempt to create the most 


4 
+ 


attractive package for consumers of news. information. 
and entertainment.* 


Cable programmers, in turn, must compete for a place 
on each cable system. At present, for example. there are 
more than 75 nonbroadcast providers of programming on 
a national basis to cable television operators. as well as 


numerous regional nonbroadcast providers of cable pro- 


gramming.* While television stations can, through use of 
the government-granted spectrum, reach most or all of the 
homes in their service areas through over-the-air trans- 
mission, Cable programming networks have no access to 
the airwaves. It is, therefore, of vital importance to 
cable programmers that they be selected for placement 
on one of the limited number of channels provided to 
viewers by each cable system and other multichannel pro- 
viders. Indeed, given the need for a critical mass of 
viewers, a cable programmer cannot survive if it fails 
to gain access 0 a significant number of cable systems. 


b. Beginning more than 30 years ago, the federal gov- 
ernment has repeatedly sought to dictate the choices made 
by cable operators with respect to programming, requir- 
ing them to carry local broadcast stations in preference 
to competing programming. See Quincy Cable TV, Inc. 


* Cable operators typically offer a “basic” tier of program services 
that al] subscribers receive. Additional tiers and services are then 
available on an optional basis. A decision to place programming 
within the basic tier thus directly controls whether all subscribers 
will view the programming for the minimum monthly charge or 
whether they must elect to add the programming at additional cost. 


*This number has risen sharply as the subscribership to cable 
television has increased. (In 1976, for example, there were four 
national cable program networks. Cable Television Developments, 
October 1992, at 7-A.) These programming sources include such 
well-recognized offerings as HBO, C-SPAN, ESPN, CNN, and the 
Discovery Channe), as wel] as recently-developed sources such as the 
Cartoon Network and the Sci-Fi Channel. In addition, cable opera- 
tors increasingly are developing their own programming for dis- 
tribution to their subscribers, as Time Warner Cable has done with 
New York 1, a 24-hour loca] news service produced and offered by 
its cable systems in the New York City area. 


5 


v. FCC, supra. In 1985, the Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia Circuit held that these must-carry 
rules violated the First Amendment rights of both cable 
programmers and cable operators. Pointing out that “the 
rules are explicitly designed to ‘favor|] certain classes of 
speakers over others,” 768 F.2d at 1451 (quoting Home 
Box Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 F.2d at 48), and that “[t]he 
rules coerce speech,” id. at 1452, the court determined 
that the asserted justifications for the rules did not support 
the degree of intrusion on First Amendment interests. 
The court found insufficient evidence that “an unregu- 
lated cable industry presents a serious threat to local 
broadcasting,” id. at 1459, and concluded that, in any 
event, the rules were “ ‘grossly’ overinclusive.” Jd. at 
1460. Although the purported basis for the rules was “to 
protect local broadcasting and not local broadcasters,” id., 
the court observed that “[t]he rules indiscriminately pro- 
tect each and every broadcaster regardless of the quan- 
tity of local service available in the community and ir- 
respective of the number of local outlets already carried 
by the cable operator.” Jd. 


The Commission thereafter redrafted the must-carry 
rules, and the court of appeals once more invalidated 
them, again emphasizing a lack of factual support. See 
Century Communications Corp. v. FCC, 835 F.2d 292 
(D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1032 (1988). 
Noting that “[t]he Commission relies heavily on its as- 
sumption that in the absence of must-carry rules, cable 
companies would drop local broadcasts,” id. at 303, the 
court found that “[e]xperience belies that assertion.” /d. 
Rather, the court stated, “during the 16 months that 
elapsed between Quincy Cable TV and the reimposition 
of the modified must-carry rules, cable companies gen- 
erally did not drop the loca] broadcast signals that they 
had been carrying prior to Quincy Cable TV.” Id. The 
court also pointed to separate reports by the Federal 
Trade Commission and the Justice Department conclud- 
ing “that the absence of must-carry would not harm local 


broadcasting.” /d. 


6 


~ 


_ The statute here at issue was enacted by Congress 
in 1992. In terms even more sweeping than the earlier 
rules. it compels cable operators to carry a specific num- 
ber of loca] broadcast stations—depending upon the num- 
ber of channels on the cable system—regardless of the 
preferences of operators and viewers and regardless of the 
effects on other programmers. Although Congress made 
findings with respect to economic factors such as a “shift 
in market share” from broadcast to cable television {sec 
Findings € 13), it made clear, as well, that the must- 
carry provisions were intended to promote “unique non- 
commercial, educational programming” (id. 4 7), assure 
“programming that is responsive to the needs and inter- 
ests of the local community” (id. € 8(B)), support “local 
origination of programming” (id. € 10), and preserve 
local broadcast stations as “an important source of local 
news and public affairs programming” (id. € 11).* 


The principal must-carry provisions are contained in 
two sections of the Act: Section 4, which deals with car- 
riage of commercial stations, and Section 5, which deals 
with carriage of noncommercial stations. Section 4(b) 
of the Act requires that cable systems with more than 12 
usable activated channels—the vast majority of cable sys- 
tems throughout the country—allocate up to one-third of 
their channels for the carriage of local commercial tele- 
vision stations. See 47 U.S.C. § 534(b)(1)(B); see also 
id. § 534(c) (requirements for carriage of low power 
television stations). Systems with 12 or fewer channels 
but with more than 300 subscribers must carry at least 
three local commercial television stations. Id. § 534 
(b)(1)(A). 


4 These findings appear in numbered paragraphs in Section 2(a) 
of the 1992 Act, reprinted in 47 U.S.C. § 521 Historical and Statu- 
tory Notes and in the Appendix, infra, at 82a-87a. 

The committee reports confirm the focus on the content of pro- 
gramming, asserting that if broadcasters are not carried the result 
will be “reductions in local news, public affairs, and other public 
{interest programs... .” H.R. Rep. No. 628, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. 
61-52 (1992). See also id. at 69 (naming with approval severa! 
specific programs offered on public television stations). 


- 


Additional channels—over and above the one-third 
cap of Section 4(b)—must be devoted to carriage of edu- 
cational television stations under Section 5(b) of the Act. 
That section requires that, subject to certain limitations, 
a cable operator shall carry “any qualified local noncom- 
mercial educational television station requesting carriage.” 
In particular, cable systems with more than 36 channels 
must show the programming of all noncommercial broad- 
cast stations requesting carriage, unless the programming 
of a Station “substantially duplicates” the programming of 
another station carried by the system. See In the Matter 
of the Implementation of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1 992 (Broadcast 
Signal Carriage Issues) Docket No. 92-259, released 
March 29, 1993, € 19 (defining “substantially duplicates” 
to mean a 50% overlap in programming). Moreover, the 
Act mandates carriage of any qualified educational sta- 
tion carried as of March 29, 1990, regardless of the 
channel capacity of the system. 


The effect of these provisions, taken together, is Sig- 
nificant. For a cable system of 36 channels, the Act 
requires carriage of up to 12 local broadcast stations and 
three educational stations—in essence asserting govern- 
ment control over more than 40 percent of its channels.® 
Furthermore, the Act interferes directly with decisions of 
the cable operator about the channels on which to place 
the stations (see 47 U.S.C. §§ 534(b) and 535(a)) and 
mandates their inclusion in the basic tier (id. § 543 
(b) (7) (i) )—which must, by law, be provided to all sub- 
scribers before they can purchase any other tier of pro 
gramming (id. § 543(b)(7)(A)). As & result, the 
broadcast stations not only benefit from mandatory car- 


8 These requirements are in addition to those of the Cable Com- 
munications Policy Act of 1984 (“the 1984 Cable Act”), which re 
quires cable operators to relinquish editorial and business control 
over (1) an unlimited number of channels (to be determined by 
franchising authorities) for public, educational] and governmental! 
access channels (Section 611(b)) and (2) up to 15% of capacity 
for leased access by persons unaffiliated with the operator (Section 
R19 (hd 11)). 


8 


riage. regardless of interest in the community, but from 
mandatory carriage to all subscribers in a_ preferred 
position.® 


3. A divided three-judge district court, convened pur- 
suant to Section 23 of the 1992 Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 
§ 555(c)(1)), upheld the must-carry requirements against 
appellants’ First Amendment challenge.’ The mayjonrty 
first took the view that Congress was regulating *‘a mar- 
ket in a commercial commodity . . ., not a market in 
speech.” J.S. App. 12a. Regarding the law as “simply 
industry-specific antitrust and fair trade practice regula- 
tory legislation,” id. at 13a, the court said that “to the 
extent First Amendment speech is affected at all, it is 
simply a byproduct of the fact that video signals have no 
other function than to convey information.” Jd. Indeed, 
despite the fact that the must-carry provisions dictate 
what programming cable operators must place on their 
systems, the court concluded that the provisions are “‘un- 
related (in all but the most recondite sense) to the con- 
tent of any messages that these embattled cable operators, 
broadcasters, and programmers have in contemplation to 
deliver.” Id. 


The district court did acknowledge that it was too late 
to reconsider the proposition “[t]hat the First Amend- 
ment is to some extent implicated whenever a govern- 


*The must-arry provisions, in turn, are linked to an additional] 
eet of provisions: the retransmission consent provisions, set forth 
tn Section 6 of the Act. See 47 U.S.C. § 825(b). Having mandated 
carriage of signals by cable operators, the Act nonetheless allows 
commercia) broadcasters the alternative of refusing to allow car- 
riage without payment. Under the Act, loca) commercial) television 
broadcast stations may elect either to assert their rights of manda- 
tory carriage or to bar cable reception of their signals absent con- 
sideration satisfactory to the station. 


7 The court also rejected, without comment, appellants’ challenges 
to the tiering and channe) positioning requirements and, with brief 
comment (J.S. App. 7a n.10), appellants’ challenge to the retrans- 
mission consent provisions. In the event that this Court reverses 
the decision below with respect to the must-carry provisions, we 
believe that these other issues should he remanded to the district 
court for further consideration. 


Q 


ment endeavors to regulate a cable industry component.’ 


JS. App. 13a. In keeping with us belief that the musi 
Carry requirements were “essenually economic reculk 
tion” (id. at 13a), however. the court refused to subject 


them to strict judicial scrutiny. See id. at 15a-l6a (pro 
visions must only “satisfy the criteria established in 
[United States v.) O'Brien|, 391 U.S. 367 (1968)] and 
its progeny”). Rejecting the argument of cable operators 
that strict scrutiny is required for laws compelling speech. 
the court held that “[a] compulsory speech requirement. 
Or One imposing upon the discretion of a speaker to say 
only what he wishes, it appears, is to be strictly scruti- 
nized only if it appears that the government has pre- 
scribed the content—either the message or the subject 
matter—of the speech to be spoken.” J.S. App. 16a 
(emphasis added). The court similarly rejected the argu- 
ment, advanced by cable programmers. that strict scrutiny 
was necessary for laws impeding some speakers in order 
to advance other speakers, stating that “[s]peaker par- 
tiality alone . . ., absent evidence that the government's 
distinction between groups of speakers is related to what 
the speakers are saying, is insufficient to trigger strict 
scrutiny.” Jd. at 18a. Finally, although not entirely clear 
on the point. the court appeared to conclude that, because 
of “certain characteristics unique to the way the industry 
has evolved and is presently structured,” id. at 20a, it 
was appropriate to give “relaxed First Amendment scru- 
uny of the must-carry provisions even if marginally 
content-related ....” Jd. at 72a n.25. 


The court then determined that, under its more lenient 
Standard of review, the requirements were adequately 
justified. Even though appellants had pointed out that 
local broadcast stations had increased in number since 
invalidation of the pnor must-carry rules—indicating that 
the system of local broadcasting was still not in any 
jeopardy (see Century Communications Corp. v. FCC, 
835 F.2d at 303)—the district court responded that 
“Congress . . . did not agree.” J.S App. 24a. Because 
Congress had assembled evidence “demonstrating, to its 
[own] satisfaction” that cable operators posed a threat to 


10 


local broadcast stations. id. at 24a-25a, the court believed 
that “the deference [it] should accord to the factfinding 
abilities of the nation’s legislature” required it to “con- 
clude that the danger perceived by Congress is real and 
substantial.” Jd. at 26a (citations omitted). The court 
extended a comparable degree of deference with respect 
to the need for “prophylactic meas res,” id. at 27a, say- 
ing that it was “unwilling to second-guess Congress’ de- 
termination that the must-carry provisions are necessary 
to accomplish its objective.” /d." 


Judge Williams dissented. He noted that the must-carry 
provisions (unlike the leased access provisions enacted in 
1984) “extend the privilege of access only to a special 
class of unaffiliated programmers—local commercial and 
non-commercial television stations,” J.S. App. 5la, and 
that “Congress rested its decision to promote these sta- 
tions in part, but quite explicitly, on a finding about their 
content.” Jd.; see also id. at 53a (“Here . . . the bene- 
ficiaries are local stations that are required by govern- 
ment to include specific content that the government has 
deemed especially worthy’). Turning to the proper stand- 
ard of judicial review, Judge Williams concluded that 
“the proper test is strict scrutiny.” Jd. at 57a. He reasoned 
that “the statute is content-based under controlling prece- 
dent. The must-carry provisions mandate speech: they 
require cablecasters to carry the speech of loca] broadcast 
stations.” Jd. at 54a. Although Judge Williams noted 
that less exacting scrutiny was given to general laws reg- 
ulating conduct and having only an “incidental” effect on 
speech, J.S. App. 54a, he stated: “The treatment of 
First Amendment values as itrelevant cannot be trans- 
ported to the context of a burden imposed on one set of 
speakers for the direct and explicit advantage of = I*mitec 
class of their competitors—a class whose programminec 


*In a concurring opinion, Judge Sporkin termed appellants’ at- 
tempts to invoke First Amendment rights “mischievous.” J.S. App. 
47a. Judge Sporkin stated that “[i]t is inconceivable that our 
forefathers at any time contemplated that the First Amendment 
would be used to regulate an industry that came into existence 
over 150 years after the Bill of Rights was adopted.” /d. 


1] 


must. as a matter of law. include content of a type spect- 
hed by the government.” /d. at 57a. 


Judge Williams then determined that the interests ad- 
vanced in support of the law were inadequate to justify 
it. With respect to the asserted interest in “promoting 
diversity of views,” J.S. App. 58a, Judge Williams found 
that “the fit between the interest and the regulation is 
extremely weak.” Jd. He observed, inter alia, that “[bJe- 
cause cablecasters now Carry the vast majority of local sta- 
uuons . . ., the must-carry rules may have little effect, but 
where they have any, it will be only to replace the mix 
chosen by cablecasters—whose livelihoods depend largely 
on satisfying audicnce demand—with a mix derived from 
congressional dictate.” J.S. App. 58a. With respect to 
the asserted interest in “the preservation of local broad- 
casting,” id. at 60a. Judge Williams expressed doubt that 
the goal of promoting local programming would qualify 
as a legitimate compelling interest, given that government 
typically cannot select the issues to be communicated to 
the public and given that less restrictive means (like 
direct subsidies) are available to Congress. And, while 
he “assume[d] . . . as an abstract matter” that the intcr- 
est im preserving access to free television is compelling, 
he found “no evidence that this access is in jeopardy.” 
J.S. App. 61a-62a; see also id. at 65a (“‘we have nothing 
to connect the limited evidence of cable operators’ actual 
conduct with any inference that a threat to broadcasting 
is imminent or serious” ).* 


THE QUESTIONS ARE SUBSTANTIAL 


This case involves a law that requires businesses pro- 
viding “news. information, and entertainment” to the 


* Judge Williams also considered, and rejected, the notion that 
cable television should be given the lesser degree of protection 
afforded to broadcasters. which make use of the scarce electro- 
magnetic spectrum (see Nationa! Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 
319 U.S. 190 (1943)). In light of leas restrictive alternatives like 
leased access channels, Judge Williams saw no basis on which “Con- 
gress can constitutionally deny cabic operators the ordinary rights 
of any First Amendment speaker.” J.S. App. 7la. 


1° 
public, see Leathers v. Medlock, 111 S. Ct. 1438, 1442 
(199]). to include programming selected by the govern. 


ment in that material. By its terms, the must-cerry stat- 
ute orders all cable operators to select. as part of their 
mix of programming. the material offered on local broad- 
Cast stations, regardless of whether the operators would 
select that material voluntarily and regardless of whether 
other programmers are thereby prevented from being 
heard. This interference with speech is not the effect of 
applying a general law regulating the activities of all busi- 
nesses—whether or not engaged in providing speech to 
the public—nor is it the effect of applying a neutral law 
regulating the time. place, and manner of speech. Rather, 
it is the result of a deliberate, focused effort by Congress 
to control the editorial choices made by cable operators— 
in order to assure that the programming expressly pre- 
ferred by Congress (that of local broadcast stations) will 
gain the largest possible audience. The district court. 
refusing to subject the law to exacting scrutiny under the 
First Amendment, sustained the law, holding that it was 
“essentially economic regulation.” J.S. App. 13a. 


This conclusion, and many of the legal principles an- 
nounced in reaching it, reflect a material departure from 
traditional protections afforded to freedom of speech and 
of the press. Although government may subject busi- 
nesses engaged in speech to laws of general applicability 
without provoking strict judicial scrutiny, it is a different 
matter when government singles out the press (or part of 
the press) for special regulation and when that regulation 
gives the government power to contro] the content of 
speech. See Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minne- 
sota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U.S. 575 (1983). More- 
over, contrary to the views of the district court, there is 
no basis for saying that either the right of cable operators 
not to speak—the constitutional equal of the right to 
speak (see Riley v. National Fed'n of the Blind of North 
Carolina, Inc., 487 U.S. 781 (1988) )—or the richt of 
operators and programmers to be free of government-man- 
dated discrimination turns upon whether the government 


13 
compels the carriage of prescribed messages rather than 
the speech of particular speakers favored by the govern- 
ment. Yet, relying on these unfounded doctrines and sug- 
gesting that cable television 1s less deserving of First 
Amendment protection than other media, the court below 
engaged in only a highly deferential review of the asserted 
justifications for the must-carry law, declaring that “‘[f]ed- 
eral courts do not ordinarily review the adequacy of the 
record before Congress to support the laws it enacts.” 
J.S. App. 15a. 


These issues are substantial and of widespread impor- 
tance. With the exception of broadcasters—whose rights 
are limited by the unique need to allocate the scarce fre- 
quencies of the electromagnetic spectrum—no member of 
the press has ever been subjected to a targeted law requir- 
ing it to devote a significant percentage of its capacity 
to speech selected by the government. Nor has this Court 
ever suggested that it 1s permissible for government to 
dictate that certain speakers be given preferred positions 
in the marketplace for speech at the expense of other 
competing speakers. Yet Congress, through the must- 
carry law, has done just those things and done so on the 
basis of a factual record that, viewed without the extraor- 
dinary deference given by the district court, makes quite 
clear that local broadcast stations are in no immediate 
danger of extinction at all. The decision below thus 
marks a dangerous and wrong-headed expansion of gov- 
ernment power over speech. Full review by this Court is 
necessary to correct it. 


1. The distnct court got off on the wrong foot by 
treaung the must-carry law as “simply industry-specific 
antitrust and fair trade practice regulatory legislation,” 
J.S. App. 13a, with at most a tangential effect on speech. 
See id. (“to the extent First Amendment speech is affected 
at all, it is simply a byproduct of the fact that video 
signals have no other function than to convey informa- 
tion”). Although the district court apparently thought 
that this characicrizauon jusuficd a Ienient standard of 


| 4 


judicial review, the opposite 1s true: regulation singling 
out the press, and giving government the opportunity to 
dictate the content of its speech to the public. merits the 
most rigorous scrutiny. 


This Court has recognized that cable television “is 
engaged in ‘speech’ under the First Amendment, and is, in 
much of its operation, part of the ‘press. ” Leathers v. 
Medlock, 111 S. Ct. at 1442. “[T)hrough original pro- 
cramming or by exercising editorial discretion over which 
stauons Or programs to include in its repertoire, [a cable 
operator] seeks to communicate messages on a wide vari- 
ety of topics and in a wide variety of formats.” Ciry of 
Los Angeles v. Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 
U.S. 488, 494 (1986). See also FCC v. Midwest Video 
Corp., 440 U.S. 689, 707 (1979) (cable operators must 
exercise “a significant amount of editorial discretion re- 
garding what their programming will include”). In that 
cable operators create and select programming to be pro- 
vided to subscribers, “[c]Jable television partakes of some 
of the aspects of speech and the communication of ideas 
as do the traditional enterprises of newspaper and book 
publishers, public speakers, and pamphleteers.” Ciry of 
Los Angeles v. Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 U.S. 
at 494. Cable programmers, in turn, provide much of 
the “news, information, and entertainment,” Leathers v. 
Medlock, 111 S. Ct. at 1442, that cable operators elect to 
provide to their subscribers. 


The fact that cable operators and programmers are 
part of the press does not mean, of course, that the First 
Amendment exempts their business activities from regula- 
uon. The press enjoys no “constitutional sanctuary” from 
economic regulation, Associated Press v. United States, 
326 U.S. 1, 7 (1945), and regulation of business prac- 
tices is not typically reviewed under exacting First Amend- 
ment standards. But that relaxed scrutiny has tradition- 
ally been applied to, and is only appropriate for, regu- 
lation carned out pursuant to general laws-—i.e.. laws 
applicable to businesses generally, not just to the press. 


15 


Thus, while observing that it “hald] long upheld economic 
regulation of the press,” Alinneapolis Star & Tribune Co. 
v. Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U.S. at 583. this 
Court has expressly noted that “[t]he cases approving 
such economic regulation . . . emphasized the general 
applicability of the challenged regulation to all busi- 
nesses.” 460 U.S. at 583. See also Cohen v. Cowles 
Media Co., 111 §S. Ct. 2513, 2518 (1991) (reviewing 
“decisions holding that generally applicable laws do not 
offend the First Amendment simply because their enforce- 
ment against the press has incidental effects on its ability 
to gather and report the news”). The requirement of 
“general applicability” acts as an inherent, essential check 
against the improper use of government power against 
the press: as the Court pointed out in the context of tax- 
ation of the press, “we need not fear that a government 
will destroy a selected group of taxpayers by burdensome 
taxation if it must impose the same burden on the rest 
of its constituency.” Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. vy. 
Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U.S. at 585 (citing 
Railway Express Agency, Inc. v. New York, 336 US. 
106, 112-13 (1949) (Jackson, J., concurring) ). 


That inherent check is wholly absent, however, when 
government singles out the ~»ess for special regulation. In 
those circumstances, the cecision to subject only the press 
to particular regulation necessarily raises the concern 
that Congress is not merely engaged in “economic regu- 
lation” but, rather, is employing legislation as a means of 
allowing it to achieve the largely forbidden goal of con- 
trolling what is said in the press. As the Court has said, 
“difierential treatment, unless justified by some special 
characteristic of the press, suggests that the goal of the 
regulation is not unrelated to suppression of expression, 
and such a goal is presumptively unconsututional.” Muin- 
neapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of 
Revenuc, 460 U.S. at 585. See also Church of the Lu- 
kumi Babalu Ayc, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 61 U.S.L.W. 
4587, 4593 (U.S. June 11, 1993) (No. 91-948) (strik- 
ing down law under free exercise clause and indicating 


16 


that, where the “general applicability requirement” is at 
issue, there are “parallels” between the free exercise and 
speech and press clauses). Although it is enough that a 
targeted law may lead to indirect interference with speech 
(e.2., the threat of more burdensome taxation in Minneap- 
olis Star), the must-carry law embodies direct interfer- 
ence: it purposefully discriminates by enhancing the mes- 
sage of those holding broadcast licenses to the detriment 
of other speakers. Whether framed as “economic regula- 
tion” or not, that targeted effort should be upheld only 
if it is “ ‘necessary to serve a compelling state interest 
and... is narrowly drawn to achieve that end.’” Burson 
vy. Freeman, 112 S. Ct. 1846, 1851 (1992) (quoting 
Perry Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass'n, 460 


U.S. 37, 45 (1983) ). 


2. Although the district court held that the must-carry 
law was “essentially economic regulation,” J.S. App. 13a, 
it ultimately acknowledged (albeit grudgingly) “[t)hat the 
First Amendment is to some extent implicated whenever 
a government endeavors to regulate a cable industry com- 
ponent,” id., finding it “a proposition now too well-estab- 
lished to reconsider.” Jd. The court then went on, how- 
ever, to devalue the First Amendment interests at stake, 
finding hitherto unknown limitations on the right not to 
speak under government compulsion and the right to be 
free of government-compelied discrimination in the mar- 
ketplace for speech. These limitations—applicable by 
their terms to all members of the press, not just to cable 
operators and programmers—are unprecedented and ill- 
founded. 


a. This Court has recently made clear that, while 
“(tJhere is certainly some difference between compelled 
speech and compelled silence, . . . in the context of pro- 
tected speech, the difference is without constitutional sig- 
nificance, for the First Amendment guarantees ‘freedom 
of speech,’ a term necessarily comprising the decision of 
both what to say and what nor to say.” Riley v. National 


17 


Fed'n of the Blind, 487 U.S. at 796-97: see Harper & Row 
Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539. 559 
(1985). Thus, along with the familiar right not to be cen- 
sored, “[t)here is necessarily, and within suitably defined 
areas, 4 concomitant freedom nor to speak publicly, one 
which serves the same ultimate end as freedom of speech 
in its affirmative aspect.’” Jd. at 559 (quoting Estate of 
Hemingway vy. Random Housc, Inc., 23 N.Y.2d 341, 348, 
296 N.Y.S.2d 771, 776, 244 N.E.2d 250, 255 (1968) ). 
This freedom, by its terms, is not limited to particular 
speakers or particular speech: “all speech inherently in- 
volves choices of what to say and what to leave unsaid.” 
Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Utils. Comm'n, 475 
U.S. 1, 11 (1986) (plurality opinion) ."” 


The right not to speak is, likewise, an inseparable part 
of freedom of the press. This Court has expressed its 
longstanding concern about any “compulsion exerted by 
government On a newspaper to print that which it would 
not otherwise print,” Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. 
Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241, 256 (1974), noting that “[t]he 
clear implication” of its prior cases was “that any such 
compulsion to publish that which ‘ “reason” tells them 
Should not be published’ is unconstitutional.” Jd. (quot- 
ing Associated Press v. United States, 326 U.S. at 20 
n.18). Although the law at issue in Tornillo—a stat- 
ute requiring newspapers to print replies by political can- 
didates to criticism in their pages—was defended on the 
ground that it would provide newspaper readers with a 
greater diversity of views, the Court nonetheless con- 
cluded that “[t]he choice of material to go into a news- 
paper, and the decisions made as to limitations on the 
size and content of the paper, and treatment of public 


1°The Court has allowed somewhat greater latitude for laws 
compelling statements in the area of commercial! speech. See, ¢.¢., 
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court, 471 
U.S. 626 (1985). It is clear, however, that the programming on 
cable television may not generally be treated as commercial speech. 
See Leathers v. Afediock, 111 S. Ct. at 1442 (“[cJable television 
provides to its subscribers news, information, and entertainment”). 


18 


issues and public officials—whether fair or unfair—con- 
stitute the exercise of editorial control and judgment. It 
has yet to be demonstrated how governmental regulation 
of this crucial process can be exercised consistent with 
First Amendment guarantees of a free press as they have 
evolved to this ume.” 418 U.S. at 258. 


Notwithstanding these established principles, the dis- 
trict court declined to give close scrutiny to the must- 
carry requirements, announcing that “[a] compulsory 
speech requirement, or one imposing upon the discretion 
of a speaker to say only what he wishes, it appears, is to 
be strictly scrutinized only if it appears that the govern- 
ment has prescribed the content—either the message or 
the subject matter—of the speech to be spoken.” J.S. 
App. 16a (emphasis added). But this novel limitation 
cannot be squared with the most basic notions of freedom 
of speech. If full protection under the First Amendment 
depended upon whether “the government has prescribed 
the content—either the message or the subject matter— 
of the speech to be spoken,” id., then it would follow that 
the government, without strict judicial review, could direct 
every newspaper to commit a section of its pages to the 
publication of materia] submitted by particular writers, or 
compel bookstores to carry a specified amount of works 
published by “local” authors, or movie theatres to show 
films produced by designated movie studios. Under the 
theory adopted by the district court, none of those man- 
dates would dictate the “message or subject matter” of the 
speech, yet each would cut deeply into the right of news- 
papers, booksellers, and movie theatres to choose what 
they will offer to the public. The freedom not to speak 
under “compulsion exerted by government” (Miami Her- 
ald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. at 256) 1s a 
freedom from the compulsion itself: it does not come and 
go depending upon the particular speech to be compelled. 
See Columbia Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. Democratic Nat'l 
Comm., 412 U.S. 94, 12425 (1973) (“[flor better or 
for worse, editing is what editors are for; and editing 1s 
selection and choice of material”). 


19 


The illogic of the district court's new rule is demon- 
Strated, in fact, by the law at issue here. Whatever face 
Congress may put upon it, the fact remains that, by 
ordering cable operators to distribute the speech of cer- 
tain broadcast stations, Congress is changing the nature 
of the speech provided by cable operators to their sub- 
scribers: “[MJandating speech that a speaker would not 
otherwise make necessarily alters the content of the 
speech,” Riley v. National Fed'n of the Blind, 487 U.S. 
at 795, and, for that reason, laws compelling speech 
are necessarily considered “as a content-based regulation 
of speech.” Jd. at 795. Thus, even though the prescrip- 
tion of speech here is ostensibly defined in terms of the 
speakers, rather than the speech itself, the government 
nevertheless is exerting direct control over the content of 
speech. That interference is properly subject to strict 
judicial review. See id. 


b. The district court also lessened the protections 
against actions by government that discriminate against 
some speakers in order to promote the speech of others. 
The must-carry law, by its terms, creates two classes of 
speech: the speech of local broadcast stations, which is 
guaranteed access to certain cable channels, and the 
speech of cable programmers and other speakers, which 
must compete for access to a proportionately diminished 
number of channels. But “the concept that government 
may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in 
order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly 
foreign to the First Amendment... .” Buckley v. Valeo, 
424 U.S. 1, 48-49 (1976). As a consequence, “distin- 
guishing among types of speech requires that the statute 
be subjected to strict scrutiny.” Burson v. Freeman, 112 
S. Ct. at 1855. 


The district court, however, again refused to apply 
Strict scrutiny to the must-carry law, declaring that 
“ “speaker-partial’ regulations, or those that purportedly 
favor one group of speakers at the expense of others, .. . 
are not subject to strict scrutiny unless they are content- 


20 


based.” J.S. App. 17a. See also id. at 18a (“Speaker 
paruality alone, however, absent evidence that the gov 
ernment’s distinction between groups of speakers 1s re- 
lated to what the speakers are saying, 1s insufficient to 
trigger strict scrutiny.”). But this narrow reading of the 
doctrine against discrimination appears to start from an 
assumption that it is normally acceptable for the govern- 
ment to decide which speakers should be heard and which 
should not. That notion gets matters precisely back- 
wards: in fact, except when government is itself funding 
speech through grants or subsidies, it is presumptively in- 
valid for the government to decide who may speak and 
who may not. “ ‘[TJhe constitutional right of free expres- 
sion is . . . intended to remove governmental restraints 
from the arena of public discussion, putting the decision 
as to what views shall be voiced largely into the hands of 
each of us... .’” Leathers v. Medlock, 111 S. Ct. at 
1444 (quoting Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15, 24 
(1971)). Absent compelling reasons, therefore, it is sim- 
ply not the business of government to reorder the private 
marketplace for speech, commanding that certain favored 
speakers be given preferred access to their listeners and 
other disfavored speakers be left to fend for themselves. 
Whether the government legislates discrimination because 
it prefers certain speech, or just because it prefers certain 
speakers, does not change the illegitimate nature of the 
intrusion.” 

In any event, the refusal of the district court to apply 
strict scrutiny was mistaken even under its own novel 
test, because the preference for local broadcasters embod- 
ied in the must-carry provisions is plainly “content- 
based.” In enacting the must-carry law, Congress ex- 
pressly sought to ensure dissemination of speech that 


11 As Judge Williams pointed out in his dissent: “Given the 
finite number of cable channels, replacement of the cablecaster's 
choice of programs with those of loca) broadcasters suppresses the 
alternative programs as completely as if Congress had ordered them 
shut down; there is nothing ‘incidental’ [see O’Brien, 391 U.S. at 
876-77} about the burden.” J.S. App. 65a (footnote omitted). 


2] 
“educaties]” citizens in a manner endorsed by the gov 
ernment. Findings © 7 (noncommercial stations). Simi 
larly. Congress deemed local broadcast stations entitled 
to preference because of its belief that they present “loca! 
news and public affairs programming and other loca! 
broadcast services critical to an informed electorate.” Jd 
€ 11. See also S. Rep. No. 92, 102d Cong., Ist Sess. 59 
(1991) (expressing concern that failure of broadcasters 
will reduce “local public service programming” and “lead 
to diminished diversity of opinion”); H.R. Rep. No. 628, 
102d Cong., 2d Sess. 64 (1992) (same). As Judge Wil- 
liams pointed out, Congress acted to promote the speech 
of local broadcasters—at the direct expense of cable 
programmers—because the government has deemed the 
specific content of broadcasters’ speech to be “especially 
worthy.” J.S. App. 53a (Williams. J.. dissenting). It 
thus cannot be said that the purposes of the provisions 
are “unrelated to the content of expression.” or that the 
Carriage requirements are “ ‘justified without reference to 
the content of the regulated speech.’"” Ward v. Rock 
Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989) (citation 
omitted ) .” 


c. The district court also referred, in a footnote, to 
“its conclusion that contextual factors unique to cable 
require relaxed First Amendment scrutiny of the must- 
Carry provisions even if marginally content-related ... .” 
J.S. App. 22a n.25: see id. at 20a (listing characteristics 
“unique to the way the industry has evolved and is pres- 
ently structured”). But, while this Court has said that 


12 While Congress did not mention the fact, it is worth noting 
that the class of programming favored by Congress is the same 
programming over which Congress exercises the greatest degree of 
control. Congress not only appropriates funds to support noncom- 
mercial broadcast stations; it also imposes, in exchange for the 
free award of scarce broadcast licenses, legislative requirements on 
the programming of commercial! broadcast stations. See, e.g., 47 
U.S.C. § 303b(a)(2) (children's programming); Pub. L No. 102- 
356 § 16(a), 106 Stat. 954, Aug. 26, 1992, to be codified at 47 U.S.C. 
§ 303 (Indecent Programming Restrictions). 


les 


-_ = 


“{eJach medium of expression must be assessed for 
First Amendment purposes by standards suited to it, for 
each may present its own problems,” Southeastern Promo- 
tions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 557 (1975), it has 
emphasized that “the basic principles of freedom of 
speech and the press, like the First Amendment's com- 
mand, do not vary. Those principles . . . make freedom 
of expression the rule.” Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson, 
343 U.S. 495, 503 (1952). Indeed, the district court 
itself noted that, the maxim about different media not. 
withstanding, this Court “has infrequently invoked unique 
media characteristics to justify relaxed scrutiny of 
content-based regulations.” J.S. App. 21a n.24. It would 
seem to go almost without saying, therefore, that. what- 
ever differences may exist among various media, any 
categorical dilution of First Amendment rights is to be 
undertaken only under compelling circumstances. 


There is nothing in the nature of cable television as a 
medium of communication—and nothing identified by the 
court below—that would justify a watering-down of its 
First Amendment nghts. Although the district court cor- 
rectly noted that cable operators (unlike many members 
of the press) commonly make special use of public rights- 
of-way,” see J.S. App. 20a, perhaps suggesting an analogy 
to use of frequencies by broadcasters, the circumstances 
are, in fact, very different. The justification for greater 
regulation of broadcast licensees is not simply that they 
make use of public property (i.e.. the airwaves) or that 
it would be inconvenient or burdensome for the govern- 
ment to allow duplicative access to those airwaves: it is 
that it would be impossible to allow duplicative access. 


18 The use of public property or rights-of-way, in and of itself, 
would not seem a promising basis for justifying laws dictating the 
content of speech. For example, even if a city could refuse to allow 
any newsboxes on its streets, it would not be able to grant permis- 
sion subject to a requirement that the favored newspapers publish 
materia! approved by the City. See City of Lakewood v. Plain 
Dealer Publishing Co., 486 U.S. 750 (1988); City of Cincinnati v. 
Discovery Network, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 1505 (1993). 


As this Court has explained. “only a uny fraction of 1 
with resources and intelligence can hope to communica: 
by radio at the same time if intelligible communication | 
to be had.” Red Lion Broadcastine Co. v. FCC. 395 US 
367, 388 (1969). No one could credibly arcue that th: 
same problem exists in the cable industry. Home Box 
Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 F.2d at 46 (“there is no readily 
apparent barrier of physical or electrical interference to 
operation of a number of cable systems in a given local 
ity”). Cable operators’ ability to speak—like that of 
fledging newspapers—is limited by economic concerns. 
not physical ones.”* 


It would be a step of enormous gravity to hold that 
the protections afforded by the First Amendment apply 
with less force to an emerging member of the media. 
especially one to whom the unique conditions of spectrum 
scarcity do not pertain. To the extent that cable televi- 
sion differs in some respects from newspapers, magazines. 
movie theatres and other traditional members of the press, 
those differences can be taken into account in determining 
whether government has demonstrated an overriding in- 
terest in the particular regulation at issue. They should 
not, however, provoke a wholly new standard of scrutiny 


** None of the other factors mentioned by the district court justi- 
fies distinguishing cable television from those media fully protected 
by the First Amendment. For example, it is hardiy distinctive that 
cable television competes for advertising; Dewspapers and maga- 
tines do the same. Nor is diminished constitutiona) protection 
warranted because there is commonly only one cable operator in a 
given locality. Most towns have only one movie theatre and. as the 
Court noted in Tornillo, most communities are served by only one 
daily newspaper. 418 US. at 249 n.13. Indeed, the proponents of 
an enforced right of access in Tornilio pointed to “dominant fea- 
tures of a press that has become noncompetitive and enormously 
powerful,” manifested by such characteristics as “[c}hains of news- 
papers, national newspapers, nationa! wire and news services. and 
one-newspaper towns” and a “monopoly controlled by the owners of 
the market” (id. at 249, 251). But the Court held that a!! such 
indicia of economic concentration were insufficient to uphold com- 
pelied access to the press or to justify governmental! intrusion upon 
the editorial function. /d. at 256, 258. 


24 


under the First Amendment, permanently ulted in favor 
of more expansive government regulation and against 
full-fledged freedom of speech. And, in any event, there 
is no difference between cable television and those media 
given full protection that would justify allowing the gov 
ernment to dictate the content of speech that must be 
provided by cable television to Its subscribers. See JS 
App. 54a-S6a (Williams, J., dissenting). 


3. Having decided that the must-carry law need not 
be reviewed according to the most exacung standards, the 
district court, in fact, gave the asserted justifications for 
the law almost no independent scrutiny at all. Rather 
than assess for itself the fit between legislauve ends and 
means. the court simply deferred to Congress with re- 
spect to whether the must-carry provisions were necessary 
The lack of meaningful judicial review would be error 
even under the less demanding O’Brien test. It was wrong 
a fortiori under strict scruuny. 


This Court has often stressed the importance of sub- 
jecting restrictions on speech to independent judicial re- 
view, saying that “[dJeference to a legislative finding can- 
not limit judicial inquiry when First Amendment rights 
are at stake.” Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Vir- 
ginia, 435 US. 829, 843 (1978), see also Sable Com- 
munications of California, Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 
129 (1989); NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 
U.S. 886, 915 (1982). Indeed, were the courts barred 
from going beneath the surface of congressional findings, 
“(t]he scope of freedom of speech and the press would 
be subject to legislative definiuon and the function of the 
First Amendment as a check on legislative power would 
be nullified.” 435 U.S. at 844; see also Lamprechi v. 
FCC, 958 F.2d 382, 392 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1992). Al- 
though the Court has at times spoken of giving deference 
to Congress’ factual findings, see Walters v. National 
Ass'n of Radiation Survivors, 473 U.S. 305, 331 n.12 
(1985): Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547, 
569 (1990), it has made clear that “whatever defer- 


25 


ence is due legislative findings would sot foreclose [this 
Court's} independent judgment of the facts bearing on an 
issue of consutuuional law... .” Sable Communications 
of California, Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. at 129. The need 
for independent judgment 1s particularly apparent here, 
given that prior must-carry rules have twice been found 
to have litue grounding in fact, see pages 4-6 supra, 
and that the current rules are prophylactic, not correc- 
uve, in nature. See NAACP v. Button, 371 US. 415, 
438 (1963) (citauons omitted) (“[bJroad prophylactic 
rules in the area of free expression are suspect’’). 


The court below, however, repeatedly stressed “‘the 
deference this Court should accord to the factfinding 
abilities of the nation's legislature.” J.S. App. 26a; see 
also id. at 27a (court “unwilling to second-guess Con- 
gress determination that the must-carry provisions are 
necessary to accomplish its objective.”) If this sort of 
exaggerated deference is put aside, it is clear that the 
supposed threat to local broadcasters, far from being 
present a cee pae is spevz'auve if not fanciful.” Con- 
gress itself found that “the most popular programming on 
cable systems, and a substanual alien of the ton 
for which consumers pay cable systems is derived from 
carriage of [broadcast signals]. Findings { 19. It is not 
surprising, therefore, that, following the invalidation of 
the original must-carry rules, cable operators did not elect 
to drop local broadcasters to any significant degree. In- 
deed, the FCC survey said by Congress to show “a seri- 
ous problem,” S. Rep. No. 92 at 43, actually found that 
only one in five cable operators had refused carriage to 
even one broadcast stauon within the scope of the survey. 


** Indeed, if there were genuine concern about the continued 
availability of broadcast programming on cable systems, it is diffi- 
cult to see why Congress, in the same statute, would give to broad- 
cast stations a new privilege to refuse to allow cable systems to 
show their programming. See note 6 euvpra. To the extent that 
loca] stations withhold consent to retransmission, they are under- 
cutting the very goals that Congress is ostensibly seeking to ad- 
vance by the must-carry requirement 


26 


See FCC Mass Media Bureau, Cable System Broadcast 
Signal Carriage Survey Report 10 (Sept. 1, 1988) (filed 
by NAB as Attachment B to Afhrmation of Jack N. 
Goodman). Overall, as Congress observed, the survey 
indicated a nationwide total of “3,600 instances” of non- 
carriage of a local station, S. Rep. No. 92 at 43, but that 
number, deceptively large when viewed in isolation (as 
Congress viewed it, ibid.), actually amounts to a noncar- 
riage rate of 5% (approximately 8500 cable systems were 
then carrying an average of eight broadcast stations each). 
See J.S. App. 64a (Williams, J., dissenting); Cable Sys- 
tem Broadcast Signal Carriage Survey Report 4, NCTA's 
Statement of Material Facts € 18. In short, as the House 
Report acknowledges, “[t]he Committee has not found 
that cable systems are engaging in a widespread pattern 
of denying carriage of local television stations... .” H.R. 
Rep. No. 628 at 52. See also J.S. App. 63a (Williams, 
J., dissenting); NCTA Statement of Material Facts as to 
Which There Is No Genuine Issue § 8 (the average UV. S. 
cable system actually carried more local broadcast sig- 
nals in 1990 than in 1986).”* 


Far from being imperiled, in fact, broadcasting has 
flourished in the years since invalidation of the must- 
carry rules in Quincy: “the number of commercial broad- 


%* Jt is also highly likely that, if broadcast television, including 
the networks, were not available on cable systems, consumers would 
then use inexpensive switching devices and antennas, which would 
readily make available both cable programming and over-the-air 
broadcast programming. While it is true, as Congress found, that 
this technology is not used when the overwhelming majority of 
broadcast stations are voluntarily carried on cable systems, it hardly 
follows that it would not be used if broadcasting—‘“the most popu- 
lar programming on cable systems” (Findings { 19)—were other- 
wise massively unavailable. See J.S. App. 66a (Williams, J. dis 
senting). To the contrary, “[cJommon sense suggests that con- 
sumers who want to receive an off-the-air channe) wil) quickly 
observe that they may need to purchase (or reconnect) antennas 
should their cable system cease offering their favorite broadcast 
stations.” Century Communications, 835 F.2d at 301 (interna) quo- 
tation omitted). 


oe 


- 
27 


Cast stations has increased by 22% (from 919 to 1118), 
the number of educational broadcast stations by 15% 
(from 316 to 363), and the number of cities receiving 
broadcast television by 16° (from 514 to 594).” Sec 
J.S. App. 62a (Williams, J., dissenting) (citing NCTA 
Statement of Material Facts #€ 12-14.)'" This significant 
expansion took place at least partially because of the 
growth of cable television, and despite the purported 
“economic incentive” of cable operators “to delete, repo- 
sition, or not carry local broadcast signals.” Findings 
€ 16. That incentive, to the extent that it exists at all, is 
thus clearly overcome by the economic incentive to carry 
the vast majority of broadcast signals." 


4. These issues are of great practical, as well as doc- 
trinal, importance. The requirements of the must-carry 
law control the programming of every cable operator 
throughout the nation. They prevent every cable opera- 
tor from deciding, voluntarily, what programming it will 
offer to its subscribers, thus invading each operator’s edi- 
torial prerogatives. No less offensively, the must-carry 
requirements deprive cable programmers of the oppor- 
tunity to communicate their messages on terms of equal- 
ity with broadcasters and other speakers competing for 
space on cable systems. 


17 The fact that broadcast stations are increasing in number casta 
grave doubt on the theory that cable operators maintain, and wil! 
exploit, a “bottleneck” over transmission of video programming. 
The ability of broadcast stations to reach their viewers without 
significant impediment indicates either that transmission by cable 
systems is not essential to their success or that cable systems are 
carrying the great majority of them See P. Areeda & H. Hoven- 
kamp, Antitrust Law § 736.2, at 847 (1992 Supp.). 


1* The district court also gave little consideration to the evail- 
ability of other means of preserving the system of loca! broadcast- 
ing. For example, if loca) broadcasters ever faced genuine financia! 
hardship, Congress could provide subsidies to the stations, as it 
does in partial form now through the grant of free broadcast 
licenses. See J.S.App. 66a (Williams, J., dissenting). 


28 


The decision below is significant for another reason as 
well: while it was less than fully explicit on the point, 
the court below quite plainly regarded cable television as 
less deserving of full First Amendment protecuon than 
other forms of communication. Although many of the 
First Amendment doctrines pronounced by the court be- 
low would apply on their face to newspapers and other 
traditional members of the press, 1 is hard to imagine 
that the federal courts would allow Congress to impose 
comparable requirements on other, more traditional media. 
See Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 113 S. Ct. 
1806, 1807-08 (1993) (Rehnquist, C.J., in chambers ) 
(“[uJnder Tornillo, Congress plainly could not impose 
the must-carry provisions on privately owned newspa- 
pers”). Yet, the basic principles of the First Amend- 
ment—the belief that government should not decide who 
may speak or what they may say—are no less applicable 
to new forms of speech than to old forms. The decision 
below marks a serious departure from those principles 
and warrants plenary review by this Court. 


9 


CONCLUSION 


The Court should note probable jurisdiction. 


ROBERT D. JoFFE 

STUART W. GoLp 

STEPHEN S. MADSEN 
CRAVATH, SWAINE & Moore 
Worldwide Plaza 
825 Eighth Avenue 
New York, NY 10019 
(212) 474-1000 


BRIAN CONBOY 
THEODORE C. WHITEHOUSE 
WILLKIE Farge & GALLAcCHER 
Three Lafayette Center 
1155 21st St. N.W. 
Suite 600 
Washington, D.C. 20036-3384 
Counsel for Time Warner 


Entertainment Company, LP. 


ALBERT G. LAUBER 

PETER VAN N. LocKwoop 
CAPLIN & DRYSDALE 
One Thomas Circle, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 820-8000 

Counsel for Discovery 
Communications, Inc. and the 
Learning Channel, Inc. 


Respectfully submitted, 


H. BaRTow Fars, III * 

JOEL I. KLEIN 
KLEIN, Farr, SMITH & 

TARANTO 

2445 M Street, N.W. 
Suite 225 
Washington, D.C. 20087 
(202) 776-0184 

Counsel for Nationa! Cable 
Television Association, Inc. 


Bruce D. SoKLER 

PeTrer KImMM, JB 

Grecory A. LEwis 
MINTZ, LEVIN, CoHN, Ferris 

GLOVSKY AND PoPEO 

701 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. 
Suite 900 
Washington, D.C. 20004-2608 
(202) 434-7300 

Counsel for Turner Broadcasting 
System, Inc., et al. 


JOHN P. CaLe, Jr. 

JOHN D. SETvER 

JOHN DAVIDSON THOMAS 
CoLe, RaAYwip & BRAVERMAN 
1919 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W. 


APPENDICES 


la 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2247 


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., ef al., 
Plaintiffs, 


Vv. 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, et al., 
Defendants. 


Civil Action No. 92-2292 


DANIELS CABLEVISION, INC., 
Plaintiff, 


Vv. 


UNTTED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Defendant. 


Civil Action No. 92-2494 


Time WARNER ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY, L.P., 
Plaintiff, 
Vv. 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, ef al., 
Defendants. 


2a 
Civil Action No. 92-2495 
NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, INC., 


Plaintiff, 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ef al., 
Defendants. 


Civil Action No. 92-2558 


DISCOVERY COMMUNICATIONS, INC.., ef al., 


Plaintiffs, 
Vv. 


UNTTED STATES OF AMERICA, et al., 
Defendants. 


MEMORANDUM AND ORDER 


[Filed Apr. 8, 1993] 


Before WILLIAMS, Circuit Judge, JACKS 
. ° F ‘ ON 
SPORKIN, District Judges. . a 


THOMAS PENFIELD JACKSON, District J udge. 


Sections 4 and 5 of the Cable Television Cons 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 
102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (to be codified at 47 U.S.C 
§§ 534 & 535) (“the 1992 Cable Act” or “the Act”) 
require cable television system operators to Carry the 
video signals of certain commercial and non-commercial 
educational television broadcast stations requesting that 
their Signals be carried. The plaintiffs in these five con- 
solidated lawsuits contend that these mandatory carriage 
(or “must-carry”) provisions violate their First Amend- 


3a 


ment rights. Upon consideration of the entire record,’ 
the Court holds that sections 4 and 5 of the 1992 Cable 
Act do not violate the plaintiffs’ First Amendment rights. 


Background 


On October 5, 1992, Congress overrode a Presidential 
veto to enact the 1992 Cable Act. The Act subjects the 
cable industry to extensive regulation. Among other 
things, it subjects certain cable system operators to rate 
regulation by the FCC and by municipal franchising au- 
thorities; it imposes restrictions on distributors of cable 
programming that are affiliated with cable operators; and 
it directs the FCC to promulgate regulations imposing 
minimum technical standards for operators of cable sys- 
tems. 


Sections 4, 5, and 6 of the Act limit the freedom of 
cable operators to refuse to carry the signals of local 
broadcast stations, and, as a corollary, prevent cable op- 
erators from carrying broadcast signals without a broad- 
caster’s consent.” The plaintiffs’ constitutional challenge 


1 During the pendency of this litigation, no fewer than 16 parties 
have eought to intervene as plaintiffs or defendants. These applica- 
tions have been held in abeyance, but al) of these applicants, to- 
gether with several amicus curiae applicants, have been granted 
leave to participate herein as amici. All applicants for intervention 
have been permitted to file motions and memoranda as exhibits to 
their motions for intervention, and the Court has considered the 
entire record amassed in this case. The Court has, contemporane- 
ously with the filing of this opinion, issued an order granting all 
pending motions for intervention insofar as the applicants seek to 
challenge or defend the must-carry provisions. 


2? “Broadcast” stations reach their viewers by transmitting elec- 
tromagnetic waves through the air for interception by television 
receivers, usually equipped with antennas. Other entities in the 
business of producing video images, generically referred to herein 
as “programmers,” do not have access to the electromagnetic spec- 
trum, and must find alternative means by which to reach viewers. 
Most often, programmers wil] arrange to have their signals trans- 
mitted by satellite to receptor dishes across the world. Cable “oper- 


4a 


to these three sections is the matter presently to be ad- 
dressed by this opinion 


Section 4 of the Act requires all cable system operators 
with more than 12 channels to carry, upon request, the 
signals of licensed “‘local’’ commercial broadcast tele- 
vision stations whose signal is received over-the-air in the 
same television market as the cable system. The op- 
erator need not devote more than one-third of its active 
useable channels to deliver local broadcast signals, but 
if there are not enough local broadcast stations to fill the 
one-third set-aside, the operator must carry the signal of 
one or two “qualified” low power broadcast stations.‘ 
Cable systems with 12 or fewer channels must deliver the 
signals of at least three local commercial broadcast sta- 
tions unless the cable system has 300 or fewer subscribers, 
in which case it is not subject to the requirements of sec- 
tion 4 at all. An operator must carry the entire program- 
ming schedule of each commercial station it is required to 


ators” develop a package of programming services by creating their 
own programming, by capturing the satellite signals of different 
programmers, and by capturing the broadcast signals of loca) and 
distant broadcasters on master antennas. These programming pack- 
ages are generally sent by cable operators to their subscribers by 
coaxial cables strung along public rights-of-way. 


® An operator's television market is defined by regulation, see 
47 C.F.R. § 78.8555(d) (8) (i) (1992), but the FCC is empowered 
to make specia]) market determinations upon request, see 1992 
Cable Act §4 (definitions) (to be codified at 47 U.S.C. § 633(h) 
(1)(C)). 


‘Low power television stations are smal! broadcast operations 
with a limited geographic transmission range. These stations are 
licensed on « secondary basis; they cannot interfere with the signals 
of any full power station and must give way to any full power 
station attempting to occupy the same frequency. Sce generally 
47 C.F.R. §§ 74.701-74.781 (1992); In the Matter of An Inquiry 
into the Future Role of Low Power Television Broadcasting and 
television Translators in the National Telecommunications System, 
BC Docket No. 78-253, 51 Rad. Reg. 476 (P & F) (April 26, 1982) 
[hereinafter 1982 LPTV Inquiry). 


Sa 


carry, and it may not accept or request payment for do- 
ing so. Every commercial broadcast station having a 
right to mandatory carriage must be carried by the cable 
operator, at the station's election, on its current over-the- 
air channel position, at the channel position it occupied 
on July 19, 1985, or at the channel position it occupied 
on January 1, 1992. 


Section 5 of the Act requires operators of cable sys- 
tems able to deliver signals on more than 36 channels 
to carry the signals of every local non-commercial educa- 
tional broadcast television station requesting carriage,* 
unless the educational station’s programming substantially 
duplicates that of another station carried by the system. 
Systems with 12 or fewer channels must carry one quali- 
fied non-commercial station, and systems having 12 to 
36 channels must carry between one and three such sta- 
tions. Section 5, like section 4, directs cable system op 
erators tO Carry the entire programming schedule of the 
broadcast stations they are required to carry, and simi- 
larly prohibits operators from accepting payment in ex- 
change for carriage. Each non-commercial station hav- 
ing a mandatory carriage right must be carried, at its 
election, on its current over-the-air channel position or 
on its channel position as of July 19, 1985. 


Section 6 of the Act. which becomes effective on Oc- 
tober 5, 1993, prohibits cable operators from retrans- 
mitting the signals of any commercial broadcasting sta- 
tion without obtaining the station's consent. In conjunc- 
tion with section 4, section 6 provides local broadcasters 
with an option to request mandatory (but uncompen- 
sated) carriage on a system or to negotiate a carriage 


* A qualified noncommercial educational! station is (1) a station 
licensed by the FCC as such, owned by a public agency or nonprofit 
entity, and eligible to receive a grant from the Corporation for 
Public Broadcasting; or (2) ao station owned and operated by a 
municipality which transmits predominantly noncommercia! pro- 
grams for educational purposes. 1992 Cable Act §5 (definitions) 
(to be codified at 47 U.S.C. § 635(1) (1)). 


Ou 


agreement with the operator. (Presumably, cable opera- 
tors will want to carry the signals of larger, viewer-popu- 
lar broadcasters and will pay for the privilege; ° less pop- 
ular broadcasters will be able to force their carriage by 
making a carnage demand under section 4.). 


On the same day that the 1992 Cable Act became law, 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc., the owner of several 
cable programming operations, brought this case against 
the FCC and the United States, challenging sections 4, 
5, and 6 as unconstitutional under the First Amendment, 
asking for declaratory and injunctive relief." Within the 
ensuing five weeks, four other plaintiff groups—com- 
prised of cable system operators and programmers— 
brought similar suits seeking similar relief." In addition 
to challenging sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Act, two of 
these plaintiff groups brought First Amendment chal- 
lenges to multiple other provisions of the 1992 Act and 
to certain provisions of the Cable Communications Policy 
Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2782 (“the 
1984 Act”).® This three-judge U.S. District Court (“the 
Court” or “this Court’) was convened pursuant to § 23 
of the 1992 Cable Act, which commands that a three- 
judge court hear “any civil action challenging the con- 
stitutionality of section [4] or [5]”’ of the 1992 Act. 


* Prior to the 1992 Act, cable operators were free to carry the 
signals of loca) broadcasters subject only to the “compulsory license” 
provisions of the copyright law. See 17 U.S.C. § 111 (1988). Under 
these provisions, operators may transmit broadcast signals if they 
pay royalty fees determined pursuant to an administrative schedule. 


’ Turner Broadcasting Sys., Inc. v. FCC, CA No. 92-2247. Turner 
later amended its complaint to add severa! additional cable pro- 


grammers as plaintiffs. 

® Daniels Cablevision, Inc. v. United States, CA No. 92-2292; 
Tene Warner Entertainment Co. v. FCC, CA No. 92-2494; National 
Cable Television Assoc. v. United States, CA No. 92-2495; Discovery 
Communications, Inc. v. United States, CA No. 92-2558. 


® Time Warner, CA No. 92-2494; Discovery, CA No. 92-2558. 


fa 
. On November 23, 1992, this Court consolidated these 
five cases for the “purpose of determining issues related to 
the constitutionality of sections 4 and 5 of the [Act], and 
any matters determined to be ancillary thereto.” Turner 
Broadcasting Svs., Inc. v. FCC, CA No. 92-2247, order 
at 2 (D.D.C. Nov. 23, 1992) (three-judge court). Four 
of the five plaintiff groups filed comprehensive preliminary 
injunction motions, but a hearing on those motions as to 
the must-Carry provisions was postponed indefinitely upon 
the Court’s approval of the parties’ assent to a “standstill 
order” proposed by the parties. Sec id., standstill order 
(D.D.C. Dec. 9, 1992) (three-judge court). On Decem- 
ber 15, 1992, this Court declined to exercise jurisdiction 
over any claim other than the must-arry claims, see Tur- 
ner Broadcasting Svs., Inc. v. FCC, 810 F. Supp. 1308 
(D.D.C. 1992) (three-judge court )."® 


The matter, i.e., the constitutionality of sections 4 and 
5, is now before the Court on motions for summary judg- 
ment of all five plaintiff groups; on the cross-motions for 
summary judgment of several intervenor-defendants; on 
the federal defendants’ cross-motion to dismiss; on an 
intervenor-plainiff's motion for preliminary injunction of 
sections 4 and 5 on “religion clause” grounds; and on an 
intervenor-defendant’s motion for summary judgment on 
a cross-claim. 


© Al) motions for preliminary injunction with respect to sections 
other than 4 and 5 were denied by the single-judge district court. 
See Time Warner Entertainment Co. r. FCC, 810 F. Supp. 1302 
(D.D C. 1992) (Jackson, J.). A decision in these cases on the merits 
is forthcoming. 


All of the plaintiffs challenge section 6, the retransmission con- 
sent provision, on the ground that it is not severable from section 4, 
and must be struck if section 4 is declared unconstitutional. Be 
cause the Court holds that section 4 is constitutional, plaintiffs’ 
challenge to section 6 must fail. and the Court expresses no opinion 
on the severability issue. One of the plaintiffa,. Daniels Cablevision, 
has brought an independent constitutional challenge to section 6. 
Pursuant to the Court's jurisdictional ruling, this challenge is 
before the single-j)udge court. 


Sa 
] 


The plaintiff cable system operators and programmers 
contend that the must-carry provisions are, on their face, 
violative of their First Amendment rights to freedom of 
speech. The primary evil of those provisions, they assert, 
is that they force cable system operators to devote a por- 
tion of their finite signal-carrying capacity to deliver the 
signals of a privileged class of competing “speakers,” 1.¢., 
over-the-air broadcasters. thus diminishing the number of 
channels remaining available to them for other program- 
ming they might prefer to carry. Must-carry also violates 
the First Amendment rights of the operators, they say, 
because it inhibits the operators’ “editorial discretion” to 
determine what programming messages to provide to their 
subscribers,’ compelling them perforce to deliver some 
programming they might otherwise choose not to carry. 
And the programmers argue that must-carry exalts broad- 
casters to preferred status as “speakers” by awarding them 
favored cable channel positions the programmers covet. 


The concept of governmentally ordained mandatory 
carriage of broadcast signals is not a novel threat to the 
cable industry. The FCC first began to experiment with 
must-carry rules in the early 1960s.* The perceived need 
for must-carry today is based on the same premise that 
gave rise to it then: that local broadcast stations, unable 
to secure carriage on cable systems serving the same 
viewer markets, will, over time, lose their audiences and 
perish. Compare 1992 Cable Act § 2(a)(15) and S. 
Rep. No. 92. 102d Cong., Ist Sess. 42-46 and H.R. Rep. 
No. 628, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. 50-57 (with Rules Re 


11 The plaintiffs note that the 1992 Act not only requires oper- 


ators to carry loca! broadcast stations, it requires operators to carry 
these stations on a “basic service tier” that must be made available 
to all subscribers. 1992 Cable Act §8(a) (to be codified at 47 


U.S.C. § 648(b) (7) (A)). 
12 The early development of must-carry regulation is compre 


hensively traced in Quincy Cable TV, Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434, 


1488-43 (D.C. Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1169 (1986). 


9a 


Microwave-Served CATV, Dockets Nos. 14895 and 
15233, 38 F.C.C. 683 € 51, 57, 58-82 (1965). As the 
audiences of broadcasting stations decline, so the reason- 
ing goes, their advertising revenues will decrease corre. 
spondingly. Local over-the-air broadcasting operations 
once they become unprofitable, will expire. Cable carriage 
of local broadcasting was then and is still now thought by 
its proponents to be essential not merely to ensure the 
continuing availability of programming with a “local” 
flavor to cable system subscribers, but also to preserve the 
vitality of a free source of over-the-air programming to 
television viewers unwilling or unable to obtain a cable 
connection. 


Not surprisingly, the parties have expended consider- 
able effort and resources arguing over the level of First 
Amendment scrutiny to be applied to speech regulation 
in the cable context. The plaintiffs contend that the must- 
carry provisions must be subjected to exacting First 
Amendment scrutiny; if they are not per se unconstitu- 
uonal, they are assuredly permissible only if found to 
have been precisely drawn to serve a compelling govern- 
ment interest, and to go no further. See, e.g., Sable Com- 
munications v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989): Min- 
neapolis Star & Tribune Co. vy. Minnesota Comm'r of 
Revenue, 460 U.S. 575, 585 (1983). The defendants 
respond that if the First Amendment is implicated at all 
in this case, the must-Carry provisions need only be judged 
by the interest-balancing traditionally applied to content- 
neutral speech regulation or legislation ostensibly unre- 
lated to expression that is discovered to impose incidental 
burdens on speech. The nature of this inquiry, originating 
in United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968). and 
refined in Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 49] US. 78] 
(1989), is to uphold such regulauion when shown to pro- 
mote a significant government interest and not to burden 
substantially more speech than necessurv to vindicate that 
interest. Rock Against Racism, 491 US. at 799. 


10a 


I] 


In 1989, Congress began the first in a series of several 
hearings to assess the video programming distribution 
landscape in light of the 1984 Cable Act.” After an ex- 
haustive fact-finding process including hearings held over 
three years,"* the 1992 Act was passed.’* Congress’ prin- 
cipal finding was that, for a variety of reasons, concentra- 
tion of economic power in the cable industry was prevent- 
ing non-cable programmers from effectively competing for 
the attention of a television audience. See 1992 Cable 
Act §§ 2(a)(2), (4), & (15). See generally 1992 Cable 
Act § 2(a); 1991 S. Rep. No. 92; 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 
628, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1992); H.R. Rep. No. 862 
(conference report). 


18 See Media Ownership: Diversity and Concentration: Hearing 
before the Subcommittee on Communications of the Senate Com- 
mittee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, 101st Cong., lst 
Seas. (1989) [hereinafter Hearing of June 1989). 


4 See, e.9., Hearings before the Subcommittee on Telecommunt- 
cations and Finance of the House Committee on Energy and Com- 
merce, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1991); S. 12: Hearing before the 
Subcommittee or Communications of the Senate Committee on 
Commerce, Science and Transportation, 10let Cong. lst Sess. 
(1991) ; “Must-Carry:” Hearing before the Subcommittee on Com- 
munications of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and 
Transportation, 10lst Cong., lst Sess. (1989) [hercinafter Hear- 
tng of October 25, 1989). See generally 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 
8-5 (1991) (discussing the 11 Senate hearings, held over two years, 
related to cable television); Debates, 138 Cong. Rec. S400, S635 
(statement of Sen. Inouye) (daily ed. Jan. 30, 1992) (“[TJhe bill 
before us is the result of 18 days of hearings and 113 different 
witnesses. We have had countless numbers of communications 
experts and lawyers look over the measure. We have conferred 
with, in addition to the 118 witnesses, at least 500 knowledgeable 
citizens.” ) 


18 See generally 1991 S. Rep. No. 92; 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 628 
(1992); 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 862, 102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1992) 


(conference report). 


lla 


Congress specifically found that cable had become the 
“dominant nationwide video medium.” 1992 Cable Act 
§ 2(a)(3); see 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 3. Almost 
56,000,000 households—60 pereent of the households 
with televisions—receive cable television, 1992 Cable Act 
§ 2(a)(3), and cable service is available to almost 90% 
of the nation, 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 3. In those homes 
receiving video signals by cable, cable has all but sup 
planted over-the-air broadcast television reception. 1992 
Cable Act § 2(a)(17). 


Congress also found that despite the dominance of 
cable, there is insufficient competition within the cable in- 
dustry. First, there is little competition between cable 
Operators. For many reasons “including local franchising 
requirements and the extraordinary expense of construct- 
ing more than one cable television system to serve a par- 
ticular geographic area,” most regions of the country are 
served by one cable operator only. 1992 Cable Act 
§ 2(a)(2).* Second, the industry has become horizon- 
tally concentrated—many operators share common owner- 
ship. See 1992 Cable Act § 2(a)(4).”’ Third, the indus- 
try is becoming vertically integrated. 1992 Cable Act 
§ 2(a)(5). Many large entities that operate cable fran- 
chises also own and operate programming enterprises. 
Id.; see also FCC Report, supra note 16, at 494 77-80. 


%* Evidence received by Congress indicated that leas than 1% 
of the cable operators in the nation face competition from other 
operators. Federal Communications Commission Report, MM 
Docket No. 89-600 98 [hereinafter FCC Report]; Hearing of 
October 25, 1989, supra note 14, at 40. See generally Debates, 138 
Cong. Rec. S400, S436 (comments of Sen. Gorton) (daily ed. Jan. 
30, 1992) (stating that although there are 11,000 cable operators, 
in the nation, there are only 63 communities which are served by 
more than one). 


17 See also Hearings of June 1989, supra note 18, at 78 (testi- 
mony of Prof. Bagdikian) (testifying that the operators serving 
one-third of the cable subscribers in the nation are owned by two 
cable companies). 


}2a 


Congress determined that geographic monopolization, 
horizontal concentration and vertical integration have cre- 
ated barriers to entry for non-cable programmers, pri- 
marily broadcasters, attempting to obtain carriage on 
cable. Vertical integration contributes to this cable 
“bottleneck” by providing cable operators with economic 
incentive to grant affiliated programmers access to their 
systems while denying it to others. 1992 Cable Act § 2 
(a)(5). Similarly, horizontal concentration and the ab- 
sence of effective competition among operators have ob- 
structed broadcaster access by creating a climate condu- 
cive to another anti-competitive operator practice. Cable 
operators compete with broadcasters for advertising reve- 
nue. Jd. at § 2(a)(14). Consequently, operators have an 
economic incentive to refuse carriage of broadcasters’ sig- 
nals to reduce broadcast viewership, thus attracting ad- 
vertising dollars that otherwise would go to broadcasters. 
Id. at § 2(a) (15). 


In summary, Congress concluded that the economic 
forces at work and the market conditions they had already 
produced had placed free local broadcast television in 
serious jeopardy. Jd. at §2(a)(16). It determined that 
mandatory carriage was necessary to remedy unfair trade 
practices, to preserve local broadcasting for those who do 
not receive cable television. id. § 2(a)(12), as well as 
those who do, id. at §2(a)(7), and to ensure that the 
public will continue to have access to a wide diversity 
of sources of video programming, id. at § 2(a)(6)-(11). 


This Court is of the opinion that, in enacting the 1992 
Cable Act, Congress employed its regulatory powers over 
the economy to impose order upon a market in dysfunc- 
tion, but a market in a commercial commodity neverthe- 
less; not a market in “speech.” The commodity Congress 
undertook to regulate is the means of delivery of video 
signals to individual receivers. It is not the information 
the video signals may be used to impart. That the video 
signals can only be used to convey a message is of no 


l3a 


particular significance. The same is true of printing 
presses, or broadcast transmitters; loudspeakers, or movie 
projectors. Yet no one doubts that Congress could regu- 
late a market in those commodities in danger of chaos or 
capture without being accused of attempting to infringe 
the First Amendment freedoms of those by whom they 
will be used to express protected “speech.” The Cable 
Act of 1992 is simply industry-specific antitrust and fair 
trade practice regulatory legislation: to the extent First 
Amendment speech is affected at all, it is simply a by- 
product of the fact that video signals have no other func- 
tion than to convey information. 


In other words, the Court holds that the must-carry 
provisions are essentially economic regulation designed to 
create competitive balance in the video industry as a 
whole, and to redress the effects of cable operators’ anti- 
competitive practices. The regulation is justified by the 
existing structure of the cable business itself, and by the 
market peculiarities resulting from the technological dif- 
ferences in the manner in which different video signal dis- 
tributors deliver their products to their viewers’ receivers. 
So perceived, the Court concludes that the must-carry 
provisions are, in intent as well as form, unrelated (in all 
but the most recondite sense) to the content of any mes- 
sages that these embattled cable operators, broadcasters, 
and programmers have in contemplation to deliver. 


TI. 


That the First Amendment is to some extent implicated 
whenever a government endeavors to regulate a cable 
industry component, however, is @ proposition now too 
well-established to reconsider."* But although many courts 


18 See City of Los Angeles v. Preferred Communications, Inc., 
476 U.S. 488, 494 (1986) (holding that operators’ exercise of edi- 
torial contro! “plainly implicate[s] First Amendment interests.”) ; 
Qvincy, 768 F.2d at 1452-53; see also Leathers v. Medlock, 111 
S. Ct. 1488, 1442-43 (“[cJable television provides to its subscribers 


l4a 


have considered the application of the First Amendment 
to various laws regulating cable,’” the question of the 
First Amendment standard to be applied to compulsory 
signal-carriage requirements has yet to be definitively 
answered. Despite twice confronting the issue, the D.C. 
Circuit has avoided its resolution. See Century Commu- 
nications Corp. v. FCC, 835 F.2d 292 (D.C. Cir. 1987), 
clarified, 837 F.2d 517 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 486 
U.S. 1032 (1988); Quincy Cable TV, Inc. v. FCC, 768 
F.2d 1434 (D.C. Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1169 


(1986).™ 


news, information, and entertainment. It is engaged in ‘speech’ 
under the First Amendment... .”). Although the defendants 
vigorously contend that the plaintiff programmers have raised no 
First Amendment issues because their only claim is that broad- 
casters have been favorably treated, this argument misses the 
point because it mischaracterizes the programmers’ claims. The 
programmers do not merely contend that Congress has failed to 
provide a benefit to programmers that it has provided to others. 
Instead, the programmers contend that Congress has, by increasing 
broadcaster speech in a limited forum, reduced the speech of the 
programmers. This is a First Amendment claim. Quincy, 768 F.2d 


at 1451-52. 


19 See, ¢.9., Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 U.S. 488; 
Chicago Cable Communications v. Chicago Cable Comm'n, 879 F.2d 
1540 (7th Cir. 1989) cert. denied, 493 U.S. 1044 (1990); Century 
Communications Corp. v. FCC, 835 F.2d 292 (D.C. Cir. 1987), 
clarified, 837 F.2d 617 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1032 
(1988) ; Quincy Cable, 768 F.2d 1434; Community Communications 
Co. v. City of Boulder, 660 F.2d 1370 (10th Cir. 1981), cert. dis 
missed, 456 U.S. 1001 (1982); Home Bor Office, Inc. v. FCC, 567 
F.2d 9 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 829 (1977); Telestat 
Cablevision, Inc. v. Riviera Beach, 773 F. Supp. $83 (S.D. Fla. 
1991) ; Century Federal, Inc. v. Palo Alto, 710 F. Supp. 1552 (N.D 
Cal. 1987); Group W Cable, Inc. v. Santa Cruz, 669 F. Supp. 954 


(N.D. Cal. 1987). 
2 As discussed below, in both cases, the court held FCC muast- 
carry regulations unconstitutional without finding it necessary to 


define the precise level of First Amendment scrutiny to be applied 
to them. See also Preferred Communications, Inc., 476 U.S. 488 


15a 


It appears to this Court that the must-carry provisions 
of the 1992 Cable Act squarely present this fundamental 
Issue, and these cases demand that it be resolved. The 
Court today holds that the government need not demon- 
strate that it has used the least restrictive means to accom- 
plish what is, primarily and essentially, economic regula- 
tion of an industry in the business of delivering video 
signals. The Court coacludes that sections 4 and 5 of the 
1992 Act will pass constitutional muster if they satisfy 
the criteria established in O'Brien and its progeny. 


To be sure, in Quincy and Century, the D.C. Circuit 
held FCC rules requiring cable operators to carry the Sig- 
nals of loca] broadcasters to be unconstitutional. Neither 
casc, however, is controlling here; the court of appeals 
was careful, in both opinions, to note that must-carry 
rules are not per se unconstitutional. Century, 835 F.2d 
at 304; Quincy, 768 F.2d at 1463. The court of appeals 
simply held, in both cases, that the FCC had failed to 
make a record demonstrating the existence of a govern- 
mental interest of sufficient moment—whether “compel- 
ling’ or merely “significant’—to warrant such First 
Amendment burdens as were imposed by its regulations 
or to demonstrate that the means it had chosen to employ 
to its putative end were necessary at all. 


The record in support of the 1992 Cable Act, in con- 
trast, was made by Congress. Federal courts do not or- 
dinarily review the adequacy of the record before Con- 
gress to support the laws it enacts. 


IV. 


All parties agree (at least. the plaintiffs concede) that 
the must-Cafry provisions are not viewpoint-based; must- 
carry mghts are conferred upon al! full-power local broad- 


(holding that municipal restrictions on cable operator franchise 
access implicate First Amendment interests, but expressing no 
opinion on the level of scrutiny to be applied). 


16a 


casters, and the obligations upon most cable operators, 
regardless of any views expressed in the programming of 
either. The provisions do not compel the carriage of any 
particular messages nor do they impose any burden on 
operators or programmers on the basis of the messages 
they or the broadcasters propose to transmit. Neverthe- 
less, a law need not be viewpoint-based to be subject to 
strict First Amendment scrutiny. It may, for example, be 
considered content-based and subjected to strict scrutiny 
if it purports to restrict a particular type or character of 
speech, irrespective of the position taken on any issue. 
Consolidated Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 447 
U.S. 530, 537 (1980) (public policy leaflets accompany- 
ing utility bills); Boos v. Barry, 485 U.S. 312, 319 
(1988) (placards embarrassing to or disparaging of a 
foreign government) (plurality opinion). 


The plaintiffs contend that strict scrutiny applies be- 
cause the must-carry provisions compel an operator to 
utter “speech” not of its choosing; because they alter an 
operator’s editorial decision-making about what to say, 
and because they favor the speech of broadcasters over 
that of operators and programmers. But none of the 
epithets invoked by the plaintiffs—‘‘compelled speech,” 
or “editorial discretion,” or “speaker-partiality’’—are 
talismans automatically necessitating strict scrutiny. Strict 
scrutiny applies only if governmental regulation is overtly 
content-based or presents an opportunity for official cen- 
sorship. A compulsory speech requirement, or one im- 
posing upon the discretion of a speaker to say only what 
he wishes, it appears, is to be strictly scrutinized only if 
it appears that the government has prescribed the con- 
tent—either the message or the subject matter—of the 
speech to be spoken.”” Examined carefully, all of the 


2! Compelled speech presents two distinct content-related dangers. 
First, it may cause a speaker to say things he or she might other- 
wise choose not to say. See Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715 
(1977). Second, it may deter a speaker from engaging in speech 


l7a 


compelled speech and editorial discretion cases cited by 
the plaintifis can be seen to have involved regulation 
telling the speaker wiat to say or at least what to talk 
about. See Riley v. National Fed'n of the Blind, 487 U.S. 
781 (1988) (state law requiring charitable fundraisers 
to disclose percentage of receipts actually devoted to good 
works); Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util. Comm'n, 
475 US. 1, 10-11 & n.7 (1986) (plurality opinion) 
(state regulation requiring utility to mail fundraising ap- 
peals of its rate-making opponents); Wooley v. Maynard, 
430 U.S. 705 (1977) (state law requiring motorist to 
display bellicose state motto on license plates); Miami 
Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 214 (1974) 
(state law requiring newspaper to carry replies of po- 
litical candidates it had opposed editorially ). 


These cases stand in sharp contrast to PruncYard 
Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74 (1980), in 
which the Supreme Court upheld a California constitu- 
tional provision interpreted to protect speech and peti- 
tioning at a privately owned shopping center. Signifi- 
cantly, the speaker's right to speak on the objecting own- 
er’s property upheld in PruneYard had nothing to do 
with the content or subject matter of his speech, and 
there was no danger that, in affording the speaker access 
to his shopping center, the owner would be affected to 
any degree in his ability to speak his own piece. 


“Speaker-partial” regulations, or those that purportedly 
favor one group of speakers at the expense of others, 
similarly are not subject to strict scrutiny unless they are 
content-based. Walsh v. Brady, 927 F.2d 1229, 1236 
(D.C. Cir. 1991); sce id. at 1238-39 (Williams, J., con- 
curring). Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976), the 
principal speaker-partiality case cited by the plaintiffs, 


that is inconsistent with the compelled speech. See Miami Herald 
Publishing Co. v. Tornillu, 418 U.S. 241, 256-57 (1974); Pacific 
Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util. Comm'n, 475 US. 1, 10-11 & n7 
(1986) (plurality opinion). 


18a 


is not to the contrary. In Buckley, the Supreme Court 
struck down a Statutory provision imposing a $1,000 
limit on the amount which an individual could spend to 
support a particular political candidate. The government 
sought to justify the provision on the ground that it was 
necessary to provide those of modest means with an 
opportunity to participate in the political process equal 
to that of the wealthy. 7d. at 48. Implicit in this rea- 
soning, of course, was a Congressional judgment that the 
speech of those spending over $1,000 was not only 
“louder” than those spending less than $1,000, but was 
also different and, more importantly, more sinister. See 
id. at 16-17. Buckley is thus a case in which the govern- 
ment sought, in effect, to suppress the expression of a 
meretricious idea. Speaker partiality alone, however, ab- 
sent evidence that the government’s distinction between 
groups of speakers is related to what the speakers are 
saying, is insufficient to trigger strict scrutiny.* 


22 The plaintiffs contend that any regulation that singles out a 
particular segment of the press, like cable operators, and imposes 
burdens on them alone, is presumptively unconstitutional. Although 
the Supreme Court has applied such a presumption to certain 
taxes that single out members of the press, see Minneapolis Star, 
460 U.S. 576 (1983). See generally Leathers, 111 S. Ct. at 1443-44, 
this presumption does not apply to the must-carry provisions. The 
Court is unpersuaded that mandatory carriage of local broadcasters, 
as opposed to the specifically targeted differentia] taxes struck in 
Minneapolis Star, will so cripple cable operators as to leave them 
unable to exercise their own constitutionally conferred right to 
inform and entertain the public as they wish. See Grosjean v. 
American Press Co., 297 U.S. 233, 246-47, 250 (1936) (discussing 
the historical use of differential tazation as a means of govern- 
menta! censorship of the press). Furthermore, specifically targeted 
differential taxes raise an inference that government has regu- 
lated content because it is difficult to imagine governmental pur- 
poses unrelated to content that cannot be served by generally 
applicable means other than differential taxation. Afinneapolis 
Star, 460 U.S. at 685. This inference does not arise with cable 
carriage requirements, however, because there are plausible legiti- 
mate goals that can be served by compelling broadcast carriage 
that cannot be served by any generally applicable means. The 


19a 


A regulation is deemed to be content-neutral if it 1s 
addressed to ends unrelated to the content of expression 
upon which it may have an effect. Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. at 791; Texas v. Johnson, 491 US. 
397, 407 (1989). As the Court has previously noted, 
because the record indicates that Congress’ primary pur- 
pose in enacting must-carry was to restore competitive 
balance and assure a functional market in the distribu- 
tion of video signals, whatever might be said with those 
Signals, the must-Carry provisions appear to be unrelated 
to the content of the expression they will affect. 


V. 


The plaintiffs argue that the government's asserted in- 
terest in “promoting widespread dissemination of infor- 
mation from diverse sources,” Federal Defendant’s Mem- 
Orandum at 33, betrays a content-based purpose. That 
Congress has found it necessary to preserve local broad- 
Cast television to promote “diversity,” even for those who 
receive cable television, they contend, indicates that Con- 
gress perceives some content difference between the mes- 
sages of “local” broadcasters and cable programmers.” 


Court thus concludes that the must-carry provisions wil] not be 
strictly scrutinized merely because they treat operators and pro- 
grammers differently from other components of the media. 


® See 1992 Cable Act §2(a)(6) (“[t)here is a substantial gov- 
ernmenta! and First Amendment interest in promoting a diversity 
of views provided through multiple technology media.”) (emphasis 
added); Amicus Brief of the United States Senate at 27 (“[a)!- 
though cable systems may provide programming on a wide range 
of subjects, the dirersity of approaches to those subjects may be 
reduced [if] control over the selection and development of pro- 
gramming is in the hands of fewer entities”) (emphasis added) 
ef. Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 647, 570-71 (1990) 
(equating diversity in ownership of broadcast licenses to diverrity 
of messages available to the public; “it is upon ownership that 
public policy places primary relance with respect to diversification 
of content... .") (citations omitted, emphasis in original). 


20a 


But if the must-carry provisions are content-related at 
all, they are only marginally so, to the point of de 
minimis. Congress may have presumed, on a very non- 
specific (and unarticulated) level, that there would be 
some content differences between the subject matter 
and or emphasis of the video signals emitted by local 
broadcasters and those produced by cable programmers 
It appears to the Court, however, that Congress’ solici- 
tousness for local broadcasters’ material simply rests on 
its assumption that they have as much to say of interest 
or value as the cable programmers who service a given 
geographic market audience, not on any recognition that 
there is a discrete “local” subject-matter. So viewed, the 
must-carry provisions hardly evince the type of nefarious 
governmental activity guarded against by the Furst 
Amendment generally and the strict scrutiny standard in 
particular. 


Moreover, even if a “local” versus “non-local” dichotomy 
of message exists, and can be said to be content-related 
in some abstract way. the cable medium exhibits certain 
characteristics unique to the way the industry has evolved 
and is presently structured, and of equally “local’’ di- 
mensions having nothing whatsoever to do with message. 
Cable operators have prevailed upon “local” public au- 
thorities to license their use of public rights-of-way over 
which to string their coaxial cable networks, and there 
are manifestly limits to the number of such licenses likely 
to be issued. They vie with broadcasters for “local” ad- 
vertisers. Cable operators have also historically enjoyed 
the right to retransmit “local” broadcast programmung 
when and to the extent they wished subject only to ad- 
ministratively set royalty fees. The technology they em- 
ploy enables a single cable operator to transmit a video 
signal superior to that of conventional over-the-air trans- 
mitters, and to deliver at a “local’’ television receiver a 
vastly greater number of channels to watch than all local 
broadcasters combined. There is, moreover, little com- 
petition among “local” cable operators themselves. In 


ela 
Short, the term “‘local’’ as applied to the cable industry 
has many implications other than as a synonym for 
provincial” as an adjective applied to programming and 


all were within the contemplation ef Congress when it 
enacted must-carry. 


The Supreme Court has observed that “differences in 
the characteristics of new media justify differences in the 
First Amendment standards applied to them.” South- 
eastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 557 
(1975); see Quincy, 768 F.2d at 1448. Compare Red 
Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 US. 367, 386 
(1969) with Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241. Cable has achieved 
its present market dominance, in large part, due to such 
“local” factors—artifacts of a sort of the industry's evo- 
lution—not because it has delivered an intrinsically better 
message. Similar factors, benign in themselves, perhaps, 
and characteristic of many successful industries having 
supplanted older rivals, have nevertheless led to regula- 
tion of such industries for economic reasons when their 
market powcrs have reached dangerous proportions. 


* Although this maxim is oft-repeated, the Supreme Court has 
infrequently invoked unique media characteristics to justify re- 
laxed scrutiny of content-based regulations. The single notable 
exception is in the broadcast context, in which the Supreme Court 
has found content-based, fair acceas regulation to be justified by 
scarcity of electromagnetic spectrum space, Red Lion Broadcasting 
Co. v. FCC, 895 U.S. 867 (1969). and has found limited content- 
based indecency regulations to be justified by broadcasting’s per- 
vasive presence and unique accessibility to children, FCC v. Pacifica 
Found., 438 U.S. 726 (1978). PruneYard, arguably, is also « case 
in which the Court found that epecia! contextua! characteristics 
of the “California shopping center” justify special First Amend- 
ment treatment. See PruneYard. 447 U.S. at 87. As discussed 
above, however, PruneYard is just as easily explained as a content- 
neutral case. See Pacific Gas, 475 US. at 12. The Seventh Circuit 
apparently has ruled that al! regulation of cable speech, whether 
or not content-based, is subject to relaxed First Amendment scru- 
tiny because of specia! characteristics peculiar to the cable medium. 
Chicano Cable, 879 F.2d at 1547-49; Omega Satellite Prods. v. City 
of Indianapolis, 694 F 2d 119 (7th Cir. 1982). 


ole) 
~-a 


Absent an indication of a Congressional purpose, 
whether avowed or covert, to effect a degree of content- 
control by mandating carriage of “local” broadcasters’ 
signals, the First Amendment should not unduly inhibit 
Congress in what clearly appears on its face to be an 
effort to level the economic playing field in the television 
industry, at large, even if in doing so it may coinciden- 
tally inhibit some freedom of choice of the cable opera- 
tors as to whose signals are to be carried and under what 
conditions. The Court accordingly concludes that O’Brien 
and Rock Against Racism provide the appropriate stand- 
ard for determining the constitutionality of Congress’ 
mandatory carriage provisions.* 


28 The plaintiffs correctly note that the Supreme Court, in Tor- 
nillo, rejected the suggestion that economic impediments to access 
justified Florida's right-of-reply law. Tornillo, 418 U.S. at 247-57. 
But, read in context, the Supreme Court's discussion in Tornillo 
has no application in this case. Importantly, the regulation in 
Tornillo was expressly based on content in two ways; it exacted 
its penalty on the basis of the antecedent publication of one mes- 
sage and it compelled carriage of another. Tornillo, 418 US. at 
256-58. The government, in Tornilic, sought to use economic scar- 
city as a justification for ensuring that the public had access to 
messages favorably portraying political candidates who had been 
criticized in the press. It was in this context that the Court re- 


related. 

The Court notes that its conclusion that contextual factors unique 
to cable require relaxed First Amendment scrutiny of the must- 
carry provisions even if marginally content-related, depends, to 
some extent, on Congress’ factual! findings. The parties have raised 
the issue of whether the courts should strictly scrutinize @ con- 
gressiona) decision that a particular communications medium war- 
rants specia) First Amendment treatment. The Court finds that it 
need not resolve this intriguing question. With respect to the 


23a 
VI. 


The inquiry to be made under the O'Brien-Rock 
Against Racism formulation is to ascertain whether the 
must-carry provisions further a significant government in- 
terest, O’Brien, 391 U.S. at 377; Rock Against Racism, 
491 U.S. at 798-99; see also Quincy, 768 F.2d at 1454, 
and whether they are “narrowly tailored” to serve that 
interest, O’Brien, 391 U.S. at 377; Rock Against Racism, 
491 U.S. at 798. The narrow tailoring requirement is 
satisfied if the government’s regulation will effectively 
remedy the condition that the government has identified 
as in need of correction, and if it does not burden sub- 
stantially more speech than necessary in doing so. Rock 
Against Racism, 491 U.S. at 799. 


Congress’ objective in enacting the mandatory carriage 
requirements, it has declared, was to promote fair com- 
petition among video “speakers” in order to assure the 
survival of local broadcasting for the benefit of both those 
who subscribe to a cable service and for those who do not. 
See 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 58; Federal Defendant's 
Memorandum at 33. Although the D.C. Circuit declined 
an invitation to rule on whether this is a governmental 
goal of sufficient significance for O’Brien purposes, see 
Quincy, 768 F.2d at 1454, other cases establish that the 
importance of broadcasting generally, and in particular 
local broadcasting, to the American public is now beyond 
dispute.* See United States v. Southwestern Cable Co., 


factua] findings made by Congress, the Court has provided Con- 
gress with the level of deference befitting a co-equa! branch of gov- 
ernment that is well-equipped to take evidence and make findings. 
Metro Broadcasting, 457 U.S. at 569; see also Columbia Broadcasting 
Sys., Inc. v. Democratic Nat'l Comm., 412 U.S. 94, 103 (1973). 
The Court, however, has viewed as a matter of law, subject to no 
deference to Congress, the issue of whether the facts present the 
need for specia] First Amendment treatment. 


2¢ 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 628 at 50 (“[)]ocal television stations are 
central to [a competitive system of over-the-air-broadcasting )— 
they are both the leading source of news and public affairs informa- 


24a 


39092 U.S 157, 172-73 & nn. 38 A 39 (1968). National 
Ass'n of Broadcasters vo. FCC, 740 F.2d 1190, 1198 
(D.C. Cir. 1984), see also Capital Cities Cable, Inc. \ 
Crisp, 467 U.S. 691, 714 (1984); *" ef. Metro Broadcast 
ing, 497 U.S. at 566-68, 572-73. See generally Communi 


cations Act of 1934, § 307(b), 48 Stat. 1083. 


The plaintiffs submit that even if averting the demise 
of local broadcasting is deemed an important govern. 
mental goal, the factual premise on which the must-carry 
provisions are based, viz., that local broadcasting 1s in 
peril, is incorrect. Citing their own statistics, the plain- 
tiffs contend that broadcasting is alive and well, and has 
actually grown since the FCC’s must-carry rules were 
struck down in Quincy. Oppressive artifices such as must- 
carry, they say, are unnecessary. 


Congress, however, did not agree, and in sharp contrast 
with the meager record before the FCC when the court 
of appeals struck down the must-carry provisions in 
Quincy and Century, the current must-carry provisions 
are based on a substantial record assembled by Congress 
itself. See generally 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 42-46 (citing 
Federal Communications Commission, Policy and Rules 
Division, Mass Media Bureau, Cable System Broadcast 
Signal Carriage Survey (1988) (staff report) ); 1992 H.R. 
Rep. No. 628 at 50-57 (same). Congress received evi- 


tion for a majority of Americans and the most popular entertain- 
ment medium.”) 


%’ The Supreme Court, in Capital Cities, considered an Oklahoma 
Law prohibiting state cable companies from carrying out-of-state 
alcohol advertising. The Court held that the law was preempted 
by the FCC must-carry provisions in effect at the time. The Court 
rejected the state's argument that its power to regulate alcoho! 
under the Twenty-First Amendment was paramount to the federa) 
mandatory carriage program. The Court found that the state's 
interest in regulating alcohol was outweighed the “substantia! 
federa) interest” in protecting broadcast television for those that 
do not receive cabie. and in ensuring diverse video programming. 
Capital Cities, 467 US. at 714. 


25a 


dence demonstrating, to its satisfaction, that cable oper 
ators, in significant numbers, are denying carriage to local 
broadcasters, are attaching onerous conditions to their 
agreements to carry broadcasters, and are exiling broad 
casters being carried to remote channel positions. 199] 
S. Rep. No. 92 at 42-43; 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 628 at 5]. 
Congress also apparently credited evidence indicating 
that this unfavorable treatment of broadcasters is the re- 
sult of the cable operators’ attempts to obtain a competi- 
tive advantage, not a function of consumer demand. 1992 
Cable Act § 2(a)(12)-(15); 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 44." 
Congress determined that refusal to carry, termination of 
carriage, and channel repositioning artificially diminish 
the audiences of local broadcasters, and, in turn, decrease 
their revenues. 1992 Cable Act § 2(a)(11)-(15); 1991 
S. Rep. No. 92 at 44-45, 59; 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 628 at 
50-51. In light of all of the evidence, Congress concluded 
that local broadcast television is not flourishing; it is in 
serious jeopardy. 1992 Cable Act § 2(a)(16); 199] 
S. Rep. No. 92 at 59. 


Furthermore, even if the state of the broadcasting in- 
dustry is not now as parlous as the defendants contend, 
the Court finds it to be indisputable on this record that 
cable operators have attained a position of dominance in 
the video signal distribution market, and can henceforth 
exercise the attendant market power. The Court does not 
find improbable Congress’ conclusion that this market 
power provides cable operators with both incentive and 
present ability to block non-cable programmers’ access to 


** The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transporta- 
tion, for example, received evidence indicating that “[ijn almost 
every instance, (broadcast) stations [that have been repositioned) 
have been replaced by a cable program service in which the system 
operator is selling advertising or in which the operator has an 
equity interest or both” 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 44. The Com- 
mittee concluded that channel repositioning of broadcasters is 
“made solely to enhance the competitive position of the cable oper- 
ator’s programming or its advertising availabilities.” /d. 


26a 


the bulk of any prospective viewing audience; uncon- 
Strained, cable holds the future of local broadcasting at 
its mercy. In light of the considerable body of evidence 
amassed by Congress, and the deference this Court should 
accord to the factfinding abilities of the nation's legisla- 
ture, see Metro Broadcasting, 457 U.S. at 569; Columbia 
Broadcasting Sys., 412 U.S. at 103, the Court must con- 
clude that the danger perceived by Congress is real and 
substantial. 


The plaintiffs also contend that the must-carry pro- 
visions are not “narrowly tailored” to accomplish their 
objective. There seems to be little doubt that the must- 
Carry provisions will be effective in sustaining local broad- 
casting for the present. Rather than dispute their effec- 
tiveness as a means to the end, therefore, the plaintiffs’ 
complaint is that they are overly so; being excessive, they 
burden speech in instances in which governmental intru- 
sion is unnecessary. 


First, they argue that Congress’ goal can be achieved 
by the use of rudimentary technology, (a selector switch, 
for example), enabling broadcast and cable signals to be 
equally accessible to cable subscribers who want to watch 
them; viewer preference will then determine the victor in 
an idealized “marketplace of ideas.” Second, they con- 
tend that mandatory cable carriage of all local broad- 
Casters is too much of a good thing; it may require an 
operator to carry signals of broadcasters it would not 
otherwise carry in a market in which there is actually a 
surfeit of “local” programming on cable as well as over- 
the-air. The Court concludes, however, that the must- 
Carry provisions are sufficiently, if not surgically, tailored 
to Congress’ larger economic market-adjusting objective. 


It is, of course, conceivable that there are less restric- 
tive alternatives that Congress could have employed in its 
attempt to preserve the vitality of local broadcasting. 
Importantly, however, under O’Brien, the government is 
not required to settle for means that serve its interests less 


27a 


effectively merely because an alternative might be less 
burdensome. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. at 799 
(citing United States y. Albertini, 472 US. 675, 689 
(1985)). Congress actually found that input-selector 
switches were ineffective sumply because viewers tended 
not to use them (a function, perhaps, of viewer inertia 
as much as viewer preference). See 199] S. Rep. No. 
92 at 44-45; 1992 H.R. Rep. No. 628 at 54; see also 
1992 Cable Act § 2(a)(17). Of more Significance, how- 
ever, is that Congress furthe: “ound that prophylactic 
measures were necessary to comivat ».- uperators’ tenden- 
cies toward anti-competitive treatment of broadcasters 
generally. See 1991 S. Rep. No. 92 at 41-46: 1992 HR. 
Rep. No. 628 at 50-58. Once again, the Court is un- 
willing to second-guess Congress’ determination that the 
must-Carry provisions are necessary to accomplish its ob- 
jective. Provoking a popularity contest between broadcast 
and cable programmers was not what it had in mind. 
See FEC v. National Right to Work Comm., 459 US. 
197, 207-11 (1982). 


Finally, the Court concludes that the must-Carry pro- 
visions do not unnecessarily burden a substantial amount 
of the plaintiffs’ own speech. Operators retain complete 
discretion over much the greater proportion of the chan- 
nel spectrum on their systems, and non-broadcast pro- 
grammers are free to compete for access to those channels 
not dedicated. Under no circumstances will an operator 
be required, under section 4, to devote more than one- 
third of its channel capacity to loca] broadcast use.” Simi- 
larly, under section 5, operators with less than 36 useable 
channels need not carry more than 3 non-educational 
channels, and no operator must carry duplicative nop- 


7° Furthermore, it appears to the Court that the burdensomeness 
of the must-carry provisions is illusory in the potentially signifi- 
cant number of cases in which a cable operator receives a carnage 
request from an operator it would have carned even in the absence 
of the request. 


28a 


educational programming. Thus, although the must-carry 
regulations may reduce the overall quantity of cable oper 
ator and programmer speech “opportunities,” as it were, 
it leaves open adequate—in fact, plentiful—alternative, 
intra-medium channels of communication for cable speak- 
ers to deliver whatever messages they choose. The Consti 
tution requires no more. Compare Heffron vy. Intl Soc. 
for Krishna Consciousness, 452 U.S. 640 (1981) with 
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Turner, 893 


F.2d 1387, 1393 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 


Conclusion 


The 1992 Cable Act represents a major congressional 
effort to bring order and stability to an industry that 
significantly, and often profoundly, touches American 
lives. It is not the province of this Court to pass judgment 
upon the wisdom of the policies the national legislature 
has chosen to pursue in such endeavors. That, of course, 
is a task our system of government commits to the elec- 
toral and political processes, and the Court S power in that 
regard is not enlarged merely because it 1s invoked in the 
name of the First Amendment. Simply put, the govern- 
mental intention evinced by the must-carry provisions is 
economic, not ideologic, and raises no suspicion of the 
type of ominous government interference with speech 
against which the First Amendment protects. 


Vil. 


National Interfaith Cable Coalition (“NICC”) seeks to 
enjoin enforcement of sections 4 and 5 of the 1992 Cable 
Act on another First Amendment ground, namely, that 
the provisions violate the Free Exercise and Establishment 
of Religion Clauses of the First Amendment. NICC'’s mo- 
tion is opposed by the federal defendants, who have filed 
a mouon to dismiss, and by several intervenor-defendants, 
many of whom have filed dispositive motions. The Court 
concludes that sections 4 and 5 do not violate the Religion 


Clauses of the First Amendment. 


29a 
NICC is an “interfaith consortium” of several Judeo 
Christian religious Froups in the United States. NIC 


disseminates its messages through the Vision Interfaith 
Satellite Network (“VISN"). a cable programming opera 
tion which competes for Carriage on the many cable Sys 
tems across the country. Like the other programmers, 
NICC objects to the must-Carry provisions because the 
provisions will reduce the number of cable television chan 
nel positions available for use by non-broadcast program- 
mers. By mandating Carriage of the religious program- 
ming of local broadcasters, the provisions represent a 
special danger to NICC: it fears that cable operators 
forced to carry some broadcast religious programming will 
resist voluntary carriage of additional religious fare. 


NICC’s Religion Clause challenges center on the prem- 
ise that the religious programming of local broadcasters 
is different in kind from NICC’s programming. NICC 
contends that most local religious broadcasters tend to 
present fundamentalist religious views and are often criti- 
cal of other viewpoints, while NICC transmits messages 
that are more “mainstream” and “religiously balanced.” 
NICC argues that the Must-Carry provisions, by granting 
preferential treatment to local religious broadcasters, cre- 
ate an illicit liaison between the federal government and 
Particular sectarian interests in violation of the Establish- 
ment Clause, and by impeding NICC from reaching its 
audience and delivering its own religious message, the 
provisions violate the Free Exercise Clause. 


To comport with the Constitution under the now 
familiar Establishment Clause test, government action 
must “(1) reflect a clearly secular Purpose; (2) have a 
primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion; 
and (3) avoid excessive government entanglement with 
religion.” Lee v. Weisman. 112 § Ct 2649, 2654 
(1992) (citing Lemon v. Kurtzman. 403 US. 602 
(1971) and Commitiee for Pub. Educ. & Relicious 
Liberty v. Nyquist, 413 US. 756 (1973)). Even if the 
Court were to accept NICC’s major premuse—that the 


30a 


must-carry provisions disproportionately favor the speech 
of certain types of religious speakers over others—the 
provisions do not violate the Establishment Clause. There 
is no evidence that the must-carry provisions were 1n- 
tended to be anything but religion—as well as content- 
neutral; they do not involve the government in religious 
affairs; and there is no basis for concluding that they 
will be perceived to represent governmental endorsement 
of parucular religious views or religion in general. 


The provisions clearly reflect a secular purpose, as dis- 
cussed above. There is nothing in the record to indicate 
that Congress was even aware of any difference in the 
religious messages of broadcasters and programmers, 
much less to indicate that must-carry represents a delib- 
erate attempt to favor or disfavor any religious views or 
pracuces. 


Similarly, the must-carry provisions kave a primary 
effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion. A law 
does not violate the Establishment Clause merely because 
it benefits or burdens religious institutions in some way. 
Mueller v. Allen, 463 U.S. 388, 393, 398-402 (1983); 
see Waltz v. Tax Comm'n, 397 U.S. 664 (1970). “In- 
cidental” burdens and benefits on religious institutions do 
not violate the Establishment Clause’s primary effect in- 
quiry. See Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 273-74 
(1981). Central to the primary effect inquiry is whether 
a reasonable observer would interpret the governmental 
action to be religion-preferential, County of Allegheny v. 
ACLU, 492 U.S. 573, 592-93 (1989); see Widmar, 454 
U.S. at 274, and there is little danger of such a perception 
if a law applies to a broad range of entities, both religious 
and secular. Widmar, 454 U.S. at 274-74. Comparc 


® As the Supreme Court noted in Widmar, “[i)f the Establish- 
ment Clause barred the extension of genera! benefits to religious 
groups. a church could not be protected by the police and fire de- 
partments, or have its public sidewalk kept in repair.” Wuidmar, 
454 U.S. at 274-75 (citations omitted). 


31a 


Mucller, 463 U.S. 388 (upholding state law providing 
income tax deduction for tuition, textbook and transpor 
tation expenses for parents of children in public as well 
as parochial schools) with Nvquist, 413 U.S. 756 (1983) 
(holding unconstitutional public assistance grants to par- 
ents of children in nonpublic schools only). The must- 
Carry provisions apply to all broadcasters, without regard 
to whether their programming contains any religious fare 
at all. Accordingly, the Court cannot conclude that the 
primary effect of the provisions is to advance the religious 
message of local broadcasters or suppress the religious 
messages of cable programmers. 


Nor can the Court conclude that the must-carry pro- 
visions foster excessive governmental entanglement with 
religion. Regulatory legislation creates excessive entangle- 
ment only if there is “detailed monitoring and close ad- 
ministrative contact” between the government and sec- 
tarian organizations or affairs. Hernandez v. Commis- 
sioner of Internal Revenue, 490 U.S. 680, 696-97 (1989); 
sce Muclicr, 463 U.S. at 403. There is no basis on which 
to conclude that the federal government will, in imple- 
menting must-carry, become involved in any activity in 
the nature of religious oversight. To be eligible for man- 
datory carriage, a broadcaster must meet two basic re- 
quirements only; it must be licensed by the FCC and it 
must operate within a cable operators’ television market. 
1992 Cable Act § 4. The must-carry provisions accord- 
ingly present no danger of entanglement beyond that 
created by the FCC’s broadcast license scheme itself. It 
is well-settled that “routine regulatory interaction which 
involves no inquires into religious doctrine” creates no 
Establishment Clause infirmity. Hernandez, 490 USS. at 
697. 


NICC contends that the must-carry provisions violate 
the Frec Exercise Clause because they prevent NICC 
from cffectively disseminating its religious message. Any 
burden imposed on NICC’s religious practice, however, 


32a 


is merely the incidental effect of a facially religion- 
neutral law that is generally applicable to all Operators, 
programmers, and broadcasters. Such laws do not violate 
the Free Exercise Clause. Employment Div. v. Smith, 
494 U.S. 872 (1990). The must-carry provisions do not, 
in any way, foreclose dissemination of any religious mes- 
Sage or abridge any religious practice. 


V10. 


The Local Community Broadcasters (““LCB’’), an in- 
tervenor-defendant in these consolidated cases, argues 
that section 4 of the 1992 Act violates the First Amend- 
ment rights to free speech and equal protection rights 
of low power television (“LPTV") stations. By way of 
relief, LCB asks this Court to require the FCC to pro- 
vide expansive mandatory carriage nights, similar to those 
provided to full power broadcasters, to LPTV. Even as- 
Suming this Court has the power to provide such a rem- 
edy, a dubious proposition, the Court finds that section 
4 does not abridge LCB’s constitutional rights. 


In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the FCC began to 
implement a program for providing low power television 
Service to viewers across the nation. LPTV operates on 
the same technological principles as broadcast television, 
but within a minimal geographic range. In addition, 
LPTV stations are licensed by the FCC on a secondary 
basis; they may not interfere with the Signals of licensed 
full power stations, and they must give way to any full 
power station attempting to use the same frequency. See 
generally 47 C.F.R. §§ 74.701-74.781 (1992): 1982 
LPTV Inquiry, supra note 4. The Commission envi- 
sioned LPTV as a less costly alternative for those seek- 
ing to enter the television broadcast industry,” and saw 


8} An Inquiry Into the Future Role of Low Power Televison 
Broadcasting and Television Translators in the National Telecom- 
menications System, 82 F.C.C.2d 47, 80 (1980) (statement of Chair- 
man Ferris). 


33a 


LPTV as enhancing diversity in the television market. 
especially for minority broadcasters.” 


The 1992 Cable Act provides very limited mandatory 
carnage rights to LPTV. Under section 4. a cable op- 
erator is only required to carry a low power station if 
there are not enough full power commercial broadcasters 
to fill the one-third channel set-aside imposed by the sec- 
tion. Furthermore, a low power station is eligible for 
mandatory carriage only if it serves a rural area without 
full power service. Cable operators with fewer than 36 
channels are required to carry one qualified LPTV sta- 
tion, and those with 36 channels or more need only to 
carry two qualified LPTV stations. 


LCB's constitutional claims are similar to those made 
by the programmers. LCB claims that because the must- 
Catry provisions favor local full power broadcasters by 
Providing them with scarce channel positions and fail to 
provide similar rights to many rural and all non-rural 
LPTV stations, the provisions impede the ability of 
LPTV stations to reach their audiences. LCB also claims 
that like the programmers, LPTV operators need must- 
carry to defend themselves against anticompetitive cable 
operator practices. 


®> See id. 


34a 


with First Amendment rights; it is, instead, claiming that 
thev have been disparately treated.” 


Unless viewpoint-based, disparate governmental treat- 
ment of diferent speakers, unlike governmental imposi- 
tion of burdens on expression, does not implicate either 
O'Brien balancing or strict scrutiny. Message-neutral gov- 
ernment decisions to provide benefits to one group of 
speakers but not others are constitutional if there are ra- 
tional legislative reasons for distinguishing between 
groups. Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educ. 
Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 806 (1985); Regan v. Taxation with 
Representation, 461 U.S. 540, 545-46; accord id. at 548- 
51 (governmental distinctions between groups of speakers 
subject only to rational basis review under equal protec- 
tion component of Fifth Amendment unless they are 
aimed at the suppression of ideas); Walsh, 927 F.2d at 
1235-37 (same); id. at 1238-39 (Williams, J., concur- 
ring) (same).™ 


®3 Because LCB asks this Court to uphold a statute that is alleged 
to burden their expressive activity, their claim is distinguishable 
from those made in virtually all of the First Amendment cases 
LCB has cited. Minneapolis Star and Arkansas Writers’ Project, 
Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221 (1987), for example, both involved 
challenges to differential taxation schemes applicable to smal! 
segments of the press. See generally Leathers, 111 S. Ct. 1442-43. 
The plaintiffs in both cases raised direct First Amendment claims 
because they challenged the validity of the taxes as either directly 
burdensome on speech or creating impermissible dangers of govern- 
mental censorship. In contrast, the position taken by LCB demon- 
strates that its sole constitutional concern is that the must-<arry 
provisions fai] to provide LPTV with the protection from anti- 
competitive practices that has been provided to full power broad- 
casters. 


* LCB’'s equa! protection claim is based entirely on the some- 
what esoteric fundamental] rights line of equa) protection juris- 
prudence. Although LCB indicates that LPTV operations are often 
run by minority groups, there is no allegation that LPTV oper- 
ators are a suspect class. 


35a 


LPTV was conceived and created as a secondary serv- 
ice, and has never enjoyed rights coextensive with full 
power television. See 1982 LPTV Inquiry, supra note 4. 
Congress's treatment of LPTV is consistent with the gov- 
erment’s treatment of LPTV since its inception. Once 
again, in the absence of any reason to suspect Congress 
of message-regulation, the Court must uphold Congress’ 
decision not to equalize the free speech rights of LPTV 
with full power broadcasting unless it is irrational. Regan, 
461 U.S. at 548. Nothing at all appears to be irrational 
about a legislative policy judgment to treat LPTV as a 
lesser player in the television market, as it has always 
been, no matter how innovative, imaginative, or deserving 
the Court might find LPTV to be. 


36a 
CONCURRING OPINION 


STANLEY SPORKIN, District Judge 


I concur. I believe that Plaintiffs have not made a case 
under the First Amendment that would invalidate the 
must-carry provisions of the 1992 Cable Act. Congress 
has acted in a highly reasonable and responsible way with- 
out trampling the constitutional rights of this nation’s 
ciuzens. I write separately to emphasize that, because 
any burden imposed by the 1992 Cable Act on speech is 
so remote and incidental to the purpose and effect of the 
1992 Cable Act, 1 do not find that the must-arry pro- 
visions of the Cable Act of 1992 implicate the First 
Amendment to the extent to which Plaintiffs claim. 


For many years, Congressional policy regarding the 
telecommunications industry has had a consistent goal: 
To foster public access to a diverse array of information 
and views. Congress has found that, to a significant de- 
gree because of federal and local governmental decisions 
in prior years, the cable industry threatens to achieve 
monopolistic contro] over the telecommunications market. 
Thus, @ competitive imbalance between the cable and 
broadcast industnes has developed, threatening this im- 
portant goal. 


umder the guise of the First Amendment, would 
this Court strike down a statute enacted by Con- 
in an effort to reign in cable companies’ growing 
economic might and to restore competitive balance in the 
telecommunications industry. However, this case is not 
about protecung free speech and the First Amendment. 
This case 1s about market domination and control. 


37a 


I 


This case involves two young industries which are essen- 
tially less than a half century old. It might be said that 
invention Of television was the first shot fired in the 
technology revolution, which continues even at this time 
at an unprecedented pace. From early on, because of the 
space limitations of the broadcast spectrum, a means had 
to be devised for allocating stations on a reasonable and 
fair basis. Congress determined that market forces alone 
could not make the proper allocation. Thus, right from 
the start this infant industry was born into a system of 
heavy regulation.’ 


The cable industry dates back to 1947, when it first 
emerged as a satellite system. Cable Originated as a 
device to facilitate transmission of television broadcast 
signals to remote areas.” Recognizing the potential of the 


The FCC, created in 1934, became the principa) vehicle for 
overseeing the television industry. That agency was given juris- 
diction to allocate space on the broadcast band by awarding licenses 


In 1947, Mr. Walson was the owner of an appliance store 
in Mahanoy City, near Allentown, when he discovered he had 
trouble selling televisions because the mountains of eastern 
Pennsylvania interfered with reception. 

He erected an antenna tower atop New Boston Mountain 
overlooking Mahanoy City and rap wire to television sets in bis 
store window. He added amplifiers to the system the next 


38a 


technoloey to serve the interests of rural America, Con- 
cress began to explore ways to protect and foster the 


nascent industry 


For several decades, while studying the issue, Congress 
left regulation of the cable industry to the FCC. In part 
because of its origin as an adjunct to broadcasting, cable 
became cloaked in much of the regulatory culture en- 
veloping the broadcast industry. 


In the mid-1970s, Congress determined that a number 
of regulatory and marketplace obstacles had prevented the 
cable industry from achieving its full potential. To en- 
hance cable’s development as a competitive force in the 
telecommunications market, Congress enacted several 
laws to support the growth of the industry. 


In 1976 Congress passed legislation granting a 

tems’ copyright licenses to retransmit over-the-air 
acieen ag Public Law No. 94-553, Title I, § 101 
(1976), codified at 17 U.S.C. §111. In 1978, in re- 
sponse to cable operators’ claim that utility companies 
were exacting unreasonable rates for the Operators’ use of 
utility poles and underground conduits, Congress passed 
legislation authorizing the FCC to resolve pole attach- 
ment disputes between the operators and utility com- 
panies. Public Law No. 95-234, § 6 (1978), codified as 
amended at 47 U.S.C. § 224. Through the pole attach- 
ment legislation, Congress sought “to minimize the effect 
of unjust or unreasonable pole attachment practices on the 


spring, then persuaded residents to hook up for a $100 installa- 
tion fee and $2 a month. 

His company, called Service Electric Cable TV, now has 
more than 400 employees and serves subscribers in eastern 
and centra) Pennsylvania and northwestern New Jersey. 

Mr. Walson made cable television history again in 1972. 
when his company became the first to offer the cable channe! 
Home Box Office to customers. HBO recently presented him 
with an award recognizing that distinction. 


39a 


wider development of cable television service to the 
public.” * 


Meanwhile, since cable often required use of local tele- 
phone lines, state and municipal authorities developed 
local franchise and license systems further regulating cable 
in their respective markets. Thus, in some ways, regula- 
tion of the cable industry was even more pervasive than 
that of the broadcast industry in general, often to the 
detriment of both the industry and its subscribers. 


Perceiving a need to establish a national policy for 
cable television, Congress passed the Cable Communica- 
tions Policy Act of 1984. Consistent with Congress’ long- 
‘tanding policy regarding the telecommunications market 

S a whole, the 1984 Act aimed to “promote competition 
in cable communications and minimize unnecessary regu- 
lation that would impose an undue economic burden on 
cable systems.” Public Law No. 98-549, §2 (1984), 
codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521(6). 


The 1984 Cable Act contained several provisions to 
support cable's competitive position. With regard to local 
franchising authorities, the Act (1) restricted their ability 
to regulate rates, allowing them to do 80 Only where 
there was a lack of effective competition, to be defined by 
the FCC, (2) limited the obligations they could impose 
On cable companies and (3) limited their authority to 
deny renewal of cable franchises. 


available to the public. To thwart the development of 
local media monopolies and to encourage diversity of 
ownership of communications outlets, the 1984 Act pro- 
hibited ownership of a cable company by the owmer of a 
tclevision broadcast license or telephone company. And 


*S. Rep. No. 580, 95th Cong. lst Seas 14 (1977), reprinted in 
1978 U.S.C.C.A.N. 109, 122. 


40a 


to foster a broad diversity of information sources, the Act 
permitted cities to continue to require in cable fran- 
chises that certain cable channel capacity be devoted to 
public, educational and governmental channels. 


As a result of technological innovation and creativity 
and supported by federal legislation, the cable industry 
has come a long way in its less than SO years existence. 
Indeed, there is little resemblance between the cable in- 
dustry of 1947 and that of today. Cable has expanded 
television Communications beyond the wildest imagination 
of its discoverers. It has virtually eliminated the original 
problems caused by the space limitation of the broadcast 
spectrum. Instead of providing access to television broad- 
casting as it main objective, through creativity and vision, 
cable now has a free standing existence. It has developed 
from being the dog’s tail to being the tail that wags the 
dog. 


Although cable has brought about much good, there 
have been excesses which, over the years, Congress has 
felt compelied to alleviate. In particular, Congress has 
found that certain anticompetitive monopolistic behavior 
on the part of cable companies has accompanied their 
success, behavior which threatens the vitality of broad- 
Cast programming and, therefore, the public interest in 
access to a wide range of information and views.‘ Thus, 
while cable has virtually eliminated the problems caused 
by scarcity on the broadcast spectrum, it has created an- 
other scarcity—mamely access to the channels on cable 
systems themselves 


In finding that the must-carry provisions of the Cable 
Act do not violate the First Amendment, several points 
merit special emphasis. First, local and federal govern- 
ment regulation played an important role in allowing cable 


*See Judge Jackson's Opinion, supra, for a discussion of the 
Congressional] findings in this regard and the voluminous record 


Supporting them. 


4la 


to achieve the position it has today. In addition to the 
Support provided by federal legislation in the 1970s and 
by the Cable Act of 1984, all too often local franchising 


authorities granted cable compames an exclusive fran- 
chise in their local market. 


Second, cable companies enjoying such de facto mo- 
nopolies wield enormous power Over programming in the 
telecommunications market as a whole. Cable operators 
can require programmers to provide the operator ex- 
clusive carriage rights or a financial interest in the pro- 
gtamming as a condition of Carriage, and some have done 
so. The substantial negative impact such conditions have 
on broadcast stations and television distributors is clear. 


Third, as an increasing proportion of the Public sub- 
Scribed to cable (now 60% of American households own- 
ing a television set), broadcast Stations have become in- 
creasingly dependent on cable to reach their television 
audiences. As cable has become the primary means for 
transmission of all broadcast Signals in a locality, it has 
become imperative for broadcasters to obtain retransmis- 
sion of their signals by the local cable company. Other- 
wise, the broadcaster will face a greatly diminished audi- 
ence. Since it is often the case that cable and broadcast 
companies are in direct competition for advertising reve- 
nues, cable companies have a powerful means by which 
to adversely affect the financial interests of broadcast sta- 
tions by refusing to Carry OF even terminating its broad- 
Cast clients. 


Congress specifically found that broadcast stations, by 
being part of the local community, continue to be an 
important source of local news. public and educational 
programming and other services critical to an informed 
electorate. The cable industry's growing monopolistic 
hold on the telecommunications industry, Congress rea- 
soned, threatens the viability of its only current competi- 
tion—local broadcasters. Congress concluded that, should 


“oo ol 


local broadcasters be forced off the aur, the public interest 
in being able to obtain access to a broad selection of local 
news and public and educational programming would be 
endangered 


I] 


Secuuons 4 and 5 of the Cable Act of 1992 are a form 
of regulation, designed to lessen the monopolistic threat 
posed by cable to the telecommunications industry. Con- 
trary to the arguments of Plaintiffs that the 1992 Act 
limits First Amendment rights on its face, the Act’s ob 
jective is to enhance the diversity of television voices 
protected by the First Amendment by neutralizing the ad- 
verse effects of cable companies’ monopolistic behavior 
and securing the position of broadcasters’ programs. As 
an interim measure to accomplish this end, “must-carry” 
is an integral part of the solution to the problems identified 
by Congress.° 


Plaintiffs have come before this Court, not because 
their freedom of speech is seriously threatened, but be- 
cause their profits are; to dress up their complaint in 
First Amendment garb demeans the principles for which 


* At some point, technological innovation wil] enable cable Bys- 
tems to accommodate al) broadcasters requesting carriage, thereby 
rendering “must carry” a problem of the past. Indeed, according 
to a April 6, 1993 article in the Washington Post, Telecommunica- 
tion’s Inc., the nation’s largest cable television company, is about 
to “unveil an ambitious plan to rewire many of its cable systems 
with 7,000 miles of high-capacity, fiber-optic lines” over the next 
four years, which eventually will “enable TCI to deliver hundreds 
of TV channels [and] ‘video-on-demand’ programming” to its sub- 
acribers. 

However, while fiber-optic and other technologica) innovations 
may be on the verge of a break through which may wel) cast a 
diferent light on Plaintiffs’ First Amendment ciaims, such innova- 
tions have not yet realized their potential in the marketplace. In 
the context of today’s technological landscape, the Cable Act of 
1992 must be viewed as regulation designed to alleviate the adverse 
impact of the cable industries’ growing monopolistic hold over the 
telecommunications industry. 


$3a 


the First Amendment stands and the protections it was 
designed to afford. To the extent to which the First 
Amendment is implicated, I agree with Judge Jackson 
that the minimal level of scrunity outlined in United 
States v. O'Brien, 39} U.S. 367 (1968) and Ward y 
Rock Against Racism, 49] U.S. 781 is the Standard the 
Court should apply. 


; Plaintiffs raise two arguments in support of their claim. 

First, the cable Operators argue that the must-carry pro- 
visions are content-based restrictions compelling them to 
carry the speech of broadcast Stations, and as such run 
afoul of the First Amendment. Second, the cable pro- 
£rammers argue that the MUSI-Carry provisions unfairly 
prefer the “speech” of broadcasters over their First 
Amendment rights. Both of these arguments fail. 


A. Operators’ Claim 


an individual to speak. See, ¢.g., Wooley v. Maynard 
430 U.S. 705, 97 S.Ct. 1428 (1977). Ses Seeeae Oe 
has extended this principle to apply to newspapers and 
to privately-owned newsletters in Miami Herald Publish- 
ing Company vy. Tornillo, 94 S.Ct 2831 (1974) and 
Pacific Gas & Elec. y. P.U.C. of California, 106 S.Ct. 


While the plaintiffs would have the Court extend the 
coverage of Tornillo and Pacifis Gas & Elec. to the case 
at bar, these cases are inapposite to the arguments raised 
by Plaintiffs. 

Tornillo broadly recognized the free speech rights of 
newspapers. Tornillo involved state action which penal- 
ized identifiable content-based speech and compelled trans- 
mission of a particular message. Im that case, the Sv- 
preme Court once again made it Clear that a statute 


44a 


which infringes on a newspaper's editorial rights is highly 
Suspect under the First Amendment. 


A continuum exists between compelled speech which is 
content based and that which incidentally relates to 
speech. While conflicting signals can be discerned from 
the case law on when regulations of business enterprises 
are content-based and when they are not, some First 
Amendment challenges lend themselves to the following 
maxim: You know it when you don’t see it. This is such 
a case. 


“Content-neutral” regulations are those that “are justi- 
fied without reference to the content of the regulated 
speech.” City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 106 
S.Ct. 925, 929 (1986). In Renton, the Court found 
that a city zoning ordinance restricting the location of 
adult theaters was not aimed at the content, but rather 
at the secondary effects such theaters had on the sur- 
rounding community. 


Perhaps more similar to the case at bar is Regan v. 
Taxation with Representation, 103 S.Ct. 1997 (1983). 
In that case, the Supreme Court found § 501(c)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, which grants tax-exempt status 
to organizations organized and operated exclusively for 
certain statutorily-prescribed purposes, is constitutional. 
Like must-carry’s distinction between cable programmers 
and broadcasters, § 501(c)(3) clearly makes a statutory 
distinction between different groups of speakers. Finding 
“no indication that the statute was intended to suppress 
any ideas”, the Court found that § 501(c)(3) is not a 
content-based restriction on speech.* 


* Section 501(c)(3) grants tax-exempt status to organizations 
“organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scien- 
tific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or 
to foster nationa) or internationa] amateur sports competition ..., 
or for the prevention of cruelty to animals[,)” provided that no 
substantia) part of the activities of which consists attempting to 
influence legislation or supporting politica) candidates. 26 U.S.C. 
§ 601(c) (3). 


45a 


Like the ordinance in Renton and the statute in Regan 
v. Taxation With Representation, the must-carry provi- 
sions plainly “are justified without reference to the con- 
tent of the regulated speech” and there is “no indication 
that the statute was intended to suppress any ideas[.]”’ 
Must carry simply does not constitute a content-based 
restriction on cable operators’ speech. 


The right-of-reply statute in Tornillo and the Califor- 
nia Public Utilities Commission’s directive in Pacific Gas 
& Elec. plainly were based on the content of the regu- 
lated speech. But unlike the governmental actions in- 
volved in Tornillo and Pacific Gas & Electric, the must- 
carry provisions of the Cable Act of 1992 neither “pe- 
naliz[e] the expression of particular points of view [nor] 
force[] speakers to alter their speech to conform to an 
agenda which they do not set.” Pacific Gas & Elec, 106 
S.Ct. at 908. The must-carry provisions do not “restrict 
[Plaintiffs’] speech to certain topics or views or [] force 
[them] to respond to views that others may hold.” /d., 
at 909. Miust-carry will not “impermissibly require 
[Plaintiffs] to associate with speech with which [they] may 
disagree” nor make them “feel compelled to respond to 
arguments and allegations made by [a local broadcaster] 
in its messages to [Plaintiffs’] customers.” Jd., at 911. 


Cable operators are left with ample channels to dis- 
seminate their own views, and there is nothing about 
sections 4 and 5 of the 1992 Cable Act which might cause 
a cable operator to “conclude that, under these circum- 
stances, the safe course is to avoid controversy, thereby 
reducing the free flow of information and ideas.” J/d., 
at 910 (citation omitted). Finally, “if experience with 
[the must-carry provisions] indicates that they have the 
net effect of reducing rather than enhancing the volume 
and quality of coverage, there will be time enough to re- 
consider the constitutional implications.”” Red Lion 
Broadcasting Co. v. F.C.C., 89 S.Ct. 1794, 1808 (1969). 


46a 


Plainuffs argue that the prohibition outlined in Tornillo 
and Pacific Gas & Elec. against governmental intrusion 
into the province of editorial discretion provides an in- 
dependent basis leading the Court to apply strict First 
Amendment scrutiny to this case. In those cases, the 
clear content-triggered operation of the governmental reg- 
ulation threatened to alter the mix of information chosen 
by the newspaper or newsletter at issue. Since neither a 
newspaper nor a newsletter is “a passive receptacle or 
conduit for news, comment, and advertising”, Tornillo, 
94 S.Ct. at 2840, such interference with the editor’s func- 
tion triggered heightened scrutiny. 


While cable operators do exercise some control and 
judgment about the mix of overall programming they 
provide, such judgment does not entail the detail- 
oriented, content-based decisions made by the editors of 
newsletters, newspapers or other published sources of in- 
formation. If the Cable Act compelied the cable pro- 
grammers to carry the broadcasters’ speech, or compelled 
the operators to relay a particular message, the Act un- 
doubtedly would run afoul of the First Amendment. But 
that is not what is presented in this case. Requiring Cable 
operators to carry the programs of broadcasters, whatever 
the content of those programs may be, simply does not 
rise to the level of interference with editorial discretion 
which impinges on free speech or threatens to alter the 
mix of information available to the public. 


B. Programmers’ Claim 


Plaintiff programmers challenge the must-carry provi- 
sions as impermissibly favoring the speech of broadcaster 
Stations over that of cable programmers. 


“Generally, statutory classifications are valid if they 
bear a rational relation to a legitimate governmental pur- 
pose. Statutes are subject to a higher level of scrutiny if 
they interfere with the exercise of a fundamental right, 


47a 


such as freedom of speech, or employ a suspect classifica- 
tion.” Regan v. Taxation W'tih Representation, 103 S.Ct. 
at 2001-2002. Programmers and broadcasters clearly are 
not constitutionally protected groups. And, having found 
that must-carry does not violate the First Amendment. 
heightened scrutiny is not warranted in this case.’ Since 
I agree with Judge Jackson that the 1992 Cable Act 
passes muster under the rational relations standard of 
review, this argument fails. 


Finally, it must be pointed out that the only challenge 
before this Court is provided under the First Amendment. 
No challenge has been made under the taking provision 
of the Fifth Amendment or any other legal provision. 
Upholding the 1992 Act against Plaintiff's First Amend- 
ment challenge should in no way be taken as an endorse- 
ment of the legislation. Indeed, it may be preferable that 
the market be permitted to regulate itself. Of course, even 
the most avid proponents of free competition recognize 
that there cannot be effective free market competition 
without first eliminating the natural and not so natural 
monopolies that too many cable companies now enjoy. 


08 


Plaintiffs’ attempt to substitute Congress’ regulation of 
the cable industry with regulation by the First Amend- 
ment is mischievous. It is inconceivable that our fore- 
fathers at any time contemplated that the First Amend- 
ment would be used to regulate an industry that came into 
existence over 150 years after the Bill of Rights was 
adopted. 


Here, the Government has steppped aside to allow the 
Private sector to perform signal transmission and alloca- 


7 Moreover, a requirement that cable operators carry broadcast 
Programming cannot be said to compel speech on the part of cable 
Programmers. Thus, even if the First Amendment was implicated 
in this case, it is not clear that the programmers would have 
standing to assert this claim. 


484 


tion functions that the Government itself could have 
reserved for itself, without facing any conceivable First 
Amendment challenge by broadcasters or other program- 
mers because of the regulatory method chosen. To the 
extent to which cable is performing a “public utility” 
function which the Government itself could perform, Con- 
gress certainly has the right to adopt reasonable recula- 
tions. 


Congress has determined that cable companies’ grow- 
ing anti-competitive behavior and monopolistic power 
threatens the broadcast industry and the public’s access to 
a wide array of local, public and educational program- 
ming. Congress decided to address this danger by enact- 
ing the Cable Act of 1992. In so doing, Congress was not 
motivated by a desire to stifle the speech of cable op- 
erators Or programmers—indeed, ample channels remain 
open for their use—but by a desire to alleviate the effects 
of cable companies’ monopolies and to preserve the di- 
versity of voices represented by local, public and educa- 
tional broadcasters. Whether there were other preferable 
ways of accomplishing Congress’ objective is not for the 
Court to decide. So long as the method adopted by 
Congress is an appropriate one, it must stand and may 
not be second guessed by the judiciary. Consequently, | 
find that the Cable Act of 1992 does not run afoul of the 
First Amendment. 


DATE 4/8/93 
/s/ Stanley Sporkin 
STANLEY SPORKIN 
USS. District Judge 


39a 


For the foregoing reasons, it is, this 8th day of April, 
1993, 


ORDERED, that the plaintiffs’ motions for summary 
judgment on the must-carry claims are denied; and 1 15, 


FURTHER ORDERED, that the federal defendants’ 
motion to dismiss the must-carry claims are granted: and 
it 1S, 

FURTHER ORDERED, that the motion of intervenor- 
defendant Local Community Broadcasters for summary 
judgment on a cross-claim is denied; and it is 


FURTHER ORDERED, that the complaints of the 
plaintiffs and the intervenor-plaintiffs, insofar as they chal- 
lenge as unconstitutional sections 4 and 5 of the 1992 
Cable Act, are dismissed with prejudice; and it is 


FURTHER ORDERED, that the complaints of the 
plaintiffs, insofar as they challenge section 6 of the 1992 
Cable Act as not severable from purportedly unconstitu- 
tional provisions of that Act, are dismissed with prejudice; 
and it is 

FURTHER ORDERED, that the cross<laim of inter- 
venor-defendant Local Community Broadcasters is dis- 
missed with prejudice; and it is 

FURTHER ORDERED, that all other pending motions 
relating to the constitutionality of sections 4 and 5 of the 
1992 Cable Act are denied and dismissed as moot. 


/s/ Thomas Penfield Jackson 
THOMAS PENFIELD JACKSON 
US. District Judge 


/s/ Stanley Sporkin 
STANLEY SPORKIN 
U.S. District Judge 


Sf) 


DISSENTING OPINION , 


WILLIAMS. Circuit Judge, dissenting: The must-carry 
provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection 
and Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Act”) are ably set 
forth by the majority at pp. 3-6. In essence, they require 
cable operators to set aside just over a third of their 
channels for local broadcast stations. (The one-third-plus 
figure comprises both the commercial stations protected 
under §4 of the Act and the non-commercial stations pro 
tected under § 5.) In addition, each privileged broadcast 
station has a right to its specific “channel position” on the 
cable system. 1992 Act at §§ 4(b)(6) and 5(g)(5). 


In considering cable, Congress confronted a very real 
problem—one for which it has an easy remedy entirely 
consistent with the First Amendment. The problem is 
that cable systems control access “bottlenecks” to an im- 
portant communications medium. In fact, while there are 
several thousand cable operators in the United States, only 
53 communities are served by more than one operator. 
Debates, 138 Cong. Rec. $400, S436 (comments of Sen- 
ator Gorton). There are well-developed regulatory re- 
sponses to this sort of situation. The “bottleneck” holder 
may be ordered to serve all parties that meet neutral 
criteria for service. The Federal Communications Com- 
mission itself administers just such regulations in assur- 
ing that interstate long-distance telephone companies have 
access to loca] telephone networks. 47 U.S.C. § 202; and 
see, e.g.. MTS and WATS Market Structure Phase III, 
100 FCC 2d 860. 861 (1985) (adopting rules and 
policies relating to access). Indeed, courts have some- 
tunes taken on the supervision of such compulsory access 
under the “essential facilities” doctrine of the antitrust 
laws. United States v. Terminal Railroad Ass'n, 224 
U.S. 383 (1912). These solutions are, of course, im- 


Sla 


| *rfect: for example, they pose tricky pricing issues.’ 
But mandatory access rules of this sort give no special 
privilege to one set of access seekers over another. 


In fact, in 1984 Congress adopted provision for neutral, 
compulsory access to cable in § 612 of the Cable Com- 
munications Policy Act of 1984 ("1984 Act”), 47 U.S.C. 
§ 532, a solution somewhat refined in §9 of the 1992 
Aci. This provision entitles independent programmers 
i ‘ease access on cable systems, at reasonable prices to 
be set by the FCC. Although the channels available for 
lease under § 612 are limited to a specified proportion of 
each operator’s channels (depending on the total number 
that the operator possesses, 47 U.S.C. §§ 532(b)(1)(a)- 
d)), Congress remains free to expand the fraction of 
channels available. The only programmers excluded from 
the benefits of § 612 are those affiliated with the cable 
operator, i.e., the very ones who would be the likely bene- 
ficiaries of operator discrimination and who are therefore 
in no need of the law’s intervention. 


The must-carry provisions, by contrast, extend the privi- 
lege of access only to a special class of unaffiliated pro- 
grammers—local commercial and non-commercial tele- 
vision stations. Congress rested its decision to promote 
these stations in part, but quite explicitly, on a finding 
about their content—that they were “an important 
source of local news and public affairs programming and 
other local broadcast services critical to an informed 
electorate.” Sec 1992 Act, § 2(a)(11). Moreover, be- 
cause of FCC licensing requirements, every such local 
broadcaster is legally bound to “provide programming 
responsive to issues of concern to its community.” Report 
and O:der, MM Docket No. 83-670, 98 FCC 2d 1076, 


1 See, e.g., William J. Baumol, “Deregulation and Residual Regu- 
lation of Loca! Telephone Service”, Ch. VII], American Enterprise 
Institute Studies in Teiecommunication Deregulation (draft, March 
8, 1993). 


52 


1091-92 (1984). See also National Association of Broad. 
casters (“NAB") Corrected Memorandum at 24-25 (em- 
phasizing force of mandate to carry local content). In 
other words, by virtue of provisions of law outside the 
1992 Act, the term used by the Act to define the benefitted 
class automatically entails content requirements. 


A number of parties challenge these mandates, among 
them the cable operators who aust carry local broad- 
cast stations in place of their own choice of program- 
ming, and, even more significantly, the unaffiliated cable 
programmers, such as Discovery Network, producer of 
the Discovery and Learning Channels, whose program- 
ming will be supplanted. I shall apply current First 
Amendment analysis to their claims, but before doing so 
] think it useful to imagine a few hypothetical cases out- 
side the area of cable. If the answers to those hypo 
theticals are as clear as I think they are, then—unless 
there is something terribly special about cable, apart from 
the bottleneck issue addressed by § 612 of the 1984 Act— 
the must-carry provisions must fall. 


1. The Washington Post develops and patents a 
special “paper-springer” that enables it to deliver 
papers at a tiny fraction of others’ costs. Assume 
that paper delivery costs represent a very large share 
of total costs, so that this technology is a source of 
overwhelming monopoly power. Congress decrees 
that The Post must license the paper-springer—but 
only to publishers of local, neighborhood papers (1.c., 
not citywide ones). This cuts out The Washington 
City Paper, The Washington Informer, and the Wash- 
ington Times. 


2. A state is concerned that large shopping cen- 
ters represent a vital gathering places of citizens and 
that center Owners may not willingly allow the sort 
of leafletting or soap-box oratory associated with a 
vibrant democracy. Accordingly it requires owners 


to allow such leafletting and oratory regardless of 
the leafletters’ or speakers’ message. See Prine Yard 
Shopping Center v. Robbins, 447 U.S. 74 (1980). 
But finding that /oca/ residents are an especially im- 
portant source of this vibrant debate, 1 limits the 
privilege to persons living within four miles of each 
shopping center. This excludes the proverbial “out- 
side agitator”. 


These scenarios are in fact /ess troublesome under the 
First Amendment than the must-carry rules; the parties 
selected to benefit from the bottleneck-breaking rules are 
vefined in content-neutral terms. Here, by contrast, the 
bencficiaries are loca] stations that are required by govern 
ment to include specific content that the government has 
deemed especially worthy.* 


Standard of Review. The standard of review in First 
Amendment cases usually depends on whether the regu- 
lation is content-based, leading to “strict scrutiny”, Ar- 
kansas Writers’ Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221, 
231 (1987); Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 455, 461-62 
(1980), or content-neutral, leading to more relaxed scru- 
tiny under the formula of United States v. O'Brien, 391 


2 Government line-<drawing in First Amendment cases can be 
analyzed both in terms of the distinction between content-based 
and content-neutra! rules, and in terms of underinclusiveness. An 
underinclusiveness claim, when the classification is not content- 
based, is extremely weak; typically the law’s challenger is saying 
in essence that the law should fal! because it burdens too little 
speech. See, e.g. Walsh v. Brady, 927 F.2d 1229, 1236 (D.C. Cir. 
1991). This seems counterintuitive, and such claims rarely pre- 
vail. See, e.g., Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 US. 
652 (1990). Here, however, the operators, and especially the inde- 
pendent cable programmers, do not say that the law fails because 
the burden is too narrow; they say it fails because the beneficianes 
are so narrowly defined, and that the underinclusiveness thwarts 
rather than furthers the legitimate purpose of diversity. Even 
apart from the content-based character of the provision, then, the 
claim is stronger than the usua! one of underinclusiveness. 


Sta 


U.S. 367 (1968), as modified in Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781 (1989). Here the statute 1s 
content-based under controlling precedent. The must- 
Carry provisions mandate speech: they require cablecast- 
ers to carry the speech of local broadcast stations. As the 
Supreme Court held in Riley v. Nat'l Fed. of the Blind 
of North Carolina, 487 U.S. 781 (1988), “Mandating 
speech that a speaker would not otherwise make neces- 
sarily alters the content of the speech. We therefore con- 
sider the Act [mandating certain disclosures by charitable 
solicitors] as a content-based regulation of speech.” /d. 
at 795. This alteration of content is equally certain 
here; under the must-carry mandate, cablecasters must 
replace the programs they would have chosen, regardless 
of origin, with programs selected by local broadcasters. 


The Riley Court did not, however, immediately pro- 
ceed to apply strict scrutiny. Rather, addressing a claim 
that the speech was basically commercial, the Court re- 
jected that view on the ground that the commercial ele- 
ments were “inextricably intertwined” with fully protected 
non-commercial speech. Jd. at 796. More generally, it 
said that the Court’s “lodestars in deciding what level of 
scrutiny to apply to a compelled statement must be the 
nature of the speech taken as a whole and the effect of 
the compelled statement thereon.”” /d. While here we 
have no issue of commercial speech, I read the Rilcy 
analysis as a Caution against assuming that all compul- 
sions of speech, even fully protected speech, must receive 
strict scrutiny. We must look further. 


Where a government regulation of conduct has an 
“incidental” burden on speech, the Court looks to whether 
the interest asserted by the government “‘is unrelated to 
the suppression of free expression”, Texas v. Johnson, 
491 U.S. 397. 407 (1989) (internal quotations omitted), 
or, as the Court expressed it later on the pase, “uncon- 
nected to expression”, id. Application of a test for “in- 


cidental” burdens on speech seems highly artificial here. 


55a 


Given the finite number of cable channels, replacement 
of the cablecaster’s choice of programs with those of 
local broadcasters suppresses the alternative programs as 
completely as if Congress had ordered them shut down, 
there is nothing “incidental” about the burden. Further, 
one of the interests explicitly asserted by Congress was 
the benefit of “local news and public affairs program- 
ming”, 1992 Act, §2(a)(11); and indeed the class of 
chosen beneficiaries is defined by other legal provisions 
as persons bound to include some minimum level of local 
programming content. Moreover, the Court applies strict 
scrutiny to rules that contro] editorial discretion, Miami 
Herald Pub. Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241 (1974), which 
surely comprises the choice of programs. See Leathers 
v. Medlock, 111 S. Ct. 1438, 1442 (1991) (noting that 
cable “is engaged in ‘speech’ under the First Amendment, 
and is, in much of its operation, part of the ‘press’’’); 
see also City of Los Angeles v. Preferred Communica- 
tions, Inc., 476 U.S. 488, 494 (1986) (noting that cable 
operators exercise significant editorial discretion ). 


On the other hand, in PruneYard Shopping Center v. 
Robins, 447 U.S. 74 (1980), the Court assessed man- 
dated speech without any explicit reference to strict scru- 
tiny. The case hardly establishes that speech mandates 
need not pass such scrutiny, however. Free speech was 
on both sides of the balance in PruneYard, for the chai- 
lenged state rule entitled anyone to engage in various 
expressive activities such as speaking and leafletting at 
shopping centers. The owner's only First Amendment 
claim was its right to silence, and the Court found that 
interest of little weight in context: the owner had dedi- 
cated the property to commercial use open to the public; 


* There is uncontroverted evidence that 2000 cable systems, serv- 
ing onethird of al] subscribers, have no excess channe! capacity. 
NCTA Statement of Materia! Fects at [ 6. It is further undisputed 
that there are many unaffiliated. non-broadcast programmers seek- 
ing access, but who will lose out because of the preferential treat- 
ment of broadcasters. Jd. at £8; Nein Affidavit at f 6. 


Soa 


it could readily disassociate self from the ideas expressed, 
and the rule made no inroad into editorial functions 
Id. at 87-88. While the Court did not use the language 
of strict scrutiny. the rule would likely have survived 
such review, given the state’s purpose of assumng ex- 
pressive Opportunities On a completely nondiscriminatory 
basis, and the weakness of the shopping center's compet- 
ing speech interests. Thus PruncYard cannot reasonably 
be taken to allow speech mandates to escape strict 
scruuny. 


The Supreme Court has also developed rules govern- 
ing the First Amendment evaluation of taxes on the 
media. While the must-carry regulations are not in form 
taxes, they are in substance indistinguishable from a tax- 
subsidy combination—a tax falling exclusively on cable- 
casters, in an amount large enough to fund a subsidy for 
local broadcasters to enable them to lease cable channels. 
The Court has insisted on a “compelling justification” 
for any use of the taxing power “to single out the press”’. 
Leathers, 111 S. Ct. at 1443; see also Minneapolis Star 
& Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 
U.S. 575, 585 (1983). Where a tax not only singles out 
the press but “targets a smal] group of newspapers”, even 
by entirely content-neutral categories, the government 
must carry a “heavy burden” to sustain the distinction. 
Id. at 591, 592-93. See also Arkansas Writers’ Project, 
Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221 (1987) (imposing 
“heavy burden” of justification for tax that singles out a 
subset of the press for a special tax, based on broad con- 
tent categories). 


Leathers itself, of course, upheld a tax statute that 
distinguished between cable operators and broadcasters, 
and indeed specified that in the context of a generally 
applicable tax the distinction was nor subject to height- 
ened scrutiny. 111 S. Ct. at 1444-47. Although the 
Court observed broadly that “differential taxation of 
speakers, even members of the press, does not implicate 


the First Amendment unless the tax 1s directed at, or pre 
sents the danger of suppressing, particular ideas”, id. at 
1447, the observation was in the context of a “broad- 
based, content-neutral sales tax” that fell on virtually 
every good or service sold in Arkansas, id. The treat- 
ment of First Amendment values as irrelevant cannot 
be transported to the context of 4 burden imposed on one 
set of speakers for the direct and explicit advantage of 
a limited class of their competitors—a class whose pro- 
gramming must, as a matter of law, include content of 
a type specified by the government. Accordingly, I con- 
clude that the proper test is strict scrutiny. 


Application of the test. To survive strict scrutiny, 
regulation of speech must serve a “compelling” govern- 
mental purpose and its “means must be carefully tailored 
to achieve those ends.” Sable Communications v. FCC, 
492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989). First we must identify the 
government's interests, and then assess the fit between 
each of those interests and the must-carry requirements. 


The Senate Report articulated the congressional inter- 
ests as follows: 


(1) preserving the benefits of local television serv- 
ice, particularly over-the-air television service; (2) 
promoting the widespread dissemination of informa- 
uuon from diverse sources; and (3) promoting fair 
competiuon in the video marketplace. 


S. Rep. 102-92 at 58. These purposes are reflected in 
§§ 2(6)-(15) of the Act. Because this statement of 
purposes involves some overlap, the analysis wil] be 
clearer if we reformulate them as follows: (A) preserva- 
tuon of open access to cable in order to assure diverse 
programming (see purposes (2) and (3) above); and 
(B) preservation of local broadcasting (see purposes (| ) 
and (3) above). This second reason involved not only 
a desire to promote “local news and public affairs pro 
gramming”, see § 2(a)(11) of the Act, but also a wish 


S5Sa 


to assure that local broadcasters could continue to serve 
those persons who either did not, or could not, subscribe 
to cable. I address diversity first, then the preservation 
of local broadcasters. 


Open Access for Diverse Programming 


] assume that, at least at some level of abstraction, the 
interest in promoting diversity of views on cable is com- 
pelling. With regard to the broadcast spectrum the Court 
has characterized programming diversity as an “import- 
ant governmental objective”, Metro Broadcasting, Inc. 
v. FCC, 110 S. Ct. 2997, 3011 (1990), and a lengthy 
passage in Miami Herald Pub. Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 
at 247-54, though inconclusive, appears to regard the 
interest in correcting newspaper monopolies as extremely 
valuable. In Tornillo, however, the Court balked at the 
State's remedy—a right-of-reply statute—on the ground 
that it would interfere with editorial discretion. The in- 
terference took two forms: first, the statute compelled 
“editors or publishers to publish that which reason tells 
them should not be published”, id. at 256 (interna] quo- 
tations omitted), and second, it tended to dissuade editors 
from publishing those controversial statements that would 
trigger the mght of reply, id. at 257. Framing the case in 
modern doctrine, the Court may be said to have found 
the solution too instrusive to satisfy the requirement of 
careful “tailoring”. 

Here, too, the fit between the interest and the regula- 
tion is extremely weak. It is far from clear that givine 
local broadcasters an entitlement to be carried will in- 


crease program diversity ar all. Because cablecasters now 


carry the vast majority of local stations (as explained 
further below), the must-carry rules may have little effect, 
but where they have any, it will be only to replace the 
mix chosen by cablecasters—whose livelihoods depend 
largely on satisfying audience demand—with a mix de- 
rived from congressional dictate. 


S9a 


Moreover, in considering “fit” one must look at the 
available alternatives. As the Court said recently in as- 
sessing the fit of a statute that burdened commercial 
speech, “[I]f there are numerous and obvious less-burden- 
some alternatives to the restriction on commercial speech, 
that is certainly a relevant consideration in determining 
whether the ‘fit between ends and means is reason- 
able.” City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 61 
U.S.L.W. 4272, 4274 n.13 (U.S. March 24, 1993). Here, 
one obvious alternative is expansion of the access pro- 
visions Of § 612 of the 1984 Act. Those access provi- 
sions are far less burdensome—in the critical sense of 
minimizing government interference in the choice of who 
will have access to cable. Under § 612. al! programmers 
are eligible for leased access except the ones that don’t 
need it—the affiliates of a cable operator. 47 U.S.C. 
§ 532(b)(1). 


Even neutral remedies such as § 612 are subject to 
challenge under Tornillo, as they replace the cablecaster’s 
speech with that of others. But a number of distinguishing 
factors argue for upholding the leased access solution. 
First, a relatively large number of channels is available 
(ranging from the teens up to 40, 50 and more), so that 
the scope of the monopolization is greater than in Tor- 
nillo. Second, the channels are discrete, so that viewers 
will be less likely to attribute all speech on all channels 
to the cablecaster. And there is no chilling effect on the 
cablecaster’s programming of the remaining channels. 
Finally, the benefitted group precisely fits the legislative 
concern— all unaffiliated programmers. 


The last is conspicuously missing from must-carry. 
The difference between the two is the difference between 
the state rule upheld in PruneYard Shopping Center and 
the hypothetical set forth at the start of this opinion—a 
PruncYard-type entitlement limited to a specific class of 
would-be speakers defined in terms of their location. 
Indeed. the must-carry requirements are worse than the 


6U0a 


PruncYard hypothetical, for admission to the privileged 
class requires, as a matter of law, the carrying of specific 
program content. 


It is quite true, of course, that Congress found in 1992 
that leased access under § 612 has not been as effective 
as predicted in 1984. pointing to cumbersome enforce- 
ment procedures and undue cablecaster control over 
prices and other conditions of access. See H. Rep. 102- 
628 at 39-40. But the Report went on to “restate[] 
the Committee’s “belief that access requirements estab- 
lish a form of content-neutral structural regulation 
‘which will foster the availability of a diversity of view- 
points to the listening audience’.” Jd. at 40. More im- 
portant, to the extent that Congress spotted defects in 
§ 612, it set out to correct them. The 1992 Act amends 
§ 612 by clarifying and broadening the FCC’s authonty 
to set maximum reasonable rates and other reasonable 
terms and conditions for access. See 1992 Cable Act, 
§ 9. Given § 612, and Congress’s authority to expand its 
scope, the must-carry rules do not provide a reasonable 
fit with the diversity rationale. 


Preservation of Local Broadcasting 


The second interest that Congress has invoked is the 
preservation of local broadcasting. Section 2(a) (10) of 
the Act is explicit: “‘A primary objective and benefit of 
our Nation’s system of regulation of television broad- 
casting is the local origination of programming. There 
is a substantial governmental interest in ensuring its con- 
tinuation.” In part this interest derived from the local 
content of such broadcasting—“an important source of 
local news and public affairs programming.” 1992 Cable 
Act § 2(a)(11). But in addition the interest derived 
from an indirect concern for the households not served 
by cable—both those unwilling or unable to pay for the 
service and the 10% for whom such service is physically 
unavailable. Here Congress reasoned that if broadcast 
stations ever lost the advertising revenues attnbutable to 


6la 


the audiences they reach through cable service, they 
would be driven from business and thus be unable to 
provide service for those without cable. There was also 
special concern that local broadcast stations were ex- 
ceptionally vulnerable as potential victims of cablecaster 
bottleneck control, because of their competition with 
cable for advertising revenue. See 1992 Act, § 2(a) 
(14)-(16). I will first address the issue of local content, 
then the preservation of over-the-air service. 


Local content. \t seems extremely doubtful that forc- 
ing local affairs content on First Amendment speakers 
could ever qualify as a compelling interest (at least out- 
Side the special preserve of broadcasting itself, to which 
I return below). If government “may not select which 
issues are worth discussing or debating in public facili- 
ties”, Police Department of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 
92, 96 (1972), it is hard to see why it may do so on 
private facilities. 


Even if by some stretch an interest in local content 
were “compelling”, far less restrictive means are readily 
available. Congress is free to subsidize favored speech 
if the market is too weak to sustain the quantity that 
Congress seeks. See, e.g., Rust v. Sullivan, 111 S.Ct. 
1759, 1774 (1991); cf. Regan v. Taxation with Repre- 
sentation, 461 U.S. 540, 544-48 (1983); compare Ar- 
kansas Writers’ Project (striking down content-based tax 
burden). Given those means, Congress cannot advance 
specific content by requiring a competing class of First 
Amendment speakers to carry the favored speech. 
“(T]he concept that government may restrict the speech 
of some elements of our society in order to enhance the 
relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First 
Amendment”. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 48-49 
(1976). 


Preserving over-the-air TV service. 1 assume that as 
an abstract matter government has a compelling interest 
in assuring access to TV for those unwilling or unable to 


62a 


subscribe to cable. and especially those beyond cable's 
physical reach. The first difficulty with the argument 
here is that there is no evidence that this access is im 
jeopardy. The interest, as the Court said of a concern 
for breaches of the peace in Texas v. Johnson, 491 US 
397 (1989), simply “is not implicated on this record” 


ld. at 407. 


The most plausible evidence would be of local TV 
stations going under and of licensees turning in their 
licenses. Nothing remotely like that is in sight—the facts 
show quite the opposite. Plaintiff National Cable Tele- 
vision Association asserts (without contradiction) that 
in the years since the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals in- 
validated the FCC's first effort at must-carry, Quincy 
Cable TV, Inc. v. FCC, 768 F.2d 1434 (D.C. Cir. 
1985), the number of commercial broadcast stations has 
increased by 22% (from 919 to 1118), the number of 
educational broadcast stations by 15% (from 316 to 
363), and the number of cities receiving broadcast tele- 
vision by 165 (from 514 to 594). NCTA'’s Statement 
of Material Facts 44 12-14. Thus, not only are licenses 
not being turned in for want of profitable opportunities, 
but evidently entrepreneurs continue to seek the addi- 
tional licenses that the FCC makes available. As a re- 
sult, they are both deepening and spreading the coverage 
of over-the-air TV. Whatever risk there may be in the 
abstract has completely failed to materialize. 


Defendants and defendant-intervenors urge in response 
that this record means little; since Quincy, the shadow of 
possible congressional intervention has fallen across the 
cable industry, causing operators to be less ruthless than 
they would be if must-carry were invalidated. Remove 
the shadow, they claim, and the operators will show their 
true monopolist colors. 

This argument is incurably flawed. If the constitution- 


ally fatal aspect of the must-carry rules is the absence of 
evidence of any visible threat to the over-the-air TV in- 


O34 


dustry, then the rules would become constitutional the 
minute the industry was visibly threatened. According}, 
cablecasters would continue to operate under the same 
shadow of congressional intervention, and over-the-air TV 
would continue to thrive. Invalidation of must-carry for 
ene of evidence would preserve the supposedly necessary 
treat. 


Supporters of must-carry thus turn to evide. . of (1) 
instances where cablecasters have actually dropp: = © .,ad- 
cast stations and (2) structural relationships in the in- 
dustry, which, they say, indicate the threat is real. In- 
deed, in its findings, Congress noted a “marked shift in 
market share from broadcast television to cable televi- 
sion”, 1992 Act, §2(a)(13), and also endorsed the 
Structural argument, id. at §§ 2(a)(12) (14-15). 


The congressional finding on actual effects is not dis- 
puted—nor is it supportive of must-carry. That cable has 
grown faster than broadcast does not in the slightest sug- 
gest that broadcast is in peril. 


The record before Congress did, however, include evi- 
dence of some cable operators’ dropping broadcast chan- 
nels. Specifically, the Senate Report cites evidence that, 
of 4303 cable systems disclosing data, 869 had dropped 
one or more local stations in a total of 1,820 instances.‘ 
S. Rep. 102-92 at 43. Because only half of the more than 
8000 cable systems disclosed data, the committee ex- 
trapolated to find that approximately 1700 cable systems 
have denied carriage in approximately 3600 instances. /d. 


These facts do not support an inference that over- 
the-air TV is at risk. First, they indicate (by simple sub 
traction) that 80% of cable systems have never dropped 


* Clearly some stations were dropped on more than one occasion, 
indicating that being dropped must in many instances have been 
temporary. We have not been directed to any evidence of how 
many Stations may have been permanently dropped. 


64a 


a single local broadcaster. Second, i is impossible to 
know what to make of the 3600 estimated instances of 
dropping when we do not know either the percentage of 
total broadcasters that the figure represents or the char- 
acter of the broadcast channels dropped. What pertinent 
data there is on the record states that the average cable 
system in 1990 carried just over eight local broadcast 
signals (7% more than were carried in 1985). Klein Affi- 
davit at € 13. Taking Congress’ figure of over 8000 cable 
systems, this would indicate that there are at least 64,000 
local broadcast signals being carried on cable systems 
(clearly this figure counts single stations multiple times, 
just as does the raw figure on drops). Next to this figure, 
the 3600 instances of droppage* do not support an in- 
ference of peril to the broadcast industry or even any 
segment of that industry. In fact, plaintiff NCTA submits 
further, uncontradicted evidence that in 1988, well after 
the FCC must-carry rules had been struck down, 987% of 
al] the broadcast stations that would have qualified for 
mandatory carriage were still being carried despite the 
absence of such a requirement. Klein Affidavit at € 12. 


There is furthermore no information about the charac- 
teristics of the broadcasters actually dropped. Such dis- 
tinctions are important. Plaintiff Time-Warner Entertain- 
ment (“ITWE”) alleges without contradiction that the 
must-carry rules will require it to carry, in its Staten 
Island, New York line-up, not one but fwo stations from 
Bridgeport, Connecticut. TWE Memorandum in Support 
of Motion for Summary Judgment at 12. If many of the 
Stations dropped have as remote a link to the dropping 
cablecaster’s market as do these Bridgeport stations, 1t 
would explain why the cable operators’ night to drop has 
coexisted with the broadcast industry's continued growth. 


® The record doesn't indicate the time frame within which these 
drops occurred. If it was a period of years, this even further 
weakens the inferentia) chain. 


Oda 


Thus we have nothing to connect the limited evidence of 
cable operators’ actual conduct with any inference that a 
threat to broadcast is imminent or serious. 


The structural argument is that the competition be- 
tween cable and broadcast for advertising revenue gives 
cable operators an incentive to drop broadcast stations. 
See 1992 Act, $§ 2(a)(12), (14-15). (Taken at its best, 
this theory would lend no support to $ 5 of the Act (relat- 
ing to noncommercial TV), as the educational stations do 
not advertise.) The evidence cited in the Senate Report 
consists of a projected 17% growth rate in cable adver- 
using revenues. S. Rep. 102-92 at 44. Yet rapid growth 
In advertising seems casily attributable to the growth of 
cable, and perhaps some branching into advertising- 
supported programs. In itself, it shows neither a purpose 
to undermine broadcast TV nor the start of a campaign 
to do so. Broadcast television evidently still acounts for 
92% of all television advertising revenues. See Hendricks 
Declaration at € 22(d).* 


*The National Association of Broadcasters points to evidence 
before Congress that on some occasions cablecasters repositioned 
broadcast channels and placed jess popular programs at the former 
broadcast position. NAB Corrected Memorandum, etc. at 22. This 
is urged as confirmation that cable operators wil! pursue advertising 
revenue at the expense of viewer satisfaction. At ora! argument 
cable representatives noted in response that the data referred to 
periods immediately after the switch, when the new programs had 
little or no reputation with audiences. In any event, the reasoning 
of the broadcasters is hard to follow, and seems especially ironic 
coming from firms that depend exclusively on advertising revenues. 
Broadcasters might wel! increase their audiences by dropping ad- 
vertisements, but no one expects them to do so: it is recognized that 
they accept detriments to audience satisfaction where justified by 
increases in net revenuc. That cable operators may make some 
such calculations is no evidence of anticompetitive purpose. In 
fact. because cable operators’ revenues arc overwhelmingly due to 
subscription fees, see below. advertising seems likely to be less 
common on cable. 


Ou 


Further, cable television appears to continue to be de 
pendent on local broadcasters as critical supphers of pro 
gramming Congress explicitly found that “broadcast pro 
gramming that os carnmed remains the most popular 
programming on cable systems, and a substantial portion 
of the benefits for which consumers pay cable systems 15 
derived from carnage of the signals of network afhliates, 
independent television stations, and public television sta 
tions.” 1992 Act, § 2(a)(19). In fact, local broadcaster 
programmung accounts for approximately two-thirds of 
total cable viewing hours. S. Rep. 102-92 at 35. More. 
over, the ratio of cable subscription fee revenues to ad- 
vertising revenue is evidently 25:1. TWE Reply Memo 
randum in Support of Motions for Summary Judgment at 
1S. So long as local broadcast programs continue to be 
so popular, it appears that cable simply cannot afford to 
drop broadcast channels to any significant degree. 


Finally, even if local broadcasters were in perceptible 
perl, it would not follow that Congress could secure their 
survival by must-<carry provisions. Again, less intrusive 
alternatives are obvious. First, if evidence of any tisk 
should appear, Congress could get broadcast TV into the 
homes of cable viewers (and thus preserve the stations’ 
advertising revenues) by expanding leased access under 
the neutral provisions of § 612 of the 1984 Act. Second, 
if broadcasters’ programs were not popular enough to 
enable them to pay the leasing fees set by the FCC, Con- 
gress could subsidize the difference to the extent neces- 
sary. Compare Rust v. Sullivan, 111 S. Ct. at 1774. 


In reaching these conclusions, I do not question Con- 
gress’s power to engage in cniical fact-finding. The de- 
gree of deference that we owe such findings is hotly dis- 
puted between the parties. Compare NCTA Reply Mem- 
orandum at 41-42 (citing Sable Communications of Cali- 
fornia v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 129 (1989): Landmark 
Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 829, 843-44 
(1978), with DOJ Answer at 37 (citing Metro Broad- 


fy /) 


casting, Inco ve FOC, 497 US $47, 572 (1990) My 
view docs not turn on any resolution of that dispute, be 
cause the legislative findines simply do not support. the 
inferences needed to sustain must-carry. The problems 
are that (1) there 1 no finding of any present or im 
minent harm, (2) the evidence of some dropping of 
broadcast channels in itself fails to show any widespread 
problem, (3) the proliferation of local broadcast stations 
since the end of the FCC's must-carry rules undermine: 
any inference of a problem, (4) the findings as to struc 
ture and incentives, taken together with the evidence of 
cable's dependence on broadcasting, fail to raise the 
concern beyond the level of speculation; and (5), even if 
the hazard were perceptible, the record does not addres< 
the less intrusive alternatives. If findings as scantily con- 
nected to the conclusion as these can justify musSt-carry, 
then the door is open—even in the area of First Amend 
ment rights—to exercise of the most naked interest-group 
preferences. Cf. Cass R. Sunstein, “Naked Preferences 
and the Constitution”, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 1689 (1984) 


Thus I conclude that—unless the analysis of First 
Amendment issues in the special context of broadcast for 
some reason supervenes—the must-carry provisions vio 
late the First Amendment. 


Proposed Use of Broadcast Analysis 


Some defendants urge the court to use the sort of 
diluted First Amendment analysis applied to broadcasting 
in Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 US. 367 
(1969). DOJ Answer at 26; NAB Corrected Memoran- 
dum, etc. at 46. Use of the broadcast standards would be 
completely inappropriate. 


The weakened status of broadcasters under the Firs: 
Amendment arose from the Supreme Court's conclusion 
that discretionan government aliocation of channels was 
necessary for the orderiy use of the broadcast medium— 


68a 


Or at any rate that such allocation was not materially more 
Intrusive on First Amendment values than any visible 
alternative. In National Broadcasting Co. v. U.S., 319 
U.S. 190 (1943), the Court upheld the FCC's so-called 
“Chain Broadcasting” regulations (aimed at preventing 
monopolization of radio licenses) against a variety of 
Statutory challenges and a First Amendment claim. 
“[R]adio inherently is not available to all.” Jd. at 226. 
“That is its unique characteristic, and that js why, unlike 
other modes of expression, it is subject to governmenta] 
regulation.” /d. Thus, “The right to free speech does not 
include .. . the right to use the facilities of radio without 
a license.” Jd. at 227. 


Although the precise question was not before it. the 
Court appeared to assume that these factors logically en- 
tailed discretionary government allocation of licenses, so 
that such allocation presented no First Amendment prob- 
lem so long as the choice was not openly based on the 
applicants’ “political, economic or social views, Or upon 
any other capricious basis.” Jd. at 226." This of course 
Overlooked content-neutral bases for handling the prob- 
lems, such as (1) the rule of first possession, which in 
fact preceded government allocation and tracked the doc- 
trine of prior appropriation,* (2) auctions, and (3) lot- 
teries.* These content-neutral alternatives evidently went 
by default, as those raising the First Amendment claims 
—the incumbent broadcasters—had no incentive to 
undermine the system under which they held their own 
quasi-monopoly licenses. NBC of course paved the way 


TI] use the qualifying adverb “openly” advisedly. Careful] re- 
search suggests, as anyone would expect, that often the politica! 
allegiance of applicants has been critical in license allocation. See, 


e.g., Lucas A. Powe, Jr., American Broadcasting and the First 
Amendment 68-84 (1987). 


*See Thomas W. Hazlett, The Rationality of U-S. Regulation 
of the Broadcast Spectrum, 33 J. L. & Econ. 133, 147-52, 163 (1990). 


* Cf. 47 U.S.C. § 809(i). 


69a 


for Red Lion, which upheld, for the broadcast medium, 
the sort of government-managed right to respond that the 
Court later struck down for the print media in Tornillo 
Compare Red Lion, 395 U.S. at 386-401, with Tornilio, 
418 U.S. at 247-58. Here, of course, not even the de- 
fendants or defendant-intervenors suggest that discretion- 
ury allocation of channels is necessary or even appropri- 
ate to preserve access to cable. In the face of $ 612. such 
a claum would be untenable. 


Defendants and defendant-intervenors, however, seek- 
ing to deny cable operators full First Amendment protec- 
tion, point to three special characteristics of cable that 
in their view justify government management of the chan- 
nels: (1) the cable operators’ need for rights-of-way, 
along or under city streets, in order to lay their cable: 
(2) the cable industry's prior enjoyment of special gov- 
ernment privileges; and (3) the ability of cable operators 
to engage in “private censorship” against the speech of 
broadcasters. Neither alone nor in the aggregate do these 
justify subjecting cable to diminished First Amendment 
protection. 


Rights-of-way. State, city and county governments 
have property interests in the streets, so that the place- 
ment of cable commonly requires government consent. 
There may also be instances where the federal govern- 
ment holds a proprietary interest essential to the laying 
of cable. These governments may seek to condition their 
consents on the operators’ waiver or abandonment of their 
First Amendment rights. If so, courts would presumably 
assess these efforts under the doctrine of unconstitutional 
conditions. Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 357-60 
(1976); Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593, 596-98 
(1972); Western Oil & Gas Ass'n v. Cory, 726 F.2d 
1340 (9th Cir. 1984) (state method of calculating 
charges for use of right-of-way invalidated under nega- 
tive commerce clause). aff'd 471 U.S. 81 (1985); Omega 


es << 


70a 


Satellite Products Co. v. City of Indianapolis, 694 F.2d 
119, 128-29 (7th Cir. 1982). We need not speculate on 
how such cases would work out. Here the federal govern- 
ment 1s not attaching conditions to the grant of a prop 
erty interest; it 18 acting in a purely regulatory role. It 
cannot lean on proprietary powers that are out of the 
picture 


Prior benefits. Defendants argue that cable’s initial 
growth depended, perhaps essentially, on government as- 
sistance in securing the right to retransmit the programs 
of broadcast channels, free of charge. See 17 U.S.C. 
$111, as amended (compulsory copynght access); see 
DOJ Memorandum in Support of Motion to Dismiss at 
27-28. This history seems completely irrelevant. If the 
Union Pacific Railroad were to own a newspaper, its his- 
tory as a recipient of government largesse on a grand 
scale would surely not condemn it to second-class First 
Amendment protection. Of course current federal gov- 
ernment benefits would provide an opportunity for at- 
tachment of conditions; but again, just what conditions 
might prove justifiable in the face of the unconstitutional 
conditions doctrine is not before us. With the adoption of 
§ 6 of the 1992 Act, Congress gave broadcast stations an 
unequivocal right to withhold consent to retransmission. 


Cablecasters’ power to censor. Finally, intervenor- 
defendant NAB argues that cable operators can use their 
position to censor broadcasters. NAB Corrected Memo- 
randum at 46. This argument amounts to nothing more 
than a reiteration of the fact that cable operators contro! 
a bottleneck. The mere fact that such contro] might force 
some programmers to find different ways to reach the 
public (which all programmers have via § 612, and which 
broadcasters uniquely have via the airwaves) does not 
give the government any right to force access on behalf 
of a preferred class of speakers. This follows a fortiori 
from TJornillo. 


hart hoc -s39)] characte fF anhie lorry: va 4 » 
In short. the special character of cuble is limited to one 


feature: bottleneck control of access to an important 
medium. A straightforward, speech-neutral solution to 
that problem exists and has already been employed by 
Congress in $ 612 of the 1984 Act, as amended by § 9 
of the 1992 Act. I see no constitutional obstacle to the 
expansion of that solution if Congress should deem it ap- 
propriate. Given the availability of that remedy (together 
with such subsidies as Congress might find suitable), I do 
not see how Congress can constitutionally deny cable 
operators the ordinary rights of any First Amendment 
speaker.” 


10 Because of my conclusion on the First Amendment challenge 
to the must-carry provisions, I do not reach the contention of TWE 
and Daniels that those provisions also represent an unconstitutional] 
taking of cablecasters’ property in violation of the Fifth Amend- 
ment. I do not, however, regard the claim as frivolous. The cre- 
ation of an entitlement in some parties to use the facilities of 
another, gratis, would seem on its face to implicate Loretto v. Tele- 
prompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982), where 
the Court struck down a statute entitling cable companies to place 
equipment in an owner's building so that tenants could receive 
cable television. The NAB responds that Loretto is limited to 
“physical” occupations of “real property”. See NAB Opposition 
at 33. But the insertion of loca] stations’ programs into a cable 
operator's line-up presumably is not a metapbysica) act, and pre 
sumably takes place on rea) property. 

NAB also argues that cable operators have no “historically rooted 
expectation of compensation” for the right to use their cable serv- 
ices, see Loretto, 458 U.S. at 441, evidently because of (1) local 
governments’ practices of imposing carriage requirements as @ con- 
dition of granting franchises and right-of-way access, and (2) prior 
similar federal impositions, seemingly granted in exchange for 
privileged entitlements to retransmit broadcasters’ signals. Both 
seem of limited relevance for the reasons discussed above in con- 
nection with the paralle! Red Lion theories: the loca! governments 
are not involved here, and the federa] government has removed the 
quid for which it now seeks a quo. 


72a 
Conclusion 


The must-carry regulations in the 1992 Cable Act 
clearly burden the protected speech of cable operators, in 
favor of local broadcasters whose programming content is 
in material part specified by law. In requiring cable sys- 
tems to carry a special group of competing speakers, Con. 
gress directly, not incidentally, restricts the cable opera- 
tors’ exercise of editorial discretion. None of the interests 
advanced by Congress supports such a burden. The 
diversity rationale fits poorly with mandatory carriage of 
a specific group of programmers, being served with neu- 
trality by § 612’s provision for leased access. Although 
the interest in protecting over-the-air TV for non-cable- 
subscribers may be compelling in the abstract, the find- 
ings in the record neither indicate any real threat nor 
Suggest any flaw in the less burdensome and obvious 
means for addressing any such threat. For these reasons. 
] respectfully dissent, and would declare the must-carry 
provisions to be unconstitutional abridgments of the First 
Amendment mghts of cable operators and unaffiliated 
programmers. 


/s/ Stephen F. Williams 
STEPHEN F. WILLIAMS 
United States Circuit Judge 


-”--* 


Jd 


APPENDIX Lb 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2495 
(SFW, TJP, SS) 


NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION, 
‘. Plaintiff, 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION, 
Defendants. 


NOTICE OF APPEAL TO THE SUPREME COURT 
OF THE UNITED STATES 


Notice is hereby given that National Cable Television 
Association hereby appeals to the Supreme Court of the 
United States from the April 8, 1993 Memorandum and 
Order of the three-judge district court, dismissing the 
complaint with prejudice. This appeal is taken pursuant 
to 28 U.S.C. § 1253. 

Respectfully submitted, 


Of Counsel: /s/ H. Bartow Farr, III 


DANIEL L. BRENNER H. Bagtow Fagg, Il 
MICHAEL S. SCHOOLER (D.C. Bar No. 303529) 
DIANE B. BURSTEIN Jor J. KLEIN 
NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION (D.C. Bar No. 168716) 
ASSOCIATION, INC. KLEIN, FARR, SMITH & 
1724 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. TABANTO 


Washington, D.C. 20036 2445 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 


(202) 7765-0184 
Counse! for Plaintiff 
Nationa) Cable Television 
Dated: May 3, 1993 Association, Inc. 


74a 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2494 
(SFW, TPJ, SS) 


TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY, L.P.. 
Plaintiff, 
- against - 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION and 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Defendants. 


NOTICE OF APPEAL TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


Pursuant to Rule 18 of the Rules of the Supreme Court 
of the United States and Section 23 of the Cable Tele- 
vision Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
1992, Public Law 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and 28 
U.S.C. § 1253, notice is hereby given that Time Warner 
Entertainment Company, L.P., hereby appeals to the Su- 
preme Court of the United States from the April 8, 1993. 
Memorandum and Order (entered April 12, 1993) of 
the three judge district court convened in the above- 
captioned action (which was consolidated with Civil 
Actions No. 92-2247, 92-2292, 92-2495, and 92-2558) 
denying TWE’s motion for summary judgment and grant- 
ing the defendants’ motion to dismiss with respect to 
Sections 4, 5, and 6 of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Public Law 
102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (the “Act”), and holding that 
Sections 4 and 5 of the Act do not violate the First 
Amendment and that Section 6 of the Act need not be 
stricken as unseverable from Sections 4 and 5. 


ida 


Simultaneously with this appeal. TWE ts noticing a 
protective appeal to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit only for the purpose 
of protecting TWE should nm ultimately be determined 
that the Circuit Court, rather than the Supreme Court, 
has jurisdiction of TWE’s appeal from the order of the 
three-judge district court 

Respectfully submitted, 


Of Counse) : /s/ Brian Conboy 


OFFE. BRIAN CONBOY 
sonia W. cab _ (D.C. Bar No. 152025) 
STEPHEN S. MADSEN, Esq THEODORE C. WHITEROUSE 


v , Swaine & Moorr (D.C. Bar No. 298331) 
pa ny Plaza WILLKI£ Farr & GALLAGHER 


Three Lafavette Centre 
rp, org on sense 1155 2ist Street, N.W. 
(212) 474-1000 Washington, D.C. 20036 
(202) 328-8000 
Attorneys of Record for 
DATED: Washington, D.C. Time Warner Entertainment 
May 3, 1993 Company, L.P. 


76a 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2247 
(Three-Judge Court) 


TURNER BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., ARTS & ENTER 
TAINMENT NETWORK, BLACK ENTERTAINMENT TELE- 
VISION, INC., E! ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION, INC., 
HeEaRST/ABC-VIACOM ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES, IN- 
TERNATIONAL FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT, INC., Na- 
TIONAL CABLE SATELLITE CORPORATION, QVC NeEtT- 
worK, INC., THE TRAVEL CHANNEL, INC., and USA 


NETWORKS, Plaintiffs, 
Vv. 


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Defendants. 


AND CONSOLIDATED ACTIONS 


Civil Action Nos. 92-2292, 92-2494, 92-2495 
and 92-2558 
(Three-Judge Court) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL TO THE SUPREME COURT 
OF THE UNITED STATES 


Notice is hereby given that Turner Broadcasting Sys- 
tem. Inc., Arts & Entertainment Network, Black Enter- 
tainment Television, Inc., E! Entertainment Television, 
Inc., Hearst ABC-Viacom Entertainment Services, Inter- 
national Family Entertainment, Inc., Natonal Cable 


_— 


a 


Satellite Corporation, QVC Network. Inc.. The Travel 
Channel, Inc., and USA Networks, the plainufis above- 
named in Civil Action No. 92-2247, hereby appeal to 
the Supreme Court of the United States from the April $. 
1993 Memorandum and Order of the three-judge district 
court, dismissing the complaint with prejudice. 


This appeal is taken pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1253 
Respectfully submitted, 


‘s Bruce D. Sokler 
Bruce D. SoKLerR ( * 205278) 
PETER KIMM, JR. (#415492) 
Grecory A. Lewis ( * 420907) 
Mintz, Levin, COHN, FERRIS, 

GLOVSKY AND Popeo, P.C. 
701 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Suite 900 
Washington, DC 20004 
(202) 434-7300 
Counsel for Plaintiffs in 
Dated: May 3, 1993 Civil Action No. 92-2247 


78a 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2292 
(SFW, TPJ. SS) 


DANIELS CABLEVISION, INC., 
Plaintiff, 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Defendant. 


AND CONSOLIDATED ACTIONS 


Civil Actions No. 92-2247, 92-2494, 92-2495, 
and 92-2558 (SFW, TPJ, SS) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL 


Pursuant to Rule 18 of the Rules of the Supreme Court 
of the United States and Section 23 of the Cable Tele- 
vision Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 
Public Law 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1253, notice is hereby given that plaintiff Daniels 
Cablevision, Inc. (“Daniels”) appeals to the Supreme 
Court of the United States from the Apnil 8, 1993, Mem- 
orandum and Order of the three-judge District Court con- 
vened in the above-captioned action denying Daniels’ mo- 
uon for summary judgment and granting the defendant's 
motion to dismiss with respect to Sections 4, 5, and 6 
of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Com- 
petition Act of 1992, Public Law 102-385, 106 Stat. 
1460 (the “Act”), in the above-captioned action and 


79a 


holding that Sections 4 and 5 of the Act do not violate 
the First Amendment and that Section 6 of the Act 
need not be stricken as unseverable from Sections 4 and 
5. Daniels also appeals from the failure of the District 
Court to pass upon its claims that Sections 4 and 5 of 
the Act violate the Fifth Amendment. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Of Counsel! : Jonwn P. COLE, JR. 


KENNETH FARABEE (D.C. Bar No. 2436) 
Daniels Cablevision, Inc. JOHN D. SEIVER 


3200 Cherry Creek South Dr. (D.C. Bar No. 296418) 
Denver, CO 80209 JOHN DAVIDSON THOMAS 


(D.C. Bar No. 426128) 


CoLe, Raywip & BRAVERMAN 
1919 Pennsylvania Avenue, \.W 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 659-9750 
Attorneys for Plaintiffs 

May 3, 1993 DANIELS CABLEVISION, INC. 


80a 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 


Civil Action No. 92-2558 
(SFW. TPJ,SS) 


DISCOVERY COMMUNICATIONS, INC. and 
THE LEARNING CHANNEL, INC., 


Plaintiffs, 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ef al., 
Defendants 


AND CONSOLIDATED ACTIONS 


Civil Actions Nos. 92-2247 92-2292. 92-2494. 
and 92-2495 (SFW, TPJ, SS) 


NOTICE OF APPEAL TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1253, Section 23 of the Cable 
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 
1992 (the “Act”), Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, 
and Rule 18 of the Supreme Court Rules, notice is hereby 
given that Discovery Communications. Inc., and The 
Learning Channel, Inc., hereby appeal to the Supreme 
Court of the United States from the memorandum and 
order of the three-judge district court filed April 8, 1993 
(entered April 12, 1993), denying plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment, granting defendants’ motion to dis- 
miss with respect to Sections 4, 5. and 6 of the Act, 
holding that Sections 4 and 5 of the Act do not violate 


® la 
‘> ite 


the First Amendment. and holding that Section 6 of the 
Act meed not be stricken as unseverable from Sections 
4 and 5. Simultaneously with this appeal, plaintiffs are 
noucing a protective appeal to the United States Court 
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit for the 
sole purpose of protecting plaintiffs should it ultimatels 
be determined that the Court of Appeals, rather than 
the Supreme Court, has jumsdiction of this appeal. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ Allan A. Tuttle 

ALLAN A. TUTTLE 

D.C. Bar No. 239676 

GARRET G. RASMUSSEN 

D.C. Bar No. 239616 

PaTTON, Boccs & BLow 

2550 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20037 

(202) 457-6000 

Attorneys of Record for 
Plaintiffs Discovery 
Communications, Inc. 

and 
The Learning Channel, Inc. 
Of Counsel]: 


ALBERT G. LAUBER, J& 
D.C. Bar No. 952911 
Peter VAN N. Lockwoop 
D.C. Bar No. 86447 


Suite 1100 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
(202) 862-5000 


DATED: May 8, 1993 


§2a 
APPENDIX C 
PUBLIC LaW 102-385 {[S. 12]: October 5, 1992 


CABLE TELEVISION CONSUMER PROTECTION 
AND COMPETITION ACT OF 1992 


An Act to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to 
provide increased consumer protection and to pro- 
mote increased competition in the cable television 
and related markets, and for other purposes. 


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- 
tives of the United States of America in Congress as- 
sembled, 


SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. 


This Act may be cited as the “Cable Television Con- 
sumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992”. 


SEC.2. FINDINGS; POLICY; DEFINITIONS. 


(a) FinpIncGs.—The Congress finds and declares the 
following: 


(1) Pursuant to the Cable Communications Pol- 
icy Act of 1984, rates for cable television services 
have been deregulated in approximately 97 percent 
of all franchises since December 29, 1986. Since 
rate deregulation, monthly rates for the lowest priced 
basic cable service have increased by 40 percent or 
more for 28 percent of cable television subscribers. 
Although the average number of basic channels has 
increased from about 24 to 30, average monthly 
rates have increased by 29 percent during the same 
penod. The average monthly cable rate has in- 
creased almost 3 times as much as the Consumer 
Price Index since rate deregulation. 


§3a 


(2) For a variety of reasons, including local 
franchising requirements and the extraordinary ex- 
pense of constructing more than one cable television 
System to serve a particular geographic area, most 
cable television subscribers have no opportunity to 
select between competing cable systems. Without 
the presence of another multichannel video pro- 
gramming distributor, a cable system faces no local 
competition. The result is undue market power for 
the cable operator as compared to that of consumers 
and video programmers. 


(3) There has been a substantial increase in the 
penetration of cable television systems over the past 
gecade. Nearly 56,000,000 households, over 60 per- 
cent of the households with televisions, subscribe to 
cable television, and this percentage is almost cer- 
tain to increase. As a result of this growth, the cable 
television industry has become a dominant nation- 
wide video medium. 


(4) The cable industry has become highly con- 
centrated. The potenial effects of such concentra- 
tion are barriers to entry for new programmers and 
a reduction in the number of media voices avail- 
able to consumers. 


(5) The cable industry has become vertically in- 
tegrated; cable operators and cable programmers 
often have common ownership. As a result, cable 
operators have the incentive and ability to favor 
their affiliated programmers. This could make it 
more difficult for noncable-affiliated programmers to 
secure Carriage on cable systems. Vertically inte- 
grated program suppliers also have the incentive and 
ability to favor their affiliated cable operators over 
nonaffiliated cable operators and programming dis- 
tributors using other technologies. 


(6) There is a substanual governmental and 
First Amendment interest in promoung a diversity 


ee 


&4a 


of views provided through multiple technology 


media 


(7) There is a substantial governmental and First 
Amendment interest in ensuring that cable sub- 
scribers have access to local noncommercial educa- 
tional stations which Congress has authorized, as 
expressed in section 396(a)(5) of the Communica- 
tions Act of 1934. The distribution of unique non- 
commercial, educational programming services ad- 
vances that interest. 


(8) The Federal Government has a substantial 
interest in making all nonduplicative local public 
television services available on cable systems be- 
cause— 


(A) public television provides educational 
and informational programming to the Nation’s 
citizens, thereby advancing the Government’s 
compelling interest in educating its citizens; 


(B) public television is a local community 
institution, supported through local tax dollars 
and voluntary citizen contributions in excess of 
$10,800,000,000 since 1972, that provides pub- 
lic service programming that is responsive to 
the needs and interests of the local community; 


(C) the Federal Government, in recognition of 
public television’s integral role in serving the ed- 
ucational and informational needs of local com- 
munities, has invested more than $3,000,000,000 
in public broadcasting since 1969; and 


(D) absent carriage requirements there is a 
substantial likelihood that citizens, who have 
supported local public television services, will 
be deprived of those services. 


(9) The Federal Government has a substantial 
interest in having cable systems carry the signals of 


85a 


local commercial television stations because the car- 
riage of such signals is necessary to serve the goals 
contained in section 307(b) of the Communications 
Act of 1934 of providing a fair, efficient, and equ- 
table distribution of broadcast services. 


(10) A primary objective and benefit of our Na- 
tion's system of regulation of television broadcasung 
is the local origination of programming. There 1s a 
substantial governmental interest in ensuring its con- 
tinuation. 


(11) Broadcast television stations continue to be 
an important source of local news and public affairs 
programming and other loca] broadcast services cri- 
tical to an informed electorate. 


(12) Broadcast television programming is sup 
ported by revenues generated from adverusing 
broadcast over stations. Such programming is other- 
wise free to those who own television sets and do 
not require cable transmission to receive broadcast 
signals. There is a substantial governmental interest 
in promoting the continued availability of such free 
television programming, especially for viewers who 
are unable to afford other means of receiving pro- 
gramming. 


(13) As a result of the growth of cable televi- 
sion, there has been a marked shift in market share 
from broadcast television to cable television services. 


(14) Cable television systems and broadcast tele- 
vision stations increasingly compete for television 
advertising revenues. As the proportion of house- 
holds subscribing to cable television increases, pro- 
portionately more adverusing revenues will be re- 
allocated from broadcast to cable television systems. 


(15) A cable television system which carries the 
signal of a local television broadcaster is assisung 


86a 


the broadcaster to increase its viewership, and thereby 
attract additional advertising revenues that otherwise 
might be earned by the cable system operator. As 
a result, there is an economic incentive for cable 
systems to terminate the retransmission of the broad- 
cast signal, refuse to carry new signals, or reposition 
a broadcast signal to a disadvantageous channel po- 
sition. There is a substantial likelihood that absent 
the reimposition of such a requirement, additional 
local broadcast signals will be deleted, repositioned, 
Or not carried. 


(16) As a result of the economic incentive that 
cable systems have to delete, reposition, or not carry 
local broadcast signals, coupled with the absence of 
a requirement that such systems carry local broad- 
cast signals, the economic viability of free local 
broadcast television and its ability to originate qual- 
ity local programming will be seriously jeopardized. 


(17) Consumers who subscribe to cable television 
often do so to obtain local broadcast signals which 
they otherwise would not be able to receive, or to 
obtain improved signals. Most subscribers to cable 
television systems do not or cannot maintain an- 
tennas to receive broadcast television services, do 
not have input selector switches to convert from a 
cable to antenna reception system, or cannot other- 
wise receive broadcast television services. The regu- 
latory system created by the Cable Communications 
Policy Act of 1984 was premised upon the con- 
tinued existence of mandatory carriage obligations 
for cable systems, ensuring that local stations would 
be protected from anticompetitive conduct by cable 
systems. 


(18) Cable television systems often are the single 
most efficient distribution system for television pro- 
gramming. A Government mandate for a substantial 
societal investment in alternative distribution systems 
for cable subscribers, such as the “A/B” input selec- 


87a 


ae 


lor antenna system, 1s not an enduring or feasible 
method of distribution and is not in the public 
interest. 


(19) At the same time, broadcast programming 
that 1s carmed remains the most popular program- 
ming on cable systems, and a substantial portion of 
the benefits for which consumers pay cable systems 
is derived from carriage of the signals of network 
affiliates, independent television stations, and public 
television stauons. Also cable programming placed 
on channels adjacet to popular off-the-air signals ob- 
tains a larger audience than on other channel posi- 
tions. Cable systems, therefore, obtain great bene- 
fits from local broadcast signals which, until now, 
they have been able to obtain without the consent 
of the broadcaster or any copyright liability. This 
has resulted in an effective subsidy of the develop- 
ment of cable systems by local broadcasters. While 
at one time, when cable systems did not attempt to 
compete with local broadcasters for programming, 
audience, and advertising, this subsidy may have 
been appropniate, it is so no longer and results in 
a competitive imbalance between the 2 industries. 


(20) The Cable Communications Policy Act of 
1984, in its amendments to the Communications 
Act of 1934, limited the regulatory authority of 
franchising authorities over cable operators. Fran- 
chising authorities are finding it difficult under the 
current regulatory scheme to deny renewals to cable 
Systems that are not adequately serving cable sub 
scribers. 


(21) Cable systems should be encouraged to 
carry low-power television stations licensed to the 
communities served by those systems where the 
low-power station creates and broadcasts, as a sub- 
Stanual part of its programming day, local program- 


mung. 
. a a 7 


SSa 


SEC. 4 CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION 
SIGNALS. 


Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 
1934 is amended by inserting after section 613 (47 
U.S.C. 533) the following new section: 


“SEC. 614. CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVI- 
SION SIGNALS. 


(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS.—Each cable operator 
shall carry, on the cable system of that operator, the 
signals of local commercial television stations and quali- 
fied low power stations as provided by this section. Car- 
riage of additional broadcast television signals on such 
system shall be at the discretion of such operator, sub- 
ject to section 325(b). 


“(b) SIGNALS REQUIRED.— 


(1) IN GENERAL.—(A) A cable operator of a 
cable system with 12 or fewer usable activated chan- 
nels shall carry the signals of at least three local 
commercial television stations, except that if such a 
system has 300 or fewer subscribers, it shall not be 
subject to any requiremens under this section so long 
as such system does not delete from carriage by that 
system any signal of a broadcast television station. 


“(B) A cable operator of a cable system with 
more than 12 usable activated channels shall carry 
the signals of local commercial television stations, 
up to one-third of the aggregate number of usable 
activated channels of such system. 


‘“*(2) SELECTION OF SIGNALS.—Whenever the num- 
ber of local commercial television stations exceeds 
the maximum number of signals a cable system 1s 
required to carry under paragraph (1), the cable op- 
erator shall have discretion in selecting which such 
stauons shall be carried on its cable system, except 
that— 


89a 


“(A) under no circumstances shall « cu 
Operator Carry a qualified low power station in 
lieu of a Jocal commercial television station: 
and 


“(B) if the cable operator elects to carry an 
affiliate of a broadcast network (as such term 
is defined by the Commussion by regulation), 
such cable operator shall carry the affiliate of 
such broadcast network whose city of license 
reference point, as defined in section 76.53 of 
tile 47, Code of Federal Regulations (in effect 
on January 1, 1991), or any successor regula- 
tion thereto, is closest to the principal headend 
of the cable system. 


“(3) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED—(A) A cable 
Operator shall carry in its entirety, on the cable sys- 
tem of that operator, the pnmary video, accompany- 
ing audio, and line 21 closed caption transmission 
of each of the local commercial television stations 
carned on the cable system and, to the extent tech- 
nically feasible, program-related material carried in 
the vertical blanking interval or on subcarriers. Re- 
transmission of other material in the vertical blank- 
ing internal or other nonprogram-related materia! 
(including teletext and other subscription and adver- 
user-supported information services) shall be at the 
discretion of the cable operator. Where appropriate 
and feasible, operators may delete signal enhance- 
ments, such as ghost-canceling. from the broadcast 
signal and employ such enhancements at the system 
headend or headends. 


“(B) The cable operator shall carry the entirety 
of the program schedule of any television station 
carried on the cable system unless carriage of spe- 
cific programming is prohibited, and other program- 
ming authorized to be substituted, under section 
76.67 or subpart F of pan 76 of ttle 47, Code of 


90a 


Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 
199] ), or any successor regulations thereto. 


(4) SIGNAL QUALITY.— 


“(A) NONDEGRADATION; TECHNICAL SPECI- 
FICATIONS.—The signals of local commercial 
television stations that a cable operator carries 
Shall~be carned without material degradation. 
The Commission shall adopt carriage stand- 
ards to ensure that, to the extent technically 
feasible, the quality of signal processing and 
carriage provided by a cable system for the 
carriage of local commercial television stations 
will be no less than that provided by the sys- 
tem for carriage of any other type of signal. 


“(B) ADVANCED TELEVISION.—At such time 
as the Commission prescribes modifications of 
the standards for television broadcast signals, 
the Commission shall initiate a proceeding to 
establish any changes in the signal carriage re- 
quirements of cable television systems neces- 
sary to ensure cable carriage of such broadcast 
signals of local commercial television stations 
which have been changed to conform with such 
modified standards. 


“(5) DUPLICATION NOT REQUIRED.—Notwith- 
standing paragraph (1), a cable operator shall not 
be required to carry the signal of any local commer- 
cial television station that substantially duplicates 
the signal of another local commercial television sta- 
tion which is carried on its cable system, or to carry 
the signals of more than one local commercial tele- 
vision stauon affiliated with a particular broadcast 
network (as such term is defined by regulation). If 
a cable operator elects to carry on its cable system a 
signal which substantially duplicates the signal of 
another local commercial television station carned 
on the cable system, or to carry on its system the 


91a 


signals of more than one local commercial television 
Station affiliated with a particular broadcast net- 
work, all such signals shall be counted toward the 
number of signals the operator is required to carry 
under paragraph (1). 


(6) CHANNEL POSITIONING.—Each signal car- 
ried in fulfillment of the carriage obligations of a 
cable operator under this section shall be carried on 
the cable system channel number on which the local 
commercial television station is broadcast over the 
air, Or on the channel on which it was carried on 
July 19, 1985, or on the channel on which it was 
carried on January 1, 1992, at the election of the 
station, or on such other channel number as is mutu- 
ally agreed upon by the station and the cable opera- 
tor. Any dispute regarding the positioning of a local 
commercial television staion shall be resolved by 
the Commission. 


“(7) SIGNAL AVAILABILITY.—Signals carried in 
fulfillment of the requirements of this section shall 
be provided to every subscriber of a cable system. 
Such signals shall be viewable via cable on all tele- 
vision receivers of a subscriber which are connected 
to a cable system by a cable operator or for which 
a cable operator provides a connection. If a cable 
operator authorizes subscribers to instal] additional 
receiver connections, but does not provide the sub- 
scriber with such connections, or with the equipment 
and materials for such connections, the operator 
shall notify such subscribers of all broadcast stations 
carned on the cable system which cannot be viewed 
via cable without a converter box and shall offer to 
sel! or lease such a converter box to such subscribers 
at rates in accordance with section 623(b) (3). 


“(8) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS CARRIED.—A 
cable operator shall identify, upon request by any 
person. the signals carried on its system in fullfill- 
ment of the requirements of this section. 


Q2a 


“(9) NoTIFICATION.—A cable operator shall pro- 
vide written notice to a local commerciai television 
station at least 30 days prior to either deleting from 
carnage or repositioning that station. No deletion or 
repositioning of a local commercial television station 
shall occur during a period in which major television 
rating services measure the size of audiences of local 
television stations. The noufication provisions of this 
paragraph shall not be used to undermine or evade 
the channel posiuoning or carnage requirements 1m- 
posed upon cable operators under this section. 


“(10) COMPENSATION FOR CARRIAGE.—A cable 
operator shal] not accept or request monetary pay- 
ment or other valuable consideration in exchange 
either for carriage of local commercial television 
stations in fulfillment of the requirements of this sec- 
tion or for the channel positioning mghts provided to 
such stations under this section, except that— 


“(A) any such station may be required to 
bear the costs associated with delivering a good 
quality signal or a baseband video signal to the 
principal headend of the cable system; 


“(B) a cable operator may accept payments 
from stations which would be considered distant 
signals under section 111 of title 17, United 
States Code, as indemnification for any in- 
creased copyright liability resulting from car- 
riage of such signal; and 


“(C) a cable operator may continue to ac- 
cept monetary payment or other valuable con- 
sideration in exchange for carnage or channel 
positioning of the signal of any local commer- 
cia] television station carried in fulfillment of 
the requirements of this section, through, but 
not beyond, the date of expiration of an agree- 
ment thereon between a cable operator and a 


93a 


local commercial! television station entered into 
prior to June 26, 1990. 


“(c) Low Power STATION CARRIAGE OBLIGATION.— 


—“(1) REQUIREMENT.—If there are not sufficient 
signals of full power local commercial television sta- 


tuons to fill the channels set aside under subsection 
(b)— 


“(A) a cable operator of a cable system 
with a capacity of 35 or fewer usable activated 
channels shal] be required to carry one qualified 
low power station; and 


“(B) a cable operator of a cable system with 
a capacity of more than 35 usable activated 
channels shall be required to carry two quali- 
fied low power stations. 


“(2) USE OF PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, OR GOVERN- 
MENTAL CHANNELS —A cable operator required to 
Carry more than one signal of a qualified low power 
Station under this subsection may do so, subject to 
approval by the franchising authority pursuant to 
secuon 611, by placing such additional station on 
public, educational, or governmental channels not 
in use for their designated purposes. 


“(d) REMEDIES.— 


“(1) COMPLAINTS BY BROADCAST STATIONS. — 
Whenever a local commercial television station be- 
lieves that a cable operator has failed to meet its 
obligations under this section, such station shal] no 
ufy the operator, in writing. of the alleged failure 
and identify its reasons for believing that the cable 
operator is obligated to carry the signal of such sta- 
tion or has otherwise failed to comply with the chan- 
nel positioning or repositioning or other require- 
ments of this section. The cable operator shall, 
within 30 days of such written noufication, respond 


94a 


in writing to such notification and either commence 
to carry the signal of such station in accordance with 
the terms requested or state its reasons for believing 
that it is not obligated to carry such signal or is in 
compliance with the channel positioning and reposi- 
tioning and other requirements of this section. A 
local commercial television station that is denied 
carriage or channel positioning or repositioning in 
accordance with this section by a cable operator may 
obtain review of such denial by filing a complaint 
with the Commission. Such complaint shall allege 
the manner in which such cable operator has failed 
to meet its obligations and the basis for such alle- 
gations. 


“(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND.—The Commis- 
sion shal] afford such cable operator an opportunity 
to present data and arguments to establish that there 
has been no failure to meet its obligations under this 
section. 


“(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL.—Within 
120 days after the date a complaint is filed, the Com- 
mission shal] determine whether the cable operator 
has met its obligations under this section. If the 
Commission determines that the cable operator has 
failed to meet such obligations, the Commission 
shall order the cable operator io reposition the com- 
plaining station or, in the case of an obligation to 
Carry a@ station, to commence carriage of the station 
and to continue such carriage for at least 12 months. 
If the Commission determines that the cable operator 
has fully met the requirements of this section, it shall 
dismiss the complaint. 


“(e) Input SELECTOR SwitcH RULES ABOLISHED — 
No cable operator shall be required— 


“(1) to provide or make available any input se- 
lector switch as defined in section 76.5(mm) of title 


95a 


47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any comparable 
device, or 

“(2) to provide information to subscribers about 
input selector switches or comparable devices. 


“(f{) REGULATIONS BY COMMISSION.—Within 180 
days after the date of enactment of this section, the 
Commission shall, following a rulemaking proceeding, is- 
sue regulations implementing the requirements imposed 
by this section. Such implemenung regulations shall in- 
clude necessary revisions to update secuon 76.51 of title 
47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 


“(g) SALES PRESENTATIONS AND PROGRAM LENGTH 
COMMERCIALS.— 


“(1) CARRIAGE PENDING PROCEEDING.—Pending 
the outcome of the proceeding under paragraph (2), 
nothing in this Act shall require a cable operator to 
carry on any wer, or prohibit a cable operator from 
carrying on any tier, the signal of any commercial 
television station or video programming service that 
is predominantly utilized for the transmission of sales 
presentations or program length commercials. 


“(2) PROCEEDING CONCERNING CERTAIN STA- 
TIONS.—Within 270 days after the date of enactment 
of this section, the Commission, notwithstanding 
prior proceedings to determine whether broadcast 
television stations that are predominantly utilized for 
the transmission of sales presentations or program 
length commercials are serving the public interest, 
convenience, and necessity, shall complete a pro- 
ceeding in accordance with this paragraph to deter- 
mine whether broadcast television stations that are 
predominantly utilized for the transmission of sales 
presentations or program length commercials are 
serving the public interest, convenience, and neces- 
sity. In conducting such proceeding, the Commis- 
sion shall provide appropnate notuce and opportu- 


96a 


nity ior public comment. The Commission shall 
consider the viewing of such stations, the level of 
competing demands for the spectrum allocated to 
such stations, and the role of such stations in pro- 
viding competiuon to nonbroadcast services offering 
similar programming. In the event that the Com. 
mission concludes that one or more of such stations 
are serving the public interest, convenience and 
necessity, the Commission shall qualify such stations 
as local commercial television stations for purposes 
of subsection (a). In the event that the Commission 
concludes that one or more of such stations are not 
serving the public interest, convenience, and neces- 
Sity, the Commission shall allow the licensees of 
such Stauons a reasonable period within which to 
provide different programming, and shall not deny 
such Stations a renewal expectancy solely because 
their programming consisted predominantly of sales 
presentations or program length commercials. , 


“(h) DEFINITIONS.— 


‘ ‘(1) LocaL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STa- 
ION.— 


“(A) IN GENERAL.—For ses of thi 
section, the term ‘local sanmeatel Taco 
station means any full power television broad- 
cast station, other than a qualified noncommer- 
cial educational television station within the 
meaning of section 615(1)(1), licensed and 
operating on a channel regularly assigned to 
its community by the Commission that, with 
respect to a particular cable system, is within 
the same television market as the cable system. 


"“(B) EXCLUSIONS.—The term ‘local com- 
mercial television station’ shall not include— 


i a . 2 
a (i) low power television stations, tele- 
vision translator stations, and passive re- 


peaters which operate pursuant to part 


O74 


ae 


74 of title 47, Code of Federal Regula- 
tions, or any successor regulations thereto, 


“(ii) a television broadcast station that 
would be considered a distant signal un- 
der section 111 of title 17, United States 
Code, if such station does not agree to in- 
demnify the cable operator for any in- 
creased copyright liability resulting from 
carriage on the cable system, or 


“(iii) a television broadcast station that 
does not deliver to the principal headend 
of a cable system either a signal level of 
—45dBm for UHF signals or —49dBm 
for VHF signals at the input terminals of 
the signal processing equipment, if such 
station does not agree to be responsible for 
the costs of delivering to the cable system 
a signal of good quality or a baseband 
video signal. 


“(C) MARKET DETERMINATIONS.—(i) for 
purposes of this section, a broadcasting sta- 
tion’s market shall be determined in the manner 
provided in section 73.3555(d)(3)(i) of ute 
47, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on 
May 1, 1991, except that, following a written 
request, the Commission may, with respect to a 
particular television broadcast station, include 
additional communities within its television 
market or exclude communities from such sta- 
tion’s television market to better effectuate the 
purposes of this section. In considering such 
requests, the Commission may determine that 
particular communities are part of more than 
one television market. 


“(ii) In considering requests filed pursuant 
to clause (i), the Commission shall afford par- 
ticular attention to the value of localism by 
taking into account such factors as— 


98a 


“(1) whether the station, or other Sta- 
tions located in the same area. have been 
historically carried on the cable System or 
Systems within such community; 


“(I1) whether the television station 


provides coverage or other local service to 
such community: 


“(I) whether any other television 
Station that is eligible to be carried by a 
cable system in such community in fulfill- 
ment of the requirements of this section 
provides news coverage of issues of con- 
cern to such community or provides car- 
riage or coverage of sporting and other 
events of interest to the community; and 


“(IV) evidence of viewin 

) £ patterns in 

cable and noncable households within the 

areas served by the cable system or SyS- 
tems in such community. 


““(il) A cable operator shall not del 
ete from 
carriage the signal of a commercial television 
station during the pendency of any proceeding 
pursuant to this subparagraph. 


“(iv) In the rulemakin 
& proceeding required 
by subsection (f), the Commission shall pro- 
vide for expedited consideration of requests 
filed under this subparagraph. 
“(2) QUALIFIED Low pPOowER 
t STATION.—The 
term ‘qualified low power station’ means any televi- 
a broadcast station conforming to the rules estab- 
~- ode A a Power Television Stations contained 
nal dh of utle 47, Code of Federal Regulations, 
“(A) such station broadcasts for 
he at least the 
minimum number of hours of operation re- 
quired by the Commission for television broad- 


99a 


cast stations under part 73 of title 47, Code of 
Federal Regulations, 


“(B) such station meets all oblgations and 
requirements applicable to television broadcast 
stations under part 73 of title 47, Code of Fed- 
eral Regulations, with respect to the broadcast 
of nonentertainment programming, program- 
ming and rates involving political candidates, 
election issues, controversial issues of public 
importance, editorials, and personal attacks, 
programming for children; and equal employ- 
ment opportunity; and the Commission deter- 
mines that the provision of such programming 
by such station would address local news and 
informational needs which are not being ade- 
quately served by full power television broad- 
cast stations because of the geographic distance 
of such full power stations from the low power 
station’s community of license, 


“(C) such station complies with interference 
regulations consistent with its secondary status 
pursuant to part 74 of ttle 47, Code of Fed- 
eral Regulations; 


“(D) such station is located no more than 
35 miles from the cable system’s headend, and 
delivers to the principal headend of the cable 
system an over-the-air signal of good quality, 
as determined by the Commission; 


“(E) the community of license of such sta- 
tion and the franchise area of the cable system 
are both located outside of the largest 160 
Metropolitan Statistical Areas, ranked by popu- 
lation, as determined by the Office of Manage- 
ment and Budget on June 30, 1990, and the 
population of such community of license on 
such date did not exceed 35,000; and 


109a 


“(F) there is no full power television broad- 
Cast station licensed to any community within 
the county or other political subdivision (of a 
State) served by the cable system. 


Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to 
change the secondary status of any low power sta- 
uon as provided in part 74 of title 47, Code of 
Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of 
enactment of this section.”’. 


SEC. 5. CARRIAGE OF NONCCMMERCIAL STATIONS. 


Part I of title V1 of the Communications Act of 1934 
(47 U.S.C. 531 et seq.) is further amended by inserting 
after section 614 (as added by section 4 of this Act) the 
following new section: 


“sec. 615. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL 
TELEVISION. 


“(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS.—lIn addition to the car- 
flage requirements set forth in section 614, each cable 
operator of a cable system shall carry the signals of quali- 
fed noncommercial educational television stations in ac- 
cordance with the provisions of this section. 


“(b) REQUIREMENTS To CARRY QUALIFIED StTa- 
TIONS.— 


““(1) GENERAL REQUIREMENT TO CARRY EACH 
QUALIFIED STATION.—Subject to paragraphs (2) and 
(3) and subsection (e), each cable operator shall 
carry, on the cable system of that cable operator, 
any qualified local noncommercial educational tele- 
vision station requesting Carriage. 

“(2)(A) SYSTEMS WITH 12 OR FEWER CHAN- 
NELS.—Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a cable op 
erator of a cable system with 12 or fewer usable 
activated channels shall be required to carry the 
signal of one qualified local noncommercial educa- 
uona! television station; except that a cable operator 


10la 


of such a system shall comply with subsection (c) 
and may, in its discretion, carry the signals of other 
qualified noncommercial educational television sta- 
tions. 

“(B) In the case of a cable system described in 
subparagraph (A) which operates beyond the pres- 
ence of any qualified local noncommercial educa- 
tional television stauon— 


“(i) the cable shall umport and carry on that 
system the signal of one qualified noncommer- 
cial educational television station; 


“(ii) the selection for carriage of such a 
signal shall be at the election of the cable op- 
erator; and 


“(iil) im order to satisfy the requirements for 
carriage specified in this subsection, the cable 
operator of the system shall not be required to 
remove any other programming service actually 
provided to subscribers on March 29, 1990; 
except that such cable operator shall use the 
first channel available to satisfy the require- 
ments of this subparagraph. 


“(3) SYSTEMS WITH 13 TO 36 CHANNELS.—(A) 
Subject to subsection (c), a cable operator of a 
cable system with 13 to 36 usable activated chan- 
nels— 

“(i) shall carry the signal of at least one 
qualified local noncommercial educational tele- 
vision station but shall not be required to carry 
the signals of more than three such stations, 
and 

“(ii) may, in its discretion, carry additional 
such stations. 

“(B) In the case of a cable system described in 
this paragraph which operates beyond the presence 


102a 


of any qualifed local noncommercial educational 
television station, the cable operator shall import and 
Carry on that system the signal of at least one quali- 
fed noncommercial educational television station to 
comply with subparagraph (A) (i). 


“(C) The cable operator of a cable system de- 
scribed in this paragraph which carries the signal of 
a qualified local noncommercial educational station 
affiliated with a State public television network shall 
not be required to carry the signal of any additional 
qualified local noncommercial educational television 
stations affiliated with the same network if the pro- 
gramming of such additional stations is substantially 
duplicated by the programming of the qualified local 
noncommercial educational television station receiv- 
ing carriage. 


“(D) A cable operator of a system described in 
this paragraph which increases the usable activated 
channel capacity of the system to more than 36 
channels on or after March 29, 1990, shall, in ac- 
cordance with the other provisions of this section, 
Carry the signal of each qualified local noncommer- 
cial educational television station requesting car- 
riage, subject to subsection (e). 


“(c) CONTINUED CARRIAGE OF EXISTING STATIONS.-— 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all 
cable operators shall continue to provide carriage to all 
qualified local noncommercial educational television sta- 
uons whose signals were carried on their systems as of 
March 29, 1990. The requirements of this subsection 
may be waived with respect to a particular cable operator 
and a parucular such station, upon the written consent 
of the cable operator and the station. 


“(d) PLACEMENT OF ADDITIONAL SIGNALS.—A cable 
operator required to add the signals of qualified local non- 
commercial educational television stations to a cable sys- 


103a 


tem under this section may do so, subject to approval by 
the franchising authority pursuant to section 611, by piac- 
ing such additional stations on public, educational, o: 
eovernmental channels not in use for their designated 
purposes. 

“(e) SysteEMS WITH MorRE THAN 36 CHANNELS. —A 
cable operator of a cable system with a capacity of more 
than 36 usable activated channels which is required to 
carry the signals of three qualified local noncommercia! 
educational television stations shall not be required to 
carry the signals of additional such stations the program- 
ming of which substantially duplicates the programming 
broadcast by another qualified local noncommercial edu- 
cational television station requesting carnage. Substantial 
duplication shall be defined by the Commission in a man- 
ner that promotes access to distinctive noncommercial 
educational television services. 


“(f) WAIVER OF NONDUPLICATION RIGHTS.—A quali- 
fied local noncommercial educational television station 
whose signal is carried by a cable operator shall not as- 
sert any network nonduplication nghts it may have pur- 
suant to section 76.92 of title 47, Code of Federal Regu- 
lations, to require the deletion of programs aired on other 
qualified local noncommercial educational television sta- 
tions whose signals are carried by that cable operator. 


“(g) CONDITIONS OF CARRIAGE.— 


“(1) CONTENT To BE CaRRIED.—A cable opera- 
tor shall retransmit in its entirety the primary video, 
accompanying audio, and line 21 closed capuon 
transmission of each qualified loca] noncommercial 
educational television station whose signal 1s carned 
on the cable system, and, to the extent technically 
feasible, program-related material carmed in the ver- 
tical blanking interval, or on subcarnmers, that may 
be necessary for receipt of programming by handi- 
capped persons or for educational or language pur- 


104a 


poses. Retransmission of other material in the verti- 
cal blanking interval or on subcarriers shall be 
within the discretion of the cable operator. 


“(2) BANDWIDTH AND TECHNICAL QUALITY.—A 
cable operator shall provide each qualified local non- 
commercial educational television station whose 
signal is carried in accordance with this section with 
bandwidth and technical capacity equivalent to that 
provided to commercial television broadcast stations 
carried on the cable system and shall carry the signal 
of each qualified local noncommercial educational 
television station without material degradation. 


“(3) CHANGES IN CARRIAGE.—The signal of a 
qualified local noncommercial educational television 
station shall not be repositioned by a cable operator 
unless the cable operator, at least 30 days in ad- 
vance of such repositioning, has provided wnitten 
notice to the station and all subscribers of the cable 
system. For purposes of this paragraph, reposition- 
ing includes (A) assignment of a qualified local non- 
commercial educational television station to a cable 
system channel number different from the cable sys- 
tem channel number to which the station was as- 
signed as of March 29, 1990, and (B) deletion of 
the station from the cable system. The notification 
provisions of this paragraph shall not be used to 
undermine or evade the channel positioning or car- 
riage requirements imposed upon cable operators 
under this secuon. 


“(4) GOOD QUALITY SIGNAL REQUIRED.—Not- 
withstanding the other provisions of this section, a 
cable operator shall not be required to carry the 
s gnal of any qualified local noncommercial educa- 
tional television station which does not deliver to the 
cable system's principal headend a signal of good 
quality or a baseband video signal, as may be de- 
fined by the Commussion. 


105a 


“(5) CHANNEL POSITIONING.—Each signal car 
ried in fulfiliment of the carriage obligations of a cable 
operator under this section shall be carried on the 
cable system channel number on which the qualified 
local noncommercial educational television station is 
broadcast over the air. or on the channel on which 
it was carried on July 19, 1985, at the election of the 
Station, Or on such other channel number as is 
mutually agreed upon by the station and the cable 
operator. Any dispute regarding the positioning of 
a qualified local noncommercial educational televi- 
sion station shall be resolved by the Commission. 


“(h) AVAILABILITY OF SIGNALS.—Signals carried in 
fulfillment of the carriage obligations of a cable operator 
under this section shall be available to every subscriber 
as part of the cable system's lowest priced service tier that 
includes the retransmission of local commercial television 
broadcast signals. 


“(1) PAYMENT FOR CARRIAGE PROHIBITED. — 


“(1) IN GENERAL.—A cable operator shall not 
accept monetary payment or other valuable consid- 
eration in exchange for carriage of the signal of any 
qualified local noncommercial educational television 
station carried in fulfillment of the requirements of 
this section, except that such a station may be re- 
quired to bear the cost associated with delivering a 
good quality signal or a baseband video signal to the 
principal headend of the cable system. 


“(2) DISTANT SIGNAL EXCEPTION.—Notwith- 
standing the provisions of this section, a cable op 
erator shall not be required to add the signal of a 
qualified local noncommercial educational television 
Station not already carmed under the provision of 
subsection (c), where such signal would be con- 
sidered a distant signal for copyright purposes unless 
such station indemnifies the cable operator for any 


106a 


increased copyright costs resulting from carriage of 
such signal. 


“(j) REMEDIES.— 


“(1) COMPLAINT.—Whenever a qualified local 
noncommercial educational television station believes 
that a cable operator of a cable system has failed to 
comply with the signal carriage requirements of this 
secuon, the station may file a complaint with the 
Commission. Such complaint shall allege the man- 
ner in which such cable operator has failed to com- 
ply with such requirements and state the basis for 
such allegations. 


“(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND.—The Commis- 
sion shall afford such cable operator an opportunity 
to present data, views, and arguments to establish 
that the cable operator has complied with the signal 
Carnage requirements of this section. 


“(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL.—Within 
120 days after the date a complaint is filed under 
this subsection, the Commission shall determine 
whether the cable operator has complied with the 
requirements of this section. If the Commission de- 
termunes that the cable operator has failed to comply 
with such requirements, the Commission shall state 
with particularity the basis for such findings and or- 
der the cable operator to take such remedial action 
as 1S necessary to meet such requirements. If the 
Commission determines that the cable operator has 
fully complied with such requirements, the Commis- 
sion shall dismiss the complaint. 


107a 


“(1) DEFINITIONS.—For purposes of this secuon— 


“(1) QUALIFIED NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL 
TELEVISION STATION.—The term ‘qualified noncom- 
mercial educational television station’ means any 
television broadcast station which— 


“(A)(i) under the rules and regulations of 
the Commission in effect on March 29, 1990, 
is licensed by the Commussion as a noncommer- 
cial educational television broadcast station and 
which is owned and operated by a_ public 
agency, nonprofit foundation, corporation, or 
associauon; and 


“(ii) has as its licensee an entity which 1s 
eligible to receive a community service grant, 
Or any successor grant thereto, from the Cor- 
poration for Public Broadcasting, or any suc- 
cessor organization thereto, on the basis of the 
formula set forth in section 396(k)(6)(B); or 


“(B) is owned and operated by a municipal- 
ity and transmits predominantly noncommercial 


programs for educational purposes. 


Such term includes (I) the translator of any non- 
commercial educational television station with five 
watts or higher power serving the franchise area, 
(IL) a full-service station or translator if such station 
or translator is licensed to a channel reserved for 
noncommercial educational use pursuant to section 
73.606 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or 
any successor regulations thereto, and (III) such 
stations and translators operating on channels not so 
reserved as the Commission determines are qualified 
as noncommercial educational stauons. 


“(2) QUALIFIED LOCAL NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCA- 


“(k) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS.—A cable operator 
shall identify, upon request by any person, those signals 
carned in fulfillment of the requirements of this section. 


TIONAL TELEVISION STATION.—The term ‘qualified 
local noncommercial educational] television station’ 


108a 


means @ qualified noncommercial educational tele- 
vision stauion— 


“(A) which is licensed to a principal com- 
munity whose reference point, as defined in sec- 
uon 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regula- 
tions (as in effect on March 29, 1990), or any 
successor regulations thereto, is within 50 miles 
of the principal headend of the cable system; or 


“(B) whose Grade B service contour, as de- 
fined in section 73.683(a) of such title (as in 
effect on March 29, 1990), or any successor 
regulations thereto, encompasses the principal 
headend of the cable system.”. 


SEC. 6. RETRANSMISSION CONSENT FOR CABLE SYSTEMS. 


Section 325 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 
U.S.C. 325) is amended— 


(1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as 
subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and 


(2) by inserting immediately after subsection (a) 
the following new subsection: 


“(b)(1) Following the date that is one year after the 
date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, no cable sys- 
tem or other muluchannel video programming distributor 
shall retransmit the signal of a broadcasting station, or 
any part thereof, excepi— 


“(A) with the express authority of the originat- 
ing stauon; or 


“(B) pursuant to section 614, in the case of a 
station electing, in accordance with this subsection, 
to assert the mght to carriage under such section. 


“(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not 
apply to— 


1094 


“(A) retransmission of the signal of a noncom- 
mercial broadcasting station, 


“(B) retransmission directly to a home satellite 
antenna of the signal of a broadcasting station that 
is not owned or operated by or affiliated with, a 
broadcasting network, if such signal was retrans- 
mitted by a satellite carrier on May 1, 1991, 


“(C) retransmission of the signal of a broadcast- 
ing station that is owned or operated by, or affili- 
ated with, a broadcasting network directly to a home 
satellite antenna, if the household receiving the sig- 
nal is an unserved household; or 


“(D) retransmission by a cable operator or other 
multichannel video programming distributor of the 
signal of a superstation if such signal was obtained 
from a satellite carner and the originating station 
was a superstauon on May 1, 1991. 


For purposes of this paragraph, the terms ‘satellite car- 
rier’, ‘superstauon’, and ‘unserved household’ have the 
meanings given those terms, respectively, in section 
119(d) of tithe 17, United States Code, as in effect on 
the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 


“(3)(A) Within 45 days after the date of enactment 
of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Com- 
petition Act of 1992, the Commission shall commence a 
rulemaking proceeding to establish regulauons to govern 
the exercise by television broadcast stations of the right 
to grant retransmission consent under this subsection and 
of the right to signal carriage under section 614, and such 
other regulations as are necessary to administer the limi- 
tations contained in paragraph (2). The Commission 
shall consider in such procceding the impact that the 
grant of retransmission consent by television stations may 
have on the rates for the basic service tier and shall en- 
sure that the regulations prescribed under this subsection 


110a 


do not conflict with the Commission's obligation under 
section 623(b)(1) to ensure that the rates for the basic 
sxvice Wer are reasonable. Such rulemaking proceeding 
Shall be completed within 180 days after the date of 
enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection 
and Competition Act of 1992. 


“(B) The tegulations required by subparagraph (A) 
shall require that television stations, within one year after 
the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer 
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and every three 
years thereafter, make an election between the right to 
grant retransmission consent under this subsection and 
the right to signal carriage under section 614. If there is 
more than one cable system which services the same geo- 
graphic area, a station's election shall apply to all such 
cable systems. 


(4) If an onginating television station elects under 
paragraph (3)(B) to exercise its right to grant retrans- 
mission consent under this subsection with respect to a 
cable system, the provisions of section 614 shall not apply 
to the carriage of the signal of such station by such cable 
system. 


“(5) The exercise by a television broadcast Station of 
the right to grant retransmission consent under this sub- 
section shall not interfere with or supersede the rights 
under section 614 or 615 of any station electing to assert 
the right to signal carriage under that section. 


“(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
modifying the compulsory copyright license established in 
secuon 111 of title 17, United States Code, or as affect- 
ing existing or future video programming licensing agree- 
ments between broadcasting stations and video program- 


mers. . 


llla 
APPENDIX D 


Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P.’s Rule 29.] 
List of Parent Companies and Subsidiaries 


Each of the following general partners of Time Warner 
Entertainment Company, L.P. (“TWE"”) is a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Time Warner Inc.: 


Home Box Office, Inc. 

Warner Cable Communications, Inc. 

Warner Communications, Inc. 

Warner Bros., Inc. 

American Television and Communications 
Corporation 

Capita! Cablevision Systems, Inc. 

People’s Cable Corporation 

Memphis CATV, Inc. 

Warner Cable Communications Company 

SIFTA Milwaukee Cable Corp. 

TA Milwaukee Cable Co., Inc. 

Warner Cable of New York, Inc. 

Time Warner Cable Inc. 

Warner Entertainment Inc. 


The following are limited partners of TWE: 


C. Itoh Entertainment Inc. 
A subsidiary of C. Itoh & Co. Ltd. 


Toshiba American Entertainment, Inc. 
A subsidiary of Toshiba Corporation 


l. 


ll2a 


PLAINTIFFS IN CIVIL ACTION NO. 92-2247 


Rule 29.) List of Parent Companies and Subsidiaries 


Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. 


The following entities hold ownership interests in 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. (“TBS”): Time 
Warner, Inc.; and Tele-Communications, Inc. 


The following are direct or indirect subsidiary 
companies, not wholly-owned, of TBS: SportsSouth 
Network, Ltd.; Checkout Channel, L.P., through its 
indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, COC Holdings, 
Inc.; Atlanta Hawks, Ltd.; and HB Entertainment 
Co., Inc. 


Arts & Entertainment Network 


The following entities hold ownership interests in 
Arts and Entertainment Network: Capital Cities’ 
ABC Video Enterprises, Inc.; The Hearst Corpora- 
tion; RCA Cable Inc.; and Radio City Music Hall 
Productions, Inc. 


Black Entertainment Television, Inc. 


BET Holdings, Inc. is the parent company of 
Black Entertainment Television, Inc. (“BET”). The 
following companies are subsidiaries, not wholly- 
owned, of BET: EMERGE Communications, Inc.; 
Haricom Advertising, Inc.; and United Image En- 
tertainment. 


E! Entertainment Television, Inc. 


The following entities hold ownership interests in 
E! Entertainment Television, Inc.: Time Warner, 
Inc., through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Warner 
Communications, Inc.; Tele-Communications, Inc., 
through its subsidiaries, United Cable Television 


ll3a 


Corp, Ltd. and United Cable Television Investments: 
Comcast Cable Communications, Inc.; Continental 
Cablevision, Inc., through its subsidiary, Continental 
Cablevision Investments, Inc.; Cox Enterprises, Inc., 
through its subsidiary, Cox Communications, Inc.; 
and Newhouse Broadcasting, through its subsidiary, 
NewChannels Corp. 


Hearst/ABC-Viacom Entertainment Services 


Hearst ABC Viacom Entertainment Services is a 
partnership owned by The Hearst Corporation; Capi- 
tal Cities ABC Video Enterprises, Inc., a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Capital Cities‘ABC Inc.; and 
Lifetime Holdings, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Viacom International, Inc. 


International Family Entertainment, Inc. 


Liberty Programming Corp. is the parent com- 
pany of International Family Entertainment. 


National Cable Satellite Corporation 


There are no parent companies or subsidiaries. 


QVC Network, Inc. 


The following entities have ownership interests in 
QVC Network in excess of 5% of the publicly 
traded stock: Liberty Media Corporation: Time 
Warner, Inc.; and Comcast Corporation. 


The Travel Channel, Inc. 


The following entities hold ownership interests in 
The Travel Channel, Inc.: Landmark Communica- 
tions, Inc.. throwgh its wholly-owned subsidiaries, 
Landmark Televison, Inc. and Landmark Broad- 
casting, Inc.; and TeleCable Corporation, through its 
subsidiaries, TeleCable Technologies, Inc., Telecable 


10. 


lida 


Investment Corporation, 
Inc., and TC Partners, L.P. 


USA Networks 


TeleCable of Cleveland, 


The following entities have Ownership interests jn 


USA Networks: Paramou 


nt Communications, Inc., 


through its wholly-ow nfs 
y-owned subsidiary, Eighth ' 
Corp.; Matsushita Electric Industrial Page oe 


through its wholly-owned 


Subsidiaries, MCA, Inc. 


and MCA Cable Services, Inc. 


—— 


115a 


Daniels Cablevision, Inc’s 
Rule 29.1 List of 
Parent Companies and Subsidiaries 


Daniels Cablevision, Inc. is a privately held corpora- 
tion, with 100% of the stock held by Bill Daniels, and 
has no parent or subsidiary corporations within the mean- 
ing or context of Supreme Court Rule 29.1. 


116a 


Discovery Communications, Inc. 
and 
The Learning Channel, Inc. 


List of Parent Companies and Subsidiaries 
Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 29.1 


The Learning Channel, Inc., is a wholly-owned sub- 


sidiary of Discovery Communications, Inc. The ultimate 
parent companies of Discovery Communications, Inc., are 
Tele-Communications, Inc., Cox Cable Communications, 
and Newhouse Broadcasting Corp. Neither The Learning 
Channel, Inc., nor Discovery Communications, Inc.. has 


any other parent companies, or subsidiaries (other than 
wholly owned subsidiaries ). 


117a 
NATIONAL CABLE TELEVISION ASSOCIATION - 
List of Parent Companies and Subsidiaries 


Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 29.1 


The National Cable Television Association is a trade 
association. It has no parent companies or subsidianes 
(other than wholly owncd subsidiaries ). 


