} FIP ED 


No. 94-197 


In The | “ <a 
Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1994 
+ 


ELOISE ANDERSON, INDIVIDUALLY AND IN 
HER OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS DIRECTOR, 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES; 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES; 
AND RUSSELL S. GOULD, DIRECTOR, 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, 


Petitioners, 


Vs. 


DESHAWN GREEN, DEBBY VENTURELLA, AND 
DIANA P. BERTOLLT, ON BEHALF OF THEMSELVES 
AND ALL OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED, 


Respondents. 
+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
+ 


PETITIONERS’ BRIEF ON THE MERITS 
+ 


Danie. E. LUNGREN ANDREA LYNN HocH 
Attorney General for the Deputy Attorney 
State of California General 

CHARLTON G. HOLLanpn, III P.O. Box 944255 
Assistant Attorney Sacramento, California 
General 94244-2550 

Dennis ECKHART, Telephone: (916) 445-0767 
Supervising 


Deputy Attorney General 


THEODORE GARELIS* 
CA Bar No. 95193 
Deputy Attorney General Attorneys for Petitioners 


*Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


Po rah ee ae a , - 4 
4 he re s o> Bib 
e ane Z al 
rey Sp om 
BL ae =. $ 


my “* : 
i 
. 
$ 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


May a state limit a new state resident’s AFDC bene- 
fits to the level of benefits received or receivable in the 
person’s state of prior residence for a period of a year, 
with full benefits to be provided thereafter? 


ii 
PARTIES 


Petitioners, who were defendants below, are Eloise 
Anderson, Director of the California Department of Social 
Services, the California Department of Social Services,and 
Russell S. Gould, Director of the California Department of 
Finance. Mr. Gould was appointed as the Director of the 
Department of Finance on August 1, 1993, and as such, is 
the successor in interest to Thomas Hayes, who was 
named in the original pleadings filed in the District 
Court. Mr. Gould is automatically substituted as a party 
for Mr. Hayes pursuant to the provisions of Rule 25(d) of 
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 


Named respondents, plaintiffs below, are Deshawn 
Green, Debby Venturella, and Diana P. Bertollt. On Janu- 
ary 29, 1993, the trial court ordered that plaintiffs shall 
provisionally maintain this matter as a class action on 
behalf of a class consisting of applicants and recipients of 
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (“AFDC”) who 
have applied or will apply for benefits on or after Decem- 
ber 1, 1992, and who have not resided in California for 
twelve consecutive months immediately preceding their 
application for aid. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
i EEE + ccc cseceeccceccoccccesees i 
EE ESSENSE SOP OT PTETTTETTTTETT TTT ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES .............ccceeeeeeess iv 
EES PO OTTTTTTTTET TTT TE TTT 1 
ree de cee ceeednerccececescocces 2 
RELEVANT CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
EEE DL ELSS ESSE OTT ETET TTT TTT TTY. 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE.............--0000005: 2 
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT ................. 8 
ST MAP ERhUbanensbeceeececocccoccocceccccs 9 


I THE STATUTE DOES NOT OPERATE AS A 
PENALTY ON MIGRATION AND THEREFORE 
MUST BE UPHELD IF IT HAS A REASONABLE 


Il EVEN IF THE STATUTE OPERATES AS A PEN- 
ALTY ON MIGRATION, THE IMPACT OF THAT 
PENALTY IS REMOTE AND INCIDENTAL, 
AND, THEREFORE, THE STATUTE SHOULD 
NOT BE SUBJECT TO STRICT SCRUTINY..... 14 


Ill CALIFORNIA’S INTEREST IN REDUCING 
WELFARE COSTS IS SUFFICIENT TO JUSTIFY 
THE USE OF A TWO-TIER SYSTEM OF DIS- 
TRIBUTING AFDC BENEFITS................. 18 


ET PPTTTTTUTTTTILILILILE LETT Tee 23 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Beno v. Shalala, 30 F.3d 1057 (9th Cir. 1994), Rhg. 
denied August 24, 1994. ........... 2.6 cece eee eens 4,5 


Beno v. Shalala, 835 F.Supp. 1193 (E.D. Cal. 1993)..... 4 


Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471 (1970) 
60débsek edbusreesshesesedevacsess 13, 16, 17, 18, 22, 23 


Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941) .......... 15 
Everett v. Schramm, 772 F.2d 1114 (3rd Cir. 1985) .... 22 
Green v. Anderson, 26 F.3d 95 (9th Cir. 1994)........ 1 
Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297 (1980)................ 11 
Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612 

SE 6cucedebeunesecsaneeuenceobustedesdsaaaus 13, 14 
Jefferson v. Hackney, 406 U.S. 535 (1972)............ 13 
King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309 (1968) ............... 13, 17 
Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 

Be Cnc cdsénedcnsecessahases 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 23 
Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969)....... passim 
Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393 (1975) ...........54.5. 15, 19 
State Attorney General of New York v. Soto- 

Lopez, 476 U.S. 898 (1986)...... 2.6.0... ccc euee 13, 18 
Williams v. Fears, 179 U.S. 270 (1900)............ 14, 15 


Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55 (1982)..11, 12, 13, 18, 19 


STATUTES AND AUTHORITIES 
28 United States Code § 1254(1) ......... 6.6.6 ccc uues 2 


28 United States Code § 1343(a)(3).............-5055. 6 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 
28 United States Code § 1983......................05. 6 
42 United States Code § 601....................005. 17 
42 United States Code § 1315(a) .................... 19 


California Welfare & Institutions Code § 11450.01 ..4, 20 


California Welfare and Institutions Code 


i hs cbudiuhtedecdadiacwacedaadsaaanidcnes 20 
California Welfare and Institutions Code 

i MU ccauacukoveudcastessncnchacddeul 3, 4, 5, 20 
OTHER 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 25(d)......... ii 
California Constitution, article IV, section 12(a)....... 5 


Legislative Counsel's Digest of Senate Bill 485, 
added by stats. 1992, c. 722, No. 10 West's Cal. 


> SE OA Bes vc cccccccsaseseccsseceesc 20, 21 
Peterson et al., Welfare Magnets (The Brookings 
I a 16, 21 


United States Constitution Fourteenth Amend- 
PES ts eee 2, 14 


No. 94-197 
+ 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1994 
o 


ELOISE ANDERSON, INDIVIDUALLY AND IN 
HER OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS DIRECTOR, 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES; 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES; 
AND RUSSELL S. GOULD, DIRECTOR, 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, 


Petitioners, 


vs. 


DESHAWN GREEN, DEBBY VENTURELLA, AND 
DIANA P. BERTOLLT, ON BEHALF OF THEMSELVES 
AND ALL OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED, 


Respondents. 


° 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


° 


PETITIONERS’ BRIEF ON THE MERITS 
° 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The decision of the Court of Appeals, Green v. Ander- 
son, is reported at 26 F.3d 95 (9th Cir. 1994) and is 
reprinted in the Appendix to the Petition for Writ of 
Certiorari (“Pet. App.”), Al-2. The decision of the district 


1 


court is reported at 811 F.Supp. 516 (E.D. Cal. 1993), and 
is reprinted at Pet. App. A3-20. 


S 


JURISDICTION 


On April 29, 1994, the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit (“the Ninth Circuit”) issued its 
opinion, affirming the preliminary injunction granted by 
the United States District Court for the Eastern District of 
California (“the District Court”). A timely petition for 
writ of certiorari was filed and docketed by this Court on 
July 28, 1994. This Court has jurisdiction to review, by 
way of writ of certiorari, the judgment or decree of the 
Court of Appeals. 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


S 


RELEVANT CONSTITUTIONAL 
AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


United States Constitution, Fourteenth Amendment: 


“Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in 
the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof, are citizens of the United States and the 
State wherein they reside. No State shall make 
or enforce any law which shall abridge the priv- 
ileges or immunities of citizens of the United 
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of 
life, liberty, or property without due process of 
law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdic- 
tion the equal protection of the laws.” 


California Welfare and Institutions Code section 
11450.03: 


“(a) Notwithstanding the maximum aid pay- 
ments specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision 
(a) of Section 11450, families that have resided 
in this state for less than 12 months shall be paid 
an amount ca culated in accordance with para- 
graph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 11450, not 
to exceed the maximum aid payment that would 
have been received by that family from the state 
of prior residence. 


“(b) This section shall not become operative 
until the date of approval by the United States 
Secretary of Health and Human Services neces- 
sary to implement the provisions of this section 
so as to ensure the continued compliance of the 
state plan for the following: 


“(1) Title IV of the federal Social Security Act 
(Subchapter 4 (commencing with Section 601) of 
Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the United States Code). 


“(2) Title IX of the federal Social Security Act 
(Subchapter 19 (commencing with Section 1396) 
of Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the United States 
Code). 


“(Added by Stats. 1992, c. 722 (S.B.485), § 37.5, 
eff. Sept. 15, 1992.)” 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


On December 1, 1992, the State of California began a 
five-year experimental project modifying welfare benefits 


provided under the Aid to Families with Dependent Chil- 
dren (“AFDC”) program. This project, known as the 
Assistance Payments Demonstration Project (“Demon- 
stration Project”), has two primary elements. The first 
element is a work incentive program, coupling a decrease 
in benefit levels with an increase in the amount of income 
a recipient can earn from work without a corresponding 
reduction in benefits. Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 11450.01.! 


The second element of the Demonstration Project, 
central to this action, is a one-year limitation on the 
amount of AFDC benefits an applicant who has not resi- 
ded in California during the prior year can receive. New 
state residents receive the level of benefits they received 
or would have received in the state they lived in prior to 
moving to California. Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 11450.03 
(“the Statute”). 


' Implementation of this element required a waiver from 
the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services (“the Secre- 
tary”) of certain federal AFDC rules. This element of the Dem- 
onstration Project is the subject of related litigation. In an effort 
to halt implementation of the project, California AFDC recip- 
ients filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern 
District of California (“District Court”) against representatives 
of the United States and the State of California. The District 
Court denied the recipients’ motion requesting a preliminary 
injunction. Beno v. Shalala, 835 F.Supp. 1193 (E.D. Cal. 1993). The 
District Court’s order was appealed to the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit vacated one 
of the waivers, reversed the District Court order, and remanded 
the matter to the District Court with instructions to remand the 
disputed waiver back to the Secretary for additional considera- 
tion of the waiver. Beno v. Shalala, 30 F.2d 1057 (9th Cir. 1994). 
Rhg. denied August 24, 1994. 


The California Legislature enacted the Statute as a 
means to reduce welfare expenditures. Impetus for the 
Statute came from the existence of continuing, severe 
economic and fiscal problems in California (Declaration 
of Dennis Hordyk, “Hordyk Declaration,” Pet.App. 21) 
and the California constitutional provision mandating a 
balanced budget.? Failure to implement the Statute was 
expected to result in additional unbudgeted state General 
Fund costs in the AFDC program of 8.4 million dollars in 
fiscal year 1992-93 and 22.5 million dollars in fiscal year 
1993-94. (Hordyk Declaration, Pet.App. 22.) 


The Legislature specified that the Statute would 
become effective upon necessary approval by the federal 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (“the Secre- 
tary”). Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 11450.03(b).3 The Secre- 
tary gave approval on October 29, 1992, and the 
California Department of Social Services began applying 
the limitation shortly thereafter. (District Court Order, 
Pet.App. 4.) 


2 “Within the first 10 days of each calendar year, the Gover- 
nor shall submit to the Legislature, with an explanatory mes- 
sage, a budget for the ensuing fiscal year containing itemized 
statements for recommended state expenditures and estimated 
state revenues. If recommended expenditures exceed estimated 
revenues, the Governor shall recommend the sources from 
which the additional revenues should be provided.” California 
Constitution, article IV, section 12(a). 


3 On July 13, 1994, the Ninth Circuit vacated the waivers 
necessary to implement the provisions of this section. Beno v. 
Shalala, 30 F.2d 1057 (No. 93-16411). 


A complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief 
(“complaint”) was filed on December 21, 1992. The com- 
plaint named the California Department of Social Ser- 
vices, and the directors of the California Departments of 
Social Services and Finance as defendants. Plaintiffs are a 
class of California residents who have applied or will 
apply for AFDC benefits on or after December 1, 1992 
and who have not resided in California for twelve consec- 
utive months immediately preceding their application for 
aid. Jurisdiction was conferred on the District Court by 28 
U.S.C. § 1343(a)(3). This suit was brought pursuant to 28 
U.S.C. § 1983. Plaintiffs’ action alleged that the Statute 
violated various provisions of the United States Constitu- 
tion, and infringed the constitutional right to travel. 


The District Court issued a temporary restraining 
order on December 22, 1992, enjoining California from 
implementing the provisions of the Statute pending a 
hearing on plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction. 


At the hearing on plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary 
injunction, plaintiffs sought to block application of the 
AFDC grant limitation as provided for in the Statute. By 
declaration, plaintiffs averred that they suffered irrepar- 
able injury because, under the Statute, they would not 
receive the same AFDC grant that they would have 
received if they had already resided in California for the 
preceding twelve months. Plaintiffs averred they were 
fleeing abusive relationships rather than seeking higher 
welfare grants in migrating to California. (District Court 
Order, Pet.App. 5.) 


California demonstrated the severe budget deficit 
facing the state - so severe that California would have no 


reserve available to cover the costs of unforeseen events, 
such as natural disasters. (Hordyk Declaration, Pet.App. 
21.) If California could not implement the Statute, it 
would have to spend 8.4 million dollars of state funds in 
fiscal year 1992-93, and 22.5 million dollars of state funds 
in fiscal year 1993-94. (Hordyk Declaration, Pet.App. 22.) 
Because of the severity of the state’s budget deficit, there 
were no funds appropriated by the 1992-93 state budget 
to pay the additional costs that would result from an 
inability to implement the Statute. (Hordyk Declaration, 
Pet.App. 22.) 


The hearing on plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary 
injunction was held on January 28, 1993. The District 
Court ruled from the bench, issuing the injunction. (Dis- 
trict Court Order, Pet.App. 3.) 


The District Court found that the Statute implicated 
the constitutional right to freedom of travel or migration, 
that a strict scrutiny analysis was therefore required to 
review the Statute, that California could not show a com- 
pelling reason for the Statute, and that plaintiffs had 
demonstrated they would suffer irreparable injury if the 
injunction were not granted. (District Court Order, 
Pet.App. 3.) 


California filed an appeal from the District Court’s 
order. On April 29, 1994, the Ninth Circuit summarily 
affirmed the District Court’s order. (Ninth Circuit Order, 
Pet.App. 2.) On June 13, 1994, the Ninth Circuit corrected 
its previous order and ordered that its April 29, 1994, 
order be published. The correction was not substantive. 
(Ninth Circuit Order, Pet.App. 2.) This Court docketed 


California’s petition for writ of certiorari on July 28, 1994. 
The petition was granted on October 7, 1994. 


S 


SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 


California may limit AFDC benefits for recent state 
residents for one year to the level of benefits they 
received or would have received in the state from which 
they came. Because California’s Statute does not deter- 
mine eligibility for benefits, it does not penalize the right 
to travel. New California residents receive the constitu- 
tionally permissible amount of benefits they received or 
would have received in their state of prior residence. 
Respondents are thus in no worse position, as a result of 
the application of the Statute, than if they had not moved 
to California. 


Furthermore, the Statute does not permanently clas- 
sify new state residents as entitled to a lower amount of 
AFDC benefits. This case presents a different situation 
from previous cases in which this Court has struck down 
state laws that penalized the right to travel. The Statute’s 
constitutionality should be analyzed by the traditional 
rational basis test. 


Even if the Statute does penalize the right to travel, 
its impact on the exercise of that right is, at best, remote 
and incidental. Statutes that do not raise a significant 
barrier to interstate migration should be analyzed under 
the traditional rational basis test. 


The Statute easily passes the rational basis test. The 
continuing and worsening budget problems in California 
provide a rational basis for a statute that lowers state 


welfare expenditures. States must have the flexibility to 
properly allocate diminishing resources among all of 
their residents. 


+ 


ARGUMENT 
I 


THE STATUTE DOES NOT OPERATE AS A PENALTY 
ON MIGRATION AND THEREFORE MUST BE 
UPHELD IF IT HAS A REASONABLE BASIS. 


Contrary to the reasoning of the District Court, as 
adopted by the Ninth Circuit, California’s two-tier system 
of AFDC benefits does not penalize new California resi- 
dents. The Statute should therefore be subjected to a 
rational basis analysis, not a strict scrutiny analysis. 


The District Court relied upon Shapiro v. Thompson, 
394 U.S. 618 (1969), and its progeny in determining that 
the Statute should be subjected to a strict scrutiny anal- 
ysis. In Shapiro, this Court held that legislation which 
denied outright welfare assistance to new state residents 
of less than one year duration was constitutionally imper- 
missible because, as such legislation “. . . touches on the 
fundamental right of interstate movement, its constitu- 
tionality must be judged by the stricter standard of 
whether it promotes a compelling state interest.” Shapiro, 
394 U.S. at 638; emphasis original. 


Although at first glance Shapiro would seem to bar 
any restriction on the right to travel, such a reading of the 
case is unjustified. In a footnote, this Court further indi- 
cated: 


10 


“We imply no view of the validity of waiting- 
period or residence requirements determining 
eligibility to vote, eligibility for tuition-free edu- 
cation, to obtain a license to practice a profes- 
sion, to hunt or fish, and so forth. Such 
requirements may promote compelling state 
interests on the one hand, or, on the other, may 
not be penalties upon the exercise of the consti- 
tutional right to interstate travel.” 


(394 U.S. at 638, n 21; emphasis original.) 


Thus, in Shapiro, this Court determined only that the 
complete denial of welfare assistance for a full year 
penalized the plaintiffs’ right of interstate movement. 


This Court reinforced its proscription against state 
legislation which penalized the right of travel in Memorial 
Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 258-259 (1974). 
There, the Court stated that Shapiro “ .. . stand[s] for the 
proposition that a classification which ‘operates to penal- 
ize those persons .. . who have exercised their constitu- 
tional right of interstate migration,’ must be justified by a 
compelling state interest,” 415 U.S. at 258, but repeated 
its prior statement in Shapiro, that “some ‘waiting 
period|s] . . . may not be penalties,’ ” Id., at 258-259. 


In both Shapiro and Memorial Hospital the plaintiffs’ 
right to travel was penalized because they were put in a 
worse position by application of the statutes at issue after 
they moved to their new states. In Shapiro, the plaintiffs 
had a right to receive welfare assistance in their state of 
prior residence. After moving, they were no longer eligi- 
ble for welfare assistance for a full year. In Memorial 
Hospital, the plaintiffs had a right to state-funded non- 
emergency medical care before they moved. After they 


11 


moved to Arizona, they were not eligible for non-emer- 
gency medical care for a period of twelve months. Thus, 
in both cases, the plaintiffs irretrievably lost their eligi- 
bility to public assistance due solely to their moving to a 
new state. This Court determined that their right to travel 
had been penalized. 


This Court may hold for petitioners in this case with- 
out disturbing the holdings of Shapiro and Memorial Hos- 
pital. Unlike the plaintiffs in Shapiro and Memorial 
Hospital, respondents here have not lost any eligibility to 
public assistance they enjoyed in their state of prior resi- 
dence. In other words, California's Statute does not 
penalize the right to travel.* 


Citing Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55 (1982), the Dis- 
trict Court determined that the relevant comparison is 
not between newcomers to California and residents of 


* Respondents argue that without the guarantee of a certain 
benefit level, they cannot move to California. They are therefore 
requesting California to fund their move to California. No other 
newcomers to California have the ability to demand a certain 
payment level upon their decision to move to a new home — nor 
should they. As a general matter, a state is under no duty to 
subsidize the costs of the exercise of constitutional rights. In 
Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 317-318 (1980), this Court held that 
a woman's freedom of choice does not carry with it a constitu- 
tional entitlement to the financial resources necessary to exer- 
cise that freedom. Here, California has not prohibited travel or 
placed a substantial obstacle in the way of a newcomer’s move 
to California; it has simply limited welfare benefit levels for 
recent California residents to no more than they received or 
would have received in their state of prior residence. New 
residents are free to travel to California, and AFDC benefits 
remain available for recent California residents. 


12 


other states, but between newcomers and existing Cali- 
fornia residents. Pet.App. Al4. However, existing resi- 
dents are not even potentially impacted by California’s 
Statute. If strict scrutiny is triggered by a penalty on the 
right to travel, then the existence of that penalty should 
be judged by its impact on persons who have traveled, or 
who may potentially travel, to California and not by a 
comparison involving existing California residents. 
Because only out-of-state residents may suffer detriment 
(be penalized) by operation of the Statute, the issue of 
penalty must be whether those out-of-state residents suf- 
fer a detriment due to a decision to travel to California. 
To determine whether this detriment exists, one must 
compare the position of newcomers before and after 
travel to California. 


Here, respondents have no change in their position 
and have suffered no detriment, as to receipt of AFDC 
benefits upon moving to California. Respondents receive 
AFDC benefits in the same amount they received, or 
would have received, in their state of prior residence. As 
such, they have suffered no detriment, and have not been 
penalized by traveling to California. 


In Zobel v. Williams, income from oil reserves was 
distributed by Alaska to its residents based upon length 
of state residency, thereby creating permanent classifica- 
tions. Because no other state provided income from oil 
reserves to its residents, the District Court cited Zobel for 
the proposition that the proper comparison in analyzing 
whether a penalty on the right to travel exists is between 
newcomers to a state and existing residents. However, 
this Court in Zobel stated, 457 U.S. at 58, that the Alaska 


13 


statute is quite unlike the durational residency require- 
ments examined in Shapiro and Memorial Hospital. Because 
this Court concluded in Zobel that the Alaska statute 
lacked a rational basis, this Court did not engage in an 
analysis of whether the Alaska statute triggered strict 
scrutiny due to its impact on travel. Therefore, this 
Court’s decision in Zobel does not compe! this Court to 
engage in the fiction of determining whether newcomers 
have been penalized by California’s Statute by comparing 
newcomers with existing residents.® 


Nor are respondents handicapped by the creation of 
permanent distinctions among residents and newcomers 
as were the plaintiffs in Zobel, State Attorney General of 
New York v. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. 898 (1986) and Hooper v. 
Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612 (1985). The statute 
at issue in State Attorney General of New York v. Soto-Lopez 
determined eligibility for veteran’s preference for civil 


5 The District Court also implied that because California's 
cost of living is generally higher than elsewhere, the benefits 
provided for by California’s Statute operate as a penalty on new 
residents. This argument assumes, however, that the benefits 
received in the prior state of residence bear some rational rela- 
tionship to the standard of need in that state. This assumption is 
in error as there is no requirement for benefit levels to be related 
to the standard of need. In fact, many states have constitu- 
tionally approved benefit levels much lower than the standard 
of need in that state. King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309, 334 (1968); 
Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 480, 483 (1970). The states 
have “undisputed power” under the Social Security Act “to set 
[both] the level of benefits and the standard of need” in the 
AFDC program. King, 392 U.S. at 334; Jefferson v. Hackney, 406 
U.S. 535, 541, 545 (1972). 


14 


service employment based upon state residency at the 
time of induction into the armed forces. Similarly, the 
statute at issue in Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor 
determined eligibility for a property tax exemption based 
upon residency before a specific date. Persons subject to 
the Statute at issue here do not have their eligibility for 
AFDC benefits determined upon California residency. 


Since the Statute does not determine eligibility based 
upon state residency, all persons subject to the provisions 
of the Statute are entitled to some level of benefits. Unlike 
plaintiffs in Shapiro, Memorial Hospital, Hooper, and Soto- 
Lopez, respondents here are not foreclosed from all AFDC 
benefits under the Statute. 


Thus, because the Statute does not operate as a pen- 
alty on the right to travel of newcomers to California, 
petitioners need only demonstrate a rational basis for the 
Statute to survive a constitutional challenge. 


EVEN IF THE STATUTE OPERATES AS A PENALTY 
ON MIGRATION, THE IMPACT OF THAT PENALTY 
IS REMOTE AND INCIDENTAL, AND, THEREFORE, 
THE STATUTE SHOULD NOT BE SUBJECT TO 
STRICT SCRUTINY 


The dissent by Chief Justice Rehnquist in Memorial 
Hospital, 415 U.S. at 282-284, notes that in Williams v. 
Fears, 179 U.S. 270 (1900), the Court upheld a Georgia 
statute taxing persons hiring labor for work outside the 
State of Georgia because it affected freedom of egress 
“only incidentally and remotely.” Because there was a 
reasonable basis for the Georgia tax statute, it did not 


15 


violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. Williams, supra, 179 U.S. at 275. 


Chief Justice Rehnquist's dissent in Memorial Hospital 
also notes that until this Court's decision in Shapiro, the 
leading case involving the right to travel, Edwards v. 
California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), invalidated a statute that 
clearly was specifically designed to deter indigent per- 
sons from entering California by subjecting to criminal 
penalties “any person ‘that brings or assists in bringing 
into the State any indigent person . . . ’.” Memorial Hospi- 
tal, 415 U.S. at 249. The Edwards statute was not an 
incidental or remote barrier to migration as it provided 
for criminal penalties. It was instead an effective and 
purposeful attempt to insulate the state from indigents 
and a significant barrier to interstate travel. Thus, cases 
prior to Shapiro demonstrate that statutes whose impact 
on travel is incidental and remote should be judged by 
traditional, reasonable basis, equal protection tests. To be 
judged by stricter, heightened scrutiny, statutes should do 
more than just “touch on” the right to travel. Strict scru- 
tiny should be reserved for statutes which impose a sig- 
nificant and severe penalty on travel. Were this not the 
case, the result in Sosna v. lowa, 419 U.S. 393 (1975) would 
be inexplicable since this Court in Sosna permitted the 
State of lowa to temporarily deprive newcomers of the 
right to file for divorce, notwithstanding the “touch” that 
state law had on interstate migration. This Court in Sosna 
made clear, therefore, that merely touching on the right to 
travel is insufficient to trigger strict scrutiny. 


Therefore, the constitutionality of California’s Statute 
should be judged by traditional, reasonable basis, equal 
protection tests. Indeed, a reasonable basis analysis is the 


16 


appropriate constitutional review for statutes involving 
the administration of public welfare assistance. Dandridge 
v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 485 (1970). 


In this case, the Statute’s impact on travel is inciden- 
tal and remote to its purpose of reducing state expendi- 
tures. As to the level of AFDC benefits, persons impacted 
by the Statute are placed in a position identical to that 
which they occupied before departing their state of for- 
mer residence.® The Statute does not provide a penalty on 
the basic necessities of life, and it does not render new 
residents of California ineligible for public assistance, nor 
does it prevent anyone from traveling to California. Per- 
sons subject to the Statute receive the same amount of 
AFDC benefits which were constitutionally permissible in 
their state of prior residence. Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 480 
and 483. 


To the extent that the Statute has the effect of paying 
new residents less welfare than persons who have resided 
in California for more than twelve months, the Statute’s 
impact is mitigated by the fact that, for every three dol- 
lars an AFDC grant is reduced by operation of the Stat- 
ute, Food Stamps are increased by approximately one 
dollar. (See Declaration of Michael C. Genest (“Genest 
Declaration” Pet.App. 26-27).) In addition, all California 


6 “In both 1980 and 1985 all but five of the states had a cost 
of living within ten percent of the national average . . . when all 
states are considered together, the variation in AFDC benefits is 
four times larger than the variation in the cost of living.” Peter- 
son, et al., Welfare Magnets (The Brookings Institute, 1990) p. 11. 
Thus, there is not a significant relationship between a state’s 
cost of living and its welfare payments. 


ee 


17 


AFDC recipients (including new residents) may be enti- 
tled to a Special Needs Allowance, including an 
allowance for homeless assistance (Genest Declaration, 
Pet.App. 26) and persons subject to the Statute remain 
eligible for full Medicaid benefits. Although respondents 
have previously focused on the high cost of living in 
California, such considerations are irrelevant as there is 
no constitutionally required relationship between the 
standard of need and the level of AFDC payments.” Fur- 
thermore, the Statute is not a permanent part of Califor- 
nia‘s AFDC program. It is one federally approved 
component of California's Assistance Payments Demon- 
stration Project. The five-year demonstration project was 
approved only through September 30, 1997. (Record, Dis- 
trict Court Clerk’s Docket entry 69, Exhibit 2, page 1. 
Joint Appendix 56.) Thus, the impact of the Statute on the 
right to travel is significantly less than the impact of the 
statute at issue in Shapiro, which operated as a total 
denial of welfare assistance for a year. The impact of the 
Statute is also much less than the impact on the right to 


? Within the broad parameters of federal AFDC require- 
ments, states have a great deal of discretion in determining the 
standard of need and the level of benefits. 42 U.S.C. §§ 601, et 
seq. King v. Smith, supra, 392 U.S. at 318. It is constitutionally 
permissible both to establish a benefit level below the standard 
of need and to set benefits which will encourage gainful 
employment. It is also constitutionally permissible to disregard 
family size in setting benefit levels. Dandridge v. Williams, 397 
U.S. 471, 480, 483 (1970). 42 U.S.C. § 601 states that the purpose 
of the AFDC program is, in part, to“ .. . furnish financial 
assistance and rehabilitation and other services, as far as practi- 
cable under the conditions in such State. ...” Thus, to the extent 
that the Statute operates as a reduction of benefits, the Statute is 
constitutionally permissible. 


18 


travel of the statutes at issue in Zobel v. Williams, State 
Attorney General of New York v. Soto-Lopez, and Hooper v. 
Bernalillo County Assessor. In all of those cases, the stat- 
utes at issue created permanent classifications among 
residents and newcomers. A strict scrutiny analysis is 
inappropriate in this case; a reasonable basis analysis 
suffices. A reasonable basis analysis is the appropriate 
constitutional review for statutes involving the adminis- 
tration of public welfare assistance. Dandridge v. Williams, 
397 U.S. 471, 485 (1970). 


Ill 


CALIFORNIA’S INTEREST IN REDUCING WELFARE 
COSTS IS SUFFICIENT TO JUSTIFY THE USE OF A 
TWO-TIER SYSTEM OF DISTRIBUTING AFDC BENE- 
FITS. 


Contrary to statements made by the District Court, 
and adopted by the Ninth Circuit, California’s interest in 
reducing welfare costs is sufficient to justify statute’s 
two-tier system of distributing AFDC benefits. 


The District Court’s finding is derived from the 
determination that the Statute must be subjected to strict 
scrutiny. However, as shown above, a strict scrutiny anal- 
ysis is not proper because the Statute does not penalize 
the right to travel as it does not affect eligibility for 
AFDC. Here, the correct analysis is the reasonable basis 
or rationality test. The Statute passes that test. The con- 
tinuing and worsening budget problems in California 
provide a rational basis for a statute that lowers state 
welfare expenditures. Furthermore, as part of a federally 
approved experiment in welfare reform, pursuant to 42 


19 


United States Code section 1315(a), it provides necessary 
information for future decision-making by state and fed- 
eral policymakers. 


When a state distributes benefits unequally, the dis- 
tinctions it makes are subject to review under the Equal 
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The 
statutory scheme must pass the rationality test at a mini- 
mum. Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55, 60 (1982). Generally, a 
law will survive such scrutiny if the distinction rationally 
furthers a legitimate state purpose. 


Durational residency requirements have been found 
constitutionally permissible if the justifications are suffi- 
cient. Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393. In Sosna, the State’s 
longstanding and virtually exclusive interest in regulat- 
ing domestic relations justified the impact on travel of a 
statute that required that a petitioner in a divorce action 
be a resident of Iowa for one year preceding the filing of 
the petition. 419 U.S. at 406. California’s interest in main- 
taining a balanced budget is at least as important as a 
State's interest in regulating domestic relations. 


The plaintiff in Sosna was not irretrievably foreclosed 
from obtaining some part of what she sought. In the 
Present case, respondents’ eligibility for public assistance 
is not in question. A potential AFDC recipient coming to 
California still may apply for, and, if eligible, obtain 
assistance, but at a rate equal to what that potential 
recipient would have received in the state of prior resi- 
dence. Here, as in Sosna, the justifications for the dura- 
tional residency requirement are rational, and hence, 
legitimate. A grant level which is constitutionally permis- 
sible in one state should not become unconstitutional in 


a 


20 


another state just because the grantee made a unilateral 
decision to change residence. 


Here, the budget problems confronting California 
outweigh respondents’ claims. The Statute is a legislative 
solution designed to confront problems not apparent in 
Shapiro and its progeny. The Statute uses a temporary 
classification which does not permanently deprive plain- 
tiffs of any interest. Because the Statute imposes no pen- 
alty on the right to travel, the Statute is constitutionally 
permissible since it rests upon a rational basis.* 


The Statute easily passes the rational basis test. The 
unstated but plain purpose of the Statute is to reduce 
California’s welfare expenditures. California was forced 
to reduce expenditures in the AFDC program in fiscal 
years 1990-91, 1991-92, and 1992-93 because of severe 
gaps between projected revenues and expenditures. Wel- 
fare and Institutions Code sections 11450.01, 11450.02, 
and 11450.03 (the Statute) were all designed as compo- 
nents of a federally approved demonstration project to 
temporarily reduce aid grants in the AFDC program and 
to provide information with which to evaluate further 
work incentives. Legislative Counsel’s Digest of Senate 
Bill 485, added by stats. 1992, c. 722, No. 10 West's Cal. 
Legis. Service, p. 2898;9 Pet.App. 29. Reducing state 


* To the extent that Shapiro and its progeny appear to hold 
that financial considerations can never justify durational resi- 
dency requirements, those holdings should be re-examined. 


* The need to reduce state expenditures required in fiscal 
year 1992-93 is evidenced by the fact that the Governor reduced 
the appropriation for the support of his office by 15 percent. His 
veto message stated, “I take this action because of the unprece- 
dented fiscal constraints and limited resources in the General 


21 


expenditures, especially in the midst of a continuing and 
growing budget deficit, is certainly a legitimate state 


purpose, just as is studying the effect of welfare reform 
initiatives. 


The Statute achieves its purpose of reducing state 
expenditures by temporarily limiting the level of AFDC 
grants to those who choose to move to California. As 
noted above, the Statute does not prevent people from 
moving to California; it removes California’s relatively 
high AFDC benefit levels, for a period of one year, as one 
of the factors a person might consider when contemplat- 
ing a move to California. 


Scholars have observed that welfare-induced inter- 
state migration has had significant effects on state AFDC 
policies. Peterson et al., Welfare Magnets (The Brookings 
Institution, 1990) p. 83. Two important studies have 
shown that the effect of welfare benefits on migration is 
strong and significant. Id., at 58. Furthermore, 


7 - a8 people make major decisions about 
whether they should move or remain where 
they are, they take into account the level of 
welfare a state provides and the extent to which 
that level is increasing. The poor do this roughly 
to the same extent that they respond to differ- 


ences in wage opportunities in other states.” Id., 
at 83. 


“A state with high welfare benefits provides 
incentives both for the poor to remain in the 


Fund.” Budget Act of 1992, stats. 1992, c. 587, No. 9 West’s Cal. 
Legis. Service, p. 1832, Pet.App. A31. 


22 


state and for the poor in other states to move 
there.” Id., at 20. 


Whether or not the Statute constitutes wise policy is 
a decision which rests exclusively with the California 
Legislature.'° The degree to which the Statute relieves the 
state’s fiscal crisis is also of no constitutional significance. 
As noted above, the setting of AFDC benefit levels is a 
political decision by the Legislature. “. . . [T]he Constitu- 
tion does not empower this Court to second guess state 
officials charged with the difficult responsibility of 
allocating limited public welfare funds among the myriad 
of potential recipients.” Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. at 
487. 


Recognizing the political process involved in the 
state’s determination of the level of benefits, the Third 
Circuit, in Everett v. Schramm, 772 F.2d 1114 (3d Cir. 1985), 
discussed the policy of political accountability in the 
failure of Delaware's standard of need to reflect inflation. 


10 Because of the experimental nature of the Statute, the 
results of this experiment may provide state and federal policy- 
makers with valuable information to assist them in future deci- 
sion-making. The Statute is a component of a federally- 
approved demonstration project pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1315(a). 
A condition to federal approval was the performance of a care- 
ful, scientific evaluation of the impact the Statute may have on 
migration. To measure this possible impact, the evaluation of 
the Statute will include an analysis of: the number of AFDC 
families migrating to California before and after the Statute is 
implemented; whether those families came from states with 
lower or higher AFDC benefit levels; the percentage of total 
caseload that migrated to California; and the average number of 
months newcomers resided in California before they applied for 
aid. (Record, District Court Clerk’s Docket entry 69: Exhibit 8, p. 
14.) 


23 


“Under the statutory scheme, AFDC recipients 
and activists must avail themselves of the politi- 
cal process, not the judicial process . . . to effect 
the changes they seek.” Id. at 1122. 


As noted by this Court, “. . . intractable economic, 
social, and even philosophical problems presented by 
public welfare assistance programs are not the business 
of this Court . . . ” Dandridge, 397 US. at 487. Like 
Delaware’s decision to reduce benefit levels, California’s 
reduction of AFDC benefits is a political decision subject 
to public scrutiny. Here the legitimate state purpose is to 
reduce expenditures so that scarce resources may be pre- 
served for all, including recipients of public assistance. 


+ 


CONCLUSION 


This Court may uphold the constitutionality of the 
Statute without overruling Shapiro and Memorial Hospital. 
Respondents are not penalized by the Statute. If the Stat- 
ute affects the decision to migrate, it does so in an inci- 
dental and remote way which does not rise to the level of 
impact that triggers strict scrutiny. 


This Court should hold that where a classification 
imposes no penalty on travel, or at most, has an inciden- 
tal and remote effect on the right to travel, that classifica- 
tion can stand if rationally based, and that conservation 
of the taxpayer's purse is a sufficiently rational basis to 
justify a limit on public assistance expenditures. States 
must have the flexibility to allocate diminishing financial 
resources among all of its residents, including recent 
ones. 


24 


This Court should reverse the judgment of the Ninth 
Circuit and remand this case with instructions that the 
preliminary injunction be dissolved and the complaint 
dismissed. 


Dated: November 14, 1994 
Respectfully submitted, 


Danie. E. LuNGren, Attorney General 
for the State of California 
CHARLTON G. HOLLAND, III 
Assistant Attorney General 
Dennis EckHart, Supervising 
Deputy Attorney General 
*THEODORE GARELIS 
Deputy Attorney General 
ANDREA LYNN HocH 
Deputy Attorney General 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


*Counsel of Record 


