9 o 7 4 Q > | Supreme Court, U.S. 
: 2) 


FILED 


{  depotget 
| - “ No. 94- j wa & a 
\" : | | CFFICE CF THE CLERK | 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


CANDISHA S. ROBINSON, 
Petitioner, 
v. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Respondent. 


we On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


DAVID B. SMITH 
English & Smith 

526 King Street, Suite 213 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(703) 548-8911 


Counsel of Record for Petitioner 


R- 33-23. nGN 18 1s? eh Pr. 


G4 - 7492 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
Whether the 5-4 decision of the court below misinterpreted 18 U.S.C. § 924(cX1) — which 


poses a mandatory 5-year consecutive sentence on person who "uses or caries’ 8 Sans 


sduring and in relation to” a drug trafficking offense — by adopting a standard that looks soley 
tothe "proximity and sccessibility" ofthe earn tothe drugs or drug proceeds rather ‘han 1 


Se2 


ii 
RULE 14.1(b) STATEMENT 
In addition to the parties listed in the caption, Roland J. Bailey was a defendant in an 
unrelated criminal prosecution, which the court of appeals consolidated with this case for 
purposes of rehearing en banc. 


EES EA ES ED Oe ee 
NN, cab ecsvccesucdeedsccease 
Na wenchenseacecscen 
EE ee 
Ne duhetcesseeccnccerctsces 
STATUTORY PROVISION INVOLVED ............0.c0ccecceseeseeeeees 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Pages 
Langston v, Unised States, 113 S.Ct. 361 (1992) .........cccecceeeseeeeeeeees 12 
Senith vy, United Staten, 113 8.x, 2080 (1993)... 6... cece cece cece eee e noes 8, 11 
United States v. Brown, 915 F.2d 219 (6th Cir. 1990) 0.0.0.0... cccceeeeee eee 12 
United States v. Castro-Lara, 970 F.2d 976 (Ist Cir. 1992), 
Se ATID MEE POU so oan Shia ho ws cnn eh dn eae eebeh ete 12 
United States v. Duke, 940 F.2d 1113 (Sth Cir. 1991) ..........ccceeeeeeeeeees 12 
United States v. Feliz-Cordero, 859 F.2d 250 (2d Cir. 1988) ..........0cceeeeeees 12 
Unieed States v. Hill, 967 F.2d 902 (3d Cir. 1992) 0.0.0... ccc cccceeeeeeeeees 12 
United States v. Matthews, 942 F.2d 779 (10th Cir. 1991) .........eceeeeeeeeees 12 
United States v. McFadden, 13 F.3d 463 (Ist Cir. 1994) ..........00cceeeeees 11, 14 
875 F.2d 24 (2d Cir.) | 

“py ye a 12 
United States v. Parrish, 925 F.2d 1293 (10th Cir. 1991) 2.0.0... cc eeeeeeeeeeees 13 
United States v. Paz, 927 F.2d 176 (4th Cir. 1991)... 00.0... cece eeeeeeeeeeeeees 12 
United States v. Poole, 878 F.2d 1389 (11th Cir, 1989) ............ccccsseeeees 12 
United States v. Sullivan, 919 F.2d 1403 (10th Cir. 1990) 

ee i Mr ikaksisenaes hs 12 
United States v. Theodoropoulos, 866 F.2d 587 (3d Cir. 1989) ............ee sees 12 
United States v. Tomes-Rodriguez, 930 F.2d 1375 (9th Cir. 1991) ...........000 ee. 12 
United States v. Villagrana, 5 F.3d 1048 (7th Cir, 1993).......0.0ccceeeeeeeeees 12 
United States v. Wilson, 884 F.2d 174 (Sth Cir, 1989) .......0..ccccccceeeeeees 12 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94- 


CANDISHA S. ROBINSON, PETTTIONER 
v 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPONDENT 


On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari 
to the United States Court of Appeals 
for the District of Columbia Circuit 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Candisha S. Robinson petitions for a writ of certiorari to review the judgment of the 

United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in this case. 
OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the en banc court of appeals (App., infra, 1a -21a) is reported at 36 F 3d 
106. The opinion of the court of appeals panel and the order granting rehearing en bane (App., 
infra, 22a - 36a) are reported at 997 F.2d 884. The opinion of the district court denying 
petitioner's post-verdict Motion for Judgment of Acquittal (App., infra, 37a - 41a) is reported at 
779 F.Supp. 606. 


2 
JURISDICTION 


The court of appeals entered its judgment on October 4, 1994. App., infra, la. The 

jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 
STATUTORY PROVISION INVOLVED 

Section 924(c\1) of Title 18 provides, in pertinent part: "Whoever, during and in relation 
to any crime of violence or drug trafficking crime * * * uses or carries a firearm, shall, in 
addition to the punishment provided for such crime * * *, be sentenced to imprisonment for five 
years * * *, nor shall the term of imprisonment imposed under this subsection run concurrently 
with any other term of imprisonment * * *.” 

STATEMENT 

1. Petitioner Robinson was convicted after a jury trial of six drug-related offenses 
including “us{ing] or carr{ying] a firearm" during and in relation to a drug trafficking offense, 
in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c1). The other five offenses, which all arose out of the same 
brief incident, were distribution of cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(aX1) and 
(bX 1X(C); possession with intent to distribute a quantity of cocaine base in excess of five grams, 
in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a(1) and (61 (B\iii); commission of the charged drug offenses 
within 1000 feet of a school, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 860(a); and maintenance of a building 
for the purpose of manufacturing, storing, distributing or using cocaine base, in violation of 21 
U.S.C. § 856(a). | Ms. Robinson submitted a post-verdict motion for judgment of acquittal 
pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29%(c) directed solely to the count charging her 
with violating section 924(c\1). Judge Richey denied the post-verdict motion in a memorandum 
opinion and order reported at 779 F.Supp. 606. Ms. Robinson, a young mother with no prior 


3 
record, was sentenced to a total of 157 months imprisonment, a four year term of supervised 


release and a special assessment of $300. 

A panel of the court of appeals reversed petitioner's conviction on the Section 924{c\1) 
count, holding that the evidence failed to establish that the gun, an unloaded derringer found in 
the locked trunk in her bedroom closet, was actually used during and in relation to the drug 
trafficking offenses for which she was convicted. The court also held that a remand was required 
for reconsideration of her sentence on the other counts of conviction because the district court 
had erroneously relied on a misstatement of fact in the presentence report in increasing her 
offense level for being a "supervisor." 997 F.2d at 890-91." 

2. The panel opinion provides a comprehensive statement of the evidence at tral. 
The following summary of the evidence is taken largely verbatim from the panel opinion (997 
F.2d at 885-86). 

According to the government's evidence, on July 15, 1991 Officer Larry Hale approached 
petitioner's sister, Veloria Robinson, and told her that he wished to buy some crack cocaine. 
Veloria took Officer Hale to Apartment 3, 1722 West Virginia Avenue, N.E. and knocked on the 
door. When petitioner opened the door, Veloria explained that Officer Hale was trying to get 
something. Petitioner asked hii what he wanted. Office Hale said that he wanted a “twenty” 
and followed Veloria into the apartment. Officer Hale saw Veloria and Candisha go into the 
apartment's one bedroom and observed Candisha hand Veloria a rock of crack cocaine. Velona 
then gave the rock to Officer Hale in exchange for $20 in marked money. 

The next evening, Officer Hale returned to the apartment. As he was walking up the 


' The government did not seek en banc review of this part of the panel's decision. 


4 
steps, he was approached by a man named Kwarme Parker. Parker stated that Veloria was inside 


the apartment, but that he also lived in the apartment and could serve him. Parker went into the 
apartment while Officer Hale waited in the hallway outside the front door. When Parker returned 
to the hallway, he gave Officer Hale a small rock of crack cocaine in exchange for marked 
money. 

About thirty minutes later, a search warrant was executed at the apartment. Inside a 
locked trunk in the bedroom closet, the police found a .22-caliber derringer and holster, a 1990 
tax return signed by Candisha, a letter from Candisha's employer, two rocks of crack cocaine 
weighing a total of 10.88 grams, $20 in marked money from the sale of cocaine made by Mr. 
Parker, and $42.80 in other cash.? Other papers bearing petitioner's name were found in other 
parts of the bedroom, including a lease which identified petitioner and another man as the 
principal lessees. A plastic cassette tape case was also found in the bedroom which contained 
a quantity of plastic ziplock bags. 

At trial, the government called an expert witness, Detective David Stroud, who testified 
that the rock of cocaine in the locked trunk would have a $700-800 street value, as is, but a 
$1400 value if it was broken down into $20 chunks. With respect to the firearm found in the 
apartment, Detective Stroud characterized the .22-caliber derringer as a "second gun” -- the kind 
of gun a drug dealer might hide on this person for use until he could get to his “real gun." Mr. 
Stroud also testified that guns are generally used by drug dealers to protect themselves from rival 
drug dealers, the police, and employees within the organization. 


2 The derringer was unloaded and no ammunition was found in the apartment. 997 F.2d 
at $88. 


5 
Ms. Robinson took the stand in her defense. She admitted that she leased the apartment 


and received rent money from her sister Veloria, Kwarme Parker, and Sharine McKinney. She 
also acknowledged that she owned the foot-locker in which the derringer and crack were found, 
out of her apartment). Ms. Robinson insisted that she had no knowledge of the drugs or the 
derringer found in her footlocker. She explained that she had taken Mr. Parker in temporarily 
because he had no place to go, but had become upset with his drug-dealing and had given him 
two weeks to find somewhere else to stay. She admitted allowing him to use the footlocker to 
safeguard his money but claimed that she tried to prevent him from bringing drugs into her 
apartment by searching him and inspecting the footlocker regularly. This account was 
corroborated in significant respects by the testimony of Ms. Bey and Ms. McKinney. Petitioner 
presented an alibi for the distribution charge. She testified that she was not in the apartment on 
the evening of July 15 because she was spending the night with her boyfriend in a motel. 

3. The panel employed its traditional multi-factor test to determine whether the 
evidence was sufficient to prove actual use of the derringer, "including the accessibility of the 
firearm, the type of firearm, the number of firearms, the proximity of the firearm to the drugs, 
and whether the firearm was loaded or previously had been used.” 997 F.2d at 887. The court 
observed that all of those factors cut against affirmance of Robinson's conviction except for the 
proximity of the gun to the drugs. 

First, there was no evidence that Robinson ever brandished or previously used the firearm 
found in the locked trunk (or any other firearm, for that matter). Second, although it was not 


clear from the record whether Robinson had a key to the lock on the trunk,’ "the gun certainly 
was not easily accessible since it was in the bedroom closet in a locked footlocker." Id The 
court could not see how the derringer would have been of any help to Robinson in an emergency. 
In order to brandish it, she would have to run to the closet, unlock the trunk, open the trunk and 
grab the gun. “Even at that point, the gun would be of virtually no use to Ms. Robinson since 
it was unloaded and there was no ammunition for it anywhere in the apartment." Id at 888. 
"The fact that the gun was unloaded, locked away, and without ammunition anywhere on the 
premises, strongly suggests that Ms. Robinson had no intention of using the gun at that time." 
Id (emphasis in original). 

The court noted that it had previously drawn distinctions between a small derringer like 
the one at issue in this case and a sawed-off shotgun, which the court had recognized as a 
“formidable firearm" for the protection of a drug stash. Even the government's expect, Detective 
Stroud, confessed that the derringer "was not the type of gun a drug dealer ordinarily would use 
to protect a stash of drugs.” Id The court also relied on the fact that only one gun was found 
on the premises. Although a single gun can violate the statute, the court had distinguished the 
possession of a single gun from the possession of an “arsenal” of weapons. 

In sum, said the court, "the possession of this single, unloaded .22-caliber derringer found 
in a locked trunk in a bedroom closet falls significantly short of the type of evidence we have 
held to establish actual use under the statute. In fact, we have reversed convictions under Section 
924(c) where there was stronger evidence against the defendant than that which is present here." 


> At a bench conference during the trial, the prosecutor told the court that "Parker had 
the key to the trunk.” 10/30/91 Tr. 41. 


Id 

The court stressed that "[i]f there was evidence that a loaded gun was in reach of Ms. 
Robinson at the time [she distributed the $20 rock to the police officer], this would be a different 
case." Id at 890. But the gun was unloaded and found the day after Ms. Robinson sold the 
crack. "Plainly, the jury cannot legitimately infer that even the unloaded gun was in Ms. 
Robinson's reach the day before. That is just speculation.” Id‘ 

It is important to note that both the panel majority and the dissenting judge erroneously 
assumed that all five drug counts could be considered predicate offenses for the Section 924(c\ |) 
charge. In fact, only the possession with intent to distribute offense was charged in tne 
indictment as the Section 924(c)\(1) predicate offense.’ Thus, the dissenting judge's attempt to 
sustain Robinson's conviction on the ground that she was convicted of distribution and 
maintenance of a premises for the purpose of distributing drugs, in addition to possession with 
intent, 997 ¥.2d at 893, was completely off-base. 

4. The D.C. Circuit granted rehearing en banc and consolidated Robinson's case with 
the unrelated prosecution of another defendant, Roland J. Bailey. A sharply divided court then 
affirmed Bailey's and Robinson's convictions under Section 924(c\1). With only five judges 
subscribing to the majority opinion, the court held that, when the predicate drug trafficking 


offense is possession with intent to distribute, the prosecution need only show (1) that a firearm 


* There was also no evidence that Robinson obtained the $20 rock from the "stash" 
inside the locked trunk. 


* The government acknowledged this in its brief for the en banc court at 6-7 and at oral 
argument before the en banc court. The point was deemed significant by the members of the 
court at the en banc argument. 


8 
was located near the drugs or drug proceeds, and (2) that the gun was sufficiently accessible at 
some point during the drug possession to have been available for use if the need arose. App., 
infra, 3a, 13a.° 

The court held that one “uses” a gun within the meaning of Section 924(c)\(1) by placing 
or keeping the gun in a location "from which one (or one’s agent) can gain access to it if and 
when needed to facilitate a drug crime." App., infra, 10a (emphasis added). While recognizing 
that Section 924(c\(1) does not criminalize "the mere possession of a firearm by someone who 
commits a drug offense” (id. at 4a), the court reasoned that “use” is an "expansive[]" term that 
does not require active employment of a gun. Id. at 9a-10a (citing Smith v. United States, 113 
S.Ct. 2050, 2054, 2058 (1993)). Thus, the court concluded that a jury can infer "use" whenever 
the potential for use inheres in the location of the gun. The court held further that, when the 
predicate drug offense is a "continuing offense” such as possession with intent to distribute, the 
government need only show that the gun was located near the drugs “at some point" in time 
during the defendant's possession of drugs. App., infra, 10a. 

The majority also held that a firearm is used "during and in relation to" a predicate drug 
offense if it is "positioned so as to be available for use during ongoing drug activity." App., 
infra, \1a. The court stressed that the gun did not have to "further" the drug offense, provided 
that its location suggests that it had the potential to facilitate the drug offense. /bid 

Applying those standards, the court concluded that the unloaded derringer in the locked 
trunk in Robinson's closet was "used" because the drugs that formed the basis of her conviction 


* Then-Chief Judge Mikva, who wrote the panel opinion reversing Robinson's Section 
924(cX1) conviction, took no part in the disposition of the case by the en banc court. 


9 

for possession with intent to distribute were found in the same trunk. The requirement of 
accessibility was satisfied, in the majority's view, because the derringer was accessible to anyone 
who had access to the drugs. The jury could infer that "Robinson placed or kept the gun in the 
same location as the drugs in order to protect her possession of the drugs.” Id at 13a.’ 

Judge Wald dissented. App., infra, 13a-1Sa. She stated that the majority's twofold 
standard for determining whether a firearm was "used" — proximity of the gun to drugs or drug 
proceeds, and accessibility of the gun at some point during the possession offense — "artificially 
limit[s]" the factors necessary to distinguish "use" from mere possession. Id. at 14a. Judge Wald 
identified several additional factors, such as the number and type of gun involved, whether the 
gun was loaded, and whether expert testimony supported an inference of "use," that are crucial 
for distinguishing "use" from mere possession. By restricting the jury's consideration to only two 
factors, the majority "diminishe[d] rather than enhance[d] the prospect of accurate assessment on 
a case-by-case basis as to whether the gun was used to facilitate the drug offense." |d at 13a 
Judge Wald observed that Congress had created no statutory presumption that "use” automatically 
would follow from the presence of any particular factors and she could find no authority for 
courts to do so. She found it ironic that the majority touted its proximity and accessibility test 
for minimizing interference with jury discretion when, in reality, the majority was artificially 
limiting the factors that the jury may legitimately consider when determining whether a defendant 
"used" a firearm during and in relation to the predicate drug offense. In doing so, the majority 


’ There was no evidence that Robinson had actual possession at any time of either the 
gun or the drugs found in the locked trunk. There was also no evidence that she owned 
either the gun or the drugs. However, she conceded that because she owned the trunk she 
could be found to have constructively possessed both the gun and the drugs found in the 
trunk. 997 F.2d at 884. 


10 
was “impermissibly curbing the jury's discretion to consider the totality of circumstances that 
might be relevant to that fact-bound determination." Jd at 14a. Judge Wald concluded that in 
Robinson's case (but not Bailey's) the majority's straitjacket test produced "a ridiculous result." 
Ibid. 
acess to ll lows inomnsion incre to replicas the ral 
can den decide Wf Gc deka os in fat wing te pun Wo 
- facilitate the drug offense. The majority effectively leaves out the 
and invades jury discretion as well. 
Id at 14a-15a. 
Judge Wald could also not subscribe to the bright line position of her dissenting brethren.* 
She could not agree “that an actor who has intentionally placed a gun within easy access of his 
person in order to guard or to distribute drugs is not using the gun to facilitate the drug offense 
unless he openly brandishes, displays, or makes verbal threats about the gun. Where evidence 
of ready access to a gun by the defendant guarding or distributing the drugs exists, I think the 
jury can fairly draw the inference that such access is an intrinsic part of the criminal drug 
trafficking act." Id at 15a 
Judge Williams, joined by Judges Silberman and Buckley, also dissented. App., infra, 
15a-21a Judge Williams faulted the majority's reliance on inferences of potential use, arguing 


x 
Judge Wald commented (id. at 15a): "Bright lines have a place in our jurisprudence 
but primarily with respect to what third parties like policemen or citizens can do without 
running afoul of the law. They are distinctly less useful in telling juries or judges what kind 
of evidence will suffice to show that a defendant is guilty of a generic crime that can be 
committed against a thousand different factual backdrops.” 


ll 

that, under the plain meaning of the statutory term, “use” "normally implies activity." Id at 15a, 
16a (citing United States v. McFadden, 13 F.3d 463, 467 (ist Cir. 1994) (Breyer, CJ. 
dissenting)). The three-judge dissent expressly rejected the majority's reliance on Smith v. United 
States, to extend “use” to encompass situations of potential use (App., irra, 19a): 

Nothing in Smith precludes limiting “use” to active employment. [Smith's] statement that 
"§ 924(c\(1)'s language sweeps broadly”, 113 S.Ct. at 2054, means only that the proscribed use 
of firearms is not limited to the obvious or typical ways in which they may assist in the 
commission of a crime. Rather, a gun may be “used” regardless of whether it acts as an 
instrument to shoot, to bludgeon, or for exchange. That is, whether a firearm is "used" does not 
depend on whether it is employed in the customary way or a more creative way. But it does 
depend on whether the gun is employed at all, and nothing [in Smith] expands “use” beyond 
active employment. 

Judge Williams also noted that Section 924 itself distinguishes between the actual use of 
a firearm, on the one hand, and the intent or potential for use, on the other. Id at 18a 
Subsection (d) of Section 924 provides for forfeiture of firearms "intended to be used” in other 
crimes. "Thus Congress [was] clearly quite alert to the distinction between firearms ‘used’ in 
commission of a crime and merely ‘intended for such use * * *." Quoting this Court's 
observation in Smith, 113 S.Ct. at 2057, that “using a firearm” should not have a “different 
meaning in § 924(c\1) than it does in § 924(d)," Judge Williams concluded that the majority 
opinion was inconsistent with Congress's choice not to reach mere "intent to use” in subsection 
(c). Finally, Judge Williams observed that the majority's definition of “use” was so broad "as 
to leave no apparent role" for the alternative element of “carrying” a firearm during and in 
relation to a drug offense. App., infra, 18a. 

Judge Silberman, in addition to joining Judge Williams’ dissent, filed a separate one- 
paragraph dissent. Stressing the “difficult[y] [of the] question presented” and the pressing need 
for "a more coherent standard firmly rooted in the statute" - which had led the court to grant 


12 
rehearing en banc — Judge Silberman lamented that the majority had not "marshaled the effort 


to confront fully the analysis set forth in [Judge Williams’] dissent.” Jd. at 21a. 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 

Two years ago, this Court noted divergences among the courts of appeals in their 
interpretations of Section 924(c\(1). Langston v. United States,, 113 S.Ct. 361, 361-362 (1992) 
(White, J., joined by Thomas, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari). Those divergences have 
deepened with the passage of time. Currently, five courts of appeals unambiguously hold that 
mere possession of a firearm by someone who commits a drug offense is not sufficient to 
establish “use” under Section 924(c\(1).° Three courts of appeals, on the other hand, have 
definitively held that mere possession — or even constructive possession — of a firearm during 
a drug offense does suffice.’ Three appear to have embraced both of those irreconcilable 
holdings." 


* See, c.g. United States v, Castro-Lara, 970 F.2d 976, 983 (Ist Ci denied, 
113 S.Ct. 2935 (1993); United States v. Wilson, 884 F.2d 7 (Sth Ci. 195 y United 
States v. Brown, 915 F.2d 219, 224 (6th Cir. 1990); leiuiibens Yeni 34 1048, 


1051 (7th Cir. 1993); United States v. Duke, 940 F.2d 1113, 1118 (8th Cir. 1991). 


© See, e.g, United States v. Paz, 927 F.2d 1 : 
possession of fi = sli 4 76, 179 (4th Cir. 1991) a 
’ . 1991) (possession of firearm constit ites " . . i 
Poole, 878 F.2d 1389, 1393 (11th Cir. 1989) (same). p Aaa Saateny. 


" Compare United States v. Feliz-Cordero, 859 Yeecti 
924(c) requires more than mere possession of a pete wit Aryond vg omg 


evidence that the defendant "intended to avail himself iid esti 
Sullivan, 919 F.2d 1403, 1432 (10th Cir. snap ides panes ut onda aot tenied 


13 

The majority opinion below did nothing to harmonize the discord among the circuits; on 
the contrary, it added yet another dissonant voice by formulating a new standard for Section 
924(c)(1) analysis that — while coming dangerously close to equating “use” with mere possession 
_ is formulated differently from the standards employed in all of the other courts of appeals. 
This Court should grant certiorari to bring order to these substantial conflicts. Moreover, the 
correct interpretation of Section 924(c)(1) presents an important issue, particularly in light of the 
frequency with which the issue arises in the lower courts. Certiorari is also warranted because 
the decision below is erroneous. 

In a petition for a writ of certiorari filed on December 28, 1994, on behalf of Roland J. 
Bailey, counsel persuasively articulated the reasons why the Court should grant review in Bailey's 
case as well as this case. Petitioner Robinson cannot improve on Bailey's comprehensive analysis 
and sees no reasons to repeat it fully here. Rather, petitioner Robinson simply adopts and 
incorporates the remainder of petitioner Bailey's argument by reference (Bailey Pet. at 9-26). 

These two cases were heard together by the en banc court of appeals and they should be 
heard together by this Court. The facts in the two cases differ significantly. Although petitioner 
Bailey asserts that his conviction under Section 924(c\1) would have reversed if the D.C. Circuit 
had not crafted its new two-factor test for evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence against him 
(Bailey Pet. at 15), that is not clear, as Judge Wald's dissenting opinion demonstrates. Applying 
the D.C. Circuit's traditional multi-factor test, she concluded that the evidence was sufficient to 
sustain Bailey's gun conviction but not Robinson's. Indeed, she characterized the result reached 


113 S.Ct. 1013 (1993), with Uni ish, 925 F.2d 1293, 1298 (10th Cir. 1991) 
(access to a gun establishes "use" if the defendant is involved in a drug trafficking offense). 


14 15 
by the majority in Robinson's case as "ridiculous." CONCLUSION 
The Court should review both of these cases in tandem in order to obtain a broader The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
perspective than a single set of facts can provide. The proper interpretation of Section 924(c)\(1) 


Respectfully submitted. 

is really a question of great importance because of the huge numbers of prosecutions under it, 

DAVID B. SMITH 
the multiple splits in the circuits, the severe five year mandatory penalty and the general absence Englisn & Smith 

526 King Street, Suite 213 
of carefully reasoned decision making by the lower courts.” There has been what can only be Alexandria, VA 22314 

(703) 548-8911 
described as a knee-jerk tendency to affirm convictions under this harsh statute whenever a Counsel for Petitioner 
convicted drug dealer possesses a firearm. A bare majority of the D.C. Circuit has now placed DECEMBER 1994 


its imprimatur on that approach in the face of superbly reasoned dissents. It is time for the Court 
to address the issue of the scope of Section 924(c)\(1) and these cases are the obvious candidates 


for review. 


2 A notable exception is then-Chief Judge Breyer's incisive dissenting opinion in United 
Stats v. McFadden, 13 F.3d 463 (ist Cir. 1994), on which both Robinson and Bailey heavily 
relied before the en banc court. The facts in McFadden are very similar to those in Robinson 
and the McFadden dissent cited the panel decision in Robinson approvingly. 


74-7499 


oe SLE CORRE GO RN STAY “Fy sty 
FILS 
CANDISHA S. ROBINSON ) j, been = 
) | CrPICE CF THE CLERA | 
Petitioner ) No 
) 
. ) 
) 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ) 
) 
Respondent. ) 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE IN FORMA PAUPERIS 
Petitioner Robinson, moves the Court for leave to proceed in forma pauperis pursuant 
to Rule 39 of the Rules of this Court. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of 


Columbia Circuit has appointed counsel under the Criminal Justice Act of 1964. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Candisha S. Robinson 
By Counsel 


ENGLISH & SMITH 
§26 King Street, Suite 213 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(703) 548-8911 


APPENDIX A 


106 to. 
36 FEDERAI 
DERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 
UNITED STA 1. Weapons 4 
TES of America m , 6 la 
ere possess) facil 
0 itate 
¥v who commits a of firearm by someone drug US. v. BAILEY 
drug offense does not am § 924(cX(1) facilitate Seeentn O28 JEY 
Roland J. BAILEY to offense of using or , mgm See vy someone ) drug crime 18 US ee Ee 107 
, Appellant. relatio carrying firearm in publicatic § 924(c\(1) SCA used t yi 
n to drug-traffic for other ot a used to protect : 
king crim judicia moun. irug-traffic 
UNITE firearm m e; instead, initions a See public and was allicking operat 
. D STATES of A -_ ust have some purpose firearm in San athe ation Words and Phras as therefore being - ation 
with respect to drug-traffi o ea w inste ~ bmn judicial constructions and wry irug-trafficking offens used in relation t& 
. Z cking en . eapons e&4 ad initions and cet Ing »ffense 
7 USC A § 924(c1) me 18 or effect interence regardless of iTy may draw this 
nh case wh . . W ‘ 1s@! f whethe 
Candish ere . eapons eS 4 lense is or , r predicat ‘ 
a Su " “Time 18 € an y Ale x . 
Cand mmerita ROBINSON a/k/a & Counts O09 distribution of drug In case wh sion with intent ag Cistributon OF posses 
yeha Robinson, Appe Du that defend nere predicate off , . e ti _ 
. llant. e regard for value of stabil the ant had distribution of drugs ense invoives S A ‘ ‘ jte Ar igs 12 
Nos 90- requires court to hav ility in law t drugs were b« that def 8, government must show . 
3119. 92-3062 ave good and endant had 
, reason to ; i sufficient lish that defend — ‘ gun in such pi “~ 13. Weap< —_— 
. to reject established law at | ndant lity in law that drugs were be place at time pons 17/4 
nited Sta - aw at later date relation to off 7 bing distributed t : E 
= tes Court of ,; c Tense sufficient lish that def , © estal ‘ i Ae 
T f Appeals 5. Courts 00 —_ endant “used” aa , 
District of Columb > 4) See publicat ” relat gun during and stol = arres 
f Columbia Uircuit Court Sun otis dic i later date relation to offense ig USCA § i anc in a = On 4 ade 
) ‘ reconsiders its . ‘ MrT wdcicia Se ‘ 924 ” a 7 g “ ¢. l¢ fer dant ™ 7 
Arm str : own prior con initions ¢ publication . ye so : . 
rgued In Banc March 30, 1994 struction of statute somewhat 2 for other judi >» Words and Phrases f cocaine v , ash, and that oU gram 
oa cause, unlike in c at gingerly be 9. Wea on nitions judicial constructions and , cated elsewher 
7 aaa ent . ‘ lor MLIOTh . ;| of rtp - + nn cor « 
Decided Oct. 4, 1994 terpretation, C ontext of constitutional in , _< | meres fend : 
,- —~ o ongress remains free te alt = in case where geriy ne i) Weapons ons Z g _ ‘ lant - 
hat court has done . session with intent ae I — . 4 rag See 
Ty + 4 Ww ernment need , e ti alter mn case where predicate ~~ 
Defendants were separate!) eapons 4 + ROSS OK F session with intent — ey 14. Weapon - 
the Unit separately convicted in place durin 1 intent to distribute dr pons ©17(4 
United States District C 4 Rejection of establ . . g entir ernment need not ue Grugs, g 
trict of Columbia. s ourt for the Dis dent.creati lished circuit prece Wlegally possessed place 4 ot prove that gun was in ti at £ 
. = tanley Ss Harris “ a ng multifactor, oO 7 th ‘ " uring entire eric se hia L ‘ 
brey E. Robinson, Jr., JJ and Av- determining wheth pen-enses test Ser at place at Ume t legally period that defendant at al 
: ’ . : . whe : . ‘uit oe , ly possesse feng . _ 
and they appealed. Diffe of drug offenses, relation to drug - — was used in ed, to establish th , = that place at tim fay or that it was . ant s : 
' rent panel -traffickin durin ed test for t time that def with r poss 
Court of Ap paneis of the ranted g crime was war ng and in relat ed. t fendant was arr listr 
: peals aff med 995 ran by fact that 4 ela — er 7) estab! sh , arrest ~ -" 
’ ' . . established becat : s used lish that defends - g » Adie e » 
and reversed. 997 F2d 1113 m ; eq test impe use possessi< du lefendant sed é enda 
‘ 7 F.2d 884 issibly intruded per session was wi luring and in re , asec =6gul nafes P = 
spective convictions of , defendants’ re- duced widely di into province of jury, pro is continuing offens: , = because poss relation to predicate offense - rug-@ ’ - 
7 ~ — mr : ys : ~ g - 
anf to Gitte @ as of firearm during tradictory ) Ey and seemingly cor nly that defendant est imper eed 4 ~~ with intent to distribut A 24 ‘ 
. -trafficki y results and ‘ r jury. pro = yntinuing offens istribute 
¢ ases we rug Cc ng crime p conflicted with piace at some ft > de I , ao gov ernment n , 
re co dards ith stan some point niy that lent need pr 15. Weapon _ 
sideration wy mye for en bane recon § 924 —_— in other circuits. 18 US.C.A possessed dn _ ey om I bee ectentont put or Kept gur esapens een 
4 ourt peals . : ‘ ug? aie lace at some , t gun in that 
Circuit Judge ~ _ , Ginsburg na 10. W yy at some point while defendant : rvive cha : 
, held that (1 ; ). Weapon & possessed d ee a _s fficie 
‘rina so U.S.C.A i drugs. 18 US - 
evidence test henceforth w Ay aere- ad 5. Criminal Law 1144.13(5) Us ‘ j VA 3 98 arT » osten 
‘ 1a ‘ Using gun t 0. W ' . r aff — 
there is evidence that firearm whether On appeal from general verd en - ee 4 governme : ag-trafficking er 
was in proximi in question defendant guilty ict finding a, OF Using gun t - r ont 
lia ty to drugs, drug paraph fact y, deference owed to trier of sales is clearly pr vars gun to protect ones drugs, a an . sence tna 
» drug proceeds p erna- requires reviewin, r Gi = ve p! lict findin If raphernaiia, or - ; iru, irug : = ‘a resionis 
defendant from and was accessible to record all inf € court to draw from purposes of offense ~~ sales is clear! proceeds of ones an gs, drug parapherna . 
site of nferences tha = tion to to trier of I learly prohibit A - st Up and was , : a rug procee 
nala, or drug drugs, drug parapher drawn in t can justifiably be drug-traffic . purposes of offens ed use of gun, for as accessibie to defer hf. 8 
proceeds support of convi ’ > " draw fror . fense of us “ r « 7 a m sit 
drug-traffi involved in predicate onviction 9zA(eK1 tion ¢ 4 f using firearm in re . g srapherna . ‘ 
cking offense, and (2) evid 6. We - stifiably be to drug-trafficking crime. 18 | ~ : rug procee 
sufficient to s ; ence was apons ©17(5) ll. Weapons & , § 924(cK1 1S » \ - ae er pr ste drug-traff 
a upport beth defendants’ convic Whether . _ eee 8s US —— 
”  Pelation to d = used during and in Positioning fire ll. Weapons 4 ’ 
rug-trafficki ' protects 
Affirmed tion of fact to be settl ng offense is ques y or is other . Positioning fir 7 
would be settled by trier of fact, wh: rug trafficking an ing and in protects « firearm in such a way that Appea . 
Wald, C accorded def relatic se is ques w is otherwise int 4 . a 
, Lire ren erence al m to < ques integrated int . “ 
it Judge, filed USCA on appeal. 15 a ilrug-t drug traffi grated —* : atei 
opusea , dissenting : ' 92A(eK(1) S.CA. § 924 f fact, wh re! : cking amounts t S¢ , ” 4 a a = 
924(¢\ 1 . elation n 4 s5e gur 004 : 
- ~ Ul rug-tr: £6 nied 
1. Weapons & : appeal. 1s Ter g-trafficking —_ 
Stephen - Williarr Ci t J ‘ 12. Weapons 17) S.C.A § 924(c\1 S ames ar 
dissenting opinion, in whi — udge, filed Defendant “uses” gun, for Whenev 1 WwW argued tl - 
Buckley. Ci ——_ ch Silberman and offense of usi fi ‘ purposes of i er ther: - eapons © 17(2) ause ar 4 
y ireult Judges oO d ng firearm during and Jury w find that W = appellar Ba , 
— tion to drug-traffickin aes durin urposes of ‘henever there is suffic 
Silberman. C fenda g crime, whenever de ing commission ~* jury to find ifficient evidence for avid B. S 
dissenti , Cireuit Judge, filed separa nt puts or keeps gun in particul put or kept fi nd in rels dur nd that defendant at some t - “ 
ng opinion parate from which defendant or defend ar place be prox reartr mene Oe uring commission of pred some time “sued * guse a - 
efendant ‘ oximate Ww i . ut *? icate drug offer appe ‘ r 
can 8 ent ¢ a! , put or ke Z ense ppella 
get access to it if and when nat , hat is clearly conn cular place be prox pt firearm in place where it 
. y conm ' oximate t ild ~~ — 
ng, jury ants agent ‘ nate to and accessible fror R. Fisher, As 
- may aso that is clear! _ ' piace A 
needed t& ng ly connected to his drug t tr. ause ‘ ary 
_e jury may alsx inf, ‘ : = he ' n r | wer CS . 
‘ infer that gun was Deing ’ > 
» : 5 zabe . 
sa 


108 
Elizabeth Trosman, Odessa F. Vincent, 


Thomas C. Black, and William E. Lawier, 
IIl, Asst. U.S. Attys., entered appearances. 


Before EDWARDS, Chief Judge, WALD, 
MIKVA,* SILBERMAN, BUCKLEY, 
WILLIAMS, GINSBURG, SENTELLE, 
HENDERSON, and RANDOLPH, Circuit 


Judges. 


Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit 
Judge GINSBURG. 


Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge 
WALD 

Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judge 
STEPHEN F. WILLIAMS, in which Circuit 
Judges SILBERMAN and BUCKLEY 
concur. 


Separate dissenting statement filed by 
Cireuit Judge SILBERMAN 


GINSBURG, Circuit Judge: 


This consolidated case involves two sepa- 
rate challenges, one by appellant Roland Bai- 
ley and one by appellant Candisha Robinson, 
to their convictions under 18 USC 
§ 924(cX1). Im relevant part, that section 
imposes a five-year term of imprisonment 
upon anyone who “during and in relation to 
any crime of violence or drug trafficking 
crime uses or carries a firearm.” We 
have long required that in order to support a 
conviction under § 924(c)1), the government 
must demonstrate both a “nexus between 
a particular drug offender and the firearm,” 
United States v. Long, 905 F.2d 1572, 1577 
(D.C.Cir.1990), and that “the gun facilitate({d) 
the predicate offense in some way,” l/nited 
States v. Jefferson, 914 F2d Wi, 206 
(D.C.Cir.1992). 
the government has made the required show- 
ing, we have developed an open-ended test 
that takes account of numerous factors argu- 
ably relevant to whether a gun was used in 
relation to a drug trafficking offense. See, 
eg., United States v. Derr, 990 F.2d 1330, 
1338 (D.C.Cir.1993); United States v. Mor- 
ria, OTT F.2d G17, 621-22 (D.C.Cir.1992). 
Applying this test, divided panels of the court 


* Then-Chief Judge Mmva, a member of the Court 
when these cases were argued in banc, took no 


3a. 


36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


In order to assess whether - 


affirmed Bailey's conviction, see United 
States v. Bailey, 996 F.2d 1113 (D.C.Cir 
1993), and reversed Robinson's conviction, 
see United States v. Robinson, 927 F 2d 834 
(D.C.Cir.1993). 


Because this complex, open-ended test has 
produced widely divergent results and be- 
cause we believe that it intrudes the court 
into the province of the jury, we now replace 
it with a test that looks to two factors only: 
the proximity of the gun to the drugs in 
volved in the underlying offense, and the 
accessibility of the gun to the defendant from 
the place where the drugs, drug parapherna 
lia, or drug proceeds are located. Applying 
that test, we affirm both convictions. 


I BackGRounD 


In each of these cases, possession with the 
intent to distribute cocaine was the predicate 
drug offense in connection with which the 
defendant was charged with using or carry 
ing a firearm in violation of § 924(c\(1). The 
facts of each case are briefly as follows 


A United States v. Bailey 


In May 1989, Roland Bailey was stopped 
by two Metropolitan Police officers after they 
noticed that the car he was driving had no 
front license plate and no inspection sticker 
When Bailey failed to produce a driver's 
license, the officers ordered him out of the 
car. Before Bailey exited the car, the offi- 
cers saw him push something between the 
seat and the front console. Upon searching 
the passenger compartment of the car they 
discovered one round of ammunition and 27 
small plastic bags containing a total of 30 
grams of cocaine. The officers then placed 
Bailey under arrest; the ensuing search of 
the trunk of his car turned up a loaded 9- 
mm. pistol and $3,216 in cash. 


Bailey was charged with one drug offense 
and one other firearms offense in addition to 
using or carrying a firearm in violation of 18 
USC. § 924(cX1). At trial, Detective 
Charlies DiDomenico, a narcotics expert, te 


part in the disposition 


tified that weapons such : 
quently carried by drug d 

themselves, but [al 
gssets, drugs and money.’ 
victed by the jury on all 
sentenced by the court to ' 
month sentences of imp 
drug and weapon charges 
and to a consecutive 60-1 
prisonment on the § 924( 


B. United States v. Rob 


In June 1991, an under: 
Metropolitan Police Depar 
Veloria Robinson, the siste 
disha Robinson, and told | 
to buy crack cocaine. Vel 
to an apartment in the nor 


the city. Candisha openec 
told her that the officer 

When Candisha asked wi 
replied that he wanted a “ 
entered the apartment anc 
ters went into the bedroor 
sha hand Veloria a rock 
which Veloria then sold t 
evening, the officer made 
buy at the same apartmen 
man who claimed that he 


Shortly after the seconc 
search warrant was execi 
ment. Inside a locked tru 
closet the police found a 
ger, appellant Robinson's 
letter from her employe: 
crack cocaine, and the ma 
the first controlled buy. 
quantity of plastic baggie: 


At trial, Detective David 
ies expert, testified that th 
“second gun”—that is, a t 
drug dealer might hide on 
until he could get to his “) 
also testified that drug des 
funs to protect themselve: 
dealers, the police, and the 


Robinson was convicted 
Separate drug counts as 
§ 924(cX1) charge. Incluc 
“erm of imprisonment 
§ 924(c\(1), she was senten 


tified that weapons such as Bailey's are fre- 
quently carried by drug dealers “not only to 
protect themselves, but [also] to protect their 
assets, drugs and money.” Bailey was con- 
victed by the jury on all charges and was 
sentenced by the court to two concurrent 51- 
month sentences of imprisonment on the 
drug and weapon charges not at issue here, 
and to a consecutive 60-month term of im- 
prisonment on the § 924(c)(1) conviction 


B. United States v. Robinson 


In June 1991, an undercover officer of the 
Metropolitan Police Department approached 
Veloria Robinson, the sister of appellant Can 
disha Robinson, and told her that he wanted 
to buy crack cocaine. Veloria then took him 
to an apartment in the northeast quadrant of 
the city. Candisha opened the door; Veloria 
told her that the officer wanted something 
When Candisha asked what he wanted, he 
replied that he wanted a “twenty.” He then 
entered the apartment and the Robinson sis 
ters went into the bedroom. He saw Candi 
sha hand Veloria a rock of crack cocaine. 
which Veloria then sold to him. The next 
evening, the officer made another controlled 
buy at the same apartment, this time from a 
man who claimed that he also lived there 


Shortly after the second controlled buy, a 
search warrant was executed at the apart- 
ment. Inside a locked trunk in the bedroom 
closet the police found a .22-caliber Derrin 
ger, appellant Robinson's 1990 tax return, a 
letter from her employer, 10.88 grams of 
crack cocaine, and the marked $20 bill from 
the first controlled buy They also found a 
quantity of plastic baggies in the bedroom 


At trial, Detective David Stroud, a narcot- 
ies expert, testified that the Derringer was a 
“second gun”—that is, a type of gun that a 
drug dealer might hide on his person for use 
until he could get to his “real gun.” Stroud 
also testified that drug dealers generally use 
guns to protect themselves from other drug 
dealers, the police, and their own employees 


Robinson was convicted by a jury on five 
Separate drug counts as well as on the 
§ 924(¢)\(1) charge. Including the 60-month 
‘erm of imprisonment for violating 
§ 924(c)(1), she was sentenced to 157 months 


Ya 


US. v. BAILEY 
Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 


109 


of imprisonment, four years of supervised 
release, and a special assessment of $300 


C. The Appeals in Bailey and Robinson 


Each defendant appealed his or her 
§ 924(c)(1) conviction on the ground that the 
Government had failed to adduce sufficient 
evidence at trial that he or she had “used” or 
“carried” a firearm in a drug 
offense. Different panels affirmed Bailey's 
conviction and reversed Robinson’s 


relation to 


in each 


case over a dissent. Bailey and the govern 


ment respectively suggested rehearing in 


banc. In order to resolve the apparent ir 
consistencies in our various decisions apply 
ing § 924 we consolidated the two cases 
and reheard them in banc 
Il. ANALY 
[1] Section 924(c)(1) states that 
Whoever, during and in relation to any 
drug trafficking crime uses or carries 
a firearm, shall, in addition to the punist 


ment for such drug trafficking crime 


be sentenced to imprisonment for fi 


Ve 
years 


By requiring that the use of the firearm be 


“in relation to” a drug trafficking offense, the 
Congress made it clear that it did not intend 
to criminalize the mere possession of a fire 
arm by someone who commits a drug of 
fense. “(T]he firearm must have some pur 


pose or effect with respect to the drug traf 


ficking crime; its presence or involvement 
cannot be the result of accident or coinci 
dence.” Smith v. United Statee  — US 
— — 113 S.Ct. 2050, 2068-59 


124 L.Ed2d 138 (1993). At the same time. it 
is clear that a firearm need not actually be 
brandished in order to be used or carried in 
connection with a drug trafficking offense 
United States v. Evans, 888 F.2d 891. 296 
(D.C.Cir.1989) As Justice Judge 
Kennedy wrote for the Ninth Circuit in the 
seminal opinion on § 924(c)(1) 


(then 


If the firearm is within the possession or 
control of a person who commits an under 
lying crime as defined by the statute, and 
the circumstances of the case show that 
the firearm facilitated or had a role in the 
crime, such as emboldening an actor who 
had the opportunity or ability to display or 


5a 
110 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


could not have been convicted based upon the 
evidence presented at trial. In response, the 


oa 
6a 


US. v. BAILEY 111 
Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 


any context, is especially so in matters of must ask not “whether [we] believe{ } that 


any context, is 
statutory constn 


discharge the weapon to protect himself or 
intimidate others, whether or not such dis- 


; 
based upon the = 


discharge occurred vernment es that it needs to present We have non 1 response, the y = statutory construction.”). the evidence at the trial established guilt 
7 va f (the statute) ee ahheaas scaly that the defendant possessed a three factors tt eds to present We have nonetheless identified at least beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether the 

ee ere 540 firearm and that the firearm in some way lished precedent int possessed a three factors that justify rejecting estab- judgment was supported by substantial evi- 

Unites Sates © posenarspe - cage _ facilitated the drug crime; thus implicitly the may properly ov: in a wy lished precedent. First, the in banc court dence.” Woodby v. Immigration & Natural- 

(9th Cir.1985) (internal citations omitted). Government sake us to abandon the Bruce- if “it decides ths s implicitly the may properly overrule a prior panel decision ‘ation Service, 385 U.S. 276, 282, 87 S.Ct. 


on the Bruce- 


is— h in favor of a simpler 
A. Section 924(c)(1) to Date Morris—Derr approac Sale aiiie 


In an effort to distinguish between mere ‘est 


important questi 
flawed.” Critica 


if “it decides that the panel’s holding on an 


483, 486, 17 L.Ed.2d 362 (1966). Or, as the 13] 
important question of law was fundamentally 


Supreme Court said in Jackson v. Virginia, iM . 


factors” may be relevant in any particular 
case: “courts have identified and will (contin- 
ue to) identify” such factors. United States 
v. Morris, 977 F.2d 617, 621 (D.C.Cir.1992). 
Just two years later Judge Wald summarized 


tion}. Among other things, we look to 
whether a gun is accessible to the defen- 


whcther it is loaded, what type of weapon 
it is, and, finally, whether there is expert 


sion, of a firearm. Only when we have re- 
solved that question can we determine the 
quantum of evidence necessary to convict and 
formulate an appropriate test for assessing 
whether the government has produced that 


ence using the Bruce—-Morris—Derr approach. 
We do so bearing in mind that because the 


that we have good and sufficient reason to 
reject it at this late date. See McKinney v. 


ruling that prece 
at 173, 109 S.Ct. : 
brief survey of 

(below) that th 
proach has produ 


circuits have per: 
construction.” C 
ject, 975 F.2d at } 


ferent from ours 
conducive to con: 


mere posses- 
n we have re- 
determine the 
to convict and 
for assessing 


of our experi- 
Derr approach. 


e law requires 
ient reason to 


able decision,” the court is justified in over- 
ruling that precedent. Patterson, 491 U.S. 
at 173, 109 S.Ct. at 2371. In this case, even a 
brief survey of our decisions demonstrates 
(below) that the Bruce-Morris-Derr ap- 


interpreting a statute “if it finds that other 
circuits have persuasively argued a contrary 
construction.” Critical Mass Energy Pro- 


they have uniformly adopted a standard dif- 
ferent from ours and one that seems more 
conducive to consistent application. 


ion of and the use or carrying of a In form the dispute between the parties is F.2d at 876. Ii i flawed.” Critical Mass Energy Project, 975 443 U.S. 307, 319, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 2789, 61 
og ith a drug trafficking little more than a disagreement over the below that the | the parties is F.2d at 876. In this regard, we conclude -Ed.2d 560 (1979), “the relevant question is 
og aor wn that re than just 7" ce necessary to sustain a § 924(c)(1) Derr approach i nent over the below that the open-ended Bruce-Morris- Whether, after viewing the evidence in the 
par sap me es sired to estab- a rete neither side expressly addresses the province of | a § 924(c)(1) Derr approach impermissibly intrudes into ight most favorable to the prosecution, any 
ae vip s: cae th session aod tion of how the disputed element of precedent [is] a ) ssly addresses the province of the jury. Second, when “a ‘ational trier of fact could have found the 
lish os aw ee B - oo F.2d he pon viz. “use,” ought be defined. In ence and consists ted element of precedent [is] a positive detriment to coher- eSSential elements of the crime beyond a 
a ~My By the next car alin however ‘this case is about what of inherent confu e defined. In ence and consistency in the law ... because easonable doubt.” /d at 319, 99 S.Ct at 
a er broegrn p= ‘that “s aa of poner use, as opposed to mere posses- able decision,” tl is about what of inherent confusion created by an unwork- 2789 (emphasis in original); see also United 
we Ww ’ 


States v. Long, 905 F.2d 1572, 1576 (D.C.Cir 
1990) (“A jury is entitled to draw a vast 
range of reasonable inferences from evi- 
dence, but may not base a verdict on mere 
speculation”). 


the development of our case law this way: evidence. to produce incon: poocases Gast poet was yooduend and wil uly aw [6] Whether a gun was used during and 
Whe ha umerated a nonexclusive set hearing in order to in bane court ma; . produce inconsistent results. Finally, the in relation to a drug trafficking offense is, at 
(woe Raye om a. - : > [2,3] We granted re mapigtes interpreting a st: , in banc court may overrule a prior precedent its co tion of f ; 
of factors to weigh in making that (distine- __...i+ these issues in the light of our experi- ig in order to re, a question of fact. In a case where 


the gun was not actually fired or brandished 
during the commission of the crime, it may 


oa : _ well b ultimate ’ act 
dent, whether & & leented pr campesntag © Bruce-Morris- Derr approach represents the other circuits (als nner - ject, 975 F.2d at 876. Again, a survey of the py it ‘. still a aod f ~ 4 od st 
the drugs (which may cut either way de- established law of the circuit, a due regard ooh f represents the other clreuits (also below) demonstrates that s @ question of fact and not of law 
pending on the facts of a particular case), +. the value of stability in the law requires ney Rave Gunes a due regard sat Of course, an appellate court may properly 


determine, as a matter of law, the baseline or 
mirimum conduct that can constitute a “use.” 


imony to bolster the government's par- ; Lith Cir.1994) {4) Prelimina : McKinney v. and it must determine in each case, with 
‘ote » donde of “use.” : hag ot adn Doan Aten “the implica- the problems inh: (11th Cir.1994) [4] Preliminarily, therefore, we survey 4pprepriate deference to the jury, whether 
Derr, 990 F.2d at 1338 (citing Morris, 977 tions of stare decisis are less weighty” when Derr approach: in h “the implica- the problems inherent in the Bruce-Morris- the record contains sufficient evidence of 
F od at 621-22). Thus, in each case in which a7 in banc court reviews an issue for the the factfinder, sec weighty” when Derr approach: intrusion into the province of such conduct. The reviewing court does not 
2 defendant challenges the sufficiency of the first time, “stare decisis is a hallmark of our and a continuing issue for the the factfinder, seemingly inconsistent results, sit, however, to make its own finding with 
evidence for his conviction under § 924(c\(1), judicial system” and should still be consid- tion of § 924(¢)(1) allmark of our and a continuing conflict with the interpreta- respect to an ultimate fact. Weighing the 
we have weighed each bit of evidence against red by the court in banc). In particular, other circuit. till be consid- ~~ of § 924 (ce) 1) adopted by virtually every evidence is a function assigned to the jury: 
him in order to determine whether the defen- we reconsider our own prior construction of 4 ao In particular, other circuit. We are not a second jury weigiing the 
dant could be said to have used (or carried) statute somewhat gingerly as well because 1. The Province nstruction of a 1. The Province of the J ovetenes anew and deciding whether or not 
his gun in furtherance of his drug crime. ~ ‘ynlike in the context of constitutional inter- (5) It is a cw well because i ~e we would vote to convict the defendant. 
Defendants Bailey and Robinson do not pretation ... Congress remains free to alter tem of criminal la itutional inter- [5] It is a cardinal principle of our sys- United States u Poston, 902 F.2d 90, 94 
’ what we have done.’” Critical Mass Energy by the trier of fa is free to alter tem of criminal law that the facts are settled (D.C.Cir.1990). Yet the use of an approach 
attack this | open-ended (for hg oem ‘ect v. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and are not ordin: ' Mass Energy by the ‘trier of fact, be it a jury or a judge, that requires the court to weigh numerous 
Bruce-Morris-Derr ) approach = pee nh awh 871. 875 (D.C.Cir.1992) (in banc ) a reviewing court. + Commission and are not ordinarily to be redetermined by factors and to determine the specific rele- 
ing whether a gun was used during *- Mo Pao : MeLeon Credit Union verdict finding a « 92) (in banc) 4 reviewing court. On appeal from a genera] Vance of individual facts in order to assess 
ee Te a aes this 91 US 164, 172-78, 109 S.Ct. 2363, 2370, ence we owe to th Credit Union, verdict finding defendant guilty, the defer- the sufficiency of the evidence invites the 
ond ona rMyy “po e be 105 LEd2d 182 (1989) (internal citations we draw from thi t, 2363, 2370, ence we owe to the trier of fact requires that ourt to do just that. 
ananed > ‘doplayed in order to be used omitted)); see also Cottrel; v. Commissioner, ean justifiably be wad cistiow we draw from the record all inferences that The Bruce-Morris-Derr approach strips 
ied. Instead, each argues that if this 628 F.2d 1127, 1131 (8th Cir.1980) (in banc) conviction. Hence: Jommissioner, can justifiably be drawn in support of the from the jury its “responsibility (as) the trier 
pesand tame ool plied h he (“The doctrine of stare decisis, weighty in cy of the evidence: 380) (in banc ) conviction. Hence, in assessing the sufficien- of fact fairly to resolve conflicts in the testi- 
approach were properly applied, he or she is, weighty in cy of the evidence, as an appellate court we mony, to weigh the evidence, and to draw 


. “oe eee ee ee oe 


Ja 


112 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


reasonable inferences from basic facts to ulti- 
mate facts.” Jackson, 307 U.S. at 319, 99 
S.Ct. at 2789. For example, in United States 
v. Bruce, 989 F.2d 1053 (D.C.Cir.1991), we 
were at considerable pains to determine 
whether a smal] gun found in the pocket of a 
coat along with a stash of drugs “was intend- 
ed for use only at the time of distribution” or 
was rather “the sort of weapon a drug dealer 
would employ for protection against an effort 
to penetrate a crack house.” /d at 1055. 
Determining that the former was more likely 
true, we reversed the conviction. See id at 
1056. Similarly, in Derr and Robinson, the 
panel struggled to determine for itself the 
significance of the fact that the defendant's 
gun was locked respectively in a closet or 
trunk with a stash of drugs at the time of the 
defendant's arrest. See Robinson, 997 F.2d 
at 888; Derr, 990 F.2d at 1338. Determining 
the weight to be given a single piece of 
evidence is not ordinarily an appropriate 
function for an appellate court. 


A due regard for the limits that the jury 
system necessarily places upon the scope of 
our review would not lead us to abdicate all 
our responsibility as an appellate court—for 
example by affirming any conviction in which 
a gun is found and there is some connection, 
no matter how speculative or remote, be- 
tween the gun and the predicate drug of- 
fense. A jury may convict a defendant for 
any of a number of impermissible reasons, 
and therefore, if the defendant claims that 
the evidence against him is insufficient to 
sustain his conviction, we must as an appel- 
late court review the record conscientiously. 
See United States v. Zeigler, 994 F.2d 845, 
849 (D.C.Cir.1993). Nor does our reccgni- 
tion that the approach heretofore used in this 
circuit impinges upon the province of the 
jury by itself predetermine precisely how we 
ought to review a § 924(c)(1) case. It does, 
however, strongly suggest that we must re- 
place the open-ended Bruce-Morrie—Derr 
approach with a manageable standard; we 
must, that is, state clearly the minimum 
showing that the government must make in 
order to put to the jury the question whether 
a defendant hase violated § 924(c)(1). 


2. Inconsistent Results 


The open-ended approach described in 
Derr has produced widely divergent and 
seemingly contradictory results. Panels 
have upheld convictions where a loaded, 
sawed-off shotgun was found along with 
crack cocaine and drug paraphernalia in a 
lawn clipping bag beneath the exterior stair- 
well of a house and additional drugs and 
paraphernalia were found in the defendant's 
bedroom, see United States v. Jefferson, 974 
F.2d 201 (D.C.Cir.1992); where loaded pis- 
tols were found underneath a sofa cushion 
and on a bedroom nightstand in the defen- 
dant’s house, which elsewhere contained 
crack cocaine in ziplock bags and other drug 
paraphernalia, see United States v. Morris, 
977 F.2d 617 (D.C.Cir.1992); and where a 
loaded 9-mm. pistol was found along with 
cash in the trunk of the defendant’s car after 
bags of cocaine had been found in the front 
seat of the car, see United States v. Bailey, 
995 F.2d 1113 (D.C.Cir.1993). In contrast, 
panels have reversed convictions where a 
loaded .22 caliber Derringer was found, along 
with individual packages of cocaine and mari- 
juana, in a pocket of the defendant's trench 
coat in the house in which he lived, see 
United States v. Bruce, 939 F.2d 1053 
(D.C.Cir.1991); where an unloaded 357 Mag- 
num revolver was found along with the de- 
fendant’s birth certificate and a locked box 
containing cash, crack cocaine, and drug par- 
aphernalia in an apartment in which the de- 
fendant was staying, see United States v 
Derr, 990 F.2d 1330 (D.C.Cir.1993); and 
where an unloaded .22 caliber Derringer was 
found in a closet along with crack cocaine 
and drug proceeds, including marked money, 
see United States v. Robinson, 997 F.2d 884 
(D.C.Cir.1993). Although each of these cases 
ean be distinguished on the basis of one or 
another fact—for example, by looking to the 
type of gun involved or to how easily the 
defendant could have grabbed the gun at the 
time that he was arrested—such distinctions 
seem counter-intuitive if not arbitrary.. Hav- 
ing reflected upon our experience, we think it 
apparent that the court has failed to take a 
consistent approach because it has not laid 
down a standard that yields determinate re- 
sults in any but the easiest of cases. 


3. Conflict with Ot 
No other circuit h: 
approach persuasive 
have each adopted a 
is considerably broa 
ing, or otherwise b 
They focus upon wh 
cerning the location o 
permit the jury to c 
some way facilitated 
ficking offense. Fro 
tive, the standards t 
assessing the sufficie 
much more similar 
accessibility” standar 
to the open-ended ¢« 
used in the past. 
The opinion in Un 
Apodaca, 889 F.2d 
representative. In t) 
executing a search ws 
mercial quantity of m 
side the defendant’s 
itself, they found an 
semi-automatic hands 
analyzing the defend 
sufficiency of this evic 
lid not look at such 
guns were loaded or 
appropriate type of 
Ongoing drug operat 
circuit law to the effec 
is only obliged to sho 
available to provide p 
dant in connection w 
drug trafficking,” the 


net 
Viction 


in Stewart, the Nini 
equally straizghtforwar 
affirm a conviction un 
firearm's) physical pr 
dant at any time dur 
the crime, or during 
inference tha: it embo 
the underlvicg offens 
United States v. Ton 


1047, 1050 “Sth Cir.19 

Every other circuit 
essence, upon whethe 
C€SsiDie ar.d croximate 
ing the comr-ssion of 


9a. 


US. v. 


BAILEY 113 


Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 


3. Conflict with Other Circuits 


No other circuit has found our open-ended 
approach persuasive. Our sister circuits 
have each adopted a definition of “use” that 
is considerably broader than firing, display- 
ing, or otherwise brandishing the firearm 
They focus upon whether the evidence con- 
cerning the location of the gun is sufficient to 
permit the jury to conclude that the gun in 
some way facilitated the predicate drug traf- 
ficking offense. From a functional perspec- 
tive, the standards they have developed for 
assessing the sufficiency of the evidence are 
much more similar to the “proximity and 
accessibility” standard we adopt today than 
to the open-ended approach that we have 
used in the past. 


The opinion in United States v. Molinar- 
Apodaca, 889 F.2d 1417 (5th Cir.1989) is 
representative. In that case, police officers 
executing a search warrant had found a com 
mercial quantity of marijuana in a shed out- 
side the defendant’s house; in the house 
itself, they found an automatic rifle and a 
semi-automatic handgun. /d at 1422 In 
analyzing the defendant’s challenge to the 
sufficiency of this evidence, the Fifth Circuit 
did not look at such details as whether the 
guns were loaded or whether they were the 
appropriate type of weapon to protect an 
ongoing drug operation. Rather. applying 
circuit law to the effect “that the government 
is only obliged to show that the firearm was 
available to provide protection to the defen 
dant in connection with his engagement in 
drug trafficking,” the court affirmed the con- 
viction 


In the wake of Justice Kennedy’s analysis 
in Stewart, the Ninth Circuit applies an 
equally straightforward test. That court will 
affirm a conviction under § 924(c)(1) “if [the 
firearm's) physical proximity to the defen 
dant at any time during the commission of 
the crime, or during arrest, supports the 
inference that it emboldened him to commit 
the underlying offense or to resist arrest.” 
United States v Torres-Medina, 935 F.2d 
1047, 1050 (9th Cir.1991) 


Every other circuit similarly focuses, in 
essence, upon whether the firearm was ac 
cessible and proximate to the defendant dur 
ing the commission of the drug offense. In 


numerical order by circuit, see. ¢.g., United 
States v. Paulino, 13 F.3d 20, 26 (ist Cir 
1994) (“[TJhe court's critical concern should 

be whether (the firearm] was ‘avail- 
able for use’ in connection with the narcotics 
trade”); United States v. Medina, 944 F 2d 
60, 66 (2d Cir.1991) (holding that a conviction 
may be affirmed “where circumstances indi 
cate that the defendant intended to use the 
weapon by strategically placing it so that it 
could be available for use during a drug 
transaction”); United States v. Hill, 967 F 2d 
902, 906-07 (3d Cir.1992) (holding that where 


the proximity of the gun to the irugs indicat 


. 
os VS MOOw BM WW We UTPUns ICG) 


ed that the defendant's “access to the weapon 


the jury could conclude that the weapon “fa 
cilitated [the defendant's] possession of and 
intention to distribute” illegal drugs); United 
States v. Paz, 927 F.2d 176, 179 (4th Cir 
1991) (affirming a conviction because, during 
the course of defendant's possessor) 
fenses, “the gun was present and accessible, 
even though under a mattress”): United 
States v. Thomas, 12 F.3d 1350, 1362 (St! 
Cir.1994) (“The presence of firearms at the 
home of a defendant where drugs, money 
and ammunition are also found is suffi 
cient to establish the ‘use’ of a firearm as an 
integral part of a drug-trafficking crime in 
violation of § 924(c\(1)"); United States 
Warner, 10 F.3d 1236, 1239 (6th Cir.1993 
affirming a conviction s lely because the 
firearm was “readily accessible for drug-re 
lated protection”); United States 1 Vasquez, 
909 F.2d 235, 240 (7th Cir.1990) holding that 
4 conviction under § 924(c)(1) is appropriate 
when guns and drugs are present in the 
same location, because the “trier of fact [can 
reasonably conclude that the availability of 
firearms instills {in the defendant] a height 


ened sense of security [while] he posses[es] 
the drugs with the intent to distribute 
them”); United States 1 Quintanilla, 25 


F.3d 694, 700 (8th Cir.1994) (“To support a 
conviction under section 924(c\(1), the gov 
ernment need only establish that a firearm 
was present and available for use”); United 
States v. Torres—Medina, 935 F.2d 1047, 1050 
(9th Cir.1991) (“We hold that a firearm may 
be considered available {and therefore used 


’ fe 
by a defendant} for purposes of section 


qa 


114 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


924(cX(1) if its physical proximity to the de- 
fendant at any time during the commission of 
the crime, or during arrest, supports the 
inference that it emboldened him to commit 
the underlying offense or tc resist arrest”); 
United States v. McKinnell, 888 F.2d 669, 
675 (10th Cir.1989) (holding that “the uses 
element of section 924(c)(1) is satisfied when 
the defendant has ready access to the fire- 
arm and the firearm was an integral part of 
his criminal undertaking and its availability 
increased the likelihood that the criminal un- 
dertaking would succeed” (internal quotation 
marks omitted)); United States v. Poole, 878 
F.2d 1389, 1393 (11th Cir.1989) (“[P]Jossession 
of a firearm constitutes use in relation to the 
drug trafficking offense if the possession is 
an integral part of, and facilitates the com- 
mission of, the drug trafficking offense”); see 
also Note, Smith v. United States and the 
Modern Interpretation of 18 U.S.C. 924(¢)(1) 
A Proposal to Amend the Federal Armed 
Offender Statute, 69 Notre Dame L.Rev. 815, 
843 & nn. 187-190 (1994) (noting that “other 
circuits have specifically rejected many of the 
factors considered by the D.C.Circuit: size of 
the gun whether the firearm was loaded, 
number of weapons, and evidence of past 
actual use”). But of United States v. Taylor, 
18 F.3d 55, 58 (2d Cir.1994) (noting that the 
analysis of a sufficiency challenge “is clearly 
a very fact-intensive question [that) re- 
quir{es] a careful examination of, among oth- 
er things, where the gun was located and 
what else was found in the apartment”). 


B. Section 924(c) Henceforth 


As the Supreme Court has made clear, the 
government must make two distinct show- 
ings in order to obtain a conviction under 
§ 924(cX1): “that the defendant ‘use(d] or 
carrie[d) a firearm’” and “that the use or 
carrying was ‘during and in relation to’” a 
predicate offense. Smith v. United States, 
— US. ——, 113 S.Ct. 2050, 124 L.Ed.2d 
138 (1993). Therefore, in determining what 
the proper standard should be, we must de- 
termine both what constitutes the use or 
carrying of a gun and in what circumstances 
such a use or carrying is in relation to a drug 
trafficking offense. 


1. “Use” of a Firearm 

In the context of § 924(c\(1), “use” could 
be defined either narrowly, so as to encom- 
pass only the paradigmatic uses of a gun, ie., 
firing, brandishing, or displaying the gun 
during the commission of the predicate of- 
fense, or more broadly, so as to include the 
other ways in which a gun can be used to 
facilitate drug trafficking. The narrow defi- 
nition has the virtue of simplicity; it is, after 
all, relatively easy to determine whether the 
defendant’s firing, brandishing, or displaying 
a gun was related to the defendant’s contem- 
poraneous (recall the “during” requirement 
of § 924(c\(1)) drug trafficking offense. The 
narrow definition also has the vice of simplic- 
ity, however; it is too narrow to capture all 
of the various uses of a firearm that the 
Congress apparently intended to reach via 
§ 924(cX(1). 

Certainly nothing in the statute indicates 
that the Congress intended to «xclude any 
use from the scope of its prohibition. In- 
deed, the Supreme Court has waid that in 
§ 924(cX1), the “Congress empluyed the 
term ‘use’ expansively.” See Smith, —— US 
at ——, 113 S.Ct. at 2058. Wherefore, it 
held that the statute prohibits the “use” of a 
firearm even as an object that can be bar 
tered for drugs. See Smith, — US. at 
—, ——, 113 S.Ct. at 2055, 2057. 


Like firing, brandishing, or displaying a 
gun, barter involves handling the gun. A 
gun can surely be used even when it is not 
being handled, however. For example, a gun 
placed in a drawer beside one’s bed for fear 
of an intruder would, in common parlance, be 
a gun “used” for domestic protection. 


This more inclusive understanding of “use” 
has long been recognized in the jurispru- 
dence of the Supreme Court. In Astor 1 
Merritt, 111 U.S. 202, 4 S.Ct. 413, 28 L.Ed 
401 (1884), the Court was required to inter- 
pret a customs statute that exempted from 
duty “[wjearing apparel in actual use of 
persons arriving in the United States.” /d 
at 203, 4 S.Ct. at 413. The petitioner sought 
an exemption for clothing that he and his 
family had purchased abroad, but not yet 
worn. The Court accepted his argument: 

If a person residing in the United States 

should purchase wearing apparel here, in a 


condition rea: 
out further n 
own use or W 
ately approac 
not exceeding 
the limit abo 
hesitate to sa 
was ‘in actual 
though some 
actually put « 
personal use 
apparel, bougl 
and set apart 
in with, and a 
person's ward 
In use, in actui 
use, as well be 
being worn or 
Id at 213, 4 § 
Smith, the Cow 
following definit 
“‘Itlo make use 
vice; to avail one 
out a purpose or 
— US. at — 
Buack’s Law Dic 
[7-9] In thec 
fore, we hold tha 
oneself of a gun, 
statute, whenever 
in a particular pla 
agent) can gain 
needed to facilita! 
where the predic: 
tribution of dry 
show that the def 
a place at the tim: 
distributed. In s 
offense is possess 
tribute drugs, how 
not prove that tl 
during the entire 
illegally possessed 
that place at the ti 


1. Invoking United 
(D.C.Cir.1994), an 
in McLaughlin v. L 
S.Ct. 1677, 90 L 
proposes that one 
nection with a dn 
displaying it or, if 
threatening to use i 
Opinion pp. 123 -2 
“uses” a weapon is 


se” could 
) encom- 
gun, ie., 
the gun 
licate of- 
‘ude the 
used to 
row defi- 
is, after 
‘ther the 
splaying 
contem- 
lirement 
se. The 
simplic- 
yture all 
that the 
sach via 


ndicates 
ide any 
yn. In 
that in 
red the 
— US 
fore, it 
se” of a 


be bar 


“use 
rispru 
stor 1 
L.Ed 


inter 


1 from 

of 

ld. 
sought 
ind his 
10t yet 
ument 
states 


e,ina 


[Oa 


US. v. 


BAILEY 115 


Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir 1994) 


condition ready for immediate wear with- 
out further manufacture, intended for his 
own use or wear, suitable for the immedi- 
ately approaching season of the year, and 
not exceeding in quantity, quality or value 
the limit above mentioned, no one would 
hesitate to say that such wearing apparel 
was ‘in actual use’ by such person, even 
though some of it might not have been 
actually put on or applied to its proper 
personal use An article of wearing 
apparel, bought for use, and appropriated 
and set apart to be used. by being placed 
in with, and as a part of, what is called a 
person's wardrobe, is, in common parlance, 
in use, in actual use, in present use, in real 
use, as wel’ before it is worn as while it is 
being worn or afterwards. 
Id at 213, 4 S.Ct at 419 Likewise, in 
Smith, the Court noted with approval the 
following definition of the verb “to use” 
“‘{tlo make use of; to convert to one’s ser 
vice; to avail oneself of; to utilize: to carry 
out a purpose or action by means of’” /d 
—— US. at ——, 113 S.Ct. at 2054 (quoting 
Back’s Law Dictionary 1541 (6th ed. 1990)) 


[7-9] In the context of § 924(c)(1), there- 
fore, we hold that one uses a gun, ie., avails 
oneself of a gun, and therefore violates the 
statute, whenever one puts or keeps the gun 
in @ particular place from which one (or one’s 
agent) can gain access to it if and when 
needed to facilitate a drug crime. In a case 
where the predicate offense involves the dis- 
tribution of drugs, the government must 
show that the defendant had the gun in such 
a place at the time that the drugs were being 
distributed. In a case when the predicate 
offense is possession with the intent to dis- 
tribute drugs, however, the government need 
not prove that the gun was in that place 
during the entire period that the defendant 
illegally possessed the drugs or that it was in 
that place at the time that the defendant was 


1. Invoking United States v. Ray 21 F.3d 1134 
(D.C.Cir.1994), and the Solicitor General's brief 
in McLaughlin v. United States, 476 U.S. 16 106 
S.Ct. 1677, 90 L.Ed.2d 15 (1986), the dissent 
proposes that one may “use” a firearm in con 
nection with a drug trafficking offense only by 
displaying it or, if the weapon is concealed, by 
threatening to use it Judge Williams Dissenting 
Opinion pp. 123-25. This ignores that how one 
uses @ weapon in a crime necessarily depends 


arrested. Because possession with the intent 
to distribute is a continuing offense—that is, 
an offense that extends through time—the 
government need only prove that the defen 
dant put or kept the gun in that place at 
some point while the defendant illegally pos 
sessed the drugs.! 


2. “During” and “In Relation T 


{10} Once it is determined that the defer 
ant hee . 
dant has used or carried a gun, the more 
iffiony! y " 
difficult question is whether he ha 


“In relation to a drug trafficking 


* x 
As the Court noted in Smith, this requir 
mont “at « haa } x 
‘ent at a Minimum, means that the firearn 
mie? . . a3 
must have some purpose or effect with re 
enect th + ai 
spect the drug trafficking crime: its pres 
- 
€ r involvemen : tt r 
aeeminoant . 
accident or coincidence — U.S at 


113 S.Ct. at 2059. For the 


violated, therefore. t 


or Naive} the pe tential of facilit ating 
drug trafficking offense.” /d _—— 
L (quoting St 
oe @ eo 7 
art, ii9 * 2d at o4/ alterations ir rigina 
ns in orig 


Using a gun to protect one’s drugs. drug 
paraphernalia, or the proceeds of ons 

sales is therefore clearly a prohibited 

the gun Our prior decisior 

$ 924(c\(1) recognize as much 


The First Circuit refers to this relationshit 
quite generally as a “facilitative nexus 
That court looks only ti 
“kept [where it was] to be av ailable for 
in an ongoing drug offense. See. « 

States v. Paulino, 13 F.3d 20, 26 (ist ¢ 
1994). The court's rationale is readily 

plained: once a person acquires a firear 
and puts or keeps it where it can be used 
more actively in his drug activity, that { 
arm becomes a part of the drug activit 

thus is used by the defendant in relatior 
the drug activity. It matters little whether 
the use is described in terms of emboldening 


upon the nature of the crime kK 
: L/ 

McLaughlin were aggravated bank 

Cases, imterpreting 18 USC. § 2113(d Dt 

) 

course one must somehow threaten anoun 


Ww 
@ dangerous weapon in order to con tha 
offense. But it is senseless to say the same of 
crimes involving possession of drugs. Th : 
furtive crimes. Stealth is essentia $ 


cess. If, as expected, the drugs are secreted 
should expect the firearm to be as we 


4 
; 
, 
‘ 
4 
: 
5 


ee nme tk Atte ties 2... en 08 pete 6h temo 


lla 7 . Do 
116 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


US. v. BAILEY 117 
Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 
the defendant to commit the drug trafficking arm in furtherance of such crime....” 131 relation to that cri: : 2 ; 

. 31 relation to that crime”). As the Eighth Cir ditd a in relation to a dru 
crime, see, ¢g, Stewart, 779 F.2d at 540, Cong.Rec. 18,155, 18,235 (July 9, 1985) (re- cuit has stated: - cuit has stated: - eallidides red ye - = ont one ~- 
a the defendant's ome ery inter. ~~ Sunes rae by It has become by It has become common knowledge that readily administered both by the district 
est in eo €9., > cae ney ma pores this . drug traffickers ac- drug traffickers typically keep firearms court, which must determine whether the 
Young-Bey, = 2d 178, 1 ~y “a ae = os eins a: oe be oe available to prot al, available to protect themselves and their Government's case may go to the jury, and 
= otherwise; any way one puts | mf . . aw. fi drugs and drug 1 r drugs and drug money. The presence and by the appellate pane! that must determin. 
arm is being used as part of the drug activi- sion of § 924(c)(1), it argued that because the availability « 


ise the availability of the firearms are often 


whether the evidence was sufficient 


ty. Therefore, like the First Circuit, we look 
to whether the gun was positioned so as to be 
available for use during ongoing drug activity 


Biack’s Law Dictionary 1158 (5th ed. 1979)); 


“existing law already requires that the carry- 
ing be ‘in relation to’ the underlying crime,” 
the proposed bill would “weaken[ } the exist- 


crucial to the “st 
prise. It is the 
ries to infer that 


crucial to the “success” of the drug enter 
prise. It is therefore permissible for ju 


port a conviction under § 
it Will assure greater uniformity 


724 


» " =" vy to inf th t fire f d on ‘ thile ena! : more pre se 

in order to determine whether the use was ing mandatory penalty provision.” 4 drug trafficker’s ruse 0 ler Chet Eirearms found amonga w penalizing more prec 

ithin the f § 924(cX1) US.C.C.AN. 1327, 1346 (1986). Therefore f 4 drug trafficker’s paraphernalia are used to that the ( ngress intend 
wae cap ¢ CAL) the “in . ‘ . of” requirement une rm pate, a drug re, further the drug venture and are thus used 

Note that in order to relate to a drug fur therance . uring and in re e during and in relation to drug trafficking 
trafficking offense, the use of the gun need — rr pent ie sha apa “bree within the mear , within the meaning of section 924(c)(1 C An = of the 
not actually have furthered the offense. As ~ acts the relationship a ms 5 ~ United States v. Y ed United States v. Young-Bey, 893 F 2d 178 13} Applying the standar 
the Supreme Court said in Smith, the wna 181 (Sth Cir.1990). - Sin apenas at 
need _— “palve) the potential cane shown between the gun and the predicate Obviously, a defi ' — a _ . =, pny 
the trafficki Ind the offense in order to support a conviction un- y - Obviously, a defendant is free to present ment presented sufficient evide 

e drug ng offense. eed, the evidence that he pc hat h th ly ¢ both Bailey and Robins Wt 
Supreme Court has consistently held that der § 924(c)(1). a different sation evidence that he possessed the gun solely for 4 a 
s earn : . ‘ . a different purpose—for example, as part of arrested, there were 30 grar : 
bes 8 rs . ari ay relat (11) In sum, it is apparent that position- & collection of guns a collection of guns that just happened to be more than $3,200 in cash, a 
m 5- n: pAb. : .- or breseae 6 Amin ing a firearm in such a way that it protects a = & place tha kept in a place that later became involved in mm : “ar 
safes pe ho to besten tote tion rd el or is otherwise integrated into one’s drug =e \rafficking. drug trafficking. See ag, United States 1 nvicte ssession wi 

ae? a — trafficking is not just a use of that gun, but is tncent, 20 F.3d 2 Pe Vincent, 20 F.3d 229, 234-35 (6th Cir.1994 listribute caine. Beca 
connection with. Morales v. Trans World ; , (noting that defer is 
Mises: Ses ns OS w2sc. * use of that gun in relation to a drug (noting that defendant had argued that he found in the same place a: 
2031 ome 119 L.Ed2d 157 (1992) ( tin trafficking offense and is therefore covered tans yA collector » was a gun collector); Umited States v. Mor- the trunk) and in the same car rug 
2 : a —- by the statute. What, then, is sufficient evi- row, 923 F.2d 427, : row, 923 F 2d 427, 435 (6th Cir.1991) (noting that formed the basis of in ¥ 


see also District of Columbia v. Greater 
Washington Board of Trade. — US. —~, 
——, 113 S.Ct. 580, 583, 121 L.Ed2d 513 
(1992) (noting that when the Congress uses 
the phrase “relates to,” it has chosen “ ‘delib- 
erately expansive’ language” (quoting Pilot 
Life Insurance Co. v. Dedeauz, 481 U.S. 41. 
47, 107 S.Ct. 1549, 1552, 95 L.Ed2d 39 
(1987))). The Congress’s use of that phrase 


dence that a gun found at the scene of a drug 
crime is being used in this way? 


[12] Whenever there is sufficient evi- 
dence for a jury to find that the defendant at 
some time during the commission of the 
predicate drug offense put or kept a firearm 
in a place where it would be proximate to and 
accessible from a place that is clearly con- 
nected to his drug trafficking (e.g, a place 


that defendant ha 
trial Uhat the only | 
shoot snakes”), It 
trier of fact, howe 
of this court, to we 
to determine wheth 
weapon was being 
trafficking operatic 

This test for us 
means of ensuri 


that defendant had “strenuously argued at 
trial that the only purpose for the gun was t 
shoot snakes”). It will be the duty of the 
trier of fact, however, and emphatically not 
of this court, to weigh all such evidence and 
to determine whether, as a matter of fact. the 
weapon was being used as part of a drug 
trafficking operation 


This test for use is not only an accurate 


drug operation 


imity and accessibility were bot} 


The gun was proximate to t 


Casuy acces 
nid 


f+ 


ling either the 


ner sale 


sible to Bailey at ar 
irug 
The ju 


nfer that Bailey had int 


— 


= 


here was clear j indi i e- , means of ensuring that the scope porated the gur mis drug 
that it intended py otpe Stato =e © So, meant, & Geteiute 2 seed) when b § 924(cX1) is as broad as the Congress ir using it as part of that operat ‘ 
prohibition, reaching more than conduct that — oe — - Area Aad ete a . a z tended it to be; it will also avoid the prot there! g it in relatior 
actively advances the underlying predicate © = re. th = hina the druc t wt ong that +s Bre lems with the Bruce-Morris—Derr approach with | listribute 
drug offense. — = athe —. —_ ri ve outlined a that we outlined above. First, as we have thoug! rd does not 
ing operation, and was therefore being used already noted, pla already noted, placing or keeping a gur Bailey ha de 8 specif 

The legislative history of § 924(cX1) re- in violation of $ 924(cX1). We emphasize such a way that it such a way that it protects a drug trafficking am he had 
veals that the Congress expressly retained that the jury may draw this inference re- Operation is clear! operation is clearly » “use” of a gun . the 
the “in relation to” requirement in prefer- gardless whether the predicate offense is one relation to a drug relation te * drug trafficking sian . sing , one 
ence to a more restrictive “in furtherance of” of drug distribution or of possession with Most canes, the gur most cases, the gun's ore to por acces ffens ' wh ott er 
requirement. One bill that passed the Sen- intent to distribute drugs; we reject any sibility from the act , bilit wad the tied site of the defendant's hom . - : 
ate as part of the legislative process that suggestions to the contrary in our prior opin- drug trafficking w om Aat—rand will be the moat er . ~~ " J 9 
culminated in the enactment of the current ions. Cf Bruce, 989 F.2d at 1055 (“Since evidetew that the gtienss Gut ae defendant oe an - rae sane! ~ 
version of § 924(cX1) would have penalized possession with intent subsequently to dis- firearm to protect | firearm to protect his drug —_ " = ; “ 1 : . - 
“[wjhoever, during and in relation to any tribute is in a sense a passive crime, it be larly, Whether the lasts states the rate: pee ~ : . = 
{one of a number of enumerated drug) fel- comes somewhat difficult analytically to de with, or to or from with. ox te or from the location of. the ~ —" ~ 
on{ies] uses a firearm, or carries a fire- termine how one goes about using a gun in Will be the — ‘Gat , - 


most p 


will be the moat probative evidence that } 


sa 


118 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


Bailey's drug trafficking offense. We there- see United States vu. Jefferson, 974 F 2d 201, 


fore affirm his conviction. 


[14] The same analysis requires that we 
affirm Robinson's conviction. In her case, 
the firearm was found in the same locked 
trunk as were the drugs that formed the 
basis of her conviction for possession with 
intent to distribute. Again, the requirements 
of proximity and accessibility are obviously 
satisfied: The gun was proximate to the 
drugs, and it was accessible to anyone, such 
as Robinson, who had access to the drugs 
Because the jury found beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the drugs were Robinson's—« 
finding not at issue here—it could also infer 
from these facts that Robinson placed or 
kept the gun in the same location as the 
drugs in order to protect her possession of 
the drugs. Hence, the jury was entitled to 

nclude that Robinson used .e gun in rela 
n to the drug trafficking offense 


Ill. Cowciusion 


115] In sum, we reject the open-ended 
Bruce-Morris—Derr approach and conclude 
instead that in order to survive a challenge to 
the sufficiency of the evidence for a convic 
tion under § 924(c)(1), the Government need 
mly point to evidence that the firearm in 
question was in proximity to the drugs, drug 
paraphernalia, or drug proceeds and was ac 
essible to the defendant from the site of the 
jrugs, drug paraphernalia, or drug proceeds 
involved in his or her predicate drug traffick 
ing offense. When there is evidence of prox 
imity and accessibility, we wil] affirm a con 
viction under § 924(c1l). Because the gov 
ernment presented such evidence at the tri 
als of both Bailey and Robinson, the judg 
ments of conviction in each case are 


Affirmed 


WALD, Circuit Judge, dissenting 


There are four reasons why | believe the 
majority's bright line test for determining 
whether a gun has been “used” to commit a 
drug offense is wrong. First: Although | 
agree that “use” under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c\(1) 
requires the government to show that the 
gun in some way “facilitated” the defendant's 
ommission of the underlying drug offense 


205 (D.C.Cir.1992), the sticking point is what 
kind of evidence it takes to make that show. 
ing. The Bruce-Morris—Derr line of cases 
did not in that sense set forth any test or 
formula for making such a determination. 
rather, it provided only a list of potentially 
relevant factors, ie, the type of weapon in- 
volved, whether it was loaded, the presence 
of expert testimony to support the govern 
ment’s theory of “use,” the proximity of the 
gun to the drugs, and the accessibility of the 
gun to the defendant. By focusing on only 
two of the factors—{1) proximity of guns to 
drugs, drug paraphernalia, or drug proceeds 
and (2) accessibility of the guns to the defen 
dant from a place used to store drugs, drug 
paraphernalia, or drug proceeds—to the ex 
clusion of any other relevant factors, the 
majority in my view diminishes rather than 
enhances the prospect of accurate assess 
ment on a case-by-case basis as to whether 
the gun was used to facilitate the drug of 
fense. Congress, it should be noted, created 
no statutory presumption that “use” auto 
matically would follow from the presence of 
any particular factors, and I can find no 
authority for courts to do so 


Rather than furnishing a clear and predict 
able guide for judges and juries, the major 
“proximity and accessibility” test 

offers only a straightjacket from 
judges must inevitably strain to escape, as 
they are confronted with a steady stream of 
new fact situations. But the circumstances 
at which they must look to justify any excep 
tion will almost certainly be the very factors 
mentioned in the much-maligned Bruce—Mor 
ris-Derr cases, .¢, United States v. Bruce, 
939 F.2d 1053, 1055-56 (D.C.Cir.1991), L/nit 
ed States v. Morris, 977 F.2d 617, 621-22 
(D.C.Cir.1992), and United States v. Derr 
990 F.2d 1330, 1338 (D.C.Cir.1993)—the size 
and type of the gun, whether it was loaded, 
and the presence or absence of ammunition 


ty's new 


which 


Succumbing to “certainty's siren call,” the 
majority would prohibit a reviewing judge 
from looking at any of these factors in decid 
ing whether there was enough evidence in 4 
particular trial record to justify an inference 
that the defendant used the guns to facilitate 
the drug offense 


Second: Because the ma 
this in banc decision wil 
promptly reduced to new ju 
seems passing strange to 8 
imity and accessibility test 
ference with jury discreti 
(Maj.Op.”) at 111-12. W 
is actually doing is artific 
factors that the jury may le; 
er when determining whet 
“used” a firearm during and 
underlying drug offense 
impermissibly curbing the ji 
consider the totality of ci 
might be relevant to that fa 
nation 


Third 
rigid, it is not even clear 
how the accessibility prong, 
majority, will work, or what 
the minimal proximity tes 
whenever the guns are lo 
to the drugs, they must a 
accessible to the defendant 
drugs are being stored. Oj 
the guns and drugs are fo. 
locked strongbox and the « 


The new test is 


away, under the majority's 
arguably accessible to the 
the place where the drugs : 
being “used” to facilitate 
the drugs. To state the 
reveal its illogic. Under tt 
must use th 
if the gun t 
the drug offense charged tl! 


defendant wh 
accessibility 


the accessibility f the g 
defendant who is positione: 
are. This latter definiti 
makes no sense whatsoe' 
majority's peculiar definiti 
renders their “use” test 

that endorsed by several ot 
at least focus on whethe 
proximate to the defenda 
merely accessible from th« 
drugs, drug paraphernalia 
are stored 
doropoulos 


See, ag. Unit 
866 F.2d 587 
1989) (guns located in ts 


boreh of apartment not pr 


Gefendant to fit within 
MecKinnell, BRR } 


States 1 


2d 201, 
is what 
it show 
if cases 
test or 
unation; 
entially 
upon in 
resence 
govern 
of the 
of the 
m only 
runs 
“oceeds 
defen 


drug 


EN 


US. v. BAILEY 


Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir 1996 119 


Cir. 1989 “use” 


when defendant had “ready access” to ff 


a 


Second: Because the majority's ruling in 
this in banc decision will predictably be 
promptly reduced to new jury instructions, it 
seems passing strange to say that the prox 


arm, which was located within easy reach 


ram defendant 
imity and accessibility test minimizes inter . 
ference with jury discretion. See Opinion Fourth: In those cases like Bailey's t 


a | ‘ 
invoive the distribution 


“Maj.Op.”) at 111-12. What the majority 
is actually doing is artificially limiting the 
factors that the jury may legitimately consid 
er when determining whether a defendant we approach of Bruce-Morris-Derr wil 
“used” a firearm during and in relation to the "“*'Y ™ake much difference. But 


oF actual possessi 


f drugs application 


4 one bi lies 
anc accessibility test or the old relevant f 


> 


. a . - as 
underlying drug offense. In so doing it is ~~ awe where the crime being charg 
impermissibly curbing the jury's discretion t 4a n WiKh intent to distribute a 
- , : 1¢ f. ™ 7, ° 
nsider the totality of circumstances that a self is not in the imme 
) ’ r< 
might be relevant to that fact-bound deterr ~eue Where he Grugs a 
nation Zuns ar ing, Whe majoritys te ar 
” ™ act r 5 result Th wu 
Third he new test is not only und ; iy: - oe 
rigid, it is not even clear. I cannot fathor — ; oo 
how the accessibility prong, as defined by the .~ ° Oe a nae Cas & 
majority, will work, or what ndeed it adds t ~~ ayt-wenredes 
‘he minimal proximity test. It seems that ew WS GEISEIS g 
whenever the guns are located proximate a on eae nue 
the drugs, they must ails he Dp tential 4 Ke 4 i0os8et n Verr. footlocker 
accessibie to the defendant from the place the oe Game Wes posses 
lrugs are being stored. Op at 115 Thue if ru ntent lustribute ar 
” _ 4 | 
the guns and drugs are found together _ sSue . ses Was Whether ne Ful ‘a 
ked strongbox and the defendant is miles — ne Cas possess 
. | : houg} — , on mab 
away, under the majority $s test, the guns ars ~e —~ Se 
arguably accessible to the defen lant fr 7 : 
> > . . . , : u : 
he place where the drugs are stored and ar: - yng hegner-giter Aa 
being used to facilitate the pe ssessior ‘ . ‘ ite ¢ the Tugs and w lid have 
the jrugs T state the propos ‘ . » * Deer . eacr lefendant oe 
reve ; i}} . r 
reveal its i) gic | nde r the statute ace W . © rugs Ww 
lof Oe : 
efengant who must use the gun. so it is the & see how this result 
ac essibility f the gun to him at the tin [ en. NOG @ .= 
the irug ffense charged that is releva : . »* . 
the accessibility f the gun t &@ phanton . 5“ a! oer oF 
- ? - 
tof : iT 
sefendant who is positioned where the druce . wae Uren = 
x . 
are This latter definition of acce bilit a ive Deen adie to force 
makes n ; what ‘ | ; , = 
I sense whatsoever Inde¢ the . = -— S 
majority s peculiar definition of accessihilit = =e wes tert - 
renders their “use” test muc? 
we ’ A : “~~ W A S 4 A 
nat encorsed by several other circuits wi 
- - 4 . al . ‘ Se 
4 east focus on whether the gur vere ery 
7 7 
proximate to the defendant as pI . 
pt » 5 14 < r 
merely accessible from the piace wT 
v ‘ ‘ 1/4 
: 
- . : = 
‘rugs, drug paraphernalia. or dr ig 
“was ‘> 
are stored 4, 6.9 U/ mat fale 
: “ . ' : [ \ 
loropouios, 866 F 2d 5a? 17-98 
[ ‘ ‘ 
RG guns ate tras} : : ‘ . 
: > A _ 
; apar prox at 
f 4 ' fi wit 9 , 


element of § 924(cX1) m 


er 


4 


at 


f the new proximit 


PO ON ee tee 8 


jury and a reviewing court needs access to all 
relevant information in order to replicate the 
real life scenario involving the guns, the 
drugs, and the defendant so that it can then 
decide if the defendant was in fact using the 
gun to facilitate the drug offense. The ma- 
jority effectively leaves out the defendant 
altogether in its streamlined test; unfortu- 
nately, in so doing it distorts the plain mean- 
ing of the law, dispenses with logic, and 
invades jury discretion as well. 

Finally, while I find Judge Williams’ nar- 
rower interpretation of “use” quite persua- 
sive, I cannot go so far as to agree that an 
actor who has intentionally placed a gun 
within easy access of his person in order to 
guard or to distribute drugs is not using the 
gun to facilitate the drug offense unless he 
openly brandishes, displays, or makes verbal 
threats about the gun. Where evidence of 
ready access to a gun by the defendant 
guarding or distributing the drugs exists, | 
think the jury can fairly draw the inference 
that such access is an intrinsic part of the 
criminal drug trafficking act. But converse- 
ly, I do not, like the majority, think it a fair 
inference that where the defendant has no 
such ready access to the gun, but instead is 
showr merely to be in constructive posses- 
sion of the drugs which are located near the 
gun but away from the defendant, he is 
nonetheless using the gun to facilitate his 
possession or distribution. That | believe to 
be the principal difference between the other 
dissenters and myself, since I agree with 
them that “use” involves activity of some sort 
by a defendant who is in the immediate 
vicinity of the weapon, and not mere place- 
ment of the weapon near the drugs. That 
difference, however, is of sufficient import so 
as not to allow me to subscribe to Judgé 
Williams’ bright line rule any more than the 
majority's. Bright lines have a place in our 
jurisprudence but primarily with respect to 
what third parties like policemen or citizens 
can do without running afoul of the law 
They are distinctly less useful in telling ju- 
1. Maj Op. at 113-14 For « representative 
sampling. see United States v. McFadden, \3 F 3d 
463, 465 (ist Cir.1994); United States v. Brecken 
ridge, 762 F.2d 1317, 1322-23 (Sth Cir.1986) 
United States v. Lyman, 692 F.2d 751, 753 (8th 


Cir. 1989); United States v. Harmon, 996 F 2d 
256, 258 (10th Cir.1993); United States v. Poole 


15a 
120 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


ries or judges what kind of evidence wil 
suffice to show that a defendant is guilty of 
generic crime that can be committed against 
a thousand different factual backdrops. 


Because | believe that there was sufficient 
evidence to support Bailey's conviction for 
use in relation to actual possession of drugs 
with intent to distribute, ie, the gun in the 
trunk of the car was readily accessible to 
protect the drugs in the passenger compart. 
ment, but not Robinson's, ie, there was 
proof only of drugs and an unloaded gun in a 
locked trunk in a bedroom closet, I would 
affirm the first conviction and reverse the 
second. I would not adopt the majority's 
proximity and accessibility test but would 
instead continue to allow juries and judges to 
rely on all relevant factors to decide each 
case. 


STEPHEN F. WILLIAMS, Circuit Judge, 
with whom SILBERMAN and BUCKLEY, 
Circuit Judges, join, dissenting: 

Nearly all of our sister circuits say that 
mere possession of a firearm does not consti- 
tute “use” under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). In the 
same breath, however, all—joined today by 
this court—allow conviction without evidence 
of the defendant's firing, brandishing, dis- 
playing or actively using the firearm in any 
way.’ In joining the other circuits, the court 
undoubtedly simplifies our previous vague 
multifactored balancing test for review of 
§ 924(c) cases for sufficiency of the evidence 
And the majority is surely right that it is 
perfectly appropriate to overturn statutory 
interpretations where, as here, the precedent 
rejected is “fundamentally flawed”, Critical 
Mass Energy Project v. NRC, 976 F.2d 871, 
876 (D.C.Cir.1992) (en banc), and of course 
especially where, again as here, the prece- 
dent acts as “a positive detriment to coher- 
ence and consistency in the law because 
of inherent confusion created by an unwork- 
able decision”. /d (quoting Patterson v. Mc- 


878 F.2d 1389, 1393 (llth Cir.1989). Other 
circuits are more honest. United States v. Meg 
gett, 875 F.2d 24, 28 (2d Cir.1989) (‘mere pos 
session of a gun can constitute use"); United 
States v. Torres-Rodriguet, 930 F.2d 1375, 1385 
(9h Cir.1991) (same) 


Lean Credit Union, 
§.Ct. 2363, 2371, 105 
recent years, our ca 
inconsistency largely 
to identify a clear de! 
of a firearm; it is th: 
our frequent second 
attempting to mend 
previous approach by 
ty” plus “accessibili 
court has in effect 

simply possession w 
use. In all but th 
defendant will be sul 
der § 924(c) if guilt 
offense and, while c 
was in possession of 
wording, history and 
for a different bright- 
active “use” rather 

contingent intent to 


Section 924(c) impo 
of punishment on 
Whoever, during « 
crime of violence or 
uses or carrie: 
18 U.S.C. § 924(cX(1) 
The word “use” in 
mally implies activity 
McFadden, 13 F.2d 
(Breyer, J., dissenting 
ings of the words ‘us 
note activity beyonc 
The majority asserts 
one’s drawer with an 
event of an intruder i 
(|) @ gun ‘used’ for dor 
at1l4. This is possib! 
they are contexts in w 
assumed Q: “What 
for?” A: “I use it to } 
that hypothetical the 
questioner’s premise t 
Sense used. But as 
something that is no 
Swerer might well go t 
“Actually, I've never h 
here in case of an in 
In support of its swe 
Meaning of “use”, the 
Merritt, 111 U.S. 202, 


of evidence wil] 

ant is guilty of a 

mmitted against 
backdrops. 


re was sufficient 
s conviction for 
session of drugs 
. the gun in the 
ly accessible to 
senger compart- 
ie, there was 
iloaded gun in a 
closet, I would 
und reverse the 
the majority's 
test but would 
23 and judges to 
to decide each 


, Circuit Judge, 
ad BUCKLEY, 
ng: 


reuits say that 
does not consti- 
924(c). In the 
oined today by 
ithout evidence 
‘andishing, dis- 
firearm in any 
cuits, the court 
yrevious vague 
for review of 
of the evidence 
ight that it is 
‘turn statutory 
the precedent 
swed”, Critical 
975 F.2d 871, 
and of course 
re, the prece 
nent to coher 
uw because 
oy an unwork 
utterson v. Mc 


r.1989). Other 
d States v. Meg 
89) ( mere pos 
use); United 
2d 1375, 1385 


loa. 


US. v. BAILEY 121 


Cite as 36 F.3d 106 
Lean Credit Union, 491 US. 16, 173, 109 
S.Ct. 2363, 2371, 105 L.Ed.2d 132 (1989)). In 
recent years, our cases have produced such 
inconsistency largely because we have failed 
to identify a clear definition of the term “use” 
of a firearm; it is that failure that has led to 
our frequent second-guessing of juries. In 
attempting to mend the incoherence of our 
previous approach by articulating a “proximi 
ty” plus “accessibility” test, however, the 
court has in effect diluted “use” to mean 
simply possession with a floating intent to 
use. In all but the rarest case, then. a 
defendant will be subject to punishment un 
der § 924(c) if guilty of a drug trafficking 
offense and, while committing the offense, 
was in possession of a firearm. | think the 
wording, history and context of § 924(c) call 
for a different bright-line rule—one requiring 
active “use” rather than possession with 4 
contingent intent to use 


Section 924(c) imposes five additional years 
of punishment on 

Whoever, during and in relation to any 

crime of violence or drug trafficking crime 

uses or carries a firearm 

18 U.S.C. § 924(ceX1) (emphasis added 

The word “use” in ordinary language nor 
mally implies activity. Cf. United States ¢ 
McFadden, 13 F.2d 4638, 467 (ist Cir.1994 
(Breyer, J., dissenting) (“the ordinary mean 
ings of the words ‘use’ and ‘carry cor 
note activity beyond simple possession” 
The majority asserts that a gun placed in 
yne’s drawer with an intent to use it in the 
event of an intruder is “in common parlance 
{ } a gun ‘used’ for domestic protection”. Of; 
at 114. This is possible in some contexts, but 
they are contexts in which the fact of “use” is 
assumed. Q: “What do you use the gur 
for?” A: “I use it to protect my family.” in 
that hypothetical the answerer accepts the 
juestioner’s premise that the gun is in some 
sense used. But as the question assumes 
something that is not established, the an 
swerer might well go back to the premise: A 


“Actually, I've never had to use it. | keep it 


here in case of an intruder.” 

In support of its sweeping idea of the plat 
meaning of “use”, the majority cites Astor t 
Merritt, 111 U.S. 202, 4 S.Ct. 413, 28 L.Ed 


(D.C. Cir. 1994) 
401 (1884). The case illustrates the impor 
The plaintiff, William 


of 


tance of context 
Astor, sought a refund of customs duties 
$1,880 (in 1878 dollars) paid on clothing he 
had purchased in Europe for personal use 
but had not yet worn at the time he re 
entered the United States. The statute pr: 
vided an exemption for “[wjearing appare! 
actual use and other personal effects (not 
merchandise), of persons arriving in the 
United States”, id at 203, 4 S.Ct at 415 
citing § 2505 of the Revised Statutes, p. 459 
°d ed.), and the government had prevailed 


below by arguing that “actual ase” required 
that each particular item of clothing have 
been worn before importation. The Court 
instead found that the term “actual use 
must be read in light of the basic dis 
drawn by the statute between articies U 
are “personal effects f (the traveller), and 
not merchandise, and not for sale,” w at <14 


4 S.Ct. at 419, and thus sought a meaning ‘or 


“actual use” that, “while it comports wit 
yrdinary habits of passengers and travellers 
will not open the door for fraud." /@ A: 

meaning that required past wearing was 


plainly incompatible with that purpose. N 


such incompatibility with statutory purpos 
ing “ - & Dile 
is created by reading “use im } Yea 


require some sort of active use, as opposed | 
simple possession with a view to possibs 
future use. Aside from Astor s emphasis 
context, its expansive interpretation 

word “use” to protect travevers hardly raises 


the same issues a8 Goes an expansive inter 


7 . ’ , ’ 
pretation of a term in &@ cruming 5 atute 
> , } > ~imntoawv? — te ; . 4 
Part of tha ext consists of § Yo4 

. ~" 
moins The initial versior passed ” 


ie) et) 


reacs a8 [0LOWS 


Whoever 
uses a Hrearn 
wT ich may be prosecute iina 


United States 


2) carnes a ! arr AW 
the commission Of any fel ny which may 0 
prosecuted in a court o1 the United States 
shall be sentenced to a term prisor 
ment for not less than one year hor mor 
than 10 years 
Pub.L. No. 90-351, 82 Stat. S85 (19s 


- 
its 1968 form, the statute suggests (nat ‘ 


a 


122 


gress had active employment of a weapon in 
mind. The phrase “uses to commit” implies 
that the defendant derived actual service 
from the weapon in completing an unlawful 
act. This service might take the form of 
injuring one's opposition by firing it, intimi- 
dating opponents by displaying or brandish- 
ing it, or offering it in exclange to complete 
an unlawful commercial transaction. It does 
not, however, imply merely potential ser- 
vice—ie., keeping it hidden from view, in- 
tending to use it only if a contingency should 
arise. For the gun in that instance has not 
actually been used to commit the crime; its 
only function is to make successful comple- 
tion more probable under contingencies that 
have not arisen. 


In 1984, Congress made two basic changes 
it raised the sentence enhancement to exactly 
five years and it both broadened and nar- 
rowed the scope of predicate offenses from 
“any felony” to “any crime of violence”. At 
the same time, it collapsed the two clauses 
into one, substituting the phrase “during and 
in relation to” the predicate crimes for the 
earlier provisions linking the firearm to the 
predicate crimes. The statute then read 

Whoever, during and in relation to any 

crime of violence, including a crime of vio- 

lence which provides for an enhanced pun 
ishment if committed by the use of a dead- 
ly or dangerous weapon or device, for 
which he may be prosecuted in a court of 
the United States, uses or carries a fire 
arm, shall, in addition to the punishment 
provided for such crime of violence, be 
sentenced to imprisonment for five years 


Pub.L. No. 98-473, 98 Stat. 2138 (1984) 
Congress gave two reasons for rewriting the 
statute, neither of which pertained to the 
scope of the term “use” or “carry”. 5S.Rep 
No. 225, 98th Cong. 2d Sess. 1, 312-13, 
reprinted in 1984 US.C.C.AN. 3182, 3490- 
91 (“Part D of title X represents a complete 
revision of subsection 924(c) to overcome the 
problems with the present subsection dis- 
cussed [below] ”) (emphasis added). First, it 
sought to clarify the statute's approach to 
suspended and concurrent sentences. Sec- 
ond, it wished to overcome the Supreme 
Court's holdings in Simpson v. United 
States, 435 US. 6, 98 S.Ct. 909, 55 L.Ed.2d 


36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


70 (1978), and Busic vu. United States, 446 
US. 398, 100 S.Ct 1747, 6 L.Ed2d 38) 
(1980), which negated the use of § 924(c) 
when another firearm penalty enhancement 
provision, such as that for armed robbery 
under 18 U.S.C. § 2113(d), applied. The 
government points to no evidence that in 
1984 Congress sought to expand the meaning 
of “use”. Moreover, Congress's adoption of 
the connective phrase “during and in relation 
to” could not have been intended to adjust 
for evolving problems of passive drug crimes; 
Congress only added drug trafficking of. 
fenses as predicate crimes in 1986. Pub.L 
No. 99-308, 100 Stat. 456 (1986). 


Moreover, the Senate Report relating to 
the 1984 change gave examples of use, both 
of them active: “pointing it at a teller or 
otherwise displaying it whether or not it is 
fired”. S.Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., 2d Sess 
1, 314, reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.AN. 3182, 
3492. While these examples were not pre 
sented as exhaustive, they provide insight 
into the general class of behavior Congress 
had in mind. Even more indicative is the 
Senate Report's commentary on the “carry” 
provision which reads: 


Evidence that the defendant had a gun in 
his pocket but did not display it, or refer to 
it, could nevertheless support a conviction 
for “carrying” a firearm in relation to the 
crime if from the circumstances or other- 
wise it could be found that the defendant 
intended to use the gun if a contingency 
arose or to make his escape More- 
over, the requirement that the firearm's 
use or possession be “in relation to” the 
crime would preclude its application in a 
situation where its presence played no part 
in the crime, such as a gun carried in a 
pocket and never displayed or referred to 
in the course of a pugilistic barroom fight 


id at 3492 n. 10 (emphasis added). The 
reference to intended use shows that Con 
gress envisioned the “carry” provision to 
punish a defendant who did not “display” or 
otherwise actively use the firearm, but who 
had at least taken the active step of carrying 
the gun on a drug trafficking foray. Thus 
the Senate evidently saw “use” as a compara 
tively narrow term, with “carry” picking up 
cases of an alternative type of activity, where 


the defendant di 
weapon. The ma 
ton around, givin; 
ing a8 to leave nc 


Another eleme 
the kindred prov 
its original form i 
the original § 924 
Pub.L. No. 90-35 
current version 0! 
feiture of firearr 
violation” of cer 
(such as unlawfu 
false statements 
of firearms “inte: 
enumerated offen 
lence and drug 
US.C. § 924(d\1 
quite alert to th 
arms “used” in « 
merely “intended’ 
forfeiture before 
drug trafficking, 
apparently saving 
tional imprisonm« 
‘(U)sing a firearn 
ent meaning in 
§ 924(d)". Smit/ 
—,—, 1138S 
138 (1993) 


Smith also obs: 
clear from § 924 
ports, exports, se 
it within the me 
The Court infer 
statutes as to wi 
feiture liability, 
US.C. § 922(aXt 
firearm to a resid 


§ 922(1) (import 
Smith —— US 
2057 n. *. All o 


Court generalize 
port”, will nearly 
nipulation of the 
explicit “carry” | 
ferred by the C 
complete. That : 
mine § 924(d)’s \ 
siona! alertness 
“use” and intent 


oa, 446 


2d 381 
924(c) 
cement 
obbery 

The 
hat in 
eaning 
tion of 
elation 
adjust 
Times; 
ng of 
?ub.L 


ing to 
both 
ler or 
titis 
Sess 
3182, 
t pre 
nsight 
gress 
is the 
carry” 


zun in 
‘fer to 
nction 
w the 
other 
ndant 
gency 
More 
arm's 
P the 

in @ 
) part 

in @ 
“ed to 


fight 
The 


Con 
m to 
" or 
who 
Ty'ng 
Thus 
para 
ww up 
vhere 


” 


Sa 


US. v. BAILEY 


123 


Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 


the defendant did not actively “use” the 
weapon. The majority has turned this rela- 
tion around, giving “use” such a broad mean- 
ing a8 to leave no apparent role for “carry” 


Another element of § 924(c)’s context is 
tne kindred provision, § 924(d), adopted in 
its original form in 1968, four months before 
the original § 924(c) “use or carry” provision 
Pub.L. No. 90-351, 82 Stat. 233 (1968). The 
current version of § 924(d) provides for for- 
feiture of firearms “used in any knowing 
violation” of certain enumerated offenses 
(such as unlawful interstate transport and 
false statements in acquiring firearms), and 
of firearms “intended to be used” in other 
enumerated offenses (such as crimes of vio- 
lence and drug trafficking crimes). 18 
U.S.C. § 924(d)\(1). Thus Congress, clearly 
quite alert to the distinction between fire 
arms “used” in commission of a crime and 
merely “intended” for such use, provided for 
forfeiture before the weapon was used in 
drug trafficking, to nip the risk in the bud 
apparently saving § 924(c)’s five years addi 
tional imprisonment for cases of actual use 
“(U)sing a firearm” should not have a “differ 
ent meaning in § 924(c\1) than it does in 
§ 924(d)". Smith vu United States. —— US 
——=, =——=, 113 S.Ct. 2050, 2057, 124 L.Ed.2d 
138 (1993) 


Smith also observed, to be sure, that “it is 
clear from § 924(d)(3) that one who trans 
ports, exports, sells or trades a firearm ‘uses 
it within the meaning of § 924(d\1)". Jd 
The Court inferred this from the specific 
Statutes as to which § 924(d)(1) creates for 
feiture liability, including, for example, 18 
U.S.C. § 922(a(5) (unlicensed transfer of a 
firearm to a resident of a different state); id 
§ 922(/) (importation of firearms). See 
Smith U.S. at n. *, 113 S.Ct. at 
2057 n. *. All of these, some of which the 
Court generalized under the word “trans 
port", will nearly always involve active ma 
nipulation of the firearm. Given § 924(c)'s 
explicit “carry” provision, the parallelism in 
ferred by the Court in Smith may not be 
complete. That does little, I think, to unde: 
mine § 924(d)’s value in evidencing congres 
sional! 


alertness to the difference between 


use” and intent to use 


Congress was also explicitly conscious of 
the relation between § 924(c) and 18 U.S.C 
§ 2113(d), which provides sharply increased 
penalties for one whw, committing a bank 
robbery or theft in violation of 18 U.S.C 
§ 2113(a) or (b>), “assaults any person, or 
puts in jeopardy the life of any person by the 
use of a dangerous weapon or device”. 18 
U.S.C. § 2113(d) (emphasis added). The 
Senate Report in 1984 mentioned § 2113(d 
and made clear that it intended that some 
defendants might be subject to both enhance 


ments. S.Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong., 2d Sess 
1, 314, reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.AN. 3182 
3492. In his brief before the Supreme Court 


United States, 476 U.S. 16 
77, 90 L.Ed2d 15 (1986), the 
Solicitor Genera! of the United States used 
that histor 
intended meanings of “use” and 
§ 924(c). In M 
held that ar 


gerous weapor 


in McLaugh 
106 S.Ct 16 


sketch out a view of the 
“carry it 
Laughlin, where the court 
maded gun could be a “dan 
under that statute, the Solic 
itor General argued that weapons that are 
concealed and unmentioned do not suffice for 
aggravated robbery 
statute (18 U.S.C. § 2113(d)) because “the 


conviction under the 


ised’ the weapon to ‘assault 
' ief for the United States at 19 
VM [ augmii N 


85-5189). He went on | 
press the point about the relative narrowness 
of the word “use” and the parallelism be 
tween § 924 and § Z2li3id 

i pea Congress is of the vieu 

t something more than the carrying 

red to eetadlisA us use 

response t this Courts decisions| 
Ss SON nited States, 4385 U.S. 6 Lae 
S.Ct. 909, 55 L.Ed.2d 70} (1978), and Bus 

nited States, 446 U.S. 398 [100 S.Ct 
1747, 64 L.Ed 2d 381) (1980 ngress 
amended 18 U.S.C. [§] 924(¢) in 1984 1 


provide an additional penalty of five years 
imprisonment for anyone who “uses or car 
ries” a firearm during a crime of violencs 
including a “erime of violence which pro 
vides for an enhanced punishment if com 
mitted by the use of a deadly or dangerous 
Thus, the additiona 


penalty of Section 924(c 


weapon or device.” 
now apples even 
though the defendant is convicted under a 
» 2113(d) that provide 
ed penalty for the use of a 


provision like Sectk 


for an enhar 


Va 
36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


124 


dangerous weapon or device. In spelling 
that out in the legislative history, in fact, 
Congress used Section 2113(d) as an exam- 
ple, stating that a person convicted under 
Section 2113(d) would also be subject to 
five years’ imprisonment under Section 
924(c) if the dangerous weapon or device 
was a firearm. S.Rep. 98-225, 98th Cong. 
ist Sess. 313-314 (1983). In its example, 
the Senate report referred to “using a gun 
* * * by pointing it at a teller or otherwise 
displaying it.” Jd at 314 [1984 
US.C.C.AN. 3492). In a footnote, the 
report noted that “evidence that the defen- 
dant had a gun in his pocket but did not 
display it, or refer to it, could nevertheless 
support a conviction for ‘carrying’ a fire- 
arm” under Section 924(c). S.Rep. 98-225, 
supra, at 314 n. 10 (1984 US.C-CAN. 
3492). Thus, Congress appeared to under- 
stand, as the language of Section 924(c) 
suggests, that there is a distinction be- 
tween carrying a gun and using a gun. 
Id at 19 mn 18 (emphasis added). Of course 
we owe no special deference to the views of 
the Solicitor General. Cf. Crandon v. United 
States, 494 US. 152, 177-78, 110 S.Ct. 997, 
1011, 108 L.Ed.2d 132 (1990) (Scaiia, J., con- 
curring) (no deference owed to Department 
of Justice on interpretation of criminal stat- 
utes as they are “not administered by any 
agency but the courts”). Where he strongly 
presses a narrow readirg of specific language 
in a criminal statute, however, it is certainly 
some evidence that that interpretation is a 
reasonable one, suggesting that, in the pres- 
ence of another arguably reasonable reading, 
we are at least confronting a statutory ambi- 
guity that under the rule of lenity should be 
resolved in favor of the narrow construction 
In United States v. Ray, 21 F3d 11% 
(D.C.Cir.1994), we relied heavily on the Solic- 


2. The majority points out that the crime at issue 
in McLaughlin and Ray, bank robbery involving 
assault or jeopar a person's life, inherently 
involves force or the threat of force, and suggests 
that while reading “use” narrowly to cover only 
open brandishing or verba! allusions made sense 
there, a broader reading is necessary for a furtive 
ongne Gute 6) penteanen Come Maj. Op. at 
115.1. But the point of the Solicitor General's 
brief in McLaughlin was that Congress intended 
a consistent (and relatively narrow) reading of 
the word “use” in both contexts, § 2113(d) and 
the relatively generic § 924(c) 


itor General's McLaughlin brief, saying, in 
our exposition of the word “use”, “It is the 
brandishing or displaying, in other words, 
that the Court [in McLaughlin) said height- 
ened the danger”. Jd at 1137. We conclud- 
ed that a defendant might “use” a concealed 
weapon (within the meaning of § 2113(d)) 
when he actively exploits its existence by 
threatening people with it. Jd at 1140-42. 
I would preserve the parallel treatment be- 
tween “use” in both § 924(c) and § 2113(d), 
and require comparable activity.’ 

Nothing in Smith precludes limiting “use” 
to active employment. Its statement that 
“§ 924(cX1)’s language sweeps broadly”, — 
US. at ——, 113 S.Ct at 2054, means only 
that the proscribed use of firearms is not 
limited to the obvious or typical ways in 
which they may assist in the commission of a 
crime. Rather, a gun may be “used” regard 
less of whether it acts as an instrument to 
shoot, to bludgeon, or fur exchange. That is, 
whether a firearm is “used” does not depend 
on whether it is employed in the customary 
way or a more creative way. But it does 
depend on whether the gun is employed at 
all, and nothing the Court said expands “use” 
beyond active employment. The observation 
that a gun “at least must ‘facilitat/e) or 
halve] the potential of facilitating’”, id at 
——~, 115 S.Ct. at 2059 (emphasis added), 
does not support an expanded definition of 
“use”; the Court made that point in refer- 
ence to the separate “in relation to” require- 
ment. 

While the majority attempts to fine-tune 
the concept of facilitation (and thereby, use) 
through its twin guideposts of proximity and 
accessibility, the ultimate result is that pos- 
session amounts to “use” because possession 
enhances the defendant's confidence.’ See 
Op. at 113, 116; McFadden, 13 F.3d at 466 


3. Occasionally, and quite understandably, 4 
court taking the majority's view will forget even 
the veneer of a requirement of more than posses 
sion in connection with the predicate crime 
(Defendant) was also convicted of two or three 
counts of use or possession of a firearm in con 
nection with d.ug trafficking crimes in violation 
of 18 U.S.C. § 924(cX1).” United States v. Win 
dom, 19 F.3d 1190, 1192 (7th Cir.1994) (empha 
sis added) 


Hat "-ongress 

mentioned is 

§ 4)'«) (addit 
“unex Or carrie 
sum «f armou 
phray.i» aided). 

Wat ix either a 
affirrnance of a 
brow!, is unlik 
line. Thus, if 
thiny Jess than 
it will lead to t] 
varillating rev 
yuan jurisprud 
court wo right! 


° . 


wer my ¥ 
workin argurr 
Kailey “used” 
were charged 
platily Lransp 
of hin car, a 
lnntructed to f 
“ted or cart 
‘evtlion arise 
Areari under 
tain convicti 

We have fi 
farrind, not on 
that of a conf 
of the slefend: 
Joseph, 392 F 
femdans at all 
anil tually 1 
trv. the fires 
* jury could 1 
“er confeder: 
“hgh to est 
"ited States 
Mey 1991) 
tien which @ 


Biiaty . ed ona 
rr 
. imhe un 


int who | 
ind hi 
he woul 


ying, in 
t is the 


words, 
height- 
sonclud- 
ncealed 
2113(d)) 
nce by 
140-42. 
ent be- 
2113(d), 


g “use” 
nt that 
ly", — 
ns only 
is not 
vays in 
ion of a 
regard 
nent to 
That is, 
depend 
stomary 
it does 
oyed at 
is “use” 
*rvation 
itfe] or 
id at 
added), 
ition of 
) refer- 
require- 


ine-tune 
py, use) 
ity and 
iat pos- 
ssession 
+ See 
at 466 


jably, a 
get even 
} posses 
e crime 
or three 
in con 
violation 

v Win 
(empha 


20a 


US. v. BAILEY 125 
Cite as 36 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 


Had Congress intended that, all it need have 
mentioned is possession. Cf. 18 U.S.C. 
§ 929(a) (additional punishment for one who 


“uses or carries a firearm and is in posses- 
sion of armour piercing ammunition”) (em- 


phasis added). In this regard, the majority's 


test is either so broad as to assure automatic 


affirmance of any jury conviction or, if not so 


broad, is unlikely to produce a clear guide- 
line. Thus, if the new standard proves any- 
thing less tnan a carte blanche for conviction, 
it will lead to the same sort of continuous and 
vacillating review of jury verdicts that our 
past jurisprudence has yielded and that the 
court so rightly deplores. 


Under my view of “use” there can be no 
serious argument that either Robinson or 
Bailey “used” the weapons as to which they 
were charged under § 924(c). But Bailey 
plainly transported his firearm in the trunk 
of his car, and the jury in his case was 
instructed to find whether the defendant had 
“used or carried” the weapon. Thus the 
question arises whether transportation of a 
firearm under these circumstances can sus- 
tain a conviction for carrying a firearm. 


We have found “carry” to cover a gun 
carried, not on the defendant’s person, but on 
that of & confederate and within easy reach 
of the defendant himself. United States 1 
Joseph, 892 F.2d 118, 126 (D.C.Cir.1989) (de- 
fendant at all times “within a few steps of 
and usually no more than an arm’s span 
from, the firearm”). We have also held that 
a jury could find that a defendant's contro! 
over confederates who carried weapons was 
enough to establish constructive possession, 
United States v. Harrison, 981 F.2d 65, 71 
(D.C.Cir.1991), and thus upheld the convic- 
ion (which alternatively might have been 
sustained on a theory of aiding and abetting) 
The same understanding embraces the de 
fendant who transports a weapon by motor 
vehicle and has as ready access to the weap 
on as he would if it were in his pocket. See, 
e.g., United States v. Cardenas, 84 F.2d 
1528, 1533 (10th Cir.1989) (the gun “was 
within effortless reach of his hands, more 
accessible than if it were in his own pocket”) 
Both readings are consistent with the basic 
concept of carrying a weapon on one’s person 


(hand, pocket or holster), extended to catch 
the criminal who uses either confederates or 
mechanical transport (car, truck, ship or 
plane) to keep the firearm moving with him. 
In the motor vehicle case, the location of the 
weapon can render it as readily accessible as 
one held by an associate—if it is on hand for 
instant use, e.g. tucked under the driver's 
seat or resting on the dashboard or front 
passenger's seat 


I do not believe § 924(c) can properly be 
extended from these situations to that of the 
defendant who, like Bailey, transports the 
weapon in his car but is not shown to have 
had immediate access at any time while he 
was committing his drug trafficking offense 
The effect would be to have § 924(c) embrace 
virtually every instance where a drug traf 
ficker transports a weapon; in view of Con- 
gress's provision of a separate penalty in an 
adjacent section for anyone who “transports” 
intent to commit a crime 
punishable by as much as a year’s imprison 
ment, 18 U.S.C. § 924(b), that seems an im 
probable duplication. Cf Cardenas, 864 
F.2d at 1534-35 (rejecting equation of “car 
ry” with Rather, consonant 
with an active notion of “use”, with the Sen- 


ate Report’s example of a weapon carried in 


a weapos with 


4 we : ” 
transport 


the defendant's pocket, see supra at 122, and 
with the principle of the “constructive pos- 
Session” cases that the defendant may use 
the gun on a moment's notice, the word 
“carry” must entail immediate availability 
Thus, the gun locked in the trunk of Bailey’s 
car was not accessible enough to support a 
conviction for carrying the gun during and in 
relation to his possession with intent to dis 
tribute drugs 


That is not to say that a defendant arrest 
ed with a gun in his trunk may never be 
convicted under § 924(c). Realistically, drug 
dealers often operate out of car trunks, re 
turning from a distribution station to replen 
ish drugs, deposit cash or retrieve a weapon 
If the government presents evidence that the 
defendant handled the weapon by placing it 
in the car “during and in relation to” action 
taken in the commission of a predicate of 
fense, that evidence would be sufficient to 
Sustain a conviction. Alternatively, there 


may be cases where the government can 


Zia 
126 36 FEDERAL REPORTER, 3d SERIES 


Prove that the defendant bought the firearm 
Such a short time before arrest on the drug 


trafficking offense as to sustain an inference 
(beyond a reasonable doubt) that he must 
have been handling it simultaneously with 
commission of the drug offense. But as a 
gun can obviously rest in a trunk for a long 
period, the mere fact of a gun's presence 
there, coupled with the defendant's use of the 
car for drug distribution, does not give rise 
to an inference of the necessary simultaneity 
of immediate access to the weapon. (in a 
context of moving it about) and commission 
of the predicate crime. As there appears to 
be no evidence in the record against Bailey 
beyond his drug trafficking and the location 
of the weapon in the trunk, his conviction 
cannot be sustained on such a ground. 


The majority's expansive view of “use” vir- 
tually emasculates the role of the term “car- 
ry” in the statute. If “use” is understood to 
require real activity (such as brandishing, 
displaying or threatening), and “carry” to 
require conveying the firearm, coupled with 
immediate ability to put it to active use, both 
terms will have a meaningful yet distinct 


content, consistent with the language, con. 


text and legislative history of § 924(c). 


I would reverse the convictions of both 
Bailey and Robinson. 


SILBERMAN, Circuit Judge, dissenting: 


I think it most unfortunate that the major. 
ity opinion is directed, virtually entirely, at 
our past precedent dealing with the difficult 


UNITEL 


The following cases ha 
asterisk identifies tho: 
Memorandum explana 
with the opinions of th. 
memo: of counsel] 
1l(c) makes clear, cow 
or preclusive effect o 
relevant. 


Tide 
Capobianchi v. Foster . 


DiBiasio v. National Trans 
Safety Bd. Wy 


Greenberg Gallery, Inc. v 
Bauman. 


GTE Service Corp. v. F.C 


Keyes v. District of Colum 
Latham v. National Transp 
Safety Bd. 


Mclver v. Babbitt 

National Union Fire Ins. Co 
Pittsburgh v. Riggs Nat. 
Bank of Washington, D.( 


Robinson v. Davis Memori: 
Goodwill Industries, Inc. 


Scurry v. Fernandez 
Stokes v. Children's Hosp., 
| 


Stone v. Williams & Conno 
U.S. v. Alexander 


vy 
US. v. Fitch .. 
U.S. v. Givens 
U.S. v. Holmes 
U.S. v. Mitchell 
U.S. v. Moore 
U.S. v. Slaughter 
U.S. v. Stewart 
U.S. v. Wilson 
Watkis v. West 


884 


~ 
7” 


LPuasine 


4 
a 


42a 


UNITED STATES of America, Appellee, 


v. 
Candisha S. ROBINSON, Appellant. 
No. 92-3062. 


United States Court of Appeals. 
District of Columbia Circuit. 


Argued Dec. 7, 1992. 
Decided June 18, 1993. 


Order Granting Rehearing En Banc 
and Vacating Judgment Oct. 8, 1993. 


Defendant filed motion for judgment of 
acquittal with respect to conviction for using 
or carrying a firearm in relation to offense of 
unlawful possession with intent to distribute 
cocaine base within 1,000 feet of a school. 
The United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia, Charles R. Richey, Jr., 
J., T79 F.Supp. 606, denied motion and fol- 
lowing conviction before the District Court, 
Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., J., appeal was tak- 
en. The Court of Appeals, Mikva, Chief 
Judge, held that: (1) unloaded .22 caliber 
derringer pistol, found in locked trunk to- 
gether with drugs and drug trafficking rec- 
ords, had not been used or carried in connec- 
tion with offense, and (2) increase in base 
offense level under Sentencing Guidelines 
had been based upon erroneous factual as- 
sumption. 

Reversed and remanded 

Karen LeCraft Henderson, Circuit 
Judge, concurred in part, dissented in part 
and filed opinion. 


1. Weapons G4, 10 

Unloaded .22 caliber derringer pistol 
found together with 288 grams of cocaine 
and records of drug possession, did not sup- 
port conviction for “us{ing] or carr{ ying) fire- 
arm” during and in relation to drug traffick- 
ing offense; there was no evidence that pistol 
had actually been used in connection with 
any drug transactions, and because of its 
limited fire power, unloaded status and loca- 
tion it could not have been available to pro- 
tect drug operation from rivals, employees 
or police 18 U.S.C.A. § 924(c))1) 


997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 24 SERIES 


2. Criminal Law 1181.5(8) 

Remand was required for reconsidera- 
tion of two level upper adjustment of base 
offense level, for drug violation, which was 
based upon defendant having played role of 
“supervisor” in drug trafficking scheme. 
judge had based increase on probation offi- 
cers report, which contained erroneous fac- 
tual allegation that defendant had instrneted 
her sister to get drugs for undercover officer 
while in fact it was sister who had given such 
instruction to defendant. US3.G 
§ 3B1.1(), 18 US.C_A App 


Appeal from the United States District 
Court for the District of Columbia, Crim. No 
91-0453 


David B. Smith (appointed by this Court 
for appellant. 

Peter V. Taylor, Asst. U.S. Atty.. of the 
bar of the Superior Court of the District of 
Columbia, pro hac vice, by special leave of 
court, with whom Jay B. Stephens, U.S. Atty 
at the time the brief was filed. John R 
Fisher, Thomas C. Black, and William E 
Lawter, III. were on brief, for appellee 


Before: MIKVA. Chief Judge 
SILBERMAN and HENDERSON reult 


Judges. 

Opinion for the Court filed by Chief Judg: 
MIKVA. 

Dissenting opinion filed by Circuit Judg 


HENDERSON 
MIKV .. Chief Judge 


Candisha Rooinson was convicted after a 
jury trial of numerous drug-related offenses 
including “usling]) or carrying) a firearm 
during and in relation to a drug trafficking 
offense, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924 
Ms. Robinson concedes that the evidence was 
sufficient to support a finding that she con 
structively possessed the unloaded derringer 
found in the locked trunk in her apartment 
but argues that her conviction under section 
924(c\1) should be reversed because the ev! 
dence failed to establish that the gun was 
actually used during and im relation to the 
drug trafficking offenses for which she was 


2a 


Fs he. ees 


US. v. ROBINSON ae 885 
a 997 F.2d Bes (D.C. Cir. 1993) 


convicted. Ms. Robinson also contends that 
as diswrict uurt. rvenevenly inaveneed her 
scmence by two points on the grounds that 
che was a “supervisor” to a drug trafficking 
«cheme, and erroneously imposed a $300 
cater Cie SD aie aneeney Ys. 
hoon anqpetentta, Wael. Wireline sesetee fan 
conviction under section 924(c) and remand 
to the district court for resentencing. 


According to the goverament’s evidence, 
. oe 1% 1991, Officer Larry Hale ap- 
praached appellant's sister, Veloria Robinson. 
and told her that he wished to buy some 
rack cocaine. Veloria took Officer Hale to 
\nartment 3, 1722 West Virginia Avenue. 
\_E. and knocked on the door. When appel- 
ant Candisha Robinson opened the door, 
\cloria explained that Officer Hale was try- 
ing te get something. Candisha asked him 
what he wanted. Officer Hale said that he 
wanted a “twenty” and followed Veloria into 
the apartment. Officer Hale saw Veloria and 
Candisha go into the apartment's one bed- 
room and observed Candisha hand Veloria a 
reck of crack cocaine. Veloria then gave the 
rock to Officer Hale in exchange for $20 in 
marked money. 

The next evening, Officer Hale returned to 
the apartment. As he was walking up the 
<veps. he was appraached by a man named 
Kwarme Parker. Parker stated that Veloria 

vas inside the apartment. but that he also 
ved in the apartment and could serve him. 
!‘arker went into the apartment while Officer 
Hale waited in the hallway outside the front 
ioor. When Parker returned to the hallway. 
w gave Officer Hale a small rock of crack 
cocaine in exchange for marked money. 


About thirty minutes later, a search war- 
rant was executed at the apartment. Inside 
a locked trunk in the bedroom closet, the 
jwlice found a 22-caliber derringer and hol- 

er, a 1990 tax return signed by Candisha, a 
wtter from Candisha’s employer, two rocks 
crack cocaine weighing a total of 10.488 
vrutns. $20 in marked money from the sale of 
cocaine made by Mr. Parker. and $42.80 in 
“her cash. Other papers bearing appellant's 
name were found in other parts of the bed- 


including a lease whic» identified ap- 
selnt. uk apcther man onthe prince 
lessees. A plastic cassette tape case was also 
found in the bedroom which contained a 
quantity of plastic mplock bags. 


At trial, the government called an expert 
witness, Detective David Stroud, who testi- 
fied that the rock of cocaine in the locked 
trunk would have a $700-800 street value. as- 
is, but a $1400 value if it was broken down 
into $20 chunks. With respect to the firearm 
found in the apartment, Detective Stroud 
characterized the .22-caliber derringer as a 
“second gun”—the kind of gun a drug dealer 
might hide on his person for use until he 
could get to his “real gun.” Mr. Stroud also 
testified that guns are generally used by 
drug dealers to protect themselves from riv al 
drug dealers, the police, and employees with- 
in the organization. 


When asked to describe a “crack house,” 
Detective Stroud explained that there are 
two basic varieties. In the first type of crack 
house, he said. drugs are “manufactured on 
the premises, cut up and bagged up for 
strect-level distribution.” He added that 
“maybe in some cases they even sell drugs 
from the premises.” However. Detective 
Stroud noted, this would be taking “a very 
big risk because you're inviting a raid 
unlike selling on the street.” In the other 
type of crack house, people come just to 
smoke the drug. “There may be some limit- 
ed selling of the drug going on, and they 
even rent the pipes to you for 8 a pipe in 
some of them.” 


Ms. Robinson took the stand in her de- 
fense. She admitted that she leased the 
apartment and received rent money from her 
sister Veloria, Kwarme Parker, and Sharinc 
McKinney. She also acknowledged that she 
owned the foot-locker in which the derringer 
and crack were found, and that she knew 
that Ms. McKinney used drugs, and that Mr. 
Parker was selling drugs (but not out of her 
apartment). Ms. Robinson insisted that she 
had no knowledge of the drugs or the derrin- 
ger found in her footlocker. She explained 
that she had taken Mr. Parker in temporarily 
because he had no place to go, but had 
hecome upset with his drug-dealing and had 


ec = 
7 = 


BILPU Baking 


L4a 


886 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 24 SERIES 


given him two weeks to find somewhere else 


sell drugs from the apartment; Ms. McKin- 
ney specifically recalled that appellant often 
searched Mr. Parker when he entered the 
apartment to ensure that he was not carrying 
drugs. 

Ms. Robinson presented an alibi for the 
distribution charge. She testified that she 
was not in the apartment on the evening of 
July 15 because she was spending the night 
with her boyfriend in a motel. Her boy- 
friend, Mr. Founteroy, corroborated this sto- 
ry by testifying that they spent the day 
together going fishing and then spent the 
night together at a hotel This alibi was 
partially contradicted by Ms. McKinney, who 
testified that she thought appellant was home 
for part of the evening, until about 10 P.M. 
which was almost an hour after Officer Hale 


said he saw appellant recover drugs from the 
bedroom. 


Lastly, appellant read to the jury a portion 
of the transcript from Veloria Robinson's 
plea hearing. At the plea hearing, Veloria 
Robinson stated that it was her girlfriend, 
not appellant, who retrieved the crack that 
she sold to Officer Hale on July 15. In 
rebuttal, the government introduced ts stimo- 
ny of an officer who stated that he was 
unable to find an original receipt for the 
hotel at which appellant and her beyfriend 
claimed they stayed on July 15. 


Appellant Candisha Robinson was found 
guilty on all six counts of the indictment, 
including distribution of cocaine base, in vio- 
lation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1) and (bX1XC); 
possession with intent to distribute a quanti- 
ty of cocaine base in excess of five grams, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(aX1) and 
(bX1XBXiii); commission of the charged 
drug offenses within 1000 feet of a school, in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 860(a): maintenance 
of a building for the purpose of manufactur 


ing, storing, distributing or using cocaine 
base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 856(a); and 
use or carrying of a firearm during and in 
relation to a drug trafficking offense, in viola- 
tion of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c1). 


Ms. Robinson submitted a post-verdict mo- 
tion for judgment of acquittal pursuant to 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 2%c) 
directed solely to the count charging her with 
violating section 924(c\1). Judge Richey de- 
nied the post-verdict motion in a memoran- 
dum opinion and order filed on December 18, 
1991. 779 F.Supp. 606. At the sentencing 
hearing, Judge Richey adopted the Probation 
Officer’s recommendation that Ms. Robin- 
son’s offense level be increased by two, from 
28 to 30, because the evidence suggested that 
she was a “supervisor” of the drug traffick- 
ing scheme. Ms. Robinson was sentenced to 
a total of 157 months imprisonment, a four 
year term of supervised release and a special 
assessment of $300. 


tT 


[1] Ms. Robinson challenges the suffi- 
ciency of the evidence to support her convic- 
tion under section 924(c). See 18 USC 
§ 924(cX1). Ms. Robinson concedes that the 
evidence was sufficient to support a finding 
that she constructively possessed the derrin- 
ger found in the locked trunk in her bedroom 
closet, but argues that the evidence failed to 
establish that she actually “used” the gun 
“during and in relation to” the drug traffick 
ing offenses for which she was convicted—as 
required by section 924(cX1). The govern- 
ment, for its part, does not argue that Ms. 
Robinson carried, brandished or otherwise 
used the derringer during or in relation to 
the distribution of the drugs to Officer Hale 
Rather, the government argues that we 
should affirm Ms. Robinson's conviction be- 
cause Ms. Robinson's apartment was a 
“crack house,” and in crack houses, the mere 
proximity of a gun to drugs is sufficient to 
support the inference that the defendant 
used the gun to protect the possession of the 
drugs. 


When reviewing these respective claims 


we are, of course, bound to view the evidence 


in the light most favorable to the government 


25a 


US. v. ROBINSON oa 887 
Cite as 997 F.2d 884 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 


and respect the right of the jury to deter- 
mine the credibility of witnesses, weigh evi- 
dence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact. 
| ‘nited States v. Williams, 952 F.2d 418, 419 
‘D.C.Cir.1991). Indeed, it is well established 
that this Court must defer to the jury's de- 
vermination and affirm if “any rational trier 
of fact could have found the essential ele- 
ments of the crime beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” Jackson v. Virginia, 443 US. 307, 
319, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 2789, 61 L.Ed2d 560 
(1979). In our effort to determine whether 
there was sufficient evidence to support the 
essential elements of section 924(c), we turn 
first to the language of the statute. Section 
“24(c) states, In pertinent part: 
Whoever, during and in relation to any 
drug trafficking crime uses or carries 
a firearm, shall, in addition to the punish- 
ment provided for such drug traffick- 
ing crime, be sentenced to imprisonment 
for five years. 


On its face, section 924(c) conspicuously 
(ails to criminalize mere possession of a fire- 
arm during and in relation to a drug traffick- 
ing offense: the statute reserves punishment 
only for these individuals who actually carry 
or “use” a firearm during and in relation to 
un illicit drug offense. Given the way section 
¥24(c) is drafted, even if an individual intends 
to use a firearm in connection with a drug 
.rafficking offense, the conduct of that indi- 
vidual is not reached by the statute unless 
the individual actually uses the firearm for 
hat purpose. As explained succinctly in 
‘nited States v. Bruce, 939 F.2d 1053, 1055 
D.C.Cir.1991), “Congress did not make it a 
crime to possess a gun with the intent to use 

in relation to a drug trafficking crime. 
Instead. section 924(c) only makes it a crime 
to wse a gun in relation to a drug trafficking 
crime 


Initially, the distinction between intended 
ise and actual use may appear to put quite a 
nurdie in the path of a prosecutor secking a 
conviction under section 924(c), particularly 
in cases such as this, where the primary drug 
utfense underlying the conviction is posses- 
‘ion with the intent to distribute. (There is 
absolutely no evidence that the gun played 
any role in the distribution of drugs to Offi- 
cer Hale.) As this Court remarked in Bruce, 


it can be “somewhat difficult analytically to 
determine how one goes about using a gun in 
relation to that crime.” /d It is important 
to keep in mind, however, that even in cases 
where the underlying drug offense is posses- 
sion with the intent to distribute, the govern- 
ment is not limited to evidence indicating 
that the defendant fired, brandished. or car- 
ried the firearm. Cf United States » Evans, 
888 F.2d 891, 896 (D.C.Cir.1989), cert de- 
nied, 494 US. 1019, 110 S.Ct. 1325. 108 
L.Ed.2d 500 (1990). We have also identified 
numerous other factors which may be proba- 
tive of actual use, including the accessibility 
of the firearm, the type of firearm, the num- 
ber of firearms, the proximity of the firearm 
to the drugs, and whether the firearm was 
loaded or previously had been used. See 
United States v. Morris, 977 F.2d 617 
(D.C.Cir.1992). Although these factors are 
not automatically determinative of actual use, 
they can help the government to prove. as it 
must, a “nexus ... between a particular drug 
offender and the firearm.” United States 1. 
Long, 905 F.2d 1572, 1577 (D.C.Cir.1990), 
cert. denied, 498 US. 948. 111 S.Ct. 365, 112 
L.Ed.2d 328 (1990), and that “the guns facili- 
tate[d] the predicate offense in some way.” 
United States v. Jefferson, 974 F 2d 201, 205 
(D.C.Cir.1992) (quoting United Stotes v 
Harris, 959 F.2d 246, 261 (D.C.Cir.1992)). 


In this case, most of the factors we have 
identified in previous section 924(c) cases cut 
against the affirmance of appellant's convic- 
tion. First, there is absolutely no evidence 
that Ms. Robinson has ever brandished or 
previously used the firearm found in the 
locked trunk. Cf Evans, 888 F.2d at 896 
(evidence that the gun was used to threaten a 
subordinate suggests actual use for purposes 
of section 924(c)); Jefferson, 974 F.2d at 207. 
Second, although it is unclear whether Ms. 
Robinson had the key to the lock on the 
trunk, the gun certainly was not easily acces- 
sible since it was in the bedroom closet in a 
locked footlocker. Thus, this case stands in 
sharp contrast to cases like Morris where 
the firearm was within “easy reach,” see 
Morris, 977 F 2d at 623, as well as Jefferson, 
where the appellant placed the gun in the 
back yard so that people who needed the gun 
in relation to drug activity could have easy 
access. Jefferson, 974 F.2d at 207 (admission 


es NN RE SE eT Re RRR Smet re 


a ee 


_— 
= 


SI PU atine 


aba 


R88 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 2d SERIES 


that the gun was previously used to protect 
possession of drugs supported section 924(c) 
conviction ). 


Still, the government contends that the 
gun was used by Ms. Robinson to protect her 
stash of drugs in the locked trunk. We fail 
to see, however, how the gun—being in a 
locked trunk in a bedroom closet—would be 
of any help to Ms. Robinson in the event of 
an emergency. In order to brandish the 
gun, Ms. Robinson would have to run to the 
closet, unlock the trunk, open the trunk and 
grab the gun. See United States v. Derr, 990 
F.2d 1330, 1337-38 (D.C.Cir.1993) (essential 
element of “use” under section 924(c) not 
established where the closet would have to be 
unlocked with keys before the gun would be 
accessible). Even at that point, the gun 
would be of virtually no use to Ms. Robinson 
since it was unloaded and there was no am 
munition for it anywhere in the apartment 
Cf United States v. Anderson, 881 F 2d 1128 
1141 (D.C.Cir.1989) (‘presence of loaded 
guns and ammunition” is pertinent evidence 
of actual use of firearms); Morris, 977 F.2d 
at 622 (“the fact that a gun is loaded 
strengthens the inference that it is actual 
use”). The fact that the gun was unloaded 
locked away, and without ammunition any- 
where on the premises, strongly suggests 
that Ms. Robinson had no intention of using 
the gun at that time 


Finally, we have specifically drawn distine 
tions between a small derringer, like the one 
at issue in this case, see Bruce, 939 F.2d at 
1055, and a sawed-off shotgun, which we 
have recognized as a “formidable firearm 
for the protection of a stash of drugs Jeffer 
son, 974 F.2d at 208. Even the government's 
drug expert, Officer Stroud, confessed to the 
jury that the derringer recovered from the 
locked footlocker was not the type of gun a 
drug dealer ordinarily would use to protect a 
stash of drugs. It is also worthy of note that 
only one gun was found on the premises 
While the use of a single gun can violate the 
statute, see Jefferson, 974 F 2d at 207, when 
evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence un 
der section 924(c), we have expressly distin 


guished the possession of a single gun from 


the possession of an “arsenal” of weapons 


See Anderson, 881 F 2d at 1141; Morris, 977 
FP2d at 622 

In short, the possession of this single. un 
loaded .22-caliber derringer found in a 
locked trunk in a bedroom closet falls signifi. 
cantly short of the type of evidence we have 
held to establish actual use under the statute 
In fact. we have reversed convictions under 
section 924(c) where there was stronger ev} 
dence against the defendant than that which 
is present here. In l/nited States v Bruce 
939 F.2d 1053 (D.C.Cir.1991), for example 
we carefully explored the distinction between 
intended use and actual use under section 
924(c), and concluded that although the police 
found a stash of drugs next to a fully loaded 
22-caliber derringer in the pocket of the 
appellant $s trench coat. the evidence was in 
sufficient to support the conviction under the 


statute. We noted that the appellant lived in 
the apartment with his mother and other 
family members, and that his gun was stored 


in a belt buckle found inside a brown paper 
bag. We held that the only reasonable view 
of the evidence was that the appellant would 
use the gun only when distributing drugs 
elsewhere, away from his family s apartmen 


sometime in the future 


We also reversed the appe lant s conviction 
in United States vu. Derr 990 F 2d 1331 
(D.C.Cir.1993), a case which is remarkal 


similar to this one—save the fact that a mor 
powerful gun and ammunition were rec 
ered by the police in (nal case In Derr. ar 


unloaded, holstered 357 Maynun revoiver 


was found by police in a locked closet in close 
proximity to nine rounds of 357 ammunition 
The gun and ammunition were on top of a 
locked box containing 18.4 grams of crack 


cocaine and drug paraphernalia. Although 
the evidence in Derr firmly supported the 
conclusion that the appellant planned to use 


the gun in the future when distributing 


drugs contained in the locked Dox he ina 
cessibility of the gun in the locked closet, a 
the fact that the gun was unloaded ala 
undermined the governments theory tha 


the defendant actually used the firearn 


protect his current possession of drugs 
Despite the precedent militating in favor 

reversal here, and the obvious shortcoming 

im the record evidence, the governme ar 


27a 


‘ US. ». ROBINSON - 889 
Cue as 997 F.2d 884 (D.C CW | ean a 
that a rational juror still could have pert witness. ge norton gh yt mes 4 
a actual use of the firearm in this case appellant was of manuiacturing. 
inferred eat rtment was a building for Gs purpase cocaine hase. in 
because Ms. | In the government's view, storing, distributing, or using that statute is 
bong ph to United States v. violation of 21 U.S.C. § at alpsene mart 
this Is broad certainly not 
Wilhams, 962 F.2d 418 (D.C.Cir.1991), and extremely broad and y 
_ States v. Anderson. 881 F.2d 1128 “crack soa, eee 
).C .Cir.1989), where convictions were up- More importantly, 2 thd deen 
| , the prox- ment was a “crack house,” the 
id under section 924(c) because apart lly 
held u he arapherna- of one or more factors generally 
imity of the firearms to t ee rom of a firearm does not 
“crack houses” strongly indicated indicative of actual use 
is & Oe protect the oceu- abana establish “use” under the stat- 
that the guns were there to ti - ey 939 F.2d at 1055 (although 
_— n of the drugs. ute. ruce, 
agit neon y that “crack houses” the defendant ere qeceness Scmrpegy he 
; not dispute 
sees gk wt considerations for the pur- loaded gun which nr te cae under sec- 
presen ion 924(c). In crack houses, proximity to drugs. ee tie aos, 
proses phere i it is reasonable to tion 924(cX1) was —— “ ’ 
intike mary ve : dence merely sugges intended. actual, 
assume that yoy bese peer - pan use). The dissent mistakenly oe = 
SS a we noted in Bruce, the mere proximity of a ~- ne = athe 
drugs stored there. a ‘crack house’ sufficient to support a conviction . ~ ; 
hag gpnee myeey er " one may infer tion 924(c) where the underlying . ~ = 
in eid Gaye as i the oceu- violation of 21 U.S.C. § 856%a). ~~ a 
that the guns ~~ oe ~— 939 F.2d at 896. Im fact. according to the a : 
payed gee aye dt 974 F.2d at 208 logic, possession of any kind of gun ape a 
2 005. Se = a Pe “protection of in a crack house makes out a eo 
y ve pense a sr be presumed from the violation. That ~~ t ai Tecate 
A opera J , 
se ver discovered on the prem- ev ween : lly used in 
amount of firepower from a crack house was not actually 
—_ relation to drug activity. a conviction under 
; home that , stand. Even in 
Yet not every apartment or ~ section 924(c) may not 
ontains crack cocaine is a “crack house Anderson and Williams (which the dissent 
~ the government's expert explained, crack cites approvingly). the guns were not only in 
houses are much more than simply places close proximity to drugs. but were also pow- 
where crack cocaine may be found. Crack erful, loaded and easily accessible. 


. » large n- alltiats 
youn pas gp! gee aon a Unlike Williams, this case does not involve 
ties of crack cocaine are 


‘ “slew of weapons [and] ammunition” in 
-here people come for the purpose of vo Rie cones Ze a large quantity of oup. 
ng the drug. Although te ” ment fits Williams, 952 F.2d at 419. Nor does “y 
—_ €S os “ees ~ crack case involve guns that are strewn aroun ha 
as Che Gperen Sane —_ r the purpose crack house in easy reach or in pole a “ 
— mouse gwen cles of crack in Anderson Anderson, 881 F.2d at oo 
S es Se ~ indicia of sucha This case involves a single, unloaded, : 
ears Oe pacer remises. No caliber derringer stored in a locked trun 
out Sunde Gus Sages « - or ingredi- with a stash of drugs. Apparently, the a 
wage ~~ yoda ew apartment. was never brandished or even remove 
ontis were found anyw 


t is free to buttress 

din the And while the governmen | | 

pho raga edaep - f “use” by expert testimony 

ith the evidence its evidence of “u 

eons mrp Ay apartment identifying the indicia of a drug trafficking 
that some perso 

were selling small amounts of crack cocaine. 

not with the operation of a “crack house of 

the type described by the governments ex- 


operation, see Morris, 977 F 2d at 622, in this 
case, the government's expert witness hurt, 
rather than helped, the prosecutor's case 


— re ee ee 


RL PY Atimn:. 


890 / PEDERAL RE 


Not only did the expert's definition of a 
“erack house” wholly fail to describe Ms. 
Robinson's apartment, the expert also explic- 
itly stated that a derringer is not the type of 
weapon a drug dealer would generally rely 
upon to protect a stash of drugs. Under 
these circumstances, we are compelled to 
conclude that this case is controlled by our 
decisions in Bruce and Derr rather than 
Anderson and Williams. The only reason- 
able view of the evidence in this case is that 


the gun was intended for use at some future 
date. 


We note that the dissent argues that Bruce 
and Derr are distinguishable from this case 
because Ms. Robinson was convicted of a 
distribution offense whereas the defendants 
in Bruce and Derr were not. Bruce, 939 
F.2d at 1056; Derr. 990 F 2d at 1333. While. 
in general, it may be easier to establish 
actual use in cases where the underlying 
offense is distribution (as opposed to posses- 
sion with intent to distribute), in this case, 
there is absolutely no evidence, aside from 
the mere proximity of the derringer to the 
stash of drugs, that the gun played any role 
whatsoever in Ms. Robinson's distribution of 
drugs to Officer Hale 


If there were evidence that a loaded gun 
was in reach of Ms. Robinson at the time of 
distribution, this would be a different case. 
But there is no such direct evidence. The 
gun was unloaded and found the day after 
Ms. Robinson sold the crack Plainly, the 
jury can not legitimately infer that even the 
unloaded gun was in Ms Robinson's reach 
the day before. That is Just speculation 


Moreover, mere proximity of a gun to 
drugs is not, and has never been, sufficient to 
Support @ conviction under section 924(c) in 
this circuit. As we explained in Morris, the 
proximity of a gun to drugs “May cut either 
way, depending upon the particular facts.” 
Morris, 977 F.2d at 622. Nevertheless, the 
dissent contends that where distribution is an 
underlying offense, little regard need be giv- 
en to whether the gun was loaded or unload- 
ed, locked in a safe or in plain view; nor 
must we consider any of the other factors 
this Court has identified as relevant in sec- 
tion 924(c) cases. See Morris 977 F.2d at 
(21-23 (and cases cited therein) The theory 


L8a 


PORTER, 2d SERIE. 


the dissent advances would require us tg 
uphold a conviction under section 924.) 
whenever the defendant is convicted of . 
distribution offense and the defendant's gun 
is found in close proximity to drugs. Ip, the 
dissent’s view, this practice would be justi 
fied, regardless of the surrounding circum, 
stances, since it is possible to speculate thar 
the defendant was “emboldened” by the pos. 
session of the gun to commit the distribution 
offense. See Dissent at 895-96 (quoting 
United States v. Stewart. 779 F.2d 538, 540 
(9th Cir.1985)). Although this may, indeed 

be the dissent’s preferred result, the 
is unable to cite a single case in 
which holds, or even hints. that m 


dissent 
this circuit 
ere proxim 
ity of a gun to drugs, and nothing more. js 
sufficient to support a conviction under sec 
tion 924(c). The result urged by the dissent 
8 particularly remarkable given that all the 
other factors identified as relevant by this 
Court cut the other way. Perhaps this is the 
reason the government never Pushed this 
novel argument on appea! 


If] 


[2] Ms. Robinson also challenges the dis 
trict court's sentencing determination. The 
district court explicitly adopted the Probation 
Officer's recommendation that Ms. Robin 
son's offense level should be increased by two 
points, from 28 to 30, because she played the 
role of a “supervisor” to a drug trafficking 


scheme. See USSG § 3B1.1(b). The Pro. 
bation Officer based this conclusion on two 
factors: 1) Ms Robinson had ‘allowed her 


apartment to be used for storing drugs and 
money,” and 2) Ms. Robinson had “advised 
her sister, Veloria Robinson to get drugs for 
the undercover officer.” 


The government now admits that the sec 
ond factor relied upon by the Probation Off} 
cer is factually inaccurate. The govern 
ments evidence clearly showed that it was 
Veloria Robinson who asked appellant to get 
the $20 rock for Officer Hale not the other 
way around. Had the district court offered 
an additional explanation for its determina 
tion that appellant was a “Supervisor,” other 
than its explicit adoption of the Probation 
Officer's conclusion, reversa! of the sentenc 
ing determination would not be so clear 


tte 
29a 


US. v. ROBINSON ~ 891 | 
ce us 997 F.2d 684 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 


H . apa 


892 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 2d SERIES 


adopted the Probation Officer's report “as 


» front door. 
fler her sister knocked on the 
om answered and asked what Hale 


aaa vo ae ao wanted. He asked for a “twenty” and stood 
sane ep 2 before the instant of- in the entrance of the apartment as the - 
rene Gees aan ae sisters went into the apartment's onl) - 
Bee ee ee as te room. Hale observed Robinson hand her 
emer. Veloria. a rock of crack cocaine. Velo- 


cocaine base in violation of 18 USC. original). We reached this conclusion be. eh 
$§ 841(aX1) and (bX1XC), one count of pos- cause d 
session with intent to distribute more than the gun—a small derringer hidden in 

five grams of cocaine base within 1,000 feet belt buckle stored in a paper bag alongside 

of a school in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 860(a). 


fense. 


misstatement of fact when adopting the Pro- 


ess 


drugs in the pocket of a raincoat hanging 


; nd for a 
hation Officer's conclusions. we rema 
~econsideration of whether Ms. —— 
was, in fact, subject to an increase In her 
offense level for being a “supervisor. 


Finally, Ms. Robinson objects to the dis- 
erict court's failure to reduce her special 
assessment from $300 to $200 after it vacated 
Count Three and Count Seven of the original 
wndicument. Since the government concedes 
that Ms. Robinson should have been subject- 
ed to only four special assessments vel S50 
each, pursuant to 18 U S.C. § 3013(a2xA), 
we direct the district court on remand to 
reduce the special assessment accordingly. 


Reversed and rema nded 


KAREN LeCRAFT HENDERSON 
Circuit Judge. concurring in part and 
dissenting in part: 

| concur in the remand to reconsider 
«whether Candisha Robinson (Robinson) acted 
as a “supervisor” within the meaning of 


ficking crime. 18 U.S.C. § 924(cK1), the ma- 
jority opinion perpetuates this court's misuse 
of two factors—the number and the firepow- 
er of the firearm(s) used. Neither of these 
factors is mentioned in the statutory lan- 
guage nor does either affect the “use” of a 


In Derr, while executing a search warrant 
lastic case for a cassette Lape that contained a of the evidence in this case is that the dap for the apartment of th fendant , = 
_ . as $ ss ; ) e nt o e defendant's frien 
"SSG § 3B1.1ec) and to reduce the special rcmes riplock bags , Fr z was intended for use at some future date the ane e upon a locked , , aie 
suant to 18 on , > cam ocked close er 
<4 ie yee because In At trial, Robinson took the stand in her , ' c = opening the door to the closet, the police 
USC 301 Sane , , . 5 she é' eer r 
: this case is distinguishable from defense. She claimed that on e hn = , ’ - To reach its conclusion. the majority relies found an unloaded, holstered 357 Magnum 
™m We s > s > ; stave Ps | = 
Me tod Stotes v. Bruce, 989 F.2d 1053 was out of town during the 1 °y seshead ’ on Bruce and Derr. In Bruce. the police revolver and nine rounds of ammunition on 
nite ‘ ° » at . > 7 tie . - . 
D.C.Cir.1991). and United States v Derr, overnight in a local — : r 7 “ou ; seized a trench coat in the front closet of the ‘op of a pile of miscellaneous items Directly 
. om - , . r at she owned the trunk and used it to & / / : 3 ' . —_ : , under the gun, the police located a plastic 
1 F 2d 1330 (D.C.Cir.1993). the cases upon that s aeeatene Ge testified teat x apartment where the defendant lived. In the Saeanatitdien eantindeen an ' 
hich the majority primarily relies. More- many of her belongings. a yey [ pockets of the coat, the police found ziplock 6 comtaming a padiocked wooden box. In 
vhich . iin " » ay > -_ sida . , rr 
ver, in concluding that Robinson did not she looked inside nego aie before her ' at bags of crack cocaine, cocaine powder and Side the box, they found 18.4 grams of crack 
we , a — ine of; > > 
4 “ "a drug traf- that the last time she exam : 
use” a firearm “in relation to a | ’ 


firearm 

As the majority notes, Officer Hale made 
two purchases from Robinson's apartment. 
On July 15, 1991, Veloria Robinson, Robin- 


1. Robinson's testimony thus is at odds with the 
maiority's assertion that “it unclear whether 


ria Robinson came out of the bedroom and 
gave Hale the crack; he paid her with 
marked money. The next evening Hale re- 
turned to make another purchase. This time 
Kwarme Parker. Robinsons tenant, ap- 
proached him outside the apartment. Par- 
ker indicated that Veloria Robinson was in- 
side the apartment and that he could serve 
him. Parker went inside while Hale waited 
outside. Parker returned and exchanged a 
rock of crack for marked money. Hale did 
not see Robinson during this sale. 

Thirty minutes later. the police executed a 
search warrant for the apartment. Robinson 
was then present. Inside a locked trunk in 
the bedroom closet, the police found 10.5% 
grams of crack cocaine with an estimated 
street value of $1,440, the marked money 
from the Parker drug sale, another $42.80, 
various personal papers containing Robin- 
son's name and a holstered .22 caliber derrin- 
ger. In the bedroom. the police also found a 


arrest was the night of July 14. According 
to her testimony, she frisked Parker, who 
also lived in the apartment, each time he 
entered the apartment because she suspected 
that he was selling drugs. Finally, Robinson 
maintained that she had never seen the gun 
or any drugs in her apartment. 

Robinson was convicted on all six counts of 
the indictment: one count of possession with 


intent to distribute more than five grams of 


Ms. Robinson had the key to the lock on the 
trunk Majority Opimon at 888 


| Pe 


<staaataiaataatasiate aa ———o 
— . 


LAW LibitAn 


a 
tee 


= 


eS 


one count of distribution of cocaine base in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(aX1) and 
(bX1XC), one count of distribution of cocaine 
base within 1,000 feet of a school in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. § 860(a), one count of mainte 
nance of a premises to manufacture, distrib- 
ute, store or use a controlled substance in 
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 856(aM1) and one 
count of using or carrying a firearm “during 
and in relation to any drug trafficking 
crime” in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c\1). 
The district court denied her motion for 
judgment of acquittal. United States v. Rob- 
ison, T79 F Supp. 606 (D.D.C.1991). She 
appeals only the section 924(c\1) conviction 
The majority reverses her firearm conviction 
because “the possession of this single, un- 
loaded .22-caliber derringer found in a 
locked trunk in a bedroom closet falls signifi- 
cantly short of the type of evidence we have 
held to establish actual use under the stat- 
ute.” Majority Opinion at 888. The majori- 
ty concludes that “[t}he only reasonable view 


marijuana; a brown bag containing empty 
ziplock bags; and “a brown bag containing a 
belt buckle which held a fully loaded .22 
caliber four-shot derringer, as well as eight 
rounds of 22 ammunition.” Bruce, 939 F 2d 
at 1054. The defendant was convicted of 
possession of more than five grams of cocaine 
base with intent to distribute and use of a 
firearm in violation of section 924(c)(1) 


We reversed the firearm conviction be- 


cause “the evidence established only that the 
gun was intended to be used for defendant's 
protection at the time and place of subse- 
quent distribution.” /d at 1056 (emphasis 


in a closet—would clearly appear to be 


intended for use only at the time of distri. 
bution. It is hardly the sort of weapon a 
drug dealer would employ for protection 


against an effort to penetrate a crack 
house. 


Id at 1055. We were able to distinguish 
between present use and intended use be. 
cause “there was no evidence presented that 
any distribution of drugs took place at the 
apartment.” /d at 1056. In other words 
because the defendant was convicted of pos- 
session with intent to distribute and not dis- 
tribution, we concluded that, while the gun 
might be used to protect Bruce during future 
distribution, it was not being used at the time 
of discovery to protect the drugs. “We do 
not see how it can be said that under such 
circumstances the gun is used in relation to 
the possession of the drugs. regardless of the 
defendant's intention to distribute the drugs 
subsequently.” /d (emphasis original 


cocaine as well as drug paraphernalia. In 
other parts of the apartment, they found 
more drug paraphernalia. Derr, who some- 
times stayed in the apartment, was charged 
with possession with intent to distribute and 
using a gun “during and in relation to his 
possession of the drugs.” Derr. 990 F 2d at 
1333 (emphasis added). The jury convicted 
Derr on both counts. We emphasized that a 
conviction under section 924(c\1) requires 
“evidence showing that the firearm actually 
facilitated the possession of the drugs.” /d 
at 1337 (emphasis original). We added 
“When the predicate offense is possession, it 


aA 


is also insufficient for the ev idence to indicate 


re 


te 


3la. 


US. v. ROBINSON ' 893 


Cite as 997 F.2d 884 (D.C. Cir. 1995) 


that the gun would be used at a later time in 
distributing the drugs.” /d at 1337 (empha- 
eis added); see Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1056. 


The majority's reliance on Bruce and Derr 
tems from its totally inexplicable statement 
that “the primary drug offense underlying 
the conviction is possession with ihe intent to 
distribute.” Majority Opinion a 887 (em- 
phasis added). Nothing could be further 
frem the truth. Robinson was convicted not 
only of possession with intent to distribute: 
che was also convicted of distribution and 
maintenance of a premises for the purpose of 
listributing drugs, neither of which convic- 
tions she contests. Contrary to the majori- 
iv's view, Bruce, Derr and every other case it 
cites is inapposite because not one of those 
cases involved distribution or maintenance 
convictions.?- Robinson's uncontested convic- 
tions on the distribution and maintenance 
counts put her in a category wholly separate 
from Bruce, Derr and the other defendants 
whose mere possession convictions have led 
this court to distinguish between present and 
future intentions, an “exceedingly slippery 
slope” according to one of my colleagues. 
l'nited States v. Morris, 977 F.2d 617, 623 

D.C.Cir.1992) (Silberman, J., concurring). 
Whether or not she “used” the gun in rela- 
tion to her possession of crack with intent to 
distribute may be, if anything, irrelevant 
The real question is whether she used the 
firearm “during and in relation to” her distri- 
bution and maintenance offenses. 


Among the several inaccuracies contained 
n the majority opinion is the statement that 

t}he government, for its part, does not ar- 
yue that Ms. Robinson carried, brandished or 
utherwise used the derringer during or in 
relation to the distribution of the drugs to 
Officer Hale.” Majority Opinion at 886-87. 
If the majority means by this statement that 


2. Umeted States v. Derr, 990 F.2d 1330 (D.C.Cir 
1993) (possession with intent to distribute); Unis 
ed States v. Morns, 977 F.2d 617 (D.C.Cir.1992) 
(same): U'nuted States v. Jefferson, 974 F.2d 201 
(D.C.Cir. 1992) (same); United States v. Williams 
952 Fld 418 (D.C.Cir.1991) (same), cent. de 
ned, — U.S , 113 S.Ct. 148, 121 LEd2d 
99 (1992); L'nited States v. Bruce, 939 F.2d 1053 
(D.C.Cir.1991) (possession with intent to distrib- 
ute and possession); United States v. Long, 905 
F.2d 1572 (D.C.Cir.) (possession with intent to 
distribute), cert. dened, 498 U.S. 948, 111 $.Ct 


Officer Hale did not in fact see Robinson 
display the firearm, then I do not disagree. 
If, however, the majority means, as | think it 
does, that the government admits that there 
is no evidence to suggest that Robinson used. 
within the meaning of section 924(c\(1), the 
firearm when she distributed the crack to 
Officer Hale, I do not agree. 


When a defendant challenges the sufficien- 
cy of the evidence to support his conviction, 
we must defer to the jury's determination 
and affirm if any rational trier of fact could 
have found the essential elements of the 
crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt 
United States v. Long, 905 F.2d 1572, 1576 
(D.C.Cir.), cert. denied, 498 US. 948, 111 
S.Ct. 365, 112 L.Ed.2d 328 (1990). We must 
“view the evidence in the light most favorable 
to the government, allowing the government 
the benefit of all reasonable inferences that 
may be drawn from the evidence, and per- 
mitting the jury to determine the weight and 
the credibility of the evidence.” United 
States v. Sutton, 801 F.2d 1346. 1358 
(D.C.Cir.1986), United States ». Butler. 924 
F.2d 1124, 1126 (D.C.Cir.), cert. deried, — 
US. —, 112 S.Ct. 205, 116 L.Ed2d 14 
(1991). Supporting evidence can be either 
direct or circumstantial. United States | 
Kegler, T24 F.2d 190, 196 (D.C.Cir.1983); 
United States v. Carter, 522 F.2d 666, 681-82 
(D.C.Cir.1975). The evidence supporting 
Robinson's section 924(c\1) conviction is cir- 
cumstantial which means that inferences are 
to be drawn from the relevant circumstances 
The most significant circumstance is that the 
firearm was found together with the crack in 
Robinson's trunk in her bedroom the wigit 
after she had distributed crack from that 
location. Robinson denied she had ben in 
the apartment the night before and the jury 
disbelieved her. If the jury rejected her 


365, 112 L.Ed.2d 328 (1990); United Srates \ 

Evans, 888 F.2d 891 (D.C.Cir. 1989) (same), cert 
demed, 494 U.S. 1019, 110 S.Ct. 1325, 108 
L.Ed.2d $00 (1990); United States v. Anderson 
881 F.2d 1128 (D.C.Cir.1989) (same). The ma 
jority parenthetically cites United States ». Harn 

959 F.2d 246 (D.C.Cir.) (per curiam) (distribu 
tion and conspiracy to distribute), cent d& 
med, — U.S. ——, 113 S.Ct. 362, 121 L.Edld 
275 (1992), which upheld the section 924(c)(1) 
convictions 


~- 
ww 
=e. 


n-LionA 


— 


UKIA 


i 


LAW. 


- 


—— 


——— — — <= 


SL TAL & Stra: « 


32a 


894 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 2d SERIES 


testimony regarding her whereabouts on 
July 15, that rejection can, and does, inform 
its interpretations and conclusions with re- 
spect to the rest of her testimony. A defen- 
dant dishbelieved as to one count does not 
suddenly become a mode! of credibility with 
respect to the remaining counts. The jury 
could have reasonably inferred that Robinson 
had obtained the crack from her trunk when 
Officer Hale saw her hand her sister the 
crack in her bedroom; indeed. according to 
the evidence, the only crack found in the 
apartment was in the trunk. The jury could 
have just as re nably concluded that the 
22 caliber derringer, found with the crack 
and seized from the locked trunk the next 
night, was in the same location a short time 
earlier.’ 


Once the jury concluded that Robinson 
opened the trunk on July 15, there are only 
two possible conclusions: either the gun was 
in the trunk then or it was placed in the 
trunk between the ever‘ng of the 15th and 
the time of the search on the evening of the 
16th. The jury disbelieved her testimony 
that she never saw drugs in the apartment 
it was also free to disbelieve her testimony 
that she never saw the gun. Moreover. the 
government is “not required to disprove ev- 
ery conceivable scenario in which appellant 
would be innocent”; instead, a defendant “is 
entitled to a judgment of acquittal ‘only when 
there is no evidence upon which a reasonable 
mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt.'” United States v. Whet 
zel 589 F.2d 707, 711-12 (D.C Cir.1978) 
(quoting United States v Davis, 562 F.2d 
681, 683 (D.C.Cir.1977)). Once the jury con- 
cluded that the gun was in the trunk with the 
crack at the time Robinson distributed the 
crack, it then had to determine whether the 
gun was “use{d] or carrie[d)}” ‘ during and in 
relation to the distribution 


3. Robinson testified that she had not looked in 
side the locker since the evening of July /4. But 
that assertion flowed from her testimony that she 
did not go home the night of July 15, testimony 
the jury did not believe 


4. Although the government does not argue on 


appeal that Robinson “carried” the gun during 
and in relation to a drug trafficking crime, the 
evidence indicates that during the July 15th dis 
tribution she carned the gun as well. We have 
held that “carry” as used in section 924(cK1) 


We have held that “[mlere Possession of 
gun even by a drug trafficker does not > 
late the statute.” United States , Morn 
977 F 2d 617, 621 (D.« Cir.1992), tate 
less, “we have construed the term as broad 
enough to encompass any case in which the 
gun facilitated or had a role in the trafficking 
offense.” Jd (emphasis added). A defen. 
dant need not brandish or fire the gun in 
order to use it. /d; see United States y 
Jefferson, 974 F.2d 201, 205 (D.C.Cir 1992) 
United States v. Evans, 888 F 2d 89] 896 
(D.C.Cir.1989), cert denied, 494 US 1019 
110 S.Ct. 1325, 108 L.Ed.2d 500 (19909) 
United States v. Anderson, 881 F 2d 1128 
1141 (D.C.Cir.1989) 


We have further held that the only limita- 
tion on the language in section 924(e\(1) ‘is 
that the guns be used ‘in relation’ to the drug 
trafficking crime involved, which we think 
requires no more than that the guns facili 
tate the predicate Offense in some way 
United States v. Harris, 959 F 2d 246, 261 
(D.C.Cir.) (per curiam) (emphasis added 
cert. denied, —~ U.S. ——, 113 S.Ct. : 32, 121 
L.Ed.2d 275 (1992) The relationship be 
tween the firearm and the predicate offense 
is satisfied 

“Lif the firearm is within the possession or 

control of a person who commits an under 

lying crime as defined by the statute, and 
the circumstances of the case show that 
the firearm facilitated or had a role in the 
crime, such as emboldening an actor who 
had the opportunity or ability to display 
or discharge the weapon to protect himself 
or intimidate others, whether or not such 
display or discharge in fact occurred.” 
Id (emphasis added) (quoting United States 
v. Stewart, 779 F.2d 538, 540 (9th Cir.1985) 
(Kennedy, J.), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 867, 108 
S.Ct. 192, 98 L.Ed.2d 144 (1987)); see also 
Morris, 977 F.2d at 623 (same): United 
States v. Morrow, 9717 F.2d 222 231 (6th 
Cir.1992) (en banc) (same): United States | 


need not be read in a ‘hypertechnical or nat 
Unued States v. Evans, 888 F.2d 
891, 894 (D.C.Cir.1989) (citation omitted) 

demed, 494 U.S. 1019 110 $.Cr 1325, 108 
L.Ed.2d 500 (1990). A weapon need not be on 2 
defendant's person to convict him of carrying 
a firearm. /d at 895 
infer that 


row way 


[A] jury could properly 
{the defendant) ‘carried’ the gun in 
the sense that it was within reach and available 
to protect him dunng his ongoing (drug traffick 
ing offense} ld 


33q ms, 


US. v. ROBINSON 895 


Cite as 997 F.2d 884 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 


Vasquez, 909 F.2d 235, 239 (7th Cir.1990) 
same), cert. denied, —— U.S. 111 S.Ct. 
vs26, 115 L.Ed.2d 996 (1991).5 

Robinson's circumstances easily satisfy the 
nossession or control prong of the test. The 
wry could have reasonably concluded that 
che had possession or control of the gun. 
The police found the gun in her trunk, which 
she checked every day. The locker was in 
the closet in her bedroom in her apartment. 
See Anderson, 881 F.2d a 1141. 


The gun also facilitated the distribution. 
The majority observes that because the gun 
was inside the locked trunk, it “certainly was 
not easily accessible” or “within ‘easy 
reach, ” Majority Opinion at 888 (quoting 
Vorris, 977 F.2d at 623), and therefore could 
not be used to protect Robinson or her drug 
stash. From its location in the trunk wert to 
the drugs, however, the derringer served two 
purposes. First, it protected Robinson dur- 
ing distribution. While reaching to get the 
drugs. Robinson could easily grab the small 
gun without being noticed, providing her with 
personal protection or allowing her to intimi- 
date others. Using the derringer in this way 
corresponds with its original use. See infra 
at n. 12. In United States v. Wilson, 938 
F 2d 785 (7th Cir.1991), vert. denied, — U.S 

112 S.Ct. 946, 117 L.Ed.2d 115 (1992), 
the Seventh Circuit concluded “that a defen- 
dant intended to use the firearm in facili- 
tation of a drug related crime ‘if it [is] strate- 
gically located so as to be quickly and easily 
available for use during a drug transac 
tiow.’” Id. at 791 (quoting United States 1 
Whitley, 905 F.2d 163. 166 (7th Cir.1990) 
quotation omitted)) (emphasis in Wilson ) 
In Wilson, the police, afler stopving the de- 


5. A charge under section 924(c)(1) can be made 
without separately charging the underlying drug 
tfense. See Umted States v. Hill, 971 F.2d 1461, 
1463-64 (10th Cir.1992) (en banc); L’nited States 

Munozr-Fabela, 896 F.2d 908, 910-11 (Sth 
Cir.), cert. dened, 498 U.S. 824, 111 S.Ct. 76, 112 
L.Ed.2d 49 (1990); Umsed States v. Hunter, 887 
F.2d 1001, 1003 (9th Cir.1989), cert. denied, 493 
U.S. 1090, 110 S.Ct 1159, 107 L.Ed2d 1062 
(1990). Lu fact, a conviction under section 
924(c)(1) can stand notwithstanding acquittal on 
the predicate drug offense. L’ntted States v. La 
ng, 889 F.2d 281, 288-89 (D.C.Cir.1989), cert 
lemed, 494 U.S. 1069, 110 S.Ct. 1790, 108 
LEd.2d 792 (1990): cf. Umted States v. Gibbs 
904 F.2d 52, 55 (D.C.Cir.1990) 


6. That the gun here may have been unloaded 
(there was no affirmative evidence one way or 
the other) and that no ammunition was present 
are matters of littl importance. Many courts 


fendant, found the gun in the locked trunk of 
his car. Nevertheless, the Seventh Circuit 
upheld his conviction under section 924(c\1) 
because the gun “was strategically located 
directly on top of the bag containing the 
cocaine and the defendant knew where the 
gun was and it was loaded and readily acces- 
sible for use if necessary should any prob- 
lems aise during the drug transaction.” /d,; 
see also Jefferson, 974 F.2d at 207 (finding 
gun was accessible in case of emergency 
where gun was located in grass-catcher bag 
next to drugs).* 


Second, the derringer protected the drugs 
during distribution. Again, the gun’s loca- 
tion made it easily accessible during distribu- 
tion, thus providing protection at that time 
If Robinson had “ ‘the opportunity or ability 
to display or discharge.’ Harris, 959 F.2d at 
261 (quoting Stewart, 779 F.2d at 540), the 
gun at the time of distribution. which the 
jury could have reasonably concluded based 
on its proximity to the drugs, the jury could 
have likewise reasonably conciuded that the 
gun “ ‘facilitated the crime’ ” by protect- 
ing her or the drugs, thereby “‘embolden- 
ing” her to commit the crime. /d. (quoting 
Stewart, 779 F.2d at 540).’ 

Moreover, even if her distribution convic- 
tion did not support Robinson's section 
924(c\(1) cenviction. her conviction based on 
21 U.S.C. § 856(aX1) does. The jury found, 
and Robinson does not contest, that she vio- 
lated 21 U.S.C. § 856(aX1) by maintaining a 
premises to manufacture, distribute, store or 
use a controlled substance. Although the 

have found that an unloaded gun can violate 

section 924(c). See. eg., Umted Stats v. Gutter 
rez-Silva, 983 F.2d 123, 125 (8th Cir.1993) 

(quickly accessible firearm in close proximity to 

drugs violated section 924(c) even though gun 

was unloaded and no ammunition was found) 

United States v. Hill, 967 F.2d 902, 905-07 (3d 

Cir.1992) (easily accessible rifle located next to 

drugs violated section 924(c) even though gun 


was unloaded, no ammunition was present and 
rifle stock was separated from barrel) 


7. In United States v. Feliz-Cordero, 859 F.2d 250 
254 (2d Cir.1988), a case cited with approval in 
Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1055, and in Long, 905 F.2d at 
1578, the Second Circuit stated that “use” in 
relation to distribution is satisfied by 

i) Proof of a transaction in which the circum 
stances surrounding the presence of a firearm 
suggest that the possessor of the firearm in 


BI PY ARIAS: 


34a 


896 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 2d SORIES 


majority goes to great lengths in its attempt 
to show that Robinson’s apartment was not 
really a “crack house,” its discussion is irrele- 
vant. Whether or not Robinson's apartment 
fits the usual description of a crack house, 
the jury found that she maintained her apart- 
ment in violation of section 856(aX1) and she 
does not challenge that finding 


Maintenance of a premises for the purpose 
of distributing drugs is not a “passive,” 
Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1055, crime like posses- 
sion. We noted in United States v. Lancas 
ter, 968 F.2d 1250, 1253 (D.C.Cir.1992), that 

[slection 856(a1) makes it unlawful only 

to “open or maintain any place for the 

purpose of manufacturing, distributing, or 
using any controlled substance.” The “ca- 
sual” drug user does not run afoul of this 
prohibition because he does not maintain 
his house for the purpose of using drugs 
but rather for the purpose of residence 
the consumption of drugs therein being 
merely incidental to that purpose. 
(emphasis added in Lancaster). Because it 
is an ongoing offense,® the jury could permis- 
sibly conclude that a gun found on the prem- 
ises was being used “during and in relation 
to” that offense. And the majority's chief 
authority, Bruce, expressly recognizes this 
difference: 

If guns are strewn around a “crack house” 

in which drugs are stored, it might be 

inferred that the guns are there to protect 

the occupant’s “possession.” In such a 

case, the guns are “used” in relation to the 


tended to have it available for possible use 
during the transaction; or ii) The circum 
stances surrounding the presence of a firearm 
in a place where drug transactions take place 
suggest that it was strategically located so as to 
be quickly and easily available for use during 
such a transaction 
Robinson's circumstances satsfy both tests delin 
eated in Feliz-Cordero, that is, her distribution 
conviction fits the first circumstance and her 
section 856(a)(!) conviction fits the second 


Indeed, we know that at least two instances of 
crack J stribution occurred in Robinson's apart 
ment within a twenty-four hour period 


a 


The only difference between the premises de 
scnbed in Bruce and Robinson's apartment is the 
absence in the latter of ‘guns strewn around 
Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1055. The danger, if not 
error, in distinguishing between one gun and 
more than one gun in an analysis of section 
924(c)\(1) is discussed infra 


10. The Supreme Court's most recent decision 
interpreting section 924(c)(1) supports affirming 
Robinson's conviction In South v. Umeted 


drug trafficking crime of Possession 

intent to distribute because they are ; 

tended to protect the stash of drugs = 
will subsequently be distributed. And - 

though the actual distribution is a sepa . 

crime, courts have treated evidence of us 

of guns in such a house for Protection of 

the distribution function as equivalent t» 

protection of possession. Since in the typr 

cal crack house possession and distribution 

are intertwined, that seems to us to be a 

logical interpretation of the statute 
Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1055 (citations omitted) ? 
In other words, Robinson used the gun to 
facilitate ongoing drug trafficking crimes (ac. 
tual distribution on the premises and mainte. 
nance of a premises for the purpose of dis. 
tributing drugs) and therefore violated sec. 
tion 924(cX1)."" 

The majority attaches significance to the 
presence of only one gun to conclude that 
Robinson did not use the derringer to protect 
herself or the drugs. We have considered 
the number of guns present to be a factor in 
determining usage, see Morris, 977 F 2d at 
622. and have distinguished between an “ar. 
senal” of guns to protect distribution sites 
and a single gun. See United States y 
Williams, 952 F.2d 418, 421 (D.C.Cir.1991 
Compare United States v. Anderson, 881 
F.2d 1128 (D.C.Cir.1989) with United States 
v. Bruce. 939 F.2d 1053 (D.C.Cir.1991 At 
the same time, however, we have made clear 
that the use of only one gun violates section 
924(c)(1). See Morris, 977 F.2d at 622. Sec- 


Sta — US — 113 S.Ct 2050, 124 
L.Ed.2d 138 (1993), the Court, citing, inter ala 
Umited States v. Harns, supra, declared 


The phrase ‘‘in relation to” is expansive, as the 
courts of appeals construing § 924(c)(1) have 
recognized. Nonetheless, the phrase does illu 
minate § 924(c\(1)'s boundaries. According to 
Webster's, “in relation to"’ means “with refer 
ence to” or “as regards The phrase in 
relation to” thus, at a minimum, clarifies that 
the firearm must have some purpose or effect 
with respect to the drug trafficking crime; 15 
presence or involvement cannot be the result 
of accident or coincidence. As one court has 
observed, the “in relation to” language “allays 
explicitly the concern that a person could be 
punished under § 924(c)(1) for commutung 4 
drug trafficking offense “while in possession of 
a firearm’ even though the firearm's presence 
is coincidental or entirely “unrelated” two the 
crime. Instead, the gun at least must “fact 
tate, or have the potennal of facilitating,” we 
drug trafficking offense 

Id U.S. a ——- 113 S.Ct. at 2058-59 


(citations omitted) (emphasis added) 


5 Qe 


59 


—= 


- 


‘1S. v. ROBINSON 
997 F.2d 884 (D.C. Cir. 1993) 


35a 


., w24(eX1) requires the use of “a” firearm, 
, multiple firearms. See United States v. 
.inger, 987 F.2d 383, 390 (8th Cir.1991) 
, -tatute which prefaces the object of the 
»ce with the word ‘a’ unambiguously au- 
-yes singular units of prosecution.”). 


. the rare occasion that we have found 
.¢ of one gun violative of the statute, 
Grearm was large and powerful. See 
con, 974 F.2d at 208 (“a 12-gauge shot- 


' 


_yn is a formidable firearm”). But section 
se) does not require that a gun be of a 


»ain caliber or size to come within the 


fe 


e"' Nor does the use of the firearm 


to be successful. A drug defendant's 


of a less effective firearm does 


not 


his use of it. The reason any firearm 
atter its size or firepower violates sec- 
24(cX1) when used during and in rela- 
to a drug trafficking crime is obvious: 
ny gun can kill or wound. See Blank Pistol 
Actor, The Son of Bruce Lee, N.Y. 


April 1, 1993, at Al4. 


creating a hierarchy of guns, we 


en- 


rage a defendant to argue about the char- 
ristics of his firearm in order to establish 


it does not come within section 


1)'s proscription. Indeed, Robins 


insel asserted at oral argument 


“thor noted, “[t}he Derringer in the late 19th 


ms 


OUNSEL: [The derringer] is basically a 


ke of a weapon 


Section 924(ch1) does differentiate among 


rms in providing for punishment. For 

use of a short-barreled rifle or shot 
eases the punishment from five years to 
"S imprisonment. If the firearm is “a 


ex 

gun 
ten 

ma 


ne gun, or destructive device, or is equipped 
sith a firearm silencer or firearm muffler, 
imshment is thirty years. If the conviction is 


v defendant's second or subsequent convic 


the 


thon 


der section 924(c)(1), the punishment increas 
to twenty years for a firearm other than a 
machine gun or a firearm that is a destructive 
ce or equipped with a silencer or muffler 
r the latter category, a second conviction re- 


in life umprisonment without release 


The history of the derringer began in the 
“U0s, the age of the riverboat gambler. As 


ntury was known as the ‘gamblers gun, 
‘use it could be hidden up a man’s sleeve 


mid 
one 


be 


and 


‘pped into his haod in an instant.” Robert 


‘ertzberg.The-Modern Handgun 68 (1965) 


897 


THE COURT: Well, now wait a minute. 
It’s not a joke of a weapon, it can kill 
people— 
COUNSEL: Well, it can, if you get 
lucky— 


Disparagement of the derringer ignores real- 
ity. Some of my colleagues have referred 
to the gun as “lowly,” Jefferson, 974 F.2d at 
209, and “ornamental,” Morris, 977 F.2d at 
622. Perhaps they have forgotten it was a 
derringer that took the life of Abraham Lin- 
coln. See George C. Nonte, Jr., Pistol & 
Revolver Guide 16 (1975) 


I have no difficulty concluding that Robin- 
son used the derringer in violation of section 
924(cX1). Accordingly, | dissent. 


Before: MIKVA, Chief Judge: WALD 
HARRY T. EDWARDS. SILBERMAN 
BUCKLEY. STEPHEN F. WILLIAMS 
D.H. GINSBURG. SENTELLE. KAREN 
LeCRAFT HENDERSON, and 
RANDOLPH, Circuit Judges 


ORDER 
Oct. &, 1993 


Appellee’s Suggestion For Rehearing Ew 
Banc and the response thereto have been 
circulated to the full Court. The taking of a 
vote was requested. Thereafter. a majority 
of the judges of the court in regular active 
service voted in favor of the suggestion 
Upon consideration of the foregoing it is 


became popular because it was easy to conceal 
and was effective in emergency situations. One 
author described it as 


truly the gun for the ladies hand bag. It is 
very small, as was the original Remington 
from which it was redesigned. It is also an 
excellent under cover gun for the peace officer 
or soldier for emergency use, or for anvone for 
a close range defense gun. The small car 
tridge is not the best for serious work but is far 
better than no gun at all and is quite effective 
at close range where such a gun would be 
used 
Elmer Keith, Sixguns by Keith 83-84 (1955) 
The modern derringer is likewise an effecuve 
weapon. The government's expert witness testi 
fied that “[t}he first weapon of choice among 
dealers is a .357 or .44 magnum, or something 
more powerful than this, but it's sull as effective 
as that .557 or 44 magnum 


£/ 
i 


ALEAARDHIA [Ai 


AIPM ARI 


36a 


898 997 FEDERAL REPORTER, 2d S">>"ES 


ORDERED, by the Court en banc, that 
the suggestion is granted and this case will 
be reheard by the Court sitting en banc 


It is FURTHER ORDERED, by the 
Court en banc, that the judgment of the 
court filed herein on June 18, 1993, is hereby 


vacated. 


ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN PHY- 
SICIANS AND SURGEONS, INC. 
et al., Appellees, 


v. 


Hillary Rodham CLINTON, 
et al.. Appellants. 


ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN PHY- 
SICIANS AND SURGEONS, INC. 
et al., Appellants, 


v. 


Hillary Rodham CLINTON, 
et al., Appellees. 


Nos. 93-5086, 93-5092. 


United States Court of Appeals, 
District of Columbia Circuit 


Argued April 30, 1993 


Decided June 22, 1993 


Motions were filed for temporary re- 
straining order and preliminary injunction to 
preclude meetings of President's Task Force 
on National Health Care Reform or any sub- 
group or subcommittee thereof without first 
meeting requirements of Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (FACA). First Lady, who 
chaired Task Force, moved for dismissal or 
summary judgment. The United States Dis- 
trict Court for the District of Columbia, 
Royce C. Lamberth, J., 813 F.Supp. 8&2, 
granted motion in part and denied it in part 
Appeal and cross appeal were taken. The 
Court of Appeals, Silberman, Circuit Judge, 
held that President’s spouse is “full-time offi- 
cer or employee of federal government” with- 
in meaning of provision of FACA exempting 
any committee composed wholly of full-time 
officers or employees of federal government 


Reversed and remanded 


Buckley, Circuit Judge, concurred ; 
judgment and filed opinion . 


1. United States 29 

President's spouse heading President’ 
Task Force on National Health Care Reform 
was “full-time officer or employee of the 
Federal Government” within meaning of pro. 
vision of Federal Advisory Committee Act 
(FACA) exempting any committee which t. 
composed wholly of full-time officers or em. 
ployees of federal government USCA 
Const. Art. 2, § 1 et seq; 3 USCA 
§ 105(e); Federal Advisory Committee Act. 
§ 3(2Xiii), 5 U.S.C.A.App. 2 

See publication Words and Phrases 

for other judicial constructions and def 

Imtons 
2. United States 29, 36 

Statutory authorization of assistance and 
services provided to President's spouse in 
connection with assistance provided by 
spouse to President is reasonably construed 
as treating spouse as de facto officer of 
employee; otherwise, if spouse routinely at- 
tended or participated in cabinet meetings 
spouse would convert all-government group 
established or used by President into adviso- 
ry committee subject to Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (FACA) 3 USCA 
§ 105(e); Federal Advisory Committee Act, 
§§ 3, 3(2Xiii), 5 U.S.C._A.App. 2. 


3. United States 36 

It is not reasonable to interpret anti- 
nepotism statute to bring it into conflict with 
congressional recognition of and apparent au- 
thorization for President's delegation of 
duties to spouse. 3 US.C.A. § 105(e); 5 
U.S.C.A. §§ 3110, 3110(aX 1A), (b, ¢ 


i. United States 28 

Even if antinepotism statute would pre- 
vent President from putting spouse on feder 
al payroll, it does not preclude spouse from 
aiding President in performance of duties. 3 
US.C.A. § 105(e); 5 USCA. §§ 3110 
3110(aX1XA), (b, c) 


5. United States €=28, 29 

Applying Federal Advisory Committee 
Act (FACA) to President's Task Force on 
National Health Care Reform would inter- 
fere with President's capacity to solicit direct 
advice on any subject related to duties from 
group of private citizens, separate from or 
together with closest governmental assoc 


She oe ee 
STO TLE ES ree 
— 


Crim. No. 91-453-01 (CRR). 
United States District Court 
District of Columbia. 


Dec. 18, 1991. 


aheg o pre oa to conviction for 
offense of me tes A firearm in relation to 
to distribute cocaine base pop wy intent must prove defendant 
of a school. The District Court they gun to assist in the act of posses i 
Richey, J., held that: (1) te saat - evidence which suggests that —_ and 
ficient for jury to was suf- would use the ou at fendant 
bnew of end bed os rey: Svea defendant in the future when reer unknown point 
session of gun in locked trunk in her hore was insufficient; Sbiein at een 
and (2) fact that premises was base for ises in which gun was found, i * prem 
distribution of crack cocaine permit ve locker, was base for distribution a locked 
ference that gun was = => cocaine and that de n of crack 
used to facilitate fendant was also con- 


possession with intent to distribute. 
Motion denied. 


1. Criminal Law 753.216, 8) 


Court must deny motion : 

of acquittal when, after viewing web = caer 
pre in the light most favorable to the 
have neey any rational trier of fact could 
sede essentia! elements of the crime 

a reasonable doubt, and court must 
give full play to right of jury to determine 
Cr.Proe ences of fact. Fed.Rules 

Proc.Rule 29, 18 US.C.A. 


2. Criminal Law @552(1) 

There is no requirement direct evi 
dence against defendant. oy - 
3. pores @17(4) 

m, gor sor in prosecution for using fire- 
2 — to possession with intent to 
a rtey~ was sufficient to support 
— de ‘endant knew of and had at 
| tructive possession of gun in 
, . as convicted of: 

distri vy BR cocaine on July 15, 1991 in 
violation 1 USC. § 341(aX1) and 


victed of maintaining a crack house permit- 


ted j 
rae ence that gun was used to facili- 
mm possession with intent to distrib- 
ule. 18 U.S.C.A. § 924(c). 


a oe Lawler, III, Asst. U.S. Atty., 
ip — Jay B. Stephens, US. 
- : brief, for the Government. 
Bee Z S. Jacobovitz, with whom was 
- Smith of Jacobovitz, English & 


Smith, Washi 
Siete, ington, D.C., on the brief, for 


MEMORANDUM OPINION 
AND ORDER 


CHARLES R. RICHEY, District Judge. 


Ph Fed.R.Crim.P. 29, Defendant 
py ork a renews her Motion for 
ape te Acquittal with respect to 
a m for using or carrying a fire- 
relation to the offense of unlawfu! 
tomers with intent to distribute cocaine 
pe wy 1,000 feet of a school in viola- 
S.C. § 924(c)." Upon consider- 

841(bX1(C) and 18 U.S.C. § 2; Count II distrib. 


ont 
pe within 1,000 feet of a public school 
y 15, 1991 in violation of 21 USC 


a 


iad key to 


defendant ) 


ises where 
ocker and 
tems, had 
house and 
room, and 
to locker, 
about his 


vith use of 
m with in- 
overnment 
used the 
‘ssion, and 
defendant 
OWN point 
the drugs 
that prem- 
1 a locked 
1 of crack 
also con- 
ise permit- 
i to facili- 
to distrib- 


J.S. Atty., 
vens, U.S. 


ivernment. 


vhom was 
English & 
brief, for 


ON 


‘ict Judge. 


Defendant 
Motion for 
respect to 
ing a fire- 
f unlawful 
ite cocaine 
»| in viola- 
1 consider- 


nt Il-distrib- 
ublic school 
21 USC. 


28a U.S. vy. ROBINSON 607 
Cite as 779 F Supp. 606 (D.D.C. 1991) 


ation of the Defenc Motion, the record 
herein, and the ap, _-able law, the Court 
denies the Motion. 


[1,2] The Court must deny a motion for 
judgment of acquittal when, “after viewing 
the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the prosecution, any rational trier of fact 
could have found the essential elements of 
the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
United States v. Poston, 902 F.2d 90, 94 
(D.C.Cir.1990) (emphasis in original) (quot- 
ing Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319, 
ug §.Ct. 2781, 2789, 61 L.Ed.2d 560 (1979). 
“When a reasonable mind might fairly have 
a reasonable doubt of guilt or might fairly 
have none, the decision is for the jury to 
make.” United States v. Herron, 567 F.2d 
510, 514 (D.C.Cir.1977), see also United 
States v. Harrison, 931 F.2d 65, 71 
‘D.C.Cir.1991) (“We do not determine 

whether we would find guilt beyond a rea- 
sonable doubt, but only whether a reason- 
able jury could find guilt beyond a reason- 
able doubt”). This standard recognizes 
that courts give “full play to the right of 
the jury to determine credibility, weigh the 
evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of 
fact.” United States v. Reese, 561 F.2d 

294, 898 (D.C.Cir.1977); see also United 

States v. Sutton, 801 F.2d 1346, 1358 

(D.C.Cir.1986). Because the jury is entitled 

to draw reasonable inferences from the 

evidence presented, “there is no require- 
ment of direct evidence against the defen- 
dant; the evidence may be entirely circum- 

stantial.” Poston, supra, 902 F.2d at 94, 

n. 4: see also United States v. Simmons, 

663 F.2d 107, 108 (D.C.Cir.1979). In short, 

courts review a jury's determination “very 

deferentially.” Harrison, supra, 931 F.2d 

at 71. 

The Defendant makes two basic conten- 
tions in support of her Motion. First, the 


§ 841(aX(1), 841(b)1XC), and 860(a), and 18 
U.S.C. § 2; Count IIl-possession with intent to 
distribute $ or more grams of cocaine base on 
July 16, 1991 in violation of 21 U S.C 
§ 841(a)(1) and 841(b) 1X BXiii), and 18 USC 
§ 2; Count IV-possession with intent to distrib 
ute S$ or more grams of cocaine base within 
1.000 feet of a school on July 16, 1991 in viola 


tion of 21 U.S.C. § 841(aX)), 841(b)1(C), and 


860(a), and 18 U.S.C. § 2; Count V-using oF 
m in the course of the offenses 


carrying a firear 


Defendant claim-. ‘hat the evidence was 
insufficient to : ‘n a finding that she 

the firearm, and therefore, she 
could not have used or carried the gun in 
relation to the offense. See United States 
v. Long, 905 F.2d 1572, 1576 (D.C.Cir.1999), 
cert. denied, — US. —, 111 S.Ct. 365, 
112 L.Ed.2d 328 (1990). Second, relying 
upon United States v. Bruce, 939 F.2d 
1053 (D.C.Cir.1991), the Defendant con- 
tends that, even if she did possess the 
firearm, the Government did not adduce 
sufficient evidence to prove beyond a rea- 
sonable doubt that she, or anyone else, 
used or carried the gun in relation to the 
drug trafficking crime. A closer review of 
the evidence presented at trial demon- 
strates the weakness in both of these argu- 
ments, and convinces the Court that there 
was sufficient evidence upon which a ra 
tional juror could convict. 


{3] Even under the case precedent re- 
lied upon by the Defendant, the evidence 
amply supports the jury’s finding that Can- 
dysha Robinson possessed the gun. In 
United States v. Long, 905 F.2d at 1577, 
the Court reversed a conviction for using 
or carrying a firearm in relation to a drug 
offense because the record was “devoid of 
any evidence linking Long to the revolver 
in the sofa, other than his presence in the 
apartment and involvement with narcot- 
ics.” (emphasis in original). In Long, the 
Court found it especially significant that 
there was no evidence that Long knew of 
the gun's existence, and no evidence that 
Long owned, leased or lived at the premis 
es. Id. at 1576. In order to demonstrate 
how the Government could make a case of 
constructive possession, the Long Court 
pointed to United States v. Anderson, 881 
F.2d 1128 (D.C.Cir.1989). In Anderson, 
there was “substantial evidence” linking 


charged in Counts [Il and IV in violation of 18 
US.C. § 924%c) and 21 U S.C. § 841(aX)), 
841(bK 1 KC), and 860(a), and 18 USC. § 2; 
Count VI-knowingly making available for use a 
building, room or enclosure for the purpose of 
using, storing, manufacturing or distributing co- 
caine base on or about July 16, 1991 in violation 
of 21 U.S.C. § 856(a) and 18 U S.C. § 2. The 
Government provided a reformed Indictment at 
trial, and the Court refers to the numerical 
ordering of the charges as set forth therein 


39 
606 ™ FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT 


the Defendant to the 
at 1578. ai “ene cae oe the bedroom, she soia the rock of 


Defendant’s wallet photograpt 

sah to Go tednen’ § ere house and also presents circums 

the id. The fact that dence that the Def tantial evi. 
Defendant in Anderson lived at the nia 


almost 
. feat - the evidence in in the Defendant's bedroom the marked 
pure tho Gute aguiast tho Boden. anlitin, Bk oa Ap ema 
- Ad Long, supra. Here, it is undisput- transaction, ne re poll oe 
a gy hy’. « drugs which Candysha Reieien Geneae 
serrye so wb andy + gr ' Gov't red to her sister in the first Gasnetten 
sha Robinson). Furthermore fang Def. ' mg yin ee 4 lek 
dont cfuits thes the ouned he tudor ond eniaat eee ee 7 
wee Fe a the er and Saeed tite ellie woen toate 
aha rok rome a items, includ- a search warrant. rctaxds 
returns. Transcript, V. Finally, based owne 
at 133.* (hereinafter, “Tr.”) On the ro yy, ape oe « te 


of this evidence, a reasonable jury cou locker, her decisi ark 

’ le ’ ion to llo 

conclude that the Defendant knew of ro keys to the locker, per thy ng A 
had at least constructive possession of, the + 5 about Parker's drug use, see 


; i the * ae ped a Tr.Vol. I. at 131-133, the jury could reaso 
items trunk nderson, ably infer that Ms. Robinson knew that Mr. 


Defendant seeks to avoid thi 

this conclusion Park i 

“ 0 a a er was storing the drugs and 

7 ak 4 2 oy Kwarme the locker. Even though iiabeen ae v: 

we Ae 2 — robe key tothe key to Mr. Parker, she had access > 

ound eas Sete and gun locker as well. In fact, the Defendant ad 

ay a Fre pov sacad First, mitted that she last used the locker on the 
atthe Sunday night prior to the execution of the 


The evidence ical According to Officer Hale’s testime 
one Gin Contin Ba the jury's infer- ber wink to the Deindeat’s « Saye 
. possessed order to } 
the drugs and the gun in the locker is 8-9. ihe ithe aeied see 
) awe trunk 


trial which showed that, in a prior drug 
Se amar “rs the premises, Candysha Rob- 
sister entered the bedroom 
when a buyer (who turned out to be an 
undercover officer) inquired about the 
availability of drugs. Peering inside the 
mage the officer saw Candysha Robin- 
ye te cane Se Geenine Ge bee clsten, 
r Defendant's sister emerged from 


2. This portion of the transcript reads: 
: vias there @ trunk that was in your room? 
* Yes, that was my trunk, where I kept all 


of my important 
papers and grade 
store my junk in that chest. papers, and | 


search warrant. Tr.Vol. I. at 136. These 
facts, in addition to evidence indicating the 
Defendant's role in a prior drug sale at the 
house, are sufficient to establish construc- 
tive possession of the drugs and the gun by 
Ms. Robinson. See Anderson, supra; 
United States v. Jenkins, 928 F.2d 1175 
1179 (D.C.Cir.1991) Gury entitled to find 
that, although drugs were hidden from 

gp Mt YOU have your tax returns in that 

A: Everything. 


3. Mr. Parker pled guilty to certain charges in 


the Indictment prior to Ms. Robinson's trial. 


e 
N 
b 
h 
é. 
! 
( 


‘VP 


40a 


U.S. vy. ROBINSON . 609 


ae es TT? FSupp. 606 (D.D.C. 1991) 


view, the Defendant who owned the house 
was on constructive notice of them).‘ 


(4) The case precedent in United States 
» Bruce, 939 F.2d 1053 (D.C.Cir.1991) does 
not undermine the verdict rendered by the 
jury in this case. In Bruce, the Court of 
\ppeals held that mere possession of drugs 
and a gun in close proximity does not nec- 
essarily establish that the gun was “used 
i» relation to” the drug offense. See 
Bruce, 939 F.2d at 1054 (“mere possession 
of a gun at the time the crime is committed 
¢ not enough to establish use”). Rather, 
when the defendant is charged with posses- 
sion with intent to distribute drugs, the 
Government must prove that the defendant 
vctually used the gun to assist in that act 
f possession. Evidence which suggests 
chat the defendant would use the gun at 
some unknown point in the future when 
distributing the drugs is insufficient to sus- 
tain a conviction under 18 US C. § 924c) 
Id. at 1055. According to the Court of 
Appeals, this standard is the only way to 
fairly apply the term “use * * * in relation 
to” the drug offense when the predicate 
offense is as elastic as possession with 
intent to distribute. /d (“Since posses 
sion with intent to distribute is in a sense & 
passive crime, it becomes somewhat diffi 
cult analytically to determine how one goes 


about using a gun in relation to that 


crime."") 
However, the Court of Appeals acknow! 


edg 


924c) 


ed that. in crack houses, drug dealers 
ise guns to protect the on-going possession 
of the drugs being sold there The Court 
explained the uniqueness of the crack 


possession with inten. distribute be 
cause they are intended to protect the 
stash of drugs that will subsequently be 
distributed. And although actual distr 
bution is a separate crime, courts have 
treated evidence of the use of guns in 
such a house for protection of the distr 
bution function as equivalent to protec 
tion of possession. Since in the typical 
crack house possession and distribution 
are intertwined, that seems to us to be a 
logical interpretation of the statute 

Id. (citations omitted) 

Given this standard, it is easy to under 
stand why the Court of Appeals vacated 
Bruce's conviction for using 4 gun in rela 
tion to the possession with intent to distrib- 
ute offense. In Bruce, upon execution ofa 
search warrant, the police found numerous 
tiplock bags and a fully-loaded 22 caliber 
Derringer revolver in the pockets of 
Bruce’s trench coat, located inside the clos 
et door next to the front door of the house 
The gun was enclosed in a Delt Duckie 
found inside of a brown paper bag. Bruce 
lived in the house with his mother anc 
other family members. The residence was 
not a “crack house’, as there was no © 
dence that drug sales occurred there The 
Court invalidated the conviction 4 
§ 924(c) because there was no evidence 
that Bruce would use the gun in relauon & 
his possession of the drugs at the house 
Based upon the evidence, the Court 
cluded that, at most, Bruce would use 


gun only when distributing drugs eise 
Because 


nder 


“On 


the 


where sometime in the future 
‘use” of the gun is required by the clear 
terms of the statute, an “intent to use the 


-~— bad 
Ae 


—_— 
~ 


+++-} 


house scenario for purposes of § 
If guns are strewn around a “crack 
house” in which drugs are stored, it 
might be inferred that the guns are there 
to protect the occupant’s “possession 
In such a case, the guns are “used” in 
relation to the drug trafficking crime of 


gun in the future does not suffice 


Defendant Robinsons gun convicuon 
survives the Bruce precedent because she 
was also convicted of maimtaining @ Cracs 
house” in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 856(a) 
and 18 U.S.C. § 2° As explained in Bruce 


4 At the very least, this evidence is sufficient to 5. Although Defendant does not directly cha 
establish that Ms. Robinson aided and abetted lenge the “crack house conviction the instant 
Defen 


Motion implicitly levels such an attacs 
dant claims that the amount of drugs and mon 
ev does not comport with the typice drug 
house. This argument fails; & ignores the fact 
that two prior isolated transactions occurred at 
the premises, a fact which expressly distin 


Mr. Parker's possession of the drugs and the gun 
by allowing him to store these materials in her 
home. See United States v. Jenkins, supra Unit 
ed States v. Raper, 676 F.2d 841 849 (D.C.Ciur 
1982). OF United States v. Poston, 902 Fld 
(D.C.Cir.1990) (Thomas, J.) 


——* Lek done : 


tt 


“Siz 


— Ee — 
~« - 


i 


———————E 
+ ——— A 


kz 
= 


bree 
i 
i 
| 


u 
i 


Han 
+f 
it 
H 


Bruce requires.* See also United States v. 


houses come in many varieties. See Tr.Vol. |. at 
73-77. 


6 Although the gun in this case was a Derringer, 
the Government s evidence does not suffer from 


Civ. A. No. 91-2125 (CRR). 
United States District Court, 
District of Columbia. 
Dec. 19, 1991. 


Taxpayer sued Internal Revenue Ser- 
vice (IRS), alleging that IRS abused its 
discretion by refusing to enter into negotia- 
tions with Japanese government upon tax- 
payer's invocation of Double Tax Treaty. 
IRS moved to dismiss. The District Court, 
Charles R. Richey, J., held that pursuant to 
Anti-Injunction Act and Declaratory Judg- 
ment Act, court lacked jurisdiction over 
action. 


Motion granted. 


1. Federal Civil Procedure ¢=1829 

In considering motion to dismiss, dis- 
trict court must construe complaint liberal- 
ly in favor of plaintiffs, but is not required 
to draw argumentative inferences in favor 
of plaintiffs. Fed Rules Civ.Proc.Rule 
12(bK6), 28 U.S.C.A. 


the same infirmity as did the Government's case 
in Bruce, supra. See 939 F.2d at 1055. Unlike 
Bruce, the Government here has presented testi. 
mony as to the usefulness of the Derringer as 8 
“second gun” in protecting the stash. See Tr 
Vol. |. at 77-79 (testimony of Detective Stroud). 


tre 


RUE INA Le scr corr crm ox srs 


9 S “s 7 4 9 ? = _ Cont, be S. 


CANDISHA S. ROBINSON ) 
Petitioner Na 
. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent ) 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 


| hereby certify that on this 29th day of December, 1994, a true copy of the foregoing was 


mailed, first class, postage prepaid, to Drew S. Days, III, Solicitor General, Department of 


Justice, 10th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20530, and to James 


G. Duncan, Mayer, Brown & Platt, 2000 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W , Washington, D.C 


20006, Telephone (202) 463-2000, counsel for Roland J. Bailey. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Yiered b SucH 


David B. Smith 
ENGLISH & SMITH 

$26 King Street, Suite 213 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(703) 548-891 | 


Counsel of Record for Petitioner Robinson 


a ee Cf — a. ~ rT. . eg? “Se 


{ hereby certify that on this }@"tay of December, 1994, a true copy of the foregoing was 
mailed, first class, postage prepaid, to Drew S. Days, III, Solicitor General, Department of 
Justice, 10th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20530. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Yadl J 


ENGLISH & SMITH 
526 King Street, Suite 213 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(703) 548-8911 


{ hereby certify that on this "tay of December, 1994, a true copy of the foregoing was 
mailed, first class, postage prepaid, to Drew S. Days, III, Solicitor General, Department of 
Justice, 10th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20530. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Yadl : 


ENGLISH & SMITH 
526 King Street, Suite 213 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(703) 548-8911 


Counsel for Petitioner Robinson 


