Bugema Court, WS 
EILeED 


No. 94-270 ~ OCT 2 7 1994 


OFHCE Ur THE CLERK 


In the Supreme Court of the Gin 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
v. 


ROBERT P. AGUILAR 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


DREW S. DAYs, II] 
Solicitor General 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: Page 


Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States, 487 U.S. 250 

I <li inlaid dagen aad ie eerinranaimansaecons 
Dowling v. United States, 493 U.S. 342 (1990) ................. 
Evans v. United States, 112 S. Ct. 1881 (1992) ................ 
Glasser v. United States, 315 U.S. 60 (1942) ................... 
Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535 (1974) ............ccceeeeeeees 
Posadas v. National City Bank, 296 U.S. 497 (1936) ...... 
Randall v. Loftsgaarden, 478 U.S. 647 (1986) ................. 2, 
i RB eee 
United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114 (1979) ............ 
United States v. Beacon Brass Co., 344 U.S. 43 (1952) ... 
United States v. Grubb, 11 F.3d 426 (4th Cir. 1993) ........ 3, 
United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57 (1984) ...........cceeeeee 
United States v. Wood, 6 F.3d 692 (10th Cir. 1993) ......... 


wwonrwwWwnNwnwsnvov © or 


Constitution, statutes and rule: 


I a asaenssesiniaisennnncidinieinents 
| RAT EE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 
I setae 1, 2, 3, 
I a lil 
I ase 


Miscellaneous: 
S. Rep. No. 541, 99th Cong., 2d Sess. (1986) ................004 7 


(1) 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-270 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER 
Vv. 


ROBERT P. AGUILAR 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


1. Respondent’s primary argument opposing certiorari is 
that, in respondent’s view, the Ninth Circuit’s construction of 
18 U.S.C. 1503 “has no continuing relevance.” Br. in Opp. 16. 
In 1988, Congress amended another statute defining certain 
witness tampering offenses—18 U.S.C. 1512(b), see App., 
infra, la-2a—to extend it to offenses involving the “corrupt[] 
persuas[ion]” of witnesses.’ Congress did not at that time 
amend Section 1503. Respondent acknowledges that this case 
presents the question “whether [respondent’s] conduct 


1 Respondent states that “corrupt[{] persua[sion]”—the term added to 
Section 1512(b)—was “precisely the term of the omnibus clause of Section 
1503 upon which the government relied to prosecute Judge Aguilar.” Br. in 
Opp. 15-16. The term “corrupt” was and is part of the omnibus clause of 
Section 1503. See Pet. 2. But neither the term “persua[sion]” nor any of its 
variants appeared in any modern version of Section 1503. 


(1) 


2 


violated Section 1503 prior to the amendment of Section 1512.” 
Br. in Opp. 17. But respondent argues that “it hardly makes 
sense for the Court to revisit that issue now,” because the 
1988 amendments would govern future cases of this sort. /bid. 
Nothing in the language or legislative history of the 1988 
amendment to Section 1512(b) would have any effect on a 
prosecution such as this one under Section 1503. The 1988 
amendment simply substituted the term “threatens, or 
corruptly persuades” for the term “threatens” in Section 
1512(b). As stated in the committee report on which 
respondent relies, that substitution was intended to make 
clear that cases of “corrupt persuasion” could and should 
thenceforth be brought under Section 1512(b). See Br. in Opp. 
16. This, however, was not a case of “corrupt persuasion”; 
respondent was not alleged to have persuaded, or attempted to 
persuade, the FBI agents to make false statements to the 
grand jury. Instead, he was charged with attempting to 
obstruct the grand jury’s investigation by making false 
statements to the FBI agents, with the intent that those 
statements be reported to the grand jury. The 1988 
amendment to Section 1512(b) had nothing to do with that 
charge, and the question that respondent concedes is 
presented in this case accordingly remains an important one. 
In any event, respondent’s argument essentially reduces to 
the proposition that Congress effected a partial implied repeal 
of Section 1503’s omnibus clause when it amended Section 
1512(b) in 1988 or, perhaps, when it first enacted Section 
1512(b) in 1982. As this Court has frequently explained, “[iJt 
is, of course, a cardinal principle of statutory construction 
that repeals by implication are not favored.” Randall v. 
Loftsgaarden, 478 U.S. 647, 661 (1986); see, e.g., TVA v. Hill, 
437 U.S. 153, 190 (1978); Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535, 551 
(1974); Posadas v. National City Bank, 296 U.S. 497, 503 
(1936). Neither of the long-recognized exceptions to that 
rule—where there is “irreconcilable conflict” between the 


3 


two statutes or where “the later act covers the whole 
situation of the earlier one and is clearly intended as a 
substitute,” see Randall, 478 U.S. at 661—would apply to the 
statutes at issue in this case. And if a partial repeal cannot be 
implied from the language of the statute, still less could it be 
implied from the comments of a congressional committee, 
upon which respondent places sole reliance. It is a familiar 
principle in the criminal law that the same conduct may 
constitute an offense under two distinct statutes, and the law 
is clear that in such a situation the government has the option 
of proceeding under either one. See, e.g., United States v. 
Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114, 123-126 (1979) (citing cases); United 
States v. Beacon Brass Co., 344 U.S. 43, 45-46 (1952). 

That the controversy concerning the meaning of Section 
1503 remains alive is apparent from the Fourth Circuit’s 
decision in United States v. Grubb, 11 F.3d 426 (1993). As we 
explain in the petition, see Pet. 18-19, the facts of Grubb are 
remarkably similar to the facts of this case: the prosecution 
under Section 1503 of a sitting judge for obstruction of a grand 
jury investigation, based on false statements he made in a tape 
recorded interview with FBI agents investigating corruption. 
The false statements at issue in Grubb were made on October 
8, 1991, see 11 F.3d at 437, well after the 1988 amendment. 
Similarly, the false statements to FBI agents that formed the 
basis of the Section 1503 count in United States v. Wood, 6 
F.3d 692 (10th Cir. 1993), occurred in 1989, see id. at 693, and 
therefore also post-dated the amendment to Section 1512(b). 
See Pet. 20 (discussing Wood). 

2. Respondent asserts that the Fourth Circuit’s decision 
in Grubb does not conflict with the Ninth Circuit’s decision in 
this case, because in Grubb the indictment alleged that “the 
Grand Jury was assisted in this investigation by Special 
Agents of the FBI” and the evidence showed that the grand 
jury investigation was “being conducted through this FBI 
agent.” Br. in Opp. 20 (quoting opinion in Grubb). In res- 


4 


pondent’s view, those facts were not present in this case and 
the two cases can therefore be harmonized. 

The facts of this case are virtually identical to those of 
Grubb. To be sure, the indictment in this case did not 
expressly allege that the FBI agents were assisting the grand 
jury investigation, nor is there any requirement that an 
indictment under Section 1503 must explain the details of the 
relationship between the defendant’s conduct and the grand 
jury investigation. But there was ample evidence that the 
FBI agents to whom respondent made the false statements 
were assisting a grand jury investigation. The foreperson of 
the grand jury testified at trial that both of the agents to 
whom respondent made his false statements—Agents Carlon 
and Noel—appeared before the grand jury, 6 Tr. 890, and that 
she was “familiar” with numerous other FBI agents involved 
in this case, id. at 896. In the tape recorded conversation 
between Solomon and respondent on May 26, 1988, prior to 
respondent’s interview with the FBI agents, Solomon 
informed respondent that FBI agents had met with him and 
said that “there’s a grand jury goin’ on now” and that “they’d 
be back with a subpoena for the grand jury.” Resp. C.A. E.R. 
39, 40.2 In addition, one of the agents himself told respondent 
that “I’d have to say yes, you know, um there is a Grand Jury 
meeting,” and that “some evidence will be heard I’m . . . I’m 
sure on this issue.” Jd. at 73. When respondent asked a 
further question about the grand jury investigation, the agent 
replied “I don’t know if I can tell you that. I mean what’s... 
is there a 6(e) rule prohibiting me from telling you that?” 
Ibid. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(e) protects the 
secrecy of grand jury proceedings, and the agent’s statements 


2 Respondent immediately understood the significance of the grand jury 
investigation, commenting that “if they subpoena me I may have a 
problem. A real problem explaining my discussions with Judge Weigel.” 
Resp. C.A. E.R. 43. 


5 


surely provided evidence that he was assisting the grand jury 
investigation. 

Respondent seizes upon the Ninth Circuit’s comment that 
“(t]here is no evidence that a grand jury had authorized or 
directed the FBI investigation; nor is there evidence that the 
FBI agents had been subpoenaed to testify,” Pet. App. 18a, and 
argues that those comments distinguish this case from 
Grubb. Br. in Opp. 20. They do not. Ordinarily grand juries 
neither specifically authorize nor specifically direct FBI 
agents who are assisting investigations, and there was no 
evidence that the grand juries either in this case or in Grubb 
did so. Indeed, this Court has explained that the government 
has no authority to swear law enforcement agents in as 
“‘agents’ of the grand jury,” and that such agents are 
ordinarily “aligned with the prosecutors.” Bank of Nova 
Scotia v. United States, 487 U.S. 250, 260 (1988). Nor does a 
grand jury ordinarily have any need to issue subpoenas to FBI 
agents, who can be expected to appear voluntarily when called. 
In short, insofar as it is of importance, the evidence in this 
case demonstrated that the relationship between the FBI 
agents and the grand jury was identical to that in Grubb: FBI 
agents were working in conjunction with the prosecutors to 
“assist[]” a grand jury in gathering evidence. See 11 F.3d at 
436 n.15. 

In any event, the Grubb court explained that the false 
statements to the FBI agents constituted obstruction of 
justice not because of some special and unusual relationship 
between the agents and the grand jury, but because the false 
statements were equivalent to other kinds of efforts to 
influence a witness to give false testimony. The Fourth 
Circuit explained that the defendant’s conduct violated 
Section 1503 because his “false statements to the FBI agents 
are not significantly different from influencing a witness 
before the grand jury to give false testimony.” 11 F.3d at 438. 
As the court stated, “[t]he effect, that of obstructing the 


6 


Grand Jury investigation, is the same.” Jbid. The Fourth 
Circuit’s affirmance of the Section 1503 conviction in Grubb is 
in direct conflict with the Ninth Circuit’s reversal of the 
Section 1503 conviction in this case. 

3. Respondent states that review is unwarranted in this 
case because the divided Ninth Circuit panel that first heard 
this case reversed respondent’s Section 1503 conviction on 
other grounds. Br. in Opp. 17-18. Respondent neglects to 
mention that the panel opinions were withdrawn when the 
Ninth Cireuit decided to hear the case en banc, see 11 F.3d 124 
(1993), and that the en banc court of appeals expressly 
declined to reach the question that formed the basis of the 
panel’s reversal of the Section 1503 conviction. See Pet. App. 
25a. Respondent’s speculation as to how the Ninth Circuit 
would resolve the knowledge issue on remand has no bearing 
on whether the questions now presented to this Court 
warrant further review. 

4. In the petition, we explain that, under the plain 
language of Section 2232(c), the government must prove that 
the defendant knew that there had been an authorization or 
application for a wiretap; that the defendant intended to 
obstruct, impede, or prevent the “possible” interception for 
which authorization had been given or application made; and 
that the defendant gave notice or attempted to give notice of 
the possible interception. Pet. 21. We continue to believe 
that the additional requirement added by the court of 
appeals—that, at the time the defendant gave notice, the 
original, unextended application or authorization of which 
defendant had notice was in fact still in effect—is not 
consonant with the language of the statute and is directly 
contradicted by its legislative history. 

Respondent errs in arguing that our interpretation of 18 
U.S.C. 2232(c) “reads the phrase ‘possible interception’ out of 
the statute.” Br. in Opp. 23. Our interpretation fully 
recognizes that the defendant has to “give notice of the 


7 


possible interception.” The effect of the term “possible” in 
that phrase is that there need not be any actual interception 
occurring. For example, where the defendant merely finds out 
about an application for a wiretap but does not know whether 
it has ‘been authorized, the statute prohibits disclosure of the 
“possible interception.” So long as it is “possible,” from the 
defendant’s point of view, that a wiretap is occurring and the 
defendant gives notice with intent to obstruct it, the violation 
is made out. 

Indeed, as we explain in the petition, although the 
interception need be “possible,” the obstruction need not be, 
for there is no reason to engraft a defense of factual 
impossibility on to the statute. See Pet. 23 (“there is no basis 
in the statutory language for the court of appeals’ require- 
ment that such obstruction be possible at the time the 
disclosure was made”) (emphasis added). There can be many 
reasons why an obstruction would not be possible, including 
failure of the application to be approved in the first place, 
malfunction of the wiretap equipment, or termination of the 
wiretap. See Pet. App. 26a-27a (Fernandez, J., dissenting). 
None of those circumstances provides a defense, where the 
defendant has otherwise violated the statutory prohibition, so 
long as the defendant “g{a]v[e] notice of the possible inter- 
ception to any person who was or is the target of the 
interception.” S. Rep. No. 541, 99th Cong., 2d Sess. 34 (1986) 
(emphasis added).’ A fortiori, the fact that the wiretap has 
expired and then been reauthorized—as occurred in this 
case—at the time the defendant makes his disclosure does not 
constitute a defense.‘ 


% Respondent certainly believed that a wiretap was possible at the time 
he made the disclosure. See Pet. App. 25a-26a & n.2. As he stated to 
Solomon in a taped conversation on May 17, 1988, “Oh yeah the phone’s 
definitely tapped. * * * Absolutely.” Resp. C.A. E.R. 17. 


* Respondent cites the court of appeals’ opinion for the proposition that 
“(t]he wiretap application of which [respondent] allegedly was aware 


8 


Respondent appears to argue that the First Amendment 
protects respendent’s right to disclose confidential law 
enforcement information he obtained in his official capacity as 
federal judge because “at least a substantial portion of 
[respondent’s] suspicions about electronic surveillance arose 
from the fact that the government chose to conduct a public 
surveillance of Chapman from a car parked in front of 
[respondent's] house.” Br. in Opp. 26 n.11. Initially, we never 
“acknowledged” that respondent’s suspicions “arose” from his 
observation of the surveillance vehicle. See Jbid. To the 
contrary, the evidence at trial established that, though 
respondent’s memory may have been jolted by his observation 
of the surveillance vehicle, respondent’s knowledge of the 
electronic surveillance “arose” entirely from Judge 
Peckham’s statement to him that he had recently reviewed a 
wiretap application involving Chapman.° 

Equally important, although respondent may be correct 
that it would be “highly anomalous’ to punish [respondent] for 


resulted in an interception that terminated 30 days after it was begun,” and 
that “it was never extended or reauthorized.” Br. in Opp. 27. Nothing in 
the statute, however, requires that the wiretap be in existence at the time 
the disclosure was made. In any event, the dispute about the proper 
characterization of the history of the wiretap in this case is merely 
semantic. The court of appeals characterized the wiretap as having 
“expired” and stated that “other” wiretaps were later authorized. Pet. App. 
5a. The “[o]ther” wiretaps, however, included the same telephone number 
and an overlapping, though changing, list of interceptees. As we 
characterized the same facts, the original wiretap was terminated and then 
was reauthorized, terminated again, reauthorized again, and then 
extended. See Pet. 22 n.5. 

° Judge Peckham testified that he told respondent “that in the course of 
a wiretap application that the name Abie Chapman had come up.” 7 Tr. 
921. And respondent's nephew, who conveyed the information about the 
wiretap from respondent to Chapman, testified that when respondent told 
him about the wiretap just after having observed the FBI surveillance, 
respondent “did say that he had overheard at work about the possibility of 
{Chapman’s] phone being wiretapped.” 5 Tr. 825. 


9 


commenting upon activities the government chose to conduct 
in public,” Br. in Opp. 26 n.11, the wiretap at issue in this case 
was not conducted in public. Had respondent merely informed 
Chapman that a law enforcement agent appeared to be 
following him, it would perhaps have constituted an error of 
judgment, not a criminal offense. But respondent was charged 
in this case with informing Chapman of the possible inter- 
ception of his conversations, a fact that respondent learned in 
his official capacity. Nothing about the wiretap or the 
application was in any sense public. Indeed, Judge Peckham 
signed a series of orders postponing the service of notices of 
the wiretap on the interceptees and maintaining the secrecy 
of the wiretap through April 25, 1989. 7 Tr. 918-919. 

5. Respondent charges that we have mischaracterized the 
trial record. Br. in Opp. 4-5. The facts, of course, are to be 
taken in the light most favorable to the verdict, which in this 
case was guilty on two counts. See, e.g., Evans v. United 
States, 112 S. Ct. 1881, 1884 (1992); Glasser v. United States, 
315 U.S. 60, 80 (1942). The fact that respondent was acquitted 
on other charges—and, in particular, on the conspiracy 
charge—has no effect on that rule. That is because the basis 
for the acquittals cannot be known—i.e., whether the jury had 
a reasonable doubt about a fact the government had to prove or 
reached its verdict through “mistake, compromise, or lenity.” 
United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57, 65 (1984). Indeed, even an 
acquittal on the ground that the jury had a reasonable doubt 
as to an essential fact would not establish that the jury found 
that fact to be false. See Dow! ing v. United States, 493 U.S. 
342, 348-350 (1990). 

Respondent specifically identifies only two areas of alleged 
“mischaracterization.” First, respondent states that “[cJon- 
trary to the implication conveyed by the government's State - 
ment, Pet. at 6, Judge Weigel recused himself from Tham’s 
petition * * * not because of questionable conduct by Judge 
Aguilar, but because of the FBI’s heavy-handed intervention. 


10 


9 Tr. 1236, 1245.” Br. in Opp. 8 The petition conveys no 
“implication” concerning this matter, because it is of no rele- 
vance to the issues before this Court. In any event, Judge 
Weigel did not explain his recusal as does respondent. See 
App., vofra, 2a-4a. 

Second, respondent states that the petition “implies 
incorrectly that the FBI agents made Judge Aguilar aware 
that a grand jury was meeting prior to eliciting the false 
statements.” Br. in Opp. 10. In the current posture of this 
‘ase, respondent’s suggestion is foreclosed. The trial court 
instructed the jury, in connection with the Section 1503 count 
on which respondent was convicted, that: 


[A] grand jury proceeding is a judicial proceeding. You 
should first determine whether one existed at or about 
| June 22, 1988]. You should then determine whether or not 
the defendant knew of it according to the standard that | 
mentioned [earlier in the instructions], that he had 
knowledge that it was ongoing and kn[e]w about it. 


10 Tr. 1582.° By convicting respondent, the jury therefore 
necessarily found that respondent knew of the ongoing grand 
jury investigation. There was ample support in the record for 
that finding, including the tape of respondent’s June 22 
conversation with the FBI agents, see Pet. 8, and Solomon's 
previous conversation with respondent, see p. 4, supra. 


® The court’s reference to “the standard that I mentioned” referred back 
to the court’s earlier general instruction that proof of a violation of Section 
1503 requires “proof [that] must satisfy you beyond a reasonable doubt 
unanimously * * * that there was a pending judicial proceeding known 
to the defendant.” 10 Tr. 1515 (emphasis added). 


A nee ne ee a 


11 


* * * Kk * 


For the foregoing reasons, as well as those stated in our 
petition, the petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 


Respectfully submitted. 


DREWS. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


OCTOBER 1994 


APPENDIX A 


18 U.S.C. 1512(b) provides: 


Whoever knowingly uses intimidation or physical 
force, threatens, or corruptly persuades another 
person, or attempts to do so, or engages in misleading 
conduct toward another person, with intent to— 


(1) influence, delay, or prevent the testimony of 


any person in an official proceeding; 


(2) cause or induce any person to— 


(A) withhold testimony, or withhold a 
record, document, or other object, from an 
official proceeding; 


(B) alter, destroy, mutilate, or conceal an 
object with intent to impair the object’s 
integrity or availability for use in an official 
proceeding; 


(C) evade legal process summoning that 
person to appear as a witness, or to produce a 
record, document, or other object, in an official 
proceeding; or 


(D) be absent from an official proceeding to 
which such person has been summoned by legal 
process; or 


(3) hinder, delay or prevent the com-munication 


to a law enforcement officer or judge of the 
United States of information relating to the 
commission or possible commission of a Federal 


(la) 


2a 
offense or a violation of conditions of probation, 


parole, or release pending judicial proceedings; 


shall be fined not more than $250,000 or imprisoned 
not more than ten years, or both. 


sa 


APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA 


No. Cr 89-0365 LCB 


UNITED STATES 


v. 


ROBERT P. AGUILAR 


Transcript of Proceedings 
August 14, 1990 
Volume 9 


[1245] The Court: What are the grounds upon which 
you believe you should have to disqualify yourself? 

The Witness: Thank you, your honor. I felt I did 
disqualify myself and I did so for this reason: 

If | denied Tham’s motion for reconsideration, 
which it was my intention to do, but if I had done that 
his lawyers could have claimed I was influenced by 
the FBI and their investigation. 

On the other hand, if I granted his motion, which | 
would not have done, but had I done so, the claim could 
have been made that I was influenced by Judge 
Aguilar, which I was not. 


4a 


And, Your Honor, if I may, I’d like to describe to the 
jury how these cases arise in our court, may I do 
that? 

The Court: Briefly. 

The Witness: In our court when a case is filed, 
whether it’s a criminal case or a civil case, there’s a 
lottery by computer, it’s assigned at the filing to one 
judge. If it’s a case assigned to me the case will bear 
a number and my initials following the cas» 

[1246] Then the case is then that jucige’s for all 
time, for all purposes. But if, for example, the case 
involves something in which a judge, I or another 
judge who gets the case, has stock in the corporation, 
he disqualifies himself because it would be unfair for 
him to hear that case. 

So for the reasons I’ve already indicated I dis- 
qualified myself from the Tham case and the result of 
that was that it goes back into the lottery and 
another judge’s name is drawn and the judge hears 
the rest of the case and that’s the way it works. 

Q. (By Mr. Meltzer) Had Judge Aguilar done 
anything to you to cause you to disqualify yourself in 
the Tham matter, sir? 

A. You mean, before I disqualified myself? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. No. 

Q. And at any time did Judge Aguilar attempt to 
improperly influence your decision in the Tham 2255? 

A. Well, not directly to me. 


