; Supreme Court, U.S. 
(3) FILED 

a NOV 2 1995 
OFFICE OF [Hi Cicnh 


No. 95-507 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE, 


Petitioner, 


DICKSON COUNTY 
SCHOOL BOARD, et al., 
Respondents. 
* 
On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 


To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Sixth Circuit 


> 
PETITIONER’S REPLY BRIEF 

« 
MICHAEL J. WOODRUFF MICHAEL STOKES PAULSEN 
Scott J. Warp c/o University of 
J. MatrHew SzyYMANSKI Minnesota Law School 
8280 Greensboro Dr. 229 19th Ave. S. 
McLean, VA 22102-3807 Minneapolis, MN 55455 
(703) 761-5000 (612) 625-0018 
Kurt V. BEASLEY KIMBERLEE Woop CoLsy 
BeasLtey & Tyson Counsel of Record 
Suite 104 Winston Place 4208 Evergreen Lane 
104 East Park Dr. Suite 222 
Brentwood, TN 37027 Annandale, VA 22003 
(615) 373-2500 (703) 642-1070 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


"BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


[acne allies Mea edetneedaeeate tenn tciciabenietaaanateniaadeniallide ine aaaee tele ie el “ 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
CASES 
Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 
NEE er ee Oa Ped Gal te ph pn ar aS ae Oe ee 2,3 


Mt. Healthy City School District v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 
ye Bis Dey Spears Ars” Jere Seer aie eer ee 5 


PETITIONER’S REPLY BRIEF 


The School District’s Brief in Opposition makes a 
powerful case for granting certiorari: The School District 
does not deny that the decision below conflicts in princi- 
ple with decisions of this Court forbidding viewpoint- 
based speech restrictions, even within areas of 
unprotected expression (see Pet. 12-14); nor does the 
School District meaningfully contest that the decision 
below directly conflicts with the decisions of at least three 
other circuits invalidating viewpoint-based restrictions 
on expression in public schools, including in curricular 
settings (see Pet. 14-19); nor does the School District deny 
that the decision below directly conflicts with the deci- 
sions of at least three circuits concerning the propriety of 
granting summary judgment on disputed issues of 
motivation, pretext, or official intention (see Pet. 25-28). In 
short, nothing in the School District’s Brief in Opposition 
challenges the existence, importance, or recurring nature 
of the important constitutional conflicts created by the 
decision below. 


Moreover, the Brief in Opposition itself is a compel- 
ling illustration of the confusion of local school districts 
over the permissibility of student expression of personal 
religious viewpoints in individual written work and 
classroom discussions. The Brief in Opposition takes the 
position (as did the court below) that school officials need 
never permit the expression of student religious viewpoints in 
any academic context, even where students are permitted 


to express other personal viewpoints or interests.! As we 
showed in the Petition, other school districts (and some 
lower courts) have taken the same position, and the 
recurring nature of the problem has excited the concern 
of both Congress and the President. Pet. 22-25. As the 
School District’s position illustrates, this Court’s guid- 
ance is urgently needed. 


1. The first question presented by the Petition is 
whether public school officials may punish or penalize 
student expression in individual written work or other 
curricular contexts on the basis of the religious viewpoint 
expressed by the student, where students are otherwise 
permitted to express personal viewpoints or discuss 
topics of personal interest. The School District argues (i) 
that this question is controlled by Hazelwood School Dis- 
trict v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988); and (ii) that this 
Court’s decisions prohibiting viewpoint-based censorship 
of expression are “inapposite” to student expression in 
any public school curricular context, on the theory that 
Kuhlmeier gives school officials complete discretion in this 
regard. Br. in Opp. 10, 11-14. The School District does not 
deny that it censored Brittney Settle’s choice of research 
topics on the basis of its supposed Christian religious 
viewpoint. Nor does it deny that its actions discriminated 


1 The teacher in this case initially took the position that 
student religious viewpoints must be censored (Pet. App. 4) — a 
position clearly contrary to settled law and from which the 
School District has retreated. Nonetheless, the School District 
continues to maintain that student religious viewpoints may be 
censored, and its position appears to be influenced by the same 
attitude that religious viewpoints present a special justification 
for censorship. 


among religious viewpoints and perspectives that stu- 
dents could address in individual research compositions. 
Nor does it deny that viewpoint-based censorship is gen- 
erally impermissible in other contexts. Rather, it simply 
asserts that this Court’s cases forbidding viewpoint-based 
censorship are “inapposite” in public school instructional 
contexts, on the theory that such censorship is authorized 
by Kuhlmeier. Put concretely, the School District’s position 
is that school officials may prohibit or punish the expres- 
sion of particular religious viewpoints by public school 
students in any curricular context. 


This, of course, is precisely the point of our Petition 
and the reason why this case is certworthy. The position 
of the School District here is not uncommon, Pet. 21 n.11 
(citing three similar reported cases), but it conflicts with 
decisions of this Court forbidding viewpoint discrimina- 
tion in every other First Amendment context (Pet. 12-14) 
and with the decisions of several other circuits involving 
analogous facts (Pet. 14-19). Moreover, the decision 
below, by permitting viewpoint-based censorship, gives 
student expression in a curricular context less constitu- 
tional protection than is afforded unprotected categories of 
expression like obscenity and fighting words, a result 
seemingly in conflict with this Court’s decisions (includ- 
ing Kuhlmeier itself) holding student expression entitled 
to constitutional protection. Pet. 19-22. 


To its credit, the School District does not try to evade 
these conflicts, but merely asserts that the decision of the 
Sixth Circuit is correct on the merits. The issue is thus 
squarely joined: Petitioner Brittney Settle contends that 
school officials may limit the subject matter of student 
expression in any educationally reasonable manner, but 


may not prohibit or punish the expression of particular 
student viewpoints within the subject matter areas that 
the school has marked out as appropriate subjects of 
discussion, simply because that viewpoint is or may be 
religious. Respondent School District contends that 
school officials may forbid student expression of religious 
viewpoints concerning permitted topics or may forbid a 
student from discussing an otherwise permitted topic 
when a student is perceived to have chosen that topic 
because of her personal religious views. This case pre- 
sents an appropriate occasion for review of this impor- 
tant, recurring issue.” 


2. Respondents do not offer any argument in oppo- 
sition to certiorari on the second question presented by 
the Petition: whether disputed issues of motivation, 
intent, or pretext may be resolved on summary judgment, 
consistent with Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. As we showed in the 
Petition, this case presents triable issues of fact concern- 
ing the “mixed motives” of respondents. Pet. 25-29. If it is 
impermissible to censor a student research paper topic on 
the basis of its presumed religious viewpoint, then the 


2 Since the filing of the Petition for Certiorari, the Commit- 
tee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives has held 
additional hearings on the question of whether a constitutional 
amendment is necessary to remedy this situation, and the Sen- 
ate Judiciary Committee has held *hree different sets of hearings 
addressed to the same matter. On both October 20, 1995 and 
October 25, 1995, this specific case was once again the subject of 
discussion at hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee. 
Hearings on Religious Liberty, Committee on the Judiciary, 
United States Senate, Oct. 20, 1995 (testimony of several wit- 
nesses); id. Oct. 25, 1995 (testimony of Assistant Attorney Gen- 
eral Dellinger). See also Pet. 22-23. 


te | 


School District must show that the teacher would have 
refused to let Brittney Settle write on this topic even 
absent the constitutionally impermissible reason. Mt. 
Healthy City School District v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274 (1977). 
There has been no trial on that question, and the facts are 
disputed. The record, construed most favorably to Britt- 
ney Settle, certainly supports the inference that the 
teacher would not have censored Brittney Settle’s paper 
but for its presumed religious viewpoint. Pet. 26. 


We also contend that the additional reasons offered 
to justify the teacher’s actions are pretextual. The Brief in 
Opposition merely repeats the School District’s assertion 
of these other reasons (and suggests a few new ones),3 


3 The School District tries to shift one of the teacher’s most 
obviously pretextual justifications - that the assignment 
required four sources and that ” ‘all of the sources that you [are] 
going to find documenting the life of Jesus Christ derive from 
one source, the Bible’ ” (Pet. App. 4-5) — into a defense that the 
teacher thought the school library’s resources too limited in 
sources for Brittney Settle’s topic. Br. in Opp. 12, 14. The record 
is clear, however, that students were not limited to sources 
available in the school library. The teacher testified as follows: 
“Our library is small, and so one of the things that I’m aware of, 
it’s hard to find information. And they were not restricted, but 
they had to be willing to produce any materials that were not in 
the library if I wanted it [sic] see them.” J.A. 38. 

The School District’s Brief also acknowledges that the 
teacher would have permitted Brittney to change her topic even 
after the outline deadline and even to a topic with some reli- 
gious aspects, so long as the paper did not involve Jesus Christ 
in any way. Br. in Opp. 5. This concession, of course, refutes the 
School District’s subsequent claim that the teacher’s action was 
somehow justified by “the blatant refusal by the Petitioner to 
conform to the procedural deadlines.” Br. in Opp. 12. The 
teacher was willing to waive the deadline, except for a paper 
expressing a particular religious viewpoint. 


but does not address the relevant question of whether 
questions of pretext may be resolved on motion for sum- 
mary judgment. The issue is not so much whether these 
reasons would have been a legitimate basis for refusing 
permission to write on the chosen topic, but whether they 
in fact were the teacher’s reasons in this case. That too is a 
question of fact on which there has been no trial and on 
which, as we showed in the Petition, there remain genu- 
ine issues of material fact. Pet. 26-27 n.14. 


As we showed in the Petition, the approach of the 
Sixth Circuit in uphotding summary judgment on issues 
of motivation and pretext is directly contrary to the deci- 
sions of the Second, Eighth, and Eleventh Circuits. Pet. 
25-28. The School District’s Brief in Opposition does not 
dispute the existence of this conflict. This issue merits the 
Court’s attention in its own right, to resolve the conflict 
among the circuits on this recurring point of law. 


3. Respondents end their Brief in Opposition with a 
series of rhetorical questions. Br. in Opp. 14. We antici- 
pated and answered these questions in the Petition (Pet. 
11): This case does not challenge the authority of teachers 
to set deadlines, impose subject matter limitations on 
papers or classroom discussion, control the manner and 
style of student classroom expression, and critique qual- 
ity of research and writing. All of respondents’ questions 
are, on the facts and procedural posture of this case, quite 
beside the point. The question framed by the facts of this 
case is whether a school, having made the instructional 
choice to permit students to write research compositions 
on topics of the students’ own choice, may punish or 
penalize a student’s choice of a topic because of the 
religious viewpoint chosen or expressed by the student. 


On that point, Brittney Settle and the Dickson School 
District have diametrically opposed answers. This case 
squarely presents that important and unresolved ques- 
tion. 


The School District’s position is, we submit, symp- 
tomatic of a widespread misunderstanding about the fun- 
damental principles of the First Amendment. This case 
provides an ideal opportunity to correct that misunder- 
standing. 


CONCLUSION 


For these reasons, and those stated in the Petition, 
this Court should grant the Writ of Certiorari. 


Respectfully submitted, 


MICHAEL J. WoopDRUFF MICHAEL STOKES PAULSEN 
Scotr J. Warp c/o University of 

J. MATTHEW SZYMANSKI Minnesota Law School 
8280 Greensboro Dr. 229 19th Ave. S. 
McLean, VA 22102-3807 Minneapolis, MN 55455 
(703) 761-5000 (612) ,625-0018 

Kurt V. BEASLEY KIMBERLEE Woop CoLsy 
Beastey & Tyson Counsel of Record 
Suite 104 Winston Place 4208 Evergreen Lane 
104 East Park Dr. Suite 222 

Brentwood, TN 37027 Annandale, VA 22003 


(615) 373-2500 (703) 642-1070 


