BS+ 507 sep 25 1995 
No. 


__ GRRE OF THE curr 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE, 


‘ 


Petitioner, 
V. 
DICKSON COUNTY 
SCHOOL BOARD, et al., 
Respondents. 


S 


Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Sixth Circuit 


+ 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
¢ 


MICHAEL J. WOODRUFF 

Scott J. WARD 

J. MatrHew SZYMANSKI 

8280 Greensboro Dr. 

McLean, VA 22102-3807 
(703) 761-5000 


Kurt V. BEASLEY 

BEASLEY & TYSON 

Suite 104 Winston Place 

104 East Park Dr. 

Brentwood, TN 37027 
(615) 373-2500 


MICHAEL STOKES PAULSEN 

c/o University of 
Minnesota Law School 

229 19th Ave. S. 

Minneapolis, MN 55455 
(612) 625-0018 


KImMBERLEE Woop CoLsy 
Counsel of Record 

4208 Evergreen Lane 

Suite 222 

Annandale, VA 22003 
(703) 642-1070 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether public school officials may punish or penal- 
ize student expression in individual written work on the basis 
of the religious viewpoint expressed by the student, consistent 
with the First Amendment. 


2. Whether disputed issues of motivation, intent, or 
pretext may be resolved on summary judgment, under Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 56. 


LIST OF PARTIES 


Pursuant to Supreme ¢ ourt Rule 14.1(b), the parties to 
this proceeding are: 


Petitioner: 
Brittney Kaye Settle, by Next Friend, Jerry Settle 
Respondents: 


The Dickson County School Board; George Caudill, in 
his official capacity as Superintendent of Dickson County 
Schools, Reed Evans, in his official capacity as Principal, and 
Dana Ramsey, in her official capacity. 


a 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED.......................... i 
a il 
IIE a es I 
ES oe ee 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED....... 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ....................... 2 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT............. 8 


I. THE DECISION BELOW PRESENTS A RECUR- 
RING AND UNRESOLVED FIRST AMENDMENT 
ISSUE OF NATIONWIDE IMPORTANCE ON 
WHICH LOWER COURTS ARE DIVIDED AND 
EEG 8 seb ia onda ss cok eabcecegc se. 10 


A. The Decision Below Conflicts in Principle with 
Decisions of this Court Forbidding Viewpoint 
Discrimination even in “Nonpublic” Fora and 
within Categories of Speech that Government 
Could Prohibit Entirely .................... 12 


B. The Decision Below Conflicts with Decisions 
of Other Federal Appellate Courts Concerning 
Viewpoint-based Restriction of Speech in the 
ee 14 


C. The Decision Below Rests on a Questionable 
Reading of Hazelwood School District v. 
Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988) that Contra- 
dicts this Court’s Other Precedents Concersing 
Student Rights to Express Personal Viewpoiiits 
IS a oboe 5 cou unuse'eneccas i9 


iV 


TABLE OF CONTENTS -— Continued 
Page 


D. The Decision Below Presents a Recurring Issue 
Of National Importance. ........ccsccccccaes 22 


Il. THE DECISION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH 
DECISIONS OF OTHER FEDERAL CIRCUITS 
CONCERNING THE PROPRIETY OF GRANT- 
ING SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON DISPUTED 
QUESTIONS OF MOTIVATION, INTENT, OR 
PUUEIGE 44668 bb ad ceed 44068 ceeueiees cere 25 


Ill. ALTERNATIVELY, THIS COURT SHOULD 
GRANT THE WRIT, AND VACATE AND 
REMAND THIS CASE FOR RECONSIDERA- 
TION IN LIGHT OF ROSENBERGER vy. RECTOR 
AND VISITORS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIR- 
GINIA, 115 S.CT. 2510 (1995) 


CONCLUSION 


gues ARPA OTE IN 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES 


Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144 (1970) ..... 25 
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242 (1986) .... 25 


Brown v. Polk County, 61 F.3d 650 (8th Cir. 1995) (en 
TT EP AAP EPPS REE a Cy ee ey ea 25, 28 


Church of Scientology v. City of Clearwater, 2 F.3d 
1514 (11th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 115 S.Ct. 54 
COR clos v5 5 eeahed ie Oils 5a ees Ce cc aaes ao: 2, ae 


Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense and Education 
Pad, STF UB. FOP Ca ko tac asa ths etsaweates 12 


DeNooyer v. Livonia Public Schools, 799 F. Supp. 744 
(E.D. Mich. 1992), aff’d without published opin- 
ion, 1 F.3d 1240, 12 F.3d 211 (6th Cir. 1993), cert. 
damiad, 416 GAN. TOO UTP) oes ceca cecnecce dees 21 


Duran v. Nitsche, 780 F.Supp. 1048 (E.D. Pa. 1991), 
vacated and appeal dismissed 972 F.2d 1331 (3d 
i a | Cee eee ere rere Te Tey eee ry trary ee 21 


Doe v. Small, 964 F.2d 611 (7th Cir. 1992) (en banc) .... 15 


Gallo v. Prudential Residential Services, 22 F.3d 1219 
‘y Es | re a err rs rie err er 25 


Good News/Good Sports Club v. School District of 
Ladue, 28 F.3d 1501 (8th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 
POR Cea Fi, eer eererr ory re 9, 16, 17 


Guidry v. Calcasieu Parish School Bd., 9 Relig. Free- 
dom Rptr. 118 (E.D. La. 1989), aff’d on jurisdic- 
tional grounds sub nom., Guidry v. Broussard, 897 
ie By a. 2h | ar ae re 21 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Page 
Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 
yi, Sree rr errr cee Err rr etree eT passim 
Hedges v. Wauconda Community School Dist., 9 F.3d 

yo 2 e, ae AB >) Sr rrr rire 7 9, 15, 16 
Lac Du Flambeau Indians v. Stop Treaty Abuse-Wis., 

a my. Be, BX AB. -) Seer 28 
Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School 

District, 113 S.Ct. 2141 (1993)........ 9, 12, 13, 14, 15 
Maresco v. Evans Chemetics, 964 F.2d 106 (2d Cir. 

NODE ic be iWnha6 dei 0k 05k6es ches eeeees cea benedas 28 
May v. Evansville-Vanderburgh School Corp., 787 

oe Bt. By, be Re, errr rr TS 15 
Miller v. Fairchild Industries, Inc., 797 F.2d 727 (9th 

Cn SEEN oe 0 66686 0 0acauet abe ulauaedeeeeeneeees 29 
Mt. Healthy City School District v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 

BIO COUT T is 00s benensnetetiea ties 7, 14, 26, 27, 28 
Patrick v. LeFevre, 745 F.2d 153 (2d Cir. 1984) ....... 27 
Planned Parenthood v. Clark County School District, 

941 F.2d 817 (9th Cir. 1991) (em banc) ............. 17 
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538 

Ca > | SERRE Pap Mirage Ne oer oek sie 7 Teh 9, 12, 13, 14, 15 
Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University 

of Virginia, 115 S.Ct. 2510 (1995).............. passim 


St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 113 S.Ct. 2742 
tS re A Fe AGE Sher hin Oe Lote, 27 


Vil 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 


Searcy v. Crim, 815 F.2d 1389 (11th Cir. 1987)..... 18, 19 


San Diego Committee Against Registration and the 
Draft v. Governing Board, 790 F.2d 1471 (9th Cir. 
i PEEL TET Te oe Pree et Ur ee ee 17 


Searcy v. Harris, 888 F.2d 1314 (11th Cir. 1989)........ 9 


Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School District. 
SPD Ue FES CIBED). onc ccccccccccs 6, 9, 15, 19, 20, 21 


United States v. Certain Funds on Deposit in Scudder 
Tax Free Investment Account #2505103, 998 F.2d 
oe ke 3 ey pee eer . 28 


Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School District, 113 
RTT Ng ge en ye 2 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


ee OR ee passim 


ee EE as cats ceca dee ce Caeenbadeenadeeec 2 


OTHER MATERIALS 


Douglas Laycock, Equal Access and Moments of 
Silence: The Equal Status of Religious Speech by 
Private Speakers, 81 Nw.U. L. Rev. 1 (1986). ....... 15 


Religious Liberty and the Bill of Rights, Hearings 
Before the Subcommittee on the Constitution, 
Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Repre- 
sentatives (June 8, 1995). .............. ccc cece eee 22 


Testimony of Professor Douglas Laycock ............ 23 


Testimony of Professor Michael McConnell.......... 23 


Vili 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES —- Continued 


Testimony of Professor Michael Stokes Paulsen ...... 23 


Religious Expression in Public Schools, Department 
of Education, Letter from Secretary Richard Riley 
CIES Ty SOE nn hadnt hewn ck cen sind es4aebacere es 24 


Remarks by the President on Religious Liberty in 
Se SE Eis, SE 6 4644 5005 000 be kek beers cue ce 24 


No. 


* 
In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
* 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE, 


Petitioner, 


DICKSON COUNTY 
SCHOOL BOARD, et al., 


Respondents. 


+ 


Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Sixth Circuit 


+ 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
+ 


Petitioner Brittney Settle respectfully petitions for a writ 
of certiorari to review the judgment and opinion of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. In the alternative, 
petitioner respectfully asks that a writ of certiorari be granted, 
the decision below vacated, and the case remanded for recon- 
sideration in light of Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the 
University of Virginia, 115 S.Ct. 2510 (1995). 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals (Pet. App. 1-16) is 
reported at 53 F.3d 152 (6th Cir. 1995). The opinion of the 
District Court (Pet. App. 19-29) is unreported. 


ee 


2 
JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the Court of Appeals was entered on 
May 8, 1995. By order of August 1, 1995, Justice Stevens 
extended the time for filing a petition to September 25, 1995. 
This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). } 


CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establish- 
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise 
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of 
the press .... 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This case involves the decision of a public school teacher 
to give a ninth grade student a grade of “zero” on a research 
paper, because the student chose as her topic “The Life of 
Jesus Christ.” The teacher rejected petitioner Brittney Settle’s 
paper explicitly on the ground that students in public schools 
may not express their personal religious viewpoints or discuss 
certain religious figures or themes within the context of 
individual research assignments, even where students are per- 
mitted to write on any other subject of their choice (including 
other religious or quasi-religious topics). Pet. App. 4, J.A. 
42.! The Court of Appeals upheld the teacher’s conduct on the 
ground that the teacher’s decision “fall[s] within the broad 
leeway of teachers to determine the nature of the curriculum 
and the grades to be awarded to students.” Pet. App. 8. 
Petitioner Brittney Settle seeks review of this ruling.2 


1 “J.A.” refers to the Joint Appendix in the Court of Appeals. 


2 Brittney Settle has since graduated and is no longer a student in the 
Dickson County schools. Her claim for damages means that the case is not 
moot. Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School District, 113 S.Ct. 2462, 2464 
n.3 (1993). In addition, Brittney Settle continues to seek injunctive relief in 
the form of removing the grade of “zero” from her academic record. 


3 


1. In March 1991, Dickson County School District 
teacher Dana Ramsey assigned her ninth grade English stu- 
dents the task of choosing a topic and writing a short research 
paper. Ms. Ramsey allowed students to write on any topic of 
their choice. J.A. 35, 37. Ms. Ramsey permitted broad choice 
in order to give students “ownership in the process” and allow 
students to choose topics “solely to be more interesting to 
them.” J.A. 37; see also J.A. 117. The only limitations were 
that the student’s choice of topic be “researchable,” in the 
sense that students would be required to make use of four 
(secondary) sources, like books, encyclopedias, magazines, or 
pamphlets, J.A. 37-38, and “decent,” in the sense of being 
“appropriate” and “something that I would approve of and 
your parents would approve of.” J.A. 38-39. Among the topics 
selected by the students in the class, and that Ms. Ramsey did 
not disapprove as outside the parameters of the assignment, 
were papers on reincarnation (including its relation to Hindu- 
ism and Buddhism), J.A. 42, 120-135, witchcraft, black magic 
and the occult, J.A. 148-157, and spiritualism (ghosts and 
supernatural encounters with deceased persons). J.A. 
136-147. In addition, students wrote papers on such diverse 
topics as the Pony Express and a jazz singer from the 1920s 
and 1930s. J.A. 44-47. 


Ms. Ramsey posted a sign-up sheet on which students 
could list the topics they had chosen. Between Friday, March 
15 and Friday, March 22, 1991, students could sign up and 
change their topics at will. Students were permitted to change 
their paper topics after that date, but were expected to notify 
Ms. Ramsey promptly of any proposed topic change, so that 
students would not change paper topics too far along in the 
research process and so that there was no duplication of paper 
topics. J.A. 35, 43-44. Draft outlines for the research papers 
were due on the Tuesday following the sign-up period (March 
26). J.A. 39. 


Petitioner Brittney Settle initially signed up to write a 
paper on “Drama.” During the weekend after the initial sign- 
up period, she decided that that topic was too broad and not 


4 


sufficiently interesting to her. She decided to change her 
paper topic to “The Life of Jesus Christ” and prepared an 
outline for the Tuesday deadline. She did not discuss the 
change with Ms. Ramsey until Tuesday, when she handed in 
her outline. Ms. Ramsey refused to accept Brittney’s outline, 
telling Brittney that the topic was “not an appropriate thing to 
do in a public school” (J.A. 57) because of its religious nature 
and because it related to Brittney’s “personal religious 
beliefs.” J.A. 57. As Ms. Ramsey explained in deposition 
testimony (J.A. 57): 


A. ... And I just knew that we don’t deal with 
personal religion — personal religious beliefs. It’s 
just not an appropriate thing to do in a public 
school, and I tried to explain that to her [Brittney]. 


Q. And how did you come up with that conclu- 
sion? 

A. Well, people don’t send their children to school 
for a teacher to get in a dialogue with personal 
religious beliefs. They send them to learn to read 
and write and think. And you can do that without 
getting into personal religion. 


Ms. Ramsey told Brittney that she was free to write on a 
topic other than Drama (J.A. 68) — even one with some 
“religion aspect” (J.A. 77, 103) — but that she must not choose 
a topic involving the person of Jesus Christ, or any modifica- 
tion of that topic. J.A. 77, 82-83. Ms. Ramsey did not disap- 
prove Brittney’s topic on the ground that it failed to satisfy 
the criteria announced for the assignment — that a topic be 
interesting, researchable and “decent.” J.A. 69. Nor did Ms. 
Ramsey disapprove the topic because it involved a change 
from Brittney’s earlier proposed topic. J.A. 68, 77. Instead, 
Ms. Ramsey told Brittney that her topic “was inappropriate 
because . . . it was dealing with her personal religion, her 
personal Savior” (J.A. 52) and that this “could lead to a bad 
experience” (J.A. 53) because of the topic’s close relationship 
to Brittney’s religious views and the prospect that Brittney 


5 


might express her own personal religious views in the course 
of writing about “The Life of Jesus Christ.” J.A. 52-57.3 


Brittney’s father, Jerry Settle, met with Ms. Ramsey and 
with the school principal, Mr. Evans, in an attempt to reach an 
understanding. Mr. Settle at one point proposed a compromise 
topic on the “psychological and scientific aspects of Jesus 
Christ,” in order to address Ms. Ramsey’s stated concerns that 
the topic was too religious and did not involve objective or 
verifiable matters. Ms. Ramsey and Mr. Evans rejected this 
alternative on the ground that “it was a play on words.” J.A. 
83. Ms. Ramsey subsequently testified that she would not 
have permitted Brittney to write a paper on the life of Jesus 
Christ or any modification thereof (J.A. 83), because that 


3 Subsequently, in statements to the School Board and at her deposi- 
tion, Ms. Ramsey offered additional reasons for her decision, including that 
Brittney had not complied with procedures for changing the topic. J.A. 56. 
However, Ms. Ramsey also stated that she would have permitted Brittney 
to change topics, after the initial deadline, so long as Brittney did not write 
about Jesus Christ. J.A. 77. At all times, Ms. Ramsey reaffirmed that the 
assumed religious nature and viewpoint of Brittney’s proposed paper was a 
sufficient reason for her action, and that she would have rejected the paper 
on that ground even if it had been Brittney’s original topic: 

Board Member #7 \ have one question. I asked this question of 

Mrs. Ramsey, in all due honesty and respect for your teaching 

ability and my knowledge of you, but let me, you got to clear 

this up in my mind. The problem that I see is the change in the 

subject matter. The fact that she changed her subject matter of 

the paper and did not come for a conference with you to change 

the subject matter. Had the paper on this subject been the 

original choice, would you have accepted it? 

Mrs. Ramsey No, I wouldn’t. Just as I wouldn’t have accepted 

one on Buddha or Muhammed. The papers that seemed to be 

causing so much problem are on religious issues and I was 

presented a religious paper. 
J.A. 231-23la (Transcript of School Board meeting). Accord J.A. 67 
(deposition testimony). Ms. Ramsey testified that she did not consider the 
papers on reincarnation, spiritualism and the occult to address religious 
topics. J.A. 62-67, 75-82, 88-99. 


6 


would be “dealing specifically with her personal redeemer.” 
ye xP 


At the time papers were due, Brittney turned in her paper 
on “The Life of Jesus Christ.” Ms. Ramsey assigned Brittney 
a grade of “zero” without reading the paper. The school 
principal and the school board supported Ms. Ramsey’s deci- 
sion. J.A. 164-179, 186, 220-231a.4 


2. Petitioner filed this suit for declaratory and injunc- 
tive relief, and compensatory damages, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1983. The district court granted respondents’ motion for 
summary judgment. The district court believed that this 
Court’s cases set forth “two methods of analysis when dealing 
with student speech in public schools.” Pet. App. 22. The 
first, established in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School 
District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969), “deals with the prohibition of a 
student’s individual, personal expression while on school 
premises” and the second, established in Hazelwood School 
District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988), “deals with the 
limits of a school official’s authority over student expression 
that is school sponsored.” Pet. App. 22. The court thought 
Kuhlmeier the more applicable precedent, because Brittney 
Settle’s paper occurred within an instructional setting. Pet. 
App. 25. The court held that “[t]his case does not present an 
issue of personal expression” but of the school’s control over 
the curriculum. Pet. App. 25. The court deemed the issue to 
be “whether the First Amendment requires a school affirma- 
tively to promote particular student speech.” Pet. App. 25 
(quoting Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. at 270). 


4 The Dickson County School District had a written policy permitting 
student religious expression in compositions: “Student-initiated expres- 
sions to questions or assignments which reflect their beliefs or non-beliefs 
about a religious theme shall be accommodated. For example, students are 
free to express religious belief or non-belief in compositions, art forms, 
music, speech and debate.” J.A. 158. The school district claims that it did 
not violate this policy because Brittney Settle’s paper was not a “composi- 
tion.” Pet. App. 28. 


oven mone, 


7 


The district court found the school district’s actions “rea- 
sonably related to pedagogical concerns,” within the meaning 
of Kuhlmeier. Pet. App. 25-26. The court noted that Ms. 
Ramsey “did accept outlines on topics such as reincarnation, 
spiritualism, and the occult, which discussed religious figures 
from history and their doctrinal teachings.” Pet. App. 21 n.1. 
The court believed, however, that these papers “did not focus 
on religion” because specific religions were mentioned only 
to illustrate belief in reincarnation or spiritualism, and were 
not themselves the topic. Pet. App. 21 n.1.5 The court stated 
that Ms. Ramsey was justifiably “fearful” that Brittney Set- 
tle’s proposed paper about Jesus might reflect Brittney’s “per- 
sonal religious beliefs,” making teacher criticism a more 
sensitive issue. Pet. App. 26. 


The court also stated that Brittney Settle had not con- 
formed to Ms. Ramsey’s deadlines and her topic “could have 
been rejected on that ground alone.” Pet. App. 25-26. How- 
ever, the court conceded that Ms. Ramsey had rejected Brit- 
tney’s paper for both that reason and because of its religious 
overtones. Pet. App. 26 n.3. The district court did not apply 
the “mixed motive” analysis of Mt. Healthy City School 
District v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274 (1977), or make any finding 
that Ms. Ramsey would have rejected the paper even had she 
not feared its particular religious nature. Rather, the court 
dismissed the case on summary judgment. 


3. The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed. 
Pet. App. 1-16. The Court acknowledged that “teachers 
should not punish or reward people on the basis of inadmiss- 
ible factors — race, religion, gender, political ideology” but 
held that “teachers, like judges, must daily decide which 


5 The court noted: “For example, a paper on reincarnation discussed 
Buddhism and Hinduism; a paper entitled ‘Spiritualism’ noted that some 
religions make it a part of their beliefs; and the composition on ‘Magic 
Throughout History’ contained such titles as ‘Jews believe in Baal,’ 
‘Demons Are Evil Spirits,’ and ‘Gods are Good Spirits.’ ” Pet. App. 21 n.1. 


8 


arguments are relevant.” Pet. App. 7. “So long as the teacher 
violates no positive law or school policy, the teacher has 
broad authority to base her grades for students on her view of 
the merits of the students’ work.” Pet. App. 6. Applying this 
premise, the Sixth Circuit concluded that “[iJt is not for us to 
overrule the teacher’s view that the student should learn to 
write research papers by beginning with a topic other than her 
own theology.” Pet. App. 8. The court held that “[aJll six of 
Ms. Ramsey’s stated reasons for refusing to allow Brittney to 
write the paper” — including the reason that students may not 
express religious viewpoints in school written work — “fall 
within the broad leeway of teachers to determine the nature of 
the curriculum and the grades to be awarded to students, even 
the reasons that may be mistaken.” Pet. App. 7-8.° 

Judge Batchelder “disagree[d] with both the majority’s 
discussion of the facts and its analysis of the law,” Pet. App. 
9, but nonetheless concurred in the judgment on the ground 
that “the facts stated simply do not state a constitutional 
claim” because the teacher did not “engage in restricting 
Brittney’s expression” but only “her choice of topic for a 
research paper.” Pet. App. 11. 

4. On August 1, 1995, Justice Stevens granted peti- 
tioner’s application to extend the time in which to file a 
petition for certiorari in this Court to and including Septem- 
ber 25, 1995. Pet. App. 33. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


This case is about viewpoint discrimination. Specifically, 
this case presents the question of whether public school offi- 
cials may censor or punish individual student expression in 
classroom discussions and written assignments on the basis of 
its particular religious viewpoint. The decision below upholds 
viewpoint-based censorship of student expression involving 
particular religious traditions and viewpoints on the theory 


© See infra at 26-27 n.14 (discussing other explanations put forward 
by school officials). 


9 


that such censorship lies within the discretion of school offi- 
cials, under this Court’s decision in Hazelwood School Dis- 
trict v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988). 


The decision below presents an important, unresolved, 
and disturbingly recurrent issue of First Amendment law 
concerning freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and pub- 
lic education. The Sixth Circuit’s decision conflicts in princi- 
ple with this Court’s cases forbidding viewpoint 
discrimination against particular speakers or messages, even 
in “nonpublic” fora, and even within categories of expression 
that government could prohibit entirely.7 The decision also 
creates a direct conflict among circuits of the U.S. Court of 
Appeals on the question of viewpoint-based restriction of 
speech in the public school context.’ 


The decision below rests on an extremely tendentious 
reading of Kuhlmeier as uniquely authorizing such viewpoint 
discrimination in the school context — a reading not supported 
by that case and that conflicts with this Court’s other deci- 
sions concerning student rights to expression in the class- 
room. Cf. Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School District, 
393 U.S. 503 (1969). The opinion below threatens to exacer- 
bate the confusion and division of lower courts over these 
issues. 


7 Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, 113 
S.Ct. 2141 (1993): R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538 (1992). See 
also Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia, 115 
S.Ct. 2510 (1995). 


8 Hedges v. Wauconda Community School Dist., 9 F.3d 1295, 1297-98 
(7th Cir. 1993) (viewpoint discrimination against student expression of 
religious views impermissible even in “nonpublic” forum at junior high 
school); Good News/Good Sports Club v. School District of Ladue, 28 F.3d 
1501 (8th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S.Ct. 2640 (1995) (school officials 
may not exclude junior high student group from school’s nonpublic forum 
on basis of religious viewpoint); Searcy v. Harris, 888 F.2d 1314, 1324-25 
(11th Cir. 1989) (school officials may not exclude speakers from school- 
sponsored Career Day program on basis of the speakers’ viewpoint). 


10 


Finally, the question presented is one of national signifi- 
cance, affecting the practices of literally every public school 
district in the nation-and involving the rights of public school 
students — and their parents — in every one of those districts. 
The issues presented by this case have been the subject of 
recent congressional hearings considering language to amend 
the Constitution, due to concerns that school authorities (and 
courts) too often misinterpret the First Amendment as if it 
authorized or required discrimination against student reli- 
gious viewpoints in the public schools. President Clinton 
delivered a major address on this subject on July 12, 1995, 
and the Department of Education, on August 10, 1995, issued 
a detailed guidance letter addressing this issue to every public 
school superintendent in the nation. This case provides an 
appropriate and needed occasion for this Court to protect the 
right of students to discuss religious viewpoints in appropri- 
ate classroom contexts, and to resolve the confusion that has 
plagued lower courts and school districts throughout the 
nation on this issue. 


I. THE DECISION BELOW PRESENTS A RECUR- 
RING AND UNRESOLVED FIRST AMENDMENT 
ISSUE OF NATIONWIDE IMPORTANCE ON 
WHICH LOWER COURTS ARE DIVIDED AND 
CONFUSED. 


The issue presented by this case is whether school offi- 
cials may engage in viewpoint-based restriction or censorship 
of individual student religious expression that occurs in a 
curricular context. Petitioner Brittney Settle, a ninth grade 
student in the Dickson County School District, sought to write 
an individual research paper on “The Life of Jesus Christ” in 
fulfillment of a class research assignment. The instructor 
allowed students to write on topics of their own choosing, 
including papers on other religious and quasi-religious themes 
(reincarnation, spiritualism, the occult, black magic) as well 
as a wide range of other topics. However, the instructor 
prohibited Brittney Settle from researching and writing about 


1] 


“The Life of Jesus Christ” because of the particular religious 
viewpoint the instructor considered the topic to present and 
because the instructor thought the choice of topic reflected 
Brittney Settle’s personal religious views and interests. J.A. 
52-57, 77, 83-84. The instructor encouraged students to 
choose topics of personal interest to them (J.A. 37, 117), 
rejected no other proposed topic, and stated that she would 
have permitted Brittney Settle to write on some other topic, 
even one involving other religious themes — so long as the 
paper did not involve Jesus Christ. J.A. 68, 77. As it comes to 
this Court, this is a straightforward case of viewpoint discrim- 
ination. 


It is important to emphasize what is not at issue in this 
case. Students have no free speech right to dictate the content 
of a public school’s curriculum and petitioner does not con- 
tend otherwise. Nor do students have a general constitutional 
right to object to a teacher’s (or school’s) control over the 
content and manner of classroom instruction or discussions, 
including the subjects chosen and, very often, even the view- 
points expressed by students. Teachers and school districts 
properly are granted substantial latitude on such matters. 
Moreover, even where a school district (or its teacher) has 
chosen to allow students to write research papers or essays, or 
make classroom presentations, on subjects of a student’s 
choosing, the school or teacher may impose limitations on the 
students’ choices for reasons of age-appropriateness, decency, 
relevance, degree-of-difficulty, lack of originality, duplication 
of other students’ efforts or previous classwork, or any other 
valid educational reason. This case challenges none of these 
principles. 


However, where a school has made the instructional 
choice to permit students to make classroom presentations or 
write individual papers on topics of the students’ own choice, 
including religious or quasi-religious topics, a school may not 
punish or penalize a student’s choice of a topic because of the 
religious viewpoint chosen or expressed by the student, unless 
the manner of its presentation offends school standards of 


12 


decency, or its context suggests that it will be perceived as 
representing the views of the school itself. Kuhlmeier, 484 
U.S. at 271-72. 

The decision below, upholding such discrimination, is 
contrary to this Court’s cases forbidding viewpoint discrimi- 
nation in other contexts and is in direct conflict with the 
decisions of other federal circuits. 


A. The Decision Below Conflicts in Principle with 
Decisions of this Court Forbidding Viewpoint Dis- 
crimination even in “Nonpublic” Fora and within 
Categories of Speech that Government Could 
Prohibit Entirely. 


It is well established that, even in a “nonpublic” forum, 
where government may restrict the subjects on which speech 
is permitted, government regulations of expression must be 
viewpoint neutral. Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense and 
Education Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 806 (1985). Similarly, even 
within categories of wholly unprotected expression, govern- 
ment may not discriminate on account of a speaker’s view- 
point. R.A.V. v. St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538, 2643-45 (1992). 
Thus, even where a public school forum has been assumed to 
be “nonpublic,” this Court has unanimously held that school 
officials may not exclude discussion of otherwise permitted 
topics on account of the speaker’s religious viewpoint. Lamb’s 
Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, 113 
S.Ct. 2141, 2148 (1993). See also Rosenberger v. Rector and 
Visitors of the University of Virginia, 115 S. Ct. 2510, 2517 
(1995) (state university may not “select[] for disfavored treat- 
ment those student journalistic efforts with religious editorial 
viewpoints.”). 

The premise of both lower courts in this case was that, 
under this Court’s decision in Kuhlmeier, once student 
expression is characterized as occurring in a curricular con- 
text, it is essentially unprotected by the First Amendment. As 
we discuss presently, this reading of Kuhimeier creates a 
severe tension among this Court’s cases dealing specifically 


13 


with students’ rights of expression in public schools. See infra 
at 19-21. But even indulging the lower courts’ premise, it 
simply does not follow that school officials may engage in 
viewpoint-based discrimination against particular student 
views. Such a holding is flatly inconsistent with R.A.V., 
Lamb’s Chapel, and Rosenberger. Even if school officials 
need not have permitted expression of any student views in 
the first place or could have imposed viewpoint-neutral sub- 
ject matter restrictions on what topics students could address, 
it does not follow that schools may prohibit the expression of 
particular views or prohibit student expression on particular 
topics because of the religious viewpoint that such a topic is 
thought to entail. 


Yet that is exactly what happened in this case. The Sixth 
Circuit held that a public school teacher may forbid a student 
from writing an individual research paper about the life of 
Jesus Christ, based on the teacher’s perception of the particu- 
lar religious viewpoint that such a paper would necessarily 
advance and because of its assumed congruence with the 
student’s own religious views. The teacher permitted students 
to write papers on other religious topics and implicating other 
world religions and explicitly encouraged students to choose 
topics of personal interest to them. The teacher censored 
Brittney Settle’s paper topic on the basis of her opinion that 
Brittney’s personal religious views as a Christian made it 
inappropriate for her to write on that topic, because “I just 
knew that we don’t deal with personal religion — personal 
religious beliefs. It’s just not an appropriate thing to do in a 
public school.” J.A. 57. 


Brittney Settle would have been permitted to write a 
paper on reincarnation, occult practices, supernatural conver- 
sations with the dead, or any of a number of other topics. She 
would have been permitted to write on any other topic of 
personal interest to her. But she could not choose a topic that 
(in the teacher’s perception) reflected an interest resulting 
from her own personal religious beliefs as a Christian or that 
reflected a Christian viewpoint. That is a viewpoint-based 


14 


restriction. The court below thought such discrimination to lie 
within a teacher’s discretion. That holding conflicts in princi- 
ple with R.A.V., Lamb’s Chapel, and Rosenberger, and merits 
this Court’s review.? 


B. The Decision Below Conflicts with Decisions of 
Other Federal Appellate Courts Concerning 
Viewpoint-based Restriction of Speech in the 
Public School Context. 


The decision of the Sixth Circuit conflicts with the deci- 
sions of the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Eleventh circuits of 
the U.S. Court of Appeals on the question of whether the First 
Amendment permits viewpoint-based discrimination against 
expression of particular views in public schools or in school- 


9 The fact that the instructor and school district subsequently gave 
additional reasons for rejecting Brittney Settle’s paper does not erase the 
problem of viewpoint-based discrimination, for two reasons. First, if a 
substantial part of the reason why the instructor rejected Brittney Settle’s 
paper was unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination, then it was incum- 
bent on the lower courts, under Mt. Healthy City School District v. Doyle, 
429 U.S. 274 (1977), to determine whether the instructor would have 
rejected the proposed paper topic absent the constitutionally illegitimate 
reason — a factual question never addressed by the lower courts. The 
instructor at all times in this litigation maintained that the religious nature 
and viewpoint of Brittney Settle’s proposed topic was the primary and 
sufficient basis for her decision to reject that topic (J.A. 67, 231-231a) and 
the Sixth Circuit upheld “{aJll six of Ms. Ramsey’s stated reasons” as 
permissible. Pet. App. at 7-8. If this holding is erroneous, summary judg- 
ment for the school district was improper under Mt. Healthy, regardless of 
whether some of the instructor’s other stated reasons would be constitu- 
tionally legitimate, standing alone. 

Second, some of the additional reasons put forth by the school district 
are variations of viewpoint discrimination, others are plainly pretextual, 
and others are at least arguably so. As we discuss below, summary judg- 
ment is inappropriate on such disputed questions of pretext or motive, and 
the decision below conflicts with that of other circuits on this score. See 
infra at 25-29. 


15 


sponsored publications. This Court’s review is warranted to 
resolve this conflict. 


The decision below directly conflicts with the Seventh 
Circuit’s analysis in Hedges v. Wauconda Community School 
District, 9 F.3d 1295 (7th Cir. 1993). In Hedges, the Seventh 
Circuit struck down two school district policies that forbade 
any student distribution of written material of a religious 
nature on junior high or elementary school grounds. The 
Seventh Circuit held that, irrespective of the nature of the 
forum as “public,” “limited public” or “nonpublic,” school 
officials may not discriminate against student expression on 
the basis of its viewpoint, and especially not on the basis of 
religious viewpoint. The court’s opinion merits quotation at 
some length: 


Schools may not prohibit their pupils from expres- 
sing ideas. Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Com- 
munity School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969). And 
n0 arm of government may discriminate against 
religious speech when speech on other subjects is 
permitted in the same place at the same time. 
Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free 
School District, 113 S.Ct. 2141, 2148 (1993); Doe 
v. Small, 964 F.2d 611 (7th Cir. 1992) (in banc). See 
Douglas Laycock, Equal Access and Moments of 
Silence: The Equal Status of Religious Speech by 
Private Speakers, 81 Nw.U.L.Rev. 1, 48 (1986). The 
first amendment’s ban on discriminating against 
religious speech does not depend on whether the 
school is a “public forum” and, if so, what kind 
(subjects to which we return). May v. Evansville- 
Vanderburgh School Corp., 787 F.2d 1105, 1114 
(7th Cir. 1986). Even when the government may 
forbid a category of speech outright, it may not 
discriminate on account of the speaker’s viewpoint. 
R.A.V. v. St. Paul, 112 S.Ct. 2538, 2543-45 (1992). 
Especially not on account of a religious subject 


16 


matter, which the free exercise clause of the first 
amendment singles out for protection. 


9 F.3d at 1297-98 (Easterbrook, J.) 


Hedges holds that viewpoint-based restriction of student 
speech is impermissible even where student speech could, if 
school officials chose, be banned outright or severely 
restricted. Here, Brittney Settle’s teacher explicitly permitted 
student expression of individual viewpoints and interests 
within the context of the research paper assignment. (In the 
teacher’s words, “I was trying to give them ownership in the 
project.” J.A. 117.) Even granting that this context is a “non- 
public” forum in which the teacher could have restricted the 
subjects on which students were permitted to write, the 
teacher could not, consistent with Hedges, exclude a particu- 
lar topic “on account of the speaker’s religious viewpoint” or 
“on account of a religious subject matter.” 9 F.3d at 1298. 


The decision below is also inconsistent with the Eighth 
Circuit’s recent decision in Good News/Good Sports Club v. 
School District of Ladue, 28 F.3d 1501 (8th Cir. 1994), cert. 
denied, 115 S.Ct. 2640 (1995). The Eighth Circuit found 
impermissible viewpoint discrimination in a junior high 
school’s exclusion of a religious club from what it assumed, 
arguendo, to be a nonpublic forum — school facilities between 
3 and 6 P.M. on school days, which the school had reserved 
for meetings of Scout groups because of the school’s long- 
standing relationship with and support of such groups. The 
Eighth Circuit found that this arrangement amounted to per- 
mitting access to some groups to express viewpoints on moral 
and character development but not to a religious group wish- 
ing to address “ ‘an otherwise includible subject’ ” (28 F.3d at 
1505 (quoting Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 806)) from a religious 
standpoint or perspective. 28 F.3d at 1506-07. 


Good News/Good Sports involved after-hours access to 
facilities, rather than student expression within the context of 
a curricular assignment, but the principle is the same: school 
officials may limit the subject matters of speech or expressive 
activities that occur in a school’s nonpublic forum; but they 


17 


may not forbid discussion of an otherwise includible subject 
on the basis of the speaker’s religious point-of-view or per- 
spective on such subject. The Sixth Circuit’s opinion holds 
that a teacher’s fears about a student’s point-of-view cn an 
otherwise permissible subject — religion, religious figures, 
and quasi-religious beliefs — authorize censorship of that 
student’s discussion of the subject. That decision is in conflict 
with Good News/Good Sports. 


Several circuits have addressed the same general issue in 
cases involving school officials’ viewpoint discrimination on 
some basis other than religious viewpoint. All have held such 
viewpoint discrimination impermissible, even within school- 
sponsored curricular activities or in school-sponsored pub- 
lications. The Sixth Circuit’s holding that Kuhlmeier places 
such matters within the discretion of school officials is 
implicitly or explicitly rejected by each of these cases, creat- 
ing a square conflict among the circuits. See San Diego 
Committee Against Registration and the Draft v. Governing 
Board, 790 F.2d 1471 (9th Cir. 1986) (“CARD”) (viewpoint 
discrimination by school officials impermissible even if 
school newspaper advertising section is a “nonpublic” forum 
in which content or subject matter restrictions are permiss- 
ible);!9 Searcy v. Crim, 815 F.2d 1389, 1393-94 (11th Cir. 


10 In CARD, the Ninth Circuit held that a public school newspaper’s 
advertising section was a “limited public forum” from which school offi- 
cials could not exclude advertising by a group opposed to military draft 
registration. The court further held that, assuming that the advertising 
section was a “nonpublic” forum, exclusion of the anti-draft group’s 
proposed advertisement nonetheless violated the First Amendment because 
school officials permitted military recruiters to place advertisements in the 
paper. Such different treatment constituted forbidden viewpoint-based dis- 
crimination. In Planned Parenthood v. Clark County School District, 941 — 
F.2d 817 (9th Cir. 1991) (en banc), the Ninth Circuit held that the first 
holding in CARD did not survive this Court’s decision in Kuhlmeier, but 
that the alternative holding remained valid: “We do not disturb the CARD 
majority’s alternative holding that, assuming the school publications were 
nonpublic forums, the school engaged in impermissible viewpoint 


18 


} 


1987) (school district policy barring “peace activists” from 
presenting career opportunities information on bulletin | 
boards, in guidance offices, and at school career days, when 
military recruiters were permitted access to address the same 
subject, violated the First Amendment, even assuming that the 
fora in question were nonpublic); accord Searcy v. Harris, 
888 F.2d 1314, 1319, 1324-25 (11th Cir. 1989) (Kuhlmeier 
does not change the applicable standard; school officials may 
not exclude speech at school-sponsored Career Day and Youth 
Motivation Day on basis of speakers’ viewpoint). | 

The Eleventh Circuit’s two decisions in Searcy present an 
especially clear conflict with the Sixth Circuit’s decision. In 
Searcy v. Harris, the school district argued that Kuhlmeier 
permitted it to engage in viewpoint-based discrimination in 
granting access to outside organizations to a Career Day and 
Youth Motivation Day, because those programs were school- 
sponsored and part of the school’s instructional program. 888 
F.2d at 1319, 1324. The Eleventh Circuit explicitly rejected 
such a claim: 

The Board argues that Hazelwood [School Dis- 
trict v. Kuhlmeier] does not prohibit school officials 
from engaging in viewpoint based discrimination. 

We disagree. Hazelwood involved a content based 
distinction; the principal decided that the subject of 
teenage sexuality was inappropriate for some of the 
younger students. . . . There was no indication that 
the principal was motivated by disagreement with 
the views expressed in the articles. Although Hazel- | 
wood provides reasons for allowing a school official 
to discriminate based on content, we do not believe 
it offers any justification for allowing educators to 
discriminate based on viewpoint. The prohibition 
against viewpoint discrimination is firmly embed- 
ded in first amendment analysis. . . . Without more 


Ae ee RE eR 


discrimination in accepting advertisements advocating military service but 
refusing CARD’s advertisement offering an opposing point of view.” 941 
F.2d at 828 n.19. (Rymer, J.) 


ee ee Te NN 


19 


explicit direction, we: will continue to require 
school officials to make decisions relating to speech 
which are viewpoint neutral. 


Searcy v. Harris, 888 F.2d at 1324-25. This analysis is flatly 
inconsistent with the Sixth Circuit’s analysis in this case. The 
Eleventh Circuit in Searcy held that Kuhlmeier does not 
authorize viewpoint discrimination by school officials. The 
Sixth Circuit here held that Kuhlmeier gives school officials 
plenary discretion to restrict or prohibit student expression 
that occurs in a curricular context, even where such discretion 
is employed to restrict student expression based on its pre- 
sumed viewpoint. This Court’s review is necessary to resolve 
the conflict between circuits on this issue. 


C. The Decision Below Rests on a Questionable 
Reading of Hazelwood School District v. 
Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988) that Contradicts 
this Court’s Other Precedents Concerning stu- 
dent Rights to Express Personal Viewpoints in 
Public Schools. 


Both lower courts thought that the teacher’s conduct in 
this case was justified by this Court’s decision in Kuhlmeier. 
This reading of Kuhlmeier creates a severe tension with — if 
not outright contradiction of — Tinker v. Des Moines Indepen- 
dent School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969), a decision reaf- 
firmed in Kuhlmeier. While we submit that the Sixth Circuit’s 
reading is erroneous, Kuhlmeier is somewhat ambiguous 
about whether Tinker remains applicable to student expres- 
sion in the classroom context. This Court’s review is needed 
to clarify the confusion in lower courts over the relationship 
between Kuhimeier and Tinker on the issue of student expres- 
sion in classroom discussions, written assignments, and oral 
presentations. 


The better reading of Kuhlmeier, we submit, is that 
school officials may make content-based decisions concerning 
curricular matters and may restrict student expression in the 
curricular context on the basis of subject matter (including 


20 


such concerns as decency and age-appropriateness), germane- 
ness to the educational objective, style and quality, and the 
likelihood that student expression will be attributed to the 
school. Kuhlmeier, 484°U.S. at 271. On such matters, a 
school’s restriction need only be “reasonably related to legiti- 
mate pedagogical concerns.” /d. at 273. Kuhlmeier also holds, 
more specifically, that Tinker is inapposite to the question of 
when “a school may refuse to lend its name and resources” to 
student expression disseminated under school auspices. /d. at 

272-73. 


Kuhlmeier does not hold, however, that Tinker is totally 
inapplicable in the classroom context. To the contrary, 
Kuhlmeier reaffirms that students “cannot be punished merely 
for expressing their personal views on school premises” 
unless school authorities “have reason to believe that such 
expression will ‘substantially interfere with the work of the 
school or impinge upon the rights of other students.’ ” 484 
U.S. at 266 (quoting Tinker). The expression in Tinker itself 
(the wearing of a symbolic black armband) took place in the 
classroom. Furthermore, the Court in Tinker was especially 
concerned about discrimination among student viewpoints. 

393 U.S. at 510. Nothing in Kuhlmeier impairs these hold- 
ings. 


We think that the most natural reading of Kuhlmeier and 
Tinker, taken together, is that school officials may not engage 
in content-based censorship of student speech on school 
premises “in the cafeteria, or on the playing field, or on the 
campus during the authorized hours” (Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. at 
266 (quoting Tinker, 393 U.S. at 512-13)); and that school 
officials may not engage in viewpoint-based censorship of | 
student speech in a curricular context, absent compelling 
justification, but may restrict the subject matter and content 
of student expression in such a context, as well as its manner, 
in any way “reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical 
concerns.” This is a consistent and sensible standard that does 
not involve federal courts in school curriculum decisions or 
intrude on a teacher’s authority over the content and manner 


ne ee aN Ome REM nN oe 


21 


of instruction, including classroom discussions and written 
assignments. 


The Sixth Circuit’s approach, however, misreads 
Kuhlmeier and eviscerates Tinker. The decision below autho- 
rizes viewpoint discrimination permitted in no other First 
Amendment context. As noted above, even within categories 
of unprotected expression, government must be viewpoint- 
neutral. But student expression in academic contexts is not 
unprotected. Tinker holds — and Kuhlmeier expressly reaf- 
firms — that students do not “shed their constitutional rights to 
freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate.” 
Tinker, 393 U.S. at 506; accord Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. at 266. 
The Sixth Circuit decision places student speech rights below 
those of any other category, contrary to both Tinker and 
Hazelwood. In so doing, the decision below sows great consti- 
tutional mischief, exacerbating existing confusion and divi- 
sion in the lower courts.!! 


11 The approach of the Sixth Circuit in this case is, unfortunately, not 
aberrational. In several reported cases, school districts have suppressed 
student expression of religious viewpoints in classroom discussions or 
written work because of its religious nature, with courts upholding such 
viewpoint-based restrictions on the authority of Kuhlmeier. See DeNooyer 
v. Livonia Public Schools, 799 F.Supp. 744, 749 (E.D. Mich. 1992), aff'd 
without published opinion \ F.3d 1240, 12 F.3d 211 (6th Cir. 1993), cert. 
denied, 114 S.Ct. 1540 (1994) (second grade student forbidden from 
making show-and-tell presentation about her participation in church choir 
by showing a video of the choir; upheld on authority of Kuhlmeier); Duran 
v. Nitsche, 780 F.Supp. 1048, 1052-55 (E.D. Pa. 1991), vacated and appeal 
dismissed, 972 F.2d 1331 (3d Cir. 1992) (student forbidden from making 
classroom oral report on “The Power of God” in fulfillment of assignment 
to prepare a presentation on some variation on “The Power of ___”; upheld 
on authority of Kuhlmeier); Guidry v. Calcasieu Parish School Bd., 9 
Relig. Freedom Rptr. 118 (E.D. La. 1989), aff’d on jurisdictional grounds 
sub nom. Guidry v. Broussard, 897 F.2d 181 (Sth Cir. 1990) (high school 
class valedictorian forbidden from speaking at commencement because of 
her expressed intention to mention her personal religious beliefs in her 
commencement address). 


22 


D. The Decision Below Presents a Recurring Issue of 
National Importance. 


The question of public school students’ rights to express 
personal religious viewpoints in appropriate classroom con- 
texts, including in oral presentations and in individual written 
assignments, is an issue of nation-wide significance and con- 
cern. The decision below has been part of an important 
national discussion of whether it is necessary to amend the 
Constitution itself in order to end the recurrent problem of 
discrimination against student religious expression. This past 
summer, Congress held hearings on this problem as the first 
step in considering whether a constitutional amendment is 
necessary to redress the systemic problem of government 
discrimination against religious viewpoints and religious per- 
sons in the administration of public schools and other govern- 
ment programs. See generally Religious Liberty and the Bill 
of Rights, Hearings Before the Subcommittee on the Constitu- 
tion, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representa- 
tives (June 8, 1995). 


The instant case was discussed by several of the leading 
witnesses at these hearings as a prime example of the perva- 
sive problem of discrimination against — indeed, bigotry 
toward — the expression of religious viewpoints in public 
school classrooms. Professor Douglas Laycock of the Univer- 
sity of Texas cited the Sixth Circuit’s decision in this case as 
an illustration of the problem of “discrimination against reli- 
gious speech aris[ing] from judicial deference to bureaucratic 
rationalizations.” Statement of Douglas Laycock submitted to 
the Subcommittee on the Constitution of the House Commit- 
tee on the Judiciary (June 14, 1995) at 6-7; see also id. at 2 
(citing the problem of “judicial deference to the rationaliza- 
tions of government employees who discriminate against reli- 
gion.”). Professor Laycock testified that the teacher’s actions 
in the instant case “discriminated, not just between the reli- 
gious and the secular, but between Christianity and spiritual- 
ism, between Christianity and magic religions such as 
voodoo, and between Christianity and religions that believe in 


23 


reincarnation, such as Hinduism.” He characterized the 
instant case as an example of the type of “egregious abuses” 
of constitutional rights of equal religious expression that 
courts sometimes fail to correct. Jd. at 6. 


Professor Michael McConnell of the University of Chi- 
cago Law School criticized the decision below as a denial of 
equal rights of expression due to a teacher’s “uninformed, 
bigoted, and selectively applied” religious stereotypes. He 
stated that he had “little doubt that the case would have come 
out the other way if a racist teacher had forbidden a paper on 
Martin Luther King, Jr., or an anti-communist teacher had 
forbidden a paper on the evils of capitalism.” Testimony of 
Michael W. McConnell before the Subcommittee on the Con- 
stitution of the House Judiciary Committee (June 7, 1995) at 
8-9. 12 


On July 12, 1995, President Clinton addressed the same 
set of issues in a major policy speech: 


The First Amendment does not — I will say 
again — does not convert our schools into religion- 
free zones. . . . The First Amendment does not 
require students to leave their religion at the school- 
house gate. We wouldn’t want students to leave the 
values they learn from religion . . . behind at the 


12 Professor McConnell also testified that the problem of discrimina- 
tion against religious expression was widespread, and that the cases he 
discussed were examples only: “[T]he Committee should be aware that 
only a small fraction of cases can be litigated; these are only the tip of the 
iceberg.” Id. at 7. 

Professor Laycock and Professor McConnell agreed that the problem 
of discrimination against religious speech and religious views is serious 
and widespread, but disagreed over whether the problem is one that 
warrants further action by Congress (McConnell) or that ought to be solved 
within the framework of existing law (Laycock). One of the attorneys for 
petitioner in this case also testified that the problem of discrimination 
against religious expression is pervasive. Testimony of Professor Michael 
Stokes Paulsen before the Committee on the Judiciary of the U.S. House of 
Representatives (June 8, 1995). 


24 


schoolhouse door, and reinforcing those values is an 
important part of every school’s mission. 


Some school officials and teachers and parents 
believe that the Constitution forbids any religious 
expression at all in public schools. That is wrong. 
.. . Students should feel free to express their reli- 
gion and their beliefs in homework, through art 
work, during class presentations, as long as it is 
relevant to the assignment. .. . All these forms of 
religious expression and worship are permitted and 
protected by the First Amendment. 


Remarks by the President on Religious Liberty in America 
(The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, July 12, 
1995) at 6, 7, 8 (emphasis added). 


On August 10, 1995, the Secretary of Education, pur- 
suant to the President’s directive, addressed a “guidance let- 
ter” to the nation’s school superintendents that contains the 
following paragraph: 


Student assignments: Students may express 
their beliefs about religion in the form of home- 
work, artwork, and other written and oral assign- 
ments free of discrimination based on the religious 
content of their submissions. Such home and class- 
room work should be judged by ordinary academic 
standards of substance and relevance, and against 
other legitimate pedagogical concerns identified by 
the school. 


The decision below is contrary to the administration’s Guid- 
ance Letter. Indeed, the specific paragraph appears motivated 
by the Sixth Circuit’s decision in this case and congressional 
testimony criticizing that decision.!3 


The actions of Congress and the Administration signal 
that the issues raised by this case and others like it are ones of 


13 In light of the Secretary of Education’s Guidance Letter, this Court 
may wish to solicit the views of the Solicitor General as to the interest and 
position of the United States with respect to this petition. 


25 


broad national concern. We urge this Court to review this 
issue of profound national concern, on which lower courts 
and school officials are divided and badly confused. 


Ii. THE DECISION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH DECI- 
SIONS OF OTHER FEDERAL CIRCUITS CON- 
CERNING THE PROPRIETY OF GRANTING 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON DISPUTED QUES- 
TIONS OF MOTIVATION, INTENT, OR PRETEXT. 


The Sixth Circuit’s decision affirming the grant of sum- 
mary judgment for respondent school district presents an 
additional conflict with the decisions of several other circuits 
on the question of whether disputed issues of pretext and 
mixed motivation may be resolved on summary judgment. 
Church of Scientology v. City of Clearwater, 2 F.3d 1514, 
1530-34 (11th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 115 S.Ct. 54 (1994) 
(genuinely disputed factual issue of pretext or motive on the 
part of government officials may not be resolved on motion 
for summary judgment); Brown v. Polk County, 61 F.3d 650 
(8th Cir. 1995) (en banc) (finding sufficient evidence of 
religiously discriminatory motivation on the part of govern- 
ment officials to preclude judgment for government, and 
directing judgment for plaintiff); Gallo v. Prudential Residen- 
tial Services, 22 F.3d 1219 (2d Cir. 1994) (summary judgment 
ordinarily inappropriate on questions of motivation and pre- 
text). 


It is settled law that, on a motion for summary judgment, 
the facts must be construed in the light most favorable to the 
nonmoving party, with all justifiable inferences drawn in that 
party’s favor. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 
255 (1986); Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157 
(1970). In this case, it is clear that a substantial — if not the 
predominant — factor in the teacher’s decision to censor Brit- 
tney Settle’s chosen topic was its presumed religious nature 
and Brittney Settle’s presumed religious viewpoint. Assuming 
that this reason violates the First Amendment, it was incum- 
bent on the school district to demonstrate that the other 


26 


reasons subsequently given by the teacher for her action 
would have caused her to reject the proposed topic even 
absent the improper viewpoint-based motivation. Mr. Healthy 
City School District v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274 (1977). In addi- 
tion, the facts give rise to a permissible inference that the 
other reasons subsequently offered by the teacher were pre- 
texts to disguise a decision made on the basis of religious 
viewpoint. These are disputed issues of fact. The record, 
construed most favorably to Brittney Settle, certainly supports 
the inference that the teacher would not have censored Brit- 
tney Settle’s paper but for the religious viewpoint she thought 
it to represent, and/or that the teacher’s later explanations 
were pretextual post hoc rationalizations.'* 


14 At no time did the teacher retreat from her initial explanation that 
(as she stated before the school board) “[wlJe are taught, the law says we are 
not to deal with religious issues in the classroom,” J.A. 222 and (as she 
stated in her deposition) that student expression of “personal religious 
beliefs . . . [is] not an appropriate thing to do in a public school.” J.A. 57. 

The Sixth Circuit identified six different reasons offered by the 
teacher, at various times, and held that all six justified the teacher's actions. 
Pet App. 7-8. All of these are at least arguably pretextual, some of them, we 
submit, plainly so: First, the teacher “stated that the student had failed to 
receive permission to write on the topic prior to handing in the outline.” 
Pet. App. 3. But the teacher stated both before the school board and in her 
deposition that she would have refused to permit Brittney to write on this 
paper in any event, even if it were the one Brittney had signed up for in the 
first instance, J.A. 67, 231-23la, and would have allowed Brittney to 
switch to any other topic. J.A. 68. 

Second, the teacher “believed it would be difficult for her to evaluate 
a research paper on a topic related to Jesus Christ,” because criticism of 
style and form might be perceived as criticism of Brittney’s Christian faith. 
Pet. App. 3. Such a view of Christian students’ ability objectively to 
discuss religious topics or understand that critique of style is not criticism 
of religion may itself be viewpoint discrimination. At the least, an infer- 
ence is permissible that this explanation is pretextual. 

The teacher’s “third” and “fifth” explanations — that religious views 
may not be discussed in the classroom — constitute the viewpoint discrimi- 
nation that is at the core of this case. Pet. App. 4. 


27 


The lower courts in this case, however, held that there 
was no genuine dispute as to the teacher’s motives and 
granted respondents judgment as a matter of law. This Court 
should grant certiorari on this issue as well, as it involves a 
recurring issue that arises in several litigation contexts: issues 
of “mixed motive” on the part of government officials who 
have taken action on grounds violative of First Amendment 
constitutional rights but also assert other justifications for 
their actions (e.g. Mt. Healthy City, 429 U.S. 274); issues of 
pretext in employment discrimination cases where the genu- 
ineness of an employer’s asertedly nondiscriminatory expla- 
nation for its action is challenged (e.g. St. Mary’s Honor 
Center v. Hicks, 113 S.Ct. 2742 (1993)); and a wide variety of 
other situations where intent or official purpose is relevant to 
some larger legal issue. See, e.g., Patrick v. LeFevre, 745 F.2d 
153 (2d Cir. 1984) (“sincerity” of religious claimant, for free 
exercise clause purposes). 


The Sixth Circuit’s decision in this case directly conflicts 
with the Eleventh Circuit’s decision in Church of Scientology, 
2 F.3d 1514. At issue in that case was a city ordinance 
regulating the solicitation of funds by charitable organiza- 
tions. Plaintiff Church of Scientology alleged that the ordi- 
nance targeted the Church because of its particular religious 


The fourth explanation, that “the teacher felt that . . . plaintiff knew a 
lot about Jesus Christ” and that “part of the purpose of the paper was to 
have the students research a paper on a subject with which they were 
unfamiliar” (Pet. App. 4) is belied by the record. The teacher urged 
students to write on topics of personal interest and permitted topics selected 
by students because they already had interest and familiarity with the topic. 
J.A. 37, 42. The facts permit an inference that this explanation was 
pretextual. 

The final explanation — that “ ‘ali of the sources that you [are] going 
to find documenting the life of Jesus Christ derive from one source, the 
Bible’ ” (Pet. App. 4-5) — is not rational or credible. The teacher did not 
require that students use original sources, but permitted enclycopedias, 
magazines, pamphlets, and books. J.A. 38. The facts not only permit but 
virtually compel an inference of pretext for this explanation. 


28 


viewpoint, and pointed to record evidence supporting such an 
inference. The Eleventh Circuit reversed the district court’s 
grant of summary judgment for the defendant city: “There is 
sufficient evidence supporting [plaintiff's] conclusion to shift 
to the City the ultimate burden of showing, under all the 
circumstances, that it would have enacted the ordinance even 
without the impermissible motive. The same evidence pre- 
cludes judgment as a matter of law for the City.” Jd. at 1534. 


The Sixth Circuit decision is also contrary to the Eighth 
Circuit’s en banc decision in Brown v. Polk County, a case 
involving discharge of a government employee allegedly 
because of his protected free exercise of religion. 61 F.3d 
650. The Eighth Circuit held that, once it was established that 
the discharge was motivated in part by the employee’s reli- 
gious activities, defendant government officials could be held 
liable “unless the defendants can prove that they would have 
fired him regardless of those activities.” /d. at 657. The 
Eighth Circuit found that this required the district court to 
apply the “mixed motives” analysis of Mt. Healthy and pre- 
cluded judgment for defendant officials. /d. 


Finally, the Sixth Circuit decision conflicts with the hold- 
ings and dicta of numerous Second Circuit decisions holding, 
in a variety of contexts, that questions of motivation, intent, 
or pretext are not readily susceptible to summary judgment. !* 
Review of this issue is therefore warranted as well. 


1S See, e.g., United States v. Certain Funds on Deposit in Scudder Tax 
Free Investment Account #2505103, 998 F.2d 129, 131 (2d Cir. 1993) 
(admonition to view evidence in light most favorable to opponent “should 
especially be kept in mind when the inferences which the parties seek to 
have drawn deal with questions of motive, intent, and subjective feelings 
and reactions.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); Maresco v. 
Evans Chemetics, 964 F.2d 106, 113 (2d Cir. 1992) (“summary judgment is 
ordinarily inappropriate where . . . intent and state of mind are at issue’’) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). See also Lac Du Flam- 
beau Indians v. Stop Treaty Abuse-Wis., 991 F.2d 1249, 1258 (7th Cir. 
1993) (“cases involving motivation and intent are usually not appropriate 


29 


Ill. ALTERNATIVELY, THIS COURT SHOULD 
GRANT THE WRIT, AND VACATE AND REMAND 
THIS CASE FOR RECONSIDERATION IN LIGHT 
OF ROSENBERGER v. RECTOR AND VISITORS 
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA, 115 S.Ct. 
2510 (1995). 


Petitioner urges this Court to grant the writ of certiorari 
and set this case for plenary consideration. In the alternative, 
petitioner suggests that the Court grant, vacate, and remand 
for reconsideration in light of its decision last Term in Rosen- 
berger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia, 115 
S.Ct. 2510 (1995). As noted above, the decision below con- 
flicts in principle with Rosenberger’s holding that government 
officials may not discriminate against religious expression on 
the basis of its religious viewpoint. In Rosenberger, this Court 
held that, where state educational institutions permit student 
expression on religious topics, they may not “select[ ] for 
disfavored treatment those student journalistic efforts with 
religious editorial viewpoints.” Jd. at 2517. Here, school 
officials gave Brittney Settle a grade of “zero” for her paper 
on “The Life of Jesus Christ” not because of any general 
exclusion of religious topics but because Brittney’s teacher 
did not want Brittney to write on a religious topic that might 
implicate Brittney’s presumed Christian viewpoint. 


Rosenberger was decided by this Court subsequent to the 
Sixth Circuit’s decision in the instant case. Accordingly, this 
case may be an appropriate one in which to grant certiorari, 
vacate the opinion below, and remand for reconsideration in 
light of the principles set forth in Rosenberger. 


for summary judgment.”); Miller v. Fairchild Industries, Inc., 797 F.2d 
727, 733 (9th Cir. 1986) (factual determinations about an employer’s state- 
of-mind are “generally unsuitable for disposition at the summary judgment 
stage.”). 


30 
CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted, 


MIcHAEL J. WoopDRUFF MIcHAEL STOKES PAULSEN 

Scotr J. Warp c/o University of 

J. MatrHew SZYMANSKI Minnesota Law School 

8280 Greensboro Dr. 229 19th Ave. S. 

McLean, VA 22102-3807 Minneapolis, MN 55455 
(703) 761-5000 (612) 625-0018 

Kurt V. BEASLEY KIMBERLEE Woop Cosy 

Beastey & Tyson Counsel of Record 

Suite 104 Winston Place 4208 Evergreen Lane 

104 East Park Dr. Suite 222 

Brentwood, TN 37027 Annandale, VA 22003 


(615) 373-2500 (703) 642-1070 


App. 1 


Reported at 53 F.3D 152. 
Brittney Kaye SETTLE, Plaintiff-Appellant, 


V. 


DICKSON COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD, et al., Defen- 
dants-Appellees. 


No. 93-6207. 
United States Court of Appeals, Sixth Circuit. 


Argued Jan. 30, 1995. 
Decided May 8, 1995. 


MERRITT, C.J., delivered the opinion of the court, in 
which WEBER, D.J., joined. BATCHELDER, J., delivered a 
separate opinion concurring in the result only. 


The issue before us is whether Dana Ramsey, a junior 
high school teacher in Dickson, a small Tennessee town, 
violated the free speech rights of one of her ninth grade 
students, Brittney Settle, by refusing to accept a research 
paper entitled “The Life of Jesus Christ,” and by giving 
her a “zero” for failing to write on another topic. 
Although this paper topic concerns religious subject mat- 
ter, the plaintiff does not bring her case under the Free 
Exercise Clause or the Establishment Clause of the First 
Amendment. Instead, she has chosen to challenge Ms. 
Ramsey’s rejection of her topic as restricting her rights of 
free speech under the First Amendment. The district 
court granted summary judgment for the defendants and 
dismissed the case. We now affirm the district court's 
judgment. 


App. 2 


FACTS 


During the week of March 15, 1991, Ms. Ramsey 
assigned a research paper to her ninth-grade class at 
Dickson County Junior High School. In assigning the 
paper, the teacher stressed te the students that she 
wanted them to learn how to research a topic, synthesize 
the information they gathered, and write a paper using 
that information. Thus, as she explained, students could 
not merely expound on their own ideas. She required that 
each student use four sources in performing the research. 


Each student could select his or her own topic, sub- 
ject to the teacher’s approval. She required only that each 
topic be “interesting, researchable and decent.” She 
posted a sign-up sheet for each student to list the topic he 
or she had chosen. Between March 15 and March 22 
students could sign up and change their topics at will. On 
March 22, Ms. Ramsey removed the sign-up sheet to 
approve the topics, and afterwards students had to 
receive her approval if they wished to change their topic. 
On March 26, each student was required to hand in an 
outline of the paper he or she planned to write. 


The plaintiff originally signed up to write a paper on 
“Drama.” Subsequently, she changed her mind after 
deciding that the topic might be too broad. Without Ms. 
Ramsey’s prior approval, plaintiff attempted to submit an 
outline for a paper entitled “The Life of Jesus Christ.” The 
teacher refused to accept the outline and told plaintiff she 
would have to select another topic. At this point, plain- 
tiff’s father intervened to complain and met with the 
principal of the school, Ms. Ramsey, and other school 
officials. Ms. Ramsey told plaintiff’s father that she 


App. 3 


would accept a paper on religion as long as it did not deal 
solely with Christianity or the Life of Christ. On April 3, 
plaintiff attempted to submit another outline, with the 
title “A Scientific and Historical Approach to Jesus 
Christ.” Ms. Ramsey rejected this outline as well. Ulti- 
mately, the principal, the superintendent of schools, and 
the Dickson County School Board all expressed their 
support for Ms. Ramsey’s decision and noted that the 
teacher had not exceeded her discretion as far as they 
were concerned. Plaintiff and her family decided to make 
an issue of the matter before the School Board and then in 
court. 


In her statement at a hearing before the School Board, 
and in depositions taken for the litigation of this case, Ms. 
Ramsey has explained that she refused to allow plaintiff's 
topic for a combination of reasons. First, she stated that 
the student had failed to receive permission to write on 
the topic prior to handing in the outline. Because plaintiff 
did not adhere to the requirement of submitting her topic 
for her teacher’s approval, she had to choose another 
topic. 


Second, Ms. Ramsey said that she believed that it 
would be difficult for her to evaluate a research paper on 
a topic related to Jesus Christ. She stated that she knew 
that plaintiff had a strong personal belief in Christianity 
that would make it difficult for her to write a dispassio- 
nate research paper. Furthermore, Ms. Ramsey believed 
that the paper would be difficult to grade because plain- 
tiff might take any criticisms of the paper too personally. 
Even remarks regarding grammar or organization might 
be misinterpreted as criticisms of plaintiff’s religious 


| 


App. 4 


beliefs. Ms. Ramsey thought it would be wiser to avoid 
such potential misunderstandings. 


Third, the teacher indicated that she “just knew that 
we don’t deal with personal religion - personal religious 
beliefs. It’s just not an appropriate thing to do in a public 
school. . . . People don’t send their children to school for 
a teacher to get in a dialogue with personal religio[us] 
beliefs. They send them to learn to read and write and 
think. And you can do that without getting into personal 
religion.” (J.A. at 57). 


Fourth, the teacher felt that because plaintiff knew a 
lot about Jesus Christ, she could produce an outline with- 
out doing any significant research, and thus defeat the 
purpose of the exercise. The teacher stated “it was a lot 
easier to write a quick little preliminary outline on Jesus 
Christ, which she knew a lot about, which most of my 
students knew a lot about.” (J.A. at 57-58). Further, she 
said that part of the purpose of the paper was to have the 
students research a paper on a subject with which they 
were unfamiliar. (J.A. at 70). 


Fifth, Ms. Ramsey at one point during her testimony 
before the School Board stated “the law says we are not to 
deal with religious issues in the classroom.” (J.A. at 222). 
She seems to have thought that she should not allow 
plaintiff to write on the topic of her choice because the 
law may prohibit this kind of religious paper in public 
school classrooms. 


Sixth, while testifying before the school board, Ms. 
Ramsey also stated that she rejected the topic because the 
assignment required the use of four sources and that “all 
of the sources that you [are] going to find documenting 


App. 5 


the life of Jesus Christ derive from one source, the Bible.” 
(J.A. at 221). She seems to have meant primary or original 
sources, but during a previous deposition she said she 
allowed secondary sources: “I required that they have 
two books and two encyclopedias or resources, but they 
could substitute using magazine articles or pamphlets.” 
(J.A. at 38). 


As a result of plaintiff’s refusal to comply with the 
requirements Ms. Ramsey had specified, she received a 
zero for the assignment. The student subsequently sued 
Ms. Ramsey for violating her rights of free speech. Judge 
Wiseman dismissed the case on a motion for summary 
judgment relying on Hazelwood Sch. Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 464 
U.S. 260, 108 S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592 (1988), which 
upheld a school official’s decision to censor a story in the 
school newspaper about pregnancy at the school. Plaintiff 
now appeals the district court’s ruling on two grounds. 
She contends that as a matter of law, Ms. Ramsey violated 
her First Amendment rights as applied to the states by 
the Fourteenth Amendment, and alternatively argues that 
there is a dispute of material fact as to what Ms. Ramsey’s 
actual reasons were for refusing to let her write the paper 
on Jesus Christ, making summary judgment inappropri- 
ate. We take up these arguments in turn. 


DISCUSSION 


After reviewing the precedents concerning students’ 
rights of free speech within a public school, we find few 
cases that address the conflict between the student’s 
rights of speech in the classroom and a teacher’s respon- 
sibility to encourage decorum and scholarship, including 


App. 6 


her authority to determine course content, the selection of 
books, the topic of papers, the grades of students and 
similar questions. Students do not lose entirely their right 
to express themselves as individuals in the classroom, but 
federal courts should exercise particular restraint in class- 
room conflicts between student and teacher over matters 
falling within the ordinary authority of the teacher over 
curriculum and course content. “Courts do not and can- 
not intervene in the resolution of conflicts which arise in 
the daily operation of school systems and which do not 
directly and sharply implicate basic constitutional 
values.” Epperson v. Arkansas, 393 U.S. 97, 104, 89 S.Ct. 
266, 270, 21 L.Ed.2d 228 (1968). 


The free speech rights of students in the classroom 
must be limited because effective education depends not 
only on controlling boisterous conduct, but also on main- 
taining the focus of the class on the assignment in ques- 
tion. So long as the teacher violates no positive law or 
school policy, the teacher has broad authority to base her 
grades for students on her view of the merits of the 
students’ work. Board of Curators of the Univ. of Mo. v. 
Horowitz, 435 U.S. 78, 98 S.Ct. 948, 55 L.Ed.2d 124 (1978); 
Parate v. Isibor, 868 F.2d 821, 828 (6th Cir.1989) (“[t]he 
individual professor’s assignment of a letter grade is 
protected speech.”) Grades are given as incentives for 
study, and they are the currency by which school work is 
measured. 


Plaintiff argues that Ms. Ramsey’s rejection of her 
paper topic infringed upon her fundamental right to free- 
dom of speech. The censorship in the Hazelwood case, 
referred to earlier, involved a school newspaper, a kind of 
open forum for students, and even there the Supreme 


a 


App. 7 


Court said that “educators do not offend the First 
Amendment by exercising editorial control over the style 
and context of student speech in school-sponsored activ- 
ities so long as their actions are reasonably related to 
legitimate pedagogical concerns.” 404 U.S. at 273, 92 S.Ct. 
at 511. Where learning is the focus, as in the classroom, 
student speech may be even more circumscribed than in 
the school newspaper or other open forum. So long as the 
teacher limits speech or grades speech in the classroom in 
the name of learning and not as a pretext for punishing 
the student for her race, gender, economic class, religion 
or political persuasion, the federal courts should not 
interfere. 


Like judges, teachers should not punish or reward 
people on the basis of inadmissible factors — race, reli- 
gion, gender, political ideology - but teachers, like 
judges, must daily decide which arguments are relevant, 
which computations are correct, which analogies are 
good or bad, and when it is time to stop writing or 
talking. Grades must be given by teachers in the class- 
room, just as cases are decided in the courtroom; and to 
this end teachers, like judges, must direct the content of 
speech. Teachers may frequently make mistakes in grad- 
ing and otherwise, just as we do sometimes in deciding 
cases, but it is the essence of the teacher’s responsibility 
in the classroom to draw lines and make distinctions — in 
a word to encourage speech germane to the topic at hand 
and discourage speech unlikely to shed light on the sub- 
ject. Teachers therefore must be given broad discretion to 
give gtades and conduct class discussion based on the 
content of speech. Learning is more vital in the classroom 
than free speech. All six of Ms. Ramsey’s stated reasons 


App. 8 


for refusing to allow Brittney to write the paper fall 
within the broad leeway of teachers to determine the 
nature of the curriculum and the grades to be awarded to 
students, even the reasons that may be mistaken. It is not 
for us to overrule the teacher’s view that the student 
should learn to write research papers by beginning with a 
topic other than her own theology. Papers on the trans- 
figuration of Jesus and similar topics may display more 
faith than rational analysis in the hands of a young stu- 
dent with a strong religious heritage — at least the teacher 
is entitled to make such a judgment in the classroom. 


The case relied upon most heavily by plaintiff’s law- 
j yers, Tinker v. Des Moines Indep. Community School Dist., 
393 U.S. 503, 89 S.Ct. 733, 21 L.Ed.2d 731 (1969), supports 
the conclusion that teachers have broad discretion in 
limiting speech when they are engaged in administering 
the curriculum. In Tinker, the Court held that a student 
could wear a black armband to protest the Vietnam War. 
But, the Court found central to its holding that wearing 
the armband would not “substantially interfere with the 
work of the school or impinge on the rights of other 
students.” Id. at 509, 89 S.Ct. at 738. The Court speci- 
fically stated that a school could limit otherwise pro- 
tected speech if it did so as part of a “prescribed 
classroom exercise.” Id. 


Ms. Ramsey’s justification that the law may prohibit 
teaching about religion in public schools may be a mis- 
take of law, depending on what she meant. Similarly, her 
contention that there is only one source for a paper on 
Jesus Christ may also be mistaken. According to plain- 
tiff’s lawyers, these mistakes raise the question of pretext 
and call forth an attack on the teacher’s integrity. 


ii ll i manne 


App. 9 


The lawyer for plaintiff contended at oral argument 
that all of Ms. Ramsey’s reasons are pretexts for punish- 
ing her for her desire to express her thoughts about the 
life of Jesus. He seemed to believe that the teacher limited 
plaintiff’s speech because of hostility to her religion, and 
he argued that we should draw an inference of lying from 
the two “mistaken” reasons. The argument that Ms. 
Ramsey was untruthful in expressing her real reasons has 
no basis in the record, as both the School Board and the 
District Court found, and arises from an unfortunate 
tendency in lawsuits for parties to cavil at their oppo- 
nents through unsupported accusations. There is no basis 
for finding a real dispute of fact about Ms. Ramsey’s 
motives, and the District Court was therefore correct in 
disposing of the case on summary judgment. 


Accordingly, the judgment of the district court is 
AFFIRMED. 


BATCHELDER, Circuit Judge, concurring. 


While I agree with the majority that the district court 
properly granted summary judgment for the defendants- 
appellees in this case, I respectfully disagree with both 
the majority’s discussion of the facts and its analysis of 
the law. Consequently, I concur only in the result of the 
majority opinion. 


There is no doubt that a balance must be struck 
between a student’s right to freedom of expression in the 
classroom and a teacher’s right to control and manage 
that classroom. And while it is true that courts should not 
meddle in the day to day operation of school functions, 
“ [t]he vigilant protection of constitutional freedoms is 
nowhere more vital than in the community of American 
schools.’ ” Epperson v. Arkansas, 393 U.S. 97, 104, 89 S.Ct. 


App. 10 


266, 270, 21 L.Ed.2d 228 (1968) (quoting Shelton v. Tucker, 
364 U.S. 479, 487, 81 S.Ct. 247, 251, 5 L.Ed.2d 231 (1960)). 
In the words of the Supreme Court, it is indisputable that 
“students . . . [do not] shed their constitutional rights to 
freedorn of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate.” 
Tinker v. Des Moines Indep. Community Sch. Dist., 393 U.S. 
503, 506, 89 S.Ct. 733, 736, 21 L.Ed.2d 731 (1969). 


However, we ought not go about striking this balance 
unless the facts of the case require it. In my view, this is 
not such a case. The crux of Brittney’s claim in this case is 
that she was assigned to choose an “interesting, research- 
able and decent” topic for a research paper in her ninth- 

j grade English class, she chose as her topic “The Life of 
Jesus Christ,” she was not permitted to write the paper 
on this topic because it was religious, and this deprived her 
of her right to engage in free expression. Although I do 
not think that the facts in regard to this claim are as clear 
as the majority opinion portrays them as being, the mate- 
rial facts are clear, those facts are not in dispute, and 
those facts do not state a First Amendment claim. This 
case is not about Brittney Settle’s First Amendment right 
to express her views, opinions or kteliefs, religious or 
otherwise, in the classroom. This case is about whether 
Brittney’s ninth-grade English teacher may determine 
what topic is appropriate to satisfy a research paper 
assignment in that class. 


The material facts are that Ms. Ramsey assigned a 
research paper to her ninth-grade class, that she permit- 
ted the students to choose their own topics, and that she 
restricted that choice only by these criteria - that the 
topic be “interesting, researchable and decent.” The paper 
was to be a research paper, not an opinion paper, and it 


App. 11 


was to be written solely to be turned in to the teacher for 
a grade, not for publication in a school newspaper or any 
other forum. Brittney timely chose a topic, changed that 
topic without the teacher’s permission to “The Life of 
Jesus Christ,” and was denied permission to write her 
paper on the changed topic. Ms. Ramsey gave a number 
of reasons for refusing to permit Brittney to write her 
paper on the life of Christ, Brittney refused to choose a 
new topic, Ms. Ramsey gave her a “zero,” and her deci- 
sion was upheld by school officials. This lawsuit ensued. 


In my view, these facts simply do not state a constitu- 
tional claim. Ms. Ramsey was not engaged in restricting 
Brittney’s expression. She was engaged in restricting 
Brittney’s choice of topic for a research paper. Brittney 
does not expressly claim that a classroom teacher cannot 
control the subject matter for such assignments without 
violating the students’ rights of expression. Rather, she 
claims that the restrictions on this assignment were so 
loose that her choice of topic fit the assignment, and that 
Ms. Ramsey refused to permit her to use that topic 
because the topic was religious. Brittney bolsters her 
claim by asserting that Ms. Ramsey’s reasons for refusing 
to permit the topic were obviously pretextual. 


I would agree that some of Ms. Ramsey’s after-the- 
fact reasons are not very convincing. And I do not agree 
with the majority’s finding that there is no basis in the 
record for a claim that Ms. Ramsey was not truthful in 
stating those reasons. More importantly, however, I do 
not think that Ms. Ramsey’s after-the-fact statement of 
reasons, even if those reasons were pretextual, were pre- 
texts for suppressing Brittney’s expression. They were 
pretexts for an error in judgment. The one thing which 


App. 12 


this record demonstrates clearly is that what Ms. Ramsey 
was guilty of was failing to provide this ninth-grade class 
with substantive guidelines for choosing their research 
paper topics. Faced with Brittney’s new and unapproved 
topic, Ms. Ramsey realized that the criteria that she had 
in mind, but had not adequately explained to the class, 
limited the acceptable topics well beyond the general 
criteria of “interesting, researchable and decent.” 


Implicit in the majority’s opinion is the view that 
classroom teachers can make mistakes of judgment in 
determining how to teach, and these mistakes, so long as 
they are not based on impermissible criteria, do not give 
rise to claims of constitutional deprivations. I wholly 
agree. And on the facts of this case, that is all that needs 
to be said. 


The majority, however, has engaged in a First 
Amendment analysis of this case. As I have stated, I do 
not believe that the facts here implicate Brittney’s First 
Amendment rights, but I take very seriously Brittney’s 
right to express her views at school - including her 
religious beliefs — and for that reason, I must respectfully 
disagree with the majority’s analysis. “Religionists no 
less than members of any other group enjoy the full 
measure of protection afforded speech, association, and 
political activity generally.” McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U.S. 
618, 641, 98 S.Ct. 1322, 1336, 55 L.Ed.2d 593 (1978) (Bren- 
nan, J., concurring). Brittney’s status as a high school 
student does not alter the fundamental core of her right 
to freedom of expression under the First Amendment. In 
the context of the classroom, however, there are necessary 
limits on student expression. The rights of students to 


App. 13 


express their views in the public classroom “are not auto- 
matically coextensive with the rights of adults in other 
settings.” Bethel Sch. Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 
682, 106 S.Ct. 3159, 3164, 92 L.Ed.2d 549 (1986). 


It is the “oft-expressed view” of the Supreme Court 
that “the education of the Nation’s youth is primarily the 
responsibility of parents, teachers, and state and local 
school officials, and not of federal judges.” Hazelwood Sch. 
Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 273, 108 S.Ct. 562, 571, 98 
L.Ed.2d 592 (1988) (citations omitted). That, it seems to 
me, is precisely why complaints such as the one Brittney 
Settle brings before us today, do not state constitutional 
claims, and cannot be made to fit within the framework 
of cases such as Hazelwood and Tinker, upon which the 
majority attempts to rely. 


The facts in this case are not analogous to the facts in 
Hazelwood. Brittney’s paper was to be written solely for 
the purpose of fulfilling an assignment in English class. It 
was not for publication in a school-sanctioned news- 
paper,’ or in any other forum. There is no way to make a 
colorable claim that this paper is speech which might be 
viewed by the community as bearing the imprimatur of 
the school, the circumstance which was central to the 


I am puzzled by the majority’s characterization of the 
school newspaper in Hazelwood as “a kind of open forum for 
students. . .. ” Majority opinion at 155. The Supreme Court in 
that case explicitly found that the district court had correctly 
dismissed as not credible the students’ claim that they believed 
they could publish “practically anything” in the paper, and held 
that the newspaper was not a forum for public expression. 
Hazelwood, 484 U.S. at 269 & n. 2, 108 S.Ct. at 569 & n. 2. 


App. 14 


Supreme Court’s holding in Hazelwood. Id. at 270-71, 108 
S.Ct. at 569-70. 


Neither is this case like the situation in Tinker. A 
research paper is not an expression of opinion, and the 
restriction of choice of topic is not readily analogous to 
the kind of pure expression of student opinion, that hap- 
pened to take place in the classroom, that the Supreme 
Court addressed there. Tinker, 393 U.S. at 511, 89 S.Ct. at 
739. 


If there were a First Amendment issue here, it would 
fall somewhere in between Hazelwood and Tinker as a 
form of student expression allowed under the school cur- 
riculum but not sponsored or endorsed by the school. 
Certainly not all student speech in the classroom bears 
the imprimatur of the school. This seems as obvious as 
the opposite proposition; students do not have an unlim- 
ited or unbridled right to speak out freely while on 
school property. The Supreme Court has acknowledged 
that a difference exists “between speech a school must 
tolerate and speech a school must affirmatively promote.” 
Alabama Student Party v. Student Government Association, 
867 F.2d 1344, 1347 (11th Cir.1989) (emphasis added) (cit- 
ing Hazelwood Sch. Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260, 108 
S.Ct. 562, 98 L.Ed.2d 592 (1988)). 


The bottom line is that when a teacher makes an 
assignment, even if she does it poorly, the student has no 
constitutional right to do something other than that 
assignment and receive credit for it. It is not necessary to 
try to cram this situation into the framework of constitu- 
tional precedent, because there is no constitutional ques- 
tion. 


App. 15 


That does not, however, make the majority’s treat- 
ment of Ms. Ramsey’s stated reasons for rejecting Britt- 
ney’s paper topic irrelevant. The majority opinion sets 
out six reasons given by Ms. Ramsey for refusing to 
permit Brittney to write her research paper on “The Life 
of Jesus Christ,” and holds that “[a]ll six of Ms. Ramsey’s 
stated reasons for refusing to allow Brittney to write the 
paper fall within the broad leeway of teachers to deter- 
mine the nature of the curriculum and the grades to be 
awarded to students, even the reasons that may be mis- 
taken.” Majority opinion at 156. I cannot agree. Ms. 
Ramsey said, for example, that “’we don’t deal with 
personal religion’ ” and “ ‘the law says we are not to deal 
with religious issues in the classroom.’ ” Majority opinion 
at 154. On the contrary, religious speech, like all speech, 
does have a place in the classroom. According to the 
Supreme Court: 


“ea 


Government in our democracy, state and 
national, must be neutral in matters of religious 
theory, doctrine, and practice. It may not be 
hostile to any religion or to the advocacy of no 
religion; and it may not aid, foster, or promote 
one religion or religious theory against another 
or even against the militant opposite. The First 
Amendment mandates governmental neutrality 
between religion and religion, and between reli- 
gion and nonreligion. 


Epperson v. Arkansas, 393 U.S. 97, 103-04, 89 S.Ct. 266, 
269-70, 21 L.Ed.2d 228 (1968) (footnote omitted). Ms. 
Ramsey was dead wrong in her view that Brittney’s 
paper topic was impermissible because a paper of a reli- 
gious nature is impermissible in the public schools. Had 
the assignment been to write a paper of opinion, and had 


App. 16 


Ms. Ramsey rejected the paper on the ground of its reli- 
gious content alone, Brittney’s freedom of speech truly 
would have been violated. I do not believe, therefore, that 
the majority correctly states the law in this regard by 
holding “[ljearning is more vital in the classroom than 
free speech.” Majority opinion at 156. “In order for the 
State in the person of school officials to justify prohibition 
of a particular expression of opinion, it must be able to 
show’ that its action was caused by something more than 
a mere desire to avoid the discomfort and unpleasantness 
that always accompany an unpopular viewpoint.” Tinker, 
393 U.S. at 509, 89 S.Ct. at 738. 


Brittney also attempts to raise an equal protection 
claim contending that because Ms. Ramsey permitted 
other students to choose research topics based on reli- 
gious themes, Brittney was denied constitutional equal 
protection under the laws. Several other students in Britt- 
ney’s class were permitted to research and write on the 
topics “Spiritualism,” “Reincarnation,” and “Magic 
Throughout History.” Once again, however, it was within 
the teacher’s discretion to determine whether these topics 
conformed to the restrictions inherent in the research 
assignment. So long as the student authors would be 
required to compile research and organize facts in an 
objective fashion, their topics, religious or not, could be 
judged appropriate for the assignment. Ms. Ramsey prop- 
erly exercised her power of control over the classroom in 
distinguishing Brittney’s topic from those others in her 
ninth-grade class. On these facts, Brittney has not pre- 
sented an equal protection claim. 


App. 17 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 


No: 93-6207 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
DICKSON COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD, et al., 
Defendants-Appellees. 


Before: Merritt, Chief Judge; Batchelder, Circuit Judge; 
Weber, District Judge. 


JUDGMENT 
(Filed May 8, 1995) 


ON APPEAL from the United States District Court 
for the Middle District of Tennessee at Nashville. 


THIS CAUSE was heard on the record from the dis- 
trict court and was argued by counsel. 


ON CONSIDERATION WHEREOF, it is ORDERED 
that the judgment of the district court is AFFIRMED. 


ENTERED BY ORDER 
OF THE COURT 


/s/ Leonard Green 
Leonard Green, Clerk 


App. 18 


Issued as Mandate: 5/30/95 
COSTS: No Costs Attest: 


i Ul eres $ 
eee $ 
Sees $ 


A True Copy. 
Attest: 


/s/ Diane Schnur 
Deputy Clerk 


App. 19 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF TENNESSEE 
NASHVILLE DIVISION 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE, 
Plaintiff 
vs. No. 3: 91-0562 


DICKSON COUNTY 
SCHOOL BOARD, ET AL., 


Defendants. 


MEMORANDUM 


This is a Civil Rights action brought pursuant to 42 
U.S.C. § 1983 by Brittney Kaye Settle against the Dickson 
County School Board and three of its employees. Plaintiff 
claims that her First Amendment freedom of speech 
rights were violated when she was not allowed to write 
her research paper on a topic of her choice. She alleges 
violations of her First and Fourteenth Amendment rights 
and seeks declaratory and injunctive relief. Both sides 
have moved for summary judgment. For the reasons set 
forth below, the Court finds that no Constitutional viola- 
tion has occurred, summary judgment is awarded to 
defendants, and the case dismissed. 


FACTUAL BACKGROUND 


During the week of March 15, 1991, Defendant Dana 
Ramsey, a ninth grade teacher at Dickson County Junior 
High School (“DJHS”), assigned a research paper to her 
class. The purpose of the paper was to teach her students 
how to research a topic and write a paper using this 
information. As Mrs. Ramsey made clear, it was not to be 


App. 20 


about the students’ own ideas. Selection of the topic of 
the paper was left entirely up to the student provided 
that the topic was “interesting, researchable, and decent.” 
Mrs. Ramsey allowed the students to choose their own 
topics as a means of getting the students to “show owner- 
ship” of their compositions. 


The students were given from March 15 through 
March 22 to select a topic and indicate their selection on a 
sign-up sheet posted in the classroom. The students could 
change their subject at any time during this period simply 
by scratching off the previous subject and adding a new 
one. On Friday March 22, Mrs. Ramsey removed the sign- 
up sheet. After the list was removed, the students were 
still allowed to change their topic but only after notifying 
Mrs. Ramsey. On Tuesday, March 26, the students were to 
submit their preliminary outlines, and no changes were 
allowed after that date, except for “modification” of 
issues within the topic. 


After originally signing up for the topic of “Drama,” 
Brittney changed her mind and decided on a new topic 
because this topic was too broad. On the morning of 
March 26, she attempted to hand in an outline entitled the 
“Life of Jesus Christ” without having first asked for 
approval. Mrs. Ramsey rejected the change, and after 
class explained to Brittney that she failed to follow the 
proper procedure and that this new topic would not serve 
the paper’s purpose. In addition, she told Brittney that 
her new topic was inappropriate because it dealt with 
Brittney’s personal religion and would be a difficult topic to 


App. 21 


write objectively.’ Later that afternoon, Mrs. Ramsey told 
Brittney that her choice of topic “could lead to a bad 
experience.” In addition, Mrs. Ramsey gave Brittney 
another chance to submit a different topic on the follow- 
ing day without penalty because she felt that Brittney 
may have not understood the procedure or may not have 
truly wanted to write on drama. In fact, Mrs. Ramsey told 
Brittney that she could write a paper with religious 
aspects as long as it did not solely deal with Christianity 
or the life of Christ. In her affidavit, Mrs. Ramsey stated, 
“[t]he whole point was for this [paper] to be a pleasant 
experience.” 


On March 28, Mr. Settle, Brittney’s father, contacted 
Reed Evans, principal of DJHS. He wanted to know why 
Mrs. Ramsey allowed writings on spiritualism, the occult, 
and reincarnation and would not allow his daughter to 
write on the life of Jesus Christ. Evans then talked with 
Mrs. Ramsey and learned that Brittney failed to follow 
proper procedures. Based upon this information, he then 
gave Mrs. Ramsey his full support for her decision. A 
meeting took place on March 27 between Mr. Evans, Mr. 
Settle, Mrs. Ramsey in which Mr. Evans agreed to look 


' Mrs. Ramsey did accept outlines on topics such as reincar- 
nation, spiritualism, and the occult, which discussed religious 
figures from history and their doctrinal teachings. These papers, 
however, did not focus on religion, and the information pro- 
vided served as background information. For example, a paper 
on reincarnation discussed Buddhism and Hinduism; a paper 
entitled “Spiritualism” noted that some religions make it a part 
of their beliefs; and the composition on “Magic Throughout 
History” contained such titles as “Jews believe in Baal,” 
“Demons Are Evil Spirits,” and “Gods Are Good Spirits.” 


App. 22 


further into the matter. Mr. Evans then talked to Mrs. 
Ramsey about the situation and again based his decision 
on Brittney’s failing to follow proper procedures. 


Mr. Settle also called George Caudill, superintendent 
of the Dickson County school system, which led to a 
meeting between Caudill, Evans, and Ramsey. It is 
unclear from the record if this is the same meeting men- 
tioned in the preceding paragraph. Following up his 
investigation, Caudill called Settle and told him that Mrs. 
Ramsey had the right to draw the parameters and guide- 
lines in her classroom. Since it was his understanding 
that Brittney did not comply, he told Mr. Settle that he 
fully supported Mrs. Ramsey’s actions. 


As a result of failure to comply, Mrs. Ramsey gave 
her a zero for the assignment. On April 1, 1991, the 
Dickson County School Board reviewed her actions and 
voted to uphold them. 


ANALYSIS 


There are two methods of analysis when dealing with 
student speech in public schools. The first method was 
established in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Com. Sch. 
Dist., 393 U.S. 503 (1969) and deals with the prohibition of 
a student’s individual, personal expression while on 
school premises. The second method was established in 
Hazelwood School Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988) 
and deals with the limits of a school official’s authority 
over student expression that is school sponsored. 


In Tinker, which the Plaintiff argues to be dispositive, 
the Supreme Court set forth a two pronged test for an 


App. 23 


individual student expressing his own opinions while at 
school. A student “may express his opinions, even on 
controversial subjects .. . , if (1) he does so without 
‘materially and substantially interferfing] with the 
requirements of appropriate discipline in the operation of 
the school’ and (2) without colliding with the rights of 
others.” Id. at 513. Under Tinker, a student’s expressions 
on public school premises are not protected if they “mate- 
rially disrupt classwork or involve substantial disorder or 
invasion in the rights of others.” Id. at 513. If these 
“restricted circumstances” are not applicable then the 
student’s speech is protected. Id. Furthermore, this test 
applies not only to “classroom hours” but also “in the 
cafeteria ..., on the playing field, or on campus during 
authorized hours.” Id. at 512-13. 


Hazelwood teaches that “educators [can] exercis[e] 
editorial control over the style and content of student 
speech in school-sponsored expressive activities so long as 
their actions are reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical 
concerns.” Id. at 273 (emphasis added). The Court 
described these activities as being “part of the school 
curriculum, whether or not they occur in a traditional 
classroom setting, so long as they are supervised by 
faculty members and designed to impart particular 
knowledge or skills to student participants and audi- 
ences.” Id. at 273. In making this determination, the Court 
reasoned: 


Educators are entitled to exercise greater control 
over ... this form of student expression to 
assure that participants learn whatever lessons 
the activity is designed to teach, that readers or 
listeners are not exposed to material that may be 


App. 24 


inappropriate for their level of maturity, and 
that the views of the individual speaker are not 
erroneously attributed to the school. 


Id. at 271. 


Furthermore, although students in public schools are pro- 
tected by the First Amendment guarantees, their free 
speech protection is not “automatically co-extensive with 
the rights of adults in other settings.” Id. at 266. 


Plaintiff insists that Tinker is controlling. She con- 
tends that her paper was clearly a personal expression 
because it was to be her own work product, was assigned 

to “show ownership” of her topic, and was not to be 
funded by or circulated around the school as with a 
school newspaper. Plaintiff argues that the Tinker test is 
easily fulfilled. Applying the facts to this test, Plaintiff 
asserts that Mrs. Ramsey’s fear of disturbance and inter- 
ference with the rights of others lacks a substantial basis. 
In addition, Plaintiff states that even if she did have a 
valid fear of disturbance, the Tinker court held “fear or 
apprehension of disturbance is not enough to overcome 
the right of freedom of expression.” Id. at 508. Thus, Mrs. 
Ramsey should have allowed her to write her paper 
under Tinker. 


Defendants rely upon Hazelwood. First, defendants 
argue that Plaintiff strains to show that Tinker controls. 
Plaintiff claims that because her paper was “personal” in 
nature, it was not subject to “censorship” unless her 
expression “materially and substantially interfer[ed] with 
the requirements of appropriate discipline in the opera- 
tion of the school .. . ” Tinker, 393 U.S. at 513. Defendant 
asserts that this argument is simply without merit and 


Ee a ee I eee a NL ME ETT Ee 


App. 25 


that the issue is not whether the expression is “personal” 
per se, for all speech can be personal to the speaker. 
Rather, the issue is “whether the First Amendment 
requires a school affirmatively to promote particular stu- 
dent speech.”? Hazelwood, 484 U.S. at 270. In other words, 
must a school accept a student’s particular form of speech 
in a “school-sponsored setting?” Defendant asserts that 
the answer is clearly no, provided that the speech “may 
fairly be characterized as part of the school curriculum” 
and is “designed to impart particular knowledge or skills 
to student participants” and that the restrictions are “rea- 
sonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns.” Id. at 
271-73. 


Defendant is correct. Hazelwood provides the appro- 
priate rationale and the controlling rule of law on these 
facts. This case does not present an issue of personal 
expression but, rather, one of the school’s “ . . . control 
over ... the school curriculum.” Id. at 271. Here, the 
research paper assignment was designed not to elicit 
personal views or beliefs, but to teach research and writ- 
ing skills. It was part of the regular school curriculum 
and was supervised by faculty. Plaintiff failed to conform 
to established deadlines and her subject change could 
have been rejected on that ground alone as “reasonably 


2 The language of this issue seems rather vague; however, 
the Supreme Court clarifies this ambiguity and states that this 
issue “concerns [the] educator’s authority over . . . the school 
curriculum.” Id. at 271. 


App. 26 


related to pedagogical concerns.”? However, Mrs. 
Ramsey’s fear that Plaintiff's motivation for changing her 
paper was because of her familiarity with the subject and 
the ease with which it could be written is also a legitimate 
pedagogical concern. Mrs. Ramsey was also fearful that a 
paper based largely on a student's personal religious 
beliefs could not be criticized for style, context, accuracy, 
source documentation, etc. without inciting personal 
offense, particularly for a ninth grade student.‘ This, toc, 


3 Q. Did you explain to Brittney at that time that due to 
the fact that she had missed her deadline for getting her topic 
approved, that you would not be able to accept this paper? 

A. Yes. 

Q. So was the reason that you didn’t accept the paper - 
was it because she had missed the deadline for approval on 
Friday, the previous Friday, or because she chose the life of Jesus 
Christ? 

A. It was both. She did not - had she - she did not submit 
it properly as everyone else in both of my classes did. And I had 
made a real big deal about that, so they all knew. And they all 
know me well, to know that when I set up a procedure, I don’t 
make exceptions. So if I’ve set up the procedure, then I expect 
everyone to follow it. So that was a primary concern. The other 
concern, as I’ve just told you, I didn’t feel it was an appropriate 
topic for someone her age. It dealt too closely with her private 
religious beliefs. 

Deposition of Dana Ramsey, at 27, 28. 


4 A. Well, when you are critiquing a paper — these are 
fourteen year olds. They are not skilled, obviously, in this pro- 
cess or I wouldn’t be teaching it on such a basic level. I felt - 
when you are critiquing someone’s work, they take it very 
personally. And if you add to it that it’s leading with personal 
religion values that may be intertwined in it, it’s a no-win 
situation. If you critique the paper because of structure or what- 
ever, then you are opening the door to, “There’s nothing wrong 


ee ee eee ee 


App. 27 


is a legitimate pedagogical concern. Furthermore, there is 
no evidence that these assigned reasons are pretextual. 


Next, Plaintiff states that Mrs. Ramsey violated the 
written policy “Religion In The Curriculum” of the Dick- 
son County Board of Education. The policy states in 
relevant part as follows: 


Religious institutions and orientations are cen- 
tral to human experience, both past and present. 
An education excluding such a significant 
aspect would be incomplete. It is essential that 
the teaching about - and not of religion be con- 
ducted in a factual, objective, and respectful 
manner. 


Therefore, the policy of the Board of Education 
shall be as follows: 


(1) The Board supports the inclusion of reli- 
gious literature, music, drama and the arts in 
the curriculum and in school activities, provided 
it is intrinsic to the learning experience in the 
various fields of study and presented objec- 
tively. 


(2) The emphasis on religious themes in the 
arts, literature and history should be only as 
extensive as necessary for a balanced and com- 
prehensive study of these areas. Such studies 
shall never foster any particular religious tenets 
or demean any religious beliefs. 


(3) Student-initiated expressions to questions 
or assignments which reflect their beliefs or 


with this. You just don’t agree with me; therefore, that’s why I 
got a bad grade.” 
Deposition of Dana Ramsey, at 26-27. 


App. 28 


non-beliefs about a religious theme shall be 
accommodated. For example, students are free 
to express religious belief or non-belief in com- 
positions, art, music, speech, and debate. 


Focusing on the third provision, Plaintiff alleges that 
Mrs. Ramsey incorrectly interpreted the meaning of 
“composition,” as expressed by the written policy. Mrs. 
Ramsey defines a composition as containing personal 
experiences and observations, as opposed to an objective 
research paper. This is a reasonable interpretation; it com- 
ports with the learning objective of the exercise; and it 
has a valid pedagogical justification. The written policy 
was not violated. 


Plaintiff asserts that Mrs Ramsey has failed to main- 
tain “a benevolent neutrality . . . permit[ting] religious 
exercise to exist without sponsorship and without inter- 
ference.” Walz v. Tax Commission, 397 U.S. 664, 669 (1970). 
In addition, Plaintiff cites Abington v. Schemp, 374 U.S. 
203, 225 (1963), in which the Supreme Court recognized 
the possibility of hostility toward religion developing in 
the public school system. Justice Clark declared for the 
Court that the state may not establish a “religion of 
secularism” by “affirmatively opposing or showing hos- 
tility to a religion,” as to do so would then have the state 
“preferring those who believe in no religion over those 
who do believe.” Thus, Plaintiff asserts that in order to 
avoid establishing a religion of “secularity,” public school 
authorities should accommodate students who wish to 
express ideas in terms of their religious faith. The Board 
policy expressly authorizes such idea expression, but, 
again, this exercise was not one of idea expression but a 
research paper. Plaintiff’s argument is specious. 


App. 29 


The religion clauses of the First Amendment are not 
implicated by the facts of this case. The free speech claim 
is governed by Hazelwood, and plaintiff’s claim falls 
under that analysis. In view of the court’s holding, it is 
unnecessary to address the qualified immunity issue. 
Summary judgment is granted all defendants. An appro- 
priate order will enter. 


/s/ Thomas A. Wiseman, Jr. 
Thomas A. Wiseman, Jr. 
U.S. District Judge 


App. 30 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF TENNESSEE 
NASHVILLE DIVISION 

BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE ’ 
Plaintiff, 

vs. ) No. 3: 91-0562 
) 
) 
) 
) 


DICKSON COUNTY SCHOOL 
BOARD, ET AL., 


Defendants. 


ORDER 


In accordance with the accompanying memorandum, 
summary judgment is granted to all defendants and this 
case is hereby DISMISSED. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


/s/ Thomas A. Wiseman, Jr. 
Thomas A. Wiseman, Jr. 
U.S. District Judge 


App. 31 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF TENNESSEE 
NASHVILLE DIVISION 


BRITTNEY KAYE SETTLE 


) 

a ) 
Plaintiff, ) CASE NO. 3-91-0562 
VS. ) NOTICE OF APPEAL 
) 
) 
) 
) 


DICKSON COUNTY 
SCHOOL BOARD, ET AL., 


Defendants. 


Notice is hereby given that Brittney Kaye Settle, 
Plaintiff above named, hereby appeals to the United 
States Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit from the Order 
of Summary Judgment granted in favor of all Defendants 
in this case by the Honorable Thomas A. Wiseman, Jr., 
U.S. District Judge, entered in this action on the 17th day 
of August, 1993. 


This Notice of Appeal being filed this the 2 day of 
September, 1993. 


Respectfully submitted, 
/s/ Kurt V. Beasley 


Kurt V. Beasley, Esq. 
BEASLEY & TYSON 

Suite 104, Winston Place 
104 East Park Drive 
Brentwood, Tennessee 37027 
(615) 373-2500 


App. 32 


/s/ Larry L. Crain by kvb 
Larry L. Crain, Esq. 
105 Westpark Drive, Suite 450 
Brentwood, Tennessee 37027 
(615) 371-1956 


Attorneys for the Plaintiff 


Participating Attorneys for 
The Rutherford Institute 


App. 33 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
No. 
A-86 
Brittney Kaye Settle, 
Petitioner 
v. 


Dickson County School Board, et al. 


ORDER 


UPON CONSIDERATION of the application of coun- 
sel for the petitioner, 


IT IS ORDERED that the time for filing a petition for 
a writ of certiorari in the above-entitled case, be and the 
same is hereby, extended to and including September 25, 
1995. 


/s/ John Paul Stevens 
Associate Justice of the Supreme 
Court of the United States 


Dated this Ist, 
day of August, 1995. 


