517US2$43z 02-04-99 16:40:49 PAGES OPINPGT




                         OCTOBER TERM, 1995                              345

                                Per Curiam


BOWERSOX, SUPERINTENDENT, POTOSI CORREC-
       TIONAL CENTER v. WILLIAMS
       on application to vacate stay of execution
                    No. A–828. Decided April 9, 1996
A Federal District Court denied respondent Williams’ third habeas corpus
  petition, finding all of his claims to be abusive, successive, or procedur-
  ally defaulted. The Eighth Circuit subsequently entered a summary
  order staying Williams’ pending execution, giving no explanation for its
  conclusion that such a stay was appropriate.
Held: The Eighth Circuit abused its discretion by entering a stay on this
 record. Entry of a stay on a second or third habeas petition is particu-
 larly egregious absent substantial grounds for relief. Delo v. Blair, 509
 U. S. 823. No such grounds can be discerned here. The Magistrate’s
 report adopted by the District Court meticulously addresses and rejects
 each of Williams’ claims. To the extent that the Eighth Circuit dis-
 cerned substantial grounds for relief, it failed to reveal them in its sum-
 mary order. Entry of a stay without explanation is disfavored, cf. Neth-
 erland v. Tuggle, 515 U. S. 951 (per curiam), for this Court loses the
 benefit of the court of appeals’ views and must resort to other portions
 of the record in evaluating whether to vacate the stay.
Application granted.

  Per Curiam.
  Doyle J. Williams is scheduled to be executed by the State
of Missouri on April 10, 1996. On January 11, 1996, a Fed-
eral District Court denied Williams’ third federal habeas
corpus petition, finding all of Williams’ claims to be abusive,
successive, or procedurally defaulted. On March 8, 1996, the
United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit en-
tered a summary order staying Williams’ execution. The
Court of Appeals scheduled oral argument for May 13, 1996,
and resolved that the stay would remain in effect pending
submission of the case and that court’s further order. The
summary order gives no explanation for the Court of Ap-
peals’ conclusion that oral argument is necessary or that
entry of a stay was appropriate. The Court of Appeals
517US2$43n 02-04-99 16:40:49 PAGES OPINPGT




346                BOWERSOX v. WILLIAMS

                          Per Curiam

denied a petition for rehearing en banc, and we now have
before us an application to vacate the stay.
   “A stay of execution pending disposition of a second or
successive federal habeas petition should be granted only
when there are ‘substantial grounds upon which relief might
be granted.’ ” Delo v. Stokes, 495 U. S. 320, 321 (1990) (per
curiam) (quoting Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U. S. 880, 895
(1983)). Entry of a stay on a second or third habeas petition
is a drastic measure, and we have held that it is “ ‘particu-
larly egregious’ ” to enter a stay absent substantial grounds
for relief. Delo v. Blair, 509 U. S. 823 (1993) (citation omit-
ted). On the record before us, we can discern no such
grounds. We are persuaded by the report prepared by Mag-
istrate Judge Hays, which meticulously addresses each of
Williams’ claims and finds each to be abusive, successive, pro-
cedurally defaulted, or meritless, and by the District Court’s
order adopting that report, in which the District Court also
denied Williams’ dilatory motion to amend the habeas peti-
tion. The Court of Appeals abused its discretion by enter-
ing a stay on this record.
   To the extent the Court of Appeals discerned substantial
grounds for relief, it failed to reveal them in its summary
order granting the stay. Although we hesitate to say that a
court of appeals must, in every case, explain the basis for its
entry of a stay, we see fit to remind the lower courts that
entry of a stay without explanation is disfavored. Cf. Neth-
erland v. Tuggle, 515 U. S. 951 (1995) (per curiam). When
a court of appeals fails to articulate its reasons for granting
a stay, we lose the benefit of that court’s views and must
resort to other portions of the record in evaluating whether
to vacate the stay. In this case, the District Court’s careful
treatment of Williams’ claims and the surface implausibility
of those claims persuade us that the stay should not have
been granted, and the Court of Appeals’ summary order does
not convince us otherwise.
517US2$43n 02-04-99 16:40:49 PAGES OPINPGT




                   Cite as: 517 U. S. 345 (1996)             347

                     Ginsburg, J., dissenting

   Accordingly, the application to vacate the stay of execution
is granted.
                                               It is so ordered.
   Justice Ginsburg, with whom Justice Stevens, Jus-
tice Souter, and Justice Breyer join, dissenting.
   I would deny the application to vacate the stay of Wil-
liams’ execution. A diligent appellate court has granted a
certificate of probable cause and scheduled this case for argu-
ment on May 13. Those actions signal to me the existence
of reasons, not the absence of reasons, for granting a stay.
At the very least, before acting irretrievably, this Court
might have invited prompt clarification of the Court of Ap-
peals’ order. Appreciation of our own fallibility, and respect
for the judgment of an appellate tribunal closer to the scene
than we are, as I see it, demand as much.
