                          McCLESKEY v. ZANT                              467

                                  Syllabus


McCLESKEY v. ZANT, SUPERINTENDENT, GEORGIA
  DIAGNOSTIC AND CLASSIFICATION CENTER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
    No. 89-7024.    Argued October 31, 1990-Decided April 16, 1991
To rebut petitioner McCleskey's alibi defense at his 1978 Georgia trial
  for murder and a related crime, the State called Offie Evans, the occu-
  pant of the jail cell next to McCleskey's, who testified that McCleskey
  had admitted and boasted about the killing. On the basis of this and
  other evidence supporting McCleskey's guilt, the jury convicted him and
  sentenced him to death. After the State Supreme Court affirmed, he
  filed an unsuccessful petition for state habeas corpus relief, alleging,
  inter alia, that his statements to Evans were elicited in a situation cre-
  ated by the State to induce him to make incriminating statements with-
  out the assistance of counsel in violation of Massiah v. United States,
  377 U. S. 201. He then filed his first federal habeas petition, which
  did not raise a Massiah claim, and a second state petition, both of which
  were ultimately unsuccessful. Finally, he filed his second federal ha-
  beas petition in 1987, basing a Massiah challenge on a 21-page statement
  that Evans had made to police two weeks before the trial. The docu-
  ment, which the State furnished at McCleskey's request shortly before
  he filed his second federal petition, related conversations that were con-
  sistent with Evans' trial testimony, but also recounted the tactics used
  by Evans to engage McCleskey in conversation. Moreover, at a hearing
  on the petition, Ulysses Worthy, a jailer during McCleskey's pretrial in-
  carceration whose identity came to light after the petition was filed, gave
  testimony indicating that Evans' cell assignment had been made at the
  State's behest. In light of the Evans statement and Worthy's testi-
  mony, the District Court found an ab initio relationship between Evans
  and the State and granted McCleskey relief under Massiah. The Court
  of Appeals reversed on the basis of the doctrine of abuse of the writ,
  which defines the circumstances in which federal courts decline to enter-
  tain a claim presented for the first time in a second or subsequent habeas
  corpus petition.
Held: McCleskey's failure to raise his Massiah claim in his first federal
  habeas petition constituted abuse of the writ. Pp. 477-503.
     (a) Much confusion exists as to the proper standard for applying the
  abuse-of-the-writ doctrine, which refers to a complex and evolving body
  of equitable principles informed and controlled by historical usage,
  statutory developments, and judicial decisions. This Court has hereto-
468                     OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                                 Syllabus                          499 u. s.

 fore defined such abuse in an oblique way, through dicta and denials
 of certiorari petitions or stay applications, see Witt v. Wainwright, 470
 U. S. 1039, 1043 (MARSHALL, J., dissenting), and, because of historical
 changes and the complexity of the subject, has not always followed an
 unwavering line in its conclusions as to the writ's availability, Fay v.
 Noia, 372 U. S. 391, 411-412. Pp. 477-489.
    (b) Although this Court's federal habeas decisions do not all admit
 of ready synthesis, a review of these precedents demonstrates that a
 claim need not have been deliberately abandoned in an earlier petition
 in order to establish that its inclusion in a subsequent petition consti-
 tutes abuse of the writ, see, e.g., Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S. 1,
 18; that such inclusion constitutes abuse if the claim could have been
 raised in the first petition, but was omitted through inexcusable neglect,
 see, e. g., Delo v. Stokes, 495 U. S. 320, 321-322; and that, because the
 doctrines of procedural default and abuse of the writ implicate nearly
 identical concerns, the determination of inexcusable neglect in the abuse
 context should be governed by the same standard used to determine
 whether to excuse a habeas petitioner's state procedural defaults, see,
 e. g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72. Thus, when a prisoner files a
 second or subsequent habeas petition, the government bears the burden
 of pleading abuse of the writ. This burden is satisfied if the govern-
 ment, with clarity and particularity, notes petitioner's prior writ history,
 identifies the claims that appear for the first time, and alleges that peti-
 tioner has abused the writ. The burden to disprove abuse then shifts to
 petitioner. To excuse his failure to raise the claim earlier, he must show
 cause-e. g., that he was impeded by some objective factor external to
 the defense, such as governmental interference or the reasonable un-
 availability of the factual basis for the claim-as well as actual prejudice
 resulting from the errors of which he complains. He will not be entitled
 to an evidentiary hearing if the district court determines as a matter of
 law that he cannot satisfy the cause and prejudice standard. However,
 if he cannot show cause, the failure to earlier raise the claim may none-
 theless be excused if he can show that a fundamental miscarriage of jus-
 tice-the conviction of an innocent person-would result from a failure to
 entertain the claim. Pp. 489-497.
    (c) McCleskey has not satisfied the foregoing standard for excusing
 the omission of his Massiah claim from his first federal habeas petition.
 He lacks cause for that omission, and, therefore, the question whether
 he would be prejudiced by his inability to raise the claim need not be
 considered. See Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 494. That he may
 not have known about, or been able to discover, the Evans document
 before filing his first federal petition does not establish cause, since
 knowlege gleaned from the trial about the jail-cell conversations and
                         McCLESKEY v. ZANT                               469

467                               Syllabus

  Evans' conduct, as well as McCleskey's admitted participation in those
  conversations, put him on notice that he should pursue the Massiah
  claim in the first federal petition as he had done in his first state peti-
  tion. Nor does the unavailability of Worthy's identity and testimony
  at the time of the first federal petition establish cause, since the fact
  that Evans' statement was the only new evidence McCleskey had when
  he filed the Massiah claim in his second federal petition demonstrates
  the irrelevance of Worthy to that claim. Moreover, cause cannot be
  established by the State's allegedly wrongful concealment of the Evans
  document until 1987, since the District Court found no wrongdoing in the
  failure to hand over the document earlier, and since any initial conceal-
  ment would not have prevented McCleskey from raising a Massiah claim
  in the first federal petition. Amadeo v. Zant, 486 U. S. 214, 224, distin-
  guished. Furthermore, the narrow miscarriage of justice exception to
  the cause requirement is of no avail to McCleskey, since he cannot dem-
  onstrate that the alleged Massiah violation caused the conviction of an
  innocent person. The record demonstrates that that violation, if it be
  one, resulted in the admission at trial of truthful inculpatory evidence
  which did not affect the reliability of the guilt determination. In fact,
  the Evans statement that McCleskey now embraces confirms his guilt.
  Pp. 497-503.
890 F. 2d 342, affirmed.

  KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST,
C. J., and WHITE, O'CONNOR, SCALIA, and SOUTER, JJ., joined. MAR-
SHALL, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which BLACKMUN and STEVENS,
JJ., joined, post, p. 506.

  John Charles Boger argued the cause for petitioner. With
him on the briefs were Roberi H. Stroup, Julius L. Cham-
bers III, Richard H. Burr III, George H. Kendall, and An-
thony G. Amsterdam.
  Mary Beth Westmoreland, Senior Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral of Georgia, argued the cause for respondent. With
her on the brief were Michael J. Bowers, Attorney General,
William B. Hill, Jr., Deputy Attorney General, and Susan
V. Boleyn, Senior Assistant Attorney General.*
   * Mark E. Olive filed a brief for the Alabama Capital Representation
Resource Center et al. as amici curiae urging reversal.
   Kent S. Scheidegger filed a brief for the Criminal Justice Legal Founda-
tion as amicus curiae urging affirmance.
470                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court             499 u. s.

  JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
   The doctrine of abuse of the writ defines the circumstances
in which federal courts decline to entertain a claim presented
for the first time in a second or subsequent petition for a writ
of habeas corpus. Petitioner Warren McCleskey in a second
federal habeas petition presented a claim under Massiah v.
United States, 377 U. S. 201 (1964), that he failed to include
in his first federal petition. The Court of Appeals for the
Eleventh Circuit held that assertion of the Massiah claim in
this manner abused the writ. Though our analysis differs
from that of the Court of Appeals, we agree that the peti-
tioner here abused the writ, and we affirm the judgment.

                                I
   McCleskey and three other men, all armed, robbed a Geor-
gia furniture store in 1978. One of the robbers shot and
killed an off duty policeman who entered the store in the
midst of the crime. McCleskey confessed to the police that
he participated in the robbery. When on trial for both the
robbery and the murder, however, McCleskey renounced his
confession after taking the stand with an alibi denying all
involvement. To rebut McCleskey's testimony, the prose-
cution called Offie Evans, who had occupied a jail cell next
to McCleskey's. Evans testified that McCleskey admitted
shooting the officer during the robbery and boasted that he
would have shot his way out of the store even in the face of a
dozen policemen.
   Although no one witnessed the shooting, further direct and
circumstantial evidence supported McCleskey's guilt of the
murder. An eyewitness testified that someone ran from the
store carrying a pearl-handled pistol soon after the robbery.
Other witnesses testified that McCleskey earlier had stolen a
pearl-handled pistol of the same caliber as the bullet that
killed the officer. Ben Wright, one of McCleskey's accom-
plices, confirmed that during the crime McCleskey carried a
white-handled handgun matching the caliber of the fatal bul-
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       471

467                    Opinion of the Court

let. Wright also testified that McCleskey admitted shooting
the officer. Finally, the prosecutor introduced McCleskey's
confession of participation in the robbery.
   In December 1978, the jury convicted McCleskey of mur-
der and sentenced him to death. Since his conviction, Mc-
Cleskey has pursued direct and collateral remedies for more
than a decade. We describe this procedural history in detail,
both for a proper understanding of the case and as an illustra-
tion of the context in which allegations of abuse of the writ
arise.
   On direct appeal to the Supreme Court of Georgia, McCles-
key raised six grounds of error. A summary of McCleskey's
claims on direct appeal, as well as those he asserted in each of
his four collateral proceedings, is set forth in the Appendix to
this opinion, infra, at 503. The portion of the appeal rele-
vant for our purposes involves McCleskey's attack on Evans'
rebuttal testimony. McCleskey contended that the trial
court "erred in allowing evidence of [McCleskey's] oral state-
ment admitting the murder made to [Evans] in the next cell,
because the prosecutor had deliberately withheld such state-
ment" in violation of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963).
McClesky v. State, 245 Ga. 108, 112, 263 S. E. 2d 146, 149
(1980). A unanimous Georgia Supreme Court acknowledged
that the prosecutor did not furnish Evans' statement to the
defense, but ruled that because the undisclosed evidence was
not exculpatory, McCleskey suffered no material prejudice
and was not denied a fair trial under Brady. 245 Ga., at
112-113, 263 S. E. 2d, at 149. The court noted, moreover,
that the evidence McCleskey wanted to inspect was "intro-
duced to the jury in its entirety" through Evans' testi-
mony, and that McCleskey's argument that "the evidence
was needed in order to prepare a proper defense or impeach
other witnesses ha[ d] no merit because the evidence re-
quested was statements made by [McCleskey] himself."
Ibid. The court rejected McCleskey's other contentions and
472                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                      Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

affirmed his conviction and sentence. Ibid. We denied cer-
tiorari. McClesky v. Georgia, 449 U. S. 891 (1980).
   McCleskey then initiated postconviction proceedings. In
January 1981, he filed a petition for state habeas corpus re-
lief. The amended petition raised 23 challenges to his mur-
der conviction and death sentence. See Appendix, infra,
at 503. Three of the claims concerned Evans' testimony.
First, McCleskey contended that the State violated his due
process rights under Giglio v. United States, 405 U. S. 150
(1972), by its failure to disclose an agreement to drop pending
escape charges against Evans in return for his cooperation
and testimony. App. 20. Second, McCleskey reasserted his
Brady claim that the State violated his due process rights by
the deliberate withholding of the statement he made to Evans
while in jail. App. 21. Third, McCleskey alleged that ad-
mission of Evans' testimony violated the Sixth Amendment
right to counsel as construed in Massiah v. United States,
supra. On this theory, "[t]he introduction into evidence of
[his] statements to [Evans], elicited in a situation created to
induce [McCleskey] to make incriminating statements with-
out the assistance of counsel, violated [McCleskey's] right to
counsel under the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States." App. 22.
   At the state habeas corpus hearing, Evans testified that
one of the detectives investigating the murder agreed to
speak a word on his behalf to the federal authorities about
certain federal charges pending against him. The state ha-
beas court ruled that the ex parte recommendation did not
implicate Giglio, and it denied relief on all other claims. The
Supreme Court of Georgia denied McCleskey's application for
a certificate of probable cause, and we denied his second peti-
tion for a writ of certiorari. McCleskey v. Zant, 454 U. S.
1093 (1981).
   In December 1981, McCleskey filed his first federal habeas
corpus petition in the United States District Court for the
Northern District of Georgia, asserting 18 grounds for relief.
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                      473

467                   Opinion of the Court

See Appendix, infra, at 504-505. The petition failed to al-
lege the Massiah claim, but it did reassert the Giglio and
Brady claims. Following extensive hearings in August and
October 1983, the District Court held that the detective's
statement to Evans was a promise of favorable treatment,
and that failure to disclose the promise violated Giglio. Mc-
Cleskey v. Zant, 580 F. Supp. 338, 380-384 (ND Ga. 1984).
The District Court further held that Evans' trial testimony
may have affected the jury's verdict on the charge of malice
murder. On these premises it granted relief. Id., at 384.
   The Court of Appeals reversed the District Court's grant
of the writ. McCleskey v. Kemp, 753 F. 2d 877 (CAll 1985).
The court held that the State had not made a promise to
Evans of the kind contemplated by Giglio, and that in any
event the Giglio error would be harmless. 753 F. 2d, at
884-885. The court affirmed the District Court on all other
grounds. We granted certiorari limited to the question
whether Georgia's capital sentencing procedures were con-
stitutional, and denied relief. McCleskey v. Kemp, 481
U. s. 279 (1987).
   McCleskey continued his postconviction attacks by filing a
second state habeas corpus action in 1987 which, as amended,
contained five claims for relief. See Appendix, infra, at 505.
One of the claims again centered on Evans' testimony, alleg-
ing that the State had an agreement with Evans that it had
failed to disclose. The state trial court held a hearing and
dismissed the petition. The Supreme Court of Georgia de-
nied McCleskey's application for a certificate of probable
cause.
   In July 1987, McCleskey filed a second federal habeas ac-
tion, the one we now review. In the District Court, McCles-
key asserted seven claims, including a Massiah challenge to
the introduction of Evans' testimony. See Appendix, infra,
at 506. McCleskey had presented a Massiah claim, it will be
recalled, in his first state habeas action when he alleged that
the conversation recounted by Evans at trial had been "elic-
474                 OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                      Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

ited in a situation created to induce" him to make an incrimi-
nating statement without the assistance of counsel. The
first federal petition did not present a Massiah claim. The
proffered basis for the Massiah claim in the second federal
petition was a 21-page signed statement that Evans made to
the Atlanta Police Department on August 1, 1978, two weeks
before the trial began. The department furnished the docu-
ment to McCleskey one month before he filed his second fed-
eral petition.
   The statement related pretrial jailhouse conversations that
Evans had with McCleskey and that Evans overheard be-
tween McCleskey and Bernard Dupree. By the statement's
own terms, McCleskey participated in all the reported jail-
cell conversations. Consistent with Evans' testimony at
trial, the statement reports McCleskey admitting and boast-
ing about the murder. It also recounts that Evans posed as
Ben Wright's uncle and told McCleskey he had talked with
Wright about the robbery and the murder.
   In his second federal habeas petition, McCleskey asserted
that the statement proved Evans "was acting in direct con-
cert with State officials" during the incriminating conversa-
tions with McCleskey, and that the authorities "deliberately
elicited" inculpatory admissions in violation of McCleskey's
Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Massiah v. United
States, 377 U. S., at 206. 1 Tr. Exh. 1, pp. 11-12. Among
other responses, the State of Georgia contended that Mc-
Cleskey's presentation of a Massiah claim for the first time
in the second federal petition was an abuse of the writ. 28
U. S. C. § 2244(b); Rule 9(b) of the Rules Governing § 2254
Cases.
   The District Court held extensive hearings in July and Au-
gust 1987 focusing on the arrangement the jailers had made
for Evans' cell assignment in 1978. Several witnesses denied
that Evans had been placed next to McCleskey by design or
instructed to overhear conversations or obtain statements
from McCleskey. McCleskey's key witness was Ulysses
                     MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                      475

467                   Opinion of the Court

Worthy, a jailer at the Fulton County Jail during the summer
of 1978. McCleskey's lawyers contacted Worthy after a de-
tective testified that the 1978 Evans statement was taken in
Worthy's office. The District Court characterized Worthy's
testimony as "of ten confused and self-contradictory." Mc-
Cleskey v. Kemp, No. C87-1517A (ND Ga., Dec. 23, 1987),
App. 81. Worthy testified that someone at some time re-
quested permission to move Evans near McCleskey's cell.
He contradicted himself, however, concerning when, why,
and by whom Evans was moved, and about whether he over-
heard investigators urging Evans to engage McCleskey in
conversation. Id., at 76-81.
   On December 23, 1987, the District Court granted McCles-
key relief based upon a violation of Massiah. Id., at 63-97.
The court stated that the Evans statement "contains strong
indication of an ab initio relationship between Evans and
the authorities." Id., at 84. In addition, the court credited
Worthy's testimony suggesting that the police had used
Evans to obtain incriminating information from McCleskey.
Based on the Evans statement and portions of Worthy's tes-
timony, the District Court found that the jail authorities had
placed Evans in the cell adjoining McCleskey's "for the pur-
pose of gathering incriminating information"; that "Evans
was probably coached in how to approach McCleskey and
given critical facts unknown to the general public"; that
Evans talked with McCleskey and eavesdropped on McCles-
key's conversations with others; and that Evans reported
what he had heard to the authorities. Id., at 83. These
findings, in the District Court's view, established a Massiah
violation.
   In granting habeas relief, the District Court rejected the
State's argument that McCleskey's assertion of the Massiah
claim for the first time in the second federal petition consti-
tuted an abuse of the writ. The court ruled that McCleskey
did not deliberately abandon the claim after raising it in his
first state habeas petition. "This is not a case," the District
476                   OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                        Opinion of the Court              499 u. s.

Court reasoned, "where petitioner has reserved his proof or
deliberately withheld his claim for a second petition." Id., at
84. The District Court also determined that when McCles-
key filed his first federal petition, he did not know about
either the 21-page Evans document or the identity of Wor-
thy, and that the failure to discover the evidence for the first
federal petition "was not due to [McCleskey's] inexcusable
neglect." Id., at 85.
   The Eleventh Circuit reversed, holding that the District
Court abused its discretion by failing to dismiss McCleskey's
Massiah claim as an abuse of the writ. 890 F. 2d 342 (1989).
The Court of Appeals agreed with the District Court that
the petitioner must "show that he did not deliberately aban-
don the claim and that his failure to raise it [in the first
federal habeas proceeding] was not due to inexcusable ne-
glect." Id., at 346-347. Accepting the District Court's
findings that at the first petition stage McCleskey knew nei-
ther the existence of the Evans statement nor the identity of
Worthy, the court held that the District Court "miscon-
stru[ ed] the meaning of deliberate abandonment." Id., at
348-349. Because McCleskey included a Massiah claim in
his first state petition, dropped it in his first federal petition,
and then reasserted it in his second federal petition, he
"made a knowing choice not to pursue the claim after having
raised it previously" that constituted a prima facie showing of
"deliberate abandonment." 890 F. 2d, at 349. The court
further found the State's alleged concealment of the Evans
statement irrelevant because it "was simply the catalyst that
caused counsel to pursue the Massiah claim more vigorously"
and did not itself "demonstrate the existence of a Massiah vi-
olation." Id., at 350. The court concluded that McCleskey
had presented no reason why counsel could not have discov-
ered Worthy earlier. Ibid. Finally, the court ruled that
McCleskey's claim did not fall within the ends of justice
exception to the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine because any
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       477

467                    Opinion of the Court

Massiah violation that may have been committed would have
been harmless error. 890 F. 2d, at 350-351.
   McCleskey petitioned this Court for a writ of certiorari, al-
leging numerous errors in the Eleventh Circuit's abuse-of-
the-writ analysis. In our order granting the petition, we
requested the parties to address the following additional
question: "Must the State demonstrate that a claim was de-
liberately abandoned in an earlier petition for a writ of ha-
beas corpus in order to establish that inclusion of that claim in
a subsequent habeas petition constitutes abuse of the writ?"
496 U. S. 904 (1990).
                               II
   The parties agree that the government has the burden of
pleading abuse of the writ, and that once the government
makes a proper submission, the petitioner must show that he
has not abused the writ in seeking habeas relief. See Sand-
ers v. United States, 373 U. S. 1, 10-11 (1963); Price v. John-
ston, 334 U. S. 266, 292 (1948). Much confusion exists
though, on the standard for determining when a petitioner
abuses the writ. Although the standard is central to the
proper determination of many federal habeas corpus actions,
we have had little occasion to define it. Indeed, there is
truth to the observation that we have defined abuse of the
writ in an oblique way, through dicta and denials of certiorari
petitions or stay applications. See Witt v. Wainwright, 470
U. S. 1039, 1043 (1985) (MARSHALL, J., dissenting). Today
we give the subject our careful consideration. We begin by
tracing the historical development of some of the substantive
and procedural aspects of the writ, and then consider the
standard for abuse that district courts should apply in actions
seeking federal habeas corpus relief.
                                A
  The Judiciary Act of 1789, ch. 20, § 14, 1 Stat. 81-82, em-
powered federal courts to issue writs of habeas corpus to
prisoners "in custody, under or by colour of the authority of
478                 OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                      Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

the United States." In the early decades of our new federal
system, English common law defined the substantive scope of
the writ. Ex parte Watkins, 3 Pet. 193, 201-203 (1830).
Federal prisoners could use the writ to challenge confinement
imposed by a court that lacked jurisdiction, ibid., or deten-
tion by the Executive without proper legal process, see Ex
parte Wells, 18 How. 307 (1856).
   The common-law limitations on the scope of the writ were
subject to various expansive forces, both statutory and ju-
dicial. See generally Bator, Finality in Criminal Law and
Federal Habeas Corpus for State Prisoners, 76 Harv. L.
Rev. 441, 463-499 (1963). The major statutory expansion of
the writ occurred in 1867, when Congress extended federal
habeas corpus to prisoners held in state custody. Act of
Feb. 5, 1867, ch. 28, § 1, 14 Stat. 385. For the most part,
however, expansion of the writ has come through judicial de-
cisionmaking. As then-JUSTICE REHNQUIST explained in
Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 79 (1977), the Court
began by interpreting the concept of jurisdictional defect
with generosity to include sentences imposed without statu-
tory authorization, Ex parte Lange, 18 Wall. 163, 176 (1874),
and convictions obtained under an unconstitutional statute,
Ex parte Siebold, 100 U. S. 371, 376-377 (1880). Later, we
allowed habeas relief for confinement under a state conviction
obtained without adequate procedural protections for the de-
fendant. Frank v. Mangum, 237 U. S. 309 (1915); Moore v.
Dempsey, 261 U. S. 86 (1923).
   Confronting this line of precedents extending the reach of
the writ, in Waley v. Johnston, 316 U. S. 101 (1942), "the
Court openly discarded the concept of jurisdiction - by then
more a fiction than anything else-as a touchstone of the
availability of federal habeas review, and acknowledged that
such review is available for claims of 'disregard of the con-
stitutional rights of the accused, and where the writ is the
only effective means of preserving his rights.'" Wainwright
v. Sykes, supra, at 79 (quoting Waley v. Johnston, supra, at
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       479

467                    Opinion of the Court

104-105). With the exception of Fourth Amendment viola-
tions that a petitioner has been given a full and fair opportu-
nity to litigate in state court, Stone v. Powell, 428 U. S. 465,
495 (1976), the writ today appears to extend to all dispositive
constitutional claims presented in a proper procedural man-
ner. See Brown v. Allen, 344 U. S. 443 (1953); Wainwright
v. Sykes, supra, at 79.
   One procedural requisite is that a petition not lead to an
abuse of the writ. We must next consider the origins and
meaning of that rule.
                                 B
   At common law, res judicata did not attach to a court's de-
nial of habeas relief. "[A] refusal to discharge on one writ
[was] not a bar to the issuance of a new writ." 1 W. Bailey,
Habeas Corpus and Special Remedies 206 (1913) (citing
cases). "[A] renewed application could be made to every
other judge or court in the realm, and each court or judge
was bound to consider the question of the prisoner's right to
a discharge independently, and not to be influenced by the
previous decisions refusing discharge." W. Church, Writ
of Habeas Corpus § 386, p. 570 (2d ed. 1893) (hereinafter
Church). See, e.g., Ex parte Kaine, 14 F. Cas. 78, 80
(No. 7,597) (CC SDNY 1853); In re Kopel, 148 F. 505, 506
(SDNY 1906). The rule made sense because at common law
an order denying habeas relief could not be reviewed.
Church 570; L. Yackle, Postconviction Remedies § 151,
p. 551 (1981); Goddard, A Note on Habeas Corpus, 65 L. Q.
Rev. 30, 32 (1949). Successive petitions served as a sub-
stitute for appeal. See W. Duker, A Constitutional History
of Habeas Corpus 5-6 (1980); Church 570; Goddard, supra,
at 35.
   As appellate review became available from a decision in ha-
beas refusing to discharge the prisoner, courts began to ques-
tion the continuing validity of the common-law rule allowing
endless successive petitions. Church 602. Some courts re-
jected the common-law rule, holding a denial of habeas relief
480                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

res judicata. See, e. g., Perry v. McLendon, 62 Ga. 598,
603-605 (1879); McMahon v. Mead, 30 S. D. 515, 518, 139
N. W. 122, 123 (1912); Ex parte Heller, 146 Wis. 517, 524,
131 N. W. 991, 994 (1911). Others adopted a middle position
between the extremes of res judicata and endless successive
petitions. Justice Field's opinion on circuit in Ex parte
Cuddy, 40 F. 62 (CC SD Cal. 1889), exemplifies this balance.
     "[W]hile the doctrine of res judicata does not apply, . . .
     the officers before whom the second application is made
     may take into consideration the fact that a previous ap-
     plication had been made to another officer and refused;
     and in some instances that fact may justify a refusal of
     the second. The action of the court or justice on the
     second application will naturally be affected to some de-
     gree by the character of the court or officer to whom the
     first application was made, and the fullness of the con-
     sideration given to it.... In what I have said I refer, of
     course, to cases where a second application is made upon
     the same facts presented, or which might have been pre-
     sented, on the first. The question is entirely different
     when subsequent occurring events have changed the
     situation of the petitioner so as in fact to present a new
     case for consideration. In the present application there
     are no new facts which did not exist when the first was
     presented. . .. I am of the opinion that in such a case a
     second application should not be heard . . . . " Id., at
     65-66.
Cf. Ex parte Moebus, 148 F. 39, 40-41 (NH 1906) (second
petition disallowed "unless some substantial change in the
circumstances had intervened").
   We resolved the confusion over the continuing validity of
the common-law rule, at least for federal courts, in Salinger
v. Loisel, 265 U. S. 224 (1924), and Wong Doo v. United
States, 265 U. S. 239 (1924). These decisions reaffirmed
that res judicata does not apply "to a decision on habeas cor-
pus refusing to discharge the prisoner." Salinger v. Loisel,
                     MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                       481

467                    Opinion of the Court

supra, at 230; see Wong Doo v. United States, supra, at 240.
They recognized, however, that the availability of appellate
review required a modification of the common-law rule allow-
ing endless applications. As we explained in Salinger:
     "In early times when a refusal to discharge was not open
     to appellate review, courts and judges were accustomed
     to exercise an independent judgment on each successive
     application, regardless of the number. But when a right
     to an appellate review was given the reason for that
     practice ceased and the practice came to be materially
     changed .... " 265 U. S., at 230-231.
Relying on Justice Field's opinion in Ex parte Cuddy, we an-
nounced that second and subsequent petitions should be
    "disposed of in the exercise of a sound judicial discretion
    guided and controlled by a consideration of whatever has
    a rational bearing on the propriety of the discharge
    sought. Among the matters which may be considered,
    and even given controlling weight, are (a) the existence
    of another remedy, such as a right in ordinary course to
    an appellate review in the criminal case, and (b) a prior
    refusal to discharge on a like application." 265 U. S.,
    at 231.
   Because the lower court in Salinger had not disposed of the
subsequent application for habeas corpus by reliance on dis-
missal of the prior application, the decision did not present an
opportunity to apply the doctrine of abuse of the writ. 265
U. S., at 232. Wong Doo did present the question. There,
the District Court had dismissed on res judicata grounds a
second petition containing a due process claim that was
raised, but not argued, in the first federal habeas petition.
The petitioner "had full opportunity to offer proof of [his due
process claim] at the hearing on the first petition," and he of-
fered "[n]o reason for not presenting the proof at the out-
set .... " Wong Doo, 265 U. S., at 241. The record of the
first petition did not contain proof of the due process claim,
482                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

but "what [was] said of it there and in the briefs show[ed]
that it was accessible all the time." Ibid. In these circum-
stances, we upheld the dismissal of the second petition. We
held that "according to a sound judicial discretion, controlling
weight must have been given to the prior refusal." Ibid.
So while we rejected res judicata in a strict sense as a basis
for dismissing a later habeas action, we made clear that the
prior adjudication bore vital relevance to the exercise of
the court's discretion in determining whether to consider the
petition.
   Price v. Johnston, 334 U. S. 266 (1948), the next decision
in this line, arose in a somewhat different context from Salin-
ger or Wong Dao. In Price, the petitioner's fourth habeas
petition alleged a claim that, arguably at least, was neither
the explicit basis of a former petition nor inferable from the
facts earlier alleged. The District Court and Court of Ap-
peals dismissed the petition without hearing on the sole
ground that the claim was not raised in one of the earlier ha-
beas actions. We reversed and remanded, reasoning that
the dismissal "precluded a proper development of the issue of
the allegedly abusive use of the habeas corpus writ." 334
U. S., at 293. We explained that the State must plead an
abuse of the writ with particularity, and that the burden then
shifts to petitioner to show that presentation of the new claim
does not constitute abuse. Id., at 292. The District Court
erred because it dismissed the petition without affording the
petitioner an opportunity to explain the basis for raising his
claim late. We gave directions for the proper inquiry in the
trial court. If the explanation "is inadequate, the court may
dismiss the petition without further proceedings." Ibid.
But if a petitioner "present[s] adequate reasons for not mak-
ing the allegation earlier, reasons which make it fair and just
for the trial court to overlook the delay," he must be given
the opportunity to develop these matters in a hearing. Id.,
at 291-292. Without considering whether the petitioner had
abused the writ, we remanded the case.
                      MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                       483

467                    Opinion of the Court

   Although Price recognized that abuse-of-the-writ princi-
ples limit a petitioner's ability to file repetitive petitions, it
also contained dicta touching on the standard for abuse that
appeared to contradict this point. Price stated that "the
three prior refusals to discharge petitioner can have no bear-
ing or weight on the disposition to be made of the new matter
raised in the fourth petition." Id., at 289. This proposition
ignored the significance of appellate jurisdictional changes,
see supra, at 479-480, as well as the general disfavor we had
expressed in Salinger and Wong Doo toward endless repeti-
tive petitions. It did not even comport with language in
Price itself which recognized that in certain circumstances
new claims raised for the first time in a second or subsequent
petition should not be entertained. As will become clear,
the quoted portion of Price has been ignored in our later
decisions.
   One month after the Price decision, Congress enacted leg-
islation, which for the first time addressed the issue of repeti-
tive federal habeas corpus petitions:
         "No circuit or district judge shall be required to enter-
      tain an application for a writ of habeas corpus to inquire
      into the detention of a person pursuant to a judgment
      of a court of the United States, or of any State, if it
      appears that the legality of such detention has been de-
      termined by a judge or court of the United States on a
      prior application for a writ of habeas corpus and the peti-
      tion presents no new ground not theretofore presented
      and determined, and the judge or court is satisfied that
      the ends of justice will not be served by such inquiry."
      28 U. S. C. § 2244 (1964 ed.).
Because § 2244 allowed a district court to dismiss a successive
petition that "present[ed] no new ground not theretofore pre-
sented and determined," one might have concluded, by nega-
tive implication, that Congress denied permission to dismiss
any petition that alleged new grounds for relief. Such an in-
terpretation would have superseded the judicial principles
484                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

recognizing that claims not raised or litigated in a prior peti-
tion could, when raised in a later petition, constitute abuse.
But the Reviser's Note to the 1948 statute made clear that
as a general matter Congress did not intend the new section
to disrupt the judicial evolution of habeas principles, 28
U. S. C. § 2244 (1964 ed.) (Reviser's Note), and we confirmed
in Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S., at 11-12, that Con-
gress' silence on the standard for abuse of the writ involving
a new claim was "not intended to foreclose judicial application
of the abuse-of-writ principle as developed in Wong Doo and
Price."
   Sanders also recognized our special responsibility in the
development of habeas corpus with respect to another provi-
sion of the 1948 revision of the judicial code, 28 U. S. C.
§ 2255 (1964 ed.). The statute created a new postconviction
remedy for federal prisoners with a provision for repetitive
petitions different from the one found in § 2244. While
§ 2244 permitted dismissal of subsequent habeas petitions
that "present[ed] no new ground not theretofore presented
and determined," § 2255 allowed a federal district court to
refuse to entertain a subsequent petition seeking "similar
relief." On its ·face, § 2255 appeared to announce a much
stricter abuse-of-the-writ standard than its counterpart in
§ 2244. We concluded in Sanders, however, that the lan-
guage in § 2255 "cannot be taken literally," and construed
it to be the "material equivalent" of the abuse standard in
§2244. Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S., at 13-14.
   In addition to answering these questions, Sanders under-
took a more general "formulation of basic rules to guide the
lower federal courts" concerning the doctrine of abuse of the
writ. Id., at 15. After reiterating that the government
must plead abuse of the writ and the petitioner must refute a
well-pleaded allegation, Sanders addressed the definition of
and rationale for the doctrine. It noted that equitable prin-
ciples governed abuse of the writ, including "the principle
that a suitor's conduct in relation to the matter at hand may
                      McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       485

467                    Opinion of the Court

disentitle him to the relief he seeks," and that these princi-
ples must be applied within the sound discretion of district
courts. Id., at 17-18. The Court furnished illustrations of
writ abuse:
     "Thus, for example, if a prisoner deliberately withholds
     one of two grounds for federal collateral relief at the time
     of filing his first application, in the hope of being granted
     two hearings rather than one or for some other such rea-
     son, he may be deemed to have waived his right to a
     hearing on a second application presenting the withheld
     ground. The same may be true if, as in Wong Doo, the
     prisoner deliberately abandons one of his grounds at the
     first hearing. Nothing in the traditions of habeas cor-
     pus requires the federal courts to tolerate needless,
     piecemeal litigation, or to entertain collateral proceed-
     ings whose only purpose is to vex, harass, or delay."
     Id., at 18.
The Court also cited Fay v. Noia, 372 U. S. 391, 438-440
(1963), and Townsend v. Sain, 372 U. S. 293, 317 (1963), for
further guidance on the doctrine of abuse of the writ, stat-
ing that the principles of those cases "govern equally here."
373 U. S., at 18. Finally, Sanders established that federal
courts must reach the merits of an abusive petition if "the
ends of justice demand." Ibid.
   Three years after Sanders, Congress once more amended
the habeas corpus statute. The amendment was an attempt
to alleviate the increasing burden on federal courts caused by
successive and abusive petitions by "introducing a greater
degree of finality of judgments in habeas corpus proceed-
ings." S. Rep. No. 1797, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., 2 (1966); see
also H. R. Rep. No. 1892, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., 5-6 (1966).
The amendment recast § 2244 into three subparagraphs.
Subparagraph (a) deletes the reference to state prisoners in
the old § 2244 but left the provision otherwise intact. 28
U. S. C. § 2244(a). Subparagraph (c) states that where a
state prisoner seeks relief for an alleged denial of a federal
486                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court             499 u. s.

constitutional right before this Court, any decision rendered
by the Court shall be "conclusive as to all issues of fact or law
with respect to an asserted denial of a Federal right .... "
28 U. S. C. § 2244(c).
   Congress added subparagraph (b) to address repetitive ap-
plications by state prisoners:
        "(b) When after an evidentiary hearing on the merits
     of a material factual issue, or after a hearing on the mer-
     its of an issue of law, a person in custody pursuant to
     the judgment of a State court has been denied by a court
     of the United States or a justice or judge of the United
     States release from custody or other remedy on an ap-
     plication for a writ of habeas corpus, a subsequent ap-
     plication for a writ of habeas corpus on behalf of such
     person need not be entertained by a court of the United
     States or a justice or judge of the United States unless
     the application alleges and is predicated on a factual
     or other ground not adjudicated on the hearing of the
     earlier application for the writ, and unless the court,
     justice, or judge is satisfied that the applicant has not
     on the earlier application deliberately withheld the
     newly asserted ground or otherwise abused the writ."
     28 U. S. C. § 2244(b).
Subparagraph (b) establishes a "qualified application of the
doctrine of res judicata." S. Rep. No. 1797, supra, at 2. It
states that a federal court "need not entertain" a second or
subsequent habeas petition "unless" the petitioner satisfies
two conditions. First, the subsequent petition must allege a
new ground, factual or otherwise. Second, the applicant
must satisfy the judge that he did not deliberately withhold
the ground earlier or "otherwise abus[e] the writ." See
Smith v. Yeager, 393 U. S. 122, 125 (1968) ("essential ques-
tion [under § 2244(b)] is whether the petitioner 'deliberately
withheld the newly asserted ground' in the prior proceeding,
or 'otherwise abused the writ'"). If the petitioner meets
these conditions, the court must consider the subsequent pe-
                      McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       487

467                    Opinion of the Court

tition as long as other habeas errors, such as nonexhaustion,
28 U. S. C. § 2254(b), or procedural default, Wainwright v.
Sykes, 433 U. S. 72 (1977), are not present.
   Section 2244(b) raises, but does not answer, other ques-
tions. It does not state whether a district court may over-
look a deliberately withheld or otherwise abusive claim to
entertain the petition in any event. That is, it does not state
the limits on the district court's discretion to entertain abu-
sive petitions. Nor does the statute define the term "abuse
of the writ." As was true of similar silences in the orig-
inal 1948 version of§ 2244, however, see supra, at 484, Con-
gress did not intend § 2244(b) to foreclose application of the
court-announced principles defining and limiting a district
court's discretion to entertain abusive petitions. See Delo v.
Stokes, 495 U. S. 320, 321-322 (1990) (District Court abused
discretion in entertaining a new claim in a fourth federal peti-
tion that was an abuse of the writ).
   Rule 9(b) of the Rules Governing Habeas Corpus Proceed-
ings, promulgated in 1976, also speaks to the problem of
new grounds for relief raised in subsequent petitions. It
provides:
     "A second or successive petition may be dismissed if the
     judge finds that it fails to allege new or different grounds
     for relief and the prior determination was on the merits
     or, if new and different grounds are alleged, the judge
     finds that the failure of the petitioner to assert those
     grounds in a prior petition constituted an abuse of the
     writ." 28 U. S. C. § 2254 Rule 9(b).
Like 28 U. S. C. § 2244(b), Rule 9(b) "incorporates the judge-
made principle governing the abuse of the writ set forth in
Sanders." Rose v. Lundy, 455 U. S. 509, 521 (1982) (plu-
rality opinion); id., at 533 (Brennan, J., concurring in part
and dissenting in part) (same). The Advisory Committee
Notes make clear that a new claim in a subsequent petition
should not be entertained if the judge finds the failure to
raise it earlier "inexcusable." Advisory Committee Notes to
488                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court             499 U.S.

Rule 9, 28 U. S. C., pp. 426-427. The Notes also state that
a retroactive change in the law and newly discovered evi-
dence represent acceptable excuses for failing to raise the
claim earlier. Id., at 427.
   In recent years we have applied the abuse-of-the-writ doc-
trine in various contexts. In Woodard v. Hutchins, 464
U. S. 377 (1984) (per curiam), the petitioner offered no ex-
planation for asserting three claims in a second federal ha-
beas petition not raised in the first. Five Justices inferred
from the lack of explanation that the three claims "could and
should have been raised in" the first petition, and that the
failure to do so constituted abuse of the writ. Id., at 378-
379, and n. 3 (Powell, J., joined by four Justices, concurring
in grant of application to vacate stay). Similarly, in Antone
v. Dugger, 465 U. S. 200 (1984) (per curiam), we upheld the
Court of Appeals' judgment that claims presented for the
first time in a second federal petition constituted an abuse of
the writ. We rejected petitioner's argument that he should
be excused from his failure to raise the claims in the first fed-
eral petition because his counsel during first federal habeas
prepared the petition in haste and did not have time to be-
come familiar with the case. Id., at 205-206, and n. 4. And
just last Term, we held that claims raised for the first time in
a fourth federal habeas petition abused the writ because they
"could have been raised" or "could have been developed" in
the first federal habeas petition. Delo v. Stokes, supra, at
321-322. See also Kuhlmann v. Wilson, 477 U. S. 436, 444,
n. 6 (1986) (plurality opinion) (petition that raises grounds
"available but not relied upon in a prior petition" is an exam-
ple of abuse of the writ); Straight v. Wainwright, 476 U. S.
1132, 1133 (1986) (Powell, J., joined by three Justices, con-
curring in denial of stay) (new arguments in second petition
that "plainly could have been raised earlier" constitute abuse
of the writ); Rose v. Lundy, supra, at 521 (plurality opinion)
(prisoner who proceeds with exhausted claims in first federal
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                     489

467                   Opinion of the Court

petition and deliberately sets aside his unexhausted claims
risks dismissal of subsequent federal petitions).

                              III
  Our discussion demonstrates that the doctrine of abuse of
the writ refers to a complex and evolving body of equitable
principles informed and controlled by historical usage, statu-
tory developments, and judicial decisions. Because of his-
torical changes and the complexity of the subject, the Court
has not "always followed an unwavering line in its conclusions
as to the availability of the Great Writ." Fay v. Noia, 372
U. S., at 411-412. Today we attempt to define the doctrine
of abuse of the writ with more precision.
   Although our decisions on the subject do not all admit of
ready synthesis, one point emerges with clarity: Abuse of the
writ is not confined to instances of deliberate abandonment.
Sanders mentioned deliberate abandonment as but one exam-
ple of conduct that disentitled a petitioner to relief. Sanders
cited a passage in Townsend v. Sain, 372 U. S., at 317, which
applied the principle of inexcusable neglect, and noted that
this principle also governs in the abuse-of-the-writ context,
Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S., at 18.
   As Sanders' reference to Townsend demonstrates, as many
Courts of Appeals recognize, see, e. g., 890 F. 2d, at 346-347
(case below); Hall v. Lockhart, 863 F. 2d 609, 610 (CA8
1988); Jones v. Estelle, 722 F. 2d 159, 163 (CA5 1983); Mil-
ler v. Bordenkircher, 764 F. 2d 245, 250-252 (CA4 1985), and
as McCleskey concedes, Brief for Petitioner 39-40, 45-48, a
petitioner may abuse the writ by failing to raise a claim
through inexcusable neglect. Our recent decisions confirm
that a petitioner can abuse the writ by raising a claim in a
subsequent petition that he could have raised in his first,
regardless of whether the failure to raise it earlier stemmed
from a deliberate choice. See, e. g., Delo v. Stokes, 495
U. S., at 321-322; Antone v. Dugger, supra, at 205-206.
See also 28 U. S. C. § 2244(b) (recognizing that a petitioner
490                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

can abuse the writ in a fashion that does not constitute delib-
erate abandonment).
   The inexcusable neglect standard demands more from a pe-
titioner than the standard of deliberate abandonment. But
we have not given the former term the content necessary to
guide district courts in the ordered consideration of allegedly
abusive habeas corpus petitions. For reasons we explain
below, a review of our habeas corpus precedents leads us
to decide that the same standard used to determine whether
to excuse state procedural defaults should govern the de-
termination of inexcusable neglect in the abuse-of-the-writ
context.
   The prohibition against adjudication in federal habeas cor-
pus of claims defaulted in state court is similar in purpose and
design to the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine, which in general
prohibits subsequent habeas consideration of claims not
raised, and thus defaulted, in the first federal habeas pro-
ceeding. The terms "abuse of the writ" and "inexcusable ne-
glect," on the one hand, and "procedural default," on the
other, imply a background norm of procedural regularity
binding on the petitioner. This explains the presumption
against habeas adjudication both of claims defaulted in state
court and of claims defaulted in the first round of federal ha-
beas. A federal habeas court's power to excuse these types
of defaulted claims derives from the court's equitable discre-
tion. See Reed v. Ross, 468 U. S. 1, 9 (1984) (procedural de-
fault); Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S., at 17-18 (abuse of
the writ). In habeas, equity recognizes that "a suitor's con-
duct in relation to the matter at hand may disentitle him to
the relief he seeks." Id., at 17. For these reasons, both the
abuse-of-the-writ doctrine and our procedural default juris-
prudence concentrate on a petitioner's acts to determine
whether he has a legitimate excuse for failing to raise a claim
at the appropriate time.
   The doctrines of procedural default and abuse of the writ
implicate nearly identical concerns flowing from the signifi-
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                      491

467                   Opinion of the Court

cant costs of federal habeas corpus review. To begin with,
the writ strikes at finality. One of the law's very objects is
the finality of its judgments. Neither innocence nor just
punishment can be vindicated until the final judgment is
known. "Without finality, the criminal law is deprived of
much of its deterrent effect." Teague v. Lane, 489 U. S.
288, 309 (1989). And when a habeas petitioner succeeds in
obtaining a new trial, the "'erosion of memory' and 'disper-
sion of witnesses' that occur with the passage of time," Kuhl-
mann v. Wilson, supra, at 453, prejudice the government
and diminish the chances of a reliable criminal adjudication.
Though Fay v. Noia, supra, may have cast doubt upon these
propositions, since Fay we have taken care in our habeas cor-
pus decisions to reconfirm the importance of finality. See,
e.g., Teague v. Lane, supra, at 308-309; Murray v. Carrier,
477 U. S. 478, 487 (1986); Reed v. Ross, supra, at 10; Engle
v. Isaac, 456 U. S. 107, 127 (1982).
   Finality has special importance in the context of a federal
attack on a state conviction. Murray v. Carrier, supra, at
487; Engle v. Isaac, supra, at 128. Reexamination of state
convictions on federal habeas "frustrate[s] ... 'both the
States' sovereign power to punish offenders and their good-
faith attempts to honor constitutional rights.'" Murray v.
Carrier, supra, at 487 (quoting Engle, supra, at 128). Our
federal system recognizes the independent power of a State
to articulate societal norms through criminal law; but the
power of a State to pass laws means little if the State cannot
enforce them.
   Habeas review extracts further costs. Federal collateral
litigation places a heavy burden on scarce federal judicial re-
sources, and threatens the capacity of the system to resolve
primary disputes. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U. S.
218, 260 (1973) (Powell, J., concurring). Finally, habeas cor-
pus review may give litigants incentives to withhold claims
for manipulative purposes and may establish disincentives to
492                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court             499 u. s.

present claims when evidence is fresh. Reed v. Ross, supra,
at 13; Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S., at 89.
   Far more severe are the disruptions when a claim is pre-
sented for the first time in a second or subsequent federal ha-
beas petition. If "[c]ollateral review of a conviction extends
the ordeal of trial for both society and the accused," Engle v.
Isaac, supra, at 126-127, the ordeal worsens during subse-
quent collateral proceedings. Perpetual disrespect for the
finality of convictions disparages the entire criminal justice
system.
     "A procedural system which permits an endless repe-
     tition of inquiry into facts and law in a vain search for
     ultimate certitude implies a lack of confidence about the
     possibilities of justice that cannot but war with the effec-
     tiveness of underlying substantive commands .... There
     comes a point where a procedural system which leaves
     matters perpetually open no longer reflects humane con-
     cern but merely anxiety and a desire for immobility."
     Bator, 76 Harv. L. Rev., at 452-453 (footnotes omitted).
If reexamination of a conviction in the first round of federal
habeas stretches resources, examination of new claims raised
in a second or subsequent petition spreads them thinner still.
These later petitions deplete the resources needed for federal
litigants in the first instance, including litigants commencing
their first federal habeas action. The phenomenon calls to
mind Justice Jackson's admonition that "[i]t must prejudice
the occasional meritorious application to be buried in a flood
of worthless ones." Brown v. Allen, 344 U. S., at 537 (opin-
ion concurring in result). And if reexamination of convic-
tions in the first round of habeas offends federalism and com-
ity, the offense increases when a State must defend its
conviction in a second or subsequent habeas proceeding on
grounds not even raised in the first petition.
   The federal writ of habeas corpus overrides all these con-
siderations, essential as they are to the rule of law, when
a petitioner raises a meritorious constitutional claim in a
                     MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                       493

467                    Opinion of the Court

proper manner in a habeas petition. Our procedural default
jurisprudence and abuse-of-the-writ jurisprudence help de-
fine this dimension of procedural regularity. Both doctrines
impose on petitioners a burden of reasonable compliance with
procedures designed to discourage baseless claims and to
keep the system open for valid ones; both recognize the law's
interest in finality; and both invoke equitable principles to de-
fine the court's discretion to excuse pleading and procedural
requirements for petitioners who could not comply with them
in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence. It is true
that a habeas court's concern to honor state procedural de-
fault rules rests in part on respect for the integrity of proce-
dures "employed by a coordinate jurisdiction within the fed-
eral system," Wainwright v. Sykes, supra, at 88, and that
such respect is not implicated when a petitioner defaults a
claim by failing to raise it in the first round of federal habeas
review. Nonetheless, the doctrines of procedural default
and abuse of the writ are both designed to lessen the injury
to a State that results through reexamination of a state con-
viction on a ground that the State did not have the opportu-
nity to address at a prior, appropriate time; and both doc-
trines seek to vindicate the State's interest in the finality
of its criminal judgments.
   We conclude from the unity of structure and purpose in the
jurisprudence of state procedural defaults and abuse of the
writ that the standard for excusing a failure to raise a claim
at the appropriate time should be the same in both contexts.
We have held that a procedural default will be excused upon
a showing of cause and prejudice. Wainwright v. Sykes,
supra. We now hold that the same standard applies to de-
termine if there has been an abuse of the writ through inex-
cusable neglect.
   In procedural default cases, the cause standard requires
the petitioner to show that "some objective factor external to
the defense impeded counsel's efforts" to raise the claim in
state court. Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S., at 488. Objec-
494                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

tive factors that constitute cause include "'interference by of-
ficials'" that makes compliance with the State's procedural
rule impracticable, and "a showing that the factual or legal
basis for a claim was not reasonably available to counsel."        I



Ibid. In addition, constitutionally "[i]neffective assistance of
counsel ... is cause." Ibid. Attorney error short of ineffec-
tive assistance of counsel, however, does not constitute cause
and will not excuse a procedural default. Id., at 486-488.
Once the petitioner has established cause, he must show" 'ac-
tual prejudice' resulting from the errors of which he com-
plains." United States v. Frady, 456 U. S. 152, 168 (1982).
   Federal courts retain the authority to issue the writ of
habeas corpus in a further, narrow class of cases despite a
petitioner's failure to show cause for a procedural default.
These are extraordinary instances when a constitutional vio-
lation probably has caused the conviction of one innocent of
the crime. We have described this class of cases as implicat-
ing a fundamental miscarriage of justice. Murray v. Car-
rier, supra, at 485.
   The cause and prejudice analysis we have adopted for cases
of procedural default applies to an abuse-of-the-writ inquiry
in the following manner. When a prisoner files a second or
subsequent application, the government bears the burden of
pleading abuse of the writ. The government satisfies this
burden if, with clarity and particularity, it notes petitioner's
prior writ history, identifies the claims that appear for the
first time, and alleges that petitioner has abused the writ.
The burden to disprove abuse then becomes petitioner's. To
excuse his failure to raise the claim earlier, he must show
cause for failing to raise it and prejudice therefrom as those
concepts have been defined in our procedural default deci-
sions. The petitioner's opportunity to meet the burden of
cause and prejudice will not include an evidentiary hearing if
the district court determines as a matter of law that peti-
tioner cannot satisfy the standard. If petitioner cannot show
cause, the failure to raise the claim in an earlier petition may
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       495

467                    Opinion of the Court

nonetheless be excused if he or she can show that a funda-
mental miscarriage of justice would result from a failure to
entertain the claim. Application of the cause and prejudice
standard in the abuse-of-the-writ context does not mitigate
the force of Teague v. Lane, 489 U. S. 288 (1989), which pro-
hibits, with certain exceptions, the retroactive application of
new law to claims raised in federal habeas. Nor does it
imply that there is a constitutional right to counsel in federal
habeas corpus. See Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U. S. 551,
555 (1987) ("[T]he right to appointed counsel extends to the
first appeal of right, and no further").
   Although the cause and prejudice standard differs from
some of the language in Price v. Johnston, 334 U. S. 266
(1948), it is consistent with Cuddy, Salinger, Wong Doo, and
Sanders, as well as our modern abuse-of-the-writ decisions,
including Antone, Woodard, and Delo. In addition, the ex-
ception to cause for fundamental miscarriages of justice gives
meaningful content to the otherwise unexplained "ends of
justice" inquiry mandated by Sanders. Sanders drew the
phrase "ends of justice" from the 1948 version of § 2244. 28
U. S. C. § 2244 (1964 ed.) (judge need not entertain subse-
quent application if he is satisfied that "the ends of justice
will not be served by such inquiry"). Sanders v. United
States, 373 U. S., at 15-17. Although the 1966 revision to
the habeas statute eliminated any reference to an "ends of
justice" inquiry, a plurality of the Court in Kuhlmann v. Wil-
son, 477 U. S., at 454, held that this inquiry remained appro-
priate, and required federal courts to entertain successive pe-
titions when a petitioner supplements a constitutional claim
with a "colorable showing of factual innocence." The miscar-
riage of justice exception to cause serves as "an additional
safeguard against compelling an innocent man to suffer an
unconstitutional loss of liberty," Stone v. Powell, 428 U. S.,
at 492-493, n. 31, guaranteeing that the ends of justice will
be served in full.
496                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

   Considerations of certainty and stability in our discharge of
the judicial function support adoption of the cause and preju-
dice standard in the abuse-of-the-writ context. Well defined
in the case law, the standard will be familiar to federal
courts. I ts application clarifies the imprecise contours of the
term "inexcusable neglect." The standard is an objective
one, and can be applied in a manner that comports with the
threshold nature of the abuse-of-the-writ inquiry. See Price
v. Johnston, 334 U. S., at 287 (abuse of the writ is "prelimi-
nary as well as collateral to a decision as to the sufficiency
or merits of the allegation itself"). Finally, the standard
provides "a sound and workable means of channeling the dis-
cretion of federal habeas courts." Murray v. Carrier, 477
U. S., at 497. "[I]t is important, in order to preclude indi-
vidualized enforcement of the Constitution in different parts
of the Nation, to lay down as specifically as the nature of the
problem permits the standards or directions that should gov-
ern the District Judges in the disposition of applications for
habeas corpus by prisoners under sentence of State Courts."
Brown v. Allen, 344 U. S., at 501-502 (opinion of Frank-
furter, J.).
   The cause and prejudice standard should curtail the abu-
sive petitions that in recent years have threatened to under-
mine the integrity of the habeas corpus process. "Federal
courts should not continue to tolerate-even in capital
cases -this type of abuse of the writ of habeas corpus."
Woodard v. Hutchins, 464 U. S., at 380. The writ of habeas
corpus is one of the centerpieces of our liberties. "But the
writ has potentialities for evil as well as for good. Abuse of
the writ may undermine the orderly administration of justice
and therefore weaken the forces of authority that are essen-
tial for civilization." Brown v. Allen, supra, at 512 (opinion
of Frankfurter, J.). Adoption of the cause and prejudice
standard acknowledges the historic purpose and function of
the writ in our constitutional system, and, by preventing its
abuse, assures its continued efficacy.
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                        497

467                    Opinion of the Court

  We now apply these principles to the case before us.

                               IV
   McCleskey based the Massiah claim in his second federal
petition on the 21-page Evans document alone. Worthy's
identity did not come to light until the hearing. The District
Court found, based on the document's revelation of the tac-
tics used by Evans in engaging McCleskey in conversation
(such as his pretending to be Ben Wright's uncle and his claim
that he was supposed to participate in the robbery), that
the document established an ab initio relationship between
Evans and the authorities. It relied on the finding and on
Worthy's later testimony to conclude that the State commit-
ted a Massiah violation.
   This ruling on the merits cannot come before us or any fed-
eral court if it is premised on a claim that constitutes an
abuse of the writ. We must consider, therefore, the prelimi-
nary question whether McCleskey had cause for failing to
raise the Massiah claim in his first federal petition. The
District Court found that neither the 21-page document nor
Worthy were known or discoverable before filing the first
federal petition. Relying on these findings, McCleskey ar-
gues that his failure to raise the Massiah claim in the first
petition should be excused. For reasons set forth below, we
disagree.
   That McCleskey did not possess, or could not reasonably
have obtained, certain evidence fails to establish cause if other
known or discoverable evidence could have supported the
claim in any event. "[C]ause ... requires a showing of some
external impediment preventing counsel from constructing or
raising the claim." Murray v. Carrier, 477 U.S., at 492
(emphasis added). For cause to exist, the external impedi-
ment, whether it be government interference or the reason-
able unavailability of the factual basis for the claim, must
have prevented petitioner from raising the claim. See id., at
488 (cause if "interference by officials . . . made compliance
498                      OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                           Opinion of the Court                   499 u. s.

impracticable"); Amadeo v. Zant, 486 U. S. 214, 222 (1988)
(cause if unavailable evidence "was the reason" for default).
Abuse-of-the-writ doctrine examines petitioner's conduct: The
question is whether petitioner possessed, or by reasonable
means could have obtained, a sufficient basis to allege a claim
in the first petition and pursue the matter through the habeas
process, see 28 U. S. C. § 2254 Rule 6 (Discovery); Rule 7
(Expansion of Record); Rule 8 (Evidentiary Hearing). The
requirement of cause in the abuse-of-the-writ context is
based on the principle that petitioner must conduct a reason-
able and diligent investigation aimed at including all relevant
claims and grounds for relief in the first federal habeas peti-
tion. If what petitioner knows or could discover upon rea-
sonable investigation supports a claim for relief in a federal
habeas petition, what he does not know is irrelevant. Omis-
sion of the claim will not be excused merely because evidence
discovered later might also have supported or strengthened
the claim.
   In applying these principles, we turn first to the 21-page
signed statement. It is essential at the outset to distinguish
between two issues: (1) Whether petitioner knew about or
could have discovered the 21-page document; and (2) whether
he knew about or could have discovered the evidence the doc-
ument recounted, namely, the jail-cell conversations. The
District Court's error lies in its conflation of the two inqui-
ries, an error petitioner would have us perpetuate here.
   The 21-page document unavailable to McCleskey at the
time of the first petition does not establish that McCleskey
had cause for failing to raise the Massiah claim at the out-
set.* Based on testimony and questioning at trial, McCles-

   *We accept as not clearly erroneous the District Court finding that the
document itself was neither known nor reasonably discoverable at the time
of the first federal petition. We note for the sake of completeness, how-
ever, that this finding is not free from substantial doubt. The record con-
tains much evidence that McCleskey knew, or should have known, of the
written document. When McCleskey took the stand at trial, the prosecu-
                          McCLESKEY v. ZANT                               499

467                         Opinion of the Court

key knew that he had confessed the murder during jail-cell
conversations with Evans, knew that Evans claimed to be a
relative of Ben Wright during the conversations, and knew
that Evans told the police about the conversations. Knowl-
edge of these facts alone would put McCleskey on notice to
pursue the Massiah claim in his first federal habeas petition
as he had done in the first state habeas petition.
  But there was more. The District Court's finding that
the 21-page document established an ab initio relationship
between Evans and the authorities rested in its entirety
on conversations in which McCleskey himself participated.

tor asked him about conversations with a prisoner in an adjacent cell.
These questions provoked a side-bar conference. The lawyers for the de-
fense reasserted their request for "statements from the defendant," to
which the court responded that "a statement . . . was furnished to the
Court but ... doesn't help [McCleskey]." App. 17. If there were any
doubt about an additional document, it is difficult to see why such doubt
had not evaporated by the time of the direct appeal and both the first state
and first federal habeas actions. In those proceedings McCleskey made
deliberate withholding of a statement by McCleskey to Evans the specific
basis for a Brady claim. In rejecting this claim on direct review, the Geor-
gia Supreme Court said: "The prosecutor showed the defense counsel his
file, but did not furnish this witness' [i. e. Evans'] statement." McClesky
v. State, 245 Ga. 108, 112, 263 S. E. 2d 146, 150 (1980) (emphasis added).
At the first state habeas corpus hearing, McCleskey's trial counsel testified
that the prosecutor told him that the statement of an unnamed individual
had been presented to the trial court but withheld from the defense. The
prosecutor made clear the individual's identity in his February 1981 state
habeas deposition when he stated:
"... Offie Evans gave his statement but it was not introduced at the trial.
It was part of that matter that was made [in] in camera inspection by the
judge prior to trial." App. 25.
   All of this took place before the first federal petition. The record, then,
furnishes strong evidence that McCleskey knew or should have known of
the Evans document before the first federal petition but chose not to pur-
sue it. We need not pass upon the trial court's finding to the contrary,
however, for the relevant question in this case is whether he knew or
should have known of the contents of the conversations recounted in the
document.
500                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court            499 u. s.

Though at trial McCleskey denied the inculpatory conversa-
tions, his current arguments presuppose them. Quite apart
from the inequity in McCleskey's reliance on that which he
earlier denied under oath, the more fundamental point re-
mains that because McCleskey participated in the conversa-
tions reported by Evans, he knew everything in the docu-
ment that the District Court relied upon to establish the ab
initio connection between Evans and the police. McCleskey
has had at least constructive knowledge all along of the facts
he now claims to have learned only from the 21-page docu-
ment. The unavailability of the document did not prevent
McCleskey from raising the Massiah claim in the first federal
petition and is not cause for his failure to do so. And of
course, McCleskey cannot contend that his false representa-
tions at trial constitute cause for the omission of a claim from
the first federal petition.
   The District Court's determination that jailer Worthy's
identity and testimony could not have been known prior to
the first federal petition does not alter our conclusion. It
must be remembered that the 21-page statement was the
only new evidence McCleskey had when he filed the Massiah
claim in the second federal petition in 1987. Under McCles-
key's own theory, nothing was known about Worthy even
then. If McCleskey did not need to know about Worthy and
his testimony to press the Massiah claim in the second peti-
tion, neither did he need to know about him to assert it in the
first. Ignorance about Worthy did not prevent McCleskey
from raising the Massiah claim in the first federal petition
and will not excuse his failure to do so.
   Though this reasoning suffices to show the irrelevance of
the District Court's finding concerning Worthy, the whole
question illustrates the rationale for requiring a prompt in-
vestigation and the full pursuit of habeas claims in the first
petition. At the time of the first federal petition, written
logs and records with prison staff names and assignments ex-
isted. By the time of the second federal petition officials had
                                                                        I




                                                                   11
                         McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       501

    467                    Opinion of the Court

    destroyed the records pursuant to normal retention sched-
    ules. Worthy's inconsistent and confused testimony in this
    case demonstrates the obvious proposition that factfinding
    processes are impaired when delayed. Had McCleskey pre-
    sented this claim in the first federal habeas proceeding when
    official records were available, he could have identified the
    relevant officers and cell assignment sheets. The critical
    facts for the Massiah claim, including the reason for Evans'
    placement in the cell adjacent to McCleskey's and the precise
    conversation that each officer had with Evans before he was
    put there, likely would have been reconstructed with greater
    precision than now can be achieved. By failing to raise the
    Massiah claim in 1981, McCleskey foreclosed the procedures
    best suited for disclosure of the facts needed for a reliable
    determination.
       McCleskey nonetheless seeks to hold the State responsible
    for his omission of the Massiah claim in the first petition.
    His current strategy is to allege that the State engaged
    in wrongful conduct in withholding the 21-page document.
    This argument need not detain us long. When all is said and
    done, the issue is not presented in the case, despite all the
    emphasis upon it in McCleskey's brief and oral argument.
    The Atlanta police turned over the 21-page document upon
    request in 1987. The District Court found no misrepresenta-
    tion or wrongful conduct by the State in failing to hand over
    the document earlier, and our discussion of the evidence in
    the record concerning the existence of the statement, see n.,
    supra, as well as the fact that at least four courts have con-
    sidered and rejected petitioner's Brady claim, belies McCles-
    key's characterization of the case. And as we have taken
    care to explain, the document is not critical to McCleskey's
    notice of a Massiah claim anyway.
       Petitioner's reliance on the procedural default discussion in
    Amadeo v. Zant, 486 U. S. 214 (1988), is misplaced. In
    Amadeo the Court mentioned that government concealment
    of evidence could be cause for a procedural default if it "was




L
502                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                       Opinion of the Court             499 u. s.

the reason for the failure of a petitioner's lawyers to raise the
jury challenge in the trial court." / d., at 222. This case dif-
fers from Amadeo in two crucial respects. First, there is no
finding that the State concealed evidence. And second, even
if the State intentionally concealed the 21-page document, the
concealment would not establish cause here because, in light
of McCleskey's knowledge of the information in the docu-
ment, any initial concealment would not have prevented him
from raising the claim in the first federal petition.
   As McCleskey lacks cause for failing to raise the Massiah
claim in the first federal petition, we need not consider
whether he would be prejudiced by his inability to raise the
alleged Massiah violation at this late date. See Murray v.
Carrier, 477 U. S., at 494 (rejecting proposition that showing
of prejudice permits relief in the absence of cause).
   We do address whether the Court should nonetheless exer-
cise its equitable discretion to correct a miscarriage of jus-
tice. That narrow exception is of no avail to McCleskey.
The Massiah violation, if it be one, resulted in the admission
at trial of truthful inculpatory evidence which did not affect
the reliability of the guilt determination. The very state-
ment McCleskey now seeks to embrace confirms his guilt.
As the District Court observed:
     "After having read [the Evans statement], the court has
     concluded that nobody short of William Faulkner could
     have contrived that statement, and as a consequence
     finds the testimony of Offie Evans absolutely to be true,
     and the court states on the record that it entertains
     absolutely no doubt as to the guilt of Mr. McCleskey."
     4 Tr. 4.
We agree with this conclusion. McCleskey cannot demon-
strate that the alleged Massiah violation caused the convic-
tion of an innocent person. Murray v. Carrier, supra, at
496.
   The history of the proceedings in this case, and the burden
upon the State in defending against allegations made for the
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                        503

467              Appendix to opinion of the Court

first time in federal court some nine years after the trial, re-
veal the necessity for the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine. The
cause and prejudice standard we adopt today leaves ample
room for consideration of constitutional errors in a first fed-
eral habeas petition and in a later petition under appropriate
circumstances. Petitioner has not satisfied this standard for
excusing the omission of the Massiah claim from his first pe-
tition. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
                                                     Affirmed.

        APPENDIX TO OPINION OF THE COURT
       Petitioner's Claims for Relief at Various Stages
                         of the Litigation
   1. Direct Appeal. On direct appeal, McCleskey raised the
following claims: (1) the death penalty was administered in
a discriminatory fashion because of prosecutorial discretion;
(2) the prosecutor conducted an illegal postindictment lineup;
(3) the trial court erred in admitting at trial the statement
McCleskey made to the police; (4) the trial court erred in al-
lowing Evans to testify about McCleskey's jail-house confes-
sion; (5) the prosecutor failed to disclose certain impeachment
evidence; and (6) the trial court erred in admitting evidence
of McCleskey's prior criminal acts. McClesky v. State, 245
Ga. 108, 112-114, 263 S. E. 2d 146, 149-151 (1980).
   2. First State Habeas Corpus Petition. McCleskey's first
state habeas petition alleged the following constitutional vi-
olations: (1) the Georgia death penalty is administered arbi-
trarily, capriciously, and whimsically; (2) Georgia officials im-
posed McCleskey's capital sentence pursuant to a pattern and
practice of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and pov-
erty; (3) the death penalty lacks theoretical or factual justifi-
cation and fails to serve any rational interest; (4) McCleskey's
death sentence is cruel and unusual punishment in light of all
mitigating factors; (5) McCleskey received inadequate notice
and opportunity to be heard; (6) the jury did not constitute
a fair cross section of the community; (7) the jury was biased




                                                                    I
504                   OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                  Appendix to opinion of the Court      499 u. s.

in favor of the prosecution; (8) the trial court improperly
excused two jurors who were opposed to the death penalty;
(9) McCleskey's postarrest statement should have been ex-
cluded because it was obtained after an allegedly illegal ar-
rest; (10) the postarrest statement was extracted involun-
tarily; (11) the State failed to disclose an "arrangement" with
one of its key witnesses, Evans; (12) the State deliberately
withheld a statement made by McCleskey to Evans; (13) the
trial court erred in failing to grant McCleskey funds to
employ experts in aid of his defense; q4) three witnesses for
the State witnessed a highly suggestive lineup involving
McCleskey prior to trial; (15) the trial court's jury instruc-
tions concerning intent impermissibly shifted the burden of
persuasion to McCleskey; (16) the prosecution impermissibly
referred to the appellate process during the sentencing
phase; (17) the trial court improperly admitted evidence of
other crimes for which McCleskey had not been convicted;
(18) the trial court's instructions concerning evidence of
McCleskey's other bad acts was overbroad; (19) the appellate
review procedures of Georgia denied McCleskey effective as-
sistance of counsel, a fair hearing, and the basic tools of an
adequate defense; (20) the means by which the death penalty
is administered inflicts wanton and unnecessary torture; (21)
McCleskey was denied effective assistance of counsel in nu-
merous contexts; (22) introduction of statements petitioner
made to Evans were elicited in a situation created to induce
McCleskey to make incriminating statements; and (23) the
evidence was insufficient to convict McCleskey of capital
murder. Petition, HC No. 4909, 2 Tr., Exh. H.
   3. First Federal Habeas Corpus Petition. McCleskey
raised the following claims in his first federal habeas petition:
(1) the Georgia death penalty discriminated on the basis of
race; (2) the State failed to disclose an "understanding" with
Evans; (3) the trial court's instructions to the jury impermis-
sibly shifted the burden to McCleskey; (4) the prosecutor im-
properly referred to the appellate process at the sentencing
                         McCLESKEY v. ZANT                      505

    467              Appendix to opinion of the Court

    phase; (5) the trial court impermissibly refused to grant Mc-
    Cleskey funds to employ experts in aid of his defense; (6) the
    trial court's instructions concerning evidence of McCleskey's
    other bad acts was overbroad; (7) the trial court's instruc-
    tions gave the jury too much discretion to consider nonstatu-
    tory aggravating circumstances; (8) the trial court improp-
    erly admitted evidence of other crimes for which McCleskey
    had not been convicted; (9) three witnesses for the State wit-
    nessed a highly suggestive lineup involving McCleskey prior
    to trial; (10) McCleskey's postarrest statement should have
    been excluded because it was extracted involuntarily; (11) the
    trial court impermissibly excluded two jurors who were op-
    posed to the death penalty; (12) the death penalty lacks theo-
    retical or factual justification and fails to serve any rational
    interest; (13) the State deliberately withheld a statement
    made by McCleskey to Evans; (14) the evidence was insuffi-
    cient to convict McCleskey of capital murder; (15) McCles-
    key's counsel failed to investigate the State's evidence ade-
    quately; (16) McCleskey's counsel failed to raise certain
    objections or make certain motions at trial; (17) McCleskey's
    counsel failed to undertake an independent investigation of
    possible mitigating circumstances prior to trial; and (18) after
    trial, McCleskey's counsel failed to review and correct the
    judge's sentence report. M cCleskey v. Zant, 580 F. Supp.
    338 (ND Ga. 1984).
       4. Second State Habeas Petition. In his second state ha-
    beas petition, McCleskey alleged the following claims: (1)
    the prosecutor systematically excluded blacks from the jury;
    (2) the State of Georgia imposed the death penalty against
    McCleskey in a racially discriminatory manner; (3) the State
    failed to disclose its agreement with Evans; (4) the trial court
    impermissibly refused to grant McCleskey funds to employ
    experts in aid of his defense; and (5) the prosecutor improp-
    erly referred to the appellate process at the sentencing
    phase. Petition, 2 Tr., Exh. G.




l
506                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                    MARSHALL, J.' dissenting           499 u. s.

   5. Second Federal Habeas Corpus Petition. In his second
federal habeas petition, McCleskey alleged the following
claims: (1) Evans' testimony concerning his conversation with
McCleskey was inadmissible because Evans acted as a state
informant in a situation created to induce McCleskey to make
incriminating statements; (2) the State failed to correct the
misleading testimony of Evans; (3) the State failed to disclose
"an arrangement" with Evans; (4) the prosecutor improperly
referred to the appellate process at the sentencing phase; (5)
the State systematically excluded blacks from McCleskey's
jury; (6) the death penalty was imposed on McCleskey pursu-
ant to a pattern and practice of racial discrimination by Geor-
gia officials against black defendants; and (7) the trial court
impermissibly refused to grant McCleskey funds to employ
experts in aid of his defense. Federal Habeas Petition, 1
Tr., Exh. 1.
   JUSTICE MARSHALL, with whom JUSTICE BLACKMUN and
JUSTICE STEVENS join, dissenting.
   Today's decision departs drastically from the norms that
inform the proper judicial function. Without even the most
casual admission that it is discarding longstanding legal prin-
ciples, the Court radically redefines the content of the "abuse
of the writ" doctrine, substituting the strict-liability "cause
and prejudice" standard of Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S.
72 (1977), for the good-faith "deliberate abandonment" stand-
ard of Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S. 1 (1963). This
doctrinal innovation, which repudiates a line of judicial deci-
sions codified by Congress in the governing statute and pro-
cedural rules, was by no means foreseeable when the peti-
tioner in this case filed his first federal habeas application.
Indeed, the new rule announced and applied today was not
even requested by respondent at any point in this litigation.
Finally, rather than remand this case for reconsideration in
light of its new standard, the majority performs an independ-
ent reconstruction of the record, disregarding the factual
findings of the District Court and applying its new rule in a
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                      507

467                 MARSHALL, J., dissenting


manner that encourages state officials to conceal evidence
that would likely prompt a petitioner to raise a particular
claim on habeas. Because I cannot acquiesce in this unjus-
tifiable assault on the Great Writ, I dissent.

                               I
   Disclaiming innovation, the majority depicts the "cause
and prejudice" test as merely a clarification of existing law.
Our decisions, the majority explains, have left "[m]uch confu-
sion . . . on the standard for determining when a petitioner
abuses the writ." Ante, at 477. But amidst this "confu-
sion," the majority purports to discern a trend toward the
cause-and-prejudice standard and concludes that this is the
rule that best comports with "our habeas corpus precedents,"
ante, at 490; see ante, at 495, and with the "complex and
evolving body of equitable principles" that have traditionally
defined the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine, id., at 489. This at-
tempt to gloss over the break between today's decision and
established precedents is completely unconvincing.
   Drawing on the practice at common law in England, this
Court long ago established that the power of a federal court
to entertain a second or successive petition should turn not on
"the inflexible doctrine of res judicata" but rather on the ex-
ercise of "sound judicial discretion guided and controlled by a
consideration of whatever has a rational bearing on the sub-
ject." Wong Doo v. United States, 265 U. S. 239, 240-241
(1924); accord, Salinger v. Loisel, 265 U. S. 224, 230-232
(1924). Thus, in Wong Doo, the Court held that the District
Court acted within its discretion in dismissing a petition
premised on a ground that was raised but expressly aban-
doned in an earlier petition. "The petitioner had full oppor-
tunity," the Court explained, "to offer proof [of the aban-
doned ground] at the hearing on the first petition; and, if he
was intending to rely on that ground, good faith required that
he produce the proof then." 265 U. S., at 241. Noting that
the evidence supporting the abandoned ground had been "ac-
508                      OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                         MARSHALL, J. ' dissenting                499 u. s.

cessible all the time," the Court inferred that petitioner, an
alien seeking to forestall his imminent deportation, had split
his claims in order to "postpone the execution of the [deporta-
tion] order." Ibid.
   In Price v. Johnston, 334 U. S. 266 (1948), in contrast, the
Court held that the District Court abused its discretion by
summarily dismissing a petition that raised a claim not as-
serted in any of three previous petitions filed by the same
prisoner. Whereas it had been clear from the record that
the petitioner in Wong Doo had possessed access to the facts
supporting his abandoned claim, the District Court in Price
had no basis for assuming that the prisoner had "acquired no
new or additional information since" the disposition of his
earlier petitions. Id., at 290. "[E]ven if it [had been] found
that petitioner did have prior knowledge of all the facts con-
cerning the allegation in question," the Court added, the Dis-
trict Court should not have dismissed the petition before af-
fording the prisoner an opportunity to articulate "some
justifiable reason [why] he was previously unable to assert
his rights or was unaware of the significance of relevant
facts." Id., at 291.
   In Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S. 1 (1963), the Court
crystallized the various factors bearing on a district court's
discretion to entertain a successive petition. 1 The Court in
Sanders distinguished successive petitions raising previously
asserted grounds from those raising previously unasserted
grounds. With regard to the former class of petitions, the
Court explained, the district court may give "[c]ontrolling
weight ... to [the] denial of a prior application" unless "the
ends of justice would . . . be served by reaching the merits of
the subsequent application." Id., at 15. With regard to the

  1
    Although Sanders examined the abuse-of-the-writ question in the con-
text of a motion for collateral review filed under 28 U. S. C. § 2255, the
Court made it clear that the same principles apply in the context of a peti-
tion for habeas corpus filed under 28 U. S. C. § 2254. See 373 U. S., at
12-15.
                      MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                         509

467                  MARSHALL, J.' dissenting


latter, however, the district court must reach the merits of
the petition unless "there has been an abuse of the writ
.... " Id., at 17. In determining whether the omission of
the claim from the previous petition constitutes an abuse of
the writ, the judgment of the district court is to be guided
chiefly by the "'[equitable] principle that a suitor's conduct in
relation to the matter at hand may disentitle him to the relief
he seeks."' Ibid., quoting Fay v. Noia, 372 U. S. 391, 438
(1963).
      "Thus, for example, if a prisoner deliberately withholds
      one of two grounds for federal collateral relief at the time
      of filing his first application, in the hope of being granted
      two hearings rather than one or for some other such rea-
      son, he may be deemed to have waived his right to a
      hearing on a second application presenting the withheld
      ground. The same may be true if, as in Wong Doo, the
      prisoner deliberately abandons one of his grounds at the
      first hearing. Nothing in the traditions of habeas cor-
      pus requires the federal courts to tolerate needless
      piecemeal litigation, or to entertain collateral proceed-
      ings whose only purpose is to vex, harass, or delay."
      373 U. S., at 18.
   What emerges from Sanders and its predecessors is essen-
tially a good-faith standard. As illustrated by Wong Doo,
the principal form of bad faith that the "abuse of the writ"
doctrine is intended to deter is the deliberate abandonment of
a claim the factual and legal basis of which are known to the
petitioner (or his counsel) when he files his first petition.
The Court in Sanders stressed this point by equating its anal-
ysis with that of Fay v. Noia, supra, which established the
then-prevailing "deliberate bypass" test for the cognizability
of claims on which a petitioner procedurally defaulted in state
proceedings. See 373 U. S., at 18. A petitioner also abuses
the writ under Sanders when he uses the writ to achieve
some end other than expeditious relief from unlawful confine-
ment-such as "to vex, harass, or delay." However, so long
510                      OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                         MARSHALL, J.' dissenting                  499 u. s.

as the petitioner's previous application was based on a good-
faith assessment of the claims available to him, see Price v.
Johnston, supra, at 289; Wong Doo, supra, at 241; the denial
of the application does not bar the petitioner from availing
himself of "new or additional information," Price v. Johnston,
supra, at 290, in support of a claim not previously raised.
Accord, Advisory Committee's Note to Habeas Corpus Rule
9, 28 u. s. c., p. 427.
   "Cause and prejudice" -the standard currently applicable
to procedural defaults in state proceedings, see Wainwright
v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72 (1977)-imposes a much stricter test.
As this Court's precedents make clear, a petitioner has cause
for failing effectively to present his federal claim in state pro-
ceedings only when "some objective factor external to the de-
fense impeded counsel's efforts to comply with the State's
procedural rule .... " Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478,
488 (1986). Under this test, the state of mind of counsel is
largely irrelevant. Indeed, this Court has held that even
counsel's reasonable perception that a particular claim is
without factual or legal foundation does not excuse the failure
to raise that claim in the absence of an objective, external
impediment to counsel's efforts. See Smith v. Murray, 477
U. S. 527, 535-536 (1986). In this sense, the cause compo-
nent of the Wainwright v. Sykes test establishes a strict-
liability standard. 2

   2
     Contrary to the majority's suggestion, this Court's more recent deci-
sions on abuse of the writ by no means foreshadowed the shift to Sykes'
strict-liability standard. The cases cited by the majority all involved
eleventh-hour dispositions of capital stay applications, and the cursory
analysis in each ruling suggests merely that the habeas petitioner failed to
carry his burden of articulating a credible explanation for having failed to
raise the claim in an earlier petition. See Advisory Committee's Note to
Habeas Corpus Rule 9, 28 U. S. C., p. 427 ("[T]he petitioner has the bur-
den of proving that he has not abused the writ"); accord, Price v. Johnston,
334 U. S. 266, 292 (1948); see also Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S. 1, 10
(1963) (Government merely has burden to plead abuse of the writ). Thus,
in Woodard v. Hutchins, 464 U. S. 377 (1984) (per curiam), the five Jus-
                          McCLESKEY v. ZANT                               511

467                      MARSHALL, J.' dissenting

   Equally foreign to our abuse-of-the-writ jurisprudence is
the requirement that a petitioner show "prejudice." Under
Sanders, a petitioner who articulates a justifiable reason for
failing to present a claim in a previous habeas application is
not required in addition to demonstrate any particular degree
of prejudice before the habeas court must consider his claim.
If the petitioner demonstrates that his claim has merit, it is
the State that must show that the resulting constitutional
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See L.
Yackle, Postconviction Remedies § 133, p. 503 (1981). 3

tices concurring in the order concluded that the habeas petitioner had
abused the writ because he "offer[ed] no explanation for having failed to
raise [three new] claims in his first petition for habeas corpus." Id., at 379
(Powell, J., joined by Burger, C. J., BLACKMUN, REHNQUIST, and O'CON-
NOR, JJ., concurring in order vacating stay) (emphasis added). A peti-
tioner who gives no explanation for omitting his claims from a previous
application necessarily fails to carry his burden of justification. Similarly,
in Antone v. Dugger, 465 U. S. 200 (1984) (per curiam), the Court rejected
as "meritless" the petitioner's claim that the imminence of his execution
prevented his counsel from identifying all of the claims that could be raised
in the first petition, because the petitioner's execution had in fact been
stayed during the pendency of the original habeas proceeding. Id., at 206,
n. 4. Finally, in Delo v. Stokes, 495 U. S. 320 (1990) (per curiam), the
Court in a five-sentence analysis concluded that the petitioner had abused
the writ by raising a claim the legal basis of which was readily apparent at
the time of the first petition. Id., at 321-322. The opinion says nothing
about whether the petitioner offered any explanation to rebut the pre-
sumption that the petitioner had deliberately abandoned this claim. In
short, the analysis in these decisions is as consistent with Sanders'
deliberate-abandonment test as with Sykes' cause-and-prejudice test.
   3
     The majority is simply incorrect, moreover, when it claims that the
"prejudice" component of the Sykes test is "[w]ell defined in the case law."
Ante, at 496. The Court in Sykes expressly declined to define this con-
cept, see 433 U. S., at 91, and since then, the Court has elaborated upon
"prejudice" only as it applies to nonconstitutional jury-instruction chal-
lenges, leaving "the import of the term in other situations ... an open
question." United States v. Frady, 456 U. S. 152, 168 (1982). Thus, far
from resolving "confusion" over the proper application of the abuse-of-the-
writ doctrine, today's decision creates it.
512                   OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                     MARSHALL, J.' dissenting             499 u. s.

                              II
   The real question posed by the majority's analysis is not
whether the cause-and-prejudice test departs from the prin-
ciples of Sanders-for it clearly does - but whether the ma-
jority has succeeded in justifying this departure as an exer-
cise of this Court's common-lawmaking discretion. In my
view, the majority does not come close to justifying its new
standard.
                                A
   Incorporation of the cause-and-prejudice test into the
abuse-of-the-writ doctrine cannot be justified as an exercise
of this Court's common-lawmaking discretion, because this
Court has no discretion to exercise in this area. Congress
has affirmatively ratified the Sanders good-faith standard in
the governing statute and procedural rules, thereby insulat-
ing that standard from judicial repeal.
   The abuse-of-the-writ doctrine is embodied in 28 U. S. C.
§ 2244(b) and in Habeas Corpus Rule 9(b). Enacted three
years after Sanders, § 2244(b) recodified the statutory au-
thority of a district court to dismiss a second or successive
petition, amending the statutory language to incorporate the
Sanders criteria:
     "[A] subsequent application for a writ of habeas corpus
     . . . need not be entertained by a court . . . unless the
     application alleges and is predicated on a factual or other
     ground not adjudicated on the hearing of the earlier
     application for the writ, and unless the court . . . is satis-
     fied that the applicant has not on the earlier application
     deliberately withheld the newly asserted ground or oth-
     erwise abused the writ." 28 U. S. C. § 2244(b).
Consistent with Sanders, the purpose of the recodification
was to spare a district court the obligation to entertain a peti-
tion "containing allegations identical to those asserted in a
previous application that has been denied, or predicated upon
grounds obviously well known to [the petitioner] when [he]
                          McCLESKEY v. ZANT                              513

467                      MARSHALL, J.' dissenting

filed the preceding application." S. Rep. No. 1797, 89th
Cong., 2d Sess., 2 (1966) (emphasis added). Rule 9(b) like-
wise adopts Sanders' terminology:
     "A second or successive petition may be dismissed if the
     judge finds that it fails to allege new or different grounds
     for relief and the prior determination was on the merits
     or, if new and different grounds are alleged, the judge
     finds that the failure of the petitioner to assert those
     grounds in a prior petition constituted an abuse of the
     writ."
   There can be no question that § 2244(b) and Rule 9(b)
codify Sanders. The legislative history of, and Advisory
Committee's Notes to, Rule 9(b) expressly so indicate, see
28 U. S. C., pp. 426-427; H. R. Rep. No. 94-1471, pp. 5-6
(1976), and such has been the universal understanding of this
Court, see Rose v. Lundy, 455 U. S. 509, 521 (1982), of the
lower courts, see, e. g., Williams v. Lockhart, 862 F. 2d 155,
 157 (CA8 1988); Neuschafer v. Whitley, 860 F. 2d 1470, 1474
(CA9 1988), cert. denied, sub nom. Demosthenes v. Neuscha-
fer, 493 U. S. 906 (1989); 860 F. 2d, at 1479 (Alarcon, J., con-
curring in result); Davis v. Dugger, 829 F. 2d 1513, 1518,
n. 13 (CAll 1987); Passman v. Blackburn, 797 F. 2d 1335,
 1341 (CA5 1986), cert. denied, 480 U. S. 948 (1987); United
States v. Talk, 597 F. 2d 249, 250-251 (CAlO 1979); United
States ex rel. Fletcher v. Brierley, 460 F. 2d 444, 446, n. 4A
(CA3), cert. denied, 409 U. S. 1044 (1972), and of commen-
tators, see, e.g., 17A C. Wright, A. Miller & E. Cooper,
Federal Practice and Procedure § 4267, pp. 477-478 (2d ed.
1988); L. Yackle, supra, § 154. 4
   4
     In this respect, the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine rests on a different
foundation from the procedural-default doctrine. In Wainwright v. Sykes,
433 U. S. 72 (1977), the Court emphasized that the procedural-default rule
set down in Fay v. Noia, 372 U. S. 391 (1963), derived only from "comity"
considerations, 433 U. S., at 83, and explained that the content of this doc-
trine is therefore subject to the Court's traditional, common-law discretion
"to overturn or modify its earlier views of the scope of the writ, even
514                      OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                        MARSHALL, J.' dissenting                  499 u. s.

   The majority concedes that § 2244(b) and Rule 9(b) codify
Sanders, see ante, at 487, but concludes nonetheless that
Congress did "not answer" all of the "questions" concerning
the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine, ibid. The majority empha-
sizes that § 2244(b) refers to second or successive petitions
from petitioners who have "deliberately withheld the newly
asserted ground . . . or otherwise abused the writ" without
exhaustively cataloging the ways in which the writ may "oth-
erwise" be "abused." See ante, at 486, 489-490. From this
"silenc[e]," the majority infers a congressional delegation of
lawmaking power broad enough to encompass the engrafting
of the cause-and-prejudice test onto the abuse-of-the-writ
doctrine. Ante, at 487.
   It is difficult to take this reasoning seriously. Because
"cause" under Sykes makes the mental state of the petitioner
(or his counsel) irrelevant, "cause" completely subsumes "de-
liberate abandonment." See Engle v. Isaac, 456 U. S. 107,
130, n. 36 (1982); see also Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S., at
87. Thus, if merely failing to raise a claim without "cause" -
that is, without some external impediment to raising it- nec-
essarily constitutes an abuse of the writ, the statutory refer-
ence to deliberate withholding of a claim would be rendered
superfluous. Insofar as Sanders was primarily concerned
with limiting dismissal of a second or subsequent petition to
instances in which the petitioner had deliberately abandoned
the new claim, see 373 U. S., at 18, the suggestion that Con-
gress invested courts with the discretion to read this lan-
guage out of the statute is completely irreconcilable with the
proposition that § 2244(b) and Rule 9(b) codify Sanders.
   To give content to "otherwise abus[e] the writ" as used in
§ 2244(b), we must look to Sanders. As I have explained,

where the statutory language authorizing judicial action has remained un-
changed," id., at 81. But unlike Fay v. Noia's "deliberate bypass" test for
procedural defaults, the "deliberate abandonment" test of Sanders has
been expressly ratified by Congress. This legislative action necessarily
constrains the scope of this Court's common-lawmaking discretion.
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                       515

467                  MARSHALL, J.' dissenting


the Court in Sanders identified two broad classes of bad-faith
conduct that bar adjudication of a claim not raised in a previ-
ous habeas application: the deliberate abandonment or with-
holding of that claim from the first petition; and the filing
of a petition aimed at some purpose other than expeditious
relief from unlawful confinement, such as "to vex, harass,
or delay." See ibid. By referring to second or successive
applications from habeas petitioners who have "deliberately
withheld the newly asserted ground or otherwise abused the
writ," § 2244(b) tracks this division. Congress may well
have selected the phrase "otherwise abused the writ" with
the expectation that courts would continue to elaborate upon
the types of dilatory tactics that, in addition to deliberate
abandonment of a known claim, constitute an abuse of the
writ. But consistent with Congress' intent to codify Sand-
ers' good-faith test, such elaborations must be confined to cir-
cumstances in which a petitioner's omission of an unknown
claim is conjoined with his intentional filing of a petition for
an improper purpose, such as "to vex, harass or delay."
   The majority tacitly acknowledges this constraint on the
Court's interpretive discretion by suggesting that "cause" is
tantamount to "inexcusable neglect." This claim, too, is un-
tenable. The majority exaggerates when it claims that the
"inexcusable neglect" formulation -which this Court has
never applied in an abuse-of-the-writ decision-functions as
an independent standard for evaluating a petitioner's failure
to raise a claim in a previous habeas application. It is true
that Sanders compared its own analysis to the analysis in
Townsend v. Sain, 372 U. S. 293 (1963), which established
that a district court should deny an evidentiary hearing if the
habeas petitioner inexcusably neglected to develop factual
evidence in state proceedings. See id., at 317. Townsend,
however, expressly equated "inexcusable neglect" with the
"deliberate bypass" test of Fay v. Noia. See 372 U. S., at
516                       OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                         MARSHALL, J.' dissenting                  499 u. s.

317. 5 But even if "inexcusable neglect" does usefully de-
scribe a class of abuses separate from deliberate abandon-
ment, the melding of "cause and prejudice" into the abuse-of-
the-writ doctrine cannot be defended as a means of "giving
content" to "inexcusable neglect." Ante, at 490. For under
Sykes' strict-liability standard, mere attorney negligence is
never excusable. See Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S., at 488
("So long as a defendant is represented by counsel whose per-
formance is not constitutionally ineffective ... , we discern
no inequity in requiring him to bear the risk of attorney error
that results in a procedural default").
   Confirmation that the majority today exercises legislative
power not properly belonging to this Court is supplied by
Congress' own recent consideration and rejection of an
amendment to§ 2244(b). It is axiomatic that this Court does
not function as a backup legislature for the reconsideration of
failed attempts to amend existing statutes. See Bowsher v.
Merck & Co., 460 U. S. 824, 837, n. 12 (1983); FTC v.
Ruberoid Co., 343 U. S. 470, 478-479 (1952); see also North
Haven Bd. of Ed. v. Bell, 456 U. S. 512, 534-535 (1982).
Yet that is exactly the effect of today's decision. As re-
ported out of the House Committee on the Judiciary, § 1303
of H. R. 5269, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. (1990), would have re-
quired dismissal of any second or subsequent application by a
habeas petitioner under sentence of death unless the peti-

   5
     Indeed, Congress expressly amended Rule 9(b) to eliminate language
that would have established a standard similar to "inexcusable neglect."
As initially submitted to Congress, Rule 9(b) would have authorized a dis-
trict court to entertain a second or successive petition raising a previously
unasserted ground unless the court "finds that the failure of the petitioner
to assert th[at] groun[d] in a prior petition is not excusable." H. R.
Rep. No. 94-1471, p. 8 (1976) (emphasis added). Explaining that "the 'not
excusable' language [would] creat[e] a new and undefined standard that
[would] g[ive] a judge too broad a discretion to dismiss a second or succes-
sive petition," Congress substituted Sanders' "abuse of the writ" formula-
tion. See id., at 5. This amendment was designed to "brin[g] Rule 9(b)
into conformity with existing law." Ibid.
                        McCLESKEY v. ZANT                             517

467                    MARSHALL, J.' dissenting

tioner raised a new claim "the factual basis of [which] could
not have been discovered by the exercise of reasonable dili-
gence," H. R. Rep. No. 101-681,pt.1,p. 29(1990)(emphasis
added). 6 The Committee Report accompanying this legisla-
tion explained that "courts have properly construed section
2244(b) and Rule 9(b) as codifications of the guidelines the
[Supreme] Court itself prescribed in Sanders." Id., at 119
(citation omitted). The Report justified adoption of the
tougher "reasonable diligence" standard on the ground that
"[t]he Sanders guidelines have not ... satisfactorily met con-
cerns that death row prisoners may file second or successive
habeas corpus applications as a means of extending litiga-
tion." Ibid. Unfazed by Congress' rejection of this legisla-
tion, the majority arrogates to itself the power to repeal
Sanders and to replace it with a tougher standard. 7
                              B
  Even if the fusion of cause-and-prejudice into the abuse-of-
the-writ doctrine were not foreclosed by the will of Congress,
the majority fails to demonstrate that such a rule would be a
wise or just exercise of the Court's common-lawmaking dis-
cretion. In fact, the majority's abrupt change in law sub-
verts the policies underlying§ 2244(b) and unfairly prejudices
the petitioner in this case.
  The majority premises adoption of the cause-and-prejudice
test almost entirely on the importance of "finality." See
ante, at 490-493. At best, this is an insufficiently developed
justification for cause-and-prejudice or any other possible
conception of the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine. For the very
  6
    House bill 5269 was the House version of the legislation that became
the Crime Control Act of 1990, Pub. L. 101-647, 104 Stat. 4789 the final
version of which left§ 2244(b) unamended.
  7
    Moreover, the rejected amendment to § 2244(b) would have changed
the standard only for second or subsequent petitions filed by petitioners
under a sentence of death, leaving the Sanders standard intact for
noncapital petitioners. The majority's decision today changes the stand-
ard for all habeas petitioners.
518                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                    MARSHALL, J., dissenting           499 u. s.

essence of the Great Writ is our criminal justice sys-
tem's commitment to suspending "[c]onventional notions of fi-
nality of litigation . . . where life or liberty is at stake and
infringement of constitutional rights is alleged." Sanders,
373 U. S., at 8. To recognize this principle is not to make
the straw-man claim that the writ must be accompanied by
"'[a] procedural system which permits an endless repetition
of inquiry into facts and law in a vain search for ultimate
certitude."' Ante, at 492, quoting Bator, Finality in Crim-
inal Law and Federal Habeas Corpus for State Prisoners, 76
Harv. L. Rev. 441, 452 (1963). Rather, it is only to point out
the plain fact that we may not, "[u]nder the guise of fashion-
ing a procedural rule, ... wip[e] out the practical efficacy of
a jurisdiction conferred by Congress on the District Courts."
Brown v. Allen, 344 U. S. 443, 498-499 (1953) (opinion of
Frankfurter, J.).
   The majority seeks to demonstrate that cause-and-
prejudice strikes an acceptable balance between the State's
interest in finality and the purposes of habeas corpus by
analogizing the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine to the procedural-
default doctrine. According to the majority, these two doc-
trines "implicate nearly identical concerns flowing from the
significant costs of federal habeas corpus review." Ante, at
490-491. And because this Court has already deemed cause-
and-prejudice to be an appropriate standard for assessing
procedural defaults, the majority reasons, the same standard
should be used for assessing the failure to raise a claim in a
previous habeas petition. See ante, at 490-493.
   This analysis does not withstand scrutiny. This Court's
precedents on the procedural-default doctrine identify two
purposes served by the cause-and-prejudice test. The first
purpose is to promote respect for a State's legitimate proce-
dural rules. See, e. g., Reed v. Ross, 468 U. S. 1, 14 (1984);
Sykes, 433 U. S., at 87-90. As the Court has explained, the
willingness of a habeas court to entertain a claim that a state
court has deemed to be procedurally barred "undercut[s] the
                     McCLESKEY v. ZANT                      519

467                 MARSHALL, J., dissenting


State's ability to enforce its procedural rules," Engle v.
Isaac, 456 U. S., at 129, and may cause "state courts them-
selves [to be] less stringent in their enforcement," Sykes,
supra, at 89. See generally Meltzer, State Court Forfei-
tures of Federal Rights, 99 Harv. L. Rev. 1128, 1150-1158
(1986). The second purpose of the cause-and-prejudice test
is to preserve the connection between federal collateral re-
view and the general "deterrent" function served by the
Great Writ. "'[T]he threat of habeas serves as a necessary
additional incentive for trial and appellate courts through-
out the land to conduct their proceedings in a manner consist-
ent with established constitutional standards.'" Teague v.
Lane, 489 U. S. 288, 306 (1989) (plurality opinion), quoting
Desist v. United States, 394 U. S. 244, 262-263 (1969) (Har-
lan, J., dissenting); see Rose v. Mitchell, 443 U. S. 545, 563
(1979). Obviously, this understanding of the disciplining ef-
fect of federal habeas corpus presupposes that a criminal de-
fendant has given the state trial and appellate courts a fair
opportunity to pass on his constitutional claims. See Mur-
ray v. Carrier, 477 U. S., at 487; Engle v. Isaac, supra, at
128-129. With regard to both of these purposes, the strict-
ness of the cause-and-prejudice test has been justified on the
ground that the defendant's procedural default is akin to an
independent and adequate state-law ground for the judgment
of conviction. See Sykes, supra, at 81-83.
   Neither of these concerns is even remotely implicated in the
abuse-of-the-writ setting. The abuse-of-the-writ doctrine
clearly contemplates a situation in which a petitioner (as in
this case) has complied with applicable state-procedural rules
and effectively raised his constitutional claim in state pro-
ceedings; were it otherwise, the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine
would not perform a screening function independent from
that performed by the procedural-default doctrine and by the
requirement that a habeas petitioner exhaust his state reme-
dies, see 28 U. S. C. §§ 2254(b), (c). Cf. ante, at 486-487.
Because the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine presupposes that the
520                       OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                         MARSHALL, J.' dissenting                    499 u. s.

petitioner has effectively raised his claim in state proceed-
ings, a decision by the habeas court to entertain the claim
notwithstanding its omission from an earlier habeas petition
will neither breed disrespect for state-procedural rules nor
unfairly subject state courts to federal collateral review in
the absence of a state-court disposition of a federal claim. 8
   Because the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine addresses the situ-
ation in which a federal habeas court must determine
whether to hear a claim withheld from another federal habeas
court, the test for identifying an abuse must strike an appro-
priate balance between finality and review in that setting.
Only when informed by Sanders does§ 2244(b) strike an effi-
cient balance. A habeas petitioner's own interest in liberty
furnishes a powerful incentive to assert in his first petition all
claims that the petitioner (or his counsel) believes have area-
sonable prospect for success. See Note, 83 Harv. L. Rev.
1038, 1153-1154 (1970); see also Rose v. Lundy, 455 U. S., at
520 ("The prisoner's principal interest, of course, is in obtain-
ing speedy federal relief on his claims"). Sanders' bar on the
later assertion of claims omitted in bad faith adequately forti-
fies this natural incentive. At the same time, however, the
petitioner faces an effective disincentive to asserting any
claim that he believes does not have a reasonable prospect for
  8
    Insofar as the habeas court's entertainment of the petitioner's claim in
these circumstances depends on the petitioner's articulation of a justifiable
reason for having failed to raise the claim in the earlier federal petition, see
Sanders, 373 U. S., at 17-18; Price v. Johnston, 334 U. S., at 291, the fed-
eral court may very well be considering the claim on the basis of evidence
discovered after, or legal developments that postdate, the termination of
the state proceedings. But the decision to permit a petitioner to avail him-
self of federal habeas relief under those conditions is one that Congress ex-
pressly made in authorizing district courts to entertain second or succes-
sive petitions under§ 2244(b) and Rule 9(b). See S. Rep. No. 1797, at 2
("newly discovered evidence" is basis for second petition raising previously
unasserted ground); Advisory Committee's Note to Habeas Corpus Rule 9,
28 U. S. C., p. 427 ("A retroactive change in the law and newly discovered
evidence are examples" of "instances in which petitioner's failure to assert
a ground in a prior petition is excusable").
                      McCLESKEY v. ZANT                        521

467                  MARSHALL, J., dissenting


 success: the adverse adjudication of such a claim will bar its
 reassertion under the successive-petition doctrine, see 28
 U. S. C. § 2244(b); Sanders, supra, at 17, whereas omission
 of the claim will not prevent the petitioner from asserting the
 claim for the first time in a later petition should the discovery
 of new evidence or the advent of intervening changes in law
invest the claim with merit, S. Rep. No. 1797, at 2; Advisory
Committee's Note to Habeas Corpus Rule 9, 28 U. S. C.,
p. 427.
   The cause-and-prejudice test destroys this balance. By
design, the cause-and-prejudice standard creates a near-
irrebuttable presumption that omitted claims are perma-
nently barred. This outcome not only conflicts with Con-
gress' intent that a petitioner be free to avail himself of newly
discovered evidence or intervening changes in law, S. Rep.
No. 1797, at 2; Advisory Committee's Note to Habeas Cor-
pus Rule 9, 28 U. S. C., p. 427, but also subverts the statu-
tory disincentive to the assertion of frivolous claims. Rather
than face the cause-and-prejudice bar, a petitioner will assert
all conceivable claims, whether or not these claims reason-
ably appear to have merit. The possibility that these claims
will be adversely adjudicated and thereafter be barred from
relitigation under the successive-petition doctrine will not ef-
fectively discourage the petitioner from asserting them, for
the petitioner will have virtually no expectation that any
withheld claim could be revived should his assessment of its
merit later prove mistaken. Far from promoting efficiency,
the majority's rule thus invites the very type of "baseless
claims," ante, at 493, that the majority seeks to avert.
   The majority's adoption of the cause-and-prejudice test
is not only unwise, but also manifestly unfair. The pro-
claimed purpose of the majority's new strict-liability stand-
ard is to increase to the maximum extent a petitioner's incen-
tive to investigate all conceivable claims before filing his first
petition. See ante, at 498. Whatever its merits, this was
not the rule when the petitioner in this case filed his first pe-
522                      OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                        MARSHALL, J.' dissenting                  499 u. s.

tition. From the legislative history of § 2244(b) and Rule
9(b) and from the universal agreement of courts and commen-
tators, see supra, at 513, McCleskey's counsel could have
reached no other conclusion but that his investigatory efforts
in preparing his client's petition would be measured against
the Sanders good-faith standard. There can be little ques-
tion that his efforts satisfied that test; indeed, the District
Court expressly concluded that McCleskey's counsel on his
first habeas conducted a reasonable and competent investiga-
tion before concluding that a claim based on Massiah v.
United States, 377 U. S. 201 (1964), would be without factual
foundation. See App. 84-85; see also infra, at 526. Before
today, that would have been enough. The Court's utter in-
difference to the injustice of retroactively applying its new,
strict-liability standard to this habeas petitioner stands in
marked contrast to this Court's eagerness to protect States
from the unfair surprise of "new rules" that enforce the con-
stitutional rights of citizens charged with criminal wrongdo-
ing. See Butler v. McKellar, 494 U. S. 407, 412-414 (1990);
Saffle v. Parks, 494 U. S. 484, 488 (1990); Teague v. Lane,
489 U. S., at 299-310 (plurality opinion).
   This injustice is compounded by the Court's activism in
fashioning its new rule. The applicability of Sykes' cause-
and-prejudice test was not litigated in either the District
Court or the Court of Appeals. The additional question that
we requested the parties to address reasonably could have
been read to relate merely to the burden of proof under the
abuse-of-the-writ doctrine; 9 it evidently did not put the par-
ties on notice that this Court was contemplating a change in
the governing legal standard, since respondent did not even
mention Sykes or cause-and-prejudice in his brief or at oral

  9
   The question reads: "Must the State demonstrate that a claim was
deliberately abandoned in an earlier petition for a writ of habeas corpus in
order to establish that inclusion of that claim in a subsequent habeas
petition constitutes abuse of the writ?" 496 U. S. 904 (1990) (emphasis
added).
                         McCLESKEY v. ZANT                               523

467                      MARSHALL, J., dissenting

argument, much less request the Court to adopt this stand-
ard. 10 In this respect, too, today's decision departs from
norms that inform the proper judicial function. See Heckler
v. Campbell, 461 U. S. 458, 468, n. 12 (1983) (Court will con-
sider ground in support of judgment not raised below only in
extraordinary case); accord, Granfinanciera, S. A. v. Nord-
berg, 492 U. S. 33, 39 (1989). It cannot be said that Mc-
Cleskey had a fair opportunity to challenge the reasoning
that the majority today invokes to strip him of his Massiah
claim.
                              III
   The manner in which the majority applies its new rule is as
objectionable as the manner in which the majority creates
that rule. As even the majority acknowledges, see ante,
at 470, the standard that it announces today is not the one
employed by the Court of Appeals, which purported to rely
on Sanders, see 890 F. 2d 342, 347 (CAll 1989). See ante,
at 470. Where, as here, application of a different standard
from the one applied by the lower court requires an in-depth
review of the record, the ordinary course is to remand so that
the parties have a fair opportunity to address, and the lower
court to consider, all of the relevant issues. See, e. g.,
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U. S. 242, 257 (1986);
Mandel v. Bradley, 432 U. S. 173, 179 (1977) (per curiam);
see also United States v. Hasting, 461 U. S. 499, 515-518
(1983) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment) (Court should
not undertake record-review "function that can better be per-
formed by other judges").
  10
    Petitioner McCleskey addressed the applicability of the cause-and-
prejudice test only in his reply brief and in response to arguments raised
by amicus curiae Criminal Justice Legal Foundation. It is well estab-
lished, however, that this Court will not consider an argument advanced by
amicus when that argument was not raised or passed on below and was not
advanced in this Court by the party on whose behalf the argument is being
raised. See United Parcel Service, Inc. v. Mitchell, 451 U. S. 56, 60, n. 2
(1981); Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U. S. 520, 531, n. 13 (1979); Knetsch v. United
States, 364 U. S. 361, 370 (1960).
524                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                     MARSHALL, J.' dissenting          499 u. s.

   A remand would have been particularly appropriate in this
case in view of the patent deficiencies in the reasoning of the
Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals concluded that
McCleskey deliberately abandoned his Massiah claim be-
cause his counsel "made a knowing choice not to pursue the
claim after having raised it" unsuccessfully on state collateral
review. 890 F. 2d, at 349. This reasoning, which the ma-
jority declines to endorse, is obviously faulty. As I have ex-
plained, the abuse-of-the-writ doctrine is independent from
the procedural-default and exhaustion doctrines; § 2244(b)
and Rule 9(b) contemplate a habeas petitioner who has effec-
tively presented his claim in state proceedings but withheld
that claim from a previous habeas application. Because
§ 2244(b) and Rule 9(b) authorize the district court to consider
such a claim under appropriate circumstances, it cannot be
the case that a petitioner invariably abuses the writ by con-
sciously failing to include in his first habeas petition a claim
raised in state proceedings. Insofar as Congress intended
that the district court excuse the withholding of a claim when
the petitioner produces newly discovered evidence or inter-
vening changes in law, S. Rep. No. 1797, at 2; Advisory
Committee's Note to Habeas Corpus Rule 9, 28 U. S. C.,
p. 427, a petitioner cannot be deemed to have deliberately
abandoned the claim in an earlier habeas proceeding unless
the petitioner was aware then of the evidence and law that
support the claim. See, e.g., Wong Doo, 265 U. S., at 241:
If the Court of Appeals had properly applied Sanders, it
would almost certainly have agreed with the District Court's
conclusion that McCleskey was not aware of the evidence
that supported his Massiah claim when he filed his first peti-
tion. In any case, because the Court of Appeals' reversal
was based on an erroneous application of Sanders, the major-
ity's decision not to remand cannot be justified on the ground
that the Court of Appeals would necessarily have decided the
case the same way under the cause-and-prejudice standard.
                           MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                                525

467                       MARSHALL, J.' dissenting

   Undaunted by the difficulty of applying its new rule with-
out the benefit of any lower court's preliminary consider-
ation, the majority forges ahead to perform its own independ-
ent review of the record. The majority concludes that
McCleskey had no cause to withhold his Massiah claim be-
cause all of the evidence supporting that claim was available
before he filed his first habeas petition. The majority pur-
ports to accept the District Court's finding that Offie Evans'
21-page statement was, at that point, being held beyond
McCleskey's reach. See ante, at 498, and n. 11 But the
State's failure to produce this document, the majority ex-
plains, furnished no excuse for McCleskey's failure to assert
his Massiah claim "because McCleskey participated in the
conversations reported by Evans," and therefore "knew ev-
erything in the document that the District Court relied upon
to establish the ab initio connection between Evans and the
police." Ante, at 500. The majority also points out that no

  11
    Nonetheless, "for the sake of completeness," the majority feels con-
strained to express its opinion that "this finding is not free from substantial
doubt." Ante, at 498, n. Pointing to certain vague clues arising at differ-
ent points during the state proceedings at trial and on direct and collateral
review, the majority asserts that "[t]he record ... furnishes strong evi-
dence that McCleskey knew or should have known of the Evans document
before the first federal petition." Ante, at 499, n. It is the majority's
account, however, that is incomplete. Omitted is any mention of the
State's evasions of counsel's repeated attempts to compel disclosure of any
statement in the State's possession. In particular, the majority neglects
to mention the withholding of the statement from a box of documents
produced during discovery in McCleskey's state collateral-review action;
these documents were represented to counsel as comprising "a complete
copy of the prosecutor's file resulting from the criminal prosecution of War-
ren McCleskey in Fulton County." App. 29 (emphasis added). McCles-
key ultimately obtained the statement by filing a request under a state
"open records" statute that was not construed to apply to police-
investigative files until six years after McCleskey's first federal habeas
proceeding. See generally Napper v. Georgia Television Co., 257 Ga. 156,
356 S. E. 2d 640 (1987). This fact, too, is missing from the majority's
account.
526                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                    MARSHALL, J.' dissenting           499 u. s.

external force impeded McCleskey's discovery of the testi-
mony of jailer Worthy. See ibid.
   To appreciate the hollowness -and the dangerousness - of
this reasoning, it is necessary to recall the District Court's
central finding: that the State did covertly plant Evans in an
adjoining cell for the purpose of eliciting incriminating state-
ments that could be used against McCleskey at trial. See
App. 83. Once this finding is credited, it follows that
the State affirmatively misled McCleskey and his counsel
throughout their unsuccessful pursuit of the Massiah claim in
state collateral proceedings and their investigation of that
claim in preparing for McCleskey's first federal habeas pro-
ceeding. McCleskey's counsel deposed or interviewed the
assistant district attorney, various jailers, and other govern-
ment officials responsible for Evans' confinement, all of
whom denied any knowledge of an agreement between Evans
and the State. See App. 25-28, 44-47, 79, 85.
   Against this background of deceit, the State's withholding
of Evans' 21-page statement assumes critical importance.
The majority overstates McCleskey's and his counsel's
awareness of the statement's contents. For example, the
statement relates that state officials were present when
Evans made a phone call at McCleskey's request to
McCleskey's girlfriend, Plaintiff's Exh. 8, p. 14, a fact that
McCleskey and his counsel had no reason to know and that
strongly supports the District Court's finding of an ab initio
relationship between Evans and the State. But in any
event, the importance of the statement lay much less in what
the statement said than in its simple existence. Without the
statement, McCleskey's counsel had nothing more than his
client's testimony to back up counsel's own suspicion of a pos-
sible Massiah violation; given the state officials' adamant de-
nials of any arrangement with Evans, and given the state ha-
beas court's rejection of the Massiah claim, counsel quite
reasonably concluded that raising this claim in McCleskey's
first habeas petition would be futile. All this changed once
                         McCLESKEY v. ZANT                             527

467                     MARSHALL, J.' dissenting

counsel finally obtained the statement, for at that point,
there was credible, independent corroboration of counsel's
susp1c10n. This additional evidence not only gave counsel
the reasonable expectation of success that had previously
been lacking, but also gave him a basis for conducting further
investigation into the underlying claim. Indeed, it was by
piecing together the circumstances under which the state-
ment had been transcribed that McCleskey's counsel was able
to find Worthy, a state official who was finally willing to
admit that Evans had been planted in the cell adjoining
McCleskey's. 12
   The majority's analysis of this case is dangerous precisely
because it treats as irrelevant the effect that the State's
disinformation strategy had on counsel's assessment of the
reasonableness of pursing the Massiah claim. For the ma-
jority, all that matters is that no external obstacle barred
McCleskey from finding Worthy. But obviously, counsel's
decision even to look for evidence in support of a particular
claim has to be informed by what counsel reasonably per-
ceives to be the prospect that the claim may have merit; in
this case, by withholding the 21-page statement and by af-
firmatively misleading counsel as to the State's involvement
with Evans, state officials created a climate in which
McCleskey's first habeas counsel was perfectly justified in fo-
cusing his attentions elsewhere. The sum and substance of
the majority's analysis is that McCleskey had no "cause" for
failing to assert the Massiah claim because he did not try
  12
     The majority gratuitously characterizes Worthy's testimony as being
contradictory on the facts essential to McCleskey's Massiah claim. See
ante, at 475. According to the District Court-which is obviously in a bet-
ter position to know than is the majority-"Worthy never wavered from
the fact that someone, at some point, requested his permission to move
Evans to be near McCleskey." App. 78; accord id., at 81 ("The fact that
someone, at some point, requested his permission to move Evans is the one
fact from which Worthy never wavered in his two days of direct and cross-
examination. The state has introduced no affirmative evidence that Wor-
thy is either lying or mistaken").
528                  OCTOBER TERM, 1990

                    MARSHALL, J.' dissenting           499 u. s.

hard enough to pierce the State's veil of deception. Because
the majority excludes from its conception of cause any recog-
nition of how state officials can distort a petitioner's reason-
able perception of whether pursuit of a particular claim is
worthwhile, the majority's conception of "cause" creates an
incentive for state officials to engage in this very type of
misconduct.
   Although the majority finds it unnecessary to reach the
question whether McCleskey was "prejudiced" by the
Massiah violation in this case, I have no doubt that the ad-
mission of Evans' testimony at trial satisfies any fair concep-
tion of this prong of the Sykes test. No witness from the
furniture store was able to identify which of the four robbers
shot the off-duty police officer. The State did put on evi-
dence that McCleskey had earlier stolen the pearl-handled
pistol that was determined to be the likely murder weapon,
but the significance of this testimony was clouded by a co-
defendant's admission that he had been carrying this weapon
for weeks at a time, App. 16, and by a prosecution witness'
own prior statement that she had seen only the codefendant
carry the pistol, id., at 11-14. See also id., at 89 (District
Court finding that "the evidence on [McCleskey's] possession
of the gun in question was conflicting"). Outside of the self-
serving and easily impeachable testimony of the codefendant,
the only evidence that directly supported the State's identifi-
cation of McCleskey as the triggerman was the testimony of
Evans. As the District Court found, "Evans' testimony
about the petitioner's incriminating statements was critical to
the state's case." Id., at 89. Without it, the jury might
very well have reached a different verdict.
   Thus, as I read the record, McCleskey should be entitled to
the consideration of his petition for habeas corpus even under
the cause-and-prejudice test. The case is certainly close
enough to warrant a remand so that the issues can be fully
and fairly briefed.
                     MCCLESKEY v. ZANT                      529

467                 MARSHALL, J.' dissenting


                              IV
   Ironically, the majority seeks to defend its doctrinal inno-
vation on the ground that it will promote respect for the "rule
of law." Ante, at 492. Obviously, respect for the rule of
law must start with those who are responsible for pronounc-
ing the law. The majority's invocation of "'the orderly ad-
ministration of justice,'" ante, at 496, rings hollow when the
majority itself tosses aside established precedents without
explanation, disregards the will of Congress, fashions rules
that defy the reasonable expectations of the persons who
must conform their conduct to the law's dictates, and applies
those rules in a way that rewards state misconduct and de-
ceit. Whatever "abuse of the writ" today's decision is de-
signed to avert pales in comparison with the majority's own
abuse of the norms that inform the proper judicial function.
   I dissent.
