Iu the Supreme Court of the United 


OCTOBER TERM, 1992 


JACKIE HOLDER, ETC., ET AL., PETITIONERS 


E.K. HALL, SR., ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES AS AMICUS CURIAE 
SUPPORTING RESPONDENTS 


- 


WILLIAM C. BRYSON 

Acting Solicitor General 
JAMES P. TURNER 

Vefepet ferw? liforwe y Ge ple ral 

EpWIN S. KNEEDLER 

Acting Deputy Solicitor General 
MICHAEL R. DREEREN 

ASSIS ‘a wf fu ti} ‘ Nolicitor ts re ral 
DENNIS J. DIMSEY 
IRVING GORNSTEIN 

Attoi ves 

Dh pea: imieni of Justice 

Washington, D.C. 20520 


(22) 514-2217 


No. 91-2012 | MAY 19 1993 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the Court of Appeals erred in holding 
that governance by a single county commissioner, 
rather than a multi-member board of commissioners, 
is subject to challenge as dilutive under Section 2 of 
the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, 42 
U.S.C. Section 1973. 


(1) 


ee . 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
Interest of the United States 202. ........2.----ccecceeeeeeees 1 
ee ecsuunmeussauonacnocnss 
a ssunnsetonentounan 7 
Argument: 


The practice of electing a sole county commissioner, 
rather than a multimember commission, is subject 
to challenge as dilutive under Section 2 of the Vot- 
EE EE ee 10 


A. Section 2 is applicable to single-member offices.. 10 


B. The application of vote-dilution theory in this 
case is consistent with Gingles and is not pre- 
mised on the view that Section 2 guarantees 


proportional representation —................. A 15 

C. Analysis under Section 2 does not ignore state 
policy interests ........................ SAE 21 
a stussnamanonnussaneas 25 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 


Allen v. State Bd. of Elections, 393 U.S. 544 
EEE SELLE SC 10 
Carrollton Branch of NAACP vy. Stallings, 829 
F.2d 1547 (11th Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 485 


a 5 
Chisom V. Roemer, 111 8. Ct. 2354 (1991) .......... 7, 10, 13, 
20, 23 

City of Lockhart v. United States, 460 U.S. 125 
EE SITS neo he a 12 
Clark Vv. Roemer, 111 S. Ct. 2096 (1991)... 12 

Dillard v. Crenshaw County, 831 F.2d 246 (11th 
ESSE TT 24 
Gregory V. Ashcroft, 111 S. Ct. 2395 (1991) .......... 23 
Growe V. Emison, 113 8S. Ct. 1075 (1993) ...... eS 15, 16 

Houston Lawyers’ Ass'n Vv. Attorney General of 
Texas, 111 S. Ct. 2376 (1991) 2.000000... 4, 9, 11, 22 

(111) 


IV 


Cases—Continued : Page 
Jeffers Vv. Clinton, 730 F. Supp. 196 (E.D. Ark. 
1989), aff'd mem., 498 U.S. 1019 (1991) ....... 18 
McNeil Vv. Springfield Park Dist., 851 F.2d 937 (7th 
Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1031 (1989)... 21 
Overton V. City of Austin, 871 F.2d 529 (5th Cir. 
EERE ERTET SLR Serer IS, 4 BO 21 
Presley v. Etowah County Comm'n, 112 S. Ct. 820 
RENNER ESE ARS CREE SESE 12,13 
Romero V. City of Pomona, 883 F.2d 1418 (9th Cir. 
a =e 21 
Sirty-Seventh Minnesota State Senate v. “Beene, 
Oe Wns 20 
Thornburg V. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30 (1986) 38, 4, 8, 14, 


15, 16, 17, 19, 21 
United States v. Dallas County Comm'n, 850 F.2d 
1430 (11th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 


1030 (1989) | EE SS ae Pa oa 24 
Voinovich V. Quilter, 113 8S. Ct. 1149 (1993) rath 15, 19 
Constitution and statutes: 
U.S. Const. Art. 11,§ 1,Cl.1 23 
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 42 U.S. C. 1973 et s seq. 
SS GA Scene eae passim 
§ 2(a), 42 U.S.C. 1973 (a) Bo AONE aS Ch 10, 13, 14 
§ 2(b), 42 U.S.C. 1973 (b) ...... uu... 10, 13, 14, 15 
Ck a } | 
Ga. Code Ann. § 36-5-22.1 (1987)... 2 24 
EE, 
Miscellaneous : 
Georgia Dep’t of Community Affairs, County Gov- 
ernment Information Catalog (1989) 18 


National Ass’n of Counties, County Government 
Structure: A State by State Report (July 
ek aoe 18 

S. Rep. No. 417, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. (1982). 21, 23 

The Federalist No. 69 (A. Hamilton) (C. Rossiter 
ed. 1961) ......... 23 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1987 Census of Gov- 
ernments, Vol. 1, No. 2: United States Govern- 
ment Organization; Popularly Elected Officials 
 ) eee piaiesebaiaaiaincbaaneneniabenieins 18 


Iu the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1992 


No. 91-2012 
JACKIE HOLDER, ETC., ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. 


E.K. HALL, SR., ET AL. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES AS AMICUS CURIAE 
SUPPORTING RESPONDENTS 


INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES 


This case involves the application of Section 2 of 
the Voting Rights Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 1973, to a 
claim that the practice of electing a sole county 
commissioner in Bleckley County, Georgia, dilutes 
the voting strength of black voters. The United 
States has the primary responsibility for enforcing 
Section 2, and the resolution of this case will affecc 
that responsibility. In response to the Court’s in- 
vitation, the Solicitor General submitted a brief at 
the petition stage of this case.’ 


'The government’s brief at the petition stage expressed 
the view that the Voting Rights Act applies to the practice of 
using single-member offices, but that the practice cannot be 


(1) 


2 
STATEMENT 


1. Bleckley County is situated in rural central 
Georgia. In 1980, it had a total population of 10,767. 
Twenty-two percent of the population is black; the 
voting age population is 19 percent black. Pet. App. 
4, 5. 

Since its creation in 1912, Bleckley County has 
had a sole commissioner form of government. Pet. 
App. 4. The commissioner, like all county governing 
authorities in the State, has both legislative and ex- 
ecutive power. Among other things, the commis- 
sioner has “exclusive jurisdiction” to control the 
county’s property, to levy taxes, to maintain roads 
and bridges, to fill vacancies in county offices, to ap- 
propriate money, and to make rules and regulations 
tu promote the general welfare. Ga. Code Ann. § 36- 
5-22.1 (1987). The commissioner is elected by all 
voters in the county and must receive a majority of 
the votes cast. Pet. App. 65. No black candidate has 
ever run for or served as commissioner.’ Jd. at 78. 


challenged under Section 2 on a vote-dilution theory. On 
further reflection, we have concluded for the reasons set forth 
in this brief that the practice of electing a sole county com- 


missioner is subject to challenge as dilutive in violation of 
Section 2. 


* Bleckley County’s black community leaders, many of whom 
are experienced local politicians, expressed the belief that it 
would be nearly impossible for a black candidate to win an 
at-large, county-wide election. Pet. App. 78-79. At trial, the 
district court agreed, stating, “[h]aving run for public office 
myself, I'll guarantee you, under the circumstances, I wouldn’t 
run if I were black in [Bleckley] county. You’re going to put 
your hard-earned time and shoe leather campaigning through- 
out this county * * * under these circumstances”” Jd. at 79. 


3 


In 1985, the Georgia legislature authorized Bleckley 
County to adopt by referendum a multimember com- 
mission consisting of five commissioners elected from 
single-member districts and a chairman elected at 
large. 1985 Ga. Laws 4406. That referendum was 
defeated by a vote of 1,156 to 887. Pet. App. 9.’ 

2. Respondents are black voters residing in Bleck- 
ley County, as well as the local chapter of the 
NAACP. In 1985, they filed suit in federal district 
court against petitioners, who are Bleckley County’s 
commissioner and its superintendent of elections. Re- 
spondents alleged that Bleckley County’s practice of 
electing 2 sole commissioner, rather than electing a 
multimember commission, violates Section 2 of the 
Voting Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. 1973. Pet. App. 66. 

After a trial, the district court ruled in favor of 
petitioners. Applying the framework established in 
Thornburg v Gingles, 478 U.S. 30 (1986), the dis- 
trict court found that respondents had satisfied the 
first of the three Gingles preconditions for a vote- 
dilution claim because, in the absence of the chal- 
lenged use of a single-member commission, black vot- 
ers were sufficiently numerous and compact that they 
would have constituted a majority in one district of 
2 multimember commission. Pet. App. 55; see Gingles, 
478 U.S. at 50-51. The court found that “[i]f the 
county commisison were increased in number to six 
commissioners to be elected from five single member 
districts and if the districts were the same as the 
present school board election districts, a black ma- 
jority ‘safe’ district * * * would result.” Pet. App. 
12. 


’ Four years earlier, county voters approved a five-member 
district plan for the election of the Bleckley County School 
Board. Pet. Br. 7 n.5. 


4 


The court determined, however, that respondenis 
had failed to prove racially polarized voting in Bleck- 
ley County, and had therefore failed to establish the 
second and third Gingles preconditions. See 478 U.S. 
at 51. In reaching that conclusion, the court assumed 
that the only way to prove polarized voting is through 
statistical evidence of voting behavior. Pet. App. 50- 
51 & n.45. The court noted that respondents had not 
produced evidence of polarized voting in local elec- 
tions. /d. at 33. Because the county has only one 
voting precinct, the court found, such evidence was 
“not available.” /d. at 25; see ‘d. at 33 n.22. Al- 
though respondents had offered statistical data con- 
cerning the 1984 and 1988 presidential primaries in 
which Jesse Jackson was a candidate, the court found 
that the evidence was insufficient to prove a pattern 
of polarized voting. /d. at 37-46, 50-51. The court 
therefore concluded that respondents had failed to 
satisfy the third Gingles precondition—that white. 
usually vote sufficiently as a bloc to defeat the mi- 
nority’s preferred candidate. 7d. at 51. For essen- 
tially the same reason, the court found that respond- 
ents had failed to prove the second Gingles precon- 
dition—that the minority group is politically co- 
hesive. /d. at 52-55. The court concluded that re- 
spondents’ failure to establish these two of the 
Gingles preconditions was fatal to their Section 2 
claim. Id. at 55-56. 

Nonetheless, the court went on to consider other 
factors relevant to the “totality of circumstances” 
under Section 2. It found that “blacks in Bleckley 
County continue to suffer from a depressed socio- 
economic status,” Pet. App. 58; that their status 
“hinders the possibility of blacks participating ac- 
tively in the political process,” ibid.; and that “[t]he 


5 


barriers to active participation in the political proc- 
ess are today compounded by the fact that Bleckley 
County now has only one voting precinct for the en- 
tire 219 sware-mile area.” /d. at 7 n.3. The court 
also found that there “have been problems in the 
past with regard to low black representation among 
workers at the election polling place.” /d. at 58. 

On the other hand, the court found that “there is 
no [candidate] slating process to stand as a barrier 
te minority participation.” Pet. App. 59. The court 
also found that respondents had failed to prove that 
the sole commissioner was unresponsive to minority 
voters or that the policy underlying the election of a 
sole commissioner is “tenuous.” J/bid. Considering 
the totality of circumstances, the court concluded that 
respondents’ Section 2 challenge to Bleckley County’s 
practice of electing a sole commissioner “must fail.” 
Id. at 59-60. 

3. The court of appeals reverse’. Pet. App. 62-86. 
Relying on its decision in Ca n Branch of 
NAACP vy. Stallings, 829 F.2d 7 (11th Cir. 
1987), cert. denied, 485 U.S. 936 (1988), the court 
of appeals held that a challenge to the practice of 
electing a sole commissioner is “subject to the same 
analysis” as that used in Gingles. Pet. App. 68. Ap- 
plying that analysis, the court agreed with the dis- 
trict court that respondents had satisfied the first 
Gingles precondition by showing that blacks coul:! 
constitute a majority of the electorate in one of five 
single-member districts. Jd. at 74-75 & n.10. The court 
rejected the argument that the entire county must 
serve as the benchmark for determining whether the 
minority group is sufficiently large to constitute a 
majority in a district, explaining that it is “appropri- 
ate to consider the size and geographical compactness 


6 


of the minority group within a restructured form of 
the challenged system when the existing structure 
is being challenged as dilutive.” Jd. at 74. 

The court of appeals further held that the district 
court had been “operating under a misconception of 
the law” in finding that respondents had failed to 
prove racially polarized voting. Pet. App. 76. The 
court explained that a wide variety of evidence, not 
only statistical data about elections, is relevant in de 
termining whether there is racially polarized voting. 
Id. at 77. After considering all the relevant evidence, 
the court of appeals found that the evidence “con- 
clusively” established both white bloc voting and mi- 
nority political cohesion. Jd. at 78-85 & n.18.* 

The court of appeals also concluded that “the to- 
tality of the circumstances found in Bleckley County 
clearly reveal[{s] a situation where the electoral power 
of Bleckley County blacks has been abridged ‘on ac- 


* Among other things, the court of appeals noted that (1) 
no black has ever run for commissioner, Pet. App. 78; (2) 
black political leaders testified that it would be futile for a 
black candidate to run, ibid.; (3) the district judge echoed 
that observation based on his political experience, id. at 79: 
(4) the available statistical evidence revealed polarized vot- 
ing, td. at 79-80; (5) black candidates had consistently lost 
local elections in which whites constituted a voting majority, 
but had won when blacks were in the majority, id. at 81: 
(6) a significant number of Bleckley County voters had sup- 
ported segregationist candidates in the past, id. at 82: and 
(7) Bleckley County had long practiced racial discrimination 
in all aspects of local life, id. at 83-84. Petitioners challenged 
in this Court the court of appeals’ conclusion that respondents 
had shown white bloc voting and minority political cohesion, 
but the Court's order limiting the grant of certiorari and 
formulating the question presented excluded those issues. 113 
S. Ct. 1382 (1993). 


> 


count of race or color.” Pet. App. 86. The court of 
appeals therefore held that respondents had estab- 
lished a violation of Section 2, and it remanded for 
the fashioning of a remedy. /bid. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The court of appeals correctly determined that the 
practice of electing a sole commissioner to Bleckley 
County’s governing body can be challenged as dilu- 
tive of minority voting power under Section 2 of the 
Voting Rights Act. If the County had moved from 
a five-member commission, with one member elected 
by minority voters, to a single-commissioner system 
in which minority voters had no power to influence 
the election, the minority vote clearly would have 
been diluted. The same analysis applies to respond- 
ents’ vote-dilution challenge to Bleckley County’s ex- 
isting single-commissioner system. 

A. The practice of electing a sole commissioner 
is a “standard, practice, or procedure” within the 
coverage of Section 2. This Court has made clear that 
there is no single-member-office exception to Section 
2. Houston Lawyers’ Ass'n vy. Attorney General of 
Texas, 111 S. Ct. 2376 (1991). Although a locality’s 
interests in retaining its existing election system 
are relevant in evaluating the totality of the circum- 
stances and in formulating a remedy, those interests 
do not provide a per se exemption from Section 2. 
Applying Section 2 in this case is further supported 
by the fact that the preclearance requirements of 
Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act are applicable to 
changes in the size of a legislative body; Sections 2 and 
5 should be accorded a similar reach in this context. 
Chisom vy. Roemer, 111 S. Ct. 2354, 2367 (1991). 


Petitioners claim that minority votes are diluted 
in this case because of the minority’s small size in 
the voting population, not because of the challenged 
single-commissioner election practice. That is incor- 
rect. In any vote-dilution challenge to an existing 
election system, it could be said that the minority’s 
small size, rather than the system itself, is the source 
of the minority’s electoral failure. Thus, the issue of 
vote dilution must be measured against a proposed 
alternative voting arrangement that is reasonable in 
the legal and factual context of a particular case. 

B. A vote-dilution challenge to Bleckley County’s 
election of a sole commissioner does not conflict 
with the first precondition for a vote-dilution claim 
announced by this Court in Thornburg v. Gingles, 
478 U.S. 30, 50 (1986), and does not rest on the 
premise that Section 2 guarantees proportional rep- 
resentation. In Gingles, this Court required the mi- 
nority group to demonstrate that, in the absence of 
the challenged structure, “it is sufficiently large and 
geographically compact to constitute a majority in a 
single-member district.” 478 U.S. at 50. The plain- 
tiffs in this case met that requirement by measuring 
the voting strength minority voters would have if 
Bleckley County had a five-member commission 
elected from single-member districts. That arrange- 
ment is common in Georgia and is consistent with 
state law and policy. Use of such a benchmark does 
not embrace a theory of proportional representation. 

Nor does it imply that the plaintiffs in a Section 2 
case May propose a commission of whatever size 
would be required to ensure that minority voters can 
elect a representative of their choice. A court would 
be fully justified, for example, in rejecting a tiny 
minority’s claim of vote dilution premised on an ec- 


9 


centric or impracticable alternative method of redis- 
tricting. Here, however, it is Bleckley County that 
has strayed from the norm. Few counties in Georgia, 
and none in other States, use a one-person commis- 
sion as the governing body. The choice of a five- 
member body, by contrast, is common, authorized, 
and practicable. Line-drawing problems that may 
arise in other cases do not warrant a finding that 
vote-dilution principles are inapplicable neve. 

C. State interests in retaining the challenge 
of electing representatives are relevant in a vote- 
dilution case. The proper point to consider those in- 
terests, however, is in evaluating the totality of the 
circumstances or in developing a remedy. Houston 
Lawyers’ Ass'n vy. Attorney General of Texas, supra. 
In this case, the efficiency and economy interests sug- 
gested by petitioner in defense of electing a single 
individual to constitute the entire county commission 
do not outweigh the substantial dilution of minority 
voting strength produced by Bleckley County’s un- 
usual scheme. 

That a vote-dilution challenge may succeed in this 
case does not lead to the conclusion that all tradi- 
tional single-office executive positions, such as may- 
ors, governors, or sheriffs, must be subdivided to com- 
ply with the Voting Rights Act. The county commis- 
sion here exercises all legislative as well as executive 
authority over the county’s citizens. The compelling 
state interests that support the retention of tradi- 
tional single-executive positions are absent with re- 
spect to the single-member-commission approach em- 
ployed in Bleckley County, a body that also exercises 
plenary legislative power within the county govern- 
ment. 


10 
ARGUMENT 


THE PRACTICE OF ELECTING A SOLE COUNTY 
COMMISSIONER, RATHER THAN A MULTIMEMBER 
COMMISSION, IS SUBJECT TO CHALLENGE AS 
DILUTIVE UNDER SECTION 2 OF THE VOTING 
RIGHTS ACT 


A. Section 2 Is Applicable To Single-Member Offices 


1. The initial step in determining whether the 
Voting Rights Act applies to Bleckley County’s prac- 
tice of electing a sole commissioner is to consider the 
language of the Act. This Court has held that the 
Voting Rights Act “should be interpreted in a man- 
ner that provides ‘the broadest possible scope’ in com- 
batting racial discrimination.” Chisom v. Roemer, 
111 S. Ct. 2354, 2368 (1991), quoting Allen v. State 
Bd. of Elections, 393 U.S. 544, 567 (1969). 

Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act provides that 
“[n]Jo * * * standard, practice, or procedure shall be 
imposed or applied * * * in a manner which results 
in a denial or abridgement of the right of any citi- 
zen of the United States to vote on account of race 
or color” or membership in a language minority. 42 
U.S.C. 1973(a). A violation of that prohibition is es- 
tablished if, “based on the totality of circumstances,” 
it is shown that the political processes leading to 
nomination or election “are not equally open to par- 
ticipation by members of a class of citizens protected 
by subsection (a) in that its members have less op- 
portunity than other members of the electorate to 
participate in the political process and to elect repre- 
sentatives of their choice.” 42 U.S.C. 1973(b). The 
practice of electing a single official to an office in a 
particular geographic area—the use of a single- 


member office—is a “standard, practice, or proce- 
dure” within the meaning of Section 2, and elections 
for such offices thus are covered by Section 2. 

This Court recognized that single-member offices 
are not immune from challenge under Section 2 of 
the Voting Rights Act in Houston Lawyers’ Ass'n v. 
Attorney General of Texas, 111 S. Ct. 2376 (1991). 
In that case, the plaintiffs brought a vote-dilution 
challenge to the election of trial judges to single- 
member offices on a county-wide basis in Texas. The 
Court expressly rejected the claim that “the ‘single- 
member office’ theory automatically exempts certain 
elections from the coverage of $2.” 111 S. Ct. at 
2381. Instead, the Court held that the “coverage of 
the Act encompasses the election of executive officers 
and trial judges whose responsibilities are exercised 
independently in an area coextensive with the districts 
from which they are elected.” /d. at 2380. The Court 
made clear that the state interests advanced in sup- 
port of the challenged practice of electing office- 
holders on a county-wide basis “are relevant either 
to an analysis of the totality of the circumstances 
that must be considered in an application of the re- 
sults test embodied in § 2, as amended,” or in formu- 
lating “possible remedies”; but those interests do noi 
affect “the threshold question of the Act’s coverage”’ 
or “automatically, and in every case, outweigh proof 
of racial vote dilution.” /d. at 2380-2381. 

Houston Lawyers’ Ass’n involved a claim that the 
minority vote was diluted by Texas’s failure to es- 
tablish smaller election districts for a single-member 
officeholder than the area over which the officeholder 
exercises jurisdiction, 111 S. Ct. at 2381, while this 
case involves a claim that the minority’s vote is di- 
luted by Bleckley County’s failure to establish a larger 


12 


commission to carry out the functions currently per- 
formed by the sole commissioner. Nonetheless, the 
principle involved in Houston Lawyers’ Ass’n is 
equally applicable here. Elections for single-member 
offices are not exempt from vote-dilution challenges 
under Section 2, and any interest the State has in 
maintaining its electoral practices for such offices 
should be considered under the totality-of-the-circum- 
stances inquiry or at the remedial stage. 

The conclusion that the election of a sole commis- 
sioner can be challenged as dilutive under Section 2 
is further supported by this Court’s decisions under 
Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. 1973c.° 
This Court has construed the identical “standard, 
practice, or procedure” language in Section 5 of the 
Voting Rights Act to apply to changes in the size 
of legislative bodies. In City of Lockhart vy. United 
States, 460 U.S. 125 (1983), a city changed from a 
three-member commission to a five-member council. 
The Court held that the addition of two seats had 
the potential to dilute minority voting strength in 
violation of Section 5, even. though there was no 
change in the underlying method of election. /d. at 
131. In Presley v. Etowah County Comm’n, 112 5. 
Ct. 820, 828 (1992), the Court reaffirmed that a 
change in the size of a legislative body is a practice 
with respect to voting covered by Section 5.° In view 


* Section 5 requires covered States or political subdivisions 
to submit changes in voting standards, practices, and pro- 
cedures to the Attorney General or to the United States Dis- 
trict Court for the District of Columbia for preclearance. See 
Clark v. Roemer, 111 S. Ct. 2096 (1991). 


*A change in the number of representatives who sit on a 
body is quite different from a reallocation of functions among 


13 


of the “close connection” between Sections 2 and 5, 
those provisions should be accorded a similar reach 
in this context. Chisom, 111 S. Ct. at 2367. 

It would, moreover, be incongruous if the practice 
of electing a sole commissioner could not be chal- 
lenged under Section 2. A jurisdiction covered by 
Section 5 would be precluded from changing from a 
multimember commission to a sole commissioner 
when to do so would have a discriminatory effect, 
but the jurisdiction would be exempt from challenge 
under Section 2 if it had a similarly discriminatory 
system already in place. This Court has previously 
found it “unlikely that Congress intended such an 
anomalous result.” Chisom, 111 S. Ct. at 2367 (ex- 
plaining that one reason for finding judicial elections 
te be covered by Section 2 is that they are covered 
by Section 5). 

2. Under the Section 2 “results” test, the exist- 
ence of a vote-dilution violation is determined by 
evaluating the effect of the challenged practice on the 
ability of minorities “to participate in the political 
process and to elect representatives of their choice.”’ 
42 U.S.C. 1973(a) and (b). Petitioners contend that 
the Section 2 results test can never be violated by the 
practice of electing a sole commissioner, because “[i]t 


government officials. In Etowah County, the Court held that 
the preclearance requirements of Section 5 are inapplicable 
to changes in the allocation of functions performed by the 
elected officials; a jurisdiction’s reduction in the number of 
elected officials, however, is clearly subject to review under 
Section 5 because it bears “on the substance of voting power.” 
112 S. Ct. at 829. Here, in contrast to Etowah County, it is 
the number of elected officials, not the assignment of their 
functions, that forms the basis for the Voting Rights Act 
challenge. 


14 


is the small size of the group of voters in the dis- 
trict, not its race, that prevents it from achieving 
a greater measure of electoral success * * °.” Pet. 
Br. 19. That claim is at odds with the theory of the 
Voting Rights Act. In any challenge to an election 
practice in which the minority group cannot elect 
representatives of its own choosing, it could be said 
that the small size of the group, not the particular 
election structure, is the cause of the group’s elec- 
toral failure. If that argument were accepted, it 
would be impossible to mount a challenge even to « 
multimember, at-large election system. Yet this 
Court entertained precisely that form of challenge in 
Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30 (1986).’ 

In Gingles, this Court explained that a minority 
group’s size is relevant to a Section 2 challenge in 
order to determine whether the group has “the pofen- 
tial to elect representatives in the absence of the chal- 
lenged structure or practice.” 478 U.S. at 50 n.17. 
When the minority group is too small to constitute a 
voting majority even absent the challenged structure 


7 Our brief at the petition stage (at 5-6) suggested that the 
practice of electing a single office holder has an adverse effect 
on minority voters only because of the minority group’s small 
size, and therefore does not meet Section 2(a)'s requirement 
of producing “a denial or abridgement of the right * * * to 
vote on account of race or color.” 42 U.S.C. 1973(a) (empha- 
sis added). Section 2(b), however, provides that a violation 
of Section 2(a) “is established” when a minority group shows 
that “its members have less opportunity than other members 
of the electorate to participate in the political process and to 
elect representatives of their choice.” Thus, under the ex- 
press terms of Section 2(b), if a minority group can show 
that it has been denied an equal opportunity to elect represen- 
tatives of its choice, it has, by definition, shown an “abridge- 
ment of the right * * * to vote on account of race or color.” 


15 


vr practice, the group “cannot claim to have been in- 
jured by that structure or practice.”* Jbid. When, 
however, the minority group can establish that, with 
the use of an alternative voting practice or structure 
it could elect representatives of its choice, the chal- 
lenge cannot be dismissed on the theory that the 
group’s plight is simply a function of smail size com- 
bined with a system of majoritarian rule. As we 
explain below, where, as in this case, the proposed 
alternative election arrangement against which to 
measure a claim of vote dilution is reasonable in the 
legal and factual context of the particular voting 
practice at issue, analysis of a vote-dilution claim 
under Section 2 can proceed. 


B. The Application Of Vote-Dilution Theory In This 
Case Is Consistent With Gingles And Is Not Premised 
On The View That Section 2 Guarantees Proportional 
Representation 


Petitioners contend (Br. 24-28) that recognition 
of a vote-dilution challenge to the County’s election 
of a sole commissioner would undermine the first 
Gingles precondition for a vote-dilution claim and 
would imply a right to proportional representation. 
See 42 U.S.C. 1973(b) (“nothing in [Section 2] es- 
establishes a right to have members of a protected 


*The Court has reserved the issue of whether Section 2 
applies to a claim that a minority group, even though lacking 
the size and compactness “to constitute a majority in a single- 
member district,” has been impermissibly impaired in its 
ability “to influence elections” through the use of a multi- 
member district. Gingles, 478 U.S. at 46 n.12: see also Voino- 
vich V. Quilter, 113 8. Ct. 1149, 1155 (1993) (assuming with- 
out deciding that an influence claim may be brought) : Growe 
V. Emison, 113 S. Ct. 1075, 1084 n.5 (1993) (leaving open the 
same issue). 


16 


class elected in numbers equal to their proportion 
in the population”). We disagree. 

1. In Thornburg vy. Gingles, supra, this Court 
stated that, as a precondition to a vote-dilution claim 
based on the submergence of a minority group in a 
multimember district electing candidates at-large, 
“the minority group must be able to demonstrate that 
it is sufficiently large and geographically compact to 
constitute a majority in a single-member district.” ” 
478 U.S. at 50. Petitioners argue that, if the mi- 
nority group were free to propose a revised votins; 
scheme involving an unlimited number of additiona! 
elected positions as a means of demonstrating vote 
dilution, the group could always establish the exist- 
ence of a single-member district in which it consti- 
tuted the majority. The effect of that rule, peti- 
tioners argue, would be to guarantee proportiona! 
representation for the minority group. 

Application of Gingles in this case does not pro- 
duce that consequence. The purpose of the first 
Gingles precondition is to ensure “that the minority 
has the potential to elect a representative of its own 
choice in some single-member district.” Growe v. 
Emison, 113 S. Ct. 1075, 1084 (1993); Gingles, 478 
U.S. at 50 n.17. The claim in this case meets that 
requirement without presupposing any right to pro- 
portional representation. In finding that the prac- 
tice of electing a sole commisisoner is dilutive, the 


* The Court articulated two other preconditions to a vote- 
dilution claim—that “the minority group must be able to show 
that it is politically cohesive” and that “the white majority 
votes sufficiently as a bloc to enable it * * * usually to defeat 
the minority’s preferred candidate.” 478 U.S. at 51. The 
court of appeals found those preconditions to be established, 
and they are not at issue in this Court. See note 4, supra. 


17 


court of appeals compared it to a five-member com- 
mission elected from single-member districts. The 
proposed five-district arrangement was _ specifically 
authorized by the state legislature when it provided 
for a referendum on a multimember commission in 
1985, is common throughout the State, and is used 
by Bleckley County for electing the school board (Pet. 
App. 86 n.20). Measuring the minority voters’ 
power to elect against that state-sanctioned electoral 
errangement does not threaten to create a right of 
minorities to have their members elected in propor- 
tion to their percentage of the population (no matter 
how small); it simply takes into account a well- 
recognized alternative election system that the county 
was free to adopt. 

Nor does acceptance of the claim described above 
imply that plaintiffs may propose a commission of 
whatever size is required to create a single-member 
district in which the minority group would have ma- 
jority voting strength. The State’s electoral policies 
and traditional ways of structuring local government 
are of substantial relevance in determining what sort 
of proposed alternative voting practice can reason- 
ably provide a measure of the dilutive effect of the 
challenged practice. For example, in Gingles this 
Court stated that a minority group must be “suffi- 
ciently * * * geographically compact” to form a ma- 
jority in a single district. 478 U.S. at 50. The geo- 
graphical-compactness rule derives not from an ex- 
press requirement to that effect in Section 2, but 
rather from traditional characteristics of this coun- 
try’s election districts, as drawn under state law." 


"In practice the compactness rule is not applied more 
strictly under Section 2 than the State applies compactness 


18 


Similarly, a court would be justified in rejecting a 
tiny minority’s claim of vote dilution that is prem- 
ised on expanding a county commission to 25 or 50 
members, for that numerous a county governing body 
would be largely, if not entirely, unprecedented in 
this country. But that does not imply that the court 
may reject a claim based on a reconstituted commis- 
sion of a size that is endorsed by state law and fully 
consistent with state policy. 

A five-member body is by far the most common 
size for a county commission in Georgia. Georgia 
Dep’t of Community Affairs, County Government In- 
formation Catalog (1989) (Table 1.A: Form of Gov- 
ernment) (76 of Georgia’s 159 counties had five 
commissioners, including 25 counties that are smaller 
than Bleckley County). Indeed, the Georgia legis- 
lature expressly authorized Bleckley County to adopt 
a commission consisting of five members elected 
from single-member districts (as well as a chair- 
man elected at-large). 1985 Ga. Laws 4406. More- 
over, far from representing a common scheme na- 
tionwide, the use of a sole commissioner to exercise 
all legislative and executive authority over citizens is 
an aberration. Georgia is the only State in which any 
counties have commissions with only one member. See 
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1987 Census of Govern- 
ments, Vol. 1, No. 2: Government Organization; 
Popularly Elected Officials [GC87(1)-2] (Jan. 1990) ; 
National Ass’n of Counties, County Government 
Structure: A State by State Report (July 1989). 
Even in Georgia, the use of a sole commissioner is 
rare. As of 1990, only 21 Georgia counties had a 


principles in its other redistricting actions. See Jeffers v. 
Clinton, 730 F. Supp. 196, 207 (E.D. Ark. 1989), aff'd mem., 
498 U.S. 1019 (1991). 


19 


sole commissioner, Pet. App. 4-5, and, as petitioners 
observe (Br. 4), only 14 have a sole commissioner 
today. 

2. Petitioners err in contending (Br. 15) that 
Gingles mandates that “[v]ote dilution must be 
measured against the number of positions in the ex- 
isting structure.” Gingles states that vote dilution is 
measured against the minority’s potential to elect 
“in the absence of the challenged structure or prac- 
tice.” 478 U.S. at 50 n.17. The fact that respond- 
ents posit a structural change in the current number 
of elected commissioners in order to measure vote 
dilution is not a reason to reject their theory; any 
vote-dilution claim contemplates a change in the sys- 
tem of electing the official or officials in question. 
For example, a claim of vote dilution directed against 
at-large elections in multimember districts envisions 
a change to single-member (istricts."' 

Nor is the theory underlying respondents’ claim 
invalid because a court must make a threshold de- 
termination of whether the number of commissioners 
proposed by the plaintiffs in a Section 2 case pro- 
vides a suitable benchmark for measuring dilution. 
It is true that that task may involve some line- 


' That the process of identifying black voters’ potential 
tc elect in this case may differ from the process of subdividing 
a multimember district described in Gingles simply reflects 
the different nature of the claims at issue. The Court has 
recognized that “the Gingles factors cannot be applied me- 
chanically and without regard to the nature of the claim. For 
example, the first Gingles precondition, the requirement that 
the group be sufficiently large to constitute a majority in a 
single district, would have to be modified or eliminated when 
analyzing the influence-dilution claim we assume arguendo to 
be actionable today.” Voinovich Vv. Quilter, 113 8. Ct. at 1157; 
see note 8, supra. 


20 


drawing. Line-drawing, however, is often required 
in making other Section 2 determinations, such as 
what constitutes sufficient geographical compactness 
of the minority population for the purpose of creat- 
ing a single-member district. In this case, respond- 
ents’ proposed benchmark was appropriate in light of 
the State’s endorsement of five-member commissions, 
the prevalence of commissions of that size, and the 
use of five districts within Bleckley County itself for 
electing school board members. Even if the task of 
determining an appropriate benchmark were more 
difficult, however, this Court has made clear that the 
need to make difficult judgments does not “justify a 
judicially created limitation on the coverage of the 
broadly worded statute, as enacted and amended by 
Congress.” Chisom v. Roemer, 111 S. Ct. at 2368. 

In a related context, this Court has articulated prin- 
ciples to guide federal courts in determining whether 
federal law may be invoked to require a modi- 
fication in the size of a legislative body. In Sirty- 
Seventh Minnesota State Senate v. Beens, 406 U.S. 
187, 200 (1972), this Court held that a district court 
abused its discretion in “drastically changing” the 
size of a State’s legislative body in order to remedy 
a one-person, one-vote violation. At the same time, 
the Court observed that it would “not disapprove a 
court-imposed minor variation from a State’s pre- 
scribed figure when that change is shown to be neces- 
Sary to meet constitutional requirements.” Jd. at 
199. 


espondents’ dilution theory does not require pe- 
titioners to make any departure from Georgia law 
or policy, since five-member commissions are the rule 
in Georgia, not the exception. There is, accordingly, 
a firm basis for concluding that the dilution of the 


21 


minority vote in electing a single member to Bleckley 

County’s commission is cognizable under Section 2. 
This case presents no issue as to whether plain- 

tiffs can challenge the size of an existing multimem- 

ber council or commission as a dilutive practice.” 

The only question presented here is whethe 

tice of electing a sole commissione 


’ r than a 
multimember commission, can be challeng That 


C. Analysis Under Section 2 Does Not Ignore State 
Policy Interests 


Finally, petitioners contend (Br. 37-40) that al- 
lowing a challenge to the practice of electing a sole 
cemmissioner would invite an impermissible intru- 
sion on state policy interests. That contention mis- 


' Some courts have rejected that type of claim. See McNeil 
V. Springfield Park Dist. 851 F.2d 937, 946-947 (7th Cir. 
1988), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1031 (1989) : Romero v. City of 
Pomona, 883 F.2d 1418, 1425 n.10 (9th Cir. 1989) ; see also 
Overton V. City of Austin, 871 F.2d 529, 543 (5th Cir. 1989) 
(Jones, J., concurring). 


22 


conceives the way in which state interests are taken 
into account in evaluating a Section 2 claim. 

In Houston Lawyers’ Ass'n vy. Attorney Genera! 
of Texas, supra, this Court explained that, under the 
totality of the circumstances that bear on the ap- 
plication of the results test under Section 2, a Staie 
may advance its “interest in maintaining an electoral 
system” as a factor to be considered. 111 S. Ct. at 
2381. “A State’s justification for its electoral sys- 
tem is a proper factor for the courts to assess in a 
racial vote dilution inquiry.” Jbid. The Court also 
indicated that, if a violation is established, the State’s 
interests and policies underlying its electoral system 
are relevant at the remedial stage. /d. at 2380. 

Under Houston Lawyers’ Ass'n, petitioners’ justi- 
fications for electing a single individual to constitute 
its county commission may be considered on a case- 
by-case basis in determining whether a violation has 
been established; those justifications are part of the 
totality of the circumstances that form the context 
of the alleged violation. The record in this case, 
however, does not indicate that petitioners established 
a justification for retaining a sole commissioner that 
outweighs the substantial dilution of black voters’ 
ability to elect representatives of their choice. While 
the district court found that petitioners’ interest in 
electing a sole commissioner is not “tenuous,” Pet. 
App. 10, the interest asserted by petitioners—that 
the election of a sole commissioner is “economical 
and efficient,” Pet. Br. 7-8—is not especially strong 
in view of the unusual character of the sole-com- 
missioner approach and the many examples of work- 
able multimember commissions in other counties (in- 


23 


cluding counties that are smaller than Bleckley 
Nation.” 

That a Section 2 violation may be establishec 
this case does not mean that all practices of electing 
@ single individual to office are open to invalidation. 
Positions of executive leadership are frequently en- 
trusted to a single individual—as exemplified by the 
Constitution’s vesting of the executive power in one 
President U.S. Const. Art. II, § 1, Cl. 1. A State will 
often have a compelling interest in electing a single offi- 
cial to perform executive functions, and it can support 
that interest by reference to long and widely followed 
traditions. See The Federalist No.69, at 415 (A. Ham- 
ilton) (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (“I proceed now to 
trace the real characters of the proposed executive 
* * *. The first thing which strikes our attention is 
that the executive authority, with few exceptions, is 
to be vested in a single magistrate.”) To permit a 
plaintiff to seek multiple officers for such positions 
would be a radical departure from this country’s 
political traditions, and there is no evidence in the 
history of the Voting Rights Act that Congress in- 
tended that consequence. Cf. Chisom v. Roemer, 111 
S. Ct. at 2364. 


Petitioners err (Br. 38) in suggesting that Gregory v. 
Ashcroft, 111 S. Ct. 2395 (1991), would require a clear state- 
ment by Congress before a court could require a change in the 
number of commissioners. Because Congress expressly relied 
on its power to enforce the Civil War Amendments in enact- 
ing Section 2, see S. Rep. No. 417, swpra, at 39-43, and be- 
cause the Voting Rights Act clearly regulates state voting 
practices, Gregory is not relevant here. See Chisom, 111 S. Ct. 
at 2372-2373 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 


24 


In contrast, the commission in Bleckley County ex- 
ercises all legislative as well as executive functions, 
including the power to set tax rates. Ga. Code 
Ann. § 36-5-22.1 (1987). That is an extraordinary 
concentration of power in a single elected official. 
Compared to the traditional practice of electing a 
single mayor, sheriff, coroner, clerk of court, school 
intendent, or governor, there is no historical or 
strong functional interest in assigning to a single 
individual all of the legislative and executive func- 
tions that Georgia law delegates to the county’s gov- 
erning body. Bodies that exercise such mixed func- 
tions are typically composed of multiple members. 

Consistent with the foregoing principles, the Elev- 
enth Circuit, while permitting minority voters to 
challenge the practice of electing a sole commissioner, 
has rejected the view that Section 2 may be used to 
alter the practice of electing a single person to offices 
such as lieutenant governor, sheriff, probate judge, 
and tax collector. See Dillard v. Crenshaw County, 
831 F.2d 246, 251 (11th Cir. 1987); United States 
v. Dallas County Comm'n, 850 F.2d 1430, 1432 nl 
(11th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1030 (1959). 
Accordingly, this Court’s affirmance of the Eleventh 
Cireuit’s holding that Section 2 is violated by the 
practice of electing a sole county commissioner in 
Ghee case » would in no way suggest that all traditional 


25 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the court of appeals should be 
affirmed. 


Respectfully submitted. 


WILLIAM C. BRYSON 
Acting Solicitor General 


JAMES P. TURNER 
Acting Assistant Attorney General 


EpwIn S. KNEEDLER 

Acting Deputy Solicitor General 
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN 

Assistant to the Solicitor General 


DENNIS J. DIMSEY 
IRVING GORNSTEIN 
Attorneys 


May 1993 


® © © @ownewweer eewrus orrice i965 34247% #0280 


