~ 5 ee ont U.S - 
4 F E D 


; 
No. 95-173 ape 18 om 


= f 
—— . 


Pen! 5 ae te 


In the Supreme Court of the Gnited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


weer 


BRIAN J. DEGEN, PETITIONER 
V. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPONDENT 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 


DANIEL W. STEWART LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS 
Daniel W. Stewart, Ltd. Counsel of Record 
Post Office Box 3021 ANDREW L. FREY 
Reno, NV 89505-3021 ALAN E. UNTEREINER 
(702) 323-3030 Mayer, Brown & Platt 


2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N. W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 463-2000 


~~ wa 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE GP AUTH SUED occ cc cect eveeseseses il 


1. The Government’s Defense Of The Decision Below 
Cannot Be Squared With This Court’s Disentitlement 


2. The Government’s Defense Of The Decision Below 
Cannot Be Squared With Principles Of Due Process .. 9 


3. The Government’s Defense Of The Decision Below 
Requires An Unwarranted And Inappropriate Expansion 
Of The Meaning Of “Fugitive” ............... 13 


4. The Government Has Not Refuted Our Showing That 
The Prosecutors In This Case Forfeited The Right To 
Invoke The Equitable Doctrine Of Disentitlement .... 18 


. 


& ~ 
a 
+ 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

Cases: Page 
Appleyard v. Massachusetts, 203 U.S. 222 

DE Nigin D cio te gee bist ow eld ceo eeesececece 14, 15 
Austin v. United States, 113 S. Ct. 

ee 7 
Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States, 

ee 10 
Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S. 371 

EE St UES’) 68s ced cee ece evens. 10 


California, 482 U.S. 400 


DPPC SCE Rede e es occccccccosecees 14 
Chambers v. NASCO, Inc., 501 U.S. 32 

(7 (2 tere Se ks e ese ee cceeconececces 11 
Cobbledick v. United States, 309 

CLs. geo ce cet sccecceuces a 
Hammond Packing Co. v. Arkansas, 

eee 10, 12, 13 
Hovey v. Elliott, 167 U.S. 409 (1897) .... ©... ow ee 12 
Insurance Corp. of Ireland, Lid. v. 

Compagnie des Bauxites de 

Guinee, 456 U.S. 694 (1982) ... 2.0... eee, 12 
International Union v. Bagwell, 114 

PAGS Sc. ssw ee ntecceces 5, 11 
Jhirad v. Ferrandina, 536 F.2d 478 

(2d Cir.), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 

SENS SES ee ae ae 16 


Lonchar v. Thomas, 64 U.S.L.W. 4243 
eS EPP eT eR eeee PETE eT 10 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Page 
Lynch v. Household Finance Corp., 

A. e 2s ob bss ot bens beds 20 
McKane v. Durston, 153 U.S. 684 (1894) ............ 9 
McVeigh v. United States, 78 U.S. 

ee id ea ben bes 10, 11 
Montana v. United States, 440 U.S. 147 

ESS OO ene ee x 
National Union of Marine Cooks and 

Stewards v. Arnold, 348 

re: aia s Be. ot elds bo ee BA ce Bbw 9 
NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490 

Dnata heen. ce cae eaéeuhe 13 
Ortega-Rodriguez v. United States. 

nh Pn dé 66 6.6 606.6 6 000-00 at passim 
Procunier v. Navarette, 434 U.S. 555 

i. ites 6 ce Mie tale oe 6s ds 6 ake eh wat 19 
Shillitani v. United States, 384 U.S. 

i eee 6 daw o's pat ok ok bine 11 
Societe Internationale v. Rogers, 

es oi og le et 2 
Tavoulareas v. Piro, 93 F.R.D. 11 : 

ey eer 5 
Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140 (1985)... . 2.2.2.0... 4 
United States v. Dunnigan, 113 

OC RSC x 


iv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


Page 

United States v. James Daniel Good 

Real Property, 114 S. Ct. 492 

Dt esey .. eneeeuneesesece he's 1, 8, 11, 20 
United States v. Kras, 409 U.S. 434 

SUED oc cccenetneded Gs oudedcteddct Fbus 10 
United States v. Marshall, 856 F .2d 

Ff fT. | FPR eee eee 14 
United States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675 

Pe ec or Pe 2 
Windsor v. McVeigh, 93 U.S. 274 (1876) ............ 11 
Statutes, Rules, And Constitutional Provisions: 
Se Gees OUD co cceteceeounsatéses6nceses 15 
PGP we cceconetsaeedoeetéeceecesus 14 
GR Be ais cc daennet ¥eueedss (haumese 16 
i Oe OE on 6 ko ck uke eae 10 
. § §. 5 > FPPC PTTITTT TT rr ee 5 
 § 8 Pr ee ese 5 
Pelb Ue GES We EE on cccec pm es cap ee bamkeedanens 10 
§ 5 | of RR re re rp 19 
FR 4 RS > eros 8 Serre 14 
Miscellaneous: 
1B Moore’s Federal Practice 


co © osesesééesosews 8 


ye eevee @eeeteewee 8&8 ee ee eS eS a 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONER 


The court of appeals disentitied Brian Degen from defending 
the civil forfeiture of his property because “he had been indicted 
in Nevada but refused to return” to the United States to face the 
criminal charges against him. Pet. App. Sa. The court 
acknowledged (id. at 8a n.2) that the seizure of petitioner's 
property was flatly unconstitutional under United States v. James 
Daniel Good Real Property, 114 S. Ct. 492 (1993). And it did not 
dispute that petitioner might well have (as indeed he does) several 
other powerful defenses to the civil forfeiture. None of this 
mattered, the panel held, because petitioner's failure to “submit 
to” the district court’s “jurisdiction in the criminal action” (Pet. 
App. Sa (emphasis added)) was sufficient to bar him from offering 
any defense to this civil forfeiture action. 

We restate the court of appeals’ decision because the 
government evidently has no desire to defend it on its own terms. 
Thus, notwithstanding the government's elaborate argument on the 
point (Br. 16-18), the courts below never found — indcod, they 
never even intimated — that petitioner's “fugitivity”™ in his criminal 
case had the slightest impact on the civil forfeiture proceedings. 
And that should hardly be surprising, since until its filing in this 
Court the government never made any such suggestion itself. In 
any event, the government's after-the-fact effort to fortify the 
decision below misapprehends this Court's disentitlement cases, 
conflicts with fundamental principles of due process, depends on 
an excessively broad concept of “fugitivity,” and arrogates to the 
federal courts a supervisory power of unprecedented breadth and 

1. The Government’s Defense Of The Decision Below 

Cannot Be Squared With This Court’s Disentitlement 
Cases 


a. The government does not dispute that this Court has 
never applied the disentitlement doctrine outside the confines of 
criminal appeals. Nor does it deny that in each of this Court's 
cases the doctrine was applied in the very proceeding in which the 
appellant had become a fugitive; that in none of the cases was the 
doctrine applied in derogation of constitutional rights; that in each 
case the disentitled person was a “fugitive” in the ordinary sense 
of the word — a person who had either escaped from custody or 


2 


jumped bail; and that in each case the fugitive was seeking 
affirmative relief from the Court (reversal of a conviction).' 
There is thus no mistaking the government’s intentions in this 
case: it wants a bold departure from this Court’s long line of 
disentitlement cases. To that end, the government argues (Br. 16) 
that the purposes of the disentitlement doctrine would be equal! 
well served by extending it to this quite different context. But the 
government misapprehends what those purposes are. As we 
explained in our opening brief (at 12-17), the disentitlement 
doctrine, as explicated in Ortega-Rodriguez, is designed to address 
(1) the inability of the disentitling court to enforce an unfavorable 
judgment against a fugitive; (2) the interest in efficient judicial 
practice; (3) the need to protect the “dignity” of the disentitling 
tribunal; and (4) the need to deter fugitives from taking flight in 
the first place. For the reasons we stated in our brief, none of 
those purposes is served by invoking the doctrine against an owner 
seeking to defend against the confiscation of his property. 


' This Court's disentitlement cases uniformly “concern{] the situation 
in which a fugitive * * * is the party seeking review * * *.” United 
States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675, 681 n.2 (1985). Although the 
government insists that this distinction is irrelevant (Br. 26), and that it 
amounts to no more than “a description of the facts of this Court's cases” 
(Br. 43), it does not explain why that is so. Nor does it account for the 
Court’s pointed refusal in Sharpe (470 U.S. at 681 n.2) to extend the 
disentitlement doctrine beyond the context in which the fugitive has 
“call[ed] upon this Court for a review of his conviction.” 
Alternatively, the government contends that petitioner was in fact 
seeking “affirmative relief” because he did not seek merely to challenge 
the government's showing of probable cause, but also sought to interpose 
affirmative defenses and to conduct discovery. Br. 26-27. That is a 
distinction without a difference. After all, the claimant in Societe 
Internationale v. Rogers, 357 U.S. 197 (1958), also raised defenses to the 
forfeiture (see id. at 199) and sought discovery assistance from the trial 
court (see id. at 203). Nevertheless, this Court held (id. at 210) that the 
claimant, “though cast in the role of plaintiff, cannot be deemed to be in 
the customary role of a party invoking the aid of a court to vindicate 
rights asserted against another. Rather [its] position is more analogous 
to that of a defendant, for it belatedly challenges the Government's action 
by now protesting against a seizure and seeking a recovery of assets.” 


3 


The government contends otherwise, but only by radically 
reformulating the purposes articulated by this Court in Ortega- 
Rodriguez. For example, the government asserts (Br. 17) that 
petitioner's “physical absence while seeking to prevent the 
forfeiture immunizes him from the enforcement of discovery 
obligations and keeps him beyond the reach of the court’s usual 
process for supervising discovery and compelling attendance at 
hearings.” Accordingly, the government surmises (ibid.), the 
“enforceability concern” underlying the disentitlement doctrine 
justifies applying the doctrine in this case. But the government 
misconceives what “the enforceability concern” is. As the Court 
explained in Ortega-Rodriguez, that goal focuses on whether the 
judgment of the disentitling court can be enforced. Thus, in 
Ortega-Rodriguez itself, the Court declined to order disentitlement 
because a “defendant returned to custody before he invokes the 
appellate process presents no risk of unenforceability; he is within 
the control of the appellate court throughout the period of appeal 
and issuance of the judgment.” 113 S. Ct. at 1206. As the 
government is constrained to admit, the same holds true here: 
“the court has control over the res and therefore may enforce any 
eventual judgment” (Br. 17). 

The government likewise misconstrues what Ortega- 
Rodgriguez meant by protecting the “dignity” of the disentitling 
tribunal. In its view, the disentitlement doctrine “protects the 
orderly functioning of the court, * * * not the ‘dignity’ of a 
particular case.” Br. 19 (emphasis in the original). Accordingly, 
the government reasons, because the criminal case and the civil 
forfeiture are both pending in the same district court, that court’s 
dignity is affronted even if petitioner’s “fugitivity” affected only 
of its brief (Br. 18-25) to cataloguing the respects in which 
petitioner’s failure to come to the United States has impaired the 
criminal prosecution. 

But the government begins with a false premise: the 
disentitlement doctrine does, to be sure, protect the dignity of a 
court, but only with respect to a particular case. Ortega- 
Rodriguez could hardly have made the point more plainly. The 
Court declined to disentitle the defendant in that case because his 
flight “hafd}] no connection to the course of the appellate 


4 


proceedings” (113 S. Ct. at 1207 (emphasis added)). “Absent 
some connection between a defendant’s fugitive status and his 
appeal, * * * the justifications advanced for dismissal of fugitives’ 
pending appeals generally will not apply” (id. at 1208 (emphasis 
added)). Thus, even were the government correct in saying that 
petitioner’s “fugitivity” impaired his criminal case (Br. 18-25), 
that simply could not justify disentitling him in the forfeiture 
proceeding. 

When the government turns to the next purpose of the 
disentitlement doctrine — the interest in efficient judicial practice 
— it is once more on shaky ground. Indeed, much of the 
government's argument in this regard should not be countenanced 
at all, since it was never raised below. For example, the 
government hypothesizes a variety of ways in which — had 
petitioner not been disentitled — his alleged fugitivity might have 
“impair[ed] the orderly and expeditious litigation of the civil 
forfeiture action” (Br. 16 (emphasis added)). But the government 
never made any such claim below, even though Ortega-Rodriguez 
was decided some five months before the amended final judgment 
in the district court (Pet. App. 32a-37a) and more than 21 months 
before the argument in the court of appeals (id. at la). Not 
surprisingly, the lower courts did not find (or even suggest) that 
petitioner’s “fugitivity” had an adverse impact on the civil 
forfeiture proceedings. Still less did either of the lower courts 
conclude that disentitlement would be a “reasonable” solution to 
any such disruption of the forfeiture proceedings. Ortega- 
Rodriguez, 113 S. Ct. at 1205. See Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 
146-148 (1985). 


Finally, the government says nothing at all about the 
deterrence rationale articulated by Ortega-Rodriguez. It concedes 
by its silence that a “fugitive” who has simply failed to travel to 
the United States to stand trial has not committed any offense 
against the disentitling court at all. Failing to come to the United 
States, even with knowledge of a pending indictment, is simply not 
an offense — much less the kind of offense that this Court has ever 
sought to deter by applying the disentitlement sanction. 


b. In sum, none of the rationales identified in Ortega- 
Rodriguez applies here. But even if those rationales could be 
recast in the way the government suggests, none would warrant the 


————— 


5 


“blunderbuss of dismissal” (Ortega-Rodriguez, 113 S. Ct. at 
1207). Certainly the merely hypothetical prospect that petitioner 
may one day disobey a court order in the forfeiture case is no 
reason to invoke disentitlement. No claimant — not even an 
alleged “fugitive” — is “immunize{d] * * * from the enforcement 
of discovery obligations” (U.S. Br. 17). In the event that a 
claimant fails to comply with a particular court order, the court has 
a wide range of sanctions at its disposal — including, as the 
government itself points out, such less drastic alternatives as 
““striking pleadings, assessing costs, [and] excluding evidence’” 
(Br. 13, quoting /nternational Union v. Bagwell, 114 S. Ct. 2552, 
2560 (1994)). If, and when, a claimant becomes non-compliant, 
a “district court can tailor a more finely calibrated response”; it 
need not, and sh ‘d not, invoke disentitlement at the outset. 
Ortega-Rodriguez, 113 S. Ct. at 1207. 


Moreover, the government’s assumption that petitioner would, 
if allowed to defend, “affront * * * the dignity of the court’s 
proceedings” (Br. 18), is unwarranted. The government bases that 
assumption on the fact that petitioner sought to have his deposition 
taken in Switzerland and to limit the scope of the government’s 
questions. Br. 18. Significantly, petitioner had already been 
disentitled by the time this deposition was noticed (see Pet. App. 
17a-26a), and thus any “effrontery” presented by the deposition 
had no bearing on the trial court’s disentitlement decision. In any 
event, there is nothing remotely unusual, let alone contumacious, 
about asking that depositions of foreign nationals be conducted in 
their country of residence. Fed. R. Civ. P. 28(b) expressly 
authorizes depositions in foreign countries; and as the government 
concedes (Br. 5), the trial court in fact ordered that petitioner’s 
wife be deposed in Switzerland. See Pet. C.A. App. 540. It is 
hard to believe that the trial judge nevertheless regarded the 
request for a foreign deposition as an “affront” to its dignity. 

Nor did petitioner’s effort to narrow the scope of deposition 
questioning constitute effrontery of any sort. Litigants, including 
the government, seek restrictions on the scope of discovery all the 
time. See, ¢.g., Tavoulareas v. Piro, 93 F.R.D. 11, 23-24 
(D.D.C. 1981). That is the very purpose of Fed. R. Civ. P. 
26(c)(4), which authorizes courts to issue protective orders 
ensuring that “certain matters not be-inquired into, or that the 


6 


scope of the disclosure or discovery be limited to certain matters.” 
And it is hardly surprising that a claimant in a forfeiture 
proceeding who is also a defendant in a criminal action would seek 
to limit the scope of questioning.’ 

The government insists (Br. 18), however, that petitioner's 
“refusal to submit to the authority of the district court to try him 
for his crimes unmistakably conveyed to that court that he would 
comply with its process only as he saw fit, and that he would use 
his foreign residence as a shield against any coercive sanctions for 
noncompliance.” It is odd, to say the least, that petitioner 
“unmistakably conveyed” that message and yet the trial court 
failed to hear it; no doubt the government's failure to raise the 
point below had something to do with that. In any case, the usual 
practice is to wait until a litigant actually abuses the process before 
punishing him for doing so. Should petitioner someday decline to 
comply with a court order — and to date he never has — the trial 
court will have ample opportunities for enforcement, not least of 
all because it retains complete control over the property itself. 


c. The government argues at length (Br. 18-25) that 
petitioner's disentitlement in the civil proceedings is justified, at 


> Indeed, the Department of Justice has openly encouraged prosecutors 
to seek depositions of forfeiture claimants precisely to compromise their 
rights against compulsory self-incrimination (U.S. Department of Justice, 
Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Assistance, Civil Forfeiture: 
Tracing the Proceeds of Narcotics Trafficking, November 1988, 
addendum January 1992, at 2-3): 


The claimant may be deposed and disclosure of his records 
compelled * * *. And, while the Fifth Amendment may still be 


asserted, a civil claimant risks an adverse factual finding by doing - 


so. This possibility places the claimant in a particular bind if 
criminal charges against him are still pending. Asserting the Fifth 
Amendment may result in an adverse factual determination, while 
answering questions may have incriminating consequences in the 
criminal proceedings. * * * 

For these reasons, the civil claimant is in a very difficult position 
relative to his posture in a criminal trial * * *. This means that, 
even when tracing obstacles exist, forfeiture proceedings should be 
considered, since the government may never be put to its proof. 


7 


least in part, because his “fugitivity” impaired the criminal 
proceedings. As we noted above (at 3-4), under Ortega-Rodriguez 
a fugitive cannot be disentitled in one proceeding because his 
fugitivity may have affected an entirely different proceeding. And 
the government offers no persuasive reason to abandon this 
sensible limitation on the disentitlement doctrine. 


For example, making a virtue of necessity, the government 
argues (Br. 19) that “pretrial fugitivity imposes significantly 
greater burdens on the administration of criminal justice than does 
fugitivity that occurs after trial.” In particular, it says, a pretrial 
fugitive “grant[s] himself an indefinite continuance” (Br. 19) and 
a “self-help severance” (Br. 20). But even were that true — and 
it is not? — the sanction of disentitlement in a separate civil 
litigation would hardly be appropriate. As the Court explained in 
Ortega-Rodriguez, disentitiement is always a “sanction [in the form 
of] dismissal.” 113 S. Ct. at 1207 (emphasis added). That is 
particularly true where, as here, the underlying proceeding — a 
civil forfeiture — is itself punitive by nature. See Austin v. United 
States, 113 S. Ct. 2801, 2810-2812 (1993). Disentitliement is thus 
appropriately reserved only to fugitives who actually deserve to be 
punished — specifically, persons who abscond following conviction 
of acrime. As we noted in our opening brief (at 35), every one 
of this Court’s disentitlement cases involved precisely such 
defendants. There is no reason to extend the doctrine more 
broadly and every good reason not to. 


Nor can disentitlement be justified because the government 
fears that the “fugitive” will obtain discovery in the forfeiture 
proceeding that enables him to “circumven{t] the limitations on 
criminal discovery” (Br. 22). The government’s concerns are 
ironic, to say the least, since the government itself routinely uses 


> As a technical matter, a district court does not even have jurisdiction 
over a defendant who remains abroad after indictment; the government 
conceded that very point at oral argument in the court of appeals. See 
Pet. Br. 16 n.11. Nor has the government been deprived, as a practical 
matter, of the opportunity to prosecute petitioner, since as it now admits 
(Br. 43-44) the United States has prevailed upon the Swiss to arrest, 
incarcerate, and prosecute petitioner on the very same charges it filed 
here. 


civil forfeiture proceedings as a means of “circumventing” the 
restrictions on the Fifth Amendment. See page 6 n.2, supra. And 
in the present case, those concerns are misplaced: the prosecutor 
specifically told the district court that there was “no need for any 
further secrecy” with regard to the parallel criminal case, and the 
trial court accordingly ordered that discovery on behalf of Karyn 
Degen go forward. 2/1/93 Tr. 14, 36. What is more, petitioner 
seeks to raise a variety of defenses in the forfeiture proceeding that 
may require virtually no discovery at all — including that the 
seizure violated this Court’s decision in James Daniel Good; that 
the forfeiture is time-barred; and that parts of the action violate the 
Ex Post Facto Clause.‘ Should discovery nevertheless stray too 
close to the government's criminal case, the government may seek 
a protective order forbidding certain lines of inquiry. And in the 
event of “contrived or perjured testimony” (U.S. Br. 24) in the 
criminal case, the trial judge would have a variety of sanctions 
available to it. See United States v. Dunnigan, 113 S. Ct. 1111 
(1993) (defendant’s sentence may be enhanced because of perjury 


* The government asserts (Br. 34-35 & nn. 18-19) that these defenses are 
likely to fail. We disagree. While the statute of limitations does indeed 
run from the date of discovery, the government's own submissions — as 
we noted in our opening brief (at 31-32) — strongly suggest that the 
government “discovered” petitioner's alleged offenses at least 20 years 
ago, when it says it began investigating him. J.A. 11. Similarly, while 
the government purports (Br. 35 n.19) to have evidence of narcotics 
violations occurring after the effective date of the two forfeiture 
provisions on which it relied, very little of that evidence relates to the 
specific properties that the prosecutors sought to forfeit. See J.A. 10-28, 
135-161. Finally, the government contends (Br. 34-35) that petitioner 
was in “privity” with his wife (whose claim was denied) and would 
therefore be estopped on remand from defending the forfeiture action. 
That is not so. Petitioner was disentitled from defending this case long 
before the district court adjudicated Karyn Degen’s claims. Pet. App. 
17a-26a, 30a-3la. Because petitioner therefore lacked “a full and fair 
opportunity to litigate,” he cannot be bound by the judgment rendered 
against his wife. Montana v. United States, 440 U.S. 147, 153 (1979); 
1B Moore's Federal Practice { 0.411[1]}, at I1Il-210 (1995) (persons 
cannot be bound by a judgment absent “an opportunity to be heard in 
opposition”). 


9 


at trial). None of these hypothetical concerns, however, authorizes 
federal courts to deprive a forfeiture claimant of his day in court. 


2. The Government’s Defense Of The Decision Below 
Cannot Be Squared With Principles Of Due Process 


In addition to departing fundamentally from this Court's 
disentitlement cases, the decision below abridged petitioner's due 
process rights to a hearing and to present a defense. The 
government acknowledges that those constitutional rights are 
implicated here, but contends that disentitling petitioner did not 
violate either due process protection. Br. 27-34.’ 

a. The government first points out (Br. 28) that the Due 
Process Clause entitles a claimant only to the “‘opportunity’ for a 
hearing,” and not necessarily to an actual hearing. Accordingly, 


* The government also contends (Br. 29-30) that there is no meaningful 
difference between depriving a forfeiture claimant of any hearing and, as 
in this Court's disentitlement cases, depriving a defendant merely of the 
right to appeal a criminal conviction. In the latter context, the 
government states, the appellant is likewise claiming that he has been 
denied “a fair hearing”; thus, the government reasons, if due process 
permits a fugitive to be disentitled from appealing a criminal conviction, 
so too does it permit a district court to disentitle a fugitive from 
defending a forfeiture. The analogy is flawed. The fugitive who is 
disentitled from defending against a forfeiture gets no hearing at all, 
whereas the convicted criminal has at least had his day in court (however 
imperfect). See National Union of Marine Cooks and Stewards v. 
Arnold, 348 U.S. 37, 42-43 (1954) (distinguishing, for due process 
purposes, between the sanction of dismissal at the trial stage, where a 
litigant has at least “had its day in court,” and the denial merely of “a 
statutory review”). More critically, the convicted criminal has no 
constitutional right to appeal at all. “An appeal from a judgment of 
conviction is not a matter of absolute right, independently of 
constitutional or statutory provisions allowing such appeal.” McKane v. 
Durston, 153 U.S. 684, 687 (1894). Rather, “the right to a judgment 
from more than one court is a matter of grace” (Cobbledick v. United 
States, 309 U.S. 323, 325 (1940)), and “is wholly within the discretion 
of the State to allow or not to allow” (McKane, 153 U.S. at 687). By 
contrast, a person who has been disentitled from defending against the 
taking of his property has been deprived of a bedrock right to due 
process. 


10 


the government reasons (ibid.), “a court may dismiss a case, or 
enter a default judgment, for noncompliance” with reasonable 
procedural rules. But in each and ev 'y case cited by the 
governmest, the “‘procedural requirements’” (ibid.) at issue were 
designed tw promote the efficiency and orderliness of the very case 
itself. See 3oddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S. 371 (1971) (time 
limitations); United States v. Kras, 409 U.S. 434 (1973) (filing 
fees); Hammond Packing Co. v. Arkansas, 212 U.S. 322 (1909) 
(orders to produce evidence). By contrast, in McVeigh v. United 
States, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 259 (1871), the Court invalidated a 
court order that struck a property owner's claim because of actions 
he had taken outside the confines of the case itself. 


Indeed, it is highly doubtful that federal courts have any 
“supervisory power” to create a rule disentitling a litigant in one 
case because of actions he may have taken in another case. Under 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 83, federal district courts are authorized to devise 
local rules to regulate “their practice.” In Ortega-Rodriguez, this 
Court construed substantially identical language in Fed. R. App. 
P. 47 to require a connection between appellate sanctions and “the 
appellate process” (113 S. Ct. at 1206 n.15) — and not just the 
“appellate process” in general, but the appellate process in the 
very case itself (see id. at 1207-1208). Under Rule 83, therefore, 
a court must tailor its local rules to the needs of the particular 
case, but not some other case. The disentitlement doctrine may 
not be applied in derogation of that limitation. Cf. Lonchar v. 
Thomas, 64 U.S.L.W. 4243, 4247-4250 (U.S. Apr. 1, 1996) 
(courts may not dismiss federal habeas corpus petitions for 
“equitable” reasons that depart from relevant statutes and Rules): 
Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States, 487 U.S. 250, 255 (1988) 
(“The balance struck by the Rule between societal costs and the 
rights of the accused may not be casually overlooked because a 
court has elected to analyze the question under the supervisory 
power.”) (internal quotations omitted).° 


* Although the government — in a surprisingly robust defense of the 
supervisory powers of the federal courts — contends that courts have “a 
sizeable reservoir of authority * * * to manage [their] civil dockets 
aggressively” (Br. 13 (internal quotations omitted)), the fact remains that 
in each of the cases it cites the exercise of supervisory power was 


~ 
a 


Nor is the government correct when it analogizes (Br. 29-30) 
the disentitlement doctrine to waiver principles. Even if a claimant 
could waive his right to defend his property without committing a 
“voluntary, knowing act” (Br. 29), surely he must do, or fail to 
do, something in the case itself to waive his rights. The 
government cites no case, and we know of none, in which a 
party's actions or inactions in one case were held to waive his due 
process rights in another case.’ 


b. The government also insists (Br. 30-34) that disentitling 
petitioner did not abridge what it calls his “absolute ‘right to 
defend’” the forfeiture. Of course, that is a strawman to begin 
with; we never contended that the right to defend is “absolute.” 
But it is an aspect of due process, and as such can be restricted 
only in a manner consistent with the Due Process Clause. 


The order disentitling petitioner does not meet that test. As 
we noted in our opening brief (at 24-27), the decision below 
cannot be squared with this Court's decisions in McVeigh v. United 
States, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 259 (1871), and Windsor v. McVeigh, 
93 U.S. 274 (1876). There, the Court made clear that even an act 
of consummate effrontery — participating in a rebellion — did not 
permit a court to deny an owner the right to defend against the 


designed to promote the orderly and efficient litigation of the very case 
in which the power was exercised. Whether the supervision was invoked 
“to compel the appearance and testimony of witnesses,” Shillitani v. 
United States, 384 U.S. 364, 370 (1966), to ensure “compl{iance] with 
document discovery,” International Union v. Bagwell, 114 S. Ct. 2552, 
2560 (1994), or generally to curb the “full range of litigation abuses,” 
Chambers v. NASCO, Inc., 501 U.S. 32, 46 (1991) — im each case the 
purpose was to facilitate the very litigation itself. See also Ortega- 
Rodriguez, 113 S. Ct. at 1207 (“We cannot accept an expansion * * * 
that would allow an appellate court to sanction by dismissal any conduct 
that exhibited disrespect for any aspect of the judicial system * * *.”). 


’ It may be added that even the court below acknowledged that the 
seizure of petitioner's property violated his due process rights under 
James Daniel Good. The government does not even cite the Good case 
in its brief, much less explain how petitioner waived his due process 
rights under that case as well. 


12 


confiscation of his property.’ Nor can petitioner's disentitlement 
be reconciled with Hovey v. Elliott, 167 U.S. 409 (1897), in which 
the Court reiterated that “due process of law signifies a right to be 
heard in one’s defense” (id. at 417). 


Hammond Packing Co. v. Arkansas, 212 U.S. 322 (1909), on 
which the government relies (Br. 32-34), is not to the contrary. 
The trial court in that case struck an answer after the defendant 
had refused to obey an order requiring the production of 
documents and witnesses. Sustaining the judgment, this Court 
explained that whereas the sanction in Hovey was “a mere 
punishment” (id. at 350), the striking of the answer in Hammond 
Packing resulted from “the presumption that the refusal to produce 
evidence material to the administration of due process was but an 
admission of the want of merit in the asserted defense” (id. at 
351). 


Hammond Packing, in short, stands only for the proposition 
that litigants can take (or fail to take) steps in the litigation itself 
that warrant a presumption that their claims are meritless. As the 
Court has made clear in subsequent cases, however, “[dJue process 
is violated * * * if the behavior of the defendant will not support 
the Hammond Packing presumption.” Insurance Corp. of Ireland, 
Lid. v. Compagnie des Bauxites de Guinee, 456 U.S. 694, 706 
(1982). In the present case, petitioner was sanctioned, indeed 
dispositively sanctioned, not because of anything he did or failed 
to do in the forfeiture proceeding, but instead because of his 
failure to come to the United States to stand trial in a separate 
criminal case. For all the reasons we have noted, the latter 


. The government suggests (Br. 31) that in neither of the McVeigh cases 
was there an “allegation * * * that the claimant had indicated his intention 
to appear on his own terms, or that the court's ability to function fairly 
and efficiently had been impaired in any respect by acts or omissions over 
which he could fairly be deemed to have control.” But there was no such 
“allegation” in the present case either, at least until the government 
submutted its brief to this Court. In any event, any such allegation would 
be groundless: petitioner has not “indicated” to the forfeiture court that 
he will disobey its orders; and the trial court did not identify any way in 
which its “ability to function” had been impaired by petitioner's “acts or 
omissions.” 


13 


“behavior” simply does “not support the Hammond Packing 
presumption.” Jbid.* 


Even if this Court concludes that property owners may be 
“disentitled” in civil forfeiture actions from defending their 
property against confiscation by the United States government, the 
Ninth Circuit's decision should be reversed because, as explained 
in our opening brief (at 34-43), petitioner does not qualify as a 
“fugitive” for two independent reasons. First, he has never been 
a “fugitive” within the ordinary meaning of that term (or even the 
more specialized meaning that has developed in analogous legal 
contexts). Petitioner has not fled from the custody of any court in 
which he was convicted of a crime; has not otherwise absconded 
or taken flight from U.S. authorities in violation of any criminal 
proscription; and has not even departed this country with any 
intent to avoid prosecution. Second, even if petitioner once was 
a fugitive from U.S. prosecutors, he is no longer. As the 
government belatedly acknowledged in this Court (Br. in Opp. 16- 
17 & nn. 10-11 (emphasis added)), petitioner was arrested by Swiss 
authorities and is currently being prosecuted by them — all “af the 
request of the United States and based principally on the conduct 
that formed the basis for the U.S. indictment.” The government's 
efforts nevertheless to maintain that petitioner remains a fugitive 
subject to disentitlement are wholly unpersuasive. 

a. The government concedes (Br. 42-43) that every one of 
this Court’s disentitlement cases has involved “fugitives” who 
broke out of prison or otherwise escaped from lawful custody 
‘ ‘tual or constructive) following a criminal trial and conviction. 
And it does not dispute that the flight in each of those cases was 
“a deliberate and unlawful flouting of the convicting court's 
authority to execute its judgment.” Pet. Br. 35 (emphasis added). 


* At a minimum, the serious due process concerns we have identified 
provide a compelling prudential reason not to extend the disentitlement 
doctrine beyond the confines of criminal appeals to civil forfeiture 
actions. Cf. NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490, 499-501 (1979). 


14 


The government nevertheless urges this Court to endorse a vastly 
expanded concept of “fugitivity” that would encompass persons 
who merely are absent from the United States while a criminal 
charge is pending here against them. That expansive definition 
departs from the ordinary meaning of the word “fugitive” and rests 
on a line of extradition cases that is plainly inapposite. More 
critically, the government's broad concept of “fugitive” bears no 
relationship to the lawful purposes of the disentitlement sanction. 


The government relies heavily on concepts drawn from the 
law of interstate extradition. Br. 37-38 & n.21. As the 
government correctly notes, the extradition statute (18 U.S.C. 
§ 3182) — which implements the Extradition Clause of the 
Constitution (U.S. Const. art. IV, § 2, cl. 2) — “has been held 
consistently to require only proof of absence from the indicting 
jurisdiction, regardless of the defendant's intent.” United States 
v. Marshall, 856 F.2d 896, 898 (7th Cir. 1988). But as this Court 
has explained, “[t}he language, history, and subsequent 
construction of the Extradition Act make clear that Congress 
intended extradition to be a summary procedure.” California v. 
Superior Court of California, 482 U.S. 400, 407 (1987). The 
summary nature of interstate extradition proceedings, and the 
special definition of “fugitive from justice” that has developed in 
that context, reflect the unique concerns and history underlying the 
Extradition Clause. As the Court explained in Appleyard v. 
Massachusetts (203 U.S. 222, 227-228 (1906) (emphasis added)): 

The constitutional provision relating to fugitives from justice, 

as the history of its adoption will show, is in the nature of a 

treaty stipulation entered into for the purpose of securing a 

prompt and efficient administration of the criminal laws of the 

several States ***. A faithful, vigorous enforcement of that 
stipulation is vital to the harmony and welfare of the States. 


The Framers correctly recognized that the federal government 
“must fail unless the States mutually supported each other and the 
General Government; and that nothing would be more likely to 
disturb its peace, and end in discord, than permitting an offender 
against the laws of a State, by passing over a mathematical line 
which divides it from another,” to avoid prosecution, and “stand 
ready, under the protection of the State, to repeat the offence as 
soon as another opportunity offered.” Superior Court of 


15 


California, 482 U.S. at 406 (internal quotations omitted). The 
Court accordingly rejected the argument that extradition could be 
challenged on the ground that the person sought to be extradited 
lacked a subjective belief that he had violated the demanding 
State’s laws at the time of departure. Appleyard, 203 U.S. at 226. 


These considerations have no relevance whatsoever in the 
disentitlement context. Disentitlement, unlike extradition, is a 
“sanction” aimed at deterring wrongful conduct that directly 
interferes with the disentitling court’s processes. For that reason, 
the definition of “fugitivity” employed in the disentitlement context 
must include some element of culpability or wrongful conduct. 
Mere absence from the United States, even when coupled with 
actual knowledge of pending charges (a factor that evidently is not 
required under the government’s proposed definition), hardly 
qualifies as conduct warranting the sanction of disentitlement, 
much less the multimillion dollar penalty exacted in this case. Nor 
does disentitlement of an absent foreign property owner serve any 
deterrent function when the owner is unaware of the pending 
charges, or has left the country without any intent to avoid 
prosecution. In short, the government’s proposed definition is not 
— as the government concedes it must be (Br. 43) — “informed 
by the purposes of th{e disentitlement] doctrine.”"° 


In sharp contrast to the extradition cases, the three criminal 
statutes cited and discussed in our opening brief (at 37-39) are 
analogous to the disentitlement doctrine because they target 
conduct meriting sanction and, according, do provide guidance on 
the appropriate definition of fugitivity. The government does not 
dispute that the Felony Fugitive Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1073, requires 
proof of flight with an intent to avoid prosecution or custody, or 
that mere absence is insufficient to violate the statute. Br. 41. 
Nor does the government explain (see Br. 42 n.23) why the 
definition of “fugitive from justice” Congress included in the 


' As explained in our opening brief (at 36-37 & n.20), the ordinary 
meaning of the word “fugitive” does not include mere absence plus 
failure to return. The several dictionaries cited by the government (Br. 
36, 42) do not disprove this point. Moreover, to the extent they suggest 
a broader definition of “fugitivity,” they merely acknowledge the special 
definition applicable in the extradition context. 


16 


federal firearms law (see Pet. Br. 37), should somehow be 
regarded as a departure from ordinary legal usage. And the 
federal tolling provision applicable to fugitives from justice, 18 
U.S.C. § 3290, clearly does provide a useful analogy. As the 
government concedes (Br. 40), under that statute “most courts of 
appeals have required that the government establish that the 
defendant intended to avoid prosecution.”"’ 


Finally, we note that the government does not dispute our 
contention (Pet. Br. 40-41) that it never even argued in the lower 
courts that petitioner left the United States with any intent to avoid 
prosecution, much less carried its burden of submitting evidence 
that would show such intent. See U.S. Br. 43 n.24. For that 
reason, if the Court agrees with any of our proposed definitions of 
“fugitivity,” it can and should simply reverse the judgment. 

b. The government fares no better in arguing that petitioner 
remains a “fugitive” from United States prosecutors today even 
though they concededly have procured his arrest and ongoing 
prosecution by Swiss authorities based on the very same conduct 
(and charges) that underlie the U.S. indictment. 


The government renews its assertion that petitioner is to blame 
for the lack of evidence in the record to demonstrate a fact whose 
truth the Solicitor General has now admitted (U.S. Br. in Opp. 16- 
17): that the United States succeeded in “transfer[ring] to 
Switzerland * * * the prosecution of Brian John Degen on the 
federal United States charges for which he was indicted in the 
District of Nevada.” Pet. Br. la; id. at 3a (“[W]e formally 
requested that the prosecution be taken over by Switzerland.”).” 


'' The government contends (Br. 40) that “every court of appeals” 
would allow such intent to be inferred from an absent property owner's 
failure to return to the United States once he learned of charges pending 
against him. That is mistaken. Only the Second Circuit has endorsed the 
concept advocated by the government, which it refers to as “constructive 
flight,” and which it has described as “concededly without precedent.” 
Jhirad v. Ferrandina, $36 F.2d 478, 483 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 429 
U.S. 833 (1976). 


'2 The government also contends (Br. 44) that we “disclaimed” this 
argument in our reply brief at the petition stage. Not so. In fact, our 


17 


Without explaining why his previous admission does not foreclose 
this argument, the Solicitor General contends (Br. 44-45) that 
petitioner was remiss in failing to ask the “district court [to] 
reconsider its disentitlement ruling” in the seven months between 
his arrest in Switzerland in November 1992 and the district court's 
entry of its order of forfeiture in June 1993. See Pet. App. 30a- 
37a. According to the government, because “petitioner does not 
allege that the government * * * did anything that affirmatively 
prevented him from making that request,” he must bear the blame 
for the state of the record. Br. 45. 


The government's argument rests on a false premise. As we 
previously explained (Pet. Br. 46; Reply Br. 10 0.8), we do 
maintain that government counsel misled the district court 
concerning the United States’ role in the Swiss proceedings, and 
that those misrepresentations not only lulled petitioner into not 
pursuing the matter further but also persuaded the district court 
that the United States was simply not involved in petitioner's arrest 
in Switzerland." Had the government been candid with the 


reply brief expressly stated that petitioner, at the merits stage, might 
“elect[] to make” the very argument the government says we abandoned. 
Reply Br. 10. Our reply brief also stated that this Court could “decline 
to consider” this argument “on the merits” if the Court agreed with the 
government's submission that petitioner was to blame for a record that 
was “factually and legally inadequate” on this issue. These statements, 
which the government overlooks, are hardly consistent with “disclaiming” 
the argument. 


'? On January 6, 1993, the lawyer representing petitioner and his wife 
filed an affidavit stating that petitioner's Swiss lawyer had glimpsed a 
letter in petitioner's criminal dossier in Switzerland indicating that the 
United States government had urged the Swiss authorities to initiate a 
criminal action against Degen. J.A. 162-164. In response to this 
allegation, the United States Attorney told the district court that this 
account of “the circumstances surrounding the arrest and detention of 
Brian DEGEN by Swiss authorities * * * is little more than a literary 
flight of fancy.” J.A. 167. At a February 1, 1993 hearing, the 
government's lawyer stated that petitioner's “unavailability” as a 
consequence of his incarceration in Switzerland “should not in any way 
be blamed on the government in this case.” Pet. Br. 7a; Pet. Br. 46. 


district court, there is little doubt that petitioner would have raised 
this argument in the district court (as he did in the Ninth Circuit). 
Any defect in the record is thus directly attributable to the actions 
of the government."* 


Moreover, in view of the government’s admission concerning 
its actual role in the Swiss prosecution, there is no need to remand 
for a determination of a fact whose truth the government concedes. 
Instead, assuming the disentitlement doctrine is ever applicable in 
civil forfeiture proceedings, on the present record the Court can 
and should decide the question whether petitioner falls within the 
appropriate legal definition of a “fugitive.” On the merits of that 
issue, the government has nothing persuasive to say. It merely 
asserts (Br. 45) that petitioner has not indicated that he would 
return to the United States if released from Swiss custody. That 
is true but irrelevant: the pertinent issue is the legal significance of 
the Swiss custody and prosecution, not whether petitioner will or 
will not travel to the United States to stand trial. In sum, the 
government does not explain, nor can it, how petitioner could 
possibly be regarded as a fugitive from United States prosecutors 
when he is currently being prosecuted in Switzerland, at the behest 
of those very prosecutors, “on the federal United States charges 
for which he was indicted in the District of Nevada” (Pet. Br. 1a). 


4. The Government Has Not Refuted Our Showing That 
The Prosecutors In This Case Forfeited The Right To 
Invoke The Equitable Doctrine Of Disentitlement 


The government acknowledges (Br. 45-46 (footnote omitted)) 
that “before the lower courts, the government’s briefs did not 
appropriately set forth the full factual background of the 


And, at the close of that hearing, when Judge Reed remarked that he was 
“not impressed by the representations that the United States government 
caused [the Swiss] criminal charges to be pressed against [petitioner]” 
(Pet. Br. 8a), the government's lawyer pointedly failed to speak up and 
correct the record. See also Pet. C.A. App. 20, 35. 


‘* Contrary to the government's suggestion (Br. 44-45), petitioner 
obviously cannot be faulted for not bringing to the district court's 
attention the activities of the Swiss magistrate in Nevada that occurred 
after the district court entered its order of forfeiture. 


19 


government’s role in urging Swiss authorities to prosecute 
petitioner.”"* It contends, however, that for two reasons the 
government is not barred under the “unclean hands” doctrine from 
invoking the equitable doctrine of disentitlement.'* 

First, the government opines (Br. 46) that “the government's 
misstatements below” did not “result{] in the judgments in the 
lower courts.” Our own crystal ball is not as clear: surely it is at 
least as likely as not that the lower courts would have ruled 
differently had the government conceded, as it now has, that the 
United States instigated petitioner’s arrest by the Swiss. At a 
minimum, that would seem to be a question for the lower courts 
to consider should a remand be necessary. 


Second, the government argues (Br. 47 n.27) that the 
“unclean hands” doctrine should not be applied so as to permit “a 
malefactor * * * to benefit from his inequitable actions.” But for 
the reascns we noted above, petitioner is not a “malefactor” — and 
certainly not in the sense the government implies. He has not 
“improperly exploited” (Br. 47) the court’s discovery process, nor 
has he committed any of the other “infractions” (Br. 47) that the 


'S Although the Solicitor General has candidly corrected many of the 
prosecutors’ misstatements, several of those misrepresentations remain 
uncorrected. Thus, for example, the prosecutor failed to make clear at 
oral argument in the Ninth Circuit that the United States had solicited the 
Swiss prosecution. To the contrary, he told the court of appeals that the 
United States had “never made” a request to the Swiss for assistance in 
the United Stetes prosecution. (A copy of the tape of the oral argument 
has been lodyed with the Clerk by the government). 


‘© The government also argues (Br. 44) that the “unclean hands” 
argument is “not properly before the Court” because it “appeared for the 
first time in [petitioner's] opening brief on the merits.” Of course, it was 
not until the brief in opposition that the government acknowledged that 
the United States was actually responsible for the Swiss prosecution, 
thereby demonstrating the prosecutors’ unclean hands. In any event, a 
petitioner need not argue every point he wishes to make in his petition, 
so long as the argument is “fairly included” in the question presented. 
S. Ct. Rule 14.1(a); Procunier v. Navarette, 434 U.S. 555, 559-560 n.6 
(1978). The government does not suggest that we have failed to meet 
that standard. 


20 


government attributes to him. However the government may wish 
to characterize petitioner’s failure to travel to 1.0 United States to 
attend his criminal trial, in this civil forfeiture case he is prepared 
to defend and to live by the rules in doing so. He should not be 
disentitled from presenting that defense, least of all by prosecutors 
who admittedly misled the lower courts in their pursuit of a 
forfeiture. 


The forfeiture of petitioner’s property deprived him, once and 
for all, of “valuable rights of ownership, including the right of 
sale, the right of occupancy, the right to unrestricted use and 
enjoyment, and the right to receive rents.” United States v. James 
Daniel Good Real Property, 114 S. Ct. 492, 501 (1993). And the 
g¢ vernment extinguished those rights, not by establishing probable 
Cause in a courtroom, not by overcoming petitioner’s defenses, and 
not even in compliance with the due process standards for pre- 
deprivation seizures. It did so, instead, by invoking a version of 
the disentitlement doctrine that bears no discernible kinship with 
this Court’s cases. 


The government’s forfeiture juggernaut does not need such 
extra-legal assistance. Particularly in light of “the breadth of new 
civil forfeiture statutes” (James Daniel Good, 114 S. Ct. at 515 
(Thomas, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)), and the 
“fundamental interdependence * * * between the personal right to 
liberty and the personal right in property” (Lynch v. Household 
Finance Corp., 405 U.S. 538, 552 (1972)), there is no reason to 
extend the supervisory powers of the federal courts this far. The 
judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted. 
DANIEL W. STEWART LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS 
Daniel W. Stewart, Lid. Counsel of Record 
Post Office Box 3021 ANDREW L. FREY 
Reno, NV 89505-3021 ALAN E. UNTEREINER 
(702) 323-3020 Mayer, Brown & Platt 


2000 Pennsylvania Ave., N. W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 463-2000 

APRIL 1996 


