0 Supreme Court, U. 8. 
\ 
I , i 


No. 95-129 FEB 27 1996 
CL te 
In The — 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


EXXON COMPANY, U.S. A., 
EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY, 


Petitioners, 


SOFEC, INC.; PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC.; 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT REFINERY, INC.; 
PRI MARINE, INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC., 


Respondents, 


GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, LTD.; 
BRIDON FIBRES AND PLASTICS, LTD., 


Third-Party Respondents. 
0 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
+ 


PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF ON THE MERITS 
* 


Srl EY M. Hupstepcer 

Counsel of Record 

Morrison & Foerster LLP 

555 West Fifth Street 

Suite 3500 

Los Angeles, California 90013-1024 
(213) 892-5200 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO, (800) 225-0964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 42-283) 


IV. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF THE ARGU- 
eee 


EXONERATING RESPONDENTS FROM ALL 
LIABILITY IN TORT FOR THE LOSS OF THE 
TANKER IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE 
COURT’S ADMIRALTY POLICIES THAT 
IMPELLED IT TO ADOPT COMPARATIVE 
ran.. ase eee 


IF THE COURT HAD INCORPORATED COM- 
MON-LAW SUPERSEDING CAUSE INTO GEN- 
ERAL ADMIRALTY LAW, RESPONDENTS 
WOULD NOT THEREBY ESCAPE LIABILITY 


THE DUE PROCESS ISSUE IS FAIRLY ENCOM- 
PASSED BY THE QUESTIONS PRESENTED ... 


RESPONDENTS CANNOT ESCAPE LIABILITY 
FOR BREACHES OF WARRANTY BECAUSE 
THE CAPTAIN WAS GROSSLY NEGLIGENT .. 


777***ͤͤͤE?17 


13 


15 


17 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
City of Milwaukee v. Cement Div., Nat’l Gypsum Co., 
515 U.S. — 115 S. Ct. 2091, 132 L.Ed.2d 148 
09. „„ 1, 10, 11 
Delta Transload, Inc. v. M/V Navios Commander, 818 
F.2d 445 (Sth Cir. 19870ũ 606s eee cece eee eens 18 
East River Steamship Corp. v. Transamercia Delaval, 
Inc., 476 U.S. 858, 106 S. Ct. 2295, 90 L.Ed.2d 865 
. oc cccncccccntpesechenseenssennnees 7, 8, 9, 19 
Federal Ins. Co. v. Sabine Towing & Transp. Co., 783 
F.2d 347 (2d Cle. 1 / „ „ „ „ 18 


Gasoline Products Co., Inc. v. Champlin Refining Co., 
283 U.S. 494, 51 S. Ct. 513, 75 L. Ed. 1188 (1931) .... 16 


Hadley v. Baxendale, 9 Ex. 341, 156 Eng. Rep. 45 


(us 090 .. „ „„%„%„%%%/%/ na seen aeein 17 
Hahn v. United States, 535 F. Supp. 132 (D.S.D 

.. „ „„ „„ e 13 
Italia Societa per Azioni di Navigazione v. 

Stevedoring Company, Inc. 376 U.S. 315, 84 8. sce 

748, 11 L.Ed.2d 732 (1964) — 1, 8, 19 


Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, 358 
US. 625, 79 S. Ct. 406, 3 L.Ed.2d 550 (1959) ..1, 7, 8, 9 


Pennzoil Producing Co. v. Off-Shore Express, Inc., 943 
NA 1465 (Sth Cle. 199%)... .ccccccvcscccssseseosess 18 


Petition of Kinsman Transit Co., 338 F.2d 708 (2d Cir. 
1964), cert. denied sub nom., Continental Grain Co. 
v. City of Buffalo, 380 U.S. 944, 85 S. Ct. 1026, 13 
L.6.28 S65 (IGGD). oo . „ 14 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 

Page 

Tennessee Valley Sand & Gravel Co. v. M/V Delta, 598 

F.2d 930, mod and rehearing denied, 604 F.2d 
V sutiepbGddbcnseweseeecocctas tices 18 
The Miraflores & The Abadesa, 1 A.C. 876 (1967)...... 10 

The Pennsylvania, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) i25, 22 L.Ed 
/ / tee eee ee 12 


The Statue of Liberty, 2 Lloyd’s List L.R. 277 (1971) .... 10 


Union Oil Co. of Cal. v The San Jacinto, 409 U.S. 
140, 93 S. Ct. 368, 34 L.Ed.2d 365 (1972)....... 11, 12 


United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., Inc., 421 U.S. 
397, 95 8. Ct. 1708, 44 L.Ed.2d 251 (1975)..... passim 


Weyerhaeuser S.S. Co. v. Nacirema Operating Co., 355 
U.S. 563, 78 S. Ct. 438, 2 L.Ed.2d 491 (1958) ...... 19 


Orner AUTHORITIES 


British Maritime Conventions Act of 1911............ 4 
5 A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts, §§ 1006, et seq. 
, AES SS ee 17 
6A J. W. Moore, et al., Moores Federal Practice 
rr eee eee cece: 16 
Prosser & Keeton on the Law of Torts 
eee e eee 4 
, 1illI eee 2, 3 
eee 6 
eee sees eee 3, 6 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
Restatement (Second of Torts) (1965) 

ͤ—»»„ 2 ĩ˙ ÜꝛwT— 5 
1» 6, 13 
12 6 
ane e ee ee 5 
.. bee eee 6 
1 6 
1 6 


1 
PETITIONERS’ REPLY BRIEF ON THE MERITS 


Petitioners Exxon Company, U.S.A. and Exxon Ship- 
ping Company (collectively “Exxon”) reply to respon- 
dents’ briefs on the merits. The HIRI respondents’ brief is 
abbreviated herein as “HRB”; the brief of the third-party 
respondents and of Sofec is abbreviated herein as “TPB.” 


INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF 
THE ARGUMENT 


Respondents’ briefs fail to acknowledge the funda- 
mental issues of admiralty policy presented by this case: 
Under what circumstances will admiralty defendants be 
relieved of all liability for marine casualties that are 
causec n fact by their tortious conduct or by their 
breact »f warranty? Those policy questions are decided 
by ass g what results admiralty law should try to 
achieve hen the objectives are identified, legal policy is 
shaped + achieve them, and the resulting law is there- 
upon ap di to the particular case before the Court. The 
case is ti . vchicle for the Court's stating admiralty law, 
but the case is the medium, not the message. 


The Court has already identified the objectives that 
general admiralty law seeks to achieve: promoting mar- 
itime safety, deterring wrongdoing most likely to injure 
others, achieving fundamental fairness, preserving the 
simplicity that is a characteristic of general admiralty law, 
and striving for uniformity. City of Milwaukee v. Cement 
Div., Nat / Gypsum Co., 515 U.S. __ __, 115 S. Ct. 2091, 
2095, 132 L.Ed.2d 148, 154 (1995); United States v. Reliable 
Transfer Co., Inc., 421 U.S. 397, 405 n.11, 409, 95 S. Ct. 1708, 
1713 n.11, 1715, 44 L.Ed.2d 251, 259 n.11, 261 (1975); Italia 
Societa per Azioni di Navigazione v. Oregon Stevedoring Com- 
pany, Inc., 376 U.S. 315, 324, 84 S. Ct. 748, 754, 11 L.Ed.2d 
732, 741 (1964); Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale Transatlan- 
tique, 358 U.S. 625, 631, 79 S. Ct. 406, 410, 3 L.Ed.2d 550, 
555 (1959). 


2 


The policy questions before the Court are thus: Will 
owners of dangerous berths and suppliers of extra- 
hazardous equipment be encouraged to make them safer 
if they know that they can avoid all liability for marine 
casualties to which they contributed by blaming the 
entire loss on navigational ineptitude of masters of 
endangered vessels? Will masters become better naviga- 
tors if they know those who furnish unsafe berths and 
dangerous equipment will escape all liability for their 
wrongdoing that was a cause-in-fact of the injury if the 
defendants can convince a trial court that the master’s 
navigation of the vessel was grossly negligent? Is it fair to 
impose the whole loss of vessels on shipowners if their 
masters respond very negligently to dangers that they 
would never have had to face but for defendants’ miscon- 
duct? The answer to each question is no.“ 


Allocating marine losses on the basis of the degree of 
fault of each of the actors in the drama is fair and simple 
to understand. Common-law legal policies labeled “prox- 
imate cause,” including superseding cause, are difficult 
for tort scholars to explain, let alone for shipowners and 
seafarers to understand and to apply. E.g., W. Keeton, et 
al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 42-45 at pp. 
272-321 (5th ed. 1984) (hereafter “Prosser and Keeton”). 
Respondents have given no sound reasons why this 
Court should import the confusing maze of common-law 
proximate cause concepts into general admiralty law 
when comparing degrees of fault that contribute to 
marine injuries is so much fairer and simpler. 


As the Court knows, ships’ captains make their 
navigational choices with abiding regard for the perils at sea 
and deep concern for the safety of the ship and the crew, not by 
pondering what may happen in a courtroom months or even 
years later. Businessmen running oil refineries and suppliers of 
marine equipment are far more likely to make choices of 
conduct based on assessments of the risks of future litigation 
and liability than are seafarers. 


3 


Like common-law plaintiffs, admiralty claimants 
must carry their burdens of proving that defendants’ 
torts or breaches of contract were causes-in-fact and legal 
causes of the losses for which they seek recovery. How- 
ever, the policy reasons for imposing or refusing to 
impose limitations of liability under legal cause doctrines 
are not identical in the two situations because the con- 
cerns of admiralty courts and the context of the maritime 
losses are not the same as those ashore. 


Respondents’ contention that they did not concede 
that their unspecified wrongdoing was a cause-in-fact of 
the stranding is not supported by the record. (HRB at p. 
16.)? Respondents necessarily made that concession 
because the superseding cause doctrine, which they per- 
suaded the district court to accept to grant their bifurca- 
tion motion, is not even relevant unless it is first 
established that the defendant’s misconduct was a sub- 
stantial factor in producing the injury; otherwise a defen- 
dant has no liability for the superseding cause doctrine to 
limit. (Prosser and Keeton, op. cit. supra, § 42 at pp. 272-73.) 
Prosser and Keeton explains that the effect of intervening 
forces presents “a question of the extent of the defen- 
dant’s original obligation; and once more the problem is 
nut primarily one of causation at all, since it does not 
arise until cause in fact is established. It is rather one of 
the policy as to imposing legal responsibility.” (Prosser 
and Keeton, op. cit. supra, § 44 at p. 301.) 

Dissatisfied with the questions presented upon which 
the Court granted certiorari, respondents have chosen to 
present and argue different questions. (HRB at p. i; TPB 


2 In arguing respondents’ bifurcation motion, counsel for 
Bridon Fibres said: “Now the Court is absolutely right that but 
for the breakout there wouldn't have been the grounding in this 
case, but for but that’s not enough for proximate causation.” 
7/27/92 RT 31. 


4 


at p. i.) They vigorously attack points that Exxon has not 
raised and misstate the contentions that Exxon has made. 


Contrary to respondents’ briefs, Exxon has not 
recited any version of the events that is contradicted by 
the district court’s findings.“ (HRB at 13.) The facts stated 
by Exxon are fully supported by the record and by the 
district court's findings of fact. Respondents’ quarrel with 
Exxon’s recitation of the facts boils down to umbrage that 
Exxon's brief called the responses of Captain Coyne and 
the crew of the tanker “heroic”. The description is apt, 
even accepting the district court’s conclusion that the 
Captain was grossly negligent. How many heroes are 
careful? 


Exxon has attacked the district court’s erroneous con- 
clusions of law, which respondents often cite as if they 
were findings of fact. (E.g., HRB at 13-14.) Respondents 
contend that Exxon's statement that the captain and the 
crew of the tanker were “valiantly dealing with a whole 
succession of emergencies” contradicts the district court's 
factual findings. (HRB at 15.) In support of that argu- 
ment, respondents quote conclusions of law and a state- 
ment from the Ninth Circuit’s opinion that is contradicted 
by the record. (HRB at 15-16.) Respondents’ vituperative 
attack on Exxon’s statement that the captain had no rea- 
son to “anticipate that the tanker would be anywhere 
near the stranding area until the whole chain of events 
occurred after the chain parted” is likewise supported by 
the record. The captain knew where the vessel was; he 
had no reason to predict that it would be far from the 
supposedly safe berth until the series of emergencies 
occurred after the SPM failed. 


3 Exxon did not attack the findings in the court of appeals 
because they were made on sharply conflicting evidence; an 
appellate attack would have been futile. Such an attack would 
be irrelevant here because this Court does not sit as an error 
correcting court. 


5 


The basic premise of respondents’ arguments is that 
the district court factually found that the tanker had 
escaped the perils created by their conduct not later than 
1830 and even as early as 1803. (E.g., HRB at pp. 14-15; 
TPB at p. 35.) Respondents rely on the district court's 
legal conclusions, and the court's legal conclusions are 
inconsistent with its factual findings. Thus, the court 
found that while the cargo hose was suspended from the 
crane, it caused the crane to collapse at 1944 injuring the 
crane operator. (Findings 64, 66, JA 156.) It also found 
that Captain Coyne commenced the final turn at 1956. 
(Findings 74, JA at p. 157.) HIRI’s mooring master and 
crewmen of the tanker would never have had to spend 
over an hour to unbolt the dangerous cargo hose from the 
ship’s manifold (Findings 64, JA 156), nor would the 
NENE have had to keep trying to prevent the hose from 
moving under the tanker throughout the ordeal, nor 
would the crane have collapsed if the chafe chain had not 
parted, the hoses had not broken, the hoses had been 
equipped with safety devices and adequate tug assistance 
had existed. The evidence was uncontradicted that when 
the crane collapsed, the boom began sweeping the 
tanker’s deck creating imminent danger of serious inju- 
ries to the deck crew and destruction of the vessel by 
explosion. (2/18/93 RT 25-26.) The absence of any find- 
ings of fact by the district court on that point does not 
change the record: The trailing cargo hose presented a 
continuing danger to the tanker from the time it broke to 
the crane’s collapse through the efforts to secure the 
boom i.e., less than 12 minutes before the tanker com- 
menced its turn at 1956.“ 


* The statement in the Ninth Circuit's opinion upon which 
respondents rely to claim that the tanker was out of danger by 
1803 (HRB at 15) is contradicted by the record, as well as by the 
district court’s finding that the hose caused the crane to topple 
at 1844. 


6 


Even if the doctrine of superseding cause had been 
incorporated into general admiralty law, it would not 
have relieved respondents of liability because the risk of 
stranding the EXXON HOUSTON (and every other tanker 
that moored at the SPM) was a foreseeable hazard created 
by respondents’ torts and breaches of admiralty warran- 
ties. (E.g., Prosser and Keeton, op. cit. supra, at pp. 303-306.) 
When the harm that happened is within the risks that a 
defendant foresaw or that his duties to the plaintiff 
required him to foresee, the fact that the harm came about 
in an unforeseen way does not limit or defeat liability. 
E.g., Restatement (Second) of Torts, (hereafter “Restate- 
ment”) §§ 281, 433, 435, 441, 442B, 450, 451 (1965). “[T]he 
effect of intervening forces . . [presents] a ‘hazard prob- 
lem’ rather than a problem of causation,” (Id. at § 281, 
cmt. h); Prosser and Keeton, §§ 43, 44 at pp. 289-299, 316. 


To prove that a particular casualty was or should 
have been foreseen by a defendant and was within the 
risks created by defendant's wrongs, a plaintiff must be 
permitted to present proof of the duties that the defen- 
dant involuntarily or voluntarily assumed, the risks cre- 
ated by the breaches of those duties, and the culpability 
of those breaches. E.g., Prosser and Keeton, op. cit. supra, 
§ 43 at pp. 280-84. By preventing Exxon from proving its 
case-in-chief, the court foreclosed the evidence that 
would have destroyed respondents’ foreseeability and 
superseding cause arguments. Respondents’ briefs mis- 
conceive Exxon’s arguments, and therefore miss the 
points. (HRB at 44-45, 47-50; TPR at 46-49.) 


Contrary to respondents, Exxon’s due process argu- 
ment is not based solely on the district court's bifurcation 
order. (HRB at pp. 43-45.) The district court did abuse its 
discretion in granting respondents’ bifurcation motion 
because legal cause cannot be correctly tried by excluding 
evidence to prove the extent of defendants’ duties to 
plaintiffs and the risks created by breaches of those 
duties. The bifurcation motion, plus the court's later rul- 
ings foreclosing Exxon from presenting its evidence on 


7 


those very points, plus the entry of judgment against 
Exxon on Phase | created the constitutional issue. The 
district court not only tried the case backwards and 
upside-down, it prevented Exxon from trying its liability 
case at all. The issues of liability on which the Court 
granted certiorari were intertwined with the due process 
issue; accordingly the due process point was within the 
questions presented. 


Stranding the tanker was a foreseeable consequence 
of respondents’ breaches of their express and implied 
admiralty warranties. The failure of the tanker's captain 
to prevent the casualty is an issue that affects damages, 
not liability, and the damage issues were never tried. 


ARGUMENT 


I. EXONERATING RESPONDENTS FROM ALL LIA- 
BILITY IN TORT FOR THE LOSS OF THE TANKER 
IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE COURT’S ADMI- 
RALTY POLICIES THAT IMPELLED IT TO ADOPT 
COMPARATIVE FAULT 


The Court’s general admiralty policies in tort cases 
are explicit in Kermarec, 358 U.S. at 631, and Reliable 
Transfer, 421 U.S. at 405, n. 11: (1) common-law tort doc- 
trines are not imported when they are not simple and 
practical in the marine context; and (2) the legal princi- 
ples that are adopted in admiralty, whether in negligence, 
strict product liability in tort, or breach of admiralty 
warranties, must be fair and have the effect of imposing 
liability on the parties best able to protect persons and 
property from failures of hazardous equipment and to 
deter wrongful behavior that is most likely to harm 
others. Accord: East River Steamship Corp. v. Transamerica 
Delaval, Inc., 476 U.S. 858, 865-866, 106 S. Ct. 2295, 2299, 


90 L.Ed.2d 865, 873-74 (1986); Italia Societa per Azioni di 
Navigazione, 376 U.S. at 323-324 (1964).° 

Respondents are simply mistaken when they argue 
that “[njeither this Court nor any other sits to enforce 
illusory standards like ‘deterrent effect’ or best situated. 
(HRB at p. 30.) They confuse public policy doctrines with 
the law that emerges to enforce them. Respondents pro- 
pose that the common-law doctrines of legal cause, includ- 
ing superseding cause, should be imported wholesale into 
admiralty because those doctrines (as respondents have 
chosen to interpret them) would reduce admiralty defen- 
dants’ liability, shorten discovery, pre-trial and trial time, 
and harmonize American general admiralty law with the 
Brussels Convention® and British law. Respondents’ pro- 
posal cannot be reconciled with existing admiralty policy; 
since Reliable Transfer, general admiralty law pronounced 
by this Court is in harmony with the Brussels Convention 


5 Referring to strict liability for unseaworthiness and strict 
liability for breach of implied warranty of workmanlike service, 
the Court explained in East River Steamship Corp.: “The Court's 
rationale in those cases - that strict liability should be imposed 
on the party best able to protect persons from hazardous 
equipment - is equally applicable when the claims are based on 
products liability. [Citations omitted.] And to the extent that 
products actions are based on negligence, they are grounded in 
principles already incorporated into the general maritime law. 
[Citing Kermarec].” 476 U.S. 858, 866. 

The Court held that strict product liability in tort would not 
lie in admiralty when a defective product manufactured by the 
defendant malfunctioned and injured only the product itself. 
Thus, the holding of the case is not relevant here, but the 
admiralty policies expressed are applicable in our case. 


The International Convention for the Unification of 
Certain Rules of Law with Respect to Collisions between 
Vessels, signed at Brussels on September 23, 1910. The 
Convention was reprinted in 8 N. Singh International 
Conventions of Merchant Shipping 1337 (2d ed. 1973). 


9 


and with British admiralty law, except that, in Article 6, 
the Brussels Convention abolished all legal presumptions 
of fault in regard to liability for collision. 

The objectives of general admiralty law are not to 
relieve wrongdoers from their aliquot shares of the losses 
from marine casualties caused in fact by their miscon- 
duct, nor to discourage meritorious litigation, nor to 
avoid the necessity of proving elements of liability or 
damages that may be time consuming. Rather, admiralty 
policies are intended to reach results that are equitable 
and, at the same time, that will deter wrongful conduct 
and will increase the safety of persons and property in 
the maritime industry. See, e.g., Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. 
at 407; East River Steamship Corp., 476 U.S. at 866. 

Wholesale adoption of common-law proximate cause 
legal principles into the law of admiralty has nothing to 
recommend it as the Court explained in Kermarec. Proxi- 
mate cause concepts developed by common law are any- 
thing but simple and uniform. As Prosser & Keeton aptly 
observe: 

This connection [between a defendant's act and 

plaintiff's injury] usually is dealt with by the 

courts in terms of what is called “proximate 
cause,” or “legal cause.” There is perhaps noth- 

ing in the entire field of law which has called 

forth more disagreement, or upon which the 

opinions are in such a welter of confusion. Id. 

§ 41 at p. 263. 

Actual causation is always a question of fact. Legal cause, 
however, is an expression of social policy whereby defen- 
dants’ liability is sometimes limited because the circum- 
stances that combine to produce plaintiffs’ injury are 
remote from the risks entailed by defendants’ miscon- 
duct. 


Since the adoption of the British Maritime Conven- 
tions Act of 1911 (1 & 2 Geo. V, C. 57), British admiralty 
law substantially adopted the Brussels Convention. 


10 


Under British law, as here, comparative fault is not 
applied when only one of the actors in a marine casualty 
committed a wrong that was causally related to the loss; 
but when more than one actor’s misconduct contributes 
to the loss, the parties must bear the loss in proportion to 
the degree of the fault of each. Under British law, as here, 
both the culpability of the misconduct of each of the 
actors and the extent to which the fault of each contrib- 
uted to the loss (irrespective of its blameworthiness) must 
be taken into account. The Statue of Liberty, 2 Lloyd's List 
L.R. 277, 282 (1971); The Miraflores & The Abadesa, 1 A.C. 
826, 845 (1967) (in determining the degrees of fault to be 
compared, “(t]he investigation is concerned with ‘fault’ 
which includes blameworthiness as well as causation. 
And no true apportionment can be reached unless both 
factors are borne in mind”). 

Respondents misunderstand the role of this Court 
when they argue that “[nJeither this Court nor any other 
sits to enforce illusory standards like ‘deterrent effect’ or 
‘best situated’ ” (HRB at p. 30). The Court does establish 
admiralty policy, and it formulates general admiralty law 
to achieve the public policy goals that it has identified. 
Respondents have simply chosen to disregard the admi- 
ralty policies that the Court has adopted and have urged 
the Court to adopt different policies more to their liking 
in this case. 

Contrary to respondents’ arguments, this case cannot 
be effectively distinguished from Reliable Transfer and 
City of Milwaukee, even assuming that Captain Coyne was 
grossly negligent. The captains of the plaintiffs’ vessels in 
both of those cases were grossly negligent. 

In Reliable Transfer, the shipowner sought damages 
from the government for the stranding of its tanker 
because the Coast Guard had negligently maintained a 
breakwater light. The tanker captain knew that the light 
was not working on the night that the tanker grounded 
on a sand bar outside New York harbor. Although the 


11 


tanker was equipped with radar, navigation charts and 
other instruments, the captain used none of them in 
navigating the tanker. Mistakenly believing that he was 
heading out to sea, the captain ordered the tanker to 
make a 180-degree turn when the tide was at flood and a 
severe storm was causing rough seas. The district court 
concluded that the tanker would not have stranded but 
for the non-functioning of the breakwater light, and it 
found that the tanker captain was 75 percent at fault for 
the stranding and the Coast Guard’s negligence was 25 
percent of the fault. 


On appeal, the government argued that the Coast 
Guard's negligence was not a cause of the stranding. The 
Second Circuit disagreed because surely it was a but- 
for cause.” Reliable Transfer Co., Inc. v. United States, 497 
F.2d 1036, 1038 (2d Cir. 1974). The Second Circuit 
described the government's causation argument as 
“essentially a variation of the last clear chance doctrine” 
and rejected it. Ibid. The court recognized that it was 
manifestly unfair to have to divide damages fifty-fifty 
when the tanker owner was seventy-five percent at fault 
for the stranding, but until this Court overturned the 
divided damages rule, the Second Circuit was bound by 
it. 

This Court accepted the Second Circuit’s implied 
invitation to correct the unfairness of the divided dam- 
ages rule in Reliable Transfer. The case was an appropriate 
vehicle for adopting comparative fault because more than 
one actor’s wrongdoing contributed to the casualty (as is 
true in our case).” 


Respondents’ reliance on Union Oil Co. of Cal. v. The 
San Jacinto, 409 U.S. 140, 93 S. Ct. 368, 34 L.Ed.2d 365 


City of Milwaukee, 515 U.S. ___, 132 L.Ed.2d 148, followed 
Reliable Transfer in apportioning fault between the less negligent 
City and a grossly negligent shipowner. 


12 


(1972) is seriously misplaced. (TPB at pp. 23-24.) 
Although more than one party was involved in that colli- 
sion between a barge and a tanker on the Columbia River, 
only one of the parties was at fault, and, therefore, The 
San Jacinto could not be a vehicle for replacing divided 
damages with comparative fault. The barge was being 
hauled by a tug down the Columbia River when the 
tanker was proceeding upstream. After the tug entered 
fog on its side of the river, the tug captain mistakenly 
thought he saw range lights indicating an imminent colli- 
sion. He caused the tug to make a U-turn putting the 
vessels on a collision course. Although the tanker captain 
ordered her full astern when the tug was sighted at a 
distance of 900 feet, the tanker could not move backward 
fast enough to escape the towed barge which thereupon 
crashed into the port bow of the tanker driving her 
aground. The district court held that the tug was solely at 
fault. The Ninth Circuit reversed, in part, holding that the 
tanker captain was also negligent because he had violated 
a regulatory maritime duty and was therefore presump- 
tively negligent under The Pennsylvania, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 
125, 22 L.Ed. 148 (1874). This Court reversed because the 
regulatory rule upon which the Ninth Circuit relied was 
not applicable under the circumstances of the case. 
Because only one party was negligent, all the loss had to 
be borne by the tug. The Court explained: 


“The District Court’s finding that any negli- 
gence on the part of the Santa Maria [the tanker] 
did not “proximately [contribute] to the colli- 
sion” was but another way of saying that fault 
based on the half-distance rule must have some 
relationship to the dangers against which that 
rule was designed to protect. Here it did not.” 
[First bracketed language added; second brack- 
eted word in original.] 


409 U.S. at 146. 


13 


In our case, the district court foreclosed Exxon from 
offering its evidence which would have proved that Cap- 
tain Coyne’s negligence under the circumstances was 
slight as compared with the egregious breaches of duty 
that the respondents voluntarily assumed or were 
required to assume as a matter of law.“ 


II. IF THE COURT HAD INCORPORATED COM- 
MON-LAW SUPERSEDING CAUSE INTO GEN- 
ERAL ADMIRALTY LAW, RESPONDENTS 
WOULD NOT THEREBY ESCAPE LIABILITY 


The district court recognized that one of the hazards 
created by the breakout was grounding (Conclusions 45a, 
JA 175) and that “the breakout was a cause-in-fact of the 
stranding.” (Conclusions 7, JA 162.) The court went 
legally astray because it decided that respondents’ torts, 
no matter how culpable, could not be a legal cause of the 
stranding unless “ ‘the forces set in motion by the break- 
out of the EXXON HOUSTON continued until the 
moment of grounding. Hahn v. United States, 535 F. Supp. 
132 (D.S.D. 1982) (Conclusion 8, JA 162.)“ The court 
misconceived and misapplied common-law legal cause. 
Section 442B of the Restatement states the applicable prin- 
ciples: 

Where the negligent conduct of the actor creates 

or increases the risk of a particular harm and is 

a substantial factor in causing that harm, the 


The Court's foreclosure of Exxon’s evidence is the basis of 
the due process issue discussed infra at pp. 15-16. 


Hahn is not in point. It was a wrongful death action 
brought by a private aircraft pilot under the Federal Tort Claims 
Act on the theory that the government's failure to install 
warning lights on its power line caused the aircraft to strike the 
line. The district court held that the government had no liability 
because the absence of warning lights was not a cause-in-fact of 
the casualty. 


14 


fact that the harm is brought about through the 
intervention of another force does not relieve 
the actor of liability, except where the harm is 
intentionally caused by a third person and is not 
within the scope of the risk created by the 
actor’s conduct. 


Because misconduct of the respondents did create the 
risk of stranding and was a substantial factor in causing 
that harm, Captain Coyne’s gross negligence did not 
become a superseding cause of the stranding. 

The district court's holding that Captain Coyne was 
solely at fault for the stranding because the danger of 
stranding created by respondents’ torts had ended at 
1830 (Conclusion 46, JA 175-75) is in conflict with its 
findings that the cargo hose caused the crane to collapse 
injuring the crane operator at 1944 just 12 minutes 
before the tanker commenced the final turn. (Findings 64, 
74, JA 156-57.) Respondents created the legal cause chain 
before the HOUSTON left the mainland because the berth 
was not safe, the SPM and its equipment and the cargo 
hoses were dangerously defective, and respondents had 
taken none of the safety measures that were required to 
make the berth and the equipment safe. The cargo hoses 
would not have broken if the chafe chain had not parted. 
The cargo hose would not have trailed and imperiled the 
tanker if the safety devices on the hoses had not been 
removed. The parting of the chafe chain and the cargo 
hoses would not have seriously endangered the tanker 
and her crew if respondents had taken any of the safety 
measures that had earlier been recommended or that the 
Coast Guard required the HIRI respondents to undertake 


% The Second Circuit correctly stated the common-law 
principles in Judge Friendly’s lucid opinion in Petition of 
Kinsman Transit Co., 338 F.2d 708 (2d Cir. 1964), cert. denied sub 
nom., Continental Grain Co. v. City of Buffalo, 380 U.S. 944, 85 S. 
Ct. 1026, 13 L.Ed.2d 963 (1965). 


15 


after the HOUSTON 's stranding. HIRI’s mooring master 
and the tanker’s crew would not have had to take over an 
hour to remove the bolts affixing the trailing cargo hose 
to the tanker’s manifold if the prior misconduct had not 
happened. The hose would not have caused the crane to 
collapse injuring one of the crewmen and threatening the 
lives of the deck crew and the tanker itseif if the chafe 
chain had not parted. To relieve respondents of all lia- 
bility for the casualty under these circumstances does not 
make common sense, let alone admiralty sense. 


III. THE DUE PROCESS ISSUE IS FAIRLY ENCOM- 
PASSED BY THE QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


Contrary to respondents’ arguments (HRB at pp. 
43-45), Exxon’s constitutional attack is not founded solely 
on the bifurcation order. Constitutional deprivation was 
begun by that order, but it was completed by the district 
court’s subsequent exclusionary orders and ultimate 
judgment that foreclosed Exxon from ever proving its 
liability case-in-chief. 

The respondents persuaded the district court that it 
could properly split the issue of legal cause by first trying 
the Captain for everything that happened after the break- 
out in Phase I. Only after Phase I was tried and decided 
would Exxon be permitted (if ever) to introduce any of its 
abundant evidence about the events and conduct of the 
respondents that occurred before the breakou Over 
Exxon’s vehement objection, the court granted respon- 
dents’ bifurcation motion, and, pursuant thereto, it fore- 
closed Exxon from introducing any of its evidence to 
prove the scope of the duties that each of the respondents 
owed Exxon in their various roles as warrantors of safe 
berth (the HIRI respondents), as wharfingers (the HIRI 
respondents), as designers, vendors, or furnishers of 
extra-hazardous marine equipment and as implied war- 
rantors of the quality of marine services supplied to 


16 


Exxon (all respondents). The court also foreciosed all of 
Exxon’s evidence about the breaches of those duties and 
the culpability of the respective respondents’ conduct. 
Legal cause could not be correctly decided without the 
evidence that the district court foreclosed. Phase II was 
never tried because the court entered judgment against 
Exxon at the conclusion of Phase I. 


The question whether a defendant should be relieved 
of liability, in whole or in part, for a casualty to which his 
own conduct contributed cannot be decided by permit- 
ting only one piece of the legal cause puzzle to be tried. 
To do so violates the due process principles stated in 
Gasoline Products Co., Inc. v. Champlin Refining Co., 283 
U.S. 494, 51 S. Ct. 513, 75 L.Ed. 1188 (1931). Those princi- 
ples are not confined to jury trials. (HRB at p. 48.) The 
same fair trial principles apply in non-jury cases. See, e. g. 
6A J. W. Moore et al., Moore’s Federal Practice 1 59.06 (2d 
ed. 1995) (applying the same concepts to determine 
whether a new trial may be ordered in jury and non-jury 
cases with respect to less than all of the issues in a case). 


Respondents argue that cutting legal cause in two 
and foreclosing all evidence on the severed part did not 
deny Exxon a fair trial because an “extraordinary lapse of 
time” distanced respondents’ wrongdoings from the 
stranding. (HRB at p. 49.) As the district court’s own 
findings established, however, the time that elapsed from 
the moment the crane collapsed to the tanker’s commenc- 
ing its final turn was twelve minutes. In the meantime 
HIRI’s mooring master and crewmen of the tanker were 
trying to unbolt the cargo hose; Captain Coyne and his 
deck crew, together with the crew of the NENE, were 
constantly struggling with the dangers to both vessels 
posed by the trailing cargo hose, the storm and the dark- 
ness. To argue that all of those difficulties were severable 
from respondents’ serious breaches of duty to Exxon is to 
ignore reality as well as basic principles of legal cause. 


17 


IV. RESPONDENTS CANNOT ESCAPE LIABILITY 
FOR BREACHES OF WARRANTY BECAUSE THE 
CAPTAIN WAS GROSSLY NEGLIGENT 


Respondents’ arguments on Exxon's claims for 
breach of express and implied admiralty warranties thor- 
oughly confuse issues relating to liability with those 
relating to damages, and they misread the authorities 
upon which they rely. (HRB at pp. 32-38; TPB at pp. 
40-45). To establish liability for breach of contract, it is, of 
course, necessary that the plaintiff prove that there is a 
causal connection between the breach and an injury from 
the breach. Both the fact of injury and the fact that the 
injury would not have happened but for respondents’ 
wrongdoing was established here, as the district court 
found. No more is required to prove liability for respon- 
dents’ breaches of warranty. Respondents’ arguments are 
relevant only with respect to damages for breach of con- 
tract, as the very authorities cited by respondents make 
clear. 


Unless changed by statute, the rule of Hadley v. Bax- 
endale, 9 Ex. 341, 156 Eng. Rep. 45 (1854) is still the 
accepted doctrine for limiting damages recoverable for 
breach of contract: General damages are usually confined 
to those which would naturally arise from the breach or 
which might have reasonably been contemplated or fore- 
seen as the probable result of the breach by both parties 
at the time they made their contract. If special circum- 
stances caused some unusual injury, damages for that 
injury are not recoverable unless the circumstances were 
known or should have been known to the guilty party at 
the time he entered the contract. E.g., 5 A. Corbin, Corbin 
on Contracts, §§ 1006 et seq. (1964). 


The doctrine of avoidable consequences is applied 
only to ascertain the amount of recoverable damages; it is 
irrelevant to the issue of liability. That is the very point 
made by authority respondents have cited. (HRB at p. 34.) 


18 


E.g., Pennzoil Producing Co. v. Off-Shore Express, Inc., 943 
F.2d 1465, 1474 (Sth Cir. 1991) (the doctrine of avoidable 
consequences is a rule of damages; “as such it stands 
wholly apart from the rules that determine who is at fault 
for the initial injury”); Delta Transload, Inc. v. M/V Navios 
Commander, 818 F.2d 445, 452 (5th Cir. 1987) (defendant 
could not argue the doctrine of avoidable consequences 
in the liability phase of the action to recover for loss of a 
marine buoy damaged by defendant's vessel because the 
doctrine “ ‘is not considered a defense at all, but merely a 
rule of damages by which certain particular items of loss 
may be excluded from consideration’. [Citation omit- 
ted.]”); Federal Ins. Co. v. Sabine Towing & Transp. Co., 783 
F.2d 347, 350 (2d Cir. 1986) (the doctrine of avoidable 
consequences is not a defense; it applies only to a dimi- 
nution of potential damages, not to the existence of a 
cause of action); Tennessee Valley Sand & Gravel Co. v. M/V 
Delta, 598 F.2d 930, 932-33, modified and rehearing denied, 
604 F.2d 13 (Sth Cir. 1979) (the doctrine is merely a 
method of apportioning damages when, after harm has 
been inflicted, the injured party has failed to exercise 
reasonable care in mitigating his loss). 


Respondents cannot successfully argue that the risk 
of stranding was not foreseeable at the time respondents 
gave Exxon their express and implied warranties. (TPB at 
p. 41.) No powers of Cassandra were required for respon- 
dents to foresee that the stranding of tankers was likely 
when the SPM and its allied equipment failed, partic- 
ularly under the severe weather conditions that existed 


'! Pennzoil Producing Co. correctly explains the avoidable 
consequences doctrine: “In order to successfully invoke the 
doctrine of avoidable consequences to limit a piaintiff’s 
recovery, the defendant must show both 1) that the plaintiff has 
acted unreasonably after the injury has occurred, and 2) that the 
plaintiff's unreasonable actions aggravated his damage.” 943 
F.2d at 1475. 


19 


when Exxon’s tanker was moored at the defective SPM. 
The district court acknowledged that reality. 

Contrary to respondents argument (HRB at p. 32), the 
admiralty principles stated in Italia Societa and East River 
Steamship Corp. are equally applicable here. To be sure, 
the defendant in Italia Societa was a stevedore that fur- 
nished dangerous equipment that injured a longshore- 
man, and, in our case, the respondents who furnished the 
dangerous equipment acted in different capacities, but 
those distinctions make no legal difference in this case. 


Exxon is entitled to recover its monetary loss caused- 
in-fact by respondents’ breaches of warranties, just as 
that shipowner in Italia Societa was entitled, by implied 
indemnity, to recover its monetary loss occasioned by its 
having to pay for the longshoreman’s injury that was 
caused by the defendant's breach of warranty. Ours is a 
stronger case than Italia Societa because in that case the 
stevedore was not negligent in supplying the defective 
equipment. Here, as in Italia Societa and Weyerhaeuser S. S. 
Co. v. Nacirema Operating Co., 355 U.S. 563, 78 S. Ct. 438, 2 
L.Ed.2d 491 (1958), the negligence of a shipowner or the 
unseaworthiness of its vessel is not fatal to its recovering 
damages from the furnisher of unsafe equipment for 
breach of contract. The admiralty policies that underlie 
the court’s imposition of liability in Italia Societa are also 
applicable here: 

[Liability should fall upon the party best situ- 

ated to adopt preventive measures and thereby 

to reduce the likelihood of injury. Where, as 

here, injury-producing and defective equipment 

is under the supervision and control of the ste- 

vedore, the shipowner is powerless to minimize 

the risk; the stevedore is not. 

376 U.S. at 324. Respondents, not Exxon, had the power 
to control the equipment that failed, and HIRI, not Exxon, 
had the power to make the berth safe, as HIRI had 
expressly warranted. 


20 


CONCLUSION 


Exxon respectfully requests that the judgment be 
reversed with directions to the Ninth Circuit to remand 
the case to the district court for a new trial. 


Dated: February 27, 1996. 
Respectfully submitted, 


Suirtey M. Hupstepver 

Counsel of Record 

Morrison & Foerster LLP 

555 West Fifth Street 

Suite 3500 

Los Angeles, California 90013-1024 
Telephone: (213) 892-5200 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


