Supreme Court, U.S. 


FILED 


95 129 wi24 1% 


No. 95-___ 


— 
_— 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 


EXXON COMPANY, U.S.A.; 
EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY, 


Petitioners, 


SOFEC, INC.; PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC.; 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT REFINERY, INC.; 
PRI MARINE, INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC., 


Respondents, 


GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, INC., 
BRIDON FIBRES AND PLASTICS, LTD., 


Third-Party Respondents. 
o 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
« 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
SJ 


SHirtey M. Hurstepier 

Counsel of Record 

Morrison & Foerster 

555 West Fifth Street 

Suite 3500 

Los Angeles, California 90013-1024 
(213) 892-5200 


Attorneys for Petitioners 


—- 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO, (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. After this Court decided United States v. Reliable 
Transfer Co., Inc. may an admiralty court exonerate defen- 
dants from all liability to a shipowner for the loss of its 
tanker when defendants conceded that their breaches of 
maritime duties imposing strict liability in tort and negli- 
gence were causes-in-fact of the vessel’s standing because 
the court found that the tanker’s captain was grossly 
negligent in navigating the imperiled vessel? , 


2. After this Court decided Italia Societa per Azioni di 
Navigazione v. Oregon Stevedoring Co., may an admiralty 
court exonerate defendants from all liability to a ship- 
owner for the loss of its tanker after defendants conceded 
that their breaches of express and implied warranties 
were causes-in-fact of the vessels’ stranding because the 
tanker captain was grossly negligent in navigating the 
imperiled vessel? 


ii 
PARTIES 


The parties are Petitioners/Plaintiffs Exxon Shipping 
Company and Exxon Company, U.S.A., Respondents / 
Defendants Pacific Resources, Inc., Hawaiian Indepen- 
dent Refinery, Inc., PRI Marine, Inc., PRI International, 
Inc. and Sofec, Inc., and Respondents / Third-Party 
Respondents Bridon Fibres & Plastics, Ltd. and Griffin 
Woodhouse, Ltd. Werth Engineering & Marine, Inc., ini- 
tially a third-party respondent, was dismissed before trial 
by stipulation of the parties.! 


' Pursuant to Rule 29.1, Petitioners state that the non- 
wholly owned subsidiaries and affiliates that have issued pub- 
lic shares in Petitioners are as follows: Sea River Maritime, Inc., 
successor in interest to Exxon Shipping Company, Compania 
Minera Disputada de las Condes S.A.; Esso Malaysia Berhad; 
Esso Societe Anonyme Francaise; General Sekiyu, K.K.; Impe- 
rial Oil Limited; Les Docks des Petroles d’Ambes; Societe 
Francaise Exxon Chemical; Tonen Kabushiki Kaisha. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED ............0cccscceeeees i 
PT £'h adeeb eth edbEdeeseKeeovesscocecverecesese ii 
ED Scnseeveccoesss béaseabecduccscccovapeedes 1 
ts PIT TTT TT TTTTTTTTTT TTT Tree 1 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVI- 
EE Ké.ng ChSERS USS Cencdeebodeecnctdeesccceccees 1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE............ 50660 ccuues 2 
IMPORTANCE OF THE ISSUES PRESENTED....... 16 
|. THE NINTH CIRCUIT'S DECISION THWARTS 
THIS COURT'S ADMIRALTY POLICIES....... 18 


Il. CONFLICTS AMONG THE CIRCUITS AFTER 
RELIABLE TRANSFER AND ITALIA SOCIETA 
ARE NOW RIPE FOR RESOLUTION BY THIS 
ES Oe Cdn ccereseedesesccccdacecsecesceces 23 


A. Circuits are Sharply Divided on Appiyins 
Intervening Cause Concepts after Reliable 
WE cocdccecc dice ccccececcccceccccsece 23 


B. The Circuits are in Conflict on the Impact of 
Intervening Negligence on Liability for 
Breach of Admiralty Warranties ........... 28 


Ill. EXXON WAS DENIED DUE PROCESS BY DIS- 
TRICT COURT'S ORDERS PREVENTING IT 


FROM PROVING LIABILITY.................. 28 
GP IOS co ceccccveccccccccccccscccsccesceces 30 
APPENDIX A - Opinion...............c0e00s App. 6 


APPENDIX B - Order Denying Petition for 
PROBATE occ cccccccccccccces App. 26 


iv 


fABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 


APPENDIX C - Judgment ................... App. 28 


APPENDIX D - 


APPENDIX E 


Findings of Fact and Conclu- 


sions of Law ..............5. App. 30 


Order Denying Motion to 
Bifurcate, Derying Cross- 
Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment, Denying Motion to 
Strike Third-Party Griffin 
Woodhouse, Ltd.'s Reply 
Memorandum and Granting 
Motion, in the Alternative, 
Leave to File Responsive Mem- 


GOURD « os ccccccccccevsccns App. 67 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
City of Milwaukee v. Cement Division, National Gyp- 
sum Co., _ US. __, 115 S. Ct. 2091, 132 
ED. OU SE A eddaccudesbdvecdésudedevceesddcs 19 
Donaghey v. Ocean Drilling & Exploration Co., 974 
Pes ED COU Ge Mn ec kcicsccccocecescvesces 15, 23 
East River S.S. v. Transamerica Delaval, 476 U.S. 858, 
106 S. Ct. 2295, 90 L.Ed.2d 858 (1986).......... 16, 18 
Employers Ins. of Wausau v. Suwanne River & Spa 
Lines, Inc., 866 F.2d 752 (Sth Cir. 1989)............ 27 
Exxon Shipping Co. v. Sofec, Inc., 54 F.3d 570 (9th 
Me MOU Re cnccncnesecesctsncdecdvesdsenecéiccecees 1 
Foremost Ins. Co. v. Richardson, 457 U.S. 668, 102 
S. Ct. 2654, 73 L.Ed.2d 300 (1982)................. 17 


Gasoline Products Co., Inc. v. Champlin Refining Co., 283 
U.S. 494, 51 S. Ct. 513, 75 L.Ed. 1188 (1931)...... 15, 29 


Hercules, Inc. v. Stevens Shipping Co., 765 F.2d 1069 


GROEN o Wncccnccctesccceseseccesscsecteceess 13, 15, 23 
Hunley v. ACE Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493 (9th 
Ge GOOG ccccncvecscccasccctncesccecenccacecesace 15 


International Ore & Fertilizer Corp. v. S.G.S. Con- 
trolled Services, Inc., 38 F.3d 1279 (2d Cir. 1994) .... 28 


Italia Societa per Azioni di Navigazion ov. n 
Stevedoring Company, 376 U.S. 315, 84S. Ct. 748, 
11 L.Ed.2d 732 (1964)............... 13, 16, 18, 21, 22 


Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, 358 
U.S. 625, 79 S. Ct. 406, 3 L.Ed.2d 550 (1959) ...16, 17 


Lone Star Indus. Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., Inc., 927 
F.2d 1453 (8th Cir. 1991)... 06666 15, 23 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES — Continued 


McDermott, Inc. v. AmClyde, 511 U.S. __ (1994) ..... 19 


Nunley v. M/V Dauntless Colocotronis, 727 F.2d 455 
(Sth Cir. en banc), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 832, 105 
S. Ct. 120, 83 L.Ed.2d 63 (1984). .............0055. 23 


Paragon Oil Co. v. Republic Tankers, S.A., 310 
F.2d 169 (2d Cir. 1962), cert. denied, 372 US. 
967, 83 S. Ct. 1092, 10 L.Ed.2d 130 (1963)...... 22, 28 


Petition of Kinsman Transit Co., 338 F.2d 708 (2d Cir. 
1964), cert. denied sub nom. Continental Grain Co. 
v. City of Buffalo, 380 U.S. 944, 85 S. Ct. 1026, 13 


5 ee Gee CL das nic cdtnecadodnseuseoueseeres 24 
Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Hawn, 346 U.S. 406, 74S. Ct. 
i, ae ee We Ons cok devedaeduectest 60060 17 
Smith v. Sperling, 354 U.S. 91, 77 S. Ct. 1112, 1 
Si Ce Cs cd oscaseanebueluesuadvctaders 29 
The Gulfstar, 136 F.2d 461 (3d Cir. 1943)............. 27 
The Imoan, 67 F.2d 603 (2d Cir. 1933)................ 27 
The Louisiana, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 164, 18 L.Ed. 85 
Pinas éoatatenedssesd eesaes dhuliawedueesest 11 
The Ly. Morris, 137 U.S. 1, 11 S. Ct. 29, 34 L.Ed. 
DV covindecnceedbanuesiian o etnadndandeuans 17 
The Pennsylvania, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125, 22 L.Ed. 
Sp ne adgiéccendensdccentddbitdcsabacesdostbhuss 11 
United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., Inc., 421 U.S. 


397, 95 S. Ct. 1708, 44 L.Ed.2d 251 (1975)..... passim 


Watz v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 431 F.2d 100 (5th Cir. 
GOES co ecccvccscdsuvanduneeedséntees dseeosécnceees 25 


ae 


vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ~— Continued 


Page 
Feperat STATUTES 
TD UGE. 6 BEBGIED 2 vcccccccccccccccecvccsecesecvecs 1 
et ie eeuccenhens 1 
BD CHR. B BGRGTD cc cccvcccccscessccccecccnceseves 11 
Orner AUTHORITIES 
Prosser & Keeton on Torts (5th ed. 1984) 
Uh ncdederdbbddsddnascsdsendceccecdccceesssesepess 27 
DGS ccccvcdnsvecteavescascevaseséeccccscoccoccesnes 27 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts (1981) 
| lapaelendsdskssnbebbabe tds 640 etesveccceess 28 
Restatement (Second) of Torts (1965) 
DUES 6GUUSebpseenhSsledbedeeecucsecvesccecesnesces 26 
DP ivécdesdpiddadaedeehsadensaesenssceesedeuss 14, 27 


i 


OPINION 


The opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit is reported in Exxon Shipping Co. v. 
Sofec, Inc., 54 F.3d 570 (9th Cir. 1995). A copy of the Slip 
Opinion is annexed hereto as Appendix A (“App. A”). 


S 


JURISDICTION 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals was filed on 
April 26, 1995. A timely petition for rehearing was denied 
by order filed May 24, 1995; a copy of the Order is 
annexed hereto as Appendix B (“App. B”). The district 
court’s jurisdiction was in admiralty, pursuant to 28 
U.S.C. § 1333. Jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 
28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


S 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitu- 
tion provides, in pertinent part: “No person shall . . . be 
deprived of . . . property, without due process of law. ... ” 


Section 1333 of 28 U.S.C. provides, in pertinent part: 
“The district courts shall have original jurisdiction, exclu- 
sive of the courts of the States, of: (1) Any civil case of 
admiralty or maritime jurisdiction, saving to suitors in all 
cases ali other remedies to which they are otherwise 
entitled.” 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Petitioners Exxon Shipping Company and Exxon 
Company, U.S.A. (“Exxon”) brought this admiralty action 
against the owners and operators of an oil refinery and a 
mooring facility in Oahu, Hawaii (collectively “HIRI” or 
“HIRI respondents”)? and against Sofec, Inc. (“Sofec,” 
manufacturer of the defective mooring system that failed) 
seeking damages for stranding and total constructive loss 
of Exxon’s tanker, the HOUSTON, caused by breach of an 
express warranty of safe berth, breaches of implied mar- 
itime warranties, strict products liability, and negligence. 
HIRI filed a third party complaint against Bridon Fibre & 
Plastics, Ltd., Griffin Woodhouse, Ltd., and Werth Engi- 
neering & Marine, Inc., manufacturers and suppliers of 
the “chafe chain” that broke, setting the tanker adrift 
from HIRI’s Single Point Mooring System (“S?M”). 


The HOUSTON was a 766-foot long tanker, weighing 
over 72,000 dead weight tons.* The tanker’s Master was 
Captain Kevin Coyne.* His deck assistants were his chief 


* The related corporations are Pacific Resources, Inc., 
Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Inc., PRI Marine, Inc., PRI 
International, Inc. CR 1. 


* Unless otherwise indicated by record citations, the recited 
facts are contained in the district court’s Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law, filed May 20, 1993. A copy of the Findings 
of Fact and Conclusions of Law is annexed hereto as Appendix 
D (App. D). 

The abbreviations used herein are “ER,” Excerpts of Record 
filed in the Ninth Circuit; “RT,” Reporter's Transcript and “CR,” 
Clerk’s Record. 


* After the stranding but before trial, the Captain changed 
his name from “Dick” to “Coyne.” 


ee 


mate, second mate, and two third mates. Six able-bodied 
seamen formed the remaining deck complement. 


This maritime drama ending with the loss of the 
tanker, loss of cargo, and injury to a seaman began with a 
written contract by which Exxon agreed to sell a tanker 
load of crude oil to the HIRI respondents delivered to 
HIRI’s SPM, located one and a half miles off the Oahu 
coastline. Title to the crude oil was to pass to HIRI when 
it entered HIRI’s cargo hoses. The contract contained an 
express warranty of safe berth in Exxon’s favor.® 


The Defective SPM. The SPM consisted of a buoy 
anchored to the seabed, pipelines running from the buoy 
to shore, a mooring assembly comprised of a bridle 
attached to the buoy and a mooring hawser and a chafe 
chain that tethered the tankers to the mooring assembly 
while cargo was being discharged to HIRI’s two 840-foot 
cargo hoses. The cargo hoses were attached to the buoy 
by heavy metal spool pieces. When cargo was being 
discharged, the cargo hoses were affixed to the manifolds 
of tankers. The cargo hoses discharged the crude oil into 
chambers in the SPM; the oil was thereafter conveyed to 
undersea pipelines connected with HIRI's refinery. The 


5 Exxon’s contract with the HIRI respondents contained the 
following covenant of safe berth: “The terminal shall provide a 
safe berth to which vessels may proceed to or depart from, and 
where the vessel can always lie safely afloat. However, notwith- 
standing anything contained in this clause, the terminal shall 
not be deemed to warrant the safety of public channels, fair- 
ways, approaches thereto, anchorages, or other publicly-main- 
tained areas either inside or outside the port area where the 
vessel may be directed.” 

Warranties of safe berth are frequently found in marine 
charters; the HOUSTON was not chartered. 


cargo hoses had originally been equipped with safety 
devices to permit quick release of the hoses in emergency 
situations, including mooring failures, but the HIRI 
respondents had removed the safety devices from the 
cargo hoses and replaced them with twelve heavy bolts to 
secure the hoses to tankers. (12/9/93 RT 61-64. CR 555; 
ER 143, 744; 12/8/92 RT 8, 22-23, 34-35, ER 157-58.) 


Before giving Exxon their express warranty of safe 
berth, the HIRI respondents had been warned by their 
own experts that SPM failures were inevitable and that 
their cargo hoses (sans safety devices) were dangerous, 
creating the hazards of grounding and oil spills to every 
tanker that moored there unless the safety devices on the 
hoses were replaced and additional adequate safety mea- 
sures were undertaken. (/bid.) 


The SPM had failed twice before the HIRI respon- 
dents gave Exxon their warranty of safe berth, and they 
therefore knew that the berth was dangerous when they 
warranted its safety. They disregarded their experts’ 
advice and undertook none of the recommended safety 
measures. (Ibid.) All of the perils against which they had 
been warned were visited upon the HOUSTON, her hap- 
less captain and her crew when the SPM failed: The chain 
tethering the tanker to the SPM broke, both cargo hoses 
broke, and the tanker was set adrift burdened by the full 
840-foot length of one of the cargo hoses bolted to the 
manifold and the second hose which broke near the water 
line. HIRI had no tugs with sufficient power to help the 


Ne et ae Alte OY ole Matte 8 oP oe me 


ee er as 


ee ee ee ee 


stricken tanker. Moreover, HIRI’s mooring masters had 
not been trained to manage tankers in such emergencies.® 


The Pretrial Order Bifurcating Liability. The respon- 
dents moved the district court to bifurcate liability by 
first trying only the conduct of the HOUSTON’s captain 
after the SPM, its equipment and the cargo hoses had all 
failed. They argued that if the court found that the Cap- 
tain’s navigation of the crippled tanker was negligent, the 
case could probably be settled and further discovery 
avoided. (CR 427, 7/27/92 RT 6.) To persuade the court to 
grant their motion, respondents conceded that their 
breaches of admiralty duties were causes-in-fact of the 
tanker’s grounding. They argued that by trying only Cap- 
tain Coyne’s conduct, the whole case could go away 
because the court could find that Captain Coyne was 
negligent and that his negligence was a superseding 
cause of the stranding. (Ibid.) Exxon vigorously opposed 
the motion. It explained that the liability issues were not 
severable, that trying the Captain’s conduct before Exxon 
was permitted to put on its liability case-in-chief would 
hopelessly distort causation and all other aspects of legal 
liability and that bifurcation would prevent the court 
from determining comparative fault as required by United 
States v. Reliable Transfer Co., Inc., 421 U.S. 397, 95 S. Ct. 
1708, 44 L.Ed.2d 251 (1975) (hereafter “ Reliable Transfer”). 
(CT 427, 7/27/92; RT 24; CR 369.) The court granted 
respondents’ bifurcation motion by order filed July 31, 
1992. A copy of the order is annexed hereto as Appendix 
E (“App. E”). 


© After the loss of the HOUSTON, the Coast Guard required 
the HIRI respondents to undertake the safety measures they had 
earlier ignored. 2/25/93 RT 170-73; Exs. 322, 331, 332. 


Exxon moved for partial summary judgment on the 
ground that the dangerous condition of the SPM, the 
chafe chain and the cargo hoses violated the HIRI respon- 
dents’ express warranty of safe berth and breached all of 
the respondents’ implied admiralty warranties. (CR 433, 
ER 49-50.) The court denied the motion on the ground 
that its bifurcation order prevented its considering any- 
thing in Phase I of the trial that occurred before the 
second cargo hose broke (called “the breakout”), but the 
court said that it would consider additional breaches of 
warranty if any occurred after the tanker was adrift. (CR 
538, ER 132.) The court said that it would decide whether 
the Captain’s negligence was “an overriding” cause of the 
stranding at the end of Phase I and that “[y]ou are really 
going to confine it to those few minutes — as he gets out 
towards the last few minutes before the grounding.” 
(2/9/93 RT 50.) 


Exxon’s Offer of Proof. After Exxon had failed to dis- 
suade the court from bifurcation, it offered to prove that 
the HIRI respondents knew that the berth was unsafe 
before the tanker sailed to Hawaii, that HIRI’s own 
experts had advised them that a breakaway was inevita- 
ble, that removal of and failure to replace the safety 
devices on the cargo hoses made them very hazardous to 
every tanker at the SPM, that powerful tugs were needed 
to prevent groundings when the equipment failed, and 
that respondents ignored all those warnings, installed 
none of the safety devices and took none of the other 
measures that had been recommended to make the berth 
safe. (2/9/93 RT 61-64, CR 544; ER 143, 744; 12/8/92 RT 
8, 22-23, 34-35, ER 157-58.) 


Exxon also offered to prove that Sofec had failed to 
order the proper chafe chain, failed to test it, and failed to 


we me 


provide adequate instructions regarding operating 
parameters. As against Bridon and Griffin, it offered to 
prove that those parties manufactured or supplied the 
defective chafe chain which had been poorly designed 
and inadequately tested. (2/9/93 RT 61-64.) 


Trial. The district court foreclosed Exxon from ever 
offering any evidence on its case-in-chief. It was not 
permitted to prove any breaches of the duties that 
respondents owed to it before the breakout, the risks of 
loss that those duties imposed upon them, or the admi- 
ralty policies laid down by this Court for allocating the 
risks for such breaches of admiralty duties and contracts. 
The court also excluded the judgment of the Administra- 
tive Law Judge of the Department of Transportation that 
had exonerated Captain Coyne from any negligence in 
the stranding. (ER at 293; 2/9/93 RT 40-42.) 


At the end of Phase I of the liability trial, the district 
court entered judgment for respondents holding that 
none of them had any liability for the loss of Exxon’s 
tanker because Captain Coyne’s navigation of the crip- 
pled tanker was the superseding cause of the stranding. 
A copy of the Judgment in a civil case filed April 20, 1994 
is annexed hereto as Appendix C (“App. C”). 


Brief Summary of the Evidence. The HOUSTON moored 
at the SPM on March 1, 1989. On March 2, 1989, while the 
tanker was discharging oil into HIRI’s cargo hoses, a 
heavy storm arrived and with it high waves and severe 
ocean currents moving toward shore. At 1715 (5:15 p.m. 
Honolulu time), the chafe chain broke and set the tanker 
adrift. Captain Coyne was unable to keep the tanker close 
to the SPM, and the rifting tanker put tension on the 
cargo hoses. At 1725, the first cargo hose broke near the 


water line. At 1728, the second huge cargo hose broke 
away from the buoy bringing with it the heavy metal 
spool piece that had secured the hose to the SPM (the 
“breakout”). The HOUSTON’s crew stopped crude oil 
from entering the cargo hoses when the chafe chain 
broke, thereby then limiting the oil spill to the oil in the 
cargo hoses. 


From the time of the breakout until minutes before 
the tanker stranded, the vessel was crippled by 840 feet of 
trailing cargo hose that, together with the spool piece, 
weighed 1700 pounds and severely restricted the tanker's 
navigability. The spool piece caused a portion of the hose 
to sink while the remainder was partially floating and 
partially submerged. The hose repeatedly began moving 
under the tanker threatening to entangle her propeller or 
rudder. That danger would have been significantly 
increased if the tanker had been navigated either forward 
or turned. If the propeller or rudder were fouled, she 
would have been helpless. Captain Coyne ordered the 
tanker to back, although she was not designed to transit 
by backing and backing the tanker was ponderously slow 
and difficult. 


The HIRI respondents had no tugs with enough 
power to assist distressed tankers when their SPM failed, 
and they knew that any help from the Coast Guard was 
hours away. When the second hose broke, HIRI had avail- 
able only one small tug, the NENE, which was directed to 
secure a line to the hose to try to prevent it from fouling 
the rudder or the propeller. 


In the hours after the NENE’s crew succeeded in 
getting a line on the cargo hose, the HOUSTON was in 
constant peril from the cargo hose while the crews of the 


I eg te A ls 


tanker and the NENE were battling the hose, the storm, 
the high seas, the adverse ocean currents, darkness and 
casualties.’ Captain Coyne earlier tried unsuccessfully to 
anchor the HOUSTON near the SPM; by 1830, however, 
he had succeeded in backing the HOUSTON a little more 
than a mile away from the SPM. The HOUSTON there 
made a lee for the NENE to avoid her being swamped by 
the heavy seas and to steady the hose’s movements as the 
NENE’s crew tried to hold the hose away from the tanker 
while the HIRI's mooring master and members of the 
tanker’s crew were removing the bolts from the cargo 
hose before it could be lowered to the sea by the port 
crane and thereafter towed away from the tanker. 


Removal of the bolts consumed more than an hour. 
At 1927, while the cargo hose was suspended from the 
ship's starboard crane and before the crane could lower 
the hose to the sea, efforts to synchronize the movements 
of the NENE with the tanker failed in the storm. The 
NENE began moving away from the HOUSTON. (2/17 
RT 221-22.) The NENE’s movement exerted so much ten- 
sion on the cargo hose that it caused the crane to topple. 
The crane operator was thrown to the cage railing of the 
operator's platform, and the boom of the collapsed crane 
began sweeping the tanker’s deck threatening the lives of 
the deck crew and creating the danger of its striking the 


” The Court of Appeals’ opinion states that “[b]y 1803, the 
small assist vessel Nene was able . . . to get control of the end of 
the second hose so that it was no longer a threat to the larger 
ship.” App. A. The record shows that the hose was a continuing 
threat to the HOUSTON until moments before stranding. The 
opinion later recognizes that the cargo hose caused the port 
crane to collapse at approximately 1947 injuring the crane oper- 
ator. App. A. 


10 


tanker’s manifold which could have caused a disastrous 
explosion. (2/18 RT 25-26.) The deck crew worked 
feverishly to restrain the swinging boom, but before the 
boom could be fully secured, the tanker stranded at 2006. 


When the crane collapsed, Captain Coyne ordered 
his second mate, the first responder for medical casu- 
alties, to leave the bridge to evaluate the crane operator's 
condition. (2/10 RT 113.) The second mate reported that 
the crane operator appeared to be going into shock from 
serious injuries. (2/10 RT 119, 122, 124.) Because the 
Captain had more medical training than his second mate, 
he decided that he should try to navigate the tanker as 
quickly as practicable to the safety of the deep seas where 
he could leave the bridge to examine the crane operator 
himself.* 


At 1956, to avoid the hose being trailed by the NENE 
on the port side, the location of which was not then 
visible, the Captain ordered the HOUSTON to make a 
starboard turn when she was 1.1 miles from the shoreline. 
If he had ordered the tanker again to back, it would have 
taken an hour to move her one mile. (2/10 RT 90; 2/10 RT 
142; Ex. 253.) The location of the tanker at that time had 
been computed by parallel radar indexing, rather than by 
plotting fixes on the very small chart of the area aboard 


* Although the Court of Appeals acknowledged that the 
crane operator was in shock, it later opined that the crane 
operator “was in fact not seriously injured.” App. A. Although 
it later turned out that the crane operator was not as seriously 
injured as he appeared to be when first examined, that fact did 
not change the apparently life-threatening condition of the 
crane operator at the time Captain Coyne had to make his 
navigation choices. 


11 


the HOUSTON. Exxon had no reason to believe that the 
tanker would be anywhere near the stranding area before 
the SPM failed. While she was making her slow turn, the 
HOUSTON struck an undersea coral pinnacle on which 
she stranded, resulting in her total constructive loss.’ 


The District Court's Findings, Conclusions and Judg- 
ment. The district court resolved all the conflicts in the 
evidence in respondents’ favor, including the sharp con- 
flicts in the testimony of Exxon’s and respondents’ expert 
witnesses with respect to Captain Coyne’s navigation of 
the stricken tanker. It adhered to its prior rulings exclud- 
ing all of Exxon’s evidence on its case-in-chief, and it 
concluded that Captain Coyne was extraordinarily negli- 
gent in ordering the final turn when he had not ordered 
fixes to be plotted and was not aware of the undersea 
coral pinnacle on which the vessel stranded. In reaching 
its conclusions, the district court also relied on two admi- 
ralty presumptions, respectively drawn from The Pennsyl- 
vania, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125, 22 L.Ed. 148 (1874) and The 
Louisiana, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 164, 18 L.Ed. 85 (1866). 


* The evidence was conflicting on the question whether the 
tanker stranded on a pinnacle shown as a dot on the only 
available chart of the area or whether the pinnacle was different 
from the only charted pinnacle. The evidence was also in con- 
flict on the question whether the charted pinnacle could have 
been seen if fixes had been plotted on the chart because of the 
small scale of the chart and of the charted pinnacle. 

© The Pennsylvania rule is that when a master of a vessel 
violates a regulatory duty, he is presumptively at fault. Plotting 
fixes on a navigation chart is a regulatory duty (33 C.F.R. 
§ 164.11(c)), but that navigation rule is not imposed when the 
master of a vessel is in perilous circumstances, as the regula- 
tions themselves recognize. Both vessels in The Pennsylvania 
were at fault, and the court divided damages equally although 


12 


The court denied all of Exxon’s post-trial motions 
and entered partial final judgment against it for loss of 
the tanker. (CR 661.) 


Exxon’s appeal from the partial final judgment was 
dismissed on respondents’ motion on the ground that the 
appeal was premature. (CR 661.) On remand, respondents 
moved for entry of final judgment on all Exxon’s claims 
for damages caused by the loss of its tanker. (CR 662.) 
Exxon resisted on the grounds, among others, that final 
judgment was premature because the court had fore- 
clesed it from introducing evidence in support of its 
claims for breaches of warranty and for strict liability to 
which negligence defenses did not apply. (3/14/94 RT 
12-13.) 


The district court entered judgment for the respon- 
dents on all theories of liability, stating that it was send- 
ing to the court of appeals the question whether Phase | 
decided all of Exxon’s claims for relief. (3/14/94 RT 
19-20; CR 674.) Final judgment was thereupon entered in 
favor of respondents and against Exxon on April 20, 1994. 
(App. C.) Exxon filed a timely appeal. (CR 677.) 


the fault of one was presumed and the fault of the other proved. 
Id., 86 U.S. at 138. 

In The Louisiana, the Court decided that a moving vessel is 
deemed to be at fault when she strikes a stationary vessel or a 
fixed structure. 

Nothing in either case suggests that the presumed fault is 
more than ordinary negligence. Here defense experts opined 
that the Captain made navigational mistakes; apparently the 
court concluded that several misjudgments and presumptive 
fault added up to extraordinary negligence. 


13 


Appeal. Exxon argued that the bifurcation order, the 
trial orders pursuant thereto, and the ultimate judgment 
deprived it of procedural due process of law because 
admiralty does not permit either liability for breach of 
warranty or for tort to be determined by confining the 
trial solely to the conduct of the plaintiff when the defen- 
dants’ misconduct is a substantial factor in causing injury. 
Exxon also contended that negligence of the plaintiff is 
not a defense to liability for breach of express or implied 
admiralty warranties; it is relevant only to the assessment 
of damages - an issue never tried below. E.g. /talia Societa 
per Azioni di Navigazione v. Oregon Stevedoring Company, 
376 US. 315, 321, 84 S. Ct. 748, 11 L.Ed.2d 732 (1964) 
(“Italia Societa”). 


Neither strict liability in tort nor negligence could be 
decided by trying only the conduct of Captain Coyne. In 
tort cases, this Court requires maritime losses to be 
apportioned by comparing degree of the parties’ faults. 
Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. at 405, n.11. (negligence). Admi- 
ralty policy is to place the risks of loss on the persons 
best situated to prevent injuries. Italia Societa, 376 U.S. at 
324 (warranty). The persons who are best situated in this 
case to reduce the likelihood of injury to or loss of 
tankers, injury to seamen and environmental pollution 
were these respondents, not shipowners or the unfortu- 
nate captains whose tankers were imperiled by respon- 
dents’ dangerous equipment. 


Exxon also argued that this Court has not written 
superseding cause into general maritime law and that the 
doctrine, as applied below, was in conflict with the com- 
parative fault requirement of Reliable Transfer, in conflict 
with the Eleventh Circuit's decision in Hercules, Inc. v. 


14 


Stevens Shipping Co., 765 F.2d 1069 (1985) (neither com- 
mon law superseding cause nor last clear chance sur- 
vived comparative fault established by Reliable Transfer), 
and irreconcilable with liability based on breaches of 
admiralty warranties, which sound in contract, not tort. 
Moreover, as Exxon explained, even if the superseding 
cause doctrine were theoretically applicable in admiralty 
tort cases, it had no application here because negligence 
of a plaintiff in response to reasonably foreseeable haz- 
ards created by defendants’ misconduct never becomes a 
superseding cause even in common law tort cases. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442B (1965). 


The Ninth Circuit's Opinion. The lower court affirmed, 
rejecting all of Exxon’s contentions. (App. A.) The court 
held that the doctrine of superseding cause applies to 
exonerate admiralty defendants from all liability for 
breach of warranty, strict liability in tort, and negligence 
even when defendants have conceded that their acts and 
omissions were substantial factors in causing the marine 
casualties. Disregarding Exxon’s argument that the doc- 
trine would not apply even in shore-based negligence 
cases under similar circumstances, the court held that the 
district court correctly found that the Captain’s negli- 
gence was the sole legal cause of the stranding and that 
its interpretation of superseding cause was not in conflict 
with Reliable Transfer. The court disregarded Exxon’s con- 
tention that negligence of a plaintiff in a breach of war- 
ranty case is relevant only to apportionment of damages. 


(App. A.) 


The opinion recognized the conflict among the Elev- 
enth, Ninth, Eighth and Fifth Circuits on the question 
whether the superseding cause doctrine survived Reliable 


15 


Transfer in maritime tort actions.'' The court held that the 
doctrine, as interpreted and applied by it, is a complete 
defense to actions based on breaches of express and 
implied admiralty warranties, strict tort liability and neg- 
ligence, eliminating any need to compare fault. It rejected 
Exxon’s due process attack on the ground that excluding 
Exxon’s evidence on its case-in-chief was within the dis- 
trict court's discretion. 


Petition for Rehearing. Exxon called the court's atten- 
tion to important factual errors and misstatements of 
Exxon’s arguments in the opinion.'? The Petition for 


'! Compare Hercules Inc., 765 F.2d 1069, 1075 (intervening 
negligence did not survive Reliable Transfer with Donaghey v. 
Ocean Drilling & Exploration Co., 974 F.2d 646, 652-53 (5th Cir. 
1992) and Lone Star Indus. Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., Inc., 927 F.2d 
1453, 1459 (8th Cir. 1991) (disagreeing with the Eleventh Circuit 
on that point). See also Hunley v. ACE Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 
493, 497, 498 (9th Cir. 1991) (applying superseding cause doc- 
trine in a maritime tort case). 


2 E.g., the opinion states: “Because it maintains the issues 
of causation, from breakout to grounding are inseverable, Exxon 
avers that it was unfairly prejudiced by bifurcation. We do not 
agree.” [Emphasis added.] App. A. Instead, Exxon had argued 
that legal cause of the stranding depended on the nature and 
extent of respondents’ contractual duties and duties of care 
imposed upon them by admiralty tort law, all of which were 
breached before the breakout and that the hazards created by 
those breaches could not be severed from the events thereafter 
without denying Exxon the fair trial that the Due Process Clause 
guarantees. Gasoline Products Co., Inc. v. Champlin Refining Co., 
283 U.S. 494, 51 S. Ct. 513, 75 L.Ed. 1188 (1931) and its spawn. 

The opinion also states: “Exxon does not dispute the district 
court's finding that the defendants met the duty of due dili- 
gence in all respects.” App. __., n.6. The statement is contra- 
dicted by the record. 


16 


Rehearing was denied without modifying the opinion to 
correct the misstatements. (App. B.) 


¢ 


IMPORTANCE OF THE ISSUES PRESENTED 


The questions presented are nationally important 
because uniformity and predictability of admiralty law 
are vital to national and international merchant shipping, 
and merchant shipping is a vital part of the Nation’s 
economy. The decision below has especially pernicious 
impact on American trade with Asia because key ports in 
trade with the Pacific Rim countries are located in states 
and territories within the Ninth Circuit's jurisdiction: 
Alaska, Washington, Oregon, California, Hawaii, Guam 
and the Trust Territories. 


Merchant shippers and their crews have to rely on 
wharfingers, stevedores, and others to supply them with 
reasonably safe moorings and facilities over which ship- 
owners have no control. Shipowners take admiralty war- 
ranties and the legal duties imposed on such persons 
very seriously. They also require the assurance of indem- 
nification that admiralty warranties have been previously 
well understood to provide. Shipowners and seafarers 
must rely on admiralty warranties and duties being 
enforced the same way whether their vessels moor in 
New York, Louisiana, or Hawaii. 


Cases within admiralty jurisdiction are controlled 
exclusively by federal admiralty law. E.g., East River 
Steamship Corp. v. Transamerica Delaval, 476 U.S. 858, 
865-66, 106 S. Ct. 2295, 90 L.Ed.2d 858 (1986); Italia Soct- 
eta, 376 US. 315, 321, 84S. Ct. 784, 11 L.Ed.2d 732 (1964); 
Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, 358 U.S. 


17 


625, 631, 79 S. Ct. 406, 3 L.Ed.2d 550 (1959). General 
maritime law has not adopted the harsher rules of com- 
mon law limiting liability in tort cases. Kermarec, 358 U.S. 
at 631. Strong policy supports uniformity of admiralty 
law. E.g., Foremost Ins. Co. v. Richardson, 457 U.S. 668, 
674-75, 102 S. Ct. 2654, 73 L.Ed.2d 300 (1982); Kermarec, 
358 U.S. at 631; Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Hawn, 346 U.S. 406, 
408-09, 74 S. Ct. 202, 98 L.Ed. 143 (1953). 


Only in the Ninth Circuit does the negligence of a 
vessel's captain exonerate admiralty warrantors from all 
liability to the shipowner for their breaches of contract. 
Only in the Ninth Circuit does negligence of a vessel's 
captain exonerate tortfeasors from all liability for both 
negligence and strict pro ‘ct liability, even when the 
losses that occurred were within the hazards created by 
defendants’ breaches of duty and were reasonably fore- 
seeable. 


In the guise of applying the common law supersed- 
ing cause doctrine to Exxon’s claims for relief based on 
tort, the opinion below revives contributory negligence as 
a complete defense to maritime torts, although this Court 
discarded that defense over a hundred years ago in The 
Max Morris, 137 U.S. 1, 11 S. Ct. 29, 34 L.Ed. 586 (1890). 
This Court adopted comparative fault 20 years ago in 
Reliable Transfer. It has not specifically adopted the super- 
seding cause doctrine into general maritime law, nor has 
the Court yet resolved the conflict among the circuits on 
the question whether that doctrine has any application 
after Reliable Transfer. The Ninth Circuit has also injected 
common law superseding cause into the law of admiralty 
warranties — a confusion of contract with tort principles 
irreconcilable with this Court's views on contract liability 
and contrary to other circuits. 


18 


I. THE NINTH CIRCUIT’S DECISION THWARTS 
THIS COURT’S ADMIRALTY POLICIES 


Causation was no longer in issue after respondents 
conceded that their misdeeds were causes-in-fact of the 
tanker’s loss. Respondents cannot successfully deny that 
the liability question was whether the risk of stranding 
was within the risks that the respondents either volun- 
tarily assumed or were required to assume by reason of 
their warranties and admiralty duties or that stranding 
was one of the very risks created by the defective equip- 
ment furnished to Exxon. This Court’s admiralty policy 
applicable to products liability, as well as the law of 
negligence, imposes liability on the party best able to take 
precautions to reduce the likelihood of injury. East River 
Steamship Corp. v. Transamerica Delaval, Inc., 476 U.S. 858, 
866, 106 S. Ct. 2295, 90 L.Ed.2d 865 (1986) (strict products 
liability adopted by admiralty law imposes liability on 
the party best able to protect persons from hazardous 
equipment); Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. at 405. Even when a 
warrantor would not be liable in tort for a maritime 
casualty, he is liable for breach of express and implied 
admiralty warranties when his breach is a factor in pro- 
ducing injury. Again, admiralty policy is to place the risks 
of loss on those who are in the best position to reduce the 
likelihood of injury. Italia Societa, 376 U.S. at 320-24. 


Tort Liability. In Reliable Transfer itself, the captain of 
plaintiff’s tanker was grossly negligent, and his negli- 
gence intervened after the defendant's negligence; he was 
75 percent at fault for the tanker’s grounding. His fault 
reduced ithe_damages for which the Coast Guard was 
liable, but it did not exonerate the government from 
liability. 


19 


That a vessel is primarily negligent does not 
justify its shouldering all responsibility, nor 
excuse the slightly negligent vessel from bearing 
any liability at all. 421 U.S. at 406, 95 S. Ct. 1708, 
44 L.Ed.2d 251, 259. 


Reliable Transfer was reaffirmed in City of Milwaukee v. 
Cement Division, National Gypsum Co., __ U.S. __, 115 
S. Ct. 2091, 132 L.Ed.2d 148 (1995). The shipowner 
brought this admiralty action against the City for the loss 
of its vessel when it broke away from the City’s mooring 
in a storm and thereafter sank. The shipowner alleged 
that the City had breached its duty as a wharfinger by 
assigning the vessel to a berthing slip known to be unsafe 
in heavy winds and in failing adequately to warn of 
hidden dangers in the slip. The City claimed that the 
shipowner was negligent because its master left the ship 
virtually unmanned in the winter without personnel 
aboard who could monitor the weather conditions or who 
could summon help. The district court held that the ship- 
owner was 96 percent at fault for the loss, and it denied 
the shipowner prejudgment interest. The appellate court 
modified the judgment by reducing the shipowner’s fault 
to 75 percent, and it awarded prejudgment interest to the 
shipowner. This Court affirmed. Citing Reliable Transfer, 
the Court required “ ‘that damages be assessed on the 
basis of proportionate fault when such an allocation can 
reasonably be made.’ McDermott, Inc. v. AmClyde, 511 U.S. 
—_. —~ (1994) (Slip Op’n. at 4).” The Court explained 
that before the prejudgment interest question could arise, 
the shipowner’s recovery had already been reduced by 
two-thirds by reason of its own negligence. It added: 


The City’s responsibility for the remaining one- 
third is no different than if it had performed the 
same negligent acts and the owner, instead of 


20 


also being negligent, had engaged in heroic 
maneuvers that avoided two-thirds of the dam- 
ages. The City is merely required to compensate 
the owner for the loss for which the City is 
responsible. [bid. 


In our case the HOUSTON’s captain and her crew 
performed heroically to try to rescue the vessel and her 
seamen from the perils in which respondents’ egregious 
misconduct placed them; but those efforts, in the last 
minutes, were unsuccessful in saving the ship or prevent- 
ing injury to the seamen. 


The policy reasons for apportioning losses by com- 
paring the degrees of fault of those whose misconduct 
contributed to the casualty are explicit in Reliable Transfer: 


It is difficult to imagine any manner in which 
the divided damages rule would be more likely 
to “induce care and vigilance” than a compara- 
tive negligence rule that also penalizes wrong- 
doing, but in proportion to measure of fault. A 
rule that divides damages by degree of fault 
would seem better designed to induce care than 
the rule of equally divided damages, because it 
imposes the strongest deterrent upon the 
wrongful behavior that is most likely to harm 
others. Id., 421 U.S. at 405, n.11. 


By shifting the entire burden of the loss from respon- 
dents to Exxon and disregarding the hazards that respon- 
dents created for all tankers that moored at the defective 
SPM, the Ninth Circuit turned this Court's admiralty 
policy upside down. 


Neither the district court nor the appellate court 
could compare the degrees of fault of Exxon and the 
respondents because the bifurcation order and the subse- 
quent orders and judgment entered thereon prevented 


21 


Exxon from introducing its evidence that would have 
established that Captain Coyne’s fault was negligible in 
comparison with respondents’ egregious breaches of 
duty. Even apples cannot be compared with apples with 
only one apple. The opinion below fails to explain how 
respondents’ admission that their acts and omissions that 
were causes-in-fact of injury, without more, could permit 
anyone to determine how respondents’ faults could be 
compared to Captain Coyne’s negligence in navigating 
the distressed tanker. 


Breach of Warranty. As this Court explained in Italia 
Societa, a shipowner’s negligence in tort does not defeat 
liability for breach of an implied admiralty warranty, a 
contract action. The Court held a stevedore liable to the 
shipowner for injury to its seaman caused by a latent 
defect in equipment furnished by the stevedore, although 
the stevedore was not negligent. 


[L]iability should fall upon the party best situ- 
ated to adopt preventive measures and thereby 
to reduce the likelihood of injury. Where, as 
here, injury-producing and defective equipment 
is under the supervision and control of the ste- 
vedore, the shipowner is powerless to minimize 
the risk; the stevedore is not. 376 U.S. at 324. 


[W]e deal here with a suit for indemnification 
based upon a maritime contract, governed by 
federal law [citation omitted] in an area where 
rather special rules govern the obligations and 
liability of shipowners prevail, rules that are 
designed to minimize the hazards encountered 
by seamen, to compensate seamen for the acci- 
dents that inevitably occur, and . . . to minimize 
the likelihood of such accidents. 376 U.S. at 324. 


22 


Neither Exxon nor Captain Coyne had any control 
over the safety of the mooring or the equipment fur- 
nished by respondents that created the azards of 
grounding, injuries to seamen and environmental damage 
with respect to every tanker that moored at the SPM. The 
SPM and allied equipment were groundings waiting to 
happen before the HOUSTON came to Hawaii. To exone- 
rate respondents from all liability because Captain Coyne 
was negligent does not make common sense, let alone 
admiralty sense, because its rule imposes no deterrent on 
respondents’ wrongful behavior that was the most likely 
to and did injure others. 


Liability for Breach of Warranty. As Italia Societa 
pointed out, liability for breach of warranty is based on 
contract. Negligence of the shipowner, in whose favor the 
warranty runs, may reduce damages for which the war- 
rantor is liable, but it does not defeat liability. Negligence 
of the master of a vessel does not relieve the warrantor of 
safe berth if the berth is, in fact, unsafe. A warrantor of 
safe berth may “lessen the amount of damages for which 
he is responsible by showing negligence, or even lack of 
diligence, on the part of the person wronged, in failing to 
take steps to lessen certain or even probable damage... . 
[T]his is an issue on which the defendant has the bur- 
den.” Paragon Oil Co. v. Republic Tankers, S.A., 310 F.2d 
169, 173-74 (2d Cir. 1962), cert. denied, 372 U.S. 967, 83 
S. Ct. 1092, 10 L.Ed.2d 130 (1963). 


23 


Il. CONFLICTS AMONG THE CIRCUITS AFTER 
RELIABLE TRANSFER AND ITALIA SOCIETA ARE 
NOW RIPE FOR RESOLUTION BY THIS COURT 


A. Circuits are Sharply Divided on Applying 
Intervening Cause Concepts after Reliable 
Transfer 


The decision below deepens the existing conflict 
among the circuits over the applicability of common law 
intervening cause doctrines to admiralty tort liability 
under general maritime law. In Hercules, Inc., 765 F.2d at 
1075, the Eleventh Circuit held that neither last clear 
chance nor intervening cause survived Reliable Transfer; 
after referring to those two doctrines, the court held: 


Under a “proportional fault” system, no justi- 
fication exists for applying the[se] doctrines 

. unless it can truly be said that one party's 
negligence did not in any way contribute to the 
loss, complete apportionment between the neg- 
ligent parties based on their respective degrees 
of fault, . . . is the proper method for calculating 
and awarding damages in maritime cases. 765 
F.2d at 1075. 


The Fifth Circuit reached the opposite conclusion in 
Donaghey v. Ocean Drilling Exploration Co., 974 F.2d 646, 
652-53 (Sth Cir. 1992), relying in part on the teaching of 
Nunley v. M/V Dauntless Colocotronis, 727 F.2d 455 (5th Cir 


en banc), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 832, 105 S. Ct. 120, 83 
L.Ed.2d 63 (1984). 


'* Lone Star Indus. Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., Inc., 927 F.2d 
1453, 1459 (8th Cir. 1991) apparently agrees with the Fifth Cir- 


cuit that the doctrine of superseding cause survived Reliable 
Transfer. 


24 


The Ninth Circuit is in conflict with the Second and 
Fifth Circuits in concluding that a plaintiff's negligence 
can become a superseding cause of a marine injury when 
the injury was within the hazards created by defendants’ 
breaches of duty and were or could have been foreseen 
by them. 


In Petition of Kinsman Transit Co., 338 F.2d 708, 723-26 
(2d Cir. 1964), cert. denied sub nom. Continental Grain Co. v. 
City of Buffalo, 380 U.S. 944, 85S. Ct. 1026, 13 L.Ed.2d 963 
(1965), an improperly constructed mooring device owned 
by the wharfinger, Continental Grain, failed during a 
heavy storm along a navigable river. That failure caused a 
ship to break away from the mooring. The owner of the 
breakaway vessel was negligent in leaving the ship 
unmanned during a heavy storm. The drifting vessel first 
severed the mooring lines of a second ship which caused 
the second ship to drift downstream and to collide with a 
third vessel. The combined collisions temporarily 
dammed the river that was clogged by ice. The clogging 
caused upstream flooding that contributed to the collapse 
of a city bridge. The wharfinger was not relieved of 
liability for its fault by the intervening negligence of the 
master of the first vessel, by the negligence of the bridge 
operator, or by the intervention of heavy storms and ice. 
It was required to bear its aliquot share of the damages 
for the multiple casualties that its own negligence set in 
motion. As Judge Friendly’s lucid opinion for the court 
explains: 


[W]e would find it difficult to understand why 
one who failed to use the care required to pro- 
tect others in the light of expectable forces 
should be exonerated when the very risks that 
rendered his conduct negligent produced other 


25 - 


and more serious consequences to such persons 
that were fairly foreseeable when he fell short of 
what the law demanded. . . . 338 F.2d at 723-724. 


The fact that the wharfinger did not have actual 
knowledge that the failure of the mooring would trigger 
this chain reaction did not excuse it from all liability. A 
reasonably prudent man would have foreseen that possi- 
bility if he had thought ahead. Id., 338 F.2d at 723. The 
court rejected the wharfingers’ argument that it was 
saved from liability because the shipowner’s master neg- 
ligently failed to take action that would have avoided the 
losses, stating that the argument grew out of “the dis- 
credited notion that only the last wrongful act can be a 
cause - a notion as faulty in logic as it is wanting in 
fairness.” Id. at 719.14 


The Fifth Circuit agreed with the Second in Watz v. 
Zapata Off-Shore Co., 431 F.2d 100, 116 (5th Cir. 1970) in 
holding that the furnisher of a defective hoist was not 
relieved of liability because it did not actually foresee the 
extent of the harm nor the manner in which it occurred 
because the risk of injury created by a defective weld 
“encompassed the sort of injury that occurred.” 431 F.2d 
at 116. In that case a shipyard worker aboard a vessel was 
injured when the load chain of the hoist broke because it 
was held together by an insufficient weld. Defendants 
claimed the? the defective weld was not the proximate 


'# The opinion below attempted to distinguish Kinsman on 
the ground that the plaintiff's vessel in that case was 
unmanned, whereas the HOUSTON was manned. (App. A.) 
That is a distinction without a legal difference because the rele- 
vant fact in that case and ours is that the master of the vessel 
was found negligent. . 


26 


cause of the accident because the hoist had been sub- 
jected to abuse by the owner. The court said that the 
resolution of the liability issue is “ ‘determined by asking 
whether the intervention or the later cause is a significant 
part of the risk involved in the defendants’ conduct or is 
so reasonably connected with it that the responsibility 
should not be terminated.’ ” 431 F.2d at 116 (quoting 
Prosser on Torts § 51, pp. 309-11 (3d ed. 1964)). 


Although the opinion below purports to rely on 
Restatement (Second) of Torts, it disregards the sections that 
apply precisely to this situation. In deciding whether an 
intervening force defeats or diminishes a defendant's lia- 
bility after his own negligence has been established as a 
substantial factor in the injury, the Restatement explains 
that a “hazard” problem, not a “causation” problem, 1s 
presented. Restatement (Second) of Torts, Section 281 com- 
ment h (1965). Section 442B states the applicable black 


letter principle: 


Where the negligent conduct of the actor 
[respondents] creates or increases the risks of a 
particular harm [stranding] and is a substantial 
factor in causing that harm, the fact that the 
harm is brought about through the intervention 
of another force does not relieve the actor of 
liability, except where the harm is intentionally 
caused by a third person and is not within the 
scope of the risk created by the actor's con- 


duct.'5 


1S “[A}ny harm which is itself foreseeable [as stranding was 
in this case], as to which the actor has created or increased the 
recognizable risk, is always ‘proximate,’ no matter how it is 
brought about, except where there is such intentionally tortious 
or criminal intervention, and it is not within the scope of the risk 


27 


The stranding of the HOUSTON was within the haz- 
ards that respondents’ misconduct created. Moreover, 
masters of vessels imperiled by misconduct of defen- 
dants, as well as the forces of the sea and weather, are not 
required to respond with the imperturbable tranquility of 
hindsight of expert witnesses who are navigating in a 
courtroom. Other circuits have consistently recognized 
that where the master of a vessel is put in the center of 
destructive forces and he must make hard choices among 
competing courses, the law requires that there must be 
something more than mistakes of judgment by the master 
to find that he was negligent, let alone extraordinarily 
negligent. E.¢., Employers Ins. of Wausau v. Suwanne River 
& Spa Lines, Inc., 866 F.2d 752, 772 (5th Cir. 1989); The 
Gulfstar, 136 F.2d 461, 465 (3d Cir. 1943); The Imoan, 67 
F.2d 603, 605 (2d Cir. 1933). 


The respondents’ serious misconduct was the legal 
cause of the HOUSTON ’s loss. Whatever negligence 
could properly be attributed to Captain Coyne could do 
nothing more than to reduce the damages for which the 
respondents were liable. 


oy by the original negligent conduct.” Id, comment b to 
Prosser & Keeton on Torts § 44 at pp. 301, 305, 312-13, 316 

ed. 1984) makes the same points. Determination of belay te 
negligence cases in which forces other than the defendants’ act 
have intervened, presents a question “of the scope of the defen- 
dants’ obligation, and far removed from causation.” (Id. at 

305.) A defendant is not relieved from legal responsibilit fs 
losses because no one could have perceived that a loss he 


occur in the particular way that it di 
298-99, 316.) y that it did. (Id. at §§ 43, 44, at pp. 


28 


B. The Circuits are in Conflict on the Impact of 
Intervening Negligence on Liability for Breach 
of Admiralty Warranties 


The Ninth Circuit’s decision below relieves admiralty 
warrantors from all liability to the shipowner for breach 
when its vessel's captain is found grossly negligent. The 
Second Circuit takes the opposite position with respect to 
admiralty warranties, following standard principles of 
contract law. Paragon Oil Co., 310 F.2d at 173-74. Accord 
International Ore & Fertilizer Corp. v. $.G.S. Controlled Ser- 
vices, Inc., 38 F.3d 1279 (2d Cir. 1994) (plaintiffs’ contribu- 
tory negligence is irrelevant to liability founded on an 
admiralty contract). 


Under the general law of contracts, a defendant who 
has breached the contract cannot relieve himself of lia- 
bility because the plaintiff was negligent. The injured 
plaintiff can recover damages for his loss, excluding those 
damages that he could have avoided by taking reasonable 
steps to mitigate his loss. E.g., Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 350, pp. 125 et seq. (1981). Moreover, if the 
plaintiff has tried to mitigate damages and has been 
unsuccessful, he may nevertheless recover the full 
amount of his loss from the defendant. [bid. 


Ill. EXXON WAS DENIED DUE PROCESS BY DIS- 
TRICT COURT’S ORDERS PREVENTING IT 
FROM PROVING LIABILITY 


If not foreclosed by the district court’s orders and its 
ultimate judgment, Exxon would have introduced its evi- 
dence establishing respondents’ liability for breaches of 
warranties and torts. Responsibility for the tanker’s loss 
could not be confined to the events that happened after 


29 


the breakout; the links in the liability chain were forged 
by respondents before the tanker ever reached Oahu. The 
lower courts severed the unseverable by cutting the chain 
in two. Captain Coyne’s response to the hazards that 
respondents’ misconduct created was not a special 
defense, like the running of limitations, that could be 
separately tried to defeat liability. 


This Court in Gasoline Products Co., Inc., 283 U.S. 494, 
500, 51S. Ct. 513, 75 L.Ed. 1188, stated the basic principle 
for determining whether a claim or an issue can be sep- 
arately tried: The issue must be so “distinct and separable 
from the others that a trial of it alone may be had without 
injustice.” !® 


The question whether Captain Coyne’s own conduct 
was even relevant to causation could not properly be 
determined without first examining the respondents’ acts 
and admissions in the light of the obligations that they 
either voluntarily assumed or were required to assume as 
express and implied warrantors, as wharfingers, or as 
manufacturers or suppliers of dangerous products that 
failed in the use for which they were intended. Foreclos- 
ing Exxon’s proof denied it a fair trial and thereby 
deprived it of procedural due process of law. 


Thanks to the district court’s foreclosure orders, the 
evidentiary record is inadequate on which to compare the 
degrees of fault of the several actors in the drama or to 
decide who, among them, was best situated to take the 


'© See also Smith v. Sperling, 354 U.S. 91, 95, 77S. Ct 
+ S. 91, 95, . Ct. 1112, 1 
L.Ed.2d 1205 (1957) (even when the issue is federal jurisdiction, 


the issue cannot be tried alone when it is factually interwoven 
with the merits). 


30 


safety precautions that would have prevented the marine 
casualties that occurred here. The district court was led 
into constitutional error by the respondents’ convincing it 
that bifurcation would save the court’s time. Judicial time 
could always be saved by preventing plaintiffs from 
proving their liability cases-in-chief, but the Due Process 
Clause just says “no” to that shortcut. 


e 


CONCLUSION 


Exxon is fully aware that this Court does not sit as an 
error correcting court. The existing confusion and con- 
flicts among the circuits about the proper application of 
this Court’s admiralty policies to maritime tort and con- 
tract cases have seriously impaired the requisite unifor- 
mity and predictability of general maritime law. The 
questions presented in this case are of national, immedi- 
ate concern because the conflicts have adverse impact on 
national and international merchant shipping. 


Dated: July 21, 1995 
Respectfully submitted, 


Suirtey M. Hurstepier 
Counsel of Record 

Morrison & Foerster 
555 West Fifth Street 


Suite 3500 
Los Angeles, California 90013-1024 


Telephone: (213) 892-5200 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
Admitted to the Bar 


of the Supreme Court 
on January 8, 1962 


App. 1 


APPENDIX A 


FOR PUBLICATION 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Exxon Company; Exxon SHIPPING 
COMPANY, - 


Plaintiffs-Counter-defendants- 
Third-Party Defendants- 
Appellants, 


Vv. 
Sorec, INc., 


Defendant-Counter-claimant- 
Appellee, 


Paciric Resources, INc.; HAWAIIAN 
INDEPENDENT Rerinery, INC.; PRI 
Marine, INnc.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, 
INc., 


Defendants-Cross-claimants- 
Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellees, 


Vv. 


GrirFin Woopxouse, Griffin 
Woodhouse, Inc., 


Third-Party Defendant-Appellee, 
BriDON Fisres AND PLastics, Lrp., 


Defendant-Third-Party Defendant- 
Appellee. 


) 


No. 94-15806 


D.C. No. 
CV-90-0271-HMF 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
OPINION 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


App. 2 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the District of Hawaii a 
Harold M. Fong, Chief District Judge, Presiding 


Argued and Submitted | 
March 14, 1995 - San Francisco, California 


Filed April 26, 1995 


Before: William C. Canby, Jr., Charles Wiggins, 
and Thomas G. Nelson, Circuit Judges. 


Opinion by T.G. Nelson 


SUMMARY 


Admiralty and Marine/Negligence/ 
Civil Litigation and Procedure 


The court of appeals affirmed a district court order. 
The court held that the district court did not err in 
finding a captain’s extraordinary negligence to be the sole 
proximate and superseding cause of damage to a vessel 
that broke away from a mooring system and later ran 


aground. 


The Exxon Houston, a tanker belonging to appellants 
Exxon Shipping Co. and Exxon Company U.S.A. (Collec- 
tively, Exxon), broke away from a Single Point Mooring 
System (SPM) manufactured by appellee Sofec, Inc. and 
sold by appellee Pacific Resources, Inc. and associated 
corporations (collectively, HIRI). A storm had caused a 
break in the chafe chain linking the vessel to the SPM. As 
the vessel drifted, two oil hoses broke away from the 
SPM, and one hose interfered with the ship’s ability to 


maneuver. 


App. 3 


Immediately after the second hose parted (the 
“breakaway”), the Coast Guard contacted the Houston to 
see whether it needed assistance. Captain Kevin Coyne 
refused the offer. During the 2 hours and 4 minutes 
following the breakout, Coyne took the ship through a 
series of phases including an attempt to anchor. Coyne 
failed to plot the ship’s position on the chart for a period 
of time, relying entirely on parallel indexing. For a time, 
Captain Coyne was alone on the bridge. He proceeded to 
make a final turn toward shore, which resulted in the 
ship’s stranding. The ship ran aground. 


Exxon filed a complaint in admiralty against HIRI 
and Sofec for the loss of its ship and cargo, and for oil 
spill cleanup costs. HIRI filed a third-party complaint 
against appellees Bridon Fibres and Plastics, Ltd. and 
Griffin Woodhouse, Ltd. Griffin moved to bifurcate the 
trial, and all defendants joined the motion. The district 
court granted the motion, limiting the first phase of the 
trial to the issue of causation with respect to the Houston's 
grounding, leaving the issue of causation with respect to 
the breakout for Phase Two. 


The district court found that Coyne’s extraordinary 
negligence was the sole proximate and superseding cause 
of the ship’s grounding. Following motions by Bridon 
and Exxon, the court entered a final motion precluding all 
of Exxon’s claims for loss of the vessel. Exxon appealed, 
contending that the district court improperly bifurcated 
the proceedings and that the doctrine of superseding 
cause has not application to cases in admiralty. 


App. 4 


[1] In United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., the 
Supreme Court rejected the rule whereby damages were 
divided equally between or among negligent vessels 
regardless of the degree of fault attributable to each. [2] 
The Ninth Circuit has affirmed the continuing viability of 
superseding cause in the maritime context. The Ninth 
Circuit previously held that an intervening force super- 
sedes prior negligence where the subsequent actor's neg- 
ligence was “extraordinary.” [3] Thus, superseding cause 
may act to cut off liability for antecedent acts of negli- 
gence in admiralty cases where the superseding cause is 
the result of extraordinary negligence. The district court 
did not “disobey” Reliable Transfer in employing the con- 
cept of superseding cause in this case. 


[4] Exxon was incorrect in arguing that it was 
unfairly prejudiced by the bifurcation. [5] The district 
court assumed at the outset of Phase One that the defen- 
dants’ negligence was a cause in fact of the grounding. [6] 
Moreover, even if Exxon’s theory that the HIRI defen- 
dants were strictly liable as warrantors of safe berth was 
accepted, such a finding would not have rendered erro- 
neous either the district court’s bifurcation of the trial or 
its superseding cause analysis. [7] The district court’s 
decision to bifurcate the trial could not be said to have 
“severed the unseverable” or to have prejudiced Exxon. 
Bifurcation of the trial was expeditious and appropriate 
in light of the circumstances of the case. 


[8] Under the rule of The Louisiana, when a moving 
vessel strikes a charted reef, it is presumed the vessel is at 
fault. [9] The Pennsylvania stands for the presumption that 
when a vessel violates a statutory rule meant to prevent 


App. 5 


strandings, the violation was a proximate cause of the 
stranding. [10] In this case, the Houston struck a charted 
reef because her captain had not bothered to fix her 
position. Exxon neither rebutted nor offered any compel- 
ling reason to ignore the traditional admiralty rules laid 
out in The Pennsylvania and The Louisiana. 


[11] In addition, the district court did not err in 
holding Coyne to a reasonable standard of care. [12] The 
district court's finding that Coyne’s failure to take fixes 
was extraordinarily negligent was supported by the 
record. [13] The district court's finding that the final 
starboard turn was extraordinarily negligent was also 
supported by the record. [14] The district court did not 
clearly err in finding that Coyne had ample time, as well 
as opportunity and available manpower, to take precau- 
tions which would have eliminated the risk of grounding 
and that his failure to do so amounted to extraordinary 
negligence, superseding any negligence of the defendants 


with regard to the breakout or provision of safe berth 
after the breakout. 


COUNSEL 


Shirley M. Hufstedler, Hufstedler & Kaus, Los 
Angeles, California, for the plaintiffs-counter-defendants- 
third-party-defendants-appellants. 


George W. Playdon, Jr., Reinwald, O’Connor, Marrack, 
Hoskins & Playdon, Honolulu, Hawaii, for defendants- 
cross-claimants-third-party-plaintiffs-appellees Pacific 
Resources, Inc., Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Inc., PRI 
Marine, Inc., PRI International, Inc. 


App. 6 


David W. Proudfoot, Case & Lynch, Honolulu, Hawaii, 
for defendant-third-party-defendant-appellee Bridon 
Fibres and Plastics, Ltd. 


OPINION 
T.G. NELSON, Circuit Judge: 


OVERVIEW 


Exxon Shipping Co. and Exxon Company U.S.A. (col- 
lectively, “Exxon”) appeal the district court's judgment 
following a bench trial in Exxon’s admiralty action seek- 
ing damages for loss of its tanker, the Exxon Houston, and 
costs of oil spill cleanup and loss of cargo, Exxon main- 
tains that the failure of a Single Point Mooring System 
(“SPM”) manufactured by defendant Sofec and sold by 
defendants Pacific Resources, Inc. and associated corpo- 
rations (collectively, “HIRI”') was the actual and proxi- 
mate cause of its losses. The district court found in Phase 
One of a bifurcated proceeding that Exxon’s negligence 
superseded any damage caused by the failure of the SPM, 
and was the sole proximate cause of the Houston's strand- 
ing. On appeal, Exxon argues that the district court 
improperly bifurcated the proceedings and that the doc- 
trine of superseding cause has no application to cases in 
admiralty. We affirm the district court's order. 


1 We follow the district court’s designation of the defen- 
dant corporations, which include Pacific Resources, Inc., 
Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Inc., PRI Marine, Inc., and PRI 
International, Inc., as “HIRI.” 


App. 7 


FACTS 


This case arises from the stranding of the Exxon 
Houston on March 2, 1989, near the Island of Oahu, sev- 
eral hours after it broke away from an SPM owned and 
operated by defendants HIRI. The Houston, a steam pro- 
pulsion oil tanker weighing over 72,000 dead weight tons, 
was engaged in delivering oil via two floating hoses into 
HIRI’s submerged pipeline, pursuant to a contract 
between Exxon and defendant Pacific Resources Interna- 
tional, Inc. (“PRII"), when a heavy southern storm 
(locally termed a Kona storm) caused a break in the chafe 
chain linking the vessel to the SPM. As the vessel drifted, 
the two oil hoses broke away from the SPM. Because the 
hoses were bolted to the ship rather than secured by more 
readily detachable safety locks, a long (800 feet) length of 
one hose remained attached to the ship, and interfered 
with her ability to maneuver. 


While the parting of the first hose did not cause a 
significant threat to the Houston, the parting and partial 
sinking of the second, longer hose, weighed down by a 
heavy piece of spool torn from the SPM, threatened to 
foul the ship’s propeller. The parting of the second hose 
at approximately 1728,? designated as the “breakout” or 
“breakaway,” is the initiating point in time for events 
covered in the Phase One trial. 


Immediately after the breakout, the Coast Guard con- 
tacted the Houston to see whether it needed assistance, 
but because he was advised assistance vessels would not 


? The equivalent local time was 5:28 p-m. In keeping with 
the record, we refer to nautical time in this opinion. 


App. 8 


arrive within two hours, Captain Coyne refused the offer, 
thinking the problem would be reso!ved within that time. 
Captain Coyne did not thereafter request assistance from 
the Coast Guard. During the two hours and forty-one 
minutes following the breakout, the Houston's Captain, 
Kevin Coyne, took the ship through a series of phases 
described in some detail in the district court's findings of 
fact. These phases are summarized in the following para- 


graphs. 


At about 1740, Captain Coyne attempted to anchor, 
dropping a single anchor which paid out one shot (90 
feet) of chain. On the basis of expert testimony, the dis- 
trict court found that Captain Coyne failed to follow 
standard maritime practice, which would have involved 
releasing five to six shots of chain to hold the ship under 
the circumstances. The Houston had twelve shots of chain 
available for each of its two anchors. After this attempt to 
anchor failed, Captain Coyne made no further efforts to 
anchor the Houston before it stranded, although the dis- 
trict court found there were numerous places en route he 


could safely have done so. 


By 1803, the small assist vessel Nene was able, with 
the assistance of the Houston, to get control of the end of 
the second hose so that it was no longer a threat to the 
larger shin. Captain Coyne controlled the Nene’s move- 
ments as necessary to coordinate with the Houston's 
movements. Between 1803 and 1830, Captain Coyne 
maneuvered the Houston out to sea and away from shal- 


low water. 


Between 1830 and 2009, the time of stranding, the 
district court found that Captain Coyne made a series of 


App. 9 


ill-advised moves. Perhaps most significant was his fail- 
ure to plot the ship’s position on the chart between 1830 


_ and 2004. Rather than plotting fixes of the vessel’s posi- 


tion at regular intervals, Captain Coyne relied after 1830 
entirely on parallel indexing, a supplemental technique 
which, according to Exxon’s Navigation and Bridge Orga- 
nization Manual (“Navigation Manual”), “does not 
relieve the ship's officer of the duty to frequently plot the 
position of the ship on the chart by means of navigational 
fixes.” Without a fix, Captain Coyne was unable to make 
effective use of the chart to check for hazards. 


Between 1830 and 1947, the crews of the Houston and 
the Nene worked to disconnect the second hose from the 
Houston. This was accomplished by 1947. The Houston's 
port crane collapsed in the process, taking the crane 
operator’s seat with it onto the deck. The second mate 
went below to attend to the crane operator, who was in 
shock, leaving Captain Coyne alone on the bridge at 1948. 
Although the Navigational Manual requires that at least 
two officers be present on the bridge at all times, Captain 
Coyne did not call upon any of the other available offi- 
cers to join him until 2000. The district court found that if 
the bridge had been properly manned, the stranding dan- 
ger would have been avoided. 


Finally, at 1956, Captain Coyne made a disastrous 
final turn to the right (toward the shore) which resulted 
in the ship’s stranding. Given that the Kona storm was 
threatening to push the vessel into shore, it is not clear 
why the Captain chose to turn right instead of continuing 
to back out safely to sea, or turning to port, away from 
the coast. Both options were viable. The district court 
found Captain Coyne’s explanations for his decision 


App. 10 


unconvincing. Because he had not taken fixes, Captain 
Coyne apparently was unaware of the ship’s position 
until he ordered Third Mate Spiller to do so at 2004. Third 
Mate Spiller testified that on seeing the 2004 fix on the 
chart, Captain Coyne uttered an expletive and imme- 
diately ordered an increased speed. Moments later the 
ship ran aground on a reef near the shore. 


PROCEDURAL HISTORY 


In April, 1990, Exxon filed its complaint in admiralty 
against HIRI and Sofec (the manufacturer of the SPM) for 
the loss of its ship and cargo, and for oil spill cleanup 
costs. HIRI filed a third-party complaint against Bridon 
Fibres and Plastics, Ltd. (“Bridon”), and Griffin Wood- 
house, Ltd. (“Griffin”). On June 3, 1992, Griffin moved to 
bifurcate the trial. All defendants joined the motion. The 
district court granted the motion on July 31, 1992, limit- 
ing the first phase of the trial to the issue of causation 
with respect to the Houston's grounding, leaving the issue 
of causation with respect to the breakout for Phase Two. 


After conducting a bench trial in admiralty between 
February 9, 1993, and March 3, 1993, the district court 
found that Captain Coyne’s (and by imputation, Exxon’s) 
extraordinary negligence was the sole proximate and 
superseding cause of the Houston’s grounding. Exxon 
filed an appeal on June 16, 1993, which was dismissed for 
lack of a final judgment. Following motions by Bridon 
and Exxon, the district court entered a final motion pre- 
cluding all of Exxon’s claims for loss of the vessel on 


3 A third company which was dismissed v:ithout prejudice. 


App. 11 


April 20, 1994. We have jurisdiction over Exxon’s subse- 


quent timely appeal pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we 
affirm the judgment. 


ANALYSIS 
A. Applicability of superseding cause in admiralty. 


[1] The district court’s conclusions of law are 
reviewed de novo. Havens v. F/T Polar Mist, 996 F.2d 215, 
217, 1994 A.M.C. 605 (9th Cir. 1993). Exxon argues that 
the Supreme Court's holding in United States v. Reliable 
Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 (1975), replacing the historical 
divided damages rule in favor of comparative negligence 
in admiralty cases, vitiates the use of concepts such as 
intervening force and superseding cause. In Reliable 
Transfer, the Court rejected the rule whereby damages 
were divided equally between or among negligent vessels 
(usually in collision cases) regardless of the degree of 
fault attributable to each. Id. at 397, 411. In concluding, 
the Court stated that: 


[W]hen two or more parties have contributed by 
their fault to cause property damage in a mar- 
itime collision or stranding, liability for such 
damage is to be allocated among the parties 
proportionately to the comparative degree of 
their fault, and that liability for such damages is 
to be allocated equally only . . . when it is not 


possible fairly to measure the comparative 
degree of their fault. 


Id. at 411. 


In the wake of Reliable Transfer, the circuits have 
considered with sometimes conflicting results the issue of 


App. 12 


whether superseding cause may still be used to attribute 
fault in admiralty cases. In Hercules, Inc. v. Stevens Ship- 
ping Co., 765 F.2d 1069 (11th Cir. 1985), on which Exxon 
relies, the Eleventh Circuit appears to have held the 
doctrine of superseding cause inapplicable in the mar- 
itime context after Reliable Transfer. Rejecting appellee's 
argument that its negligence was not a proximate cause 
of the accident in question, the Hercules court stated: 


The doctrines of intervening cause and last clear 
chance, like those of “major-minor” and “active- 
passive” negligence, operated in maritime colli- 
sion cases to ameliorate the . . . so-called 


“divided damages” rule [rejected by the 
Supreme Court in Reliable Transfer]. . . . 


Under a “proportional fault” system, no jus- 
tification exists for applying the[se] doctrines. 
_. . Unless it can truly be said that one party’s 
negligence did not in any way contribute to the 
loss, complete apportionment . . . is the proper 
method for calculating and awarding damages 


in maritime cases. 


765 F.2d at 1075. 


While Hercules was understood by the Eighth Circuit 
to reject the role of superseding cause altogether in mar- 
itime cases, Lone Star Industries, Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., 
Inc., 927 F.2d 1453, 1458 (8th Cir. 1991), it is not entirely 
clear whether in rejecting intervening cause the Bleventh 
Circuit meant merely to reject “normal intervening cause 
as defined by Restatement (Second) of Torts (“Restate- 
ment”) section 443, or whether it meant also to reject 
“superseding cause” as defined by Restatement section 


App. 13 


440.4 Given that the Hercules court explicitly rules that 
appellee’s underlying actions were a proximate cause (as 


* Section 440 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts defines 
super=.ding cause as: 

an act of a third person or other force which by its 

intervention prevents the actor from being liable for 

harm to another which his antecedent negligence is a 

substantial factor in bringing about. 

Comment b adds: 

A superseding cause relieves the actor from liability, 
irrespective of whether his antecedent negligence was 
or was not a substantial factor in bringing about the 
harm. 

Section 441 defines intervening force as: 
one which actively operates in producing harm to 
another after the actor’s negligent act or omission has 
been committed. 

Section 443 on “normal intervening force” states that: 
[t]he intervention of a force which is a normal conse- 
quence of a situation created by the actor’s negligent 
conduct is not a superseding cause of harm... . 

Section 442 lays out factors for determining whether an inter- 

vening force is a superseding cause: | 
(a) the fact that its intervention brings about harm 
different in kind from that which would otherwise 
have resulted from the actor's negligence; 

(b) the fact that its operation or the consequences 
thereof appear after the event to be extraordinary 
rather than normal in view of the circumstances exis- 
ting at the time of its operation; 

(c) the fact that the intervening force is operating 
independently of any situation created by the actor's 
negligence, or, on the other hand, is or is not a normal 
result of such a situation; 

(d) the fact that the operation of the intervening 
force is due to a third person's act or to his failure to 
act; 


App. 14 


well as a cause in fact) of the damage, it is plausible that 
the court would not have ruled out a defense based on 
superseding cause as the sole proximate cause of the 


damage. 


[2] It is not necessary to resolve here whether the 
Eleventh Circuit has proscribed the use of superseding 
cause in admiralty. Several other circuits, most impor- 
tantly this one, have affirmed the continuing viability of 
superseding cause in the maritime context. In Hunley v. 
Ace Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493, 497, 1991 A.M.C. 1217 
(9th Cir. 1991), we held that an intervening force super- 
sedes prior negligence where the subsequent actor's neg- 
ligence was “extraordinary” (defined as “neither normal 
nor reasonably foreseeable”). Thus, a ship’s failure to 
stand by and offer assistance to the sinking vessel with 
which it had collided was deemed the sole proximate 
cause of injury to a rescuing vessel’s crewman, even 
though both of the colliding vessels were causes-in-fact of 
the collision. Id. at 496-97. Accordingly, we held the 
departing vessel “solely responsible” for the injuries of 
the seaman aboard the rescuing vessel. Id. at 498. See also 
Protectus Alpha Navigation Co. v. Northern Pac. Grain 
Growers, 767 F.2d 1379, 1384, 1986 A.M.C. 56 (9th Cir. 
1985) (indicating in dicta that application of the principle 


(e) the fact that the intervening force is due to an act 
of a third person which is wrongful toward the other 
and as such subjects the third person to liability to 
him; 

(f) the degree of culpability of a wrongful act of a 
third person which sets the intervening force in 


motion. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts §§440-42 (1965). 


App. 15 


of superseding cause in a maritime case “would not have 
been improper.”); Nunley v. M/V Dauntless Colocotronis, 
727 F.2d 455, 466, 1984 A.M.C. 2920 (5th Cir.) (indicating 
that superseding cause might come into play in admi- 
ralty), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 832 (1984); Donaghey v. Ocean 
Drilling & Exploration Co., 974 F.2d 646, 652, 1994 A.M.C. 
512 (Sth Cir. 1992) (holding that “the doctrine of super- 
seding negligence in maritime cases . . . retains its vital- 
ity”); and cf. Lone Star, 927 F.2d at 1458-60 (rejecting the 
Hercules approach and applying superseding cause in a 


case involving ordinary (as opposed to extraordinary) 
negligence). 


[3] We hereby reaffirm that superseding cause may 
act to cut off liability for antecedent acts of negligence in 
admiralty cases where the superseding cause is the result 
of extraordinary negligence. We therefore hold that the 
district court did not “disobey” Reliable Transfer in 
employing the concept of superseding cause in this case. 


B. The decision to bifurcate. 


The trial court’s decision to bifurcate a trial is 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Counts v. Burlington 
N. R.R., 952 F.2d 1136, 1139 (9th Cir. 1991). Rule 42 of the 


Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides in pertinent 
part: 


[t]he court, in furtherance of convenience or to 
avoid prejudice, or when separate trials will be 
conducive to expedition and economy, may 
order a separate trial of any claim, . . . third 
party claim, or of any separate issue or of any 
number of claims . . . or issues, always preserv- 
ing inviolate the right of trial by jury. 


App. 16 


[4] Exxon argues that the district court’s decision to 
bifurcate the trial, and to limit Phase One to the issue of 
causation after the breakout, denied Exxon due process 
and deprived it of a fair trial by foreclosing it from 
presenting its case-in-chief. Because it maintains that the 
issues of causation, from breakout to grounding, are 
inseverable, Exxon avers that it was unfairly prejudiced 
by the bifurcation. We do not agree. 


[5] The district court assumed at the outset of Phase 
One that the defendants’ negligence was a cause in fact of 
the grounding. There was thus no need in Phase One for 
Exxon to establish HIRI’s fault in causing the breakout. 
Rather, Exxon had the burden of proving that the forces 
set in motion by the breakout were the proximate cause 
of the grounding. HIRI had the burden of showing by be 
preponderance of the evidence that Captain Coyne s 
actions subsequent to the breakout were the sole proxi- 
mate or superseding cause of the grounding of the vessel, 
such that the defendant parties were relieved of liability 


for the Houston's loss.° 


As the district court noted in its order granting the 
motion to bifurcate, if it did not find Captain Coyne’s 
navigation after the breakout to be the sole proximate or 
superseding cause of the grounding, it could “still deter- 
mine in the first phase of a bifurcated trial the compara- 
tive fault (cause) of the grounding as between the 
breakout and the subsequent navigation of the vessel.” 
The district court noted, too, that it was “well aware of 


5 We find Exxon’s argument that the district court improp- 
erly allocated the burdens of proof to be without merit. 


App. 17 


the possibility that the issue of causation with respect to 
the breakout may still require a second phase of trial, 
perhaps before a jury.” After a lengthy bench trial, the 
district court found that Captain Coyne’s extraordinary 
negligence was the sole proximate cause of the grounding 
of the Houston, obviating any need to make a comparative 
analysis of fault regarding the loss of the ship. “The 
principles of comparative negligence are not applicable 
when damages can be apportioned to separate causes 


based on evidence in the record.” Protectus Alpha, 767 
F.2d at 1383. 


[6] Exxon also argues that the district court erred in 
holding that the safe berth clause in the contract between 
HIRI and Exxon imposed a duty of due diligence rather 
than one of strict liability upon the defendants. Had the 
district court applied the strict liability standard, Exxon 
indirectly avers, it could not have bifurcated the trial or 
upheld HIRI’s superseding cause defense. We find it 
unnecessary to decide here which standard of care is 
appropriate in this context; even were we to accept 
Exxon’s theory that the HIRI defendants were strictly 
liable as warrantors of safe berth, such a finding would 
not render erroneous either the district court’s bifurcation 
of the trial, or its superseding cause analysis. 


Where, as here, the district court finds the injured 
party to be the superseding or sole proximate cause of the 
damage complained of, it cannot recover from a party 
whose actions or omissions are deemed to be causes in 


® Exxon does not dispute the district court's finding that 
the defendants met the duty of due diligence in all respects. 


App. 18 


fact, but not legal causes of the damage, regardless of 
whether that party’s liability is premised on negligence or 
strict liability. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 440 
cmt. b (1965) (“superseding cause relieves the actor of 
liability, irrespective of whether his antecedent negli- 
gence was or was not a substantial factor in br ageng 
about the harm”); and see In re Related Asbestos Cases SS 
F.Supp. 1142, 1150 (N.D. Cal. 1982) (holding the (ures 
of superseding cause applicable in cases of strict liability 


in tort.) 


[7] Given the viability of the superseding cause doc- 
trine in cases such as this one, the district court’s decision 
to bifurcate the trial cannot be said to have “severed the 
unseverable” or to have prejudiced Exxon. Because bifur- 
cation of the trial was expeditious and appropriate in 
light of the circumstances of this case and did not result 
in prejudice to Exxon, we hold the district court did not 
abuse its discretion in choosing to take this approach. 


C. The district court's finding of extraordinary negli- 
gence. 


A district court’s findings of fact are reviewed under 
the clearly erroneous standard. Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a); 
Campbell v. Wood, 18 F.3d 662, 681 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 
114 S. Ct. 2125 (1994). This standard applies to findings of 
fact made by admiralty trial courts. Havens, 996 F.2d at 
217. “[Rleview under the clearly erroneous standard is 
significantly deferential, requiring a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been committed.” Concrete 
Pipe and Prod. of Cal. Inc. v. Construction of Cal., Inc. v. 
Construction Laborers Pension Trust, 113 S. Ct. 2264, 2280 


App. 19 


(1993) (internal quotations omitted); see also United States 
v. Ramos, 923 F.2d 1346, 1356 (9th Cir. 1991). Special 
deference is paid to a trial court's credibility findings. Id. 
A district court’s findings of negligence, including issues 
of proximate cause, are reviewed under the clearly erro- 
neous standard. Vollendorff v. United States, 951 F.2d 215, 
217 (9th Cir. 1991). This standard of review is an excep- 
tion to the general rule that mixed questions of law and 
fact are reviewed de novo. Id. “[D]eterminations of negli- 
gence in admiralty cases are findings of fact which will be 
given application unless clearly erroneous.” Hasbro Indus- 
tries, Inc. v. M/S St. Constantine, 705 F.2d 339. 341 (9th 
Cir.), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1013, 104 S. Ct. 537 (1983). 


Exxon “recognizes the futility of at.»cking on appeal 
the district court’s finding that Captain Coyne was negli- 
gent” because of conflicting expert testimony on that 
issue, but argues that the district court erred: 1) in finding 
Captain Coyne’s actions to have been extraordinarily 
negligent; and 2) in finding Captain Coyne’s negligence, 
even if correctly characterized as “gross,” to have been 
the legal cause of the loss. 


The district court made detailed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law after the bench trial. The district court 
rested its conclusion that Captain Coyne was extraordi- 
narily negligent, and that his negligence was the sole 
proximate and superseding cause of the ship’s ground- 
ing, and thus its loss, on its findings that: 1) Exxon had 
failed to rebut the presumptive admiralty rules of The 
Louisiana, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 164 (1865), and The Pennsylva- 
nia, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125 (1873); 2) even aside from these 
presumptions, Captain Coyne acted with extraordinary 


App. 20 


negligence; 3) Captain Coyne acted slowly and deliber- 
ately and thus cannot have been said to have acted “in 
extremis;” and 4) Captain Coyne’s actions constituted a 
superseding cause of the ship’s loss under Restatement 
section 442 and the law of this circuit. 


[8] Under the rule of The Louisiana, when a moving 
vessel strikes a charted reef, it is presumed the vessel is at 
fault. 70 U.S. at 173. The vessel may rebut this presump- 
tion by showing by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the collision was the fault of a stationary object, that the 
moving vessel acted with reasonable care, or that the 
collision was an unavoidable accident. /[d.; see 
Weyerhaeuser v. Atropos Island, 777 F.2d 1344, 1347 (9th Cir. 
1985). Because the Houston struck a charted reef, and 
because Exxon failed to meet its rebuttal burden, the 
district court concluded that Captain Coyne’s navigation 
was negligent, and that this negligence was a proximate 
cause of the stranding. 


[9] The Pennsylvania stands for the presumption that 
when a vessel violates a statutory rule meant to prevent 
strandings, the violation was a proximate cause of the 
stranding. 86 U.S. at 136. This presumption can be rebut- 
ted by a “clear and convincing showing of no proximate 
cause.” Trinidad Corp. v. S.S. Keiyoh Maru, 845 F.2d 818, 
825 (9th Cir. 1988). The district court found that Captain 
Coyne’s failure to plot fixes between 1830 and 2004, and 
his failure to call another officer to be bridge between 
1948 and 2000, while he stood there alone, violated 33 
C.F.R. § 164.11 and § 164.11(a). Because Exxon failed to 
sustain its burden under the rule, the district court found 
these statutory violations were a proximate cause of the 


stranding. 


App. 21 


[10] Exxon responds to these findings in a footnote, 
wherein it notes, with respect to the Pennsylvania rule, but 
without offering any support, that there is no duty to plot 
fixes in a time of peril, and, with respect to the Louisiana 
rule, that “the Ninth Circuit has questioned whether pre- 
sumption of fault applies when the ship strikes a sub- 
merged structure.” Exxon cites Grace Line, Inc. v. Todd 
Shipyards Corp., 500 F.2d 361, 366 (9th Cir. 1974), in which 
we “questioned” but did not decide whether the tradi- 
tional rule would apply in a case where a ship struck a 
submerged drydock with a hidden recess. Id. In the 
instant case, the Houston struck a charted reef because her 
captain had not bothered to fix her position. The analogy 
to Grace Line is not apt. Exxon neither rebuts nor offers 
any compelling reason to ignore the traditional admiralty 
rules laid out in The Pennsylvania and The Louisiana. 


Quite apart from these rules, the district court found 
that Captain Coyne “acted negligently, unreasonably and 
in violation of the maritime industry standars” in a 
number of instances. The court cited his failure to anchor 
properly, or to make more than one attempt to anchor; his 
failure to request assistance from the Coast Guard or 
other available ships; his failure to back the vessel far 
enough from shore; and his decision instead to linger 
unnecessarily in the vicinity of shore, only a half mile or 
so from the actual grounding line. 


[11] Because the district court found, partly on the 
basis of the Captain’s own testimony, that Captain Coyne 
acted with calm deliberation and without the pressure of 
imminent peril, it held him to the standard of “such 
reasonable care and maritime skill as prudent navigators 
employ for the performiance of similar service.” Stevens v. 


App. 22 


The White City, 285 U.S. 195, 202 (1932). Exxon acknowl- 
edges the Captain remained calm, but argues that 
because the ship was never out of peril, a more lenient 
standard should have been adopted. Exxon cites no 
authority on appeal for this proposition. Because the 
district court’s finding that Captain Coyne had ample 
time in which to reflect and act between 1830 and the 
time of grounding is well supported by the record, we 
find that the district court did not err in holding him to a 
reasonable standard of care. 


Finally, the district court found Captain Coyne’s neg- 
ligence not only to be a proximate or legal cause of the 
stranding, but to be the sole proximate, and thus the 
superseding, cause of the ship’s loss. On the basis of the 
testimony of the Houston's crew and expert witnesses, the 
district court found that “[a}lthough the breaking of the 
mooring chain imperilled the ship, the EXXON Houston 
successfully avoided that peril. By 1830, [she] was head- 
ing out to sea and in no further danger of stranding.” The 
court recognized from the start that the Houston's reach- 
ing a point of safety was not by itself enough to break the 
chain of events set in place by the breakout. Under 
Restatement sections 442 and 447, as adopted by this 
Circuit, Hunley, 927 F.2d at 497, the Captain's actions after 
reaching this point of safety would have to be extraordi- 
narily negligent to be deemed a superseding cause cut- 
ting off the liability of the defendants. The district court 
specifically found Captain Coyne’s negligence to be 
extraordinary with respect to the failure to fix and plot 
the ship’s position after 1830, and the decision to make 
the final starboard turn. The court also found the fact that 


App. 23 


the ship grounded almost three hours after the breaka- 
way “was highly extraordinary rather than normal.” 


Exxon argues that the court's findings of extraordin- 
ary negligence are erroneous, maintaining that none of 
the Captain's decisions were outside the range of discre- 
tion or “so bizarre” as to be unforeseeable, and that “the 
only command that lead [sic] the tanker to strand was the 
[right] turn order.” Exxon also argues that it was unnec- 
essary for the Captain to plot fixes because he knew his 
position by parallel indexing and there would have been 
no room on the chart to plot fixes. Finally, Exxon argues 
that the Captain’s concern about the injured crane opera- 
tor made him anxious. 


Exxon interprets Captain Coyne’s actions as depen- 
dent intervening, and thus not superseding, forces under 
Restatement section 441. Essentially, Exxon argues that all 
of the Captain’s actions were reactions to the breakout, 
and thus cannot be reviewed independently. Exxon relies 
on Kinsman Transit Co., 338 F.2d 708, 723-26 (2d Cir. 1964), 
cert. denied, 380 U.S. 944 (1965), for the proposition that 
failure to foresee danger will not excuse liability. The case 
is inapposite. Kinsman concerned liability for injuries aris- 
ing from the drifting of an unmanned vessel after it came 
unmoored. In the portion of the case cited by Exxon, the 
court deemed it was foreseeable that an unmanned ship 
turned loose by a faulty mooring device would come to 
harm or collide with other vessels. Id. The Houston was 
not an unmanned vessel, but one fully manned by and 


App. 24 


directed by a captain who was capable of getting her to 
safety before grounding her by his own acts.” 


[12] The district court's findings that Captain 
Coyne’s failure to take fixes was extraordinarily negligent 
is supported by the record. All of the expert witnesses, 
including Exxon’s, testified that it was imprudent and 
contrary to industry standards for Captain Coyne not to 
plot fixes after 1830. The record does not support Exxon’s 
contention that plotting fixes would have obliterated the 
chart. Captain Coyne made no such claim; he explained 
that he did not plot fixes because he felt it was unnecess- 
ary to do so. He believed that he could adequately assess 
the ship’s position through parallel indexing. Exxon’s 
assertion that parallel indexing was sufficient is also con- 
tradicted by all of the witnesses, including Exxon’s. Cap- 
tain Coyne’s sole reliance on parallel indexing was, 
moreover, contrary to Navigation Safety Regulations, 33 
C.F.R. § 164.11, and to Exxon’s own Navigation Manual. 


[13] The district court's finding that the final star- 
board turn was extraordinarily negligent is also sup- 
ported by the record. Captain Coyne stated that he 
wanted to get away from shore, but the turn right took 
him toward shore. As for his concern with the hose and 


? Kinsman rejects the doctrine of last clear chance under 
which the trial court had excused the moorers (and the ship- 
owner) from liability. 338 F.2d at 719. While Exxon has analo- 
gized superseding cause doctrine to last clear chance, that 
argument fails, and Kinsman does not rescue it. HIRI was not 
absolved of fault because Exxon had the “last clear chance” to 
avoid danger, but because the district court found that Exxon’s 
independent and extraordinarily negligent actions were the sole 
legal cause of the stranding. 


App. 25 


danger of collision with the Nene, it is undisputed that 
Captain Coyne made no effort to ascertain the position of 
the Nene. The district court properly rejected the Cap- 
tain’s argument that he could not continue to back up 
because of his concern for Denton, the injured crane 
operator, as the man was in fact not seriously injured, no 
one called upon the Coast Guard or other available ships 
for assistance in a supposed medical emergency, and the 
Captain's own testimony that his concerns for Denton did 


not in fact cause him to do anything he would not other- 
wise have done. 


[14] In sum, the district court found that Captain 
Coyne had ample time, as well as opportunity and avail- 
able manpower, to take precautions which would have 
eliminated the risk of grounding, and that his failure to 
do so amounted to extraordinary negligence, superseding 
any negligence of the defendants with regard to the 
breakout or provision of safe berth after the breakout. 
Because the district court’s findings are well supported 
by the record, we hold they are not clearly erroneous. 


CONCLUSION 


We hold the district court did not err in finding 
Captain Coyne’s extraordinary negligence to be the sole 


proximate and superseding cause of the damage to the 
Houston, and we 


AFFIRM. 


App. 26 App. 27 
APPENDIX B 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Appellants’ Petition for Rehearing is DENIED. 


No. 94-15806 


D.C. No. 
CV-90-0271-HMF 


EXXON COMPANY, EXXON 
SHIPPING COMPANY, 


Plaintiffs /Counter-defendants / 
Third-Party Defendants / 


Appellants, 
v. ORDER 
SOFEC, INC., (Filed 
Defendant /Counter- May 24, 1995) 
claimant/ Appellee, 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC., 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT 
REFINERY, INC.; PRI MARINE, 
INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC., 


Defendant /Cross-claim-Third- 
Party Plaintiffs/ Appellees, 


Vv 


GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, 
Griffin Woodhouse, Inc., 


Third-Party 
Defendant / Appellee, 


BRIDON FIBRES AND 
PLASTICS, LTD., 


Defendant-Third-Party 
Defendant / Appellee. 


me ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee meee See” eee ee See ee” ee” eee ee” 


Before: CANBY, WIGGINS, and T.G. NELSON, Circuit 
Judges. 


App. 28 


APPENDIX C 


——————————————————————EEE 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
DISTRICT OF HAWAII 


EXXON SHIPPING JUDGMENT IN A 
COMPANY, et al., CIVIL CASE 
Plaintiffs, 
V. 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, 


INC., et al., 
Defendants. (Filed Apr. 20, 1994) 


[X] 


CASE NUMBER: 
90-0027 1 HMF 


Jury Verdict. This action came before the Court for a 
trial by jury. The issues have been tried and the jury 
has rendered its verdict. 


Decision by Court. This action came for hearing 
before the Court. The issues have been heard and a 
decision has been rendered. 


IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED 


that pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b), final judgment 
is hereby entered against plaintiffs on all causes of 
action stated in their complaint as follows: 


A. In favor of all Defendants on Plaintiffs’ 
claim for damages to and loss of the Exxon 
Houston; and 


App. 29 


B. In favor of Defendants Sofec, Inc., Bridon 
Fibres and Plastics, Ltd., and Griffin Wood- 
house, Ltd., on Plaintiffs’ claim for recovery 
of costs of clean-up of the bunker oil spill. 


APR 20 1994 /s/ Walter A. Y. H. Chinn 


Date Clerk 


ce:all parties 


(By) Deputy Clerk 


App. 30 


APPENDIX D 
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAII 


EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY ) CIV. NO. 


and EXXON COMPANY, U.S.A. ) 90-00271 HMF 
(A division of Exxon ) 
corporation), 

Plaintiff, 


Vs. 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC.; 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT 
REFINERY, INC.; PRI MARINE, 
INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, 
INC.; and SOFEC, INC., 


Defendants. 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC.; 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT 
REFINERY, INC.; PRI MARINE, 
INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, 
INC., 


Third-Party Plaintiffs, 


VS. 


BRIDON FIBRES AND 
PLASTICS, LTD.; GRIFFIN 


[FINDINGS OF 
WOODHOUSE, LTD., and 


FACT AND 
WERTH ENGINEERING, INC., CONCLUSIONS 
Third-Party Defendants. OF LAW] 


ed 
8 ee el 


App. 31 


FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
(Filed May 20, 1993) 


On March 2, 1989, the oil tanker EXXON HOUSTON 
stranded near Barbers Point on the island of Oahu after 
breaking away from its mooring earlier that day. Between 
February 9, 1993 and March 3, 1993, the court held a 
bench trial in this admiralty action relating to the strand- 
ing. The trial was the first phase (“Phase One”) of a 
bifurcated proceeding, and was limited to events occur. 


ring after the EXXON HOUSTON broke away from its 
mooring. 


The court makes the following findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. To the extent that any findings of fact 
herein are more properly construed as conclusions of law, 
they shall be so construed; and to the extent any conclu- 


sions of law are more properly construed as findings of 
fact, they shall be so construed. 


FINDINGS OF FACT 


A. Parties 


1. Plaintiff Exxon Shipping Company was the 
owner and operator of the EXXON HOUSTON, an oil 
tanker. Exxon Shipping Company vessels carry petroleum 
products for Plaintiff Exxon Company, U.S.A. This order 
will refer to the Plaintiffs collectively as Exxon. 


2. Defendants and Third-party Plaintiffs Pacific 
Resources, Inc., PRI International, Inc., and Hawaiian 
Independent Refinery, Inc. are affiliated corporations. 
These corporations trade in oil and operate the single 
point mooring and refinery at Barbers Point. 


App. 32 


3. Defendant Sofec, Inc. manufactured the single 
point mooring at Barbers Point. 


4. Third-party Defendant Griffin Woodhouse, Ltd. 
manufactured the chafe chain which held ships to the 
single point mooring. 

5. Third-party Defendant Bridon Fibres and Plas- 
tics, Ltd. distributed the chafe chain. 


6. Third-party Defendant Werth Engineering, Inc. 
was dismissed from this action before the trial. This order 
will refer to the Defendants and Third-party Defendants 
collectively as the Defendants. 


B. Contractual Arrangements 


7. Plaintiff Exxon Company, U.S.A., a division of 
Exxon Corporation, and Defendant PRI International, 
Inc., (“PRII”) entered into a buy/sell arrangement in 
1988, pursuant to which Exxon Company, U.S.A. deliv- 
ered Alaska North Slope crude oi! to PRII and PRII deliv- 
ered West Texas Intermediate crude oil to Exxon 


Company U.S.A. 


8. Among the terms of the agreement was a para- 
graph entitled “Safe Berth Availability” which provided, 


in relevant part: 


The terminal shall provide a safe berth to which 
vessels may proceed to or depart from, and 
where the vessel can always lie safely afloat. 
However, notwithstanding anything contained 
in this clause, the terminal shall not be deemed 
to warrant the safety of public channels, fair- 
ways, approaches thereto, anchorages, or other 


App. 33 


publicly-maintained areas either inside or out- 
side the port area where the vessel may be 
directed. 


9. On April 4, 1988, at PRII’s request, Exxon U.S.A. 
agreed that the above quoted provision “includes ‘single 
point mooring’”. The provision, as amended, was in 
effect on March 2, 1989. 


10. On June 7, 1988, Exxon U.S.A. agreed to deliver 
crude oil “by vessel into Hawaiian Independent Refinery, 
Ewa Beach, Hawaii via offshore single point system, or 
upon request by PRI vessel into a West Coast refinery or 
terminal acceptable to Exxon.” 


11. On March 1, 1989, pursuant to the above con- 
tract, the EXXON HOUSTON arrived at the single point 
mooring (SPM) at Barbers Point, Oahu. The SPM is 
owned and operated by Defendant Hawaiian Indepen- 
dent Refinery, Inc. (HIRI), an affiliate of PRIL 


C. Arrival Of The EXXON HOUSTON At HIRI's 
SPM 


12. At all times relevant to Phase One trial, the 
EXXON HOUSTON was a single screw, steam propulsion 
oil tanker, 72,056 dead weight tons and 766.9 feet in 
length, with shaft horsepower of 19,000 ahead, and 
approximately 6,000 astern. 


13. At all times relevant to Phase One trial, the 
EXXON HOUSTON was equipped with two forward 
anchors, mounted on the port and starboard bows respec- 
tively, and another anchor astern. The forward anchors 
carried with them 1,080 feet of anchor chain. 


App. 34 


14. At all times relevant to Phase One trial, Kevin 
Dick was the Master of the EXXON HOUSTON. Kevin 
Dick has changed his name to Kevin Coyne, and these 
findings of fact will refer to him as Captain Coyne. Cap- 
tain Coyne was an employee of Exxon Shipping Com- 
pany and was acting within the course and scope of his 
duties throughout the events leading up to the stranding. 


15. Previous visits in Exxon tankers had famil- 
iarized Captain Coyne with HIRI’s single point mooring 
at Barbers Point. At these earlier visits, HIRI mooring 
masters had briefed Captain Coyne on the conditions at 
the SPM. This briefing included information about the 
unpredictability of currents at the SPM. 


16. On March 1, 1989, the EXXON HOUSTON 
arrived at HIRI’s SPM. Captain Stephen Kuntz, a mooring 
master provided by HIRI, toarded the EXXON 
HOUSTON and oversaw the mooring of the vessel to the 
SPM. 


17. Before allowing the vessel to moor at the SPM, 
Captain Kuntz presented to Captain Coyne a document 
entitled General Instructions, Discharging /Loading 
Orders and Indemnification, dated Miarch 1, 1989, which 
Captain Coyne signed. 


18. On March 2, 1989, the EXXON HOUSTON was 
manned by the following officers (@ther than Captain 
Coyne) who were employed by Exxon Shipping Com- 


pany: 


App. 35 


Name Position 
Duane Madinger Chief Mate 
Hallock Davis Second Mate 
Raymond Spiller Third Mate 
Richard Spear Third Mate 


All were acting within the course and scope of their 
duties that day. 


19. Third Mate Spear had been relieved by Third 
Mate Spiller on March 1, 1989, but remained on board 
through March 2, 1989 as an extra man per Captain 
Coyne’s instructions. 


20. On March 2, 1989, Marie Huhnke, a licensed 
third mate, was employed by Exxon Shipping Company 
on board the EXXON HOUSTON as an able-bodied sea- 
man (AB). 


21. On March 2, 1989, Captain Steven Marvin 
relieved Captain Kuntz as mooring master and was on 
board the EXXON HOUSTON at all times relevant to 
Phase One trial. 


22. Captain Marvin was a competent and experi- 
enced mooring master by virtue of his naval background, 
his training as a mooring master, and his 8 years of 
experience as a HIRI mooring master. Captain Marvin did 
not have a master’s license nor experience aboard com- 
mercial tankers as master or first mate. These were HIRI 
requirements for mooring masters which were instituted 
after Captain Marvin had begun serving as a mooring 
master. The court finds Captain Marvin's failure to meet 


App. 36 


these requirements to be irrelevant in light of his experi- 
ence and training and not a cause of the incident on 


March 2, 1989. 


23. On March 2, 1989, the EXXON HOUSTON was 
moored to HIRI’s SPM and discharging oil into HIRI's 
submerged pipeline. The discharge required two floating 
hoses, each approximately 840 feet in length, which ran 
from the port manifold of the EXXON HOUSTON to the 
SPM. Each hose was secured to the ship’s manifold by 
twelve bolts and several restraining lines. 


24. A mooring assembly including a chafe chain 
and mooring hawser attached the bow of the EXXON 
HOUSTON to the SPM. During normal operations at the 
SPM, the mooring assembly held the ship in place and 
allowed the hoses to float freely without any tension. 


D. The Breakout 


25. On March 2, 1989, while the EXXON HOUSTON 
was discharging oil at the SPM, there was a heavy storm 
with winds and seas coming generally from the south (a 
Kona storm). At 1715,' the storm caused a link in the 
chafe chain to part. The ship began to drift away from the 
SPM, putting the hoses under tension. 


26. Despite an attempt to keep the ship near the 
SPM, the hoses parted. The first hose parted close to the 
water line of the vessel beneath the port manifold of the 


1 In conformance with the trial testimony, all times in these 
findings are given in Honolulu local time in military format 
Thus, 5:15 p.m. Honolulu time is written as 1715. 


App. 37 


EXXON HOUSTON at 1725. Because only a short portion 
of this hose was left attached to the ship, it was not a 
threat to the ship’s subsequent handling. 


27. The second hose parted at approximately 1728 
on March 2, 1989. This is the point which has been 
designated as the “breakout” and is the initiating point in 
time for the Phase One trial. 


28. The second hose tore a heavy meta! spool piece 
off the SPM, leaving approximately 840 feet of that hose 
connected to the ship’s port manifold. Approximately 100 
feet at the end of the hose sank due to the weight of the 
spool piece. The remainder of the hose continued to float. 
(Any further references to “the hose” refer to this second, 
longer hose.) 


29. The hose was long enough to reach the ship's 
propeller from the port manifold. Captain Coyne was 
justifiably concerned that the hose would foul the pro- 
peller if the ship went forward. 


30. A small line handling boat, the NENE, was at 
the SPM to assist the EXXON HOUSTON when the break- 
out occurred. The NENE was too small to push or tow the 
EXXON HOUSTON to safety after the breakout. 


31. At 1728, the EXXON HOUSTON’s draft was 15 
feet forward and 30 feet aft. This left an unusually large 
portion of the EXXON HOUSTON ’s bow above the water, 
making the vessel more difficult to turn in the wind. 


| 32. During the period between 1728 and 2009, the 
bridge of the EXXON HOUSTON was manned by an 
able-bodied seaman acting as the helmsman, and the 


App. 38 


following vessel's officers and the mooring master as 
shown below: 


A. From 1728 until 1830: 
Captain Coyne 
Captain Marvin 
Second Mate Davis 


B. From 1830 until 1948: 
Captain Coyne 
Second Mate Davis 


C. From 1948 until 2000: 
Captain Coyne 


D. From 2000 until 2009: 
Captain Coyne 
Third Mate Spiller 


33. Two vessels had broken away from HIRI’s SPM 
on previous occasions. In one case the vessel was suc- 
cessfully remoored to the SPM, while in the other case the 
vessel's master kept the vessel's head to the SPM while 
the oil hoses were disconnected. 


34. At 1730, the U.S. Coast Guard Joint Rescue 
Coordination Center initiated a radio call to the EXXON 
HOUSTON asking if assistance was needed. The Coast 
Guard told Captain Coyne that assistance vessels would 
take more than two hours to arrive. Captain Coyne 
refused the offer of assistance, believing that the situation 
would be resolved within that time. 


E. Attempt To Anchor 


35. At approximately 1740, Captain Coyne dropped 
his forward starboard anchor which paid out one shot (15 


App. 39 


fathoms /90 feet) of chain. The depth of water in the area 
where the anchor was dropped is 10-11 fathoms (60-66 
feet). 


36. The standard practice in anchoring a ship is to 
release several additional shots of chain which increase 
the anchor’s holding power. When the anchor stops pull- 
ing chain out by itself, the ship deploys the extra chain by 
either going slightly astern or by pushing chain out with 
the anchor windlass. 


37. One shot of chain could not hold the ship in 
10-11 fathoms of water. Five to six shots of chain would 
have been required to hold the EXXON HOUSTON at its 
1740 anchoring position. On the evening of March 2, 1989, 
the EXXON HOUSTON had on board and available 12 
shots (1080 feet) of anchor chain for each of the forward 
anchors. 


38. Captain Coyne neither went astern nor engaged 
the windlass to deploy the chain. Captain Coyne aban- 
doned the anchoring attempt at 1747 after the chain did 
not pay out of its own accord. 


39. While raising the starboard anchor, the long 
hose became lodged on the anchor. Captain Coyne then 
ordered the anchor re-lowered to dislodge the hose from 
the starboard anchor. 


40. Although in retrospect this might have provided 
an opportunity to keep the hose secured away from the 
propeller, there was a real possibility that the hose would 
later free itself and again endanger propulsion. Moreover, 
the situation presented to Captain Coyne was a novel 
one, and it was not negligent that Captain Coyne did not 


App. 40 


think of exploiting the happenstance snagging of the 
hose. 


41. After Captain Coyne raised the starboard 
anchor at approximately 1747, he never again attempted 
to anchor the EXXON HOUSTON prior to the stranding. 


42. A review of the track taken by the EXXON 
HOUSTON between 1747 and 2009 shows numerous 
areas where the vessel could have safely anchored. 


F. The Transit 


43. By 1803, the NENE had attached a line to the 
hose and was able to control the end of the hose, keeping 
it on the EXXON HOUSTON’s port side and away from 
the EXXON HOUSTON’s propeller. Captain Coyne 
ordered the NENE’s movements as necessary to coordi- 
nate with the EXXON HOUSTON’s movements. 


44. The EXXON HOUSTON backed out to sea 
between 1803 and 1830. Its position was plotted on chart 
# 19362 for times 1740, 1747, 1803, 1820 and 1830. From 
1803 to 1830, the EXXON HOUSTON made a course of 
260°, proceeding in a generally westerly direction at a 
speed of 2 knots over ground, on a half astern bell. This 
course took the EXXON HOUSTON out to sea and away 


from shallow water. 


45. Captain Marvin testified that at 1830, positions 
for times 1803, 1820, and 1830 were not plotted on the 
chart. The implication of this testimony is that the three 
fixes were falsified. Captain Marvin further testified that 
he had accurately estimated the ship’s position at 1830 to 


itn 


_ 


—— 


App. 41 


be 800 yards due west of the SPM, a position that con- 
flicts with the plotted 1830 position. The court finds these 
portions of Captain Marvin’s testimony to be not credible 
in light of the weight of the evidence. The court finds that 
the 1803, 1820, and 1830 fixes accurately reflect the posi- 
tions of the EXXON HOUSTON at those times. 


G. Post-1830 Maneuvers 


46. At 1831, Captain Coyne quit transmitting away 
from the shore and ordered a slow ahead bell. The change 
of course at 1831 was not caused by any necessity or 
emergency and there was no reason why the vessel could 
not have continued to back out to sea after 1830. At 1830, 
the EXXON HOUSTON was only slightly more than one 
mile away from the shore, and about a half mile from the 
grounding line. 


47. The EXXON HOUSTON remained from 0.9 to 
1.1 miles from shore from 1830 until 1956. Had Captain 
Coyne so decided he could have continued to back the 
ship after 1830 to any distance offshore he wanted. Later 
in the evening, Captain Coyne could have suspended 
disconnecting the hose at any time and backed another 
mile to deeper water. Backing further to sea could have 
been accomplished without significant risk to the EXXON 
HOUSTON or the NENE, and in fact posed much less risk 
than remaining near the shore while a Kona storm tended 
to push the ship ashore. 


48. At 1831, Captain Coyne began backing and fill- 
ing-alternating short ahead and astern bells to maintain a 
sheltered lee on the port side of the vessel. The lee 


App. 42 


allowed the hose to be disconnected with reduced expo- 
sure to the wind and seas from the south. The backing 


and filling caused the ship to stop its progress away from 
the shore. 


H. Navigation After 1830 


49. Between 1830 and 2004 on the evening of March 
2, 1989, a period of one hour and thirty four minutes, no 
positions of the EXXON HOUSTON were plotted on any 


chart. 


50. At some time between 1830 ‘and 2004, the 
EXXON HOUSTON moved out of the area charted on 
chart # 19362. At that point, chart # 19357 should have 
been used. Chart # 19357 was less detailed than chart # 
19362, but was adequate for plotting fixes. Fixes could 
have been plotted on Chart # 19357 without obliterating 
either prior fixes or the information on the chart. 


51. There are adequate charted aids to navigation in 
the vicinity of Barbers Point. 


52. A prudent mariner would have fixed and plot- 
ted his vessel's position at least every 15 to 20 minutes in 
the situation in which the EXXON HOUSTON found 
itself after 1830 on March 2, 1989. Many factors existed 
that day that would have compelled a prudent mariner to 
fix his position frequently. These factors include, but are 
not necessarily limited to: the proximity to shore, the 
rough weather pushing the ship shoreward, the difficulty 
of estimating the ship’s position in the dark, the possi- 
bility that removing the hose would be a distraction from 


el ge eh 


lA A Ge = Al Accel ee ly it ea A ee ie Ri A 


App. 43 


navigation, and the difficulty of maneuvering the EXXON 
HOUSTON with the hose attached. 


53. Frequent plotting of the vessel's position would 
have enabled Captain Coyne to determine the effects of 
wind, sea and any currents on the tanker, and would 
have alerted him that he was approaching danger. 


54. Captain Coyne had personnel available for the 
plotting of fixes but failed to use them. As a requirement 
of receiving a third mate’s license, an individual must 
pass a Coast Guard examination and demonstrate an 
ability to take and plot fixes. Each of the officers and AB 
Huhnke were able to take and plot fixes. 


55. Captain Coyne testified that between 1830 and 
1956, he navigated by the method of parallel indexing, a 
technique in which a line is drawn on the radar to show 
relative movement with respect to an object. Using paral- 
lel indexing, Captain Coyne endeavored to keep the 
EXXON HOUSTON at a distance of 0.9 to 1.1 miles from 
the shore. 


56. Parallel indexing is not a substitute for fixing 
the position of the vessel. Navigation by parallel indexing 
without plotted fixes is inherently dangerous and a viola- 
tion of industry standards. 


| 57. With respect to the technique of parallel index- 
ing, the Exxon Navigation and Bridge Organization Man- 
ual specifically states as follows: 


Parallel indexing does not relieve the ship's offi- 


cer of the duty to frequently plot the iti 
position of 
a ship on the chart by means of navigational 
xes. 


App. 44 


* * * 


FAILURE TO FOLLOW THE ABOVE PRECAU- 
TIONS OR TO PROCEED WITHOUT RELIABLE 
CHARTED FIXES IS DANGEROUS. PARALLEL 
INDEXING IS A SUPPLEMENTAL NAVIGA- 
TIONAL TECHNIQUE ONLY. 


Joint Trial Exhibit 250, Appendix G, p. 5 (capitalization in 
original). 


58. Captain Coyne testified at trial that he often 
ascertained the position of the ship after 1830 even 
though he failed to plot it on the chart. For the reasons 
explained below, the court finds this testimony to be not 


credible. 


59. Captain Coyne’s trial testimony contradicts his 
own earlier deposition testimony. Captain Coyne testified 
at trial that he took bearings to Barbers Point lighthouse 
after 1830. These bearings and the parallel indexing range 
taken from the radar supposedly allowed him to ascertain 
the ship’s position. At his deposition on April 3, 1991, 
however, Captain Coyne testified that he did not remem- 
ber taking bearings and that he relied on parallel index- 
ing. When asked to explain this discrepancy at the trial, 
Captain Coyne did not have a plausible explanation. 


60. Captain Coyne also testified at trial that he and 
Second Officer Davis frequently cross-checked their par- 
allel indexing and that both understood the ship's navi- 
gational situation. This situation, as described by Captain 
Coyne and confirmed by the ship’s ultimate stranding 
position, was that the EXXON HOUSTON rounded Bar- 
bers Point and moved northward along Oahu’s west 
shore. In order to monitor this progress, Captain Coyne 


eee ee ee ee 


MD Se Sh ON Bt DOG MA te lal a we 


—* on «a 


| 
| 


App. 45 


would have needed to use chart # 19357. In contrast, 
Second Officer Davis testified in his deposition that he 
believed the ship had remained near its 1830 position in 
the area charted on chart # 19362. He further testified 
that chart # 19357 was not used while he was on the 
bridge. Second Officer Davis’ account shows that he did 
not know the true position of the ship, and casts further 
doubt on Captain Coyne’s assertion that Second Officer 
Davis and Captain Coyne cross-checked their positions. 


61. The conflicting testimony is not the only evi- 
dence that Captain Coyne did not know the position of 
the EXXON HOUSTON after 1830. As discussed in more 
detail below, at 1956 Captain Coyne ordered a right turn 
that took the EXXON HOUSTON directly onto a charted 
reef. The most plausible explanation for that turn is that 
Captain Coyne did not know the EXXON HOUSTON’s 
position when he started that turn. 


62. Thus, the court finds that Captain Coyne did not 
take bearings to ascertain the EXXON HOUSTON’s posi- 
tion after 1830 on March 2, 1989. From 1830 to 2004, 
Captain Coyne knew only his range from shore from the 
parallel indexing plot. This single input did not allow 
him to fix the ship’s position. Without a fix, Captain 
Coyne was not able to check the chart for hazards. 


|. Hose Disconnect And Crane Failure 


63. At 1830, Captain Marvin left the bridge of the 
EXXON HOUSTON to assist with disconnecting the hose. 
Captain Marvin did not return to the bridge again until 
after the grounding. Captain Coyne did not ask Captain 
Marvin to return to the bridge at any time after 1830. 


App. 46 


64. It took over an hour to disconnect the hose. 
After the hose was disconnected, the EXXON 
HOUSTON’s port crane was used to lower the hose into 
the water. While the hose was suspended from the crane, 
the NENE and the EXXON HOUSTON moved apart, 
causing the crane to collapse at 1944. 


65. The crane’s collapse freed the hose, allowing it 
to drop into the water. At 1947, the NENE pulled the hose 
clear of the EXXON HOUSTON. 


66. As the crane collapsed, it carried the crane oper- 
ator’s seat onto the deck with it. Chief Mate Madinger 
feared that the crane operator, AB Ike Denton, had been 
injured. Denton was taken to his quarters. 


67. At 1948, Captain Coyne sent Second Mate Davis 
from the bridge to evaluate AB Denton’s condition. Sec- 
ond Mate Davis had received medical training from 
Exxon Shipping Company, and was the designated “first 
responder” for medical casualties. 


68. Captain Coyne did not replace Second Mate 
Davis with another officer on the bridge. From approx- 
imately 1948 to 2000, Captain Coyne was the only officer 
on the bridge of the EXXON HOUSTON. That left the 
bridge inadequately manned, with no other officer to fix 
the vessel's position. 


69. Between 1948 and the time of the stranding, 
there were additional ship’s officers available for duty on 
the bridge. 


70. Exxon Shipping Company's Navigation and 
Bridge Organization Manual (“Navigation Manual”) 
required that under conditions similar to those present on 


| 
; 


App. 47 


the March 2, 1989, at least two ship’s officers be present 
on the bridge at all time. 


71. If the bridge had been properly manned, the 
danger of stranding would have been avoided. 


J. The Final Turn 


72. After evaluating AB Denton, Second Mate Davis 
reported to Captain Coyne that AB Denton was possibly 
going into shock, but had no external injuries. 


73. Because Captain Coyne had more medical train- 
ing than Second Mate Davis, Captain Coyne decided that 
he should personally evaluate AB Denton’s condition as 
soon as possible. In order to accomplish this, Captain 
Coyne decided to rapidly move the ship away from the 
coast so that he could allow another officer to relieve him 
on the bridge. 


74. At 1956, Captain Coyne commenced the “final 
turn,” a right turn on a half ahead bell, which he then 
reduced at 1958 to a slow ahead, and he proceeded to 
execute the attempted turn on slow ahead bell until 2005. 


75. Captain Coyne did not look at the navigational 
chart before commencing the final turn. 


76. At the time when he commenced the final star- 


board turn, Captain Coyne did not know the ship’s posi- 
tion. 


77. The prevailing directions of the wind and sea, 
the EXXON HOUSTON’s trim condition, and the low 
engine speed tended to broaden the turn, carrying the 


App. 48 


ship towards the shore. Given these factors, a prudent 
mariner would not have attempted the starboard turn. 


78. The starboard turn was towards the coast line, 
towards shallower water and towards potential danger. 
The starboard turn was grossly negligent, regardless of 
whether or not it could have been made successfully. 


79. Backing out to sea or turning to port were viable 
and safe alternatives to the starboard turn. These options 
would have taken the EXXON HOUSTON away from the 
coast rapidly, allowing Captain Coyne to leave the bridge 
and attend to AB Denton. 


80. Captain Coyne’s stated reasons for rejecting the 
alternatives to the final turn do not excuse his choice. 
Captain Coyne testified that he rejected the port turn 
because of fears of colliding with the NENE and that he 
rejected backing out to sea because it was too slow and 
ineffective. Any danger of colliding with the NENE dur- 
ing a port turn could have been easily avoided by radar 
and/or radio contact. Backing out to sea was also a 
proven and effective maneuvering option. 


81. Third Mate Spiller arrived on the bridge at 
around 2000. Captain Coyne was in doubt as to the ship’s 
position at that time, and ordered Third Mate Spiller to 
take a fix of the vessel's position. Third Mate Spiller 
plotted the fix on chart # 19357 for time 2004. 


82. When Captain Coyne saw the 2004 fix on the 
navigational chart, he exclaimed, “Oh, shit!” He imme- 
diately ordered an increased speed of half ahead, fol- 
lowed by full ahead at 2005.5. 


ee 


SER en Sry ae ERR Se n 


i itn Dh ate 


App. 49 


83. The EXXON HOUSTON stranded at 2009 
approximately 0.5 miles off of Barbers Point at 21° 17.8 
N, 158° 07.3' W. 


84. The stranding occurred at a reef that was clearly 
charted on Chart # 19357. 


85. Over two and one-half hours elapsed between 
the breakout and the stranding. During that period, Cap- 
tain Coyne and his crew had ample time to consider the 
situation calmly and deliberately. 


K. Current Information 


86. Exxon has argued that the final turn failed only 
because of a large current that pushed the ship onto the 
reef. Exxon claims that the current was predictable, that 
HIRI should have warned Captain Coyne about the cur- 
rent, and that Captain Coyne would not have attempted 
the final turn had he known about the current. 


87. In his videotaped deposition, Dr. Karl Bathen 
testified as to the magnitude, direction, and predictability 
of the currents affecting the ship at Barbers Point on 
March 2, 1989. That testimony showed that the currents at 
the area where the ship stranded changed rapidly during 
the evening. 


88. Exxon failed to show that the current studies 
done by Dr. Bathen could have been reduced to a format 
that would be easy for a ship’s master to use. Dr. Bathen 
included a large number of variables in his study, includ- 
ing wind magnitude and direction, tide magnitude and 
direction, sea magnitude and direction, and bottom 
depths. The court finds that any current data such as that 


App. 50 


presented by Dr. Bathen would have been either 
extremely difficult to use, or would have yielded only 
very general results. 


89. Captain Coyne would not have used current 
data such as that prepared by Dr. Bathen had it been 
available to him on the bridge on March 2, 1989. Captain 
Coyne’s decision to turn to starboard was made in haste 
without due consideration of several other pieces of 
information which should have caused him to reject the 
turn. For example, Captain Coyne decided to turn with- 
out looking at the chart, without fixing or plotting the 
vessel's position since 1830, without checking the NENE’s 
position by radar or radio, and without consulting any of 
his officers or Captain Marvin. In short, Captain Coyne 
recklessly ignored all pertinent information that was 
available to him. The court is therefore convinced that 
Captain Coyne would not have used any current studies 
had they been available. Therefore, the absence of such 
studies was not a cause in fact of the stranding. 


L. Post-Stranding Changes in SPM Operating Pro- 
cedures 


90. After the events of March 2, 1989, the Coast 
Guard has required that HIRI provide 30-minute standby 
tug assistance to tankers at the SPM. The required tugs 
must be able to handle a disabled tanker in forty knot 
winds. Had such tug assistance been available on March 
2, 1989, Captain Coyne would have used it and the 
EXXON HOUSTON would not have stranded. 


91. In the wake of the EXXON HOUSTON strand- 
ing, the Coast Guard has also designated the SPM as a 


App. 51 


pilotage area. HIRI is now required to provide two moor- 
ing masters with pilot's licenses for ships at the SPM. 


CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 


1. This is an admiralty and maritime claim within 
the meaning of Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(h) and within the admi- 
ralty jurisdiction of this Court under 28 U.S.C. § 1333. 


2. Pursuant to the Order Granting Motion To Bifur- 
cate, entered on July 31, 1992, and the Order Denying 
Plaintiffs’ Motion For Clarification, entered on August 27, 
1992, Phase One of the trial was limited to a determina- 
tion of issues after the breakout of the EXXON 
HOUSTON at 1728. Phase Two will explore the causes of 
the breakout. 


3. The court bifurcated the trial because a substan- 
tial question existed as to whether the post-breakout nav- 
igation of the EXXON HOUSTON constituted a 
superseding, intervening cause of the stranding. 


4. In light of the bifurcation order, the alleged 
causes of the stranding may be divided into three groups: 
the causes contributing to the breakout; HIRI’s post- 
breakout violations of the safe berth clause; and Exxon’s 
post-breakout navigation. In order to find that any one of 
these asserted causes justified the imposition of liability, 
the court would need to find the breach of a duty, that the 
breach was a cause in fact, and that the breach was a 
proximate cause of the stranding. 


App. 52 


A. The Breakout 


5. Exxon has alleged that the Defendants are 
responsible for the breakout and that the breakout was a 
proximate cause of the stranding. 


6. By bifurcating the trial, the court relieved Exxon 
of the burden of proving in Phase One that Defendants 
were at fault or strictly liable for the breakout. 


7. Obviously, the breakout was a cause in fact of the 
stranding, i.e., had the mooring chain not parted, the 
EXXON HOUSTON would not have stranded. 


8. As stated in the court’s July 31, 1992 bifurcation 
order, in order to prove that the breakout was a proxi- 
mate cause, “Exxon would have to show that the forces 
set in motion by the breakout of the EXXON HOUSTON 
continued until the moment of the grounding.” Hahn v. 
United States, 535 F. Supp. 132 (D.S.D. 1982). The question 
of proximate causation is considered below. 


B. Post-Breakout Breaches of the Safe Berth Clause 


9. Exxon claims that HIRI’s SPM was an unsafe 
berth in breach of the safe berth clause in the Voyage 
Charterparty between Exxon Shipping Company and 
PRII. Exxon presented three theories of how the duty was 
breached: that the mooring masters were inadequate; that 
tug assistance was inadequate; and that current informa- 
tion was inadequate. 


10. The court turns first to the scope of the duty. 
Although this court has previously referred to the safe 
berth clause as a “safe berth warranty,” the court has not 


App. 53 


considered the scope of the charterer’s duties under a 
safe berth clause. Exxon argues for the Second Circuit 
rule that a charterparty’s safe berth clause makes a char- 
terer the warrantor of the safety of a berth. See, e.g., Park 
S.S. Co. v. Cities Service Oil Co., 188 F.2d 804 (2d Cir.), cert. 
denied, 342 U.S. 862 (1951). HIRI counters that the better 
rule avoids the imposition of strict liability upon the 
charterer. Under this rule, a safe berth clause imposes 
upon the charterer a duty of due diligence to select a safe 
berth. Atkins v. Fibre Disintegrating Co., 2 Fed. Cas. 78 
(E.D.N.Y. 1868) (No. 601), aff'd 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 272 
(1873); Orduna S.A. v. Zen-Noh Grain Corp., 913 F.2d 1149, 
1157 (Sth Cir. 1990). The weight of academic opinion 
supports the due dilig®@nce standard. See Gilmore & Black, 
The Law of Admiralty, § 4-4 at pp.205-207 (2d Ed. 1975); }. 
Bond Smith, Jr., Time and Voyage Charters: Safe Port/Safe 
Berth, 49 Tul. L. Rev. 860, 862-869 (1975). In the absence of 
Ninth Circuit authority on the question, the court will 
follow the persuasive reasoning of the Fifth Circuit's 
Orduna opinion. Thus, the court holds that a safe berth 
clause imposes on the charterer a duty of due diligence to 
select a safe berth. 


«* 


Having decided the scope of the safe berth duty, 
the court turns to whether that duty was breached after 
the breakout. In the following paragraphs, the court con- 
cludes that it was not. 


12. The first asserted safe berth breach is the inade- 
quacy of mooring master assistance. Exxon contends that 
HIRI should have provided two mooring masters, and 
that they should have been certified pilots. As evidence 
of this duty, Exxon relies upon the fact that the Coast 
Guard instituted these requirements after the EXXON 


App. 54 


HOUSTON stranded. Over HIRI’s objection that these 
were remedial measures, the court allowed this evidence 
at trial because the Coast Guard mandated the measures. 
See In re Aircrash in Bali, Indonesia, 871 F.2d 812 (9th Cir.), 


cert. denied, 493 U.S. 917 (1989). 


13. A duly diligent charterer would not have fore- 
seen a need to provide two mooring masters on March 2, 
1989. Exxon adduced no evidence that would show that 
HIRI should have anticipated that additional mooring 
master assistance was needed. Indeed, even with the 
hindsight of knowing how the EXXON HOUSTON 
stranded, the court sees no need for two mooring mesters 
as neither mooring master fatigue nor unavailability 
played a role in the casualty. Although the bridge was 
inadequately manned on the evening of March 2, 1989, 
there were available ship's officers who could have 
manned the bridge. Captain Coyne’s failure to use his 
own crew does not create a duty on HIRI’s part to supply 
another mooring master. 


14. Similarly, the pilot’s license requirement has not 
been shown to be a necessary element of a safe berth. 
Although a pilot would have been arguably more familiar 
with local conditions, lack of experience with local condi- 
tions did not contribute to the stranding. Captain Marvin 
had adequate experience to prevent the casualty had 
Captain Coyne consulted him after 1830. Thus, HIRI sat- 
isfied its safe berth duty by providing one competent 
mooring master, Captain Marvin. 


15. Exxon’s second theory is that the berth was 
unsafe because a tug capable of towing a disabled tanker 
was not available. As evidence of the need for such tug 


el A MS 


App. 55 


assistance, Exxon points out that the Coast Guard has 
instituted this requirement since the EXXON HOUSTON 
in :dent. 


16. Exxon has not met their burden of showing that 
a duly diligent charterer would provide tug assistance. 
Notably absent from Exxon’s case was expert opinion as 
to the industry standard. In assessing due diligence, the 
court is left only with the Coast Guard requirement and 
the nature of the EXXON HOUSTON incident itself. The 
court considers the Coast Guard requirements to be only 
minimally relevant to the inquiry of whether the need for 
tug assistance was foreseeable before March 2, 1989. 
Countering Exxon’s claim that tugs should have been 
required, the EXXON HOUSTON episode itself shows 
that a tanker could maneuver itself to a safe position 
without forward propulsion in a heavy storm. The weight 
of the evidence does not support Exxon’s claim that a 
duly diligent charterer would have provided additional 
tug assistance on March 2, 1989. 


17. The final safe berth theory is that HIRI should 
have provided detailed current studies of the grounding 
area. The evidence that a duly diligent charterer would 
have done such studies is minimal. Unlike the other 
theories of safe berth breaches, the Coast Guard has not 
required current studies in the wake of the EXXON 
HOUSTON stranding. Moreover, Exxon presented no evi- 
dence of the industry standard. HIRI did provide an 
experienced mooring master who briefed the ship’s mas- 
ter on environmental conditions. The court concludes that 


the safe berth clause did not impose any greater duty on 
HIRI. 


App. 56 
18. In summary, the court concludes that after the 


breakout, HIRI did not breach any duty imposed by the 
safe berth clause. 


C. Exxon’s Negligence 


19. The court now turns to whether Exxon negli- 
gently navigated the EXXON HOUSTON after the break- 


out. 


20. Captain Coyne and all other officers and crew of 
the EXXON HOUSTON acted at all times relevant to this 
claim within the scope of their employment with Exxon, 
and therefore their negligence, if any, is imputed to Exxon 
for the purpose of this claim. Jackson Marine Corp. v. Blue 
Fox, 845 F.2d 1307, 1309-1310 (Sth Cir. 1988). 


21. Per the contract signed by Captain Coyne upon 
his arrival at the SPM, HIRI’s General Instructions, Dis- 
charging/Loading Orders and Indemnification, dated 
March 1, 1989 (Joint Trial Exhibit 92), any negligence of 
Captain Marvin or of the assist vessel NENE is imputed 
to Exxon for the purpose of this claim. Kane v. Hawatian 
Independent Refinery, Inc., 690 F.2d 722, 723 (9th Cir. 1982). 


22. When a moving vessel strikes a charted reef, it is 
presumed that the vessel is at fault. The Louisiana, 70 US. 
(3 Wall.) 164, 173 (1865); Wardell v. Department of Transp., 
884 F.2d 510, 512 (9th Cir. 1989); McAllister Bros., Inc. v. 
United States, 709 F.Supp. 1237, 1251 (S.D.N.Y.) (charted 
reef), aff'd 890 F.2d 582 (2d Cir. 1989). Because the EXXON 
HOUSTON stranded on a charted reef, the presumption 
of The Louisiana rule applies. 


App. 57 


23. The presumption of fault pursuant to The Louisi- 
ana rule suffices to make a prima facie case against the 
moving vessel. The presumption does not disappear 
when conflicting evidence is presented, but must be over- 
come by a preponderance of the evidence. Wardell, 884 
F.2d at 513. The Louisiana Rule presumption is universally 
described as “strong”, and as one that places a “heavy 
burden” on the moving ship to overcome. Id. at 512-513 
(citing Carr v. Hermosa Amusement Corp., Ltd., 137 F.2d 
983, 987 (9th Cir. 1943), cert. denied, 321 US. 764 (1944)). 


24. The strong presumption of negligence arising 
under The Louisiana rule can be rebutted by showing, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, either that the collision 
was the fault of a stationary object, that the moving 
vessel acted with reasonable care, or that the collision 
was an unavoidable accident. Wardell, 884 F.2d at 513 
(citing Bunge Corp. v. M/V Furness Bridge, 558 F.2d 790, 795 
(Sth Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 435 U.S. 924 (1988)); 
Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Atropos Island, 777 F.2d 1344, 1347 (9th 
Cir. 1985). 


25. The EXXON HOUSTON has failed to meet its 
Louisiana rule burden of proving by a preponderance of 
the evidence that the EXXON HOUSTON acted with rea- 
sonable care, or that the stranding was unavoidable. 
Thus, the court concludes that Exxon was negligent in the 
navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON on March 2, 1989, 
and that such negligence was a proximate cause of the 
stranding. 


App. 58 


26. The admiralty law further presumes that when a 
vessel violates a statutory rule meant to preveni strand- 
ings, the violation was a proximate cause of the strand- 
ing. The Pennsylvania, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125 (1873); Mathes 
v. The Clipper Fleet, 774 F.2d 980, 982 (9th Cir. 1985); 
Waterman S.S. Corp. v. Gay Cottons, 414 F.2d 724, 736 (9th 
Cir. 1969) (Pennsylvania rule applies to strandings). 


27. The presumption arising under The Pennsylvania 
rule can be rebutted by a “clear and convincing showing 
of no proximate cause.” Trinidad Corp. v. S.S. Ketyoh Maru, 
845 F.2d 818, 825 (9th Cir. 1988). 


28. At all times relevant to this claim, the Naviga- 
tion Safety Regulations codified in Part 164 of Title 33 of 
the Code of Federal Regulations applied mandatorily to 
the EXXON HOUSTON and her crew. See 33 C.F.R. 
§ 164.01. 


29. The Navigation Safety Regulations provide in 
relevant part: 


§ 164.11 Navigation Underway: General. 


The owner, master or person in charge of each 
vessel underway shall ensure that: 


(a) The wheelhouse is constantly manned by 
persons who: 


(1) Direct and control the movement of the 
vessel; and 


(2) Fix the vessel's position; 


(c) The position of the vessel at each fix is 
plotted on a chart of the area and the person 


App. 59 


directing the movement of the vessel is 
informed of the vessel's position; 


33 C.RR. § 164.11. 


30. The rule of The Pennsylvania applies to the 
EXXON HOUSTON. The EXXON HOUSTON was in vio- 
lation of the following statutory rules designed to pre- 
vent strandings: 


a. Between 1830 and 2004, while the EXXON 
HOUSTON was under way approximately one mile or 
less from the shore of Oahu, Captain Coyne failed to have 
the position of the vessel fixed and plotted on a naviga- 
tional chart, in violation of 33 C.F.R. § 164.11(c). 


b. Between 1948 and 2000, during which time 
the EXXON HOUSTON was under way approximately 
one mile or less from the shore of Oahu, Captain Coyne 
was the only officer on the bridge, and was not capable of 
both directing and controlling the movement of the vessel 
and fixing the vessel's position, in violation of 33 C.F.R. 
§ 164.11(a). 


31. Exxon failed to sustain its burden, under The 
Pennsylvania Rule, of proving by clear and convincing 
evidence that the above-cited statutory violations could 
not have caused the stranding of the EXXON HOUSTON. 
Therefore, the court finds that these statutory violations 
were a proximate cause of the stranding of the EXXON 
HOUSTON. 


32. In the section that follows, the court has also 
considered whether Captain Coyne’s conduct was negli- 
gent without applying the Pennsylvania or Louisiana rules. 


App. 60 


33. Exxon has argued that the EXXON HOUSTON 
was in extremis from the time of the breakout to the time 
of the stranding, and that Captain Coyne’s conduct 
should be judged by that more lenient standard. See The 
Propeller Genesee Chief v. Fitzhugh, 53 U.S. (12 How.) 443 
(1851) and subsequent cases. 


34. As Captain Coyne’s decisions were made 
calmly, deliberately and without the pressure of an immi- 
nent peril, the in extremis rule cannot be applied in this 
case. 


35. In considering whether Captain Coyne was neg- 
ligent, the court has measured his conduct against the 
standard of “such reasonable care and maritime skill as 
prudent navigators employ for performance of similar 
service.” Stevens v. The White City, 285 U.S. 195 (1932). 


36. Captain Coyne acted negligently, unreasonably 
and in violation of the maritime industry standards in the 
following instances: 


a. He did not deploy sufficient chain to anchor 
the ship at 1747. 


b. He did not request assistance from the Coast 
Guard or other available ships. 


c. He did not attempt to anchor the ship again 
after 1747. Anchoring the ship would have prevented the 
hose removal from becoming a distraction to safe naviga- 
tion. 

d. He failed to continue backing the vessel after 
1830 until the vessel reached a safe distance from the 
shore. 


App. 61 


e. He chose to linger in the vicinity of a lee 
shore, only .4 to .6 miles from the actual grounding line. 


37. Captain Coyne’s failure to plot fixes between 
1830 and 2004 was grossly and extraordinarily negligent 
and in violation of the maritime industry standards. The 
danger of stranding could and would have been avoided 
by regular fixing of the position of the EXXON 
HOUSTON and plotting it on the navigational chart. 


38. Captain Coyne’s final starboard turn was 
grossly and extraordinarily negligent and in violation of 
the maritime industry standards because he commenced 
it without knowing the vessel's position. 


39. Even if Captain Coyne had known the vessel's 
position at the onset of the final turn, the turn order was 
still extraordinarily negligent and in violation of the mar- 
itime industry standards because it unnecessarily 
exposed the vessel to the danger of grounding. In light of 
the vessel's trim, its maneuvering characteristics, the 
proximity of the beach, and the weather conditions, the 
turn was beyond the capability of the vessel. The danger 
of stranding could and would have been avoided had 
Captain Coyne backed out or ordered a left turn instead 
of attempting a right turn. 


D. Causation 


40. The determination of whether a cause-in-fact 
was a proximate cause involves a consideration of “pub- 
lic convenience, of public policy, [and] of a rough sense of 
justice.” Hunley v. Ace Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493, 497 
(9th Cir. 1991) (internal quotations and citations omitted). 


App. 62 


41. The analysis of proximate cause involves a 
determination of whether superseding, intervening 
causes relieve any earlier causes from legal responsibility. 
Pan-Alaska Fisheries, Inc. v. Marine Constr. & Design Co., 
565 F.2d 1129, 1137-39 (9th Cir. 1977). A defendant assert- 
ing the existence of a superseding intervening cause 
bears the burden of proving it by a preponderance of the 
evidence. 


42. The following considerations are of importance 
in determining whether an intervening force is a super- 
seding cause of harm to another: 


(a) the fact that its intervention brings about 
harm different in kind from that which would 
otherwise have resulted from the actor's negli- 
gence; 


(b) the fact that its operation or the conse- 
quences thereof appear after the event to be 
extraordinary rather than normal in view of the 
circumstances existing at the time of the opera- 
tion; 


(c) the fact that the intervening force is operat- 
ing independently of any situation created by 
the actor’s negligence, or on the other hand, is 
or was not a normal result of such a situation; 


(d) the fact that the operation of the interven- 
ing force is due to a third person’s act or to his 
failure to act; 


(e) the fact that the intervening force is due to 
an act of a third person which is wrongful 
toward the other and as such subjects the third 
person to liability to him; and 


App. 63 


(f) the degree of culpability of a wrongful act 
of a third person which sets the intervening 
force in motion. 


Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442 (cited with approval by 
Hunley v. Ace Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493, 497 (9th Cir. 
1991)). 


43. Determining the causes of the breakout is not 
necessary to a determination of whether the EXXON 
HOUSTON’s navigation was a superseding, intervening 
cause of the stranding. When remoteness in time or 
extraordinarily negligent intervening acts are established, 
disputed facts regarding the extent of defendant's negli- 
gence will not prevent a judgment in favor of defendant. 
See, e.g., Gilmore v. Shell Oil Co., 613 So.2d 1272 (Ala. 
1993); Greiner v. Whitesboro Sch. Dist., 562 N.Y.S.2d 255 
(N.Y. App. Div. 1990) (remoteness), appeal den., 557 N.E.2d 
1057 (N.Y. 1991); Brazell v. Board of Educ., 557 N.Y.S.2d 645 
(N.Y. App. Div. 1990) (extraordinary intervening negli- 
gence); cf. Donaghey v. Ocean Drilling & Exploration Co., 
974 F.2d 646, 650-53 (5th Cir. 1992) (considering only the 
factors of the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442 in deny- 
ing summary judgment motion on superseding, interven- 
ing cause). 


44. The extraordinary negligence of Captain Coyne 
in failing to fix and plot his vessel’s position superseded 
any force generated by the breakout of the vessel from 
the SPM as a cause of the stranding and was the sole 
proximate cause of the stranding of the EXXON 
HOUSTON. The analysis of the factors listed in the 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442 mandates this conclu- 
sion: 


App. 64 


a. The failure to plot fixes of the vessel after 
1830 caused a fully operational vessel which was at that 
time free of any encumbrances to her navigation to strand 
on a charted reef not adjacent to HIRI’s SPM. That is a 
harm different in kind from that which would otherwise 
have and previously had resulted from a breakout. /d. 
§ 442(a). The harm that the breakout risked was that a 
disabled ship would have been driven onto the shore 
before it could reach safety. The EXXON HOUSTON had 
reached a safe position and only the gross negligence of 
its master put it into further danger. 


b. Both Captain Coyne’s failure to plot fixes of 
his vessel's position after 1830 and the fact that the vessel 
stranded almost three hours after the breakout are highly 
extraordinary rather than normal. Id. § 442(b). 


c. Captain Coyne’s failure to plot fixes after 
1830 was entirely independent of the fact of breakout; he 
voluntarily decided not to plot fixes in a situation where 
he was able to plot fixes. Id. § 442(c). 


d. The failure to plot fixes after 1830 was solely 
Captain Coyne’s omission in which Defendants did not 
participate and could not have participated. Id. § 442(d). 
Captain Coyne was aware of the danger of being set 
toward the lee shore and negligently failed to avoid it. 
Therefore, Captain Coyne’s negligence is viewed as an 
intervening force and superseding cause which became 
the sole proximate cause of the stranding. 


e. Captain Coyne’s failure to plot fixes after 
1830 carries a very high degree of culpability. Id. § 442(f). 
It was a voluntary, unforced decision, and it was grossly 


App. 65 


negligent and in violation of all applicable industry stan- 
dards and regulations. 


45. Captain Coyne’s extraordinary negligence in 
ordering the final starboard turn was also a superseding, 
intervening cause. Applying the factors listed in the 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442, the court finds as 
follows: 


a. The harm resulting from the final turn was 
the stranding at a point far from the SPM. The harm that 
could have resulted from the breakout was a grounding 
before the ship regained control. These harms are differ- 
ent in kind. Id. § 442(a). 


b. Captain Coyne’s attempt to turn the ship 
towards the coast was extraordinarily negligent and not a 
foreseeable consequence of the breakout. Id. § 442(b). 


c. The decision to make the final turn was made 
independently of the breakout and was not foreseeable. 
Id. § 442(c). 


d. The Defendants did not participate in the 
decision to turn the ship. Id. § 442(d). 


e. The final turn was highly culpable and 
grossly negligent. Id. § 442(f). 


46. In summary, the Defendants are not legally 
responsible for the stranding of the EXXON HOUSTON. 
Although the breaking of the mooring chain imperilled 
the ship, the EXXON HOUSTON successfully avoided 
that peril. By 1830, the EXXON HOUSTON was heading 
out to sea and in no further danger of stranding. Only the 
grossly negligent actions of its master endangered the 
vessel further. Captain Coyne inexplicably chose to loiter 


App. 66 


in a dangerous area without fixing his position. Then, 
while overly concerned by an injury to a crew member, 
he drove the ship onto a charted reef. It would be mani- 


festly unjust to hold anyone legally responsible for the 
consequences of these acts other than Captain Coyne and 


his employer, Exxon. 
IT IS SO ORDERED. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, MAY 20 1993 


/s/ Harold M. Fong 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT 


JUDGE 


EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY, et al. v. PACIFIC 
RESOURCES, INC., et al.; Civ. No. 90-00271 HMF; FIND- 
INGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 


App. 67 


APPENDIX E 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAII 


EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY 
and EXXON COMPANY, U.S.A. 
(A Division of 

Exxon Corporation), 


Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC., 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT 
REFINERY, INC., PRI MARINE, 
INC., PRI INTERNATIONAL, 
INC., and SOFEC, INC., 


Defendants. 


and 


PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC., 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT 
REFINERY, INC., PRI 
MARINE, INC., and 

PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC., 


Third-Party 
Plaintiffs, 


vs. 


BRIDON FIBRES AND PLASTICS, 


LTD., GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, 
LTD., and WERTH 
ENGINEERING, INC., 


Third-Party 
Defendants. 


) 


ae 


Nm me ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee” 


Civil No. 
91-00271 HMF 


(Filed Jul 31, 1992) 


App. 68 


ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO BIFURCATE, DENY- 
ING CROSS-MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDG- 
MENT, DENYING MOTION TO STRIKE THIRD-PARTY 
GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, LTD.’S REPLY MEMORAN- 
DUM AND GRANTING MOTION, IN THE ALTERNA- 
TIVE, FOR LEAVE TO FILE RESPONSIVE 
MEMORANDUM 


INTRODUCTION 


On July 27, 1992, the court heard third-party defen- 
dant Griffin Woodhouse, Ltd.’s (“Griffin”) motion to 
bifurcate or, in the alternative, to continue trial filed on 
June 3, 1992. Defendants Pacific Resources, Inc., Hawai- 
ian Independent Refinery, Inc., PRI Marine, Inc. and PRI 
International, Inc. (collectively “HIRI”) filed a joinder in 
the motion to bifurcate and an opposition to the alterna- 
tive motion to continue on June 18, 1992. Defendant and 
third-party defendant Bridon Fibres and Plastics, Inc. 
(“Bridon”) also filed a joinder in the motion to bifurcate 
and an opposition to the alternative motion to continue 
on June 19, 1992. Defendant Sofec, Inc. (“Sofec”) also filed 
a joinder in the motion to bifurcate and an opposition to 
the alternative motion to continue on June 22, 1992. Plain- 
tiffs Exxon Shipping Company and Exxon Company, 
U.S.A. (collectively “Exxon”) filed a memorandum in 
opposition on June 18, 1992. Griffin, in turn, filed a mem- 
orandum in reply on July 16, 1992. On July 24, 1992, 
Exxon filed a motion to strike Griffin’s reply memoran- 
dum or, in the alternative, for leave to file responsive 
memorandum. 


Bridon filed a cross-motion for partial summary 
judgment on June 18, 1992, which was joined by Sofec 
and Griffin on June 22, 1992, and by HIRI on June 23, 


App. 69 


1992. Exxon filed a memorandum in opposition on July 7, 
1992. Bridon, in turn, filed a memorandum in reply on 
July 16, 1992. 


BACKGROUND 


This case arises out of the March 2, 1989 breakaway 
of the EXXON HOUSTON, which was owned and oper- 
ated by Exxon, from HIRI’s single point mooring (SPM) at 
Barber’s Point and subsequent grounding approximately 
three hours later. The breakaway occurred when a Type 
“C” chafe chain, which was used to connect the SPM to 
the EXXON HOUSTON, parted. Post-accident, destruc- 
tive testing of the chain has indicated that the welds of 
the chain links may have been defective. 


DISCUSSION 


1. CROSS-MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDG- 
MENT 


A. Standard for Summary Judgment 
Rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
provides that summary judgment shall be entered when: 


... the pleadings, depositions, answers to inter- 
rogatories, and admissions on file, together with 
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genu- 
ine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to a judgment as a 
matter of law. 


The moving party has the initial burden of “identify- 
ing for the court those portions of the materials on file 
that it believes demonstrate the absence of any genuine 


App. 70 


issue of material fact.” T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. 
Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630 (9th Cir. 1987), citing 
Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 
2553 (1986). The movant must be able to show “the 
absence of a material and triable issue of fact,” Richards v. 
Neilsen Freight Lines, 810 F.2d 898, 902 (9th Cir. 1987), 
although it need not necessarily advance affidavits or 
similar materials to negate the existence of an issue on 
which the non-moving party will bear the burden of 
proof at trial. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323, 106 S. Ct. at 2553. 
But cf., id., 477 U.S. at 328, 106 S.Ct. at 2555-56 White, J., 
concurring) 


If the moving party meets its burden, then the oppo- 
sing party may not defeat a motion for summary judg- 
ment in the absence of any significant probative evidence 
tending to support his legal theory. Commodity Futures 
Trading Comm'n v. Savage, 611 F.2d 270, 282 (9th Cir. 1979). 
The opposing party cannot stand on his pleadings, nor 
can he simply assert that he will be able to discredit the 
movant's evidence at trial. See T.W. Elec., 809 F.2d at 630. 
Similarly, legal memoranda and oral argument are not 
evidence and do not create issues of fact capable of 
defeating an otherwise valid motion for summary judg- 
ment. British Airways Bd. v. Boeing Co., 585 F.2d 946, 952 
(9th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 440 U.S. 981 (1979). Moreover, 
“if the factual context makes the nonmoving party's claim 
implausible, that party must come forward with more 
persuasive evidence than would otherwise be necessary 
to show that there is a genuine issue for trial.” Franciscan 
Ceramics, 818 F.2d at 1468, citing Matsushita Elec. Indus. 
Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S.Ct. 
1348, 1356 (1986). 


App. 71 


The standard for a grant of summary judgment 
reflects the standard governing the grant of a directed 
verdict. See Eisenberg v. Insurance Co. of North America, 815 
F.2d 1285, 1289 (9th Cir. 1987), citing Anderson v. Liberty 
Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 2512 (1986). 
Thus, the question is whether “reasonable minds could 
differ as to the import of the evidence.” Id. 


However, when “direct evidence” produced by the 
moving party conflicts with “direct evidence” produced 
by the patty opposing summary judgment, “the judge 
must assume the truth of the evidence set forth by the 
nonmoving party with respect to that fact.” T.W. Elec., 809 
F.2d at 631. Also, inferences from the facts must be drawn 
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. 
Inferences may be drawn both from underlying facts that 
are not in dispute, as well as from disputed facts which 
the judge is required to resolve in favor of the non- 
moving party. /d.' 


B. Analysis 

With its cross-motion, Bridon seeks a judgment on 
the pleadings that the parting of the Type “C” chafe 
chain, which connected the EXXON HOUSTON to the 


' For the purposes of deciding this motion, the court 
applies substantive admiralty law. With respect to the adoption 
and application of products liability law in admiralty cases, the 
Supreme Court and the Ninth Circuit have borrowed substan- 
tially from principals developed in “land-based” jurisprudence. 
East River Steamship Corp. v. Transamerica Delaval, Inc., 476 US. 
858, 865-75 (1986); Pan-Alaska Fisheries, Inc. v. Marine Construc- 
tion & Design Co., 565 F.2d 1129, 1133 (9th Cir. 1977). 


App. 72 


SPM, was not the proximate cause of the grounding of the 
EXXON HOUSTON. According to Bridon, the testimony 
of the vessel's officers shows that, after the EXXON 
HOUSTON broke out from the SPM, the vessel had 
reached and remained at a point of safety for one hour 
and fifteen minutes before she left the safe area and 
drifted towards the shore, eventually grounding two 
hours and fifty minutes after the breakout. Bridon further 
contends that the “undisputed evidence on the record 
shows that the decision of the vessel's Master to stop the 
progress of the vessel along her course away from the 
shore was a voluntary decision made when the vessel 
was in no imminent danger and when he had ample time 
to reflect on possible courses of action.” As such, Bridon 
argues that Exxon cannot establish a causal nexus or 
connection between the parting of the chafe chain and the 
subsequent grounding nearly three hours later. 


At the time of the breakout, the EXXON HOUSTON 
was connected to the SPM by a mooring assembly, which 
included a Type “C” chafe chain, manufactured by Griffin 
and sold by Bridon, and by two oil hoses, eighteen inches 
(18") in diameter and eight hundred feet (800°) long, 
which were mounted on the ship’s manifold. The cause of 
the failure of the chafe chain and the resulting breakout is 
disputed. 


Once the chafe chain parted, the master of the 
EXXON HOUSTON, Captain Dick, attempted to prevent 
the oil hoses from breaking by bringing the vessel’s head 
to the SPM buoy. In spite of his efforts, one hose broke 
close to the ship, dangling harmlessly from the manifold, 
whereas the second hose tore at the buoy, with its entire 


App. 73 


length remaining connected to the manifold. For the pur- 
pose of the motion, Bridon does not contest Exxon’s claim 
that the second hose obstructed the navigation of the 
EXXON HOUSTON by preventing the vessel from pro- 
ceeding ahead out of concern that the hose would become 
entangled in the propeller. Assuming this obstructior the 
navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON was restricted to 
backward movement using astern propulsion. 


Furthermore, Bridon assumes, for the purpose of the 
motion, that from the time of the breakout at approx- 
imately 1715 hours until 1803 hours, Captain Dick was 
attempting to gain control of the vessel. At 1803, Captain 
Dick set the vessel, moving astern, on a westerly course, 
roughly parallel to the coastline between Pearl Harbor 
and Barbers Point. Bridon’s Memorandum in Support of 
Cross-Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, Exhibit B at 
212-13, 233 (Deposition of Second Officer Hallock G. 
Davis, III) (“Davis Deposition”). At 1830 hours, it appears 
that the EXXON HOUSTON had cleared Barbers Point 
and was in some 100 feet of water. 


The parties dispute, however, whether the EXXON 
HOUSTON could have continued on the same course 
until it was positioned far from the shoreline? Although 
Exxon has admitted that there was no mechanical limita- 
tion on the capabilities of the vessel's engines which 
would have precluded her from continuing on her 


? Furthermore, the parties dispute whether the navigation 
or maneuvering of the EXXON HOUSTON that led to her 
grounding, after the hose had been disconnected, was negligent. 


App. 74 


1803-1830 course, Captain Dick has testified that circum- 
stances precluded him from continuing to navigate the 
EXXON HOUSTON offshore. 


Q. You said that it would be prudent to get 
further offshore, but the circumstances 
made it difficult to do so? 


A. That's true. . 


Q. Now, what circumstances are we talking 
about? 


A. The position of the hose, the wind, sea and 
swell conditions, the ship being able to only 
use astern propulsion because of the posi- 
tion of the hose. 


Q. Did these circumstances remain constant 
throughout the entire period from the 
breakaway up and to the grounding? 


A. No, they were ever changing, but always 
present. 


Exxon’s Memorandum in Opposition, Exhibit 1 at 374-75 
(Deposition of Kevin P. Coyne, f.k.a. Kevin Dick)(“Dick 
Deposition”). 

On the other hand, Second Officer Davis, who was 
responsible in part for the navigation of the vessel, testi- 
fied that there was nothing to prevent Captain Dick from 
continuing on his westerly course - away from shore - 
proceeding astern. 


Q. Was the ship proceeding generally in a 
westerly direction from 1803 until 1830? 


A. That's correct. 


App. 75 


Q. Do you know of any reason why the vessel, 
after 1830, could not have proceeded in the 
same direction? 


No, I don't. 


> 


Q. Was - are you aware of any necessity for 
change of direction of the vessel at — after 
1830? 


A. Not that I can recall. 


Davis Deposition at 233-35; see also Exxon’s Memoran- 
dum in Opposition, Exhibit 2 at 318 (Deposition of Steve 
Marvin, HIRI’s mooring master) (describing “beautiful” 
ease with which the EXXON HOUSTON was able to 
proceed astern). The vessel allegedly remained in the 
general vicinity of its 1830 position, southwest of Barbers 
Point, for one hour and fifteen minutes, until 1948 hours, 
during which time the crew was disconnecting the oil 
hose. In the process, the hose damaged the vessel's crane 
and put its operator into danger, requiring the assistance 
of other crew members. At 2006 hours, the vessel 
grounded. 


It is elementary that Exxon has the burden of proving 
that the breakout of the vessel from her mooring was the 
proximate cause of the grounding. 1 Am. Law Prod. 
Liab.2d Proximate Causation § 4:3 (1987); 63 Am. Jur.2d 
Products Liability §§ 261, 264 (1984). Proximate causation 
is defined as “that cause which, in a natural and contin- 
uous sequence, unbroken by any efficient, intervening 
cause, produces the injury, and without which the result 
would not have occurred.” 1 Am. Law Prod. Liab.3d 
Products Liability § 4:1 (1887); see generally Hunley v. Ace 
Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493, 497 n.1, 1991 A.M.C. 1217 


App. 76 


(9th Cir. 1991) (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts on 
relevant factors used to determine whether intervening 
force is superseding cause). To prove that the failure of 
the Type “C” chafe chain proximately caused the ground- 
ing, Exxon would have to show that the forces set in 
motion by the breakout of the EXXON HOUSTON contin- 
ued until the moment of the grounding. Hahn v. United 
States, 535 F. Supp. 132 (D.S.D. 1982).° 


The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has 
adopted the Restatement (Second) of Torts for the ele- 
ments of a defense of superseding cause. Hunley v. Ace 
Maritime Corp., supra. 


The following considerations are of importance 
in determining whether an intervening force is a 
superseding cause of harm to another: 


(a) the fact that its intervention brings about 
harm different in kind from that which would 
otherwise have resulted from the actor’s negli- 


gence; 


(b) the fact that its operation or the conse- 
quences thereof appear after the event to be 
extraordinary rather than normal in view of the 
circumstances existing at the time of the opera- 
tion; 


3 Where the relevant facts show that the causal connection 
between the defendant's negligence and the plaintiff's injury ts 
remote, the question of causation is decided by the court as a 
matter of law. Robertson v. Allied Signal, Inc., 914 F.2d 360 (3d Cir. 
1990); see also Rexall Drug Co. v. Nihili, 276 F.2d 637, 645 (9th Cir. 
1960) (proximate cause becomes a question of law if evidence is 
insufficient to raise reasonable inference that act complained of 


was proximate cause of injury). 


App. 77 


(c) the fact that the intervening force is operat- 
ing independently of any situation created by 
the actor’s negligence, or, on the other hand, is 
or was not a normal result of such a situation: 


, 


(d) the fact that the operation of the interven- 
ing force is due to a third person's act or to his 
failure to act; 


(e) the fact that the intervening force is due to 


an act of a third person which is wrongful 
toward the other and as such subjects the third 
person to liability to him; 


(f) the degree of culpability of a wrongful act 
of a third person which sets the intervening 
force in motion. 


Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442. In support of its 
motion, Bridon writes that the court need not determine 
whether any negligence on the part of Captain Dick cre- 
ated such an intervening force; instead, Bridon relies on 
the (disputed) fact that the EXXON HOUSTON reached a 
“point of safety” to establish a superseding cause of the 
grounding. Bridon refers the court to V/O Exportkhleb and 
Insurance Co. of U.S.S.R. (Ingosstrakh) Ltd. v. $.S. William 
A. Reiss, 1983 A.M.C. 782 (1982) (£.D. Ohio 1982) for the 
proposition that “when a vessel which successfully 
avoids a collision or other emergency, and after having 
reached a point of safety, goes aground, the initial negli- 
gence of the other vessel which had placed the grounded 
vessel in danger is extinguished as a proximate cause of 
the grounding.” Bridon’s Memorandum in Support of 
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment at 13. 


Even though Bridon has pled its case persuasively, 
the motion must be denied. First, there is a material issue 


App. 78 


of disputed fact as to whether Captain Dick was respond- 
ing to or struggling with the consequences of the break- 
out, and the attendant, changing circumstances of the 
rough seas, from the time of the oreakout up until the 
time of the grounding. See Restatement (Second) of Torts 
§§ 443 and 445 (explaining that actions taken in conse- 
quence to situation created by negligent conduct are not 
superseding cause of harm). Because of the conflicting 
testimony on the capacity of the EXXON HOUSTON to 
proceed astern, and farther off shore, the issue of causa- 
tion is not appropriate for summary adjudication at this 
stage. 


Second, Bridon’s characterization of the law in this 
area is only partially accurate. In V/O Exportkhleb, the 
plaintiff's ship went aground five to six minutes after it 
had narrowly avoided colliding with the defendant's ves- 
sel. The district court hold that, because the shallow 
waters were not thrust upon the plaintiff's ship suddenly 
and the plaintiff had ample opportunity to avoid the 
danger, the plaintiff’s negligence after the passing was the 
proximate cause of the grounding. As such, in order to 
find that the navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON was a 
superseding cause of the grounding, this court would be 
required to find that Captain Dick’s actions, in arresting 
the movement of the vessel at 1830 and, subsequently, in 
maneuvering the vessel, were, in fact, negligent.* See 


* According to Bridon, once the EXXON HOUSTON was in 
a safe position in deep water for over one hour, any forces that 
may have initially been set in motion by the parting of the chafe 
chain had long since been extinguished. In this regard, Bridon 
appears to rely on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur - the ground- 
ing must have resulted from the (negligent) navigation of the 


App. 79 


Dougherty v. United States, 207 F.2d 626, 630, 1953 A.M.C. 
1541, 1547 (3d Cir. 1953), quoted in V/O Exportkhleb, 1983 
A.M.C. at 739. It is not enough, for the purpose of break- 
ing the chain of events set in motion by the breakout, for 
the court to find that the EXXON HOUSTON had reached 
a point of safety. 


The court would also note that the negligence stan- 
dard required to establish a superseding cause is higher 
than in ordinary circumstances. As the Restatement (Sec- 
ond) of Torts instructs: 


The fact that an intervening act of a third person 
is negligent in itself or is done in a negligent 
manner does not make it a superseding cause of 
harm to another which the actor’s negligent 
- ames is a substantial factor in bringing about, 
i 


(a) the actor at the time of his negligent con- 
duct should have realized that a third person 
might so act, or 


(b) a reasonable man knowing the situation 
existing when the act of the third person was 
done would not regard it as highly extraordin- 
ary that the third person had so acted, or 


(c) the intervening act is a normal consequence 
of a situation created by the actor’s conduct and 
the manner in which it is done is not extraordinarily 
negligent. 


vessel. As discussed above, a finding that the navigation of the 


vessel was the superseding cause of the grounding must be 
predicated on a finding of negligence. . 


App. 80 


Restatement (Second) of Torts § 447 (emphasis altered). 
The evidence presented in the record is clearly insuffi- 
cient to support a finding by this court, on summary 
judgment, that the navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON 
by its master was negligent, least not extraordinarily so. 


Accordingly, the motion for partial summary jucdg- 
ment is DENIED. 


Il. MOTION TO BIFURCATE OR IN THE ALTERNA- 
TIVE, TO CONTINUE TRIAL 


Griffin seeks to bifurcate the issue of causation, as 
between the breakout and the post-breakout navigation 
of the EXXON HOUSTON, from the other liability issues 
in the case — that is, the extent to which the master’s 
navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON caused its ground- 
ing on March 2, 1989. Griffin asserts that bifurcation 
could obviate the need for extensive discovery, trial prep- 
aration, and weeks of trial if the court first determines the 
cause or comparative causes of the grounding, excluding 
the cause of the breakout. In this regard, Griffin suggests 
that such an inquiry is discrete and much simpler for 
adjudication than the cause of the breakout itself. 


According to the Marine Casualty Report submitted 
by Exxon following the accident, the damages alleged by 
Exxon for the loss of the EXXON HOUSTON amounts to 
approximately eighty percent (80%) of the total damages 
claim. Assuming that these damages are resolved or allo- 
cated in the first phase of a bifurcated trial, Griffin and 
the other defendants assert that the parties will likely 
settle the remaining twenty percent (20%) of claimed 
damages. Exxon disputes these estimates. The court need 


App. 81 


not, however, resolve this dispute as a predicate to decid- 
ing the motion to bifurcate. 


The court has broad discretion to order separate tri- 
als pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure when a separate trial will further convenience, 
avoid prejudice or “be conducive to expedition and econ- 
omy.” See Davis & Cox v. Summa Corp., 751 F.2d 1507, 1517 
(9th Cir. 1985); Airlift International v. McDonnel Douglas 
Corp., 685 F.2d 267, 269 (9th Cir. 1982). Here, a separate 
trial offers the probability of settlement after the conclu- 
sion of the first phase in the opinion of every defendant. 
Only Exxon holds to the contrary. Additionally, if the 
court determines that the navigation of the EXXON 
HOUSTON was the proximate cause of its grounding, 
then it would be unnecessary for the court to resolve the 
issue of “comparative fault.” See Protectus Alpha Naviga- 
tion v. North Pacific Grain Growers Ass'n, 767 F.2d 1379 (9th 
Cir. 1986). In Protectus, the plaintiff's ship caught fire 
while moored at the dock. The defendants employees 
apparently panicked and negligently cast the ship adrift 
whereafter the ship was destroyed by fire because the fire 
fighters could not reach her. In affirming the trial court's 
disposition, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
explained why a determination of comparative fault was 
unnecessary. 


The [district] court found that 92.5% of the 
loss was sustained after the ship was set adrift, 
and therefore attributed that percentage of lia- 
bility to [defendant] North Pacific. 


Appellant [North Pacific] contends that the 
district court erred in ignoring principles of 


App. 82 


comparative negligence and apportioning dam- 
ages based upon its view of causation, rather 


than culpability. .. . 


However, as [plaintiff] Protectus points out, 
there is no shipowner negligence to “compare.” 
Even if Protectus were negligent in causing the 
fire, such negligence had ceased to be an operat- 
ing force when the vessel was cast off by North 
Pacific’s employees. The testimony of each 
expert and fireman who viewed the fire that 
night was that the fire would have been put out 
in fifteen to twenty minutes had the vessel not 


been cast off... . 


Where injuries can properly be apportioned 
to separate causes based on evidence in the 
record, there is no occasion to invoke the doc- 
trine of comparative negligence . . The whole 
point of comparative negligence is that the rela- 
tion between injury and cause cannot be accu- 
rately determined, and an allocation based on 
the degree of negligence of each party becomes 
the measure of liability. 


767 F.2d 1383-84; see also Newby v. F/V Kristen Gail, 937 
F.2d 1439, 1992 A.M.C. 149 (9th Cir. 1991) (comparative 
fault inapplicable where trier of fact concludes that losses 
can be attributed to separate causes). 


On the other hand, if the court does not find that the 
navigation of the vessel was the superseding cause of the 
grounding, the court can still determine in the first phase 
of a bifurcated trial the comparative fault (cause) of the 
grounding as between the breakout and the subsequent 
navigation of the vessel. United States v. Reliable Transfer 
Co., 421 U.S. 397, 95 S. Ct. 1708, 44 L.E.2d 251 (1975). As 


App. 83 


discussed earlier, a determination of whether the mas- 
ter’s alleged negligence is an intervening, superseding 
cause, which would cut off defendants’ liability at the 
point of the intervening event, requires an examination of 
all the claimed causes of the casualty. See Hunley v. Ace 
Maritime Corp.,927 F.2d 493, 1991 A.M.C. 1217 (9th Cir. 
1991); White v. Roper, 901 F.2d 501 (9th Cir. 1990). 


The court is well aware of the possibility that the 
issue of causation with respect to the breakout may still 
require a second phase of trial, perhaps before a jury. The 
court, however, is in the best position to determine 
whether bifurcation in this case promotes judicial econ- 
omy. The court finds that it does. 


Accordingly, the motion to bifurcate is GRANTED so 
that the first phase of the trial will be limited to the issue 
of causation with respect to the EXXON HOUSTON ’s 
grounding, but not including the issue of causation with 
respect to the breakout itself.5 


Finally, the court must address Exxon’s motion to 
strike Griffin’s reply memorandum or, in the alternative, 
for leave to file responsive memorandum. After review- 
ing Griffin’s moving papers, the court does not find that 
Griffin changed its position vis-a-vis the scope of the first 
phase of the bifurcated trial in a manner that would 
violate Local 220-4. Nevertheless, the court, in its discre- 
tion, will permit Exxon to file the responsive memoran- 
dum attached as an exhibit to its motion. Exxon should be 


5 Having granted the motion to bifurcate, the court does 
not address the motion, in the alternative, to continue trial. 


App. 84 


advised that the court has carefully reviewed and consid- 
ered the proposed filing in connection with its ruling on 
the motion to bifurcate. 


Accordingly, the motion to strike is DENIED and the 
motion, in the alternative, for leave to file responsive 
memorandum is GRANTED. 


IT IS SO ORDERED. 


DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, July 31, 1992 


/s/ Harold M. Fong 
UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT JUDGE 


EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY and EXXON COMPANY, 
U.S.A. (A division of Exxon corporation) vs. PACIFIC 
RESOURCES, INC., HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT REFIN- 
ERY, INC., PRI MARINE, INC., PRI INTERNATIONAL, 
INC., and SOFEC, INC.; PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC., 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT REFINERY, INC., PRI 
MARINE, INC., and PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC. vs. 
BRIDON FIBRES AND PLASTICS, LTD., GRIFFIN 
WOODHOUSE, LTD., and WERTH ENGINEERING, INC. 


Civil No. 91-00271 HMF 


ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO BIFURCATE, DENY- 
ING CROSS-MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDG- 
MENT, DENYING MOTION TO STRIKE THIRD-PARTY 
GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, LTD.'S REPLY MEMORAN- 
DUM AND GRANTING MOTION, IN THE ALTERNA- 
TIVE, FOR LEAVE TO FILE RESPONSIVE 
MEMORANDUM 


