BEST AVAILABLE COPY 


i 
RESTATEMENT OF QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


I. Whether federal admiralty law should apply the same 
principles of proximate causation for maritime torts that have 
been developed by the courts in the common law of torts, 
including principles of comparative fault and superseding 
cause? 


Il. Whether federal admiralty law should apply the same 
principles of causation in cases involving maritime contract 
claims, framed in terms of “foreseeability,” as the courts apply 
in the common law of contracts? 


ii 
LIST OF PARTIES 


The petitioners are Exxon Company, U.S.A. and Exxon 
Shipping Company. The respondents are Sofec, Inc.; Pacific 
Resources, Inc.; Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Inc.; PRI 
Marine, Inc.; and PRI International, Inc. The third-party 
respondents are Bridon Fibres and Plastics, Ltd.; and Griffin 
Woodhouse, Ltd. 

The following statement is made pursuant to Supreme 
Court Rule 29.6 for each of the parties represented on the brief: 

(1) Sofec, Inc. has no nonwholly owned subsidiaries. The 

parent company of Sofec, Inc. is FMC Corporation. 

(2) Bridon Fibres and Plastics, Ltd., which has since been 

renamed Bridon Fibres Ltd., has no nonwholly.owned 
subsidiaries. The parent company is Bridon Plc. 

(3) Griffin Woodhouse, Ltd. has no parent companies and 

no nonwholly owned subsidiaries. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
RESTATEMENT OF QUESTIONS PRESENTED ....... i 
CEE il 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ...................0.... v 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ...................... | 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ..................... 13 
ES 15 
I. ADMIRALTY COURTS SHOULD APPLY THE 
SAME PRINCIPLES OF PROXIMATE CAUSE 
FOR MARITIME TORTS AS THE COURTS 
APPLY IN THE COMMON LAW OF TORTS ..... 15 
A. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause in Tort Law 
Includes the Principle of Superseding Cause .... 16 
B. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with Principles of Comparative Fault ......... 18 


C. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with the Court’s Decision in Reliable Transfer . . 20 


D. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with Principles of Admiralty Law Applied by 
the World’s Leading Maritime Nations ........ 25 


E. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with Traditional Concerns of Admiralty Law ... 30 


iv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
(continued) 


PAGE 


Il. THE COURTS BELOW PROPERLY APPLIED 
THE PRINCIPLES OF PROXIMATE CAUSE 
ON THE FACTS OF THIS CASE .............-. 34 


I. ADMIRALTY COURTS SHOULD APPLY 
PRINCIPLES OF CAUSATION FROM THE 
COMMON LAW OF CONTRACTS, FRAMED IN 
TERMS OF “FORESEEABILITY,” IN CASES 
INVOLVING MARITIME CONTRACTS ......... 40 


A. Foreseeability Principles from Contract Law 
Afford No Grounds for Granting Relief to 
PRED oc co ccccencedscceecoseceoes 4) 


B. These Common-Law Principles Should Be 
Applied in Cases of Maritime Contracts ....... 43 


IV. TRIAL COURTS ENJOY THE SAME BROAD 
DISCRETION TO ESTABLISH ORDERLY AND 
EFFICIENT PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING 
THE FACTUAL AND LEGAL ISSUES IN 
ADMIRALTY CASES AS IN ALL OTHER 


GHD ccccccdscuncecesaceceecanséeewons ces 46 


\ 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
PAGE 

Cases 
Anderson v. City of Bessemer City, 

ee i cedaaceoeees 36 
Bernardo v. Bethlehem Steel Co., 

200 F. Supp. 534 (S.D.N.Y. 1961), 

aff d, 314 F.2d 604 (2d Cir. 1963) ............... 47 
Buckley v. Bell, 

703 P.2d 1089 (Wyo. 1985) .................... 20 
Carlotta v. Warner, 

601 F. Supp. 749 (E.D. Ky. 1985) ................ 20 
City of Milwaukee v. Cement Div., Nat'l Gypsum Co., 

i de cn cena 21 
Connors v. Gasbarro, 

CE 20 
Desmond v. Holland Am. Cruises, 

1981 A.M.C. 211 (S.D.N Y. 1981) ............... 23 
East River Steamship Corp. v. Transamerica 

Delavall, Inc., 

EE eke sc ccewahbauades 40, 42, 44 
Ellertson v. Dansie, 

os on cnc ncereeceececs 20 


Executive Jet Aviation, Inc. v. City of Cleveland, 
in lt A = 33 


vi 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
(continued) 
PAGE 

Foremost Ins. Co. v. Richardson, 

Br ED 6 6.oo deeddstccedddeddkewens 33 
Gasoline Prods. Co. v. Champlin Refining Co.., 

Pe EE nicde bandubedntéeenandedas 46-47 
Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 

ES Go cesececccccddccteovdnnse 36 
Graver Tank & Mfg. Co. v. Linde Air Prods. Co., 

& 7. rr 36, 40, 43 
Hellenic Lines, Lid. v. Prudential Lines, Inc., 

ED BN ci cccnasedeoseness 24 
Hercules, Inc. v. Stevens Shipping Co., 

765 F.2d 1069 (11th Cir. 1985) .................. 12 
Hunley v. Ace Maritime Corp., 

ee IE GED Ss ccdiccscccevenccooes 17 
In re Bendectin Litig., 

857 F.2d 290 (6th Cir. 1988), 

cert. denied, 488 U.S. 1006 (1989) ............ 47, 48 
In re Beverly Hills Fire Litig., 

ey EEE, CE coc dcccaseccscedsene 48 
In re Related Asbestos Cases, 

543 F. Supp. 1142 (N.D. Cal. 1982) .............. 20 


vil 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
(continued) 
PAGE 
Italia Societa per Azioni di Navigazione v. Oregon 
Co., 

ie dct pane ateggdeaaduadbedcesas 44 
Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, 

EE cack bu cedacdadennens <x 30-31 
Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Stewart, 

ee an i oe ado 4 26 
Kossick v. United Fruit Co., 

EE, Bees cGieu he 6ddd aah velenie’s 45 
Kroon v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 

ere 20 
Lisa v. Fournier Marine Corp., 

866 F.2d 530 (1st Cir.), 

cert. denied, 493 U.S. 819 (1989) ................ 47 
Lone Star Indus., Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., 

927 F.2d 1453 (8th Cir. 1991) ................... 17 
McDermott, Inc. v. AmClyde, 

og ds Si ccawudetecacias 21 
McGraw v. J. Ray McDermott & Co., 

SP PL BED Sacccecccccdccceses 47 
Peckham v. Continental Casualty Ins. Co., 

oe ee 17 


viii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
(continued) 
PAGE 

Petitions of The Kinsman Transit Co., 

338 F.2d 708 (2d Cir. 1964), 

cert. denied, 380 U.S. 944 (1965) ..........60055: 42 
R.H. Macy & Co. v. Otis Elevator Co., 

SP ee CUE SEE 6 cecccccccecesvinse 20 
S.S. SINGLETON ABBEY v. S.S. PALUDINA, 

SRE GE, OD vcccccccsccvseses 14, 28-30, 36 
Sisson v. Ruby, 

Se SEE -scuduceuceseesedavseuusees 33 
THE CITY OF LINCOLN, 

Py MR, PE ud ecuedesed os neaeees 27,29 
THE LOUISIANA, 

A 9,37 
THE MAX Morris v. Curry, 

og BL eer ere ee 22 
THE PENNSYLVANIA, 

86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125 (1873)... ........... 9, 37, 38 
Union Oil Co. of Cal. v. THE SAN JACINTO, 

Se PEED SC Gaca ied be ci cdtdg sees passim 
Union Oil Co. of Cal. v. THE TUGBOAT SAN JACINTO, 

304 F. Supp. 519 (D. Ore. 1969) ............0005. 23 


ix 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
(continued) 
PAGE 

United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 

FR ae passim 
Waggoner v. Town & Country Mobile Homes, Inc., 

Pe BOUED cc csvtaciccveccoceces 42 
Waring v. Clarke, 

46 U.S. (5S How.) 441 (1847) ..... 00.2.0... cee ee 47 
Watters v. TSR, Inc., 

of FG rere ree 17 
Yee v. City of Escondido, 

EE ae 46 
Constitutional and Statutory Provisions 
SP es SR ETEED 6 bck Gb cede cee desedes 10, 37 
ee eG Tere eee 10, 37 
ee Cn ca5 bce nb wed ches baddest ccekes 47 
Se ede eee lice kwebdedua 46, 47 
Maritime Conventions Act, 

OP a, 8 8 ft rrr rrr rr ere 28 
i eee ee ee ad dee eaten Vile dupes 46 
ED so. ce ci cideespasbdeeseshenes 42 


x 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
(continued) 
PAGE 

Other Authorities 
Benedict on Admiralty 

(F. Wiswall, ed.) (7th rev. ed. 1995) ........... 25, 26 
CE Ebbs 00S cedccenrsevsendies 42 
Grant Gilmore & Charles Black, 

The Law of Admiralty (2d ed. 1975) ........... 32, 38 
Alfred Huger, The Proportional Damage Rule 

in Collisions at Sea, 

pn OED osc oc aekdeacbabiacnes 25 


W. Page Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 
SS GED Sed cedesdadccesessccsseness passim 


Herman W.H. Lee, Abandon Ship? The Need 
to Maintain a Consistency Between Causation 


in Admiralty and Causation in Tort, 

25 Creighton L. Rev. 1007 (1992) ............... 32 
William L. Prosser, Law of Torts 

ket oudhwsbhe se Seeeceueséaees 34, 35 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts ............ 41, 42,45 
Restatement (Second) of Torts ...... 0.666.000 00s passim 


Thomas J. Schoenbaum, 
Admiralty and Maritime Law (1994) ......... passim 


Williston on Contracts (W. Jaeger ed.) (3d ed. 1968) .... 41 


xi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


(continued) 


Charles A. Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice & Procedure (1995) 


No. 95-129 
—_-  mrRrwrwooonene 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


EXXON COMPANY, U:S.A.; 
EXXON SHIPPING COMPANY, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


SOFEC, INC.; PACIFIC RESOURCES, INC.; 
HAWAIIAN INDEPENDENT REFINERY, INC.; 
PRI MARINE, INC.; PRI INTERNATIONAL, INC., 
Respondents, 
Vv. 


GRIFFIN WOODHOUSE, LTD.; 
BRIDON FIBRES AND PLASTICS, LTD., 
Third-Party Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THIRD-PARTY RESPONDENTS AND 
FOR RESPONDENT SOFEC, INC. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


Introduction 

The central factual issue in this case concerns proximate 
causation. In particular, the trial here properly focused on 
determining the proximate cause (or causes) of the stranding of 
the EXXON HOUSTON, an oil tanker owned and operated by 
petitioners. Petitioners’ statement of the case portrays the 
events of March 2, 1989 as a continuous jumble of occurrences 
unbroken at any point and unaffected by any superseding causal 


2 


forces such as the subsequent extraordinary negligence of 
Captain Coyne and the crew. Viewing the case from this 
perspective, petitioners suggest that the trial court’s 
concentration on the dispositive issue of proximate cause was 
ill conceived. Petitioners’ strategic portrayal is not uncommon 
in tort cases involving multiple parties, but it badly 
misconceives the important role of the doctrine of proximate 
cause in clarifying the complex factual skeins that often must 
be sorted out in adjudicating such cases. 

The late Judge Fong conducted a three-week bench trial in 
this case, and for purposes of the Court’s review, the record 
here is fully set forth in the factual findings made by the 
District Court and upheld on review by the Court of Appeals. ' 
Judge Fong also made a crucial ruling prior to trial, on 
respondents’ motion to bifurcate the proceedings. Essentially, 
he determined that two significant sets of events occurred in 
this case, which took place not contemporaneously but 
successively: first, there were various factors that led to the 
initial breakout of the vessel from its mooring; second, there 
were a number of other events that might also be found to have 
led to her ultimate stranding. 

Judge Fong determined that judicial efficiency and the 
resources of all the parties would be most usefully 
concentrated, as an initial matter, upon the potentially 
dispositive issue of proximate cause. He therefore granted 

’ motion for bifurcation. J.A. 58-75. In Phase One 
of the trial, he directed the parties to focus their attention on 
determining whether the breakout and/or other events were the 
proximate cause (or causes) of the vessel’s stranding. J.A. 71- 
74, 103-04. Phase Two of the trial, if necessary, would be 
devoted to allocating responsibility for the events that caused 


' In a footnote to their brief, petitioners appear to disparage the 
late Judge Fong as unfamiliar with admiralty law and thus seeking 
help from his law clerk. See Petitioners’ Brief on the Merits (“Pet. 
Br.”) 4.4. Judge Fong, however, was a respected jurist who served 
for seven years as the Chief Judge of the District Court for the 
District of Hawaii, and during his thirteen years of service on the 
bench he presided in many admiralty cases. Any aspersions upon his 
capabilities are inappropriate and wholly unwarranted. 


3 


the breakout and to assessing damages. J.A. 73-74. Detailed 
factual discovery and trial preparation on these latter points 
might be averted, in the court’s view, if it first were to 
determine the proximate cause (or causes) of her stranding. J.A. 
71-72. Much of petitioners’ ire is aimed at the bifurcation 
order, which they believe led the court “to try the case upside- 
down and backwards.” Pet. Br. 4. 

In the end, Judge Fong found as a factual matter that after 
the vessel broke loose from its mooring, it reached a position of 
safety more than 90 minutes before it was stranded. He also 
found that the acts and omissions of Captain Coyne and the 
crew, which occurred after the vessel had reached a position of 
safety, constituted extraordinary negligence. That conduct, 
rather than the original breakout of the vessel, was determined 
to have proximately caused its stranding. The legal issues must 
be examined against this factual backdrop. 

This is a traditional tort case, based upon relationships that 
were defined in part by the terms of a contract. Petitioners 
entered into a contract to deliver crude oil “by vessel into 
Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Ewa Beach, Hawaii, via 
offshore single point system.” J.A. 143. Among the terms of 
various related agreements between the parties was a warranty 
of “safe berth,” which required the terminal to “provide a safe 
berth to which vessels may proceed to or depart from, and 
where the vessel can always lie safely afloat.” J.A. 142-43. On 
March 1, 1989, pursuant to the terms of this contract, the 
EXXON HOUSTON arrived at the single point mooring at Barbers 
Point, Oahu, was moored there, and proceeded to discharge oil 
into a submerged pipeline. J.A. 144-46. 

A mooring assembly, which included a chafe chain and 
mooring hawser, attached the bow of the ExxON HOUSTON to 
the mooring. Oil was discharged from the vessel to the 
submerged pipeline through two floating hoses, which were 
secured to the vessel by twelve bolts and several restraining 
lines. The mooring assembly held the vessel in place and 

allowed the hoses to float freely without any tension. J.A. 146. 
Captain Coyne, the master of the EXxON HOUSTON, was 
acting within the course and scope of his employment at all 
times leading up to the stranding. Through past experience, 


4 


Captain Coyne was familiar with the mooring at Barbers Point 
and with maritime conditions in the vicinity. J.A. 144. 

On March 2, 1989, at 1715,’ stormy conditions at the 
mooring caused a link in the chafe chain to part. The vessel 
began to drift away from the mooring, which put the hoses 
under tension. By 1728, both hoses had parted, causing some 
oil to discharge into the water. One of the two lengths of hose 
remained connected to the vessel, raising concern that it could 
foul the propeller if the ship were to move forward. J.A. 146- 
47. The trial court specifically designated 1728 as the point of 
the “breakout” of the vessel from its mooring. At trial, the 
court focused the parties’ efforts on determining whether the 
breakout or events subsequent to the breakout constituted the 
proximate cause (or causes) of the eventual stranding. 

At 1730, the U.S. evenghe ony ob hang evga ey 
radio call to Captain Coyne, i ir offer o . 
for he believed the situation would be resolved before 
assistance vessels could arrive. J.A. 148.° At 1740, Captain 
Coyne tried to anchor the vessel, but the effort foundered when 
he failed to follow standard practice by releasing enough of the 
See ees eee Oy 2 ae ey ere 

, though ample length of chain was available to do so. J.A. 
a. At 1747, the anchor was raised. Captain Coyne never 
again sought to drop anchor, despite the fact that over the 
course of more than two hours between this time and the 
eventual stranding he had many opportunities to anchor the 
vessel safely. J.A. 150. ; 

An assist tug was available at the mooring site to provide 
assistance after the breakout occurred. Although this boat, the 
NENE, was not able to tow the EXXON HOUSTON to safety, by 
1803 it had attached a line that gave it control of the end of the 
remaining hose and enabled it to secure the hose away from the 
EXXON HOUSTON’s propeller. Thereafter, Captain Coyne 


2 All of the times stated here are Honolulu local time, given in 
nautical format. Thus, for example, 1715 is 5:15 p.m. Honolulu time. 


> The trial court found that individual vessels had broken loose 
from the same mooring on two prior occasions, each of which 
concluded without incident. J.A. 148. 


5 


ordered the movements of the NENE as needed to coordinate 
with the movements of the ExxON HousTON. J.A. 147, 150. 
The EXXON HOUSTON backed out to sea between 1803 and 
1830, on a slow course that took it away from shallow water. 
Its position was regularly and accurately plotted on the vessel’s 
navigational chart from 1740 to 1830. J.A. 150-51. Between 
1830 and 1947, the remaining hose was disconnected from the 
EXXON HOUSTON, and was pulled clear at 1947. J.A. 156. 

At 1831, Captain Coyne changed course, a decision that 
“was not caused by any necessity or emergency and there was 
no reason why the vessel could not have continued to back out 
to sea after 1830.” J.A. 151. At this point, the ship was slightly 
more than a mile from the shore, and about one-half mile from 
the grounding line in shallow water near the shore. From 1830 
to 1956, the EXXON HOUSTON remained approximately the 
same distance from the shore, though at any time Captain 
Coyne could have backed the vessel “to any distance offshore 
he wanted” without significant risk, a course that would have 
been much safer than remaining near the shore while the winds 
tended to push the ship ashore. J.A. 151. 

Between 1830 and 2004, the position of the Exxon 
HOUSTON was not plotted on any chart, which violated federal 
law, though proper charts for this purpose were easily 
accessible on the bridge of the vessel. J.A. 152, 168-69. “A 
prudent mariner would have fixed and plotted his vessel's 
position at least every 15 to 20 minutes” in this situation, 
especially in view of the ship’s proximity to the shore and the 
difficulty of estimating its position in the dark. J.A. 152. 
Captain Coyne had personnel available to plot the ship’s 
position, but failed to make use of them. Instead, from 1830 to 
1956 he elected to navigate by the method of “parallel 
indexing,” which is designed simply to keep the ship a constant 
distance from the shore. J.A. 153. “Parallel indexing is not a 
substitute for fixing the position of the vessel. Navigation by 
parallel indexing without plotted fixes is inherently dangerous 
and a violation of industry standards.” J.A. 153. “Without a 
fix, Captain Coyne was not able to check the chart for hazards.” 
J.A. 155. Captain Coyne testified inconsistently on these 
matters between his deposition and the trial, and his testimony 
that he knew the position of the vessel at all times was 


6 


contradicted by one of the ship’s officers. J.A. 154-55. In sum, 
at this juncture “Captain Coyne inexplicably chose to loiter in 
a dangerous area without fixing his position.” J.A. 175-76. 

A member of the crew appeared to have been injured at 
approximately 1944, though the injury was not a serious one. 
J.A. 156, 233. Captain Coyne sent an officer to evaluate the 
crew member’s condition, but did not order any of the other 
available officers to replace him, which left Captain Coyne as 
the only officer on the bridge from 1948 to 2000, with no other 
officer present to fix the vessel’s position. J.A. 156. This 
situation also violated federal law. J.A. 156-57, 168-69. “If the 
bridge had been properly manned, the danger of stranding 
would have been avoided.” J.A. 157. 

At 1956, Captain Coyne commenced the final turn that 
culminated in the stranding of the vessel, which the court found 
was “not a foreseeable consequence of the breakout.” J.A. 175. 
He “did not look at the navigational chart before commencing 
the final turn,” even though at the time he “did not know the 
ship’s position.” J.A. 157. Given “the prevailing directions of 
the wind and sea” and the other conditions, “a prudent mariner 
would not have attempted” this turn, which “was grossly 
negligent, of whether or not it could have been made 
successfully.” J.A. 157-58. An officer of the ship happened to 
arrive on the bridge at 2000. Captain Coyne was in doubt as to 
the ship’s position at that time and ordered the officer to plot a 
fix of its position, which was done at 2004. J.A. 158. 

When Captain Coyne saw the 2004 fix on the navigational 
chart, he exclaimed, “Oh shit!” J.A. 158. He immediately 
ordered the vessel’s speed to be increased, but moments later 
the EXXON HOUSTON stranded on a reef that was clearly 
charted on the ship’s navigational chart. J.A. 158-59. “Over 
two and one-half hours elapsed between the breakout and the 
ample time to consider the situation calmly and deliberately.” 
J.A. 159.“ “In short, Captain Coyne recklessly ignored all 


* At trial, petitioners contended that the final turn failed “only 
because of a large current that pushed the ship onto the reef” and that 
Captain Coyne should have been warned about this supposed current. 
J.A. 159. The court rejected this explanation because petitioners 


; 


pertinent information that was available to him.” J.A. 160. 


The Bifurcation Order 
Petitioners brought suit against respondents, alleging 
claims for breach of contract warranties, negligence, and 
products liability. Respondent Sofec, Inc. manufactured the 
single point mooring system, which was owned and operated by 


The principal ak of the damages claimed by 
petitioners stemmed from the grounding of the ExxONn 
HOUSTON herself, as the damages incurred from the oil cleanup 
were relatively minor. JA. 71. The central difficulty in 


the issue of causation among the multiple parties with respect 
to the harm that the vessel suffered when it was stranded. 
Respondents and the third-party respondents vigorously 
disputed among themselves the cause of the initial breakout of 
the vessel from its mooring. J.A. 63. Petitioners and all of the 
various respondents also disputed the actual and proximate 
cause of the vessel’s stranding. J.A. 62-69. Observing that 
petitioners bore “the burden of proving that the breakout of the 
vessel from her mooring was the proximate cause of the 
grounding,” J.A. 66, the trial court found itself unable to 
resolve these issues on summary judgment because the critical 
factual issues were legitimately in dispute, J.A. 69, 71. 

More than two years after the complaint was filed, the trial 
court sought to simplify the imminent trial proceedings by 
granting respondents’ motion to bifurcate the issue of causation 


failed to show that their post-hoc studies of the currents in the area 
could have been reduced to a usable format and, more important, 
because petitioners failed to show that Captain Coyne would have 
referred to such data had it been available. Instead, the court found 
that Captain Coyne’s decision to turn “was made in haste without due 
consideration of several other pieces of information which should 
have caused him to reject the turn,” such as the navigational chars, 
fixed plots that should have been taken of the vessel’s position, or 
consultations with his other officers. J.A. 160. 


as between the breakout and the stranding of the vessel. J.A. 
71-74. The trial court noted its authority to exercise “broad 
discretion to order separate trials pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure when a separate trial will 
further convenience, avoid prejudice or be conducive to 
expedition and economy.” J.A. 72 (quotation omitted). 

The court considered those factors and determined that 
they supported bifurcation on the causation issue. It 


could obviate the need for extensive discovery, trial 
preparation, and weeks of trial if the court first determines the 
cause or comparative causes of the grounding, excluding the 
cause of the breakout,” which would involve complicated 
matters of proof. J.A. 71. The court also noted that Phase One 
of the trial would address 80% of petitioners’ damage claims, 
which supported respondents’ view that “a separate trial offers 
the probability of settlement after the conclusion of the first 
phase.” J.A. 72. Moreover, the court concluded that if it were 
to determine “that the navigation of the EXXON HOUSTON was 
the proximate cause of its grounding, then it would be 
unnecessary for the court to resolve the issue of ‘comparative 
fault” or assess damages. J.A. 72 (citation omitted). 

The court explained, however, that the ascertainment of 
comparative fault would be very much at issue in Phase One of 
the trial if the facts supported this resolution: “On the other 
hand, if the court does not find that the navigation of the vessel 
was the superseding cause of the grounding, the court can still 
determine in the first phase of a bifurcated trial the comparative 
fault (cause) of the grounding as between the breakout and the 
subsequent navigation of the vessel.” J.A. 73. Finally, the 
court weighed and resolved the competing considerations that 
were raised by the motion to bifurcate: 

The court is well aware of the possibility that the 
issue of causation with respect to the breakout may 
still require a second phase of trial, perhaps before a 
jury. The court, however, is in the best position to 
determine whether bifurcation in this case promotes 
judicial economy. The court finds that it does. 


9 


J.A. 74 (emphasis in original).* Judge Fong thus ordered the 
parties initially to try “the issue of causation with respect to the 
EXXON HOUSTON’s grounding, but not including the issue of 
causation with respect to the breakout itself.” J.A. 74. 


The Trial Court Judgment 

The purposes that the trial court believed would be served 
by the bifurcation order were vindicated by the trial 
proceedings themselves. The causation issues addressed in 
Phase One of the trial alone required three weeks of courtroom 
time. After a bench trial of those issues, the court entered 
judgment for respondents, concluding that they “are not legally 
responsible for the stranding of the EXXON HOUSTON.” J.A. 
175. The court based this conclusion on the findings of fact as 
related above, and on the following determinations. 

First, the court noted the Court’s venerable holding in THE 
LOUISIANA, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 164 (1865), that when a moving 
vessel strikes a charted reef, it is presumed that the vessel is at 
fault. Jd This presumption of fault suffices to make out a 

prima facie case of negligence against the moving vessel. The 
presumption is “universally described as strong, and as one that 
places a heavy burden on the moving ship to overcome.” J.A. 
167 (quotations omitted). It can be overcome only by proving, 
for instance, that the vessel acted with reasonable care or that 
the stranding was inevitable. Yet the trial court found that 
petitioners simply failed to carry their burden of proof on either 
point. It thus concluded that petitioners were negligent and that 
Se ee SENG SNEED SHE FES NENG JA. 

Second, the court recognized that “admiralty law further 
presumes that when a vessel violates a statutory rule meant to 
prevent stranding, the violation was a proximate cause of the 
stranding.” J.A. 168; see THE PENNSYLVANIA, 86 U.S. (19 
Wall.) 125 (1873). Captain Coyne was found to have violated 
mandatory federal directives both by failing to have the vessel’s 


* At that juncture, a jury trial might have been necessary on 
various contract claims that Sofec had asserted against HIRI, which 
did not fall within federal admiralty jurisdiction. Sofec has since 
dismissed those claims, leaving no matters that would require 
resolution by a jury. 


10 


position plotted on a navigational chart between 1830 and 2004 
and by manning the bridge alone between 1948 and 2000. See 
33 C.F.R. § 164.11(a) & (c) (1995). Because petitioners again 
failed to rebut the presumption of negligence imposed by this 
rule, the court found that petitioners’ violations were a 
proximate cause of the stranding of the vessel. J.A. 169. 

Third, the court went on to consider in more detail whether 
Captain Coyne’s conduct was negligent without regard to the 
application of the foregoing rules. It found that he acted 
“negligently, unreasonably and in violation of the maritime 
industry standards” in numerous ways: (1) by not deploying 
sufficient chain to anchor the ship at 1747; (2) by not 
requesting assistance from the Coast Guard or others; (3) by not 
attempting to anchor the ship again after 1747; (4) by not 
continuing to back the ship after 1830 until it reached a safe 
distance from the shore; (5) by choosing to linger in the vicinity 
of the shore, only about one-half mile from the actual 
grounding line. J.A. 170-71. In addition, Captain Coyne’s 
failure to plot fixes of the vessel’s position between 1830 and 
2004, which would have avoided any danger of stranding, “was 
grossly and extraordinarily negligent and in violation of the 
maritime industry standards.” J.A. 171. . 

Captain Coyne’s final turn, which led immediately to the 
grounding of the vessel, was found to be “grossly and 
extraordinarily negligent and in violation of the maritime 
industry standards because he commenced it without knowing 
the vessel’s position.” J.A. 171. The decision to turn the ship 
toward the coast was found to have been made “independently 
of the breakout,” and this decision and the attempt to make the 
turn were each found to be “not a foreseeable consequence of 
the breakout.” J.A. 175. Once again, the trial court found that 
Captain Coyne could have avoided any danger of stranding by 
simply backing out to sea or turning the other way. J.A. 171. 

Fourth, and of extreme significance here, the court made 
an independently dispositive determination that the causal chain 
between the initial breakout and the ultimate stranding was 
broken during the intervening period. In particular, the court 
found that by 1830, the EXXON HOUSTON had reached a 
position of safety, which vitiated the causal forces that had 
previously operated on the vessel after it came loose from its 


mooring.® “The EXXON HOUSTON had reached a safe position 
and only the gross negligence of its master put it into further 
danger.” J.A. 174. The court later reiterated the same point: 
“By 1830, the Exxon Houston was heading out to sea and in no 
further danger of stranciag. Only the grossly negligent actions 
of its master endangered the vessel further.” J.A. 175.’ 

For all of these reasons, the court concluded that 
petitioners did not carry their burden of proving that the initial 
breakout proximately caused the stranding of the vessel. J.A. 
162, 172-76. It based this conclusion on careful consideration 
of the factors laid out in section 442 of the Restatement 
(Second) of Torts, which define when “an intervening force is 
a superseding cause of harm to another.” J.A. 172-73. The 
court found, in particular, that many features of Captain 
Coyne’s conduct were “highly extraordinary” and “grossly 
negligent,” though they resulted from “voluntary, unforced” 
decisions, J.A. 174-75, made not in any extreme crisis, but 
“calmly, deliberately and without the pressure of an imminent 
peril,” J.A. 170. In the end, his actions were judged to be “the 
sole proximate cause of the stranding of the EXXON HOUSTON.” 
J.A. 173. 

Judge Fong summed up his determinations as follows: 
“Captain Coyne inexplicably chose to loiter in a dangerous area 
without fixing his position. Then, while overly concerned by 
an injury to a crew member, he drove the ship onto a charted 
reef. Jt would be manifestly unjust to hold anyone legally 
responsible for the consequences of these acts other than 
Captain Coyne and his employer, Exxon.” J.A. 175-76 
(emphasis added). 


° The court had confronted the same potentially dispositive issue 
on motion for summary judgment, but was unable to resolve it in that 
posture, for whether the vessel had reached a position of safety, and 
whether Captain Coyne had been negligent, were both disputed facts 
that could only be resolved after trial. J.A. 68-71. 


’ The court also found that petitioners had failed to establish any 
post-breakout breaches of the “safe berth” clause or warranty 
contained in their contract with respondents HIRI, who owned and 
operated the single point mooring system. J.A. 162-66. 


12 


The Court of Appeals Decision 

The Court of Appeals unanimously affirmed. It began its 
analysis by focusing on the issue of proximate cause, including 
the subsidiary principle of superseding cause, and discerned 
some confusion among the courts of appeals on the continued 
applicability of these concepts under the comparative fault rule 
adopted in United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 
(1975).* After considering the case law, the court reaffirmed its 
previous ruling that “ ing cause may act to cut off 
liability for antecedent acts of negligence in admiralty cases 
where the superseding cause is the result of extraordinary 
negligence. We therefore hold that the district court did not 
‘disobey’ Reliable Transfer in employing the doctrine of 
superseding cause in this case.” J.A. 223. 

The Court of Appeals then easily dispatched petitioners’ 
claim that the District Court had improperly bifurcated the 
proceedings, noting that trial courts enjoy broad discretion 
under Rule 42(b), and concluding that Judge Fong did not 
abuse his discretion. Legally, the bifurcation was 
unexceptionable, for the District Court had correctly 
determined that if it found “the injured party to be the 
superseding or sole proximate cause of the damage complained 
of, it cannot recover from a party whose actions or omissions 
are deemed to be causes in fact, but not legal causes of the 
damage, regardless of whether that party’s liability is premised 
on negligence or strict liability.” J.A. 225-26 (emphasis in 
original). Moreover, the court soundly exercised its discretion, 
for bifurcation of the trial was “expeditious and appropriate” 
and did not prejudice Exxon. J.A. 226. 

Finally, the Court of Appeals turned to the trial court’s 
findings that Captain Coyne had acted “with extraordinary 


* In particular, the Ninth Circuit found inconsistency between 
the Eleventh Circuit’s decision in Hercules, Inc. v. Stevens Shipping 
Co., 765 F.2d 1069 (11th Cir. 1985), which apparently is the only 
decision to reject the doctrine of superseding cavse, and later 
decisions by the Fifth, Eighth, and Ninth Circuits, which hold that the 
doctrine of proximate cause, including the subsidiary principle of 
superseding cause, retains its full vitality in maritime tort cases. See 
J.A. 219-23. 


13 


negligence” and that those actions “constituted a superseding 
cause of the ship’s loss.” J.A. 227-28. On each point, the 
Court of Appeals approved the trial court’s determinations, 
relying heavily on its factual findings, which were found to be 
“well supported by the record” and thus were upheld in their 
entirety. J.A. 233; see generally J.A. 226-33. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Admiralty courts should apply the same principles of 
proximate causation for maritime torts that courts apply in the 
common law of torts. The doctrine of proximate cause has 
been elaborately developed and refined over centuries of 
adjudication. These foundational principles for ascertaining 
legal responsibility for wrongs done to another are embodied in 
ie settled case law as well as in the leading authorities on tort 
law. No sound reasons have been advanced for departing from 
these well-settled principles in cases involving maritime torts. 

The established doctrine of proximate cause in the law of 
torts includes the principle of superseding cause. Indeed, this 
principle is a bedrock tenet of causation analysis in 
circumstances where different causal forces operate 
successively rather than concomitantly. In particular, where a 
court determines that a subsequent causal force is an 
extraordinary intervening event that is not a normal 
consequence of previous causal forces, the accepted principle 
of superseding cause holds that the subsequent causal force 
constitutes the proximate cause of any harm that may have 
occurred. Any other approach would represent a significant 
departure from the established doctrine of “proximate” cause. 

. These tort-law concepts are wholly consistent with 
principles of comparative fault. Most modern regimes of tort 
law have adopted comparative negligence as the basic rule for 
allocating liability, and yet they continue faithfully to apply the 
principle of superseding cause in their analysis of proximate 
cause both in negligence cases and in products liability cases. 
For these reasons, the principle of superseding cause is 
consistent with this Court’s decision in United States v. 
Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397 (1975), which adopted the 
rule of comparative fault in maritime tort cases. The plain 
consistency of traditional causation principles with the 


14 


comparative fault rule is shown by the Court’s decision in 
Union Oil Co. of Cal. v. THE SAN JACINTO, 409 U.S. 140 (1972), 
which must be overruled for petitioners to prevail. 

The accepted doctrine of proximate causation reflects the 
straightforward and practical approach favored in federal 
admiralty law. This is primarily so because this doctrine can 
aid in streamlining comple:. causal chains of events that would 
multiply the practical difficulties of trying maritime tort cases 
involving multiple claims and multiple parties. Consistency 
between the common law of torts and federal admiralty law 
governing maritime torts is also important to discourage forum 
shopping in those cases where federal admiralty jurisdiction 
may be uncertain or disputed. 

In addition, the Court has stressed the need to maintain 
consistency between American admiralty law and the legal 
principles applied by other leading maritime nations. This is 
important to discourage transoceanic forum shopping, which is 
detrimental to maritime commerce and to the just and orderly 
resolution of civil disputes that arise with regularity in 
international waters. Consistent treatment of maritime tort 
claims between these bodies of law is best facilitated by 
adhering to settled principles of proximate causation, as 
exemplified by a strikingly similar British decision, S.S. 
SINGLETON ABBEY v. S.S. PALUDINA [1927] App. Cas. 16. 

The lower courts correctly applied the doctrine of 
proximate causation here. The trial court made two pivotal 
factual findings that are dispositive of petitioners’ claims. First, 
the trial court found that after the vessel broke loose from its 
mooring, it ultimately reached a position of safety, at which 
point the causal forces stemming from the breakout were no 
longer any substantial factor in its subsequent movements. The 
circumstances obtaining at that juncture allowed calm 
deliberation and decisionmaking as to where to guide the vessel 
thenceforth. Second, the trial court found that Captain Coyne 
committed “extraordinary” negligence in his subsequent 
handling of the vessel, and that this extraordinary negligence 
was the sole proximate cause of her stranding. These factual 
findings are critical to proper disposition of the claims 
advanced in this case, and stand in sharp contrast io the skewed 
account of events conjured up in petitioners’ brief. 


15 


Petitioners have also recast their tort claims, based on the 
same underlying events, as contract claims premised on express 
and implied warranties contained in their contract to deliver 
crude oil. For many of the reasons already stated, this Court 
should hold that the same causation principles apply to 
maritime contract claims, framed in terms of “foreseeability,” 
as the courts apply in the common law of contracts. The 
foreseeability doctrine tends to reflect tort-like principles of 
proximate cause, but is more limited in scope. Application of 
this doctrine in this case affords no relief to petitioners, but is 
fully consistent with traditional concerns of admiralty law. 

Finally, the real object of petitioners’ recriminations is the 
District Court’s ruling that bifurcated the trial in order to focus 
judicial resources on the dispositive issue of proximate 
causation. Petitioners y assert that the trial court’s 
bifurcation order deprived them of due process of law. Yet 
they did not frame this issue as one of their questions presented, 
and therefore they cannot seek reversal on this ground. 

Moreover, any such claim is frivolous. It is standard 
procedure in tort cases involving multiple parties to conserve 
the resources of the court and litigants alike by trying one or 
more potentially dispositive issues in the first instance, and 
postponing resolution of other issues, if necessary at all, until 
a later stage. In admiralty cases, as in other cases, trial courts 
should enjoy broad discretion to devise what they judge to be 
orderly and efficient processes for determining the factual and 
legal issues. The results of this trial fully vindicate the 
purposes that the late Judge Fong concluded would be served 
by bifurcation here. 


ARGUMENT 


I. ADMIRALTY COURTS SHOULD APPLY THE 
SAME PRINCIPLES OF PROXIMATE CAUSE FOR 
MARITIME TORTS AS THE COURTS APPLY IN 
THE COMMON LAW OF TORTS. 


The essence of the decisions below, and of our position 
before this Court, is that maritime torts are no different from 
land-based torts in terms of the legal principles that should 
govern such basic issues as breach of duty, causation, and 


16 


damages. In particular, the doctrine of proximate cause, which 
courts have refined over many decades of jurisprudential 
development, should apply to maritime torts for the same 
reasons of fairness and efficiency that have been found to 
justify its application in all other kinds of tort cases. This 
general principle of consistency between federal admiralty lav. 
and the common law also discourages forum shopping in cases 
where federal admiralty jurisdiction is uncertain or disputed. 


A. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause in Tort Law 
Includes the Principle of Superseding Cause 

The doctrine of proximate cause is firmly established in the 
common law of torts. It is a critical tool for avoiding endless 
squabbles about how far along the truly infinite chain of causal 
forces courts should extend their inquiries in order to fix legal 
responsibility for harm suffered by complaining parties. See, 
e.g., W. Page Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 
§ 44, at 302 (Sth ed. 1984) (“In the effort to hold the 
defendant's liability within some reasonable bounds, the courts 
have been compelled, out of sheer necessity and in default of 
anything better, to fall back upon” the doctrine of proximate 
cause, including “intervening cause.”). 

The principal features of proximate causation are set forth 
in the Restatement (Second) of Torts, and were correctly relied 
upon by the courts below. See J.A. 172-76, 221 n.4, 230-33. 
For a party’s conduct to constitute the legal cause of any harm, 
that conduct must be “a substantial factor in bringing about the 
harm” and must not be subject to any rule of law that relieves 
that party “from liability because of the manner in which his 
negligence has resulted in the harm.” Restatement (Second) of 
Torts § 431 (1965). One of the rules that relieves a party from 
liability for its negligence is the doctrine of superseding cause. 
A “superseding cause” is defined as any “intervening force” 
that “actively operates in producing harm” to the complaining 
party “after the actor’s negligent act or omission has been 
committed,” at least where certain other considerations are 
present. Jd §§ 440 & 441. 

The considerations that suffice to transform an intervening 
force into a superseding cause, which relieves the defendant of 
liability, are set out in the Restatement, as follows: 


17 


(a) the fact that its intervention brings about harm 
different in kind from that which would otherwise 
have resulted from the actor’s negligence; 

(b) the fact that its operation or the consequences 
thereof appear after the event to be extraordinary 
rather than normal in view of the circumstances 
existing at the time of its operation; 

(c) the fact that the intervening force is operating 
independently of any situation created by the actor’s 
negligence, or, on the other hand, is or is not a normal 
result of such a situation; 

(d) the fact that the operation of the intervening 
force is due to a third person’s act or his failure to act; 

(e) the fact that the intervening force is due to an 
act of a third person which is wrongful toward the 
other and as such subjects the third person to liability 
to him; 

(f) the degree of culpability of a wrongful act of 
a third person which sets the intervening force in 
motion. 

Id. at § 442. Consistent with this itemization of pertinent 
considerations, courts continue to apply the principle of 
superseding cause in making determinations of liability for all 
manner of tort claims." 

Dissenting from the widespread acceptance of these 
principles, petitioners’ amicus quotes a passage from Dean 
Prosser that, taken out of context, seems critical of this 
doctrine: “It must be conceded that ‘intervening cause’ is a 
highly unsatisfactory term, since we are dealing with problems 
of responsibility, and not physics.” See Maritime Law 


* As will be discussed in more detail, see Section II, infra, the 
trial court painstakingly applied the factors set forth in section 442 of 
the Restatement in order to reach a correct determination of liability 
in this case. See J.A. 172-76. 


” See, e.g., Peckham . Continental Casualty Ins. Co., 895 F.2d 
830, 838 (1st Cir. 1990); Watters v. TSR, Inc., 904 F.2d 378, 383 (6th 
Cir. 1990); Lone Star Indus., Inc. v. Mays Towing Co., 927 F.2d 
1453, 1459-60 (8th Cir. 1991) (maritime tort); Hunley v. Ace 
Maritime Corp., 927 F.2d 493, 497 (9th Cir. 1991) (maritime tort). 


Association of the United States as Amicus Curiae in Support 
of Petitioners (“MLA Br.”) 12 n.7. The complete passage, 
however, shows that this supposed criticism is merely 
linguistic, not conceptual, for it continues: 
[The term “intervening cause”’] is used in default of a 
better, because it is useful in dealing with the type of 
case where a new and independent cause acts upon a 
situation once created by the defendant. In the most 
common usage it is meant to be understood in a very 
from concurring causes of either natural or human 
origin, which come into active operation at a later 
time to change a situation resulting from the 
defendant’s conduct. 
Prosser and Keaton, supra, § 44, at 302. The broader context 
of Dean Prosser’s discussion demonstrates even more fully his 
t with the definitive position of the Restatement that 
the principles of superseding or intervening cause represent an 
established doctrine of tort law that is useful in settling legal 
responsibility for the harms that occur in certain kinds of 
factual situations. See id. at 301-19. 


B. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with Principles of Comparative Fault 

The gist of petitioners’ dissatisfaction with the law as 
framed by the lower courts in this case is their contention that 
the legal principle of superseding cause is wholly inconsistent 
with comparative fault. See Pet. Br. 23-29. Yet because this 
principle is an accepted feature in legal analysis of proximate 
causation, and since that analysis occurs routinely in tort cases 
governed by modern principles of comparative negligence, 
petitioners’ contention is plainly wrong. 


"In the court below, petitioners sought to analogize the doctrine 
of superseding cause to the now-discredited doctrine of “last clear 
chance,” but this distortion was recognized plainly as such and 
roundly rejected. See note 12, infra. In this Court, they have shifted 
ground and now seek to analogize superseding cause to the doctrine 
of contributory negligence, see Pet. Br. 21 & 32, which again 
misconceives basic principles of tort law. Compare, eg. 


19 


The principle of imposing liability in proportion to the 
amount of harm caused by each party’s conduct was not 
favored in an earlier age where the trial of cases was marked by 
simpler legal standards and methods of proof were perhaps 
more primitive and less exacting. In recent decades, however, 
the common law has generally embraced comparative fault as 
the accepted rule in ioning liability for tortious conduct. 
See Prosser and Keeton, supra, § 67, at 479 (“comparative fault 
apportionment of damages is veritably sweeping the land”). 
With the adoption of comparative fault, many of the doctrines 
that had grown up under the prior tort-law regime have been 
rendered obsolete. The harsh corrective rule of contributory 
negligence as a complete bar to recovery, for example, along 
with such counter-correctives as “last clear chance,” have not 
been sustained in the new regime of modern tort law based on 
principles of comparative fault. See id at 477-78." 

At the same time these developments have occurred, 
however, courts have not diminished their allegiance to the 
traditional principles of causation analysis, including proximate 
cause. The doctrine of proximate cause remains critical in 
fixing legal responsibility for harm even under a tort-law 
regime that has embraced the apportionment of damages among 


Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra, ch. 16 (discussing causation, 
including superseding cause) with id ch. |7 (discussing contributory 


negligence). 


"In the decision below, the Ninth Circuit correctly 
distinguished the doctrine of superseding cause, which remains useful 
and valid in determining proximate cause, from “last clear chance,” 
which has been discarded under a tort regime of comparative 
to last clear chance, that argument fails .... HIRI was not absolved 
of fault because Exxon had the ‘last clear chance’ to avoid danger, 
but because the district court found that Exxon’s independent and 
extraordinarily negligent actions were the sole legal cause of the 
stranding.” J.A. 232 n.7. Compare | Thomas J. Schoenbaum, 
Admiralty and Maritime Law § 5-3 (1994) (approving causation 
doctrines, including superseding cause) with id § 5-12 (disapproving 
last clear chance) and id § 5-13 (disapproving contributory 
negligence); see also note | 1, supra. 


20 


multiple See, e.g., Connors v. Gasbarro, 448 A.2d 756, 
761 (RL Sam Galan cattanee of enn water ab eats 
proximate cause of collision, comparative negligence does not 
apply); Kroon v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 628 F.2d 891, 893 (Sth 
Cir. 1980) (same; applying Florida law). And it continues to be 
ecuabtiches law Gist Gos Coctine of presientie eaasp Saas 
the subsidiary principle of superseding cause Restatement 
(Second) of Torts, supra, § 442; Prosser and Keeton, supra, 
§ 44; see also, e.g., Carlotta v. Warner, 601 F. Supp. 749, 751 
(E.D. Ky. 1985) (superseding cause obviates comparison of 
parties’ ; applying Kentucky law); Ellertson v. 
Dansie, 576 P.2d 867, 869 (Utah 1978) (where plaintiff's 
conduct was superseding cause, comparative negligence does 
not apply). 

The same approach also governs tort claims brought under 
the modern doctrine of strict products liability. Here too, the 
So poo nblity Lor cagly mlloves So complaining pary 
for products liability law simply relieves the 
of the onus of proving negligence, but leaves in place all other 
elements of proof. See, e.g., Prosser and Keeton, supra, § 98. 
Thus, the plaintiff in a products liability case must still prove 
that the improper design or manufacture of a product was the 
proximate cause of any alleged harm. See id § 102 at 710. 

In such cases, moreover, the principle of superseding cause 

remains fully As Dean Prosser has summarized: 
“virtually all courts have seemingly agreed that the conduct or 
misconduct of another, including an intermediate seller, the 
claimant, or anyone else, may be of such a nature or kind as to 
constitute a superseding cause.” Prosser and Keeton, supra, 
§ 102, at 710; see, e.g, RH. Macy & Co. v. Otis Elevator Co., 
554 N.E.2d 1313, 1317 (Oh. 1990) (superseding cause applies 


to strict products liability claims); Buckley v. Bell, 703 P.2d 
1089, 1091-95 (Wyo. 1985) (same); Jn re Related Asbestos 


Cases, 543 F. Supp. 1142, 1150 (N.D. Cal. 1982) (same). 


C. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with the Court’s Decision in Reliable Transfer _ 
Petitioners contend that the doctrine of proximate cause is 
inconsistent with the Court’s holding in Reliable Transfer that 
“when two or more parties have contributed by their fault to 


21 


cause property damage in a maritime collision or stranding, 
lability for such damages is to be allocated among the partie 

to the comparative degree of their fault.” 
United States v. Reliable Transfer Co., 421 U.S. 397, 411 
(1975). Because this contention depends upon the premise that 
the principles of proximate cause, including superseding cause, 
are not consistent with comparative fault, it is squarely refuted 
by the preceding section. But a fuller understanding of Reliable 
Transfer confirms the same point." 

In Reliable Transfer, the Court did not have occasion to 
consider any issue of ing cause. In that case, a vessel 
ran aground on a sand bar outside New York Harbor. The 
vessel's owner brought suit against the United States, alleging 
that the Coast Guard had failed to maintain the light that 
marked a breakwater near the spot where the vessel was 
25% by the Coast Guard's failure to maintain the breakwater 
light and 75% by the fault of the vessel’s captain, who was 
negligent in setting his course based on little more than 
guesswork. 421 U.S. at 399. The case was thus legitimately 
one of multiple causation, where the alleged fault of each party 
was found as a factual matter to have operated concomitantly 


. to cause the stranding."* 


The principal issue confronted by the Court was whether 
liability should be allocated evenly between the two parties, 
without regard to the trial court’s finding that they had been 
responsible in different proportions for causing the resulting 
harm. More than a century before, the Court had adopted the 
“divided damages” rule, which “was an ancient form of rough 
justice, a means of apportioning damages where it was difficult 
to measure which party was more at fault.” 421 U.S. at 402, 
403. Yet the Court recognized that with the passage of time the 


" Petitioners cite City of Milwaukee v. Cement Div. Nat'l 
Gypsum Co., 115 S. Ct. 2091, 2097 (1995), and McDermott, Inc. v. 
AmClyde, 114 S. Ct. 1461, 1465 (1994), as recent reaffirmations of 
Reliable Transfer. Pet. Br. 24-25. Neither decision, however, sheds 
any light on the issues raised in this case. 

Petitioners’ amicus concedes that Reliable Transfer did not 
address any issues of superseding cause. MLA Br. 15 n.10. 


22 


United States had come to be “virtually alone among the 
world’s major maritime nations” in not ing the more 
modern rule of proportional fault, id at 403, and that the older 
rule “produces palpably unfair results” in many cases, id. at 
405. Therefore, the Court overruled its prior decisions 
endorsing the “divided damages” rule and adopted the rule of 
comparative fault to govern maritime tort claims. /d at 411. 

It is apparent that the Court adopted the comparative fault 
rule under federal admiralty law for essentially the same 
reasons that the common law of torts was embracing the 
doctrine of comparative negligence during the same period. 
The old regime had “continued to prevail in this country by 
sheer inertia rather than by reason of any intrinsic merit. The 
reasons that originally led to the Court’s adoption of the rul: 
have long since disappeared. The rule has been repeatedly 
criticized” for its inequity. /d at 410-11. Similar concerns 
prompted general adoption of comparative negligence. 

The consequences of Reliable Transfer have also been the 
same as those that flowed from the adoption of comparative 
negligence in tort law. Several odd doctrines peculiar to 
admiralty law, which had grown up in reaction to the problems 
of the “divided damages” rule, became immediately obsolete. 
“Reliable Transfer and the doctrine of comparative negligence 
also have simplified the law of collision, sounding the death 
knell for a number of doctrines that are no longer needed,” such 
as the “Major-Minor Fault Rule” and the doctrine of inscrutable 
fault. 2 Thomas J. Schoenbaum, Admiralty and Maritime Law 
§ 14-4, at 271 (1994). By the same token, some of the same 
doctrines that had been discarded in the common law of torts 
were similarly irrelevant to a maritime tort regime based on 
comparative fault, such as “last clear chance” and contributory 
negligence. See, 1 Schoenbaum, supra, §§ 5-12 & 5-13." 

By contrast, as the one leading authority on admiralty law 
to address the issue has concluded, “the superseding cause 
doctrine can be reconciled with comparative negligence. 


'* The defense of contributory negligence had been rejected in 
admiralty law much earlier, see THE MAX MorRIS v. Curry, 137 U.S. 
1 (1890), but the doctrine of “last clear chance” had continued to be 
applied up until the Court’s decision in Reliable Transfer. 


: 
: 
; 
: 


23 


Superseding cause operates to cut off the liability of an 
admittedly negligent defendant, and there is properly no 
apportionment of comparative fault where there is an absence 
of proximate causation.” /d. at § 5-3, at 166. Or, as Professor 
Schoenbaum restates the same point: “If the court can apply 
the doctrine of superseding cause to apportion injuries to 
separate causes based on the evidence, there is no need for the 
doctrine of comparative negligence” to come into play. /d at 
165 n.16 (citing Desmond v. Holland Am. Cruises, 1981 
A.M.C. 211 (S.D.N.Y. 1981), as a case in which the trial court 
properly applied proximate cause analysis to find that a 
superseding cause precluded defendant's liability). 

Indeed, the clear consistency between causation doctrines 
and the comparative fault rule is demonstrated by the Court’s 
decision in Union Oil Co. of Cal. v. THE SAN JACINTO, 409 U.S. 
140 (1972) (Rehnquist, J.). The Court granted certiorari in 
Union Oil to reconsider the same “divided damages” rule that 
it eventually overruled three years later in Reliable Transfer. 
409 U.S. at 141. Before addressing that important issue, 
however, the Court held that it was first to deal with 
a potentially dispositive threshold issue. That threshold issue, 
which ultimately did prove to be dispositive, was the issue of 
proximate cause. 

In Union Oil, a barge under tow collided with a tanker. In 
the ensuing lawsuit, the trial court determined that though both 
parties may have been negligent, the tug and barge had been the 
sole proximate cause of the collision. See Union Oil Co. of 
Cal. v. THE TUGBOAT SAN JACINTO, 304 F. Supp. 519 (D. Ore. 
1969). As in the case presently before the Court, the trial court 
determined as a factual matter that any negligence by the tanker 
was “not a contributing cause of the collision,” and that the in 
extremis rule did not apply. /d at 522. The Ninth Circuit 
reversed, holding that because the tanker was also at fault, the 
two parties must each be held liable for half the total damages 
under the “divided damages” rule, without regard to any 
finding as to proximate causation. See 409 U.S. at 143-44. 

In this posture, the Supreme Court granted review. After 
recounting the background facts of the collision and the 
statutory rules of fault that governed the parties’ conduct, the 
Court found itself in agreement with the trial court’s 


24 


determination that any fault ascribed to the tanker “did not 
proximately contribute to the collision.” /d. at 146 (quotations 
omitted). It then held that the causation issue is logically 
antecedent to the apportionment of damages, and thus was 
dispositive of the case. Jd. The Court therefore reversed and 
reinstated the trial judgment, without proceeding on to consider 
whether it should apply the comparative fault rule.'® 

The Court’s holding in Union Oil, though predating the 
Reliable Transfer decision, is controlling here and completely 
defeats petitioners’ contentions. Here, as in Union Oil, the trial 
court found as a factual matter that though both parties may 
have been negligent or somehow at fault, only one party was 
the proximate cause of the harm at issue. Petitioners here claim 
that the trial court erred by making this threshold determination 
and by not continuing on to apply the comparative fault rule 
adopted in Reliable Transfer. Yet in Union Oil the Court 
granted review explicitly to consider whether to adopt this same 
rule, and ended up holding that proximate cause was properly 
a threshold issue that must be determined before going on to 
apportion damages under the comparative fault rule. If that was 
so in Union Oil, it must be so in this case also, unless the 
Court’s decision in Union Oil is now to be overruled. 
Petitioners have made no persuasive case to justify this step, 
however, and in fact sound principles of tort law support the 
logic of the Court’s holding there.’ 


'© Lower courts have likewise held that to include in a 
comparative fault determination an element of negligence found not 
to constitute a contributing cause of the harm is a mistake of law. 
See, e.g, Hellenic Lines, Lid. v. Prudential Lines, Inc., 813 F.2d 634, 
638 (4th Cir. 1987). 

'’ Petitioners’ amicus disagrees with petitioners about the 
continuing validity of the doctrine of superseding cause. See MLA 
Br. 9, 15-16. Yet amicus’ view of the proper approach to resolving 
such cases, see id. at 15-16, is simply inconsistent with the Court’s 
disposition in Union Oil. In addition, the clear consistency of 
causation doctrine and the comparative fault rule adopted in Reliable 
Transfer is also reflected in the Draft Maritime Comparative 
Responsibility Act with Comments, which has been proposed in 
Congress and was approved by petitioners’ amicus. See 2 Benedict 


25 


D. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 
with Principles of Admiralty Law Applied by the 
World’s Maritime Nations 

In Reliable Transfer, the Court decided to jettison the 

“divided damages” rule in part because continued adherence to 
that rule had put the United States out of step with Great Britain 
that Great Britairrand many other countries follow the Brussels 
Collision Liability Convention of 1910, which provides for 
apportionment of on the basis of the degree of fault 
caused by the various parties. 421 U.S. at 403-04 & n.7. The 
relative isolation of the United States in adhering to the 
outmoded “divided damages” rule was deemed to be of great 
concern because the Court recognized that this not only cast 
doubt upon the wisdom of its prior position but also 
“encourages transoceanic forum shopping.” /d at 404. Such 
incentives to forum shopping are undesirable because they are 
detrimental to the just and orderly resolution of civil disputes 
that arise with recurring frequency in international waters.'* 
These same problems would arise here, however, if the Court 
were to abrogate or limit its consideration of the issue of 


on Admiralty § 7, at 1-28.1 n.5 (F. Wiswall, ed.) (7th rev. ed. 1995). 
The initial section of this draft legislation, which would codify the 
comparative fault rule, states that “[Ijegal requirements of causal 
relation apply both to fault as the basis for liability and to 
contributory fault.” Jd The comments are more elaborate: “For the 
conduct stigmatized as fault to have any effect under the provisions 
of this Act it must have had an adequate causal relation to the 
claimant’s damage. This includes the rules of both cause in fact and 
proximate cause.” Id. at |\-33 (emphasis added). 


" For example, one account of the problems that were alleviated 
by the Brussels Convention describes a maritime collision in which 
the parties brought suit in England, Belgium, and Holland to take 
advantage of the distinct rules of recovery that had prevailed in those 
jurisdictions. See Alfred Huger, The Proportional Damage Rule in 
Collisions at Sea, 13 Cornell L.Q. 531, 531 (1928). 


26 


proximate cause in maritime tort cases.'° 

The Brussels Convention itself is wholly consistent with 
traditional causation doctrine in fixing responsibility for harms 
that occur on the high seas. Article 3 of the Convention states 
that if a collision “is caused by the fault of one of the vessels, 
liability to make good the damages shall attach to the one 
which has committed the fault.” See 6 Benedict on Admiralty, 
Doc. 3-2, at 3-11 (F. Wiswall, ed.) (7th rev. ed. 1995) 
(emphasis added). From the perspective of this understanding 
of “fault” as grounded in causation, Article 4 then states the 
fault” rule adopted in Reliable Transfer. Finally, 
Article 13, which applies the same provisions to noncollision 
cases (such as this one), reflects the same causation approach: 

This Convention shall extend to the making good 

of damages which a vessel has caused to another 

vessel or to persons or things on board either vessel, 

either by the execution or nonexecution of a 

manoeuvre or by the nonobservance of ihe 

regulations, even if no collision has actually taken 


place. 

Id. at 3-14 (emphasis added). 

It is not surprising that the Brussels Convention, which is 
followed by “the world’s major maritime nations,” Reliable 
Transfer, 421 U.S. at 403, incorporates the same causation 
principles developed over many years by courts in determining 

responsibility for torts that occur in other contexts. To suggest, 
as petitioners do, that mere involvement in the events that 
culminate in allegations of harm suffices to require a party to 
bear partial legal responsibility for any such harm -- regardless 
of whether that party’s actions can be found as a legal matter to 
have actually caused that harm -- is simply too facile. 

Moreover, the British courts apply the same causation 
principles to maritime torts that are applicable to terrestrial 
torts. Significantly, this means that British maritime decisions 


'® Petitioners’ amicus touches on the importance of “harmony 
and uniformity” in the international relations of American maritime 
‘law, MLA Br. 14-15 (citing Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Stewart, 253 
U.S. 149, 150 (1920)), but never suggests or shows that its position 
is more consistent with such uniformity than is respondents’ position. 


27 


have long embraced the doctrine of proximate cause, including 
the established subsidiary causation principle of “novus actus 
interveniens.” Two i t cases illustrate this approach. 

In THE CiTy OF LINCOLN, 15 P.D. 15 (C.A. 1889), a case 
decided by the Court of Appeal prior to Great Britain’s 
adoption of the Brussels Convention, a steamer by that name 
collided with another ship. In the collision, a large portion of 
the other ship was cut off, which caused its steering compass, 
log glass, and various charts to be lost. The master of the 
truncated ship sought to navigate her to port, but was unable to 
calculate the distances properly in the absence of the ship’s log 
and ultimately stranded the vessel. The owners of the stranded 
vessel brought suit against the owners of the steamer, which 
was acknowledged to have been at fault for the collision, for 
the damages sustained by the stranded vessel. 

A unanimous court held that the defendants were liable for 
the stranding because it resulted directly from the consequences 
of the collision. Lord Esher recognized that “there may be 
intermediate circumstances in a case which prevent the ultimate 
damage from being the direct result of the defendants’ act,” but 
concluded that on these facts “the ultimate loss of the ship was 
caused by the captain being deprived of the means of finding 
out where his ship was, which deprivation was the direct result 
of the wrongful act of the defendants.” 15 P.D. at 17. Judge 
Lindley agreed, concluding that because the captain’s 
subsequent conduct was reasonable and not negligent, this 
“reasonable human conduct” is “such a consequence as in the 
ordinary course of things would flow from the act.” /d at 18. 
Judge Lopes also concurred on the basis that no “intervening, 
independent moving cause” led the damaged ship to run 
aground, and thus the defendants were responsible “for all the 
natural consequences occasioned by their original misconduct.” 
Id. at 19. On the other hand, he stated, “if the consequence had 
been caused by anything which those on board the [other ship], 
by the exercise of proper skill and care, could have prevented 
clearly that liability would not attach.” Jd The various 
opinions thus recognized the principle of superseding cause, but 
held that it did not apply on the facts of that case. 

By contrast, the House of Lords approved and carefully 
applied the doctrine of superseding cause in a later admiralty 


28 


case. S.S. SINGLETON ABBEY v. S.S. PALUDINA, [1927] App. Cas. 
16. That decision came down well after Great Britain had 
adopted the principles of proportional fault embodied in the 
Brussels Convention, see Maritime Conventions Act, 1911, 
1 & 1 Geo. 5, ch. 57, § 1, and in it the majority expressly 
distinguished THE CiTY OF LINCOLN on its facts. 

The case involved three ships moored to a quay in Valetta 
Harbor, Malta. A strong wind came up, which caused the 
PALUDINA to drag her anchors and make contact with the 
SINGLETON ABBEY. Both ships broke away from their 
moorings, and the SINGLETON ABBEY thereafter struck a third 
ship, the SARA, and cast her adrift also. The latter two ships 
then manouvered in the harbor under their own steam to keep 
away from the shore and were brought up heading to the wind. 
The PALUDINA was clear of both of the other ships at this time. 
Twenty minutes later, the SARA collided with the SINGLETON 
ABBEY, which caused the SARA to sink. [1927] App. Cas. at 
16. The owners of the SINGLETON ABBEY sued the owners of 
the PALUDINA, which was found liable for the initial collisions. 
On appeal to the House of Lords, the PALUDINA was conceded 
to have been at fault in causing the initial collisions; the issue 
instead was whether it was liable for the final collision between 
the SINGLETON ABBEY and the SARA, or whether that collision 
was due to a novus actus interveniens. Id. at 22. 

Lord Sumner, for the majority, concisely stated the 
controlling principles of law: “the plaintiffs must prove that the 
PALUDINA’s negligence was the cause of [the final collision]. 
The injury must have been caused directly, though not 
necessarily solely, by that negligence. If the PALUDINA merely 
fai'!.” Jd at 26. On the facts as previously stated, he concluded 
that the PALUDINA’s negligence was not the proximate cause of 
the final collision, for the captain of the SINGLETON ABBEY had 
reached a position in which he acted as a “free agent,” at which 
point he “could do as he chose and he did so, none the less that 
he had to decide and act quickly.” Jd “My lords, the 
PALUDINA is not liable for mere negligence, but only for 
negligence causing damage. The SINGLETON ABBEY herself is 
the cause of the damage she has suffered, not merely if her 
captain’s action brought it about negligentiy. She will be the 


29 


cause of that damage, if her captain, freely and as the direct 
consequence of his own decision, brought it about at all.” /d 
at 26-27.” He thus distinguished THE Crry oF LINCOLN, where 
the captain steered his vessel wrongly and stranded it “because 
his means of observation, the log, etc., had been carried away 
in the collision.” Jd. at 27.7! 

These decisions thus establish that British admiralty law 
adheres both to the rule of proportional fault in maritime tort 
cases and to the doctrine of proximate causation, including the 
subsidiary principle of ing cause or novus actus 
interveniens. As will be shown in Section I, infra, the 
application of the causation rules adopted in the S.S. PALUDINA 
decision to the facts of this case reinforce respondents’ position 
that the trial court’s judgment is correct and should be affirmed. 
In Lord Sumner’s words, subsequent to the breakout Captain 
Coyne had reached a position in which he acted as a “free 
agent,” at which point he “could do as he chose and he did so, 
none the less that he had to decide and act quickly” (though 
Captain Coyne had considerably more time in which to set his 
course). /d at 26. Respondents may have “created the 
occasion” for Captain Coyne’s actions that caused the stranding 
of the EXXON HOUSTON, but in fact the stranding of the vessel 


*° Lord Sumner als= stated his conclusion in terms of novus 
actus interveniens: “[The captain’s] action was his own. No part of 
it was a ‘natural’ consequence of the PALUDINA’s action, except in a 
sense that would make negligence on his part also a ‘natural’ 
consequence. His action was wilful, and, though rapid, was 
deliberate. The PALUDINA’s negligence did not make him take it. 
Cause and consequence in such a matter do not depend on the 
question, whether the first action, which intervenes, is excusable or 
not, but on the question whether it is new and independent or not.” 
Id. at 28. : 


*' Lord Blanesburgh, concurring with Lord Sumner, added that 
the handling of the SARA was also a novus actus interveniens 
between the PALUDINA’s negligence and the sinking of the SARA, 
which broke the chain of causation. Id. at 36. The two dissenting 
Lords did not contest the validity of the doctrine of novus actus 
interveniens, but thought that it did not apply on the facts. See id at 
24 (Viscount Dunedin); id. at 32 (Lord Phillimore). 


30 


was due to petitioners’ own “wilful” and “deliberate” actions, 
which constituted extraordinary negligence. /d at 28. 
Respondents are “not liable for mere negligence, but only for 
negligence causing damage. The [EXXON Houston] herself is 
the cause of the damage she has suffered,” for the extraordinary 
negligence of “her captain, freely and as the direct consequence 
of his own decision, brought it about” that she was stranded. 
Id. at 26-27. 

To maintain consistency with international maritime law, 
the Court should expressly state that the doctrine of proximate 
causation, including the subsidiary principle of superseding 
cause, is consistent with the rule of comparative fault.” The 
endorsement of any other approach to proximate causation in 
maritime tort cases would encourage the very “transoceanic 
forum shopping” that the Court deplored and sought to avoid in 
Reliable Transfer. 421 U.S. at 404. 


E. The Doctrine of Proximate Cause Is Consistent 

with Traditional Concerns of Admiralty Law 

Seeking to undermine the doctrine of proximate cause in 
maritime tort cases, petitioners quote the Court’s admonition 
that “conceptual distinctions” accepted at common law may be 
“foreign to [the] traditions of simplicity and practicality” 
embedded in admiralty law. Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale 
Transatlantique, 358 U.S. 625, 631 (1959). 

In Kermarec, the Court declined to incorporate into federal 
admiralty law the “distinctions which the common law draws 
between licensee and invitee.” Jd at 630. The Court reached 
this conclusion, however, because it determined that these 
distinctions were uniquely “inherited from a culture deeply 
rooted to the land,” and had “originated under a legal system in 


2 Of course, there is nothing improper about this Court seeking 
to maintain consistency between federal admiralty law and the 
maritime law of other nations. In brushing aside this cavil in Reliable 
Transfer, the Court observed that “the Judiciary has traditionally 
taken the lead in formulating flexible and fair remedies in the law 
maritime, and Congress had largely left to this Court the 
responsibility for fashioning the controlling rules of admiralty law.” 
421 U.S. at 409 (quotations omitted). 


31 


which status depended almost entirely upon the nature of the 
individual’s estate with respect to real property, a legal system 
in that respect entirely alien to the law of the sea.” /d. at 630, 
631-32. The Court also observed that these feudalistic 
distinctions posed such a “semantic morass” that the common 
law was moving “towards imposing on owners and occupiers 
a single duty of reasonable care in all the circumstances.” /d. 
at 631 (quotations omitted). The Court thus declined to 
— such “inappropriate common-law concepts.” /d. at 

The issue of whether American admiralty courts should 
continue to adhere to principles of proximate causation, 
however, is entirely different from the situation before the 
Court in Kermarec. The doctrine of proximate cause is not 
rooted in peculiar considerations that grew out of a “heritage of 
feudalism,” and is not at all tied to a legal system built upon the 
primacy of real property. To the contrary, it is an established 
pillar of tort law, fully applicable to tort claims that have little 
or no connection with the ownership of property, such as 
negligence and products liability claims. 

The consistency between the doctrine of superseding cause 
and the admiralty rule of comparative negligence has been fully 
and clearly discussed in a leading treatise on admiralty law. As 
Professor Schoenbaum has cogently explained: 

Another aspect of proximate causation is whether 

an intervening or superseding cause relieves the 

defendant of liability. In some cases the defendant 

may be at fault, but the plaintiff or a third party may 

have committed an act which supersedes, in terms of 

cause, the fault of the defendant. The doctrine of 

superseding cause is thus properly applied to preclude 

direct causation; otherwise, the court will apportion 

liability and damages according to comparative fault. 
> * * 


The doctrine of superseding cause is thus applied 
where the defendant’s negligence in fact substantially 
contributed to the plaintiff's injury, but the injury was 
actually brought about by a later cause of independent 
origin that was not foreseeable. It is properly applied 
in admiralty cases. 


32 


1 Schoenbaum, supra, § 5-3, at 165-66.” 

In a footnote to this passage, Professor Schoenbaum also 
cites with approval the “thorough discussion” of this issue in a 
recent law review commentary. See Herman W.H. Lee, 
Abandon Ship? The Need to Maintain a Consistency Between 
Causation in Admiralty and Causation in Tort, 25 Creighton L. 
Rev. 1007 (1992). Petitioners’ amicus cites the same 
commentary (though petitioners do not), see MLA Br. 16 n.11, 
though it squarely supports respondents’ position for many of 
the reasons already explained above. The article concludes: 

The doctrine of superseding cause should not be 
abrogated because it serves to assist Courts in keeping 

a defendant’s liability within reasonable bounds 

against the innumerable possible causes which may 

intervene subsequent to the defendant's negligent act. 

Courts should adhere to [this approach} in future 

admiralty tort cases by maintaining the consistency 

between causation in admiralty and common law tort. 

A court holding otherwise would subject a defendant 

to greatly increased liability and also encourage 

overzealous plaintiffs to submerge the court with a 

tide of lawsuits. 

Abandon Ship, supra, at 1041. These authorities thus 
persuasively conclude that proximate cause, including the 
subsidiary principle of superseding cause, is fully consistent 
with principles of federal admiralty law. See also Union Oil, 
409 U.S. at 143-46. 

Perhaps even more to the point, application of the settled 
doctrine of proximate causation simply cannot be avoided in 


> Petitioners quote a passage from Professors Gilmore and 
Black in an attempt to show that “the maritime court has been less 
ready than the shore courts to find that a subsequent wrongful act by 
one party breaks the chain of causation.” Pet. Br. 23 n.19 (quoting 
Grant Gilmore & Charles Black, The Law of Admiralty § 7-5, at 494 
(2d ed. 1975)). Petitioners neglect to mention, however, that this 
statement was made before the Court’s decision in Reliable Transfer, 
which did away with outmoded doctrines of allocating damages that 
had influenced the maritime courts to strain in applying traditional 
causation principles. 


33 


any legal system that seeks to impose liability rationally and 
consistently on the basis of fault. As discussed in Section |B, 
supra, the doctrine of proximate cause thus continues to be 
applied throughout the common law of torts -- both in 

cases and in strict products liability cases -- to fix 
legal responsibility for harms. Any other approach would be 
incompatible with the foundations of Anglo-American law, 
whether maritime or otherwise. Indeed, to hold a defendant 
liable for harm actually caused by another's subsequent, 


petitioners here also would undermine the objective of 
maintaining consistency between the common law and federal 
admiralty law governing maritime torts, which is to be desired 
in the absence of strong reasons to the contrary. This 
consistency is important to discourage forum shopping in tort 
cases where federal admiralty jurisdiction may be uncertain or 
disputed, which are not infrequent even in this Court. See, e.g. 
Sisson v. Ruby, 497 U.S. 358 (1990); Foremost Ins. Co. v 
Richardson, 457 U.S. 668 (1982); Executive Jet Aviation, Inc 
v. City of Cleveland, 409 U.S. 249 (1972). 

Moreover, this case illustrates how a trial court’s attention 
to proximate cause may allow it in some cases to take a simpler 
and more practical approach in adjudicating all the liability and 
damage issues raised among multiple parties. By bifurcating 
the trial here into two distinct phases, Judge Fong was able to 
defer intricate discovery and trial preparation on the issue of 
liability for the breakout, as well as on the damage issues, until 
the question of proximate cause was first resolved. The parties 
estimated that bifurcation could save them at least fifty days of 
depositions, amounting to more than $750,000 in expenses, on 
these issues, as well as reducing the amount of trial time by 
approximately 80%. J.A. 49. Even without bifurcation, 


_ ™ In this case, for example, Judge Fong powerfully captured this 

point by concluding that because petitioners’ extraordinary 

see ee oo Be Re alll ommend ~ wren 

stranding, it would be “manifestly unjust to hold anyone legally 

responsible for the consequences of these acts other than 
[petitioners}.” 3.A. 176 (emphasis added). 


34 


attention to this threshold issue may succeed in simplifying the 
disposition of many cases. See, e.g., Union Oil, 409 U.S. at 146 
(holding that where one party is the sole proximate cause of any 
harm, the case is correctly resolved without determining issues 
of comparative fault). 

In this case, the trial of the issues addressed in Phase One 
alone consumed three weeks of courtroom time. Had the court 
been obliged to conduct a single trial that addressed each of the 
various liability and damage issues involving all of the various 
parties -- which petitioners erroneously suggest it should have 
been required to do as a constitutional matter -- it would have 
been unable to effect any simple, practical resolution of the 
dispositive issues presented. The resulting judicial melee 
would have amply justified Dean Prosser’s concern that in 
comparative negligence cases involving multiple parties, such 

a “[t}heoretically perfect” procedure would lead to “almost 
incredible complexity in the resulting issues,” thereby 
multiplying the burdens and expense that would have to be 
borne by both the litigants and the court. William L. Prosser, 
Law of Torts § 67, at 438 (4th ed. 1971).” 


Il. THE COURTS BELOW PROPERLY APPLIED 

THE PRINCIPLES OF PROXIMATE CAUSE 

ON THE FACTS OF THIS CASE. 

After a lengthy bench tal, Judge Fong determined that 
Captain Coyne’s extraordinary negligence in navigating the 
vessel after it had reached a position of safety at 1830 was the 
sole proximate cause of its stranding. J.A. 173. Under standard 
legal principles of respondeat superior, whose application is 
not contested here, Captain Coyne’s conduct was attributable 
to petitioners, since he was acting within the scope of his 
employment at the time. The trial court thus determined that 


* This sort of judicial melee, however, is precisely what 
petitioners and their amicus believe is required by the comparative 
fault rule. See Pet. Br. 21 (“Reliable Transfer requires that ail the 
faults of ail the parties must be compared regardless of the particular 
order in which the faults occurred.”); id at 27 (same), MLA Br. 15- 
16 (same). Yet this position is totally at odds with the Court's 
holding in Union Oil. 


35 


respondents were not liable to petitioners for any damages that 
may have resulted from the stranding of the vessel. The Court 
of Appeals unanimously affirmed this judgment, upholding all 
of the trial court’s factual findings. On the facts of this case, 
this outcome is plainly correct and amply justified. 

Initially, it is crucial to ize that the trial court found, 
as a matter of fact, that at 1830 the EXXON HOUSTON had 
reached a position of safety, at which juncture the causal forces 
set in motion by the initial breakout of the vessel had run their 
course. See J.A. 175 (“By 1830, the Exxon HOUSTON was 


heading out to sea and in no further danger of stranding. Only 
the grossly negligent actions of its master endangered the vessel 
further.”). The trial court thus determined, in essence, that a 
complete break in the chain of causation had occurred at this 
juncture. One way of analyzing the facts of this case, therefore, 
is that the original breakout simply did not cause the vessel's 
issue of whether it could be held to have proximately caused 
that result. As the court restated its conclusion: “The EXxONn 
HOUSTON had reached a safe position and only the gross 
negligence of its master put it into further danger.” /d at 174. 

In making this determination, the court acted as the 
ultimate factfinder, and its determination on this point was 
upheld on review by the Court of Appeals. Deference to this 
finding is in accord with the Restatement, which describes the 
function of the jury (or, as in this case, the court as factfinder) 
as including the determination of “whether the defendant's 
conduct has been a substantial factor in causing the harm to the 
plaintiff.” Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra, § 434. The 
trial court’s findings and conclusions on this particular point 
must therefore be affirmed by this Court unless petitioners can 


establish that they are clearly erroneous, which they manifestly 


** Dean Prosser likewise notes that it is property the function of 
the trial court to determine “any limitation of liability as to 
consequences directly caused, or any case in which the defendant's 
responsibility is superseded by abnormal intervening forces,” with 
any legitimately disputed factual questions to be resolved by the 
primary factfinder. William L. Prosser, Law of Torts § 45, at 290 
(4th ed. 1971). 


36 


are not. See, e.g, Anderson v. City of Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 
564 (1985). Indeed, these factual findings are especially solid 
under the “two court rule” that this Court applies in cases where 
findings of fact were concurred in by two courts below.” 

The import of this factual finding -- that the EXXON 
HOUSTON reached a position of safety at 1830 -- is to compel 
the conclusion that the chain of causal forces from the breakout 
of the vessel to its stranding was effectively severed at 1830. 
Understood in terms of the Restatement, this finding precludes 
any conclusion that the breakout of the vessel was “a 
substantial factor in causing the harm [i.e., the stranding).” 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 434. This factual finding is 
dispositive. Petitioners seek to recast the trial court’s factual 
findings to conform to the Restatement by repeatedly referring 
to the breakout as “a substantial factor in the tanker’s loss,” 
Pet. Br. 20 (emphasis added); see also id. at 17, 23, 29, but this 
is merely to take a different view of the underlying facts, which 
is not permissible on review here. The more accurate account 
is that stated by Lord Sumner in S.S. PALUDINA: respondents 
a oe but only for negligence 

using damage”, where the breakout “merely created the 
connie for the ultimate stranding of the vessel, but Captain 
Coyne reached a position of safety in which he acted as a “free 
agent” who “could do as he chose,” then the ExxON HOUSTON 
“herself is the cause of the damage she has suffered,” 
particularly where it came about by the extraordinary 
negligence of her captain. [1927] App. Cas. at 26-27. 

In addition, the trial court determined that Captain Coyne’s 
subsequent conduct was quite unusual -- enough so as to 
constitute “extraordinary negligence.” From this standpoint as 
well, the court found that petitioners’ actions were properly 


” See, e.g, Graver Tank & Mfg. Co. v. Linde Air Prods. Co., 
336 U.S. 271, 275 (1949) (“A court of law, such as this Court is, 
rather than a court for correction of errors in fact finding, cannot 
undertake to review concurrent findings of fact by two courts below 
in the absence of a very obvious and exceptional show of error.”); 
Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 482 U.S. 656, 665 (1987) (quoting 
Graver, 336 U.S. at 275). The “two court rule” was cited with 
approval in Reliable Transfer, 421 U.S. at 401 n.2. 


37 


viewed as the sole proximate cause of the vessel’s 
JA. 166-74. The trial court explicitly found that Captain 
Coyne did not merely make a few mistakes in his handling of 
the vessel, but was “grossly negligent” in a number of different 
ways, which led him to navi the vessel squarely into a 
charted reef. See J.A. 171, 174, 175. The trial court rested this 
further determination on several alternative 

First, the court recognized the settled admiralty rule that 
“[w)hen a moving vessel strikes a charted reef, it is presumed 
that the vessel is at fault.” J.A. 166. This rule was first 
established in THE LOUISIANA, 70 U.S. (3 Wall.) 164 (1865), 
and it remains just as valid today. Professor Schoenbaum 
endorses its utility as embodying “both the burden of producing 
rebuttal evidence and the burden of persuasion,” thus operating 
as a sensible version of res ipsa loquitur in cases that involve 
a collision between vessels or the collision of a vessel into a 
fixed structure. 2 Schoenbaum, supra, § 14-3, at 268-69. The 
trial court recognized that the ing party may seek to rebut 
the presumption, but concluded that petitioners failed to meet 
their burden “of proving by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the EXXON HOUSTON acted with reasonable care, or that 
the stranding was unavoidable.” J.A. 167. 
comply with standard navigation practice as stated in 
ere enn nee 

with navigation safety directives. See J.A. 168-69 (quoting 33 
C.F.R. § 164.11). The court found that between 1830 and 
2004, Captain Coyne “failed to have the position of the vessel 
fixed and plotted on a navigational chart, in violation of 33 
C.F.R. § 164.1 1(c).” J.A. 169. In addition, between 1948 and 
2000, Captain Coyne was alone on the bridge, and “was not 
capable of both directing and controlling the movements of the 
vessel and fixing the vessel's position, in violation of 33 C.F.R. 
§ 164.11(a).” J.A. 169. Failure to comply with these directives 
again raises a presumption of fault, which is rebuttable, but 
which was not rebutted by petitioners here. /d at 168 (citing 
THE PENNSYLVANIA, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 125 (1873)).” 


* Petitioners have not challenged the validity of either the 
LOUISIANA tule or the PENNSYLVANIA rule in the proceedings before 


38 


The gravity and importance of strict compliance with these 
requirements should not be underestimated. As one leading 
authority has cautioned: 

The general lawyer, used to the rather fast-and-loose 

way of a court with a statute, must accustom himself 

to a far different atmosphere in dealing with these 

Rules, for they are strictly and literally construed, and 

compliance is insisted upon. This is as it should be, 

for, though they have the force of statute, they are not 
couched in legal terms of art, and are not lawyers’ 
law, but are plain and simple directions addressed to 
ship’s officers, the more competent among whom 
have most of them substantially committed to 
memory. 
Grant Gilmore & Charles Black, supra, § 7-3, at 489; see also 
2 Schoenbaum, supra, § 14-2, at 256 (these directives “are not 
mere prudential regulations or guidelines; they are binding 
enactments that must be adhered to closely”). 

In yet another attempt to recharacterize the facts here, 
petitioners and their amicus try to squeeze this case into the 
regulatory exception for actions taken in extremis. See Pet. Br. 
26-27; MLA Br. 14 n.9. Yet the trial court found that “Captain 
Coyne and his crew had ample time to consider the situation 
calmly and deliberately,” J.A. 159, and expressly concluded 
that as his decisions “were made calmly, deliberately and 
without the pressure of an imminent peril, the in extremis rule 
cannot be applied in this case,” J.A. 170. 

Third, in an extremely thorough review of the facts proved 
at trial, Judge Fong went on to determine that Captain Coyne 
committed “extraordinary” negligence in his handling of the 
vessel quite independent of any legal presumptions drawn from 
the foregoing points. In this respect, the court determined that 
petitioners acted “negligently, unreasonably and in violation of 
the maritime industry standards” in numerous ways: (1) by not 
deploying sufficient chain to anchor the ship at 1747; (2) by not 


this Court; and neither rule could properly be placed in issue here in 
any event, for the trial court specifically went on to determine that 
petitioners committed extraordinary negligence even apart from any 
such presumptions, as is further explained immediately below. 


39 


requesting assistance from the Coast Guard or others; (3) by not 
attempting to anchor the ship again after 1747; (4) by not 
continuing to back the ship after 1830 until it reached a safe 
distance from the shore; (5) by choosing to linger in the vicinity 
of the shore, only about one-half mile from the actual 
grounding line. J.A. 170-71. In addition, Captain Coyne’s 
failure to plot fixes of the vessel’s position between 1830 and 
2004, which would have avoided any danger of stranding, “was 
grossly and extraordinarily negligent and in violation of the 
maritime industry standards.” J.A. 171. His final turn, which 
led immediately to the grounding of the vessel, was “grossly 
and extraordinarily negligent and in violation of the maritime 
industry standards because he commenced it without knowing 
the vessel’s position.” J.A. 171. Once again, the court found 
that he could have avoided any danger of stranding if he had 
simply backed out to sea or turned in the other direction. J.A. 
171. 

The court thus presented ample justification for its 
determination that Captain Coyne’s handling of the vessel was 
grossly and extraordinarily negligent. Under the causation 
principles set out in the Restatement, however, this fact 
operates as a superseding cause of the vessel’s stranding. The 
court established this point by applying the list of 
considerations presented in section 442 of the Restatement, 
which are described as being “of importance in determining 
whether an intervening force is a superseding cause of harm to 
another.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442. The trial court 
carefully applied those factors in concluding that Captain 
Coyne’s extraordinary negligence both in “failing to fix and 
plot his vessel’s position” and in “ordering the final starboard 
turn” constituted superseding causes of the stranding of the 
EXXON HousTON. J.A. 173-75.” The court could also have 


** Petitioners seek vindication in section 442B of the 
Restatement, Pet. Br. 29-30, which states that where the defendant's 
negligence “creates or increases the risks of a particular harm and is 
a substantial factor in causing that harm,” then the intervening act of 
a third party will not relieve the defendant of liability unless it is “not 
within the scope of the risk created by the actor’s conduct.” 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442B. Yet the factual findings of the 


40 


relied upon section 447 of the Restatement, which indicates that 
where the intervening conduct of another party is so 
“extraordinarily negligent” as to be not within reasonable 
expectations, it stands as a superseding cause of any subsequent 
harm. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 447. 

Once again, it does not matter for purposes of this Court’s 
review whether petitioners agree or disagree with the trial 
court’s version of the facts. In this bench trial, Judge Fong was 
the proper factfinder. His findings and determinations cannot 
be overturned “in the absence of a very obvious and 
exceptional showing of error.” Graver Tank & Mfg. Co., 336 
U.S. at 275; see supra note 27. No such showing has been 
made here. 


Il. ADMIRALTY COURTS SHOULD APPLY 
PRINCIPLES OF CAUSATION FROM THE 
COMMON LAW OF CONTRACTS, FRAMED IN 
TERMS OF “FORESEEABILITY,” IN CASES 
INVOLVING MARITIME CONTRACTS. 

Petitioners have also framed their claims against 
respondents, based on the same underlying facts, in terms of 
contract law by pleading them in the alternative as warranty 
claims.” They thus seek to blur the important lines that the 
Court has sought to draw between tort law and warranty law 
concerning product liability claims. See East River Steamship 
Corp. v. Transamerica Delaval, Inc., 476 U.S. 858 (1986). 
Even if petitioners’ tort claims are treated under the asserted 
heading of warranty law, however, the same principles of 
causation should govern such maritime contract claims as are 
applied in the common law of contracts. As will be seen, these 


trial court here foreclose any determination that the breakout was “a 
substantial factor” in causing the stranding of the EXXON HOUSTON, 
and the independent and extraordinary negligence of Captain Coyne 
cannot be included within the scope of the risk created here, as this 
point is elaborated more fully in section 447 of the Restatement. 


* In petitioners’ complaint, the first two causes of action include 
warranty claims based on breach of warranty of safe berth and breach 
of warranty of workmanlike performance, as well as other related but 
more limited contract claims. See J.A. 33-38. 


4] 
principles provide no support for petitioners in this case. 


A. Foreseeability Principles from Contract Law 
Afford No Grounds for Granting Relief to 
Petitioners Here 

The common law of contracts applies the same general 

principles of causation as does the common law of torts, with 
one important caveat: recovery of damages for breach of 
contract is more limited than recovery for breach of duty in tort 
law. Thus, if petitioners should not recover on their tort claims 
here, then likewise they should not recover on their warranty 
claims, which are premised on the same underlying facts. 

Section 351 of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts 

specifies that the foreseeability principle is the accepted limit 
of recovery on contract claims at common law: 

(1) Damages are not recoverable for loss that the 

party in breach did not have reason to foresee as a 

probable result of the breach when the contract was 

made. 

(2) Loss may be foreseeable as a probable result of a 

breach because it follows from the breach 
(a) in the ordinary course of events, or 
(b) as a result of special circumstances, beyond 

the ordinary course of events, that the party in breach 

had reason to know. 

Restatement (Second) of Contracts, § 351 (1981). As 
Comment a to this section explains further: “[T]he requirement 
of foreseeability is a more severe limitation of liability than is 
the requirement of substantial or ‘proximate’ cause in the case 
of an action in tort or for breach of warranty.” /d. at cmt. a. 
The same point is made by the leading commentators. 
Professor Williston observes: “The law of torts and the law of 
contracts differ in this respect. For a tort, the defendant 
becomes liable for all proximate consequences, while for 
breach of contract he is liable only for consequences which 
were reasonably foreseeable at the time when it was entered 
into, as probable if the contract were broken.” 11 Williston on 
Contracts § 1344, at 227 (W. Jaeger ed.) (3d ed. 1968). 
Similarly, Professor Corbin notes that numerous courts have 
barred recovery “because the injury was said not to be the 


42 


‘proximate’ result of the breach,” but where they have ventured 
to define this principle, “it will practically always be found that 
it is expressed in terms of the possibility of foresight.” 
5 Corbin on Contracts § 1000, at 26 (1964); see also id. at 
§ 997; see also East River Steamship Corp., 476 U.S. at 874-75 
(noting and explaining this same distinction in the context of 
general maritime law); Petitions of The Kinsman Transit Co., 
338 F.2d 708, 721-26 (2d Cir. 1964) (same), cert. denied, 380 
U.S. 944 (1965). 

It has been widely recognized that the same underlying 
facts could give rise to either a tort claim or a breach of 
warranty claim, depending on a claimant’s mere choice of 
pleading, particularly with the modern evolution in tort law 
from negligence claims through warranty claims to strict 
products liability claims. In this situation, the distinction 
between tort law and contract law has been minimized by 
expressly basing a party’s recovery for a breach of warranty 
that causes injury to person or property on tort principles of 
proximate cause. See, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Contracts 
§ 351 cmt. a (noting that the requirement of proximate cause 
applies “in the case of an action in tort or for breach of 
warranty”). The Uniform Commercial Code, in particular, 
accomplishes this result by specifying that in warranty cases 
involving “injury to person or property,” recovery may be had 
only for consequential damages “proximately resulting” from 
the breach of warranty. U.C.C. § 2-715(2)(b); see, e.g., 
Waggoner v. Town & Country Mobile Homes, Inc., 808 P.2d 
649, 652 (Okla. 1990) (“manufacturers’ products liability and 
the UCC warranty provisions provide parallel remedies” for 
injury to other property). 

All of these same principles should be applied in cases 
involving maritime contract claims. Although _ the 
foreseeability test is highly fact-specific, it is a familiar 
standard that the courts apply in many areas of law. It remains 
serviceable in resolving maritime contract claims for the same 
reasons that it has been maintained in the common law of 
contracts. Indeed, the Court has approved the foreseeability 
principle as a means of resolving true maritime warranty 
claims. See East River Steamship Corp., 476 U.S. at 874. At 
the same time, principles of proximate causation are most 


43 


appropriate to govern breach of warranty claims involving 
consequent injury to person or property -- which are 
indistinguishable from tort claims -- and should be applied in 
such cases consistent with the Uniform Commercial Code. 
Applying these principles to petitioners’ claims affords 
them no grounds for relief here. As explained at length in 
Section II, supra, the trial court determined that the breakout 
was not a proximate cause of the stranding of the EXXON 
HOUSTON, and that Captain Coyne’s conduct, which was 
extraordinarily negligent in a number of respects, was in fact 
the sole proximate cause of the stranding. Compare Union Oil, 
409 U.S. at 146. These findings preclude recovery on 
petitioners’ tort claims, and thus a fortiori preclude recovery on 
their contract claims. The trial court also expressly found that 
neither the decision to turn the ship toward the coast nor the 
actual attempt to make the turn, which was “extraordinarily 
negligent,” was “a foreseeable consequence of the breakout.” 
J.A. 175. These further findings, which petitioners have not 
chall on review, also preclude relief on their warranty 
claims.*' Even if these findings had been challenged, they 
could not be overturned by this Court “in the absence of a very 
obvious and exceptional showing of error.” Graver Tank & 
Mfg. Co., 336 U.S. at 275; see also supra note 27. No such 
showing has been made or could be made in this case. 


B. These Common-Law Principles Should Be Applied 

in Cases of Maritime Contracts 

The principles described in the preceding section, which 
govern contract claims at common law, should be applied in 
federal admiralty law for at least three reasons. 

First, petitioners have presented no sound reason why 
admiralty law should differ from the common law with respect 
to these points. Instead, they simply quote, out of context, a 
passage from one case involving a warranty claim, which does 
not advance their position. Pet. Br. 35. The quoted passage is: 


>! At one point, petitioners do contradict the trial court’s finding 
that Captain Coyne’s conduct was not foreseeable, see Pet. Br. 29, 
but this is just an improper recasting of the facts, which disregards 
the express finding that the conduct was extraordinarily negligent. 


44 


.. . liability should fall upon the party best situated to 
adopt preventive measures and thereby to reduce the 
likelihood of injury. Where, as here, injury-producing 

and defective equipment is under the supervision and 

control of the stevedore, the shipowner is powerless to 

minimize the risk; the stevedore is not. 
Italia Societa per Azioni di Navigazione v. Oregon Stevedoring 
Co., 376 U.S. 315, 324 (1964). Even taken out of context, this 
passage is fully consistent with the purposes served by 
application of the doctrine of proximate cause. 

A fuller examination of the case, however, shows that this 
passage (and the case as a whole) did not discuss whether to 
apply the doctrine of proximate causation to warranty claims; 
instead, it concerned whether a stevedore’s liability under its 
warranty of workmanlike service should be premised on 
negligence or strict liability. In holding that strict liability 
should be applied, the Court explained its reasons in the 
passage quoted above. See id. at 323-24; see also East River 
Steamship Corp., 476 U.S. at 865-66 (characterizing /talia 
Societa in these terms). Yet this discussion does not illuminate 
the issues raised here concerning maritime warranty claims. 
Strict liability already applies to these claims, which are 
essentially a repackaging of petitioners’ tort claims. The 
principal issue before this Court, instead, is the permissible 
grounds for recovery on these claims under the foreseeability 
principle. None of petitioners’ citations challenges the 
established doctrine of foreseeability in contract law.” 

Second, the Court recently evinced its concern to maintain 
a sensible relationship between tort law and warranty law in 
maritime cases that involve claims of consequent injury to 


* Although the infirmities of Jtalia Societa itself are perhaps not 
especially germane to the resolution of this case, it should be pointed 
out that Professor Schoenbaum fully canvasses the “spurious origin” 
of the warranty of workmanlike performance — one of the claims 
pleaded by petitioners in this case, see J.A. 36-37 - which he 
describes as “one of the most ambiguous and controversial concepts 
in all of admiralty law,” whose application has “had very harsh and 
strange results,” and which has been only partially overruled by 
subsequent statutes. See | Schoenbaum, supra, § 5-8, at 190-99. 


45 


person or property. In the East River Steamship case, the Court 
held that strict products liability law is part of the general 

maritime law. See 476 U.S. at 864-66. Yet where a claim is 
based on damage only to the product itself, with no consequent 
injury to the person or to any other property, the Court held that 
such claims can be based only on warranty law, not on tort law, 
for otherwise “contract law would drown in a sea of tort.” Jd 

at 866. By the same token, where, as in this case, a tort claim 
involving injury to other property is repackaged as a warranty 
claim, recovery should not be expanded beyond the principles 
of proximate cause that apply in tort law, so as to prevent tort 
law from drowning in a sea of warranty. For this reason also, 
the most sensible approach here is to follow section 2-715(2)(b) 
of the Uniform Commercial Code and hold that tort principles 
of proximate cause govern recovery on such warranty claims, 

as explicitly sanctioned by the Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts. See id. § 351 cmt. a. 

Third, the concern that federal admiralty law should not 
stimulate forum shopping by departing from settled common- 
law principles is also apt in contract cases, where disputes over 
the proper extent of admiralty jurisdiction frequently recur. As 
Justice Harlan observed, “The boundaries of admiralty 
jurisdiction over contracts . . . being conceptual rather than 
spatial, have always been difficult to draw.” Kossick v. United 
Fruit Co., 365 U.S. 731, 735 (1961). It thus is especially 
important to maintain harmony between these two founts of law 
whenever possible. This objective can be readily achieved by 
applying accepted principles of contract and warranty law to 
the same kinds of claims when raised in a maritime setting. 
See, e.g., 1 Schoenbaum, supra, § 5-7, at 186 (advocating 
reliance by admiralty courts on UCC concepts in addressing 
claims based on express and implied warranties, which will 
lead to “very little, if any, difference in the cases between the 
general admiralty law, the UCC, and the common law”). 


46 


IV. TRIAL COURTS ENJOY THE SAME BROAD 
DISCRETION TO ESTABLISH ORDERLY AND 
EFFICIENT PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING 
THE FACTUAL AND LEGAL ISSUES _ IN 
ADMIRALTY CASES AS IN ALL OTHER CASES. 
Petitioners’ brief reveals that the real object of their 

recriminations is the bifurcation order issued by Judge Fong 

prior to trial. See Pet. Br. 3-8, 17, 21-22, 33. Yet because 
petitioners did not seek certiorari on the question of whether the 
trial court erred in granting bifurcation, they cannot now seek 

reversal on this ground. See S. Ct. R. 14.1(a); see also, e.g., 

Yee v. City of Escondido, 503 U.S. 519, 535-38 (1992) 

(explaining importance of strict compliance with the rule). 

In any event, petitioners’ complaints on this score should 
have no bearing on the Court’s resolution of the questions 
actually presented in this case. For it is well settled that trial 
courts enjoy broad discretion to issue such orders in order to 
structure trial proceedings in the manner that they determine 
would be most conducive to expedition and economy for both 
litigants and the court. Indeed, Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedure -- which is fully applicable in admiralty 
cases -- specifically vests such authority in the District Court: 

(b) Separate Trials. The court, in furtherance of 
convenience or to avoid prejudice, or when separate 
trials will be most conducive to expedition and 
economy, may order a separate trial of any claim, 
cross-claim, counterclaim, or third-party claim, or of 
any separate issue or of any number of claims, cross- 
claims, counterclaims, or third-party claims, or 
issues, always preserving inviolate the right of trial by 


jury.... 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(b) (emphasis added); see also 9 Charles A. 
Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure 
§ 2388, at 475 (1995) (Rule 42(b) applies in admiralty cases). 
Petitioners baldly contend that the trial court’s decision to 
bifurcate the causation issues among the multiple parties in this 
case deprived them of due process of law. See Pet. Br. 33 
(citing Gasoline Prods. Co. v. Champlin Refining Co., 283 U.S. 


47 


494 (1931)).” Yet petitioners are in no different position from 
any other litigant who feels aggrieved that the trial court 
exercised its discretion to set the schedule of proceedings in a 
manner that it did not desire. In courts across the country every 
day, parties lose cases in part because the trial court has 
isolated a potentially dispositive issue and given it priority over 
other issues that might have redounded more advantageously 
for them had the issues been considered in a different order. 
This is likewise true in many admiralty cases. See, e.g., Lisa v. 
Fournier Marine Corp., 866 F.zd 530 (ist Cir.) (bifurcating 
liability issues for trial in admiralty case), cert. denied, 493 
U.S. 819 (1989); McGra» v. J. Ray McDermott & Co., 81 
F.R_D. 23 (E.D. La. 1978) (same); Bernardo v. Bethlehem Steel 
Co., 200 F. Supp. 534 (S.D.N.Y. 1961) (same), aff'd, 314 F.2d 
604 (2d Cir. 1963). Such trial court rulings do not call for 
constitutional relief. 

The Court of Appeals considered and rejected petitioners’ 
claim that the bifurcation order in this case represented an 
abuse of discretion and a deprivation of their constitutional 
nghts. The court recognized that this claim ultimately reduced 
to nothing more than petitioners’ argument that the doctrine of 
superseding cause is not viable in maritime tort cases, with 
which the court disagreed. As the court concluded: 

Given the validity of the superseding cause 
doctrine in cases such as this one, the district court’s 


* The Gasoline Products case is truly inapposite here, for it 
addressed Seventh Amendment concerns in a case where the Court 
was troubled about the prospect of retrying part of a case before a 
jury in a posture that seemed likely to generate “confusion and 
uncertainty” for the jury. See 283 U.S. at 500-01. There is no right 
to a jury trial in admiralty cases, see, e.g, Waring v. Clarke, 46 U.S. 
(5 How.) 441, 460 (1847), Fed. R. Civ. P. 38(e), and no prospect 
remains in this case of a jury trial on any nonmaritime issue, see 
supra note 5. 

™ Indeed, it has been held that Rule 42(b), which was adopted 
after the Court’s decision in the Gasoline Products case, has 
incorporaied compliance with that standard into its provisions. See, 
e.g., In re Bendectin Litig., 857 F.2d 290, 308-09 (6th Cir. 1988), 
cert. denied, 488 U.S. 1006 (1989). 


48 


decision to bifurcate the trial cannot be said to have 

‘severed the unseverable’ or to have prejudiced 

Exxon. Because bifurcation of the trial was 

expeditious and appropriate in light of the 

circumstances of this case and did not result in 

prejudice to Exxon, we hold that the district court did 

not abuse its discretion in choosing to take this 

approach. 
J.A. 226 (emphasis added). 

This conclusion is plainly correct. In granting bifurcation, 
Judge Fong realized that “bifurcation could obviate the need for 
extensive discovery, trial preparation, and weeks of trial if the 
court first determines the cause or comparative causes of the 
grounding, excluding the cause of the breakout,” which would 
require much more complicated matters of proof. J.A.71. The 
court also noted that Phase One of the trial would address 80% 
of petitioners’ damage claims, which suggested that “a separate 
trial offers the probability of settlement after the conclusion of 
the first phase.” J.A. 72. Moreover, the court concluded that 
if it were to determine “that the navigation of the EXXON 
HOUSTON was the proximate cause of its grounding, then it 
would be unnecessary for the court to resolve the issue of 
‘comparative fault’” or to calculate the damages related to the 
stranding of the vessel. J.A. 72. Compare Union Oil, 409 US. 
at 146 (same). For these reasons, the trial court acted well 
within its discretion in ordering bifurcation to focus initially on 
the issue of proximate cause. Indeed, such orders are 
Se 

parties. See, e.g, In re Beverly Hills Fire Litig., 
93 £24 907 toh Ci 1982) (granting bifurcation in tort case 
on issue of causation), cert. denied, 461 U.S. 929 (1983); In re 
Bendectin Litig., 857 F.2d at 308-14 (granting bifurcation in 
tort case on issue of proximate cause). 

Moreover, there is no reason why this Court should hamper 
federal admiralty courts in exercising their discretion to 
structure trial proceedings “conducive to expedition and 
economy” in the same manner as the federal courts do in other 
civil cases under Rule 42(b). Maritime torts involving multiple 
parties can be just as complex, and perhaps even more so, than 
such cases which arise on land. The need for orderly and 


49 


efficient trial proceedings, which in the long run serve the 
interests of courts and litigants alike, is as great in admiralty 
cases as in all others. 

Indeed, a leading authority on trial procedure in the federal 
courts expressly states that the application of this rule may be 
even more common and beneficial in admiralty cases than in 
other civil cases: 

In certain suits in admiralty, separation for trial of the 

issues of liability and damages, or of the extent of 

and beneficial, particularly in view of the statutory 

right to interlocutory appeal in admiralty cases... . 

Thus, the amendment of Rule 42(b) in 1966 was 
intended to reassure the admiralty bar that there would 

be no change in this practice. 

9 Charles A. Wright & arthur R. Miller, supra, § 2388, at 475. 
The Court should thus reject petitioners’ invitation to 
constitutionalize their quarrel with the manner of proceedings 
followed here. 


50 


CONCLUSION 
The judgment of the Court of Appeals should be affirmed. 
Respectfully submitted, 

DAVID W. PROUDFOOT KENNETH W. STARR 
BELLES GRAHAM Counsel of Record 

PROUDFOOT & WILSON EDWARD W. WARREN 
Watumull Plaza RICHARD A. CORDRAY 
4334 Rice Street KIRKLAND & ELLIS 
Suite 202 655 Fifteenth Street, N.W. 
Lihue, Kauai, Hawaii 96766 Washington, D.C. 20005 
(808) 245-4705 (202) 879-5000 
JOHN R. LACY RANDALL K. SCHMITT 
GOODSILL ANDERSON McCORRISTON MIHO 

QUINN & STIFEL MILLER & MUKAI 
1800 Alii Place 5 Waterfront Plaza, 4th Floor 
1099 Alakea Street 500 Ala Moana Boulevard 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
(808) 547-5700 (808) 529-7300 

Attorneys for Respondent Sofec, 


Inc. and Third-Party Respondents 
February 7, 1996 


