f FILEpb 
Al 
MAR 18 1996 


NO. 95-386 CLERK 


Suoreme Court, U.S. 


; 


IN THE 


Supreme Court Of Che United States 


OCTOBER TERM 1995 
JASON RICHARDS and FANNIE HILL, 
Petitioners, 
v. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 
and BIRMINGHAM-JEFFERSON CIVIC 
CENTER AUTHORITY 


Respondents. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 


REPLY BRIEF ON THE MERITS 


WILLIAM J. BAXLEY 

JOEL E. DILLARD 

Baxley, Dillard, Dauphin & McKnight 
2000 Sixteenth Avenue South 
Birmingham, Alabama 35205 

(205) 939-0995 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
Jason Richards and Fannie Hill 


1 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


There has been no discovery in this action. No deposi- 
tions have been taken; no interrogatories have been pro- 
pounded. (R. 1- 429). Hence, our requested relief, in the 
petition for certiorari granted by this Court, that after 
reversal of the Alabama Supreme Court's res judicata deci- 
sion “the case be remanded for trial.” (Petition for Cer- 
tiorari, p. 11). Jefferson County, for the first time in its 
Brief of Respondents, disputes Petitioners’ claim that 
paragraph 1(B) of Ordinance 1120 exempts employees 
of the businesses it excludes. The ordinance provides: 
“The words ‘vocation, occupation, calling and profes- 
sion’... shall not mean or include . . . businesses, profes- 
sions or occupations for which license fees are required 
under .. . Title 40, §§ 40-21-52 [freight lines and equip- 
ment companies], 53, 54, 55 [public utilities], 58 [tele- 
phone businesses], 59 [telegraph businesses], 60 [ex- 
press companies], 40-16-6 [financial institutions] and 27- 
4-9 [insurers].” (Appendix to this brief, p. A-19) The 
County now claims to have been collecting the tax from 
“almost all natural persons” employed by these busi- 
nesses. (Brief of Respondents, p. 17) If so, it is a matter 
which would logically emerge during discovery. Petition- 
ers cannot, at this point, concede that these employees 
are properly paying the tax if, in fact, they are. 

Submitted herewith, via one last appendix for this 
Court’s consideration, are documents which address Re- 
spondents’ arguments, in brief, that Petitioners suffer 
from “an enormity . . of misconception” regarding ex- 
emption of insurance companies, express Companies, 
railroads and banks (Brief of Respondents, p. 18); which 
refute Jefferson County’s allegation that if it loses this 
case it faces a “daunting political challenge” persuading 
the Alabama Legislature to take simple steps to correct 
the constitutional deprivations inherent in its occupa- 


2 


tional tax exemption scheme (Brief of Respondents, p. 
27); and which further refute Jefferson County's claim 
that “the only sizeable class of natural persons who are 
not subject to the Occupational Tax comprise the state- 
regulated professions.” (Brief of Respondents, p. 48). 
These appended documents are: Paragraph 1(B) of the 
tax itself; a Birmingham Bar Association Memorandum 
attached to a bill introduced in the Alabama Legislature 
which, if enacted, would have easily eliminated the ex- 
emptions complained of by Richards and Hill; and a 
pleading filed by federal district judges sitting in Jeffer- 
son County which addresses the irrationality of the tax 
exemption scheme by revealing that “preachers” in the 
county, though not exempt from the tax, are not re- 
quired by Jefferson County to pay it. 


We respectfully submit that these are but three of 
many matters addressing the merits of the equal protec- 
tion claims of Richards and Hill which deserve to be 
made the subject of discovery, and, thereafter, a judg- 
ment in the trial court. Hence, our contention that the 
posture of this case in this Court is such that it should be 
reversed on the res judicata grounds stated in our Peti- 
tion, and remanded for a trial upon the merits of 
Richards’ and Hill's federal equal protection claims. 


ARGUMENT 


RESPONDENTS’ HISTORY OF HOW THE 
EXEMPTION SCHEME BUILT INTO THE 
JEFFERSON COUNTY OCCUPATIONAL TAX “GOT 
SO BAD” DOES NOT EXCUSE AN IRRATIONAL 
DENIAL OF EQUAL PROTECTION TO 
RICHARDS AND HILL 


Following a lengthy and protracted historical apology 
for how the exemption scheme built into Jefferson 
County's Occupational Tax became the albatross that it 


5 


is, Respondents assert that it should be left undisturbed 
because: (1) it is an “economic and political snapshot of 
an essentially rural and undeveloped state prior to World 
War II” and (2) the County considers it to have harm- 
lessly evolved to accommodate “professions, learned and 
otherwise” and callings involving “quaint, obsolete or 
transient activities” beyond its control. (Brief of Respon- 
dents, pp. 2-20) This ignores the fact that we now know 


Jefferson County compounds the facial irrationality of its 


tax exemption scheme by exempting “preachers” — an 
odd classification not exempted anywhere on the face of 
the tax — by simply refusing to collect from them. (Ap- 
pendix to this Reply Brief, p. A-9). It also ignores simple 
mathematics. A manicurist pays $5.00 a year to the state 
for a license, and completely avoids the tax. (Appendix 
to Brief of Respondents, p. A-57) A veterinarian does 
likewise, to like effect. (Appendix of Brief of Respon- 
dents, p. A-94) A preacher pays nothing. As the bill 
which would have eliminated the exemptions com- 
plained of here makes clear, a deduction only for license 
fees paid to the county might be a logical method for 
correcting the federal constitutional deprivations now be- 
fore this Court, but even then there would be no rational 
basis for equating license fees paid to the state with occu- 
pational tax payments made to the county. License fees 
paid to the state offer a license holder a measure of ex- 
clusivity, lessened competition, and, in some cases, self 
regulation. License fees are not in any way comparable to 
tax payments which benefit the County treasury. A simt- 
lar bill, if enacted, would simply correct the tax exemp- 
tion imbroglio which is now before this Court. 


Respondents candidly admit that the Alabama Legisla- 
ture was a lobby interest for big business in 1927, when 
the license scheme which underpins the exemptions 
here in issue emerged. (Appendix to Brief of Respon- 
dents, A-200) The Birmingham Bar Association Memo- 


4 


randum appearing in the appendix to this brief proves 
little has changed since. Today in Alabama, professions 
which employ lobbyists and those which enjoy exemption 
from the Jefferson County Occupational Tax are fre- 
quently the same. All too often, their interest in enjoying 
exemption from this tax is effectively balanced against 
imposition of an irrational burden on citizens like 
Richards and Hill only by the United States Constitution, 
and only by this Court. 


Respondents raise the issue of legislative corrective ac- 
tion in a footnote, citing this Court's decision in Davis v. 
Michigan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U.S. 803 (1989), and shud- 
dering as they speculate upon the possibility of paying a 
refund of taxes unconstitutionally collected. Shortly after 
this Court handed down its decisions in Davis, supra, a 
group of Alabama citizens similarly situated to the Davis 
plaintiffs filed suit seeking similar relief. Sizemore v. 
Rinehart, 611 So.2d 1064 (Ala. Civ. App. 1992) writ 
quashed, 611 So.2d 1064 (Ala. 1993). The taxpayer plain- 
tiffs in Sizemore obtained not only a refund for a class of 
taxpayers situated similarly to Richards and Hill, but also 
a reasonable and swift amendment, in the Alabama Leg- 
islature, to the state statutes which were offensive to this 
Court's decision in Davis. The Alabama Court of Civil 
Appeals noted with approval the wisdom and dispatch of 
the Legislature's reaction to Davis: 


We note that the amount of refunds due to 
be paid to the class in this case exceeds 
$17,700,000. This court is mindful of the impact 
this amount of refund will have on the state's 
treasury; however, refusing to follow a decision 
of the United States Supreme Court would be 

‘an act of futility and show a lack of judicial re- 
sponsibility. 


5 


We further note that, in response to the Davis 
decision, the Alabama legislature enacted Act 
No. 90-596 which amended 40-18-19 and 40-18- 
20, Code 1975, granting a full exemption from 
Alabama income tax to the members of this 
class, so that these taxation statutes would not 
be in violation of 4 U.S.C.A. 111 (West 1985) 
and the doctrine of intergovernmental tax im- 
munity. 


611 So.2d at 1069 


We therefore contend that Jefferson County's claim 
that “[t)here is simply no way that the county could meet 
its current governmental responsibilities, while at the 
same time absorbing the loss of the occupational tax and 
financing a refund of the cumulative taxes collected and 
spent since January 1, 1988” is flat wrong. It can do both, 
expeditiously, by imposing a tax which meets constitu- 
tional muster on the many currently exempted occupa- 
tions described in our petition, or it can exempt all and 
choose to impose a tax of a wholly different character 
upon its citizens. But one thing is certain: our legislature 
knows how to act promptly and efficiently to follow a 
decision by this Court, as it did in the wake of Davis v. 
Michigan Department of Treasury, supra, and has done on 
numerous occasions when this Court has made known to 
Alabama the error of its statutory ways. 


HANSBERRY v. LEE, AND MARTIN v. WILKS 
DIRECTLY REFUTE THE RES JUDICATA 
ARGUMENTS MADE IN JEFFERSON 
COUNTY'S BRIEF 


In Hansberry, supra, this Court described in terms of 
notice and an opportunity to be heard, exactly how it 
handles a res judicata issue like the one in this case: 


6 


State courts are free to attach such descriptive 
labels to litigations before them as they may 
choose and to attribute to them such conse- 
quences as they think appropriate under state 
constitutions and laws, subject only to the re- 
quirements of the Constitution of the United 
States. But when the judgment of a state court, 
ascribing to the judgment of another court the 
binding force of res judicata, is challenged for 
want of due process it becomes the duty of this 
Court to examine the course of procedure in 
both litigations to ascertain whether the litigant 
whose rights have thus been adjudicated has 
been afforded such notice and opportunity to 
be heard as are requisite to the due process 
which the Constitution prescribes. 


311 U.S. at 40 


Jefferson County is well aware that neither Richards 
nor Hill had any notice or opportunity to be heard upon 
their federal equal protection claims — or any others, for 
that matter — when the Bedingfield case was tried. There- 
fore it adopts in brief, three fallback positions, none of 
which is persuasive. The first it calls “virtual representa- 
tion . . . pragmatically established.” (Brief of Respon- 
dents, pp. 29-31) In the second it maintains that what the 
Alabama Supreme Court really meant to describe in the 
opinion below was “issue preclusion” (Brief of Respon- 
dents, p. 32), and in the third it maintains that a virtual 
privity concept should somehow be designed to link the 
Bedingfield plaintiffs to Richards and Hill. (Brief of Re- 
spondents, p. 33-36) (This third position is Jefferson 
County's oddest, because it basically seeks reversal of 
Martin v. Wilks, supra, sub silentio.) 

No amount of pragmatism can change the fact that 
three arcane state law issues, and only those three issues, 


7 


were heard and decided by the trial and appellate courts 
in Bedingfield, supra. Nothing can change the fact that the 
Bedingfield plaintiffs had never paid the occupational tax, 
therefore lacking standing to complain about those ex- 
empted. Still, Jefferson County cites a few obscure virtual 
representation cases, omitting reference to the “ad- 
equacy of representation” component of each which is 
missing in this case. In Southwest Airlines Co. v. Texas Intl 
Airlines, 546 F.2d 84 (5th Cir. 1977) cert. den. 434 U.S. 
832 (1977) and N.A.A.C.P. v. Hunt, 891 F.2d 1555 (11th 
Cir. 1990), the Fifth and Eleventh Circuit Courts of Ap- 
peals, respectively, held that privity of the stripe urged by 
Jefferson County exists only where nonparties to a first 
action were “adequately represented” by the parties in an 
original action. Southwest Airlines Co. v. Texas Int'l Airlines, 
546 F.2d, at 100; N.A.A.C.P. v. Hunt, 891 F.2d, at 1561. 
Moreover, the Southwest Airlines Co. case involved first 
case representation by a government authority, and the 
N.A.A.C.P. case involved first and second case representa- 
tion by a common plaintiff who appeared individually, 
and as a member of both the N.A.A.C.P. and the Ala- 
bama legislature, in both actions. See also, Footnotes 55 
and 59, Southwest Airlines Co., Inc., supra. 


Jefferson County also suggests that the Alabama Su- 
preme Court's decision “would be more defensible” had 
it reached the same result as a matter of “issue preclu- 
sion”. In that vein it cites Grubb v. Public Utilities Commis- 
sion of Ohio, 281 U.S. 470 (1930) for the proposition that 
omitted mention of an issue “distinctly presented” did 
not, in that case, render that issue undecided. Grubb was 
a case involving a particular bus route excluded from a 
certificate of authority issued by the Ohio Public Utilities 
Commission. Unlike the case at bar, it involved an identi- 
cal plaintiff in both suits, and actual presentation of the 
exact same constitutional issue in both. This Court's con- 
clusion in Grubb (“[A] judgment upon the merits in one 


> 8 
suit is res judicata in another where the parties and subject 
matter are the same.” 281 U.S., at 479) (Emphasis supplied) 
is one with which we have no quarrel. It is simply not 
applicable to this action involving different parties and a 
different subject matter in different lawsuits. 


The final fallback position pressed by Jefferson County 
seeks to force privity onto the Bedingfield plaintiffs and 
Richards and Hill by describing both suits as involving 
“the same public question”, and considering the very dif- 
ferent claims of Richards and Hill to be nothing more 
than assertive of an “illusory private right”. (Brief of Re- 
spondents, pp. 28-29, 32-33) Nothing in the record, or 
elsewhere, supports this odd contention. Indeed, Ala- 
bama Associate Justice Maddox (who was a Justice upon 
the Alabama Supreme Court when Bedingfield was de- 
cided) recalls otherwise: 


The trial judge, in denying the defendants’ 
motion for a summary judgment in this case 
(that motion being based on the ground that 
the action was barred by the doctrine of res 
judicata), issued an order in which he con- 
cluded, in part, that “[i]n Bedingfield v. Jefferson 
County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the 
trial court nor [this Court] determined 
whether Act No. 406 (Alabama Legislature 
1967), authorizing the tax in question, or Jeffer- 
son County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson 
County Commission 1987), imposing the tax in 
question, violates the equal protection clause of 
the United States Constitution by creating an 
unreasonable, unjust, and improper classifica- 
tion of citizens subject to the tax in an arbitrary, 
irrational and unjust manner.” The trial judge 


9 


U.S.C. 111) as it pertains to federal employees.” 
I agree with the trial court on both points. 


In concluding that the trial judge was correct, 
I have examined the pleadings in Bedingfield 
and the order entered by the trial judge in that 
case and I have studied the opinion issued by 
this Court in Bedingfield, a case in which I par- 
ticipated. I have also carefully considered the 
argument of Jefferson County that “the claims 
in this case arise from the same nucleus of op- 
erative fact as the claims made in Bedingfield and 
[that] because the evidence necessary to sup- 
port both claims is identical, it is axiomatic that 
the fourth element of res judicata is sausfied,” 
and I have given careful consideration to the 
views of my colleagues expressed in the majority 
opinion, and my only comment is that if the 
“same cause of action presented in both suits” 
element of the res judicata doctrine is so easily 
satisfied, then it could be extended ad infinitum 
and would establish a precedent that could 
close the courthouse doors to other plaintiffs in 
other cases who might find themselves faced 
with the rule of law herein established. I think 
that the Court is establishing a bad precedent. 


My opinion that Bedingfield does not bar the 
claims presented in this case is the same as that 
of the trial judge: that this Court, in Bedingfield, 
did not adjudicate these claims, or any claims 
similar to them. 

Appendix to Petition, A-8,9 


This recollection of the difference between the two ac- 


also determined that “[i]n Bedingfield v. 

County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the 
trial court nor [this Court] determined whether 
the tax in question violates the Buck Act (4 


tions is particularly instructive here because the majority 
does not contend otherwise. Petitioners’ private class ac- 
tion claims, based on the irrationality of an exemption 


10 


scheme built into the tax, were not even similar to the 
claims adjudicated in Bedingfield. Without contradiction 
from the majority, Justice Maddox places the clear differ- 
ences between parties and claims in the these two actions 
directly into the precedential path of Martin v. Wilks, 
supra. 

If this Court meant what it said in Martin, none of 
Jefferson County’s arguments are persuasive. Conversely, 
if those arguments here have merit, Martin is wrong and 
due to be reversed. In Martin, this Court resolutely held: 


Joinder as a party, rather than knowledge of a 
lawsuit and an opportunity to intervene, is the 
method by which potential parties are subjected 
to the jurisdiction of the court and bound by a 
judgment or decree. The parties to a lawsuit 
presumably know better than anyone else the 
nature and scope of relief sought in the action, 
and at whose expense such relief might be 
granted. It makes sense, therefore, to place on 
them a burden of bringing in additional parties 
where such a step is indicated, rather than plac- 
ing on potential additional parties a duty to in- 
tervene when they acquire knowledge of a law- 
sult. 


490 U.S. at 765 


Richards and Hill, of course, had no notice whatsoever of 
the case by which the Alabama Supreme Court deter- 
mined them to be barred, and no opportunity to inter- 
vene. Their claims underscore the prescience of this 
Court's further observation, in Martin, that: 


[E}ven under a regime of mandatory interven- 
tion, parties who did not have adequate knowl- 
edge of the suit would relitigate issues. Addi- 


11 


tional questions about the adequacy and timelli- 
ness of knowledge would inevitably crop up. 


490 U.S. at 768 


Indeed, this Court recognized the likelihood of subse- 
quent claims under the equal protection clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment in cases involving occupational 
taxes years before in Walters v. City of St. Louis, Missouri, 
347 U.S. 231 (1954). There, a municipal income tax ordi- 
nance was subjected to this Court’s scrutiny because it 
treated profits of corporations and businesses differently 
from the wages of individuals. The St. Louis tax was up- 
held on an issue far removed from the one here — treat- 
ing the gross receipts of corporations and individuals dif- 
ferently — but the collection status of the tax was similar 
to that of the Jefferson County Occupational Tax when 
Bedingfield was decided: 


A weakness of the appellants’ case is that its 
anticipatory character precludes consideration 
of any contentions insofar as they depend upon 
actual application of the tax or the regulations 
promulgated for its administration. This action 
was commenced almost immediately after the 
Act became effective. A portion of appellants’ 
wages has been withheld by their employer, but 
the City has not yet collected the tax. There is no 
evidence as to how the amount withheld from 
appellants compares with taxes collected from 
self-employed persons or businesses. The com- 
plaint attacks only the state legislative Act del- 
egating power to the City of St. Louis and the 
taxing ordinance enacted by that City. (Empha- 
sis supplied) 


347 U.S. at 233 


12 


This failure of collection resulted in a concurring opin- 
ion by Justice Douglas, with whom Justice Black joined, 
regarding an anticipated future challenge, after collec- 
tion of the tax: 


I am less confident than my Brethren that the 
Supreme Court of Missouri did not pass on the 
regulations as well as the ordinance. But I bow 
to their reading of the record, saving for a future 
day the serious and substantial question under the 
Equal Protection Clause raised by the regulations 
which grant employers deductions for taxes paid the 
federal government, yet do not allow employees a de- 
duction for the same tax. (Emphasis supplied) 


347 U.S. at 238 


Jefferson County would, of course, contend that a sub- 
sequent challenge by different parties, mounting a differ- 
ent subject matter challenge to the tax (a “future day” 
question, in the parlance of Justice Douglas), should be 
barred by res judicata. That contention should not be seri- 
ously made today, after this Court’s decision in Martin, 
because its logic would have left the firefighters in that 
action without their “own day in court”, 490 U.S. 762, 
and Mr. Hansberry without a right to peacefully occupy 
his own home. 311 U.S., at 46. The same contention simi- 
larly robs Hill and Richards of due process of law by 
denying them their own day in court. 


13 
CONCLUSION 


The Equal Protection Clause protects Richards and 
Hill from arbitrary and irrational classifications like the 
constitutionally obnoxious ones built into the exemption 
scheme of the Jefferson County Occupational Tax, but 
only if they, and the class they represent, have a day in 
court. Richards and Hill come into this Court with a 
standing which is superior to that of the Birmingham 
firefighters in Martin v. Wilks, for the firefighters at least 
had notice through their association and local newspa- 
pers that a prior case existed. We therefore renew here 
our petition for reversal of the res judicata decision of the 
Alabama Supreme Court, and remand of this case to the 
trial court for a decision upon the merits of Jason 
Richards’ and Fannie Hill's federal equal protection 
claims. 


Respectfully submitted, 


WILLIAM J. BAXLEY 


mh E. DILLARD | 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
BAXLEY, DILLARD, 
DAUPHIN & McKNIGHT 
2000 Sixteenth Avenue South 
Birmingham, Alabama 35205 
(205) 939-0995 


v 


APPENDIX 


A-l 
APPENDIX 


IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
ELEVENTH CIRCUIT 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, a 
political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, 


Appellant, 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT 
COURT FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF 
ALABAMA, SOUTHERN DIVISION CIVIL ACTION 
NOS. 93-M-0069-S AND 93-M-0196-S 


MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE AMICI CURIAE BRIEF 
BEFORE EN BANC PANEL 


Come now James H. Hancock, Robert B. Propst, Edwin 
L. Nelson, Sharon Lovelace Blackburn and C. Lynwood 
Smith, Jr., pursuant to Rule 29, Federal Rules of Appel- 
late Procedure, and respectfully move for leave to file 
amici curiae briefs in support of appellees’ position before 
the en banc panel in the above-entitled appeal. The inter- 
est of movants is that we are Article III judges (as are 
appellees), whose performance of judicial duties are pur- 


A-2 


portedly subjected to licensing by appellant, Jefferson 
County, a state political subdivision. We are officers of 
the United States as that term is defined in Rule 29. Our 
brief is desirable in order to argue from our perspective 
how the subject ordinance unta sly discriminates against 
Article III judges, and effectively taxes and unduly bur- 
dens an essential function of the federal government. 


We propose to refile a brief previously filed by four of 
us aS amici cunae in support of appellees’ application for 
rehearing and suggestion for rehearing en banc in the 
above entitled appeal and also a copy of the brief filed by 
the appellants in the case of Richards, et al v. Jefferson 
County, Ala., et al, No. 95-386, as to which the Supreme 
Court of the United States has granted certioran. A copy 
of each of said proposed briefs is attached hereto. 


/s/ James H. Hancock 
JAMES H. HANCOCK 


/s/ Robert B. PROPST 
ROBERT B. PROPST 


_ /8/ Edwin L. Nelson 
EDWIN L. NELSON 


/s/ Sharon Lovelace Blackburn 
SHARON LOVELACE BLACKBURN 


/s/ C. Lynwood Smith, Jr. 
C. LYNWOOD SMITH, JR. 


Proposed Amiai Cunae 


A-3 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 


I, one of the proposed amici curiae, hereby certify that I 
have on this 19th day of January, 1996, mailed a copy of 


the foregoing by U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, to the fol- 
lowing attorneys of record at their addresses of record: 


Irwin W. Stolz, Jr. 

Seaton D. Purdom 

One Peachtree Center, Suite 4300 
303 Peachtree Street, N.E. 
Auanta, GA 30308 


Jeffrey M. Sewell 

Edwin A. Strickland 

Jefferson County Attorney's Office 
214 Jefferson County Courthouse 
Birmingham, AL 35263 


Carlos E. Heaps 
2019 3rd Avenue North 
Birmingham, AL 35203 


/s/ Robert B. Propst 
ROBERT B. PROPST 


A-4 A-5 


IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS AMICI CURIAE BRIEF OF JAMES H. HANCOCK, 
ELEVENTH CIRCUIT ROBERT B. PROPST, EDWIN L. NELSON AND 

SHARON LOVELACE BLACKBURN IN SUPPORT OF 

APPELLEES’ APPLICATION FOR REHEARING AND 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, SUGGESTION FOR REHEARING EN BANC 
a political ) 
subdivision of the State ) (\ BSH COCK 
of Alabama, | ROBERT B. PROPST 
EDWIN L. NELSON 
Appellant, ) SHARON LOVELACE BLACKBURN 
) 1729 - 5th Avenue North 
¥. ) Case No. 94-6400 BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA 35203 
) 
WILLIAM ACKER and ) PRO SE 
U. W. CLEMON, ) 
) 
Appellees. ) 
) 
) 


ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT 
COURT FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF 
ALABAMA, SOUTHERN DIVISION CIVIL ACTION 
NOS. 93-M-0069-S AND 93-M-0196-S 


A-6 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR 
THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ALABAMA DIVISION 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, a 
political subdivision of 
State of Alabama, 


Appellant, 


CASE NO. 94-6400 
WILLIAM ACKER and U. W. 
CLEMON, 


ee 


Appellees. 


CERTIFICATE OF INTERESTED PERSONS 


Amici curiae hereby certify as interested all persons 
listed in appellees’ certificate of interested persons. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page: 

Certificate of Interested Persons ............666006: i 
Pe 6 cc che csocevecccescccceceséees ii 
ee Is 6 bb cc cdocdcedevevececeseeos iii 
Statement of the Issues .... 2.00.00 eee l 
yp  PPPPPTTITITITITITTI TTT 2 
Is Ordinance No. 1120 an Income Tax?........... 3 


Does Ordinance No. 1120 Unfairly Discriminate 


Against Federal Judges ............666000 eee 4 


A-7 


Does Ordinance No. 1120 Unconstitutionally 
Diminish the Salary of Those Article III Judges 
Who Were Appointed Prior to Its Effective Date.... 6 


a a ee os ed open 7 
a i ieweeseeeest 8 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES: Page 


Hatter v. United States 
— F.3d — (Fed. Cir. 1995) 


EE RIE A PRE ee + 6 
Hatter v. United States 

i cats eebebetsovcasboece 6 
O'Malley v. Woodrough 

i i cite kk ees ds ebb eee eee é 6 

6 dt a ba gbs0 be oe 660 bo oe 19 
RULES: 
RETR Sa al RE al ea oe 2 

STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES 


1. Whether Ordinance No. 1120 constitutes an income 
tax? 

2. Whether Ordinance No. 1120 unfairly discriminates 
against federal judges? 

3. Whether Ordinance No. 1120 unconstitutionally di- 
minishes the salaries of those Article III judges who 
were appointed prior to its effective date? 


A-8 
ARGUMENT 


Pursuant to Rule 29, Federal Rules of Appellate Proce- 
dure, the undersigned, James H. Hancock, Robert B. 
Propst, Edwin L. Nelson and Sharon Lovelace Blackburn, 
active judges of the United States District Court for the 
Northern District of Alabama, being officers of the 
United States not requiring leave of court under Rule 29 
in order to file an amici curiae brief, but obviously having 
a substantial interest in the outcome of this case, respect- 
fully file the following brief amici in support of the appli- 
cation for rehearing and suggestion for rehearing en banc 
filed by appellees, William M. Acker, Jr. and U. W. 
Clemon. 

Amici are in total agreement with Judge Moye, with the 
dissent of Chief Judge Gerald B. Tjoflat, and with 
appellees’ brief on application for rehearing. We want 
this Honorable Court to understand, contrary to the pos- 
sible implication contained in the panel’s majority opin- 
ion, that after Judge Charles Moye’s ruling in the lower 
court, all active district judges within the Northern Dis- 
trict of Alabama, some of whom had previously paid Jef- 
ferson County's occupational license, discontinued pay- 
ing it, and none have since paid it. We will hereinafter 
briefly state our reasons, keeping them short in order not 
to duplicate what has already been said. 


Is Ordinance No. 1120 an Income Tax? 

The central proposition in the two-judge opinion is 
that what Jefferson County expressly calls its occupa- 
tional license is not really an occupational license but an 
income tax. There are several flaws in the rationale em- 
ployed by the panel majority in reaching this conclusion. 

1. Alabama categorically forbids a county government 
from enacting an income tax. Jefferson County is not 
exempted from this express. 


A-9 


2. There would be no purpose in the language of Or- 
dinance 1120 making illegal an activity performed and 
generating income in Jefferson County unless the intent 
of the ordinance is to require that the county grant its 
permission to perform a particular activity before a per- 
son can perform that activity in the county. 

3. A tax which expressly exempts from its effect every 
person who holds a state license authorizing him or her 
to perform his or her occupation, without regard to how 
small his state license fee is in comparison to the dollar 
figure required to be paid by assessment of a percentage 
of income, as here exacted by Jefferson County, the tax- 
ing unit, from non-exempt occupations, cannot objec- 
tively or fairly he viewed as an income tax. 

4. If Ordinance 1120 were a true income tax, 
clergypersons would be paying it, because Alabama un- 
derstandably does not issue licenses to members of the 
clergy, any more than to federal judges. The fact that 
Jefferson County has chosen not to sue its preachers who 
fail to pay the license, despite no exemption, must be 
viewed as a clear concession by Jefferson County that this 
is not an income tax, because while the First Amend- 
ment’s anti-establishment clause precludes a govern- 
ment’s granting of a license to preach, it does not grant 
preachers an exemption from income taxation. 


5. If Ordinance 1120 were a true income tax, it would 
not be based on a percentage of the work performed in 
Jefferson County. By its very nature this scheme is geared 
to the right to work in Jefferson County. Thus, the tax- 
able event as to federal judges is the performance of 
their duties in Jefferson County, and therefore Jefferson 
County has effectively taxed an essential function of the 
federal government. 


A-10 


Does Ordinance No. 1120 Unfairly Discriminate Against 
Federal Judges? 


The panel majority holds that the “occupational tax does 
not discriminate against judges, vis-a-vis other professions” and 
that the “slight difference in economic burden does not compel a 
finding of discrimination.” (emphasis supplied). Slip Op. at 
p. 3159. We very respectfully point out that no “profes- 
sion” except the judge’s profession (if judging is a profes- 
sion) pays Jefferson County's occupational license. All 
other professions except the clergy are licensed by the 
State of Alabama and are therefore exempt from the tax 
by the express terms of Ordinance 1120. Furthermore, 
not a dime of the $250 state license fee paid by a highly 
successful lawyer practicing in Jefferson County goes to 
Jefferson County, whereas all of the $670.00 (.5% of an- 
nual salary) claimed of the district judges (whose cham- 
bers unfortunately are in Jefferson County) would go to 
Jefferson County and none to the state. The fact that 
Jefferson County obtains nothing from resident attorneys 
and $670.00 from resident federal judges is facially dis- 
criminatory. Also, the term “economic burden” is broad 
enough to require consideration of the time and effort to 
accomplish the very strict record keeping that will be 
necessary to prove what is almost, if not entirely, impos- 
sible, namely, how much of our income was earned from 
work performed in one out of 31 countries. Such record 
keeping, if required, will constitute a very significant 
“economic burden.” 


Does Ordinance No. 1120 Unconstitutionally Diminish 
the Salary of Those Article III Judges Who Were Ap- 
pointed Prior to Its Effective Date? 

It is not only interesting but of great significance that 
the decision of a trial court cited by Jefferson County in 
its supplemental submission of January 6, 1994, shortly 


A-11 


before oral argument in this case, has recently been over- 
ruled by the appellate court to which it was appealed. In 
Hatter v. United States, — F.3d — (Fed. Cir. 1995), 1995 
WL 517506, decided on August 30, 1995, the Court of 
Appeals for the Federal Circuit not only flatly disagreed 
with Hatter v. United States, 31 Fed. Cl. 436 (1994), but 
explained why O'Malley v. Woodrough, 307 U.S. 277 
(1939), a case relied upon by the panel majority in the 
instant case, is not controlling on the issue here pre- 
sented. Two of the appellants in Hatter are district judges 
sitting in Georgia, and one sits in Florida. If the Federal 
Circuit had been dealing with a county occupational li- 
cense instead of with a Social Security deduction appli- 
cable to every taxpayer, its task would have been even easier. 
Amia do not want to be understood to be taking the 
position that the panel opinion in the instant case should 
not be vacated unless this Court, en banc, agrees with the 
Federal Circuit in Hatter, although Judge Moye confi- 
dently and correctly predicted the Hatter outcome. 


A-12 
CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, and for the others which 
have already been articulated, the undersigned respect- 
fully suggest that this case is a proper case for en banc 
reconsideration and for the entry of a judgment in favor 
of appellees and against Jefferson County. 


Respectfully submitted 


/s/ James H. Hancock 
JAMES H. HANCOCK 


/s/ Robert B. Propst 


ROBERT B. PROPST 


/s/ Edwin L. Nelson 


EDWIN L. NELSON 


/s/ Sharon Lovelace Blackburn 


SHARON LOVELACE BLACKBURN 


PRO SE 


A-13 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 


I, one of the above appearing amici curiae, hereby cer- 
tify that I have on this 20th day of September, 1995, 
mailed a copy of the foregoing by U.S. Mail, postage 
prepaid, to the following attorneys of record at their ad- 
dresses of record: 


Irwin W. Stolz, Jr. 

Seaton D. Purdom 

One Peachtree Center, Suite 4300 
303 Peachtree Street, N.E. 
Atlanta, GA 30308 


Jeffrey M. Sewell 

Edwin A. Strickland 

Jefferson County Attorney's Office 
214 Jefferson County Courthouse 
Birmingham, AL 35263 


Carlos E. Heaps 
2019 - 3rd Avenue North 
Birmingham, AL 35203. 


/s/ James H. Hancock 
JAMES H. HANCOCK 


A-14 
MEMORANDUM 


TO: All Members of the Birmingham Bar Association 
FROM: Warren B. Lightfoot, President 
RE: Proposed increase in Your Taxes 


House Bill 527 (enclosed) which has been introduced 
in the state legislature appears to eliminate lawyers’ ex- 
emption from the Jefferson County Occupational Tax. 
Currently, lawyers and others who are required to pur- 
chase a license from, or pay a privilege tax to, the State of 
Alabama or Jefferson County, are exempt from Jefferson 
County's Occupational tax. This exemption includes ac- 
countants, architects, dentists, doctors, engineers, optom- 
etrists, real estate agents and brokers, stock brokers, and 
many others. House Bill 527 would remove that exemp- 
tion and authorize Jefferson County's governing body to 
levy a license or privilege tax at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of 
the annual gross receipts of those formerly exempt tax 
payers. You may wish to contact your state representative 
and/or senator concerning this bill. Printed below for 
your information is a draft of a letter which you may want 
to use in contacting your state representative or senator, 

Since many of your clients may also be affected by this 
legislation, you may also want to notify them of this legis- 
lation so that they may contact their state representative 
and/or senator. Also printed below is a draft of a letter 
which you may want to utilize in notifying them of this 
proposed legislation. 


DRAFT LETTER TO REPRESENTATIVE/SENATOR 
RE: House Bill 527 


The above bill has been brought to may attention. | 
live in your district, and I want to register my opposition 
to this bill and state the reason. It is my opinion that a 


A-15 


privilege tax on gross earnings imposed at the county 
level is not a desirable or appropriate revenue base for 
Jefferson County. From the perspective of the County, it 
simply serves to increase the competitive disadvantage 
the County now suffers relative to surrounding counties, 
particularly North Shelby County. The effect is to en- 
courage businesses and professionals to locate in, or relo- 
cate to, other counties. Furthermore it is highly probable 
that this tax will be passed on to the consumers through 
higher fees. It is obvious to me and to many other voters 
and taxpayers, that this is a short-sighted revenue gener- 
ating program. 

I have an alternative suggestion. | urge you and our 
other representatives to support comprehensive tax re- 
form, implemented statewide, and to reject band-aid ap- 
proaches such as this Bill. 


DRAFT LETTER TO CLIENTS: 


House Bill 527 has been introduced in the state legisla- 
ture to eliminate certain exemptions from the Jefferson 
County Occupational Tax. Currently, persons who are 
required to purchase a license from, or pay a privilege 
tax to, the State of Alabama or Jefferson County are ex- 
empt from Jefferson County's Occupational Tax. This in- 
cludes accountants, architects, dentists, doctors, engi- 
neers, lawyers, optometrists, real estate agents and bro- 
kers, stock brokers and many others. House Bill 527 
would remove that exemption and authorize Jefferson 
County's governing body to levy a license or privilege tax 
at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of the annual gross receipts of 
those formerly exempt tax payers. Since you will be af- 
fected by this legislation either through the loss of the 
exemption or from increased costs passed on by those 
who lose the exemption, you may wish to contact your 
state representative and/or senator concerning this bill. I 


A-16 


have enclosed for your information a draft of a letter 
which you may wish to use in contacting your state repre- 
sentative and/or senator. If you have any questions con- 
cerning this bill, do not hesitate to contact me. 


H. 527 By McDowell and McClaim (With Notice and 
Proof) 

RI 4/30/91 

RFD Local Legislation No. 2 


A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT 


Relating to Jefferson County, to amend Act No. 406, H. 
832, 1967 Regular Session, so as to delete certain exemp- 
tions and provide the county commission with authority 
to levy an occupational tax upon all persons and busi- 
nesses to limit the amount of such business or privilege 
tax, and to provide a deduction for other privilege tax 
paid to the county. 

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALA- 
BAMA: 

Section 1. The Title of Act No. 406, H. 483, 1967 
Regular Session is hereby amended to read as follows: 


/“An act to authorize the governing body of any county 
of the state having a population of 500,000 or more, ac- 
cording to the last or any subsequent federal census, to 
levy a business or privilege tax for revenue purposes upon 
any business, vocation, occupation, calling or profession, 
ether the State-of Atabameor-the-comnty-by the taws- of 


the—State—ot-Atabamea, and to limit the amount of any — 


such business or privilege tax, and to provide a deduction 
from said privilege or license tax for amounts paid to the county 
pursuant to a state license code and to provide for collection of 
said tax and penalties for the enforcement thereof. 


A-17 


Section 2. Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Act No. 406, H. 832, 
1967 Regular Session, are hereby amended to read as 
follows: 


“Section 3. The purpose of this Aet act is to equatire 
provide authonty to 
the county governing body to impose a license or privilege 
(ax upon persons as defined herein for trowe engaging in 
certam businesses 
teretther- the -state-or-comnty as defined herein in the county.” 
“Section 4. The governing body of the county is 
hereby authorized for revenue purposes to levy and collect a 


license or privilege tax upon any person for engaging in 
any business torswhich-hets rot-reqired-bytaw-to_pay 


+946-as-amended in the county and to allow a deduction from 
said tax for amounts actually paid for the use of the county by 
such person required for said business pursuant to a state license 
code or other state, license or privilege tax. 

“When a person is engaged in more than one business 
for one or more of which a license or privilege tax is 
required to be paid to the State or the county but for one 
or more of which no license or privilege tax is required 
to be paid to the State or county, the county governing 
body shall have the authority to levy a license or privilege 
tax upon that business, or those businesses, for engaging 
in which such persons is not required to pay any license 
or privilege tax to the State or county.” 

“Section 5. The tax hereby levied shall be paid to that 
the County Director of Revenue or other officer or employee 
of the county chargeable with the duty of collecting State 


or county license or privilege taxes payabte-to-the-connty 
who shall have parallel authonty to enforce hens and collect said 


A-18 


tax that is now or hereafter provided to collect the license or 
privilege taxes of the State and counties by the Code of Alabama 
or other law or regulation including Title 40, Chapters 1, 12, 
29 Code of Alabama 1975. Non-payment of said tax is subject to 
the same liens, penalties and interest as are provided by law for 
non-payment of State and county license or privilege taxes in- 
cluding Title 40, Chapters 1, 12, 29, Code of Alabama 1975.” 
“Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied by the 


governing body of the county or-any-persons-tor-engag- 
ee ee 
n employee of a business shall be at a rate which is in 


excess of the rate of teense-or-privitege-taxteviedt-by the 


targest-mumietpatity-ot-the-comnty-orr the same—or-simitar 
type-of-business-activity 1/2 of 1% of the gross wages or 
earnings of such employee.” 

Section 3. All laws or parts of laws which conflict with 
this act are hereby repealed. 

Section 4. The provisions of this act are severable. If 
any part of this act is declared invalid or unconstitu- 
tional, such declaration shall not affect the part which 
remains. 

Section 5. This act shall become effective immediately 
upon its passage and approval by the Governor, or upon 
its otherwise becoming a law. 


A-19 


(B) The werds “vocation, occupation, calling and profession” 
shall mean and include the doing of any kind of work, the 
rendering of any kind of personal services, or the hold- 
ing of any kind of position or job within Jefferson 
County, Alabama, by any clerk, laborer, tradesman, man- 
ager, official or other employee, including any non-resi- 
dent of Jefferson County who is employed by any em- 
ployer as defined in this section, where the relationship 
between the individual performing the services and the 
person for whom such services are rendered is, as to 
those services, the legal relationship of employer and em- 
ployee, including also a partner of a firm or an officer of 
a firm or corporation, if such partner or officer receives a 
salary for his personal services rendered in the business 
of such firm or corporation, but they shall not mean or 
include domestic servants employed in private homes and shall 
not include businesses, professions or occupations for which l- 
cense fees are required to be paid under any General License 
Code of the County vr to the State of Alabama or the County by 
any of the following: Chapter 12, Article 2, Title 40; §§40-21- 
50, 40-21-52, 53, 54 and 55; 40-21-57, 58, 59, and 60; 40- 
16-6; and 27-4-9 of the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 


— Ordinance No. 1120 
Jefferson County, Alabama 


