5 Fil ED 
No. 95-386 san 8 O98 
IN THE poe 
Supreme Court Of The Hnited States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


JASON RICHARDS and FANNIE HILL, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 
and BIRMINGHAM-JEFFERSON CIVIC 
CENTER AUTHORITY, 


Respondents. 


On Writ Of Certiorari ‘To The 
Supreme Court Of Alabama 


JOINT APPENDIX 


WILLIAM J. BAXLEY WILLIAM M. SLAUGHTER 
JOEL E. DILLARD RICHARD H. WALSTON 
Baxley, Dillard, Dauphin Haskell Slaughter Young 

& McKnight & Johnston, 


2000 Sixteenth Avenue South Professional Association 
Birmingham, Alabama 35205 1200 AmSouth/Harbert Plaza 


(205) 939-0995 1901 Sixth Avenue North 
Birmingham, Alabama 35203 
Attorneys for Petitioners (205) 251-1000 
Attorneys for Respondents 


Petition for Certiorari Filed on September 7, 1995 
Certiorari Granted on November 22, 1995 


‘fi: 


To, Maat ese Pe le J 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chronological List of Relevant Docket Entries ....... ill 
Plaintiffs’ Complaint, filed April 21, 1992 ........... l 
Defendants’ Answer (excluding exhibits), filed 

BU I, Be cece cc ce ccccscecesecsvvercsstpe 15 


Motion to Intervene of Birmingham-Jefferson 
Civic Center Authority (excluding exhibits), 


OG Fee 4, IGOR. wc rccccccccccvcvcccssevces 22 
Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment 
(excluding exhibits), filed June 4, 1992.......... 25 


Act 406 Enacted at the 1967 Regular Session 
of the Legislature of Alabama (first 
appeared in record as Exhibit A to 
ee ee neha 33 


Ordinance No. 1120 Adopted by the Jefferson County 
Commission (first appeared in record as 
Exhibit B to Defendants’ Answer) .............. 34 


Complaint in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County 
(appeared in record as part of Exhibit B to 
Detendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment)... . . 44 


Complaint in Phillips et al. v. Jefferson County 
(appeared in record as part of Exhibit B to 
Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment)... . . 49 


Plaintiffs’ memorandum of Law in Bedingfield v. 
Jefferson County (appeared in record as part 
of Exhibit B to Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
PUGTOME) onc ccc cccccccdesscceccssesccccces 53 


Order of Circuit Court Consolidating Bedingfield v. 
Jefferson County and Phillips et al. v. Jefferson 
County (appeared in record as part of Exhibit C to 
Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment)... . . 59 


il 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 


Judgment of Circuit Court in Bedingfield v. Jefferson 
County (appeared as part of Exhibit C to Defendants’ 


Motion for Summary Judgment) ............... 60 


Opinion of Supreme Court of Alabama in 


Bedingfield v. Jefferson County (first 
appeared in record as Exhibit A to 


Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment) . . . . . 65 


Defendants’ Motion to Strike Affidavits Submitted 
by Plaintiffs, filed November 2, 1992 ............ 75 


Plaintiffs’ Notice of Filing of Documents 
Relating to a Parallel Pending Federal 


Action, filed March 2, 1993............0000005. 82 
Defendants’ Request for Certification to Appeal 
Interlocutory Order, filed August 18, 1993 ....... 99 


Order of Circuit Court With Respect to Defendants’ 


Motion for Summary Judgment, entered 
TE rehab ees Gednseessvecceses 105 


Order of Circuit Court Certifying Questions 
for Interlocutory Appeal, entered 


RE 106 
Opinion of Supreme Court of Alabama, released 

ES hd Nee pick 60 -64.6 Rint veccee cs 110 
Plaintiffs’ Application for Rehearing, filed 

ESE A a re 124 


Order of Supreme Court of Alabama Overruling 
Plaintiffs’ Application for Rehearing, 
EE 125 


iti 
CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 
RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 


April 21, 1992 — Plaintiffs’ Complaint filed in the Cir- 
cuit Court for Jefferson County, Alabama. 


May 29, 1992 — Answer filed by Defendants Jefferson 
County and Randy Godeke. 


June 4, 1992 — Motion to Intervene filed by Birming- 
ham-Jefferson Civic Center Authority, together with An- 
swer as Defendant. 


June 4, 1992 — Motion for Summary Judgment filed 
by Defendants Jefferson County and Randy Godeke. 


June 19, 1992 — Order of Recusal entered by original 
Circuit Judge, requesting appointment of a Circuit Judge 
from outside the Tenth Judicial Circuit (Jefferson 
County). 


April 8, 1993 — Original Order entered by Circuit 
Judge, John Rochester (specially sitting because of 
recusal of original judge), denying Defendants’ Motion 
for Summary Judgment as to the Plaintiffs’ federal consti- 
tutional claims and granting said motion as to the Plain- 
tiffs’ state claims. 

ust 18, 1993 — Defendants filed Motion to Vacate 
ore because parties did not receive timely notice 
of Citcuit Court's order with respect to summary judg- 
ment. 


August 18, 1993 — Defendants filed Request for Certi- 
fication to Appeal Interlocutory Order as basis for ap- 
pealing the Circuit Court's order denying Defendants’ 


iv 
CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF 


RELEVANT DOCKET ENTRIES 
(Continued) 


Motion for Summary Judgment as to the Plaintiffs’ fed- 
eral constitutional claims. 


November 17, 1993 — Circuit Court vacated original 
order with respect to Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
Judgment, entered new Order denying said motion as to 
the Plaintiffs’ federal constitutional claims and granting 
said motion as to Plaintiffs’ state claims, and entered Or- 
der certifying questions for interlocutory appeal to Su- 
preme Court of Alabama. 


January 6, 1994 — Supreme Court of Alabama granted 
permission for an interlocutory appeal of the questions 
certified by the Circuit Court. 


March 31, 1995 — Supreme Court of Alabama re- 
leased its opinion and judgment. 


April 14, 1995 — Plaintiffs filed Application for Re- 
hearing before Supreme Court of Alabama. 


June 9, 1995 — Application for Rehearing denied by 
Supreme Court of Alabama. 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF JEFFERSON COUNTY, 
ALABAMA 


JASON RICHARDS and FANNIE HILL, individually and 


on behalf of all employees, excluding employees of the 
United States of America, who are subject to the Jeffer- 
son County, Alabama occupational tax which is more 

i described by this complaint; and GEORGE 
DAVID DYKES and JOAN FOLEY DYKES, individually 
and on behalf of all employees of the United States who 
are subject to the Jefferson County, Alabama occupa- 
tional tax which is more particularly described by this 
complaint, 

Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, a political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, and RANDY GODEKE, individually 
and in his official capacity as Director of the Department 
of Revenue for Jefferson County, Alabama, and as succes- 
sor in office to C. H. Ritchie, former Director of the 
Department of Revenue for Jefferson County, Alabama 


Defendants.’ 


COMPLAINT 
Filed April 21, 1992 


Plaintiffs, by and through their undersigned counsel, 
complain and allege as follows: 


‘All pleadings and orders contained in this Joint Appendix were 
originally filed in this case, except those items preceded by the cap- 
tion for a different case. 


2 
JURISDICTION AND VENUE 


1. Jurisdiction of this Court is invoked pursuant to 
Rule 57, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure and 42 U.S.C. 
1983, as this is a civil action arising under the laws and 
Constitution of the United States. This action involves a 
violation of federal law for which 42 U.S.C. 1983 provides 
a remedy, and to which Rule 57 of the Alabama Rules of 
Civil Procedure is applicable. A question of intergovern- 
mental immunity arising under the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. 
101, et seq, is presented by Plaintiffs Dykes individually, 
and on behalf of all similarly situated federal employees. 
Venue lies in the Circuit Court for Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, the tax challenged by this action being levied and 
collected by Jefferson County, Alabama, against and from 
plaintiffs, and similarly situated class members within Jef- 
ferson County, Alabama. 


PARTIES 

2. Plaintiff Jason Richards is a courier privately em- 
ployed by a law firm in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is 
a resident citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; Fannie 
Hill is a domestic servant privately employed in commer- 
cial buildings in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a resi- 
dent citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; they bring this 
action individually on their own behalf, and in a repre- 
sentative capacity on behalf of all other employees in 
Jefferson County, Alabama, other than employees of the 
United States of America, who have been subject to the 
levy, collection and payment of taxes established by Jef- 
ferson County Ordinance 1120, commonly known as the 
Jefferson County Occupational Privilege Tax (“the occu- 
pational tax”) since January 1, 1988. George David Dykes 
is a Reclamation Specialist employed by the United States 
of America in the Office of Surface Mining, Department 
of the Interior in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a 


3 


resident citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; Joan Foley 
Dykes is a Registered Nurse employed by the United 
States of America in the Department of Veterans’ Affairs 
in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a resident citizen of 
Jefferson County, Alabama; they bring this action indi- 
vidually on their own behalf, and in a representative ca- 
pacity on behalf of all other employees of the United 
States of America, who have been subject to the levy, 
collection and payment of the occupational tax since 
January 1, 1988. Plaintiffs Jason Richards, Fannie Hill, 
and Joan Foley Dykes have been required by their em- 
ployers to pay the occupational tax at all times relevant to 
these proceedings, continuously since January |, 1988, 
when the occupational tax became effective. Plaintiff 
George David Dykes was required by his employer to pay 
the occupational tax for approximately one year after 
enactment of the occupational tax, after which he re- 
fused to continue to do so, based upon the authorities 
cited herein. 


CLASS ACTION AVERMENTS 


3. This lawsuit is brought by plaintiffs as a class action, 
on their own behalf and on behalf of all others similarly 
situated, under the provisions of Rule 23(a) and Rule 
23(b)(1) of the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure for 
injunctive and declaratory relief, and for an order award- 
ing members of the plaintiff classes compensatory dam- 
ages in sums equal to the amounts of taxes illegally lev- 
ied, collected and paid by them, and for relief incident 
and subordinate thereto, including costs and attorneys 
fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1988, and such other authori- 
ties as shall be determined applicable to this action. 

4. The classes represented by plaintiffs in this action, 
and of which plaintiffs themselves are members, consist 
of all persons subject to the occupational tax, both fed- 
eral and non-federal employees, who have been subject 


4 


to its levy, collection and payment since January 1, 1988, 
when the occupational tax became effective. 


5. The exact number of members of the classes, as 
herein identified, is not known, but it is estimated that 
there are thousands of members of each class. The 
classes are so numerous that joinder of individual mem- 
bers herein is impracticable. 


6. There are common questions of law and fact in the 
action that relate to and affect the rights of each member 
of the classes represented by the named plaintiffs and the 
relief sought is common to both classes, namely a decla- 
ration that the occupational tax is unconstitutional. 


7. The claims of plaintiffs, who are representatives of 
the class herein are typical of the claims of the classes 
they represent, in that the claims of all members of the 
classes, including plaintiffs, depend on a showing of the 
unconstitutionality of the occupational tax in a manner 
which is beneficial to each. There is no conflict as be- 
tween any individual named plaintiff and any other mem- 
ber of either class with respect to this action, or with 
respect to the relief sought herein. The Dykes Class of 
federal employees are beneficiaries of federal and state 
statutes which prohibit discrimination in a manner which 
is consistent with the general prohibition of discrimina- 
tion applicable to the Richards/Hill Class of non-federal 
employees, and both classes are protected equally by the 
equal protection and due process clauses of the Four- 
teenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States, and the state laws cited herein. 


8. The named plaintiffs are the representative parties 
for their respective classes, and are able to, and will, fairly 
and adequately protect the interests of the classes they 
represent. The attorneys for plaintiffs are experienced 
and capable in litigation in the field of constitutional, tax 
and civil rights claims, and have successfully represented 
claimants in other litigation of this nature. 


5 


ALLEGATIONS OF FACT 

9. On or about January 1, 1988, Defendant Jefferson 
County levied and began collecting, and Plaintiffs and 
the classes they represent began involuntarily paying, the 
occupational tax, which was described by Defendant as a 
“license or privilege tax on natural persons engaged in 
any vocation, occupation, calling or profession who are 
not required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 
the state or county.” A copy of the occupational tax ordi- 
nance is attached to this complaint, and made a part 
hereof as Exhibit A. 

10. The occupational tax is calculated as one-half of 
one percent of the gross earnings of plaintiffs and mem- 
bers of both classes, but is characterized by Defendant as 
a license or privilege tax, rather than an income tax. 
Specifically the taxing ordinance provides: 


It shall be unlawful for any person to engage In 
or follow any vocation occupation, calling or 
profession as defined in Section | within the 
County on and after the Ist day of January, 
1988, without paying license fees to the County 
for the privilege of engaging in or following 
such vocation, occupation, calling or profes- 
sion, which license fees shall be measured by 
one-half percent (1/2%) of the gross receipts of 
each such person. 


11. The taxing ordinance also defines gross receipts 
and compensation, as follows: 


The words “gross receipts” and “compensation” 
shall have the same meaning, and both words 
shall mean and include the total gross amount 
of all salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses or 
other money payment of any kind, or any other 
considerations having monetary value, which a 
person receives from or is entitled to receive 
from or be given credit for by his employer for 


6 


any work done or personal services rendered in 
any vocation, occupation, calling or profession, 
including any kind of deductions before “take 
home” pay is received; but the words “gross re- 
ceipts” and compensation shall not mean or in- 
clude amounts paid to traveling salesmen or 
other workers as allowance or reimbursement 
for traveling or other expenses incurred in the 
business of the employer, except to the extent 
of the excess of such amounts over such ex- 
penses actually incurred and accounted for the 
by employee to the employer. 


7 


County by any of the following: Chapter 12, Ar- 
ticle 2, Title 40; Sections 40-21-50, 40-21-52, 53, 
54 and 55; 40-21-57, 58, 59 and 60; 40-16-6; and 
27-4-9 of the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 


and also includes within its ambit all federal employees 
represented here by Plaintiffs Dykes, as follows: 


The words “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” shall also mean and include the 
holding of any kind of office or position either 
by election or appointment, by any federal, 
state, county or city officer or employee where 
the services of such official or employee are ren- 


12. The occupational tax carves out of its scope, by 
way of its definition of “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” a substantial array of persons, as follows: 


dered within Jefferson County, Alabama. 
13. The occupational tax broadly defines “employer” 


The words “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” shall mean the doing of any kind of 
work, the rendering of any kind of personal ser- 
vices, or the holding of any kind of position or 
job within Jefferson County, Alabama, by any 
clerk, laborer, tradesman, manager, official or 
other employee, including any non-resident of 
Jefferson County who is employed by any em- 
ployer as defined in this section, where the rela- 
tionship between the individual performing the 
services and the person for whom such services 
are rendered is, as to those, services, the legal 
relationship of employer and employee, includ- 
ing also a partner of a firm or an officer of a 
firm or corporation, if such partner or officer 
receives a salary for his personal services ren- 
dered in the business of such firm or corpora- 
tion, but they shall not mean or include domes- 
tic servants employed in private homes and shall 
not include businesses, professions or occupa- 
tions for which license fees are required to be 
paid under any General License Code of the 
County or to the State of Alabama or the 


to “mean and inciude any person, business, firm, corpo- 
ration, partnership, association or any other kind of orga- 
nization who or that employs any person in any vocation, 
occupation, calling or profession in Jefferson County, 
Alabama, within the meaning of subsection (B) of Sec- 
tion 1 of this Ordinance.” (This subsection is set forth in 
full at paragraph 12 of this complaint). Defendant, by 
and through its Director of Revenue and County Attor- 
ney, has interpreted “employer” to include the United 
States of America, and “employee” to include all federal 
employees in Jefferson County, including all United 
States District Judges in the Northern District. 


14. The occupational tax by its terms, and in actual 
practice, exempts from its levy, collection and payment 
businesses and vocations or occupations listed at Chapter 
12, Article 2, Title 40, Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, 
which range from attorneys, certified public accountants, 
dentists and physicians to blueprint makers, casket manu- 
facturers, pig iron storage operators, lightning rod in- 
stallers and snuff retailers, and it includes a specific ex- 
emption for domestic servants employed in private 
homes. By its terms and in actual practice, it taxes all 


—— 


8 


federal employees, including all United States District 
Judges in the Northern District of Alabama, all Circuit, 
District and Probate Judges in Jefferson County, and an 
array of other occupations, including couriers, secretar- 
ies, skilled and unskilled laborers, police officers, busi- 
ness executives, teachers and domestic servants not em- 
ployed in private homes. 

15. The net effect, dollarwise, of the occupational tax, 
is an absurdity which allows, by way of example, physi- 
cians and attorneys earning hundreds of thousands of 
dollars a year to pay a license fee of $150.00 or less and 
avoid the occupational tax — which would be levied at 
more than ten times the amount of the license fee paid 
by these high income professionals. In all cases, the occu- 
pational tax imposes upon those citizens against whom it 
is levied and collected a percentage of income tax which 
is substantially more than the license fees paid by simi- 
larly situated persons exempted from its burden. 


16. The occupational tax, on its face and in actual 
practice, is arbitrary and capricious, and discriminatory 
in a manner which defies logic and, insofar as federal 
employees are concerned, 4 U.S.C. 111. The array of per- 
sons subject to the occupational tax, when compared 
with the array of persons exempted from the tax, and the 
concomitant disparity in taxes paid by and between occu- 
pations in Jefferson County, Alabama which fall within 
and without the burden of the occupational tax, render 
it irrational, unduly burdensome, and violative of the 
equal protection clause and the due process clause of 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States. 


17. The content, nature and characteristics of the em- 
ployment of Plaintiffs Dykes, Richards and Hill, and all 
the members of the classes they represent, are neither 
reasonably, rationally or fairly different, nor profession- 
ally distinct, from the content, nature and characteristics 


9 


of the employment of the above described persons ex- 
empt from the occupational tax, and the economic bur- 
den thrust upon them by Defendant, relative to those 
exempted, is substantial and absurd. 


18. The irrationality and unconstitutionality of the oc- 
cupational tax is well known to the Defendant's officers 
and agents responsible for its administration and collec- 
tion, and has resulted in their adoption of a policy of 
further exempting from its levy and collection federal 
employees who refuse to pay it. This pay-if-you-wish 
policy is itself arbitrary and capricious, irrational, indica- 
tive of Defendant’s callous disregard of the constitutional 
rights of other federal and private employees from whom 
the tax is collected, and demonstrative of Defendant's 
cognizance of the constitutional defects complained of 
herein. 


19. Plaintiffs aver that unless Defendant is enjoined 
and restrained by the court from enforcing the occupa- 
tional tax ordinance, they will suffer economic injury. 


COUNT ONE 


DYKES CLASS BUCK ACT CLAIMS 
AND FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS 


20. Plaintiffs Dykes, individually and on behalf of the 
above described class of employees of the United States 
which they represent, claim Defendants, a political subdi- 
vision of the State of Alabama and its Director of Rev- 
enue, acting by and through their County Attorney, and 
such other administrative officers as have acted and con- 
tinue to act in concert with them, were and are acting 
under color of a statute, ordinance, regulation, custom 
or usage of the State of Alabama in subjecting its citizens 
described herein to a deprivation of rights, privileges or 
immunities secured by the Constitution and laws of the 
United States, specifically 4 U.S.C. 111 and the due pro- 


10 


cess and equal protection clauses of the Constitution of 
the United States. 


21. The occupational tax violates the equal protection 
guaranties of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution and 4 U.S.C. 111 by unreasonably and 
arbitrarily favoring the above described state, local and 
private employees who are exempted from its purview in 
the unequal manner described above while taxing the 
similarly situated federal employees represented by Plain- 
tiffs Dykes as described herein. 


22. The occupational tax has been previously chal- 
lenged in this court on non-federal and other state law 
grounds, and, its measurement by a percentage of pay or 
compensation for personal service as described by 4 
U.S.C. 111 notwithstanding, been declared to be a li- 
cense or privilege tax rather than an income tax. 
Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). 
In the trial court in Bedingfield, supra, the plaintiff initially 
asserted that the occupational tax was, under state law, 
an illegal income tax; the trial court rejected that claim, 
and it was abandoned on appeal. 


23. Plaintiffs Dykes and their similarly situated federal 
employee class members also claim the occupational tax 
is so arbitrary and irrational, as described herein, as to 
violate the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment to the Constitution of the United States, both on its 
face and in its application to both classes of taxpayers 
bringing this action. 


COUNT TWO 


RICHARDS/HILL CLASS FEDERAL CLAIMS 
24. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill, individually and on 
behalf of the class of non-federal employees they repre- 
sent, claim Defendants, a political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, and its Revenue Commissioner, acting 


11 


in concert with their County Attorney, and such other 
administrative officers as have acted and continue to act 
in concert with them, were and are acting under color of 
a statute, ordinance, regulation, custom or usage of the 
State of Alabama in subjecting or causing its citizens de- 
scribed herein to a deprivation of rights, privileges or 
immunities secured by the Constitution and laws of the 
United States, specifically the equal protection clause of 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States. 


25. The occupational tax violates the equal protection 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution 
of the United States by discriminating against Plaintiffs 
Richards and Hill, and the class of similarly situated non- 
federal employees they represent, a class against whom it 
has been and is now levied and collected, in a manner 
which is not only arbitrary and irrational, as described 
herein, but which also creates an unjust, unreasonable 
and improper classification of citizens subject to the tax. 
There is no legitimate difference between Plaintiffs 
Richards and Hill, and the class of non-federal employees 
they represent and the above described exempted em- 
ployees which is related to any legitimate government 
object or purpose, and the arbitrariness and capricious- 
ness of selection of the Richards/Hill class by Defendant 
to pay the occupational tax is clear upon the face of the 
taxing ordinance and in its implementation by Defen- 
dant. Persons engaged in the same businesses as Richards 
and Hill, and the members of the class they represent are 
granted exemption privileges by Defendant under em- 
ployment conditions which are the same as those experi- 
enced by Richards, Hill and the Richards/Hill class, 
while the Richards/Hill class is contemporaneously, arbi- 
trarily and unreasonably — in the context of the equal 
protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Constitution of the United States — taxed. 


12 


26. The occupational tax has been previously chal- 
lenged in the state courts on other state law grounds, 
and, its measurement by a percentage of pay or compen- 
sation for personal service notwithstanding, been de- 
clared to be a license or privilege tax rather than an 
income tax. Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 
(Ala. 1988). In the trial court in Bedingfield, supra, the 
plaintiff initially asserted that the occupational tax was, 
under state law, an illegal income tax; the trial court 
rejected that claim, and it was abandoned on appeal. 
Additionally, these federal constitutional claims are 
joined in this action with federal Buck Act claims which 
present a related federal statutory question under federal 
law. 


27. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill and their similarly situ- 
ated non-federal employee class members also claim the 
occupational tax is so arbitrary and irrational, as de- 
scribed herein, as to violate the due process clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States, both on its face and in its application to 
both classes of taxpayers bringing this action. 


COUNT THREE 


DYKES CLASS PENDENT STATE LAW CLAIMS 


28. Plaintiff Dykes, individually and on behalf of the 
above described class of employees of the United States 
which they represent, claim the occupational tax violates 
Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3, which provides that 
the salaries, fees, commissions or other income of offic- 
ers or agents of the United States or its agencies and 
instrumentalities or its contractees, received from the 
United States or from its agencies and instrumentalities, 
shall be subject to income taxes levied by the state of 
Alabama as other income is taxed, but without discrimi- 
nation, and only to the same extent and in the same 


13 


manner as other income is taxed, insofar as the State of 
Alabama may be constitutionally or legally authorized to 
tax such income. 

29. The Alabama Constitution prohibits cities and 
counties from collecting income taxes, hence Defen- 
dant’s designation of the occupational tax as a license or 
privilege tax, despite its measurement by a percentage of 
gross income or gross receipts. 

30. The occupational tax, as a license tax measured by 
a percentage of gross income or gross receipts, autho- 
rized by a general law of the State of Alabama, is never- 
theless subject to the “without discrimination” prohibi- 
tion of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3, and that code 
section's requirement that it be collected “only to the 
same extent and in the same manner as other income is 
taxed.” Plaintiffs Dykes and the class of federal employ- 
ees they represent, based upon the above described alle- 
gations regarding persons exempted from paying the oc- 
cupational tax, aver that they have been discriminated 
against and required to pay taxes to a different extent 
and in a different manner from their incomes in viola- 
tion of Code of Ala. 40-18-3 and the due process and 
equal protection provisions of the Constitution of Ala- 
bama of 1901. 


COUNT FOUR 


RICHARDS/ HILL CLASS PENDENT STATE CLAIMS 


31. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill, individually and on 
behalf of the class of non-federal employees subject to 
the occupational tax which they represent, aver that the 
occupational tax discriminates against non-federal em- 
ployees, as described above, in a manner which violates 
the due process and equal protection provisions of the 
Constitution of Alabama of 1901. 


14 
PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, Plaintiffs pray that the Court grant and 
award them the following relief: 


A. That a hearing be set as soon as practicable after 
commencement of this action, under Rule 23(c) (1), Fed- 
eral Rules of Civil Procedure, to determine by order 
whether this action is to be maintained as a class action, 
and whether certification should be conditional, and 
whether the Richards’ and Dykes’ classes should be certi- 
fied as sub-classes pursuant to Rule 23(c)(4)(B), Ala- 
bama Rules of Civil Procedure. 


B. That the Court declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional, as depriving plaintiffs of due process of law 
and equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, vio- 
lative of intergovernmental immunity secured by 4 U.S.C. 
111, violative of the due process and equal protection 
clauses of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and viola- 
tive of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3. 

C. That the Court declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional in its application to plaintiffs, depriving them 
of due process of law and equal protection of the laws 
under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States, violative of intergovernmental immu- 
nity secured by 4 U.S.C. 111, violative of the due process 
and equal protection clauses of the Constitution of Ala- 
bama of 1901, and violative of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 
40-18-3 by virtue of Defendants’ policy of allowing taxpay- 
ers who disagree with the tax to disregard it while insist- 
ing upon its payment by those who cannot persuade their 
employers to cease payroll deductions or who otherwise 
lack the necessary clout with Defendants to prevent its 
levy and collection. 


D. That the Court award plaintiffs, as compensatory 
damages suffered as a result of Defendant's deprivations 


15 
of the constitutional rights described herein, a sum equal 
to the amount of tax each has paid to the Defendant 
since January |, 1988. 

E. That the Court enjoin and restrain Defendant from 
continued deprivations of the constitutional rights de- 
scribed herein by way of the occupational tax. 

F. That the Court allow plaintiffs and their counsel all 
costs in this proceeding and payment of a reasonable 
attorneys fee, determined by 42 U.S.C. 1988 and/or pur- 
suant to equitable common fund principles to attorneys 
for plaintiffs and the classes represented by them. 

G. That the Court award plaintiffs such other and 
further relief as the Court, after a full hearing, deems 


appropriate. 
{Subscription of Attorney Omitted in Printing] 
*_*s eee * 


ANSWER 


Filed May 29, 1992 
{Caption Omitted in Printing] 

Come now the Defendants, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, a political subdivision of the State of Alabama, and 
Randy Godeke, individually, and in his official capacity as 
Director of the Jefferson County, Alabama, Department 
of Revenue, and for answer to the Complaint state as 
follows: 


FIRST DEFENSE 
Admission and Denial 

1. For answer to paragraph | of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs attempt to invoke the jurisdic- 
tion of this Court pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, 4 U.S.C. 
§ 101 and Rule 57, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure. 
Defendants admit that Jefferson County, Alabama, is the 
proper venue for this case. 


16 


2. For answer to paragraph 2 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants demand strict proof in that Defendants are without 
knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief as to 
the truth of the allegations regarding residence and em- 
ployment of Jason Richards, Fannie Hill, George David 
Dykes and Joan Foley Dykes. Defendants state that they 
are without sufficient information to form a belief as to 
the truth of the remaining allegations of paragraph 2 of 
the Complaint and demand strict proof. 


3. For answer to paragraph 3 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs attempt to invoke the provi- 
sions of Rule 23, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure. 


4. For answer to paragraph 4 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs are subject to the Jefferson 
County occupational tax. 


5. For answer to paragraph 5 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that there are numerous taxpayers. 


6. For answer to paragraph 6 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants deny that the Jefferson County occupational tax is 
unconstitutional. 


7. For answer to paragraph 7 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants deny that the occupational tax is unconstitutional. 
Defendants state that they are without information and 
belief as to any conflicts which may or may not exist 
between Plaintiffs and demand strict proof. 


8. For answer to paragraph 8 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants state that they are without knowledge or informa- 
tion sufficient to form a belief as to the truth of the 
allegations contained therein and demand strict proof. 


9. For answer to paragraph 9 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that on or about January 1, 1988, Jefferson 
County, Alabama, began to levy and collect the occupa- 
tional tax. Defendants deny that Plaintiffs paid said tax 
involuntarily. For answer to the remaining portion of 
paragraph 9 of the Complaint, Defendants plead the lan- 


17 


guage of the occupational tax ordinance which is at- 
tached hereto as Exhibit “A” and Act No. 406, Legislature 
1967, attached as Exhibit “B”. 

10. For answer to paragraph 10 of the Complaint, 
Defendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 
County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit “A” and which speaks for itself. 

11. For answer to paragraph 11 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 
County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit “A” and which speaks for itself. 

12. For answer to paragraph 12 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 
County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit “A” and which speaks for itself. 

13. Admitted. 

14. For answer to paragraph 14 and 15, Defendant 
states as follows: 

The Jefferson County Occupational Tax Ordinance 
No. 1120 comports with the express authority granted to 
the Jefferson County Commission by Act No. 406, Legis- 
lature of Alabama, 1967 (“Act No. 406"). Act No. 406 
reflects an acknowledgment of the Alabama Legislature 
that numerous persons, corporations, firms, associations 
or entities were already required by State law to pay a 
license or privilege tax to either the State of Alabama or 
to the County pursuant to Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51; 
Sections 176, 177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429 and 
826 in Title 51 of the Code of Alabama of 1940, as 
amended. Act No. 406 authorized the County Commis- 
sion to levy a license or privilege tax upon any person, 
corporation, firm, association or other entity and busi- 
ness, vocation, occupation, calling or profession that is 
not required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 
either the State of Alabama or the County by any of the 
foregoing provisions of the Code of Alabama. 


18 


The legislature in Section 6, Act No, 406, further lim- 
ited the authority granted to the County Commission by 
declaring that: 


Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied by 
the governing body of the county on any person 
for engaging in any business shall be at a rate 
which is in excess of the rate of license or privi- 
lege tax levied by the largest municipality of the 
county on the same or similar type of business 
activity. 

Accordingly, the Jefferson County Occupational Tax 
ordinance incorporates the same exclusions from its pro- 
visions as are required by Act No, 406. Further, the Jeffer- 
son County Occupational Tax Ordinance specifically ex- 
cludes “domestic servants employed in private homes” 
for the reason that such persons are excluded from the 
occupational tax of the City of Birmingham which is the 
largest municipality located in Jefferson County, as re- 
quired by Section 6, Act No. 406, above. 


15. Defendants deny paragraphs 16 and 17. For fur- 
ther answer thereto, Defendants assert that federal em- 
ployees engaged in a business, vocation, occupation, call- 
ing or profession are treated exactly the same as all other 
persons without regard to the nature of their employer. 
That is, only those federal employees that are not re- 
quired by law to pay any license or privilege tax to either 
the State of Alabama or the County by any of the forego- 
ing quoted provisions are subject to the occupational tax. 


The purpose of Act No. 406 was to authorize the 
County to impose a license or privilege tax upon persons 
who are engaging in such businesses, vocations, occupa- 
tions, callings and professions without paying any license 
tax through either the State or County. 

Additionally, the rate of the Jefferson County Occupa- 
tional Tax is exactly the same for all persons subject 


19 


thereto. Said rate is .05 percent of the gross receipts of 
such persons earned in Jefferson County, There is no 
difference in rate between persons employed by the fed- 
eral government and all other persons who are subject to 
the tax. 

16. Defendants deny paragraph 18. For further answer 
Defendants assert that Defendants have instituted a rea- 
sonable and orderly procedure to effect collection of the 
occupational tax. Substantial start up work and effort has 
been required to develop the required information so as 
to identify those persons subject to the tax and to initiate 
tax withholding procedures by employers in the County. 
Substantial efforts were required to achieve such with- 
holding action by the federal employers in Jefferson 
County. No exceptions from the tax beyond those re- 
quired by Act No. 406 have been established or allowed. 
A program to collect arrearages from persons who have 
failed or refused to pay the tax as required by law is 
ongoing. 

17. Defendants deny paragraph 19. 

18. For answer to paragi aph 20 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants deny that they have deprived Plaintiffs of any 
right, privilege or immunity secured by the Constitution 
or laws of the United State of America. 

19. Denied. 

20. For answer to paragraph 22 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants admit that the occupational tax at issue in this 
case has been previously challenged in the state courts 
on both federal and state constitutional claims. Defen- 
dants aver that the occupational tax at issue in this case 
has already been held constitutional by the Alabama Su- 
preme Court in the case Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 
So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). Further, that the Plaintiffs in 
Bedingfield had the opportunity to appeal the Bedingfield 
decision of the Alabama Supreme Court to the Supreme 
Court of the United States, which opportunity said Plain- 


20 


tiffs failed to pursue and thereby waived and forfeited 
and which decision of the Alabama Supreme Court is 
now a matter adjudged and conclusive upon and res 
judicata to all of the rights of Plaintiffs asserted herein. 
Defendants deny the remaining allegations of paragraph 
22 of the Complaint. 

21. Denied. 


22. For answer to paragraph 24 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants deny that they have deprived Plaintiffs of any 
right, privilege or immunity secured by the Constitution 
or laws of the United States of America. 

23. Denied. 


24. For answer to paragraph 26 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants admit that the occupational tax at issue in this 
case has been previously challenged in the state courts 
on both federal and state constitutional claims. The Ala- 
bama Supreme Court has held that the occupational tax 
at issue in this case is constitutional. Bedingfield v. Jefferson 
County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). Defendants deny the 
remaining allegations of paragraph 26 of the Complaint. 

25. Denied. 

26. Denied. 

27. Denied. 

28. Denied. 

29. Denied. 

30. Defendants deny each and every remaining allega- 
tion of the Complaint and demand strict proof thereof. 


SECOND DEFENSE 
Res Judicata 


Defendants plead the affirmative defense of res 
judicata as a complete or partial bar to the causes of 
action set forth in the Complaint. 


21 


THIRD DEFENSE 
Collateral Estoppel 
Defendants plead the affirmative defense of collateral 
estoppel to the causes of action set forth in the Com- 
plaint. 
FOURTH DEFENSE 
Non Claim Statute 


Defendants plead the Alabama non claim statute as a 
complete or partial bar to the relief requested in the 
Complaint. 


FIFTH DEFENSE 
Laches 


Defendants plead the defense of laches as a complete 
or partial bar to the causes of action set forth in the 
Complaint. 


SIXTH DEFENSE 
Statute of Limitations 


Defendants plead the applicable statute of limitations 
as a complete or partial bar to the relief sought in the 
Complaint. 


SEVENTH DEFENSE 
No Deprivation of Federally Protected Right 


Defendants aver that Plaintiffs have not been deprived 
of any right, privilege or immunity secured by the Consti- 
tution or laws of the United States of America. 


EIGHTH DEFENSE 
Voluntary Payment 


Defendants aver that all payments made by named 
Plaintiffs have been voluntary. 


NINTH DEFENSE 
No Buck Act Violation 


Defendants plead the provisions of 4 U.S.C. § 106 as a 
defense to Plaintiffs’ Buck Act claims. 


22 


TENTH DEFENSE 
Immunity 


Defendant, Godeke, pleads the defense of immunity 
whether absolute, qualified, good faith or discretionary 
function. 


ELEVENTH DEFENSE 


Waiver 
Defendants plead the affirmative defense of waiver as a 
complete or partial bar to the causes of action set forth 
in the Complaint. 


TWELFTH DEFENSE 
General Defenses 
1. Defendants assert that the Complaint fails to state a 
cause of action upon which relief can be granted. 
2. Defendants plead good faith in all their dealings 
with Plaintiffs. 
3. Defendants plead the general issue. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


see * 


MOTION BY BIRMINGHAM-JEFFERSON 
CIVIC CENTER AUTHORITY 
FOR AN ORDER TO INTERVENE 


Filed June 4, 1992 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


Comes now the Intervenor/Defendant, Birmingham- 
Jefferson Civic Center Authority (“BJCC”), by and 
through the undersigned attorneys, and moves this court 
for leave to intervene pursuant to Rule 24(a)(2), Ala- 
bama Rules of Civil Procedure, or in the alternative, pur- 


23 


suant to Rule 24(b)(2), Alabama Rules of Civil Proce- 
dure, and as grounds in support thereof, states as follows: 


1. That on or about April 21, 1992, the Plaintiffs, Jason 
Richards, Fannie Hill, George David Dykes and Joan 
Foley Dykes (the “Plaintiffs”), filed with this court the 
above referenced matter. 

2. That the Plaintiffs’ complaint seeks to have Ordi- 
nance No. 1120 which was adopted by the Jefferson 
County Commission pursuant to Act No. 406, enacted at 
the 1967 regular session of the Alabama Legislature, as 
amended, (the “Occupational Tax”) declared unconstitu- 
tional as depriving the Plaintiffs of due process of law 
and equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, vio- 
lative of intergovernmental immunities secured by 4 
U.S.C. § 111, violative of the due process and equal pro- 
tection clauses of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, 
and violative of Ala. Code § 40-18-3 (1975). 


3. That Plaintiffs’ complaint seeks an injunction re- 
straining the Defendants from alleged constitutional dep- 
rivations of the Plaintiffs’ constitutional rights described 
in said complaint by way of the Occupational Tax. 

4. That on January 15, 1989, the BJCC issued Capital 
Outlay Special Tax Bonds, Series 1989 in the principle 
amount of $83,710,000.00 for the purpose of providing 
funds to expand and improve portions of the BJCC com- 
plex. See Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center Authority 
Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds, Series 1989 a true and 
correct copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit “A” 
and incorporated herein. fe 


5. That on August 15, 1989, the BJCC issued Capital 
Outlay Special Tax Bonds, Series 1989B in the principle 
amount of $48,670,000.00 for the purpose of providing 
funds to be used to expand and improve portions of the 
BJCC complex. See Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center 
Authority Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds, Series 1989B 


24 


a true and correct copy of which is attached hereto as 
Exhibit “B” and incorporated herein. 


6. That pursuant to that certain Pledge and Appro- 
priation Agreement between the Defendant, Jefferson 
County and the Intervenor, said Defendant appropri- 
ated, pledged and agreed to pay a portion of the pro- 
ceeds of the Occupational Tax issue in this matter to the 
BJCC for repayment of the Series 1989 and Series 1989B 
Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds issued by the BJCC in 
twenty (20) annual payments of $10,000,000.00 begin- 
ning in the year 1989 and ending in the year 2008. See 
attached hereto as Exhibit “C” a true and correct copy of 
said Pledge and Appropriation Agreement between the 
Defendant, Jefferson County and the BJCC. 


7. That the Plaintiffs’ complaint seeks to ultimately 
have declared as unconstitutional and/or unlawful the 
Occupational Tax which is the primary source of revenue 
pledged specifically to satisfy the BJCC’s Series 1989 and 
1989B Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds, and further 
seeks to have Defendant repay to Plaintiffs all payments 
made pursuant to said tax. 


8. That of the total $132,470,000.00 received by the 
BJCC from the issuance of the Series 1989 and Series 
1989B, Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds, approximately 
$125,000,000.00 has either already been spent or con- 
tractually obligated to be paid by the BJCC. 


9. That the BJCC’s Series 1989 and 1989B Capital Out. 
lay Special Tax Bonds which were issued by the BJCC and 
purchased by the bondholders in reliance upon the 
County's obligation to levy and collect the Occupational 
Tax constitute an “interest” which is the subject of the 
action presented by the Plaintiffs’ complaint. 


10. That an order declaring the Occupational Tax un- 
constitutional and/or unlawful, as a practical matter, will 
impair and/or impede the BJCC’s ability to protect its 
interest and the interest of the bondholders. 


25 


11. That attached hereto as Exhibit “D” and incorpo- 
rated herein by reference is the BJCC’s proposed Answer 
to the Plaintiffs’ Complaint. 

12. That defenses asserted in Exhibit “D” presents 
both questions of law and fact common with Plaintiffs’ 
Complaint. 

13. That this motion to intervene is, and has been, 
presented to this Court timely. 

14. That the legal interest of the BJCC will not be ad- 
equately protected by the Defendant. 

WHEREFORE, PREMISES CONSIDERED, the Interve- 
nor/Defendant, the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center 
Authority, respectfully moves this Court for an order al- 
lowing it to intervene into this civil action. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


*euERKHA * 


MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT 


Filed June 4, 1992 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


COME NOW the Defendants, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, a political subdivision of the State of Alabama, and 
Randy Godeke, individually and in his official capacity as 
Director of Revenue of Jefferson County, Alabama and 
hereby Move For Summary Judgment in their favor in accor- 
dance with Rule 56, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure as 
follows. 


The Jefferson County Occupational Tax has already 
been challenged and upheld on both state and federal 
constitutional grounds. In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988) the Alabama Supreme Court 
held that Act 406 and Jefferson County Ordinance 1120 
imposing the occupational tax were constitutional. This 
suit is clearly barred by the doctrine of res judicata. The 


26 


material facts are undisputed. Defendants are entitled to 
a judgment as a matter of law. 

This motion is supported by the Bedingfield opinion 
attached as Exhibit A; excerpts of the Bedingfield com- 
plaints collectively attached hereto as Exhibit B; the trial 
court’s final order in the Bedingfield case attached 
hereto as Exhibit C; excerpts of Bedingfield's appellate 
briefs collectively attached hereto as Exhibit D; Amicus 
Briefs on behalf of the AFL-CIO, Birmingham Area 
Chamber of Commerce, Public Employees Local Union 
1317, and Shelby County, Alabama collectively attached 
hereto as Exhibit E; Alabama Act No. 406, Legislature 
1967 attached as Exhibit F [hereafter referred to as “Act 
No. 406"]; and, Jefferson County Occupational Tax Ordi- 
nance No. 1120 attached as Exhibit G [hereafter referred 
to as “Ordinance No. 1120”. 


FACTS 


1. On September 28, 1987 the Jefferson County Com- 
mission adopted Ordinance 1120 levying a county-wide 
occupational tax effective January 1, 1988. 

2. THE PRIOR SUIT. In October, 1987 the City of 
Birmingham, Alabama and Hoyt Bedingfield, individu- 
ally and in his official capacity as Finance Director for the 
City of Birmingham, filed suit in the Tenth Judicial Cir- 
cuit against Jefferson County, Alabama and the Jefferson 
County Commission and alleged that Act No. 406 and 
Ordinance No. 1120 were violative of the state and fed- 
eral constitutions and were, therefore, void. The Verified 
Complaint [attached at Exhibit B) stated a cause of ac- 
tion under the Alabama Declaratory Judgment Act § 6-6 
220, Alabama Code; Sections 44, 45, 71, 104, 105, 212, 
Alabama Constitution; and the equal protection and due 
process clauses of the United States and Alabama Consti- 
tutions. This suit was denominated Case No. CV 87-504 
465. 


27 


3. In October, 1987 Carolyn Phillips, John Rogers and 
Dale Patton, all individuals, filed suit against the Jeffer- 
son County Commission in the Tenth Judicial Circuit 
and also alleged that Act No. 406 and Ordinance No. 
1120 were unconstitutional and void. That case was de- 
nominated Case No. CV 87 504-469, That Complaint al- 
leged that the Act and Ordinance violated Sections 105, 
106, 110, Alabama Constitutional and the due process 
clause, equal protection clause and Fourteenth Amend- 
ment to the United States Constitution. [Complaint at- 
tached as Exhibit B}. 

4. In November, 1987 Phillips, Rogers and Patton 
amended their complaint to expand their federal equal 
protection and due process claims and to add federal 
civil rights claims pursuant to 42 USC § 1983 and 1988. 
{Amended Complaint also attached at Exhibit B). 


5. The cases were consolidated by order of the trial 
court dated November 18, 1987. [Order also attached as 
Exhibit B}. 

6. The consolidated cases were tried on December 2, 
1987 and final judgment in favor of the County was en- 
tered on December 11, 1987. [Final Order attached as 
Exhibit C}. 

7. The consolidated cases were appealed to the Ala- 
bama Supreme Court. In their brief, Appellants argued 
that Act No. 406 and Ordinance No. 1120 violated the 
federal and state constitutions. [Excerpts of Bedingfield 
brief attached as Exhibit D}. 

8. The Alabama Supreme Court permitted amicus 
briefs from the Birmingham Area Chamber of Com- 
merce, the Alabama AFL-CIO, the Laborers Interna- 
tional Union of North America, Local 1317, and Shelby 
County, Alabama. All of the amicus briefs asserted 4ed- 
eral equal protection and state constitutional challenges 
against the occupational tax. [Amicus Briefs attached as 
Exhibit E}. 


28 


9. On May 20, 1988 the Alabama Supreme Court re- 
leased its opinion wherein it affirmed the trial court and 
held that Act No. 406 and Ordinance No. 1120 were 
constitutional. [Bedingfield opinion attached hereto as 
Exhibit A}. 


INTRODUCTION 


This is a tax case. Plaintiffs assert causes of action un- 
der the Alabama Declaratory Judgment Act; the equal 
protection clause of the United States Constitution; 42 
USC § 1983; and the Buck Act — 4 USC § 101 et seq. 

As set forth below, this action is barred by the Doctrine 
of Res Judicata. The occupational tax at issue has already 
been challenged on both federal and state constitutional 
grounds and has been upheld by the Alabama Supreme 
Court. The material facts are undisputed. Accordingly, 
the County is due the entry of summary judgment in its 
favor. 


ARGU MENT 


The elements of the affirmative defense of res judicata 
are: (1) a prior judgment on the merits; (2) rendered by 
a court of competent jurisdiction; (3) substantial identity 
of the parties; and (4) substantially same cause of action. 
Baker v. City of Guntersville, 1992 WL 69934 (Ala. Civ. App. 
April 10, 1992), adopting, NAACP v. Hunt, 891 F.2d 1555 
(11th Cir. 1990); Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 
So.2d 723 (Ala. 1990). These elements are discussed as 
follows. 


1. PRIOR JUDGMENT 

Clearly, the Bedingfield trial court and Supreme Court 
rendered prior judgments on the merits. 

2. COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION 


Clearly, the trial court and Alabama Supreme Court 
had jurisdiction over the Bedingfield case. 


29 
3. SUBSTANTIAL IDENTITY OF PARTIES 
In Dairyland, supra, the Supreme Court held that: 
[T]he party identity criterion of res judicata 
does not require complete identity, but only 
that the party against whom res judicata is as 
serted was either a party or in privity with a party 
to the prior action or that the non-party’s inter- 
ests were adequately represented by a party in 
the prior suit, and the relationship between the 
party and non-party is not so attenuated as to 
violate due process. 
566 So.2d at 725, 726, citing, Whisman v. Alabama Power 
Co., 512 So.2d 78, 82 (Ala. 1987). 


In NAACP v. Hunt, supra, the Eleventh Circuit applied 
Alabama res judicata law to bar a second suit challenging 
the display of the Confederate battle flag on the Alabama 
capitol. The Court defined privity as “a relationship be- 
tween one who is sufficiently close so as a judgment for 
or against the party should bind or protect the 
nonparty.” 891 F.2d at 1560. The court further held: 
privity exists where the nonparty’s interests were repre- 
sented adequately by the party in the original suit. Privity 
also exists where a party to the original suit is so closely 
aligned to a nonparty’s interest as to be his virtual repre- 
sentative. 

891 F.2d at 1560, citing, United Merchants v. Sanders, 508 
So.2d 689, 692 (Ala. 1987). 

The “interests” of Hoyt Bedingfield, Carolyn Phillips, 
John Rogers, Dale Patton, the City of Birmingham, the 
Birmingham Area Chamber of Commerce, the AFL-CIO, 
the Public Employees Local 1317 and the citizens of 
Shelby County, Alabama are identical to the interests of 
the named plaintiffs in the instant suit. The former 
Plaintiff's sought to avoid payment of the County occupa- 
tional tax. The current Plaintiffs seek to avoid payment of 


30 


the occupational tax. Clearly, the former plaintiffs inter- 
ests were “so closely aligned with (current plaintiffs) as to 
be their virtual representative.” 

If the former Plaintiffs had prevailed, the instant plain- 
tiffs would rightfully claim res judicata in a subsequent 
suit against them to compel payment of the tax. Accord- 
ingly, there exists “a relationship between (former plain- 
tiffs) and (current plaintiffs) so as a judgment in favor of 
(former plaintiffs) would have protected (current plain- 
tiffs). The instant plaintiffs would have been protected 
had the Bedingfield Plaintiffs prevailed. Therefore, pursu- 
ant to the tests employed by the Alabama Courts, the 


instant plaintiffs are in privity with the Bedingfield parties. 
4. SUBSTANTIALLY SAME CAUSE OF ACTION 


Res judicata is a defense not only to the precise legal 
theory presented in the prior case, but to all legal theories 
ana claims arising out of the same nucleus of operative fact. 
Baker v. City of Guntersville, supra; NAACP v. Hunt, 891 
F.2d at 1561. The legal theories and claims in the instant 
case clearly arise from the same “nucleus of operative 
fact” as those asserted in Bedingfield (i.e. the levy of an 
occupational tax). All of the theories raised by current 
plaintiffs either were raised or could have been raised by 
former plaintiffs. The Alabama Courts have repeatedly 
held that res judicata bars any claim which was or could 
have been adjudicated in the previous action. Dairyland, 
supra, 566 So.2d at 725. Hughes v. Allenstein, 514 So.2d 
858 (Ala. 1987). 

In NAACP v. Hunt, supra, the Eleventh Circuit, apply- 
ing Alabama res judicata law, held that a second suit to 
remove the confederate flag from the state capitol was 
barred by res judicata despite the fact that the second 
suit contained new constitutional and federal statutory 
claims which were not litigated in the prior case. The 
Court held that “[bJjecause (plaintiff) could have raised 


31 


the same First Amendment and section 1988 claims in 
the first action, the claims are identical. The action is 
thus precluded under res judicata.” 891 F.2d at 1561. 

It is immaterial that current plaintiffs seek money dam- 
ages in addition to equitable relief. In Robinson v. Holley, 
549 So.2d 1 (Ala. 1989), the Supreme Court held that a 
difference in requested relief is not grounds for distin- 
guishing two causes of action for res judicata purposes. 
Robinson I involved the removal of an estate administra- 
tion to the Elmore County Circuit Court in which the 
beneficiary received an adverse declaratory judgment 
and accounting. Robinson I] was a suit in the jefferson 
County Circuit Court wherein the same beneficiary 
brought a fraud action against the executor and trustee 
of the estate. The dismissal of the Jefferson County suit 
on res judicata grounds was affirmed by the Supreme 
Court which ruled that a plaintiff cannot escape the doc- 
trine of res judicata by pleading different causes of action 
or asserting new elements of damages in a second suit. 
The court held: 


The basis of this rule is that a cause of action 
grows out of the wrongful action and not out of 
the various forms of damages that may flow 
from the single wrongful act. Chappell v. Boykin, 
41 Ala. App. 137, 127 So.2d 636 (1960) cert 
denied, 271 Ala. 697, 127 So.2d 641 (Ala. 1961). 


The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the prin- 
cipal test to determine whether two suits involve substan- 
tially the same cause of action is whether the same evi- 
dence would support a recovery in both suits. Garns v. 
South Alabama Production Credit, 5367 So.2d 911 (Ala. 
1989); Dominex Inc. v. Key, 456 So.2d 1047 (Ala. 1984); 
Wheeler v. First Alabama Bank, 364 So.2d 1190 (Ala. 
1978). In Garris, the Court held: 


Regardless of the form of the action, the issue is 
the same when it is supported in both actions by 


32 
substantially the same evidence. If it be so sup- 
ported, a judgment in one action is conclusive 


upon the same issue in any suit, even if the cause 
of action is different. 


537 So.2d at 914. 


The evidence necessary to have Act 406 and Ordi- 
nance No. 1120 declared unconstitutional is the same 
today as it was when Bedingfield filed suit in 1987. The 
facts have not changed. The evidence available to the 
plaintiffs in the earlier case is identical to the evidence 
available to plaintiffs in the instant suit. The Alabama 
Supreme Court has already reviewed that evidence and 
determined that the tax is constitutional. Therefore, it is 
clear that the “substantially same evidence” test is satis- 
fied despite the fact the instant plaintiffs have plead addi- 
tional causes of action beyond those litigased-in the ear- 
lier case. 


CONCLUSION 


As demonstrated above, there was (1) an earlier judg- 
ment on the merits; (2) by a court of competent jurisdic- 
tion; (3) the instant plaintiffs are in privity with the 
former plaintiffs; and (4) the issues in both suits are sub- 
stantially the same. Res judicata bars the relitigation of all 
issues raised in the earlier case and all issues which could 
have been raised in that case. All of the claims asserted by 
Plaintiff were or could have been litigated by the Bedingfield 
plaintiffs. Therefore, this action is barred. 


WHEREFORE, PREMISES CONSIDERED, Defendants 
respectfully request the entry of summary judgment in 
their favor. 


| Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


*eeEKKESE 


33 


Act No. 406 


Enacted at 1967 Regular Session of the 
Legislature of Alabama 


[Title of Act Omitted in Printing] 


Section |. This Act shall apply to any county of the 
State of Alabama having a population of 500,000 or 
more, according to the last or any subsequent federal 
census, and to no other county. 


Section 2. As used in this Act, the following words and 
terms have the meanings hereby ascribed to them; “the 
county” means a county subject to this Act; “the govern- 
ing body” means the governing body of the county, 
whether it be a county commission, board of revenue or 
other governing body; “person” includes any natural per- 
son, corporation, firm, association or other entity; and 
“business” includes business, vocation, occupation, call- 
ing or profession; “license or privilege tax” shall not in- 
clude any sales or use tax. 

Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to equalize the 
burden of taxation by authorizing the county to impose a 
license or privilege tax upon persons now engaging in 
certain businesses without paying any license tax thereon 
to either the state or county. 


Section 4. The governing body of the county is hereby 
authorized to levy a license or privilege tax upon any 
person for engaging in any business for which he is not 
required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 
either the State of Alabama or the county by any of the 
following Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51; Sections 176, 
177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429, and 826 in Title 51 
of the Code of Alabama of 1940 as amended. 


When a person is engaged in more than one business 
for one or more of which a license or privilege tax is 
required to be paid to the State or the county but for one 
or more of which no license or privilege tax is required 


34 


to be paid to the State or county, the county governing 
body shall have the authority to levy a license or privilege 
tax upon that business, or those businesses, for engaging 
in which such person is not required to pay any license 
or privilege tax to the State or county. 

Section 5. The tax hereby levied shall be paid to that 
officer or employee of the county chargeable with the 
duty of collecting license or privilege taxes payable to the 
county. 

Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied by the 
governing body of the county on any person, for engag- 
ing in any business shall be at a rate which is in excess of 
the rate of license or privilege tax levied by the largest 
municipality of the county on the same or similar type of 
business activity. 

Section 7. It is hereby provided that all laws or parts of 
law in conflict with provisions of this Act are hereby re- 
pealed to the extent of such conflict. 

Section 8. The provisions of this Act are severable; and 
should any part of this Act be declared unconstitutional 
or void, such declaration shall not affect the remaining 
provisions. 

Section 9. This Act shall become effective upon its ap- 
proval by the Governor or upon its otherwise becoming a 
law. 


*eeEHEHE SE 


ORDINANCE NO. 1120 


Adopted by the Jefferson County 
Commission on September 29, 1987 


An Ordinance to establish a license or privilege tax on 
persons engaged in any vocation, occupation, calling or 
profession in Jefferson County who is not required by law 
to pay any license or privilege tax to either the State of 
Alabama or the County as set out herein. 


35 


BE IT RESOLVED AND ORDAINED by the Jefferson 
County Commission as follows: 


Section 1. DEFINITIONS. That the following words, 
when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meaning 
ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indi- 
cates or requires a different meaning: 


(A) The word “person” shall mean any natural person. 
Whenever the word “person” is used in any clause pre- 
scribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or 
imprisonment, the work as applied to a partnership or 
other form of unincorporated enterprise shall mean the 
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corpora- 
tions shall mean the officers and directors thereof. 


(B) The words “vocation, occupation, calling and pro- 
fession” shall mean and include the doing of any kind of 
work, the rendering of any kind of personal services, or 
the holding of any kind of position or job within Jeffer- 
son County, Alabama, by any clerk, laborer, tradesman, 
manager, official or other employee, including any non- 
resident of Jefferson County who is employed by any em- 
ployer as defined in this section, where the relationship 
between the individual performing the services and the 
person for whom such services are rendered is, as to 
those services, the legal relationship of employer and em- 
ployee, including also a partner of a firm or an officer of 
a firm or corporation, if such partner or officer receives a 
salary for his personal services rendered in the business 
of such firm or corporation, but they shall not mean or 
include domestic servants employed in private homes 
and shall not include businesses, professions or occupa- 
tions for which license fees are required to be paid under 
any General License Code of the County or to the State 
of Alabama or the County by any of the following: Chap- 
ter 12, Article 2, Title 40; §§40-21-50, 40-21-52, 53, 54 and 
55; 40-21-57, 58, 59, and 60: 40-16-6; and 27-4-9 of the 
Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 


36 


(C) The words “vocation, occupation, calling and pro- 
fession” shall also mean and include the holding of any 
kind of office or position either by election or appoint- 
ment, by any federal, state, county or city officer or em- 
ployee where the services of such official or employee are 
rendered within Jefferson County, Alabama. 

(D) The word “employee” shall mean and include any 
person engaging in or following any vocation, occupa- 
tion, calling or profession within the meaning of subsec- 
tion (B) of Section | of this Resolution and Ordinance. 

(E) The word “employer” shall mean and include any 
person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, associa- 
tion or any other kind of organization who or that em- 
ploys any person in any vocation, occupation, calling or 
profession in Jefferson County, Alabama, within the 
meaning of subsection (B) of Section 1 of this Ordi- 
nance. 

(F) The words “gross receipts” and “compensation” 
shall have the same meaning, and both words shall mean 
and include the total gross amount of all salaries, wages, 
commissions, bonuses or other money payment of any 
kind, or any other consideration having monetary value, 
which a person receives from or is entitled to receive 
from or be given credit for by his employer for any work 
done or personal services rendered in any vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession, including any kind of de- 
ductions before “take home” pay is received; but the 
words “gross receipts” and “compensation” shall not 
mean or include amounts paid to traveling salesmen or 
other workers as allowance or reimbursement for travel- 
ing or other expenses incurred in the business of the 
employer, except to the extent of the excess of such 
amounts over such expenses actually incurred and ac- 
counted for by employee to the employer. 


37 


(G) The word “licensee” shall mean and include any 
person required to file a return or to pay a license fee 
under this ordinance. 

(H) The word “county” shall mean Jefferson County, 
Alabama. 

(1) The words “Director of Revenue” shall mean the 
Director of Revenue of Jefferson County, Alabama. 

(J) The singular shall include the plural and vice 


versa, and the masculine shall include the feminine and 
the neuter. 


Section 2. LICENSE FEES REQUIRED. It shall be un- 
lawful for any person to engage in or follow any vocation, 
occupation, calling or profession as defined in Section 1 
within the County on and after the Ist day of January, 
1988, without paying license fees to the County for the 
privilege of engaging in or following such vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession, which license fees shall be 
measured by one-half percent (1/2%) of the gross re- 
ceipts of each such person. 


Section 3. WHERE WORK DONE OR SERVICES PER- 
FORMED BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE 
COUNTY, In cases where compensation is earned as a 
result of work done or services performed both within 
and without the county, the license fees required under 
this Ordinance shall be computed by determining upon 
the Oath of the employer, or if required by the Director 
of Revenue upon the oath of the employee, that percent- 
age of the compensation earned from the proportion of 
the work which was done or performed within the 
County. 

Section 4. EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD LICENSE 
FEES AND FILE RETURNS. Each employer shall deduct 
from each payment due each employee the amount of 
the license fees measured by one-half per centum (1/ 
2%) of the compensation due each employee beginning 
on the Ist day of January, 1988. The payments required 


38 


to be made on account of such deductions by employers 
shall be made monthly to the County for the monthly 
periods ending January 31, February 28, March 31, April 
30, May 31, June 30, July 31, August 31, September 30, 
October 31, November 30 and December 31st of each 
year, on or before the twentieth day of the month next 
following the end of each such monthly period, and each 
employer shall at the same time make a return in con- 
nection therewith on a form made available to such em- 
ployer by the Director of Revenue at the office of the 
Director of Revenue, provided that, if the total amount 
deducted from payments made to or due all employees 
of an employer is less than fifty ($50.00) dollars during 
each calendar month of the previous calendar year, then 
such employer may elect, for the current calendar year, 
to remit such deductions to the County for the quarterly 
periods ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th 
and December 31st of such following calendar year, on 
or before the twentieth day of the month next following 
the end of each such quarterly period, and each such 
employer shall at the same time make a return in con- 
nection therewith on a form made availa‘¥ic to such em- 
ployer by the Director of Revenue at th: office of Direc- 
tor of Revenue. Provided, however, tout she failure or 
omission by any employer to deduct such license fees 
shall not relieve an employee from the payment of such 
license fees and compliance with the requirements for 
making returns as provided in this Ordinance, or with 
any regulations promulgated under this Ordinance. Each 
employer shall file in the office of the Director of Rev- 
enue on or before January 31, of each year a return on a 
form made available by said Director of Revenue, at the 
office of said Director of Revenue, which return shall 
show the gross amount of compensation of each em- 
ployee, the amount of license fees deducted and paid by 
such employer for all or any part of the preceding calen- 


39 


dar year and the last known address of each such em- 
ployee. Each employer shall keep accurate records of all 
such compensation, deductions, license fees, payments 
and returns. Such records shall be kept and maintained 
by each such employer for not less than five (5) years 
subsequent to the date such compensation was earned. 


Section 5. RETURNS TO BE FILED BY EMPLOYEES. 
When a monthly or quarterly return, as required by Sec- 
tion 4 hereof is not filed by an employer and the license 
fees are not paid to the County by such employer 
monthly as herein provided, the employee for whom no 
return has been filed and no payment has been made 
shall file a return with the Director of Revenue on or 
before the Ist day of the second month next following 
the end of each such monthly or quarterly period, show- 
ing in said return his gross receipts subject to license fees 
for such month or quarter, and he shall also file a return 
with the Director of Revenue on or before January 31st 
of each year thereafter in which his employer has failed 
to file any monthly or quarterly return required in the 
preceding calendar year, showing on said return the 
gross receipts subject to license fees during the preced- 
ing calendar year. If for any reason all license fees of a 
person subject to the provisions of this Ordinance were 
not withheld by his employer from his gross receipts, 
such person shall file each return required by this Sec- 
tion on a form obtainable at the office of the Director of 
Revenue. In addition to the gross receipts earned by him, 
such return shall show such other pertinent information 
as may be required by the Director of Revenue. Each 
person making a return required by the Section shall, at 
the time of filing thereof, pay to the County the amount 
of license fees due under this Ordinance; provided, how- 
ever, that any portion of the license fees deducted at the 
source shall be deducted on the return and only the 
balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of 


40 


filing said return. Each employee shall keep accurate 
records of all such compensation, deductions, license 
fees, payments and returns. Such records shall be kept 
and maintained by each such employee for not less than 
five (5) years subsequent to the date such compensation 
was earned. 


Section 6. DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF REV- 
ENUE. It shall be the duty of the Director of Revenue to 
collect and receive all license fees imposed by this Ordi- 
nance and to keep records showing the amounts received 
by him from each employer. All moneys received by the 
Director of Revenue shall be deposited in a duly ap- 
proved depository. 

Section 7. INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE DI- 
RECTOR OF REVENUE. The Director of Revenue or 
any agent or employee designated by him is hereby au- 
thorized to examine the books, papers and records of 
any employer or supposed employer, or of any license or 
supposed license, in order to determine the accuracy of 
any return made, or if no return was made to ascertain 
the amount of license fees due under the terms of this 
Ordinance by such examination. Each such employer or 
supposed employer or licensee or supposed licensee shall 
give to the Director of Revenue, or to his duly authorized 
agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportuni- 
ties for the making of such examination and investiga- 
tion. The Director of Revenue is hereby authorized to 
examine any person under oath concerning any gross 
receipts which were or should have been shown in a re- 
turn, and to this end he may compel the production of 
books, papers, records and the attendance of all persons 
before him, whether as parties or as witnesses, whom he 
believes to have knowledge of such gross receipts or com- 
pensation. 


Section 8. REGULATIONS MAY BE PROMUL- 
GATED. The Director of Revenue may prescribe, adopt, 


41 


promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regula- 
tions not in conflict with this Ordinance relating to any 
matter or thing pertaining to the administration and en- 
forcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, including 
but not limited to provisions for the re-examination and 
correction of returns as to which overpayment or under- 
payment is claimed or found to have been made, and the 
regulations so promulgated shall be binding upon all lic- 
ensees and employers. 

Section 9. INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL. 
Notwithstanding any resolutions and ordinances to the 
contrary, any information gained by the Director of Rev- 
enue or any other official or agent or employee of the 
County as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings, 
or verifications required or authorized by this Ordinance 
shall be confidential, except for official purposes, or in 
accordance with proper judicial order, or the enforce- 
ment of this Ordinance, and any person or agent divulg- 
ing such information, except as herein permitted, shall 
upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than 
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or to imprisonment of 
not exceeding thirty (30) days, or to both such fine and 
imprisonment. 


Section 10. INTEREST AND PENALTIES. 


(A) All license fees imposed by this Ordinance 
which are delinquent, that is, which remain unpaid after 
they become due shall, subject to the provisions hereinaf- 
ter set out, bear interest at the rate of twelve percentum 
(12%) per annum, and any person who has failed to pay 
such license fees when the same became due shall, sub- 
ject to the provisions hereinafter set out, also be charged 
a penalty of ten percentum (10%) of the amount of such 
unpaid license fees. Any person or employer who fails or 
refuses to withhold any license fees payable under this 
Ordinance, or who fails to pay such fees after withhold- 
ing the same to the County at the time it is due, as pro- 


42 


vided under the provisions of Section 4 hereof, shall be- 
come liable to the County for such fees, as well as for the 
interest thereon at the rate of twelve percentum (12%) 
per annum, and for the aforesaid penalty. Provided, how- 
ever, that the minimum penalty imposed against such 
person or employer shall be Three Dollars ($3.00). Pro- 
vided the Director of Revenue, if a good and sufficient 
reason is shown for the failure to pay the tax within the 
time required, may waive or remit the penalty and inter- 
est, or a portion of either, upon payment of the tax due. 

(B) Any person or employee who shall fail, neglect or 
refuse to pay a license fee as by this Ordinance required, 
or any employer who shall fail to withhold said license 
fees, or to pay over to County such license fees, penalties 
or interest imposed by this Ordinance, or any person 
required to file a return under the provisions of Section 
5 of this Ordinance, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to 
file such return, or any person or employer who shall 
refuse to permit the Director of Revenue or any agent or 
employee designated by him, in writing, to examine his 
books, records and papers for any purpose authorized by 
this Ordinance, or who shall knowingly make any incom- 
plete, false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to 
do anything whatever to avoid the full disclosure of the 
amount of gross receipts or compensation in order to 
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of a license 
fee, shall upon conviction be subject to punishment 
within the limits of and as provided by law for each of- 
fense. Such punishment shall be in addition to the penal- 
ties imposed under subsection (A) of this section. 

Section 11. EXTENSION OF TIME FOR MAKING RE- 
TURN. The Director of Revenue, for good cause, may 
extend the time for making any return required under 
the provisions of this Ordinance, but the time for filing 
any such return shall not be extended for a greater pe- 
riod than thirty (30) days from the day such return is due 


43 


to be made and shall not prevent penalty and interest 
from accruing during the period of such extension. 

Section 12. USE OF LICENSE FEES. All money de- 
rived from license fees under the provisions of this Ordi- 
nance shall be paid to the General Fund of the County 
and expended as authorized by law. 

Section 13. SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Or- 
dinance are severable. If any provision, section, para- 
graph, sentence or part thereof, or the application 
thereof to any employer or licensee or class or persons, 
shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision 
shall not affect or impair the remainder of the Ordi- 
nance, it being the legislative intent to ordain and enact 
each provision, section, paragraph, sentence and part 
thereof, separately and independently of each other. 

Section 14. REPEAL OF RESOLUTION AND ORDI- 
NANCES. All resolutions and ordinances or parts of reso- 
lutions and ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance 
are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 


Section 15. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall 
be in full force and effect on and after January 1, 1988, 
and from year to year thereafter, until repealed. 


ese eee 


44 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 
IN EQUITY 


HOYT BEDINGFIELD, JR., 
individually and in his capacity 
as Acting Director of Finance of the 
City of Birmingham, and THE 
CITY OF BIRMINGHAM, 

Plaintiffs, 


CIVIL ACTION 
NO. 


Vv. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA, 

REUBEN DAVIS, JIM GUNTER, 

JOHN KATAOPODIS, CHRIS 

McNAIR, and DAVID ORANGE 

in their official capacities as 

Commissioners of Jefferson County, 
Defendants. 


VERIFIED COMPLAINT 


1. This is a complaint for a declaratory judgment and 
other equitable relief. 


2. This action is brought pursuant to the Alabama 
Declaratory Judgments Act, Ala. Code § 6-6-220 et seq. 
(1975), and Rules 57 and 65, Alabama Rules of Civil Pro- 
cedure, for a declaratory judgment that Ordinance No. 
1120 adopted by the Jefferson County Commission is 
void and invalid, and if necessary, that Act No. 406 
passed by the Alabama Legislature in 1967 and 
by the Governor on September 7, 1967, is void and in- 
valid to the extent that it supports any comprehensive 
occupational tax on all persons working in Jefferson 
County. Ala. Code § 6-6-223 specifically authorizes the de- 
claratory judgment with respect to such statutes and ordi- 
nances. Plaintiffs allege that there is presently uncer- 
tainty and insecurity as to the rights and legal relations of 


eee 


45 


the parties, as to the matters at issue in this action, and 
that a declaratory judgment is needed to determine 
those rights and legal relations. 

3. Venue is proper in this Court. 

4. Attached hereto as Appendix “A” is Ordinance No. 
1120 adopted by the Jefferson County Commission on or 
about the 29th day of September, 1987 to be effective 
January 1, 1988. Said ordinance purports to establish a 
licensed or privileged tax on persons engaged in any vo- 
cation, occupation, calling or profession in Jefferson 
County who is not required by law to pay any licensed or 
privileged tax to either the State of Alabama or the 
County. 

5. It is the well established law in Alabama that county 
governments lack the authority to impose taxes unless 
specifically authorized by the Legislature. 

6. The defendants or some of them have publicly con- 
tended that Ordinance No. 1120 is authorized by Act 406 
adopted by the Alabama Legislature in 1967 and ap- 
proved by the Governor on September 7, 1967. A copy of 
that Act is attached as Appendix “B”. 

7. During the 1987 regular session of the Alabama 
Legislature, the defendants recognized that they did not 
have authority to enact a comprehensive occupational 
tax like the one purported to be adopted in Ordinance 
No. 1120, and the defendants, or most of them, had pro- 
posed in the Alabama Legislature House Bill No. 941, 
purporting to give them the authority to adopt an occu- 
pational tax. A copy of that bill is attached as Appendix 
“C”. It failed to pass the Alabama Legislature. 

8. If put into effect, Ordinance No. 1120 would have a 
dramatic effect upon the plaintiffs. First with respect to 
plaintiff Bedingfield individually, the occupational tax 
would be taken from his salary. Second, plaintiff 
Bedingfield, as acting Director of Finance of the City of 
Birmingham, needs an immediate declaration as to 


46 


whether Ordinance No. 1120 is valid or constitutional. 
Plaintiff Bedingfield must take steps immediately to 
implement a system to withhold taxes from employees of 
the City under Ordinance No. 1140. If said Ordinance is 
not valid, then it would be improper for him to withhold 
the tax from the many employees of the City. Third, and 
more importantly, the occupational tax would exacerbate 
the problems faced by the City of Birmingham, and its 
residents, in attracting and maintaining jobs, especially 
in light of the strong competition faced by it from areas 
such as north Shelby County in attempting to recruit 
jobs, especially higher paying jobs, from the City of Bir- 
mingham and into the suburban area of north Shelby 
County. The effect of Ordinance 1120 would be not only 
taking jobs from the City of Birmingham but also to 
erode the tax base and to otherwise harm the City and 
the residents of the City of Birmingham. 


9. Plaintiffs need an immediate determination and a 
preliminary injunction against the enforcement of Ordi- 
nance No. 1120. Without such a determination and pre- 
liminary injunction, plaintiffs would suffer irreparable 
harm. First, plaintiff Bedingfield and the City of Birming- 
ham will have to incur the cost of establishing and imple- 
menting a system to withhold taxes from employees of 
the City. If the Ordinance No. 1120 is illegal or unconsti- 
tutional, then plaintiff Bedingfield and the City of Bir- 
mingham would be acting improperly in withholding 
taxes from employees of the City, and may face claims 
against them for doing so. If he refuses to withhold, then 
he faces possible criminal prosecution under §10 of Or- 
dinance No. 1120. 


10. Plaintiffs offer to do equity. 


CLAIM ONE 


10. Paragraphs | through 9 are hereby realleged and 
incorporated herein. 


47 


11. Under Art. IV § 44 and Art. XI § 212 of the Consti- 
tution of Alabama of 1901, Ordinance No. 1120 is an 
unconstitutional effort by the Jefferson County Commis- 
sion to impose a tax upon the citizens of Jefferson 
County and those working in Jefferson County. 


CLAIM TWO 


12. Paragraphs | through 11 are hereby realleged and 
incorporated herein. 

13. Ordinance No. 1120 is not authorized by Act 406 
and is therefore an unauthorized attempt by the Jeffer- 
son County Commission to impose a tax upon the citi- 
zens of Jefferson County and those working in Jefferson 
County. 


CLAIM THREE 


14. Paragraphs | through 13 are hereby realleged and 
incorporated herein. 

15. If Ordinance No. 1120 were authorized by Act 406, 
then Act 406 is unconstitutional based upon any one of 
the following grounds: 

A. Act 406 is unconstitutional local legislation under 
Article IV, §§ 104(15) and 105 of the Constitution of Ala- 
bama of 1901. 

B. Act 406 is a violation of the equal protection re- 
quirements and provisions of the federal and state consti- 
tuuion. 

C. If Act No. 406 were construed to give the defen- 
dants the authority to adopt Ordinance No. 1120, then 
Act 406 is unconstitutional under Article IV, § 45 of the 
Constitution of Alabama of 1901 because the title of the 
bill is not sufficiently descriptive to support a compre- 
hensive occupational tax and the title is not consistent 
with the content of the act. 

D. If Act No. 406 were construed to give the defen- 
dants the authority to adopt Ordinance No. 1120, then 


48 


Act No. 106 is unconstitutional under Article IV, §§ 45 
and 71 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 in that the 
law contains more than one subject. 

E. Act No. 406 is vague and ambiguous and there- 
fore is a violation of the due process requirements of the 
state and federal constitution. 

WHEREFORE, plaintiffs demand judgment against de- 
fendants and request this Court: 

A. To declare that Ordinance No. 1120 is void, in- 
valid, and unconstitutional and to issue preliminary and 
final injunctive relief prohibiting the enforcement of said 
ordinance; 

B. To the extent necessary to declare that Act 406 is 
invalid, void, and unconstitutional and to issue appropri- 
ate injunctive relief prohibiting its enforcement; 

C. To issue such other and further relief as may be 
appropriate and necessary under the circumstances. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Jurat Omitted in Printing] 


Kee K KK 


49 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT 
| FOR 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


CAROLYN PHILLIPS, 

JOHN ROGERS, 

DALE PATTON 
PLAINTIFFS, CASE NO. 

CV 87-504-469 JDC 


VS. 


THE JEFFERSON COUNTY 
COMMISSION 


DEFENDANT. 


i 


AMENDED AND VERIFIED COMPLAINT 
FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 


Filed November 4, 1987 


1. This is a suit for declaratory and injunctive relief 
against the action of the Jefferson County Commission 
levying an occupational tax on employees of Jefferson 
County. 


PARTIES 


2. Plaintiffs Carolyn Phillips, John Rogers, Dale Patton 
are over the ages of nineteen (19) years, employees 
within Jefferson County, and reside in Jefferson County, 
Alabama. 


3. Plaintiffs bring this action in their individual capac- 
ity. 

4. Defendant, the Jefferson County Commission is the 
County's governing body established pursuant to Federal 
Decree of 1985 in the case of Taylor, et al. v. Jefferson 
County Commission and otherwise governed by the gen- 
eral laws of Alabama. 


50 
FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS 


5. On September 29, 1987, Defendant adopted a reso- 
lution levying a county-wide occupational tax to take ef- 
fect January 1, 1988. 

6. Defendant followed Act No. 406 of 1967 State of 
Alabama as authority to impose said occupational tax. 


7. Act No. 406 of 1967 authorizes the governing body 
of any county of the State having a population of 500,000 
or more, according to the last or and subsequent Federal 
Census, to levy a business or privilege tax upon any busi- 
ness, vocation, occupation, calling or profession for 
which a license or privilege tax is not required for either 
the State of Alabama or the county by the laws of the 
State of Alabama, and to limit the amount of any such 
business or privilege tax. 

8. Act No. 406 of 1967, State of Alabama, was enacted 
as a general law. 


9. Section 110 of the Constitution says: “A general law 
within the meaning of this Article is a law which applies 
to the whole state; a local law is a law which applies to any 
political subdivision or subdivisions of the State less than 
the whole; a special or private law within the meaning of 
this Article is one which applies to an individual, associa- 
tion, or corporation.” 

10. Plaintiffs aver that Act No. 406 of 1967 is not a 
general law because of its arbitrary classification. For Act 
No. 406 to be a “general” law, it must have application to 
a shifting class; there must be a possibility of application 
to other counties within the classification fixed by the 
statute. Act No. 406 of 1967 applies ostensibly to Jeffer- 
son County and does not apply to any other county in 
the State of Alabama. 


11. Section 106 of the Constitution provides that no 
local, special, or private law shall be passed on any sub- 


51 


ject without giving the notice as there prescribed, and 
makes it the mandatory duty of the Courts to declare the 
same void if the journals do not affirmatively show that it 
was passed in accordance with the Section. 


12. Act No. 406 of 1967, although passed as a general 
law under Section 110 of the Constitution, is a local law 
and is due to be held void on the basis that the journals 
do not reflect that there was notice of said Act as re- 
quired by Section 106 of the Constitution of Alabama. 


13. Plaintiff avers that Act No. 406 of 1967 is constitu- 
tionally offensive because the classification restriction to 
counties with a population of 500,000 or more residents 
does not bear a reasonable relationship to the purpose of 
the law. Such classification is arbitrary and results in a 
violation of the Constitution of Alabama and of the 
United States. There is no logical relationship between 
the population contained in said Act and the purpose as 
set out in Section One of said Act. 


14. Plaintiffs aver that Act No. 406 of 1967 should be 
declared void for vagueness, inasmuch as its language 
appears to tax certain persons and not tax others. 
Equally, said Act contains a reference to establishing as a 
benchmark the rate of license or privilege tax levied by 
the largest municipality in the county. 


15. Plaintiffs aver that reference to said Act No. 406 of 
1967 authorizing the county to levy a business or license 
fee on those businesses that are not licensed by the 
county or State shows an intention by the Legislature to 
avoid other taxes such as the occupational tax the Defen- 
dant has adopted to take effect January 1, 1988. 


16. Plaintiffs allege that the Defendant is due to be 
enjoined from levying an occupational tax because said 
tax, effective January 1, 1988, will subject their wages to 
confiscation without due process of law as required by 
the Constitution of Alabama and of the United States. 


52 


17. Plaintiffs allege that Act No. 406 of 1967 adopted 
by the Defendant constitutes a denial of equal protection 
in violation of the Fourteenth Amet.iment of the United 
States Constitution. Said Act exempts professional occu- 
pations required by State law to be licensed but does not 
exempt other professional or nonprofessional occupa- 
tions. 


18. Plaintiffs request an expedited hearing of this mat- 
ter. 


19. Plaintiffs allege that they are entitled to Attorney 
fees under 42 U.S.C. 1988 with respect to civil rights 
claims. 


WHEREFORE, for the above reasons Plaintiffs pray 
that this Court will assume jurisdiction and enter a judg- 
ment as follows: 


1. That this Court award a reasonable Attorney fee to 


Plaintiff's lawyers as prevailing parties pursuant to 42 
U.S.C. 1988. 


2. Enter an Order finding that Act No. 406 of 1967 
was not intended to authorize Defendant to levy any tax 
other than on “businesses” that, on its effective date, did 
not pay a license or privilege tax to the state or county 
and permanently enjoin Defendant from levying an occu- 
pational tax on Plaintiffs. 


3. Enter an Order finding that Act No. 406 of 1967 is 
void on its face by not comporting to the requirements of 
Section 106 of the Alabama Constitution which requires 
that the journal of both House and Legislature contain a 
showing of notice and proof of advertising. 


4. Enter an Order finding that the population classifi- 
cation contained in Act No. 406 of 1967 does not bear a 
reasonable relationship to the purpose of said Act and it 
therefore a local law void on its face in violation of Sec- 
tion 106 of the Alabama Constitution. 


53 


5. Enter an Order finding that Act No. 406 of 1967 
violates the due process clause of the Constitution of the 
United States by denying Plaintiffs their right to equal 
protection. 

6. Enter an Order finding that Act No. 406 of 1967 is 
void for vagueness and is unconstitutional on its face. 

7. Enter an Order granting such other relief as the 
Court may deem proper. 

8. Enter an Order taxing cost against Defendant. 


[Subscription of Attorney, Jurat and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


xe KKK K 


IN THE TENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT COURT 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


IN EQUITY 
HOYT BEDEINGFIELD, JR., 
et al., 
Plaintiffs, CIVIL ACTION 
NO. 
v. 87-504-465 JDC 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA, 
et al., 


i 


Defendants. 


CITY PLAINTIFFS’ SUPPLEMENTAL 
MEMORANDUM OF LAW ON EQUAL PROTECTION 
AND ALABAMA CONSTITUTION SECTION 105 


The City Plaintiffs’ here present argument to supple- 
ment that already submitted to the Court by their 


54 


PREHEARING MEMORANDUM. The purpose of this 
memorandum is to focus the Court’s attention on the 
applicability of Alabama Constitution Section 105 and 
the Equal Protection provisions of the federal and Ala- 
bama Constitutions. 


The City’s argument is two-tiered. Firstly, Act 406 is 
infirm as an attempt by the legislature to grant special or 
“local” taxation powers to Jefferson since no rational ba- 
sis exists for distinguishing Jefferson from other County's 
within Alabama. Secondly, the above argument is aug- 
mented by Section 105 considerations. 


We will develop these arguments, in tandem, below. 


PEDDYCOART and EQUAL PROTECTION 


In the area of statutory grants of authority to munici- 
palities or counties based upon population classifica- 
tions, there must exist a reasonable relationship between 
the statute’s purpose and the population classification 
established. If not, the classification will be deemed arbi- 
trary and the statute must fail under Equal Protection 
scrutiny. Dearborn v. Johnson, 234 Ala. 84, 173 So. 864 
(1937); Peddycoart v. City of Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808, 
(Ala. 1978). 

In our case here, we do not have to surmise about the 
possible purpose of Act 406, the purpose of the act is quite 
clearly and simply set out in Section 3 of the act, viz: 


“Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to equalize the 
burden of taxation by ‘authorizing the county to im- 
pose a license or privilege tax upon persons now engag- 
ing in certain businesses without paying any license tax 
thereon to either the state or county.” (emphasis in- 
serted) Act 406 of the 1967 Regular Session of the 
Alabama Legislature. 


Section 4. goes on to identify those “certain businesses”. 


55 


“Section 4. The governing body of the county is 
hereby authorized to levy a license or privilege tax 
upon any person for engaging in any business for 
which he is not required by law to pay any license or 
privilege tax to either the State of Alabama or the 
county by any of the following Article 1, Chapter 20 Title 
51; Sections 176, 177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 
429, and 826 in Title 51 of the Code of Alabama of 1940 
as amended.” (emphasis inserted) Act 406 of the 1967 
Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature. 


The obvious purpose of the Act was to reach those busi- 
nesses that were enjoying a “free ride” by operating 
within Jefferson County with no obligation to pay busi- 
ness license fees. Under the Act, those businesses could 
be required to assume tax responsibility comparable to 
other businesses falling subject to license taxation under 
the “general laws” set forth within Section 4. 


The critical determination for this Court is whether 
the population classification recited in the statute, (i.e, 
500,000 or more) bears any relationship to the statute's 
purpose, and then further, whether that relationship is a 
reasonable one. Peddycoart, supra. 

Unmistakably, the statute's emphasis and direction is 
focused upon then-unlicensed businesses. There is no indi- 
cation that any need for revenue by Jefferson County 
supplied any part of the legislative motivation. 


The analysis, then, for application of Equal Protection, 
should focus on whether there is a reasonable relation- 
ship between taxing previously unlicensed businesses and 
counties with populations numbering 500,000 or more. 
We say there is not. There is no articulable distinction, 
except bare location of operation, between unlicensed 
businesses operating in Jefferson County and those oper- 
ating in any of the other 66 counties within the state. 


For example, Court Reporters are taxed under County 
Ordinance No. | (the 1968 ordinance that implemented 


56 


the authority granted under Act 406 (See Richie depo., 
PX.1)). There is no basis for singling out Court Report- 
ers operating in Jefferson County and subjecting them to 
additional taxation while their Montgomery County 
counterparts remain unaffected. 

The irrationability of the statute's classification is en- 
hanced by the fact that it does not require those “certain 
businesses” to do anything, but gives the County the au- 
thority, exercisable at the discretion of the County's gov- 
erning body, to levy the tax as it deems appropriate. 


SECTION 105 APPLICABILITY 


Additionally, the Act violates Section 105 of the Ala- 
bama Constitution. That provision prohibits local legisla- 
tion that invades the province of existing general laws on 
the subject. 


(N)o ... local law, ... shall be enacted in any case 
which is provided for by a general law, ... nor shall 
the legislature indirectly enact any ... local law by 
the partial repeal of a general law” Section 105, Ala- 
bama Constitution. 
Local and general laws are defined in Section 110 of the 
Alabama Constitution (as last amended by Amendment 
No. 397) 


“Sec. 110. “General law” “local law” and “special law” 
defined. 


A general law is a law which in its terms and effect 
applies either to the whole state, or to one or more 
ees of the state less than the whole in a 
class. .. . 


_ A special or private law is one which applies to an 
individual, association or corporation. A local law is a 
law which is not a general law or a special or private 
law ... ”. (emphasis inserted) 


57 


In Crandall v. City of Birmingham, 442 So.2d 77 (Ala. 
1983), the Alabama Supreme Court, relying upon the 
rationale of Peddycoart, supra., struck down the City of 
Birmingham's 90-day claim/notice statute contained in 
Section 659 of old Title 62, Code of Alabama 1940 
(Recompiled 1958), citing that at the time of passage of 
Section 659, a general law (now Alabama Code Section 
11-47-23) “already existed and addressed the same sub- 
ject” for all Alabama municipalities. Crandall, at 80. The 
Court declared that: 


“We hold that s659, a local law, is unconstitutional 
under Art. IV, 5105, of the Constitution because it 
was enacted at variance with an already existing gen- 
eral law on the same subject.” id. at 80. 


Our Act 406 is likewise infirm in that it seeks to cover 
legislative ground already preempted by a general law. At 
the time of passage of Act 406 in 1967, there was already 
in existence a scheme of general laws on the subject of 
licensing businesses and professions operating within the 
various counties of Alabama. (ie. Article 1, Chapter 20, 
Title 51; the predecessor statute to Article 2 of Chapter 
12, Title 40 Code of Alabama 1975) 


Prior to setting forth, at s41-12-41 ef seq., an enumera- 
tion of businesses and professions covered, that Article 
declares: 


“s40-12-40. Who must procure state and county licenses. 


Every person, firm, company, corporation or asso- 
ciation, receiver or trustee, but not a governmental 
subdivision, engage in any business, vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession herein enumerated or 
who shall exercise any privilege hereinafter de- 
scribed for which a license or privilege tax is re- 
quired shall first procure a state license, and a 
county license when so required, and shall pay for 
the same or shall pay for the exercise of such privi- 


58 


lege the amounts hereinafter provided, and comply 

with all other provisions of this title.” 
The provisions of Title 40, Chapter 12 contain a compre- 
hensive scheme for the license and privilege taxation, by 
counties and the state, of businesses and professions in 
Alabama. In fact, Section 40-12-3 requires that any tax 
collected, where both a county tax and state tax are lev- 
ied under Article 2, shall be distributed one-half to the 
county and one-half to the state. 

We argue that the Court's task here is completely 
analogous to the Crandall case. Act 406 is unquestionably 
a “local act” which seeks to establish, in Jefferson County 
alone, who must procure a county business license. In exhaus- 
tive and comprehensive fashion, that subject is already 
covered by general law. 

For the foregoing reasons, these plaintiffs urge the 
Court to find this case indistinguishable from Peddycoart 
and Crandall and declare Ordinance 1120 invalid as an 
unconstitutional exercise of legislative authority. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


59 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


HOIT BEDINGFIELD, JR. and = * 
CAROLYN PHILLIPS, Z 
Plaintiff 
* Civil Action Nos. 
vs. CV-87-504-465 JDC 
* CV-87-504-469 JDC 


JEFFERSON COUNTY 
COMMISSION, . 
Defendants. * 


ORDER 
Filed November 23, 1987 


It is ORDERED that these actions shall be consoli- 
dated; and it is further 

ORDERED that all discovery shall be completed not 
later than November 18, 1987, and that this matter be set 
for hearing on the merits at 9:00 a.m. on December 2, 
1987. 

DONE this 18th day of November, 1987. 


BRAXTON L. KITTRELL, JR. 
Circuit Judge 


see eene * 


60 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT 
TENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT OF ALABAMA 


HOYT BEDINGFIELD, JR., et al., 


) 
) 
Plaintiffs, ) 
) Case No. 
vs. ) 87-504-465 JDC 
) 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA, ) 
et al., | ) 
) 
Defendants. ) 
CAROLYN PHILLIPS, et al., ) 
) 
Plaintiffs, ) 
) Case No. 
VS. ) CV87-504-469 
) JDC 
THE JEFFERSON COUNTY ) 
COMMISSION, ) 
Defendants. 


ORDER 
Filed December 14, 1987 


This matter was submitted to the Court on a stipula- 


tion of counsel, and testimony heard in open Court at a 
hearing on the merits. 


The Court is faced with two major issues in these law- 
suits. First, is Act No. 406, of the 1967 Regular Session of 
the Legislature of Alabama, constitutional; and second, is 
Ordinance No. 1120, adopted by the Jefferson County 


Commission on September 29, 1987, validly authorized 
by Act No. 406. 


61 


Plaintiffs argue that Act No. 406 is unconstitutional as 
violative of the provisions of the Constitution of Alabama of 
1901 at Section 104 (15), which bars “local or special 
legislation regulating the assessment or collection of 
taxes”: at Section 105, which bars enactment of local laws 
where a general law exists; at Section 45, which bars legis- 
lation containing more than one subject; and at Sections 
44 and 212, which bar an unlawful delegation of legisla- 
tive authority. 

The Courts have long held that there is a distinction 
between the terms “assessment” and “levy” and held that 
“assessment,” as used in Subdivision (15), relates to prop- 
erty taxes rather than privilege taxes. Opinion of the Jus- 
tices, 266 Ala. 363, 369, 96 So.2d 634 (1957) (quoting 
Standard Oil Co. vs. Limestone County, 220 Alu. 25., 234 
935, 124 So. 523 (1929). In addition, Act No. 406 autho- 
rizes the county governing body to levy, not assess, taxes. 

The Alabama Supreme Court has interpreted that Sec- 
tion 105 “was not intended to prevent the enactment of a 
local law on a subject already covered by a general law, 
when the local law is substantially different from the gen- 
eral law.” Peddycoart vs. City of Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808, 
812 (Ala. 1978). In an explanation of that interpretation, 
the Court has stated, “Courts are charged with the duty 
to determine whether there is a substantial difference 
between the general and local law....” Peddycoart vs. City of 
Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808, 812 (Ala. 1978) (quoting 
Standard Oil Co. vs. Limestone County, 220 Ala. 231, 235, 

124 So. 523, 526 (1929). That same Court held: 


“If, in the judgment of the Legislature, local 
needs demand additional or supplemental laws 
substantially different from the general law, the 
Legislature has power to so enact.” Peddycoart vs. 
City of Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808, 812 (Ala. 
1978) (quoting Standard Oil Co. vs. Limestone 


62 


County, 220 Ala. 231, 235, 124 So. 523, 526 

(1929). 
While the Peddycoart court eventually overruled all prior 
interpretations of Section 105 and “prohibited the enact- 
ment of a local act when the subject is already subsumed 
by the general statute”, it specifically noted that such new 
interpretation would be prescriptive, leaving pre- 
Peddycoart legislation under the old interpretations. 


Plaintiffs cite Section 40-12-1 et seq., Code of Alabama 
1975 as a general law governing license taxes, and main- 
tain that this law governs license taxes to be levied by 
counties. Code of Alabama 1975, at Section 40-12-3, allows 
counties to levy license taxes for school purposes. Act No. 
406 authorizes the county to levy a license or privilege 
tax for general county purposes. Statutory construction is 
subject to the rule that statutes should be construed as a 
whole to determine legislative intent. Green v. Fairfield 
City Bd. of Education, 365 So.2d 1217 (Civ.App. 1978). 
Nothing in Section 40-12-1 et seq prohibits the legislature 
from authorizing counties to levy license or privilege 
taxes for other than school purposes. “Power denied to 
local governments is reserved to the State Legislature; 
and subject only to constitutional proscriptions, the legis- 
lature is free to determine policy and enact local laws 
accordingly.” Drummond Co. vs. Boswell, 346 So.2d 955, 
958 (1977). The Court further stated it is not the broad, 
overall subject matter which is scrutinized to determine 
whether a local act, taken together with the general law, 
is violative of constitutional provisions prohibiting enact- 
ment of special, private or local laws in any case which is 
provided for by general law. Drummond Co. at 958. 
Rather, the Court must determine whether the object of 
the local law is to accomplish an end not substantially 
provided for and effectuated by general law. Drummond 
Co, at 958. Act No. 406 accomplishes an end not other- 
wise provided for by Section 40-12-1 et seq. and, therefore, 


63 


is not violative of the constitutional proscription on this 
ground. | 

Act No. 406 does not contain, on its face, any provi- 
sions relative to enforcement of the other provisions of 
the act. If it did contain enforcement provisions, such 
provisions would not necessarily violate the constitutional 
proscription on multi-subject legislation. The Supreme 
Court has said that the legislative purpose in requiring 
single subject legislation is laudatory, but it is met when 
the separate provisions of a bill germane to the bill's 
general purpose. Thomas v. Niemann, 397 So.2d 90, 93 
(1980). Included in the concept of levying a tax and 
clearly related is the idea that enforcement provisions 
would follow. 

As to the delegation of legislative authority, “the levy- 
ing of a tax is a purely legislative power, while duties of 
various officers in relation to assessment and collection 
of taxes are ministerial and sometimes judicial. Opinion of 
the Justices, 291 Ala. 262, 265, 280 So.2d 97 (1973). A bill 
authorizing the governing body of any county .. . to levy 
a privilege tax is not a violation of Section 212 of our 
Constitution. Id at 266. This Court finds nothing in Act 
No. 406 which is repugnant to the Constitution of Alabama 
of 1901, and which would invalidate the act. The provi- 
sions of Ordinance No. 1120, to the extent that they fol- 
low Act No. 406, are likewise valid. 

The Court is not persuaded by the plaintiffs’ conten- 
tion that Act No. 406 does not authorize an occupational 
tax. The Act itself provides that the term “business” in- 
cludes “business, vocation, occupation, calling or profes- 
sion”, and further provides that the governing body of 
the county is authorized to levy a license or privilege tax 
upon any “person” engaging in any business for which he 
is not required by law to pay any license or privilege tax 
either to the State of Alabama or the county. 


64 


The Court is also not persuaded by the plaintiff's argu- 
ment that the construction of Act No. 406 prohibits the 
adoption of Ordinance 1120. As the defendants note in 
their brief, there is no requirement within Act No. 406 or 
any other law which requires an immediate “use it or lose 
it” implementation by the county. The fact that certain 
officials may have placed a different interpretation upon 
Act No. 406 will not operate to preclude its implementa- 
tion by the county. 


As Act No. 406 does not authorize portions of Ordi- 
nance No. 1120, such as criminal sanctions, reporting 
requirements, interest and penalties, it would at first ap- 
pear that those provisions are due to be severed. But the 
Supreme Court of Alabama, in the case of the Town of 
Hackleburg v. Northwest Alabama Gas District, 277 Ala. 355, 
170 So.2d 792 (1965), noted: 


Municipalities have no inherent power of taxa- 
tion, but the State, having the power to tax may 
confer and delegate this power on and to a mu- 
nicipality. Stein v. Mayor, etc., of Mobile, 24 Ala. 
591; Estes v. City of Gadsden, 266 Ala. 166, 94 
So.2d 744. If the taxing power delegated is not 
limited, it includes all the taxing power pos- 
sessed by the State. See McQuillin, Municipal 
Corporation, 3rd Ed., Vol. 16, Sec. 44.07. 


The Court finds nothing in Act No. 406 which is re- 
pugnant to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 and which 
invalidates the Act, nor does it find that Ordinance No. 
1120 is invalid. The wisdom of and the necessity for this 
tax are matters for the determination of the county gov- 
erning body. It has chosen to adopt this tax and this 
Court finds that its action in so doing is authorized by 
the constitution and laws of the State of Alabama. 


65 


ORDER 

Based upon the above and foregoing, the Court OR- 
DERS, DECLARES and DETERMINES that Act No. 406 
of the 1967 Regular Session of the Legislature of Ala- 
bama, and Ordinance No. 1120 adopted by the Jefferson 
County Commission on September 29, 1987, are valid 
and subsisting laws and in full force and effect. 

It is further ORDERED that the costs of Court be taxed 
against the plaintiffs, for the recovery of which let execu- 
tion issue. 

DONE this 11th day of December, 1987. 


BRAXTON L. KITTRELL, JR. 
Circuit Judge 


x*e£eEEE * 


Hoyt BEDINGFIELD, Jr., in his capacity as the acting 
director of finance of the City of Birmingham, et al. 


Vv. 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, et al. 


87-316. 
Supreme Court of Alabama. 
May 20, 1988. 


City Challenged constitutionality of county ordinance 
establishing occupational tax. The Circuit Court, Jeffer- 
son County, Braxton L. Kittrell, Jr., J., upheld ordinance, 
and appeal was taken. The Supreme Court, Beatty, |., 


held that: (1) statute authorized county to levy occupay 
tional tax; (2) statute was general, rather than local legis- 


lation; and (3) statute authorizing levy of tax provided 
for collection of such tax. 


Affirmed. 


= 


66 
BEATTY, Justice. 


This is an appeal by Hoyt Beddingfield, Jr., as acting 
director of finance of the City of Birmingham, and the 
City of Birmingham from a judgment upholding a Jeffer- 
son County ordinance, specifically Ordinance No. 1120, 
establishing an occupational tax. We affirm. 


The action was filed on October 19, 1987, and was 
consolidated for trial with the case of Carolyn Phillips, et 
at. v. Jefferson County Commission. 

Ordinance No. 1120 levies a license or privilege tax on 
natural persons engaged in any vocation, occupation, 
calling, or profession who are not required by law to pay 
any license or privilege tax to the state or county. This 
tax was promulgated by Jefferson County under the au- 
thority of Act No. 406, approved September 7, 1967, Acts 


of Alabama 1967, at 21-23. Pertinent sections thereof are 
quoted below: 


“AN ACT 


“To authorize the governing body of any 
county of the State having a population of 
500,000 or more, according to the last or any 
subsequent Federal census, to levy a business or 
privilege tax upon any business, vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession for which a license 
or privilege tax is not required for either the 
State of Alabama or the county by the laws of 
the State of Alabama, and to limit the amount 
of any such business or privilege tax. 


“Be It Enacted by the Legislature of Alabama: 


“Section 1. This Act shall apply to any county 
of the State of Alabama having a population of 
500,000 or more, according to the last or any 


subsequent federal census, and to no other 
county. 


67 


“Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to 
equalize the burden of taxation by authorizing 
the county to impose a license or privilege tax 
upon persons now engaging in certain busi- 
nesses without paying any license tax thereon to 
either the state or county. 


“Section 4. The governing body of the county 
is hereby authorized to levy a license or privi- 
lege tax upon any person for engaging in any 
business for which he is not required by law to 
pay any license or privilege tax to either the 
State of Alabama or the county by any of the 
following: Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51; Sec- 
tions 176, 177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429, 
and 826 in Title 51 of the Code of Alabama of 
1940 as amended. 


“When a person is engaged in more than one 
business for one or more of which a license or 
privilege tax is required to be paid t the State or 
the county but for one or more of which no 
license or privilege tax is required to be paid to 
the State or county, the county governing body 
shall have the authority to levy a license or privi- 
lege tax upon that business, or those businesses, 
for engaging in which such person is not re- 
quired to pay any license or privilege tax to the 
State or county. 


“Section 5. The tax hereby levied shall be 

id to that officer or employee of the county 
chargeable with the duty of collecting license or 
privilege taxes payable to the county. 


“Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied 
by the governing body of the county on any per- 
son, for engaging in any business shall be at a 
rate which is in excess of the rate of license or 
privilege tax levied by the largest municipality 
of the county on the same or similar type of 
business activity.” 


68 


Allegations of unconstitutionality made below were de- 
nied by the defendants. Following discovery, testimony 
taken in open court, and stipulation, the Jefferson Cir- 
cuit Court upheld the ordinance, and this appeal fol- 
lowed. Because a number of issues are presented here, 
we shall treat them seriatim. 


Did Act No. 406 manifest a legislative intent to autho- 
rize Jefferson County to levy an occupational tax? 


Plaintiffs’ argument here is multifaceted. First, they 
contend that the stated purpose of the Act is to authorize 
a tax only upon “certain businesses,” and not “occupa- 
tions.” Further, plaintiffs argue that § 6 of Act No. 406 
does not permit a privilege tax “which is in excess of the 
rate of license or privilege tax levied by the largest mu- 
nicipality of the County on the same or similar type of 
business activity,” meaning that Jefferson County could 
not implement the Act by levying a tax in excess of that 
which had been levied by Birmingham. Because Birming- 
ham had no such privilege tax in 1967, plaintiffs argue, 
any county tax under Act No. 406 would offend the Act. 
Finally, according to plaintiffs, the county’s own imple- 
mentation of the Act when it was enacted in 1967, as only 
a licensing code authorizing licensing of certain busi- 
nesses, gives weight to the limiting nature of Act No. 406. 


We must respectfully reject these arguments. While we 
are mindful that taxing statutes are to be strictly con- 
strued, State v. Seals Piano Co., 209 Ala. 93, 95 So. 451 
(1923), it does not offend that principle to uphold this 
statute. Indeed, the express language of the Act autho- 
rizes the county “to levy a business or privilege tax upon 
any business, vocation, occupation, calling or profes- 
sion.” When the intention of the legislature is so appar- 
ent from the face of a statute that there can be no ques- 
tion as to its meaning, there is no room for construction. 


69 


American Institute of Psychotherapy v. Alabama Board of Exam- 
iners in Psychology, 410 So.2d 54 (Ala. 1982). Thus, § 4 is 
to be read as authorizing a privilege tax “upon any per- 
son for engaging in any business [or occupation]. 

Municipal licensing authority has existed at least since 
the Code of 1907, see Code of 1975, § 11-51-90. Birming- 
ham originally adopted its licensing code as early as 
1916, and in 1967 it had an extensive catalog of — 
categories subject thereto. However, it was not unt 
that eons itself adopted Ordinance No. 70-76, 
providing for a license fee for occupations and profes- 
sions. Given the fact that Birmingham had possessed the 
authority under state law to impose an occupational 
privilege tax since 1907, it is clear that by § 6 of Act No. 
406 the legislature, cognizant of that power, decided to 
restrict the county's authority to a maximum as estab- 
lished by Birmingham's occupational privilege tax. It isa 
fundamental principle that the legislature, in enacung a 
statute, is presumed to have full knowledge and informa- 
tion on prior and existing law on the subject of the stat- 
ute. Ex parte Love 513 So.2d 24 (Ala. 1987). Thus, we 
cannot agree with plaintiffs that Act. No. 406 required 
Jefferson County to implement its authority contempora- 
neously thereunder, or lose it altogether. The Act itself 
contains no such limiting language. True, Jefferson 
County did nui implement the “occupational” aspect of 
the statute until 1987. Nevertheless, the authority to do 
so continued.” 

Finally, we are not persuaded by plaintiffs’ argument 
that, in construing Act No. 406, this Court should defer 
to the county's alleged contemporaneous interpretation 


* By stipulation, it was established that, while Birmingham itself 
adopted its license code as early as 1916, and possessed an extensive 
license code in 1967, it did not establish its occupational tax until 
1970. 


70 


of the Act. Because we do not find the Act doubtful in its 
meaning, we need not resort to an alleged contempora- 
neous interpretation by the county. 


Il. 

Is Act No. 406 unconstitutional as violating limitations 
on local legislation as explained in Peddycoart v. City of 
Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808 (Ala. 1978)? 

According to plaintiffs, Act No. 406 violates the man- 
date of Peddycoart in two respects: (1) the general laws of 
Alabama have preempted the field of license and _privi- 
lege taxation to prevent reliance upon local legislation, 
and thus Act No. 406 violates Section 105 of the Constitu- 
tion; and (2) the population classification of Act No. 406 
(500,000 or more), which makes it a “bracket bill,” lacks 
a reasonable relationship with the statute's purpose. 


Commenting upon Peddycoart in Freeman v. Purvis, 400 
So.2d 389 (Ala. 1981), this Court stated: 


“We must point out, however, that following the 
decision which was released on January 
13, 1978, two amendments to the Alabama Constitu- 
tion of 1901 were ratified by the people: Amend- 
ment No. 375, ratified on November 20, 1978, and 
Amendment No. 3839, ratified on November 4, 1980. 
Because the latter Amendment is pertinent, we 
quote it here: 


“Any statute that was otherwise valid and consti- 
tutional that was enacted before January 13, 1978, 
by the legislature of this state and was a general 
act of local application on a population basis, that 
applied only to a certain county or counties or a 
municipality or municipalities of this state, shall 
not be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any 
court of this state because it was not properly ad- 
vertised in compliance with section 106 of this 
Constitution. 


71 


“All such population based acts shall forever 
apply only to the county or counties or municipal- 
ity or municipalities to which they applied on 
January 13, 1978, and no other, despite changes in 


“The effect of this Amendment was to validate all 
‘bracket bills’ enacted without advertising before 
January 13, 1978, the date of the Peddycoart decision, 
and which were not otherwise unconstitutional . .. . 


Act No. 406 was approved in 1967, well before the date 
of the Peddycoart decision of January 13, 1978, and, as a 
general law of local application, was validated by Amend- 
ment 389 even though it was not advertised under Sec- 
tion 106 of the Constitution of 1901. 


Even under Peddycoart standards, Act No. 406 must 
lian 6 tandiaiends sah tad on 0 cegnend oak 
of relationship between its purpose and the expressed 
population classification. As observed in Dearborn v. 

234 Ala. 84, 173 So. 864 (1937), on that subject, 
much is left to legislative discretion in fixing that classifi- 
cation and in recognizing that purpose. In Couch v. 
Rodgers, 253 Ala. 533, 45 So.2d 699 (1950), this Court 
reviewed a number of its decisions that had upheld 
“bracket bills” of substantial minimum, but no maxi- 
mum, population classifications: 


“We have numerous decisions which give illustra- 
tion to the principle. We will not undertake to ana- 
lyze them all, but only such as seem to shed light 
upon the instant suit. In the case of Wages v. State, 
225 Ala. 2, 141 So. 707, 708 [1932], this Court was 
dealing with an act similar to the one here involved. 
By its terms it had application to counties having a 

ion of three hundred thousand or more ac- 
cording to the last or any subsequent federal census. 


72 


The Court there undertook to apply the principle 
which we have stated above. The act was held to be 
general, although it then applied only to Jefferson 
County. We quote from that opinion as follows: ‘The 
wisdom of the law and the necessity for its enact- 
ment and the classification adopted were addressed 
to the lawmaking body. It may be well said, this body 
understood and appreciated the necessity of furnish- 
ing protection to the people in the matter legislated 
upon in the act, in the larger and more populous 
counties of the state, which was not necessary or 
practicable in the smaller counties.’ 


“We have numerous cases which bring out that 
application of the principle wherein it was observed 
that counties of large population may reasonably be 
supposed to be differently served in many respects 
than counties of smaller population and there is 
sometimes drawn a distinction between a classifica- 
tion based upon a minimum population and a classi- 
fication based upon a population with both a mini- 
mum and a maximum limit. The case of State ex rel. 
Shirley v. Lutz, 226 Ala. 497, 147 So. 429 [1933], 
brings out that distinction. That case was dealing 
with an act regulating the business of plumbing in 
counties having a population of 100,000 or more 
according to the last or any subsequent federal cen- 
sus. The Court emphasized the different principles 
applicable when there is only a minimum but not a 
maximum number. When there is only a minimum, 
the Court thought a more liberal application of the 
principle should be made. 


“In the Opinion of the Justices, 249 Ala. 511, 31 So.2d 
721, we were responding to a legislative inquiry as to 
a proposed act applicable to counties of 400,000 
population or more according to the last or any sub- 
sequent federal census, which would require the pay- 


73 


ment to such counties of a license tax of one cent on 
each gallon of gasoline. We thought there was a rea- 
sonable relation of the subject matter of the Act to 
counties of such population because we thought that 
in large counties the load of traffic on the highways 
by reason of such population justified the legislature 
in providing additional income in order to take care 
of its effect.” 


It is clear from the terms of Act No. 406 that its pur- 
pose was to provide more populous counties with a 
source of revenue by authorizing them to impose a privi- 
lege or license tax. The record establishes, if common 
sense does not, that needs and demands for services 
made upon county governments keep pace with urban- 
ization and increases in population, necessitating new 
opportunities for revenue. It follows that populous coun- 
ties experience greater demands for costly services than 
those sparsely populated. In this case, therefore, the req- 
uisite relationship was established. Peddycoart, supra. 

Is Act No. 406 unconstitutional under § 105, Constitu- 
tion of 1901? 


Plaintiffs maintain that Act No. 406 is constitutional 
under Section 105, Constitutional of 1901. The pertinent 
part of that section states that “[n)o special, private, or 
local law . . . shall be enacted in any case which is pro- 
vided for by a general law.” Plaintiffs reason that Act No. 
406 is infirm under that provision because of the prior 
enactment of Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51, Code of 
1940, now Article Il, Chapter 12, Title 40, Code of 
1975, which provides: 


“Every person, firm, company, corporation or as- 
sociation, receiver or trustee, but not a governmen- 
tal subdivision, engaged in any business, vocation, 
occupation, calling or profession herein enumer- 
ated or who shall exercise any privilege hereinafter 
described for which a license or privilege tax is re- 


74 


quired shall first procure a state license, and a 
county license when so required, and shall pay for 
the same or shall pay for the exercise of such privi- 
lege the amounts hereinafter provided, and comply 
with all other provisions of this title.” 


Section 40-12-40, Code of 1975. 


Act No. 406, as we have stated, is a general law, not a 
local law; thus Section 105 is inapplicable. 


Finally, plaintiffs contend that Act No. 406 fails for 
want of an express provision therein for the collection of 
an occupational tax. Plaintiffs argue further that a read- 
ing of Act No. 406 to so provide would violate Section 
104(15) of the Constitution of 1901, which prohibits the 
enactment of a local law “[rjegulating either the assess- 
ment or collection of taxes.” 


For the reasons previously discussed, Act No. 406 is a 
general, not a local, law; hence, this provision, Section 
104(15), is inapplicable. And, as the trial court found: 


“The Courts have long held that there is a distinc- 
tion between the terms ‘assessment’ and ‘levy’ and 
held that ‘assessment,’ as used in Subdivision (15), 
relates to property taxes rather than privilege taxes. 
Opinion of the Justices, 266 Ala. 363, 369, 96 So.2d 634 
(1957) (quoting Standard Oil Co. v. Limestone County, 
220 Ala. 231, 234-235, 124 So. 523 (1929).” 


Moreover, the grant of authority to “levy a license or 
privilege tax upon any person” in § 4 of Act No. 406 was 
in itself authority to collect such a tax. Cf., Syracuse Trust 
Co. v. Board of Supervisors, 13 N.Y.S.2d 390 (Sup.Ct.), af- 
firmed, 258 A.D. 17, 15 N.Y.S.2d 920 (1939); to “levy” is to 
“collect” a tax. Black’s Law Dictionary (5th ed. 1979) at 
816. 


Let the judgment be affirmed. 


75 
AFFIRMED. 


TORBERT, C.J., and MADDOX, 
JONES, ALMON, SHORES and 
ADAMS, ]]J., concur. 


*eEKAE 


MOTION TO STRIKE 


Filed November 2, 1992 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


COME NOW the Defendants, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama and Randy Godeke, and hereby move this Court to 
strike the affidavits of Braxton Kittrell, William Acker, 
Sara Tackett and Fannie Hill which were submitted by 
Plaintiffs in response to the County’s MOTION FOR 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT. In further support of this mo- 
tion, Defendants state as follows: 


1. AFFIDAVIT OF BRAXTON KITTRELL 


The contents of Judge Kittrell’s affidavit are immaterial 
to the issue of res judicata. The test is not whether the 
federal constitutional claims were adjudicated by Judge 
Kittrell, rather the test is whether the federal constitu- 
tional claims could have been adjudicated. Baker v. City of 
Guntersville, 600 So.2d 280 (Ala. Civ. App. 1992); 
Dairyland Insurance Company v. Jackson, 566 So.2d 723 
(Ala. 1990); NAACP v. Hunt, 891 F.2d 1555 (11th Cir. 
1990). As discussed in the County’s MOTION FOR SUM- 
MARY JUDGMENT, res judicata bars not only the precise 
legal theories adjudicated in the prior case, but all legal 
theories and claims arising out of the same nucleus of operative 
fact. The federal constitutional claims in the instant suit 
clearly arise out of the same nucleus of operative fact as 


76 


those presented in Bedingfield. Thus, said claims are 
barred regardless of whether they were properly pre- 
sented, briefed and argued by the Bedingfield plaintiffs or 
adjudicated by Judge Kittrell, 

Moreover, the law is well settled that a trial judge's 
failure to rule on a claim operates as a denial of that 
claim. McClure v. Moore, 565 So.2d 8 (Ala. 1990). The 
Bedingfield complaints and amended complaints (collec- 
tively attached to the MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDG- 
MENT as Exhibit B) contain numerous allegations pursu- 
ant to the United States Constitution, federal civil rights 
laws and state law. Thus, by operation of law, Judge 
Kittrell’s failure to rule on the federal claims amounts to 
a denial of those claims. 


Further, regardless of Judge Kittrell’s order, the Ala- 
bama Supreme Court dealt squarely with the Federal 
Equal Protection argument as it was framed in Beding- 
field's appellate brief. In that brief (attached to the 
County's MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT as Ex- 
hibit D1-6), Bedingfield’s attorneys denominated their 
equal protection argument as issue II-B: 


“[djoes Act No. 406 and the occupational tax 
adopted by Jefferson County comply with principles 
of equal protection?” 


The corresponding Argument portion of the Bedingfield 
brief (attached to the County's MOTION FOR SUM- 
MARY JUDGMENT as Exhibit D4-5) asserted that Act 
No. 406 violated the Equal Protection clause in that there 
was no reasonable relationship between the statute's pur- 
pose and the population classification. The Bedingfield 
brief took its argument from Peddycoart v. City of Birming- 
ham, 354 So.2d 808 (Ala. 1979) (attached hereto), in 
which the Supreme Court determined that a 1915 popu- 
lation classification act which conferred immunity upon 
all cities with a population of more than 100,000 violated 


77 


the Equal Protection clause of the U.S. Constitution because 
the statute's purpose was not reasonably related to the 
population classification therein. 


At page 1272 of the Bedingfield opinion, Justice Beatty 
(also the author of Peddycoart) reprinted the issue as set 
forth in Bedingfield’s brief and denominated it as Issue II- 
(2). He then devoted nearly two pages of the opinion to 
a discussion of Peddycoart and concluded at page 1274 
that the purpose of Act No, 406 was reasonably related to 
the population classification: 


“It is clear from the terms of Act No. 406 that its 
purpose was to provide more populous counties with 
a source of revenue by authorizing them to impose a 
privilege or license tax. The record establishes, if 
common sense does not, that needs and demands 
for services made upon county government keep 
pace with urbanization and increases in population, 
necessitating new opportunities for revenue. It fol- 
lows that populous counties experience greater de- 
mands for costly services than those sparsely popu- 
lated. In this case, therefore, the requisite relation- 
ship was established. Peddycoart, supra.” 


527 So.2d at 1274. 


Thus, regardless of Judge Kittrell's order, it is clear 
that the Federal Constitutional Challenges to the occupa- 
tional tax were HEARD and REJECTED by the Alabama 
Supreme Court in the Bedingfield case. For these reasons, 
Judge Kittrell’s affidavit adds nothing to the res judicata 
analysis and is due to be stricken as immaterial. 


2. AFFIDAVIT OF WILLIAM ACKER. 


The affidavit of William Acker also adds nothing to the 
res judicata analysis. The affidavit merely asserts that 
Judge Acker intends to force the County to sue him to 
collect the tax. It is more significant that William Acker 


78 


and all other active Federal Judges of the Northern Dis- 
trict of Alabama and all of the other federal employees 
have paid and continue to pay without challenge the City of 
Birmingham Occupational Tax (measured at 1% of gross 
receipts) since its enactment in 1970!!! 


%. AFFIDAVIT OF SARA TACKETT. 

The affidavit of Ms. Tackett, office manager for Plain- 
tiffs’ lawyers, is due to be stricken for several reasons. 
First, it adds absolutely nothing to the res judicata analy- 
sis. Second, it contains untrue assertions to the effect that 


Jason Richards, a courier, pays in excess of $300 in 


County Occupational Tax on a $6,000 annual salary 
while, at the same time, the attorneys Baxley and Dillard 
pay no occupational tax on salaries of hundreds of thou- 
sands of dollars. Ms. Tackett's statement are misleading, 
her arithmetic is erroneous and she fails to disclose that 
the lawyers in her firm are paying thousands of dollars 
each year in occupational taxes to the City of Birming- 
ham and to the State of Alabama. 


Act No. 406 states, on its face, that its purpose is to 
“equalize the burden of taxation” by imposing a County Oc- 
cupational Tax on individuals who work in the County 
and who do not already pay occupational tax to the State. 
Section 3, Act 406 (attached to County's MOTION FOR 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT as Exhibit F). Thus, individuals 
(such as practicing attorneys Bill Baxley and Joel Dillard) 
who are required by State law to pay the State Occupa- 
uional License are exempt from the County tax. Section 
4, Act No. 406. Further, Act No. 406 expressly recognizes 
that many of the prospective taxpayers would also be re- 
quired to pay the Birmingham Occupational Tax. There- 
fore, Act No. 406 prohibits the rate of the County tax 
from exceeding the occupational tax rate of Birming- 
ham. Section 6, Act 406, 


79 


As set forth in the attached affidavit of Randy Godeke, 
Director of Revenue, Jefferson County, Alabama, the true 
calculation of occupational taxes for Jason Richards and 
Bill Baxley on income earned in the City of Birmingham 
are as follows: 


JASON RICHARDS — 1991 EARNINGS —$ 6,269.00 


A. State Occupational — 4) 
B. County Occupational (.005) $ 31.35 
C. City Occupational (.01) — $ 62.69 
TOTAL $ 94.04 
BILL BAXLEY — 1991 EARNINGS — $ 388,371.00 
A. State Occupational $ 151.25 

B. County Occupational Ap 
C. City Occupational (.01) $ 3,883.00 
TOTAL $ 4,034.25 


Thus, the statement and calculations contained in the 
Tackett affidavit are complete fabrication. As they serve 
no purpose, other than to inflame and mislead the 
reader, they are due to be stricken. 


4. AFFIDAVIT OF FANNIE HILL. 

The County occupational tax (and the Birmingham 
occupational tax) exempts domestic servants. The term 
“domestic servant” is defined by Black's Law Dictionary 
as follows: 


“A domestic, or, in full, domestic servant, is a servant 
who resides in the same house with the master. The 
term does not extend to workmen or laborers em- 


ployed out of doors.” 
Id. 


In her affidavit, Ms. Hill erroneously describes herself 
as a “domestic servant in commercial settings”. There is 
no such thing. Her own affidavit establishes that she is a 


80 


full-time professional janitor employed by a commercial 
contract janitorial company, not a domestic servant. Inter- 
estingly, she fails to state that she continues to pay, with- 
out challenge, the Birmingham occupational tax. 

Ms. Hill's affidavit adds nothing to the res judicata 
analysis and is, therefore, due to be sticken. 


CONCLUSION 


In its MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT, the 
County has demonstrated that the doctrine of res 
judicata bars all of the claims raised by the Plaintiffs in 
the instant suit. Specifically, the County has demon- 
strated that: 


1. The Bedingfield opinion is a prior judgment on the 
merits; and 

2. The Alabama Supreme Court is a court of compe- 
tent jurisdiction; and 

3. Substantial identity of parties exists between current 
and former Plaintiffs in that, under the test set forth by 
the Alabama Supreme Court, former and current Plain- 
tiffs are in privity with one another because their inter- 
ests, rights, motivations and goals are identical and be- 
cause current Plaintiffs would have been protected from 
payment of the tax had the Bedingfield court invalidated 
the tax; and, 

4. The causes of action in the instant suit are substan- 
tially the same as those which were or could have been 
presented in Bedingfield because they all clearly arise out 
of the same nucleus of operative fact. That is, the facts 
have not changed; the evidence has not changed; the 
remedies have not changed; and the tax itself has not 
changed. 

The affidavits of Braxton Kittrell, William Acker, Sara 
Tackett, and Fannie Hill are wholly immaterial to the 
issue of res judicata and are, therefore, due to be 


81 


stricken. Further, this suit is clearly barred by the doc- 
trine of res judicata and the County should not be put to 
the burden and expense of having to relitigate the consti- 
tutionality of its occupational tax. The County is due the 


entry of summary judgment in its favor without further 
delay. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


AFFIDAVIT 


Before me, the undersigned Notary Public in and for 
said County and State, personally appeared Randy 
Godeke, who being known to me and being first duly 
sworn, states on oath as follows: 


My name is Randy Godeke, I am the Director of 
Revenue for Jefferson County, Alabama. | am over 
the age of twenty-one (21) and have personal knowl- 
edge of the facts set forth herein. 


I have reviewed the affidavit of Sara Tackett which 
was provided to me by the Jefferson County's 
Attorney's office. In her affidavit, Ms. Tackett incor- 
rectly states the amount of County Occupational Tax 
owed by Jason Richards. Further, Ms. Tackett fails to 
state the other occupational taxes which would be 
— by both Mr. Richards and the lawyers in their 
irm. 


Assuming that Jason Richards earned $6,269.00 in 
1991 in Birmingham, Alabama, he would owe occu- 
pational taxes as follows: 


A. State Occupational — 4)- 

B. County Occupational (.005)— $31.35 

C. City Occupational (.01) — $62.69 
TOTAL $94.04 


82 


Assuming that Mr. Baxley earned $388,371.00 in 
1991 in Birmingham, Alabama, he would owe occu- 
pational taxes as follows: 


A. State Occupational $ 151.25 

B. County Occupational 4h 

C. City Occupational (.01) $3,883.00 
TOTAL $4,034.25 


/s/ Randy Godeke 
Randy Godeke 
({Jurat Omitted in Printing] 


*ee eee * 


NOTICE OF FILING AFFIDAVITS IN SUPPORT OF 
CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATION OF CLASS AND 
SUB-CLASSES, AND IN OPPOSITION TO SUMMARY 
JUDGMENT 


Filed March 2, 1993 
[Caption Omitted in Printing) 


Come plaintiffs and file with the Court certified copies 
of an Order, Defendant's First Set of Interrogatories to 
Plaintiff, and the affidavit of Defendant Randy Godeke in 
response thereto from a parallel pending federal action, 
Jefferson County v. Acker, CV 93-U-0069-S. 


{Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing} 
eee ee 


ORDER 
Entered February 25, 1993 
[Caption Omitted in Printing} 


83 


The above-captioned cases were filed in the District 
Court of Jefferson County, Alabama, seeking to recover 
taxes allegedly due by defendants pursuant to Jefferson 
County Ordinance 1120, and each was removed to this 
Court. They are now before the Court on motions to 
remand and to consolidate. 


The above cases were removed to this Court pursuant 
to 28 U.S.C. § 1442 (a)(1), (3) which provides in perti- 


nent pal t: 


(a) a civil action .. . commenced in a State 
court against any of the following persons may 
be removed by them to the district court of the 
United States for the district and division em- 
bracing the place wherein it is pending: 

(1) Any officer of the United States . . . for 
any act under color of such office or on account 
of any right, title or authority claimed under 
any Act of Congress for the apprehension or 
punishment of criminals or the collection of the 
revenue ... 


(3) Any officer of the courts of the United 
States, for any act under color of office or in the 
performance of his duties. 


Petitioners, Unites States district judges, are officers of 
the United States and of the courts of the United States. 
Jefferson County claims that, pursuant to ordinance 
1120, each defendant owes Jefferson County in taxes a 
percentage of each defendant's gross salary from the 
United States for the applicable period. 


Jefferson County's ordinance No. 1120, upon which 
the original complaint are based, provides in part: 


It shall be unlawfull for any person to engage in 
or follow any vocation, occupation, calling or 
profession . . . without paying license fees for 


84 


the privilege of engaging in a following such 
vocations, occupation, calling or profession . . . 


The ordinance therefore clearly implicates defendants’ 
acts under color of office as United States district judges 
with respect to both civil and criminal matters — indeed 
every judicial act performed by them. Since the removed 
actions involve claimed delinquent taxes, the ordinance 
purports to say that such acts were unlawfully performed 
by defendants. 

Claimant Jefferson County urges that the cases be re- 
manded on the ground that this Court has no subject 
matter jurisdiction, citing the Tax Injunction Act, 28 
U.S.C. § 1341 and the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. § 106(a). But 
this Court has, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1442, at least the 
same jurisdiction as that possessed by the District Court 
of Jefferson County. Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission v. 
McGinnes, 179 F. Supp. 578, 580 (D.C. Pa, 1959), af- 
firmed 278 F. 2d 330, cert. den, 364 U.S. 820. The defen- 
dants have sought no relief other than that which would 
appear to be within the jurisdiction of the District Court 
of Jefferson County Alabama. There are numerous Cases 
to the effect that 28 U.S.C. § 1442 shall be given a liberal 
construction. The motions to remand are therefore DE- 
NIED. 

The motion to consolidate the two above captioned 
cases is unopposed, the cases present identical questions 
of fact and law, and this Court finds consolidation appro- 
priate, and grants the motion to consolidate. 


SO ORDERED, this 23 day of February, 19953. 


CHARLES A. MOYE, JR. 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE 


se eee 


85 


DEFENDANT'S FIRST SET 
OF INTERROGATORIES TO PLAINTIFF 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 

Pursuant to Rule 26, F.R.Civ.P., William M. Acker, Jr., 
defendant in the above-entitled cause, propounds the fol- 
lowing interrogatories to plaintiff, Jefferson County, a po- 
litical subdivision of the State of Alabama. 

1. Does Jefferson County's Ordinance No. 1120, as 
predicted in its preamble, “establish a license or privilege 
tax” on persons engaged in Jefferson County in certain 
vocations, occupations, callings and professions, to the 
exclusion of other persons engaged in Jefferson County 
in other vocations, occupations, callings and professions? 

2. Inasmuch as Ordinance No. 1120 uses the phrases 
“occupational tax”, “privilege tax” and “license fee” inter- 
changeably, are the phrases intended as synonyms? 

3. What are the differences, if any, between a “license 
fee,” an “occupational tax” and a “privilege tax”? 

4. Do persons engaged in the following businesses, vo- 
cations, occupations, callings and professions enjoy an 
exemption from the obligation to “pay a license fee un- 
der this ordinance” as provided in the definition of “li- 


cense” contained in Section 1(G) of Ordinance No. 
1120: 


(a) Lawyers in private practice. 
(b) Lawyers who work as salaried employees for public 


entities or business entities but who hold licenses to prac- 
tice law in the State of Alabama. 


(c) Stockbrokers even though affiliated with a broker- 
age firm. 


(d) Physicians in private practice. 
(e) Physicians who work as salaried employees for 


public entities or business entities but who hold Alabama 
licenses to practice medicine. 


(f) Veterinarians. 

(g) Pharmacists. 

(h) Chiropractors. 

(i) Naturopaths. 

(j) Podiatrists. 

(k) Osteopaths. 

(1) Registered nurses. 

(m) Licensed practical nurses. 

(n) Engineers in private practice. 

(o) Engineers who work as salaried employees for 
public entities or business entities but who hold Alabama 
engineering licenses. 

(p) Architects. 

(q) Real estate agents. 

(r) Real estate brokers. 

(s) Insurance agents. 

(t) Insurance agents who work as salaried employees 
for public entities or business entities but who hold Ala- 
bama real estate licenses. 

(u) Insurance brokers. 

5. List all occupations not named in response to No. 4 
and which require a license from the State of Alabama 
and are therefore excluded from the requirements of 
Ordinance No. 1120. 

6. List all occupations not named in response to No. 4 
and which require a license from Jefferson County and 
therefore are excluded from the requirements of Ordi- 

nance No. 1120. 

7. Have Alabama's two United States senators, both of 
whom have offices located in Jefferson County, ever paid 
a license fee or any portion of their legislative salaries to 
Jefferson County pursuant to Ordinance No. 1120? 

8. Have either the Jefferson County Attorney or any 
member(s) of his staff of attorneys ever paid a license fee 


87 


or any portion of their salaries to Jefferson County pursu- 
ant to Ordinance No. 1120? 

9. Has any United States Tax Court judge, who sits in 
Jefferson County from time to time, ever paid any occu- 


pational tax to Jefferson County pursuant to Ordinance 
No. 1120? 


10. Has any United States Courts of Appeals judge (in 
particular Hon. Robert S. Vance), who sits in Jefferson 
County from time to time, ever paid any occupational tax 
to Jefferson County pursuant to Ordinance No. 1120? 

11. Have any entertainers or artists who have per- 
formed in one-time concerts or events in Jefferson 
County ever paid the license fee or any portion thereof 
pursuant to Ordinance No. 1120? 


12. Have all members of the Armed Forces of the 
United States who reside in and perform services in Jef- 
ferson County paid the license fee or any portion thereof 
pursuant to Ordinance No. 1120? 


13. Will the federal judge who is specially appointed 
or designated to sit in this case because of the recusal of 
all regular judges of this court be subject to Jefferson 
County's so-called occupational tax upon a portion of his 
or her income earned from judicial services performed 
in this case while in Jefferson County? (This defendant 
expressly waives the venue or territorial jurisdictional re- 
quirement that this case proceed in the Southern Divi- 
sion of this court in order to obviate any problems inher- 
ent in this question.) 

14. Since the enactment of Ordinance No. 1120, has 
Jefferson County made any demand or demands on per- 
sons not residents of Jefferson County, or on their em- 
ployers who are located in Jefferson County, for payment 
of the license fee or occupational tax pursuant to Ordi- 
nance No. 1120? 


88 


15. If the answer to No. 14 is affirmative, name all 
such persons and employers, giving their residence and 
business addresses, when and how each demand was 
made, whether or not there was compliance after de- 
mand, and whether or not a suit has been filed or an 
arrest made in the event of non-compliance. 


16. After January 1, 1988, how many people have been 
audited by Jefferson County on a suspicion or belief by 
Jefferson County that a higher percentage of their an- 
nual income was earned in Jefferson County than was 
claimed by the licensee? 

17. Is it routine that a licensee under Ordinance No. 
1120 pay one-half of one percent of all of his or her 
income to Jefferson County no matter what percentage 
of his or her income was earned in Jefferson County and 
thereafter to file a verified claim for a refund, or is the 
licensee routinely allowed to estimate in advance the per- 
centage of his or her income expected to be earned in 
Jefferson County and to pay only the percentage of a full 
license fee reflected by that estimate, subject to later 
amendment and audit? 

18. State the words of the oath or oaths required of 
licensees and of employers pursuant to Ordinance No. 
1120? 

19. Are the penalties for false swearing under the re- 
quired oath the same penalties as for perjury under the 
criminal statutes of Alabama? 

20. Does Ordinance No. 1120 constitute an “income 
tax” in any sense? 

21. If the answer to No. 20 above is affirmative, ex- 
plain in detail how and under what circumstances Ordi- 
nance No. 1120 constitutes an “income tax.” 

22. Has Jefferson County ever filed a claim in the Fed- 
eral Claims Court, or any other court, against the United 
States or against any agency of the United States as an 


89 


employer of a person or persons subject to withholding 
under Ordinance No. 1120 as a result of the employer's 
not withholding payment from its employee or employ- 
ees as required by Ordinance No. 1120? 

23. If the answer to No. 22 is negative, why has Jeffer- 
son County never filed such a claim or suit? 


24. State the rationale, if there is a rationale, for the 
exemption of domestic servants, no matter what the 
amount of their income earned in Jefferson County, 
from the license fee in Ordinance No. 1120. 


25. Was a reason for calling Ordinance No. 1120 an 
“occupational tax” or a “privilege tax” or a “license fee” 
the prohibition of Alabama law against Jefferson 
County’s levying an income tax? 

26. If the answer to No. 25 is negative, state the ratio- 
nale for carefully never referring to tax based exclusively 
on a percent of income as an “income tax”? 


27. Does Jefferson County concede that, with proper 
legislative authority from the Alabama Legislature, all 31 
counties in the Northern District of Alabama could adopt 
ordinances similar to Ordinance No. 1120, thus obligat- 
ing a federal judge who sits in all 31 counties to pay a 
portion of his or her income to each and all of the 31 
counties? 

28. If the answer to No. 27 is negative, why would it 
not be possible? 

29. Why is Jefferson County's so-called “occupational 
tax” or “privilege tax” or “license fee” markedly different 
from the similar tax levied by the City of Birmingham, 
particularly in that the City’s ordinance contains no ex- 
ceptions for persons holding other licenses and treats all 
taxpayers alike? 

30. Does Jefferson County consider it fair and equi- 
table and equal treatment for a lawyer who practices law 
only in Jefferson County and who earns one million dol- 


90 


lars a year to be entitled to perform such professional 
services in Jefferson County for a license fee of $200.00 
per year paid to the State (only a portion of which goes 
to Jefferson County), while a federal judge who earns 
approximately $133,000 per year and who performs ser- 
vices in 31 counties, must, in order lawfully to perform 
his duties, pay a license fee of approximately $665.00 per 
year to Jefferson County alone for the privilege of having 
his main office in Jefferson County (one of the 31 coun- 
ties he or she serves), a location chosen not by him or 
her but by the United States? 


31. Now that Section 104 of the Federal Courts Ad- 
ministration Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-572), which 
amended 28 U.S.C. § 29l(c), allows federal district 
judges to be reassigned outside their districts, if the 
Northern District of Alabama successfully requests the 
assignment here of a district judge from another district 
for conducting a long trial or trials because of an unman- 
ageable case load in the Northern District of Alabama, 
will he or she be deemed subject to Ordinance No. 1120 
while situated temporarily in Jefferson County? 


32. State all reasons why Jefferson County attempted 
during the legislative year 1991, by having H.R. 527 intro- 
duced, to amend Act No. 406, adopted by the 1967 Ala- 
bama Legislature and upon which Ordinance No. 1120 is 
based? 

33. Was one reason Jefferson County proposed an 
amendment to Act No. 406 its doubts or worries about 
the constitutionality or legality of Ordinance No. 1120? 

34. Explain precisely how the fee, penalties and 
attorney's fees alleged in the instant complaint were cal- 
culated. 

35. How many employees of the United States or agen- 
cies of the United States does Jefferson County claim to 
have been delinquent or not properly licensed under Or- 


91 


dinance No. 1120 prior to the first collection suit’s hav- 
ing been filed by Jefferson County? 

36. Does a United States district judge who has an of- 
fice and courtroom in the same federal courthouse in 
which this defendant has his office and courtroom and 
who has periodic responsibility for trying cases in Jeffer- 
son Coynty, but whose permanent assignment and cham- 
bers within the Northern District of Alabama is in Madi- 
son County, Alabama, owe the occupational license or 
any portion thereof to Jefferson County? 

37. Would an honestly held belief that Ordinance No. 
1120 is unconstitutional or illegal in its application to a 
particular individual constitute a sufficient reason for Jef- 
ferson County's waiving penalty and/or interest under 
the provision of the ordinance which allows such a waiver 
if “a good and sufficient reason is shown for the failure to 
pay the tax within the time required”? 

38. If the answer to No. 37 is negative, list all “good 
and sufficient reasons” for such a waiver of penalty and/ 
or interest, that is unless the Director of Revenue has 
total discretion in the matter. 

39. What Alabama statute of limitations bars a claim 
for an unpaid license fee under Ordinance No. 1120? 

40. What is the maximum punishment that can be im- 
posed upon a person convicted under Ordinance No. 
1120 (refer in particular to the statutory basis)? 

41. What is the statute of limitations for a criminal 
prosecution for an alleged violation of Ordinance No. 
1120 (refer in particular to the statutory basis) ? 


WILLIAM M. ACKER, JR. 
Defendant 
Pro se 
481 U.S. Courthouse 
| Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing} 


see ee 


92 
ANSWERS TO INTERROGATORIES 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 

1. Jefferson County Ordinance 1120 levies a license or 
privilege tax upon persons engaged in any vocation, oc- 
cupation, calling or profession in Jefferson County who 
are not required by law to pay license or privilege tax to 
the State for the particular business. The Ordinance is 


authorized by Alabama Act No. 406, Legislature of Ala- 
bama 1967 (herein “Act No. 406") which provides in 
part: 
Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to equal- 
ize the burden of taxation by authorizing the 
county to impose a license or privilege tax upon 
persons now engaging in certain businesses 
without paying any license tax thereon to either 
the state or county. 


2. The terms appear to be synonymous as used in the 
Ordinance and the Act. 


3. None, as those terms are used in the Ordinance and 
the Act. 


4. Section 4 of Act No. 406 authorizes the governing 
body of the County “to levy a license or privilege tax 
upon any person for engaging in any business for which 
he is not required by law to pay any license or privilege 
tax to either the State of Alabama or the County” by the 
State License Code. The State License Code is chiefly set 
out at Chapter 12, Title 40, Code of Alabama (1975). 
Accordingly, for each occupation questioned in Inter- 
rogatory 4 (a) - (u) reference must be made to the State 
License Code. If the subject occupation is included 
therein, and the individual is “required by law” to pro- 
cure the State License Code license for the individuals’ 
specific “business” then that individuals’ specific “busi- 
ness” is exempted from the license or privilege tax estab- 


93 


lished by Act No. 406. Following herewith are citations to 
the State License Code which appear to coincide with the 
occupations which Interrogatory 4 identifies. Each 
individual's business must be examined in light of the 
express provisions of the State License Code to deter- 
mine if it is covered thereby. (The mere fact that an 
individual purchases a State license does not provide an 
automatic exemption from the County tax.) 

a. See § 40-12-49. 

b. Depends upon whether lawyer is required to pur- 
chase State license in accordance with § 40-12-49. 

c. See § 40-12-162. 

d. See § 40-12-126. 

e. Depends upon whether physician is required to pur- 
chase State license in accordance with § 40-12-126. 

f. See § 40-12-178. 


g- No license required by Title 40. However, pharma- 


cists must purchase a County license. See § 34, Ordi- 
nance 1172. 


h. See § 40-12-136. 

i. See § 40-12-155. 

j. See § 40-12-126. 

k. See § 40-12-1536. 

|. No license required by Title 40. 

m. No license required by Title 40. 

n. See § 40-12-99. 

o. Depends on whether the engineer is required to 
purchase State license in accordance with § 40-12-99. 

p. See § 40-12-48. 

q. See § 40-12-149. 


r. No license required by Title 40. However, real estate 


salesmen must purchase County license. See § 89, Ordi- 
nance 1172. 


94 


s. No license required by Title 40. However, insurance 
agents must purchase County license. See § 90, Ordi- 
nance 1172. 


t. Ido not understand this question. 


u. No license required by Title 40. However, insurance 
agents must purchase County license. See § 90, Ordi- 
nance 1172. 

5. Objection. Plaintiff objects to listing every conceiv- 
able occupation. The information sought by this Inter- 
rogatory is equally available to the Defendant by refer- 
ence to Act No. 406 and the State License Code. 


6. Objection. Plaintiff objects to listing every conceiv- 
able occupation. The information sought by this Inter- 
rogatory is equally available to the Defendant by refer- 
ence to Act No. 406, the License Code of Jefferson 
County (Ordinance No. 1172) and the State License 
Code. 


7. The individuals who actually work in the offices of 
the United State Senators located in Jefferson County are 
subject to and pay the Jefferson County Occupational 
Tax on the portion of their earnings reported to be 
earned in Jefferson County. The Senators have not re- 
ported any earnings in Jefferson County. 


8. The Jefferson County Staff Attorneys are required 
by State law to pay their license or privilege tax to the 
State. Accordingly, Act No. 406 does not authorize the 
County to tax their earnings. However, they are subject 
to the City of Birmingham Occupational Tax of | per- 
cent of their earnings. 


9. I do not know any such judges. However, any such 
judges would be subject to the Jefferson County Occupa- 
tional Tax on the portion of their earnings earned in 
Jefferson County (and the Birmingham Occupational 
Tax on the portion of their earnings earned in Birming- 
ham). 


95 


10. I do not know any such judges. However, any such 
judges would be subject to the Jefferson County Occupa- 
tional Tax on the portion of their earnings earned in 
Jefferson County (and the Birmingham Occupational 
Tax on the portion of their earnings earned in Birming- 
ham). A dialogue was in process with Judge Robert 
Vance concerning the tax at the time of his death. 


11. These individuals are required by State law to pay 
license or privilege tax to the State and are, therefore, 
exempt from the County occupational tax. 


12. Members of the armed forces of the United States 
are subject to Jefferson County Occupational Tax on the 
portion of their earnings earned in Jefferson County. 


13. It is my understanding that the Federal Judge as- 
signed to this case is in senior status. If that is correct, he 
would not owe occupational tax to Jefferson County. 


14. Yes. 


15. Objection. Jefferson County has filed approxi- 
mately 4,400 civil lawsuits against delinquent occupa- 
tional taxpayers. The information concerning these suits 
is equally available to Defendant by inspection of the Dis- 
trict Court records of Jefferson County, Alabama. Fur- 
ther, some of the information requested by Interrogatory 
15 may be confidential pursuant to Section 9, Ordinance 
1120. No one has been arrested. 


16. In excess of 15,000 individual tax accounts have 
been examined to date to determine whether the proper 
amount of occupational tax has been paid. 


17. The taxpayers who earn part of their wages in Jef- 
ferson County, Alabama, have the option of paying the 
tax on their full wages and later seeking the appropriate 
refund or, paying tax on the estimated amount of in- 
come they earn in Jefferson County, Alabama. The De- 
partment of Revenue has adopted a procedure to obtain 
a written estimate from the taxpayer. 


96 


18. No oaths are required of Jefferson County occupa- 
tional taxpayers. 

19. There are no required oaths. 

20 - 21. Ordinance 1120 is not an “income tax” under 
Alabama law. However, with regard to federal employees, 
the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. § 110(c) defines “income tax” as 
any tax levied on or measured by net income, gross in- 
come or gross receipts. The Buck Act makes all such state 
and local taxes applicable to federal employees. 

22 - 23. Jefferson County had made efforts to obtain 
the voluntary cooperation of several agencies of the 
United States to implement the withholding of the Jeffer- 
son County Occupational Tax. Only two United States 
agencies have failed to initiate withholding at this time. 
As time and resources permit, other efforts will be pur- 
sued. 

24. I do not know what was in the minds of the County 
Commissioners in 1987 when the Ordinance was adopted 
concerning exempting “domestic employees employed in 
private homes”. However, the County Occupational Ordi- 
nance is very close to the City of Birmingham Occupa- 
tional Ordinance which had been in place for 17 years 
before the County Ordinance was adopted and which 
also exempted such domestic servants employed in pri- 
vate homes. Further, it is apparent that performing do- 
mestic services in private homes does not carry the usual 
commercial concepts applicable to commercial suppliers 
of goods and services. 

25. The terms identified at interrogatory no. 25 are 
used in accordance with the enabling legislation, Act No. 
406 (1967). 

26. See answer 25 above. 

27 - 28. Jefferson County acknowledges that the State 


Legislature has the power to impose revenue taxes upon 
individuals with earnings from services provided within 


97 


the State. Further, that the State legislature has the 
power to delegate authority to counties and to munici- 
palities to impose revenue taxes on the earnings of indi- 
viduals performing services within those respective juris- 
dictions. Businesses routinely pay such revenue taxes to 
multiple taxing jurisdictions in which they conduct busi- 
ness. All municipalities in Alabama are already autho- 
rized to impose such business revenue taxes on earnings 
occurring within their jurisdictions. 


29. It appears that in 1970 the City of Birmingham 
exercised its authority in full (except as to domestic ser- 
vants employed in the home) as delegated to it by the 
Alabama Legislature by imposing its occupational tax on 
all occupations. It appears that Jefferson County exer- 
cised its authority in full (except as to domestic servants 
employed in the home) as delegated to it by the Alabama 
Legislature by imposing its occupational tax on all occu- 
pations that are not included in the State License Code. 
It also appears that the Alabama Legislature elected to 
subordinate the taxing authority which it delegated to 


Jefferson County to its own exercise of taxing authority 


through the State License Code. 


30. Object. This interrogatory is argumentative. Never- 
theless, it is noted that the argument is specious and 
implausible as demonstrated by substituting other taxing 
authorities. That is, does the Defendant likewise refuse to 
pay State @f Alabama income tax and the City of Birming- 
ham occupational tax because other federal judges lo- 
cated in states and municipalities without income tax and 
without privilege taxes do not have to pay similar taxes? 
The Defendant's argument is no different than an argu- 
ment that might be raised by any employee of an em- 
ployer (other than the United States) which directs an 
employee to work within an assigned territory. Probably 
very few such employee tax payers have the choice of 
which jurisdiction they will perform their services in. 


98 


31. Alabama income tax and municipal and county oc- 
cupational taxes are imposed on earnings earned within 
the respective jurisdiction. The United States Congress is 
fully aware of the authority of state and municipal and 
county jurisdictions to impose revenue taxes on the earn- 
ings of members of the federal judiciary which occur 
within the jurisdictions. The United States Congress ex- 
pressly declared in “The Buck Act” that such earnings are 
subject to such state and local revenue taxes and further 
are subject to withholding by the United States and its 
agencies. Neither the United States Congress nor the Ala- 
bama Legislature made any exception from their acts for 
members of the federal judiciary or other federal em- 
ployees by reason of being “situated temporarily” within 
any such jurisdiction. 

32. The bills referred to Interrogatory 32 would 
broaden the tax base and increase revenues for the op- 
eration of County government. 

33. No. The constitutionality of Ordinance 1120 and 
Act 406 have already been upheld by the Alabama Su- 
preme Court. See Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 
1270 (Ala. 1988). 

34. The base tax is equal to one-half of one percent 
(.005%) of gross wages earned in Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama. The interest and penalties are imposed by Section 
10, Ordinance 1120. Pursuant to Section 10, interest on 
delinquent taxes accrues at the rate of 12 percent per 
year. Pursuant to Section 10, delinquent taxes are subject 
to a 10 percent penalty. 

35. The County has filed approximately 2,800 collec- 
tion suits against employees of the United States, its 
agencies and instrumentalities. 

36. Yes, but only upon that portion of gross wages 
earned in Jefferson County, Alabama. Further, if a judge 
is in senior status he or she would not owe any County 
occupational tax. 


99 


37. Ordinance 1120 has already been declared lawful 
and constitutional by a State Circuit Court and by the 
Alabama Supreme Court. It would be self-defeating and 
chaotic to conclude that a taxpayer would still have an 
“honestly held belief” that the Ordinance is unconstitu- 
tional as to that taxpayer. 

38. Good and sufficient reasons for a waiver of penalty 
and/or interest may include, but are not limited to, situa- 
tions where the taxpayer did not pay the tax based upon 
erroneous information provided by the County Revenue 
Department. Another good and sufficient reason in- 
cludes situations where penalty and interest are calcu- 
lated on an erroneous amount of base tax. In those situa- 
tions, a tax r may be ted a partial wai - 
fc are y be granted a | waiver of pen 

39. Section 6-2-35(2), Alabama Code. 


40 - 41. There does not appear to be a criminal statute 
for violation of Ordinance 1120. 


/8/ Randy Godeke 
RANDY GODEKE, Director, 


Jefferson County Department of 
Revenue 


(Jurat and Certificate of Service Omitted in Printing] 


eee eee 


REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATION TO 
APPEAL INTERLOCUTORY ORDER 


Filed August 18, 1993 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


Come now the Defendants, Jefferson County, Alabama 
and Randy Godeke, and the Intervenor, Birmingham-fef- 


100 


ferson Civic Center Authority, and in accordance with 
Rule 5, Alabama Rules of Appellate Procedure, hereby 
request this Court to certify as immediately appealable its 
Interlocutory Order denying Defendant's MOTION FOR 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT on all federal constitutional and 
statutory claims (except the Buck Act claim) contained in 
Counts I and II of the Complaint. In further support of 
this request, Defendants state as follows: 

1. This request for certification is presented to this 
Court simultaneously with a MOTION TO VACATE 
PRIOR ORDER, being the ORDER which this Court ren- 
dered on April 8, 1993. Said motion demonstrates that if 
the action by the Jefferson County Circuit Clerk of 
merely writing “4-9-93 order per sep paper. Jd Rochester” 
on the Case Action Summary sheet constitutes an entry 
of the ORDER, the Clerk violated Rule 77(d), Alabama 
Rules of Civil Procedure, by failing to immediately notify 
parties of the rendition and entry of the ORDER. Accord- 
ingly, this REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATION TO AP- 
PEAL INTERLOCUTORY ORDER assumes that the 
Court will grant the MOTION TO VACATE PRIOR OR- 
DER and render another Order to which this request for 
certification applies. 

2. In its ORDER in paragraph | the Court found 
that: 


101 
tain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, i 
tional and unjust manner. irae 


Whereas, in paragraph 3 the Court found that: 


3. The trial court in Bedingfield v. Jefferso 

County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. i508), aid - fact 
consider the constitutionality of Act No. 406 and 
Jefferson County Ordinance No. 1120 as it re- 
lates to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 and 
found “nothing” in said Act to be “repugnant” 
to such a degree as to invalidate the Act, and 
further did not find Ordinance No. 1120 to be 
invalid”. (Order of Judge Braxton Kittrell, 

cially Sitting, CV-87-504-465 and CV-87-504-469 

— County, Alabama, December 11, 


The Court then declared: 


The state constitutional issues in this matter 
have been previously adjudicated. 


Accordingly, summary judgment i 
GRANTED in favor of defendants a andes 
plaintiffs as to Counts III and IV of the com- 
plaint based on the doctrine of res judicata. Sum- 
“Wed judgment is DENIED as to Counts I and 


1. In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 
1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor the 
Alabama Supreme Court determined whether Ala- 
bama Act No. 406 (Alabama Legislature 1960) 
authorized the tax in question, or Jefferson 
County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson County 
Commission 1987), imposing the tax in ques- 
tion violates the equal protection clause of the 
United States Constitution by creating an unrea- 
sonable, unjust and improper classification of 
citizens subject to the tax while exempting cer- 


The Court's ORDER confirms the application of the 
doctrine of res judicata to Plaintiffs’ Complaint in this 
case by declaring that neither Act No. 406 or Ordinance 
1120 violated the Constitution of Alabama. However, the 
Court finds that neither the trial court nor the Alabama 
Supreme Court “determined” whether Act No. 406 or 
Ordinance No. 1120 “violates the equal protection clause 
of the United States Constitution”, and denied summary 
judgment as to Count I (federal employees Buck Act and 
federal equal protection claims) and Count II (non fed- 
eral employees federal equal protection claim). 


102 


The Alabama Supreme Court has repeatedly held that 
the doctrine of res judicata bars claims which could have 
been raised in the prior suit along with the claims that 
were actually raised and adjudicated. See Baker v. City of 
Guntersville, 1992 WL 69934 (1992); NAACP v. Hunt, 891 
Fed.2d 1555 (11th Cir. 1990); Dairyland Insurance Com- 
pany v. Jackson, 566 So.2d 723 (Ala. 1990); Hughes v. 
Allenstein, 514 So.2d 858 (Ala. 1987); Robinson v. Holley, 
549 So.2d 1 (Ala. 1989); Garris v. South Alabama Produc- 
tion Credit, 537 So.2d 911 (Ala. 1989); Dominick's, Inc. v. 
Key, 546 So.2d 1047 (Ala. 1984); Wheeler v. First Alabama 
Bank, 364 So.2d 1190 (Ala. 1978). 

3. It is axiomatic that the alleged violations of the 
equal protection clause of the United States Constitution 
could have been raised by the Bedingfield plaintiffs. Thus, 
it is immaterial whether the Bedingfield trial court or the 
Supreme Court actually “determined” or “adjudicated” 
such claim. Because the federal equal protection claim 
could have been raised in Bedingfield, that claim is clearly 
barred by res judicata. 

4. In accordance with the requirements of Rule 5, 
the Defendants assert the following: 


a. The applicability of res judicata to the federal 
constitutional and statutory claims in Counts 
I and II (except Buck Act claim) is a control- 
ling question of law as to which there is a 
substantial ground for difference of opinion. 


b. That an immediate appeal from the ORDER 
would materially advance the ultimate termi- 
nation of the litigation. 


c. That the appeal would avoid protracted and 
expensive litigation. 


Specifically, Defendants contend that the application 
of res judicata to the federal equa! protection claims in 


103 


Counts I and II of the Complaint, which are claims that 
could have been raised in Bedingfield, is a controlling 
question of law which will dispose of all federal constitu- 
tional claims in this case. 


Secondly, such adjudication of the federal constitu- 
tional claims would materially advance the ultimate ter- 
mination of the titugation by leaving only the Count | 
(Buck Act) claim as to certain federal employees. Such 
federal employees are limited in number. Moreover, the 
Buck Act claim is a question of law which may be quickly 
decided on a follow up motion for summary judgment 
while the Rule 5 appeal is proceeding. 


Finally, such disposition of the federal constitutional 
claims will avoid protracted and expensive litigation. The 
Defendant Jefferson County is a public entity. The Inter- 
venor Birmingham-Jefferson County Civic Center is a 
public entity. The occupational tax revenue goes to the 
County General Fund. $10,000,000 per year is irrevocably 
pledged to payment of Birmingham-Jefferson County 
Civic Center bonds. The balance of about $26,000,000 
represents approximately one-third of the County General 
Fund. It pays for hundreds of public projects and public 
contracts and commitments for public services to thou- 
sands of individuals. Accordingly, if the federal constitu- 
tional claims in Counts I and II remain in this case, the 
Defendants must initiate contingency planning that may 
include suspension and termination of projects and con- 
tracts and cancellation of commitments; hiring freezes 
and development of employee lay-off lists. The affected 
projects include the renovation of the County Nursing 
Home (for the impecunious) currently in process, reno- 
vations of the Cooper Green Hospital (for indigents) cur- 
rently in process and the construction of the Juvenile and 
Family Court of Jefferson County, phase one currently in 
progress. There are hundreds of individuals and institu- 
tions who have purchased securities issued by the County 


104 


and by the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center which are 
secured and paid by occupational tax revenue. These in- 
dividuals and institutions will be greatly concerned for 
the value and security of the bonds. An immediate ap- 
peal with disposition of the federal constitutional claims 
on res judicata should completely diminish the disrup- 
tion, confusion and concern described above. 


Also, as previously noted to the Court, the class mem- 
bers involved in Count II of the Complaint include every 
taxpayer of the Jefferson County occupational tax. There 
are several hundred thousand of such putative class 
members. Defendants do not have an individual idenufi- 
cation by name and address of most of the class mem- 
bers. Defendants rely on employers to withhold and 
make payment of the occupational tax through consoli- 
dated returns. Discovery and identification of the class 
members will disrupt the business of the Department of 
Revenue and the County at a substantial cost of lost pro- 
ductive time and incurrence of overtime for the County 
and for all of the public employers and the private em- 
ployers from whom information must be obtained. De- 
fendants contend that the Rule 5 appeal will result in the 
barring of all such federal constitutional claims which 
will dispose of the foregoing loss of public and private 
funds and resources for such class certification and noti- 
fication. 


5. Defendants submit that no party will be prejudiced 
by an interlocutory appeal. The Plaintiffs will be spared 
the expenditure for and effort of discovery and class cer- 
tification. Further, the intervening time period may be 
used to seek legislation that would moot the underlying 
complaint in the future. 

6. Defendants submit that there can be no more ap- 
propriate use of a Rule 5 appeal than exists in this case. 
The great impact of the federal constitutional claims on 
the public interests described above is compelling for the 


105 


application of a Rule 5 appeal which provides a very real- 
istic Opportunity to avoid the great public losses and 
other grim effects of its continuation. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing] 


see eee 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


ORDER 


Filed November 17, 1993 
[Caption Omitted in Printing] 


After a consideration of the law, statutes, legal evi- 
dence and argument of counsel for the parties the Court 
finds that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment as 
to certain claims raised by the Plaintiffs due to the doc- 
trine of res judicata, but that certain of Plaintiffs’ claims 
should not be dismissed. The Court FINDS as follows: 


1. In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 
1988), neither the trial court nor the Alabama Supreme 


Court determined whether Alabama Act. No. 406 (Ala- 
bama Legislature 1967), authorizing the tax in question, 
or Jefferson County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson 
County Commission 1987), imposing the tax in question, 
violates the equal protection clause of the United States 
Constitution by creating an unreasonable, unjust and im- 
proper classification of citizens subject to the tax, while 
exempting certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, 
irrational and unjust manner. | 
2. In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 
1988), neither the trial court nor the Alabama Supreme 
Court determined whether the tax in question violates 


106 


the Buck Act (4 U.S.C. § 111) as it pertains to federal 
employees. 

3. The trial court in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 
So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), did in fact consider the constitu- 
tionality of Alabama Act No. 406 and Jefferson County 
Ordinance No. 1120 as it relates to the Constitution of 
Alabama of 1901 and found “nothing” in said Act to be 
“repugnant” to such a degree as to invalidate the Act, 
and further did not find Ordinance No. 1120 to be “in- 
valid.” (Order of Judge Braxton Kittrell, Specially Sitting, 
CV-87-504-465 and CV-87-504-469, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, December 11, 1987.) Thus the state constitutional 
issues in this matter have been previously adjudicated. 

Accordingly, Summary Judgment is GRANTED in favor 
of Defendant, and against Plaintiffs as to Counts Three 
and Four of the Complaint based on the doctrine of res 
judicata. Summary judgment is DENIED as to Counts 
One and Two. 

Done and Ordered this 17th day of November, 1993. 


JOHN E. ROCHESTER, Circuit Judge 
Specially Sitting 


***e ee 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


ORDER 


Filed November 17, 1993 
[Caption Omitted in Printing} 
This case came on for hearing on Defendants’ and 
Intervenor’s REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATION TO AP- 


PEAL INTERLOCUTORY ORDER. Defendants Jefferson 
County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center Au- 


107 


thority urge the Court to certify as appealable under 
Rule 5, Alabama Rules of Appellate Procedure, that por- 
tion of its ORDER of November 17, 1993, denying sum- 
mary judgment for Defendants on Count | and Count 2 
of Plainuffs Complaint. Defendants’ summary judgment 
motion maintained that all four counts of the Complaint, 
except that portion of Count | asserting federal employ- 
ees’ Buck Act (4 U.S.C. § 111) claims, are barred by res 
judicata based upon the decision of the Supreme Court 
in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (1988). 
The ORDER granted summary judgment as to Counts 3 
and 4 based on the doctrine of res judicata. The remain- 
ing Count | asserts federal employees’ Buck Act claims 
and federal constitutional claims. The remaining Count 
2 asserts non-federal employees’ federal constitutional 
claims. 


In support of the REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATION to 
appeal under Rule 5, the parties have informed the 
Court and the Court hereby finds the following with re- 
spect to the Rule 5 requirements. 


The Jefferson County occupational tax at issue in this 
case generates approximately $36,000,000 per year. Ten 
million dollars of the annual proceeds are pledged for a 
twenty year period to pay the main component of debt 
service on bonds of the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Cen- 
ter authority (the “Civic Center Authority”) that are now 
outstanding in the principal amount of $123,205,000 
(the City of Birmingham has pledged $3,000,000 per year 
to pay the remaining debt service on these bonds). 


With respect to class certification there are several 
hundred thousand putative class members who pay the 
County occupational tax. However, Defendants rely on 
employers to withhold and pay the tax and, therefore, 
Defendants do not have an individual identification by 
name and address of most of the putative class members. 


108 


WHEREFORE, upon due consideration of the forego- 
ing; the purpose and requirements of Rule 5, Alabama 
Rules of Appellate Procedure; and, the arguments of 
counsel, it is the OPINION of the Court and the Court 
thereby finds that the portion of its ORDER denying 
summary judgment on Counts | and 2, except for the 
federal employees’ Buck Act claim, should, as a matter of 
public interest and exigency, be and hereby is CERTI- 
FIED as immediately appealable in accordance with Rule 
5, Alabama Rules of Appellate Procedure. The Court fur- 
ther finds and CERTIFIES as follows: 


1. Whether Plaintiffs’ claims asserted in Counts | and 
2 are also barred by the doctrine of res judicata is a con- 
trolling question of law as to which there is substantial 
ground for difference of opinion. 


2. The Plaintiffs’ claims asserted in Counts | and 2 
also present a controlling question of law, as to which 
there is substantial ground for difference of opinion, 
with respect to the issue of whether Act No. 406 enacted 
by the Legislature of Alabama in 1967 (the statute autho- 
rizing the levy of the County's occupation tax), by its 
terms, denied the Plaintiffs and other citizens similarly 
situated the equal protection of the laws as guaranteed by 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Consti- 
tution. Act No. 406 and the general professional licens- 
ing laws of the State of Alabama exempt certain profes 
sions and occupations from the County's occupation tax 
and in so doing make certain legislative classifications 
among the citizens of the County for purposes of levying 
the tax in question. 

3. An immediate appeal from the Interlocutory OR- 
DER would materially advance the ultimate termination 
of the litigation. While the questions herein certified are 
on appeal, this Court expects to proceed to adjudicate 
the sole remaining Buck Act claim on behalf of a rela- 
tively small class of federal employees who work in the 


109 


County. The parties have advised the Court that they are 
not aware of any factual disputes pertaining to the Buck 
Act claim, therefore, said claim may be decided on cross 
motions for summary judgment, thereby terminating the 
litigation in the circuit court. 

4. An interlocutory appeal would avoid protracted 
and expensive litigation. If it is determined by the Rule 5 
appeal that Counts | and 2 are barred either by res 
judicata or by decision of the equal protection question 
as a matter of law, both the Defendants and the Plaintiffs’ 
employers in the County would be spared the great cost 
and disruption of having to identify and locate and give 
notice to each of the several hundred thousand class 
members. 


DONE and ORDERED this 17th day of November, 
1993. 


/s/ John E. Rochester 


JOHN E. ROCHESTER, Circuit Judge 
Specially Sitting 


see ee ee 


110 
SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994-95 
1930255 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic 
Center Authority 


v. 
Jason Richards, et al. 


Appeal from Jefferson Circuit Court 
(CV-92-3191) 


ALMON, JUSTICE. 


This appeal by permission is from the denial of a sum- 
mary judgment in a declaratory judgment action brought 
on behalf of two classes of taxpayers against Jefferson 
County. The taxpayers sought to have Act 406, 1967 Ala. 
Acts, and Jefferson County Ordinance 1120, adopted in 
1987, declared unconstitutional. Act 406 authorizes the 
Jefferson County Commission to levy a county occupa- 
tional tax on all persons who earn wages in the County 
and who are not required to pay the state business li- 
cense tax. Ordinance 1120 levies the county occupational 
tax at the rate of .005 (/, of 1%) on all eligible income 
earned in the county, exempting persons who pay the 
state business license tax and domestic servants employed 
in private homes. The complaint was filed by two classes 
of taxpayers: the “Foley-Dykes” class, which represents all 
Federal emplovees subject to the tax, and the “Richards 
Hill” class, which represents all non-Federal employees 
subject to the tax. The complaint alleges that Act 406 and 
Ordinance 1120 violate the equal protection and due 
process provisions of the Federal and State constitutions, 
and, with regard to the class of Federal employees only, 
the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. § 111 et seq. The plaintiffs allege 


that the Act and the ordinance are made unconstitu- 
tional by what they call the arbitrary and irrational char- 
acter of the exemptions. The Birmingham-Jefferson Civic 
Center Authority (“BJCC”) was allowed to intervene, as- 
serting as its interest $10 million per year of occupational 
tax proceeds that have been pledged to the BJCC for a 
20-year period to repay BJCC special tax bonds that are 
now outstanding in the principal amount of over $123 
million. 


The County moved for a summary judgment, contend- 
ing that all of the claims, except for the Federal employ- 
ees’ Buck Act claim, are barred by the doctrine of res 
judicata, based on the action that was the subject of this 
Court's opinion in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 
2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). The trial court entered a summary 
judgment for the County on all State constitutional 
claims, but denied the motion for summary judgment 
with regard to the Federal constitutional and statutory 
claims, stating: 


“In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 
1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor the 
Alabama Supreme Court determined whether 
Alabama Act No. 406 (Alabama Legislature 
1967), authorizing the tax in question, or Jeffer- 
son County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson 
County Commission 1987), imposing the tax in 
question, violates the equal protection clause of 
the United States Constitution by creating an 
unreasonable, unjust and improper classifica- 
tion of citizens subject to the tax, while exempt- 
ing certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, 
irrational and unjust manner.” 


Pursuant to Rule 5, Ala. R. App. P., we granted the 
County permission to appeal the denial of the summary 
judgment. The issue before us is whether the trial court 
correctly held that the Federal constitutional claims are 


112 


not barred by the doctrine of res judicata and thus cor- 
rectly denied the summary judgment on these claims. 
The doctrine of res judicata is a well-established prin- 
ciple of law: 
“The elements of res judicata, or claim pre- 


clusion, are (1) a prior judgment on the merits, 
(2) rendered by a court of competent jurisdic- 
tion, (3) with substantial identi ¢ of the parties, 
and (4) with the same cause of action presented 
in both suits. Hughes v. Allenstein, 514 So. 2d 
858, 860 (Ala. 1987).” 


Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 So. 2d 723, 725 
(Ala. 1990). 


“If those four elements are present, any claim 

that was or could have been adjudicated in the 

prior action is barred from further litigation.” 
Id.; Crutcher v. Wynn, 591 So. 2d 453, 454 (Ala. 1991); Ex 
parte McCracken, 576 So. 2d 664, 665 (Ala. 1991); Wood v. 
Tricon Metals & Services, Inc., 548 So, 2d 138, 140 (Ala. 
1989); Trimble v. Bramco Products, Inc., 351 So. 2d 1357 
(Ala. 1977). 


“In general a judgment is res judicata not 
only as to all matters litigated and decided by it, 
but as to all relevant issues which could have 
been but were not raised and litigated in the 
suit.” 
Heiser v. Woodruff, 327 U.S. 726, 735 (1946) (citations 
omitted). 

The appeal in Bedingfield arose from two complaints 
that were consolidated in a single action. One complaint 
was filed by Hoyt Bedingfield, Jr., individually as a tax- 
payer, and also in his capacity as acting director of fi- 
nance of the City of Birmingham, and by the City of 
Birmingham. The Bedingfield/Birmingham complaint 
requested a judgment declaring 


113 


“that Ordinance No. 1120 adopted by the Jeffer- 
son County Commission is void and invalid, and 
if necessary, that Act No. 406 passed by the Ala- 
bama Legislature in 1967 and approved by the 
Governor on September 7, 1967, is void and in- 
valid to the extent that it supports any compre- 
hensive occupational tax on all persons working 
in Jefferson County.” 


Among the grounds alleged in that complaint were that 
“Act 406 is a violation of the equal protection require- 
ments and provisions of the federal and state constitu- 
tion,” and that “Act 406 is vague and ambiguous and 
therefore is a violation of the due process requirements 
of the state and federal constitution.” 


The second complaint sought declaratory and injunc- 
tive relief “against the action of the Jefferson County 
Commission levying an occupational tax on employees of 
Jefferson County.” It was filed by three persons “in their 
individual capacity” as “employees within Jefferson 
County.” In addition to several other allegations of viola- 
tions of due process and equal protection principles, the 
complaint alleged that the tax 


“constitutes a denial of equal protection in vio- 
lation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the 
United States Constitution. Said Act 


fessional occupations required by State law to be li- 
censed but does not exempt other professional and 


nonprofessional occupations. ” 

(Emphasis added.) This allegation is the substance of the 
allegations made in the complaint now before the Court. 

The complaint that is the subject of this appeal asks 
the circuit court to “declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional, as depriving plaintiffs of due process of law 
and equal protection of the laws” guaranteed under the 
United States and Alabama Constitutions. The same 
cause of action was presented in both actions. Both were 


114 


actions for declaratory judgments challenging the consti- 
tutionality of the Jefferson County occupational tax. Both 
complaints alleged violations of the equal protection and 
due process provisions of the State and Federal constitu- 
tions. The appellate briefs in Bedingfield argued an equal 
protection issue regarding the fact that Act No. 406 ap- 
plied only to counties with a population of 500,000 or 
more. Bedingfield was decided, both by the circuit court 
and by this Court, on other State constitutional grounds, 
but the Federal and State equal protection and due pro- 
cess claims were pleaded, and it is at least true that they 
“could have been adjudicated.” Dairyland Ins. Co. v. Jack- 
son, 566 So. 2d 723, 725 (Ala. 1990). Furthermore, they 
arguably were adjudicated, because they were grounds 
stated as a basis for relief, and a final judgment denying 
relief was affirmed. 


“Res judicata applies not only to the precise legal theory 
presented in the prior case, but to all legal theories and 
claims arising out of the same nucleus of operative fact.” 
NAACP v. Hunt, 891 F. 2d 1555, 1561 (11th Cir. 1990) 
(citations omitted). 


“{A] party ... is not at liberty to split up his 
demand and prosecute it by piecemeal, or 
present only a portion of the grounds on which 
special relief is sought, and leave the rest to be 
presented in a second suit, if the first fail. There 
would be no end to litigation if such a practice 
were permissible.’ Baltimore Steamship Company v. 
Vernon Philips, 274 U.S. 316 [47 S.Ct. 600, 71 
L.Ed.2d 1069] (1926).” 


Century 21 Preferred Properties, Inc. v. Alabama Real Estate 
Comm'n, 401 So. 2d 764, 768 (Ala. 1981) (per Jones, J., 
with three Justices concurring and two Justices concur- 
ring in the result). 

The only other element of res judicata that is at issue is 
“substantial identity of the parties,” see Dairyland, supra. 


115 


“The second set of persons to whom res judicata 
applies is composed of those persons who are or 
were in privity with the parties to the original 
suit. ... Privity is defined as ‘a relationship be- 
tween one who is a party of record and a 
nonparty that is sufficiently close so a judgment 
for or against the party should bind or protect 
the nonparty.’ ... Privity exists where the 
nonparty’s interests were represented ad- 
equately by the party in the original suit. ... 
Privity also exists where a party to the original 
suit is ‘so closely aligned to a nonparty’s interest 
as to be his virtual representative.’ United Mer- 
chants & Mfrs., Inc. v. Sanders, 508 So. 2d 689, 
692 (Ala. 1987).” 


NAACP v. Hunt, supra, at 1560-61 (citations omitted). See 
also Century 21, supra. The taxpayers in the Bedingfield 
action adequately represented the interests of the taxpay- 
ers here, and the respective taxpayers’ interests are not 
only closely aligned — they are essentially identical. The 
“substantial identity of the parties” element of res judicata 
is met here. 


The wisdom of disallowing successive attacks on the 
county tax on grounds that could have been pursued and 
adjudicated in the initial challenge is demonstrated by 
the BJCC’s motion to intervene, which recites that it is- 
sued two series of bonds in 1989 to expand and improve 
the civic center. The motion continues: 


“[P]ursuant to that certain Pledge and Appro- 
priation Agreement between the Defendant Jef- 
ferson County and the intervenor, said Defen- 
dant appropriated, pledged and agreed to pay a 
portion of the proceeds of the Occupational 
Tax [at] issue in this matter to the BJCC for 
repayment of the Series 1989 and Series 1989B 
Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds issued by the 
BJCC in twenty (20) annual payments of 


116 


$10,000,000.00 beginning in the year 1989 and 
ending in the year 2008.” 


In 1989, the county and the Authority, in pledging the 
occupational tax revenue and issuing the bonds, could 
have relied on Bedingfield as authoritatively establishing 
that the county occupational tax was not unconstitutional 
for the reasons asserted by the Bedingfield plaintiffs. To 
allow a challenge now that was pleaded and could have 
been adjudicated in Bedingfield would not only violate the 
res judicata principles discussed above, but would also im- 
properly interfere with the operations of the county and 
the BJCC and undermine the security of the bonds, to 
the detriment of the bondholders. 


For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the circuit 
court incorrectly held that Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), did not, by the operation of 
the doctrine of res judicata, bar this action. 


REVERSED AND REMANDED. 
Shores, Kennedy, Cook, and Butts,* [J., concur. 
Maddox, J., dissents. 


*Although Justice Butts was not a member of this Court when this 
case was orally argued, he has listened to the tape of oral argument 
and has studied the record. 


117 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center Au- 
thority v. Jason Richards, et al. 


MADDOX, JUSTICE (dissenting). 

The elements of the doctrine of res judicata have been 
precisely set out by this Court in Wheeler v. First Alabama 
Bank of Birmingham, 364 So. 2d 1190, 1199 (Ala. 1978), 
where this Court said: 


“The elements of res judicata are as follows: 
(1) prior judgment rendered by court of com- 
petent jurisdiction; (2) prior judgment ren- 
dered on the merits; (3) parties to both suits 
substantially identical; and (4) same cause of ac- 
tion present in both suits.” 


See also Dominey v. Mathison, 292 Ala. 293, 293 So. 2d 471 
(1974), and my dissenting opinion in Century 21 Preferred 
Properties, Inc. v. Alabama Real Estate Comm'n, 401 So.2d 
764, 770 (Ala. 1981). Even a cursory examination of this 
doctrine as applied to the facts of this case reveals that it 
has no application to this case. In this dissent, | will make 
a brief statement of the facts and will state the principle 
of law I think should be applied to sustain the trial 
court's order. 


The majority holds that these plaintiffs are bound by 
the iudgment rendered in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), where the City of Birming- 
ham challenged the constitutionality of Act No. 406 and 
the validity of a county ordinance establishing an occupa- 
tional tax. 


The trial judge, in denying the defendant's motion for 
a summary judgment in this case (that motion being 
based on the ground that the action was barred by the 
doctrine of res judicata), issued an order in which he con- 
cluded, in part, that “[i]n Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor 


{this Court] determined whether Act No. 406 (Alabama 
Legislature 1967), authorizing the tax in question, or Jef- 
ferson County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson County 
Commission 1987), imposing the tax in question, violates 
the equal protection clause of the United States Constitu- 
tion by creating an unreasonable, unjust and improper 
classification of citizens subject to the tax, while exempt- 
ing certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, irratio- 
nal and unjust manner.” The trial judge also determined 
that “li]n Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 1270 
(Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor [this Court] de- 
termined whether the tax in question violates the Buck 
Act (4 U.S.C. § 111) as it pertains to federal employees.” | 
agree with the trial court on both points. 


In concluding that the trial judge was correct, I have 
examined the pleadings in Bedingfield and the order en- 
tered by the trial judge in that case and I have studied 
the opinion issued by this Court in Bedingfield, a case in 
which I participated. | have also carefully considered the 
argument of Jefferson County that “the claims in this 
case arise from the same nucleus of operative fact as the 
claims made in Bedingfield and [that] because the evi- 
dence necessary *o support both claims is identical, it is 
axiomatic that the fourth element of res judicata is satis- 
fied,” and I have given careful consideration to the views 
of my colleagues expressed in the majority opinion, and 
my only comment is that if the “same cause of action 
presented in both suits” element of the res judicata doc- 
trine is so easily satisfied, then it could be extended ad 
infinitum and would establish a precedent that could 
close the courthouse doors to other plaintiffs in other 
cases who might find themselves faced with the rule of 
law herein established. | think that the Court is establish- 
ing a bad precedent. 

My opinion that Bedingfield does not bar the claims 
presented in this case is the same as that of the trial 


119 
judge: that this Court, in Bedingfield, did not adjudicate 
these claims, or any claim similar to them. The West Pub- 
lishing Company synopsis in Bedingfield succinctly states 
what that case was about, and the issues it adjudicated: 


“City challenged constitutionality of county 
ordinance establishing occupational tax. The 
Circuit Court, Jefferson County, Braxton L. 
Kittrell, Jr., J., upheld ordinance, and appeal 
was taken. The Supreme Court, Beatty, ]., held 
that: (1) statute authorized county to levy occu- 
pational tax; (2) statute was general rather than 
local legislation; and (3) statute authorizing levy 
of tax provided for collection of such tax.” 


527 So. 2d at 1270. Where in the Bedingfield opinion is 
there an adjudication of the federal constitutional claims 
the plaintiffs raise in the instant action? Neither the or- 
der of the tial judge nor the opinion of this Court con- 
tains a single reference to whether the Act and the 
county ordinance violate any provision of the Federal 
Constitution. 

It is true that the plaintiffs, in Bedingfield, did allege in 
their complaint that “[i}f Ordinance No. 1120 were au- 
thorized by Act 406, then Act 406 is unconstitutional 
based upon any one of the following grounds: ... . B. Act 
406 is a violation of the equal protection requirements 
and provisions of the federal and state constitutions.” But 
I ask this question: Is the mere making of such an allega- 
tion in a complaint sufficient to satisfy the “same cause of 
action presented in both suits” element of the res 
judicata doctrine? | think not, especially when the 
adjudicatory orders of the trial court, and of this Court, 
affirmatively show that the issues in Bedingfield involved 
whether Act No. 406 was a general law or was a local law 
because the Act was applicable only to counties with a 
population of 500,000 or more. 


120 


But even assuming that the federal equal protection 
claim was presented and adjudicated in Bedingfield, the 
plaintiffs in this case are attacking the exemption scheme 
contained in Ordinance No. 1120, which exempts a num- 
ber of occupations from the occupational tax.’ Clearly, 


‘Ordinance 1120 taxes the gross receipts of any person who en- 
gages in or follows any “vocation, occupation, calling and profes 
sion,” but exempts from its definition of “vocation, occupation, call- 
ing and profession” the following: utility companies; freight lines 
and equipment companies; electric Companies, gas Companies, rail- 
roads; telephone companies, telegraph companies, express compa- 
nies; financial institutions, insurance Companies, abstract companies; 
acetylene gas and carbide manufacturers, adding machine, calculat- 
ing machine, and comptometer businesses, advertising companies; 
air conditioning plant and equipment businesses; amusement parks; 
architects; attorneys; auctioneers; automobile dealers, automobile 
accessory dealers, automobile garages and shops, automobile storage 
beauty parlors; bicycle and motorcycle dealers; blueprint makers; 
mop manufacturers, cereal and soft drink retailers and wholesalers; 
certified public accountants, cigar, cigarette, and cheroot retailers 
and wholesalers, circus operators, cleaning and pressing establish- 
ments, coal and coke dealers, coffin and casket manufacturers, deal- 
ers, and agents, collection agencies; commission merchants or mer- 
chandise brokers; concert and musical entertainers, persons en- 
gaged in discounting notes, mortgages, and conditional sales con- 
tracts, Construction companies or contractors, cotton buyers, cotton 
compress operators, millers; persons operating cotton warehouses; 
credit agency personnel, persons operating creosoting businesses, 
directory printers, refrigerator dealers, embalmers, engineers, do- 
mestic servants emploved in private homes; owners and operators of 
tertilizer factones; damaged and close out goods salesmen: fireworks 
dealers, fortunetellers, palmists, clairvoyants, astrologers, phrenolo- 
gists and crystal gazers, fruit dealers, gasoline station and pump op- 
erators, glass salesmen; golf course operators, hat cleaners, fur deal- 
ers, horse, rodeo, and dog and pony show operators, horse and mule 
dealers, ice cream manufacturers, innkeepers, punk dealers, launder- 


121 


that claim was not presented or adjudicated in Beding- 
field. 

Jefferson County and BJCC argue that even if the 
plaintiffs’ claims were not previously raised or adjudi- 
cated in the Bedingfield case, the claims are barred, never- 
theless, because “any claim that was or could have been 
adjudicated in the prior action is barred from further 
litigation.” Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 So. 2d 
723, 725 (Ala. 1990). Stated differently, the County and 
BJCC contend that the theory on which the plaintiffs 
bring this action could have been asserted in the 


ers; sleight-of-hand artists; lighting rod installers; lumber dealers and 
jobbers, lumberyard operators, machinery repair shops; manicurists; 
hairdressers; upholsterers; doctors, chemists, bacteriologists, and 
roentgenologists, persons engaged in the photocopy business; min- 
ers, monument and tombstone sellers; motion picture operators; 
oculists, optometrists, and opticians; osteopaths and chiropractors; 
operators of packing houses and cold storage plants; pawnbrokers, 
peddlers and itinerant vendors; photographers, musical instrument 
ing card salesmen; plumbers, steamfitters and tin shop operators, 
operators of pool halls, owners of racetracks and athletic fields, radio 
salesmen; real estate brokers and agents; restaurant, cafe, and cafete- 
na operators, operators of roadhouses, nighclubs, and public dance 
halls; sandwich shops, barbecue stands, hamburger and hot dog 
chine salesmen; shooting gallery operators, shotgun and rifle deal- 
kers; street fair and carnival operators; syrup and sugar factory op- 
erators, theater, vaudeville, and variety show operators, ticket scalp- 
ers, tourist Camp operators, tractor, road machinery, and trailer deal- 
ers, trading stamp merchants, freight carriers, transient dealers, ven- 
dors, and peddlers, turpentine stillers; vending machine operators, 
vetenmmanians, warehouse operators, wax factory operators and waste 
grease and animal by-product purchasers and receivers. See Ordi- 
nance 1120, § 1(B) and § 2; §§ 40-12-40 through 40-12-180, § 40-12- 
50, §§ 40-12-52 through 40-12-55, §§ 40-12-57 through 40-12-60, § 40 
16-6, and § 274-9, Ala. Code 1975. 


122 


Bedingfield case and that this action is therefore due to be 
dismissed. 

The test for determining whether two cases involve 
substantially the same cause of action is whether the 
same evidence would support a recovery in both actions. 
Barber v. Fields, 624 So. 2d 532, 536 (Ala. 1993); Vaughan 
v. Barr, 600 So. 2d 994, 996 (Ala. 1992); Waters v. Jolly, 
582 So. 2d 1048, 1053 (Ala. 1991); Garris v. South Alabama 
Production Credit Ass'n, 537 So. 2d 911, 914 (Ala. 1989); 
Dominex, Inc. v. Key, 456 So. 2d 1047, 1054-55 (Ala. 1984); 
Wheeler v. First Alabama Bank of Birmingham, 364 So. 2d 
1190, 1200 (Ala. 1978). In Barber v. Fields, this Court re- 
versed a summary judgment entered on res judicata 
grounds where both the former and the latter cases in- 
volved the city water service but the claims in the latter 
case, which pertained to the removal of water meters, was 
not litigated in the former case, which involved a claim 
that the city’s refusal to extend water service to the 
plaintiff's land was a violation of her right to equal pro- 
tection of the laws. Barber, 624 So. 2d at 536. In Vaughan 
v. Barr, this Court reversed a judgment entered on res 
judicata grounds where both the former case and the 
latter case involved the same land and landowners but 
the former case, which involved a boundary dispute, was 
“based on different theories” and “require(d) different 
evidence” from that required in the latter case, which 
involved a claim of an easement by necessity. Vaughan, 
600 So. 2d at 996. 


Although this case and the Bedingfield case involve Act 
406 and Ordinance 1120, the similarity there ends, be- 
cause the evidence necessary to prove the claims asserted 
in this case, and the legal arguments in support of those 
claims, will be very different from those in Bedingfield. 
Here, the plaintiffs allege that the exemptions to the tax 
violate their equal protection rights under the Federal 
Constitution. The Federal employees are permitted to 


123 


maintain their Buck Act claims. How are their claims dif- 
ferent from those of the non-Federal employees who 
claim equal protection violations? In each case, the plain- 
tiffs apparently are citizens of the United States who are 
claiming protection of their rights under Federal consti- 
tutional and statutory provisions. The foundation of their 
claims, the Federal Constitution, is the same. 

I have carefully examined the arguments of Jefferson 
County and those of BJCC, and I recognize the impor- 
tance of this case to those entities, but I think the law is 
against them. The plaintiffs’ claims in this case are just 
different from those presented in Bedingfield, and the evi- 
dence necessary to prove their claims will be very differ- 
ent from the evidence used to prove the claims asserted 
in Bedingfield. \n fact, the issues presented in Bedingfield 
were largely legal issues relating to the classification be- 
tween counties of 500,000 or more in population and 
counties of less than 500,000 in population and to the 
question of whether Act 406 violated the Alabama Consti- 
tution, and there is no mention in Bedingfield of any Fed- 
eral constitutional claims adjudicated in either the trial 
court or this Court. 

Based on the foregoing, I believe that the fourth ele- 
ment of the doctrine of res judicata as set forth in 
Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 So. 2d 723, 725 
(Ala. 1990) (“the same cause of action presented in both 
suits”), is not present in this case; I believe that the trial 
judge correct concluded that the plaintiffs could main- 
tain their action. 


124 
APPLICATION FOR REHEARING 


Filed April 14, 1995 
[Caption Omitted in Printing} 

Come now Jason Richards and Fannie Hill, Appellees, 
and respectfully move the Court to grant them rehearing 
in the above captioned cause, with affirmance rather 
than reversal of the Circuit Court's ruling upon partial 
summary judgment, upon the following grounds: 

1. The Court's opinion recognizes Appellants’ claim as 
one to “declare the occupational tax unconstitutional, as 
depriving plaintiffs of due process of law and equal pro- 
tection of the laws” guaranteed under the Untied States 
and Alabama Constitutions, but fails to acknowledge that 
Hoyt Bedingfield and his co-plaintiffs were incapable of 
binding them to the outcome of his prior litigation his 
was not a class action (which would have allowed plain- 
tiffs to “opt out” or intervene to protect their interests 
here in issue). 

2. Appellant Fannie Hill's standing to represent do- 
mestic servants employed in commercial buildings who 
are subject to the tax, while domestic servants employed 
in private homes are exempted, has been rejected with- 
out comment by this Court, in spite of the fact that nei- 
ther Bedingfield nor any of his co-plaintiffs had standing 
to present such a claim. 


[Subscription of Attorney and Certificate of Service 
Omitted in Printing} 


eee ee 


125 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 
June 9, 1995 


1930255 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic 
Center Authority vy. Jason Richards, et al. (Jefferson: CV- 
92-3191) 


NOTICE 


The application for rehearing filed in this cause is 
overruled. No opinion written on rehearing. 
ALMON, ].— Shores, Kennedy, Cook 
and Butts, [], concur; 
Maddox, ]J., dissents. 


I, Robert G. Esdale, as Clerk of the Supreme Court of 
Alabama, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a full, 
true and correct copy of the instrument(s) herewith set 
out as same appear(s) of record in said Court. 

Witness my hand this 9th day of June, 1995. 


/s/ Robert G. Esdale 


Clerk, Supreme Court 
of Alabama 


