# Cox Broadcasting — bounded pre-divergence finality source

Source: Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U.S. 469 (1975), official United States Reports, pp.477–487, relevant portion of Part II.
Official PDF: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USREPORTS-420/pdf/USREPORTS-420-469.pdf
Retrieved October 4, 2026 for the authorized Richards §1257 finality inquiry. The reported source predates the simulation divergence. No target-case material is included.
Extraction: pdftotext -f 9 -l 19 -layout, ending before Part III. This bounded portion was read in full; the rest of the opinion was not needed for this legal fork. Text begins mid-Part II and preserves reporter pagination/OCR; no language is reconstructed.
Original official PDF SHA-256: 0ba47134439726da17dd7dc51bef23fcd2e15b291f70623393ce3943b0227261

           COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                       477

469                   Opinion of the Court

rendered a “[f]inal judgment or decree.” Title 28 U. S. C.
§ 1257 retains this limitation on our power to review cases
coming from state courts. The Court has noted that
“[c]onsiderations of English usage as well as those of
judicial policy” would justify an interpretation of the
final-judgment rule to preclude review “where anything
further remains to be determined by a State court, no
matter how dissociated from the only federal issue that
has finally been adjudicated by the highest court of the
State.” Radio Station WOW, Inc. v. Johnson, 326 U. S.
 120, 124 (1945). But the Court there observed that the
rule had not been administered in such a mechanical
fashion and that there were circumstances in which there
has been “a departure from this requirement of finality
for federal appellate jurisdiction.” Ibid.
    These circumstances were said to be “very few,” ibid.;
but as the cases have unfolded, the Court has recurringly
encountered situations in which the highest court of a
State has finally determined the federal issue present in
 a particular case, but in which there are further pro-
ceedings in the lower state courts to come. There are
 now at least four categories of such cases in which the
 Court has treated the decision on the federal issue as a
 final judgment for the purposes of 28 U. S. C. § 1257 and
has taken jurisdiction without awaiting the completion
 of the additional proceedings anticipated in the lower
 state courts. In most, if not all, of the cases in these
 categories, these additional proceedings would not require
 the decision of other federal questions that might also
require review by the Court at a later date,6 and imme-
  6 Eminent domain proceedings are of the type that may involve
an interlocutory decision as to a federal question with another fed-
eral question to be decided later. “For in those cases the federal
constitutional question embraces not only a taking, but a taking on
payment of just compensation. A state judgment is not final unless
it covers both aspects of that integral problem.” North Dakota
478                  OCTOBER TERM, 1974

                       Opinion of the Court                  420 U. S.

diate rather than delayed review would be the best way
to avoid “the mischief of economic waste and of delayed
justice,” Radio Station WOW, Inc. v. Johnson, supra,
at 124, as well as precipitate interference with state
litigation.7 In the cases in the first two categories con-
sidered below, the federal issue would not be mooted or
otherwise affected by the proceedings yet to be had be-
cause those proceedings have little substance, their out-
come is certain, or they are wholly unrelated to the federal
question. In the other two categories, however, the fed-
eral issue would be mooted if the petitioner or appellant
seeking to bring the action here prevailed on the merits
in the later state-court proceedings, but there is neverthe-
State Board of Pharmacy N. Snyder’s Drug Stores, Inc., 414 U. S.
156, 163 (1973). See also Grays Harbor Co. n . Coats-Fordney Co.,
243 U. S. 251, 256 (1917); Radio Station WOW, Inc. v. Johnson,
326 IT. S. 120, 127 (1945).
  7 Gillespie v. United States Steel Corp., 379 U. S. 148 (1964),
arose in the federal courts and involved the requirement of 28 U. S. C.
§ 1291 that judgments of district courts be final if they are to be
appealed to the courts of appeals. In the course of deciding that the
judgment of the District Court in the case had been final, the Court
indicated its approach to finality requirements:
“And our cases long have recognized that whether a ruling is 'final’
within the meaning of § 1291 is frequently so close a question that
decision of that issue either way can be supported with equally
forceful arguments, and that it is impossible to devise a formula
to resolve all marginal cases coming within what might well be called
the 'twilight zone’ of finality. Because of this difficulty this Court
has held that the requirement of finality is to be given a 'practical
rather than a technical construction.’ Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial
Loan Corp., [337 U. S. 541, 546]. See also Brown Shoe Co. n .
 United States, 370 U. S. 294, 306; Bronson n . Railroad Co., 2 Black
524, 531; Forgay v. Conrad, 6 How. 201, 203. Dickinson v. Petro-
leum Conversion Corp., 338 IT. S. 507, 511, pointed out that in de-
ciding the question of finality the most important competing con-
siderations are ‘the inconvenience and costs of piecemeal review on
the one hand and the danger of denying justice by delay on the
other.’ ” 379 U. S., at 152-153.
           COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                        479

469                    Opinion of the Court

less sufficient justification for immediate review of the
federal question finally determined in the state courts.
   In the first category are those cases in which there are
further proceedings—even entire trials—yet to occur in
the state courts but where for one reason or another the
federal issue is conclusive or the outcome of further pro-
ceedings preordained. In these circumstances, because
the case is for all practical purposes concluded, the judg-
ment of the state court on the federal issue is deemed
final. In Mills v. Alabama, 384 U. S. 214 (1966), for
example, a demurrer to a criminal complaint was sus-
tained on federal constitutional grounds by a state trial
court. The State Supreme Court reversed, remanding
for jury trial. This Court took jurisdiction on the rea-
 soning that the appellant had no defense other than his
 federal claim and could not prevail at trial on the facts
 or any nonfederal ground. To dismiss the appeal “would
 not only be an inexcusable delay of the benefits Congress
 intended to grant by providing for appeal to this Court,
 but it would also result in a completely unnecessary waste
 of time and energy in judicial systems already troubled
 by delays due to congested dockets.” Id., at 217-218
 (footnote omitted).8

   8 Other cases from state courts where this Court’s jurisdiction was
sustained for similar reasons include: Organization for a Better Aus-
tin v. Keefe, 402 U. 8. 415, 418 n. (1971); Construction Laborers v.
Curry, 371 U. S. 542, 550-551 (1963); Pope v. Atlantic C. L. R. Co.,
345 U. S. 379, 382 (1953); Richfield Oil Corp. v. State Board, 329
U. S. 69, 73-74 (1946). In the Richfield case the Court said with
respect to finality:
   “The designation given the judgment by state practice is not con-
trolling. Department of Banking v. Pink, 317 U. S. 264, 268. The
question is whether it can be said that ‘there is nothing more to be
decided’ {Clark v. Williard, 292 U. S. 112, 118), that there has been
‘an effective determination of the litigation.’   Market Street Ry.
 Co. v. Railroad Commission, 324 U. S. 548, 551; see Radio Station
 WOW v. Johnson, 326 U. S. 120, 123-124. That question will be
480                 OCTOBER TERM, 1974

                      Opinion of the Court                420U.S.

   Second, there are cases such as Radio Station WOW,
supra, and Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963), in
which the federal issue, finally decided by the highest
court in the State, will survive and require decision re-
gardless of the outcome of future state-court proceedings.
In Radio Station WOW, the Nebraska Supreme Court
directed the transfer of the properties of a federally li-
censed radio station and ordered an accounting, rejecting
the claim that the transfer order would interfere with the
federal license. The federal issue was held reviewable
here despite the pending accounting on the “presupposi-
tion . . . that the federal questions that could come here
have been adjudicated by the State court, and that
the accounting which remains to be taken could not
remotely give rise to a federal question . . . that may
later come here . . . .” 326 U. S., at 127. The judgment
rejecting the federal claim and directing the trans-
fer was deemed “dissociated from a provision for an
accounting even though that is decreed in the same
order.” Id., at 126. Nothing that could happen in the
course of the accounting, short of settlement of the case,
would foreclose or make unnecessary decision on the fed-
eral question. Older cases in the Court had reached the
same result on similar facts. Carondelet Canal & Nav.
Co. N. Louisiana, 233 U. S. 362 (1914); Forgay v. Conrad,
6 How. 201 (1848). In the latter case, the Court, in an
opinion by Mr. Chief Justice Taney, stated that the Court
had not understood the final-judgment rule “in this
strict and technical sense, but has given [it] a more
liberal, and, as we think, a more reasonable construction,

resolved not only by an examination of the entire record (Clark n .
WUliard, supra) but, where necessary, by resort to the local law to
determine what effect the judgment has under the state rules of
practice.” Id., at 72.
           COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                      481

469                   Opinion of the Court

and one more consonant to the intention of the legis-
lature.” Id., at 203.9
   In the third category are those situations where the
federal claim has been finally decided, with further pro-
ceedings on the merits in the state courts to come, but
in which later review of the federal issue cannot be had,
whatever the ultimate outcome of the case. Thus, in
these cases, if the party seeking interim review ultimately
prevails on the merits, the federal issue will be mooted;
if he were to lose on the merits, however, the governing
state law would not permit him again to present his fed-
eral claims for review. The Court has taken jurisdic-
tion in these circumstances prior to completion of the
case in the state courts. California v. Stewart, 384 U. S.
436 (1966) (decided with Miranda v. Arizona), epito-
mizes this category. There the state court reversed a
conviction on federal constitutional grounds and re-
manded for a new trial. Although the State might have
prevailed at trial, we granted its petition for certiorari
and affirmed, explaining that the state judgment was
“final” since an acquittal of the defendant at trial would
preclude, under state law, an appeal by the State. Id.,
at 498 n. 71.
   A recent decision in this category is North Dakota
State Board of Phannacy v. Snyder’s Drug Stores, Inc., 414
U. S. 156 (1973), in which the Pharmacy Board rejected
an application for a pharmacy operating permit relying
on a state statute specifying ownership requirements
which the applicant did not meet. The State Supreme

   9 In Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963), the Maryland
courts had ordered a new trial in a criminal case but on punishment
only, and the petitioner asserted here that he was entitled to a
new trial on guilt as well. We entertained the case, saying that
the federal issue was separable and would not be mooted by the new
trial on punishment ordered in the state courts. Id., at 85 n. 1.
482                  OCTOBER TERM, 1974

                        Opinion of the Court                   420 IT. S.

Court held the statute unconstitutional and remanded
the matter to the Board for further consideration of the
application, freed from the constraints of the ownership
statute. The Board brought the case here, claiming that
the statute was constitutionally acceptable under modern
cases. After reviewing the various circumstances under
which the finality requirement has been deemed satisfied
despite the fact that litigation had not terminated in the
state courts, we entertained the case over claims that we
had no jurisdiction. The federal issue would not survive
the remand, whatever the result of the state administra-
tive proceedings. The Board might deny the license on
state-law grounds, thus foreclosing the federal issue, and
the Court also ascertained that under state law the Board
could not bring the federal issue here in the event the
applicant satisfied the requirements of state law except
for the invalidated ownership statute. Under these cir-
cumstances, the issue was ripe for review.10
    Lastly, there are those situations where the federal
issue has been finally decided in the state courts with
further proceedings pending in which the party seeking
review here might prevail on the merits on nonfederal
grounds, thus rendering unnecessary review of the federal
 issue by this Court, and where reversal of the state court
 on the federal issue would be preclusive of any further

  10 Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U. S. 541 (1949),
was a diversity action in the federal courts in the course of which
there arose the question of the validity of a state statute requiring
plaintiffs in stockholder suits to post security for costs as a pre-
requisite to bringing the action. The District Court held the state
law inapplicable, the Court of Appeals reversed, and this Court, after
granting certiorari, held that the issue of security for costs was
separable from and independent of the merits and that if review
were to be postponed until the termination of the litigation, “it will
be too late effectively to review the present order, and the rights
conferred by the statute, if it is applicable, will have been lost, prob-
ably irreparably.” Id., at 546.
          COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                483

469                 Opinion of the Court

litigation on the relevant cause of action rather than
merely controlling the nature and character of, or deter-
mining the admissibility of evidence in, the state proceed-
ings still to come. In these circumstances, if a refusal
immediately to review the state-court decision might
seriously erode federal policy, the Court has entertained
and decided the federal issue, which itself has been finally
determined by the state courts for purposes of the state
litigation.
    In Construction Laborers v. Curry, 371 U. S. 542 (1963),
the state courts temporarily enjoined labor union picketing
over claims that the National Labor Relations Board had
exclusive jurisdiction of the controversy. The Court took
jurisdiction for two independent reasons. First, the
power of the state court to proceed in the face of the pre-
emption claim was deemed an issue separable from the
merits and ripe for review in this Court, particularly
“when postponing review would seriously erode the na-
tional labor policy requiring the subject matter of re-
spondents’ cause to be heard by the... Board, not by the
state courts.” Id., at 550. Second, the Court was con-
vinced that in any event the union had no defense to
the entry of a permanent injunction other than the pre-
emption claim that had already been ruled on in the state
courts. Hence the case was' for all practical purposes
concluded in the state tribunals.
   In Mercantile National Bank v. Langdeau, 371 U. S.
555 (1963), two national banks were sued, along with
others, in the courts of Travis County, Tex. The claim
asserted was conspiracy to defraud an insurance company.
The banks as a preliminary matter asserted that a special
federal venue statute immunized them from suit in
Travis County and that they could properly be sued only
in another county. Although trial was still to be had
and the banks might well prevail on the merits, the
Court, relying on Curry, entertained the issue as a “sep-
484                  OCTOBER TERM, 1974

                        Opinion of the Court                  420U.S.

arate and independent matter, anterior to the merits and
not enmeshed in the factual and legal issues comprising
the plaintiff’s cause of action.” Id., at 558. Moreover,
it would serve the policy of the federal statute “to deter-
mine now in which state court appellants may be tried
rather than to subject them ... to long and complex
litigation which may all be for naught if consideration
of the preliminary question of venue is postponed until
the conclusion of the proceedings.” Ibid.
   Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S.
241 (1974), is the latest case in this category.11 There
a candidate for public office sued a newspaper for refus-
ing, allegedly contrary to a state statute, to carry his
reply to the paper’s editorial critical of his qualifica-
tions. The trial court held the act unconstitutional,
denying both injunctive relief and damages. The State
Supreme Court reversed, sustaining the statute against
the challenge based upon the First and Fourteenth
Amendments and remanding the case for a trial and
appropriate relief, including damages. The newspaper
brought the case here. We sustained our jurisdiction,
relying on the principles elaborated in the North Dakota
case and observing:
      “Whichever way we were to decide on the merits, it
   11 Meanwhile Hudson Distributors v. Eli Lilly, 377 U. S. 386
(1964), another case of this genre, had been decided. There a
retailer sued to invalidate a state fair trade act as inconsistent with
the federal antitrust laws and not saved by a federal statute authoriz-
ing state fair trade legislation under certain conditions. The defend-
ant manufacturer cross-petitioned for enforcement of the state act
against the plaintiff-retailer. The trial court struck down the statute,
but a state appellate court reversed and remanded for trial on the
cross-petition. The Ohio Supreme Court affirmed that decision.
Relying on Curry and Mercantile National Bank v. Langdeau, 371
U. S. 555 (1963), this Court found the state-court judgment to be
ripe for review, although the retailer might prevail at the trial. 377
U. S., at 389 n. 4.
            COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                        485

469                    Opinion of the Court

      would be intolerable to leave unanswered, under
      these circumstances, an important question of free-
      dom of the press under the First Amendment; an
      uneasy and unsettled constitutional posture of
      § 104.38 could only further harm the operation of a
      free press. Mills v. Alabama, 384 U. S. 214, 221-
      222 (1966) (Dougla s , J., concurring). See also
      Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe, 402 U. S.
      415, 418 n. (1971).” 418 U. S., at 247 n. 6.12
    In light of the prior cases, we conclude that we have
jurisdiction to review the judgment of the Georgia Su-
preme Court rejecting the challenge under the First and
Fourteenth Amendments to the state law authorizing
damage suits against the press for publishing the name
of a rape victim whose identity is revealed in the course
of a public prosecution. The Georgia Supreme Court’s
judgment is plainly final on the federal issue and is not
subject to further review in the state courts. Appellants
 will be liable for damages if the elements of the state
 cause of action are proved. They may prevail at trial on
 nonfederal grounds, it is true, but if the Georgia court
 erroneously upheld the statute, there should be no trial at
 all. Moreover, even if appellants prevailed at trial and
made unnecessary further consideration of the constitu-
 tional question, there would remain in effect the unre-
 viewed decision of the State Supreme Court that a civil
  action for publishing the name of a rape victim disclosed
  in a public judicial proceeding may go forward despite the
First and Fourteenth Amendments. Delaying final
    12 The import of the Court’s holding in Tornillo is underlined by
 its citation of the concurring opinion in Mills v. Alabama. There,
 Mr . Just ic e Dou gl as , joined by Mr . Just ice Bre nn an , stated
 that even if the appellant had a defense and might prevail at trial,
 jurisdiction was properly noted in order to foreclose unwarranted
 restrictions on the press should the state court’s constitutional judg-
 ment prove to be in error.
486                   OCTOBER TERM, 1974

                        Opinion of the Court                   420U.S.

decision of the First Amendment claim until after trial
will “leave unanswered ... an important question of
freedom of the press under the First Amendment,” “an
uneasy and unsettled constitutional posture [that] could
only further harm the operation of a free press.” Tor-
nillo, supra, at 247 n. 6. On the other hand, if we now
hold that the First and Fourteenth Amendments bar civil
liability for broadcasting the victim’s name, this litigation
ends. Given these factors—that the litigation could be
terminated by our decision on the merits13 and that a
failure to decide the question now will leave the press in
Georgia operating in the shadow of the civil and criminal
sanctions of a rule of law and a statute the constitution-
ality of which is in serious doubt—we find that reaching
the merits is consistent with the pragmatic approach that
we have followed in the past in determining finality.
   13 Mr . Just ice Reh nq ui st , post, at 507-508, is correct in saying
that this factor involves consideration of the merits in determining
jurisdiction. But it does so only to the extent of determining that the
issue is substantial and only in the context that if the state court’s
final decision on the federal issue is incorrect, federal law forecloses
further proceedings in the state court. That the petitioner who pro-
tests against the state court’s decision on the federal question might
prevail on the merits on nonfederal grounds in the course of further
proceedings anticipated in the state court and hence obviate later
review of the federal issue here is not preclusive of our jurisdiction.
Curry, Langdeau, North Dakota State Board of Pharmacy, Cali-
fornia v. Stewart, 384 U. S. 436 (1966) (decided with Miranda n .
Arizona), and Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S.
241 (1974), make this clear. In those cases, the federal issue hav-
ing been decided, arguably wrongly, and being determinative of the
litigation if decided the other way, the finality rule was satisfied.
   The author of the dissent, a member of the majority in Tornillo,
does not disavow that decision. He seeks only to distinguish it by
indicating that the First Amendment issue at stake there was more
important and pressing than the one here. This seems to embrace the
thesis of that case and of this one as far as the approach to finality
is concerned, even though the merits and the avoidance doctrine are
to some extent involved.
            COX BROADCASTING CORP. v. COHN                       487

469                    Opinion of the Court

See Gillespie v. United States Steel Corp., 379 U. S. 148
(1964) ; Radio Station WOW, Inc. v. Johnson, 326 U. S.,
at 124; Mills v. Alabama, 384 U. S., at 221-222 (Doug -
las , J., concurring).14
