Supreme Cour: us. 
FILE y 


APR Y i996 


CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


¢ 
MICHAEL A. WHREN and JAMES L. BROWN, 
Petitioners, 
v. 
UNITED STATES, 
Respondent. 


S 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court of Appeals 
For The District of Columbia Circuit 


+ 


REPLY BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONERS 
+ 


A.J. KRAMER 

Federal Public Defender 

New H. JAFree 

Lisa BurGet WRIGHT" 

Asst. Federal Public Defenders 
625 Indiana Avenue, N.W. 
Suite 550 

Washington, D.C. 20004 

(202) 208-7500 

Counsel for Petitioner Whren 


G. Atten DALE 

307 G Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001 
(202) 638-2900 

Counsel for Petitioner Brown 


*Counsel of Record 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


a 


Po, Se inal 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


o Page 
Ce Ge PO oS 60.5 6 bb oo ce ssb eds cveces iii 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT....................... 1 
EE AIRS etyU cor esdtsescdevesce ds binse¥snse 2 


I. 


Il. 


BECAUSE MERE OBSERVATION OF A CIVIL 
TRAFFIC INFRACTION DOES NOT LIMIT 
OFFICIAL DISCRETION IN DECIDING WHICH 
MOTORISTS TO SEIZE, THE FOURTH 
AMENDMENT’S REASONABLENESS 
REQUIREMENT COMPELS CONFORMANCE 
TO STANDARD POLICE PROCEDURES... .... 


A. The Government Does Not Dispute That 
Pervasive Traffic Regulations Confer 
Unbridled Authority On Police And Create 


Opportunities For Pretextual Seizures. ..... : 


B. Requiring Conformance To Standard 
Procedures Is An Appropriate Alternative 
Means Of Constraining Police Discretion In 
These Unique Circumstances............... 


C. The Government’s Proposed Solutions To 
The Pretextual Traffic Stop Problem Are 
I Race daiawe veupeccaerdicessceones 


1. The Equal Protection Clause ........... 
2. The “Scope” Of Traffic Stops........... 
3. Recourse To The Political Branches..... 


THE “REASONABLE OFFICER WOULD HAVE” 
INQUIRY IS THE SAME WORKABLE 
STANDARD ROUTINELY APPLIED BY TRIAL 
JUDGES UNDER TERRY V. OHIO............. 


2 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 
Page 


A. As Always, The “Reasonable Officer” Is A 
Reasonable Officer In The Circumstances Of 
The Officer Who Made The Intrusion...... 13 


B. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will Not 
Hinder Traffic Enforcement By Officers In 


The Wald. ....cccedsnsendssersseawaueneeee 14 

C. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will 
Encourage Police Rulemaking.........-.--. 16 

D. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will Not 
Be Cumbersome To Apply.......-..++++++: 17 
CONCLUSION 2nocccccccceccccscstveusueeeaneunnem 20 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 

Abel v. United States, 362 U.S. 217 (1960) ............. 8 
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635 (1987) ......... 4, 12 
Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420 (1984)............. 10 
Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47 (1979).................... 6 
Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648 (1979) ......... 1, 5, 10 
Florida v. Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248 (1991)................ 12 
Florida v. Wells, 495 U.S. 1 (1990) .................... 7 
Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989)...... 4, 12-15, 17 
Illinois v. Krull, 480 U.S. 340 (1987).................. 12 
Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352 (1983).............. 1 
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988)................ 2 
New York v. Quarles, 467 U.S. 649 (1984)............. 15 
Railway Express Agency v. New York, 

SOO US. 106 (1969)... 2.2... ccc cc ccc ccc cece. 11 
Scott v. United States, 436 U.S. 128 (1978)............ 13 
ae? US. 02 (09) oman 5,7, 12 
South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364 (1976)........ 7 
Steagald v. United States, 451 U.S. 204 (1981)......... 16 


Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1 (1985).............. 5, 14 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 
Page 
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968)..........-. 9, 11, 12, 15 


United States v. Botero-Ospina, 71 F.3d 783 
(10th Cir. 1995) (en banc), petition for cert. 
pending, No. 95-8121... ...... 6-600 eee e eee e eee e ees 12 


United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873 (1975) .... 13 
United States v. Buchanon, 72 F.3d 1217 


(6th Cle. 1995)... 2. cc cccccccnvcccceceneccccsccsens 10 
United States v. Caceres, 440 U.S. 741 (1979).......... 17 
United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984)............ 12 
United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218 (1973)......... 8 
United States v. Travis, 62 F.3d 170 (6th Cir. 1995), 

cert. denied, 116 S. Ct. 738 (1996). .............-455. 4 
Winston v. Lee, 470 U.S. 753 (1985) .........- 6... 20 enue 5 
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 (1886)............--. 9 


Rutes AND REGULATIONS 


Se Be SS) eee i eeeeseadneeaenee es 4 
District of Columbia itan Police Department 
General Order 303.1 (Apr. 30, 1992).............. 18, 19 


Lecat TREATISES 


2 W. LaFave & J. Israel, Criminal Procedure § 13.4 
SIDED. cn vcicanccncotcctataceeanesseaunebescsuaudeuse 8 


W. Page Keeton, Dan B. Dobbs, Robert E. Keeton 
& David G. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on Torts 
RT Y B. Peer re 13 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Orner AUTHORITIES 
Kenneth Culp Davis, Police Discretion (1975) 


Michael A. Fletcher, Driven to Extremes: Black Men 


Take Steps to Avoid Police Stops, The Washington 
Post, Mar. 28, 1996 — 


Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Thirteen W Looking at 
a Black Man, The New Yorker se 10ers 23, 1995) 


U.S. Dept. of Tr tion, A Manual of Model 
Police Traffic Services - Policies and A tne 
§ 2.5 (Jan. 1986) 


eeeeeaevpeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 


Page 


1 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The government does not contest the fundamental 
premise of petitioners’ argument - that in the unique 
context of civil traffic regulations, allowing mere observa- 
tion of an infraction automatically to justify a stop places 
no effective limit on the discretion of the police. Such 
unbridled discretion is unacceptable under the Fourth 
Amendment. In other settings in which reliance on proba- 
ble cause has been found impracticable, the Court has 
relied on compliance with standard procedures as an 
alternative safeguard against arbitrary searches and sei- 
zures. Although the Court has never before confronted 
the novel problem raised by this case (probable cause 
providing an inadequate check on officer discretion), it 
makes sense to turn to the same solution the Court has 
used to solve the analogous problem of how to limit 
discretion in those cases in which the Fourth Amendment 
balance “precludes insistence upon . . . individualized 
suspicion,” Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 654-655 
(1979). By requiring the police to exercise their discretion 
in civil traffic enforcement pursuant to a consistent stan- 
dard — set either by their own internal regulations or, at a 
minimum, by their own routine practices - the “reason- 
able officer would have” standard is a workable solution 
to a problem that undermines the privacy and security of 
every motorist in this country. 

+ 


2 
ARGUMENT 


I. BECAUSE MERE OBSERVATION OF A CIVIL 
TRAFFIC INFRACTION DOES NOT LIMIT 
OFFICIAL DISCRETION IN DECIDING WHICH 
MOTORISTS TO SEIZE, THE FOURTH 
AMENDMENT’S REASONABLENESS 
REQUIREMENT COMPELS CONFORMANCE TO 
STANDARD POLICE PROCEDURES. 


A. The Government Does Not Dispute That 
Pervasive Traffic Regulations Confer 
Unbridled Authority On Police And Create 
Opportunities For Pretextual Seizures. 


The government does not dispute petitioners’ 
description of the reality of traffic enforcement and, in 
particular, pretextual traffic enforcement. The govern- 
ment effectively concedes that the pervasiveness of minor 
civil traffic offenses (such as the “full time and attention” 
offense in this case) allows the police to establish “proba- 
ble cause” of a “violation” by any motorist at any time 
(Pet. Br. 17-21). See also Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 
727-728 (1988) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (“ ‘We know that no 
local police force can strictly enforce the traffic laws, or it 
would arrest half the driving population on any given 
morning’ ”) (quoting address by then-Attorney General 
Robert Jackson to Conference of United States Attorneys, 
April 1, 1940). 


Nor does the government deny that the broad discre- 
tion conferred by civil traffic laws creates a temptation to 
use those laws as pretexts to evade Fourth Amendment 
requirements, that police routinely yield to that tempta- 
tion, and that they do so disproportionately against racial 
minorities (Pet. Br. 21-29). Given the evidence set out in 
our opening brief, it is little wonder that “[t]here’s a 
moving violation that many African-Americans know as 


3 


D.W.B.: Driving While Black.” Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 
Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Black Man, The New Yorker 
56, 59 (Oct. 23, 1995). See also Michael A. Fletcher, Driven 
to Extremes: Black Men Take Steps to Avoid Police Stops, The 
Washington Post, Mar. 28, 1996, at Al (reporting inordi- 
nate numbers of traffic stops experienced by several 
prominent black men and their “strategy for dealing with 
DWB”). Unfortunately for the thousands of innocent 
motorists arbitrarily singled out for investigation, the 
hunches on which the police rely are overwhelmingly 
wrong (Pet. Br. 25 & n.21). 


__ The government disputes none of this. The government 
merely argues that none of this matters - that probable 
cause is probable cause, and that “probable cause” per se 
equals “reasonable seizure,” even if the probable cause is 
of a minor civil traffic infraction for which a reasonable 
officer would not make a seizure. Far from denying that 
pretextual traffic stops are epidemic, the government 
argues that they are a good thing (Govt. Br. 23, 25): 
[I]t is not necessarily improper for officers, in 
deciding which traffic offenders to stop, to take 
into account “collateral” (Br. 38) law enforce- 
ment objectives beyond the fact that an offense 
has been committed. . . . On the contrary, it 
would be unreasonable to forbid a police 
department from focusing its finite resources 
disproportionately on those observed traffic 
offenders whom officers in the field suspect may 
also be engaged in more serious offeases. 


The government's analogy to prosecutorial discretion 
(Govt. Br. 24 n.11) is misplaced. The government argues tivat 
this Court has upheld charging decisions as long as the 
prosecutor has probable cause and the decision was not 
based on constitutionally impermissible factors such as rece 
or religion. But the government overlooks that when police 


4 


officers make seizures, they are subject to an additional 
constitutional constraint not applicable to prosecutors: the 
Fourth Amendment requirement of “reasonableness.” 


The government's argument that “in deciding which 
valid searches, seizures, or arrests to undertake and 
which to forgo, officers routinely consider . . . legitimate 
‘collateral’ factors” (Govt. Br. 24) begs the very question 
in this case: whether the police have a “valid” basis for 
action where a reasonable officer in the same circum- 
stances would not act on that basis. If the floor for estab- 
lishing a “valid” ground to stop is set so low that it 
includes grounds upon which a reasonable officer would 
not rely, the independently inadequate (and thus illegiti- 
mate) “collateral” motive becomes, objectively viewed, 
the operative reason for a stop that would not otherwise 
have been made by a reasonable officer. The government 
not only rejects inquiry into the subjectively pretextual 
motives of individual officers in particular cases (as do 
petitioners), but also seeks endorsement of a patently 
sham system that affirmatively encourages objectively 
pretextual traffic stops.' 


The government advocates complete police discretion 
within “the universe of searches, seizures, and arrests for 
which probable cause or reasonable suspicion exists” 
(Govt. Br. 23), while not disputing that, in the unique 
context of civil traffic regulations, that “universe” 


1 Petitioners agree that courts should not inquire into 
whether a particular officer’s actions were subjectively 
“pretextual” (Govt. Br. 13-16). But the “reasonable officer would 
have” standard allows courts to find police action “objectively 
pretextual” in the same sense this Court has recognized that 
courts can find an officer’s action to have been undertaken in 
“objective ‘good faith,’ ” Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 399 n.12 
(1989) (citing Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635 (1987)). 


5 


includes all motorists. In asking this Court to endorse a 
system whereby police focus on those “observed traffic 
offenders” the police “suspect” may be involved in crimi- 
nal activity (Govt. Br. 25), the government is really asking 
the Court to allow officers to play their hunches against 
everyone who gets behind the wheel. This Court’s deci- 
sion in Prouse says that is impermissible. 


B. Requiring Conformance To Standard 
Procedures Is An Appropriate Alternative 
Means Of Constraining Police Discretion In 
These Unique Circumstances. 


The government acknowledges that this Court has in 
some cases “required police conduct to conform to inter- 
nal standards or routines to satisfy the Fourth Amend- 
ment” (Govt. Br. 8) and that the application of standard 
procedures in those settings “avoids the risk of arbitrary 
police action” (Govt. Br. 17). The government argues, 
however, that such conformance has been required only 
as an alternative to a showing of individualized suspi- 
cion, never as an addition to probable cause or reasonable 
suspicion (Govt. Br. 8, 16-17). But if “a showing of indi- 
vidualized suspicion is not a constitutional floor, below 
which a search or seizure must be presumed unreason- 
able,” Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Association, 489 
U.S. 602, 624 (1989), neither is it a floor above which a 
search or seizure must be presumed reasonable. The 
Court’s decisions in Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1 (1985), 
and Winston v. Lee, 470 U.S. 753 (1985), confirm that 
probable cause alone does not necessarily make a search 
or seizure objectively reasonable. 


The ultimate constitutional question - objective rea- 
sonableness — “depends ‘ “on a balance between the pub- 
lic interest and the individual’s right to personal security 


6 


free from arbitrary interference by law officers.” ’” Brown 
v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 50 (1979) (citations omitted). A 
“central concern” in striking this balance “has been to 
assure that an individual’s reasonable expectation of pri- 
vacy is not subject to arbitrary invasions solely at the 
unfettered discretion of officers in the field.” Id. at 51. 


To this end, the Fourth Amendment requires that a 
seizure must be based on specific, objective facts 
indicating that society’s legitimate interests require 
the seizure of the particular individual, or that the 
seizure must be carried out pursuant to a plan 
embodying explicit, neutral limitations on the con- 
duct of individual officers. 


Id. The government emphasizes the “or” and argues that 
because the first requirement is met here, there is no basis 
for imposing the second (Govt. Br. 17). However, observa- 
tion of a civil traffic infraction does not automatically 
establish “that society’s legitimate interests require the 
seizure of the particular individual” (Brown, 443 U.S. at 
51). Indeed, because such offenses can be detected in the 
conduct of just about everyone, they do not in fact iden- 
tify those “particular individual[s]” whose seizure is 
“require([d]” by society’s interests.? It is therefore consis- 
tent with Fourth Amendment precedent to turn to this 
Court’s alternative means of constraining discretion - 


2 The traffic regulations relied upon by the police in this 
case were promulgated not to define criminal conduct, but as 
part of a scheme designed to regulate in hypertechnical detail 
every conceivable aspect of motor vehicle use in the District of 
Columbia. It is therefore not surprising that, when combined 
with the traditional criminal probable cause standard, they 
confer a degree of discretion far beyond that normally available 
to the police in enforcing the criminal laws. 


7 


requiring compliance with “standardized criteria” or 
“established routine,” Florida v. Wells, 495 U.S. 1, 4 (1990). 


Conceptually, this case is analogous to the “special 
needs” cases. Where the government has shown “special 
needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement,” 
this Court has dispensed with the probable cause require- 
ment if the balance of government and privacy interests 
shows it to be “impracticable.” Skinner, 489 U.S. at 619. 


In limited circumstances, where the privacy 
interests implicated by the search are minimal, 
and where an important governmental interest 
furthered by the intrusion would be placed in 
jeopardy by a requirement of individualized 
suspicion, a search may be reasonable despite 
the absence of such suspicion. 


Id. at 624. This case presents the reverse situation: the 
sweeping discretion available to police under the civil 
traffic code and the documented use of that discretion to 
make pretextual seizures makes probable cause an 
impracticable means of guaranteeing an objectively rea- 
sonable seizure. Cf. South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 US. 
364, 370 n.5 (1976) (probable cause “unhelpful” in inven- 
tory context because “[t}he standard of probable cause is 
peculiarly related to criminal investigations, not routine, 
noncriminal procedures”). The governmental interest in 
the seizures at issue is minimal (since, by definition, the 
“reasonable officer would have” test addresses only those 
infractions the government does not normally act upon) 
and the important privacy interest in avoiding arbitrary 
seizures is placed in jeopardy by reliance on probable 
cause alone. Although the problem is different than in the 
Court’s “special needs” cases, the solution is the same: 


8 


reliance on standard procedures to ensure against arbi- 
trary exercise of official discretion.* 


C. The Government's Proposed Solutions To The 
Pretextual Traffic Stop Problem Are Ineffec- 
tive. 


1. The Equal Protection Clause 


The government's reliance on the Equal Protection 
Clause as the answer to the pretextual traffic stop prob- 
lem is misplaced. First, of course, the fact that an “unrea- 
sonable” police seizure might in some circumstances 
violate the Equal Protection Clause does not mean it does 
not also violate the Fourth Amendment. 

Second, the Equal Protection Clause cannot be relied 
upon to curb the systemic abuses petitioners have docu- 
mented. See generally 2 W. LaFave & J. Israel, Criminal 
Procedure § 13.4 at 185-203 (1984) (discussing heavy bur- 
den facing discriminatory enforcement claimants and 
problems of proof in establishing such a claim under 
Equal Protection Clause). An equal protection claim in 
the selective traffic enforcement setting would require 
determination of the very subjective intent of the officer 


3 The government understates the importance of Abel v. 
United States, 362 U.S. 217 (1960), in pointing the way to such a 
solution. Abel is highly significant because, in the face of a claim 
that an administrative power was being used as a pretext for 
criminal law enforcement, and despite the existence of 
individualized suspicion that Abel was a deportable alien, this Court 
“focus[ed] ... on the regularity of procedures” (Govt. Br. 20) in 
upholding the agency action. Likewise, this Court's reliance on 
the absence of any “departure from established police 
department practice” in putting aside the pretext claim in 
United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218, 221 n.1 (1973), is 
significant given that the police clearly had probable cause of a 
criminal violation in that case. 


9 


that the government agrees is so difficult to establish 
(Govt. Br. 31 & n.16). Any individual motorist, such as the 
priest stopped on the New Jersey Turnpike (see Pet. Br. 
47), might have a “gut instinct” that his race played a role 
in his stop, but would be hard-pressed to gather even the 
minimal amount of information needed under FED. R. 
CIV. P. 11 to file a complaint. Even if the claim survived 
Rule 11, the kind of data required to prove intentional 
discrimination is not generally available. See United States 
v. Travis, 62 F.3d 170, 175 (6th Cir. 1995), cert. denied, 116 S. 
Ct. 738 (1996). 


In sum, even if the scope of the Equal Protection 
Clause were relevant in determining what is “reasonable” 
under the Fourth Amendment, it cannot be counted on to 
deter the kind of arbitrary traffic enforcement policies 
encouraged by the “could have” test. Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 
118 U.S. 356 (1886), has been on the books for over 100 
years but, as the evidence in our opening brief shows, it 
has obviously had little, if any, impact on traffic stops. 
Application of the traditional Terry-type “reasonable offi- 
cer” standard, on the other hand, would go a long way 
toward deterring officers who are inclined to use the civil 
traffic code to play out their subjective hunches against 
motorists whose conduct would not normally result in an 
intrusion. 


2. The “Scope” of Traffic Stops 


The government suggests that because “ ‘ “the stop 
and inquiry must be reasonably related in scope to the 
justification for their initiation” ’” (Govt. Br. 27) (quoting 
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 29 (1968)), there is no need to 
restrict the authority to make a traffic stop to those a 
reasonable officer would have made. But whatever the 
Fourth Amendment limits on the scope of the intrusion 


10 


following a stop for a traffic violation may be, they can- 
not undo the harm to a motorist’s privacy interests 
caused by the stop itself. This Court in Prouse held that a 
traffic stop is a significant enough intrusion that it cannot 
be made at the unfettered discretion of officers in the 
field. 

Moreover, any limits this Court has placed on the 
scope of a Terry stop are not relevant since most traffic 
stops are made upon an observed infraction and are not 
investigatory Terry stops. A “traffic stop supported by 
probable cause” may “exceed the bounds set by the 
Fourth Amendment on the scope of a Terry stop.” 
Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 439 n.29 (1984). The 
scope of a traffic stop is broad enough, in any event, to 
provide plenty of incentive for pretextual stops. At a 
minimum, a legitimate traffic stop includes detention of 
the motorist for a reasonable period “while the officer 
checks his license and registration.” Id. at 437. Assuming 
the stop itself is valid, an officer will always be free to use 
the time he is waiting for a response from dispatch to 
request consent to search, or to subject the motorist and 
his car to a sniff by a drug-sniffing dog, without exceed- 
ing the “scope” of the stop. In a recent Sixth Circuit case, 
an Ohio State Highway Patrol Trooper “testified that as 
part of his drug interdiction unit’s investigative method, 
he ‘automatically’ uses [his dog] to perform a narcotics 
sniff on every vehicle his unit stops.” United States v. 
Buchanon, 72 F.3d 1217, 1228 (6th Cir. 1995). 


3. Recourse To The Political Branches 


The government suggests that petitioners’ claim for 
relief from the excessive discretion conferred on police 
under the civil traffic code should be “addressed to the 
political branches” (Govt. Br. 9, 29). But this Court has 


11 


\ 
never hesitated to impose a judicial remedy when a legis- 


lature has vested excessive discretion in the hands of the 
police. See Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352 (1983) (loiter- 
ing statute unconstitutionally vague under Due Process 
Clause). Fourth Amendment limits are not defined by the 
political branches. The political solution would make 
sense only if, contrary to society's expectations, the tech- 
nical traffic regulations that create the pretext problem 
were strictly enforced across the board. But, by definition, 
the “would have” test acdresses stops for violations that 
reasonable officers would generally ignore. It is precisely 
because the political majority cannot be counted on to 
resist overinclusive laws that are enforced only against 
the few that the problem of arbitrary enforcement requires 
a judicial remedy. “[NJothing opens the door to arbitrary 
action so effectively as to allow [municipal] officials to 
pick and choose only a few to whom they will apply 
legislation and thus to escape the political retribution that 
might be visited upon them if larger numbers were 
affected.” Railway Express Agency v. New York, 336 U.S. 
106, 112 (1949) (Jackson, J., concurring). 


Il. THE “REASONABLE OFFICER WOULD HAVE” 
INQUIRY IS THE SAME WORKABLE STANDARD 
ROUTINELY APPLIED BY TRIAL JUDGES 
UNDER TERRY V. OHIO. 


The government argues that the “would have” test is 
“unworkable” (Govt. Br. 9-10, 29-38). But the inquiry 
petitioners propose is no different from that made every 
day by judges facing Fourth Amendment challenges to 
Terry stops: “[WJould the facts available to the officer at 
the moment of the seizure or the search ‘warrant a man of 
reasonable caution in the belief’ that the action taken was 


12 


appropriate?” Terry, 392 U.S. at 21-22. See United States v. 
Botero-Ospina, 71 F.3d 783, 790 (10th Cir. 1995) (en banc) 
(Seymour, C.J., dissenting), petition for cert. pending, No. 
95-8121 (filed Mar. 1, 1996); id. at 796 (Lucero, J., dissent- 
ing). 

This Court has always accepted that “ ‘[t}]he test of 
reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment is not capa- 
ble of precise definition or mechanical application.’ ” 
Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396 (1989) (citation omit- 
ted). “What is reasonable . . . ‘depends on all of the 
circumstances surrounding the search or seizure and the 
nature of the search or seizure itself.” Skinner, 489 U.S. 
at 619 (citation omitted). A test that asks whether a rea- 
sonable officer in the circumstances would have taken a 
particular action is no more “unworkable” than other 
“reasonable officer” inquiries prescribed by this Court. 
See Florida v. Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248, 251 (1991) (scope of 
consent is determined by asking “whether it is reasonable 
for an officer to consider a suspect's [statements of con- 
sent] to include consent to [make the search at issue]”); 
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 646 n.6 (1987) (quali- 
fied immunity depends on “whether the actions 
[allegedly] taken are actions that a reasonable officer 
could have believed lawful”); Illinois v. Krull, 480 U.S. 
340, 355 (1987) (asking whether “reasonable officer 
should have known that the statute was unconstitu- 
tional”); United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 919-920 (1984) 
(“where the officer's conduct is objectively reasonable, 
‘... the officer is acting as a reasonable officer would and 
should act in similar circumstances.’ ”) (citation omitted). 


13 


A. As Always, The “Reasonable Officer” Is A 
Reasonable Officer In The Circumstances Of 
The Officer Who Made The Intrusion. 


The government suggests that even if the policy and 
practice of the police are relevant, there is no reason for 
the reference point to be officers in the circumstances of 
Officers Soto and Littlejohn, i.e., out of uniform and in 
unmarked cars, rather than “the entire police force” 
(Govt. Br. 36-37). But Fourth Amendment reasonableness 
depends on an “objective assessment of the officer's 
actions in light of the facts and circumstances confronting 
him at the time.” Scott v. United States, 436 U.S. 128, 136 
(1978) (emphasis added). Petitioners’ test therefore asks 
whether a reasonable officer in the circumstances of the 
officer who made the stop would have made it, not whether 
a reasonable officer in some other hypothetical circum- 
stances theoretically could have made the stop. In 
Graham, 490 U.S. at 396, this Court made clear that “[t}he 
reasonableness of a particular use of force [under the 
Fourth Amendment] must be judged from the perspective of 
a reasonable officer on the scene ....” (emphasis added). 
The “man of reasonable caution” considered in Terry, 392 
U.S. at 22, is a prudent police officer in the shoes of the 
officer making the search or seizure. See United States v. 
Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 885 (1975). Likewise, the 
classic “reasonable person” in tort law means a reason- 
able person with the same physical attributes and profes- 
sional knowledge and experience as the defendant. See W. 
Page Keeton, Dan B. Dobbs, Robert E. Keeton & David G. 
Owen, Prosser and Keeton on Torts § 32 at 175-176, 185 (5th 
ed. 1984).4 


* The government attempts to shift this Court’s focus from 
the fact that this seizure was made with an unmarked car by 


14 


B. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will Not 
Hinder Traffic Enforcement By Officers In The 
Field. 


The government argues that the “would have” test 
will confuse officers in the field, whose “split-second” 
decisions (Govt. Br. 9, 33) will be hindered by uncertainty 
as to whether a court would later find that a reasonable 
officer would have made a particular traffic stop on the 
basis asserted. 


First,1 ‘er the “reasonable officer would have” test, 
any officer who witnesses a traffic violation that he genu- 
inely believes warrants enforcement action will not have 
to think even a moment about the constitutionality of 
stopping the motorist’s car. It would be the truly rare case 
in which a traffic stop that was in fact motivated by 


urging the Court to separate the manner in which this seizure 
was made from the seizure itself (Govt. Br. 18 n.7, 39-41 & n.19). 
But “the question is ‘whether the totality of the circumstances 
justifie[s] a particular sort of . . . seizure.’ ” Graham, 490 U.S. at 
396 (quoting Garner, 471 U.S. at 8-9). Likewise, the government's 
attempt to dismiss the unmarked car regulation as “merely 
allocat[ing] enforcement duties among different officers” (Govt. 
Br. 37) fails. The regulation at issue in fact withdraws authority 
to enforce from officers out of uniform or in unmarked cars 
except in the most exigent of circumstances. The safety concerns 
behind this regulation are apparent. Cf. U.S. Dept. of 
Transportation, A Manual of Model Police Traffic Services — Policies 
and Procedures § 2.5 at 109-110 (Jan. 1986) (model regulations of 
International Association of Chiefs of Police allow use of 
unmarked cars for traffic enforcement only if specifically 
authorized in connection with “special enforcement needs” and 
if “equipped with both emergency lights and siren”). The 
unmarked car that stopped the Pathfinder in this case was not 
equipped with any emergency lights or sirens (Tr. 177-178). 


15 


traffic concerns would fail the “would have” test.> Only 
an officer using a minor traffic infraction as a pretext to 
investigate some subjective hunch would have to ask 
himself what a reasonable officer would do in light of the 
facts and circumstances confronting him - an inquiry no 
different from that necessary in every Terry stop. Since 
such an officer has already gone through the rather com- 
plex mental process of realizing he has a hunch that does 
not meet the Terry test, and deciding to look for a traffic 
infraction to provide Fourth Amendment justification for 
a stop, the government can hardly criticize the “would 
have” test on the ground that it “ ‘complicaties] the 
thought processes . . . of police officers’ ” (Govt. Br. 33) 
(quoting New York v. Quarles, 467 U.S. 649, 659 (1984)).° 


Second, application of the exclusionary rule in these 
circumstances does not risk “overdeterring officers from 
responding to observed offenses” (Govt. Br. 38). An offi- 
cer making an ordinary traffic stop would have no con- 
cern with the exclusionary rule because he would not 
expect it to yield the kind of “fruit” that he would want 


5 It is theoretically possible that an “unreasonable” but well- 
intentioned police officer could make a stop for traffic-related 
reasons that deviated sufficiently from the enforcement 
practices of his department that it would fail the “reasonable 
officer would have” test. This should not trouble the Court. 
Subjective good faith has never been determinative of 
reasonableness. Graham, 490 U.S. at 397; Terry, 392 U.S. at 22. 


6 The government is unnecessarily alarmist when it 
suggests that petitioners’ test would somehow prevent officers 
from “’follow[ing] their legitimate instincts when confronting 
situations presenting a danger to the public safety.’ ” Id. Clearly, 
any traffic violation “presenting a danger to the public safety” 
as this Court used that phrase in Quarles, would objectively 
justify a traffic stop under the “would have” test, no matter 
what the officer's actual motivation. 


16 


to use in court; having witnessed the infraction, the offi- 
cer already has all the evidence he needs to obtain a civil 
adjudication. Therefore, the only officers the exclusionary 
rule would “deter” would be those improperly using the 
traffic laws to make stops that would not normally be 
made but in which the officer has a subjective hope of 
finding evidence of crime. This Court has repeatedly 
condemned such pretextual government action (see Pet. 
Br. 30, 33-34) and should not hesitate to adopt a standard 
that will deter it. See Govt. Br. 21 n.10 (acknowledging 
that “th[e] rule [in Steagald v. United States, 451 U.S. 204 
(1981)] was adopted in part to eliminate the possibility of 
pretextual use of an arrest warrant”). 


C. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will 
Encourage Police Rulemaking. 


The government is wrong that, under a “reasonable 
officer would have” standard, police departments “would 
be well-advised to dispense with internal prohibitions on 
enforcement altogether” (Govt. Br. 32). Under the “rea- 
sonable officer would have” standard, the choice for 
police departments is not between having every stop 
upheld if they do not adopt regulations, and having some 
stops struck down if they do adopt regulations. Because 
of the inherently selective nature of traffic law enforce- 
ment, individual officers will always make some arbitrary 
stops in the absence of regulations guiding their discre- 
tion. Discretion-limiting regulations, however, avoid ad 
hoc judicial inquiries into police practices and make stops 
undertaken in conformance with such regulations pre- 
sumptively reasonabie. Moreover, such regulations actu- 
ally reduce the number of unreasonable stops by giving 
officers concrete standards to help them exercise their 
discretion. Therefore, under a “reasonable officer would 


17 


have” standard, police departments will have an incen- 
tive to engage in the sort of self-regulation this Court has 
recognized as desirable. See United States v. Caceres, 440 
U.S. 741, 755 & n.23 (1979).” See also Kenneth Culp Davis, 
Police Discretion (1975). 


D. The “Reasonable Officer” Standard Will Not 
Be Cumbersome To Apply. 


The government argues that, absent a police regula- 
tion to guide the “reasonable officer” inquiry, a court 
seeking to determine what reasonable conduct would be 
for an officer in the stopping officer's circumstances 
“would either have to rely on the court’s own notions of 
whether enforcement of a particular infraction would be 
reasonable, or receive testimony from other officers as to 
their usual practices with regard to the offense” (Govt. Br. 


? The holding in Caceres has no applicability to this case. In 
Caceres, this Court made clear that the defendants had no 
reasonable expectation of privacy in the conversations being 
recorded in violation of IRS regulations. 440 U.S. at 750. 
Therefore, the Fourth Amendment reasonableness requirement 
was simply not implicated. Indeed, the Court found that the 
particular violations at issue did “not raise any constitutional 
questions.” Id. at 750-751 (emphasis added). The Caceres Court 
merely rejected “a rigid application of an exclusionary rule to 
every [police or prosecutorial] regulatory violation.” Id. at 755. 
The Court never suggested that violation of a police regulation 
would not be relevant to the “reasonableness” of police conduct 
under the Fourth Amendment. Petitioners do not contend that 
the violation of a regulation will always be dispositive of the 
reasonableness inquiry. The “would have” standard permits 
any traffic stop a reasonable officer would have made. All of the 
circumstances, including “vague or general” department 
policies (Govt. Br. 33), will be viewed through the eyes of a 
reasonable officer on the scene, not “with the 20/20 vision of 
hindsight.” Graham, 490 U.S. at 396. 


18 


31). The government exaggerates the difficulties of such 
an inquiry. 

First, even if some lower courts purporting to apply 
the “reasonable officer would have” test have not always 
done so consistently, and have, on occasion, slipped into 
a consideration of the subjective motives of the individ- 
ual officer (Govt. Br. 34-35), that does not mean that the 
standard itself is inherently unworkable. There is no rea- 
son to believe that, with proper guidance from this Court, 
lower courts cannot consistently and objectively apply a 
traditional “reasonable officer” standard in this context. 


Second, it is not unrealistic to expect that a court will 
be able to develop the facts necessary to apply the “rea- 
sonab!.. »fficer would have” standard in the course of an 
ordinary suppression hearing. The officer who made the 
stop is competent to testify to any relevant written or oral 
policies.* He is also competent to testify as to his own 
practice in similar circumstances, and that of others to the 
extent he knows it. It is a simple matter to ask the officer 
how often he sees a car, for example, exceed the speed 
limit by two miles per hour under similar conditions, and 
how often he stops such cars. If the officer sees 100 such 
violations per day but has stopped only two motorists for 
that violation in the past month, the court will probably 
not require any additional information. The government 


8 In the District of Columbia, for example, District 
Commanders must consult with the Commanding Officer of the 
Traffic Enforcement Branch to develop selective enforcement 
policies for their districts, which are then implemented by the 
patrol officers. MPD General Order 303.1(I)(A)(1)(f-g), 
(III)(A)(1) & (111)(B)(5) (Pet. Br. Add. 4, 29-30). Thirty percent of 
all MPD roll call training must be traffic enforcement related. 
MPD General Order 303.1(III)(B)(8) (Pet. Br. Add. 30). 


19 


will always be free to submit evidence, if it can, that the 
stopping officer’s practice is unrepresentative and that 
reasonable officers are trained to, and do in fact, rou- 
tinely stop motorists under similar circumstances. If the 
stopping officer testifies that the stop was consistent with 
his standard practice and that of others, absent a contrary 
departmental policy, that will presumably be the end of 
the matter unless there is evidence that the officer’s 
claimed practice is not representative. 


Petitioners submit that the vast majority of traffic 
stops will easily pass the “reasonable officer would have” 
standard and that judges will be able to spot those few 
unreasonable stops in which the police have arbitrarily 
deviated from standard procedure. Here, for example, 
MPD regulations affirmatively prohibited the officers 
who stopped petitioners’ car from taking such enforce- 
ment action.? Moreover, even aside from the written pro- 
cedures, Officer Soto candidly acknowledged that as a 
vice officer on plainclothes patrol, he stops drivers for 
traffic infractions “[nJjot very often at all” (Pet. Br. 7 


% The government is plainly wrong in suggesting (Govt. Br. 
38) that a reasonable officer could have thought the Pathfinder’s 
violations were “so grave as to pose an immediate threat to the 
safety of others” so as to permit enforcement action under MPD 
General Order 303.1(1)(A)(2)(a)(4) (Pet. Br. Add. 4) (emphasis in 
original). First, the infractions did not occur “at night” (Govt. 
Br. 38). Officer Soto testified at the preliminary hearing that it 
was “still light” (6/16/93 Tr. 8). Second, as described by Officer 
Soto himself, these infractions were not of a type that “would 
somehow endanger the safety of anybody” (Pet. Br. 7 (quoting 
Tr. 72-73)). See also MPD General Order 303.1(1)(A)(1)(e) (Pet. Br. 
Add. 3) (department policy even with respect to officers on 
regular patrol is “[t]o target enforcement activities against those 
committing hazardous violations”) (emphasis added). 


20 


(quoting Tr. 78)). The record establishes the objective 
unreasonableness of this stop. 


S 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons and the reasons set forth in 
the Brief for the Petitioners, the judgment of the Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit should be 
reversed, and the case should be remanded for entry of 
an order vacating petitioners’ convictions and suppress- 
ing all evidence obtained as a result of the unconstitu- 
tional seizure in this case. 


Respectfully submitted, 


A.J. KRAMER 

Federal Public Defender 

Nem H. JArree 

Lisa Burcet WriGHT* 

Asst. Federal Public Defenders 
625 Indiana Avenue, N.W. 
Suite 550 

Washington, D.C. 20004 

(202) 208-7500 

Counsel for Petitioner Whren 


G. Auten Dae 

307 G Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001 
(202) 638-2900 

Counsel for Petitioner Brown 


*Counsel of Record 
April 9, 1996 


