Lonchar v. Thomas, Warden, 517 U.S. 314 (1996).








LII



Supreme Court









Lonchar v. Thomas, Warden (95-5015), 517 U.S. 314 (1996).


Opinion
[ Breyer ]Concurrence
[ Rehnquist ]Syllabus


HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version















NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
U.S. 321, 337.




SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES




Syllabus


LONCHAR v. THOMAS,
WARDEN




certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eleventh circuit




No. 95-5015.
Argued December 4, 1995 -- Decided
April 1, 1996









Petitioner Lonchar was sentenced to death for murder nine years ago.
In the years following the affirmance of his conviction and sentence, his
sister and brother each filed "next friend" state habeas petitions, which
Lonchar opposed, and Lonchar filed, and then had dismissed, a state habeas
petition. Shortly before his scheduled execution, he filed another state
habeas petition. When it was denied, he filed this "eleventh hour" federal
petition, his first. Reasoning that federal Habeas Corpus Rule 9, not some
generalized equitable authority to dismiss, governed the case, the District
Court held that Lonchar's conduct in waiting almost six years to file his
federal petition did not constitute an independent basis for rejecting
the petition and granted a stay to permit time for consideration of other
grounds for dismissal raised by the State. The Court of Appeals vacated
the stay. It held that equitable doctrines independent of Rule 9 applied,
relying chiefly on this Court's per curiam order in Gomez
v. United States Dist. Court for Northern Dist of Cal., 503
U.S. 653. Setting aside the Rules and traditional habeas doctrines,
the court concluded that Lonchar did not merit equitable relief.




Held:




1. The principle of Barefoot
v. Estelle, 463
U.S. 880, applies when a district court is faced with a request for
a stay in a first federal habeas case: if the district court cannot dismiss
the petition on the merits before the scheduled execution, it is obligated
to address the merits and must issue a stay to prevent the case from becoming
moot. If the court lacks authority to directly dispose of the petition
on the merits, it would abuse its discretion by attempting to achieve the
same result indirectly by denying a stay. Since Lonchar's claims certainly
seem substantial enough to prevent dismissal under Habeas Corpus Rule 4
and the State does not argue to the contrary, the courts below correctly
assumed that he could not be denied a stay unless his petition was properly
subject to dismissal. This Court's Gomez order has not displaced
Barefoot's rationale with one permitting denial of a stay in first
federal habeas cases, even when the district court lacks authority to dismiss
the petition on the merits. Gomez did not involve a denial of a
stay in a case in which the lower court had no authority to dismiss the
petition or a first habeas petition, and it neither discussed nor
cited Barefoot, much less repudiated its rationale. Pp. 4-7.




2. The Court of Appeals erred in dismissing Lonchar's first federal
petition for special ad hoc "equitable" reasons not encompassed within
the relevant statutes, the Federal Habeas Corpus Rules, or prior precedents.
First, the history of the Great Writ reveals, not individual judges dismissing
writs for ad hoc reasons, but, rather, the gradual evolution of more formal
judicial, statutory, or rules based doctrines of law that regularize and
thereby narrow the discretion that individual judges can freely exercise.
See, e.g., McCleskey v. Zant, 499
U.S. 467, 479-489. Second, the fact that the writ has been called an
"equitable" remedy, see, e.g., Gomez, supra, at 653-654, does not
authorize a court to ignore this body of statutes, rules, and precedents.
Rather, "courts of equity must be governed by rules and precedents no less
than the courts of law," Missouri v. Jenkins, 515 U. S. ___,
___ (Thomas, J., concurring). The arguments against ad hoc departure from
settled rules seem particularly strong when dismissal of a first
habeas petition is at issue, since such dismissal denies the petitioner
the protections of the Great Writ entirely. See Ex parte Yerger,
8 Wall. 85, 95. Third, Rule 9(a)--which permits courts to dismiss a habeas
petition when "it appears that the state . . . has been prejudiced in its
ability to respond . . . by delay in [the petition's] filing"--specifically
and directly addresses the delay factor that led the Court of Appeals to
dismiss Lonchar's petition. The District Court was not asked to, and did
not, make a finding of prejudice in this case, whereas the Rule's history
makes plain that the prejudice requirement represents a critical element
in the balancing of interests undertaken by Congress and the Rule's framers,
which courts may not undermine through the exercise of background equitable
powers. See Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States, 487
U.S. 250, 255. Fourth, contrary to the Court of Appeals' view, Gomez,
supra, at 653-654, did not authorize ad hoc equitable departures from
the Habeas Corpus Rules and did not purport to work a significant change
in the law applicable to the dismissal of first habeas petitions. Fifth,
the fact that Lonchar filed his petition at the "eleventh hour" does not
lead to a different conclusion. Gomez, supra, at 654, and, e.g.,
Sawyer v. Whitley, 505
U.S. 333, 341, n. 7, distinguished. The complexity inherent in developing
fair and effective rules to minimize the harms created by last minute petitions
in capital cases offers a practical caution against a judicial attempt,
outside the framework of the Habeas Rules, to fashion reforms concerning
first federal habeas petitions. Sixth, a different result is not warranted
by the special circumstances in this case, including the "next friend"
petitions filed by Lonchar's siblings, his filing and later withdrawal
of his own state habeas petition, and the fact that his motive for
filing this federal habeas petition was in part to delay his execution.
The Court expresses no view about the proper outcome of the Rules' application
in this case. Pp. 7-18.




58 F. 3d 590,
vacated and remanded.




Breyer, J., delivered the opinion
of the Court, in which Stevens, O'Connor, Souter, and Ginsburg, JJ., joined.
Rehnquist, C. J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which
Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas, JJ., joined.
