ae No. 95-83 


: Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


t ALAN MEGHRIG AND MARGARET MEGHRIG, 
SA Petitioners, 


Cis . vs. 
“hae KFC WESTERN, INC.,; 


fe “On Writ of Certiorari to the United States 
ae | Court.of Appeals For the Ninth Circuit 


~)*. BRIEF ROR THE STATE OF LOUISIANA 
ok: TRANSPORTATION AND Ml 
[= AS AMICUS CURIAB IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


‘ Edgar D. Gankendorff 
: Robert A. Mahsook, Jr. 
‘ Victoria A. Guidry 
é Lawrence E. Marino 
% Oats & HUDSON 
. ‘ Suite 400, Gordon Square 
100 East Vermilion Street 
9 . Lowisians 70501 
4 . - (318) 233-1100 
sae | 
“by Counsel for Amicus Curiae 
<p, a State of Louisians 
eae a Through Rs Department of 
ies ne Ps, Transportation and Development 


: 
rs > —_ ’ 
phones fs 
“ mt ‘ - e 
a 
ne 
a oe - ¥ 
al il sae : 
~~ i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ................... 
INTEREST OF THE AMICUS CURIAE ........... 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT .................. 


I. SECTION 6972(A)(1)(B) OF RCRA PROVIDES 
PRIVATE CITIZENS WITH THE RIGHT TO 
RESTITUTION FROM THE RESPONSIBLE PARTIES 
FOR THE COSTS OF REMEDIATING HAZARDOUS 
WEE. x ecole ck oe ARR dk ok GS dk eos 
A. Remediation Expenditures May Be 

Recovered Pursuant to the RCRA 
Citizen’s Suit Provision ............. 
1. The Plain Language of the 
Citizen’s Suit Provision 
Authorizes Restitutionary Relief. . . . 
2. The Purposes For Which RCRA 
Was Enacted Are Advanced By An 
Interpretation of the Citizen’s 
Suit Provision Permitting 


3. Plaintiffs Are the Intended 
Beneficiaries of the Citizen’s 
SS > re 

4. The Reasonableness of Remediation 
Expenditures Pursuant to RCRA 
Can Be Assessed Adequately. 


of Restitution Must Also Be 
DT £4 Sib os poe be e-e ee 
Il. THE "IMMINENT AND SUBSTANTIAL 
ENDANGERMENT" Must EXist WHEN 
REMEDIATION IS INITIATED. ............... 
Ill. RECOVERY OF REMEDIATION EXPENDITURES IS 
PROPER UNDER RCRA REGARDLESS OF THE 
APPLICABILITY OF CERCLA. .............. 
A. CERCLA Has Not Preempted the Fields of 
Remediation or Recovery of Remediation 
ES Se eee eee 
B. CERCLA and RCRA Are Independent 
Statutes Which Apply to Different 
Classes of Hazardous Materials. ........ 
C. RCRA Contains No Exclusion Comparable 
in Scope or Substance to the CERCLA 
Petroleum Exclusion. ............... 
D. Leaking Underground Gasoline Storage 
Tanks Are Regulated Pursuant to RCRA. . . 
EEE OES Sta ee 


B. Equity Permits Restitution oy Remediation 
Expenditures in the Context of a RCRA 


GRE AD Shh ce bem cece cccecs 


l. The Courts Have the Inherent 
Power to Apply the General 
Principles of Equity and to 
Provide Equitable Restitution. 


2. The Language of RCRA Evidences 


the Availability of Equitable 


le ee 


3. Reason Leads to the Logical 
Conclusion That Because the 
Equitable Defense of Laches Is 
Available, the Equitable Remedy 


. 


14 


17 


22 


22 


. 26 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
CASES 


Agricultural Excess & Surplus Ins. Co. v. A.B.D. 
Tank & Pump Co., 


878 F.Supp. 1091 (E.D. Ill. 1995) ..... 


Amoco Oil Co. v. Borden, Inc., 


889 F.2d 664 (Sth Cir. 1989)......... 


Bayless Investmt. & Trading Co. v. Chevron U.S.A., 
39 E.R.C. (B.N.A.) 1428 (D. Ariz. 1994) _.. . 


Blood v. Fleming, 
161 F.2d 292 (10th Cir. 1947) ....... 


Bollinger and Boyd Barge Services, Inc. v. Motor 
Vessel, Captain Claude Bass, 
576 F.2d 595 (Sth Cir. 1978). ........ 


Chapman v. Houston Welfare Rights Org.., 
441 U.S. 600, 99 S.Ct. 1905 (1979) __.. 


Citizens and Landowners Against the Miles City/New 


Underwood Powerline v. Secretary, United States 


Department of Energy, 
683 F.2d 1171 (8th Cir. 1982) ........ 


City of Chicago v. Environmental Defense Fund, 


__ U.S. _, 114 S.Ct. 1588 (1994) ........... 


Costello v. United States, 


305 U.S. 265, 81 S.Ct. 534 (1961) ........... 


Cowart v. Wicklos Drilling Co., 


__ US. __, 112 S.Ct. 2589(1992) .......... 


13 


17 


Craig Lyle Lid. Partnership v. Land O'Lakes, Inc., 


877 F.Supp. 476 (D. Minn. 1995).......... 22, 27 
Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 

321 U.S. 321, 64 S.Ct. 587 (1944) ....... 8, 13, 15 
Johnson v. Kay, 

860 F.2d 529 (2d Cir. 1988) .........-- ee ees 7 


KFC Western, Inc. v. Meghrig, 
49 F.3d 518 (9th Cir. 1995) ............ passim 


Morrissey v. Bologna, 
123 So.2d 537 (Miss. 1960), 


cert. denied, 81 S.Ct. 1091 ...........25255- 13 
Niecko v. EMRO Marketing Co., 

769 F.Supp. 973 (E.D. Mich. 1991) .......... 23 
Porter v. Warner Holding Co., 

328 U.S. 395, 66 S.Ct. 1086 (1946) ........... 8 
Gwaltney of Smithfield, Lid. v. Chesapeake Bay 
Foundation, Inc., 

484 U.S. 49, 108 S.Ct. 376 (1987) ............ 8 
United States v. Aceto Agricultural Chemicals Corp., 

872 F.2d 1373 (8th Cir. 1989) ............ 20, 21 
United States v. Conservation Chemical Company, 

619 F.Supp. 162 (W.D. Mo. 1985) ........... 18 
United States v. Dickerson, 

640 F.Supp. 448 (D. Md. 1986) .............. 18 
United States v. Mottolo, 

605 F.Supp. 898 (D.N.H. 1985)............. 18 

iv 


United States v. Reilly Tar and Chemical Co., 
$46 F.Supp. 1100 (D. Minn. 1982)........... 17 


Wilshire Westwood Associates v. Atlantic Richfield 
Corp. 


881 F.2d 801 (9th Cir. 1989)............... 23 
Winston v. Shell Oil, 

861 F.Supp. 713 (C.D.Ill. 1984) ............ 27 
Wyandotte Transp. Co. v. United States, 

389 U.S. 191, 88 S.Ct. 379 (1967) ........... 16 
Zands v. Nelson, 

779 F.Supp. 1254 (S.D. Cal. 1991) ......... 22, 27 

STATUTES 

Comprehensive Environmental Resource Conservation, 


Liability and Recovery Act of 1980, 
Pub. L. No. 96-510, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 9601, et seq. 3, 24 


ween ee oe est eee ah 15, 22 
a re ok PN ae 21 
Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984, 

Pub.L. No. 98-616, 98 Stat. 3221 (1984) ........ 6, 17, 24 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, ef 

P66 Ober ee O04 06s bs Wee eedaecoeneeces 2 
ee eee. ee wie 9 
I a Tees TR a Hee. 3 9 
42 U.S.C. §@O2I@NQNA) ..... «2.2 ee ee ee ee 24 


42 U.S.C. § G921(DM 2B) .. ©. ee eee 24 


42 U.S.C. § 6972(aM IMB) ... 2... ee eee eee ees passim 
42 U.S.C. § GBT2(a) (1984)... ee eee 6 
GOB. CETTE .cccccccctesccssecesecs 14, 15 
42 U.S.C. 6 GOP1, BOR. 0 ccc cece cence 26 


Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 
Pub.L. No. 99-499, 100 Stat. 1613 (1986) ........... 17 


La. R.S. 30:2271(4)(c)3, 15 


Cal.Health & Safety Code § 25317 .... 2... ee eens 15 
MISCELLANEOUS 

Robert N. Aguilez, Refining CERCLA’s Petroleum 

Exclusion, 7 TULANE ENV. L.J. 41, 64 (1993) ......... 26 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 1... 2... 66 ee eee 12 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity §2 ....- 66-6. eee ee eee 12 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 23... ©. 2 6 ee es 11 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 86 ©... ©. 6 ee es 12 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 87 .... 2. 2 es 12 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 104 ©... 2.1 ees 14 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity §119 ... 2.6.6 eee eee 18 
27 Am Jur. 2d Equity § 120 ©... 2... eee ee 13 

vi 


fo eS se 12 
ee) 13 


James Baller, The Petroleum Exclusion - Stronger 
Than Ever After Wilshire Westwood, 43 SOUTHWESTERN 


ie DE ES BRU h eG eed et eersdetices 23 
BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY (6th ed. 1990) ......... 7, 12 
GBR ie rere 13 
Fe dah aes'e. 12 
ES ae 13 
GID es kc caccacenecwoes 11, 12 
ne I 2 ar ae) a te ced d 11 
ae al a al a ae 13 
ee 18 
Rn 13 
SD on esc cca ce ccccececns 17 
I 7 
126 Cong. Rec. H11,976 (Dec. 3, 1980) ............ 24 
130 Cong. Rec. $2028 (Feb. 29, 1984) ............, 27 
S. COOKE, THE LAW OF HAZARDOUS WASTE (1995) ... . . 21 


EPA, Clarification of the Regulatory Determination 
for Wastes from the Exploration Development and 


vii 


Production of Crude Oil, Natural Gas and Geothermal 
Energy, 58 Fed. Reg. 15,284 (March 22, 1993) ........ 26 


EPA, EXECUTIVE SUMMARIES, REPORT TO CONGRESS: 
MANAGEMENT OF WASTES FROM THE EXPLORATION, 
DEVELOPMENT, AND PRODUCTION OF CRUDE OIL, 

NATURAL GAS, AND GEOTHERMAL ENERGY, 

PO. OPE GRP cme i se cesucsvnceevesensn 25 


EPA General Counsel, Scope of CERCLA Petroleum 
Exclusion Under Sections 101 (14) and 104(a)(2) 5 


Ee CUTE chat e ad debecteesrdeevecneeve 23 
50 Fed. Reg. 13,456 (April 4, 1985) ...........565.. 23 
51 Fed. Reg. 8,206 (March 10, 1986) .............. 23 


House Conf. Rep. No. 96-1444, Joint Explanatory 
Statement of the Committee of Conference, 


reprinted in 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5019, S031... ....... 25 
RESTATEMENT OF RESTITUTION (1937) .............. 13 
WEBSTER’S NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY (1979) ....... 7 


Vili 


No. 95-83 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 


ALAN MEGHRIG and MARGARET MEGHRIG, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 


KFC WESTERN, INC., 
» Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the United States 
Court of Appeals For the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE STATE OF LOUISIANA 
THROUGH ITS DEPARTMENT OF 
TRANSPORTATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT 


INTEREST OF THE AMICUS CURIAE 


The Louisiana Department of Transportation and 
Development ("DOTD"), an agency of the State of Louisiana 
charged with the construction and maintenance of highways, 
frequently encounters hazardous waste in the rights-of-* ay that it 
has purchased or expropriated. Typically, when such materials are 
discovered during highway construction, compliance with 
Louisiana and federal environmental laws necessitates immediate 


cessation of construction, pending investigation and/or remediation 
of the site. When construction is stopped, DOTD is usually 
obligated under industry-standard highway construction contracts 
to pay “delay damages” to the contractors building the highways. 
DOTD incurs significant costs when forced to delay construction 
to comply with environmental laws. 

Once a site is determined to contain hazardous materials, 
DOTD must decide whether to remediate immediately at its own 
expense in order to minimize the threat to human health and the 
environment as well as the contractual delay damages, or to permit 
the threat to remain unabated and to incur significantly greater 
delay damages by allowing the highway construction site to remain 
closed until the responsible parties are identified and mandated to 
remediate the site. 

DOTD has consistently and reasonably opted in favor of 
the former by remediating sites as quickly as possible and then 
recommencing highway construction. To date, DOTD has 
encountered approximately forty (40) sites at which remediation 
costs have been incurred. DOTD estimates that it has spent tens 
of millions of state taxpayer funds and federal matching dollars in 
remediating these sites. This money would otherwise have been 
used to repair Louisiana's highways, complete unfinished 
highways, or construct new highways. DOTD cannot 
overemphasize the fact that it is in no way responsible for the 
presence of the hazardous materials at these sites. Moreover, it is 
suggested that the highway departments of the other forty-nine (49) 
States may be similarly situated with respect to environmental 
remediation, and that the combined financial cost to the nation’s 
taxpayers is staggering. 

DOTD is aggressively pursuing responsible parties to 
recover the funds that DOTD has spent on remediation of the 
hazardous waste it has encountered. The holding of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in the present case 
confirms that the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. § 6901 ef seq., confers upon private 
citizens, including government agencies, the valuable right to 
recover the costs of remediation from the parties who are truly 


responsible for the presence of the hazardous materials. KFC 
Western, Inc. v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518, 521 (9th Cir. 1995). 

DOTD’s ability to recover these costs will be seriously 
jeopardized if this Honorable Court does not affirm the Ninth 
Circuit’s holding. Louisiana is a major petroleum-producing state, 
with large petroleum refining and petrochemical industries. 
Therefore, the “petroleum exclusion" contained in_ the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., 42 U.S.C. 
§ 9601(14), and Louisiana’s analogous state environmental law, 
La. R.S. 30:2271(4)(c), may render recovery of remediation 
expenses at many sites difficult or impossible. Furthermore, as the 
Ninth Circuit noted, state "common law” remedies (which are 
necessarily statutory under Louisiana’s civil law system), such as 
nuisance, trespass, negligence, and breach of warranty, are 
severely limited as a result of the difficulties of proof, short 
statutes of limitation, and the fact that the hazardous materials 
present at the sites were usually placed there by or with the 
acquiescence of the former owners of the property. 

DOTD fully intends to continue to act in the best interest 
of the public health and the environment, but its funds are not 
unlimited, particularly in light of the current trend toward reducing 
governmental budgets. The facts of the present case involve only 
a party who has encountered hazardous waste in a single instance. 
Many entities encounter hazardous waste sites repeatedly, such as 
state highway departments, other government agencies, land 
development companies, and gas or power companies when 
constructing pipelines or power transmission lines. Such entities 
cannot fund environmental remediation indefinitely, without 
restitution of these funds. Precluding recovery of these funds by 
DOTD (and other entities that encounter hazardous waste 
repeatedly) will therefore ultimately thwart efforts to curtail 
endangerment to human health and the environment, because such 
entities will no longer be able to afford to remediate these sites. 

Accordingly, DOTD respectfully represents to this 
Honorable Court that it will suffer significant losses if the opinion 
below is not affirmed. Specifically, DOTD will be left without an 
adequate state, federal, or equitable remedy for recovery of the 


3 


state and matching federal dollars that it has expended in 
remediating hazardous waste for which other parties should be 
responsible under RCRA. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The plain language of RCRA'’s citizen suit provision, 
conferring authority upon the courts to “restrain” responsible 
parties, to order such parties to “take such other action as may be 
necessary,” or “both,” clearly authorizes not only mandatory and 
prohibitory injunctive relief, but also restitutionary relief. Given 
RCRA's beneficial purpose of speedy remediation of hazardous 
waste sites presenting a threat to the public health or the 
environment, the “most natural” interpretation of the residual 
power is that it authorizes the courts to require the parties 
responsible for the improper disposal of hazardous waste to repay 
others who have remediated the contaminated sites in question. 
This interpretation maximizes private citizens’ incentive to 
remediate and minimizes the delay within which remediation may 
be performed. 

Citizens’ suits under RCRA invoke the courts’ traditional 
~ powers of eyuity, and therefore courts may order the equitable 
remedy of restitution pursuant to RCRA. Equity may require 
repayment by a person whose duty to the public has been 
performed by another, because equity resolves disputes in 
accordance with the principles of justice and fairness. Justice 
would be frustrated if an innocent party were forced to bear the 
ultimate responsibility for and cost of remediating hazardous waste 
properly attributable to another party. Moreover, there is no 
functional difference between requiring a responsible party to 
remediate a site, which Petitioners admit is permissible, and 
requiring such a person to repay another who has already 
remediated the site. 

RCRA expressly preserves all of the citizen's suit 
plaintiff's rights to relief, including equitable relief. Thus, the 
courts’ authority to order the responsible parties to take “such 
other action as may be necessary” includes equitable relief, and the 


remedy of restitution should be available to citizen's suit plaintiffs, 
in the proper circumstances. 

Furthermore, the "imminent and substantial endangerment” 
necessary to give rise to liability under RCRA’s citizen's suit 
provision need exist only at the time remediation is undertaken, 
because any other interpretation would frustrate the purposes for 
which the citizen's suit provision was enacted. 

Finally, it is irrelevant to the propriety of claims for 
recovery of remediation expenditures under RCRA whether 
recovery is also permissible under CERCLA. CERCLA does not 
preempt the field of remediation or recovery of remediation 
expenditures. RCRA and CERCLA are entirely independent 
statutes, and therefore, even if the leaded gasoline at issue in the 
present case is properly exempted from CERCLA as a result of 
CERCLA’s petroleum exclusion, recovery of KFC’s remediation 
expenditures under RCRA is proper because RCRA contains no 
such restriction. 


ARGUMENT 


I. SECTION 6972(A)(1)(B) OF RCRA PROVIDES PRIVATE 
CITIZENS WITH THE RIGHT TO RESTITUTION FROM THE 
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES FOR THE COSTS OF REMEDIATING 
HAZARDOUS WASTE. 


A. Remediation Expenditures May Be Recovered 
Pursuant to the RCRA Citizen's Suit Provision. 


RCRA, prior to its amendment in 1984, authorized private 
citizens to file suit only to “enforce [a] regulation or order, or to 
order the Administrator to perform such act or duties as the case 
may be.” 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a) (1984). The 1984 amendments 
substantially broadened the scope of the citizen’s suit provision by 
adding subsection 6972(a)(1)(b), pursuant to which a citizen may 
obtain a court order: 


to restrain any person who has contributed or who 
is contributing to the past or present handling, 
storage, treatment, transportation, or disposal of 
any solid or hazardous waste [which may present 
an imminent and substantial endangerment to 
health or the environment], to order such person to 
take such other action as may be necessary, or 
both. 


Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984, Pub.L. No. 98- 
616, 98 Stat. 3221 § 402, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B). 

The Ninth Circuit in its opinion in the present case held 
that the relief contemplated by the phrase, "... such other action as 
may be necessary,” includes restitutionary relief, such as 
repayment by the responsible party of the costs of remediation 
incurred by the citizen’s suit plaintiff. KFC, 49 F.3d at 521. 
Petitioners, however, argue that RCRA's citizen's suit provision 
authorizes only injunctive relief, and only with respect to an 
"imminent endangerment" in existence at the time suit is filed. 
Brief for the Petitioner at 13-18, Meghrig v. KFC Western, Inc., 


6 


__ U.S. __ (19__) (No. 95-83) ("Petitioners’ Brief"). Petitioners’ 
interpretation of the statute is unduly narrow, and supported by 
neither RCRA’s language nor its purpose. 


1. The Plain Language of the Citizen’s Suit Provision 
Authorizes Restitutionary Relief. 


Judicial inquiry as to the proper interpretation of a statute 
must end with its language when the meaning is clear. Cowart v. 
Wicklos Drilling Co., _ U.S. ___, 112 S.Ct. 2589, 2594 (1992). 
RCRA’s citizen’s suit provision authorizes courts to award 
plaintiffs three (3) forms of relief: (1) "... to restrain any person"; 
(2) "... to order such person to take such other action as may be 
necessary"; or (3) "both." 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B). The plain 
language of the statute, authorizing courts to order any action that 
is "necessary", logically includes the restitutionary relief sought by 
KFC because the definition of “necessary” is not limited by the 
language of the provision to injunctive relief. 

The relief contemplated by the authorization "... to restrain 
any person" indisputably includes injunctive relief, as Petitioners 
concede. Petitioners’ Brief at 14. Injunctive relief includes both 
prohibitory injunctions, which preserve the status quo, and 
mandatory injunctions, which disturb the status quo by ordering 
affirmative relief. Johnson v. Kay, 860 F.2d 529, 541 (2d Cir. 
1988); 43 C.J.S. Injunctions § 7 ("an injunction is mandatory or 
[prohibitive] according to whether it directs a person to do a 
particular thing or to refrain from doing an act"); BLACK’s LAW 
DICTIONARY 784-85 (6th ed. 1990). 

To "restrain" means to “prevent from doing" or to “limit, 
restrict, or keep under control.” WEBSTER’S NEW COLLEGIATE 
DICTIONARY 979-80 (1979). The retrospective language contained 
in the citizen’s suit provision authorizing a court to order restraint 
of “any person who has contributed ... to the past ... handling, 
storage, treatment, transportation, or disposal of any solid or 
hazardous waste" that presents an imminent and substantial 
endangerment to health or the environment, is expressly directed 
to past conduci. 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B) (emphasis added). An 
order issued with respect to such conduct would necessarily require 


7 


affirmative action to abate the endangerment because the person to 
whom such an order would be issued would no longer be doing 
anything that could be prohibited. Consequently, the authorization 
to "restrain" includes the power to issue a mandatory injunction 
ordering a responsible party to remediate the endangerment. 

Accordingly, both prohibitory and mandatory relief is 
contemplated by the phrase, "... to restrain any person,” and 
therefore the phrase, "... such other action as may be necessary,” 
may not reasonably be interpreted, as Petitioners urge, Petitioners’ 
Brief at 14, merely to restate the authorization of mandatory 
injunctive relief already provided by the former phrase. See Porter 
v. Werner Holding Co., 328 U.S. 395, 399, 66 S.Ct. 1086, 1089 
(1946); Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321 U.S. 321, 328, 64 S.Ct. 587, 
591 (1944) (authority to grant injunctive relief or “other order” 
contemplates a remedy other than an injunction, including equitable 
relief). Such redundancy is particularly unlikely to represent 
Congressional intent in light of the final words of the sentence, “or 
both.” The inclusion of these words indicates unequivocally that 
the preceding phrases represent alternative remedies, and that 
neither constitutes a reiteration of the other. Rather, further relief 
is clearly authorized. 

Contrary to Petitioners’ arguments, Petitioners’ Brief at 35, 
the Ninth Circuit has not created a new right of action by 
implication with its decision in this case; it has simply recognized 
an alternative remedy already provided by Congress. 


2. The Purposes For Which RCRA Was Enacted Are 
Advanced By An Interpretation of the Citizen's 
Suit Provision Permitting Recovery of Remediation 
Expenditures. 


When the language of a statute is ambiguous, a court must 
adopt the “most natural" interpretation of that provision. Gwaltney 
of Smithfield, Ltd. v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation, Inc., 484 US. 
49, 57, 108 S.Ct. 376, 381 (1987). As in all cases of statutory 
construction, the words of the statute must be interpreted in light 


of the purposes Congress sought to serve. Chapmu. v. Houston 
Welfare Rights Org., 441 U.S. 600, 608, 99 S.Ct. 1905, 1911 


(1979). Therefore, even if the language of RCRA’s citizen's suit 
provision were ambiguous, its proper interpretation may be 
ascertained only by reference to the purposes for which RCRA and 
its citizen's suit provision were enacted. 

One of RCRA'’s stated purposes is to “assurfe] that 
hazardous waste management practices are conducted in a manner 
which protects human health and the environment." 42 U.S.C. § 
6902(a4). Hazardous waste disposed of in a manner that 
endangers health or the environment violates this policy, and must 
not be permitted to remain unabated. Further, Congress 
established in RCRA a national goal of protecting the public from 
the dangers associated with improper handling of hazardous wastes, 
by stating that: 


The Congress hereby declares it to be the national 
policy of the United States that, wherever feasible, 
the generation of hazardous waste is to be reduced 
or eliminated as expeditiously as possible. Wastes 
that are nevertheless generated should be treated, 
stored or disposed of so as to minimize the present 
and future threat to human health and the 
environment. 


42 U.S.C. § 6902(b). This Honorable Court, too, has recognized 
that RCRA’s goals are to encourage resource recovery and protect 
against contamination. City of Chicago v. Environmental Defense 
Fund, _U.S. _., 114 S.Ct. 1588, 1594 (1994). Clearly, these 
goals are best and most fully achieved when hazardous waste 
constituting an imminent endangerment is remediated as quickly as 
possible. 

The purposes for which RCRA was enacted are also 
furthered by an interpretation of the phrase "... such other action" 
to include restitution of remediation costs to a citizen's suit plaintiff 
by the parties responsible for the presence of the waste. Such an 
interpretation encourages innocent parties to remediate 
contaminated land voluntarily, secure in the knowledge that they 
will be repaia by those responsible. Landowners will be more 
willing to remediate imminent endangerments with respect to which 


9 


federal, state, and local environmental authorities have declined to 
take action, whether as a result of resource constraints or for other 
reasons, if the landowners can expect to recover their costs. Even 
more importantly, permitting such recovery speeds the process of 
abating the dangers presented by hazardous waste, because 
from the responsible parties. These benefits would be lost if the 
phrase were interpreted as sthorizing only injunctive relief. 
Under the latter interpretation, the danger presented by the waste 
would continue to threaten the public health and the environment 
until responsible parties could be identified, sued, and mandated to 
remedy the problem. 

Given RCRA's purpose of ameliorating the problems posed 
by the improper disposal of hazardous waste, and the fact that this 
purpose is best advanced by interpreting the statutory language to 
include the award of restitutionary relief, interpreting the citizen's 
suit provision, "... such other action as may be necessary,” as 
authorizing recovery of remediation expenditures is the “most 
natural” reading of that passage. 


3. Plaintiffs Are the Intended Beneficiaries of the 
Citizen's Suit Provision. 


permissible only to supplement the regulatory role of the federal 
government as private “attorneys general” or “enforcers” of 
RCRA. Petition for Writ of Certiorari at 28, Meghrig v. KFC 
Western, Inc, _ US. _ (19__) (No. 95-83) ("Petition for 
Writ"). This position is flatly contradicted by the language of 
RCRA’s citizen's suit provision, which states that “any person may 
commence a civil action on his own behalf..." 42 U.S.C. § 
6972(a)1)(B). While RCRA as it existed prior to 1984 permitted 
a private citizen to sue only to enforce an order or regulation, the 
addition of the language of Subsection 6972(a)(1)(B) 
unambiguously grants to private citizens a right of redress, and not 
merely a responsibility to be exercised charitably for the good of 
all humanity or not at all. Accordingly, private citizens may 


10 


| 


benefit as a result of pursuing their claims under RCRA, to the 
extent of recouping their remediation expenses. 

Furthermore, the word “necessary” in the phrase, “... such 
other action as may be necessary,” refers to the citizen bringing the 
suit, as the phrase occurs in the section entitled “Citizens’ Suits.” 
42 U.S.C. § 6972. The relief that may be awarded thereunder 
should be that which is necessary to citizen's suit plaintiffs, i.e., 
that which is necessary to restore them to their original positions. 


4. The Reasonableness of Remediation Expenditures 
Pursuant to RCRA Can Be Assessed Adequately. 


Petitioners also argue that RCRA’s lack of a mechanism 
for determining which of the remediation expenditures by plaintiffs 
are recoverable indicates that RCRA was not intended to be used 
as a cost recovery vehicle. Petitioners’ Brief at 24. This position 
is untenable, because the determination whether expenditures are 
recoverable under RCRA can be made in the same manner as in 
any other area of the law, through the traditional means of 
hearings, expert testimony, introduction of evidence as to the 
reasonableness of the expenditures, and the application of 


remedy, as discussed infra, and therefore only “reasonable” or 
“fair” expenditures may be recovered thereunder. 27 AM. JUR. 2D 
Equity §23; 30A C.J.S. Equity §§ 94-95. Significant remedial 
activity has been undertaken throughout the United States in recent 
years, primarily as a result of the impact of CERCLA and RCRA, 
creating a large body of knowledge regarding the cost and 
character of appropriate remediation expenditures. Experts in 
remediation and remediation technology can opine on the basis of 
knowledge and experience as to the necessity or reasonableness of 
particular remediation procedures. Moreover, CERCLA’s National 
Contingency Plan provides a valuable yardstick against which a 
finder of fact can measure the reasonableness of remediation 
undertaken pursuant to RCRA. The absence of a statutory scheme 


within RCRA by which to determine whether remediation 
expenditures were proper is irrelevant to the propriety of 
permitting the recovery of such expenditures. 

Finally, permitting RCRA citizen's suit claims with respect 
to underground storage tanks ("USTs") will not, as Petitioners 
allege, Petition for Writ at 17, remove such claims improperly and 
en masse from state to federal court. The RCRA citizen’s suit 
provision authorizes recovery of remediation expenditures only 
with respect to “imminent endangerments,” 42 U.S.C. § 
6972(a(1)(B), and therefore only suits in which there is an 
imminent endangerment can be shifted to federal court from state 
court. The federal courts will not be overwhelmed by remediation 
claims because only a fraction of hazardous waste sites present an 
imminent endangerment within the meaning of RCRA. 
Additionally, it must be remembered that RCRA causes of action 
may be sued upon in state court. More importantly, however, it 
would be inappropriate to interpret a statute in a particular manner 
purposefully to ensure that fewer citizens will be able make use of 
it, especially when the statute has a purpose as beneficial as the 
remediation of imminent endangerment to human health or the 
environment. 


B. Equity Permits Restitution of Remediation 
ee fo ae ap? 
t. 


KFC may also obtain restitution of its remediation 
expenditures pursuant to the courts’ broad, inherent authority in 


equity. 

_ Equity is a system of jurisprudence that resolves disputes 
according to the dictates of justice, or fairness, rather than 
according to the strictly formulated rules of the common law. 27 
AM. JuR. 2D Equity §§ 1, 121; BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY 540 
(6th ed. 1990). Equity applies when the law does not provide an 
adequate remedy, and proceeds flexibly, case-by-case and on a 
highly fact-specific basis, as fairness necessarily depends heavily 
upon the particular facts of a given situation. See 27 AM. JuR. 2p 
Equity §§ 2, 86-87; 30A C.J.S. Equity §§ 20, 94. 


12 


Equitable relief, in the form of equitable restitution of 
remediation expenditures, is available in the context of a RCRA 
citizen's suit action. The award of equitable restitution is properly 
awarded through the courts’ inherent equitable power to do justice, 
as well as under the statutory language preserving the right to 
equitable relief pursuant to RCRA itself. 


1. The Courts Have the Inherent Power to Apply the 
General Principles of Equity and to Provide 


Where there is statutory law, equity follows the law. 27 
AM. Jur. 2D Equity § 123; 30A C.J.S. Equity § 118. 
Nevertheless, even when an area of substantive law is addressed by 
statute, the courts retain their inherent jurisdiction in equity unless 
the statute specifically restricts that jurisdiction. Porter, 328 U.S. 
at 39°: 30A C.J.S. Equity § 6(c). Equity goes beyond the statute 
to provide the necessary remedy when the given legal procedure is 
inadequate, provided that it is just to do so. Bollinger and Boyd 
Barge Services, Inc. v. Motor Vessel, Captain Claude Bass, 576 
F.2d 595, 597-98 (Sth Cir. 1978); and Morrissey v. Bologna, 123 
So.2d 537, 543 (Miss. 1960), cert. denied, 81 S.Ct. 1091. Equity 
will not suffer a wrong to be without a remedy. 27 AM. JUR. 2D 
Equity § 120; and 30A C.J.S. § 120. 

The equitable remedy of restitution, or repayment for costs 
expended, is available when a person performs another’s duty to 
the public, even without the other’s knowledge or consent, when 
the former intends to charge the latter for the services, and the 
performance is necessary to the public safety. RESTATEMENT OF 
RESTITUTION §§ 114, 115 (1937). Restitution should be granted 
when good conscience demands it. Hecht, 321 U.S. at 326; Blood 
v. Fleming, 161 F.2d 292, 296 (10th Cir. 1947); 30A CJS. 
Equity § 93. Conscience demands that the party who causes harm 
should pay to remedy the damage. Accordingly, under the proper 
circumstances, equity will require that the party who is responsible 
for the creation of an imminent and substantial endangerment must 
remediate the hazardous waste causing the danger. Petitioners 


13 


admit that this result is proper in the context of a citizen's suit 
under RCRA. Petition for Writ at 11. 

The next logical step, however, is to require the 
responsible party to repay the innocent citizen who actually 
undertook the remediation. There is no logical or functional 
difference between payment for remediation and repayment to an 
innocent third person who has paid for the remediation; the same 
result of requiring the person causing the harm to bear the expense 
of remediating the damage is obtained either way. Thus, 
restitution represents the fair and equitable resolution required by 
good conscience, and it is an appropriate equitable remedy under 
RCRA. 

Repayment is simply shifting the burden of remediation 
back to the party who is ultimately responsible for the presence 
(and therefore the remediation) of the hazardous waste. Such 
restitution is more nearly akin to repayment of a debt than to 
payment of damages. Thus, in the present case, KFC seeks only 
repayment of a debt due as a result of KFC having paid for 
remediation that should have been paid by the Meghrigs (assuming 
for purposes of this case, as we must, that the factual allegations 
of KFC’s Complaint are true). 

Furthermore, courts go much further to provide relief in 
furtherance of the public interest than when purely private interests 
are involved. 27 AM. JUR. 2D Equity § 104. The compelling 
public interest in speedy remediation of hazardous waste is a 
critical consideration supporting the award of restitutionary relief 
in the present case. 


2. The Language of RCRA Evidences the Availability 
of Equitable Restitution. 


Two separate components of RCRA’s citizen’s suit 
provision evidence Congressional intent to allow courts to retain 
their traditional powers of equity with respect to citizen suits, and 
to provide the equitable relief that justice demands. 

First, 42 U.S.C. § 6972(f) provides that: 


14 


Nothing in this section [the citizen’s suit provision] shall 
restrict any right which any person (or class of persons) 
may have under any statute or common law to seek 
enforcement of any standard or requirement relating to the 
management of so'id waste or hazardous waste, or to seek 
any other relief (including relief against the Administrator 
or a State agency). 


Subsection 6972(f) clearly leaves available to the courts the ability 
to provide “any other relief,” including equitable relief. This 
language does not preclude the exercise of the court’s equitable 
powers, but rather explicitly preserves such remedies. 

Second, the passage describing the relief that may be 
awarded, "... such other action as may be necessary,” 42 U.S.C. 
§ 6972(a)(1)(B), is broad and open-ended. The citizen's suit 
provision indisputably confers the ability to award injunctive relief, 
an equitable remedy. See Hecht, 321 U.S. at 329. However, 
injunctions represent only one of the permissible forms of relief 
available in equity. Limiting the interpretation of this phrase to 
injunctive relief would be reading into the statute restrictions that 
do not exist. The statute does not limit the type of relief available, 
but instead specifically provides for authority to require responsible 
parties to take “other actions”. 

The Ninth Circuit’s observation that KFC would be denied 
all right to recover its costs of remediation if RCRA is not 
construed to provide such relief, KFC, 49 F.3d at 524, is entitled 
to considerable weight. Petroleum and its fractions are unregulated 
under CERCLA and many state hazardous substance laws, 
including those of California and Louisiana. 42 US.C. § 
9601(14); Cal.Health & Safety Code § 25317; La. RS. 
30:2271(4)(c). The hazardous waste in question in the present case 
was gasoline, a petroleum product, and therefore recovery may be 
difficult or impossible to obtain under CERCLA and analogous 
state laws. 

Further, as the Ninth Circuit properly recognized, the tort 
remedies that are available to plaintiffs in KFC’s position are 
largely inadequate, because of short statutes of limitation, 
difficulties of proof, and court delays. KFC, 49 F.3d at 523. 


15 


Moreover, negligence is nearly impossible to prove, given the 
historical standards for hazardous waste disposal, many-of which 
are unsatisfactory according to modern disposal standards, and the 
difficulty of establishing the reasonableness of waste disposal 
methods decades in the past. Trespass and nuisance causes of 
action are useless in many or most of these cases because the 
hazardous waste was usually placed on the property by its owner 
at the time or by a person otherwise privileged to do so. As 
CERCLA does not apply to sites contaminated by hazardous waste 
comprised of petroleum or petroleum fractions, potentially 
including gasoline, regardless of the extent of the threat to human 
health or the environment posed thereby, such sites may be 
remediated only through RCRA. Thus, the need to encourage 
remediation of petroleum-derived hazardous waste through RCRA 
is particularly compelling. 

As further noted by the Ninth Circuit, precluding recovery 
of remediation expenses under RCRA would deprive “the very 
citizens who most deserve the remedy, namely innocent citizens, 
like KFC,” of the right to restitution of expenditures for 
compliance with the environmental laws with respect to 
environmental hazards that they did not create. KFC, 49 F.3d at 
523. Instead, the persons who actually generated, transported, or 
disposed of the hazardous waste would be fully insulated from 
liability for their actions, and the entire cost of their actions would 
fall upon innocent parties. Restitution is available to prevent 
wrongdoers from shifting responsibility for the consequences of 
their actions onto innocent victims. Wyandotte Transp. Co. v. 
United States, 389 U.S. 191, 204, 88 S.Ct. 379, 387 (1967). 

Equity demands fairness. Equity gives the courts the 
power to decide each case on its individual merits, and to avoid 
harsh results when broad and far-reaching rules of law are applied 
to a narrow set of facts. The manifest injustice caused by allowing 
the responsible party to escape liability while burdening the 
innocent party with all costs of remediation can be avoided by the 
reasonable application of the principles of equity to the specific 
facts of each RCRA case. 


16 


3. Reason Leads to the Logical Conclusion That 
Because the Equitable Defense of Laches Is 
Available, the Equitable Remedy of Restitution 
Must Also Be Available. 


Petitioners argue that because RCRA contains no statute of 
limitations, it must not provide for a restitutionary remedy. The 
Ninth Circuit, however, recognized that laches would be available 
to limit the time within which a citizen could bring an action under 
RCRA. KFC, 49 F.3d at 522. Acknowledgment of the 
availability of the equitable defense necessarily requires 
acknowledgment of the availability of equitable remedies. 

Laches is an equitable mechanism by which enforcement 
of a right is pretermitted wh. its exercise would unjustly cause 
injury to the defendant as a result of inexcusable delay or lack of 
diligence on the part of the person asserting the right. Costello v. 
United States, 305 U.S. 265, 282, 81 S.Ct. 534, 543 (1961); and 
30A C.J.S. Equity §§ 129. Determining whether the doctrine of 
laches should bar a claim requires consideration of all of the 
circumstances of a particular case. See Citizens and Landowners 
Against the Miles City/New Underwood Powerline v. Secretary, 
United States Department of Energy, 683 F.2d 1171 (8th Cir. 
1982); and United States v. Reilly Tar and Chemical Co., 546 
F.Supp. 1100 (D. Minn. 1982). 

Petitioners contrast RCRA with CERCLA, in order to 
support their argument that only CERCLA provides for recovery 
of remediation costs. Petitioners’ Brief at 23. CERCLA, unlike 
RCRA, expressly provides a statute of limitations for citizens’ 
suits. Petitioners ignore the fact that CERCLA, as it was enacted 
in 1980, also lacked a specific statute of limitations with respect to 
recovery of remediation expenditures. For six years, CERCLA 
actions for cost reimbursement were not subject to a statute of 
limitations. Congress did not enact a statute of limitations for 
CERCLA until the Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act 
of 1986. Pub. L. No. 99-499, 100 Stat. 1613 (1986). 

Several cases interpreting CERCLA as it existed prior to 
the 1986 amendment addressed the issue of whether a time 
limitation existed for cost recovery under CERCLA, and each 


17 


determined that the exercise of these rights was limited by laches. 
The court in United States v. Mottolo, 605 F.Supp. 898, 909 
(D.N.H. 1985) held that, prior to its amendment, CERCLA 
contained no statute of limitations with respect to actions for 
recovery of remediation costs, but that the doctrine of laches 
would be applied instead because a cost reimbursement action 
under CERCLA is essentially equitable in nature. The court 
further held that the doctrine of laches does not apply to suits 
brought by a federal or state government in its sovereign capacity. 
Id. Thus, prior to the addition of a statute of limitations on cost 
recovery actions, there was no limit on the time within which a 
government could pursue cost recovery under CERCLA. See also 
United States v. Dickerson, 640 F Supp. 448, 451 (D. Md. 1986) 
(adopting same); and United States v. Conservation Chemical 
Company, 619 F.Supp. 162, 213 (W.D. Mo. 1985). (adopting 
same). 

Amicus respectfully asserts that the equitable defense of 
laches must be available under RCRA, as noted by the Ninth 
Circuit, KFC, 49 F.3d at 522. Amicus further asserts that, 
because the equitable defense is availabie to the benefit of 
defendants, the equitable right to restitution must be available to 
the plaintiff. The principles of equity do not permit advantage to 
accrue to either party to a dispute. Bollinger, 576 F.2d at 598. 
Equity must be equally available to all parties because “equity 
delights in doing justice completely, and not by halves." 27 AM. 
Jur. 2D Equity § 119; 30A C.J.S. Equity § 119. It would be 
unfair for the defendant to obtain the benefit of equitable defenses 
such as /aches if plaintiffs are not similarly afforded the benefits 


of equity. 


Il. THE "IMMINENT AND SUBSTANTIAL ENDANGERMENT" 
Must Exist WHEN REMEDIATION Is INITIATED. 


Petitioners interpret RCRA's authorization of citizens’ suits 
for improper disposals of hazardous waste that "... may present an 
imminent and substantial endangerment” to require the danger to 
be imminent when suit is filed, rather than when remediation is 
commenced. This strained and restrictive interpretation ignores 
RCRA's express authorization of citizens’ suits concerning past 
conduct, as well as the compelling public policy behind RCRA, as 
discussed supra at Section 1(A). 

Petitioners’ interpretation of RCRA would require 
abatement of an imminent endangerment to await, at a minimum, 
identification of the responsible parties, proper notice, and filing 
of suit. Meanwhile, the potential danger to public health and the 
environment would continue, and the harm threatened thereby 
might actually come to pass. As noted by the Eight Circuit in the 
context of the nearly identically-worded provision by which EPA 
can file suit with respect to an “imminent and substantial 
endangerment": 


We agree with the district court, however, that 
RCRA's “imminent and substantial endangerment” 
language does not require the EPA to file and 
prosecute its RCRA action while the endangerment 
exists. As the district court aptly noted, this 
would be an “absurd and unnecessary” 
requirement. The endangerment language is 
plainly intended by Congress to limit the reach of 
RCRA to sites where the potential for harm is 
great.... The purpose of [RCRA] is to ‘give broad 
authority to the courts to grant all relief necessary 
to ensure complete protection of the public health 
and the environment’ (citations omitted). The 
limitation urged by defendants [that the EPA must 
file suit under RCRA prior to undertaking 
remed.ation] would defeat this purpose. 


19 


United States v. Aceto Agricultural Chemicals Corp., 872 F.2d 
1373, 1383 (8th Cir. 1989). 

The absurdity of requiring private citizens to file suit prior 
to remediating hazardous waste sites is similarly apparent, as such 
a requirement would similarly defeat the compelling public policy 
behind RCRA, i.e., the immediate remediation of imminent 
endangerment. The words “imminent endangerment” entail a real 
threat to human health or the environment, and the neutralization 
of such threats would be severely impeded if remediation were 
delayed by bureaucratic hurdles that are unnecessary under a 
reasonable reading of the statute. 

Under Petitioners’ interpretation of RCRA, those parties 
who act promptly to address dangerous contamination would be 
deprived of their remedy under RCRA, while the remedies of those 
who chose to do nothing, or to litigate rather than remediate, will 
be preserved. See Bayless Investmt. & Trading Co. v. Chevron 
U.S.A., 39 E.R.C. (B.N.A.) 1428, 1432 (D.Ariz. 1994). The 
statute should be read to avoid such an inappropriate result. 
Petitioners’ interpretation of the RCRA citizen's suit provision is 
neither the most natural reading nor the reading most conducive to 
fulfillment of RCRA's purpose, and therefore constitutes an 
impermissible curtailment of the relief available under RCRA. 


Ill. RECOVERY OF REMEDIATION EXPENDITURES IS PROPER 
UNDER RCRA REGARDLESS OF THE APPLICABILITY OF 
CERCLA. 


The Ninth Circuit stated in its opinion below that KFC 
“has no remedy under CERCLA because CERCLA’s petroleum 
exclusion covers refined petroleum products such as gasoline and 
therefore bars a lawsuit to recover response costs occasioned by its 
release.” KFC, 49 F.3d at 523 n.6. Petitioners and the Western 
States Petroleum Association ("WSPA") as Amicus Curiae, argue 
that recovery of remediation expenditures under RCRA is improper 
because permitting such relief would nullify CERCLA’s petroleum 
exclusion. Petitioners’ Brief at 25-26; Brief for the Western States 
Petroleum Association as Amicus Curiae in Support of Petitioners 


20 


at 17, Meghrig v. KFC Western, Inc., U.S. ___ (19__) (No. 95- 
83) (“WSPA Brief"). This argument is without merit. 

RCRA and CERCLA were both enacted to address the 
problem of hazardous materials discharged into the environment, 
but they are independent statutory schemes. CERCLA does not 
preempt the field of remediation or recovery of remediation 
expenditures and CERCLA's applicability vel non is irrelevant to 
the existence of a cause of action under RCRA. 


A. CERCLA Has Not Preempted the Fields of 
Remediation or Recovery of Remediation 


Expenditures. 


This Honorable Court should not construe CERCLA’s 
explicit provision for recovery of the costs of remediation from the 
parties ultimately responsible to preclude such recovery under 
RCRA. Admittedly, CERCLA is primarily a clean-up statute (it 
has been described as “overwhelmingly remedial" in nature, U.S. 
v. Aceto Agricultural Chemicals Corp., 872 F.2d 1373, 1380 (8th 
Cir. 1989)), while RCRA is primarily a regulatory statute (it has 
been described as a "prospective cradle-to-grave regulatory regime 
governing the movement of hazardous waste in our society,” /d. at 
1377). Nevertheless, in light of RCRA’s authorization for private 
citizens to pursue civil actions, recovery of the costs of remediation 
of such hazardous waste from those ultimately responsible is also 
appropriate under RCRA. 

CERCLA explicitly states that "[t}his chapter [CERCLA] 
does not affect or otherwise impair the rights of any person under 
Federal, State, or common law,” with certain exceptions not 
relevant here. 42 U.S.C. § 9659(h). Thus, CERCLA does not 
provide the sole means of redress relative to matters regulated 
thereunder. Although CERCLA is “the centerpiece of the federal 
hazardous substance cleanup and liability program", S. COOKE, 
THE LAW OF HAZARDOUS WASTE § 12.01(2) (1995), it is not the 
only piece. CERCLA'’s existence in no way alters the availability 
of other remedies under other statutes, including RCRA, the 
common law, or equity. 


21 


B. CERCLA and RCRA Are Independent Statutes 
Which Apply to Different Classes of “lazardous 
Materials. 


The terms “hazardous waste" and “hazardous substance”, 
to which RCRA and CERCLA apply respectively, are not 
coextensive; a material can meet the definition of one without 
satisfying the definition of the other. A “hazardous substance” is 
defined under CERCLA to include any material defined as a 
“hazardous waste" under RCRA, except petroleum or a fraction 
thereof, or natural or synthetic gas. 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14). Thus, 
only RCRA, and not CERCLA, applies to hazardous waste 
consisting of petroleum or petroleum fractions, and the exclusion 
of CERCLA does not bar application of RCRA. Agricultural 
Excess & Surplus Ins. Co. v. A.B.D. Tank & Pump Co., 878 
F.Supp. 1091, 1097 (E.D. Ill. 1995); Craig Lyle Lid. Partnership 
v. Land O'Lakes, Inc., 877 F.Supp. 476, 480-81 (D. Minn. 1995); 
and Zands v. Nelson, 779 F.Supp. 1254, 1263 (S.D. Cal. 1991). 
It would be unconscionable, as well as contrary to the language of 
RCRA, to proscribe regulation of hazardous waste on the grounds 
that RCRA cannot apply because CERCLA's petroleum exclusion 
precludes regulation under CERCLA. Such an interpretation 
would free petroleum and its fractions, including benzene, toluene, 
and xylene, from all environmental regulation, despite the threat 
to human health and the environment that such materials may pose. 


C. RCRA Contains No Exclusion Comparable in 
Scope or Substance to the CERCLA Petroleum 
Exclusion. 


CERCLA applies exclusively to “hazardous substances", 
which are defined to exclude “petroleum, including crude oil or 
any fraction thereof which is not otherwise listed or designated as 
a hazardous substance under subparagraphs (A) through (F) of this 
paragraph.” 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14). This exclusion is commonly 
referred to as the “petroleum exclusion". 

The United States Environmental Protection Agency 
("EPA") has interpreted the CERCLA petroleum exclusion to apply 


22 


to materials such as crude oil and crude oil fractions, hazardous 
substances indigenous to petroleum, such as benzene, and 
indigenous, refinery-added hazardous substances that are normally 
mixed with or added to crude oil or crude oil fractions during the 
refining process. EPA General Counsel, Scope of CERCLA 
Petroleum Exclusion Under Sections 101 (14) and 104(a)(2) 5 (July 
31, 1987). EPA has stated that the petroleum exclusion does not 
apply to hazardous substances that are added to oil during use. /d. 
at 4, citing 50 Fed. Reg. 13,456 (April 4, 1985) and 51 Fed. Reg. 
8,206 (March 10, 1986). The courts have largely followed EPA's 
interpretation of the petroleum exclusion. E.g., Wilshire Westwood 
Associates v. Atlantic Richfield Corp., 881 F.2d 801, 810 (9th Cir. 
1989); and Niecko v. EMRO Marketing Co., 769 F Supp. 973, 982 
(E.D. Mich. 1991). 

The limited legislative history regarding the petroleum 
exclusion is comprised primarily of concerns expressed by 
members of Congress about the lack of authority under the bill to 
respond to releases of petroleum. James Baller, The Petroleum 
Exclusion - Stronger Than Ever After Wilshire Westwood, 43 
SOUTHWESTERN L.J. 915, 918 (1990). Typical of these concerns 
are the comments of Representative Mikulski of Maryland: 


I realize that it is disappointing to see no 
oil-related provision in the bill, but we must also 
realize that this is our only chance to get 
hazardous waste dump site cleanup legislation 
enacted. | would note that we have had assurances 
from Members of the Senate that an oilspill 
proposal would be considered a very high 
legislative priority in the 97th Congress. 

Moreover, there is already a mechanism in 
place that is designed to deal with spills in 
navigable waterways. There is not, however, any 
provision currently in our law that addresses the 
potentially ruinous situations of abandoned toxic 
waste dump sites. 

I, therefore, believe that it is very 
imperative that we pass the Senate bill as a very 


23 


important beginning in our attempt to defuse the 
ticking environmental time bomb of abandoned 
toxic waste sites. 


126 Cong. Rec. H11,976 (Dec. 3, 1980). Thus, the CERCLA 
petroleum exclusion was enacted as a compromise measure to 
ensure the passage of a stopgap bill to begin the process of 
regulating hazardous substances in circumstances, such as the 
absence of a responsible party, to which RCRA did not apply at 
the time. RCRA'’s authorization for citizen suits with respect to 
imminent endangerments was added in 1984, Pub.L. No. 98-616 
(1984), four years after CERCLA was enacted, Pub.L. No. 96-510 
(1980). 

RCRA also contains a “petroleum exclusion” of sorts, but 
it is far more limited in scope than CERCLA’s petroleum 
exclusion. Congress temporarily exempted from regulation under 
RCRA all “drilling fluids, produced waters, and other wastes 
associated with the exploration, development, or production of 
crude oil or natural gas", pending investigation by EPA as to 
whether regulation of these materials under RCRA was warranted. 
42 U.S.C. § 6921(b)(2)(A), (B). This exemption is commonly 
referred to as the “Bentsen exemption.” EPA eventually 
determined that regulation of these materials under RCRA was 
inappropriate, and the Bentsen exemption became a permanent part 
of RCRA. 

The legislative history of the exemption indicates that it 
excludes from regulation only those wastes intimately associated 
with the exploration for and initial recovery of oil, and nothing 
more’ 


The term “other wastes associated” is specifically 
included to designate waste materials intrinsically 
derived from primary field operations associated 
with the exploration, development, or production 
of crude oil, natural gas or geothermal energy. It 
would cover such substances as: Hydrocarbon 
bearing soil in and around related facilities, drill 
cuttings; and material (such as hydrocarbons, 


24 


water, sand, and emulsion) produced from a well 
in conjunction with crude oil, natural gas or 
geothermal energy; and the accumulated material 
(such as hydrocarbons, water, sand, and emulsior ) 

The phrase “intrinsically derived from the 
primary field operations” is intended to 
differentiate exploration, development, and 
production operations from transportation (from 
_ the point of custody transfer or of production 
separation and dehydration) from manufacturing 
operations . 


House Conf. Rep. No. 96-1444, Joint Explanatory Statement of the 
Committee of Conference, reprinted in 1980 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5019, 


5031. 

Subsequently, EPA expanded on the distinction between 
waste resulting from field operations and waste produced, stating 
that: 


wastes associated with such processes as oil 
refining and petrochemical-related manufacturing 
are not exempt because those processes are not an 
integral part of primary field operations. 


EPA, EXECUTIVE SUMMARIES, REPORT TO CONGRESS: 
MANAGEMENT OF WASTES FROM THE EXPLORATION, 
DEVELOPMENT, AND PRODUCTION OF CRUDE OIL, NATURAL GAS, 
AND GEOTHERMAL ENERGY, Pt. 1, p. 7 n.1 (1987). Accordingly, 
the Bentsen exemption applies only to hazardous waste that is: 


associated with operations to locate or remove oil 
or gas from the ground or to remove impurities 
from such substances, and it must be intrinsic to 
and uniquely associated with oil and gas 
exploration, development or production operations 
(commonly referred to simply as exploration and 


25 


production or E&P); the waste must not be 
generated by transportation or manufacturing 
operations. 


EPA, Clarification of the Regulatory Determination for Wastes 
from the Exploration Development and Production of Crude Oil, 
Natural Gas and Geothermal Energy, 58 Fed. Reg. 15,284 (March 
22, 1993). 

Thus, the RCRA Bentsen exemption does not create a 
blanket exemption of all petroleum-related substances from 
RCRA’s ambit. Rather, it is a narrow exemption, the purpose of 
which is merely to except from RCRA hazardous waste produced 
by oil and gas exploration and production activities. 

The court of appeals below did not even discuss whether 
the leaded gasoline discharged onto the property falls within the 
Bentsen exemption, and the foregoing discussion of EPA's 
interpretation of the exemption renders it apparent that the 
exemption does not apply to leaded gasoline, a refined petroleum 
product that is well-removed from exploration and production 
activities. 

The scope of the CERCLA petroleum exclusion is much 
more broad than that of the RCRA Bentsen exemption, in that it 
applies to all petroleum fractions, rather than merely to substances 
used for oil and gas exploration and development. Moreover, 
according to its plain meaning, as well as its interpretation by 
Congress and EPA, the Bentsen exemption does not encompass 
refined petroleum products, such as the leaded gasoline at issue in 
the present case, regardless of whether such products fall within 
the CERCLA petroleum exclusion. 


D. Leaking Underground Gasoline Storage Tanks Are 
Regulated Pursuant to RCRA. 


When Congress addressed the problem of leaking 
underground gasoline storage tanks in 1984, it did so not by 
amending CERCLA and its petroleum exclusion, but by amending 
RCRA explicitly to permit regulation of leaking USTs. 42 U.S.C. 
§ 6991, et seq. ("Subtitle I"). See Robert N. Aguilez, Refining 


26 


CERCLA’s Petroleum Exclusion, 7 TULANE ENV. L.J. 41, 64 
(1993), citing Amoco Oil Co. v. Borden, Inc., 889 F.2d 664, 667 
(Sth Cir. 1989). Thus, Congress has clearly indicated its 
willingness to regulate disposal of petroleum-derived substances 
through RCRA, regardless of the exclusion of these substances 
from CERCLA’s regulatory scheme. 

WSPA raises two issues with respect to USTs. First, 
WSPA implies that citizens cannot file suit under RCRA with 
respect to leakage of gasoline from USTs because gasoline is not 
“waste” within the meaning of RCRA. WSPA Brief at 11, citing 
130 Cong. Rec. $2028, S2080 (daily ed., Feb. 29, 1984) 
(comments of Sen. Durenberger). Most courts that have examined 
the issue, however, have held that leaked gasoline is a waste 
material. Agricultural Excess, 878 F.Supp. at 1095; Craig Lyle, 
877 F.Supp. at 482; and Zands, 779 F.Supp. at 1262. C/,, 
Winston v. Shell Oil, 861 ©.Supp. 713, 716 (C.D.Ill. 1984). 

WSPA also notes ' at Subtitle | contains no cost recovery 
mechanism. WSPA Brief at 11. This point is irrelevant because 
Subtitle I is part of RCRA, and RCRA’s citizen suit provision 
authorizes suit for any “imminent and substantial endangerment" , 
as discussed supra at section I(A), including threats caused by 
violation of Subtitle 1. 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B). 

Accordingly, by providing for the regulation of USTs 
under Subtitle I of RCRA, Congress has clearly indicated that the 
CERCLA petroleum exclusion does not preclude regulation under 
RCRA of gasoline that has leaked from USTs, when an imminent 
endangerment to human health and the environment is presented 


thereby. 


27 


CONCLUSION 


For the foregoing reasons, Amicus respectfully urges this 
Honorable Court to affirm the decision of the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit recognizing that, under proper 
circumstances, the RCRA citizen's suit provision authorizes courts 
to order a party responsible for the disposal of hazardous waste 
which creates an imminent and substantial endangerment to health 
and the environment to repay an innocent party who has 
remediated the contamination in question. 


Respectfully submitted: 


Lawrence A. Durant 
General Counsel 

Counsel of Record 

James M. Bookter 

Senior Attorney 

Office of General Counsel 
Louisiana Department of 
Transportation and 
Development 

P.O. Box 94245 

Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70000 
(504) 379-1207 


Charley Hutchens 

Suite 105 

412 West University 
Lafayette, Louisiana 70506 
(318) 237-4102 

Special Counsel 


December 8, 1995 


William M. Hudson, III 
Edgar D. Gankendorff 
Robert A. Mahtook, Jr. 
Victoria A. Guidry 
Lawrence E. Marino 
OaTS & HUDSON 

Suite 400 

Gordon Square 

100 East Vermilion Street 
Lafayette, Louisiana 70501 
(318) 233-1100 

Special Counsel 


Counsel for Amicus Curiae 
State of Louisiana 

Through Its Department of 
Transportation and 
Development 


