No. 95-83 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


Alan Meghrig 
and Margaret Meghrig, 
Petitioners 
vs. 


KFC Western, Inc., 
Respondent 


AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF OF 
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SERVICE 
STATION ASSOCIATION 
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


Dimitri G. Daskalopoulos 
3 Church Circle 

Suite 500 

Annapolis, MD. 21401 
(301) 261-8480 

Counsel of Record 

for Amicus Curiae 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether the citizen suit provision 
of RCRA, 42 U.S.C. 6972 (a)(1)(B), 
which authorizes district courts to 
restrain persons who have contributed 
to contamination or to ‘order such 
persons to take such other action as 
may be necessary", also authorizes a 
private party suit for reimbursement 
of clean up costs, despite the absence 
in RCRA, unlike CERCLA and other 
Statutes, of any express language 
authorizing such an action. 


2. Whether the citizen suit provision 
of RCRA, 42 U.S.C. 6972 (a)(1)(B), 
which only permits. suits against 
persons who have contributed to the 
generation, transport or disposal of 
solid or hazardous waste “which may 
present an imminent and substantial 
endangerment to health or the 
environment” authorizes a citizen suit 
for contamination that was fully 
remediated at least 3 years before the 
action was commenced. 


a a ee ee cad I 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ..n nce ccc ccc cces II 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES......... meediueekae III 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE... ... 0... cc ccc ccces 1 
INTRODUCTION AND INTEREST OF AMICUS ..... 1 
A ee es 11 
I. THE 9th CIRCUIT DECISION IS BASED * 
UPON ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTIONS .............. 


II. THE PLAIN LANGUAGE OF THE STATUTE DOES 
NOT AUTHORIZE THE CAUSE OF ACTION CREATED 


a a atened 15 
III. THE LEGISLATIVE HISTORY DOES NOT SUPPORT 
sae Oe 


IV. IF SUCH A CAUSE OF ACTION EXISTS 
IT IS LIMITED TO CASES PRESENTING 


- II - 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES 
bette 11975) AGL AEE TEES ESS ee 11, 17 
ay ieee eth Cir. 1995) ........ 15, 17 
Foundation, 
nse occvecce 29 
Satie eo. | SSSR 3 
ee BS Sak 15 


Middlesex County Sewerage Authority v. 
National Sea Clammers Association, 
453 U.S. l (19S Adcccccccecs ee ee | rf 24, 25 


Milwaukee v. Illinois (II) 

Ge ee 25 
Wilshire Westwood Associates v. Atlantic 
Richfield Co. 

881 F.2d 601 (9th Cir. 1991)....... 5 


Yommer _v. McKenzie 
255 Md. 220, 257 A.2d 138 (Md. 1969)... ‘5 


STATUTES 


42 U.S.C. 6972 (a)(1)(B)............ 15,27,28 
42 uU.S.C. 6991lb se efeeweeneeeeeee#sees © © @ = 


- 333 = 


C2 DeB.C GPDID 66100). ccccccccccece 13,15 

42 U.S.C. 6991b (h)(2)......ccceceee 18 

en ORS I ee eo Sr ee 9 

on eee ME Mee eee 5,7 

42 U.S.C. 9607 (a)(2)(B).......... 23 

af  ' Sf ee Se epee e Rear 23 

California Health & Safety Code 

SY MEGS CULEEG be déeececcecec 18 
25299.10..... eevcce eece 10 
ME MOEN ob cbccbeccccces 10 
|| § | — Fee 10 
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY 


Senate Report 94-988, 
94th Cong. Second Session, (1976)... 20 


House Report # 98-198 (Part 3) 


(Judiciary Committee) 
98th Cong. 2d Session, (1984) ...... 25 


House Report 98-1133, 
98th Cong., 2nd Sess. Sens 6beeeeos 7, 22 


House Report # 99-962, 
(99th Cong. 2d BOSGEGR) oc acccccccce cooe 9 


Congressional Record... 

116 Cong. Record 33104 ........... 29 

Oct. 5, 1984 pp. S13812, 13813...... 27 

S. 2513 (Sen. Durenberger)........ 6 
- IV - 


BR 2560 (Rep. Florio)..ccccccccccccce 7 


REGULATORY MATERIALS 


40 CFP 280 ceoeoeveeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeees 4 
subpart > Gade COnGanews é0e chee 9, 12 


60 Federal Register 46692 ........... 2 
Se eesveececce & 
SUE ncccescesces § 
GeGee secsecceces F 


,3 
’ 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Amicus hereby adopts the statement of the 


case as shall be set forth in Petitioner's 
brief on the merits. 

INTR“DUCTION AND INTEREST OF AMICUS _ 

Amicus, the Southern California Service 
Station Dealers Association, represents the 
interests of gasoline retailers throughout the 
region, a region which is the largest single 
petroleum market in the world. 

The activities of the gasoline retailers 


represented by the Association have been 


' extensively regulated by the Resource 


Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) since 
1984 Amendments thereto became effective. 

The interpretation of RCRA, particularly 
with respect to underground storage tanks, is 


of tremendous concern to the Association. 


If the interpretation of the 9th Circuit 
is upheld, the practical impact on our members 
would go far beyond the legal implications. 

In particular, if upheld, the ruling 
would hurt our members ability to obtain 
investment capital, and would substantially 
drive up our costs of dealing with the RCRA 
regulated substances that are at the heart of 
the daily operation of a modern service 
station. 

Moreover, if upheld, the ruling would 
effectively repeal EPA's newly promulgated 
underground tank lender liability rule. 60 
Fed. Regis. 46692 (Sept. 7, 1995). 

EPA explained the need for the rule: 

" Until now, EPA believes that concerns 
over environmental liability have made a 
significant number of lenders reluctant to 
make loans to otherwise credit-worthy owners 
and operators of UST's. The free flow of 
credit to UST owners (many of whom are small 


entities and that may rely on _ secured 
financing mechanisms for capital){such as our 


2 


ao ew — 


a a ee 


members},is expected to assist UST owners and 
operators in meeting their obligations to 
upgrade, maintain, or otherwise comply with 
RCRA Subtitle I and other environmental 
requirements. 


Conversely, the lack of such capital may 
adversely affect the ability of an UST owner 
to meet its obligations under subtitle I with 
concomitant adverse environmental impacts from 
UST's and UST systems, that are out of 
compliance due to the lack of financing to 
make the necessary improvements. 60 Fed. 
Regis. at 46692, 46693. 


It is extremely important that the Court 
be aware that the major reason EPA believes 
the tank lender liability rule will withstand 
scrutiny is the absence of a private damage 
action under RCRA subtitle I; whereas a 
similar rule under CERCLA was struck down by 


in Kelley, et.al. _v. EPA, 15 F.3rd .1100 
(D.C.Cir. 1994). 


EPA explains: 


“ The Court held that “EPA lacked statutory 
authority to restrict by regulation private 
rights of action under the statute.... 

Whereas CERCLA contains a provision regarding 
private rights of action, there is no explicit 


3 


provision for private rights of action 
contained under RCRA Subtitle I. " 60 Fed. 
Regis. at 46699. 


This ruling reverses that well settled 
principal, a principal that has been relied 
upon by both regulators and the regulated 
community. 

The importance of the rule to our 
members, a rule puc in jeopardy by the 9th 
Circuit ruling, compels us to seek reversal. 

A review of the history of regulation of 
underground storage tanks, shows why creation 
of this new federal cause of action by the 9th 
Circuit is particularly inappropriate. 

Prior to 1983, gasoline underground 
storage tanks were largely out of sight and 
out of mind. 

Those instances where leakage had 
eccurred were dealt with under state law, 


under a variety of theories, ranging from 


strict liability, See, e.g., Yommer v. 
McKenzie, 255 Md. 220, 257 A.2d 138 (Md. 
1969), to trespass and nuisance. 

A series of highly publicized leaks, in 
particular, one at Canob Park, Rhode Island, 
that ended up on the TV show “60 Minutes", 
spurred calls for Congressional action. 

Members of Congress were told by the EPA 
that it lacked authority under existing 
statutes to remediate leaking underground 
storage tanks ("LUSTS”). 

In particular, Superfund (CERCLA) could 
not be used, because gasoline falls within the 
“petroleum exclusion” found at 42 U.S.C. 9601 


(14). See generally, Wilshire Westwood 


Associates v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 881 F.2d 
801 (9th Cir. 1991). 


As a result, two bills amending CERCLA 


were introduced in that 98th Congress, H.R. 


4761-by Rep. Ritter, and 'S. 2513 by Sen. 
Durenberger, that shared — common 
objectives: 

(1) to repeal the petroleum exclusion and 
allow Superfund authority to be used in 
leaking tank cases and (2) to authorize EPA to 
establish regulations for UST's. 

Amicus, represented by Counsel of Record, 
and our national organization, the Service 
Station Dealers of America, were key players 
in the ensuing legislative debate. 

The industry viewed repeal of the 
petroleum exclusion as a costly disaster in 
the making. If gas stations were hung with the 
“Superfund Site” label, investment capital and 
liability insurance would disappear, and the 
cost of handling our products would 
substantially increase. 


On the other hand, regulation of tanks 


was viewed as a sensible step. 

As a result, a consensus was reached 
which enabled a regulatory program to be 
established under Subtitle I of RCRA created 
by the 1984 Amendments. See generally, House 
Report 98-1133, 98th Cong., 2nd Sess. (1984). 

Nevertheless, a Congressman or Senator 
with a tank leak in his or her district still 
could not call EPA and request a federal 
response to a tank leak. 

The next Congress saw proposals to 
partially lift the CERCLA petroleum exclusion, 
42 U.S.C. 9601(14), by defining releases from 
petroleum underground tanks as hazardous 
substances. See, e.g., Section 101 of HR 2560 
(99th Cong. lst Session) (authored by Chairman 
Florio). 

Once again, these proposals to repeal or 


modify the petroleum exclusion, and thus 


subject gasoline UST cases to CERCLA, 
authority did not survive. 

It is instructive to note that had any of 
these proposals passed, then a federal cause 
of action for cost eesevery in petroleum UST 
cases would exist under CERCLA. 

The fact that they did not pass shows 
that the 9th Circuit ruling lacks merit. 

Congress chose a different path. 

Under Section 205 of the 1986 Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) a 
comprehensive financial responsibility scheme 
was established, along with creation of the 
federal leaking underground storage tank trust 
fund. See, 42 U.S.C. 699lb. 

Although a Superfund bill was used as the 
vehicle, the fund was created under RCRA, 
primarily because of the desire to keep 


underground gasoline storage tanks out of the 


ineffective quagmire that Superfund had turned 
into. See generally, House Report # 99-962, 
(99th Cong. 2d Session) (The Conference Report 
on SARA). 

The net result of the legislative debate 
was to create a comprehensive regulatory 
scheme, See 60 Fed. Regis. 46693- 46694, and 
40 CFR 280, 281, that EPA was authorized to, 
and in fact has, “franchised” to the states 
under 42 U.S.C. 699lc. 

For purposes of this case, the key 
provisions are those dealing with corrective 
action, financial responsibility, and the 
federal and state funds. 

EPA's financial responsibility 
regulations (40 CFR part 280 subpart 48) 
require UST owners and operators to maintain 
an annual aggregate of “financial assurance” 


of 1 million to 2 million dollars. 


———————— Oe 


TF a ie eee 


| 


The method of demonstrating financial 
assurance most relied upon nationwide is the 
42 state tank trust funds. 

California has a tank fund set up on the 
authority of the Section 25299.10 of the 
Health and Safety Code. 

That fund, like others, was set up 
because of the unavailability of insurance, 
See, Cal. Health & Safety Code, 25299.10 
(b)(4), and provides reimbursement of clean up 
costs and other costs to eligible claimants. 

It was also designed so that California 
could obtain its “tank franchise” from EPA, 
and was enacted to further: 


" the interest of the people of the state in 


order to avoid direct federal requlation, of 


persons already subject to state law...Cal. 
Health & Safety Code 25299.10 (b)(10). 


Congress did not create an implied 
federal cause of action for cost recovery in 
UST cases; it left the issue to state law. 


10 


ARGUMENT 
As a threshold matter, SCSSA believes the 


time has come for the Court to refine the 
analysis under Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 
(1975), as to when an implied cause of action 
is available under a federal statute. 

Specifically, we believe that where the 
statute does not expressly provide for the 
cause of action or relief sought, there must 
exist a clearly articulated and affirmatively 
expressed intent in the legislative history 
that creates an unmistakable implication that 
Congress intended to create such a cause of 
action. 

If this threshold inguiry is not met, 
then federal courts should not be required to 
engage in the analysis under the other three 
factors enunciated in Cort. 

As demonstrated, infra, this test cannot 


ll 


be met, therefore then decision below should 
be reversed on this basis alone. 


I. THE 9th CIRCUIT DECISION IS BASED 
UPON ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTIONS 


The basis of the 9th Circuit decision is 
an assumption that to rule against an implied 
right of action for contribution under RCRA 
would leave the plaintiffs without a remedy, 
and thus would be “bad public policy”. 

The fact is that state law has always 
provided the remedies for our members, who 
have more experience with petroleum 
contaminated properties than anyone else. 

As noted, supra, due to the requirements 
of RCRA that underground tank owners and 
operators be able to demonstrate financial 
responsibility, See, 40 CFR Pa t 280 Subpart 
H, and the unavailability of underground tank 
insurance for small businesses such as those 


operated by our members, California and 41 


12 


other states have created underground tank 
clean up funds. 

These funds are designed to reimburse 
petroleum tank clean up costs such as those at 
issue in this case. | 

In the cases of orphan tank leaks, where 
no responsible owner or operator can be found, 
States and EPA may turn to the federal leaking 
underground storage tank (LUST) trust fund. 

Neither service station dealers, who pay 
the tax that finances the fund, nor any other 
private party, are allowed to tap into the 
federal fund for reimbursement, as the plain 
- language of the statute limits cost recovery 
to “costs incurred by the Administrator or by 
a State” . 42 U.S.C. 699lb (6)(a). 

The reimbursement issue has quite 
properly been handled by the states, and 


claims for reimbursement have been, and 


13 


continue to be made to state tank funds in 
California and 41 other states. 

In addition, the full range of legal 
remedies under state iaw will continue to be 
available to our members, who buy more 
contaminated property than anyone else, as 
well as to others. 

What the 9th Circuit majority saw as bad 
public policy, was in fact a carefully crafted 
legislative response, that has created an 
award winning program and a model federal - 
state partnership. 

In this case, the bad public policy would 
come about through legislating from the bench, 
based upon the erroneous assumption that the 
Respondent, or similarly situated persons 
would be left without a remedy. 

The second erroneous assumption made by 


the 9th Circuit majority is that the same 


a4 


remedies available to the EPA Administrator 
should also be available in a citizen suit. 


KFC Western v. Meghrig, 49 F.3rd 516, at 521- 
522.(9th Cir. 1995). 


In Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3rd 1092 (8th 
Cir. 1995), the 8th Circuit aptly described 


this argument as a non seguitur. Id. at 1100. 

As we have seen, cost recovery from the 
federal LUST trust fund is limited to costs 
incurred by “the Administrator or by a State” 
42 U.S.C. 699lb (6)(a). The available remedies 
to the Administrator and a private party are 
not the same, thus, the 9th Circuit's 
assumption is contradicted by the plain 


language of the statute. 


II. THE PLAIN LANGUAGE OF THE STATUTE DOES NOT 
AUTHORIZE THE CAUSE OF ACTION CREATED 


BY THE 9th CIRCUIT 
In pertinent part, 42 U.S.C. 


6972(a)(1)(B) allows any person to 


15 


maintain a civil suit : 


"on his own behalf against any past or 
present generator, transporter or past or 
present operator of a treatment, storage or 
disposal facility who has contributed or is 
contributing to the past or present to the 
past or present handling, storage, treatment 
or disposal of any solid or hazardous waste 


which may present an imminent and substantial 
endangerment to health or the environment... 


The district court shall have 
jurisdiction to ... enforce permits and other 
requirements, to restrain any person who is 
contributing to the past or present handling, 
storage, treatment, transportation or disposal 
of any solid or hazardous waste... 


as_may be necessary, or both...” 
The 9th Circuit majority attempted to 


support its holding by relying on the term 


ns suc 


as may be necessary “ with respect to 


regulated substances that pose an imminent and 
substantial endangerment to health or the 
environment. 

We believe the key is the term 
"necessary". 


16 


SCSSA fails to see how it is “necessary” 
to award cost recovery or damages under 
federal law in order to have a potentially 
responsible party abate an imminent and 
substantial endangerment. 


In its analysis of the Cort v. Ash 


factors in Furrer, the 8th Circuit noted that 
a persuasive argument can be made that the 
Furrers, (as well as respondent KFC Western 
herein), are in a class of persons that the 
statute is directed against - owners of a 
storage facility where petroleum products or 
hazardous waste presents an imminent and 
substantial endangerment. 62 F.3rd at 1092. 
The key point is that the “carrot” of a 
potential damage award under RCRA is not what 
would motivate a service station operator or 
owner of a leaking tank to take action; rather 


it is the “stick” of “corrective action” 


17 


mandated by 42 U.S.C. 699lb(h)(2) et. seq. 

The “stick” is provided by the threat of 
heavy fines and even criminal prosecution in 
some cases under state (See, e.g. Cal. Health 
and Safety Code Sec. 25299) or federal law if 
the corrective action is not taken. 

Thus, to characterize potential damage 
awards made by federal courts under RCRA as 
“action necessary” defies logic and common 
sense. 

Additionally, to the extent that 
“carrots” are relevant at all, those carrots 
exist in the form of the ability of owners and 
operators who have complied with applicable 
UST regu)ations to seek reimbursement under 
state funds. 

The fact that a private party has no 
right to tap into the federal UST Trust Fund 


is telling evidence of two facts: 


18 


(1) that the federal cause of action implied 
by the 9th Circuit was expressly rejected by 
Congress and (2) that an implied federal cost 
recovery cause of action can not be justified 
on the basis that it is “action necessary” to 
ensure that parties undertake the abatement of 
imminent and substantial hazards to human 
health or the environment. 

Simply put, if Congress had intended to 
allow the relief sought, it would have done so 
in the plain language of the statute. 

Congress refused to repeal or modify the 
CERCLA petroleum exclusion, and also did not 
allow private parties to tap into the federal 
underground tank trust fund. 

Moreover, if the cause of action created 
by the 9th Circuit had in fact been created by 
Congress, either expressly or implicitly, in 


the 1984 RCRA Amendments at issue here, then 


19 


there would have been no — to attempt to 
repeal or modify the petroleum exclusion, or 
to open up the federal UST fund to private 
party cost recovery during the 1986 Superfund 
Amendments debate. 

This fact lends further support to view 
taken by the 86th Circuit in Furrer; and 
clearly de..onstrates that the opinion below 


must be reversed. 


III. THE LEGISLATIVE HISTORY DOES NOT SUPPORT 
CREATION OF AN IMPLIED CAUSE OF ACTION 


RCRA has contained a citizen suit 
provision dating back to its original 
enactment in 1976. 

According to the discussion of the 
original citizen suit provision found in 
Senate Report 94-988, 94th Cong. Second 


Session at p.18: 


“ The Committee drew on the similar 
provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1970 and 
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 


20 


Amendments of 1972. 

The bill provides for citizen 
participation in the enforcement of 
requirements and regulations established under 
this Act. 

to 
actions where violations of standards or 
regulations or a failure on the part of 
officials to perform mandated action is 
alleged. 

Time is provided between notice and 
filing of the action to give the State or the 
Administrator an opportunity to act on the 
alleged violation.” 


We believe two points are critical here. 

First, from its inception, the RCRA 
citizen suit provision has been “carefully 
restricted”. 

Those “careful restrictions" have never 
been removed by Congress, despite efforts to 
do so. 

Even a cursory review of the Conference 
Report to the 1984 Amendments reveals that : 

. The Senate Amendment contains a 
Seer Ceres, limiting citizens’ right of 


CONFERENCE SUBSTITUTE.- The Conference 
Substitute adopts the Senate Amendment with 


21 


es 


additional limitations on citizens’ right of 


action ... 
House Report # 98-1133 (98th Cong. 2d Session, 
1984). 

If Congress has removed these “careful 
restrictions” and “additional limitations", 
then the source of that removal is absent from 
the legislative history. 

Given the detailed list of restrictions 
spelled out in the Confere. -e Report, (and the 
statute itself), it stands to reason that such 
restrictions would appear in the important 
areas of what costs are recoverable, and the 
statute of limitations. 

The 9th Circuit opinion gives us 
no guidance as to what costs would be 
recoverable, rather it would require an ad hoc 
determination of whether the onthe incurred 
are, or were, “action necessary”. 

By contrast, under CERCLA, where the 


right of private parties to seek reimbursement 


22 


for clean up costs incurred is expressly 
provided for in the statute, the only costs 
recoverable are those that are : 

“necessary costs of response incurred by any 
other person consistent with the National 
Contingency Plan.” 42 U.S.C. 9607(a)(2)(B)- 

A second area where the 9th Circuit would 
throw “careful restrictions” out the window is 
with respect to the statute of limitations. 

CERCLA provides a remarkably detailed 
statute of limitations for cost recovery 
actions. 42 U.S.C. 9613 (g)(2). 

RCRA's silence on this point, both in the 
statute, as well as in the legislative 
history, is deafening. 

If Congress’ intended to create a private 
right of action for cost recovery or damages 
under “carefully restricted" citizen suit 
provision of RCRA, it would have spelled out 


what costs are recoverable, and when an action 


23 


to recover such costs must be filed. 

At a minimun, in should be able to find 
legislative history that clearly articulates 
and affirmatively expresses what costs are 
recoverable, what standard is used in 
conducting judicial review of such cost 
recovery actions; and what statute of 
limitations is to be applied. 

Such history is conspicuous by its 
absence, thus it is entirely inappropriate to 
“unlimit" the carefully restricted RCRA 
citizen suit provision. 

The second point made clear by the 
legislative history is that the result in this 
case is virtually dictated by the decision in 
Middlesex County . Sewerage Authority v.- 
National Sea Clammers Association, 453 U.S. 1, 
17 (1981). 


As discussed, supra, the history makes 


24 


clear that the RCRA citizen suit provision is 
based upon the comparable provision of the 
Clean Air Act. 

In Sea Clammers, 453 U.S. 1, (1981), the 
Court noted that the citizen suit provision of 
Clean Air Act of 1970: 


“ makes no provision for damages to the 
individual” 453 U.S. at 17, citing 116 Cong. 
Record 33104 (Statement of Senator Hart). 


It should be noted that the legislative 
history does reveal an effort in the House to 
undercut the holding of Sea Clammers and also 
that of Milwaukee v. Illinois (11), 451 U.S. 
304 (1981), with respect to the issue of 
whether actions may be brought under RCRA 
pursuant to supplementary authority to the 
express language of the statute inferred by 
“federal common law". See, House Report 98- 
198, Part 3, at p.20 (Judiciary Committee). 


The provision was dropped in Conference, 


25 


as evidenced by the following: 


“ I note with satisfaction the decision 
of the Conference Committee to reject the 
House Amendment entitled * Preservation of 
Other Rights ” ; 

This innocuous sounding amendment was 
intended to convey the message to the federal 
judiciary that there is a “ federal common law 
“ applicable to hazardous waste. 

As a result of the decisions in the City 

and National Sea Clammers cases, 
it is clear beyond dispute that there cannot 
be any “federal common law” in an area covered 
by a comprehensive Federal statute such as the 
Solid Waste Disposal Act......-- 


The ironic thing is that there is hardly any 
area in which the ad hoc creation of remedies 
by individual judges is less necessary.” 
(Cong. Rec. Oct. 5, 1984 pp. $13812, 13813; 
(remarks of Sen. Simpson). 

Whether it is viewed as an implied cause 
of action, or an attempt to revive the notion 
that “federal common law" can create this 
cause of action, the fact is that Congress 
affirmatively ejected attempts on several 
fronts to create the ad hoc remedy conjured up 


by the 9th Circuit majority. 


The ruling sought by the Respondents 


26 


would revolutionize the rules of the game that 
those of us who making our living in the 
petroleum marketing industry have lived with 
for over a decade. 

In conclusion, the legislative history is 
utterly devoid of the a clearly articulated 
and affirmatively expressed intent to create 
the cause of action relied upon by the 
Respondent, therefore the opinion below must 
be reversed. 


IV. IF SUCH A CAUSE OF ACTION EXISTS 
IT IS LIMITED TO CASES PRESENTING AN 


“IMMINENT AND SUBSTANTIAL ENDANGERMENT" 
The plain language of the citizen suit 
provision allows a person to bring an action: 


“" on his own behalf against any past or 
present generator, transporter or past or 
present operator of a treatment, storage or 
dicposal facility who has contributed or is 
contributing to the past or present handling, 
storage, treatment or disposal of any solid or 


hazardous waste which may present an imminent 
and substantial endangerment to health or the 


environment... 
42 U.S.C. 6972(a)(1)(B). 


27 


The key is the plain meaning of the term 
“imminent”. 

There is simply no imminent endangerment 
where the site has question has been cleaned 
up three years prior to the action being 
brought. 

Thus, even if a cause of action for cost 
recovery or damages can be implied, it cannot 
be applied under the facts of this case. 

The endangerment in this case is neither 
“imminent” nor is it ongoing, rather damages 
are sought for actions of the past. 

The opinion in effect rewrites the 
statute by adding the term “may have” to the 
existing law, which addresses only situations 
: which may present an imminent and 
substantial endangerment to health or the 


environment. 42 U.S.C. 6972(a)(1)(B).- 


Congress could just as easily added the 


28 


term “may have” and thus applied RCRA to past 
endangerments, as it defined potentially 
responsible parties as those of the “past or 
present" whose actions may be causing an 
imminent endangerment. 

The plain language of the statute is 
clearly dispositive on this point. 

In _Gw ithfi Vv. 
Bay Foundation, 484 U.S. 49 (1987), the Court 
held that under the Federal Water Pollution 
Act, no action should lie where a citizens 
suit is based upon violations that occurred 
entirely in the past. Gwaltney further shows 
that no cause of action should lie in the case 
at bar. 

CONCLUSION 

Congress never intended to create a 

private right of action for cost recovery or 


damages under RCRA generally, or under the 


29 


underground tank program created by Subtitle I 
of RCRA specifically. 

The practical effect of the 9th Circuit's 
ruling is enormous. Congress was aware of 
those effects and rejected efforts to 
expressly provide the cause of action that the 
9th Circuit has implied. 

The opinion under review amounts to 
judicial repeal of a carefully crafted 
legislative framework that has worked well. 

SCSSA therefore must urge the Court to 


reverse the decision of the 9th Circuit. 


Respectfully submitted, 
Dei fe Dale ciale — 
Dimitri G. D opoulos 


3 Church Circle 
Suite 500 

Annapolis, Md. 21401 
(301) 261-8880 


30 


