Supreme Court, U.S. 
i i ae Se 


ore ©°9 1995 


CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


ALAN MEGHRIG AND MARGARET MEGHRIG, 


Petitioners, 
vs. 


KFC WESTERN, INC., 


Respondent. 
. 


On Writ Of Certiorari 


To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


Sf 
OPPOSITION TO MOTION OF AMICI 


CURIAE MASSACHUSETTS, ET AL. FOR 
PERMISSION TO FILE A LATE BRIEF 


S 


Joun P. Zaimes 
Counsel of Record 


Curton J. McFarLAnp 

McCuntock, WEsTON, 
BeNsHOOF, ROCHEFORT, 
RuspatcavA & MacCuisH 

444 South Flower Street, 
43rd Floor 

Los Angeles, California 90071 

(213) 623-2322 

Counsel for Petitioners 


2, py 


Throughout these proceedings, Petitioners have tried to 
conduct themselves with the courtesy and dignity befitting a 
proceeding in the United States Supreme Court. For example, 
we have readily agreed to all requests for consent to file 
amicus briefs, even those opposing Petitioners’ position and 
even those that have come to us within the last 48 hours 
before a filing deadline. We were contacted by both the Bi- 
State Development Agency of the Missouri-Illinois Metro- 
politan District and Kaufman & Broad Home Corporation and 
gave consent for each to appear as an amicus in support of 
Respondent. We have also readily supplied copies of our 
briefs and those of Respondent to opposing amici on request. 


However, we were never contacted by several other amici 
who have appeared in this case, including the moving amici, 
to seek consent or to alert Petitioners to the fact that they 
would be appearing on behalf of Respondent. We understand 
that amici states are not required to seek consent prior to 
filing. However, given the shortened 20 day time period 
within which Petitioners have been required to prepare and 
file a reply brief, several days of which were taken up by the 
Christmas holiday, such notification would appear to have 
been an appropriate courtesy. That is particularly so because 
the moving amici’s lengthy brief (30 pages) embarked on an 
entirely new analytical focus (although one not materially 
different from Respondent's new focus) in arguing that the 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeal should be affirmed. 

The moving amici served their surprise brief by first 
class mail, rather than overnight mail, on its due date, Decem- 
ber 8th, and the brief did not arrive in Petitioners’ counsel's 
offices until December 12. This further reduced the short 
amount of time available to Petitioners to prepare a response. 


The effect of all of this has been to put an increased 
burden on Petitioners to prepare a response to an entirely new 


' That discourtesy has now been repeated by the moving parties. 
They filed their motion on or about December 19, again without any notice 
to Petitioners, and again served the motion by first class mail such that it 
was not received by Petitioners until December 26. 


2 


analytical construct in an extremely short time frame made 
shorter by the moving amici’s acts. While it is certainly 
within the discretion of this Court to grant the moving amici 
permission to file out of time, given the circumstances and the 
insensitivities exhibited by the moving parties, this would 
appear to be an instance in which that motion should be 
denied. 


Dated: December 28, 1995. 
Respectfully submitted, 


Joun P. Zaimes 
Counsel of Record 


Curron J. McFarLanp 
McCuintock, Weston, BensHoor, 
RocHerort, RuBALCAVA & MacCuisn 


Counsel for Petitioners 


