 —_a 


| LED 


e) 


No. 95-83 
SLERA 


— se — See ee 


4 
1 aw 
| NOV 9 1985 


In the Supreme Court 
of the 


United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


Alan Meghrig and Margaret Meghrig, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 
KFC Western, Inc., 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE WESTERN STATES 
PETROLEUM ASSOCIATION AS AMICUS 
CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


Donna R. Black 
Counsel of Record 
MANATT, PHELPS & PHILLIPS 
- 11355 West Olympic Boulevard 
Los Angeles, California 90064 
(310) 312-4000 
Counsel for Amicus Curiae 
Western States Petroleum Association 


wa ie -  elee re 


i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTEREST OF THE AMICUS CURIAE 


THE LIKELY IMPACT OF THE EXPANSION 
OF RCRA CITIZEN SUIT REMEDIES 


B. _ Effect of the Decision Below 


1. The Creation of a New 


CONCLUSION 


TT 
If Allowed to Stand, the 
Decision Below will 
Significantly Impact the 
Caseload of the Federal 
District Courts ........... 


iii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 


Key Tronic Corp. v. United States, U.S. , 
114S. Ct. 1960 (1994) .......... 8, 10, 16 


Middlesex County Sewerage Authority v. 
National Sea Clammers Assn. ; 
EE A eee 20 


Washington State Dept. of Transportation v. Washington 
Natural Gas Co., 51 F.3d 1489 


DD wees We dbeoeSeccvcees 10 
City of Chicago v. Environmental Defense Fund, 

__ US. ___, 114 S.Ct. 1588 (1994) ....... 6 
Wilshire Westwood Assoc. v. Atlantic Richfield Corp., 

881 F.2d 801 (9th Cir. 1989) .......... 10 

Statutes 

DE Sevee sls bbeccectseeses 12 
RINE eke Ce ecoeseiees 7, 8, 13, 16, 18 
i Ai 1 tik eign c ea 00s eee eee e 7 
ES Tee eee ee 11 
DD coc ce cre eacccceccs 4, 10 
EES ee 9, 15, 19 


STE 10, 15 


iv 

Miscellaneous 
$36 Come. Res. SONGS CIGFED. cw cc ces 20 
126 Cong. Rec. H11793-11802 (Dec. 3, 1980) .. 11, 18 


130 Cong. Rec. $2028, S2080 (daily ed. Feb. 29, 1984) 
(comments of Sen. Durenberger) ............. 12 


132 Cong. Rec. $14931-32 (daily ed. Oct. 3, 1986) . 19 
40 C.F.R. §§ 300.400 - 300.440 .......... 10, 15 


H.R. Rep. No. 1491, 94 Cong., 2d Sess. reprinted in 
1976 Oil and Hazardous Substances Liability: 


Hearings on H.R. 29& H.R. 85 ............ 11 
Inside EPA Weekly Report at 1-2 (May 12, 1995) .. 20 
Ohio Admin. Code § 1301:7-7-13 ............ 13 
Pub. L. No. 86-616, 98 Stat. 3221-93 ....... 11, 18 
Third Quarter Oil Cleanups, Releases Nearly Equal, 

26 Env’t Rep. 709 (Aug. 11, 1995) ......... 3, 19 
U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News at 1641-42 ..... 7 
53 Fed. Reg. 37083 (Sept. 23, 1988) ........... 3 
4 W. Rodgers, Environmental Law § 7.6(b) .... 8, 13 
96th Cong., Ist Sess. 177 (1979) ............ ll 
S. Cooke, The Law of Hazardous Waste ...... passim 


No. 95-83 


In the Supreme Court 
of the 
United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


Alan Meghrig and Margaret Meghrig, 
Petitioners, 
VS. 
KFC Western, Inc., 


Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF FOR THE WESTERN STATES 
PETROLEUM ASSOCIATION AS AMICUS 
CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS' 


INTEREST OF THE AMICUS CURIAE 


The Western States Petroleum Association ("WSPA") 
is an association of 31 companies that together account for 
the bulk of the petroleum exploration, production, refining, 
transportation and marketing activities in six western states -- 
Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, Oregon, and 


' Written consent to the filing of this amicus brief has been 
obtained from both parties and separately filed with the Court. 


2 


Washington.? Unlike petitioners, who owned only one 
commercial property upon which a gas station was formerly 
located, WSPA’s member companies own and have owned 
thousands of such properties. WSPA is thus well positioned 
to discuss the important questions raised by the Ninth 
Circuit’s decision and the significant impact of that decision 
on affected parties as well as on the workload of the district 
courts. 


If not reviewed and reversed by this Court, the Ninth 
Circuit’s decision will, for the first time, allow petroleum 
contamination cleanup cost recovery actions to proceed in 
federal court. Congress expressly excluded petroleum 
product cleanups from the reach of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act 
("CERCLA") and limited the remedies provided by the 
citizen suit provisions of the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act ("RCRA") to injunctive relief. As a result, 
actions to recover costs for cleaning up property contaminated 
by petroleum products have been brought exclusively in state 
courts pursuant to various statutory and common law 
theories. 


THE LIKELY IMPACT OF THE EXPANSION 
OF RCRA CITIZEN SUIT REMEDIES 


The potential impact of the Ninth Circuit’s expansion 
of RCRA citizen suit remedies on federal district courts is 
Staggering. A few years ago, the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") estimated that 
over two million underground storage tanks containing 


? WSPA’s members also account for the majority of these 
activities nationally, although WSPA focuses on activities in the six 
western states listed above. 


3 


petroleum products were in operation in the United States. 
53 Fed. Reg. 37083 (Sept. 23, 1988). These tanks were 
located at over 700,000 facilities nationwide. Jd. Based 
upon a study of over 10,000 tanks, EPA concluded that 
approximately 25 percent of those underground petroleum 
tanks had leaked. /d. at 37086. EPA also estimated that the 
“number of sites needing significant cleanup ... is expected 
to be in the tens of thousands nationwide." Id. at 37097 
(emphasis added). More recent data indicates that there are 
over 1,100,000 underground petroleum tanks being actively 
operated in the United States. There are also approximately 
170,000 petroleum tank sites nationwide awaiting cleanup. 
Third Quarter Oil Cleanups, Releases Nearly Equal, 26 Env’t 
Rep. 709 (Aug. 11, 1995). 


In preparation for submitting this brief, WSPA polled 
several of its member companies. Information was sought on 
the number of service stations owned by member companies 


and the amount of pending litigation concerning underground 
petroleum tanks. One company reported that it currently 
owned about 1,000 service station properties in the western 
United States and stated that it had owned over 16,000 gas 
Station properties in that region historically. A second 
company reported owning about 3,000 gas stations nationwide 
and stated that it had owned over 9,000 gas station properties 
within the last 10 years. A third company reported owning 
about 4,000 gas stations nationwide, but could provide no 
historical ownership information. A fourth company reported 
owning over 1,000 service stations and stated that it had 
owned over 25,000 service station properties since the early 
1900s. 


These four companies also reported being named as 
defendants in over 1,600 actions for recovery of petroleum 
contamination cleanup costs brought in state courts over the 
past five to ten years. Approximately one-third to one-half 


4 
of these cases are still pending. 


Although the results of the informal survey conducted 
here are not definitive, a clear indication of the magnitude of 
the impacts emerges when the responses are considered in 
light of EPA’s published data. EPA reported that 
underground petroleum tanks were located at over 700,000 
active facilities nationwide in the year 1988. Given the 
significant downsizing in the retail marketing end of the 
petroleum industry both before and after 1988, confirmed by 
the large number of former gas station properties reportedly 
owned by the surveyed companies, it would appear that 
underground petroleum tanks historically have been located 
at well over one million, and perhaps at several million, 


properties. 


EPA also reported that tens of thousands of 
underground petroleum tank properties would require 
"significant cleanup." Given that just the four WSPA 
member companies surveyed reported being named as 
defendants in over 1,600 petroleum tank cleanup cases, 
EPA’s estimate appears accurate. Extrapolating from the 
information obtained from WSPA members, it is a reasonable 
estimate that well over 10,000 underground petroleum storage 
tank cost recovery actions have been filed in the state courts 
in the past five to ten years and that several thousand such 
cases are currently pending. 


I. SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Currently, all cases seeking the reimbursement of 
costs expended in cleaning up contamination associated with 
underground petroleum tanks are brought in state courts. 
This is because the cornerstone of federal cleanup law, 
CERCLA, excludes petroleum products from its reach. 42 
U.S.C. § 9601(14). And, prior to the decision below, it was 


5 


"well settled" that the RCRA citizen suit provision -- which 
arguably reaches petroleum contamination -- did not provide 
a cost recovery remedy but was limited to injunctive relief. 
Cooke, infra, § 16.03(3)(f). 


If the decision of the Ninth Circuit is not reversed, 
Virtually all petroleum cleanup cost recovery cases will shift 
from state to federal court. This is primarily because the 
RCRA citizen suit contains an attorney’s fees provision, as 
well as a provision for recovery of expert’s fees, whereas 
such fees generally cannot be recovered in state courts 
pursuant to common law theories. In addition, state common 
law causes of action are subject to definite statutes of 
limitation whereas the RCRA citizen suit does not contain 
such a provision. Because of the large number of 
underground petroleum tank cleanup cases, the shifting of 
these cases to the federal courts would result in a significant 
additional burden on the federal court system. Such a result 
would be ironic, to say the least, because the legislative 
history of environmental citizen suit provisions expressly 
indicates that Congress was aware of this potential 
consequence and deliberately crafted citizen suit provisions to 
avoid overburdening the federal courts. 


Finally, if the decision below is not reversed, the 
express petroleum exclusion of CERCLA would be nullified 
and cost recovery actions for cleanups of petroleum could 
proceed in federal court for the first time. 


II. ARGUMENT 


While the industrial revolution has produced many 
useful benefits for society, many industrial processes and 
practices which were not only completely lega!, but which 
were widely perceived to be safe and even state-of-the-art at 
the time, have resulted in the contamination of numerous 


6 


properties across the country. This issue first arose in the 
1970s and resulted in the enactment of three federal statutes: 
(1) the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 
("RCRA"); (2) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 ("CERCLA"); and 
(3) the underground storage tank provisions of Subtitle I of 
RCRA enacted as part of the Hazardous and Solid Waste 
Amendments of 1984 ("Subtitle I"). 


We will briefly review the relevant portions of RCRA, 
CERCLA and Subtitle I that comprised federal statutory 
contamination cleanup law prior to the Ninth Circuit’s 
decision below in order to show that that decision is 
completely contrary to the underlying legislative framework. 
We will then illustrate the impacts of the decision on the 
federal district courts and on the petroleum industry. 


A. The Underlying Legislative Framework 
1. RCRA 


RCRA was signed into law in October 1976. The 
RCRA legislation completely replaced the former Solid Waste 
Disposal Act with nine new subtitles, denominated A though 
H, addressing the management of hazardous and solid wastes. 
S. Cooke, The Law of Hazardous Waste, § 1.02 (1995) 
("Cooke"). As this Court has noted, "RCRA is a 
comprehensive environmental statute that empowers EPA to 
regulate hazardous wastes from cradle to grave, in 
accordance with the rigorous safeguards and management 
procedures of Subtitle C" and to regulate solid waste under 
the “much ... loose[r]" procedures of Subtitle D. City of 
Chicago v. Environmental Defense Fund, U.S. __, 114 
S.Ct. 1588, 1590 (1994). 


7 


At the time of its passage, RCRA was viewed as 
Closing the “last remaining loophole in environmental law, 
that of unregulated land disposal of discarded materials and 
hazardous wastes." H.R. Rep. No. 1491, 94 Cong., 2d Sess. 
reprinted in 1976 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News at 1641- 
42. With respect to contamination of property by solid and 
hazardous wastes, RCRA remains largely prospective in 
nature -- it is designed primarily to prevent future 
occurrences of property contamination. 


However, two provisions of RCRA do provide a 
mechanism for reaching past activities that have caused 
property contamination: (1) the “imminent hazard" 
provision, 42 U.S.C. § 6973, and (2) the citizen suit 
provision, 42 U.S.C. § 6972. Under the imminent hazard 
provision, the Administrator of the EPA is authorized to file 
suit against any person who has contributed, or who is 
contributing, to the past or present handling or disposal of a 
hazardous or solid waste that "may present an imminent or 
substantial endangerment to human health or the 
environment." 42 U.S.C. § 6973. If the EPA finds the 
requisite danger present, it may seek an injunction in district 
court “to require that the liable parties refrain from 
potentially harmful activity, and undertake any action 
necessary to abate the hazard." Cooke, § 15.01(1)(a). The 
EPA is also provided with authority to issue "such orders as 
may be necessary to protect public health and the 
environment." 42 U.S.C. § 6973(a). 


The citizen suit provision of RCRA authorizes a 
citizen-plaintiff to file suit in district court against a person 
who has contributed, or who is contributing, to the past or 
present handling or disposal of a solid or hazardous waste 
that "may present an imminent and substantial endangerment 
to human health or the environment." 42 U.S.C. § 
6972(a)(1)(B). The district court has jurisdiction to "restrain" 


/ 


a liable party, to “order such person to take such other action 
as may be necessary, or both." /d. As a leading treatise on 
hazardous waste law has stated, “[iJt is well settled that, 
under [the RCRA citizen suit provision], as is the case with 
the C[{lean}] W{ater] A[ct], an award of damages to the 
plaintiff is not permitted." Cooke, § 16.03(3)(f); see also, 4 
W. Rodgers, Environmental Law § 7.6(b) (1992).’ 


2. CERCLA 


As noted above, RCRA is largely prospective in 
operation and regulates the handling and disposal of solid and 
hazardous waste. Congress recognized “that while RCRA 
amply addressed the management of hazardous wastes from 
generation through disposal, it provided only limited authority 
to clean up wastes that had been improperly disposed of." 
Cooke, § 12.02(3) (emphasis added). This, coupled with 
several well known incidents of environmental contamination, 
including particularly the Love Canal site in New York, led 
to the passage of CERCLA in 1980. /d., § 12.02(2). 
CERCLA is now the “centerpiece of the federal hazardous 
substance cleanup and liability program." /Jd., § 12.01(2). 


CERCLA provides the federal government with 
“broad power to command private parties and other 
government agencies to clean up hazardous waste sites." Key 


7 


> In the decision below, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals 
ruled that the RCRA citizen suit provision, 42 U.S.C. § 
6972(aX 1B), provides for the recovery of costs expended in 
cleaning up hazardous waste and solid waste because the statutory 
language providing the district courts with jurisdiction to “order 
such person to take such other action as may be necessary" is broad 
enough to encompass not only mandatory injunctive relief but 
money damages in the form of recovery of cleanup costs expended. 


9 


Tronic Corp. v. United States, __-s«sUS._, 114 S. Ct. 
1960, 1964 (1994). The federal government, generally acting 
through the EPA, may undertake the cleanup itself or may 
attempt to compel liable parties to undertake the cleanup. 
Cooke, § 12.01(2). Thus, CERCLA, which is largely 
retrospective in operation, provides a cost recovery 
mechanism pursuant to which the federal government may 
file suit in district court to recover its cleanup expenses from 
liable parties. 42 U.S.C. § 9607(a). 


The CERCLA cost recovery cause of action is also 


available to private party plaintiffs who effectuate a cleanup. 
CERCLA provides that: 


[A]ny person who at the time of disposal of 
any hazardous substance owned or operated 
any facility at which such hazardous 
substances were disposed of 


*** 


shall be liable f 


(A) all costs of removal or remedial action 
incurred by the United States Government or 
a State or an Indian Tribe not inconsistent with 
the National Contingency Plan; [or] 


(B) any other necessary costs of response 
incurred by any other person Consistent with 
the National Contingency Plan. 


42 U.S.C. § 6907(a)(2)(A) & (B) (emphasis added). 


By providing a private party cost recovery cause of 
action, CERCLA allows owners of property contaminated 


10 


with hazardous substances to clean up their property and then 
seek recovery of their cleanup expenses in the federal courts 
from liable parties under CERCLA. Former owners or 
lessees of contaminated property are typical defendants in a 
CERCLA private party cost recovery action. 


There are, however, some restrictions on the recovery 
of cleanup costs in these cases. First, the costs incurred must 
be consistent with the National Contingency Plan ("NCP"). 
Washington State Dept. of Transportation v. Washington 
Natural Gas Co., 51 F.3d 1489 (9th Cir. 1995). The NCP 
contains detailed procedures on how cleanups are to be 
conducted and covers nearly thirty pages in the Code of 
Federal Regulations. 40 C.F.R. §§ 300.400 - 300.440. 
Second, an action must be brought within the statutory 
limitations period. 42 U.S.C. § 9613(g)(2). Third, 
attorney's fees are not recoverable in a private party 
CERCLA cost recovery action. Key Tronic, supra, 114 S. 
Ct. 1960. 


Finally, there is no cost recovery under CERCLA for 
cleanup of petroleum product contamination, but only for 
cleanup of “hazardous substances." The term “hazardous 
substance" is defined in CERCLA and explicitly "does not 
include petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof 
which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a 
hazardous substance” elsewhere in CERCLA. 42 U.S.C. § 
9601(14); Wilshire Westwood Assoc. v. Atlantic Richfield 
Corp., 881 F.2d 801 (9th Cir. 1989). 


* This definitional exclusion is commonly referred to as the 
"CERCLA petroleum exclusion." Early subcommittee testimony on 
the CERCLA legislation evinced Congressional awareness that 
petroleum contamination posed less of a threat to public health than 

(continued...) 


1] 
3. Subtitle I 


The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 
were the first federal enactment to address underground 
petroleum storage tanks. Pub. L. No. 86-616, 98 Stat. 3221- 
93 codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 6991 - 6991i. This legislation 
created Subtitle I of RCRA which directed the EPA to 
establish regulations for leak detection and cleanup of 
contamination at existing tanks and to establish standards for 
the installation and operation of new tanks. Cooke, § 
7.01(2). The provisions of Subtitle I are not at issue here. 


The legislative history of Subtitle I contains a 
noteworthy analysis of the reasons for its enactment: 


Underground storage tanks are seldom 
regulated. At present [1984], Federal 
regulation of storage tanks covers only above- 
ground tanks containing chemical wastes. 
And, if a tank is leaking, the Federal 
Government cannot under [CERCLA] 
authority respond or clean up a spill if it 
involves petroleum products. 


** * 


‘(...continued) 
those chemicals that later came to be defined as “hazardous 
substances." Oil and Hazardous Substances Liability: Hearings on 
H.R. 29 & H.R 85 Before the Subcomm. on Coast Guard and 
Navigation of the House Comm. on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, 
96th Cong., Ist Sess. 177 (1979). The legislative debates on the 
final compromise language of CERCLA indicated that Congress 
intended to enact subsequent legislation on petroleum 
contamination. See 126 Cong. Rec. H11793-11802 (Dec. 3, 1980). 


12 


The tank storage of one of the most common 
underground contaminants -- gasoline -- is 
unregulated because it is not a waste product 
(and thus not governed under the authority of 
[RCRA]) and spills of the fuel cannot be 
cleaned up under [CERCLA] because it is a 
petroleum product. 


130 Cong. Rec. $2028, $2080 (daily ed. Feb. 29, 1984) 
(comments of Sen. Durenberger). 


Congress provided a mechanism in the Subtitle | 
legislation for the states to enact their own legislation and to 
adopt regulations governing underground petroleum tanks that 
would supersede the federal legislation and regulations. 42 
U.S.C. § 6991c. Prodded by Subtitle I, virtually all states 
have adopted laws and promulgated regulations governing 
underground petroleum tanks. In practical terms, this means 
that a party installing, operating or cleaning up contamination 
from a tank refers to applicable state laws and regulations in 
conducting its activities. These activities are generally 
regulated and overseen by state agencies that have been 
delegated these duiies by state statute. It is critical to note 
that Subtitle I provides no cost recovery cause of action in 
favor of parties who expend costs cleaning up petroleum 
contamination from underground tanks. 


In sum, then, the federal statutory framework 
governing property contamination litigation is as follows. (1) 
RCRA is largely designed to prevent future contamination 
problems, and the provisions that address existing 
contamination are limited to injunctive relief only. (2) 
CERCLA provides authority for the cleanup of past incidents 
of contamination, and allows a private party who cleans up 
“hazardous substance" contamination (not petroleum products) 
to recover its costs in federal court pursuant to the CERCLA 


13 


private party cost recovery action. (3) Petroleum 
contamination is addressed by state agencies pursuant to state 
laws and regulations.’ These state programs were 
encouraged by federal Subtitle I legislation, which itself 
provided no cost recovery cause of action. 


Because of CERCLA’s petroleum exclusion, parties 
who clean up property contaminated by petroleum from an 
underground tank cannot bring a CERCLA cost recovery 
action in federal court. Neither can parties who clean up 
petroleum contamination on their property bring a cost 
recovery action in federal court pursuant to Subtitle | 
because Subtitle I does not provide for such a cause of action. 
And, until the Ninth Circuit's decision in KFC Western, Inc. 
v. Meghrig, it was well settled that such parties could not 
bring a cost recovery action in federal court under the RCRA 
citizen suit provision, 42 U.S.C. § 6972, because only 
injunctive relief was available under that provision.° Cooke, 
§ 16.03(3)(d); 4 W. Rogers § 7.6(b). Parties seeking 
monetary damages in these circumstances have available to 


* For example, many states have detailed and complex 
formulae set forth in regulations and guidance documents to 
determine “how clean is clean." E.g Ohio Admin. Code § 1301:7- 
7-13; Calif. Leaking Underground Fuel Tank Field Manual. Federal 
regulations contain no parallel provisions. 


* The RCRA citizen suit provision authorizes a citizen- 
plaintiff to obtain a prohibitory injunction to halt on-going 
contamination or a mandatory injunction to compel abatement of 
existing contamination. This provision applies to both hazardous 
waste and solid waste. Solid waste arguably includes petroleum 
contamination. However, the relief available is limited to injunctive 
relief. Cost recovery is not expressly provided for in the RCRA 


14 


them a full array of state common law and statutory causes of 
action which can be brought in state court.’ 


B. Effect of the Decision Below 


The decision below, if not reviewed and reversed by 
this Court, will significantly alter the above-described 
legislative framework. This, in turn, will result in a series of 
inconsistencies, anomalies and uncertainties in the law of 
hazardous substance and petroleum contamination cleanup. 
In addition, of course, the creation of a new federal remedy 
in an area as active as petroleum contamination cost recovery 


cannot help but significantly impact the workload of the 


1. The Creation of a New Loosely-Defined 
Federal Remedy by the Ninth Circuit is 
Unwarranted 


In ruling that the RCRA citizen suit provision allows 
plaintiffs to recover costs expended in cleaning up hazardous 
wastes or solid wastes, the Ninth Circuit has created a new 
federal remedy. Because this “citizen suit cost recovery 


” A leading treatise in the area has noted that “{iJn the 
absence of federal or state statutes creating private causes of action, 
private suits involving damage to... property [from contamination} 
are brought under common law tort principles." Cooke, § 
17.01(1\(b). Because of the CERCLA petroleum exclusion, lack of 
a cost recovery cause of action under Subtitle | and the limitation 
of RCRA citizen suits to injunctive relief, all actions to recover 
costs expended in cleaning up petroleum contamination have been 
brought in state courts. Although additional causes of action may 
be available in some jurisdictions under certain factual situations, 
most petroleum contamination cases proceed under three common 
law causes of action -- trespass, nuisance and negligence. 


15 


action" was never intended by Congress, it is ill-defined and 


For example, RCRA provides no standards for 
determining which costs expended by a plaintiff are 
recoverable in a citizen suit cost recovery action. In contrast, 
under CERCLA, a private party can recover only costs that 
axe necessary and consistent with the National Contingency 
Plan. 42 U.S.C. § 9607(a). The NCP contains detailed 
procedural requirements intended to ensure that cleanups are 
well designed, well implemented and cost effective. 40 
C.F.R. §§ 300.400 - 300.440. The lack of such standards 
under RCRA is anomalous given the Congressional 
this lack of standards is strong evidence that Congress did not 
intend the RCRA citizen suit provision to be a cost recovery 
mechanism. If the decision below is allowed to stand, the 


RCRA provides no statute of limitations for citizen 
suit cost recovery actions. Again, in contrast, CERCLA 
provides an express statute of limitations for cost recovery 
actions. 42 U.S.C. § 9613(g)(2). The lack of a statute of 


stand, the district courts will be required to resolve this issue 
as well, and substantial uncertainty and unevenness of 


16 
decisions will exist for some time.* 


The RCRA citizen suit provision expressly provides 
that attorney’s fees may be awarded to the prevailing party. 
42 U.S.C. § 6972(e). It is a long-standing American rule of 
law that attorney’s fees are not recoverable. See, Key Tronic, 
supra, 114 S.Ct. at 1965. Attorney’s fees are not 
recoverable in private party CERCLA cost recovery actions, 
nor are attorney's fees generally recoverable in cost recovery 
cases brought under state common law theories. In all 
likelihood, Congress decided to allow an attorney’s fees 
award in the context of the RCRA citizen suit provision due 
to the limited nature of the relief Congress was providing -- 


If the Ninth Circuit’s ruling is allowed to stand, 
several anomalies will be created. Attorney's fees will be 
recoverable in a federal "cost recovery" action brought under 
RCRA, but not under CERCLA. Thus, CERCLA -- the 
Statute designed to address the less numerous but potentially 
more dangerous hazardous substance sites -- will provide a 
less comprehensive remedy, from a plaintiff's perspective, 
than the RCRA citizen suit provision. The end result is 
clear: all parties seeking cost secovery for any type of 
contamination cleanup will bring a RCRA citizen suit action 
instead of, or in addition to, a CERCLA claim in an effort to 
recover attorney's fees. And, because attorney's fees would 


* The Ninth Circuit’s opinion below has suggested that the 
doctrine of laches “will alleviate any unfairness that might be 
created by the lack of a limitations period under RCRA.” Pet. App. 
at A9. This suggestion is troubling both because it will encourage 
stale claims and because it injects tremendous uncertainty into the 
law, whereas contamination cases brought in state courts have well- 
settled limitation periods. 


17 


be recoverable in federal court under RCRA, petroleum “cost 
recovery” actions will be brought in federal court instead of 
in state court where attorney's fees are not recoverable. 


The movement of underground petroleum storage tank 
cleanup litigation from state to federal courts would be an 


unfortunate development because the state courts are the more 
logical forum for resolution of these disputes. As noted 
above, virtually all states have passed laws and promulgated 


regulations governing underground petroleum tanks. 


Accordingly, regulatory decisions regarding underground 
tanks generally occur at the state level. Determinations as to 


whether a tank cleanup was done properly, cost-effectively 
and in a timely manner, and whether the level of cleanup 
satisfies applicable standards, are all questions of state law. 


State courts have been deciding tank cleanup cases for 
a decade, and a body of case law, based on common law tort 
concepts, has developed. The state common law courts of 
general jurisdiction are ideally suited to resolve disputes of 
this nature by applying general rules of decision to the facts 
of the cases before them. In addition, the respective 
obligations of current and former lessees and landowners that 


are at the center of most underground petroleum tank cleanup 
cases are matters historically determined by state law. 


2. The Ninth Circuit’s Ruling Would 
Effectively Eliminate The CERCLA 
Petroleum Exclusion 


In addition, if the Ninth Circuit’s opinion is upheld, 
the CERCLA petroleum exclusion would be rendered a 
nullity. The legislative history of CERCLA indicates that 
Congress understood that petroleum contamination posed less 
of a threat to public health than the chemicals defined as 
“hazardous substances” under CERCLA. The legislative 


history also indicates that Congress intended to pass 
subsequent legislation addressing petroleum contamination. 
See, supra at 10 n.4; 126 Cong. Rec. H11793-11802 (Dec. 
3, 1980). As discussed above, Subtitle I, enacted in the 
Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984, was that 
subsequent legislation. But Subtitle I clearly does not contain 
a Cost recovery provision. 


The RCRA citizen suit provision was also amended 
and assumed its current form in the Hazardous and Solid 
Waste Amendments of 1984. Pub. L. No. 86-616, 98 Stat. 
3221-93. Respondents argue that these 1984 amendments 
introduced a cost recovery mechanism into RCRA for 
petroleum contamination by adding language allowing district 
courts to “order [persons] to take such other action as may be 
necessary." 42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B). Respondents further 
argue that this is the manner in which Congress decided to 
create a broad cost recovery remedy and to override the 
policy decision it had made in including the petroleum 
exclusion in CERCLA. 


But the legislative history of the 1986 amendments to 
CERCLA, which were enacted only two years after RCRA 
petroleum exclusion remained effective. A colloquy from the 
Senate debates makes this abundantly clear: 


"Mr. Bentsen. I would like to ask a question 
with regard to the effects of this legislation. 
It is my understanding that these amendments 
would not diminish the scope of the present 
exclusion from liability for petroleum found in 
section 101(14) of the act. Is my 
understanding correct, Senator? 


19 


Mr. Simpson. Yes, the Senator from Texas is 
correct in his interpretation. This bill will not 
diminish the scope of the present petroleum 
exclusion. That provision, found in section 
101(14) of the act, excludes from the 
definition of ‘hazardous substance’ all types of 
petroleum ...." 


132 Cong. Rec, $14931-32 (daily ed. Oct. 3, 1986). 


This colloquy would have made little sense had the 
CERCLA petroleum exclusion been effectively nullified by 
the 1984 amendments to RCRA. 


3. If Allowed to Stand, the Decision Below will 


Significantly Impact the Caseload of the 
Federal District Courts 


As previously stated, approximately 170,000 tank sites 
nationwide are currently awaiting cleanup. 26 Env’t Rep. at 
709. Cleanups are being completed at the rate of 
approximately 25,000 sites per year. Jd. If only 10 percent 
of these cleanups result in litigation, approximately 2,500 
new tank cleanup cost recovery cases would be filed 
nationwide each year. 


As a result of the Ninth Circuit’s decision, plaintiffs 
will be highly motivated to bring petroleum cost recovery 
suits in federal court under RCRA because of the possibility 
of recovering attorney's fees. In addition, plaintiffs who are 
barred from proceeding in state court on statute of limitations 
grounds will file in federal court where an uncertain, but 
potentially much longer, limitations period may apply. The 
end result will be that virtually all underground tank litigation 
will shift to federal court. This trend has already begun. 
Court Ruling On Cost Recovery Under RCRA Spawns Raft of 


20 


New Lawsuits, Inside EPA Weekly Report at 1-2 (May 12, 
1995) (quoting industry spokespersons predicting that 
"hundreds" of underground petroleum tank cases will soon be 
filed in the district courts of the Ninth Circuit alone). 


It would be ironic if the construction placed upon the 
RCRA citizen suit provision by the Ninth Circuit resulted in 
unduly burdening the federal courts. Congress took great 
pains to avoid just this result when it adopted the first 
environmental citizen suit provision 25 years ago. This is 
clearly indicated in Congressional debates such as the 
following: 


"It has been argued, however, that conferring 
additional rights on the citizen may burden the 
courts unduly. / would argue that the citizen 
suit provision of [this bill] has been carefully 
drafted to prevent this -consequence from 
arising. First of all, it should be noted that 
the bill makes no provision for damages to the 
individual. It therefore provides no incentives 
to suit other than to protect the health and 
welfare of those suing and others similarly 
situated. Jt will be the rare, rather than the 
ordinary, person, I suspect, who with no hope 
of financial gain and the very real prospect of 
financial loss, will initiate court action under 
this bill." 


116 Cong. Rec. 33104 (1970) (comments of Sen. Hart) 
quoted in Middlesex County Sewerage Authority v. National 
Sea Clammers Assn., 453 U.S. 1 n.27 (1981) (emphasis 
added). 


——— eee 


21 


The Ninth Circuit’s decision takes this very precise 
indication of legislative intent -- and over a decade of judicial 
decisions which have adhered to it -- and stands them on their 
head. Such an arbitrary and ill-founded construction of the 
law should not be countenanced by this Court. 


CONCLUSION 


If left to stand, the Ninth Circuit’s decision below will 
work a massive disruption of well-settled principles of federal 
environmental law and underground petroleum tank litigation. 
The federal courts will be inundated with new cases better 
brought in state court, contrary to clearly expressed 
Congressional intent. Those subject to cost recovery actions 
under RCRA, which will in some cases involve WSPA 
member companies, will be subject to a myriad of 
uncertainties in the litigation process. For these reasons, 
WSPA respectfully urges this Court to reverse the decision of 
the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. 


Dated: November 9, 1995. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Donna R. Black 

Counsel of Record 

MANATT, PHELPS & 
PHILLIPS 

11355 West Olympic Boulevard 

Los Angeles, California 90064 

(310) 312-4000 

Counsel for Amicus Curiae 

Western States Petroleum 

Association 


