No. 95-83 


> 
i 
Ltd | 
ad | 
co 
— © 
—s 
<< 
—— 
a 
CD | 
wer 
co 


CLERK 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


ALAN MEGHRIG and MARGARET MEGHRIG, 
Petitioners, 


Vv. 


KFC WESTERN, INC., 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE OF THE 
PETROLEUM MARKETERS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA 


ALPHONSE M. ALFANO 
(Counsel of Record) 

Rosert S. BASSMAN 

BASSMAN, MITCHELL & 


ALFANO, CHTD. 
1201 New York Avenue, N.W. 
Of Counse/ Washington, D.C. 20005 
John J. Huber, Counsel 202-466-6502 
Petroleum Marketers 
Association of America Counsel for Amicus Curiae 


NR a ee TR 
CASILLAS PRESS, INC. WASHINGTON, D.C. 202-223-1220 


OO Cet “ 
« 


nt A Sage 


eee 7, he Rice 
a th pa er 


rat - "a a” 
tetas eee a 


“a 


ui. 
PP rt 7 
“ iem. La 
a. ee tadeed 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 

Boris v. Hill, 375 S.E.2d 716 (Va. 1989)........ 11 
California v. Sierra Club, 

451 U.S. 287 (1981) (White J.) .............. 5 
Cannon v. University of Chicago, 
Re 12, 14 


Director, UWCP v. Perini North 
River Assoc., 459 U.S. 297°(1983) ........... 12 


Feldman v. Rucker, 109 S.E.2d 379 (Va. 1959)... 11 
Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3d 1092 (8th Cir. 1995) . 6, 13 
Hydro-Manufacturing, Inc. v. Kayser- 


Roth Corp., 640 A.2d 950 (R.I. 1994) ....... 8,11 
KFC v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518, 519 
"Saleen aia 3, 6,9, 11, 14 


Philadelphia Electric Co. v. Hercules, Inc., 

762 F.2d 303 (3rd Cir. 1985), 

cert. denied, 474 U.S. 980 (1985)............ 11 
Porter v. Warner Holding Co., 328 U.S. 395 (1946) . 7 
Smith Land & Improvement Corp. v. 

Rapid-American Corp., 

18 Envtl. L. Rep 20, 769 (M.D. Pa. 1987) ...... 11 


Touche Ross & Co. v. Reddington, 
ED oda bae deus te eeenes 5,14 


TransAmerica Mortgage Advisors, Inc. v. 

lewis, 444 U.S. 11 (1979)... .......2 2c eee 5 
Westwood Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. 

37 F. Supp. 1272 (W.D.N.Y. 1990), 

affd, 964 F.2d 857 (2d Cir. 1992) ........... 11 


Wilson Auto Enterprises, Inc. v. Mobil Oil 
Corp., 778 F. Supp. 101 (DRI. 1991) ....... 8,11 


Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
(CERCLA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675 .......... 13 


Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
(RCRA), 42 US.C. § 6972, et seq. ....... 4,9, 10 
Other Authorities: 


Friedman, Contracts and 
of Real Property (4th ed. 1984) § 1.2(n) ....... 11 


H.R. Rep. No. 98-198, 98th Cong., 
2d Sess., at 48 (1984), reprinted in 


1984 US.CCA.N. 5576 ............. 6, 10, 13 
Little, Brown & Ca (1965)... .......00 cee eees 7 
John F. O'Connell, Remedies, West (1985) ....... 7 


IN THE 


Supreme Court of the United States 
OcToBER TERM, 1995 


ALAN MEGHRIG and MARGARET MEGHRIG, — 


Petitioners, 

. KFC WESTERN, INC., 
t% Respondent. 
3 

* On Writ of Certiorari to the 

| United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
ye 

“4 

” BrigF AMICUS CURIAE OF THE 

ar PETROLEUM MARKETERS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA 
a The Petroleum Marketers Association of America 


(PMAA) respectfully submits this brief amicus curiae in 


<3 support of Alan and Margaret Meghrig in this case 
| Written consent to the filing of this brief has been obtained 
| from all parties. The original letters authorizing consent 
By have been filed concurrently herewith. 

r 


INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE 


The PMAA is a federation of 42 state and regional 
trade associations representing more than ten thousand 
small business petroleum marketers:’ Together, PMAA 
members market approximately 46 percent of the gasoline 
and 75 percent of the home heating oil sold in America. 
In addition, they supply more than one-half of the Nation’s 
retail motor fuel facilities?’ approximately three-quarters of 
which are operated by independent retailers. PMAA 
members are primarily composed of jobbers and other 
wholesale distributors of refined petroleum products, as 
well as chain retailers that market motor fuels through 
service station outlets. 


In connection with their businesses, PMAA members 
have purchased and sold tens of thousands of parcels of 
real property at which petroleum products were stored, 
distributed, or sold. Because they served as both the 
vendor and vendee of petroleum-contaminated properties, 
petroleum marketers have a unique perspective as to the 
balance of interests that is reflected in the parties’ 
determinations of fair market value They also have a 
great deal at stake At issue is a decision of the Ninth 


A list of the constituent state and regional trade associations 
that compose the PMAA is set forth in the Appendix hereto. 


2\Independent marketers own or lease more than 50,000 retail 
facilities nationwide and store fuel at more than 10,000 addi- 
tional “bulk plants.” PMAA’s 1994 member survey discloses 
that its members supplied 71,279 of America’s approximately 
150,000 retail motor fuel distribution outlets (e.g., gasoline 
stations, truck stops, convenience stores). Their 240,000 full- 
time employees service this network with roughly 100,000 
vehicles. 


3 


Circuit Court of Appeals® that exposes petroleum 
marketers to unlimited liability for the costs of remediating 
petroleum contamination at properties in which they had 
an ownership interest at one time or another over a period 
of decades. 


Although PMAA members stand to benefit from the 
decision below, to the extent they were vendees of 
petroleum-contaminated property, or to be affected 
adversely by the decision, to the extent they were vendors, 
their collective interest is aligned with that of the Meghrigs. 
For the reasons that follow, the Ninth Circuit's decision in 
this case, if allowed to stand, would serve to retroactively 
reallocate the rights and obligations of parties to settled 
real estate transactions. It would place a cloud over the 
transactions and jeopardize the viability of many petroleum 
marketers who may now be called upon to suffer the costs 
of remediating sites they parted with years ago. The 
uncertainties created by these contingent liabilities would 
stifle the business plans of all but the most ambitious 
marketer; it would unsettle real estate markets for 
petroleum-related properties, and it would lead to 
dislocations in an industry in which market stability and 


predictability are essential to plans for growth. 


Over the decades, petroleum marketers purchased and 
sold tens of thousands of properties at which petroleum 
storage, distribution, or dispensing operations were 
conducted. An important component in establishing the 
fair market value of these properties was a set of common 

i as to the risk of exposure of the vendor 
and vendee to claims arising out of petroleum 


contamination. These understandings were grounded in 


The opinion of the Court of Appeals is reported at 49 F.3d 518 
(9th Cir. 1995). 


4 


certain well-defined rules regarding the liability of property 
owners to state regulatory agencies, to adjacent property 
owners, and to successor land owners. The rules emanate 
from the common law and from the various state statutes 
that govern petroleum leaks and spills. 


The understandings of the vendor and vendee as to the 
risks and liabilities of property ownership were reflected in 
the purchase price for the property. Properties sold "as is" 
or in their “present condition" were conveyed without any 
warranty as to condition, thus reflecting the intent of the 
vendor and vendee to allocate the risks of property owner- 
ship in the context of determining fair market value If a 
vendor sold a contaminated property at an appropriately 
discounted price, the rules governing real property trans- 
actions, including the doctrine of caveat emptor, precluded 
any unbargained-for liability to remote vendees. In this 
way, the market allocated resources and risks in an orderlv 
climate of well-defined rights and responsibilities. 


The decision of the Ninth Circuit in this case imputes to 
Congress an intent to retroactively reallocate the rights and 
obligations of parties to real property transactions without 
regard to the understandings on which the transactions 
were based. By interpreting the citizen suit provision of 
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRAF’ to 
authorize a private right of action for money damages, 
albeit in the form of “equitable restitution,” the court 
created a remedy so broad in scope as to effectively pre- 
empt the more limited state remedies and defenses which 
had heretofore governed the parties’ actions. The ultimate 
consequence of the ruling is enormous. It calls into 
question the understandings on which thousands of 
bargained-for transactions were grounded and subjects 
them to scrutiny on the basis of ruies that were never 
imagined when the parties set out to define their respective 
obligations. 


#42 U.S.C. § 6972(a)(1)(B). ‘ 


5 


The decision of the Ninth Circuit rests on the notion 
that Congress intended these consequences notwith- 
standing the absence of any explicit reference in RCRA’s 
citizen suit provision to a private right of action for money 
damages. It construed the language “to take such other 
action as may be necessary” to include the full range of 
equitable remedies, including "restitution," to be targeted, 
in the absence of a statute of limitations, to each vendor 
in the chain of title 


For the reasons that follow, the presumption that 
Congress had the will to effect such enormous change 
cannot be based on so little in the way of evidence of 
congressional intent. Indeed, it is clear that the decision of 
the court below rested not on evidence of congressional 
intent, but on a conclusion that “public policy concerns" 
favor a restitutionary remedy. It is not the role of the 
federal courts, however, to "engraft a remedy on a statute, 
no matter how salutary, that Congress did not provide” 
California v. Sierra Club, 451 U.S. 287, 298 (1981) 
(White, J.). 


A. The Ninth Circuit Erred in Failing to Apply 
the Precedents of this Court that Establish 
Standards for Implied Rights of Action 


In Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975), this Court set out 
four standards for determining whether a private right of 
action exists in a statute. They are: (i) whether the plaintiff 
is in the class for whose benefit the statute was enacted, 
(ii) whether the legislative history evidences an intent to 
create a cause of action, (iii) whether the proposed remedy 
is consistent with the statutory scheme, and (iv) whether 
the cause of action is one traditionally a matter of state 
law. In later decisions, the Court restructured the inquiry, 
stating that congressional intent is the determinative factor, 
and that the other three are indicative of its presence or 
absence Jouche Ross & Ca v. Reddington, 422 U.S. 
560, 575-576 (1979); TansAmerica Mortgage Advisors, 


Inc. v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11, 18 (1979). The central focus 
of the inquiry, therefore, is whether Congress intended to 
create a remedy. 


The focus of the decision below is not on congressional 
intent. On the contrary, it assumes that congressional 
intent is evident in an explicit authorization for courts “to 
take such other action as may be necessary," which the 
court construed as including equitable remedies such as 
restitution. In effect, the Ninth Circuit concluded that it 
was not recognizing an implied right of action; rather, it 
was giving effect to an express right of action for 
restitutionary relief2’ 


In order to accomplish this result, the court indulged in 
two assumptions, neither of which was subjected to even 
a cursory analysis. First, the court agreed with KFC that 
“its damages claim was actually a claim for ‘equitable 
restitution.’" KFC v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518, 519 (9th Cir. 
1995). Second, it concluded that an equitable remedy, 
such as restitution, is merely an adjunct to the type of 
injunctive relief that is indisputably authorized by the 
statute and encompassed in the language “such other 
action as may be necessary... ." This assumption was 
necessary to conform the remedy to what Congress clearly 
intended as the “equitable authority of Section 7003.” 
H.R. Rep. No. 98-198, 98th Cong., 2d Sess., 48 (1984), 
reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5576, 5607. As will be 
developed more fully below, however, neither of these 
assumptions is valid. 


*/The approach taken by the court below stands in stark contrast 
to the one applied by the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in 
Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3d 1092 (8th Cir. 1995), which examined 
the identical issue. The Eighth Circuit applied the factors set 
out in Cort v. Ash and concluded that RCRA does not authorize 
a private right of action for monetary remedies. 


Private Right of Action for Money Damages 


Restitution is an equitable remedy that attempts to 
restore a plaintiff to the position it would have been in had 
there been no wrongful act committed by the defendant. 
See, eg., Porter v. Warner Holding Co, 328 U.S. 395, 
402 (1946). The remedy is restorative in nature; on the 
basis of equitable principles, it attempts to reimburse the 
plaintiff for what was unlawfully acquired from him. The 
most distinctive feature of restitution is that liability is 
based on, and recovery is usually measured by, benefit to 
the defendant rather than harm to the plaintiff In short, 
restitution is based upon the gains to the defendant which 
would be unjust for him to retain2’ 


The remedy imposed by the court below is more 
mechanical in its approach than anything that can be 
characterized as restitutionary. It requires any party who 
contributed in the past to a current endangerment to 
reimburse the plaintiff for the costs of cleaning up a site 
Damages are measured by the amount of the plaintiff's 
costs of remediation; there is no attempt to determine 
whether the defendant was unjustly enriched or whether 
a reimbursement in the amount of the remediation costs 
would restore the status quo ante. 


Assuming that the wrongful act of the defendant is its 
contribution to the endangerment, the aggregate of the 
plaintiff's clean-up costs may be greater than necessary to 
restore the plaintiff to the position it would have been in 
had the wrongful act not occurred. Were the property not 
contaminated, the plaintiff may never have been in a 


*Douglas Laycock, Modern American Remedies, 462. 


John F. O'Connell, Remedies, 72. 


position to purchase it. Clearly, the range of options 
available to a vendor of clean property is significantly 
greater than would be the case if the property were 
polluted with petroleum hydrocarbons. More than likely, 
the price at which the plaintiff purchased the property 
would have been greater in the event the property were 
clean at the time of sale. Assuming for the moment that 
the purchase price for the property was discounted by the 
estimated amount of clean-up costs, reimbursement in the 
manner prescribed by the court below would unjustly 
enrich the plaintiff, KFC. 


Moreover, "[b]uyers of contaminated land, unlike the 
victims of negligent acts, are in a position to protect 
themselves through contract or by refusing to conclude a 
transaction." Hydro-Manufacturing, Inc. v. Kayser-Roth 
Corp., 640 A.2d 950, 956 (Rl. 1994). A prospective 
buyer, for example, "can bargain with the seller for security 
or indemnity against unknown defects." Wilson Auto 
Enterprises, Inc. v. Mobil Oil Corp., 778 F. Supp. 101, 105 
(D.R.1. 1991). Even where no security is obtained by the 
buyer, and there is no reduction in the purchase price, the 
property may have a value to the buyer that is far in 
excess of its fair market value. Whether reimbursement is 
equitable, therefore, and whether the vendor has been 
unjustly enriched as a result of remediation by the vendee, 
it is subject to numerous market-based and other policy 
considerations, among which is whether a vendee who 
purchases property after a satisfactory inspection assumes 
all risk of liability from petroleum contamination. 


The Ninth Circuit did not, however, appear concerned 
with the intricacies of —— a truly restitutionary 
remedy. its conception of the remedy envisioned by 
Congress is one in the nature of indemnity. See KFC, 
supra, at 524. ("[T]he innocent private party, like KFC, 
who purchases already-contaminated property, often must 
clean the property immediately and recover secondarily 
from the actual polluter"). Its aim is narrow; that is, to 
compensate the vendee for the costs of remediation on the 


9 


assumption that a “right to reimbursement" would 
encourage prompt cleanups” As such, it is functionally 
no different from compensatory damages. 


2. The Citizen Suit Provision of RCRA 
Was not Intended by Congress as a 
Private Right of Action for Damages 


The RCRA citizen suit provision provides in pertinent 
part that: 


The district court shall have juris- 
diction .. . to restrain any person who 
has contributed or who is contributing to 
the past or present handling, storage, 
treatment, transportation, or disposal of 
any solid or hazardous waste referred to 
in [8 6972(a)(1)(B) (the endangerment 
provision)] [and] to order such person to 
take such other action as may be 
necessary, or both... . 


42 U.S.C. § 6972(a). 


In construing the “such other action as may be necessary," 
language to include a private right of action for damages, 
the court below crafted a broad-based remedy that 
effectively abrogates the various defenses available to the 
defendant under the common law. Thus, the court has 
created a “super remedy" that supersedes and renders 
meaningless the traditional common law remedies available 
to a vendee against the vendor of real property. Congress 
could not have intended to create such a remedy and, at 


"See 49 F.3d at 524. ("The right to reimbursement becomes 
important to the Administrator only when contamination requires 
prompt attention, which is always the case for private citizens 
who are ordered to remedy contamination."). 


10 


the same time, to preserve state law remedies as an 
adjunct to the equitable remedies available under RCRA. 


In RCRA, Congress inserted a savings clause which 
preserves a person's rights “under any statute or common 
law... to seek any other relief." 42 USC. § 6972(f). 
The legislative history of the 1984 amendment to § 6972 
reflects the awareness of Congress that these state law 
claims would be instituted in conjunction with a citizen's 
suit under RCRA to abate an imminent hazard?’ In fact, 
the legislative history of the 1984 amendment suggests a 
congressional awareness that the state and federal actions 
would be instituted in tandem, the federal action for 
injunctive relief to abate the endangerment and the state 
causes of action to seek reimbursement for the losses 
associated with petroleum contamination22 In any 
event, the congressional assumptions evident in the legis- 
lative history would make no sense if the citizen’s suit 
provision were interpreted to include the private damage 
remedy envisioned by the Ninth Circuit. For the reasons 
set forth below, the state remedies would be useless sur- 
plusage in relation to the more potent federal cause of 
action. 


Where, as here, a vendee sues the vendor of real 
property, common law defenses are often available to bar 
the claim. In jurisdictions that adhere to the doctrine of 
caveat emptor, a seller cannot be held responsible for 
defects, such as petroleum contamination, existing in the 


2H.R. Rep. No. 98-198, 98th Cong., 2d Sess., 48 (1984), 
reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5576, 5612. 


1°/See id. ("Although the Committee has not prohibited a citizen 
from raising claims under state law in a Section 7002 action, 
the Committee expects courts to exercise their discretion 
concerning pendent jurisdiction in a way that will not frustrate 
or delay the primary goal of this provision, namely the prompt 
abatement of imminent and substantial endangerments."). 


11 


property at the time of sale’ Nor would such defects 
afford the purchaser a basis to resist an action for specific 
performance of the sales contract, Feldman v. Rucker, 
109 S.E.2d 379 (Va. 1959) or, absent an attempt by the 
seller to prevent discovery of the defects, to seek recision. 
Boris v. Hill, 375 S.E.2d 716 (Va. 1989). The same result 
would obtain where the buyer attempts indirectly to 
circumvent the rule, such as by claiming that the defects 
were the result of the seller’s negligence, Hydro- 
Manufacturing, supra; Wilson Auto Enterprises, supra, or 
where the purchaser claims that the defects have resulted 
in a private nuisance. Westwood Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. 
National Fuel Gas Distribution Corp., 737 F. Supp. 1272, 
1282 (W.D.N.Y. 1990), affo, 964 F.2d 85 (2d Cir. 1992). 
This is also true where the vendee of real property seeks 
compensation for remediation expenses from the vendor on 
a theory of common law indemnity. Philadelphia Electric 
Ca. v. Hercules, Inc., 762 F.2d 303, 318 (3d Cir. 1985), 
cert. denied, 474 U.S. 980 (1985) ("The same policy 
considerations that counsel adherence to the rule of caveat 
emptor in this situation militate against shifting the loss to 
Hercules on an indemnity theory."). See a/so, e.g., Smith 
Land & Improvement Corp. v. Rapid-American Corp., 
18 Envtl. L. Rep. 20, 769 (M.D. Pa. 1987). Common law 
remedies are also susceptible to being barred by the 
applicable statutes of limitations and repose. 


The remedy envisioned by the Ninth Circuit is immune 
to these defenses. The court below authorized relief in the 
form of money damages in a suit by a vendee against the 
vendor of real property without regard to caveat emptor 
and any statute of limitations” KFC, supra, at 522- 


1/Milton Friedman, Contracts and Conveyances of Real Property 
§ 1.2(n) (4th ed. 1984) and cases cited therein. 


2/The Ninth Circuit does not see the lack of any limitations period 
"as a problem.” 49 F.3d at 522-523. In addressing this issue, 


(continued...) 


12 


523. In short, it imputed to Congress an intent to create 
a super remedy that imposes strict liability on any party 
contributing to an endangerment, irrespective of negligence 
or other actionable conduct, and one that is not susceptible 
to the traditional common law defenses. Moreover, by 
characterizing the remedy as one sounding in restitution, 
the court below did not fcreclose the possibility that 
restitution could go beyond compensation for clean-up 
costs and extend to other areas, such as lost profits or 
other business-related damages. 


Because the remedy made available to KFC is signifi- 
cantly more potent than anything available at common law, 
or under state statutes that are subject to a statute of 
limitations, it is unlikely that private litigants would rely on 
the traditional common law remedies. It is unlikely, there- 
fore, that Congress made a point of preserving state law 
only to create a remedy that effectively supersedes it!” 


It is even more unlikely that Congress could have 
intended a remedy that is such a marked departure from 
existing law in the absence of some explicit reference in 
the statute or in the legislative history. Indeed, the 
legislative history indicates a contrary intention. Congress 
could not have characterized the citizen's suit provision as 


12, continued) 

it concluded that “[bly applying equitable defenses such as 
laches, courts can alleviate any unfairness that might be created 
by the lack of a limitations period for RCRA citizens’ suit.” /d. 
In substance, the court below construed congressional intent to 
permit the courts unlimited discretion to determine the reach of 
the remedy it created on a case-by-case basis. 


It is assumed, of course, “that Congress is aware of existing 
law when it passes legislation.” Director, VWCP v. Perini North 
River Assoc., 459 U.S. 297, 319-320 (1983); Cannon v. 
University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 696-697 (1979). 


13 


conferring “a limited right . . ."** to sue and, at the same 
time, to have envisioned a super remedy that broadens the 
pihie of eedaniensina waeend endive beating ot 


common law. 


As the Eighth Circuit concluded in Furrer, referring to 
the explicit provision contained in the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
(CERCLA),” Congress would have included an express 
provision in RCRA authorizing contribution or indemnity if 
such were its intent: 


Congress, knowing its CERCLA citizen's 
suit provision, did not extend the 
available remedies to include a cause of 


vision), and wishing to allow such a 
remedy in certain cases, enacted 


§ 9613/(f)(1) to provide expressly for 


62 F.3d at 1096-97. On the basis of the foregoing, there 
is No reason to believe that Congress would not have been 
equally as clear had it desired to create a CERCLA-type 


remedy in RCRA. 


1/4.R. Rep. No. 98-198, 98th Cong., 2d Sess., 48 (1984), 
reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5576, 5612. 


1/42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675. 


15 


of hindsight, it attempts to inject into these transactions 
contemporary notions of fairness without regard to the 
market factors on which the transactions were based. It 
exposes thousands of vendors of real property to 
unbargained-for liability to remote vendees many years 
after the sales of property were concluded, and seriously 
threatens the viability of many of them. 


The Ninth Circuit's decision was rendered in the 
absence of any analysis of these implications and without 


Congress has played its part in attempting such a balance 
through the enactment of comprehensive statutory 
schemes that explicitly define the rights and obligations of 


ALFANO, CHTD. 

1201 New York Avenue, N.W. 
D.C. 20005 

202-466-6502 


Counsel for Amicus Curiae 


Amicus Curiae, Petroleum Marketers Association of 
America, is a non-profit trade association comprising the 
following associations: 


2a 


Petroleum Marketers of lowa 


