22a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-2056SI, 93-2111SI 


Filed: December 8, 1994 


Charles Howe; Robert Wells; Ralph W. Thompson; Patrick 
Mousel, on Behalf of Themselves and as Representatives 
of a Class of Persons Similarly Situated; John Altomare; 
Charles Barron; Alexander Charron; Charlotte Chiles; 
Anita Crowe; Ray Darr; Doris Guidicessi; Barnett Lucas, 
Robert Skromme; and Estate of Walter Smith, 
individually, 


Appellees/Cross-Appellants, 


—_—V.— 


Varity Corporation and Massey Ferguson, Inc., 


Appellants/Cross-Appellees. 


On Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Southern District of lowa. 


Before RICHARD S. ARNOLD, Chief Judge, 
HANSEN, Circuit Judge, and STOHR,* District Judge. 


° The Hon. Donald J. Stohr, United States District Judge for the 
Eastern District of Missouri, sitting by designation. 


PER CURIAM. 


We have before us the motion of appellants for a clarifi- 
cation of our opinion filed September 29, 1994. 

The motion is granted, and we offer the following addi- 
tional explanation and guidance for the benefit of the District 
Court on remand. 

It was not our intention to give any reinstated persons rights 
that do not appertain generally to members of the MF plan as 
it now exists. Any entitlement that the reinstated persons have 
with respect to past benefits (and we include in this phrase 
benefits accrued since the trial) will be taken into account 
when restitution is made on remand and the District Court 
adjusts the amount of restitution as appropriate in light of 
intervening events. As for the future, the right to modify the 
plan exists to the full extent indicated by our opinion, subject 
of course to any applicable requirements of law and to any 
claim that any future modification is retaliatory with respect 
to, or discriminatory against, the plaintiffs in this case. 

On remand, the District Court should have these remarks in 
mind and is free to fashion, after hearing the views of the par- 
ties and any additional evidence that it may find relevant, a 
more detailed decree, not inconsistent with our previously 
filed opinion. 

In addition, appellees have requested by letter certain tech- 
nical amendments to the caption. Appellants do not object. 
The request for amendments to the caption is granted, and the 
caption on this opinion has been amended acc ordingly. 

It is so ordered. 


A true copy. 
Attest: 
CLERK, U.S. CourRT oF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


