                                                3
                                                                         Supreme Court, U. §
                                                                                            +.
                                    No. 94-1471
                                                                           ele EP
                                                                   oe JUN
                                                                   ;            f
                                         IN THE                    |         whe     1995

             Supreme Court of the United States’
                                               2|
                                OCTOBER TERM, 1994

                                          >

                                VARITY    CORPORATION,
                                                                   Petitioner,
                                          ——V   —




           CHARLES    HOWE,     ROBERT    WELLS,      RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
              PATRICK MOUSEL, on Behalf of Themselves and as Rep-
              resentatives of a Class of Persons Similarly Situated, JOHN
              ALTOMARE,       CHARLES    BARRON,     ALEXANDER     CHARRON,
              CHARLOTTE       CHILES,   ANITA CROWE,       RAY   DARR,    DORIS
              GUIDICESSI,     BARNETT     LUCAS,     ROBERT   SKROMME,       and
              the Estate of WALTER SMITH, individually,
                                                                 Respondents.


                    ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
                     COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT



                                JOINT APPENDIX

 ee
[-=
           FLOYD    ABRAMS*                         H. RICHARD   SMITH*
i)         CAHILL    GORDON    & REINDEL            AHLERS,   COONEY,
jC         (a partnership including a                 DORWEILER, HAYNIE,
 hadead       professional corporation)               SMITH & ALLBEE, P.C.
 i         80 Pine Street                           100 Court Avenue
 cS        New York, New York 10005                 Des Moines, lowa 50309
i—«        (212) 701-3000                           (515) 243-7611
—          * Counsel of Record                      * Counsel of Record
 <=
 —           for Petitioner                           for Respondents
 —
bean
aA                    PETITION FOR WRIT FILED MARCH 6, 1995
 hadiead                CERTIORARI GRANTED APRIL 24, 1995
cS
                     TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                               PAGE

 List of Documents Printed in Appendix to Petition
      War @ Welt Of Cortioeadl..... 6 .ccceciccccccevccceces..... ii

Chronological List of Relevant Docket Entries......._. J.A. 1

Excerpt-from Massey-Ferguson Inc. Benefits Plan
     (excerpt from Trial Exhibit 156)................... S.A. 5

Memorandum from John H. Ruth, dated December |.
    1983 (Trial Exhibit 585).......................... J.A.27

Memorandum      from B.D. Quandt, dated December,
      1983 (excerpt from Trial Exhibit 512) ........... J.A. 31

Memorandum from John H. Ruth, dated December
    12, 1983, attaching Massey-Ferguson Inc.
    Comprehensive Major Medical Plan (Trial
    SUN WIEN oid vechowcusheh      sient eit
                                           aune
                                             piwedces J.A. 35

Memorandum from W. Zinkewich, dated April 24,
    1986 (Trial Exhibit 47)......000000000000000...... J.A. 63

Side-By-Side Comparison of Benefits (excerpt from
     Composite Trial Exhibit “A”).....0......00. J.A. 67

Massey Combines Corporation Questions and Answers
     (excerpt from Composite Trial Exhibit “A”) ..... J.A.74

Transcript of Message From Mr. Ivan Porter (excerpt
     from Composite Trial Exhibit “A”) .............. J.A. 78
                              ul
                                                          PAGE

Letter from I. Porter, with one page attachment,
      dated April 30, 1986 (excerpt from Composite
      Trial Bails WA)... ccisedcescccccsccccsvccccceess J.A. 81

Handwritten Note from Ivan [Porter] to Victor [Rice],
     dated August, 1987 (Trial Exhibit 80)............ J.A. 84

Letter from Vince D. Laurenzo to Ivan Porter, dated
      November 2, 1987 (Trial Exhibit 88)............. J.A. 88

Letter from Vince D. Laurenzo to Ivan Porter, dated
     November 2. 1987 (Trial Exhibit 89)............. J.A.91
               LIST OF DOCUMENTS PRINTED
                 IN APPENDIX TO PETITION
                FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI

   The items set forth below have been previously printed in
the Petition for a Writ of Certiorari. Pursuant to Rule 26.1.
they are not reproduced herein, but for the convenience of the
Court are listed in chronological a (with their corre-
sponding page numbers in the appendiwo the Petition).
                                                                     ~


                                                        PETITION PAGE
Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for
     the Eighth Circuit Denying Plaintiffs’ Motion
     for Preliminary Injunction, dated February 15,
      PARR      edi vise tieaedkaddssbowvcaececeses pesanceues    ll6a

Order of the United States District Court for the
     Southern District of lowa, dated March 26,
     Pr     inde th oncivnnvcinvnawenk@cecnceicesxécetécneccene    24a

Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law of the United
     States District Court for the Southern       District of
     lowa, dated March 26, 1993.......................             48a

Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the
     Eighth Circuit, dated September 29, 1994......                 la

Order of the United States Court of Appeals for the
     Eighth Circuit Denying Petition for Rehearing
     and Suggestion for Rehearing En Banc, dated
     December 5, 1994... pus ebubssubnnsseoss                     125a

Opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the
     Eighth Circuit, dated December 8, 1994...    ..               22a
                             J.A.1

  CHRONOLOGICAL        LIST OF RELEVANT      DOCKET ENTRIES

October 26, 1988                Complaint filed.
December    13, 1988            Defendants’ motion to dismiss
                                the complaint filed.
December    19, 1988            Plaintiffs’ motion for prelimi-
                                nary injunction filed.
July 14, 1989                  Order of the district court
                               granting plaintiffs’ motion for
                               preliminary    injunction and
                               denying defendants’ motion to
                               dismiss.
July 25, 1989                  Defendants’ notice of appeal
                               to the Eighth Circuit from
                               order granting preliminary
                               injunction filed.
August 8, 1989                 Answer filed.
September |, 1989              Plaintiffs’   motion     for   class
                               certification filed.

February 15, 1990              Decision of Eighth         Circuit
                               vacating preliminary       injunc-
                               tion.
April 18, 1990                 Defendants’     motion   for sum-
                               mary judgment filed.
September   11, 1990           Order of the district court
                               granting defendants’ motion
                               for summary judgment as to
                               retiree-plaintiffs, and certify-
                               ing that order for interlocutory
                               appeal to the Eighth Circuit.
September 21, 1990             Plaintiffs’ motion to file inter-
                               locutory appeal pursuant to
                               28 U.S.C. § 1292(b), seeking
                               reversal of district court order
                          J.A.2

                             granting summary judgment as
                             to retiree-plaintiffs filed.
November    14, 1990         Decision of the Eighth Circuit
                             denying plaintiffs’ motion to
                             file interlocutory appeal from
                             district court order granting
                             summary judgment for defen-
                             dants as to retiree-plaintiffs.
November       26, 1990      Plaintiffs’ motion for recon-
                             sideration of order granting
                             summary judgment for defen-
                             dants as to retiree-plaintiffs
                             filed.
June 4, 1991                 Order of the district court
                             granting plaintiffs’ motion for
                             reconsideration, vacating prior
                             grant of summary judgment as
                             to retiree-plaintiffs, and grant-
                             ing plaintiffs’ motion for class
                             certification.
Augu:t   16, 1991            Amended Complaint filed.
August 26 -                  Jury trial, days one through
  September 23, 1991]        eighteen, including rendering
                             of verdict.
September 30, 1991           Judgment entered.
October !5, 1991             Defendants’ motion for judg-
                             ment notwithstanding verdict
                             or, in alternative, for new trial
                             filed.
March 26, 1993               Findings of fact and conclu-
                             sions of law of the district
                             court.
                     J.A.3

March 26, 1993          Order of the district court
                        granting in part and denying
                        in part motions for judgment
                        notwithstanding verdict and
                        new trial.
April 15, 1993         Plaintiffs’ election of remedies
                       filed.
April 22, 1993         Defendants’    notice of appeal
                       filed.
April 26, 1993         Plaintiffs’   notice   of appeal
                       filed.
September 29, 1994     Decision of the Eighth Circuit
                       affirming the judgment of the
                       district court and remanding.
October 13, 1994       Defendants’ petition for re-
                       hearing with suggestion for
                       rehearing en banc filed.
October 13, 1994       Defendants’ motion to clarify
                       the September 29, 1994 deci-
                       sion of the Eighth Circuit
                       filed.
December 5, 1994       Order of the Eighth Circuit
                       denying defendants’ petition
                       for rehearing with suggestion
                       for rehearing en banc, with
                       Judge Hansen and Judge Bow-
                       man voting to grant the sug-
                       gestion for rehearing en banc.
December 8, 1994       Order of the Eighth Circuit
                       granting defendants’ motion to
                       clarify September 29, 1994
                       decision of the Eighth Circuit.
                 J.A.4

March 6, 1995       Defendants’ petition to the
                    United States Supreme Court
                    for a writ of certiorari to the
                    Eighth Circuit filed.
April 24, 1995      Order of the United States
                    Supreme Court granting defen-
                    dants’ petition for a writ of
                    certiorari.
                                  J.A.5
eee
ate
 et



            EXCERPT   FROM MASSEY-FERGUSON INC.
                         BENEFITS PLAN
                (EXCERPT FROM TRIAL EXHIBIT 156)

                               IN THE
                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                         CENTRAL DIVISION




                         CiviL No. 88-1598-E




      CHARLES   HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,    RALPH   W. THOMPSON.
         PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
         sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JoHN
        ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON.
        CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR. DORIS
        GUIDICESS!, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME. and
        the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                       ~~               Plaintiffs,

                                 -—\   —




       VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON.      INC.

                                                      Defendants.
                                 J.A.6

                                                                    (*]'
                   MASSEY FERGUSON INC.
                  EMPLOYEE BENEFITS PLAN
                          INDEX

Section   |.      Establishment of Plan ..................

Section 2.        General Definitions.....................
Section 3.        Long-Term Disability Benefits.........
Section 4.        Medical and Accident Benefits.........
Section 5.        PO         cis once cadsampatadetentcccveysce.
Section 6.        Administration by Committee..........
Section 7.        Management of Funds and Amend-
                  ment or Termination of Plan............
Section 8.        Allocation of Responsibilities
                  Among Named Fiduciaries .............
Section 9.        Benefits Not Assignable................
Section    10.    Communication to Employees..........
Section    11.    CE       PINS          hse vcedddeessivcesssos
Section    12.    CORRTEE FUOTCIOG        occ cceescsccccccstes
Section    13.    Administrative Services Only
                  Sc         cdbcvcacbeneedsedeusas iexeeuas*
Section    14.    Insurance and Reinsurance
                  ee                                  ne    ee

Section    15.    Adoption by Subsidiary and Affiliate
                  CE         ce asdcccsneeyccavessseievacss
Section    16.    ERR
                    PEE LER AN                                Ro




          Bracketed asterisks indicate beginning of page in original doc-
ument.
                             J.A.7

APPENDIX   A.    Long-Term Disability Benefits for
                 Salaried Employees?
APPENDIX   B.    (1)   Accident & Health Benefits for
                 Salaried Employees?
                                                               [*]
APPENDIX    B.   (2)   Benefits for Employees of United
                 States Bargaining Units?
APPENDIX    B.   (3)   Accident and Health Benefits for
                 Hourly Employees of Badger Northland
                 Inc. Subsidiary of Massey-Ferguson Inc.’
APPENDIX    B.   (4)   Accident and Health Benefits for
                 Salaried Employees of Badger Northland
                 Inc. Subsidiary of Massey-Ferguson Inc.”
APPENDIX    B.   (5)   Accident and Health      Benefits for
                 Hourly Retirees of the Former Batavia,
                 New York Plant?

                                                               [*]




     Material not included in Joint Appendix.
                            J.A.8

                MASSEY-FERGUSON INC.
               EMPLOYEE BENEFITS PLAN

Section 1.   Establishment of Plan:
          Massey-Ferguson Inc., a Maryland corporation,
       (herein called the “Company”), hereby creates and
       establishes an employee benefits plan, which shall be
       known respectively, as from time to time amended or
       supplemented, as the Massey-Ferguson Inc. Employee
       Benefits Plan (herein called the “Plan”), pursuant to
       which the Company and certain of its present and
       future subsidiary or affiliated companies, which adopt
       the Plan with the consent of the Company, may pro-
       vide benefits to those of their employees who qualify
       for eligibility under the terms of the Plan. It is the
       intention of the Company that there be created a “Vol-
       untary Employees’ Beneficiary Association” under
       Section 501(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of
       1954 as amended (hereinafter called the “Code”) and
       the regulations promulgated thereunder. The terms of
       the Plan are as follows:

Section 2.   General Definitions:
          Wherever used herein, unless the context clearly
       indicates otherwise, the following words, wherever
       capitalized, shall have the following meanings:

                                                           [*]
2.1    “Act” means the Employee Retirement Income Secu-
       rity Act of 1974 (including amendments of the Code
       affected thereby), and the rules and regulations issued
       thereunder.
2.2    “Board” shall mean the Board of Directors of the
       Company or the Executive Committee of such Board
       of Directors when acting for the Board.
ava    “Committee” shall mean the administrative committee
       duly appointed and constituted to administer the Plan.
                            J.A.9

2.4    “Employer” means the Company and future partici-
       pating companies to the Plan and Trust Agreement.
       “Plan Year” shall mean the twelve month period end-
       ing on October 3lst of each year, except the initial
       year when such Plan Year shall be the partial year
       ending on October 31, 1978.
2.6    “Trust” shall mean the Massey-Ferguson Inc. Employee
       Benefits Trust Agreement as in effect from time to
       time. Said Trust Agreement is hereby incorporated
       into this Plan by reference. “Trust Fund” shall mean
       the fund held by the Trustee of the Trust under the
       Plan.
2.7    “Trustee” shall mean the person appointed from time
       to time by the Board. A corporation or a national
       banking association is a person for purposes of this
       Plan.
2.8    “Voluntary Employees’ Beneficiary Association” shall
       mean the association of Employees created upon exe-
       cution [*] of the Plan and Trust pursuant to § 501(c)(9)
       of the Code for the purpose of providing for the pay-
       ment of benefits to members of the Association in
       accordance with provisions of the Plan and Trust.

Section 3.    Long-Term Disability Benefits:
          Long-term disability benefits shall be provided for
       certain salaried employees under the following terms
       and conditions:
3.1    A plan of long-term disability benefits marked
       Appendix A has been attached hereto and is hereby
       incorporated by reference. Such benefits shall be pro-
       vided in accordance with this Section 3 and other
       applicable provisions of the Plan and Trust.
       “Effective Date” of Section 3 means the first day of
       August, 1978.
                              J.A. 10

3.3    “Employee” under this Section 3 means all active
       salaried employees of the Company, who meet the
       requirements for eligibility set forth in Appendix A of
       this Plan.
3.4    The Plan of benefits set forth in Appendix A may be
       amended from time to time in accordance with Section
       7 of this Plan.

Section 4.     Medical and Accident Benefits.
         Medical, accident and other benefits shall be pro-
       vided for certain employees under the following terms
       and conditions:
                                                            [*]
4.1    A plan of benefits marked Appendix B has been
       attached hereto and is hereby incorporated into this
       Plan by reference. Such benefits shall be provided in
       accordance with this Section 4 and other applicable
       provisions of the Plan and Trust.
4.2    The “Effective Date” of Section 4 means the first day
       of November, 1978.
4.3    “Employee” under this Section 4 means all employees
       of the Company who meet the requirements for eligi-
       bility set forth in Appendix B of this Plan.
4.4    Employees and dependents may be required to con-
       tribute under certain circumstances towards the cost of
       benefits with respect to coverage under the medical
       and accident benefit provisions of Section 4 of this
       Plan. Employees and dependents who may be required
       to contribute, circumstances under which they may be
       required to contribute, and the amount of contributions
       are set forth below:
       4.4.1    —   All Employees on an Employer-approved
                    leave of absence may continue, for up to
                    twelve calendar months, all benefits under
                    this Section, by payment to the Plan of the
                       J.A.11

            appropriate monthly contributions; pro-
            vided, however, that hourly Employees on
            leave of absence for local union business are
            not eligible for such continuation under the
            terms of the collective bargaining agree-
            ments. The required contributions are:
             (i)   Salaried Employees- bargaining and
                   non-bargaining:
                                                      [*]
                   —   Employee only benefits $ 34.34
                   —   Employee and dependent
                       benefits                118.14
             (ii) Hourly Employees—bargaining:
                   —   Employee only benefits $ 38.49
                   —   Employee and dependent
                       benefits                125.20
4.4.2   -   Surviving dependents of a deceased, salaried
            Employee who was a participant in Part 2 of
            the Employer-sponsored Pension Plan, and
            who was under Age 55 at the time of death,
            may continue coverage under this Part by
            making a monthly contribution to the Plan.
            The monthly contribution shall be the lesser
            of (a) an amount determined by multiplying
            the number of covered dependents by
            $34.34 or (b) $118.14.
4.4.3   -   Surviving dependents of a deceased hourly
            Employee may continue coverage per the
            collective bargaining agreement. To be ell-
            gible, there must be, at the time of the
            Employee’s death, a surviving spouse at
            least 45 years of age. Coverage for such
            dependents may be continued to the earlier
            of:
              (i) The spouse’s attainment of age 62;
             (ii) Remarriage of the spouse;
                              J.A. 12

                    (ili) The spouse’s attainment of eligibility
                          for full widow or widower's insurance
                          benefits or old age survivor's benefits
                          under the Federal Social Security
                          Act (as now in effect or hereafter
                          amended).
                       The required monthly contribution for
                    continuation of coverage for surviving
                    dependents of deceased hourly Employees is
                    the lesser of (a) an amount determined by
                    multiplying the number of covered depen-
                    dents by $38.49 or (b) $125.20.
       4.4.4    —   Hourly Employees not on Supplemental
                    Unemployment Benefits while on a layoff,
                    qualifying under Section       1.03 of the
                    Massey-Ferguson Inc. Supplemental Unem-
                    ployment Benefit Plan, may continue for a
                    period of twelve calendar months, benefits
                    [*] under this Section by paying to the Plan
                    the appropriate monthly contribution. The
                    required contributions are:
                     (i) Employee only benefits          $ 38.49
                    (ji) Employee and dependent
                         benefits                         125.20
4.5    The Plan of Benefits set forth in Appendix B may be
       amended from time to time in accordance with Sec-
       tion 7 of this Plan.

Section 5.     Funding:
          Each Employer shall make such contributions under
       the Plan to the Trust at such time and in such amounts
       as shall be determined by the Board to be necessary to
       maintain the Plan on a sound financial basis and to
       provide the benefits payable under the Plan.
                           J.A. 13

Section 6.   Administration by Committee
6.1    The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and not
       less than two, nor more than four other individuals
       who shall be appointed by the Board to serve at the
       pleasure of the Board. Any member of the Committee
       may resign and his successor,       if any, shall be
       appointed by the Board. The Committee shall be
       responsible for the general administration and inter-
       pretation of the Plan and ‘or carrying out its provi-
       sions, except to the extent all or any of such
       obligations specifically imposed on the Trustee or the
       Board. The Chairman of the Committee shall also
       serve as the Plan Administrator, and shall be agent    [*]
       for service of legal process of the Plan. The Chairman
       may be empowered and act for the Committee as 1{ so
       determines.
6.2    The Committee shall also elect a Secretary and may
       elect an acting Secretary, either of whom may be, but
       need not be, a member of the Committee. The Com-
       mittee may appoint from its membership, such sub-
       committees with powers as the Committee shall
       determine, and may authorize one or more of its mem-
       bers, or any agent, to execute or deliver any instru-
       ments or to make     any      payment   in behalf   of the
       Committee.
6.3    The Committee sha'l hold such meetings upon such
       notice at such places and at such intervals as it may
       from time to time determine. Notice of meetings shall
       not be required if notice is waived, in writing, by all
       of the members of the Committee at the time in office,
       or if all such members are present at the meeting.
6.4    A majority of the members of the Committee, at the
       time in office, shal! constitute a quorum for the trans-
       action of business. All resolutions or other actions
       taken by the Committee at any meeting, shal! be by
       vote of a majority of those present at any such meet-
       ing and entitled to vote. Resolutions may be adopted
                             J.A. 14

        or other action taken, without a meeting, upon written
        consent thereto, signed by all of the members of the
        Committee.
                                                              [*]
6.5     The Committee shall maintain full and complete
        records of its deliberations and decisions. Its records
        shall contain all relevant data pertaining to individual
        Employees and their rights under the Plan and in the
        Fund.
6.6     Subject to the limitations of the Plan and of the Act,
        the Committee may, from time to time, establish rules
        or by-laws for the administration of the Plan and the
        transactions of its business.
6.7     No individual member of the Committee shall have
        any right to vote or decide upon any matter relating
        solely to himself or to any of his rights or benefits
        under the Plan (except that such member may sign
        unanimous written consent to resolutions adopted or
        other action taken without a meeting).
6.8     The Committee may correct errors and, so far as prac-
        tical, may adjust any benefit, credit or payment
        accordingly.
6.9     Subject to the claims procedure set forth in Sec-
        tion 11, the Committee shall have the duty and author-
        ity to interpret and construe the provisions of the Plan
        and to decide any dispute which may arise regarding
        the rights of Employees hereunder, which determina-
        tions shall apply uniformly to all persons similarly sit-
        uated and shall be binding and conclusive upon all
        interested persons.
 6.10    The Committee      may   engage   an actuary,   attorney,
         accountant,   [*] or any other technical advisor on mat-
         ters regarding the operation of the Plan and to perform
         such other duties as shall be required in connection
         therewith, and may employ such clerical and related
                             J.A. 15

        personnel as the Committee shall deem requisite or
        desirable in carrying out the provisions of the Plan.
        The Committee shall, from time to time, but no less
        frequently than annually, and with the advice of an
        actuary, review the financial condition of the Plan and
       determine the financial needs of the Plan in relation to
       the liabilities and obligations thereof and the require-
       ments of the Act. The Committee shall communicate
       such financial needs to the Company and to the
       Trustee so that the funding policy and investment pol-
       icy may be appropriately coordinated to meet such
        needs.
6.11   No fee or compensation shall be paid to any member
       of the Committee for his services as such.
6.12   The Committee shall be entitled to reimbursement out
       of the Trust Fund for its reasonable expenses properly
       and actually incurred in the performance of its duties
       in administration of the Plan, provided that the Board
       may, by written notice to the Trustee, provided that all
       or any portion of such expenses shall be paid by the
       Company.
6.13   The Committee shall determine whether an individual
       is an Employee, and the decision of the Committee
       shall be [*] final and conclusive.

Section 7.   Management     of Funds     and   Amendment      or
             Termination of Plan:
7.1    All assets of the Plan shall be held in a Trust which
       shall be established and administered to fund and to
       provide for the payment to the Employees or their
       dependents or their successors in interest benefits as
       provided in the Plan out of the income and principal
       of the Trust. All Fiduciaries (as defined in the Act),
       with respect to the Plan, shall discharge their duties as
       such solely in the interest of the Employees or their
       dependents or their successors in interest, and (i) for
                            J.A. 16

the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to
Employees or their dependents or their successors in
interest and defraying reasonable expenses of admin-
istering the Plan, including the Trust which is a part of
the Plan, (ii) with the care, skill, prudence, and dili-
gence under the circumstances then prevailing that a
prudent man, acting in a like capacity and familiar
with such matters, would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of like character and with like aims, and
(iii) in accordance with the Plan and Trust, except to
extent such documents may be inconsistent with the
Act. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
Section 7.1, the following special provisions shall
apply:
                                                              (*]
7.1.1    -        Initial Non-Qualification: If the Plan fails
                  initially to satisfy the qualification require-
                  ments of Section 501(c)(9) of the Code, and
                  if the Company declines to amend the Plan
                  to satisfy such qualification requirements,
                  contributions made prior to the determina-
                  tion that the Plan has failed to qualify, shall
                  be returned to the Company.
7.1.2 -           Disallowance of Deduction: To the extent
                  that a Federal Income Tax deduction is dis-
                  allowed for any contribution made by an
                  Employer, the Trustee shall immediately
                  refund to the Employer, the amount so dis-
                  allowed, upon presentation, within one year
                  of the date of such disallowance, of evi-
                  dence thereof and a demand by the
                  Employer for such refund.
 7.1.3       -—   Loss of Qualified Status: If it is determined
                  that the Plan does not constitute a qualified
                  Plan for any Plan Year, there shall be
                  returned to each Employer, upon demand,
                             J.A. 17

                  any contribution made by each Employer,
                  with respect to any year in which the quali-
                  fied status is denied, provided that demand
                  is made be each Employer and refund is
                  made by the Trustee, within one year of the
                  date of denial of qualification of the Plan.
     7.1.4   —    If, following a complete termination of the
                  Plan, there are assets in the Trust Fund after
                  all liabilities of the Plan to Employees or
                  their dependents or their successors in inter-
                  est have been satisfied, such remaining
                  assets shall be distributed among the
                  Employers in accordance with the determi-
                  nation made by the Board except as other-
                  wise provided under the Act.
     7.1.5   —   In the case of a contribution made by a mis-
                 take in fact, such. contribution shall be
                 returned to the appropriate Employer with-
                 out interest or other increment, as soon as
                 practical, but not later than one year after
                 payment thereof.
tN   The Company and the Trustee shall enter into an
     appropriate Trust Agreement, which shall be a part of
     the Plan, for [*] the administration of the Trust under
     the Plan. Such agreement shall contain such powers
     and reservations as to controls and disbursement of the
     funds of the Trust, and such other provisions not
     inconsistent with the provisions of this Plan and its
     nature and purpose, and the Act, as shall be agreed
     upon and set forth therein. Said agreement shall pro-
     vide that the Board may remove the Trustee at any
     time, upon     reasonable   notice, that the Trustee   may
     resign at any time, upon reasonable notice, and that
     upon such removal or resignation of the Trustee, the
     Board shall designate a successor-Trustee.
                                J.A. 18

7.3    All requests, directions, requisitions and instructions
       of the Committee to the Trustee shall be in writing and
       signed by the Committee's Chairman or acting Chair-
       man and by its Secretary or acting Secretary.
7.4    The Company hereby reserves the right, by action of
       the Board, to amend or terminate the Plan or Trust at
       any time, provided no such amendment or termination
       shall have the effect of diverting the Trust funds to
       purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the
       Employees except as provided in Section 7.1. How-
       ever, the right to amend or terminate the Plan shall
       not, in any way, affect an Employee’s right to claim
       benefits, diminish, or eliminate any claims for bene-
       fits under the provisions of the Plan to which the
       Employee shall have become entitled prior [*] to the
       exercise of the Company’s right, through its Board, to
       terminate or amend.

Section 8.     Allocation     of Responsibilities   Among   Named
               Fiduciaries:

8.1    The Named Fiduciaries, with respect to the Plan and
       the responsibilities allocated to each, are as follows:
       8.1.1    —   Board:
                      (i) To amend the Plan;
                     (ii) To appoint and remove Trustees under
                           the Plan;
                    (iii) To determine the amount to be con-
                           tributed to the Plan by the Company
                           and each Employer; and
                     (iv) To terminate the Plan.
        8.1.2 —     Committee:
                      (i) To interpret the provisions of the Plan
                          and to determine the rights of Employ-
                          ees under the Plan, except to the
                          extent otherwise provided in Sec-
                          tion 11 relating to claims procedure,
                         J.A. 19

              (it)   To administer the Plan in accordance
                   with its terms, except to the extent
                   powers to administer the Plan are
                   specifically delegated to another
                   named fiduciary or other person or
                   persons as provided in the Plan:
             (iit) To direct the Trustee in the distribu-
                   tion of the Trust assets; and
             (iv) To determine the eligibility of any
                   person to be, or to become, an
                   Employee under the Plan.
8.1.3   —   Plan Administrator:
              (i) To file such reports as may be required
                     to the United States Department    of
                     Labor, [*] the Internal Revenue Ser-
                  vice, and any other governmental
                  agencies to which reports may be
                  required to be submitted from time to
                  time;
             (ii) To comply with requirements of law
                  for disclosure of Plan provisions and
                  other information relating to the Plan
                  to Employees and other interested
                  parties; and
            (iii) To administer the claims procedure to
                  the extent provided in Section 10.
8.1.4   -   Trustee:
              (i) To invest and reinvest Trust assets:
             (11) To make distributions to Plan Employ-
                  ees as directed by the Committee;
            (iit) To render annual accountings to the
                  Committee as provided in the Trust
                  Agreement; and
            (iv) Otherwise to hold, administer, and
                  control the assets of the Trust as pro-
                  vided in the Plan and Trust.
                           J.A. 20

8.2    Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a Named
       Fiduciary of the Plan shall be responsible and liable
       only for its own acts of ommission with respect to
       fiduciary duties specifically allocated to him and des-
       ignated as his responsibility.
8.3    Indemnification by Company: Notwithstanding any
       foregoing provision, the Company shall indemnify and
       save harmless each Committee member and the Plan
       Administrator from any liabilities incurred by them in
       the exercise and performance of their powers and
       duties under this Agreement except where attributable
       to their fraud, misfeasance,willful neglect,   [*] affir-
       matively proved; but any amount paid by the Com-
       pany shall be reimbursed to the Company by the Trust
       Fund, if sufficient funds are available, and shall be
       deemed an expense for purposes of Subsection 6.12.

Section 9.   Benefits Not Assignable:
9.1    No portion of the benefit, with respect to any Employee,
       shall be subject, in any manner, to anticipation, alien-
       ation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance,
       or charge, except as so provided in Section 9.3, and
       any attempt so to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer,
       assign, pledge, encumber, or charge the same, shall be
       void; nor shall any portion of such benefit be in any
       manner payable to any assignee, receiver, or trustee,
       or be liable for the Employee's debts, contracts, lia-
       bilities, engagements, or torts, or be subject to any
       legal process to levy upon or attach.
9.2     If any Employee shall by physically, mentally, or
        legally incapable of receiving or acknowledging
        receipt of any payment under the Plan to which he is
        entitled, the Committee, upon receipt of satisfactory
        evidence of his incapacity and satisfactory evidence
        that another person or institution is maintaining him
        and that no guardian or committee has been appointed
                               J.A.21

           for him, may cause any payment otherwise payable to
           him to be made to such person or institution so main-
           taining him.
                                                               [*]
9.3       Medical benefits, provided by this Plan, may be
          assigned, to physicians, hospitals, and other health
          care providers, upon the Employee’s execution of a
          plan-provided assignment of benefits form. However.
          such assignment shall only be effective as to those
          costs covered by this Plan.

Section 10.      Communication to Employees:
             In accordance with the requirements of the Act, the
          Company shall communicate the principal terms of the
          Plan to the Employees. The Company shall make
          available for inspection, by Employees and their ben-
          eficiaries, during reasonable hours at the principal
          office of the Company and at such other places as may
          be required by the Act, a copy of the Plan, the Trust
          Agreement, and of such other documents as may be
          required by the Act.

Section    11.   Claims Procedure:

          An Employee or his dependent may present a claim
          for benefits under this Plan by submitting written
          proof of claim to the Committee or the delegate of the
          Committee. The Committee shall furnish forms for
          this purpose. The Committee may, under reasonable
          circumstances and at any reasonable time, require an
          Employee or dependent to furnish certification by a
          physician or other practitioner of the healing arts in
          support of the claim.
          If an Employee or beneficiary believes that he is [*]
          entitled to benefits under the Plan which are not being
          paid to him, he (herein called the “Claimant”) may file
          a written claim with the Plan Administrator (as
                     J.A. 22

defined in Section 6.1). The Plan Administrator shall
decide whether the claim shall be allowed in whole or
in part. In the event that the Plan Administrator shall
wholly or partially deny the claim for benefits made
by any Claimant, written notice of such denial shall be
furnished to the Claimant within thirty (30) days fol-
lowing receipt of the claim by the Plan Administrator.
Such notice shall be worded in a manner calculated to
be understood by the Claimant and shall set forth:
(i) specific reason or reasons for the denial; (ii) spe-
cific references to pertinent Plan provisions on which
the denial is based; (iii) a description of any additional
material or information necessary for the Claimant to
perfect the claim and an explanation of why such
material or information is necessary; and (iv) an
explanation of the Plan’s review procedure. Within
sixty (60) days following receipt of such notice by the
Claimant, or within sixty (60) days following the close
of the above-mentioned thirty-day period, if the claim
is not allowed and such notice is not received within
such thirty-day period, such Claimant may appeal
denial of the claim by filing, in writing, with the Com-
mittee, [*] a written application for review. Follow-
 ing request for such review, the Committee shall fully
and fairly review the decision denying the claim. Prior
 to the decision of the Committee, the Claimant shall
 be given an opportunity to review pertinent documents
 and to submit issues and comments in writing. The
 Committee shall make its decision regarding the mer-
 its of the claim promptly, and within sixty (60) days
 following receipt by it of the request for review (or
 within 120 days after such receipt, in a case where
 there are special circumstances requiring extension of
 time for processing the claim), shall deliver the deci-
  sion to the Claimant in writing. Such decision shall set
  forth specific reasons for the decision, shall be worded
  in a manner calculated to be understood by the
                               J.A. 23

          Claimant, and shall cite specific references to the per-
          tinent Plan provisions on which the decision is based.
          All actions set forth herein to be taken by the
          Claimant, may likewise be taken by a representative of
          the Claimant duly authorized by him to act in his
          behalf in such matters. The Committee may require
          such evidence as it may reasonably deem necessary or
          advisable of the authority to act of any such repre-
          sentative. In the event the Claimant shall be the Plan
          Administrator, all actions set forth in this Section 1]
          to be taken by the Plan Administrator, shall instead be
          [*] taken by the Secretary of the Committee.

Section    12.   General Provisions:

             Neither the establishment of the Plan or Trust
          hereby, nor any modification thereof, nor the creation
          of any fund or account, nor the payment of any bene-
          fits, shall be construed as giving to any Employee or
          other person, any legal or equitable right against the
          Company, or any officer or employee thereof, or the
          Board, or the Committee, or the Plan Administrator, or
          the Trustee, except as herein provided. Under no cir-
          cumstances shall the terms of this Plan constitute a
          contract of continuing employment or in any manner
          obligate the Company to continue or discontinue the
          service of an Employee.

Section 13.      Administrative Services Only Contract:
            The Committee    shall have the right to direct the
          Trustee to enter into an Administrative Services Only
       Contract with a third party Claims Administrator
       (hereinafter called the “Claims Administrator”) where-
       by the Claims Administrator will furnish administra-
       live services in connection with the Plan. The
       Administrative Services Only Contract may autho-
       rize the Claims Administrator to act as agent for the
       Committee in receiving and processing claims for ben-
                              J.A. 24

          efits under the Plan, disbursing claim payments under
          the Plan, and performing such addi-[*]tional duties as
          set forth in such Administrative Services Only Con-
          tract.

Section    14.   Insurance and Reinsurance   Contracts:

             The Committee shall have the right to direct the
          Trustee to enter into contracts of insurance and rein-
          surance with insurance companies, brokers, or under-
          writing groups to provide such limitations of liability
          to the Plan as may be appropriate from time to time.

Section 15.      Adoption by Subsidiary and Affiliate
                 Companies:
             The Company may, by resolution, provide for par-
          ticipation in the Plan and Trust Agreement by other
          subsidiary or affiliated companies. The following spe-
          cial provisions shall apply to the Company and all
          such participating subsidiary and affiliated companies
          (“Employers”) to the Plan except as otherwise
          expressly provided herein or in a separate agreement.
15.1      For purposes of the Plan, employment shall not be
          deemed to be interrupted by the transfer, at any time,
          of an Employee from the employment of one Employer
          to the employment of another Employer, it being the
          intent hereof that interchangeable employment with
          the Employers, shall not affect adversely, the eligi-
          bility or benefits of any Employee affected thereby.
 15.2     The Committee, as designated by the Board of the
          Company, [*] shall be the Committee with respect to
          all Employers to the Plan.

Section 16.      Miscellaneous.

 16.1     Governing Law and Rules of Construction. This Plan
          shall be governed in all respects, whether as to con-
                             J.A. 25

        struction, capacity, validity, performance, or other-
        wise, by the laws of the State of lowa.
16.2   Interpretation. Wherever reasonably necessary, pro-
       visions of any gender shall be deemed synonymous, as
       shall singular and plural pronouns.
16.3   Headings. The index to this Plan and the headings to
       the Articles and Paragraphs of this Plan are included
       solely for convenience and shall in no event affect, or
       be used in connection with, the interpretation of this
       Plan.
16.4   Severability. Each provision of this Plan shall be
       treated as severable, to the end that, if any one or
       more provisions shall be adjudged or declared illegal,
       invalid, or unenforceable, this Plan shall be inter-
       preted, and shall remain in full force and effect, as
       though such provision or provisions had never been
       contained in this Plan.
16.5   Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two
       or more counterparts, each of which constitutes an
       Original.
16.6   Miscellaneous     Protective    Provisions.   It is further
       agreed:
                                                               [*]
       (a)   Any Named Fiduciary may request and rely upon
             an opinion of counsel, who may or may not be
             counsel for the Company, and shall be fully pro-
             tected for any action taken, suffered or omitted in
             good faith reliance upon such opinion.
       (b)   No recourse under this Plan, or for any action or
             non-action hereunder, or for any loss or diminu-
             tion of the Trust Fund, or for any payment         or
             nonpayment of benefits, or for any other reasons
             whatsoever relating to the Plan, shall be had by
             any person whomsoever against any stockholder,
                           J.A. 26

             officer, director or employee of any Employer as
             such, past, present or future nor shall such
             recourse be had against any Employer, any
             Trustee, any Plan Administrator, the Committee,
             or any member or Secretary thereof, except for
             fraud, misfeasance or willful neglect, affirma-
             tively proved.
       (c)   Where the establishment of any facts is in ques-
             tion any Named Fiduciary may in its discretion
             accept as evidence thereof any properly executed
             instrument or document furnished by any other
             Named Fiduciary or such other evidence as may
             seem reasonable under the circumstances.
                                                            {*]
  IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Massey-Ferguson Inc. Employee
Benefits Plan is, by the authority of the Board of Directors,
hereby executed as of the 24th day of October, 1978.
                               MASSEY-FERGUSON       INC.
  [SEAL]
                               /s/ W.R. MEARNS
                               Vice-President
ATTEST:

/s/ EH. GRAHAM
Secretary
                             J.A. 27

          MEMORANDUM FROM JOHN H. RUTH.
              DATED DECEMBER 1, 1983
                 (TRIAL EXHIBIT 585)

                         IN THE
           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
          FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                   CENTRAL DIVISION




                    CIVIL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,    RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
  ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON.
  CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR. Doris
  GUIDICESS1, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME. and
  the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                                   Plaintiffs,



 VARITY    CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON,     INC...

                                                 Defendants.
                             J.A. 28

            LETTERHEAD OF MASSEY FERGUSON
                                             December    |, 1983
MEMORANDUM
To:        All U.S. Salaried Non-Union Employees
From:      John H. Ruth
Subject:   COMPENSATION      IMPROVEMENTS

           As you are aware, we are committed to a break-
           even level at the end of fiscal 1983 and a profit in
           1984. However, we reported a U.S. $11.9 million
           loss in Massey-Ferguson Ltd. in our latest quarter.
           In developing our compensation improvements for
            1984, consideration has been given to your major
           sacrifices over the past years which contributed to
           the survival of the Company.
           Therefore, we have committed to the following
           compensation improvements for all active non-
           union salaried employees and have incorporated
           them into the 1984 budget.
            ° Effective January 1, 1984, employee contribu-
               tions of $60.00 per family coverage and $30.00
               per single coverage towards health coverage
               will be eliminated.
               On January 1, 1984, a new Comprehensive
               Major Medical Plan will be in effect. Full
               details of the Plan will be available to you in the
               near future. The major features of the Plan fol-
               low:
               —      LIFETIME MAXIMUM—$250,000.00 per cov-
                      ered individual
               —      DepuctTisLes—    $100.00—Single
                                       $200.00—Family
                —     Co-InSURANCE—After the deductibles are
                      satisfied, 80% of covered charges will be
                      paid by Massey-Ferguson through the John
               J.A. 29

     Hancock   Mutual    Life Insurance   Co.: 20%
      paid by the employee.
 —   OUT-OF-POCKET MAXIMUM—The total pay-
     ment by employees for both the deductible
     and co-insurance is limited to $1,100.00—
     Single, and $2,200.00—Family, in a calen-
     dar year, after which the Plan pays covered
     expenses at 100% of the reasonable and cus-
     tomary fee for the service.
—    THE LIMITATION ON REASONABLE & Cus-
     TOMARY LEVELS will be removed to allow a
     continuing correlation between medical
     costs and payments under the Plan.
                                               [*]
—    COST CONTAINMENT will be stressed under
     the new Plan. There will be financial incen-
     tives to use provisions such as Second Sur-
     gical Opinion, Pre-admission Testing and
     Out-Patient/Ambulatory Surgical Facilities.
 For those employees currently receiving COLA,
the current cost-of-living allowance will be
incorporated into their base rate, effective with
the first pay period of 1984. This has the added
benefit of improving life insurance coverage as
well as the pensionable earnings.
Effective February |, 1984, for charges incurred
on and after that date, reimbursement for Type
I and II Dental Services will increase to 80%
from the current 50%. The Limitation on Rea-
sonable & Customary Levels will be removed to
allow a continuing correlation between dental
costs and payments under the Plan.
Effective February 1, 1984, a Vision Care Plan
will be re-introduced. This Plan will provide
benefits at intervals of 24 months and more.
A change of prescription will not be required.
                        J.A. 30

        ° Effective February |, 1984, the Tuition Aid Pro-
          gram will be reinstated.
      As I indicated earlier, we are committed as a Com-
      pany to make a profit in 1984 and I want to provide
      salaried non-union employees with both the incen-
      tive to make it happen and the opportunity to share
      in the results. Therefore, I am pleased to announce
      that the Remuneration Plan has been extended
      through fiscal 1984 (see attached).
      We must become profitable in 1984 and with your
      commitment we will do so!

                /s/ JOHN H. RUTH
                   John H. Ruth
                   Vice President & General Manager
                   Marketing & Distribution Operations
Attachment
                             J.A. 31

          MEMORANDUM FROM B.D. QUANDT
                                            ,
                DATED DECEMBER. 1983
           (EXCERPT FROM TRIAL EXHIBIT 512)

                         IN THE
           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
          FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                   CENTRAL DIVISION




                    CIVIL No. 88-1598-F




CHARLES   HOWE,    ROBERT    WELLS,    RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and
                                                      as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons Similarly situa
                                                    ted, JOHN
  ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER
                                         CHARRON,
  CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY
                                      Darr, Doris
  GUIDICESS!, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT
                                    SKROMME, and
  the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                                    Plaintiffs,



 VARITY   CORPORATION       and MASSEY-FERGUSON,       INC.,

                                                  Defendants.
                              J.A. 32

           LETTERHEAD     OF MASSEY     FERGUSON
memo
to pensioners
Massey Ferguson
                                             December,    1983
          117560
JENIVIE L JACK
6417 MOTT AVE
Des MOINES     IA 60311   Y
   As a concerned Massey-Ferguson pensioner, we are sure
you are aware that the Company has suffered a loss of U.S.
$41.1 million in the nine months which ended October 31,
1983. Despite this, we are committed to making a profit in
1984.
    In preparation for 1984, we have spent long hours review-
ing the financial needs of our pensioners and employees, bal-
ancing their needs with the financial plight of the Company.
While we are still concerned with the continuing depressed
market conditions and our ability to achieve our financial
plan, we are pleased to announce that your gross monthly
pension will be increased by $1.00 effective January |, 1984.
Since First Wisconsin Trust needs additional time to process
these increases, your March check will reflect this increased
pension plus a retroactive amount for January and February.
    Massey-Ferguson provides one of the most complete health
care programs available for salaried employees and retirees
 and their eligible family members. The Massey-Ferguson pro-
 gram provides hospital, surgical, dental, vision, prescription
 druy and hearing aid benefits.
     As you are no doubt aware, health care costs have been
 escalating at an alarming rate. The outstanding coverage pro-
 vided by the Company has not escaped this trend. Many major
 companies have revised their plans to help contain this rate of
 increase by introducing Comprehensive Major Medical Plans.
     We have thoroughly reviewed our benefit plans, and effec-
 tive January 1, 1984, a new Comprehensive Major Medical
  Plan will be introduced for all active employees, laid off
 employees, pensioners and their eligible survivors, and LTD
  recipients in the U.S.
                                J.A. 33


    The new Plan covers all health benefits and provides
                                                               [*]
                                                            that
 the employee or pensioner pay part of the early costs
                                                        through
 deductibles and coinsurance. Full details are attac
                                                      hed. The
 main features of the new Plan follow:
      ° LIFETIME MAXIMUM—$250,000.00 per covered indi-
        vidual.
      ° DEDUCTIBLES— $1} 00.00—Single
                     $200.00—Family
      * COINSURANCE—After the deductibles are satisf
                                                          ied,
        80% of covered charges will be paid by Massey-
        Ferguson through the John Hancock Mutual Life
        Insurance Company; 20% paid by the pensioner.
     ° OuT-OF-POCKET-MAXiIMUM—The total payment by
        pensioners for both the deductible and coinsurance is
        limited to $1,100.00—Single, and $2,200.00—Family,
        in a calendar year, after which the Plan pays covered
        expenses at 100% of the reasonable and customary fee
        for the service.
     * COST CONTAINMENT will be stressed under the new
       Plan. There will be financial incentives to use provi-
       sions such as Second Surgical Opinion, Pre- Admission
       Testing and Out-Patient/Ambulatory Surgical Facili-
       ties.
     * MEDICARE—After age 65, the Plan will be integrated
       with Medicare and Medicare will continue to be
       the first payor. The Company will continue to reim-
       burse pensioners over age 65 for the Medicare Part ‘B’
       premium.
    * DRUG PLAN—Unchanged.
  In addition   to the above,   we have found   it necessary   to
modify the Dental and Vision Care Plans as follows:
                           J.A. 34

    ° DENTAL PLAN CHARGES for Type | and Type II bene-
       fits will be reimbursed at 80% of reasonable and cus-
       tomary levels.
    ° Vision CARE—The Vision Care Plan will provide ben-
      efits at intervals of 24 months or more, with no change
      of prescription required.
   The modified health coverage will continue to provide you
with outstanding protection at minimal cost, and will assist
the Company in achieving its primary goal of making a profit
in 1984.
                                                           [*]
   We are aware that you may have questions about the new
Comprehensive Major Medical Plan. In order to assist you in
answering any queries that you may have, we will install a
toll-free number during the week of January 16, 1984. If you
wish to take advantage of this service, please call 1-800-247-
2123 between the hours of 8:30 AM and 4:00 PM (Central
Standard Time) during the period of January 16 - 20, 1984.
   In addition, if you require claim forms you should contact
the following:
     Human Resources Department
     Massey-Ferguson Inc.
     P.O. Box 1813
     Des Moines, lowa 50306
   As you know, the Company, during the last two years, has
had two health benefit plans; one for active employees and
one for retirees. The plan for active employees has required
an employee contribution amount and provided a reduced
level of benefits. The high cost of administering two plans
combined with escalating health care costs as well as the
financial state of the Company require the introduction of a
common plan for both active and retired employees.
                                     Sincerely,

                               /s/ Bryon D.
                                          Quandt
                                     B. D. Quandt
                                     Director Human Resources
                            J.A. 35

        MEMORANDUM FROM JOHN H. RUTH,
            DATED DECEMBER 12, 1983,
        ATTACHING MASSEY-FERGUSON INC.
      COMPREHENSIVE MAJOR MEDICAL PLAN
                (TRIAL EXHIBIT 511)

                         IN THE
           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
          FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                   CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CiviL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES   HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,    RALPH   W. THOMPSON.
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
  ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHAR
                                            RON,
  CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, Ray DARR,
                                           Doris
  GUIDICESSI, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME,
                                              and
  the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                                  Plaintiffs,

                           —_v—




 VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON.     INC.,

                                                Defendants.
                            J.A. 36

           LETTERHEAD      OF MASSEY      FERGUSON

                                            December   12, 1983
MEMORANDUM

To:       All U. S. Non-Union Salaried Employees
From:     John H. Ruth
Subject   EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PROGRAM
          On December 1, 1983 the Company announced
          changes to several Employee Benefit Programs. The
          purpose of this communication is to provide details
          of the Comprehensive Major Medical Plan, to clar-
          ify the effect of the changes to the Dental and
          Vision Care Plans, to restate the provisions related
          to eligibility, to introduce changes to Claim Pro-
          cessing procedures and to restate the Tuition Aid
          Program.
           A.    COMPREHENSIVE        MAJOR MEDICAL    PLAN

                 Attached is a summary description of the Plan.
                 If there are discrepancies between the sum-
                 mary and the Plan document, the Plan docu-
                 ment will prevail.
           B. DENTAL PLAN
                 All covered charges incurred on and after
                 February 1, 1984 for Type I—Preventative and
                 Type I11—Restorative Services, will be reim-
                 bursed at 80% of the current Reasonable &
                 Customary rate.
            C. THE LIMITATION ON REASONABLE & CUSTOM-
               ARY levels for the above Plans will be removed
               to allow a continuing correlation between costs
               and payments under the Plans.
            D.   VistON CARE PLAN
                 On February 1, 1984 the Vision Care Plan will
                 provide benefits at intervals of 24 months with
                 or without a prescription change.
                       J.A. 37

E.       HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN ELIGIBILITY
         Individuals participating in the Company's
         Benefit Plans on December 31, 1983 will be
         automatically enrolled in the Plans which take
         effect on January 1, 1984 and February 1,
         1984.
         Individuals participating in the Company's
         Benefit Plans on December 31, 1983, may
         change their status under the Plans if:
         °
             there is a change in marital status:
         °
             there is a change in the employment status
             of the employee or the employee's spouse;
             the employee has single coverage and
             acquires an eligible dependent.
        Application must be made within 30 days of
     the above change.
                                                     [*]
     Employees not participating in the Company's
     Benefit Plans on December 31, 1983 and
     employees who elected single coverage, may
     make application to re-enroll or change their
     Status in the Plans at any time during the next
     twelve months with coverage commencing on
     January 1, 1985.
     In addition, employees not participating in the
     Plans on December 31, 1983 are eligible to re-
     enroll in the Plans prior to January 1, 1985 if:
     °
             there is a change in marital status;
     °
             there is a change in the employment status
             of the employee or the employee's spouse;
             the employee acquires an eligible depen-
             dent.
     Application       must be made   within 30 days of
     the above change.
                 J.A. 38

F.   CLAIM PROCESSING

     1. Every transaction John Hancock processes
        cost Massey-Ferguson approximately $12.00.
        Employees can help reduce this substantial
        expense by grouping small claims and sub-
        mitting them in amounts of not less than
        $50.00. Your cooperation ensures that
        Massey-Ferguson derives the maximum
        benefit from its benefits dollars.
     2. To ensure that claims subject to Coordina-
        tion of Benefits are properly processed,
        John Hancock will no longer process claims,
        for which the Massey-Ferguson Plan is the
        primary payor, from photocopies of bills or
        claim forms.
G. TUITION AID
     The Tuition Aid program provides reimburse-
     ment of 80% of tuition fees, excluding books,
     upon successful completion of pre-approved
     courses.
     Employees applying for Tuition Aid must com-
     plete a “Tuition Aid Request” MF-2413 and
     have it approved by their immediate supervisor
     and the Human Resources Department prior to
     beginning the course. Reimbursement           is
     dependent upon the receipt of evidence that the
     course has been successfully completed and an
     itemized receipt for the tuition fee.
     Employees eligible for educational assistance
     under programs such as “Educational Assis-
     tance for Veterans and Servicemen” are not eli-
     gible for Company-paid Tuition Aid program.
                                                  [*]
     Internal Revenue Code, Section 127, which
     allows tax-free tuition reimbursements termi-
                                J.A. 39

                nates December 31, 1983, making tuition reim-
                bursements in 1984 fully taxable. However.
                legislation is pending which may return these
                payments to a tax free status. The progress of
                this legislation is being monitored.
                Please forward any questions you may have to
                your Human Resources office.


                      /s/ JOHN H. RUTH
                          John H. Ruth
                          Vice President & General Manager
                          Marketing & Distribution Operations
Attachment

                                                                 [*]

                 MASSEY-FERGUSON INC,
          COMPREHENSIVE MAJOR MEDICAL               PLAN

NoTe:    THIS IS A SUMMARY OF THE PLAN. IF THERE
         ARE DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN THE SUMMARY
         AND THE PLAN DOCUMENT, THE PLAN DOCU-
         MENT WILL PREVAIL.
                                                                [*]
                   TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                           Page(s)
Schedule of Benefits                                            1-2
Satisfying the Cash Deductible                                     3
Reinstatement of Aggregate Maximum        Benefit                  3
Covered Expenses & Exclusion                                  4-14
Pre-Determination of Benefits                                    14
Coordination of Benefits                                         15
How Benefits Become Payable                                      16
How Much is Payable                                              16
Who is Eligible                                                  16
How to Become Covered                                        16-17
When    Do Benefits Terminate                                    17
                          J.A. 40

When Do Benefits of a Dependent Terminate                 18
                                                          18
Extension of Benefits
Modification of Provision for Persons Entitled to
                                                          18
  Medicare
Right of Reimbursement                                     19
                                                          20
Definitions
                                                          (*]

              COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL PLAN
                  SCHEDULE OF BENEFITS

Effective Date:   January 1, 1984
Eligible Class:   AIU.S. Salaried—Non-Bargaining Employ-
                  ees: U.S. Salaried Perkins Engines—
                  Non-Bargaining Employees; and US.
                  Salaried Pensioners, Survivors and LTD
                  claimants—Non-Bargaining.
Waiting Period:    31 days continuous active service, for new
                   hires and rehires.

Spouse:  For purposes of this plan—wife or husband while
         not divorced or legally separated from you.
 Dependent Children: Age Limit—end of calendar year in
                      which the dependent attains age 25.
                      Coverage for permanently disabled
                      unmarried children continues.
 COVERED BENEFITS
 Cash Deductible:
   Individual     $100 per Calendar Year
   Family         $200 per Calendar Year
      All covered family members may contribute to the family
      deductible.
 Coinsurance: 80% of eligible covered expenses with the
                 exception of those outlined below.
                             J.A.41

Out-Of-Pocket Maximum:
   Individual     $1,000 per Calendar Year
   Family         $2,000 per Calendar Year
      All covered family members may contribute to the out-
      of-pocket limit.
   (Note:   Coinsurance related to treatment received for ner-
            vous and mental disorders/alcoholism and drug
            abuse and any expenses incurred following expi-
            ration of the duration limits shown on Page 2 are
            not applied to the out-of-pocket maximum.)
Aggregate Lifetime Maximum:       $250,000.00 per covered indi-
                                  vidual   with   restoration    of
                                  up to $1,000.00 per calendar
                                  year.
Covered Expenses Paid at 100%:
   * Emergency Care for Accidental Injury or Life Threat-
     ening Illness
   °
     Second Surgical Opinion Only (Deductible Waived)—
     Mandatory for Listed Procedures
     Outpatient and Ambulatory Surgery (Charges for
     Approved Facility Only) —Mandatory for Listed Proce-
     dures
     Pre-/, imission Testing
  ° Extended Care Facility
  ° Home Health Care
  ° PAID Prescription Drug Coverage ($2.00 Deductible)
  ° Hearing Aid Benefit (Deductible Waived)

                                                                (*]
LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
   Maximum Daily Private or Semi-Private Room and Board
Rate will be considered at 100% of the hospital's charge for
the highest priced semi-private accommodations subject to
deductible and coinsurance. In other accommodations—will
be considered at 100% of the full charge made subject to
deductible and coinsurance.
                           J.A. 42

  Nervous and Mental Disorder and Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Limits—
  Coinsurance  — Outpatient    50%
               — Inpatient     80%
  Lifetime Maximum         $25,000
  Second Surgical Opinion—If a second opinion is not
obtained on Listed Procedures, the Plan will only pay 65% of
covered the surgical fee.
   Outpatient and Ambulatory Facility—If a listed Procedure
is performed on an inpatient basis room and board expenses
will not be paid, unless confinement is for an emergency or is
medically necessary.

  Duration Limits—
Inpatient Nervous and Mental Disorder/
  Alcoholism and Drug Abuse                90 Days per
                                            Calendar Year

Outpatient Nervous and Mental Disorder/
  Alcoholism and Drug Abuse             50 Visits per
                                         Calendar Year

Extended Care Facility                      120 Days per
                                             Period of
                                             Confinement or
                                             Calendar Year

 Home Health Care                           60 Visits at 4
                                             Hours per Visit

   Room and Board Charge for Weekend Admission (Friday
 afternoon through Sunday morning) for elective and/or non-
 emergency surgery will not be paid.

   Hearing Aid Benefit
      Audiometric Examination                     $30.00
      Hearing Aid Evaluation Test                 $30.00
      Hearing Aid, Including Mold                $275.00
                               J.A. 43

 (Note:    Benefits are available for each subsequent hearing aid
           once every three years.)
 THE RIGHT IS RESERVED BY THE PLAN ADMINIS-
 TRATOR  TO TERMINATE,   SUSPEND,  WITHDRAW.
 AMEND OR MODIFY THE PLAN IN WHOLE OR IN PART
 WITH RESPECT TO ANY CLASS OR CLASSES OF COV-
 ERED INDIVIDUALS AT ANY TIME.
                                                                [*]
              SATISFYING     THE CASH    DEDUCTIBLE

   The Cash Deductible is satisfied by incurring, while cov-
ered, medical expenses in excess—$100.00 Single—$200.00
Family.
   Only Covered Expenses incurred in a Calendar Year shall
be applied to satisfy the Cash Deductible for that year.


     REINSTATEMENT     OF AGGREGATE       MAXIMUM     BENEFIT

   On January | of each year, the amount of the benefits which
became payable in the past but which were not previously
reinstated shall be automatically restored by up to $1,000 but
in no event shall the aggregate maximum benefit exceed
$250,000.00.
                                                                [*]

               WHAT   ARE “COVERED       EXPENSES”

     The reasonable and customary charges made for any of the
following:

|.    Hospital Confinement
      (a) Board and room charges.
      (b) Charges for other services and supplies furnished by
          the hospital for use during confinement (but not for
          special nursing services or physicians’ services).
2.    Medical treatment or surgical procedure by a physician.
                               J.A. 44

3. Private duty nursing service by a registered or licensed
   nurse if the physician recommends such service, provided
   the nurse is not a member of the immediate family or
   household.
4.    Local use of ambulance.
5. Certain services and supplies:
           (i) prescription drugs and medicines through the
               PAID Prescription Plan.
          (ii) anesthetics and oxygen and their administration.
         (iii) rental of durable medical equipment, designed
               primarily for use in a hospital for therapeutic
               purposes.
          (iv) blood and blood plasma, and their administration,
               to the extent not replaced by donations.
           (v) braces, crutches, and prosthesis necessitated by
                injury or disease occurring while insured (not
                 including repair or maintenance).
          (vi)   x-ray examinations and laboratory tests.
         (vii)   physiotherapy.
 6.   Diagnosis and treatment of nervous and mental conditions
      by a psychologist, to the extent they would be covered if
      made by a psychiatrist.
                                                              [*]
 7.   Extended Care Facility
      Charges for the following services and supplies, if con-      ,




      finement is by means of direct transfer from a hospital in
      which the individual was confined for at least 3 days, and
      for the same condition that caused the hospital confine-      -

      ment.                                                         x

                                                                    ‘


      The following are extended care facility services and sup-
       plies:
            (i) board and room and nursing care (but not private-
                duty nurse or attendant).

                                                                    Bay
                                                                    SO
                                                                    ion
                                                                     es
                                                                     he
                                                                     ae
                                                                     Ae
                                                                     {
                            J.A. 45

     (11) physical therapy,       occupational   therapy   and
          speech therapy.
    (iii)    medical social service.
    (iv) biologicals, supplies, appliances and equipment
         ordinarily provided by the facility for care of
         patients.
     (v) medical care by an intern or resident-in-training
         of a hospital and other diagnostic and therapeu-
         tic services furnished to extended care facility
         patients by a hospital.
    (vi) other necessary services generally provided to
         patients by extended care facilities.
 Tubal legations and voluntary vasectomies. Reversals are
  not covered.
 Pre-Admission testing charges made by a hospital.
 Second surgical opinion on the need for undergoing non-
 urgent surgery.
 (a) If the second opinion differs from the initial opinion
     which recommends the surgery, the benefit will also
     be payable, if the person before undergoing the
     surgery, obtains a third opinion on the need for the
     surgery and this opinion is furnished by a physician
     not involved in either earlier opinion.
 (b) the benefit payable for a second or third Opinion, is
     an amount equal to the sum of the following charges,
     to the extent such charges are reasonable and cus-
     tomary:
    (i) the physician's charge for furnishing such opin-
        ion, and
   (11) charges incurred for necessary and ancillary tests
            undergone at the recommendation of the physi-
            cian furnishing such opinion.
                                                           (*]
(c) The surgical procedures for which a second surgical
    Opinion is required are:
                             J.A. 46

           (i) breast surgery;
          (il) cataract surgery;
         (ili) cholecystectomy;
          (iv) inguinal heriorraphy;
           (v) foot surgery;
          (vi) gastroectomy;
         (vil)   hemorrhoidectomy;
        (vill)   hip replacement;
          (ix) hysterectomy
           (x) knee surgery;
          (xi) prostatectomy;
         (xii) sinus operation;
        (xiii)   spinal surgery;
         (xiv)   submucous resection of the nasal septum;
          (xv)   tonsillectomy.
  A SECOND       OPINION   IS NOT   REQUIRED   FOR   EMERGENCY
SURGERY OR ANY SURGICAL PROCEDURE NOT LISTED.
                                                            [*]
11.   Outpatient and Ambulatory Surgical Facility Procedures
      as outlined below. If these specific procedures are not
      performed in the outpatient department of a hospital, or
      in an ambulatory surgical facility, the surgery will be     .

      reimbursed as a normal covered expense. However,
                                                                  -

                                                                  {
      Room and Board charges for those procedures performed       :
                                                                  ,


      in the hospital will not be a covered expense under the     ;
                                                                  rd

      Plan unless medical necessity requires hospital con-        é
      finement.
                                                                  ee
                                                                  po


      SCHEDULE OF OUTPATIENT AND
      AMBULATORY SURGICAL OPERATIONS
      OTOLARYNGOLOGY/AUDITORY           SYSTEM

       1. Treatment of closed or open nasal fracture without
          manipulation.
       2. Myringotomy including aspiration and/or eustachian
          tube inflation.
                          J.A. 47

       Tympanostomy (requiring insertion of ventilating
       tube), local or topical anesthesia; unilateral.
       Tympanostomy (requiring insertion of ventilating
       tube), local or topical anesthesia; bilateral.
      Tympanostomy (requiring insertion of ventilating
      tube), general anesthesia; uni/ateral.
      Tympanostomy (requiring insertion of ventilating
      tube), general anesthesia; bilateral.

GENERAL     SURGERY/INTEGUMENTARY              SYSTEM
  A   Biopsy of skin, subcutaneous tissue and/or mucous
      membrane (including simple closure), unless other-
      wise listed (separate procedure); one lesion.
      Biopsy of skin, each additional lesion.
      Excision of nail and nail matrix, partial or complete
      (eg, ingrown or deformed nail), for permanent
      removal.

                                                            [*]
10.   Repair of superficial wounds.
1.    Biopsy of breast; needle (separate procedure).
12.   Biopsy of breast; incisional.

GENERAL     SURGERY/DIGESTIVE         SYSTEM
13.   Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, diagnostic.
14.   Esophagogastroduodenoscopy;         with    removal   of
      polyp(s).
15.   Proctosigmoidoscopy;    diagnostic (separate proce-
      dure).
16.   Proctosigmoidoscopy;     with    removal   of polyp   or
      papilloma
17.   Sigmoidoscopy, flexible fiberoptic; diagnostic.
                         J.A. 48

       Sigmoidoscopy, flexible fiberoptic, with removal of
       polyp(s).
19.    Surgical removal of impacted teeth.
20.    Repair of inguinal hernia, under age 5 years, with or
       without hydrodelectomy; unilateral.
21.    Repair of inguinal hernia, under age 5 years, with or
       without hydrodelectomy; bilateral.

GYNECOLOGY/FEMALE          GENITAL SYSTEM

22.    Biopsy, single or multiple, or local excision of
       lesion, with or without fulguration (separate proce-
       dure).
       Biopsy of cervix, with or with D&C.
       Dilation and curettage, diagnostic and/or therapeutic.
       Legal (therapeutic) abortion, completed with D&C
       and/or vacuum extraction.
       Laparoscopy for visualization of pelvic viscera.
       Laparoscopy for visualization of pelvic viscera; with
       fulguration of oviducts.
                                                               [*]
 NEUROSURGERY/NERVOUS              SYSTEM

 28.    Excision, benign tumor; subcutaneous.
 29.    Neurolysis and/or transposition;      median   nerve    at
        carpal tunnel.
 ORTHOPEDICS/MUSCULOSKELETAL                SYSTEM

 30.    Excision of nail and nail matrix, partial or complete
        (eg, ingrown or deformed nail) for permanent
        removal.
 31.    Reconstruction of nail bed; simple.
 32.    Reconstruction of nail bed; complicated.
                             J.A. 49

 33.    Excision of ganglion, wrist (dorsal or volar): pri-
        mary.
 34.   Tendon sheath incision for trigger finger.
 35.   Tenotomy, subcutaneous, single, each digit.
 36.    Arthrotomy with exploration, drainage or removal of
        loose or foreign body; metacarpophalangeal joint.
 37.   Arthrotomy with exploration, drainage or removal of
       loose or foreign body; interphalangeal joint.
 38.   Excision of lesion of tendon sheath or capsule (eg,
       cyst or ganglion).
39.    Tenotomy, flexor, single, finger, open, each.
40.    Arthroscopy, knee, diagnostic (separate procedure)
4}.    Arthroscopy, knee, surgical with synovial biopsy.
42.    Arthroscopy, knee, surgical, with removal          of loose
       body.
43.    Excision of Morton neuroma, single.
44.    Tenotomy, open, extensor, foot or toe.
45.    Hammertoe operation; one toe (eg, interphalangeal
       fusion, filleting, phalangectomy).

                                                               [*]
46.    Hallux valgus (bunion) correction, with or without
       sesamoidectomy; simple exostectomy (Silver type
       procedure).
47.    Fractures (Colles’ type upper extremities, toes, fin-
       gers, clavicular fractures, lower extremities, ankle or
       foot bones, fibula).
UROLOGY/URINARY           SYSTEM

48.    Cystourethroscopy
49.    Cystourethroscopy, with calibration and/or dilation
       of urethral   stricture   or stenosis,   with   or without
                          J.A. 50

        meatotomy and injection procedure for cystography,
        male or female, hospital.
50.     Meatotomy, cutting of meatus (separate procedure),
        except infant.
51.     Meatotomy, cutting of meatus (separate procedure),
        infant.
$2.     Dilation of urethral stricture by passage of sound,
        male; initial.
$3.     Dilation of urethral stricture by passage of sound,
        male; subsequent.
$4.     Dilation of urethral stricture by passage of filiform
        and follower, male; initial.
55.     Dilation of urethral stricture by passage of filiform
        and follower, male; subsequent.
56.     Dilation of female urethra including suppository
        and/or instillation; initial.
 57.    Dilation of female urethra including      suppository
        and/or instillation; subsequent.
 58.     Vasectomy, unilateral or bilateral (separate proce-
         dure) including postoperative semen examination(s).

 ENDOSCOPY
 59.     Bronchoscopy; diagnostic, rigid bronchoscope.
 60.     Bronchoscopy; diagnostic, fiberoptic bronchoscope
         (flexible).

 61.     Bronchoscopy; with biopsy, rigid bronchoscope.
 62.     Bronchoscopy; with biopsy, fiberoptic bronchoscope
         (flexible).
 63.     Proctosigmoidoscopy; diagnostic (separate proce-
         dure) and minor operative procedures.
  64.    Sigmoidoscopy, flexible fiberoptic; diagnostic and
         minor operative procedures.
                         J.A. 51

65.   Colonscopy, fiberoptic, beyond 25 cm to splenic
      flexure; diagnostic procedure and minor operative
      procedures.
66.   Colonscopy, fiberoptic, beyond splenic flexure; diag-
      nostic procedure and minor operative procedures.

                                                         [*]
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
67.   Excision, nasal polyp(s); extensive, unilateral.
68.   Excision, nasal polyp(s); extensive, bilateral.
69.   Bronchoscopy; diagnostic, rigid bronchoscope.
70.   Bronchoscopy; diagnostic, fiberoptic bronchoscope
      (flexible).
71.   Bronchoscopy; with biopsy, rigid bronchoscope.
72.   Bronchoscopy; with biopsy, fiberoptic bronchoscope
      (flexible).
 Home Health Care benefits by a home health agency or
 certified rehabilitation agency for Covered Home Health
 Services (excluding custodial or housekeeping care).
   The maximum weekly benefit shall not exceed the usual
and customary weekly cost for care in an extended care
facility and benefits shall not be payable for more than 60
visits during any period of 12 consecutive months. A visit
under this plan shall be limited to 4 hours in a 24-hour
period. The term “home care” means care and treatment of
a covered individual under a plan of care established,
approved in writing and reviewed at least every 2 months
by the attending physician, unless the attending physi-
cian determines that a longer interval between reviews is
sufficient.
   The term “Covered Home Health Services” means the
items and services listed below, but only if the attending
physician certifies that:
                    J.A. 52

 (i) Hospitalization or confinement in a skilled nurs-
     ing facility would otherwise be required.
(ii) Necessary care and treatment are not available
     from members of the covered individual's imme-
     diate family or other persons residing with the
     covered individual’s immediate family or other
     persons residing with the covered individual
     without causing undue hardship.
(iii) The home care services shall be provided or
      coordinated by a state-licensed or medicare-
      certified home health agency or certified reha-
      bilitation agency.
List of Covered Home Health Care Items
   Part-time or intermittent home nursing care by or
under the supervision of a Registered Nurse or a
Licensed Practical Nurse (L.P.N.). (In Texas, the Plan
will cover service by a R.N. or Licensed Vocational
Nurse, L.V.N.)
   Part-time or intermittent home health aide services
which are medically necessary as part of the home care
plan, under the supervision of a registered nurse or
medical social worker, which consist solely of caring
for the patient.
                                                    [*]
Physical, respiratory, occupational or speech therapy.
   Medical supplies, drugs and medications prescribed
by a physician and laboratory services by or on behalf
of a hospital, to the extent such items would be covered
under the plan if the individual had been hospitalized.
   Nutrition counseling provided by or under the super-
vision of a registered dietician where such services are
medically necessary.
   The evaluation of the need for and development of a
program, by a registered nurse, physical extender or
medical social worker, for home care when approved or
requested by the attending physician.
                              J.A. 53

           Any of the foregoing items and services which are
        provided on an outpatient basis, under arrangements
        made by the home health agency because the items and
        services cannot be made readily available to the indi-
        vidual at home, not including transportation of the indi-
        vidual to use the outpatient facilities.
  Excluding, however, any item or service if it would not be
included as an inpatient hospital service under Medicare if
furnished to an inpatient of a hospital.
13.   Hearing aids prescribed and based on the most recent
      audiometric examination, and hearing aid evaluations
      performed by a physician audiologist.
      Pap smears and routine pregnancy tests, including lab-
      Oratory and physician's charges.
      Confinement in private room because of medically nec-
      essary quarantine.
16.   Initial emergency care by physicians (not including
      surgery) and hospitals for treatment of accidental injury
      or life threatening illness.
                                                              [*]
                          EXCLUSIONS

  “Covered Expenses” does not include charges for or in con-
nection with the following:
      General health examination, or eye examinations for
      astigmatism, myopia or hyperopia. (Please refer to
      Vision Care Plan.)
      Fitting or cost of eye glasses or hearing aids, except as a
      result of injury while covered. (Please refer to Vision
      Care Plan.)
      The prevention or correction of teeth irregularities and
      malocclusion of jaws by wire appliances, braces or other
      mechanical aids, or any other care, repair, removal,
      replacement, or treatment of the teeth, or surrounding
                        J.A. 54

  tissues, except, (a) when necessitated by damage to
  sound natural teeth or surrounding tissues as a result of
  an injury which occurs while the employee or dependent,
  as the case may be, is covered under this benefit, or (b)
  for the excision of impacted unerupted teeth or of a
  tumor or cyst, or incision and drainage of an abscess or
  cyst, or (c) for any other oral surgical procedure not
  involving any tooth structure, alveloar process, or gin-
  gival tissues.
. Transportation or travel other than local use of ambu-
  lance.

  Injury or disease resulting from war or any act of
  war, whether declared or undeclared, occurring while
  covered.
. Cosmetic Surgery or Treatment except when necessitated
  by an accidental bodily injury occurring while the
  employee or dependent is covered.
  Injury, disease or pregnancy which existed before
  becoming covered under the Plan unless the charge is for
  an item received after you (or your Dependent), as the
  case may be, (a) had been without medical care or treat-
  ment, and had not consulted a physician, for such injury,
  disease or pregnancy for 90 days of continuous employ-
  ment, provided the 90-day period ended on or after the
  date you (or your Dependent) became covered or (b) had
  completed 12 consecutive months of being covered under
  this Plan, or with respect to charges incurred by you on
  your own account, unless the charge is for an item
  received after you complete 6 consecutive months of
  being both covered under this Plan and actively at work.
  (This exclusion is waived if you or your dependent were
  covered under the plan in effect on December 31, 1983
  and for a child who became covered on or prior to 15
  days of age.)
  Any item received after the Aggregate Lifetime Maxi-
  mum Benefit is exhausted and before reinstatement of
  that benefit.
                                  J.A. 55

                                                                  [*]
       9. The calculation of benefits shall not
                                                 include or be based
          on any charges for hospital confinement,
                                                       or any exami-
          nation, or any surgical, medical or other
                                                    treatment or any
          service or supply,
          (a) furnished without recommendation and
                                                     approval of a
              physician acting within the scope of his
                                                       license;
          (b) not medically necessary to the care
                                                   and treatment of
              any injury, disease, or pregnancy; except
                                                          that hos-
              pital charges for confinement of a new-
                                                        born child
              while the mother is in the same hospital
                                                       shall not be
              excluded;
         (c) furnished in connection with an occu
                                                  pational injury
             or disease;
         (d) furnished by any government or divi
                                                  sion thereof,
             except a program for civilian employees of
                                                        a gov-
             ernment;
         (e) if the charge would not have been made
                                                      in absence
             of benefits or which you are not legally
                                                       obligated
             to pay;
         (f) to the extent the Employer is prohibit
                                                    ed by law or
             regulation from providing benefits for the
                                                        charge.
 10.    Charges for hearing aids ordered whil
                                                e covered but
        delivered more than 60 days after term
                                               ination of cov-
        erage.
11.     Charges for hearing aids which are lost or
                                                   broken unless
        at time of replacement 3 or more years have
                                                     lapsed since
        benefits were last paid by the Plan.

PRE-DETERMINATION          OF BENEFITS
    If, before you agree to undergo a recomm
                                              ended surgical
procedure, you wish to obtain a pre-dete
                                            rmination of the
plan’s surgical benefit you should obtain
                                          a Pre-Surgical Ben-
efit Determination Form from your employer
                                              for you and your
                           J.A. 56

physician to complete. Upon receipt of the form the Claim
Processor will pre-determine the benefit and return a copy of
the form to you.
                                                           [*]
COORDINATION     OF BENEFITS

  When benefits would be payable under more than one
Group Plan, benefits under those Plans will be coordinated as
follows:
    A plan with no provision for coordination of other bene-
    fits will be considered to pay its benefits before a plan
    which contains such a provision.
    A plan which covers a person other than as a dependent
    will be considered to pay its benefits before a plan which
    covers the individual as a dependent.
    The benefits of a plan which covers the person on whose
    expenses claim is based as a dependent of a male person
    shall be determined before the benefits of a plan which
    covers such person as a dependent of a female person
    except that in the case of person for whom claim is made
    on a dependent child,
    (a) when the parents are separated or divorced and the
        parent with custody of the child has not remarried, the
        benefits of a plan which covers the child as a depen-
        dent of the parent with custody of the child will be
        determined before the benefits of a plan which covers
        the child as a dependent of the parent without custody,
    (b) when the parents are divorced and the parent with cus-
        tody of the child has remarried, the benefits of a plan
        which covers the child as a dependent of the parent
        with custody shall be determined before the benefits
        of a plan which covers that child as a dependent of the
        step-parent, and the benefits of a plan which covers
        that child as a dependent of the step-parent to whom
        the parent with the custody of the child is currently
        married will be determined before the benefits of a
                                J.A. 57

          plan which covers that child as a dependent of the par-
          ent without custody
      Notwithstanding (a) and (b) above, if there is a court
      decree which would otherwise establish financial respon-
      sibility for the medical, dental or other health care
      expenses with respect to the child, the benefits of a plan
      which covers the child as a dependent of the parent with
      such financial responsibility shall be determined before
      the benefits of any other plan which covers the child as a
      dependent child.
4.    Where I, 2 and 3 above do not establish the order of pay-
      ment, the plan under which the person has been covered
      for the longer period of time will be considered to pay its
      benefits before the other.
                                                              [*]
               HOw   BENEFITS     BECOME   PAYABLE

     If you (or your Dependent), while covered, incur Covered
Expenses as a result of a nonoccupational injury, or a nonoc-
cupational disease or; a female employee (or a dependent
wife) while covered incur covered expenses as a result of
pregnancy; and the covered expenses exceed the deductible
amount in a calendar year benefits become payable.

                     HOw   MUCH    Is PAYABLE

   After the deductibles are satisfied, 80% of covered charges
will be paid. You are responsible for any remaining balance.
The deductibles and coinsurance are limited to $1,000.00—
Single, and $2,200.00—Family in a calendar year, after which
the Plan pays 100% of Covered Expenses incurred during the
remainder of that calendar year.

                       WHO   Is ELIGIBLE

  All individuals participating in the Plan which was in effect
on December 31, 1983, continue to participate in the Plan
which becomes effective January |, 1984.
                            J.A. 58

  New employees and their eligible dependents, rehired
employees and their eligible dependents become eligible after
satisfying the appropriate waiting period.

                 How To BECOME COVERED

  Individuals participating in the Plan on December 31, 1983,
may change their status under the Plan if:
     °
         there is a change in martial status;
     °
         there is a change in employment status of the
         employee or employee's spouse;
         if the status of an employee with single coverage is
         changed by the addition of an eligible dependent.
  Applications must be made within 30 days of the above
change.
                                                            [*]
   Employees not participating in the Plan on December 31,
1983, and employees who elected Single coverage, may apply
for enrollment in the Plan or change their status at any time
during the period December |, 1983 through December 31,
1984, with coverage commencing on January 1, 1985.
   Employees not participating in the Plan on December 31,
1983, may re-enroll in the Plan prior to January |, 1985, if:
     °
         there is a change in marital status;
     °
         there is a change in employment        status   of the
         employee or employee's spouse;
     °
         they acquire an eligible dependent.
   Application must be made within 30 days of the above
change.
   New hires and rehires must apply for coverage by complet-
ing the appropriate forms within 30 days of becoming
eligible.
   Employees who are not participating in the Plan on Decem-
ber 31, 1983, who do not elect to apply for re-enrollment
prior to January 1, 1985, and new hires and rehires who do
                               J.A. 59

 not elect coverage within 30 days of becoming eligible may
 enroll in the Plan if:
       °
           there is a change in marital status:
       °
           there is a change in employment           status   of the
           employee or employee's spouse;
       °
           they acquire an eligible dependent.
  Application     must be made within 30 days of the above
change.

                WHEN   Do BENEFITS       TERMINATE

   Coverage under the Plan terminates on the date you cease
active work with your Employer. Exceptions to this are:
            (i) sickness or injury where coverage continues
                indefinitely.
           (ii) Leave of Absence—the employee has the option
                to continue the coverage by paying the appro-
                priate group rate.
                                                                 [*]
      WHEN    Do BENEFITS   OF A DEPENDENT        TERMINATE

(1)   The date your coverage terminates.
(2)   On the date the dependent ceases to qualify as a depen-
      dent.


                   EXTENSION    OF BENEFITS

   If you or your Dependent are wholly disabled on the date
coverage under this Plan is terminated, and if charges are
incurred as a result of that disabling condition within | year
after termination and during the continuance of that disabil-
ity, the benefits shall be payable for the charges so incurred
that would have been payable if incurred while covered.
                            J.A. 60

       MODIFICATION OF PROVISION FOR PERSONS
           ENTITLED TO MEDICARE BENEFITS

   Active employees, age 65 to 69, and spouses of active
employees, age 65 to 69, who elect in writing to be covered
under the Company’s Plan will not have benefits under this
Plan reduced or eliminated by any benefits provided by Medi-
care.
   Each other person who is covered by Medicare under the
Social Security Act will be considered to have full Medicare
coverage. (The term “full Medicare coverage” means cover-
age for all of the benefits provided under Medicare, including
benefits made available on an optional basis, whether or not
the person is enrolled in all portions of Medicare for which he
is eligible.)
   Any limitation or exclusion contained herein with respect
to services or items furnished by or through a government or
agency thereof, shall not apply to any services or items for
which benefits are provided under Medicare.
                                                            {*]
                 RIGHT OF REIMBURSEMENT

  In the event benefits are paid for charges incurred by an
employee as a result of accidental bodily injury or sickness
sustained by such employee or any eligible dependents,
    (1) The employee shall reimburse the Employer to the
        extent of such benefit payments (a) out of any recov-
        ery by the employee (whether by settlement, judg-
        ment, or otherwise) from any person or organization
        responsible for causing such injury or sickness, or
        from their insurers, and the Employer shall have a lien
        upon any such recovery, or (b) if the eligible depen-
        dent recovers from the person or organization respon-
        sible for causing such injury or sickness, or recovers
        from their insurers, but in no event shall such
        employee be required to make reimbursement in an
        amount exceeding the recovery made from the person
                             J.A. 61

        or Organization responsible for causing the injury or
        sickness, or made from their insurers.
    (2) The employee or dependent shall execute and deliver
        such instruments and papers as may be required by the
        plan and do whatever else is necessary to secure the
        rights of the plan under (1) above.
  It is agreed that the Employer shall have no obligation
under this plan to recover such reimbursement from an
employee.
                                                              {*]
                         DEFINITIONS

   “Full-time employee” means only an employee who works
at least 40 hours per wee<.
   “Physician” means a person who is duly licensed (1) to pre-
scribe and administer any drugs, or (2) to perform surgical
procedures.
   “Hospital” means only a licensed hospital which with
respect only to the treatment of alcoholism and drug abuse,
shall also mean a treatment or residential facility, or a clinic,
licensed or approved for the purposes of such treatment. This
does not include a hotel, rest home, nursing home, conva-
lescent home, place for custodial care or home for the aged.
   “Reasonable and Customary”—Refers to the general level
of charges being made by others of similar standing in the
locality where the charge is incurred, when furnishing like or
comparable treatment, services or supplies to individuals for
a similar disease or injury.
   “Medically Necessary” means medical treatment which fol-
lows good n._dical practice; is required for the wellbeing of
the patient and is prescribed by qualified medical profes-
sionals.
   “Pre-Admission Testing” means those laboratory tests
and/or x-ray examinations which are normally required prior
to inpatient surgery or medical treatment for either surgery or
medical treatment which is to commence       within seven days
subsequent to the testing.
                            J.A. 62

    “Second Surgical Opinion” means that when a person
receives a physician's opinion recommending non-urgent
surgery, and before undergoing the recommended surgery, that
person obtains a second opinion on the need for such surgery
furnished by another physician. The term “non-urgent
surgery” refers to surgery which can be postponed without
undue risk.
   “Home Health Agency” means a licensed public agency or
private organization which engages primarily in providing
skilled nursing and other therapeutic services under the direc-
tion of a physician for care and treatment of injury or disease.
                           J.A. 63

        MEMORANDUM FROM W. ZINKEWICH.
              DATED APRIL 24, 1986
                (TRIAL EXHIBIT 47)


                          IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CiviL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES HOWE, ROBERT WELLS, RALPH W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DorRIS
   GUIDICESS!I, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                                  Plaintiffs,



  VARITY   CORPORATION    and MASSEY-FERGUSON,       INC..,

                                                Defendants.
                           J.A. 64

      MASSEY-FERGUSON     INTERNAL CORRESPONDENCE

From:      WW Zinkewich        se              Date:   86-04-24
To:        N D Arnold                          Copy:
           Keith Robson
           W Ostapchuk
                          Reference:   Wzink     /860424/0159

SUBJECT: SUNSHINE—MCC        OFFERS OF EMPLOYMENT
                                            (CONFIDENTIAL)

INFORMATION     PASSED ALONG TO YOU:

  YOU SHOULD RECOGNIZE THAT THE AGREEMENTS CALL
FOR MF TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL TERMINATION COSTS
OF EMPLOYEES WHO DECLINE ACCEPTANCE OF THE MCC
OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT. MCC OBVIOUSLY WOULD LIKE ALL
EMPLOYEES TO SIGN UP, BUT AS YOU ARE LIKELY AWARE,
THERE COULD BE MANY EMPLOYEES WHO COULD BE QUITE
SKEPTICAL. THEREFORE, I RECOMMEND THAT MF ASSIGNS
URGENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THIS PROBLEM. AREAS OF
CONCERN ARE WITH FOREMEN ASSOCIATION (INFORMAL
UNION)   WHERE   ALL COULD   REFUSE  TO SIGN. BILL
ZINKEWICH
      FROM:     JB WELLMAN             DATE: 86-04-24, 00:32
         To:    E M ARUNDELL

COPIES:   IPORT    WZINK  DAELL    RDGAR-  EDL
          GGAMB    RHAR-   PWPITT
PRINT HARDCOPY FOR SUSAN FREMES—F RASER & BEATTY

  IN CONFIRMATION OF OUR CONVERSATION EARLIER THIS
WEEK—THE     LOGISTICS OF OFFERING EMPLOYMENT TO
EMPLOYEES WHO ARE TO BE TRANSFERRED TO MCC AT
FIRST SEEMED RELATIVELY SIMPLE. HOWEVER AS WE GET
CLOSER TO ACTUALLY MAKING THE OFFERS SOME PROB-
LEMS RELATED TO REPRESENTING BOTH MF AND MCC ARE
ARISING. I BELIEVE IT ESSENTIAL FOR MF TO DESIGNATE A
REPRESENTATIVE TO WHOM QUESTIONS WHICH RELATE TO
WHAT MF WILL DO IF THE EMPLOYEES DECLINE EMPLOY-
MENT WITH MCC CAN BE REFERRED. GARY GAMBACORT,
                          J.A. 65

AN MCC EMPLOYEE, WHO HAS BEEN DESIGNATED AS THE
CONTACT FOR EMPLOYEE QUESTIONS CANNOT RESPOND ON
MF’S BEHALF TO QUESTIONS LIKE
  “IF | REFUSE EMPLOYMENT WITH MCC, FOR ANY REA-
SON:
                                                      [*]
      —   HOW LONG WILL IT BE BEFORE I AM RELIEVED OF
          MY DUTIES AND OFF THE PAYROLL?
      —   WILL I QUALIFY FOR THE USUAL SEVERANCE BEN-
          EFITS, 1.E. SEVERENCE PAY BASED ON LONGEVITY,
          EARNED VACATION PAY?
      —   CAN    I RETRIEVE    MY CONTRIBUTED    PENSION
          FUNDS?
      —   WHAT     WOULD    MY   STATUS BE: TERMINATED,
          ACTIVE, ON PAYROLL, OR ON LAYOFF?
  IF | AM PRESENTLY ELIGIBLE AS AN MF EMPLOYEE TO
RETIRE NOW, DO I HAVE THAT ALTERNATIVE TO ACCEPTING
MCC   EMPLOYMENT?
  THEY ARE ACTUAL EMPLOYEE QUESTIONS WHICH WERE
PASSED ONTO US. MANY OF THESE EMPLOYEES WILL INSIST
ON KNOWING WHAT MF HAS PLANNED FOR THEM BEFORE
THEY WILL BE PREPARED TO COMMIT TO AN OFFER OF
EMPLOYMENT WITH MCC.
  IT is TO MF’S ADVANTAGE TO HAVE ALL EMPLOYEES DES-
IGNATED AS TRANSFERS TO MCC ACCEPT EMPLOYMENT
WITH MCC. THE OPPOSITE IS LIKELY TRUE FOR MCC’s
POINT OF VIEW. IT THEREFORE, APPEARS THAT IT WOULD BE
A CONFLICT OF INTEREST FOR AN MCC EMPLOYEE TO
RESPOND ON BEHALF OF MF. IT APPEARS THAT THERE
NEEDS TO BE A CLEAR SPLIT OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS
AREA AND WITH CLOSING SCHEDULED FOR NEXT WEEK THE
ISSUE HAS TO BE ADDRESSED URGENTLY.
  IT IS ALSO NECESSARY TO REACH A CONSENSUS ON WHAT
CONSTITUTES ACCEPTANCE OF EMPLOYMENT WITH MCC IN
THE CASE OF AN ACTIVE SALARIED EMPLOYEE PRIOR TO
CLOSING.
                          J.A. 66

         COMMENTS   ON   THE   ABOVE   WOULD   BE APPRECI-
  YOUR
ATED.

 REGARDS
 JiLL WELLMAN
                            J.A. 67

     SIDE-BY-SIDE COMPARISON OF BENEFITS
   (EXCERPT FROM COMPOSITE TRIAL EXHIBIT “A”)

                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CiviL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similariy situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DorRIS
   GUIDICESS!, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                  Plaintiffs,




  VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON,     INC.,

                                                 Defendants.
                             J.A. 68

     LETTERHEAD OF                      MASSEY COMBINES
    MASSEY FERGUSON                        CORPORATION

  Employee Benefit                     Employee Benefit
  Program U.S.                         Program U.S.
  Salaried Employees                   Salaried Employees
   In addition to regular com-       In addition to regular com-
pensation, a salaried employee    pensation, a salaried employee
is eligible for the coverage      is eligible for the coverage
under an extensive benefit        under an extensive benefit
program provided by the           program provided by the
Company. The following is a       Company. The following is a
brief summary of the major        brief summary of the major
benefits.                         benefits.

Life Insurance                    Life Insurance
   Employees are protected           Employees are protected
under a basic group life insur-   under a basic group life insur-
ance plan entirely paid for by    ance plan entirely paid for by
the Company. Employees are        the Company. Employees are
covered by insurance equal        covered by insurance equal
to one year’s earnings (bi-       to one year’s earnings (bi-
weekly base salary x 26) with     weekly base salary x 26) with
additional coverage for eligi-    additional coverage for eligi-
ble commissions and bonuses.      ble commissions and bonuses.
   In addition, employees may         In addition, employees may
purchase up to two times          purchase up to two times
annual salary in additional       annual salary in additional
coverage by paying the appro-     coverage by paying the appro-
priate premium.                   priate premium.
   There is also an accidental        There is also an accidental
death provision which pro-        death provision which pro-
vides additional insurance of     vides additional insurance of
two and a half times annual       two and a half times annual
salary of $50,000, whichever      salary of $50,000, whichever
is greater.                        is greater.
                             J.A. 69

Health Benefit Plan               Health Benefit Plan
  Subject  to a monthly             Subject  to   a monthly
employee contribution of          employee contribution of
  $30.00—Single                        $30.00—Single
  $60.00—Family                        $60.00—Family
the Company offers a 5 part       the Company offers a 5 part
benefit plan which is subject     benefit plan which is subject
to a 31 day waiting period.       to a 31 day waiting period.
  —Comprehensive Major                 —Comprehensive Major
    Medical Plan                         Medical Plan
  —Prescription Drug Plan              —Prescription Drug Plan
  —Dental Plan                         —Dental Plan
  —Vision Care                         —Vision Care
  —Hearing Aid                         —Hearing Aid
1. Comprehensive Major            1. Comprehensive Major
   Medical Plan                        Medical Plan
  This plan is subject to cash         This plan is subject to cash
  deductibles    of $100   per         deductibles of $100 per
 individual or $200 per fam-           individual or $200 per fam-
 ily. After the deductibles            ily. After the deductibles
 are satisfied, 80% of cov-            are satisfied, 80% of cov-
 ered charges are paid under           ered charges are paid under
 the plan, subject to annual           the plan, subject to annual
 out-of-pocket maximums                out-of-pocket    maximums
 of an additional $750 per             of an additional $750 per
 individual     or $1500   per         individual   or $1500    per
 family. There is a lifetime           family. There is a lifetime
 maximum of $250,000 per               maximum of $250,000 per
 covered    individual. The            covered individual. The
 coverage, which is subject            coverage, which is subject
 to a pre-existing condition           to a pre-existing condition
 provision, includes:                  provision, includes:
 Hospital Benefits: Hospital           Hospital Benefits: Hospital
 board and room charges are            board and room charges are
 paid up to the semi-private           paid up to the semi-private
 rate. Miscellaneous hospi-            rate. Miscellaneous hospi-
                          J.A. 70

tal expenses while con-             tal expenses while con-
fined are also provided.            fined are also provided.
Surgical Benefits: Paid on          Surgical Benefits: Paid on
the basis of the reasonable         the basis of the reasonable
and customary charges for           and customary charges for
the particular surgical pro-        the particular surgical pro-
cedure. There is a man-             cedure. There is a man-
datory    second    surgical        datory    second    surgical
opinion provision for a             opinion provision for a
specified list of proce-            specified list of proce-
dures.                              dures.
Medical Benefits: In-hos-           Medical Benefits: \n-hos-
pital medical is paid on the        pital medical is paid on the
basis of reasonable and             basis of reasonable and
customary charges.                  customary charges.
Diagnostic Benefits: Diag-          Diagnostic Benefits: Diag-
nostic x-ray and laboratory         nostic x-ray and laboratory
expenses will be paid on            expenses will be paid on
the basis of reasonable and         the basis of reasonable and
customary charges for such          customary charges for such
services.                           services.
Maternity    Benefits: The          Maternity    Benefits: The
Company pays the reason-            Company pays the reason-
able and customary fees             able and customary fees
for prenatal and postnatal          for prenatal and postnatal
care and for delivery, nor-         care and for delivery, nor-
mal baby expenses (exclud-          mal baby expenses (exclud-
ing well-baby care), and the        ing well-baby care), and the
mother’s hospital expenses.         mother’s hospital expenses.
                                                             [*]
. Prescription Drugs                . Prescription Drugs
 This prepaid plan covers            This prepaid plan covers
 the cost of eligible drugs          the cost of eligible drugs
 subject to a $2.00 deduct-          subject to a $2.00 deduct-
                              J.A. 71

   ible per    prescription   or        ible per       prescription        or
   refill.                              refill.
3. Dental Benefits:                3. Dental Benefits:
   Subject to certain limita-           Subject to certain limita-
   tions and co-insurance pro-          tions and co-insurance pro-
   visions, dental     benefits         visions, dental benefits will
   will be paid in an amount            be paid in an amount based
   based on the reasonable              on the reasonable and cus-
   and customary charge for             tomary charge for the den-
   the dental service, includ-          tal    service,    including
   ing preventive restorative,          preventive              restorative,
   prosthodontics and ortho-            prosthodontics and            ortho-
   dontic treatment.                    dontic treatment.
4. Vision Care Benefits            4. Vision Care Benefits
  Subject to a schedule and             Subject to a schedule and
  certain limitations, vision           certain     limitations,     vision
  care benefits provide cov-            care benefits provide cov-
  erage for examinations,               erage   for examinations,
  lenses and frames every 24            lenses and frames every 24
  months.                               months.

5. Hearing Aid Benefits            5. Hearing Aid Benefits
  Subject to a schedule and             Subject to a schedule and
  certain limitations, this plan        certain limitations, this plan
  provides coverage for audio-          provides coverage for audio-
  metric examinations, hear-            metric examinations, hear-
  ing aid evaluation tests and          ing aid evaluation tests and
  one hearing aid once in 36            one hearing aid once in 36
  months when the need is               months when the need is
  indicated.                            indicated.
Dependent’s Benefits               Dependent's Benefits
   An employee's dependents             An employee’s dependents
may be covered subject to          may be covered subject to sat-
satisfying eligibility require-    isfying        eligibility      require-
ments.                             ments.
                             J.A. 72

Disability Benefit Plan            Disability Benefit Plan
  The purpose of this plan is        The purpose of this plan is
to provide short and long          to provide short and long
term disability benefits to        term disability benefits to
employees who become dis-          employees who become dis-
abled as the result of bodily      abled as the result of bodily
injury or illness.                 injury or illness.

Tuition Aid                        Tuition Aid

  The Company encourages             The Company encourages
employees to continue their        employees to continue their
education and training by          education and training by
taking   advantage  of the         taking advantage    of the
Tuition Aid Program which          Tuition Aid Program which
reimburses 80% of tuition          reimburses 80% of tuition
fees   (excluding   books)   for   fees (excluding books) for
approved courses.                  approved courses.

Vacations                          Vacations

   Employees become eligi-            Employees become eligi-
ble for 10 days vacation after     ble for 10 days vacation after
12 months of continuous            12 months of continuous
employment. This increases         employment. This increases
to 15 days in the third year,      to 15 days in the third year,
20 days in the tenth year and      20 days in the tenth year and
25 days in the twentieth year      25 days in the twentieth year
of service.                        of service.

Holidays                           Holidays
  Ten days are observed dur-         Ten days are observed dur-
ing the year: New Year's           ing the year: New Year's
Day, Good Friday, Memorial         Day, Good Friday, Memorial
Day,   Independence     Day,       Day,   Independence     Day,
Labor   Day, Thanksgiving          Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, Day after Thanksgiving,       Day, Day after Thanksgiving,
Christmas Eve Day, Christ-         Christmas Eve Day, Christ-
mas Day, and New Year's            mas Day, and New Year's
                            J.A. 73

Eve Day. In addition, extra      Eve Day. In addition, extra
days are usually provided        days are usually provided
during the Christmas shut-       during the Christmas             shut-
down period.                     down period.
Pensions                         Pensions

   The Company’s Pension           The Company’s Pension
Plan provides for normal         Plan provides for normal
retirement at age 65, and        retirement      at   age   65,    and
optional    retirement    upon   optional  retirement upon
completion of 30 years of        completion of 30 years of
credited    service.   Pension   credited       service.    Pension
benefits are 100% vested         benefits are 100% vested
after 10 years service. Ser-     after 10 years service. Ser-
vice for pension purposes        vice for pension purposes
begins on the date of hire.      begins on the date of hire.
   The Company pays the full        The Company pays the full
cost of the Pension Plan.        cost of the Pension Plan.
Savings Plan                     Savings Plan
   The Savings Plan provides        The Savings Plan provides
for matched contributions up     for matched contributions up
to a maximum of 6% of regu-      to a maximum of 6% of reg-
lar   compensation   with   an   ular compensation with an
additional 6% in supplemen-      additional 6% in supplemen-
tal savings.                     tal savings.
                            J.A. 74

        MASSEY COMBINES CORPORATION
           QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
   (EXCERPT FROM COMPOSITE TRIAL EXHIBIT “A”)


                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   Civit No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DORIS
   GUIDICESS!, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                  Plaintiffs,
                             —Y   —



  VARITY    CORPORATION     and MASSEY-FERGUSON,     INC.,

                                                 Defendants.
                             J.A. 75

 LETTERHEAD     OF MASSEY COMBINES CORPORATION
 225 Henry Street    ° Brantford, Ontario   ° N3T SMI
   The following are questions and answers which have been
prepared in 2 ticipation of many concerns that we, as Massey-
Ferguson Industries Limited employees, may have in making
the decision to accept the offer of employment from the
Massey Combines Corporation. They are not intended to
answer all questions which you may have but simply address
some of the most obvious concerns which may be raised after
you have had the opportunity of viewing the video presenta-
tion by Mr. Porter.
Q.      Be   What happens if I don’t sign the offer of employ-
             ment letter?
A.      1.   We need a signed acceptance to assist us to pro-
             cess a continuation of your salary and benefits
             through Massey Combines Corporation. Your sig-
             nature confirms your acceptance of employment
             as an MCC employee without disruption of either
             salary or benefits.
     ae -    What happens if I don’t accept employment with
             MCC?
i.     a     Positions related to the Combines business are
             part of MCC and, in that regard, it is uncertain
             whether Massey-Ferguson could offer compara-
             ble employment prospects. You would not be eli-
             gible for termination benefits from Massey
             Combines Corporation as you would never have
             been employed?
       a?    What happens to my benefits, pension, etc.?
>      wn    When you transfer to MCC, pay levels and ben-
             efit programmes will remain unchanged. There
             will be no loss of seniority or pensionable ser-
             vice.
Q.     4.    Do you expect the terms        and   conditions   of
             employment to change?
                J.A. 76

Employment conditions in the future will depend
on our ability to make Massey Combines Corpo-
ration a success and if changes are considered
necessary or appropriate, they will be made.
When do I start working for MCC and stop work-
ing for MF?
Technically, you are working for MCC now. Your
acceptance of employment with MCC, however,
will be effective as soon as you return the offer
letter.
Will we have the option of continuing employ-
ment with MF?
Massey Combines Corporation cannot speak for
MF. We are offering you an alternative employ-
ment relationship with a corporation that builds
and markets combines. We do know that Massey
Ferguson will have no involvement with combine
production and we cannot therefore speculate on
their staffing requirements.
Will we have the option of transferring back to
MF?
Massey Combines Corporation is a company
totally separate from MF in both operation and
staffing requirements. It is uncertain that the type
of transfer relationship which existed when MCC
was a division of MF, will continue.
Are the pensions protected under MCC?
Responsibility for pension benefits earned by
employees transferring to Massey Combines Cor-
poration is being assumed by the Massey Com-
bines Corporation Pension Plan.
The assets which are held in the Massey Fergu-
son Pension Plan to fund such benefits as deter-
mined by actuarial calculations, are being
               J.A.77

transferred to the Massey Combines Corporation
Plan. Such benefits and assets will be protected
by the same legislation that protect the Massey
Ferguson Pension Plan.
There will be no change in pension benefits as a
result of your transfer to Massey Combines Cor-
poration.
                            J.A. 78

            TRANSCRIPT OF MESSAGE
             FROM MR. IVAN PORTER
   (EXCERPT FROM COMPOSITE TRIAL EXHIBIT “A”)


                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CIVIL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
  ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
  CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DORIS
  GUIDICESSI, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                   Plaintiffs,

                            —


  VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON,      INC..,

                                                 Defendants.
                             J.A. 79

    TRANSCRIPT OF MESSAGE FROM MR. IVAN PORTER
     PRESIDENT—MASSEY COMBINES CORPORATION

     Hello, I'm Ivan Porter, President of Massey Combines Cor-
 poration. Massey Combines Corporation is a new, stand-alone
 Company. It is the result of a lot of hard work which started
  14 months ago when we established the Combines and
 Related Equipment Division.
     Let’s just take a few minutes to review what we've
 achieved in that time. First, in Ju.y 1985, we acquired a range
 of rotary combines previously manufactured by White Farm
 Canada Limited. These products will shortly be launched to
 the market under the Massey brand name. They will enable us
 to increase sales by competing in a sector of the market from
 which we have previously been excluded. Second, we are cur-
 rently implementing a major facilities rationalization program
 which will consolidate all Engineering, Manufacturing, Mar-
 keting and Administrative activities in Brantford. The Engi-
neering group has already moved into a new Research &
Development facility on Morton Avenue. Early next year we
Shall be moving to a new headquarters building currently
under construction on Colborne Street. All Manufacturing
activities will be consolidated into the Park Road facility.
These programs will enable us to reduce costs by approxi-
mately 1/3, an essential element in the future success of
Massey Combines Corporation, and thirdly, we are currently
doing many other exciting things designed to improve the
profitability and efficiency of the business, such as, the intro-
duction of innovative methods of Marketing both new and
used combines and searching for alternative products to man-
ufacture in the Park Road facility. Later this year we shall be
introducing an employee suggestion scheme which will enable
you to earn financial rewards by submitting new ideas to help
improve the business. All of these activities have been incor-
porated into a 5 year Business Plan which maps out the way
ahead.
    It was this Business Plan and our achievements over the
last 14 months which gave confidence to our lenders and
the governments of Canada and Ontario to support a major
                           J.A. 80

financial restructuring of the Combines & Related Equipment
Division. This financial restructuring created Massey Com-
bines Corporation and will provide the funds necessary to
ensure its future viability. I believe that with the continued
help and support of you we can make Massey Combines Cor-
poration the kind of successful business enterprise which we
all want to work for.
   Shortly you will be asked to officially confirm your accep-
tance of employment with Massey Combines Corporation.
When you transfer your employment to the Massey Combines
Corporation, pay levels and benefit programs will remain
unchanged. There will be no loss of seniority or pensionable
service. Employment conditions in the future will depend on
the success of the Massey Combines Corporation and should
changes be deemed appropriate or necessary, they will be
made. If you have any questions regarding the transfer of your
employment to Massey Combines Corporation, please contact
Gary Gambacort, the General Human Resources Manager,
located in Brantford.
   Finally, despite the depression which persists in the North
American economy, I am excited about the future of Massey
Combines Corporation. Together we can exploit all available
opportunities in the Combines business. I look forward to
working with you in the future to ensure the success of
Massey Combines Corporation.
                                            Thank You.
                           J.A. 81

              LETTER FROM I. PORTER,
           WITH ONE-PAGE ATTACHMENT,
                DATED APRIL 30, 1986
    (EXCERPT FROM COMPOSITE TRIAL EXHIBIT “A”)


                        IN THE
           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
          FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL    DIVISION




                   CiviIL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES   HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON.
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
  ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON.
  CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, Doris
  GUIDICESS!I, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
  the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,

                                                  Plaintiffs,




 VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON.      INC.,

                                                Defendants.
                            J.A. 82

MASSEY COMBINES CORPORATION
225 Henry Street ° Brantford, Ontario            °    N3TS5MI1
                                               April 30, 1986
   Massey Combines Corporation, is now legally a stand-alone
Company.
   The creation of this new corporation results from a major
financial restructuring of Massey-Ferguson Limited and its
subsidiaries and will enable us to realize all available oppor-
tunities in the combines business. To enable us to accept you
as an employee of Massey Combines Corporation and to con-
tinue to process the payment of benefits to you, we require
that you complete the information below and return this let-
ter to the Human Resources Department in Brantford. An
extra copy is attached for your records.    —
   When you accept employment with Massey Combines Cor-
poration, pay levels and benefit programs will remain
unchanged. There will be no loss of seniority or pensionable
service. Employment conditions in the future will depend on
our ability to make Massey Combines Corporation a success,
and if changes are considered necessary or appropriate, they
will be made.
   We are all very optimistic that our new company, has a
bright future, and are excited by the new challenges facing all
of us.
  Yours very truly,
  /s/ 1. Porter
  |. Porter
                                                            (*]
MASSEY COMBINES CORPORATION
225 Henry Street ° Brantford, Ontario           °     N3T SMI
   | accept employment with Massey Combines Corporation
effective

- SIGNATURE                                          DATE
                              J.A. 83

Note:   In order to ensure uninterrupted continuation of your
        pay and benefits, please return this signed acceptance
        of employment form to the Human Resources Depart-
        ment no later than Monday, May 19, 1986. Offers
        returned by mail must be postmarked no later than Fri-
        day, May   16, 1986
                            J.A. 84

    HANDWRITTEN NOTE FROM IVAN [PORTER]
     TO VICTOR [RICE], DATED AUGUST 1987
               (TRIAL EXHIBIT 80)


                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CiviL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, Doris
   GUIDICESS!I, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                   Plaintiffs,

                            —V.—




  VARITY   CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON,      INC.,

                                                 Defendants.
                                  J.A. 85

                                  Aug/87
 Victor

   Reference our discussions last Friday I have given some
thought to what you proposed and must admit to being some-
what perplexed by the complexity of two employers, retention
bonuses, long term incentive bonuses etc. etc. I have therefore
sat down and tried to develop an approach to and timetable
for the next twelve months or so based on what already is in
place and what we now see as being the most likely course of
events. The base documents I have used are your letters dated
January 27, 1986/May 8, 1986 (two separate letters), Vince
Laurenzo’s letter dated March 1987 and our conversation last
Friday.

1.       What is currently in place
     ° two year secondment to MCC (Feb. 1, 1986 to Jan. 31,
       1988)
       Base salary Cdn. $165,000—net eligible for currency
       equalization practice.
       Short-term incentive equal to 50% of base salary at
       normative level.
     ° Retention bonus Cdn. $150,000. Eligibility Jan. 31,
       1988 but only payable if I stay with Varity until at
           least Jan. 31, 1989.
           Long term incentive—Varity stock options.
           Fringe benefits—same as other Varity HQ senior exec-
           utives.

do   What is currently forseen         to be most   likely course    of
     events
           IP to stay in MCC      until summer
     0
                                                 of 1988 in order to
          carry out final rites (i.e. restructure, wind-up, sale)
          and to ensure Varity exposure is minimized.
          For internal planning purposes assume IP returns to

                                                                    [*]
                             J.A. 86

      Varity July 1, 1988 accepting that date could advance
      or extend depending on actual circumstances.
    ° Varity wish to offer some additional long term reten-
      tion incentive to IP (stated by VAR to be Cdn.
      $100,000 payable on Jan. 31, 1991)
             The issues that are perplexing me are as follows:
          i) With the best will in the world it is impossible at
             this stage to firmly fix a transfer date back to
             Varity. The date must be dictated by actual cir-
             cumstances which given the fragile condition of
             MCC are impossible to predict right now. There-
             fore in my view the best approach would be to
             establish some flexible extension of the second-
             ment arrangement to cover the period Feb. |,
             1988 to date of return to Varity.
          ii) it appears illogical to offer IP, at this stage, an
              additional long term retention incentive. In my
              view it would be better to offer this at the time IP
              actually transfers back to Varity. Under the orig-
              inal retention bonus arrangement IP is chained to
              Varity until Jan. 31 1989 which on current pro-
              jections is likely to be well after IP returns to
              Varity. While I am flattered by the offer I want to
              be sure I have not misunderstood the rationale
              behind this additional long term retention incen-
              tive.
  Based on the above I would therefore propose the follow-
ing for your consideration
                                                               [*]
     1.    Maintain the terms and conditions currently in place
           through to Jan. 31, 1988.
    2.     In January 1988 agree a flexible extension to the
           secondment agreement. In this respect we should let
           the experts—(Harman) define flexible.
                            J.A. 87

     3.   At an appropriate time (assume May/June 1988)
          agree the terms and conditions of new position in
          Varity. Introduce the long term retention incentive
          at this point if still considered appropriate in light
          of whatever overall Compensation package is
          agreed.
  If you are available we can review    this after the meeting
planned for August 21.

                                      Ivan Porter

                                            [DATE STAMP]
                                            OFFICE   OF THE
                                             Aug 12 1987
                                         CHAIRMAN      & CEO
                            J.A. 88

          LETTER  FROM VINCE D. LAURENZO,
                   TO IVAN PORTER,
               DATED NOVEMBER 2, 1987
                   (TRIAL EXHIBIT 88)


                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                   CiviL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,   ROBERT    WELLS,     RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DORIS
   GUIDICESS!I, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                    Plaintiffs,

                            —_—_—Voi—




  VARITY    CORPORATION     and MASSEY-FERGUSON,       INC.,

                                                   Defendants.
                             J.A. 89

            LETTERHEAD    OF VARITY    CORPORATION

World Headquarters
595 Bay Street
Toronto, Canada M6G 2C3
Telephone     416-593-3811
Telex        065-24210
Rapifax      416-593-3820
                                                         VARITY
STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL
November 2, 1987
Mr. Ivan Porter
President
Massey Combines Corporation
Massey House
171 Colborne Street
Suite 201
Brantford, Ontario
N3T 6E1

Dear Mr. Porter:

   To recognize your present position at Massey Combines
Corporation (“MCC”), we hereby undertake to indemnify you
against any personal liability you may incur by reason of your
acting in your capacity as President of Massey Combines Cor-
poration and which MCC, because of its difficult financial
condition, may be unable to cover.
   Paragraph 14 of MCC’s by-law No. | reads as follows:
     Subject to the provisions of Section 136 of the (Ontario
     Business Corporation) Act, the Corporation shall indem-
     nify a director or officer, a former director or officer, or
     a person who acts or acted at the Corporation's request
     as a director or officer of a body corporate of which the
     Corporation is or was a shareholder or creditor, and his
     heirs and legal representatives against all costs, charges
     and expenses, including an amount paid to settle an
     action or satisfy a judgment, reasonably incurred by him
                           J.A. 90

    in respect of any civil, criminal or administrative action
    or proceeding to which he is made a party by reason of
    being or having been a director or officer of the Corpo-
    ration or such body corporate, if (a) he acted honestly
    and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the
    Corporation,   and (b) in the case     [*] of a criminal or
    administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by
    a monetary penalty, he had reasonable grounds for
    believing that his conduct was lawful. The Corporation
    shall also indemnify any such person in such other cir-
    cumstances as the Act of law permits or requires. Noth-
    ing in this by-law shall limit the right of any person
    entitled to indemnity to claim indemnity apart from the
    provisions of this by-law to the extent permitted by the
    Act or law.

   We undertake that if MCC shall fail or appear to be unable
to indemnify you as now provided in the quoted section of its
by-law we shall fully and promptly indemnify you to the full
extent provided therein, and this will be the case notwith-
standing any change made to the text of the by-law.
                                     Yours very truly,

                              /s/ VincE D. LAURENZO
                                     Vince D. Laurenzo
                                     President
                             J.A.91

           LETTER FROM VINCE D. LAURENZO
                   TO IVAN PORTER,
               DATED NOVEMBER 2, 1987
                   (TRIAL EXHIBIT 89)


                         IN THE
            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
           FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA
                    CENTRAL DIVISION




                    CIVIL No. 88-1598-E




CHARLES    HOWE,    ROBERT    WELLS,   RALPH   W. THOMPSON,
   PATRICK MOUSEL, on behalf of themselves and as repre-
   sentatives of a class of persons similarly situated, JOHN
   ALTOMARE, CHARLES BARRON, ALEXANDER CHARRON,
   CHARLOTTE CHILES, ANITA CROWE, RAY DARR, DORIS
   GUIDICESS!I, BARNETT LUCAS, ROBERT SKROMME, and
   the Estate of WALTER SMITH, Individually,
                                                    Plaintiffs,




  VARITY    CORPORATION      and MASSEY-FERGUSON,      INC.,

                                                  Defendants.
                             J.A. 92

            LETTERHEAD    OF VARITY    CORPORATION

World Headquarters
595 Bay Street
Toronto, Canada M6G 2C3
Telephone    416-593-3811
Telex        0065-24210
Rapifax      416-593-3820
                                                        VARITY
STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL
November 2, 1987

Mr. Ivan Porter
President
Massey Combines Corporation
Massey House
171 Colborne Street
Suite 201
Brantford, Ontario
N3T 6E1
Dear Mr. Porter:
   This letter refers to my letter to you of the same date con-
cerning Varity’s indemnification of you as an officer of MCC.
   All elements of that letter apply. In addition, the following
is required as an integral part of that letter.
   The aforementioned letter is to be treated as a confidential
document and is not to be divulged in any manner at any time
to anyone without the mutual written consent of the writer
and the recipient.
                                    Yours very truly,

                               /s/ VINCE D. LAURENZO
                                    Vince D. Laurenzo
                                    President
   I hereby acknowledge receipt of the this letter, accept it,
and agree to abide by the restrictions set forth in it.
          Nov.271987            >         /s/ IVAN PORTER _
              Date                            Ivan Porter
-
