oem _— ‘ mn a ate -" 4 ‘wee : 
Suoreme ‘Cotirt, U.S. ees 
EiL ED 
JUL) 23 WS. 
CLERK 


e ee a Supreme Court ‘sf the United States 


Ce ME ewe Ocroper Term, 1995 

yea | VARITY CORPORATION, 
ee Petitioner, 

v. 

CHARLES Howe, ef ai., 

Respondents. 
On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eighth Circuit 


BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE CENTRAL STATES, 
SOUTHEAST AND SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH 
‘AND WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
MN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS 


THOMAS C, NYHAN * 
General Counsel 
TERENCE G. CRAIG 
CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND 
SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH AND 
WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
9377 West Higgins Road 
Rosemont, Illinois 60018-4988 
(708) 518-9800 
Attorneys for Amici Curiae 


* Counsel of Record 


—— —_— Se error 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY, 


a Se 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
pe PR ICS ee ee ii 
INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE ..................... EEN 1 
Central States Pension Fund ............... 1 
Central States Health and Welfare Fund ................ 2 
Interests of Central States ...... Es AEN 3 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ......................................... 4 
ARGUMENT ..............-.-...... oe REN LE Es Se ee a 5 
I. RESTITUTION ORDERS AGAINST TRUS- 
TEES WOULD BE UNTENABLE FOR MUL- 
TIEMPLOYER PLANS ....... . 5 
Il. RESTITUTION SHOULD COME FROM THE 
PLAN .. 7 


CONCLUSION saieaasianiaains ipaciiaaiinsieeeilalisialibibiiindiiniganpinat 9 


ii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES Page 
Health Cost Controls v. Skinner, 44 F.3d 535 (7th 
CRs. TITUIIE ccmnitisincstssehsdsiennsntecdttntaniauncsimanaaaiaeein 8 
Massachusetts Mutuai Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 
PB? SS 0 ee 7 
Porter v. Warner Holding Co., 328 U.S. 395 
CIGD. cctncsecscsiccansiisestasicnibimaihaiiansaiaenraa 8 
Tull v. US., 481 U.S. 412 (1067) ............cccccecceseseses 8 
STATUTES 
ERISA § 3(21) (A), 29 U.S.C. § 1002 (21) (A) ......... 1 
ERISA § 409 (a), 29 U.S.C. § 1109(a) ....................... 4,7,8 
ERISA § 502(a) (1), 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a) (1)........... 5, 7,8 
ERISA § 502(a) (2), 29 U.S.C. § 1182(a) (2)........... 7 


ERISA § 502(a) (3), 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a) (3)-.......... passim 


IN THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 
OcTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 94-1471 


VARITY CORPORATION, 


. Petitioner, 


CHARLES Howe, et ai., 
Respondents. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Eighth Circuit 


BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE CENTRAL STATES, 
SOUTHEAST AND SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH 
AND WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
IN SUPPORT Us RESPONDENTS 


INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE 
Central States Pension Fund 


Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Pension 
Fund is a multiemployer defined benefit pension trust 
fund established in 1955 by affiliates of the International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters and by various employer asso- 
ciations pursuant to section 302(c)(5) of the Labor 
Management Relations Act (LMRA). The Pension 
Fund is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of an 
equal number of union and management appointees (four 
of each). The trustees are plan fiduciaries within the 
meaning of Section 3(21)(A) of the Employee Retire- 
ment Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. 


2 


§ 1002(21)(A). The Pension Fund is administered for 
the exclusive benefit of the participants to whom the 
trustees owe an undivided duty of loyalty. The purpose 
of the Pension Fund is to pay retirement and certain 
other benefits to participants and their beneficiaries who 
become eligible under the terms of the Central States pen- 
sion plan. Central States Pension Fund is the largest 
multiemployer pension plan in the country. Its current 
assets exceed $12.3 billion and the present value of its 
liabilities for vested benefits is approximately $14.5 bil- 
lion. Participating employers contribute to the Pension 
Fund pursuant to their collective bargaining agreements 
for work performed by their covered (bargaining unit) 
employees. The Pension Fund covers 170,000 retirees 
presently drawing benefits and 220,000 active participants 
of approximately 5,000 contributing employers. 


Central States Health and Welfare Fund 


Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Health 
and Welfare Fund was established in 1950. It provides 
health and welfare benefits to eligible employees of con- 
tributing employers that are signatory to collective bar- 
gaining agreements with local unions affiliated with the 
International Brotherhood of -Teamsters. Like the Pen- 
sion Fund, the Health and Welfare Fund is governed by 
a Board of Trustees consisting of four management and 
four union-appointed trustees, who are plan fiduciaries 
within the meaning of ERISA.’ The Health and Welfare 
Fund has net assets of more than $130 million and pro- 
vides benefits to more than 125,000 active participants, 
as well as over 20,000 retirees and their families. 


1 The two funds are jointly administered under the direction of 
the same eight-member Board of Trustees. The Funds will here- 
after be referred to collectively as Central States or individually 
as the Pension Fund and the Health and Welfare Fund. 


3 


Interests of Central States 


The Central States plans are multiemployer plans and 
thus are fundamentally different from the single-employer 
plan administered by Petitioner Varity Corporation 
(“Varity”) which is the subject of this case. Multiem- 
ployer plans are funded by more than one employer (in 
the case of Central States, thousands of employers) and 
are administered by an independent board of trustees who 
are the plan fiduciaries. Varity’s plan by contrast is 
funded by Varity which also administers the plan and 
is the plan fiduciary. Despite these differences in these 
types of plans, ERISA applies a single set of rules to 
both. Central States is concerned that the ruling in this 
single-employer plan case should also take into account 
its impact on multiemployer plans. 


The court below ruled that individual plan participants 
may maintain an action for equitable relief against a plan 
fiduciary pursuant to Section 502(a)(3) of ERISA, 29 
U.S.C. § 1132(a)(3). As relief for the fiduciary breaches 
by Varity, the court ordered that certain retirees be re- 
stored to their original health and welfare plan. The 
court further ordered “restitution” be made by Varity to 
these retirees for their lost benefits. This latter form of 
relief is of concern to Central States (and to multiem- 
ployer plans generally). Ordinarily benefits are paid by 
plans, not fiduciaries. In ordering restitution from Varity, 
the court below did not specify whether Varity would 
pay these benefits from its plan or directly. Because 
Varity was the sole source of plan funding, it would pay 
in either case. If, however, this restitution remedy were 
applied under similar circumstances to the trustees of a 
multiemployer plan, the same would not be true. If pay- 
ment of the benefits is deemed a personal liability of the 
trustees rather than the plan, the plan (and indirectly its 
contributing employers) is relieved of an obligation that 
was otherwise its to pay. And if decisions by trustees 
regarding the payment of benefits can be construed as 


4 


fiduciary breaches that subject the individual trustees to 
personal liability for the benefits, then there will be no 
trustees for none will serve. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The court below ruled that a cause of action may be 
maintained under Section 502(a)(3) of ERISA, 29 
U.S.C. § 1132(a)(3), by individual plan participants for 
their own benefit against a plan fiduciary to enjoin a 
breach of fiduciary duty. Specifically the court affirmed 
a district court ruling that Varity had breached its fidu- 
ciary duties to certain retiree participants in its health and 
welfare plan by transferring them to a new plan that 
subsequently folded. The court ruled that Varity must 
restore the participants to their original plan. The court, 
then, ruled that “restitution” to these participants be 
made by Varity as a further form of equitable relief. 


Assuming that the court below was correct in its first 
ruling—that a cause of action against a fiduciary may be 
brought under § 502(a)(3) and that an _ injunction 
against Varity to restore the retirees to their original plan 
is appropriate equitable relief—was the court also cor- 
rect in ordering restitution from Varity? If the answer is 
yes, this court should clarify the rationale for that relief. 
In Varity’s case an order to pay the retirees’ lost benefits 
does not need further refinement because Varity is the 
source of plan assets to pay the benefits in any event. 
Multiemployer plans to which this kind of ruling might 
be applied are different in that the fiduciaries (the plan’s 
trustees) are not the source of plan assets. An order of 
restitution directed against the trustees personally would 
not be appropriate equitable relief because the trustees 
did not gain from the participant’s loss. Such liability for 
trustees would dangerously destabilize multiemployer 
plans for who would accept such a job at such risk. 


Section 409(a) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. § 1109(a), limits 
the pensonal liability of fiduciaries for their fiduciary 


5 


breaches to that amount necessary to make the plan whole. 
An action against a fiduciary under § 502(a)(3) for a 
fiduciary breach may result in other equitable relief, but 
should not extend the scope of personal liability. To the 
extent “restitution” is an available remedy under § 502 
(a)(3), it should restore the parties to their prior posi- 
tions. Only if the loss to the participants inures to the 
benefit of the fiduciary, should direct restitution be avail- 
able. If the fiduciary does not benefit, as is generally the 
case with multiemployer plan trustees, personal liability 
for lost benefits is not appropriate relief. This does not 
mean that no relief is available. If a court may restore 
the participants to the plan under § 502(a)(3), as the 
court did here, then it has restored the plan’s obligation 
to pay the participants’ benefits. Thus the remedy should 
be payment by the plan (which loses nothing it should 
not have paid in the first place), not by the trustees per- 
sonally. The appropriate “restitution” remedy under 
§ 502(a)(3) would be an injunction that the fiduciary 
cause the plan to pay the benefit. Alternatively, the par- 
ticipant would have a cause of action against the plan 
under § 502(a)(1) for the benefits that were otherwise 
lost. 


ARGUMENT 


I. RESTITUTION ORDERS AGAINST TRUSTEES 
WOULD BE UNTENABLE FOR MULTIEMPLOYER 
PLANS. 


In the single-employer plan at issue here the fiduciary 
(Varity) is also the source of funding for the plan. By 
ordering Varity, the fiduciary, to make restitution the 
court, in effect, also orders Varity, the sole source of 
funding for the plan, to pay benefits to these participants. 
This is the same as ordering the plan itself to make the 
payments. Both parties below are, therefore, largely in- 
different to how the monetary relief is characterized be- 
cause however so, its source is the same. This reflects in 
the decision pelow, which does not draw such distinc- 
tions. These distinctions are, however, very important for 


6 


other plans and especially for multiemployer plans where 
the source of funding and the fiduciaries are different. 
In the case of a multiemployer plan, to order that a 
fiduciary make restitution for payments otherwise due 
under the plan is to introduce a different source of fund- 
ing for these benefits; and the plan (and those who fund 
it) are relieved of the obligation that would otherwise 
be theirs to pay the benefits. 


If the decision below is affirmed without clarification, 
then courts may begin to allow fiduciary claims resulting 
in restitution orders against trustees of multiemployer 
plans in cases like this that involve only the payment of 
benefits to individual participants. We can be sure of 
two effects. First, it is unlikely that trustees generally 
will be able to pay these benefits. Trustees, generally, will 
not have the resources to satisfy the order. Nor is a 
fiduciary breach the kind of event that may readily be in- 
sured. As a consequence trustee personal liability is 
probably not an adequate remedy for a participant’s lost 
benefits. Second, who would serve as a trustee if per- 
sonal liability under the circumstances of this case is the 
cost. Trustees are volunteers who generally serve without 
pay. They do not expect or accept the risk of having to 
pay benefits of participants in lieu of the plan. It is un- 
likely that any qualified person would take such a risk, 
nor would it be reasonable to expect anyone to assume it. 


In sum the availability of a broad restitution remedy to 
apply to multiemployer plan trustees for the benefit of 
individual participants would not provide an adequate 
remedy to participants and would harm plans by driving 
away trustees. 


Central States does not, however, contend that the 
court below was wrong in ordering restitution from 
Varity. The problem, in Central States view, is that 
if the court below is simply affirmed, it may be construed 
that ERISA fiduciaries generally are personally liable to 
make restitution for their fiduciary breaches resulting from 


~~ 


te ee ee ee fe Re eS ee Se ee 


~~ eet wwe 


7 


their decisions regarding participation and the payment 
of benefits. Central States believes that such a broad in- 
terpretation should be rejected and that this Court should 
clarify that restitution from fiduciaries to individual par- 
ticipants is available only where the fiduciary was en- 
riched at the individual’s expense. This is clearly the case 
with Varity, but would generally not be the case with 
trustees of multiemployer plans. 


II. RESTITUTION SHOULD COME FROM THE 
PLAN. 


Having held that § 502(c)(3) permits an individual 
action against a fiduciary for a breach of fiduciary duty, 
the courts below sought relief within the scope of that 
provision. Section 502(a)(3) allows injunctions against 
violations of ERISA and “other appropriate equitable 
relief.” Accordingly the court of appeals affirmed an in- 
junction to restore the retirees to their original plan. The 
court also affirmed so much of the district court’s ruling 
that ordered restitution of lost benefits to the retirees by 
Varity. The court of appeals did not specify its rationale 
for why Varity should make restitution rather than the 
plan to which the individuals were restored. 


Under Section 409(a) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1109(a), however, a plan fiduciary is “personally” 
liable only to make good to such plan any losses to the 
plan resulting from such breach. Section 409(a) is en- 
forced through § 502(a)(2) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 
$ 1132(a)(2). Relief to individuals is not available 
under these provisions. Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins. 
Co. v. Rusell, 473 U.S. 134 (1985). Individual relief 
may be found in § 502(a)(1) (to recover benefits) and 
in § 502(a)(3) (to enjoin violations of the statute and 
for other appropriate equitable relief). The court below 
ruled that a fiduciary breach that damages an individual 
may be redressed through $ 502(a)(3), and restoration 


8 


of the retirees here to their original plan would appear 
to be appropriate equitable relief. 


In light of the limits provided by § 409(a), however, is 
it appropriate equitable relief to expand the personal lia- 
bility of fiduciaries under § 502(a)(3)? Central States 
agrees for purposes of this brief that an order of resti- 
tution against Varity was appropriate. But the order 
against Varity can be viewed in two ways (with the same 
effect) that are consistent with the statute. First, Varity 
profited at the expense of the retirees—a classic circum- 
stance justifying restitution. See Tull v. U.S., 481 US. 
412, 424 (1987) citing Porter v. Warner Holding Co., 
328 U.S. 395, 402 (1946); see also Health Cost Controls 
v. Skinner, 44 F.3d 535, 538 (7th Cir. 1995). But also 
the order could be construed as directing Varity, who 
controlled and funded the plan, to make restitution from 
the assets of the plan for the lost benefits. It would be 
unnecessary for the court below to put such a fine point 
on its order, however, because Varity will pay in any 
event and the status quo will be restored. 


In order to restore the status quo where a multiemployer 
plan is involved, the restitution order must be more pre- 
cise. The trustees of the plan do not profit from this 
kind of fiduciary breach, so there is no ill-gotten gain to 
be restored to the participant by the fiduciary personally. 
On the other hand the plan has been enriched to the ex- 
tent it did not pay benefits it otherwise would have. And 
the contributors to the plan benefit indirectly through 
lower plan payments. So the multiemployer plan, not the 
trustee, should make restitution to an individual deprived 
of a benefit through a fiduciary breach. 


There are two routes to this more appropriate remedy. 
One would be an action against the plan under § 502 
(a)(1) for payment of the benefit. But a plaintiff who 
lacks the foresight to make the plan a defendant is not 
without remedy. It is within the power of the court to 


9 


enjoin the fiduciaries not only to restore the individual’s 
Status as a participant, but to restore the benefits as well. 
An order directing the trustees of a multiemployer plan 
to cause the plan to pay the lost benefits restores each 
party and the plan to their rightful positions as if the 
breach had not occurred. The plan and its contributing 
employers are no worse off since the benefits should have 
been paid in the first place; the participant receives the 
benefits that were due; and the trustees perform their 
duty as they should have in the first place. 


In sum, if this court affirms the court below it should 
clarify that the restitution remedy under § 502(a)(3) is 
directed to the fiduciary’s obligations to pay benefits under 
the plan and not to the personal liability of the fiduciary. 


CONCLUSION 


The court below reached the correct result and should 
be affirmed, but the rationale of that result should be 
clarified to limit the restitution remedy to the plan, not 
the fiduciary. 

Respectfully submitted, 


THOMAS C. NYHAN * 
General Counsel 
TERENCE G. CRAIG 
CENTRAL STATES, SOUTHEAST AND 
SOUTHWEST AREAS HEALTH AND 
WELFARE AND PENSION FUNDS 
9377 West Higgins Road 
Rosemont, Illinois 60018-4938 
(708) 518-9800 


Attorneys for Amici Curiae 
* Counsel of Record 


