116a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 89-2319 


Submitted: October 11, 1989 
Filed: February 15, 1990 


Charles Howe; Robert Wells; Ralph W. Thompson; Charlotte 
Chiles; Patrick Mousel, On behalf of themselves and as 
representatives of a Class of Persons Similarly Situated, 


Appellees, 


—V.— 


Varity Corporation and Massey-Ferguson, Inc., 
Appellants. 


Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Southern District of lowa 


Before Lay, Chief Judge, HENLEY, Senior Circuit Judge, 
and ARNOLD, Circuit Judge. 


Lay, Chief Judge. 


Varity Corporation (Varity) and Massey-Ferguson, Inc. 
(M-F Inc.) appeal from a preliminary injunction issued by the 
district court requiring them to reinstate portions of a termi- 
nated employee welfare benefit plan. We reverse in part and 
affirm in part. 


ree eee, ee ee 


117a 
BACKGROUND 


M-F Inc., which makes farm equipment, is wholly owned 
by Varity. M-F Inc. maintains a comprehensive health and 
welfare benefit plan for its employees and retirees. Section 
7.4 of the “Master Plan” contains the following language: 


to amend or terminate the Plan or Trust at any time, pro- 
vided no such amendment or termination shall have the 
effect of diverting the Trust funds to purposes other than 
the exclusive benefit of the Employees except as pro- 
vided in Section 7.1. However, the right to amend or ter- 
minate the Plan shall not, in any way, affect an 
Employee’s right to claim benefits, diminish, or elimi- 
nate any claims for benefits under the provisions of the 
Plan to which the Employee shall have become entitled 
prior to the exercise of the Company’s right, through its 
Board, to terminate or amend. 


In the late 1970’s M-F Inc. began having financial diffi- 
culties which continued through 1986. On May 9, 1986, 
Varity transferred a portion of M-F Inc.'s operations to a 
newly-created Canadian corporation, Massey Combines 
Corporation (MCC). As part of this restructuring, known as 
“Project Sunshine,” approximately 1500 employees of M-F 
Inc. and other Varity subsidiaries were transferred to MCC. In 
addition, MCC assumed the obligations of M-F Inc. and other 
Varity subsidiaries to provide welfare benefits to 3500-4000 
retirees. Because MCC adopted M-F Inc.’s welfare plan ver- 
batim, however, this restructuring did not immediately affect 
the welfare benefits of M-F Inc. employees and retirees. 

MCC’s financial condition quickly slid downhill. On March 
4, 1988, MCC went into receivership in Canada and termi- 
nated all of its employees. MCC’s receiver sent notice to all 
former employees, retirees, and other plan beneficiaries indi- 
cating there were no funds available to continue welfare ben- 
efits. All welfare benefits immediately ceased. 

This suit was brought pursuant to the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act (ERISA), 29 U.S.C. §§ 1001-1461 
(1982), by representatives of former salaried employees, 


118a 


retirees, disabled employees, and eligible dependents of 
retirees and disabled employees of M-F Inc. who were trans- 
ferred to MCC in 1986 through the Project Sunshine restruc- 
turing. Plaintiffs sought an order requiring Varity and M-F 
Inc. to restore benefits to retirees, disabled employees, and 
their survivors and eligible dependents.' The district court 
granted plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction, find- 
ing that the welfare benefit plan entitled retirees to continued 
benefits throughout their lifetimes.” This interlocutory appeal 
followed. 


DISCUSSION 


A. Benefits of Retirees 


The district court based its order of preliminary relief on 
the ground that welfare benefits vested upon retirement and 
could not thereafter be terminated by MCC or defendants. 
Since we deal here only with welfare benefits (medical, den- 
tal, disability, and life insurance), ERISA’s mandatory vest- 
ing requirements relating to pension rights do not apply. 29 
U.S.C. § 1051(1) (1982). The issue we confront is “simply 
one of contract interpretation.” Anderson v. Alpha Portland 
Indus., Inc., 836 F.2d 1512, 1516 (8th Cir. 1988) (quoting 
Local Union No. 150-A v. Dubuque Packing Co., 756 F.2d 66, 
70 (8th Cir. 1985)). Welfare benefit plans may be modified or 
terminated absent the employer’s contractual agreement to the 
contrary. Anderson, 836 F.2d at 1516-17. 


| The court conditionally certified the class “for the narrow pur- 
pose of effectuating the preliminary injunction.” In view of our reversal 
on the issuance of the preliminary injunction as to the conditional class 
as a whole, we need not pass on the propriety of the conditional certifi- 
cation. See part B of our discussion. 


2 The district court's analysis is contained in a 51-page Memo- 
randum and Order adopted verbatim from a memorandum submitted by 
plaintiffs in support of their motion. Despite our disapproval of this judi- 
cial practice, see Jones v. International Paper Co., 720 F.2d 496, 499 (8th 
Cir. 1983), these findings and conclusions are nevertheless formally those 
of the district court, and we must examine the record for support of these 
findings and conclusions. /d. 


119a 


Plaintiffs argue that the contractual language contained in 
the plan documents constitutes a promise that welfare bene- 
fits vest for life upon an employee's retirement. The district 
court held that Section 7.4, which secures an employee’s right 
to claim benefits to which the employee “shall have become 
entitled” prior to termination of the plan, constitutes explicit 
vesting language. In addition, the court found that past com- 
pany practice and summary plan documents stating that wel- 
fare benefits “continue in retirement” establish retirement as 
a vesting point. 

The district court’s ruling is based on an erroneous view of 
the law.’ Plaintiffs have the burden of proving vested welfare 
benefits. Anderson, 836 F.2d at 1517. In Anderson we held 
that this burden was not met by the employer’s promise to 
provide welfare benefits “until death of retiree” where the 
employer had expressly reserved the right to terminate or 
amend the plan. /d. at 1518. Similarly, in DeGeare v. Alpha 
Portland Indus., Inc., 837 F.2d 812 (8th Cir. 1988), vacated 
and remanded, 109 S. Ct. 1305 (1989) we held that an 
employer’s promise to future retirees that benefits “will con- 
tinue” could not be read as a promise of vested lifetime ben- 
efits in the face of a termination clause. /d. at 814, 816-17.‘ 


3 We recognize that a preliminary injunction is ordinarily 
reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard. Dataphase Sys. Inc. v. 
CL Sys. Inc., 640 F.2d 109, 114 & n.8 (8th Cir. 1981) (en banc). How- 
ever, an appellate court reviewing the grant or denial of a preliminary 
injunction may also determine whether the district court based its deci- 
sion on an erroneous legal premise. Calvin Klein Cosmetics Corp. v. 
Lenox Laboratories, Inc., 815 F.2d 500, 503 (8th Cir. 1987); O'Connor 
v. Peru State College, 728 F.2d 1001, 1002 (8th Cir. 1984). We therefore 
may reach the legal issues at the heart of the case. See Calvin Klein, 815 
F.2d at 504 (appellate court may review legal conclusions where it is 
plain that lower court's ruling is “inextricably bound up in its view of the 
law”). 


* — The Supreme Court's remand of DeGeare was based on its deci- 
sion in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Bruch, 109 S. Ct. 948 (1989). In 
DeGeare, we held as an initial matter that a plan fiduciary's interpreta- 
tion of plan terms was entitled to deference on review. DeGeare, 837 F.2d 
at 814-15. We went on to hold, however, that “/iJ/n any event,* * * the 
administrator and district court correctly construed the plan documents 


120a 


After a careful review of the plan documents, we find noth- 
ing that allows plaintiffs to escape these holdings. Section 7.4 
of the plan does not itself pinpoint retirement as a vesting 
trigger. Section 7.4 merely protects an employee's right to 
claim benefits for an injury or disabling event that occurs 
prior to termination of the plan.°* 

As Anderson and DeGeare make clear, the mere fact that 
employee welfare benefits continue in retirement does not 
indicate that the benefits become vested for life at the 
moment of retirement. No inference of an intent to vest can be 
presumed from the fact the benefits are retirement benefits. 
DeGeare, 837 F.2d at 815; Anderson, 836 F.2d at 1516-17. 
Indeed, the benefits at issue here are “retirement benefits” in 
a technical sense only. Unlike pension benefits, coverage 
under the welfare benefit plan does not begin at an 
employee’s retirement. Rather, as plaintiffs themselves stren- 
uously argue, the welfare benefits simply continue when an 
employee retires. Nothing in the documents establishes retire- 
ment as a vesting point. 

The district court’s reliance on extrinsic evidence is also 
misplaced. The court found that in the past defendants had 
exempted retirees from plan changes, thereby implying that 
retirees’ benefits were “untouchable.” As a general rule, how- 
ever, extrinsic evidence may not be relied upon where 
the documents are unambiguous on their face. See. e.g., 
Anderson, 836 F.2d at 1517 (“[I)f the contract is deemed 


* * *." Id. at 815. We then applied the contract interpretation principles 
established in our prior cases. Jd. at 815-16. 

Bruch’s holding that the plan fiduciary is entitled to deference in con- 
struing terms only when the plan expressly reserves the right to do so did 
not affect the principles underlying the central part of our decision in 
DeGeare. See Bruch, 109 S. Ct. at 956; see also Lakey v. Remington Arms 
Co., 874 F.2d 541, 543-44 (8th Cir. 1989) (explaining the effect of 
Bruch). Thus, we disagree with the district court’s conclusion that the 
remand of DeGeare leaves this circuit's law “up in the air.” The basic 
contract interpretation principles of DeGeare and Anderson still apply. 


— example, if a covered employee were to break a bone one 
day before the plan is terminated, that employee would be “entitled” to 
medical expense reimbursement for the injury. 


12la 


ambiguous, then the court may weigh extrinsic evidence to 
aid in its construction.”) (quoting Dubuque Packing, 756 F.2d 
at 69) (emphasis added). Moreover, it is the extrinsic evidence 
itself, in our view, that is ambiguous. Merely because defen- 
dants chose to exempt retirees from plan changes in the past 
does not mean that defendants considered themselves forever 
bound to do so. Plaintiffs have not argued estoppel, nor have 
they suggested any detrimental reliance on defendants’ prac- 
tices. This evidence therefore does not aid plaintiffs in meet- 
ing their burden of proof. 

We hold that the district court erred in granting the pre- 
liminary injunction on the ground that the welfare plan could 
not be terminated as to retirees. 


B. Propriety of Preliminary Injunction as to Subclasses 


The district court’s injunction reinstates all retirement and 
disability benefits as they existed immediately prior to March 
4, 1988, the date MCC went into receivership. As our holding 
above makes clear, retirees as a general class are no longer 
entitled to these benefits. Varity and M-F Inc. concede, how- 
ever, that Section 7.4 establishes an “entitlement” in favor of 
beneficiaries who became injured or disabled prior to plan 
termination.® Therefore, MCC was not at liberty to ter uinate 
payments to these persons. However, MCC is presumably 
without funds to pay these benefits and is not a party to this 
lawsuit. Thus, beneficiaries with vested rights are left to look 
solely to Varity and M-F Inc. for satisfaction of their claims. 

This observation requires us to consider two subclasses of 
beneficiaries. The first subclass consists of persons who 
became injured or disabled (and thereby vested) prior to May 


© Defendants concede Section 7.4 is a “pipeline” provision which 
protects employees and retirees against termination of benefits once they 
suffer an injury or illness. The plan language indicates that disabled per- 
sons fall within this group and are thus entitled to continued disability 
benefits if their disability occurred prior to the plan termination date. The 
plan makes clear that these disability benefits may be terminated only 
upon the employee's death, attainment of age 65, or end of disability, 
whichever comes first. 


122a 


9, 1986, the date they were transferred to MCC. We disagree 
with defendants’ argument that these beneficiaries must look 
solely to MCC for recovery. M-F Inc.’s contractual obliga- 
tions to provide health and disability benefits to this group 
had fully ripened prior to the 1986 transfer and could not be 
discharged by a transfer of the obligations to MCC. It is fun- 
damental that an assignment will not discharge the assignor’s 
debt to a third party without the third party’s consent. E.g., 4 
A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts § 866 (1951). The record 
is not clear, but assuming there are members of the condi- 
tional class who became entitled to welfare benefits by reason 
of injury or disability before May 9, 1986, then the prelimi- 
nary injunction shall continue as to these persons. 

The second subclass consists of persons whose benefits 
became vested by reason of an injury or disability occurring 
after the 1986 transfer but before MCC went into receivership 
on March 4, 1988. Defendants appear to suggest that the 
transfer of these persons to MCC relieved both Varity and 
M-F Inc. of all continuing benefits obligations. The district 
court disagreed, finding defendants liable for these obliga- 
tions under three alternative theories: (1) as “alter egos” of 
MCC; (2) as “employers” under ERISA, see 29 U.S.C. 
§ 1002(5) (1982), or; (3) as plan fiduciaries, see id. 
§§ 1002(21)(A), 1109. We are convinced that resolution of 
these issues depends on a more fully developed record and 
more carefully-considered factual findings than those before 
us. We do not accept the district court’s adoption of plaintiffs’ 
proposed findings as a final determination of the factual issues 
involved under these theories. Such “mechanically adopted” 
findings “do not reveal the discerning line for decision” on the 
factual issues establishing defendants’ liability. United States 
v. El Paso Natural Gas Co., 376 U.S. 651, 657 (1964). 

Nevertheless, we find reasonable probability that the mem- 
bers of this subclass may be able to prove defendants liable 
under one or more of these theories. At the present time, we 
are satisfied that the district court did not abuse its equitable 
powers in granting this aspect of the preliminary injunction 
on the proposed findings it adopted. However, the district 


123a 


court must now independently determine whether the record 
supports defendants’ liability as to those persons who became 
entitled to benefits between May 9, 1986, and March 4, 1988. 

Although the record is not completely clear on the issue, it 
appears that the named plaintiffs in this case do not fall 
within the two subclasses we have discussed.’ However, the 
record does disclose the existence of some unnamed members 
of the conditional class who may fall within these groups.* 
Class representatives must have a persona! stake in the out- 
come of the case at the time the district court rules on class 
certification in order to prevent mootness of the action. E.g., 
Inmates of Lincoln Intake & Detention Facility v. Boosalis, 
705 F.2d 1021, 1023 (8th Cir. 1983). In addition, plaintiffs 
purporting to represent a class must satisfy the requirements 
of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. Because the named 
plaintiffs in this case sought relief on their claim that welfare 
benefits were vested as to all retirees, the district court con- 
ditionally certified a broad class for purposes of preliminary 
relief. In light of our ruling today, the class conditionally cer- 
tified by the district court is too broad and cannot serve as the 
class for purposes of final judgment. The district court must 
now reevaluate the case under Rule 23 and redefine the class 
in accordance with this opinion. This may require substitution 
of suitable class representatives. Cf. Kremens v. Bartley, 43) 
U.S. 119, 134-35 (1977) (remanding for reconsideration of 
class definition and substitution of class representatives 
where named plaintiffs’ claims have become moot). 


7 Affidavits in the record indicate plaintiffs Howe, Thompson, 


Chiles, and Mousel did not suffer disability or uncompensated injury 
prior to March 4, 1988. The record before us is devoid of information 
concerning the remaining named plaintiff, Robert Wells. 


° Affidavits in the record indicate that Harold Lynam suffered a 
disabling heart attack while working for M-F Inc. in April, 1986; that 
Roy Mahon had his leg amputated and suffered aneurysms in January, 
1988. 


124a 
CONCLUSION 


We reverse the grant of the preliminary injunction as to the 
general class of persons conditionally certified by the district 
court. We affirm the district court’s issuance of the prelimi- 
nary injunction as to plan beneficiaries who are members of 
the class conditionally certified by the district court and who 
became disabled or otherwise entitled to benefit payments 
prior to the March 4, 1988. 


A true copy. 


™ attest: 
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT. 


125a 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-2056/2111SIDM 


Charles Howe, et al, 
Appellees, 


—_Y,— 


Varity Corporation, et al, 


Order Denying Petition for Rehearing and 
Suggestion for Rehearing En Banc 


The suggestion for rehearing en banc is denied. Judge 
Bowman and Judge Hansen would grant the petition. The 
petition for rehearing by the panel is also denied. 


December 5, 1994 


Order Entered at the Direction of the Court: 


/s/ MICHAEL E. GANS 
Clerk, U.S. Court of Appeals, Eighth Circuit 


