O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., 517 U.S. 308 (1996).








LII



Supreme Court









O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp. (95-354), 517 U.S. 308 (1996).


Opinion
[ Scalia ]Syllabus


HTML version
WordPerfect versionHTML version
WordPerfect version















NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released,
as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion
is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court
but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience
of the reader. See United States v. Detroit Lumber Co., 200
U.S. 321, 337.




SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES




Syllabus


O'CONNOR v. CONSOLIDATED
COIN CATERERS CORP.




certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fourth circuit




No. 95-354.
Argued February 27, 1996 -- Decided
April 1, 1996









At age 56, petitioner was fired by respondent corporation and replaced
by a 40 year old worker. He then filed this suit, alleging that his discharge
violated the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA). The District
Court granted respondent's summary judgment motion, and the Court of Appeals
affirmed, holding that petitioner failed to make out a prima facie case
of age discrimination under McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411
U.S. 792, because he failed to show that he was replaced by someone
outside the age group protected by the ADEA.




Held: Assuming that
Title VII's McDonnell Douglas framework is applicable to ADEA cases,
there must be at least a logical connection between each element of the
prima facie case and the illegal discrimination. Replacement by someone
under 40 fails this requirement. Although the ADEA limits its protection
to those who are 40 or older, it prohibits discrimination against those
protected employees on the basis of age, not class membership. That one
member of the protected class lost out to another member is irrelevant,
so long as he lost out because of his age. The latter is more reliably
indicated by the fact that his replacement was substantially younger than
by the fact that his replacement was not a member of the protected class.




56 F. 3d 542,
reversed and remanded.




Scalia, J., delivered the opinion
for a unanimous Court.
