| Supreme Court, U.S. ™~] 
FILED 
MAR 1 1996 
4) CLERK a 
No. 95-668 
—eeEEEE——————— 
IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., 


Petitioner, 


Vv. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


Joun D. O’REIty, III 
(Counsel of Record) 
O’REILLY & GROSSO 
77 Turnpike Road 
Post Office Box 3118 
Southborough, MA 01745 
(508) 460-1500 


Counsel for Petitioner. 


ea omeeimienane 
Werrington, O.C + THIEL PRESS + (202) 328-3286 


Kd * 


(i) 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether an Employer is bound by a 
Union’s "acceptance" of an earlier Employer 
proposal for a collective bargaining 
agreement when, at the time of the Union’s 
"acceptance", the Employer had a reason- 
able basis for a good faith doubt of the 
Union’s continued majority status, and 
expressed that doubt within a reasonable 
period of time after being advised of the 
final erosion of Employee support for the 
Union, but less than one day after the 
Union had telegraphed its "acceptance". 


(ii) 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDING 


National Labor Relations Board 


Auciello Iron Works, Inc.* 


* In accordance with Rule 29.6, 
Auciello Iron Works, Inc. hereby discloses 


that it has no parent company, 
or subsidiaries. 


affiliates 


(iii) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED ... 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE ........... 


I. Where a Union, whose sup- 
port has rapidly deterio- 
rated since the Employer’s 
last contract offer was 
made, suddenly communicates 
its “acceptance” of that 
last offer, the Employer 
should be entitled to raise 
its doubt as to the Union’s 
majority status as of the 
date of the Union’s “accep 
TONE sc ccccccceccccsceeecess 


II. The Board ruling that an 
"agreement" created by a 
Union’s “acceptance” creates 
an irrebuttable presumption 
of the Union’s majority 


12 


13 


13 


Iil. 


IV. 


(iv) 


status, thus rendering imma- 
terial the Employer’s evi- 

dence of the Union’s actual 

lack of majority status, is 
inconsistent with the doc- 

trine that the creation of 

such a majority status pre- 
sumption must have been 
legitimately and lawfully 
established........eeeeeeee 21 


Even if a requirement exist- 

ed that an Employer, suddenly 
faced with the basis for 
asserting a doubt of the 
Union’s majority status, 

must withdraw any outstanding 
contract proposals, it should 
be afforded a reasonable 

period of time to withdraw out- 
standing contract proposals 

or to assert its doubt of the 
Union’s majority status..... 25 


The judicial deference to 

NLRB interpretations of the 

Act is inapplicable where 

the Board’s statutory inter- 
pretation is unpersuasive or 
rests on erroneous legal 
foundations, or is not sup- 
ported by, or consistent 

with, the history or language 

OF Che ACE. cccccccccccscccess 32 


CONCLUSION .ncccccccccvccccecscees 36 


SSUUEEE SA cccccctiedudesesthe App. 1 


NLRB _v. All Brand Printing Corp. 
594 F.2d 926 (2nd Cir. 1979) .... 


(v) 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases: 
437 U.S. 483 (1978) vase eee 
899 F-2d 104, (ist Cir. 1990) ... 


Chicago Tribune Co. v. NLRB, 
965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992) .... 
-— 2. . 89,20, 33. 


Corp. Vv. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27 


(1987) ee fteeeeeese ne fetes e ees *# 22, 
Franks Bros. v. NLRB, 321 U.S 
FOB €29646) cecccces she thneees 23, 
International Ladies Garment 

, 366 U.S. 


731 (1961) wccccccccce 24, 28, 32, 


's- 


289 NLRB No. 40 (1988) ....6550-, 


Lechmere v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527 
(1992) reer eeeeneeeneneneneeeneneneneeeeeeee 


, 197 NLRB 
198, (1972) ee eeeeeeneeeneneneeeeee 


23 


25 


36 


30 


33 


25 


25 


(vi) 


NLRB _v. Babcock & Wilcox, 351 U.S. 
105 (1956) *enreneeneteerneeee eee 33, 34, 35 


NLRB v. Baptist Hospital 
co 8... Fo — TP : 


Co., 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 
1989) *eerereneeeneneeeee So, 15, 17, 27, 31 


NLRB _v. Brown, 380 U.S. 278 
(1965) *eneeeneteneteenrtreeneneneneneneneneeneneeee#e 33 


NLRB _v. Cayuga Crushed Stone, 
474 F.2d 1380 (2nd Cir. 1973) ... 25 


NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, 
494 U.S. 775 (1990) ....9, 15, 19, 22 


NLRB _v. Financial Institution 
, 471 U.S. 


1098 (1986) *eereeeneeneeneeeneneeneeneee#e 23 


NLRB _v. Food and Commercial Workers, 
G56 Gello Bun ED. so enueecbenns 33 


NLRB _v. Ironworkers, 434 U.S. 
335, (1978) *eeenerneenee eee ee eee 22 


NLRB v. Laverdiere’s Enterprises, 
933 F.2d 1045 (1st Cir. 1991) .... 28 


Pepsi Cola Bottling Co. v. NLRB 
659 F.2d 87 (8th Cir. 1981) ...... 26 


NLRB _ v. Radio and Television Broad- 
, 364 U.S. 573 
(1961) eft ee -enereweeneeeneeeer#e##*eee##ee#e##se#** *# *# @ 33 


(vii) 
Republic Aviation Corp. v. NLRB, 
Se Wile We GEEED. ececcccece 33, 34 


Royal Coach Lines v. NLRB 
838 F.2d 47 (2nd Cir. 1988) .. 24, 25 


Station KKHI, 284 NLRB No. 113 
(1987) eee ee eee eee eee eee rere errr 29 


, 184 NLRB 139 
(1970) *seeeeeeeeneeeeeeneeneeeeneeeee 14 


Wallkill Valley General Hospital 
288 NLRB No. 18 (1988) .........+. 30 


No. 95-668 


IN THE 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC., 
Petitioner 


V. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE PETITIONER 


OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion of the First Circuit Court 
of Appeals dated July 21, 1995 is reported 
at 60 F.3d 24 (Pet.App. i1a).+ A copy of 
the Supplemental Decision and Order of the 


"References to the Joint Appendix are desig- 
nated as “App.” followed by the appropriate page 
number(s). References to the Appendix to the 
Petition for Writ of Certiorari are designated as 
"Pet. App.” followed by the appropriate page num- 
ber(s). 


2 


National Labor Relations Board dated May 
9, 1995 is reported at 317 NLRB No. 60 
(Pet. App. 9a). The earlier decision of 
the First Circuit Court of Appeals dated 
November 30, 1992 is reported at 980 F.2d 
804 (Pet. App. 59a). The original Deci- 
sion and Order of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board, incorporating by reference 
the original Decision of the Administra- 
tive Law Judge of November 24, 1989, is 
reported at 303 NLRB No. 90 (Pet. App. 
84a). 


JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT 


On July 21, 1995, the First Circuit 
Court of Appeals entered its Judgment and 
Opinion, enforcing the Supplemental Deci- 
sion and Order of the National Labor Re- 
lations Board dated May 9, 1995. Peti- 
tioner’s Petition for Writ of Certiorari 
was filed on October 19, 1995. The Court 
granted the Petition on January 19, 1996. 
The Court has jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. 
§1254(1). 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


This case involves consideration of Sec- 
tion 7 and Sections 8(a)(1),(2) and (5) 
and 8(b)(1) of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Act ("NLRA" or "the Act"), 29 
U.S.C., §157, §§158 (a)(1),(2),(5) and 
158(b) (1). 


Section 7 of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. §157, 
provides: 


Employees shall have the right to 
self-organization, to form, join, or 


3 


assist labor organizations, to bargain 
collectively through representatives 
of their own choosing, and to engage 
in other concerted activities for the 
purpose of collective bargaining or 
other mutual aid or protection, and 
shall also have tke right to refrain 
from any or all of such activities 
except to the extent that such right 
may be affected by an agreement 
requiring membership in a labor orga- 
nization as a condition of employment 
as authorized in section 8(a) (3). 


Sections 8(a)(1), (2) and (5) of the 
NLRA, 29 U.S.C. §§158(a)(1), (2) and (5) 
provide: 


(a) It shall be an unfair labor prac- 
tice for an employer-- 


(1) to interfere with, restrain, or 
coerce employees in the exercise of 
the rights guaranteed in section 7; 


(2) to dominate or interfere with the 
formation or administration of any 
labor organization or contribute 
financial or other support to it: 
Provided, That subject to rules and 
regulations made and published by the 
Board pursuant to section 6, an em- 
ployer shall not be prohibited from 
permitting employees to confer with 
him during working hours without loss 
of time or pay; 


(5) to refuse to bargain collectively 
with the representatives of his em- 


4 


ployees, subject to the provisions of 
section 9(a). 


Section 8(b)(1) of the NLRA provides: 


(b) It shall be an unfair labor prac- 
tice for a labor organization or its 
agents - 


(1) to restrain or coerce (A) employ- 
ees in the exercise of the rights 
guaranteed in section 7: Provided, 
That this paragraph shall not impair 
the right of a labor organization to 
prrescribe its own rules with respect 
to the acquisition or retention of 
membership therein; or (B) an employer 
in the selection of his representa- 
tives for the purposes of collective 
bargaining or the adjustment of griev- 
ances. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The factual background to this case is 
virtually undisputed and was summarized by 
the United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit in its original November 30, 
1992 Decision at 980 F.2d 805 to 807. 
(Pet. App. 60a-65a) 


The Employer maintains an iron works 
fabrication shop located in Hudson, Massa- 
chusetts, and had enjoyed an amicable 
collective bargaining relationship with 
Local 501 of the Iron Workers’ Union for a 
number of years. A series of collective 
bargaining agreements had been negotiated 
without incident over those years. The 


2 ee 


5 


most recent agreement expired in September 
25, 1988. After several negotiating ses- 
sions in 1988, a final Employer proposal, 
which the Union agreed to submit to the 
membership for approval, was rejected by 
the membership and the parties continued 
to bargain until October 13, 1988, when a 
second Employer proposal was presented to 
the membership and was rejected with a 
strike vote taken, resulting in a strike 
commencing on October 14, 1988 and with 
picket lines being placed at the Employ- 
er’s plant. Some four weeks into the 
course of the strike and the picketing 
activity, a gradual erosion of employee 
support for the Union was evidenced, so 
that by the final week of the strike, the 
Employer noticed an increased deteriora- 
tion of Union support. The factual basis 
upon which the Employer relied for its 
growing belief that the Union might no 
longer maintain strong support of the 
bargaining unit was the fact that several 
employees had elected to cross the picket 
line, and/or had resigned from the Union 
and, more importantly, had made direct 
comments to upper management supervisory 
employees, affirmatively reflecting the 
bargaining unit employees’ lack of support 
for the Union. As a result of the Employ- 
er’s feeling that the support for the 
Union was on the downslide, the Employer, 
at the last negotiating session between 
the parties on November 17, 1988, advanced 
a proposal which incorporated by reference 
some earlier points on which agreement had 
been reached, but which took a harder line 
on other points. The Union then terminat- 
ed the negotiating session, and over the 
course of the next week, the Employer 


6 


observed additional factors which support- 
ed its earlier impression that the Union’s 
support was rapidly deteriorating. 


The picket line was withdrawn the next 
day, Friday, November 18, 1988, and on 
that day and throughout the following week 
of November 21, 1988, the balance of the 
employees returned to work and additional 
employees continued to make strong com- 
ments to management representatives, indi- 
cating their lack of any continuing sup- 
port for the Union. Also during that week 
of November 21, 1988, a number of addi- 
tional employees resigned from Union mem- 
bership. Not only did these returning 
employees affirmatively express lack of 
support for the Union during the week of 
November 21, 1988, but other employees, 
including the Unior Steward, who were 
presumed to have supported the Union, 
indicated to the company that they would 
not be returning, and had obtained perma- 
nent employment elsewhere. Set forth in 
the appendix hereto at page App. 1-2 is a 
summary of those employees who, after the 
withdrawal of the Union picket line on 
Friday, November 18, 1988, and throughout 
the week of November 21, 1988, affirma- 
tively indicated to the company their lack 
of support for the Union, including their 
resignation from the Union, as well as a 
list of employees who had been supporting 
the Union and who advised the company that 
same week that they were not returning to 
work, as they were permanently employed 
elsewhere. While the Employer was in the 
process of assessing these dramatic events 
occurring during that week, and was in the 
process of reviewing what, if any, actions 


7 


would be appropriate in view of this now- 
apparent final erosion of employee support 
for the Union, the Union sent a Sunday 
evening (App. 17a, 65a) telegram to the 
home of the company president on November 
27, 1988, purporting to "accept" the man- 
agement offer of November 17, 1988, which 
offer had been made prior to: (a) the 
withdrawal of the picket line; (b) the 
return to work of a number of employees; 
(c) the withdrawal from Union membership 
by additional employees; (d) the increased 
expressions of dissatisfaction with the 
Union being made by employees; and (e) the 
determination that some employees who had 
been supporting the Union would not be 
returning to work, as they were permanent- 
ly employed elsewhere. Management repre- 
sentatives met with their attorneys the 
following Monday morning, November 28, 
1988, and reviewed the Employer’s revised 
assessment as to the now-complete lack of 
employee support for the Union, and imme- 
diately advised the Union that it would no 
longer recognize the Union as the exclu- 
sive bargaining representative of the 
employees, and, in view of the Union’s 
clear lack of support among employees, its 
prior contract proposal was no _ longer 
available for "acceptance". (App. 66a) 


Based on an Unfair Labor Practice Charge 
filed with the Regional Office of the 
National Labor Relations Board alleging a 
statutory refusal to bargain by the Enm- 
ployer’s refusal to consider itself bound 
by the Union’s "acceptance" of the earlier 
management proposal, the Regional Office 
of the Board issued a Complaint on January 
17, 1989, alleging the Employer violated 


the Act by withdrawing recognition from 
the Union and by refusing to execute an 
agreement with the Union. 


Hearings were conducted before Adminis- 
trative Law Judge Zankel on June 21, Au- 
gust 8 and August 9, 1989, and on November 
24, 1989, the Administrative Law Judge 
issued a decision that the issue of the 
Employer’s good faith doubt of the majori- 
ty status of the Union was, in fact, imma- 
terial, as the Union had "accepted" the 
Employer’s proposal immediately prior to 
the Employer’s withdrawal of recognition. 
The Administrative Law Judge determined 
that a collective bargaining agreement 
between the Employer and the Union came 
into existence upon the Union’s transmit- 
tal of its Sunday evening, November 27, 
1988, telegram purporting to "accept" the 
Employer’s last proposal, and that the 
Employer’s withdrawal the following day of 
recognition and refusal to execute an 
agreement was, therefore, unlawful. (Pet. 


App. p. 84a) 


Approximately a year and a half later, 
on June 27, 1991, the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board issued a three-paragraph Order 
affirming the Administrative Law Judge 
(Appendix, p. 84a). In connection with 
the NLRB attempting to seek enforcement of 
that Order in the United States Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit, the Court 
affirmed a number of aspects of the NLRB 
Order, but agreed with the Employer that 
the NLRB decision wrich had merely cited 
prior NLRB determinations dealing with 
instances where the Union’s lack of sup- 
port had arisen only after the making of 


9 


the agreement, and were, therefore, not a 
basis for ruling on a factual situation 
involving a Union’s lack of support which 
existed at the time of the Union’s efforts 
to “accept" the Employer’s earlier propos- 
al, had not adequately dealt with the fac- 
tual issues presented by this case. The 
Court determined that the Board had 
“glossed over" what the Court determined 
to be the “tough question" presented in 
this case, namely whether a contract must 
be irrebuttably presumed, where the Union 
effort to accept an earlier Employer pro- 
posal came at a time when the Union clear- 
ly lacked majority support. The First 
Circuit noted a then-recent decision of 
the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals de- 
termining that an earlier management pro- 
posal was no longer available for “accep- 
tance” by a Union which had clearly lost 
its majority support of the workers. 

, 965 F.2d 244 
(7th Cir. 1992). 


The First Circuit Court of Appeals fur- 
ther noted that in recent decisions, both 
before this Court* as well as before the 
Eleventh Circuit’, the Courts had become 
involved in the issue of whether the Enm- 
ployer had, in fact, a good faith doubt of 
the continued Union’s majority in cases 
factually identical to the instant case, 
namely, when that good faith doubt was 


*NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, 494 U.S. 
777 (1990) 


» 871 
F.2d 980 (llth Cir. 1989) 


10 


first raised by the Employer only immedi- 
ately after the allegedly minority Union 
had attempted to "accept" an earlier man- 
agement proposal, and those Courts, unlike 
to Board in this case, had, in fact, de- 
termined the issve »hased on the legitimacy 
of the Employer’s gvod faith doubts of the 
Union’s majority status. The matter was 
remanded by the First Circuit to the NLRB 
to address the apparent inapplicability of 
the prior Board precedent cited in its 
June 27, 1991 decision, as well as to 
address the apparent inconsistencies in 
the approach taken in prior matters, both 
with this Court as well as with the Elev- 
enth Circuit, and to address the impact of 
the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals deci- 
sion in Chicago Tribune, supra, that an 
Employer’s offer is no longer available to 
the Union whose majority support has been 
clearly eroded subsequent to the tendering 
of the earlier management proposal. The 
Board was specifically directed by the 
First Circuit to “act with expedition" and 
to forward a copy of its Supplemental 
Decision to the Clerk of the First Circuit 
“as soon as it can". (Pet. App. p. 83a) 


Notwithstanding the First Circuit’s 
mandate to rule on this matter expedi- 
tiously, it took the Board a full two and 
one-half years to finally issue its Sup- 
plemental Decision and Award wherein it 
determined that, for policy considerations 
of “industrial stability" and “employee 
freedom of choice", the presumption of 
majority status must prevail until the 
Employer expressly challenges that majori- 
ty status. It further determined that, 
if an Employer has a good faith doubt as 


11 


to the Union’s continued majority status, 
it must initially raise that issue before 
the Union accepts its offer. In the fac- 
tual context of this case, the Board’s 
decision, in essence, stated that the fact 
that the Union moved quicker than the 
Employer by sending a Sunday evening tele- 
gram to the home of the company’s presi- 
dent before the management’s announcement 
of withdrawal of Union recognition, in the 
face of complete and obvious erosion of 
any Union support, on the following day, a 
Monday morning, was dispositive of the 
case, and precluded the Employer from 
presenting evidence that, at the time of 
the Union’s “acceptance”, the Employer had 
a legitimate doubt of the Union’s majority 
status. (Pet. App. 9a) 


The matter was again reviewed by the 
United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit on July 21, 1995 and it was 
determined that, in view of the Board’s 
finally having announced an articulated 
policy-oriented basis for its determina- 
tion, the Court would affirm that ruling. 
The Court specifically noted that, in 
adopting the Board’s rule that an Employer 
may not raise the issue of the Union’s 
majority status once the Union has "ac- 
cepted" an earlier management proposal 
(even though the Employer attempts to 
raise this issue within a day or, in theo- 
ry, within an hour after the Union’s "ac- 
ceptance") the First Circuit was reaching 
“a result different from that by our sis- 


ter circuit in Chicago Tribune Co." (App. 
Pp. 7a). 


12 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


This case presents the intriguing issue 
of whether the established policy of ac- 
cording to a Union an irrebuttable pre- 
sumption of majority status once a col- 
lective bargaining agreement has been 
reached, should also apply to situations 
such as this, where, at the time the 
"agreement" has been reached via _ the 
Union’s somewhat unorthodox actions in 
sending a Sunday evening telegram of ac- 
ceptance in an apparent effort to prevent 
the Employer from fully assessing the 
impact of the sudden erosion of Union 
support, the Employer has not had a real- 
istic and reasonable opportunity to assert 
an expression of its good faith doubt of 
the Union’s continued majority status. 
The traditional purpose in establishing 
such an irrebuttable presumption of con- 
tinued Union majority status is to pre- 
serve a legitimately created and lawfully 
continued bargaining relationship between 
the parties. Such an irrebuttable pre- 
sumption has no place in a factual situa- 
tion such as is involved here, where the 
asserted collective bargaining relation- 
ship which the Board contends created an 
irrebuttable presumption of Union majority 
status was fictitiously created at a time 
when: (a) the Employer had a basis for 
believing the Union no longer maintained a 
majority status; and (b) the Employer had 
not had a reasonable opportunity to assess 
the rapidly eroding Union support or to 
express its doubt as to the Union’s con- 
tinuing majority status. 


13 


The Board’s determination that an Em- 
ployer’s prior offer for a collective bar- 
gaining agreement remains available for 
acceptance by a Union who, subsequent to 
the offer having been made, has lost its 
majority support among employees is so 
irrational, in view of the objectives of 
the Act to protect employees’ Section 7 
rights and to prevent and prohibit Employ- 
ers from entering into agreements with 
minority Unions, that it should not be 
confirmed by this Court. In similar con- 
texts, both the Board, as well as various 
reviewing Courts, have allowed Employers 
to introduce affirmative evidence estab- 
lishing a lack of majority status at the 
time the “agreement” was reached, and have 
rejected arguments that once the "agree- 
ment" has been reached, the irrebuttable 
presumption of continued Union majority 
status prevents the consideration of any 
Employer contention that, in fact, at the 
time of the "“agreement", the Union was 
lacking a majority status. 


ARGUMENT 


I. 

WHERE A UNION, WHOSE SUPPORT HAS RAP- 
IDLY DETERIORATED SINCE THE EMPLOYER’S 
LAST CONTRACT OFFER WAS MADE, SUDDENLY 
COMMUNICATES ITS “ACCEPTANCE” OF THAT 
LAST OFFER, THE EMPLOYER SHOULD BE 
ENTITLED TO RAISE ITS DOUBT AS TO THE 
UNION’S MAJORITY STATUS AS OF THE DATE 
OF THE UNION’S "ACCEPTANCE". 


The factual situation involved in this 
case is a recurring one, wherein during 


14 


the course of a prolonged strike, the 
parties continue to negotiate and, when 
the gradually eroding employee support 
for the Union reaches a low ebb, the Union 
is generally inclined to grab “whatever it 
can" by attempting to “accept” the most 
recent Employer proposal’, even though 
that Employer proposal was likely made by 
the Employer at a time when either: (1) 
the Union’s support among bargaining unit 
employees was greater; or (2) the employer 
may not have been fully aware of the ex- 
tent of the Union’s lack of employee sup- 
port. Where, as in this case, the Union’s 
"acceptance" of the earlier Employer offer 
literally comes out of the blue and is 
sent in such apparent panic circumstances 
by being telegraphed on a Sunday evening 
to the home of the company’s president 
only a few days after the final indicia of 
any employee support for the Union has 
vanished, the Employer is placed in a 
position where it must make a rapid as- 
sessment and determination of whether, at 
the time of the Union’s effort to capture 
the benefit of a prior Employer proposal, 
the Union was, in fact, a representative 
of a majority of the bargaining unit em- 
ployees. Prior decisions of other Circuit 
Courts of Appeals as well as the decision 


“tn the very similar circumstances involved in 

, 184 NLRB 139 (1970), the 

Board had referred to such telegrams of “accep- 

tance”, sent at a time when the Union’s employee 

support had clearly evaporated, as a “capitulated . 

contractual surrender”, sent in the Union’es 

"haste to secure its bargaining status", which 

would not place any obligation on the Employer to 
accept. 


15 


of this Court in NLRB v. Curtin Matheson 
Scientific, 494 U.S. 775 (1990) have de- 
termined that the critical issue in such 
circumstances, where the Employer, after 
receiving such a Union attempt to "accept" 
a prior offer in the face of eroding em- 
ployee support, is whether the Employer 
may reject in a timely fashion such an 
"acceptance" based on the Employer’s good 
faith belief that the Union, at the time 
of its “acceptance”, no longer possessed 
the support of a majority of the bargain- 
ing unit employees. Unlike the decision 
in this Court in Curtin Matheson Scientif- 
ic and unlike the Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals’ decision in Chicago Tribune Co. 
Vv. NLRB, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992), and 
unlike the Eleventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals’ decision in NLRB v. Bickerstaff 

, 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 
1989), the First Circuit Court of Appeals 
determined that the question of the 
Employer’s good faith doubt of the Union’s 
majority status at the time of receiving 
such a telegram "acceptance" is immateri- 
al, as the agreement is fully consummated 
by the Employer’s receipt of the Union’s 
"acceptance", and that "agreement" consti- 
tutes an irrebuttable presumption of the 
Union’s majority status. Thus, the deci- 
sion of the First Circuit Court of Appeals 
in this case is inconsistent with at least 
two other Circuits, as well as with the 
rationale of this Court. 


In NLRB v. Bickerstaff Clay Prods. Co., 
871 F.2d 980 (lith Cir. 1989), cert. den. 
493 U.S. 924 (1989), the Employer’s last 
offer of November 6 was not accepted but, 
after further detericration of the Union’s 


16 


majority status, was "accepted" by a Union 
telegram on April 8th. As in the instant 
case, one day after receiving this “accep- 
tance", management withdrew recognition 
from the Union and advised the Union that 
the prior offer was no longer available 
for “acceptance.” While, unlike the in- 
stant case, both the Administrative Law 
Judge and the National Labor Relations 
Board decided the matter on the question 
of whether this subsequent expression by 
the Employer of its doubt of the Union’s 
majority status was, in fact, based upon a 
good faith doubt, based on objective con- 
siderations (a matter which, in this case, 
the Board and First Circuit are now saying 
is immaterial, in view of the Union’s 
having sent its "acceptance" one day prior 
to the Employer’s withdrawal of recogni- 
tion), the Board did argue before the 
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, as it 
did in the instant case, that the prior 
offer of the Employer remained available 
for "acceptance", notwithstanding the 
Employer having reasonably concluded in 
the meantime that the Union no longer 
represented a majority of the bargaining 
unit employees. According to the Board’s 
argument in that case, the Employer’s 
offer would be available for such "“accep- 
tance" until such time as the Employer 
expressly either withdrew the offer or 
withdrew recognition. The Eleventh Cir- 
cuit Court of Appeals, unlike the First 
Circuit Court of Appeals in the instant 
case, determined that there was no such 
obligation to either withdraw the offer or 
withdraw recognition. 


17 


"There is no authority cited by the 
Board, and none exists, for the propo- 
sition that withdrawal of a prior of- 
fer is a condition precedent to an 
employer’s withdrawal of recognition 
based on a good faith doubt of the 
Union’s majority status. If the cir- 
cumstances changed such that the Em- 
ployer reasonably believed that the 
Union no longer represented a majority 
of its employees on April 8, 1986, 
Bickerstaff had no duty to withdraw 
its offer by notifying the Union." 
NLRB _v. Bickerstaff Clay Products, 871 
F.2d 980, 993-994 (1lith Cir. 1989) 


The Court of Appeals in that case went 
on to determine that the Employer was 
within its rights in rejecting the Union’s 
telegram “accepting” the Employer’s prior 
offer and in withdrawing recognition from 
the Union, even though this was not done, 
as in the instant case, until one day 
after the Union had "accepted" the Employ- 
er’s prior offer. This decision is, thus, 
Clearly inconsistent with the First Cir- 
cuit’s decision in this case that, not- 
withstanding an Employer’s legitimate, 
good faith doubt of the continuing majori- 
ty status of the Union, it is bound by a 
Union “acceptance" of the Employer’s most 
recent proposal. 


Similarly, in Chicago Tribune Co. v. 
NLRB, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992), the 
Employer had engaged in a number of col- 
lective bargaining sessions with the Union 
and, after becoming aware of the nearly 
complete erosion of the Union’s support 
among employees, had not’ specifically 


18 


withdrawn its earlier offers to the Union. 
It was only several days after the Union’s 
eventual “acceptance” of the Employer’s 
earlier offer that the Employer, for the 
first time, formally took the position 
that at the time of the Union’s "“accep- 
tance", it no longer represented a majori- 
ty of the employees. As in the instant 
case, the National Labor Relations Board 
took the position that the acceptance of 
the Employer’s earlier offer bound the 
Employer to a collective bargaining agree- 
ment, and it was too late for the Employer 
to maintain that, at the time of that 
"acceptance", the Union no longer repre- 
sented a majority of the employees. That 
position was rejected by the Seventh Cir- 
cuit Court of Appeals on the basic ratio- 
nale that an Employer may not legally 
consummate an agreement with a Union when, 
at the time of that "consummation", the 
Employer has reason to believe that the 
Union does not represent a majority of its 
employees. The Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals also placed great emphasis on the 
fact that to allow a Union to suddenly 
grasp an earlier Employer offer at a time 
when the Union’s support has disappeared 
and, simply because the Employer has not 
formally withdrawn either the offer or its 
recognition of the Union, to force its 
employees to be bound by a collective 
bargaining agreement with a Union with 
whom they no longer have any allegiance is 
unduly and unnecessarily penalizing those 
employees. The Court drew careful dis- 
tinctions between situations such as those 
involved in this case where, in the ab- 
sence of any bad faith bargaining by the 
Employer, the Employer simply had not 


19 


formally withdrawn its prior offer or 
Union recognition in the face of the 
Union’s eroding support, and cases where 
the Employer refuses to comply with its 
statutory obligation to bargain in good 
faith and, as the result of such refusal, 
the employee support eventually erodes. 
The Court suggested that in the latter 
case, the Employer would not be in a posi- 
tion to reject the Union’s acceptance of 
any Employer offer, as the Employer itself 
has illegally contributed to the erosion 
of the Union’s support. There is no sug- 
gestion that any such circumstances exist- 
ed in the instant case. The Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit in the in- 
stant case expressly acknowledged that its 
determination would be contrary to this 
decision of the Seventh Circuit Court of 


Appeals in Chicago Tribune. (App. p. 7a) 


The facts of the instant case are also 
remarkably similar to those involved in 
NLRB_v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, 859 
F.2d 362 (5th Cir. 1988) rev’d. 494 U.S. 
777 (1990). In that case, the Employer 
had made an offer to the Union on June 
12th, and after serious erosion of Union 
support, the Union finally “accepted" the 
offer on July 16th. Four days later, the 
Employer declined the Union’s "acceptance" 
and, for the first time, formally 
announced its withdrawal of that earlier 
offer, based on its doubts as to the 
Union’s majority status as of the date the 
Union purported to "accept" the Employer’s 
offer. The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals 
determined that on those facts, there was 
no violation of Sections 8(a)(1) and 8(a) 
(5) by the Employer refusing to execute an 


20 


agreement, and by withdrawing its recogni- 
tion of the Union. Most significantly, 
unlike the Court of Appeals in the instant 
case, it did not consider a legitimate 
agreement to have been entered into simply 
by the Union’s attempting to "accept" the 
Employer’s last proposal. Obviously, if 
the Fifth Circuit had felt that the mere 
"acceptance" by the Union of the earlier 
Employer offer resulted in an "agreement", 
there would have been no need for the 
Court of Appeals even to have considered 
the legitimacy of the Employer’s clain, 
made four days after this "acceptance" as 
to the Union’s lack of majority status. 


On appeal, a majority of this Court 
determined that the Employer’s asserted 
basis for its contention that the Union no 
longer maintained a majority status (the 
existence of a number of striker replace- 
ments which the Employer had assumed did 
not support the Union) was not a legiti- 
mate basis for the Employer’s withdrawal 
of recognition. But, under the rationale 
of the First Circuit in the instant case, 
there would have beer no need to have even 
reached that issue if the Union’s "“accep- 
tance" of the Employer’s earlier offer 
constituted a binding agreement, regard- 
less of the Employer’s feeling that the 
Union then no longer enjoyed a majority 
status. 


Similarly, the extended dissenting opin- 
ions of four members of this Court deter- 
mining that the Employer had not violated 
the statute by refusing to execute an 
agreement with the Union necessarily as- 
sumed that a binding contract was not 


7h ta ot Sal 


21 


consummated simply by the Union’s "“accep- 
tance" of the Employer’s earlier offer. 
494 U.S. at 798, 801 


Thus, the eventual determination of the 
Board, as affirmed by the First Circuit 
Court of Appeals, that the Employer’s 
Claim of a good faith doubt of the Union’s 
majority status should not even be consid- 
ered if that claim is formally announced 
the day after the Union’s telegram of 
"acceptance" is immaterial, is inconsis- 
tent with the manner in which this Court 
and other Circuits have dealt with that 
same factual situation. 


II. 
THE BOARD RULING THAT AN "AGREEMENT" 
CREATED BY A UNION’S “ACCEPTANCE" CRE- 
ATES AN IRREBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION OF 
THE UNION’S MAJORITY STATUS, THUS REN- 
DERING IMMATERIAL THE EMPLOYER’S EVI- 
DENCE OF THE UNION’S ACTUAL LACK OF 
MAJORITY STATUS, IS INCONSISTENT WITH 
THE DOCTRINE THAT THE CREATION OF SUCH 
A MAJORITY STATUS PRESUMPTION MUST 


HAVE BEEN LEGITIMATELY AND LAWFULLY 
ESTABLISHED. 


This Court has approved in various cir- 
cumstances the Board’s creation of either 
irrebuttable or rebuttable presumptions of 
a Union’s majority status. For example, a 
Union certified by an NLRB election is 
irrebuttably presumed to have a majority 
status for a one-year period after the 
Board certification; after that one-year 
period, its majority status has only a 
rebuttable presumption, and the Employer 
may properly raise, after that one-year 


22 


period, a claimed good faith doubt as to 
the majority status of the Union. NLRB v. 


Curtin Matheson Scientific, 494 U.S. 775 
(1990); Fall River Dyeing and Finishing 


Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 37 (1987) 


Similarly, a Union who has entered into 
a valid collective bargaining agreement 
with an Employer is irrebuttably presumed, 
during the course of that agreement, to 
have a majority status among bargaining 
unit employees; after the expiration of 
that collective bargaining agreement and 
during the course of negotiations for a 
successor agreement, the Union is deemed 
only to have a rebuttable presumption of a 


majority status. NLRB v. Ironworkers, 434 
U.S. 335, 343 (1978) 


To the same effect, a Union who enters 
into a recognition agreement with an Em- 
ployer is irrebuttably presumed to have a 
majority status for "a reasonable time" 
after that recognition agreement is 
reached. The rationale for such a policy 
creating presumptions of majority status 


5tn this case, while there was an NLRB Certif- 
ication in 1977, (App. 69a), the rebuttable pre- 
sumption of the Union’s majority status which was 
applicable in the 1988 negotiations was based on 
the recently-expired agreement, and not on the 
earlier Certification. (Indeed, none of the 1988 
employees were even employed at the time of the 
1977 Certification. (App. p. 55a) Similarly, the 
“irrebuttable presumption” upon which the Board is 
now relying so as to preclude the Employer’s evi- 
dence of the Union’s loss of majority is the “con- 
tract" created by the Union’s November 27, 1988 
telegram; it is not based on the original 1977 
Certification. 


23 


is that “a bargaining relationship, once 
rightfully established, must be permitted 
to exist and function for a reasonable 
period in which it can be given a fair 
chance to succeed". Franks Bros. v. NLRB, 
321 U.S. 702, 705 (1944) This Court has 
more recently noted that this type of 
presumption of majority status is intended 
to “promote stability in collective-bar- 
gaining relationships, without impairing 
the free choice of employees". Fall River 

, 482 
U.S. 27 (1987) Obviously, the creating of 
an irrebuttable presumption of Union ma- 
jority status will have an unavoidable 
impact of infringing on the ability of 
bargaining unit employees to engage in 
activity otherwise protected by Section 7 
of the Act, such as challenging an incum- 
bent Union’s majority status or in seeking 
certification by another Union or in at- 
tempting to refrain from Union activity. 
However, as this Court noted in NLRB v. 


ca, 471 U.S. 1098 (1986), the preference 
for industrial stability created by lawful 
collective bargaining relationships must 
prevail over the incidental impact the 
protection of collective bargaining rela- 
tionships may have on the ability of the 
employees to engage in otherwise available 
Section 7 activities. Moreover, while 
that deprivation of Section 7 rights might 
be justified in order to protect legiti- 
mate collective bargaining relationships, 
it is an impermissible infringement on 
Section 7 rights and a clear violation of 


24 


the principles of Section 8(a)(2)° of the 
Act to extend such a presumption of major- 
ity status to relationships which are 
based on Union agreements unless the Union 
agreement itself was lawfully entered 
into; where the agreement was not lawfully 
entered into, such am agreement should not 
serve as the vehicle for the creation of 
such majority status presumption, so as to 
deprive employees of their Section 7 
rights. 


For example, in Royal Coach Lines v. 
NLRB, 838 F.2d 47 ‘2nd Cir. 1988), the 
Employer had entered into a recognition 
agreement with the Union. Such an agree- 
ment ordinarily would create an irrebutta- 
ble presumption of Union majority status, 
at least for a “reasonable period of 
time". In that case, the Employer, upon 
being advised that at the time of the 
recognition agreement, the Union, in fact, 
did not represent a majority of its enm- 
ployees, immediately repudiated the agree- 
ment and disavowed any obligation to deal 
with the Union, based on its good faith 
doubt that the Union had not represented a 
majority of the employees. The Second 
Circuit Court of Appeals acknowledged the 
general irrebuttable presumption of the 
Union’s majority status flowing from such 
agreements, but indicated that the general 


‘under Sections 8(a)(2) and 8(b)(1),, it is 
clearly illegal for an Employer or Union to negoti- 
ate or enter into an agreement when the Union does 
not represent a majority of the employees. 14 
U.S. 731, 732-733 (1961) 


25 


rule for the operation of presumptions of 
Union majority status "must be limited to 
those bargaining relationships that have 
indeed been ‘lawfully established’". The 
Second Circuit quoted language from an 
earlier decision in 

Stone, 474 F.2d 1380 (2nd Cir. 1973), 
where the presumptions flowing from a 
Union recognition agreement were limited 
to those agreements which were "valid" at 
the time of their consumption. The court 
also noted in its earlier decision in NLRB 
v. All Brand Printing Corp., 594 F.2d 926, 
929 (2nd Cir. 1979), that the basis for 
this presumption of Union majority status 
must be a “valid” agreement. This Court, 
in Franks Bros. v. NLRB, 321 U.S. 702 
(1944), indicated that the collective 
bargaining relationships which are to be 
protected by the aforesaid presumptions of 
majority status must have been "rightfully 
established" in order to receive the pro- 
tection of such presumptions. Otherwise, 
"the interest in protecting bargaining 
relationships could not justifiably out- 
weigh the burdens on employee freedom that 
flow in some circumstances from the impo- 
sition of a period of irrebuttably pre- 
sumptive Union majority support". Royal 
Coach Lines, 838 F.2d 47 at 52. 


The Board itself has noted the distinc- 
tion that must be drawn between creating 
presumptions of Union majority status from 
valid agreements, as opposed to those 
which are invalid as a result of the Union 
not maintaining a majority status as of 
the time of the entering into of the con- 
tract. In Moisi & Son Trucking, 197 NLRB 
198, (1972), it was determined that an 


26 


Employer who has entered into a voluntary 
recognition agreement with the Union is 
faced with an irrebuttable presumption 
that the Union represents a majority of 
its employees, and must deal with the 
Union for a reasonable period of time, 
“unless he introduces affirmative evidence 


lack of majority at the time of 
agg BR agp nem F (Emphasis 


added) 


Ill. 

EVEN IF A REQUIREMENT EXISTED THAT AN 
EMPLOYER, SUDDENLY FACED WITH THE BA- 
SIS FOR ASSERTING A DOUBT OF THE 
UNION’S MAJORITY STATUS, MUST WITHDRAW 
ANY OUTSTANDING CONTRACT PROPOSALS, IT 
SHOULD BE AFFORDED A REASONABLE PERIOD 
OF TIME TO WITHDRAW OUTSTANDING CON- 
TRACT PROPOSALS OR TO ASSERT ITS DOUBT 
OF THE UNION’S MAJORITY STATUS. 


Under the Board’s own guidelines, an 
Employer’s offer for a collective bargain- 
ing agreement will remain available for 
acceptance until it is expressly with- 
drawn, unless circumstances arise which 
would lead the parties to reasonably be- 
lieve that the offer was no longer avail- 
able, or “unless there are intervening 
circumstances which would make it unfair 
to hold the company to its offer." Pepsi 

. Vv. NLRB, 659 F.2d 87, 
89-90 (8th Cir. 1981) One of the circum- 
stances that could frequently arise be- 
tween the making of such an offer and the 
Union’s subsequent attempt to "accept" 
that offer is the loss of the Union’s 
majority status and, as noted above, (pp. 
15-16), the Eleventh Circuit Court of Ap- 


27 


peals has expressly noted that in those 
circumstances, the Employer has no duty to 
withdraw its offer from what has now be- 
come a minority Union. NLRB_v. Bicker- 

, 871 F.2d 980, 993-994 
(lith Cir. 1989) 


Moreover, even if the Board were to 
administratively create such a duty, com- 
mon sense dictates that the time within 
which an Employer must withdraw its offer 
should be dictated by the circumstances 
which have led the Employer to believe 
that the Union no longer maintains its 
majority status. Obviously, an Employer. 
who has made a prior contract offer to te 
Union and is subsequently presented, for 
the first time, with compelling evidence 
which would serve as the basis for a good 
faith belief on its part that the Union no 
longer maintains a majority status, should 
not be held committed to a Union contract 
if the Union, within minutes or hours of 
the Employer’s receiving that information, 
telegraphs its "acceptance" of the Emp loy- 
er’s offer. The Employer should have a 
reasonable opportunity not only to inves- 
tigate and verify the information, which, 
if confirmed, would serve as the basis for 
the Employer’s good faith doubt of the 
Union’s majority status, but the Employer 
should also have a reasonable period of 
time to communicate its good faith doubt 
to the Union. Clearly, if the Employer 
prematurely and without properly investi- 
gating and verifying the information that 
could lead to a good faith doubt of a 
Union’s majority status, withdraws recog- 
nition from the Union, it has exposed 
itself to an unfair labor practice charge. 


28 


NLRB v. Laverdiere’s Enterprises, 933 F.2d 
1045, 1051-1053 (ist Cir. 1991); Bolton- 
Emerson v. NLRB, 899 F.2d 104, 106 (ist 
Cir. 1990) The need for the Employer to 
have at least a reasonable opportunity to 
assess the factual basis for any possible 
belief that the Union no longer maintains 
majority status is emphasized by the fact 
that if it were to continue to recognize 
and deal with a Union, after becoming 
aware of the basis for a belief that the 
Union no longer maintains a majority sta- 
tus, it has violated Section 8(a)(2) of 


the Act. 
, 366 U.S. 731, 732- 


Workers Union v. NLRB 

733 (1961) It would be an unfair and 
unreasonable requirement to place a burden 
upon the Employer to have to go through 
the difficult and prolonged process of 
accurately evaluating the current majority 
status of the Union (at the peril of in- 
curring possible Unfair Labor Practice 
charges)’ and then to have to decide 
whether or not to formally announce its 
disavowal of its obligation to deal with 
that Union within a matter of hours or 
even days of the Employer’s first receiv- 
ing the factual information which could 


’?he dilemma faced by an Employer having to 
determine when it is permissible to assert its good 
faith doubt that the Union no longer maintains a 
majority status is demonstrated in the instant case 
where the Board’s decision implies that the Employ- 
er waited too long to announce its decision, yet 
General Counsel, before the Administrative Law 
Judge, argued at length that, even as of November 
28th, when the Employer announced its good faith 
doubt, the Employer did not yet have a sufficient 


factual basis for that good faith doubt. 


29 


serve as a possible basis for the conclu- 
sion that the Union no longer enjoyed a 
majority status. 


While in this case, the Board is 
attempting to depict the Employer as one 
casually “sitting back" and methodically 
deciding if and when it will announce it’s 
doubt of the Union’s continuing majority 
status, or whether it will continue to 
negotiate with a minority Union in an 
attempt to obtain a more favorable con- 
tract (Pet. App. p.36a), the facts of this 
case clearly negate any such reference and 
demonstrate the need for allowing at least 
a reasonable period of time for an Employ- 
er to assess and evaluate the facts creat- 
ing a possible good faith doubt of the 
Union’s majority status. While the Em- 
ployer had limited information that sever- 
al months prior to the strike, one or two 
employees had expressed dissatisfaction 
with the Union (App. p. 3la, 46a, 60a), 
and that some employees had crossed the 
picket line and resigned from the Union 
(App. p. 9a, 13a, General Counsel Exhibits 
2a, b, c, da, 3a, b, c, a, 4) and that a 
few strike replacements had been hired 
(App. p. 40a), it certainly had far less 
than an adequate basis for disavowing an 
obligations to deal with the Union as of 
November 17, 1988, when it made its last 
offer to the Union. As the Board has 
ruled on a number of occasions, the mere 
fact of several employees crossing a pick- 
et line and re-signing from the Union and 
several additional employees being hired 
as strike replacements is an inadequate 
basis for refusing to recognize the Union. 


Station KKHI, 284 NLRB No. 113 (1987); 


30 


‘one 
NLRB No. 40 (1988); Wallkill Valley Gener~- 
al Hospital, 288 NLRB No. 18 (1988) It 
was only after the Union withdrew its 
picket line during the day of Friday, 
November 18th, and throughout the follow- 
ing week, that a continuous and changing 
barrage of events took place that served 
as the factual basis for the Employer’s 
forming a possible belief that the Union 
no longer enjoyed the support of a majori- 
ty of its employees. For the balance of 
that day and throughout the following week 
of November 21st, not only did a number of 
employees who had been either picketing or 
honoring the picket line return to work 
and express to management representatives 
their lack of support for the Union and, 
in some instances, actually resign from 
the Union, but a number of heretofore 
Union supporters announced for the first 
time, during that same period, that they 
had decided to accept permanent employment 
elsewhere, and accordingly, would not be 
considered any longer to be bargaining 
unit employees in the Employer’s assess- 
ment of whether the Union had the support 
of a majority of the bargaining unit enm- 
ployees. See Appendix to Brief, p. App. 
1 detailing the apparent change in union 
support status of 13 employees during that 
3-or 4-day period. The change in apparent 
status of some 13 employees in a relative- 
ly small unit consisting of some 23 en- 
ployees was not made known to the Employer 
until after the picket line was withdrawn 
on November i8th and throughout the work 


, 289 


31 


week of November 2ist®. It stands to rea- 
son that a relatively small Employer who 
is attempting to run its commercial enter- 
prise would need to investigate and to 
assess the changed circumstances in which 
it found itself, as the result of the 
change in status of these 13 employees, 
and it would be an unreasonable burden to 
force such an Employer to prematurely 
announce its disavowal of its obligation 
to the Union, and thus incur the risk of 
exposure to an unfair labor practice 
charge. Clearly, such an Employer should 
have at least a few days to assess its 
position and, even if this Court were to 
disagree with the determination of the 
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Bick- 
erstaff Clay Products, supra, p. 15-16, 
and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals 
in Chicago Tribune Co. v. NLRB, supra, p. 
17-18, that an Employer who is placed in 
the posture of having a good faith belief 
of the Union’s loss of majority status 
need not expressly withdraw any outstand- 
ing contract proposals or withdraw recog- 
nition from the Union, it certainly should 
have at least a reasonable period of time 
to assess its position and to decide the 
appropriateness of withdrawing outstanding 
contract proposals and/or withdrawing 
recognition from the Union. Not only 
should it be allowed a reasonable time to 


®the time which was available to the Employer 
to assess and analyze the sudden shift in employee 
support for the Union was, in fact, even more 
limited, as the result of the work week of November 
21st being a short work week, due to the Thanksgiv- 
ing holiday. 


32 


assess the information available to it and 
to analyze that information, it clearly 


has, as the Court noted in International 
, 366 


U.S. 731, 739 (1961), a statutory respon- 
sibility to carefully analyze the informa- 
tion available to it to assure itself 
whether the Union, in fact, represents a 
majority of its employees. 


It is respectfully submitted that the 
Board’s decision, depriving the Employer 
of a reasonable period of time to assess 
and determine the status of the Union 
merely upon the fact that the Union, cur- 
rently having become aware of its total 
lack of support, sends a telegram of ca- 
pitulation, that such a telegram deprives 
the Employer of an opportunity to react to 
the Union’s sudden loss of majority sta- 
tus is so lacking in persuasive logic that 
it should not be enforced by this Court. 
Moreover, that Sunday evening telegram of 
capitulation, according to the _ Board, 
ensnares the employees of a company in a 
three-year affiliation with a Union with 
which the employees have affirmatively 
disclaimed any support. 


IV. 

THE JUDICIAL DEFERENCE TO NLRB INTER- 
PRETATIONS OF THE ACT IS INAPPLICABLE 
WHERE THE BOARD’S STATUTORY INTERPRE- 
TATION IS UNPERSUASIVE OR RESTS ON 
ERRONEOUS LEGAL FOUNDATIONS, OR IS NOT 
SUPPORTED BY THE HISTORY OR LANGUAGE 
OF THE ACT. 


In dealing with the traditional argument 
of the Board in seeking enforcement of its 


33 


Orders, that its interpretation of the Act 
should be granted judicial deference, this 
Court has determined on a number of occa- 
sions that such judicial deference is 
inapplicable where the Board’s Order 
“rests on erroneous legal foundations", 


Lechmere v. NLRB, 502 U.S. 527, 539 


' (1992); NLRB v. Babcock & Wilcox, 351 U.S. 


105 (1956), and the deference to NLRB 
statutory interpretations is limited to 
circumstances in which the Board’s inter- 
pretation of the Act is both "rational" 
and “consistent with the statute". NLRB 
, 484 U.S. 
112, 123 #£4(1987) Thus, whenever’ the 
Board’s argument in support of its statu- 
tory interpretation is either “unpersua- 
sive" or the Board’s views are not sup- 
ported by the history or language of the 
statute, the Court will not defer to the 
pay Sg interpretation of the stat- 
ute. = 
, 364 U.S. 573, 581, 584 
(1961) Where the Board has adopted "pre- 
sumptions", this Court has noted that the 
judicial role is to insure that there is a 
sound connection between the proven facts 
and the inferred facts created by the 
presumption. j . 
442 U.S. 773, 787 (1979), quoting Republic 
, 324 U.S. 793, 804- 
805 (1945) and Beth Israel Hospital v. 
NLRB, 437 U.S. 483, 501 (1978) for the 
proposition that such NLRB-created "pre- 
sumptions" should be upheld only if there 
is a rational basis, based on the proven 
facts, for the inferences created by those 
"presumptions". 


34 


In NLRB v. Brown, 380 U.S. 278 (1965), 
the Court set forth in detail the applica- 


ble standards for review of cases where 
the Court feels that the Board has acted 
in a manner inconsistent with the statute 
or which may frustrate the policies under- 


35 


»__V. Labor Board, 
supra [380 U.S. 300 (1965)]" 


Courts must, of course, set aside 
Board decisions which rest on "an er- 
roneous legal foundation. 


lying that statute. 


"Courts should be “slow to overturn an 
administrative decision," NLRB v. Bab- 
cock & Wilcox Co., 351 U.S. 105, 112, 
but they are not left "to ‘sheer 
acceptance’ of the Board’s' conclu- 
sions," Republic Aviation Corp. v. 
NLRB, 324 U.S. 793, 803. Reviewing 
courts are not obliged to stand aside 
and rubber stamp their affirmance of 
administrative decisions that they 
deem inconsistent with a_ statutory 
mandate or that frustrate the congres- 
sional policy underlying a _ statute. 
Not only is such review always proper- 
ly within the judicial province, but 
courts would abdicate their responsi- 
bility if they did not fully review 
such administrative decisions. of 
course due deference is to be rendered 
to agency determinations of fact, so 
long as there is substantial evidence 
to be found in the record as a whole. 
But where, as here, the review is not 
of a question of fact, but of a judg- 
ment as to the proper balance to be 
struck between conflicting interests, 
"(tj)he deference owed to an expert 
tribunal cannot be allowed to slip 
into a judicial inertia which results 
in the unauthorized assumption by an 
agency of major policy decisions prop- 
erly made by cCongress. 


NLRB_yv. 
, (351 U.S. at 112- 
113)" 


380 U.S. at 291; see also cases cited 
therein at footnote 5. 


It is submitted that this case projects 
the very type of circumstances in which 
judicial deference to a Board’s decision 
should be withheld. The very concept of 
the Board ordering an Employer to enter 
into an agreement with a Union which the 
Employer clearly and legitimately feels it 
had reason to believe did not represent 
anything close to a majority of its em- 
ployees is certainly one that must be 
supported by either clear statutory lan- 
guage or by strong and persuasive policy 
considerations. Obviously, the statutory 
language does not support such a conclu- 
sion, as the congressional mandate is 
clear that collective bargaining relation- 
ships should only be protected when en- 
tered into with majority Unions, and the 
establishment of such collective bargain- 
ing relationships with minority Unions not 
only is expressly prohibited by Section 
8(a)(2) of the Act, but is would also 
Clearly restrict the Section 7 rights of 
the employees. 


More specifically, the "policy" determi- 
nations which the Board claims to support 
its "presumption" that a Union with little 


36 


or any employee support who is astute 
enough to literally race to the closest 
telegraph office to fire off a communica- 
tion to the Employer "accepting" the 
Employer’s last offer, at a time when the 
Union was presumably aware of its lack of 
employee support, are so lacking in ratio- 
nal or statutory support that they should 
not be deferred to by this Court. 


The Board’s creation of a presumption of 
a majority status as the result of an 
allegedly minority Union having "accepted" 
the company’s last offer, which "“accep- 
tance" bars consideration of the Employ- 
er’s evidence that, in fact, the Union did 
not have majority support, flies in the 
face of the rationale of this Court in 


International Ladies Garment Workers Union 
v. NLRB, 366 U.S. 731, 737 (1961), indi- 
cating that the unlawful "genesis" of such 
an “agreement" precludes its subsequent 
use to establish (or, in this case, to 
presume) the Union’s majority status. 


As noted above on pages 23 to 25, such 
policy considerations intended to protect 
collective bargainng relationships are 
properly limited to the protection of 
legitimately established and continued 
collective bargaining relationships and 
should not be stretched beyond recognition 
so as to apply to a Union’s effort to 
continue that bargaining relationship by 
sending surprise telegrams on a Sunday 
evening to the home of the Employer’s 
president, in a hasty effort to attempt to 
secure, for another three years, a collec- 
tive bargaining agreement so as to capture 
within the web of that agreement employees 


37 


who had clearly and recently indicated 
their lack of interest in that Union. It 
is respectfully submitted that such an 
irrational basis for an even more irratio- 
nal result cannot serve as a proper justi- 
fication of what the Seventh Circuit noted 
to be a clear infringement upon the Sec- 
tion 7 rights of the employees. Chicago 
Tribune, supra, 965 F.2d at 249-250 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, it is 
respectfully requested that this Court 
reverse the Decision of the Court of Ap- 
peals for the First Circuit below, and 
order that this case be remanded to the 
National Labor Relations Board for a 
determination of whether, at the time of 
the receipt by the Employer of the Union’s 
telegram purporting to "accept" the 
Employer’s last offer, the Employer main- 
tained a good faith doubt of the Union’s 
majority support of employees within the 


bargaining unit. 
Dated this first day of March, 1996. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JOHN D. O’REILLY, III 


O’REILLY & GROSSO 

77 Turnpike Road 

P. O. Box 77 

Southborough, MA 01745-0118 
(508) 460-1500 


Counsel for Petitioner. 


Employees who were apparent Union 
Supporters and who advised the company on 
or after November 18, 1988 of their change 
of position to lack of Support for the 
Union are: 


1. Gary Boudreau, who picketed through 
the last day of picketing, November 
18th, advised the company on the 18th 
that he was "disgusted" with the 
Union. He returned to work on the 
21st and advised the company that he 
would resign from the Union that week; 
he confirmed with the company later 
that week that he had resigned from 
the Union. (App. 29a) 


Rocco Aliberti came into the company 
after the picketing stopped on the 
18th, and advised the company he was 
not a supporter of the Union, and 
would vote against the Union. (App. 
17a-18a) 


Robert Cibelli had been picketing and 
was one of the three remaining 
picketers, as of November 18th. On 
the 18th, he advised the company he 
would be returning to work the 
following week, and during the week of 
November 2list, he advised the company 
he had resigned from the Union, and 
that he was no longer ai Union 
Supporter, and was happy that the 
Union was no longer at the company. 
(App. 23a-25a) 


App. 2 


4. David Duplisea had not worked during 
the strike and came in after the 
picket line was withdrawn. He then 
advised the company that he was 
against the Union and that he didn’t 
feel that a Union was needed at the 
company and that he would vote against 
the Union, and that he resigned from 
the Union. (App. 31la-32a) 


5. Quang Nguyen had honored the Union 
picket line, and advised the company 
on the 18th that he would be returning 
the week of November 28th, and that he 
intended to resign from the Union. 
(App. 33a-34a) 


Apparent Union supporters who advised the 
company on November 18th that they were 
employed permanently elsewhere, and would 
not be returning to the company: 


1. Union Steward Joe Parenti (App. 25a- 
26a) 


2. Richard DeLarda (App. 19a, 47a) 

3. Paul McCarthy (App. 25a-26a) 

4. Ken Seaver (App. 26a, 30a-31a) 

S. Michael Coyne (App. 32a) 
Additionally, McCarthy advised the company 
on the 18th of his assessment that the 


Union no longer had support among most of 
the employees. (App. 28a) 


App. 3 


Additionally, the Employer had been aware 
of various other employees previously 
crossing the picket line, resigning from 
the Union, and disavowing any support for 
the Union. 


(App. 18a, 22a, 28a, 33a, 35a and 38a-39a) 


