9 Supreme Court, U.S. 
No. 95-5257 tT; . 


kbd DEC 20 1995 
Supreme Court of the United) Satis! 0 | 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


> 


SAUL ORNELAS, et al., 


Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF AMICUS CURIAE OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL 
LIBERTIES UNION, THE ACLU OF WISCONSIN, 
AND THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL 
DEFENSE LAWYERS, IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS 


Tracey Maclin 

(Counsel of Record) 
Boston University School of Law 
765 Commonwealth Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02215 
(617) 353-4688 


Steven R. Shapiro 
American Civil Liberties Union 


Of Counsel: Foundation 
Barbara E. Bergman 132 West 43 Street 
University of New Mexico New York, New York 10036 
School of Law (212) 944-9800 


1117 Stanford N.E. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 
(505) 277-3304 


II]. ILLINOIS v. GATES DID NOT ALTER 
THE TRADITIONAL METHOD FOR 
REVIEWING PROBABLE CAUSE AND 
REASONABLE SUSPICION DETERMI- 
NATIONS INVOLVING WARRANT- 
LESS INTRUSIONS .......--- +++ +e+5> 17 


A. Using A Totality Of The Circum- 
stances Test To Evaluate Probable 
Cause And Reasonable Suspicion De- 
terminations Does Not Conflict With 
The Requirement Of De Novo Review .. . 17 


B. Seventh Circuit Rulings Ignore This 
Court’s Longstanding Preference For 
A Magistrate’s Approval Before An 
Intrusion Instead Of The Warrantless 
Decision To Search And Seize ........- 20 


IV. THE CLEAR ERROR TEST USED TO 
REVIEW QUESTIONS OF CONSENT 
UNDER THE FOURTH AMENDMENT 


IS NOT RELEVANT TO THIS CASE ..... 22 
A. The Issue Of Consent Concerns A 
Suspect’s Mental State .........+-+- 22 


B. When The Overall Reasonableness Of 
Police Behavior Is At Issue, The 
Rationale Of Bustamonte Has Been 
Confined To Purely Factual Questions ... 24 


CONCLUGION ..ccccccccesssnuaueeneneeen 26 


il 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Page 
Cases 
Aguilar v. Texas, 
ee 18 
Alabama v. White, 
EE 16, 18 
Beck v. Ohio, 
379 U.S. 89 (1964)............. 6, 11, 12, 19, 21, 23 
Brinegar v. United States, 
338 U.S. 160 (1949) ................. 4, 10, 11, 18 
Carroll v. United States, 
eee 9, 10 
Elkins v. United States, 
EEE 11 
Florida v. Jimeno, 
EE a 25 
Florida v. Rodriguez, 
EE 15 
Henry v. United States, 
LE LE 4,7 
Illinois v. Gates, 
462 U.S. 213 (1963) ............ 5, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 
Illinois v. Rodriguez, 
ee 18, 24, 25 
Johnson v. United States, 
i 19 


Ker v. California, 
374 U.S. 23 (1963) 


Linkletter Vv. Walker , 


381 U.S. 618 (1965) ....---- eee eee eens 21 
Miller v. Fenton, 
474 U.S. 104 (1985) ....-- eee eee eee 6, 19 
Miranda v. Arizona, 

384 U.S. 436 (1966) .. 0... ee ee eres 7, 19, 23 
New Jersey v. T.L.O., 

469 U.S. 325 (1985) ....-- ee eee eee eeeee 16, 17 
Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 

456 U.S. 273 (1982) . 0... ee ee eee eee eee eeeee 23 
Reid v. Georgia, 

448 U.S. 438 (1980) .. 1... ee eee eens 15 
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 

412 U.S. 218 (1973) ....--- eee ee eee eee 22, 24, 25 
Sibron v. New York, 

398 U.S. 40 (1968)... eee eee eee ree 16 
Spinelli v. United States, 

393 U.S. 410 (1969)... 6. eee eee eens 18 
Terry v. Ohio, 

398 U.S. 1 (1968) ......-- eee eee eens 12-14, 16, 25 


Thompson v. Keohane, 
__ US. _, 64 U.S.L.W. 4027 


(Nov. 29, 1995) ...---- eee eee eeees 7, 8, 18, 22, 23 
v. Louisiana, 
469 U.S. 17 (1984)... ete 22 
United States v. Cortez, 
449 U.S. 411 (1981) .... 2-6 eee eee 6, 14, 15, 18 
iV 


United States v. Jeffers, 
EE I i ee 20 


United States v. 
EE err rae 21 


United States v. Leon, 
a a a 19 


United States v. Mendenhall, 
ee EE a ob be web 60 ccecécdecvben 23 


United States v. Sokolow, 
Le 14, 15, 18 


United States v. Spears, 
965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1992) 


United States v. Ventresca, 
380 U.S. 102 (1965) 


Watts v. Indiana, 
cae Se eh ea a 6 


Statutes and Regulations 
ee 7 


Other Authorities 


Monaghan, Henry P., 
Constitutional Fact Review," 
SS Camm Bev. 229 CIGES) 0... ccc ccc cc ccce 16 
Van Duizend, Richard, Sutton, L. Paul 
& Carter, Charlotte A., THE SEARCH 


WARRANT PROCESS: PRECONCEPTIONS, 
PERCEPTIONS, AND PRACTICES (1983) 


INTEREST OF AMICI ' 

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is a 
nationwide, nonprofit, nonpartisan organization with nearly 
300,000 members dedicated to the principles of liberty and 
equality embodied in the Bill of Rights. The ACLU of 
Wisconsin is one of its statewide affiliates. Since its 
founding in 1920, the ACLU has frequently appeared before 
this Court, both as direct counsel and as amicus curiae. In 
particular, the ACLU has participated in many cases involv- 
ing the Fourth Amendment. Because this case addresses an 
important Fourth Amendment question, its proper resolution 
is a matter of significant concern to the ACLU and its 
members. 


The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers 
(NACDL) is a nationwide, nonprofit voluntary association 
of criminal defense lawyers founded in 1958 with a mem- 
bership of more than 8,700 attorneys. The NACDL is affili- 
ated with 68 state and local criminal defense organizations 
with which it works cooperatively on issues related to the 
area of criminal defense and, thus, it speaks for more than 
28,000 criminal defense lawyers nationwide. Among other 
things, the NACDL seeks to promote the proper and fair ad- 
ministration of criminal justice and the continued recogni- 
tion and adherence to the Bill of Rights which is necessary 
to sustain the quality of the American system of justice. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The facts are not disputed. On the morning of Decem- 
ber 11, 1992, Michael Pautz, a Milwaukee, Wisconsin law 
enforcement officer, observed petitioners’ car in a motel 
parking lot. The car was a two-door 1981 Oldsmobile with 


' Letters of consent to the filing of this brief have been lodged with the 
Clerk of the Court pursuant to Rule 37.3. 


l 


California license plates. Pautz noticed the car because old- 
er model General Motors cars are allegedly easy to conceal 
drugs in, and because California is a “source” state foe 
drugs. A police dispatcher informed Pautz that the owner 0 
the car was either Miguel Ledesma Omelas or Miguel 
Ornelas Ledesma; Pautz was unsure which name the dis- 


patcher gave. J.A. 56-57. 


Pautz then checked the motel registration list and 
learned that Ismael Ornelas and a second man had registered 
at 4:00 am. Another officer, Don Hurrle, joined Pautz. 
The officers requested a check of the two names on the Nar- 
cotic and Dangerous Drug Information System (NADDIS). 
Two “hits” were reported by NADDIS: Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas was identified as a suspected heroin dealer in El 
Centro, California. Ismael Ornelas, Jr., was identified as a 
suspected cocaine dealer in Tucson, Arizona. The officers 
also ran a warrant check on both names, but neither person 
was wanted for arrest. J.A. 58. 


in the morning, two men left the motel and got 
into ‘c Cates By then, Pautz and Hurrle had been 
joined by a third officer, Lyle Luedke. Luedke and Hurrle 
positioned their vehicles on both sides of the Oldsmobile. 
Officer Hurrle approached the car, identified himself as a 
police officer, and asked the men for identification. The 
driver, Saul Ornelas, produced a driver’s license in that 
name. The passenger, Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma, produced a 
driver’s license in the name of Ismael Ornelas. After ex- 
amining the proffered licenses, the officers requested and re- 
ceived consent to search the car. J.A. 58. 


When Officer Luedke searched the interior of the car, 
he noticed a loose panel in the armrest area in the rear pas- 
senger side. According to Luedke, a screw holding the vent 
cover was rusty, which he believed indicated that the screw 
had been recently removed. Luedke forced open the vent 
cover by removing the screw and discovered a package of 


2 


cocaine concealed inside the cavity of the car. The petition- 
ers were then arrested. J.A. 59. 

A federal magistrate denied petitioners’ suppression mo- 
tion. He found reasonable suspicion for an investigatory de- 
tention. The magistrate also concluded, however, that there 
was no probable cause to remove the vent cover and that 
petitioners’ consent did not extend to the cavity of the car. 
The magistrate nevertheless held that the cocaine would 
have been discovered under the inevitable discovery doctrine 
and denied the motion. A federal district court accepted the 
magistrate’s recommendation to deny the suppression mo- 
tion, but relied upon a different legal theory. Agreeing that 
there was reasonable suspicion for a stop, the district court 
concluded that the search of the car’s inner cavity was sup- 
ported by probable cause. J.A. 33-35. 


The Seventh Circuit, following United States v. Spears, 
965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1992), reviewed the district court’s 
findings of reasonable suspicion and probable cause under a 
clear error standard. Conceding that the issue of reasonable 
suspicion was "close," J.A. 65, the appellate court refused to 
disturb the district court’s conclusion on this point. The ap- 
pellate court ruled, however, that the record could not sup- 
port the district court’s probable cause finding. In that re- 
gard, the appellate court emphasized that Officer Luedke’s 
testimony regarding the loose door panel was critical to the 
district court’s probable cause finding. The magistrate, 
however, made no finding on the credibility of that testimo- 
ny. Thus, the appellate court remanded the case to the dis- 


trict court to clarify whether that testimony was credible. 
J.A. 70-73. 


On remand, the case was again referred to the magis- 
trate, who recommended that the suppression motion be 
granted. The magistrate ruled that the record did not sup- 
port a finding of probable cause. J.A. 83. The district court 
in turn rejected the magistrate’s new recommendation. 


3 


While the district court conceded that the "issue [of probable 
cause] is a close one," J.A. 87, it reaffirmed its earlier find- 
ing that probable cause had been shown without ever _ 
ducting an evidentiary hearing. The court of appeals, apply- 
ing a clear error test, upheld the district court s conclusion 
that there was probable cause to search the car's interior. 
J.A. 92. 


: - f appeals 
In this Court, petitioners argue that the court 0 

should have treated the district court’s holdings on reasona- 

ble suspicion and probable cause as legal conclusions subject 

to de novo review rather than as factual findings subject to a 


clear error test. 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


The Fourth Amendment  proscribes unreasonable 
searches and seizures. A critical component of a valid 
search or seizure is the existence of probable cause. Under 
our legal system, this Court is responsible for defining > 
contours of probable cause. That duty requires carefully 
balancing the competing legal interests at stake. On the one 
hand, the Court has recognized that probable cause is an an- 
cient safeguard that protects individual citizens from un- 
founded and arbitrary violations of their privacy and liberty. 
Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. 98, 100 (1959). On the 
other hand, probable cause is also designed to instruct police 
officers who are charged with promoting the community s 
legitimate law enforcement interests. As this Court has 
noted, the concept of probable cause 1s _ the best compro- 
mise that has been found for accommodating these often op- 
posing interests. Requiring more would unduly hamper law 
enforcement. To allow less would be to leave law-abiding 
citizens at the mercy of the officers’ whim or caprice. 
Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 176 (1949). 


Because the existence vel non of probable cause (or its 


companion standard, reasonable suspicion) is more than a 
collection of historic fact, this Court has never felt con- 
strained to utilize a clear error standard when reviewing 
cases involving issues of probable cause. To the contrary, 
because probable cause involves the application of an objec- 
tive legal standard to a given set of facts, de novo review 
has been the tradition of this Court for reviewing a lower 
court’s finding concerning probable cause. As Chief Justice 
Rehnquist has described the matter, the development and 
definition of the probable cause norm requires that this 
Court "hold the balance true." Jilinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 
213, 241 (1983). 


Appellate courts should follow this same standard when 
they review probable cause and reasonable suspicion find- 
ings of trial courts. In concluding that clear error was 
proper for reviewing a district court’s probable cause and 
reasonable suspicion findings, the court below ignored this 
Court’s many rulings which have applied de novo review to 
the findings of lower courts. 


The court below also misconstrued the significance of 
Illinois v. Gates. Although both this case and Gates involve 
probable cause determinations, the two cases arise in very 
different contexts. Gates involved the validity of a search 
warrant; this case involves the validity of a warrantless 
search. The holding in Gates that a magistrate’s probable 
cause determination is entitled to deference when reviewing 
a search warrant ultimately rested on society’s interest in en- 
couraging the use of the warrant process. However, that ra- 
tionale -- and that deference -- has no application to the sort 
of warrantless search at issue here. The Seventh Circuit's 
reliance on Gates is critically flawed precisely because it 
fails to recognize the significant differences between a prob- 


able cause finding made ex ante and a similar finding made 
post hoc. 


Finally, the clear error rule used to review questions of 


5 


i 


consent to search has no bearing on this case. A search is 
valid pursuant to consent when the individual's consent is 
voluntary and not a product of undue pressure. This is a 
question of historic fact that relates to the state of mind of 
the person. Probable cause and reasonable suspicion, in 
contrast, are objective legal norms that do not depend on the 
subjective views of any legal actor. 


ARGUMENT 


I. PROBABLE CAUSE IS A LEGAL JUDG- 
MENT, NOT AN HISTORICAL FACT 


Under this Court’s well-established precedents, both 
probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations in- 
volve a two-step process. First, there is an assemblage of 
the underlying facts. Resolving factual disputes, of course, 
"*is not this Court’s concern." Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89, 
100 (1964)(Harlan, J., dissenting), quoting Watts v. /ndiana, 
338 U.S. 49, 51-52 (1949); Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23, 
34 (1963). But “once such underlying factual issues have 
been resolved . . . the moment comes for determining 
whether, under the totality of the circumstances," Miller v. 
Fenton, 474 U.S. 104, 117 (1985), probable cause or rea- 
sonable suspicion exists. The second step of this process re- 
quires a legal judgment on the ultimate question: Are the 
facts contained in the record enough to convince a person of 
reasonable caution that a crime has been committed. See 
Ker, 374 U.S. at 35; United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 
418 (1981). That legal judgment can and should be subject 
to de novo review under the normal rules of appellate proce- 
dure, , especially when core constitutional values are at 
stake. 


2 The fact that the probable cause standard is intimately tied to core con- 
(continued...) 


This Court’s recent decision in Thompson v. Keohane, 
a U.S. —, 64 U.S.L.W. 4027 (Nov. 29, 1995), is particu- 
larly instructive on this point. The issue in Thompson was 
whether a federal habeas court should exercise de novo re- 
view of a state court’s determination that a defendant was 
not in custody for Miranda purposes at the time of his con- 
fession, or whether the determination of custody should be 
regarded as a factual question entitled to a presumption of 


correctness in habeas proceedings under 28 U.S.C. §2254(d). 
By a 7-2 vote, the Court ruled in favor of de novo review. 


The reasoning that supported the Court’s holding in 
Thompson applies with equal force here. As Justice Gins- 
burg explained in her majority opinion: 


Two discrete inquiries are essential to the de- 
termination [of custody]: first, what were the 
circumstances surrounding the interrogation; 
and second, given those circumstances, would a 
reasonable person have felt he or she was not 
at liberty to terminate the interrogation and 
leave. Once the scene is set and the players’ 
lines and actions are reconstructed, the court 
must apply an objective test to resolve "the ul- 
timate inquiry": "[was] there a ‘formal arrest 


 (...continued) 


stitutional values is as indisputable as the history that led to the Fourth 
Amendment's adoption. As this Court has frequently explained: “The 
general warrant, in which the name of the person to be arrested was left 
blank, and the writs of assistance, against which James Otis inveighed, 
both perpetuated the oppressive practice of allowing the police to arrest 
and search on suspicion. Police control took the place of judicial con- 
trol, since no showing of ‘probable cause’ before a magistrate was re- 
quired." Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. at 100. The probable cause 
norm was designed to reverse this practice. 


7 


or restraint on freedom of movement’ of the 
degree associated with a formal arrest." The 
first inquiry, all agree, is distinctly factual. 
State court findings on these scene- and action- 
setting questions attract a presumption of cor- 
rectness under 28 U.S.C. §2254(d). The sec- 
ond inquiry, however, call for application of 
the controlling legal standard to the historical 
facts. This ultimate determination, we hold, 
presents a "mixed question of law and fact," 
qualifying for independent review. 
64 U.S.L.W. at 4031 (footnotes and citations omitted). 


Likewise, the issue presented by this case requires a de- 
termination of what the police knew and when they knew it. 
But those historical facts do not, by themselves, answer the 
question of probable cause. As in Thompson, the facts must 
be measured against an objective legal standard designed to 
preserve core constitutional values. That process, in turn, 
produces a legal conclusion that this Court has historically 
subjected to de novo review. 


This case, therefore, does not require the Court to enun- 
ciate a new constitutional rule. It merely requires the Court 
to reaffirm its longstanding practice in probable cause cases. 


Il. PRIOR RULINGS INDICATE THAT THIS 
COURT APPLIES A DE NOVO STANDARD 
WHEN REVIEWING THE PROBABLE CAUSE 
AND REASONABLE SUSPICION CONCLU- 
SIONS OF LOWER COURTS 


Although this Court has not directly decided the issue, a 
review of its cases demonstrates that de novo review is the 
norm when this Court examines the probable cause and 
reasonable suspicion findings of lower courts. 


A. This Court Has Consistently Exercised De 
Novo Review Of Probable Cause Determina- 
tions By Lower Courts When Considering 
The Validity Of Warrantless Searches 


In Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23, a nearly unanimous 
Court agreed that the Fourth Amendment conclusions of 
state courts would receive plenary review when addressed in 
this Court. Speaking for eight Justices, Justice Clark con- 
ceded that the Court does not consider disputed factual ques- 
tions. He was emphatic, however, that the Court will "make 
an independent examination of the facts, the findings, and 
the record so that it can determine for itself whether in the 
decision as to reasonableness the fundamental -- i.e., consti- 
tutional -- criteria established by this Court have been re- 
spected." Jd. at 34. Applying the equivalent of a de novo 
test, the Ker Court "proceed{ed] to examine the entire rec- 
ord," id. (emphasis added), to determine whether there was 
probable cause to arrest Ker and whether exigent circum- 


te justified a warrantless, unannounced entry of Ker’s 
ome. 


) While Justice Clark’s statement in Ker remains the clas- 
sic description of how this Court approaches lower courts’ 
probable cause findings, the tradition of independent review 
of probable cause rulings predates the announcement found 
in Ker. This Court’s seminal ruling in Carroll v. United 
States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925), applied a de novo test when 
deciding whether probable cause existed to search an auto- 
mobile for contraband. There, the defendants were convic- 


* See 374 U.S. at 34-41 (after an extensive review of the record, plurali- 
ty found sufficient probable cause to justify arrest, and that the > semen 
less, unannounced entry did not violate the constitutional test of reason- 
ableness mandated by the Fourth Amendment); id. at 60-63 (opinion of 
Brennan, J.\(de novo review of the record reveals insufficient exigency 
to justify a warrantless, unannounced entry of Ker’s home). 


9 


ted of violating the National Prohibition Act. In this Court, 
they contended that federal prohibition officers stopped and 
searched their car without reasonable cause that it contained 
contraband. Although the Carroll Court did not state what 
level of review it was utilizing, an examination of the opin- 
ion indicates that the Court conducted an independent exam- 
ination of the record.‘ 


If there was any doubt after Carroll that a probable 
cause finding of a lower court was not subject to a clear er- 
ror test, that doubt was surely eliminated by Brinegar v. 
United States, 338 U.S. 160. With an undisputed factual 
record, two lower federal courts ruled that police officers 
lacked probable cause to believe that Brinegar was illegally 
transporting liquor into Oklahoma. This Court reversed, 
after spending six pages examining the historic facts leading 
up to the seizure of Brinegar’s car, and comparing those 
facts with the facts of Carroll, see Brinegar, 338 U.S. at 


* Consideration of the probable cause issue by both the majority and dis- 
senting Justices indicates independent review of the matter. Significant- 
ly, the majority opinion made no reference to any findings of the lower 
court, and it took judicial notice that Detroit was situated on the inter- 
national border and an “active” locale for the distribution of illegal 
liquor into the country. See 267 U.S. at 160. Accordingly, the Court 
asserted: 


That the officers when they saw the defendants believed that 

they were carrying liquor we can have no doubt, and we think 

it equally clear that they had reasonable cause for thinking so. 

Emphasis is put by defendants’ counsel on the statement made 

by one of the officers that they were not looking for defend- 

ants at the particular time when they appeared. We do not 

perceive that it has any weight. 
Id. (emphasis added). Similarly, the dissenting Justices asserted: "The 
facts known by the officers who arrested [the defendants] were wholly 
insufficient to create a reasonable belief that they were transporting 
liquor contrary to law." /d. at 171 (emphasis added). 


10 


165-71.’ In a noteworthy passage, the Court explained that 
unless there are significant variations in the facts of cases, 
it cannot be that the Fourth Amendment’s incidence turns 
on whether different trial judges draw general conclusions 
that the facts are sufficient or insufficient to constitute prob- 
able cause." Jd. 


After this trenchant statement, the Brinegar majority ex- 
plained that the probable cause rule protects "citizens from 
rash and unreasonable interferences with privacy and from 
unfounded charges of crime," while at the same time giving 
“fair leeway for enforcing the law in the community’s pro- 
tection." Id. at 176. While some cases may present close 
questions, “a line necessarily must be drawn by an act of 
judgment formed in the light of the particular situation and 
the _ taken of all the circumstances." /d. (emphasis 


Similarly, in Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89, a majority of 
the Court reversed a ruling by the Ohio Supreme Court up- 
holding Beck’s arrest and the subsequent search of his car. 


* Justice Jackson's dissent took the position that the maijori 

majority was con- 
ducting plenary review. 338 U.S. at 187 (Jackson, J., dissenting noting 
that the majority had drawn inferences from the facts that the two lower 


ee ee Ceaee Game, had catenes 


* Cf Elkins v. United States, 364 U.S. 206, 223-24 (1960), where, in the 
context of overruling the "silver platter” doctrine, the Court explained: 


quiry by a state court, and irrespective of how any such in- 
quiry may have turned out. The test is one of federal law 
enlarged by what one state court may have counte- 


ll 


In this Court, Beck argued that his arrest was not supported 
by probable cause. In resolving this issue, the Beck Court 
looked to the standard articulated by Justice Clark in Ker. 
Beck, 379 U.S. at 92, quoting Ker, 374 U.S. at 34. 


After acknowledging that the trial court made no factual 
findings on the issue of probable cause and commenting on 
the "meager" state of the record, Beck, 379 U.S. at 92-93, 
the Beck majority undertook an independent examination of 
the record, including a review of the testimony of one of the 
arresting officers, and concluded that Beck's arrest was not 


supported by probable cause. /d. at 93-97. 

In an incisive dissent, Justice Harlan was mildly critical 
of the majority for not giving greater deference to state 
court factual findings that involve contested factual matters, 
or "on-the-spot considerations which no appellate court can 
estimate with assurance on a cold record." /d. at 101. But 
where the factual record is clear, Justice Harlan agreed that 
de novo review was proper. He wrote: “It is equally clear 
that in cases involving asserted violations of constitutional 
rights the Court is free to draw its own inferences from es- 
tablished facts, giving due weight to the conclusions of the 
state court, but not being conclusively bound by them.” /d. 
at 100 (citations omitted). 


B. This Court Applies A De Novo Test When 


Analyzing The Constitutionality Of Less In- 
trusive Detentions And Searches 


While the Court normally requires probable cause for 
full scale seizures and searches, it has also recognized that a 
lesser degree of suspicion may support a detention or search 
that is minimally intrusive. The landmark ruling in Terry v. 
Ohio, 398 U.S. 1 (1968), held that a limited frisk of a per- 
son was permissible where a police officer reasonably sus- 
pects the individual is engaged in criminal conduct and is 


12 


presently armed and dangerous. /d. at 30. Although Terry 
was a sharp break from precedent in its willingness to allow 
a police intrusion in the absence of probable cause, it force- 
fully asserted that the lesser degree of suspicion it was pro- 
posing for limited intrusions derived its meaning from fun- 
damental Fourth Amendment principles.’ Thus, Chief Jus- 
tice Warren cautioned: 
The scheme of the Fourth Amendment be- 
comes meaningful only when it is assured that 
at some point the conduct of those charged 
with enforcing the laws can be subjected to the 
more detached, neutral scrutiny of a judge who 
must evaluate the reasonableness of a particular 
search or seizure in light of the particular cir- 
cumstances. Cane & 
is imperative facts be judged against an 
objective standard: would the facts available to 
the officer at the moment of the seizure or the 
search “warrant a man of reasonable caution in 
the belief’ that the action taken was 
appropriate? 
Id. at 21-22 (footnotes and citations omitted). 


After Terry was decided, state and lower federal judges 
were confronted with a myriad of fact patterns that raised 
difficult questions about the scope and limits of the Terry 
doctrine. As many of these cases came to this Court, there 
was an obvious need to provide guidance to the rest of the 


” At the core of Terry's willingness to allow searches and seizures on 

less than probable cause was the constitutional mandate that distinctive 

and prudent evidence support such intrusions. 398 US. at 21, 0.18 

("This demand for specificity in the information upon which police ac- 

aan Seeeats ee Ee Seat Cea ad 
1s statement indi 

Se a indisputably reflects the legal na- 


13 


judiciary on the meaning of Terry. When reviewing those 
cases, this Court has never applied a clear error test when 
confronted with a claim that reasonable suspicion did not 
support a challenged detention. 

For example, in United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 
this Court reversed the court of appeals’ conclusion that rea- 
sonable suspicion was lacking to justify a detention of the 
defendants’ vehicle. Cortez explained that the legal concept 
of reasonable suspicion contains two elements. First, there 
is an assessment of all of the historic facts, information and 
experience possessed by the law enforcement officers. After 
the totality of the circumstances have been assembled, then 
there is a judicial judgment of whether the "whole picture 
_.. yYield{s] a particularized suspicion” that justifies 
subjecting the individual to the challenged intrusion. Apply- 
ing this framework, the Cortez Court conducted its own ex- 
tensive review of the factual record, see id. at 418-21, and 
decided that the record contained sufficient evidence to jus- 
tify stopping the defendants.’ 

Recent decisions continue the tradition of independent 
review of a lower court’s finding on reasonable suspicion. 
These cases recognize that the concept of reasonable suspi- 
cion is a legal precept, rather than a description of historic 
fact. One example is United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1 
(1989). Sokolow reversed a determination by the Ninth Cir- 
cuit that federal drug enforcement agents did not have rea- 
sonable suspicion to detain Sokolow. The appellate court 


* Interestingly, the appellate court stated that it applied clear error re- 
view on the question of reasonable suspicion. While the Cortez Court 
acknowledged that fact, 449 U.S. at 416, quoting 595 F.2d 505, 507 (9th 
Cir. 1979), it abstained from endorsing that standard. On the contrary, 
the Cortez Court’s lengthy recounting and meticulous scrutiny of the 
facts suggests that the Court felt free to render its own independent 
judgment of the quantum and quality of the evidence in the record. 


14 


had ruled that, unless evidence of "‘ongoing criminal activ- 
ity,’ such as the use of an alias or evasive movement 
through an airport," was exhibited by a suspect, id. at 6, 
quoting 831 F.2d 1413, 1419 (9th Cir. 1987), a temporary 
seizure was impermissible. 

Speaking for the majority, Chief Justice Rehnquist ex- 
plained that "[t}he concept of reasonable suspicion, like 
probable cause, is not ‘readily, or even usefully, reduced to 
a neat set of legal rules." 490 U.S. at 7, quoting Jllinois v. 
Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 232 (1983). Rather than turning on 
the factual characterization of different types of behavior, 
the Chief Justice instructed that the concept of reasonable 
suspicion depends on the “probative value" and "evidentiary 
significance" of the facts in the record. Put simply, the 
legal norm of reasonable suspicion, like the legal principle 
of probable cause, depends on "‘the degree of suspicion that 
attaches to particular types of noncriminal acts." Sokolow, 
490 US. at 10, quoting Gates at 243-44, n.13 (emphasis 
added). With these legal principles in mind, the Sokolow 
Court then reviewed the facts and independently found suffi- 
cient proof to uphold the temporary seizure of Sokolow.® 


* In contrast to the situation in Cortez, the lower court in Sokolow stated 
that it was applying de novo review on the issue of reasonable suspicion 
831 F.2d at 1417 (footnote and citations omitted). Although this Court 
did not expressly approve or disapprove of the standard utilized below, 
it obviously did not hesitate to reverse the Ninth Circuit's legal conclu- 
sion and exercised its own independent assessment of the reasonable sus- 
picion question without any deference to the ing below. 
See also Reid v. Georgia, 448 US. 438, : Giles oneiee 
versing lower court finding of reasonable suspicion; concluding that the 
officer “could not, as a matter of law, have reasonably suspected the pe- 
titioner of criminal activity" on the basis of the facts in the record) (em- 
phasis added), Florida v. Rodriguez, 469 US. |, 6 (1984\per curi- 
am)\reversing lower court’s conclusion that there was no reasonable sus- 
picion supporting the detention of the defendants). 


15 


As the above cases teach, de novo review of the reason- 
able suspicion norm is important because it guarantees a 
consistent, case-by-case development of Fourth Amendment 
rules. Indeed, de novo review is indispensable because of 
the "exceedingly small number of cases in this Court indi- 
cating what suffices for probable cause [or reasonable sus- 
picion]." Sibron v. New York, 398 U.S. 40, 74 (1968)(Har- 
lan, J., concurring in result). Although the concepts of 
probable cause and reasonable suspicion involve an initial 
collection of historic fact and experience, this point should 
not prompt the Court to alter its traditional process of inde- 
pendently reviewing the ultimate legal question at stake."° 
As Professor Monaghan has noted, de novo review is neces- 
sary because “norm elaboration occurs best when the Court 
has power to consider fully a series of closely related situa- 
tions involving a claim of constitutional privilege." Henry 
P. Monaghan, "Constitutional Fact Review," 85 Colum.L. 
Rev. 229, 273 (1985). New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325 
(1985), illustrates how the Court combines a case-by-case 
model and de novo review when interpreting the Fourth 
Amendment. 


In 7.L.O., this Court addressed for the first time the ap- 
plication and scope of the Fourth Amendment concerning 
searches and seizures by public school officials. The New 


© See Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325 (1990). In White, the Alabama 
Court of Criminal Appeals, after a careful review of the facts and rec- 
ord, see 550 So. 1074, 1078-79 (1989), reversed a trial court’s order de- 
nying White’s suppression motion. The Alabama appellate court found 
that an anonymous tip, notwithstanding subsequent police corroboration 
of certain details, did not provide reasonable suspicion to justify a Terry 
stop. Acknowledging that the issue of reasonable suspicion in White 
was "a close case,” White, 496 U.S. at 332, this Court reversed the lower 
court and found, without any deference to the opposite finding below, 
that the anonymous tip, as corroborated, justified a stop of the de- 
fendant’s car. 


16 


Jersey Supreme Court had found that the search of T.L.O.’s 
purse was unreasonable under the facts of the case. In re- 
versing the decision of the New Jersey court, this Court an- 
nounced that the constitutionality of a school search depends 
on "the reasonableness, under all the circumstances, of the 
search." Jd. at 341-42. If clear error review was the proper 
method for interpreting Fourth Amendment norms, one 
might have expected a remard of 7.1.0. to provide the New 
Jersey courts an opportunity to analyze the facts under the 
Court’s new standard. Instead, recognizing that the New 
Jersey Supreme Court had applied a legal standard "not sub- 
stantially different from the standard" it had adopted, id. at 
343, this Court reached a different legal conclusion after 
independently examining the facts and found sufficient evi- 
dence to validate the challenged search. /d. at 343-48. 


il. ILLINOIS v. GATES DID NOT ALTER THE 
TRADITIONAL METHOD FOR REVIEW- 
ING PROBABLE CAUSE AND REASONA- 
BLE SUSPICION DETERMINATIONS IN- 
VOLVING WARRANTLESS INTRUSIONS 


A. Using A Totality Of The Circumstances 
Test To Evaluate Probable Cause And Rea- 
sonable Suspicion Determinations Does Not 
Conflict With The Requirement Of De 
Novo Review 


Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, concerned whether a 
magistrate’s issuance of a search warrant on the basis of a 
partially corroborated anonymous tip could satisfy the prob- 
able cause rule. Gates reaffirmed that probable cause is to 
be judged from the totality of the circumstances.'' Although 


'' 462 U.S. at 238. As is the case with probable cause, reasonable suspi- 
(continued...) 


17 


Gates found "it is wiser to abandon the ‘two-pronged test’” 
for judging probable cause findings established in previous 
decisions,’ it did not disturb the longstanding principle that 
the probable cause determination remains an objective 
test.’ Similarly, a temporary detention or limited search is 
permissible only where the evidence indicates an “objective 
manifestation that the person stopped is, or is about to be, 
engaged in criminal activity.""* 

Gates also reiterated that a magistrate’s probable cause 
finding was entitled to substantial deference. 462 U.S. at 
236. But contrary to the Seventh Circuit’s view, the reaffir- 
mation of a totality of the circumstances test for determining 
probable cause in Gates does not imply deferential review 
for judging the evidence supporting a warrantless police in- 
trusion.'® Indeed, Gates can most fairly be read to point 


" (continued) 

cion is also judged by a totality of the circumstances rule. See Alabama 
v. White, 496 U.S. at 332 ("[W]e concluded that under the totality of the 
circumstances, the anonymous tip, as corroborated, exhibited sufficient 
indicia of reliability to justify the investigatory stop of respondent's 
car"); Sokolow, 490 U.S. at 8 (when evaluating the constitutionality of a 
detention, "we must consider ‘the totality of the circumstances -- the 
whole picture’), quoting Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417. 


'2 The so-called “two-pronged” test for determining probable cause 
emerged from the reasoning of Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964), 
and Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969). 


8 See, e.g., Brinegar, 338 U.S. at 175 ("Probable cause exists where ‘the 
facts and circumstances within [the officers] knowledge and of which 
they had reasonably trustworthy information [are] sufficient in 
themselves to warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that’ an 
offense has been or is being committed")\citation omitted)(brackets in 
original); J/linois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 184-86 (1990). 


'* Cortez, 411 U.S. at 417 (footnote and citation omitted). 


'S See Thompson v. Keohane, 64 U.S.L.W. at 4031 n.11 (use of a totality 
(continued...) 


18 


in precisely the opposite direction. The intent of Gates was 
to encourage use of the warrant process.'° Accordingly, 
the criticism in Gates of de novo review was directed at the 
type of “grudging or negative" and “hypertechnical" review 
that might well prompt police officers to forgo the warrant 
process. /d. at 236. Where officers engage in warrantless 
searches, however, the raison d'etre for great deference to 
the magistrate is gone. An officer’s belief that probable 
cause or reasonable suspicion existed is not enough. While 
police Officers are entitled to draw "the usual inferences 
which reasonable men draw from evidence," Johnson vy. 
United States, 333 U.S. 10, 13-14 (1948), when they act 
outside of the warrant process, their subjective beliefs are 
not enough." 


'* (continued) 

standard for deciding whether a person is in custody under Miranda v. 
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), does not mean deferential review is prop- 
er), Miller v. Fenton, 474 U.S. at 117 (employing a totality standard for 
deciding whether a confession is voluntary under the Fifth Amendment’s 


Due Process Clause does not preclude independent review by federal 
habeas court). 


© 462 U.S. at 236. It is well known that many police officers prefer to 
bypass the warrant process. See, e.g., Richard Van Duizend, L. Paul 
Sutton & Charlotte A. Carter, THE SEARCH WARRANT PROCESS: PRE- 
CONCEPTIONS, PERCEPTIONS, AND PRACTICES 66 (1983). Many of this 
Court’s cases, including Gates, have tried to counter this phenomenon. 
See, e.g., United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984)\(holding that where 
an officer has acted in objective reliance on a search warrant issued by a 
neutral and detached magistrate, evidence secured pursuant to warrant is 
admissible at trial even if it is later determined that the warrant was 
issued without probable cause); United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102 
(1965\in a close or marginal situation, a search authorized by a warrant 
may be upheld where without one it would fail). 


- Beck, 379 U.S. at 97 (“If subjective good faith alone were the test, the 
protections of the Fourth Amendment would evaporate, and the people 


(continued...) 


19 


B. Seventh Circuit Rulings Ignore This Court’s 


Longstanding Preference For A Magistrate’s 
Approval Before An Intrusion Instead Of 


The Warrantless Decision To Search And 
Seize 


The reasoning supporting the Seventh Circuit's adoption 
of a clear error standard is not only out of step with the pur- 
poses announced in Gates, it also ignores critical considera- 
tions that have informed this Court’s judgment when ex- 
plaining the meaning and value of the probable cause norm. 
In the case that provides the foundation for the ruling be- 
low, the Seventh Circuit opined that, because a magistrate’s 
warrant is owed substantial deference, even though it is is- 
sued after an ex parte hearing, 


it would be anomalous to require a more 
searching review of a district judge’s probable 
cause determination. Because there is little to 
distinguish a magistrate’s probable cause deter- 
mination in a warrant case and a district 
judge’s probable cause determination in a non- 
warrant case, appellate review should be the 
same for both. 


United States v. Spears, 965 F.2d at 270 (citation omitted). 


The flaw in this reasoning is the failure to recognize the 
significant differences between a probable cause finding 
made ex ante and a similar finding made post hoc. First, a 
magistrate’s finding of probable cause is the preferred mode 
because it "interposes an orderly procedure,""* overseen by 


'” (continued) 
would be ‘secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,’ only in 
the discretion of the police"). 


'® United States v. Jeffers, 342 U.S. 48, 51 (1951). 


20 


a neutral and detached official, rather than a process gener- 
ated by the "hurried action of officers and others who may 
happen to make arrests [or searches]."'* In addition, the ex 
ante probable cause finding is favored because it allows an 
objective evaluation of the need to search before an intru- 
sion of privacy occurs.” 


The Seventh Circuit correctly notes that the degree of 
evidence needed to support a probable cause finding is the 
same whether made a magistrate in an ex parte hearing, or 
made by a district court after-the-fact. Spears, 965 F.2d at 
270. But this truism forgets that the warrant process pro- 
tects and encourages constitutional values that are lost and 
become irreplaceable once officers act on their own. An ex 
ante process ensures that a record of the need to intrude is 
compiled before the intrusion. This not only diminishes the 
opportunity for potential police misconduct, it also guaran- 
tees that the probable cause finding will not occur in the 
"far less reliable procedure of an after-the-event justification 
for the arrest or search, [which is] too likely to be subtly in- 
fluenced by the familiar shortcomings of hindsight judg- 
ment." Beck, 379 U.S. at 96. Thus, the rationale that 
underlies the decision below has neglected bedrock consider- 
ations put in place by this Court to ensure that the probable 
cause rule is applied in an objective manner that protects in- 
dividual liberty without unduly restraining legitimate law 
enforcement interests. De novo review promotes the ulti- 
mate goal of this process, which is an objective judgment on 
whether law enforcement officers have adhered to constitu- 


'* United States v. Lefkowitz, 285 U.S. 452, 464 (1932). 


* It has been said that once an unreasonable intrusion has 

occurred, an 
after-the-fact remedy -- whether in the guise of the exclusionary rule or 
a damages actions brought against the offending officers -- may offer |it- 
tle solace or relief for the constitutional harm because "[rJeparation 
comes too late.” Linkletter v. Walker, 381 U.S. 618, 637 (1965). 


21 


tional commands. Moreover, de novo review offers the ad- 
ditional advantage of providing guidance to the police, helps 
to unify precedent and stabilizes the contours of constitu- 
tional principles. Thompson v. Keohane, 64 U.S.L.W. at 
4032. 


IV. THE CLEAR ERROR TEST USED TO RE- 
VIEW QUESTIONS OF CONSENT UNDER 
THE FOURTH AMENDMENT IS NOT RELE- 
VANT TO THIS CASE 


A. The Issue Of Consent Concerns A Suspect’s 
Mental State 


As the Court’s cases show, the determination of proba- 
ble cause involves no inquiry into the subjective state of 
mind of a legal actor. Moreover, the standard for reviewing 
a finding of consent has no bearing on this case. In 
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 248-49 (1973), 
this Court described the question of consent to search as fac- 
tual in nature and implied that a finding of consent was sub- 
ject to clear error review. Such a standard makes sense be- 
cause courts determine consent by asking whether undue 
pressure affected an individual’s mental state and thus 
played a role in the procurement of consent. "[TJhe ques- 
tion whether a consent to a search was in fact ‘voluntary’ or 
was the product of duress or coercion, express or implied, is 
a question of fact to be determined from the totality of the 
circumstances." Jd. at 227. Accordingly, a trial court’s 
finding of consent is given the same deference afforded 
other findings that "depend[{] heavily on the trial court's 
appraisal of witness credibility and demeanor." Thompson 
v. Keohane, 64 U.S.L.W. at 4030; cf. Thompson v. Louisi- 
ana, 469 U.S. 17, 23 (1984)(per curiam)(the issue of con- 
sent "is ordinarily a factual issue unsuitable for [the Court's] 


22 


consideration in the first instance").”' 


In contrast, the probable cause and reasonable suspicion 
norms are considered under an objective standard that asks 
"whether the rule of law as applied to the established facts 
is or is not violated." Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 
273, 289, n.19 (1982). The subjective beliefs of the police 
are not relevant. Beck, 379 U.S. at 97. Therefore, the de- 
termination of either of these Fourth Amendment norms, 
like the determination of whether a person has been seized 
within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment, is a conclu- 
sion of law meriting de novo review.” 


*' The institutional and efficiency concerns that have moved the Court to 
defer to the factual findings of lower courts on questions like juror bias 
and competency are not controlling in the context of Fourth Amendment 
suppression motions. Only judges or magistrates decide the relevant le- 
gal questions, “and they do so with a view to identifying recurrent pat- 
terns, and advancing uniform outcomes.” Thompson v. Keohane, 64 
U.S.L.W. at 4031 n.13. In this case, the district court decided the peti- 
tioners’ probable cause claim without conducting an evidentiary hearing. 
J.A. 29, n.1; J.A. 86. See Thompson, 64 U.S.L.W., n.12 (noting that a 
trial court’s superior capacity to resolve credibility issues on the issue of 
custody of Miranda is not a concern when the trial court resolves that 
issue without conducting an evidentiary hearing). 

* Cf. United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 551-52, n.5 (1980) 
(opinion of Stewart, J.\"[T}he correctness of the legal characterization 
of the facts appearing in the record [on whether a seizure occurred ] is a 
matter for this Court to determine")\citations omitted); id. at 565, n.5 
(Powell, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment referring 


~ — district court’s finding of reasonable suspicion as a "conclusion of 
aw"). 


23 


—— 


B. When The Overall Reasonableness Of Police 
Behavior Is At Issue, The Rationale Of 
Bustamonte Has Been Confined To Purely 
Factual Questions 


Furthermore, it would be illogical to draw from Busta- 
monte the broader proposition that probable cause and rea- 
sonable suspicion are factual findings entitled to clear error 
review when this Court has limited the applicability of this 
level of review to the narrow question of whether consent 
was in fact given. When faced with the larger question of 
the validity of consent to a search based upon the reasona- 
ble, but mistaken, view that a third party possessed common 
authority over the premises, this Court has made it clear that 
an objective standard applies and the conclusions drawn 
under that standard are conclusions of law. 


In Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, the lower courts 
found that, because Rodriguez’ ex-girlfriend did not possess 
common authority over the apartment she and Rodriguez 
had once shared, the police could not reasonably rely on her 
apparent authority to consent to search the home. This 
Court reversed that conclusion. Speaking for the majority, 
Justice Scalia conceded that the question whether an officer 
has a reasonable belief of a third-party’s common authority 
to consent to a search "is the sort of recurring factual ques- 
tion to which law enforcement officials must be expected to 
apply their judgment." /d. at 186. But the factual nature of 
the issue did not compel deference to the lower courts’ 
Fourth Amendment conclusions. 


On the contrary, the Court held that a mistaken police 
judgment on the issue of third-party consent does not vitiate 
the search provided the mistake is a reasonable one. As ex- 
plained in Rodriguez: 

(Prior cases establish] that in order to satisfy 
the ‘reasonableness’ requirement of the Fourth 


24 


Amendment, what is generally demanded of 
the many factual determinations that must regu- 
larly be made by agents of the government . . . 
is not that they always be correct, but that they 
always be reasonable . . . . 

As with other factual determinations bearing 
oe seizure, determination of con- 
must "be judged against an objec- 
tive standard: would the facts available to the 
officer at the moment ... ‘warrant a man of 
reasonable caution in the belief" that the con- 
senting party had authority over the premises? 

Id. at 188, quoting Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. at 21-22. 


Similarly, in Florida v. Jimeno, 500 U.S. 
(1991), the Florida courts hed ruled thet consent t0 2 peneral 
search of a car did not extend to sealed containers found in- 
side the car. This Court reversed and held that a search is 
valid when, “under the circumstances, it is objectively rea- 
sonable for the officer to believe that the scope of the sus- 
pect s consent permitted him to open a particular container 
within the automobile." Id. at 249. Though this standard 
requires an assessment of all the facts available to an of- 
ficer, Jimeno did not imply that deferential review was 
proper. Jimeno explained that "[t]he standard for measuring 
the scope of a suspect's consent under the Fourth Amend- 
ment is that of ‘objective’ reasonableness -- what would the 
typical reasonable person have understood by the exchange 
between the officer and the suspect?" /d. at 251. 


The use of an objective standard in both Rodri 

. * * guez and 
Jimeno 's not surprising. Those decisions simply follow a 
tradition of independent review of lower court legal find- 
ings. Rather than suggesting that clear error is proper for 
tus case, the reasoning of Bustamonte has been confined to 
ae ydheegguamaas a historic fact relating to an actor’s 


25 


CONCLUSION 


For the reasons stated above, the judgment of the Court 
of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit should be reversed. 


Of Counsel: 
Barbara E. Bergman 


Respectfully submitted, 


Tracey Maclin 

(Counsel of Record) 
Boston University School of Law 
765 Commonwealth Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02215 
(617) 353-4688 


Steven R. Shapiro 

American Civil Liberties Union 
Foundation 

132 West 43 Street 

New York, New York 10036 

(212) 944-9800 


University of New Mexico 


School of Law 
1117 Stanford N.E. 


Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 


(505) 277-3304 


Dated: December 20, 1995 


26 


ole ae Og el i atte 


— a... 


AMICUS CURIAE 
BRIEF 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


SAUL ORNELAS and ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA, 
Petitioners, 
vs. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


Respondent. 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF 
AMICI CURIAE 
OF 
AMERICANS FOR 
EFFECTIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT, INC.., 
JOINED BY 
THE NATIONAL DISTRICT 
ATTORNEYS ASSOCIATION, INC.., 
IN SUPPORT OF AFFIRMANCE OF THE 
DECISION OF THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 
COURT OF APPEALS BELOW. 


(List of Counsel on Inside Front Cover) 


Y 


