: Supreme Court, u.s. 
(\) FilLgeD 


ni 66'S 06 19 1995 
Tenn nenne eee in The eee Oe We CORK 
Supreme Court of the Gnited States 


October Term, 1995 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. , 
Petitioner, 
v. 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Respondent. 
On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the United States 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


JOHN D. O'REILLY III, ESQUIRE. 
Attorney For Petitioner 
O'REILLY & GROSSO 

77 Turnpike Road 

Post Office Box 3118 
Southborough, MA 01745-0118 
(508) 460-1500 


PRINTERS: CURRY & TAYLOR (800) 222-8738 


48 


i 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether an Employer is bound by a Union's 
“acceptance” of an earlier Employer proposal for a 
collective bargaining agreement when, at the time of the 
Union's "acceptance", the Employer had a reasonable basis 
for a good faith doubt of the Union's continued majority 
status, and expressed that doubt within a reasonable period 
of time after being advised of the final erosion of Employee 
support for the Union, but less than one day after the Union 


had telegraphed its "acceptance". 


ii 
PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 


National Labor Relations Board 


Auciello Iron Works, Inc. 


In accordance with Rule 29.6; Auciello Iron Works, Inc. 


hereby discloses that it has no parent, affiliates or 
subsidaries. 


OL — En 


87] F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989) determining that. 
under facts identical to those involved in this 
case, an Employer may reject a Union's 
“acceptance” of an Employer's earlier offer when 


time of the “acceptance”, the Union no longer 


would have been immaterial in view of the 
Union's having “accepted” the Employer's 
earlier offer prior to the Employer's having 
challenged the Union's majority status. .............. 10 
CD co ccoccccccanenansccetebabiceedleves vewel 22 
National Labor Relations Act ...................4... l-a 


United States Court of Appeals For the First 

Circuit Opinion dated July 21, 1995 in No. 

PRMD ccccovccceddeedaccebecedcetecedeee le eee 59a 
National Labor Relations Board Decision and 

Order Dated November 24, 1989 in Case 

RRS AE A AS EE Ea K4a 
National Labor Relations Board Decision Dated 
January 20, 1989 in Case 1-CA-25969 ............. 90a 


Vv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

Cases 
Bolton-Emerson v. NLRB, 899 F.2d 
I I lon oo one pccgncvcoceces 20 
Chicago Tribune Co. v. NLRB, 965 9, 11,12, 13, 16 
F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992) ....... 06665 ccccuuee 17 18, 23 
Curtin Matheson Scientific v. NLRB, 
859 F.2d 362 (Sth Cir. 1988) rev'd. 
SE, SES Wahu becccdccdebsccccescecccces 17 
International Ladies’ Garment 
Workers Union v. NLRB, 366 U.S. 
oe scan 21 
NLRB v. Bickerstaff Clay Prods. 
Co., 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989) ............. 12-15 
NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, 
ee a. cosccvcece 12, 13 
NLRB v. Laverdiere's Enterprises, 
933 F.2d 1045, 1051-1053 (1st Cir. 
a ee oe eddeccoes 20 
Viking Lithographers, 184 NLRB 
IID (IDTO) oc rreccccvccccvccceevserecesesessscesees 22 

Statutes 
I a a  cpesaee 
29 U.S.C. Sec. 158(aX(1) and (5) ................. 5, 17 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD, Respondent 


ON PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT 
OF APPEALS FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT 


The Petitioner, Auciello Iron Works, Inc., 
respectfully prays that a writ of certiorari issue to review 
the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit, entered in the above-entitled proceeding on 
July 21, 1995. 


2 
OPINIONS BELOW 


The opinion and judgment of the First Circuit Court 
of Appeals, dated July 21, 1995 is reported at 60 F.3d 24. 
A copy of the opinion is reproduced in the Appendix at p. 
la. A copy of the Supplemental Decision and Order of the 
National Labor Relations Board dated May 9, 1995 is 
reported at 317 NLRB No. 60 and is reproduced in the 
Appendix at p. 9a. The earlier decision of the First Circuit 
Court of Appeals dated November 30, 1992 is reported at 
980 F.2d 804, and is reproduced in the Appendix at p. 59a. 
The original decision and order of the National Labor 
Relations Board, incorporating by reference the original 
decision of the Administrative Law Judge of November 24, 
1989 is reported at 303 NLRB No. 90 and is reproduced in 
the Appendix at p. 84a. 


3 
JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT 


On July 21, 1995, the First Circuit Court of Appeals 


entered judgment and opinion enforcing the Supplemental 
Decision and Order of the National Labor Relations Board 


dated May 9, 1995. 


The jurisdiction of this Court to review the decision 
of the First Circuit Court of Appeals is invoked pursuant to 
28 U.S.C. Sec. 1254(1). 


STATUTES INVOLVED 
29 U.S.C. Sec. 158(a)(1) and (5) 


These provisions are reproduced, verbatim, in the 
Appendix to this Petition commencing at p. |-a. 


4 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


The Employer maintains an iron works fabrication 
shop located in Hudson, Massachusetts, and had enjoyed an 
amicable collective bargaining relationship with Local 501 
of the Iron Workers' Union for a number of years. A series 
of collective bargaining agreements had been negotiated 
without incident over those years. After several 
negotiating sessions in 1988, the parties reached a tentative 
agreement with the Employer agreeing to the Union 
proposal for the economic terms of a wage increase. This 
agreement was brought back to the Union membership for 
employee ratification, and was rejected by the Union 
membership. 


After unsuccessful efforts by the bargaining 
committees to refine the settlement package, a strike vote 
was taken by the Union membership and a strike 
commenced on October 14, 1988, with picket lines being 
placed at the Employer's plant. Some five weeks into the 
course of the strike and the picketing activity, a gradual 
erosion of employee support for the Union was evidenced, 
so that by the final week of the strike, the Employer noticed 
an increased deterioration of Union support. The factual 
basis upon which the Employer relied for its growing belief 
that the Union might no longer maintain a majority status 
was the fact that many of the employees had elected to 
cross the picket line, and/or had resigned from the Union 
and, more importantly, had made direct comments to upper 
management supervisory employees, affirmatively 
reflecting the bargaining unit employees’ lack of support 
for the Union. As a result of the Employer's feeling that 
the support for the Union was on the down slide, the 
Employer, at the last negotiating session between the 
parties on November 17, 1988, advanced a proposal which 


negotiations, and immediately the Employer observed 
factors that supported their earlier impression that the 
Union support was deteriorating. 


The picket line was withdrawn the next day, Friday, 
November 18, 1988, and the following week, the balance 
of the employees returned to work and continued to make 
strong comments to management representatives indicating 
their lack of any continuing support for the Union. Also 
during that week of November 21, a number of additional 
employees withdrew from Union membership. While the 
Employer was in the process of reviewing what, if any, 
actions would be appropriate in view of this final erosion of 
employee support for the Union, the Union sent a Sunday 
evening telegram to the home of the company president, 
purporting to “accept” the management offer which had 
been made prior to: (a) the withdrawal of the picket line; 
(b) the return to work of employees; (c) the withdrawal of 
Union membership by additional employees; and (d) the 
increased expressions of dissatisfaction with the Union 
being made by employees. Management representatives 
met with their attorneys the following Monday morning, 
November 28, 1988, and reviewed the Employer's revised 
assessment as to the now complete lack of employee 
support for the Union, and immediately advised the Union 
that it would no longer recognize the Union as the 
exclusive bargaining representative of the employees, and 
in view of the Union's clear lack of support among 
employees, its prior contract proposal was no longer 
available for "acceptance". 


6 


Based on an Unfair Labor Practice Charge filed 
with the Regional Office of the National Labor Relations 
Board alleging a statutory refusal to bargain by the 
Employer's refusal to consider itself bound by the Union's 
"acceptance" of the earlier management proposal, the 
Regional Office of the Board issued a Complaint on 
January 17, 1989, alleging the Employer violated the Act 
by withdrawing recognition from the Union and by 
refusing to execute an agreement with the Union. 


Hearings were conducted before Administrative 
Law Judge Zankel on June 21, August 8 and August 9, 
1989, and on November 24, 1989, the Administrative Law 
Judge issued a decision that the issue of the Employer's 
good faith doubt of the majority status of the Union was, in 
fact, immaterial, as the Union had “accepted” the 
Employer's proposal immediately prior to the Employer's 
withdrawal of recognition. The Administrative Law Judge 
determined that a collective bargaining agreement between 
the Employer and the Union came into existence upon the 
Union's transmittal of its Sunday evening, November 27, 
1988, telegram purporting to "accept" the Employer's iast 
proposal, and that the Employer's withdrawal the following 
day of recognition and refusal to execute an agreement 
was, therefore, unlawful. 


Approximately a year and a half later, June 27, 
1991, the National Labor Relations Board issued a 
three-paragraph order, affirming the Administrative Law 
Judge (Appendix, p. 84a). In connection with the NLRB 
attempting to seek enforcement of that Order in the United 
States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, the Court 
affirmed a number of aspects of the NLRB Order, but 
agreed with the Employer that the NLRB decision which 
had merely cited prior NLRB determinations dealing with 


7 


instances where the Union's lack of support occurred only 
after the making of the agreement, and were, therefore, not 
a basis for determining a factual situation involving the 
Union's lack of support which existed at the time of the 
Union's efforts to “accept” the Employer's earlier proposal. 
The Court determined that the Board had "glossed over" 
what the Court determined to be the "tough question" 
presented in this case, namely whether a contract must be 
irrebuttably presumed where the Union effort to accept an 
earlier Employer proposal came at a time when the Union 
clearly lacked majority support. The First Circuit noted a 
then-recent decision of the Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals determining that an earlier management propcsal 
was no longer available for "acceptance" by a Union which 
had clearly lost its majority support of the workers. 
Chicago Tribune Co. v. NLRB, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 
1992). 


The First Circuit Court of Appeals further noted 
that in recent decisions, both before this Court as well as 
before the cCleventh Circuit, the Courts had become 
involved in the issue of whether the Employer had, in fact, 
a good faith doubt of the continued Union's majority in 
cases factually identical to the instant case, namely, when 
that good faith doubt was first raised by the Employer only 
immediately after the minority Union had attempted to 
"accept" an earlier management proposal. The matter was 
remanded by the First Circuit to the NLRB to address the 
apparent inapplicability of the prior Board precedent cited 
in its June 27, 1991 decision, as well as to address the 
apparent inconsistencies in- the approach taken in prior 
matters, both with this Court as well as with the Eleventh 
Circuit, and to address the impact of the Seventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals decision in Chicago Tribune, supra, that 
an Employer's offer is no longer available to the Union 


whose majority support has been clearly eroded subsequent 
to the tendering of the earlier management proposal. The 
Board was specifically directed by the First Circuit to "act 
with expedition" and to forward a copy of its Supplemental 
Decision to the Clerk of the First Circuit "as soon as it 


Two and one-half years later, the Board issued its 
Supplemental Decision and Award wherein it determined 
that, for policy considerations of "industrial stability" and 
"employee freedom of choice", the presumption of majority 
status must prevail until the Employer expressly challenges 
that majority status. It further determined that, if an 
Employer has a good faith doubt as to the Union's 
continued majority status, it must initially raise that issue 
before the Union accepts its offer. In the factual context of 
this case, the Board's decision, in essence, stated that the 
fact that the Union moved quicker than the Employer by 
sending a Sunday evening telegram to the home of the 
company's president before the |§management's 
announcement of withdrawal of Union recognition, in the 
face of complete and obvious erosion of any Union support 
on the following day, a Monday morning, was dispositive 
of the case. 


The matter was again reviewed by the United States 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit on July 21, 1995 and 
it was determined that, in view of the Board's finally 
having announced an articulated policy-oriented basis for 
its determination, the Court would affirm that ruling. The 
Court specifically noted that, in adopting the Board's rule 
that an Employer may not raise the issue of the Union's 
majority status once the Union has "accepted" an earlier 
management proposal (even though the Employer attempts 
to raise this issue within a day or, in theory, within an hour 


9 
after the Union's "acceptance") that the Board was reaching 
"a result different from that by our sister circuit in Chicago 
Tribune Co." (Appendix p. 7a). 


10 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


l. The decision of the First Circuit Court of 
Appeals below was acknowledged by that Court to be 
directly contrary to the decision of the Court of Appeals for 
the Seventh Circuit in Chicago Tribune Co. v. NLRB, 965 
F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992). 


2. The decision of the First Circuit Court of 
Appeals below is also inconsistent with the decision of the 
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in NLRB vy. 
Bickerstaff Clay Products, 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989) 
determining that, under facts identical to those involved in 
this case, an Employer may reject a Union's “acceptance” 
of an Employer's earlier offer when the Employer has 
reason to believe that, at the time of the "acceptance", the 
Union no longer represented a majority of its employees. 


3. The decision of the First Circuit Court of 
Appeals below is inconsistent with the rationale of this 
Court in NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, 494 U.S. 775 
(1990) where, notwithstanding the Union's "acceptance" of 
the Employer's earlier offer, the decision solely considered 
whether the Employer's rejection of that "acceptance" was 
based on the Employer's having an actual and reasonable 
good faith doubt as to the Union's continued majority status 
as of the date of the Union's "acceptance". If the decision 
of the First Court were correct, the existence of the 
Employer's good faith doubt would have been immaterial 
in view of the Union's having "accepted" the Employer's 
earlier offer prior to the Employer's having challenged the 
Union's majority status. 


The factual situation involved in this case is a 
recurring one, wherein during the course of a prolonged 


of the Union's effort to capture the benefit of a prior 
Employer proposal, the Union was, in fact, a representative 
of a majority of the bargaining unit employees. Prior 
decisions of other Circuit Courts of Appeals as well as the 
decision of this Court in NLRB v. Curtin Matheson 
Scientific, 494 U.S. 775 (1990) have determined that the 
critical issue in such circumstances, where the Employer, 
after rece ng such a Union attempt to “accept” a prior 
offer in the face of eroding employee support, is whether 
the Employer may reject in a timely fashion such an 
“acceptance” based on the Employer's good faith belief that 
the Union, at the time of its “acceptance”, no longer 
possessed the support of a majority of the bargaining unit 
employees. Unlike the decision in this Court in Curtin 
Matheson Scientific and unlike the Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals’ decision in Chicago Tribune. and unlike the 
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision in NLAB vy. 
Bickerstaff Clay Prods. Co.. infra, the First Circuit Court of 


12 


Appeals determined that the question of the Employer's 
good faith doubt of the Union's majority status at the time 
of receiving such a telegram “acceptance” is immaterial, as 
the agreement is fully consummated by the Employer's 
receipt of the Union's "“scceptance” and that "agreement" 
constitutes an irrebutiable presumption of the Union's 
majority status. Thus, the decision of the First Circuit 
Court of Appeals in this case is inconsistent with at least 
two other Circuits, as well as with the rationale of this 
Court. 


In NLRB v. Bickerstaff Clay Prods. Co., 871 F.2d 
980 (11th Cir. 1989), cert. den. 493 U.S. 924 (1989), the 
Employer's last offer of November 6 was not accepted but, 
after further deterioration of the Union's majority status, 
was “accepted” by the Union on April 8th. As in the 
instant case, one day after receiving this “acceptance”, 
advised the Union that the prior offer was no longer 
available for “acceptance.” While, unlike the instant case, 
Relations Board decided the matter on the question of 
whether this subsequent expression by the Employer of its 
doubt of the Union's majority status was, in fact, based 
upon a good faith doubt, based on objective considerations 
(a matter which, in this case, the Board and First Circuit are 
now saying is immaterial, in view of the Union's having 
sent its “acceptance” one day prior to the Employer's 
withdrawal of recognition), the Board did argue before the 
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, as it did in the instant 
case, that the prior offer of the Employer remained 
available for "acceptance", notwithstanding the Employer 
having reasonably concluded in the meantime that the 
Union no longer represented a majority of the bargaining 
unit employees. According to the Board's argument in that 


"There is no authority cited by the Board, 
and none exists, for the proposition that 
withdrawal of a prior offer is a condition 
precedent to an employer's withdrawal of 
recognition based on a good faith doubt of 
the Union's majority status. If the 
circumstances changed such that the 
Employer reasonably believed that the 
Union no longer represented a majority of 
its employees on April 8, 1986, Bickerstaff 
had no duty to withdraw its offer by 
notifying the Union." NLRB v. Bickerstaff 
Clay Products, 871 F.2d 980, 993-994 (11th 
Cir. 1989) 


The Court of Appeals in that case went on to 
determine that the Employer was within its rights in 
rejecting the Union's telegram “accepting” the Employer's 
prior offer and in withdrawing recognition from the Union, 
even though this was not done, as in the instant case, until 
one day after the Union had “accepted” the Employer's 
prior offer. This decision is, thus, clearly inconsistent with 
the First Circuit's decision in this case that, notwithstanding 
an Employer's legitimate, good faith doubt of the 
continuing majority status of the Union, it is bound by a 
Union “acceptance” of the Employer's most recent 
proposal. 


14 


Batata, & One Seer Ee NLRB, 965 
F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992), the Employer had my af 
number of collective bargaining sessions with the Union 
and, after becoming aware of the nearly complete erosion 


of the Union's support among employees, had not 
specifically withdrawn its earlier offers to the Union. iv 


was only several days after the Union's eventual 
“acceptance” of the Employer's earlier offer that the 


was too late for the Employer to maintain that, at the time 
of that “acceptance”, the Union no longer represented a 
majority of the employees. That position was rejected by 
the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals on the basic rationale 
that an Employer may not legally consummate an 
agreement with a Union when, at the time of that 
consummation, the Employer has reason to believe that the 
Union does not represent a majority of its employees. The 
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals also placed great 
emphasis on the fact that to allow a Union to suddenly 
grasp an earlier Employer offer at a time when the Union's 
has not formally withdrawn either the offer or its 
recognition of the Union, to force its employees to be 
bound by a collective bargaining agreement with a Union 
with whom they no longer have any allegiance is unduly 
and unnecessarily penalizing those employees. The Court 
drew careful distinctions between situations such as those 
involved in this case where, in the absence of any bad faith 
bargaining by the Employer. the Employer simply had not 
formally withdrawn its prior offer or Union recognition in 


15 


the face of the Union's eroding support and cases where the 
Employer refuses to comply with its statutory obligation to 
bargain in good faith and, as the result of such refusal, the 
employee support eventually erodes. The Court suggested 
that in the latter case, the Employer wovld not be in a 
position to reject the Union's acceptance of any Employer 
offer, as the Employer itself has illegally contributed to the 
erosion of the Union's support. There is no suggestion that 
any such circumstances existed in the instant case. The 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in the instant case 
expressly acknowledged that its determination would be 
contrary to this decision of the Seventh Circuit Court of 


Appeals in Chicago Tribune. (Appendix p. 7a) 


The facts of the instant case are also remarkably 
similar to those involved in Curtin Matheson Scientific v. 
NLRB, 859 F.2d 362 (Sth Cir. 1988) rev'd. 499 U.S. 777 
(1990). \n that case, the Employer had made an offer to the 
Union on June 12th, and after serious erosion of Union 
support, the Union finally “accepted” the offer on July 
16th. Four days later, the Employer declined the Union's 
“acceptance” and, for the first time, formally announced its 
withdrawal of that earlier offer, based on its doubts as to 
the Union's majority status as of the date the Union 
purported to “accept” the Employer's offer. The Fifth 
Circuit Court of Appeals determined that on those facts, 
there was no violation of Sections 8(a\1) and 8(a)(5) by 
the Employer refusing to execute an agreement, and by 
withdrawing its recognition of the Union. Most 
significantly, unlike the Court of Appeals in the instant 
case, it did not consider a legitimate agreement to have 
been entered into simply by the Union's attempting to 
“accept” the Employer's last proposal. Obviously, if the 
Fifth Circuit had felt that the mere “acceptance” by the 
Union of the earlier Employer offer constituted an 


16 


agreement, there would have been no need for the Court of 
Appeals even to have considered the legitimacy of the 
Employer's claim, made four days after this "acceptance" 
as to the Union's lack of majority status. 


On appeal, a majority of this Court determined that 
the Employer's asserted basis for its contention that the 
Union no longer maintained a majority status (the existence 
of a number of striker replacements which the Employer 
had assumed did not support the Union) was not a 
legitimate basis for the Employer's withdrawal of 
recognition. But, under the rationale of the First Circuit in 
the instant case, there would have been no need to have 
even reached that issue if the Union's “acceptance” of the 


Employer's earlier offer constituted a binding agreement, 
regardless of the Employer's feeling that the Union then no 


Similarly, the extended dissenting opinions of four 
members of this Court determining that the Employer had 
not violated the statute by refusing to execute an agreement 
with the Union necessarily assumed that a binding contract 
was not consummated simply by the Union's "acceptance" 
of the Employer's earlier offer. 


It is certainly a giant step for the Board, in this case, 
to expand the rule whereby an Employer is prevented from 
contesting a Union's majority status during the term of an 
agreement to the point the Employer is also prevented 
from questioning the very existence and validity of that 
same agreement as having been consummated at a time 
when the Union lacked a majority status. As the 
Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals noted in Chicago Tribune 
Co., it is a classic bootstrap argument to maintain that the 
legality of the alleged consummation of an agreement 


17 


creating an irrebuttable presumption of the Union's 
majority status may not be attacked by a claim of the 
Union's lack of majority status at the time of the alleged 


consumption of that agreement. 


In the instant case, the full implications of the 
Union's true lack of support were not highlighted until the 
picket line was withdrawn on Friday, November 18, 1988 
and, during the course of the following week, when 
employees returned to work and resigned from the Union, 
and also continued to express a strong lack of support for 
the Union. It would indeed be a gross disregard for the 
rights of these various employees who had now clearly 
indicated their lack of support for the Union for the 
principle of law to be applied that, as soon as this lack of 
support finally became apparent, both to the Union and to 
the Employer, the fact that the Union won the race to the 
telegraph office by sending a telegram to the home of the 
company's president on Sunday evening, November 27th, 
the employees now have to be governed by a three-year 
contract "accepted" by a Union with which the employees 
clearly want no affiliation. 


There could well be circumstances where an 
Employer involved in a factual situation identical to that in 
this case has improperly elected not to raise the majority 
status issue until some time in the distant future, so as to rid 
itself of what turned out to be an onerous Union agreement. 
That is not the situation in this case, as the Employer not 
only had not engaged in any collective bargaining sessions 
with the Union after the Union's picketing and striking had 
terminated, and other indications of employee non-support 
of the Union had been brought to the attention of the 
Employer, but it also immediately had disclaimed any 
obligation to deal further with the Union. 


18 

The Employer in this case certainly raised the issue 
within a reasonable time after becoming fully aware of the 
complete extent of the Employees’ dissatisfaction with their 
Union and no bargaining sessions had been held in that 
time. Thus, to the extent the rationale of the Board is to the 
effect that an Employer may not have it both ways in 
becoming aware of the lack of the Union majority status 
and still, hopefully, attempting to negotiate a favorable 
agreement without waiving its ability to resist the Union's 
"acceptance" of the Employer's last proposal, that rationale 
is inapplicable to this case, as the Employer raised that 
issue on the very first business day after the week in which 
the Employees had all come back to work and expressed 
their dissatisfaction with the Union. 


The Board's Supplemental Decision also seems to 
be premised on the contention that the Employer has sole 
control over the timing of its announcement that it was 
withdrawing Union recognition based on a good faith doubt 
of a lack of the Union's majority status, and elected not to 
withdraw its Union recognition. Clearly, the ability to 
withdraw Union recognition based on the Employer's good 
faith doubt that the Union maintains a majority status is not 
a matter which is based upon a precise mathematical 
formula, and an Employer who prematurely attempts to 
disavow its obligation to deal with the Union, based on the 
Employer's alleged good faith doubt that the Employer has 
lost its majority status is exposed to Unfair Labor Practice 
charges. Prior decisions of this same Circuit clearly 
indicate that an Employer must be absolutely certain and 
secure in its assessment of the factual basis for its alleged 
good faith doubt of the Union's majority status before 
attempting to rescind its relationship with the Union. 
NLRB v. Laverdiere's Enterprises, 933 F.2d 1045, 
1051-1053 (ist Cir. 1991); Bolton-Emerson v. NLRB, 899 


19 


F.2d 104, 16 (Ist Cir. 1990). On the-_other hand, the 
Employer is faced with possible Unfair Labor Practice 
charges if, in fact, it continues its recognition of the Union 
when it clearly has reason to believe that the Union no 
longer enjoys a majority status. International Ladies’ 
Garment Workers Union v. NLRB, 366 U.S. 731, 732-733 
(1961). lt would be an unfair and unreasonable 
requirement to place a burden upon the Employer to have 
to go through the difficult and prolonged process of 
accurately evaluating the current majority status of the 
Union (at the peril of incurring possible Unfair Labor 
Practice charges)’ and then having to decide whether or not 
to formally announce its disavowal of its obligation to deal 
with that Union within a matter of hours or even days of 
the Employer's first receiving the factual information which 
could serve as a possible basis for the conclusion that the 
Union no longer enjoyed a majority status. 


While there surely would reach a time when the 
Employer's delay in making such a formal announcement 
to the Union would be considered to be unreasonably late, 
it is respectfully submitted that the facts of this case do not 
indicate any such delay on the part of the Employer, and its 
advising the Union on Monday, November 28th that it was 
withdrawing its recognition (an announcement made only 
days after the full impact of the employees’ withdrawal of 


The dilemma faced by an Employer having to 
determine when it is permissible to assert its good faith doubt 
that the Union no longer maintains a majority status is 
demonstrated in the instant case where the Board's decision 
implies that the Employer waited too long to announce its 
decision, yet General Counsel, before the Administrative Law 
Judge, argued at length that, even as of November 28th, when 
the Employer announced its good faith doubt, the Employer did 
not yet have a sufficient factual basis for that good faith doubt. 


20 


Union support had been made apparent to the Employer), 
certainly was timely, and the ability of the Employer to 
make such a withdrawal should not be thwarted by the 
Union's having literally run to the Western Union office to 
send a Sunday evening telegram to the company's 
president, purporting to "accept" the last Employer offer. 
Such an insincere "acceptance" was obviously made at a 
time when both the Union and the Employer were aware 
that there was no longer any significant Employee support 
for the Union, and should not be treated as a bar to the 
Employer's timely and legitimate withdrawal of recognition 
from the Union.’ 


The Board itself, in its Supplemental Decision of 
May 9, 1995, recognized that, where the Employer's 
assertion of a good faith doubt is "simultaneous with the 
Union's attempt to accept the Employer's outstanding 
offer", difficult problems are presented and should be 
decided on a case-by-case basis. (NLRB Slip Op. p. 11-12) 
However, although the Board accepts the Employer's 
contention that much of the factual basis upon which the 
Employer finally concluded that the Union no longer 
enjoyed a majority status did not take place until the week 
of November 21, 1988 (Appendix p. 35a), it determined 
that the Employer's assertion of a good faith doubt only a 
few days later was "untime'y”. 


Were the question simply one of Williston's 
application of principles of contract law, one could 


. In an earlier decision, Viking Lithographers, 184 NLRB 
139 (1970) which the Board has apparently now rejected, the 
Board had referred to such telegrams of “acceptance”, sent at a 
time when the Union's employee support had clearly 
evaporated, as a “capitulated .. . contractual surrender” which 
would not place any obligation on the Employer to accept. 


21 


understand a ruling being made that an outstanding offer 
may be accepted by the one who wins the race to the 
telegraph office. However, such a ruling in a labor law 
context would completely deny the statutory rights of 
employees to be represented by a Union of their own 
choice, and in this case, the employees clearly no longer 
wished to have any affiliation with this Union. However, 
as the result of the NLRB ruling as eventually affirmed by 
the Court of Appeals below, the Employer, simply by being 
out-raced to the telegraph office, is deprived of the 
opportunity to present evidence reflecting the basis for his 
reasonable good faith belief that the Union had lost its 
majority status. 


To allow such an artificial distinction based on a 
clearly insincere effort by a minority Union to bind the 
employees to a _ three-year agreement is clearly 
unwarranted. The Seventh Circuit, in Chicago Tribune, 
supra, determined that the bargaining rights of the 
employees would be improperly and unjustifiably thwarted 
if the Employer were not allowed, based on facts known 
to it at the time of the Union's "acceptance" (as opposed to 
facts which might subsequently come to the Employer's 
attention) to question the Union's majority status. 


22 
CONCLUSION 


For the reasons set forth above, it is respectfully 
submitted that the Petition for Writ of Certiorari should be 
granted to resolve the above-described split among various 
Circuit Courts of Appeals as to whether an Employer in the 
circumstances of this case may withdraw recognition from 
the Union and refuse to consider a Union “acceptance” of 
an earlier Employer proposal when, at the time of that 
"acceptance", the Employer has a reasonable and good faith 
doubt as to the Union's continued majority status. 


Respectfully submitted, 


LL ) 0K, 
JOWN D. O'REILLY, 11 


O'REILLY & GROSSO 
77 Turnpike Road 
Post Office Box 3118 
Southborough, MA 01745-0118 
Tel.: (508) 460-1500 
Counsel of Record and 
Counsel for Petitioner 


Dated: October 19, 1995 


l-a 


LABOR MANAGEMENT RELATIONS ACT 


SEC. 8. (a) It shall be an unfair labor practice for an 
employer -- 


(1) to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in 
the exercise of the rights guaranteed in Section 7; . . . 


(5) to refuse to bargain collectively with the 
representatives of his employees, subject to the provisions 
of section 9(a). 


United States Court of Appeals 
For the First Circuit 
No 91-1905 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Vv. 
AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC.., 


Respondent. 


ON APPLICATION FOR ENFORCEMENT OF AN 
ORDER OF THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD 


Before 


Selya, Circuit Judge, 
Campbell, Senior Circuit Judge, 
and Keeton,* District Judge. 


John D. O'Reilly, Il, with whom O'Reilly & 
Grasso was on brief for respondent. 

Collis Suzanne Stocking with whom Jerry M. 
Hunter, General Counsel, D. Randall Frye, Acting 
Deputy General Counsel, and Aileen A. Armstrong. 
Deputy Associate General Counsel, were on brief for 
petitioner. 

July 21, 1995 


2a 
* Of the District of Massachusetts, sitting by designation. 


CAMPBELL, Senior Circuit Judge. Several years 
ago, the National Labor Relations Board ("the Board") 
pens OS ee Se ee ee 

issued against Auciello Iron Works, Inc. ("the Company”) 
pursuant to § 10(e) of the National Labor Relations Act, 
29 U.S.C. § 160(e) ("NLRA"), We affirmed, in large 
part, the Board's decision underlying the order. NLRB v. 
Auciello Iron Works, Inc., 980 F.2d 804 list Cir. 1992). 


However, while retaining jurisdiction, we declined to 
enforce the order and remanded to the Board for further 


consideration of an issue which we found the Board to 
have inadequately addressed. The Board has now, at long 
last, responded by issuing a comprehensive supplemental! 
decision and order addressing the problems raised in our 
opinion. Auciello Iron Works, Inc., 317 N.L.R.B. No. 
60 (1995). Pursuant to our invitation, both parties have 
commented on the Board's opinion. We now grant the 
Board's petition for enforcernent of its order. 

The Board issued its original order upon 
concluding that the Company had committed an unfair 
labor practice in refusing to negotiate with the Shopmen's 
Local Union No. 501, a/w International Association of 
Bridge, Structural and Ornamental Iron Workers 
(AFL-CIO) ("the Union "). a union certified to be the 
exclusive collective bargaining representative for a 


3a 
sarang Boe ay Ae ape Auciello Iron 
Works, Inc., 303 N.L.R.B. 562 (1991). During 


negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement, 
the Union had accepted one of the Company's outstanding 
proposals.’ The Company, however, subsequently refused 
to sign an agreement based on that proposal and withdrew 
its recognition of the Union . 

In concluding that the Company had thereby 
committed an unfair labor practice, the Board affirmed the 
administrative law judge's refusal to consider the 
Company's defense that, at the time the Union accepted 
the Company's contract proposal, the Company 
entertained a good- faith doubt of the Union ' s majority 
status, The Board thus refused to allow the Company to 
present evidence that the Union in fact lacked majority 
support at the time it accepted the Company’ s outstanding 
offer. In a footnote to its summary opinion, the Board 
wrote: 

We agree that under established 

Board precedent, once the Board finds that 

the parties have reached a binding 

collective-bargaining agreement, it is 

unnecessary to consider the issue of a 


In opposition to the petition for enforcement, the 
company challenged the continuing availability, and the 
subsequent acceptance, of its proposal. In our previous opinion, 
we affirmed the NLRB's finding that the proposal was still open 
and that the union had accepted it. Auciello, 980 F.2d at 808-09. 


da 


respondent's alleged good-faith doubt of 
the union's majority status. Belcon, 

Inc., 257 NLRB 1341, 1346 (1981); North 
Bros. Ford, 220 NLRB 1021, 1022 (1975). 


Auciello Iron Works, Inc., 303 N.L.R.B. 562, 562 n.2 
(1991). 


Unsatisfied with the Board's brief treatment of this 
issue, we remanded for further consideration. Although 
we recognized that Board precedents clearly barred 
employers from raising a good-faith doubt about a union's 
majority status arising from events occurring after the 
parties reached an agreement, see, ¢.g., North Bros. 
Ford, Inc., 220 N.L.R.B. 1021, 1022 (1975), we found it 
less clear that such a prohibition extended to bar 
good-faith doubts arising from events occurring before the 
parties reached an agreement. a gre 
Board's casual extension of the “contract bar rule " 
pre-agreement doubts about majority status , pon 
reasoned policy analysis to support that extension. We 
were further troubled by the fact that neither party had 
addressed the Seventh Circuit's decision in Chicago 
Tribune Co. v. NLRB, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992), 
which was handed down prior to oral argument in this 
case and which reached a result at odds with the Board's 
conclusion. 

Unlike the Seventh Circuit, however, we did not 


undertake to pass ultimate judgment on _ the 


Sa 


appropriateness of the Board's policy judgment. We noted 
instead that the Board “ has the chief responsibility for 
and that the question “calls for the Board's reasoned 
application of its expertise." Auciello, 960 F.2d at 812. 
813. We therefore remanded to the Board, ordering it to " 
revisit , clarify , and explain the principles that it thinks 
apply in the present circumstances.” Id. at 812. 

The Board has responded with a thorough 
supplemental decision in which it affirms its earlier 
conclusion, namely, that an accepted offer bars an 
employer from later raising, as a defense to an unfair 
labor practice charge, a good faith doubt about the union's 
majority status arising out of events occurring prior to the 
acceptance of the offer. Auciello Iron Works, Inc., 317 
N.L.R.B. No. 60 (1995). Now, however, the Board has 
for the first time articulated the policy considerations 
underlying its rule, weighing both the advantages and 
disadvantages of varying rules in the specialized collective 
bargaining context. The Board found that the policies 
underlying the relevant provisions of the NLRA and 
earlier Board precedents supported extending the 
contract-bar rule to cover good faith doubts arising from 
events occurring prior to the acceptance. In particular, the 
Board found that the rule furthered the policy of 
preserving stable bargaining relationships and did not 
undermine the policy of preserving the workers’ freedom 
to choose their own representatives . Pursuant to our 


6a 


remand, the Board also considered the Seventh Circuit's 
opinion in Chicago Tribune, concluding that it was 
inconsistent with the policies underlying the NLRA. 

As earlier stated, the Board's policy judgments on 
this type of question are entitled to substantial deference 
from the courts. “Especially as the relevant principles 
here are informed less by statutes than by Board policies 
set out in its decisions, the area is one where the Board's 
presumed expertise is key." Auciello, 960 F.2d at 812. 
The public, the bar, the parties, and the courts are 
entitled, however, to have the Board's key rulings 
supported by “articulate, cogent, and reliable analysis." 
Id. at 813 (citations omitted). Having at last the benefit of 
the Board's explanation, we are now satisfied, as we were 
not before, that the Board's decision is amply supported 
by rational application of its expertise. While the question 
is perhaps close, the Board's policy choice is reasonable 
and, as now articulated, quite persuasive. The Board's 
choice falls well outside the sphere of arbitrariness that 
might tempt us to substitute our own judgments for the 
Board's expertise on a question like this. See Fall River 
Dyeing & Finishing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 42 
(1987) ("If the Board adopts a rule that is rational and 
consistent with the Act, then the rule is entitled to 
deference from the courts.") 

We accordingly accept the Board's ruling that, 
absent exceptional circumstances’, an employer is barred 


The Company seeks to bring this case within the 


7a 


in these circumstances from raising, after the union's 
acceptance of its outstanding offer, a defense of good faith 
doubt as to the union’ s majority status premised on events 
prior to that acceptance. In adopting the Board's rule, we 
reach a result different from that of our sister circuit in 
Chicago Tribune, Co. , 915 F.2d at 250. The Seventh 
Circuit was, however, without the benefit of the Board's 
present analysis. We hope the time and effort expended in 
this case will cause the Board to avoid the kind of 
perfunctory, inarticulate decision-making that caused the 
present difficulties. 

The Company argues finally that, even if we 
uphold the Board's decision, we should condition 
enforcement of the Board's order upon a 
Board-supervised election to ensure that the Union still 
enjoys the support of the workers. The Company cites 
NLRB v. LaVerdiere's Enter., 933 F.2d 1045, 1053 (1st 
Cir. 1991), in which we refused to enforce the Board's 
bargaining order and instead ordered an election where: 
(1) there existed a showing of substantial employee 
dissatisfaction with the union prior to the employer's 


exception set forth in the Board's opinion for cases in which a 
company's good faith doubt arises simultaneously with the 
union's acceptance of the offer. See Auciello, 317 N.L.R.B. No. 
60, at 11-12. We agree with the Board's implicit conclusion that 
this case does not fall within the exception, as the Company had 
all of the relevant information to support its claim prior to its 
acceptance of the offer. 


8a 


misconduct; (2) the employer's misconduct was less than 
egregious; and (3) there had been an inordinate delay in 
the Board's decision. 

Although there is no doubt that a great amount of 
time has elapsed since the underlying unfair labor 
practice, we are disinclined to order, on our own initiative 
and contrary to the Board's requested relief, a 
Board-supervised election at this point. This case is 
distinguishable from LaVerdiere’s, insofar as 
LaVerdiere's involved a clear showing of employee 
dissatisfaction with the union. In that case, the employees 
had filed a decertification petition with the Board, and had 
exhibited other substantial evidence of dissatisfaction. Id. 
at 1048, 1054. In this case, by contrast, although there 
existed evidence that the strike was losing employee 
support, the evidence that the Union was losing employee 
support fell far short of that in LaVerdiere's. Accordingly 
, without meaning to pass judgment on the propriety of an 
election should one be sought and considered in another 
context, we enforce the Board's order in its entirety. See 
id, at 1053 (holding that the Board's choice of remedy is 
entitled to deference). 


The order of the Board will be enforced. 


9a 


Notice: This opinion is subject to formal revision before 
publication in the Board volumes of NLRB decisions. 
Readers are requested to notify the Executive Secretary, 
National Labor Relations Board. Washington, D.C. 
20570, of any typographical or other formal errors so that 
corrections can be included in the bound volumes. 


Auciello Iron Works, Inc. and Shopmen's Local 
Union No. 501 a/w International Association of 
Bridge, Structural and Ornamental Iron Work- 
ers (Ar-CIO). Case 1-CA-25969 


May 9, 1995 


SUPPLEMENTAL DECISION AND ORDER BY 
CHAIRMAN GOULD AND MEMBERS STEPHENS, 
BROWNING, COHEN, AND TRUESDALE 


This case is on remand from the United States 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit’ The court has 


’ On June 27, 1991. the National Labor Relations Board 
issued its Decision and Order in this proceeding in which it 
found inter alia. that the Respondent violated Sec. 8(a)(5) and (1) 
by withdrawing recognition from the Union and by refusing to, 
execute an agreed-on collective-bargaining agreement. 303 
NLRB 562. Thereafter, the Board filed with the court a petition 
for enforcement of its Order. in an opinion dated November 30, 
1992, the court remanded the case in part for further proceedings 
consistent with the court's opinion. NLRB v. Auciello Iron 


10a 


instructed the Board to determine whether the Board erred 
in refusing to consider the Company's argument “that, in 
declining to recognize the Union or to bargain further 
with it, the Company was acting pursuant to a 
well-supported good-faith doubt that the Union still had 
majority support among those it supposedly represented. "* 
The court questioned whether the Company should be 
permitted to present evidence that, at the time of the 
certified Union's purported acceptance of the Company's 
outstanding offer during negotiations for a successor labor 
agreement, the Union lacked majority support and was 
therefore incapable of creating by its acceptance a valid 
contract. The Board accepted the court's remand 


A. Background: The Case Before the Board and 
the Court 


The relevant facts are undisputed. The 
Respondent operates an iron fabrication shop. In 1977, the 
Board certified the Union as the collective-bargaining 
representative of the Respondent's production and 


Works, 980 F.2d 804 (1st Cir. 1992). 

By letter dated April 22 1993, the Board 
notified the parties that it had accepted the court's remand and 
that statements of position could be filed with respect to the 
issues raised by the court's opinion. The General Counsel and the 
Respondent filed statements of position with the Board. 

. 980 F.2d at 813. 


lla 


maintenance employees. Since that time, the parties have 
executed successive bargaining agreements. On September 
21, 1988,° 4 days before the agreement then in effect was 
to expire, the parties commenced negotiations for a new 
agreement and met on several occasions in September and 
October. On October 13, the union membership voted to 
reject the Respondent's latest proposal and to strike. A 
strike commenced on October 14. | 

Negotiations continued on October 18 and 
November 17, when the Respondent presented numerous 
proposals. The picketing effectively ended by November 
18. On November 27, the Union notified the Respondent 
by telegram that the unit employees had voted to accept 
the November 17 offer and to return to work.°On 
November 28, the Respondent sent the Union a telegram 
Stating in pertinent part: "Employer now has reason to 
believe that Local 501 no longer represents a majority of 
employees in the appropriate unit and therefore disavows 
any obligation to carry on further negotiations." In 
support of its contention, the Respondent relied, inter alia. 
on employee criticisms of and statements of disaffection 
’ All subsequent dates are in 1988 unless otherwise 
indicated. 
’ The court enforced the Board's findings that the 
Respondent's offer remained open and available for acceptance 
on November 17 when the Union accepted it. and that 
ratification by the union membership was not a precondition to 


the formation of a contract These issues are not before the Board 
in this proceeding. 


12a 


with the Union, abandonment of the strike by several 
employees, and the refusal of other employees to strike, 
all of which occurred prior to the Union's November 27 
acceptance of the Respondent's proposals. 

The strike ended as stated in the Union's 
November 27 telegram, but the Respondent refused to 
sign a collective-bargaining agreement containing the 
terms of its November 17 proposals. No further 
negotiations occurred. 

The complaint alleged that the Respondent violated 
Section 8(a)(5) and (1) of the Act by refusing to execute a 
written contract and by withdrawing recognition from the 
union. The Respondent contended, inter alia, that it had a 
good-faith doubt that the Union continued to represent a 
majority of the unit employees, and on this basis 
disclaimed any further obligation to bargain with the 
Union. 

The administrative law judge found that after the 
Union accepted the Respondent's contract offer, the 
parties had formed a valid contract and the Respondent 
could not rely on a good-faith doubt of the Union's 
majority status to withdraw recognition or avoid its 
contractual bargaining obligations. The judge therefore 
found it unnecessary to consider whether the Respondent's 
alleged good-faith doubt was supported by reasonable and 
objective evidence. The Board adopted the judge's 
findings that the Respondent violated the Act as alleged, 
stating: 


13a 


[UJnder established Board precedent, once the Board 
finds that the parties have reached a binding 
collective-bargaining agreement, it is unnecessary to 
consider the issue of a respondent's alleged good-faith 
doubt of the union's majority status. Belcon, Inc., 
257 NLRB 1341, 1346 (1981); North Bros. Ford, 220 
NLRB 1021, 1022 (1975).’ We also agree with the 
judge that the Board's decision in Bickerstaff Clay 
Products, 286 NLRB 295 (1987), enf. denied 871 
F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989), in which the Board 
addressed the respondent's good-faith doubt defense 

In Belcon, as here, the employer withdrew recognition 
after the union accepted its contract offer, relying on conduct 
that occurred prior to acceptance to support its alleged good-faith 
doubt. There, the Board adopted the judge's finding that the 
respondent's withdrawal of recognition was unlawful because "it 
was during the term of the newly negotiated agreement and at a 


time when it was not lawfully permissible for [r)espondent to do 
so." 257 NLRB at 1346. 

The Board in North Bros. Ford held that once the parties 
reached final agreement on the substantive terms of the contract. 
the employer was not free to refuse to bargain even if it had 
lawful grounds for believing that the union had subsequently lost 
its Majority status. 

220 NLRB at 1022. 

In Bickerstaff Clay Products, the Board found that the 
employer had not met its burden of establishing a good-faith 
doubt, where as here, the respondent first raised the doubt after 
the union had accepted its offer. 


9 


reliance on North Bros. Ford, stating that the Board failed 
to address the Respondent's contention “that a lack of 
majority status on the date the Union purported to accept 
the Company's outstanding offer should be distinguished 
from a good faith doubt of majority status based on events 
occurring after a valid contract was made," as in North 
Bros. Ford.’ The court questioned whether the acceptance 
of a contract offer by a union that lacks majority support 
at the time of acceptance can create a valid and binding 
contract that prevents the employer from withdrawing 
recognition or otherwise refusing to bargain based on an 
alleged lack of majority status during the contract term. 
In asking for a clearer explication of the Board's 
position, the court instructed the Board to address the 
Seventh Circuit's decision in Chicago Tribune Co. v. 
NLRB," which, relying on Ladies Garment Workers , v. 
NLRB," denied enforcement of the Board's Order that the 


————— —— ——-—— - — 


303 NLRB a at 1 562 fn 2. 
. 980 F.2d at 812. The court acknowledged that Belcon 


was not so limited 
8 965 F. 2d 244, 250 (7th Cir. 1992), rehearing denied 
Nos. 91-2750, 91-2916 (June 24, 1992, denying enf. 303 NLRB 


682 (1991). 


366 U.S. 731 (1961). 
"Chicago Tribune Co., 303 NLRB 682 (1991) (where 


requiring an employer to raise the good-faith doubt defense to, 
an 8(a)(5) allegation prior to the formation of an otherwise valid 
contract The judge dismissed the difficulty of litigating the 
concept of a “good-faith doubt" that is first expressed after a 
contract is reached, particularly when the employer is seeking to 
show the doubt as it existed in the employer's mind at the time of 
the contracts formation. Describing such an inquiry as too 
subjective. the judge reasoned that the relevant inquiry should 
instead be whether changed circumstances exist to vitiate an 
outstanding contract offer accepted before the refusal to bargain. 
The judge found that because the factors on which the 
respondent relied to support in good-faith doubt were present 
and known at the time the respondent renewed its offer, they 
were not changed circumstances” that would have led both 


in Chicago Tribune focused on the statutory issues raised by Sec. 
8(a\2). The court found that the Board's Rule that a union's 
acceptance of offer creates a binding contract, if applied in the 
context of a loss of majority support” would violate the principle 
of Ladies Garment Workers, 366 U.S. at 737-738, that an 
employer may not contract with a “minority union" would give 
too much weight to the interests of unions and too little weight to 
the interests of employees, and would authorize “sweetheart 
deals” between companies and unions at the employees’ expense. 
The court also suggested that the Board's blocking charge rule 
unfairly prevents employers from challenging a union's majority 
status, a factor not present here. 965 F.2d at 250. 

7 287 NLRB 350 (1987). enf. denied 859 F.2d 362 (Sth 
Cir. 1988), rehearing denied 864 F.2d 791 (Sth Cir. 1988), revd. 
494 U.S. 775 (1990), on remand 905 F.2d 871 (Sth Cir. 1990). 

? 286 NLRB 295 (1987), enf denied 871 F.2d 980 (1 Ith 
Cir. 1989), cert. denied 493 U.S. 924 (1989). 


17a 


guidance and reasoned analysis to decide the issue,” the 
court remanded the case, instructing the Board "to revisit, 
clarify and explain the principles that it thinks apply to the 
present circumstances,” and to explain the application of 


% 980 F.2d at 812-813. 

Although some of the court's language in ordering a 
remand in this case refers to an “actual loss" of majority status as 
well as a good-faith” doubt of majority status, there is a 
significant distinction between a case involving a claim of actual 
loss of majority status and one involving a claim of good-faith 
doubt. As the Supreme Court stated in NLRB v. Curtin Matheson 
Scientific, Inc. 494 U.S. 775, 787 fn. 8 (1990), unlike in an actual 
loss of majority status case, an employer need not show an 
actual numerical loss of majority support to prove a good-faith 
doubt and may rely instead on circumstantial evidence to satisfy 
its burden of proof. We emphasize that this case involves only 
the issue of whether the Respondent had good-faith doubt that 
the Union retained majority support. In fact at no point in the 
proceedings before the Board or the court did the Respondent 
urge that the Union had suffered an actual loss of majority 
support and there has been no finding that, or discussion of 
whether, the Union actually lacked majority status when it 
accepted the Respondent's final contract offer. As the 
Respondent stated in its supplemental brief to the Board: "[T}he 
issue which has been remanded to the Board by the Court of 
Appeals is whether an employer who, at the time of a Union's 
effort to accept a previously expressed management proposal. 
has a good faith doubt of the Union's continued majority status. 
may refuse to execute an agreement based on that Union's 


permitting an employer to “sit” on a purported doubt to 
await the outcome of contract negotiations and to raise its 
doubt because of subsequent dissatisfaction with the 
contract would encourage employers to manipulate the 
bargaining process resulting in “inequity and ... 
destabilize[d] bargaining relationships." The General 
Counsel also contends that reliance on Ladies Garment 
Workers is misplaced because the union in that case, 
unlike the certified Union here, had never enjoyed 
majority support when the employer granted recognition. " 


‘acceptance’ and whether it should be allowed to present 
evidence to support its claim that, at the time of the Union's 
‘acceptance’ it had a basis for such good faith doubts. "Therefore, 
we address here only the Respondent's good-faith doubt in 
defense in evaluating the 8(a)(5) violations alleged. 

" Finally, the General Counsel maintains that if the Board 
reaches the merits of the Respondent's good-faith doubt defense. 
the Respondent did not have the necessary objective evidence to 
support its alleged good-faith doubt The Respondent contends to 


19a 


The Respondent, citing Ladies Garment Workers. 
contends that the Board's refusal to consider its alleged 
good-faith doubt violates the principle that an employer 
may not enter into an agreement with a minority union 
and that the Board's general rule that a contract offer is 
open for acceptance until an employer expressly 


_ withdraws it must be conditioned on the union's 


that this case involves a contract forced on management 
by a minority union, the Respondent further contends that 
the Board's result forces unwanted representation on 
employees in the same way as occurs when a colluding 
union and employer, faced with a loss of the union's 
majority support and the possibility of a decertificaxion 
petition, sign a contract in violation of Section 8(a)(2) and 
(1) and Section 8 (b)(1)(A). 

Finally, the Respondent maintains that the Board's 
refusal to consider its alleged good-faith doubt is 
inconsistent with Curtin Matheson Scientific. Inc., above. 
and Bickerstaff Clay Products, above. and with the 
Board's decision in Viking Lithographers."* The 
Respondent argues that the Board, in contrast to this case, 
permitted the employers in each of those cases to litigate 
an alleged good-faith doubt as a defense to 8(a)(5) charges 
when the refusal to bargain was based on the employer's 


the contrary. 
s 184 NLRB 139(1970). 


20a 


rejection of the union's purported acceptance due to an 
alleged erosion of the employers’ union support. 

As noted above, the Board has accepted the court's 
remand. As the court has reminded us, our responsibility 
is to develop coherent and correct legal standards 
governing labor negotiations and to explain their 
application to the relevant facts. The precise issue before 
us is whether, when negotiations for a collective-bargaing 
agreement after the certification year has ended have 
culminated in the union's acceptance of an employer's 
contract proposals, an employer may withdraw 
recognition or otherwise refuse to bargain by presenting 
objective evidence, in existence and known to the 
employer before acceptance, to support a good-faith doubt 
that the union lacked majority status at the time of 
acceptance. "° 


For the reasons below, we reaffirm our findings 


that the Union's acceptance of the Respondent's 
November 17 proposals created a valid and binding 
contract, and that the Respondent was not thereafter 
entitled to present evidence of a good-faith doubt as a 
defense to the allegation of an 8(a)(5) violation. 

We have structured our analysis to respond to the 
court's concerns. After discussing the Board's 


7 As our analysis will make clear, this case does not 


involve an employer's voluntary initial recognition of a union or 
an alleged actual loss of a union's majority status. See fns. 14, 
supra, and 74, infra. 


2la 


presumptions regarding a certified union's majority status 
we set forth legal principles, based on statutory, practical, 
and policy considerations, governing when an employer 
lawfully may refuse to bargain based on an alleged 
good-faith doubt. Our discussion accords with and 
elaborates on the adminisirative law judge's analysis in 
Chicago Tribune. As instructed by the court, we also 
analyze the statutory issues the Seventh Circuit raised in 
Chicago Tribune. In this regard, we examine the specific 
conduct prohibited by Section 8(a)(5) and (2) of the Act, 
discuss the applicability of these provisions to the 
Respondent's withdrawal of recognition, and consider 
analogous cases in which Congress, the Board, and the 
Supreme Court have resolved the tension between the 
policies arising out of obligations imposed by Section 
8(a)(5) and those imposed by Section 8(a)(2). 


C. The Boards Mandate and the Presumptions 
Respecting a Certified Union's Majority Status 


The Board's mandate in administering the Act is to 
further industrial peace and labor relations stability by 
encouraging the practice and procedure of collective 
bargaining while preserving for employees the right to 
choose, or to refrain from choosing, a bargaining 
representative.” In enforcing the nation's labor laws, the 


» See 29 U.S.C. Sec. 15]. 


22a 
Board seeks to balance these dual objectives while 
recognizing that the overriding policy of the Act is 
"industrial peace."*' 
The Board has established several presumptions 


free choice of employees.” The presumptions "indicate 
the relationship between the existence of a Board 
certificate and the right of an employer to question a 
union's majority in good faith." At the outset, it is well 
settled that absent unusual circumstances a union enjoys 
an irrebuttable presumption of majority status during the 
first year following its certification. After the certification 
year (and in the absence of a collective-bargaining 
agreement), the presumption of majority status remains, 
but becomes rebuttable.“ An employer may rebut the 
presumption of majority status by establishing either (1) 
that at the time of the refusal to bargain a majority of 
employees did not in fact support the union, or (2) “that 
the refusal was predicated on a good-faith and reasonably 


” Fall River Dyeing Corp. v. NLRB, 482 U.S. 27, 38-39 
(1987): Brooks v. NLRB, 348 U.S. 96, 103 (1954). 

- See Fall River, 482 U.S. at 38-39. 

- Celanese Corp. of America, 95 NLRB 664, 671 (1951), 
overruled in part on other grounds Hawaii Meat Co., 139 NLRB 
966, 968 (1962). 

“ Fall River, 482 U.S. at 37-38 (and cases cited therein). 


23a 


grounded doubt, supported by objective considerations, of 
the union's majority status." ** 

A valid collective-bargaining agreement also 
affects the presumptions of majority status. In general, a 
union enjoys an irrebuttable presumption of majority 
status during the contract term.” On the contract's 
expiration, the presumption becomes rebuttable.”” The 
issue here arises at the time the rebuttable postcontract 
term presumption would become the irrebuttable contract 
term presumption and raises the question whether that 
change in status can occur when an employer asserts that 
it had objective evidence to support a good-faith doubt of 
majority status before or at the time the union accepted its 
offer, but had failed to raise such a dovbt until after the 
agreement was reached pursuant to that acceptance.” 


: Burger Pits, Inc., 273 NLRB 1001, 1001 (1984), enfd. 


785 F.2d 796 (9th Cir. 1986). 

- We note, however, that with the exception of the 
healthcare industry and seasonal operations, a rival 
representation or decertification petition may be filed during that 
"window" period which is more than 60 days but less than 90 
days before the expiration date of the existing contract of 3 years’ 
duration or less. 

ow Burger Pits, 173 NLRB at 1001 (and cases cited 
therein). 

= See Chicago Tribune Co., 965 F. 2d at 250. 

The First Circuit in remanding the present case stated that the 
Board's decisions regarding the availability of the good-faith 
doubt defense after the parties have reached a binding agreement 


24a 


As the Supreme Court in Fall River noted, the 
Board bases its presumptions of majority stafus not on 
absolute certainty that the union's majority status will not 


erode following certification, but rather on carefully — 


considered policy choices intended to further the Act's 
objectives. The Court, commenting approvingly on the 
Board's presumptions concerning majority support for an 
incumbent union, explained how the presumptions 
promote industrial peace: 
In essence, [the presumptions] enable a union to 
concentrate on obtaining and fairly administering a 
collective bargaining agreement without worrying that, 
unless it produces immediate results, it will lose 
majority support and will be decertified. ... The 


— — —_ ————— — ----—-- 


are based on the contract bar rule. 980 F.2d at 810. Under tha 
rule, a contract meeting certain requirements is valid and will bar 
an election. See generally Hexton Furniture Co., 111 NLRB 342 
(1955). Although the Board has on occasion framed its 
discussion of a union's continuing majority support during the 
term of a contract in terms of the contract bar rules (see, ¢.g., 
Westwood Import Co., 251 NLRB 1213, 1213-1214 (1980), 
enfd. 681 F.2d 664 (9th Cir. 1982)). we emphasize that the 
precise rule of law applicable here is the irrebuttable 
presumption that a union retains majority status during the 
contract. We note, however, that the same policy underlies both 
the presumptions of majority status and the contract bar rules: 
achieving a reasonable balance between industrial stability ad 
employee freedom of choice. See Crompton Co., 260 NLRB 
417, 418 (1982), and discussions below. : 


25a 


presumptions also remove any temptation on the part of 
the employer to avoid good-faith bargaining in the hope 
that, by delaying, it will undermine the union's support 
among the employees . . . . The upshot of the 
presumptions is to permit unions to develop stable 
bargaining relationships with employers, which will 
enable the unions to pursue the goals of their members, 
and this pursuit, in turn, will further industrial peace.”” 
D. Circumstances Under Which an Employer May 
Withdraw Recognition Based on Good-Faith Doubt 


In accord with the court's instructions, we now 
examine when an employer may lawfully withdraw 
recognition or otherwise refuse to bargain based on a 
good-faith doubt of a certified union's continuing majority 
status. Before addressing the facts here, we set forth two 
related rules and their rationales. 

1. Within a_ reasonable time before a 
collective-bargaining agreement expires, an employer that 
establishes a good-faith doubt of a union's majority status 
may announce that it does not intend to negotiate a new 
agreement.” Additionally, after the contract has expired, 
- 482 U.S. at 38-39 (citations and footnotes omitted). 
Although the issue in Fall River concerned a successor 
employer's obligation to bargain under the Act we find that the 
Court's discussion of the rationale supporting the presumptions is 
also pertinent to the issue presented in this case. 

7 Burger Pits, 273 NLRB at 1001. 


26a 


an employer is entitled to raise a good-faith doubt of a 
union's continuing majority sims ety See prick © 0 
union's acceptance of its contract proposals.” 
existence of a good-faith doubt is a question of fact. ie 
employer has the burden of proving that it had a 
reasonable, good-faith belief that the union no longer 
represented a majority of the bargaining unit employees.” 
Although the good-faith doubt must be reasonably 
grounded and supported by objective considerations 
known to the employer, the employer need not 
conclusively demonstrate that a majority of its employees 


. This was, in fact ‘the situation | present in | Viking 
Lithographers, in which the Board found that where the parties 
during contract negotiations had not reached a complete 
agreement the employer did not violate Sec. 8(a)(5) and (1) by 
withdrawing recognition from the union based on reasonable 
objective factors to support its good-faith belief that the union 
had lost majority status. Specifically, the Board found that 
although the union had accepted the respondent's purported 
"final offer,” there was in fact no final offer “comprising a 
complete contract.” 184 NLRB at 139-140. We therefore reject 
the Respondent's contention that Viking Lithographers is 
dispositive here, and we find that case factually distinguishable 
from the present one. We reaffirm our finding in our initial 
decision, as enforced in pertinent part by the court that urtlike in 
Viking Lithographers, the parties here had reached a complete 
and binding agreement when the Respondent sought to withdraw 
recognition. 

- Pilgrim Industries. 286 NLRB 244 (1987). 


27a 


no longer desire to be represented by the union.” When, 
however, an employer fails to assert a good-faith doubt by 
announcing it and acting on it during the period when the 
presumption is rebuttable, no evidence exists from which 
to infer that the employer has rebutted the presumption of 
the union's continuing majority. From a_ practical 
standpoint the placement of the burden of proof on an 
employer stabilizes labor relations-and protects employee 
free choice--by prohibiting an employer from withdrawing 
recognition or refusing to bargain without first adducing 
objective evidence of its employees’ desires to no longer 
be represented by the union. 

2. We reaffirm the rule set forth in North Bros. 
Ford that a union's acceptance of an employer's 
outstanding contract offer precludes the employer from 
raising a good-faith doubt of the union's majority status 
based on events occurring after acceptance. Thus, the 
employer's good-faith doubt based on subsequent events is 
not available to defend a refusal to execute a valid 
agreement or a withdrawal of recognition. This rule is 
based on the fact that before or at the time the contract 
was formed no one had questioned the majority status of 
the union and the consequent validity of the agreement. 
As the Supreme Court reasoned in Fall River, this rule 
promotes industrial peace and labor relations stability by 
enabling a union to concentrate on obtaining and fairly 


33 


NLRB v. Randle-Eastern Ambulance Services. 584 F.2d 
720, 728 (Sth Cir. 1978). 


28a 


administering its collective-bargaining agreements without 
the concern that, absent immediate results, it will lose 
majority support and be decertified.™ 

3. Turning to the facts of this case, we reaffirm the 
principle applied in our initial decision and in the Board's 
decisions in Chicago Tribune and Belconz: where 
objective evidence to support a good-faith doubt of a 
union's majority status is known to the employer before a 
union's acceptance of the employer's contract offer but 
the employer does not act on that evidence prior to 
acceptance, the union's acceptance creates a valid 
collective-bargaining agreement. Therefore, all employer 
that disclaims its bargaining obligation in reliance on a 
good-faith doubt at that point violates Section 8(a)(5) of 
the Act. Further, the employer is precluded during the 
contract term from withdrawing recognition or otherwise 
refusing to bargain based on an alleged good-faith doubt 
that the union lacked majority status at the time of 
acceptance. We adhere to this rule for the following 
reasons. 


E. Statutory Considerations Arising from Section 8(a)(5) 


Section 8(a)(5) of the Act provides that it is an unfair 
labor practice for an employer to refuse to bargain 
collectively with the representative of its employees. The 
Supreme Court in First National Maintenance Corp. v. 


- 482 U.S. at 38-39. 


29a 


NLRB described the labor policies furthered by the 
statutory bargaining obligation: 


A fundamental aim of the [Act] is the establishment 
and maintenance of industrial peace to preserve the 
flow of interstate commerce. ... Central to 
achievement of this purpose is the promotion of 
collective bargaining as a method of defusing and 
channeling conflict between labor and management.. . 
Congress ensured that collective bargaining would go 
forward by ... giving [the NLRB] the power to 
condemn as unfair labor practices certain conduct by 
unions and employers that it deemed deleterious to the 
process, including the refusal “to bargain 
collectively. "* 


Relying on this mandate, we agree with the 
administrative law judge in Chicago Tribune that it is 
inconsistent with the concept of good-faith bargaining for 
the Board to adopt a rule that an employer may continue 
to bargain-and thus to treat the union as the representative 
of a majority of its employees-by leaving its contract offer 
on the table to await the outcome of negotiations before 
deciding whether to raise a doubt of the union's majority 
support based on grounds that it knew existed prior to the 
formation of the contract. * 


3$ 


452 U.S. 666, 674 (1981) (footnotes and citations 
omitted). 


[T]he majority issue must not have been raised by the 
employer in a context of illegal antiunion activities or 
other conduct by the employer aimed at causing 
disaffection from the union or indicating that in raising 
the majority issue the employer was merely seeking to 
gain time in which to undermine the union.” 


7 The Board and the courts have held that the common law 
rule that a rejection or counterproposal terminates an offer has 
little relevance in the collective-bargaining setting. In collective 
bargaining, an offer will remain on the table and be capable of 
acceptance unless the offeror explicitly withdraws it or changed 
circumstances would lead both parties reasonably to believe that 
the offer was withdrawn. Chicago Tribune Co., 303 NLRB 682. 
690 (1991) (citing NLRB v. Burkart Foam, 848 F.2d 825, 830 
(7th Cir. 1988)). 

- 95 NLRB at 673 (emphasis in original). 


3la 


In a similar vein, the Court in Fall River explained 
that the presumptions of majority status remove any 
temptation to avoid good-faith bargaining in the hope that 
by delaying, an employer will unfairly undermine the 
union's majority status.“ Thus, the Board has found that 
an employer's claim of good-faith doubt is neither held in 
good faith nor reasonable where the employer did not 
raise it until the parties had fully agreed on a contract, 
even though the claim was based on information known to 
the employer throughout bargaining.” Similarly, the First 
Circuit itself has heldthat an employer lacked good faith 
where, despite the employer's doubts aboutthe union's 
majority status it had entertained prior to negotiations, it 
erent cane “hoping to get a contract to its 


“ 482 U.S. at 38. 

“ Bennett Packaging Co., 285 NLRB 602, 608 (1987). See 
also King Radio Corp., 208 NLRB 578, 584 (1974), enfd. 510 
F.2d 1154 (10th Cir. 1975), cert. denied 423 U.S. 839 (1975) 
(Board found employer's claim of doubt asserted as a defense to, 
withdrawal of recognition, was not held in good faith where it 
knew of the factors relied on to establish its doubt during 
negotiations bui failed to raise the doubt until the parties were 
close to reaching agreement on a contract the employer did not 
want). 

a. Bolton-Emerson, Inc. v. NLRB, 899 F. 24 104, 107 (ist 
Cir.1990) enfg. 293 NLRB 1 124( 1989). 


Further, we share the awareness of the 
administrative law judge in Chicago Tribune of the 
practical difficulties of litigating a doubt alleged to have 
been held before or at the time the contract was reached 
but on which the employer did not act until after the 
contract was reached. As he suggested, a determination of 
the critical issue of whether an employer had a reasonable 
doubt, held in good faith but not articulated, at an"earlier 
unspecified time"--presumably prior to the union's 
acceptance of the employer's contract offer--would 
involve an inquiry into matters too speculative and 
subjective "not only to vitiate that contract but to dissolve 
the bargaining relationship."*' Instead, as discussed above, 
the existence of a good-faith doubt of majority support is a 


as 303 NLRB at 691. 


33a 


question of fact, and to demonstrate it, the employer must 
a r “9 er grereenpey qreeny 
Thus, practicalities support the rule that, if an 
employer is aware of objective evidence to support a 
good-faith doubt before the union accepts its offer, it 
must, for the defense to be timely raised, act on this doub: 
before the union accepts its offer. Further, and this policy 
choice goes to the heart of the First Circuit and Seventh 
Circuit's concerns, if an employer fails to raise a doubt 
based on known preacceptance factors until after 
acceptance, the Board will not view those factors as 
changed circumstances" vitiating the employer's offer or 
the contact's validity. Board recognition of the factors 
supporting the doubt as changed circumstances would 
defeat in large part the purpose of denying the employer 
pt peed of raising the after-the-fact doubt defense-it 
v a contract as to the validi 
indie tikwens 
Accordingly, we reaffirm as consistent with our 
Statutory mandate and the practicalities of case litigation 
the rule that once the union accepts the employer's offer, 
in the absence of a previous assertion of good-faith doubt 
or other changed circumstances to call into question the 
union s competence to enter into a contract, the parties 


42 


(40) See generally Brown & Root U.S.A.. 308 NLRB 
~~ mae and Laidlaw Waste Systems, 307 NLRB 1211 
). 


34a 


have fonned a valid contract precluding the employer 
from raising a good-faith doubt or refusing to bargain 
with the union during its term.“ 

Having reaffirmed that the Respondent could not 
raise its alleged good-faith doubt as a defense to its 
withdrawal of recognition and refusal to execute the 
contract, we find it unnecessary to pass on whether the 
Respondent presented sufficient objective evidence to 
support a reasonable, good-faith doubt of the Union's 
majority status. However, some features of the 
Respondent's evidence illusaate the practical difficulties of 
determining, without a timely assertion of doubt 
accompanied by appropriate action, when an employer 
possesses sufficient objective evidence to support an 
stages gnot-falth doubt.“ 
= We note ‘that an employer's ‘ability to manipulate the 
timing of its good-faith doubt defense and the difficulty of 
litigating tbe issue given that fact have influenced our approach 
in this case. Our focus here does not, however, necessarily carry 
over into other areas that do not present the same policy 
considerations. For example, in the case before us, the statutory 
period of limitations began to run when the Respondent refused 
to execute the contract and asserted that it was withdrawing 
recognition from tbe Union, not when tbe Respondent formed its 
good-faith doubt. 

- Member Cohen does not rely on _ general 
pronouncements concerning tbe timliness of an employer's 
assertion of a good-faith doubt of majority status. He confines 
himself to the specific facts of this casee, i.e.. the assertion of tbe 


35a 


The court found that the Respondent relied on 
events prior to the Union's November 27 acceptance to 
support its good-faith doubt, asserted on November 28. 
Ralph Auciello, the Respondent's vice president, testified 
that after receiving the Union's telegram, management 
met on November 28, discussed each employee's union 
sentiment, and that "at that time, it was clear to me that 
the union did not represent the men." He attributed this 
belief to employees’ oral statements of dissatisfaction with 
the Union over several months. For example, Auciello 
admitted that one employee's statement that the Union was 
a joke could have been made immediately after the strike 
began or "6 months before.” He could not recall the most 
recent conversation with an employee who did not support 
the Union, but testified that "quite a few” discussions 
occurred on November 18 and that some of the 
conversations took place the week of November 21 .*° 
According to Auciello, November 28 was the first 
time that the Respondent discussed the Union's majority 
status "in such depth" and that management had not 
discussed the issue previously because contract 


doubt after a contract offer has been accepted in circumstances 
where tbe assertion is based on facts that were known prior to 
acceptance. 

See Bolton-Emerson, 293 NLRB at 1129, enfd. 899 F.2d 
at 107 (company representative's testimony that the company 
entertained good-faith doubt throughout negotiations conclusive 
of bad-faith bargaining). 


36a 


negotiations were ongoing.“ Auciello admitted, 
however,that management prepared a list of employees 
indicating who was likely to vote against union 
reptesentation "toward the end of the strike"*’ and "on or 
before" November 28. The Respondent did not take any 
action On one list because negotiations were ongoing and 
because the document represented a “worst case 
scenario." 

Auciello's testimony makes it clear that the 
Respondent harbored its doubt while its contract offer was 
outstanding. If we were to permit Respondent to "sit" on 
that doubt and to raise it after the offer is accepted, we 
would effectively permit an employer to unilaterally 
control a vital part of the collective-bargaining process. 
An employer with such a doubt would then not only be 
able to act on it and nullify the offer, but also it could wait 
until the offer is accepted and then vitiate the contract. If 
the Board's policies were to permit an employer to retain 
complete control over when to act on its purported doubt, 
control that can even invalidate after the fact a union's 
prior, appropriate, and good-faith bargaining acts, the 
demonstration of that doubt, with its profound legal and 


7 We note that Auciello testificd that he did not take notes 
about the employees’ antiunion sentiments until the Respondent 
began to prepare its response to the Union's November 27 


telegram. 
7 We note that the picketing ended on November 18 and 


that the Union called off the strike in its November 27 telegram. 


37a 


practical consequences, becomes amenable to post-hoc 
reasoning and self-serving interpretations. 


G. Section B(a)(2), Ladies Garment Workers, and 
Balancing Employee Free Choice Against Bargaining 


Our affirmation of Belcon, which we applied in 
our initial decision, is based on the obligations imposed by 
the statutory duty to bargain in good faith under Section 
8(aX(S). The Seventh Circuit in Chicago 
Tribune“maintained, however, that irrespective of 
whether an employer continues to negotiate by leaving an 
offer on the table, Section 8(a)(2),” which protects the 
right of employees to decide for themselves whether to be 
represented, requires consideration in determining the 
availability of the good-faith doubt defense.” According 
to the Chicago Tribune court, applying Ladies Garment 
Workers, the interests of the majority of employees who 
had not desired representation when the contract was 
formed dictate that the employer should not be estopped 


. We note that the Seventh Circuit issued its decision in 


_ Chicago Tribune after the instant case was argued before the 


First Circuit 

= Sec. 8(a)(2) prohibits an employer from dominating or 
interfering with the formation or administration of any labor 
organization or from contributing financial or other SUPPoOrt to it. 
- 965 F.2d at 250. 


38a 


from withdrawing its offer and refusing to bargain with 
et rsnpbeii ye Ta Harty i'd the 


belief in the union's majority status, the employer violated 
Section 8(a)(2), and that by its acceptance of exclusive 
bargaining authority the union violated Section 8(b)(1)(A). 
The Court held that a grant of exclusive recognition to a 
minority union is unlawful because the union so favored is 
given "a marked advantage over any other in securing the 
adherence of employees."*' 

We respectfully disagree that Ladies Garment 
Workers resolves the issue here. As an initial matter, this 
case is factually distinguishable from Ladies Garment 
Workers. The instant case concerns a certified_union and 
the employer's obligation to bargain with it as enforced by 
Section 8(a)(5), whereas Ladies Garment Workers 
involved the empl!oyerr's inadvertent voluntary 
recognition of a union the majority of its employees never 
supported in violation of Section 8(a)(2). Additionally, 


366 U.S. at 738 (citing NLRB v. Pennsylvania 
Greyhound Lines,303 U.S. 261. 267 (1938)). 


39a 


this case, unlike Ladies Gannent Workers, occurred in the 
context of ongoing negotiations and the shifting balances 
of power caused by an economic strike, as discussed 
below. It follows from these distinctions, as well as from 
the different legislative purposes of the two provisions, 
of furthering labor relations stability and ensuring 
employee freedom of choice are appropriate. 

Thus, Ladies Garment Workers presented a 
fundamentally different issue from the one presented 
here.That case involved an employer's recognition of a 
This case, on the other hand, involves the Respondent's 
withdrawal of recognition of the incumbent, presumptively 
majority Union. In Ladies Garment Workers, the 
employer's asserted good-faith belief that the union had 
achieved majority status at the time of recognition was no 
defense to its unlawful recognition;in this case, the issue 
is whether the Respondent's asserted good-faith belief that 
the Union had lost its presumptive majority status is a 
validly raised defense to its withdrawal of recognition. 


H. Statutory Considerations-Section 8(a)(2) 


The violation in Ladies Garment Workers arose 
under Section 8(a)(2). The gravamen of an 8(a)(2) 
violation is the domination or interference by an employer 
with the formation or administration of any labor 


40a 


organization. Congress’ goal in enacting Section 8(a)(2) 
was to preserve for employees the right to choose their 
bargaining representative free of employer interference or 
coercion.” The Court in Ladies Garment Workers 
made clear that the violation found was the employer's 
initial grant of exclusive representation status to a union 
that had not been chosen by a majority of its employees.” 
We respectfully disagree with the Seventh Circuit's 
finding in Chicago Tribune that the employers’ conduct in 
North Bros. Ford and Belcon, and therefore also in the 
instant case, is prohibited by Section 3(a)(2). The Board's 
presumptions of continued majority status under Section 
8(a)(S) operate only to mainain lawfully established 
continuing bargaining relaionships.“ In Ladies Garment 
Workers, following the employer's unlawful recognition 
of the minority union, the Board voided the agreement 
and the union was no longer presumed to be the majority 
representative. By contrast, the Union in this case was not 
recognized unlawfully, but was the certified representative 
of the Repondent's unit employees. A Board-certified 
election clarifies beyond question a union's status as the 
emloyees' exclusive collective-bargaining representative .~ 


m Electromation Inc., 309 NLRB 990, 994 fn. 18 (1992). 

- 366 U.S. at 736. 

“5 Roval Coach Lines v. NLRB, 838 F.5d 47, 51 (2d Cir. 
1988). 
- See W.A. Krueger Co., 299 NLRB 914. 916 fn. 18 
(1990). Members Stephens and Cohen do not rely on this and 


4la 


Before acceptance of the Respondent's offer, when the 
Union was operating under a rebuttable presumption of 
continued majority support, there was no legally 
presumption was unchallenged at the time of acceptance, 
even though the Respondent and the unit employees 
themselves were free to attack it. Under the 
circumstances, Section 8(a)(2) does not preclude a finding 
that the parties formed a valid agreement preserving the 
Union's presumptive majority during the contract's term. 
Thus, the aim of Congress in enacting Section 8(a)(2)-to 
prevent employers from foisting representatives on 
unwilling employees*-is not frustrated by the 
presumption's protection of the status of certified 
incumbent union against post-hoc attack.’ 


Thus, we respectfully disagree with the courts in 
this case and Chicago Tribune to the extent that they hold 


subsequent references to W. A. Kreuger. 

us Electromation, 309 NLRB at 994. 

5 We further note that contrary to the Seventh Circuit's 
suggestionn in Chicago Tribune, the Board's blocking charge 
rule does not prevent an employer from challenging a union's 
majoriry status. An employer is entitled to secure evidence to 
support an alleged good-faith doubt despite the pendency of a 
decertification petition and is privileged to withdraw recognition 
based on tangiblee evidence of a loss of majority support. See 
Atwood & Morrill Co., 289 NLRB 794 (1988). 


42a 


that 8(a)(2) considerations require that an employer be 
permitted to raise a “reasonable doubt" defense to an 
8(a)(5) withdrawal-of ition violation where the 
objective considerations —assertedly me te 
reasonable doubt existed before the union accepted the 
employer's contract offer, but the reasonable doubt itself 
was not expressed by the employer until after the union 
accepted the contract offer. 


I. Voluntary Recognition as Distinct from Board 
Certification 


The procedure used to accord recognition to a 
union also affects the duration and effect of the 
presumption of majority status. When a union is certified 
following a Board-supervised election, the presumption of 
majority status generally remains irrebuttable for | year. 
Voluntary recognition, however, presents risks to stable 
bargaining relations not present where employees have 
chosen a union through a Board-conducted election. Thus, 
when an employer voluntarily recognizes a union, the 
Board has set the period of irrebuttably presumptive 
majority at a less definite “reasonable time"for 
bargaining. Without the safeguards of a Board conducted 
election, voluntary recognition can lead to recognition of a 
minority union, as occurred in Ladies Garment Workers. 
In this case, although the certification year had ended, the 


= See Roval Coach Lines, 838 F.2d at 51-52. 


43a 
Union remained the presumptive majority representative 
of the unit employees when it accepted the Respondent's 
offer. The Union's longstanding status as the employees’ 
certified bargaining representative distinguisbes it from 
the uncertified union in Ladies Garment Workers: and the 
national labor policy of stabilizing bargaining 
relationships™supports, from a policy perspective, our 
finding that the Respondent's attempted withdrawal of 
recognition posed a risk to stable bargaining relations not 
addressed by Section 8(a)(2), but falling within the 
an Sanaa Greta, ty Sepsis GD af he 


- See Exce/ Corp., 313 NLRB S88, S89 (1993), discussed 
below. See also Edison Sault Electronic Co.. 313 NLRB 753 
(1994) petitioner precluded from filing unit clarification petition 
wer Nene | oer om reached but prior to ratification where 
petitioner not reserve the right during bargaining to file: 
decision extends Board's Rule and policy that to entertain a unit 
clarification petition during the term of a contract which defines 
the bargaining unit would disrupt the bargaining relationship). 
Union Plaza Hotel & Casino, 296 NLRB 918, 918 fn. 4 (1989), 
enfd sub nom. E G. & H Inc v. NRLB, 949 F.2d 276, 278. 280 
(9th Cir. 1991) (employer may not repudiate agreement formed 
but not yet signed by arguing that the unit is inappropriate 
because it contains statutory supervisors). 

= _ We note further that an employer that has voluntarily 
recognized a umon is permitted to defend an 8(a\5) complaint 
allegation by introducing evidence demonstrating a lack of 


44a 


J. The Significance of an Economic Strike During 
Bargaining and Shifting Balances of Power 


The Seventh Circuit in Chicago Tribune also 
warned that finding a valid contract on tbe union's 
acceptance of an employer's offer notwithstanding that 
“the union lost the support of the workers" between the 


majority at the time of recognition. if the employer is successful, 
the presumption of majority status ends. See Moisi & Son 
Trucking, 197 NLRB 198 fn. 2 (1972); Concord Services, 310 
NLRB 821, 822 (1993). This defense, of course, is cognizable 
only when recognition has occurred within 6 months of the filing 
of the related unfair labor practice charge. See Sewell-Allen Big 
Star, Inc., 294 NLRB 312, 313 (1989), enfd. mem 138 LRRM 
2160 (6th Cir. 1991); Jim Kelley's Tahoe Nugget, NLRB 357 
(1976), enfd 584 F.2d 293 (9th Cir. 1978), cert denied 442 U.S. 
921 (1979). However, the Board's decision in Burger Pits,273 
NLRB at 1001, suggests that even in voluntary recognition 
cases, once tbe parties have formed a valid collective-bargaining 
agreement an employer cannot challenge the union's majority 
status during the conract's term in order to avoid the bargaining 
obligations imposed by the agreement This finding reflects the 
Board's policy, discusscd above, of preserving enduring 

Members Stephens and Cohen do not pass on the issue 
of whether an employer can challenge a contract based on the 
minority status of the union at the time of recognition, where 
such recognition occurred less than 6 months prior to the 
challenge. 


45a 


offer and its acceptance would undermine employee free 
choice because the resulting agreements would be 
“sweetheart deals" between the company and the union.*! 
As a practical matter, because many good-faith doubt 
cases occur during strikes, we find that “sweetheart” deals 
are less likely in this context than the court prophesied. 
A strike is defined by discord between the union 
and the employer to gain bargaining power. In this 
atmosphere, an employer and a union struggling to reach 
agreement on contract terms, or an employer hoping to 


place at the employees’ expense, the Respondent prepared 
forms for employees to resign from the Union, thus 
seeking to alter the prevailing balance of power and 
weaken the Union's economic position. The Union's 
eventual acceptance of the Respondent's contract offer 
was not collusive; it was a recognition of the 
Respondent's increased bargaining strength as the unit 
employees abandoned the strike. Yet even after the Union 
capitulated to the Respondent's offer, the Respondent stil! 
sought to terminate, rather than continue, the bargaining 
relationship.” 


: 965 F.2d at 250. 
In contrast to the good-faith doubt cases involving 


46a 


K. Balancing Statutory Considerations 


The court's remand calls on us to determine 
whether the Respondent can rely on the employees’ 
statutory right of free choice to justify withdrawing 
recognition from the Union. We have found that the 
Respondent's conduct in bargaining with the Union does 
not come within the gravamen of an offense under Section 
8(a)(2). However, as the Respondent's conduct implicates 
the employees’ statutory right of free choice, we shall 
examine the Board's and the Supreme Court's 
accommodations of the dual interests in employee free 
choice and stable bargaining relations. We have 
consistently recognized in our prior decisions that 
employee free choice may be outweighed, in some 
circumstances and in limited appropriate degrees, by the 
goal of industrial stability, and this approach has found 
favor in the courts. 


certified unions, casts involving velumary sseegnition-ené tus 
cooperation-between an employer and a union present a more 
likely context for sweetheart deals to occur. For example, in 
Baby Watson Cheesecake, 309 NLRB 417 (1992), the Board 
found that the employer and the voluntarily recognized 
incumbent union unlawfully executed a renewai agreement when 
faced with an organizing campaign by a rival union, despite their 
knowledge that the incumbent union did not enjoy majority 
status. 


47a 


In Bryan Mfg. Co., the Supreme Court held that 
where a collective-bargaining agreement was executed at a 
time when the union did not represent a majority of the 
unit employees, complaints alleging lack of majority status 
were barred by Section 10(b) of the Act when they were 
filed more than 6 months after the execution of the 
agreement. In so finding, the Court recognized the 
competing interests at stake--employee self-determination 
versus burying stale disputes in the interest of stability-and 
concluded that Congress had decided the appropriate 
balance by establishing the 6-month statutory limitations 
period. Thus, the minority status of the union could not be 
litigated once the statutory period had run "even at the 
expense of the vindication of statutory rights. "© 

In cases involving lawful bargaining relationships 
where Congress has not determined the outcome cf the 
accommodation analysis, the Supreme Court has refused 
to allow employers to rely on assertions of employees’ 


362 U.S. at 429. By the same token, the Board has 
acknowledged employers’ interests in maintenance of a str ‘s 
quo that has developed in the absence of timely action by the 
bargaining representative. Thus, for example, if more than 6 
months pass after a union is on notice of an employer's refusal to 
execute a bargaining agreement, the Board will not entertain an 
8(aS) charge on any continuing violation theory, since parties 
to a collective-bargaining relationship must “be able to assess 
their obligations to each other expeditiously and with reasonable 
certainty.” Chambersburg County Market, 293 NLRB 654. 655 
(1989). 


48a 


rights to justify refusals to bargain. In Brooks v. NLRB,“ 
the Court held that the employer was obligated to bargain 
with the certified union even if shortly after the election 
and through no reason attributable to the employer the 
Board has proedures through which parties can petition 
the Board for release from their bargaining obligations, 
the Court stated: 


The underlying purpose of this statute is industrial 
peace. To allow employers to rely on employees’ 
rights in refusing to bargain with the formally 
designated union is not conducive to that end, it is 
inimical to it... . 


In placing a nonconsenting minority under the 
bargaining responsibility of an agency selected by 
a majority of the workers, Congress has discarded 
common-law doctrines of agency. 


In Franks Bros. Co. v. NLRB,” the Court affirmed 
the Board's Order that an employer bargain with a union 
which had lost its majority following the employer's 
unlawful refusal to bargain with it. The Court stated that 
such an order involves no "injustice to employees who 


S 348 U.S. 96 (1954). 
sas 348 U.S. at 103. 
- 321 U.S. 702 (1944). 


49a 


may wish to substitute for the particular union some other 
. . » @frangement,” because “a bargaining relationship 
once rightfully established must be permitted to exist and 
function for a reasonable period in which it can be given a 
fair chance to succeed."®’ Similarly, in the situation where 
the Board has issued a bargaining order to remedy an 
employer's unfair labor practices, the argument has been 
made that a bargaining order is an unnecessarily harsh 
remedy that needlessly prejudices employees’ Section 7 
rights of free choice. The Supreme Court rejected this 
argument in NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co.* by pointing out 
that [t}here is, after all, nothing permanent in a bargaining 
order, and if, after the effects of the employer's acts have 
worn off, the employees clearly desire to disavow the 
union, they can do so by filing a representation petion." 
And, in the situation where the Board issued an 
affirmative bargaining order because it found that a 
successor employer did not have a good-faith doubt of the 
incumbent union's majority status when the employer 
refused to recognize that union, the Fourth Circuit 
recently held that even though such an order "infringes 
upon" and “restricts employees’ freedom of choice," such 


° 321 U.S. at 705 (citations omitted). See also NLRB v. 
Mexia Textile Mills, 339 U.S. 563 (1950) (claim of an 
intervening loss of majority no defense to a proceeding for 
enforcement of en order to cease and desist from certain unfair 
labor practices). 

” 395 U.S. 575, 613 (1969). 


50a 


"a restriction does not... render the remedy 
inappropriate," because "“[iJt does not fix a permanent 
bargaining relationship between the employer and the 
union" and "[a}fter a reasonable period, the employees 
will be free to reject the union, if they so choose... ." 
NLRB vy. Williams Enterprises, No. 94-1294, slip op. at 
13-14 (4th Cir. Apr. 6, 1995). 

In addition to Court precedent, Board decisions 
involving challenges to incumbent unions' status offer 
further guidance in analyzing, from a policy perspective, 
the limits on the Respondent's right to challenge the 
Union's majority status. In Excel Corp., the Board refused 
to permit the decertification petitioners to submit 
signatures in support of their showing of interest after the 
expiration of the window period. The parties in Excel 
executed a successor agreement after the window period 
expired. Emphasizing that the parties had an enduring 
bargaining relationship, the Board found that to permit a 
decertification election based on untimely signatures 
would “unjustifiably place at risk the collective-bargaining 
agreement and the bargaining relationship between the 
Employer and the Union."® 

In W. A. Krueger Co., the Board held that an 
employer may not make unilateral changes in 
employees'terms and conditions of employment after a 


4 313 NLRB at 589. Member Stephens, who dissented in 
Excel Corp., and Member Cohen find it unnecessary to rely on 
the above discussion. 


Sla 


union loses the tally in a decertification election but before 
a certification of results issues. Although recognizing that 
an employer may act unilaterally at its ‘peril in an initial 
certification where it has no preexisting duty to bargain,” 
the Board found that different interests prevail respecting 
a decertification petition, as it is filed in the context of an 
existing bargaining relationship where the employer has a 
duty to bargain over changes in unit employees’ terms and 
conditions of employment. The Board found that its 
Rule-i.e., that election results are not final until a 
certification issues-promotes stability "while the Board 
determines whether the apparent employee choice was 
freely made."” Finally. the Board majority, in addressing 
the dissent's concerns that an employer might be 
compelled to bargain with a minority union, stated: 


[B]y referring to the confusion that can exist over a 
union's status and an employer's corresponding 
obligations, our colleague has _ inadvertently 
highlighted a compelling reason for establishing a 
date certain for a losing union's change in status.” 


Pe See Mike O'Connor Chevrolet-Buick-GMC, 209 NLRB 
701 (1974), enf. denied on other grounds 512 F.2d 684 (8th Cir. 
1975). 

" 299 NLRB at 916-917. 

7 299 NLRB at 918 fn 21. We note that the Board in 
Krueger relied on two decisions that similarly reflect the Board's 
interest in preserving existing bargaining relationships: Dresser 
Industries, 264 NLRB 1088 (1982) (Rule permitting an 


52a 


From a policy perspective, then, the delineation of a 
precise point in time when a certified union's majority 
status ceases to be rebuttable promotes stability during the 
period when the union's status is in doubt. 

The Supreme Court and the Board did not base 
these decisions on the certainty that the incumbent unions 
continued to represent a majority of the unit employees. 
Rather, these cases reflect the policy determination that 
stable in the face of challenges to an incumbent union's 
status As both the Court and the Board have observed, 
this policy is particulariy compelling where, as here, the 
parties have maintained an enduring collective-bargaining 
relationship.” 

We emphasize that the intent of these cases is not 
to impose bargaining relationships and representation on 
unwilling employees. However, the cases ‘Suggest that 


employer to withdraw from berghining solely because a 
decertification petition has been filed does not give weight to the 
incumbent union's continuing presumption of majority status); 
and RCA Del Caribe, Inc., 262 NLRB 963 (1982) (Rule that 
mere filing of a representation petition by an outside union does 
not require or permit an employer to withdraw from bargaining 
with an incumbent union furthers stable bargaining relations and 
insures employee free choice.) 


” See. e.g., Excel Corp., 313 NLRB at 588. See also 
Krueger, 299 NLLRB at 915-918. 


53a 


with respect to employers, permissible methods of 
self-help to select and reject bargaining agents--in this 
case assertion of a good-faith doubt and attempted 
withdrawal of recognition-must be carefully circumscribed 
to prevent stable labor relations from being undermined 
by total employer control.” 

Like we did in Krueger, we have established a date 
certain-a union's acceptance of an employer's contract 
offer-after which an employer cannot challenge the 
majority status of a certified union based on an aleged 
good-faith doubt. We believe that as a policy matter, the 
stability resulting from this principle outweighes its 
potential adverse impact on employee freedom of choice. 
We further believe that our policy choice stabilizes 
enduring bargaining relationships, and gives the 
bargaining agreement that was formed while the union’ s 
presumed majority status remained unrebutted a chance to 
succeed. 


74 


See Brooks, 348 U.S. at 103. Compare the Supreme 
Court's decision in NLRB v. Curtin Matheson, 494 U.S.at 
794-796 (Board's refusal to adopt an antiunion presumption 
regarding the views of stike replacements is consistent with the 
Act's overriding policy of achieving industrial peace because it 
limits employers’ ability to oust a union without adducing any 
evidence of the employees’ union sentiments and encourages 
negotiated solutions to strikes). 


S4a 
L. Cases Involving Extraordinary Circumstances 


We recognize that extraordinary circumstances 
may arise in which a union's acceptance of an employer's 
final contract offer and the employer's assertion of a 
good-faith doubt are simultaneous.” For example, 
employees may first present signed petitions stating that 
they do not want to be represented by a union at virtually 
the same time that the union accepts an employer's 
contract offer. In such infrequent instances, the Board will 
evaluate case by case whether an employer is permitted to 
raise a good-faith doubt of the union's majority status. 
Further, the possibility that an employer may be permitted 
to raise a good-faith doubt that developed 
contemporaneously with a union's purported acceptance 
of its offer does not affect the principle that a union and 
an employer are not permitted to continue bargaining if 
the union has actually lost its majority scatus and the 
employer and the union are aware of this actual loss.” 


7 Cf. Royal Coach Lines v. NLRB, 838 F.2d 47 at 54, in 
which the court, in the context of a discussion of the burden of 
proof in voluntary recognition cases, recognized the possibility 
that an employer might provide evidence to cast a serious doubt 
of majority support for the union immediately prior to or 
contemporaneous with voluntary recognition. 


” See S.M.S. Automotive Products, 282 NLRB 36, 41-44 
(1986); Clark Equipment Co., 234 NLRB 935 (1978), on remand 
249 NLRB 660 (1980). In the initial Clark decision, the Board 


intel a - 


t 
_ 


55a 


M. Reconciling Curtin Matheson and Bickerstaff 


Finally, we find that tbe Board's decisions in 
Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 287 NLRB 350 (1987), 
and Bickerstaff Clay Products Co., 286 NLRB 295 
(1987), although they may appear to be inconsistent with 
our result here, do not indicate shifting or poorly defined 
Board policies. The Board's analyses of the cases before it 
are guided implicitly by the manner in which the cases are 
pled and litigated and, more explicitly, by the issues 
raised in the parties’ exceptions. In both Curtin Matheson 
and Bickerstaff the parties did not litigate the timeliness of 
the employers’ good-faith doubts even though they were 
asserted after the unions’ acceptances of the respondents’ 
outstanding contract offers. Instead, the parties framed 


found that the General Counsel established a prima facie case 
that the employer knowingly bargained with a union that had lost 
majority status. In so finding, the Board found that the evidence 
presented went beyond "naked claims” and included a specific 
listing of employees who had purportedly signed authorization 
cards for a rival union. No such arguments are made here. In the 
second Clark decision, however, the Board found that most of 
the key events established in the General counsel's prima facie 
case an relied on by the Board previouly did not, in fact, occur, 
an therefore that the employer did not violate the Act. Cf. 
Quality Hardware Mfg. Co., 307 NLRB 1445 (1992). We further 
emphasize that the case before us does not involve allegations of 
an actual loss of majority status. 


56a 


and argued the issue to the Board in both cases as whether 
the employers had met their burden of demonstrating a 
good-faith doubt. The focal point of each case in 
enforcement proceedings narrowed even more and became 
whether, in evaluating the employers’ evidence, the Board 
should entertain the presumption that sniker replacements 
do not support the union. 

The court in this case accepted the Board's 
insistence that it was not deliberately abandoning Belcon 
in considering the merits of the employers’ good-faith 
doubts in Curtin Matheson and in Bickerstaff. Rather, the 
court characterized the Board's evaluation of the 
good-faith doubt defenses in those cases as "an unwitting 
oversight encouraged, perhaps, by a readiness . . .to 
secure review of an important substantive issue.”” 
Although the resulting appearance of inconsistency is 
unfortunate, we agree with the court's assessment.” 


N. Conclusion 


” 980 F.2d at 812. 

" In Curtin Martheson, the Supreme Court reversed the 
Fifth Circuit's opinion and beld that the Board had acted within 
its discretion in refusing to adopt an antiunion in refusing to 
adopt an antiunion presumption regarding strike replacements. 
To the extent that the lower courts’ opinions in Curtin Matheson 
and Bickstaff have not been overruled they are of limited 
precedential value. 


reasons set forth above, we reaffirm our finding that the 
Respondent is precluded from demonstrating that it had a 
good-faith doubt of the Union's majority status at the time 
of acceptance. We therefore adhere to our previous 
findings that the Respondent violatea Section 8(a)(5) and 
(1) of the Act by refusing to execute a written contract 
with the Union and by withdrawing recognition. 


ORDER 


The National Labor Relations Board reaffirms its order in 
the underlying proceeding, 303 NLRB 562 (1991), and 
orders that the Respondent, Auciello Iron Works, Inc.. 
Hudson, Massachusetts, its officers, agents, successors, 
and assigns, shall take the action set forth in that Order. 
Dated, Washington, D.C. May 9, 1995 


William B. Gould IV, Chairman 


James M. Stephens, Member 


58a 
Margaret A. Browning, Member 
Charles I. Cohen, Member 


John C. Truesdale, Member 
(SEAL) NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


United States Court of 
Appeals 


For the First Circuit 
NO. 91-1905 


NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, 
Petitioner. 
v. 
AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC.., 


Respondent. 


ON APPLICATION FOR ENFORCEMENT OF AN 
ORDER OF THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD 


Before 
Selya, Circuit Judge 
Campbell, Senior Circuit Judge, 
and Keeton, * District Judge. 


John D. O'Reilly. Il], with whom O'Reilly & 
Grasso was on brief for respondent. 
Hunter, General Counsel, D. Randall Frye, Acting 
Deputy General Counsel, and Aileen A. Armstrong. 


Deputy Associate General Counsel, were on brief for 


November 30, 1992 


* Of the District of Massachusetts, sitting by designation 


CAMPBELL, Senior Circuit Judge. The National 
Labor Relations Board petitions for enforcement of its 
order issued against Auciello Iron Works, Inc., on June 
27, 1991, pursuant to section 10(e) of the National Labor 
Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 160(e). We decline to enforce 
the order at this time, retain jurisdiction and remand for 
further proceedings. 


Background 


Respondent, Auciello Iron Works, Inc. ("the 
Company") is an employer engaged in commerce within 
the meaning of sections 2(6) and (7) of the National 
Labor Relations Act ("NLRB"). The Company 
operates an iron fabrication shop in Hudson, 
Massachusetts, and employs approximately 23 production 
and maintenance workers. In 1977, the National Labor 
Relations Board ("NLRB") certified the Shopmen's Local 
Union No. 501, a/w International Association of Bridge, 
Structural and Ornamental Iron Workers (AFL-CIO) ("the 


6la 


Union"), to be the exclusive collective bargaining 
representative of employees within a unit that included the 
Hudson facility's production and maintenance workers. 
Since 1977, the Company has negotiated and entered into 
several collective bargaining agreements with the Union. 

On September 21, 1988, four days before the 
collective bargaining agreement then in effect was to 
expire, the Company and the Union began negotiations for 
a new agreement. The Union was represented in the 

‘ati by the I lane ive Rot 
Thomas, its local president David Mortimer, and one 
Joseph Parenti. The Company was represented by its 
attorney John D. O'Reilly, its controller Gerald Sauer, 
and its plant superintendent Manlio DeGrandis. 

On September 30, 1988, the Company presented 
contract proposals and the parties discussed wages, 
medical insurance premiums and pension plans. Following 
the meeting, the Union's membership rejected proposals 


October 4 or 5, 1988, representatives of the Company and 
suggested to Company representative O'Reilly that if the 
Company would adopt the Union's contract proposal, 
there would be no need to submit it to the membership for 
a vote. Nothing came of this suggestion. 

On October 13, 1988, the Company modified its 
proposals but the Union's negotiating team declined to 
accept them. It agreed, however, to submit the modified 


62a 


offer to the membership without a recommendation. The 
membership voted to reject the Company's offer and to 
strike the next day. 

The Company and the Union met on October 18, 
1988 with a federal mediator. The Union made a proposal 
which the Company declined. The stalemate continued 
through the parties’ next meeting on October 26, 1988. 

On November 17, 1988, the Company and the 
Union met again with a mediator. The Company made 
oral proposals on wages, overtime and medical insurance 
premiums, and written proposals on grievance arbitration, 
supervisory performance of unit work, and management 
expired contract. The Union team requested that it be 
allowed to caucus in order to study the proposals. After 
doing so, it decided it needed more time to consider them. 
The team asked for an adjournment of the bargaining 
session. The mediator advised the Company's 
representatives of this request. The Union negotiators then 
left the negotiating room, neither rejecting nor otherwise 
responding to the Company's proposals. The Company 
took no action to withdraw its offer. 

Three days later, on November 20, 1988, Thomas, 
for the Union, telephoned Company representative 
O'Reilly to ask if there was any point in meeting again. 
O'Reilly replied that he did not envision any change in the 
Company's position. O'Reilly reported Thomas’ call to 
controller Sauer. Nothing was said on behalf of the 


63a 


Company by way of withdrawing its November 17 
proposals. After calling O'Reilly, Thomas telephoned 
Mortimer, the Union's local president, and informed him 
what had occurred. Thomas told Mortimer to advise the 
Union members to accept the Company's proposals of 
November 17 and to end the strike. Mortimer did so, and 
was able to reach eight to ten of the 23 employees. 

On November 26, 1988, Mortimer reported to 
Thomas that the employees he polled had agreed to accept 
the Company's offer of November 17 and to return to 
work. On behalf of the Union, Mortimer sent the 


Company a telegram on November 27, 1988, stating: 


After careful consideration the proposed 
contract submitted by your company on 
November 17, 1988 to Local Union 501 has 
[been] unanimously ratified in its 
entirety by our negotiating committee. 

The strike at your plant has concluded as 
of this date and the employees have been 
advised to return to work on Monday 
November 28, 1988. 


The Company's management representatives met to 
discuss their beliefs concerning the loyalties of various 
employees to the Union on November 28, 1988. After the 
meeting, the Company's attorney O'Reilly sent a telegram 
to the Union stating: 


64a 


Employer position in response to your 
notice of November 27 is as follows: 
1. Employer offer of November 17, was 


rejected by Local 501 and is no longer 
open for unilateral acceptance. 2. In any 
event your claimed ratification limited to 
rank and file membership is insufficient. 
Employer now has reason to believe that 
Local 501 no longer represents a majority 
of the employees in the appropriate unit 
and therefore disavows any obligation to 
carry on further negotiations. 


The strike ended as stated in the Union's telegram, 
but the Company refused to sign a contract with the Union 
based upon the November 17 proposals. The Union then 
filed an unfair labor practice charge and an amended 
charge with the NLRB against the Company on December 
1, 1988, and January 17, 1989, respectively. In the 
charges the Union alleged that since November 28, 1988, 
the Company had refused to bargain with the Union in 
violation of section 8(a) (5) and (1) of the NLRA, by 
refusing to execute a collective bargaining agreement and 
by withdrawing recognition from the Union as bargaining 
agent for those unit employees. 

The regional office of the NLRB issued an unfair 


65a 


labor practice complaint on January 17, 1989. Hearings 
were conducted before an Administrative Law Judge 
("ALJ"). Sauer, the Company's controller, testified that 
on November 17 the Union negotiators had "stormed out" 
of the negotiating room without responding to the 
Company's proposals. He and Thomas both conceded, 
however, that the Union had not expressly rejected the 
Company's proposals. Sauer further conceded upon 
Cross-Examination that the Company had not removed its 
proposals from the bargaining table on November 17. 

On November 24, 1989, the ALJ issued a decision 
concluding that the Company's November 17 proposal 
was still outstanding when the Union accepted it on 
November 26, hence the Company's later refusal to sign 
an agreement based upon this proposal, and its withdrawal 
of recognition, were refusals to bargain in violation of 
section 8(a)(5) and (1) of the NLRA, 29 U.S.C. § 158(a) 
(5) and (1). 

The NLRB, without opinion, affirmed the ALJ's 
rulings, findings, and conclusions and substantially 
adopted his recommended order.” See Auciello Iron 
* The Board stated in a footnote: We agree. __ that under 
established Board precedent, once the Board finds that the 
parties have reached a binding collective-bargaining agreement, 
it is unnecessary to consider the issue of a respondent's alleged 
good-faith doubt of the union's majority status. Belcon, Inc., 257 
NLRB 1341, 1346 (1981); North Bros. Ford, 220 NLRB 1021, 
1022 (1975). We also agree with the judge that the Board's 
decision in Bickerstaff Clay Products, 286 NLRB 295 (1987), 


66a 


Works, Inc., 303 NLRB No. 90 (1991). The Board 
ordered the Company to cease and desist from the unfair 
labor practices found, and required it, upon request of the 
Union, to put in writing, sign, and effectuate, 
retroactively to November 27, 1988, the collective 
bargaining agreement that the Union had accepted on that 
date. The order further required the Company to make 
whole, with interest, the employees to whom that 
agreement applied for lost wages and other benefits 
suffered as a result of the Company's refusal to execute 
the agreement. 
The NLRB now seeks enforcement of that order. 


A. Standard of Review 

A court must enforce the Board's order if the 
Board correctly applied the law and if its findings of fact 
are supported by substantial evidence on _ the 
administrative record viewed as a whole. Destileria 
Serrales, Inc. v. NLRB, 882 F.2d 19, 21 (ist Cir. 1989). 
Substantial evidence "is more than a mere scintilla. It 
means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion.” Penntech 
Papers. Inc. v. NLRB, 706 F.2d 18, 22 (ist Cir. 1983), 


[enforcement denied], 871 F.2d 980 (Tith Cir. 1989), in which 
the Board addressed the respondent's good-faith doubt defense 
even though the Board found that the parties had reached a 
binding agreement, did not overrule the precedent followed in 


Belcon. 


67a 


cert. denied, 464 U.S. 892 (1983) (quoting Universal 


Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951)). 

A court of appeals reviews the NLRB's orders 
with considerable deference. NLRB v. Laverdiere's 
Enterprises, 933 F.2d 1045, 1049 list Cir. 1991). We will 
sustain inferences the Board reasonably draws from the 
facts, as well as its reasonable application of statutory 
standards to the facts and inferences. Soule Glass & 
Glazins Co. v. NLRB, 652 F.2d 1055, 1073 (1st Cir. 
1981). We may not substitute our judgment for the 
Board's when the choice is "between two fairly conflicting 
views, even though the court would justifiably have made 
a different choice had the matter been before it de novo." 
Universal Camera v. NLRB, 340 U.S. at 488. 


B. The Duty to Bargain 

Under NLRA § 8(a)(5) and (1), an employer has 
the obligation to bargain collectively with the 
representative of its employees. Section 8(d) of the Act, 
29 U.S.C. § 158(d), provides that the duty to bargain 
includes the duty to “executf[e] . . . a written contract 
incorporating any agreement reached if requested by 


These sections provide: (a) It shall be an unfair labor 
practice for an employer--(1) to interfere with, restrain. or coerce 
emplovees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in section 157 
of this title; (5) to refuse to bargain collectively with the 
representatives of his employees, subject to the provisions of 
section 159(a) of this title. 29 U.S.C. § 158(a)(1) and (5). 


68a 


either party." An employer commits an unfair labor 
practice in violation of section 8(a) (5) and (1) of the 
NLRA by refusing to sign a writt.... contract incorporating 
agreed-upon terms or by otherwise repudiating an oral 
agreement. NLRB _v. Strong, 393 U.S. 357, 359, 362 
(1969); H.J. Heinz Co. v. NLRB, 311 U.S, 514, 525-526 


(1941); NLRB v. Crimptex, Inc., 517 F.2d 501, 505-06 
(1st Cir. 1975). 


The Company argues that in the circumstances of 
this case it did not commit an unfair labor practice by 
refusing to sign a collective bargaining agreement based 
on the Union's acceptance on November 27 of its 
November 17 offer, and by withdrawing recognition from 
the union. It contends that the offer made on November 
17 was no longer available when the Union's negotiating 
committee accepted it; that the committee's acceptance 
never resulted in a binding agreement because the Union's 
membership never ratified the purported agreement; and 
that the Company properly withdrew recognition from the 
Union because it believed, in good faith, founded on 
reasonable and objective factors, that the Union, in fact, 
clearly no longer represented a majority of the unit 
employees. We consider these arguments in turn. 


Il. 
A. Whether the November 17 offer was still available 
when the Union accepted it 


69a 


Although not bound by all the technical rules of 
contract law, the NLRB is free to fashion and apply 
general contract principles in the collective bargaining 
context. NLRB vy. International Bhd. of Elec. Workers 
Local 22, 748 F.2d 348, 350 (8th Cir. 1984); Pepsi-Cola 
Bottlina Co. v. NLRB, 659 F.2d 87, 89 (8th Cir. 1981); 
NLRB v. Electra-Food Mach., Inc., 621 F.2d 956, 958 
(9th Cir. 1980). The Board and courts have held that "[iJn 
the collective bargaining context, an offer will remain on 
the table unless the offeror explicitly withdraws it or 
unless circumstances arise that would lead the parties to 
reasonably believe that the offeror has withdrawn the 
offer." NLRB v. Burkart Foam. Inc., 848 F.2d 825, 830 
(7th Cir. 1988); see Williamhouse-Resency, Inc. v. 
NLRB, 915 F.2d 631, 634-635 (11th Cir. 1990). 

Here the ALJ, in findings affirmed by the Board, 
found “neither evidence nor contention" of express 
withdrawal by the Company prior to the Union's 
November 27 acceptance. Similarly, the AU found that 
nothing in the Company’ s or Union's conduct or reaction 
prior to the Union's November 27 acceptance suggested 
that the parties believed, or had reason to believe , the 
offer of November 17 had been rejected, withdrawn or 
ceased to be open for acceptance. 

We accept these findings as they are amply 
supported by substantial evidence in the record. The 
Company contends that the Union delegation's "storming 
out" of the November 17 meeting without setting another 


70a 


meeting date or saying farewell was an “extremely 
negative response" which led management to infer a 
rejection of its proposal. However, the absence of any 
reference to withdrawal or rejection of the proposal in 
conversations between Thomas and O'Reilly on 
November 20 caused the ALJ to doubt that the employer 
believed its proposals had been rejected. In factual matters 
of this nature, we defer to the Board's resolution. The 
ALJ also thought, we think reasonably, that a mere 
uncommunicated, unilateral judgment by the Company 
that rejection had occurred would, by itself, be ineffective 
to remove its proposal from the table. We find no error. 
The Board acted well within its authority in finding that 
the offer of November 17, 1988, was still on the table 
when the Union's negotiating committee purported to 
accept it by telegram on November 27, 1988. 
B. Ratification 

The Company argues that no valid contract was 
ever entered into with the Union because the Union 
negotiating committee's acceptance of the November 17 
proposal was never ratified by the Union members. The 
ALJ, in an analysis adopted by the Board, rejected this 
contention, finding that there was no express or implied 
mandate or agreement making membership ratification a 
precondition to a binding collective bargaining contract. 

The NLRB has consistently held that unless parties 
have explicitly agreed that any agreement between the 
negotiators must be ratified by the employees, the 


Tila 


formality of a vote is not required to create a binding 
agreement. Newtown Corp., 280 NLRB 350 (1986), 
enforced, 819 F.2d 677 (6th Cir. 1987); Consumat Sys.. 
Inc., 273 NLRB 410, 413 (1984); Martin J. Barry Co.. 
241 NLRB 1011, 1013 (1979), later proceeding, 278 
NLRB 393 (1986); see also Houchens Mkt., Inc. v. 
NLRB, 375 F.2d 208, 212 (6th Cir. 1967) (“[Wy)hether 
or not [the] bargaining unit may enter into a binding 
contract with or without membership ratification. _. is 
not an issue which the Company can insist upon without 
mutual agreement by the Union __.") 

The ALJ found, and it is undisputed, that neither 
the Iron Workers' International constitution nor the 
by-laws of the local union contain any provision requiring 
membership ratification of a collective bargaining 
agreement. The ALJ also found that there were no 
explicit discussions between the Company and the Union 
during the 1988 negotiations in which the Union advised 
the Company that membership ratification was needed to 
establish a contract. While there was evidence that 
membership votes were taken in 1988, and possibly 
before, the ALJ concluded, and the Board agreed, that 
such submission to membership votes fell short of 
establishing that ratification was a pre-condition to the 
formation of a binding agreememt. While another 
determination might be possible, we think this conclusion 
was within the authority of the Board to reach on this 
record. 


27 acceptance, as indicative of the Union’ s loss of 
majority support. Among other things, the Company 
asserts that some nine unit employees crossed the picket 
line on a daily basis during the strike; that as many as 13 


The ALJ, however, refused to consider whether 
or not the Company's alleged good faith doubt, 
manifested on November 28, was justified by evidence 
indicating the Union had, in fact, lost majority status. He 
relied upon the Board's decision in Belcon. Inc. . 257 


73a 


NLRB 1341 (1981) , for the proposition that, once a 
union has accepted the employer's contract offer, thus 
establishing a binding contract between the parties, the 
employer may not decline to bargain with the union under 
the terms of the contract on grounds of a good faith doubt 
of majority status. 

The Board confirmed the ALJ’ s determination, 
reiterating its support for the Belcon doctrine. See supra 
note 1. The Board's position, which it reiterated in its 
argument before us, goes back to NLRB decisions 
rendered in the 1970s: North Bros. Ford. Inc., 220 
NLRB 1021 (1975), and Utility Tree Serv.. Inc., 215 
NLRB 806 (1974), supp. op., 218 NLRB 784 (1975), 
enforced, 539 F.2d 718 (9th Cir. 1976). In North Bros. 
Ford, the Board ruled that once a "final agreement on the 
substantive terms [of the collective bargaining agreement 
is} reached, and regardless of the status of any written 
instrument incorporating that agreement, [the employer is] 
not free to refuse to bargain even if it has lawful grounds 
for believing that [the Union] has subsequently lost its 
majority status." North Eros. Ford, 220 NLRB at 1022. 

Underlying the Board's rationale is the so-called 
contract bar rule, a Board-created rule that once an 
employer and a union enter into a valid collective 
bargaining contract, the majority status of the union is 
presumed for the duration of the contract, not to exceed 
three years. EE] Torito-La Fiesta Restaurants. Inc. v. 
NLRB. 929 F.2d 490, 492-93 (9th Cir. 1991); Pioneer 


74a 


Inn Assocs. v. NLRB, 578 F.2d 835, 838 (9th Cir. 1978). 
The rule has been applied by the Board to prevent 
challenges to a union's majority status “even if a majority 
of the employees withdraw their support.” Pioneer Inn 
Assocs.,578 F.2d at 838. 

In North Bros. Ford, the employer's good faith 
doubt centered on the union's loss of majority status 
occurring after the making of the contract. See 220 NLRB 
at 1021-22. Belcon was not expressly so limited, 
however, see 257 NLRB at 1346-47, and in cases like the 
present, the Board apparently believes that even if the 
Union lacked majority status at the very moment its 
negotiating committee accepted the employer's offer, a 
completed contract should be presumed, barring the 
employer from thereafter questioning the union's lack of 
majority support. Chicago Tribune Co. , 303 NLRB No. 
106 (1991) ,enforcement denied, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 
1992). 

There is an obvious chicken-egg problem in this 
approach. If the Union in fact lacked majority status at the 
time of acceptance, should its acceptance be held to create 
a valid and binding contract that bars the employer from 
thereafter questioning the existence of majority status at 
that critical earlier time? The closest thing to a relevant 
justification of the Board's approach appears in the ALJ's 
opinion (subsequently reversed by the Seventh Circuit) in 
Chicago Tribune. The ALJ wrote: 


75a 


There is no reliable authority for the 
proposition that an employer may invoke a 
refusal to bargain or withdrawal of 
recognition after a contract has been 
reached. Good faith doubt is a difficuli 
enough concept to litigate when alleged 
doubts are expressed in the form of a 
refusal to bargain; it would be an 
impossible concept to litigate if it could 
be invoked after a contract is reached and 
in the absence of a prior refusal to 
bargain not only to vitiate that contract 
but to dissolve the bargaining 
relationship. This would permit an 
employer to litigate an alleged doubt as 
it might have existed in his own mind at 
the time a contract was reached rather 
than at the time of an objective event, 
that is. a refusal to bargain or 
withdrawal of recognition. The cases do 
not permit such a subjective inquiry. 


The Board in Chicago Tribune proceeded on the basis of 
the ALJ's opinion, without attempting any further 
explanation of its own. In briefs and argument before us, 
Board counsel made no mention at all of the decisions so 
far rendered in Chicago Tribune, and neither the ALJ nor 
the Board here have attempted to address the employer's 


76a 


argument that the contract bar rule should not be applied 
to prevent an employer from attempting to question the 
very existence and validity of a contract for lack of 
majority status. 

Even more troublesome, after argument in April 
1992, neither party advised us that, on May 29, 1992, the 
Seventh Circuit had refused to enforce the bargaining 
order in Chicago Tribune. Chicago Tribune Co. v. 
NLRB, 965 F.2d 244 (7th Cir. 1992), reh'g denied, Nos. 
91-2750, 91-2916, 1992 U.S. App. LEXIS 14485 (June 
24, 1992). The Seventh Circuit's analysis has direct 
bearing here. Writing for the panel, Judge Posner refused 
to accept “the Board’ s rule that a union’ s unconditional 
acceptance of an offer for a collective bargaining contract 
is valid and binds the company unless circumstances have 
changed since the company's offer was made or renewed . 
where between the original offer and its renewal the union 
lost the support of the workers." Chicago Tribune, 965 
F.2d at 250. The Seventh Circuit reasoned that while the 
employer might have been at fault for leaving its offer on 
the table, the interests of the unrepresented majority-- who 
had not desired representation by the union at the time the 
contract was supposedly agreed to could not properly be 
sacrificed to the interests of the repudiated union and to 
whatever considerations might support holding that the 
employer had waived his rights. See id. The Seventh 
Circuit relied upon International Ladies' Garment 
Workers’ Union v. NLRB, 366 U.S. 731 (1961), 


77a 


forbidding a company to sign a collective bargaining 
contract with a union that it knows does not have the 
support of a majority of the workers in the bargaining 
unit. See Chicago Tribune, 965 F.2d at 249-51. 

In their briefs and argument before us, the parties 
did not explore to any degree the pros and cons of 
applying the contract bar rule against an employer on the 
basis of a contract made by a union that, at the time it 
accepted the employer's offer, may have lacked majority 
support . The Company raised the point, however, noting 
that in North Bros. Ford the loss of support had occurred 
only after the making of the contract and, on that basis, 
arguing for release from the contract bar rule. 

We find disappointing the Board's failure to 
recognize that the mere rote citation of North Bros. Ford 
and Belcon does not answer the Company's contention. 
The Board seems to have mechanically applied what 
Judge Posner aptly terms, “the beguiling syllogism: an 
offer not withdrawn can be accepted at any time provided 
there are no changed circumstances; an agreement once 
accepted must be signed: a signed agreement creates an 
irrebuttable presumption that the union has majority 
support . " 965 F.2d at 250 (citations omitted). The 
Board has glossed over the analytically tough question 
presented here: should the making of a contract be 
irrebuttably presumed for purposes of the contract bar 
rule where the creation of the alleged contract, by the 
union's acceptance of the employer's offer. may have 


78a 


come at a tune the union lacked majority support? The 
ALJ in Chicago Tribune believed it would be 
impracticable not to presume a valid contract even in 
those circumstances. The Seventh Circuit held, to the 
contrary, that that approach conflicted with the firmly 
established principle that an employer may not contract 
with a minority union. See 965 F.2d at 250. 

The National Labor Relations Board has the chief 
responsibility for developing coherent and correct labor 
negotiating rules. Especially as the relevant principles 
here are informed less by statutes than by Board policies 
set Out in its decisions, the area is one where the Board's 
presumed expertise is key. Yet the Board cannot provide 
meaningful leadership through ote, unthinking, 
unexplained applications. The fitful quality of the Board's 
attention in the instant area was shown in two recent cases 
cited here by the Company, in which the Board appears to 
have overlooked altogether its North Bros. Ford and 
Beicon precedent. In _ enforcement proceedings 


494 U.S. 775 (1990), and NLRB v. Bickerstaff Clay 
Prods. Co.. 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989), cert. denied. 
493 U.S. 924 (1989), the Board, without comment, 
allowed an employer to litigate an issue of good faith 
doubt after the union had accepted an outstanding offer. 
Without mentioning the Belcon doctrine, the Board 
plunged into the merits of the employer's asserted good 


faith doubt. See Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc., 287 


79a 


NLRB 350 (1987), enforcement denied, 859 F.2d 362 
(Sth Cir. 1988), rev'd, 494 U.S. 775 (1990); Bickerstaff 
Clay Prods. Co., 286 NLRB 295 (1987), enforcement 
denied, 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 1989) , cert. denied, 493 
U.S. 924 (1989) . The Board now suggests various 
reasons for its oversight in those cases, insisting that it 
was not deliberately abandoning Belcon. We accept the 
Board's insistence as true. We are not persuaded by the 
Company's arguments that Belcon was knowingly 
abandoned or that the Supreme Court, in Curtin 
Matheson, tacitly overruled it. What occurred looks like 
an unwitting oversight encouraged, perhaps, by a 
readiness to circumvent precedent in order to secure 
review of an important substantive issue. But the course 
taken does not reflect much credit on the Board 
Employers and unions are entitled to expect an 
even-handed application of the rules announced in the 
Board’ s prior administrative decisions. If the Board and 
its General Counsel do not remember and follow Board 
precedent, how can others be expected to do so? And if, 
when the Board undertakes to apply its precedent, it does 
so, as here, without bothering to explain applications in 
factually distinguishable circumstances, it weakens the 
credibility of its policies. 

The Board's conclusory ruling in the present case 
simply failed to address the argument that acceptance of 
an outstanding offer by a minority union should not be 
deemed to establish a valid collective bargaining 


80a 


agreement that forever bars the employer from raising a 
good faith doubt. The Board nowhere addressed the 
Company's argument that a lack of majority status on the 
date the Union purported to accept the Company's 
outstanding offer should be distinguished from a good 
faith doubt of majority status based on events occurring 
after a valid contract was made. Can acceptance by an 
unrepresentative minority union create a binding 
contract?®* 

Particularly in light of the Seventh Circuit's decision in 
Chicago Tribune, we think the Board must revisit, clarify 
and explain the principles that it thinks apply in the 
present circumstances. We do not Say its ultimate result 
need necessarily be different from what it was here. We 
are not ready to say that the Seventh Circuit's analysis 
should apply, nor, indeed, that we adopt the Seventh 
Circuit's holding in Chicago Tribune. This is an area 
where the courts should tread softly, with considerable 
deference to the Board's reasoned analysis. In the 
practical arena of labor negotiations, the Seventh Circuit's 
analysis may still be found wanting as a yardstick. But the 
Board, by default, has left us without the policy guidance 
and reasoned analysis needed to decide the issue. The 
question is not a purely legal one, but calls for the Board's 
a“ We do not, of course, say that the Union necessarily 
lacked majority support here. The ALJ expressly refrained from 


making findings as to that issue, relying instead on the contract 
bar rule to prevent the employer from raising the matter 


8la 


reasoned application of its expertise. Reviewing courts are 
entitled to have that expertise demonstrated in a 
meaningful Board opinion, rather than in a laconic rule of 
thumb presented without reasoning and without attention 
either to the employer's arguments or to underlying policy 
concerns (such as_ the attention due to the rights of 
unrepresented workers). 

A court may require that the Board's decision "be 
supported by articulate, cogent, and reliable analysis." 
Northport Health Servs., Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 961 F.2d 
1547, 1553-54 (11th Cir. 1992); accord Williams Enters.. 
Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 956 F.2d 1226, 1235-36, 1240 (D.C. 
Cir. 1992); Hyatt Corp. v. N.L.R.B. 939 F.2d 361, 
367'68, 376 (6th Cir. 1991); Pacific Northwest 
Newspaper Guild. Local 82 v. N.L.R.B., 877 F.2d 998, 
1001-03 (D.C. Cir. 1989); Teamsters Local Union 171 v. 
N.L.R.B., 863 F.2d 946, 957-59 (D.C. Cir. 1988), cert. 
denied sub nom. A. G. Boone Co. v, N.L.R.B., 490 U.S. 
1065 (1989); Hotel _ Holiday Inn de Isla Verde v. 
N.L.R.B., 723 F.2d 169, 172-73 (1st Cir. 1983). 

Accordingly, while we shall retain jurisdiction, we 
remand to the Board for its further consideration.” We 
direct the Board to hear additional argument from the 


- Under the statute granting this court jurisdiction to 


entertain petitions for enforcement of Board orders, the court has 
the “power to grant such temporary relief or restraining order as 
it deems just and proper, and to make and enter a decree 
enforcing. modifying, and enforcing as so modified. or setting 


82a 


parties on the principles to be applied where, after the 
Union's supposed acceptance, an employer seeks to 
present evidence that at the time of the Union's 
acceptance, it lacked majority support. Following 
argument, the Board should issue a reasoned opinion 
Stating the appropriate rule or rules it proposes to apply, 
and resolving that question here in accordance with those 
articulated principles. As we have said, the Board's result 
may Or may not be the same as before. However, the 
Board's opinion should include a discussion of the 
Seventh Circuit's ruling in Chicago Tribune, and of the 
legal and policy principles (as well as practicalities) it 
believes are controlling, and of the application of those 
considerations to the facts, While we set no specific time 
limit, we ask the Board to act with expedition, and to send 
a certified copy of the record and its opinion and further 
order to the clerk of this court as soon as it can.” 


aside in whole or in part the order of the Board." 29 U.S.C. § 
160(e). This power has been applied to authorize remand to the 
Board for further proceedings pursuant to the court’ s opinion 
while retaining jurisdiction. See, e.a.. N.L.R.B. v. New York 
Univ. Medical Ctr, 702 F.2d 284, 299 (2d Cir. 1983) 
(remanding to Board, while retaining jurisdiction, for application 
of proper legal standard), vacated on other grounds, 464 U.S. 
805 (1983); N.L.R.B v. Mount Desert Island Hosp., 695 F.2d 


634, 642 list Cir. 1982); New Alaska Dev. Corp. v. N.L.R.B.. 
44) F.2d 491, 495 (7th Cir. 1971) (retaining jurisdiction and 


remanding for required detailed factual findings). 
of In the event the Board determines that further 


83a 


For the sake of clarity, we reiterate that we are 
prepared to enforce the Board's determinations, (a) that 
the Company's offer remained open and "available" on 
November 27, when the Union purported to accept it; and 
(b) that membership ratification Per se was not a 
requirement. Our doubt focuses on whether and why the 
employer should not be allowed to try to show that, at the 
time of the Union's purported acceptance of the 
Company’ s outstanding offer, the Union was lacking in 
majority support and therefore incapable of creating by its 
acceptance a valid contract. 

We decline to enforce the order at this time, and 
the cause is remanded to the Board for further 
Proceedings consistent herewith, with jurisdiction to be 
retained by this court. 


Adm. Office, U.S. Courts - Blanchard Press, Inc., Boston, 
Mass. 


fact-finding is required, necessitating a remand to the ALJ, we 
direct the Board to notify us to this effect and authorize the 
Board to then move to terminate our retained jurisdiction over 
the present enforcement petition. 


CDO 
303 NLRB No. 90 D--2090 
Hudson, MA 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


BEFORE THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. 
and 
Case 1--CA--25969 


SHOPMEN'S LOCAL UNION NO. 501 a/w 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF BRIDGE, 
STRUCTURAL AND ORNAMENTAL IRON 
WORKERS (AFL--CIO) 


DECISION AND ORDER 


On November 24, 1989, Administrative Law 
Judge Norman Zanke! issued the attached decision. The 
Respondent filed exceptions and a supporting brief,” and 


a4 


On May 3, 1990, the Respondent filed a motion to file a 
supplementary memorandum of law on the applicability and 


85a 


the General Counsel resubmitted his brief to the judge in 
support of the judge's decision. 

The National Labor Relations Board has delegated 
its authority in this proceeding to a three-member panel. 

The Board has considered the decision and the 
record in light of the exceptions and briefs and has 
decided to affirm the judge's rulings, findings, and 
conclusions “ and to adopt the recommended Order. 


impact of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in NLRB vy. Curtin 
Matheson Scientific, Inc.. 110 S.Ct. 1542 (1990). The Board 
granted this motion on May 8, 1990, stating that all parties 
could file such briefs. Only the Respondent filed a 
supplementary memorandum of law. 


* We agree with the judge that under established Board 
precedent, once the Board finds that the parties have reached a 
binding collective-bargaining agreement, it is unnecessary to 
consider the issue of a respondent's alleged good-faith doubt of 
the union's majority statue. Belcon, Inc., 257 NLRB 1341, 1346 
(1981); North Bros. Ford, 220 NLRB 1021, i022 ~1975). We 
also agree with the judge that the Board's decision in Bickerstaff 
Clay Products, 286 NLRB 295 (1987), enf. denied 871 F.2d 980 
(1 1th Cir. 1989), in which the Board addressed the respondent's 
good-faith doubt defense even though the Board found that the 
parties had reached a binding agreement, did not overrule the 
precedent followed in selcon. 

In agreeing with his colleagues that it is unnecessary to 
consider the issue of good-faith doubt, Member Oviatt relies on 
the fact that the Respondent not only failed to withdraw its offer 
prior eo the Union's acceptance but that it did not immediate!) 


D--2090 


ORDER 

The National Labor Relations Board adopts the 
recommended Order of the administrative law judge and 
orders that the Respondent, Aucie!lo Iron Works, Inc.., 
Hudson, Massachusetts, its officers, agents, successors, 
and assigns, shall take the action set forth in the Order, 
except that the attached notice is substituted for that of the 
administrative law judge. 

Dated, Washington, D.C. June 27, 1991 


Mary Miller Cracraft, Member 
Dennis M. Devaney, Member 
Clifford R. Oviatt, Jr., Member 


(SEAL) NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 


communicate to the Union its “good-faith doubt” that the Union 
had lost ire majority status. He notes parenthetically that to allow 
a proposal to remain on the bargaining table after the 
Respondent has e good-faith doubt as to the Union's majority 
status may be tantamount to bargaining with a minority 
union---and thus could leave the Respondent vulnerable to a 
Sec. 8 a2) charge. 


D--2090 
APPENDIX 
NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES 


Posted by Order of the 
National Labor Relations Board 
An Agency of the United States Government 


The National Labor Relations Board has found that we 
violated the National Labor Relations Act and has ordered 
us to post and abide by this notice. 


Section 7 of the Act gives employees these rights. 


To organize 

To form, join, or assist any union 

To bargain collectively through representatives of their 
own choice 

To act together for other mutual aid or protection 

To choose not to engage in any of these protected 
concerted activities. 


WE WILL NOT unlawfully withdraw recognition from, 
or refuse to bargain with, Shopmen's Local Union No. 
501 a/w International Association of Bridge. Structural 
and Ornamental Iron Workers (AFL-CIO) as the 


exclusive collective bargaining representative of 
employees in the following appropriate unit: 


All production and maintenance employees, including 
working foremen, engaged in the fabrication of iron, 
steel, metal, and other products, or in maintenance work 
in or about the vicinity of our Hudson, Massachusetts 
facility, but excluding all office clerical employees, 
guards, and supervisors as defined in the Act (except 
working foremen). 


WE WILL NOT fail and refuse to sign and implement the 
collective-bargaining agreement which has been found to 
have been created on November 27, 1988. 


WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner interfere 
with, restrain, or coerce you in the exercise of the rights 
guaranteed you by Section 7 of the Act. 


WE WILL, on request of the above-named Union, put in 
writing, sign, and put into effect, retroactively to 
November 27, 1988, the collective-bargaining agreement 
which the Union accepted that date. 


WE WILL make whole, with interest, all employees to 
whom the November 27, 1988 collective-bargaining 
agreement applies, for all lost wages and other benefits 
they may have suffered as a result of our failure to sign an 


89a 
agreement containing our November 17, 1988 proposals 


and from our withdrawal of recognition from the Union 
on November 28, 1988. 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. 
(Employer) 
Dated By 
(Representative) (Title) 


This is an official notice and must not be defaced by 
anyone. 


This notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive 
days from the date of posting and must not be altered, 
defaced, or covered by any other material. Any questions 
concerning this notice or compliance with its provisions 
may be directed to the Board's Office, 10 Causeway 
Street, Sixth Floor, Boston Massachusetts 02222-1072, 
Telephone (617)-565-6739. 

JD-287-89 
Hudson, MA 


90a 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BEFORE THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS 
BOARD 
DIVISION OF JUDGES 
WASHINGTON D. C. 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. 
and 


SHOPMEN'S LOCAL UNION No.501 a/w 

Case No. 1-CA-25969 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF BRIDGE, 
STRUCTURAL AND ORNAMENTAL IRON 
WORKERS 
(AFL-CIO) 


Avrom J. Herbster, Esg., of Boston, MA 
for the General Counsel 


John D. O'Reilly, Ill, Esq.., 
O'Reilly and Grosso, of 
Framingham, MA for the Employer 


Mr. Robert Thomas, General Organizer, 
of Smithfield, RI for the Union 


DECISION 


9la 


NORMAN ZANKEL, Administrative Law Judge: 
This case was tried before me on June 21 and August 8 and 
9, 1989 at Boston, Massachusetts upon a Complaint and 
Notice of Hearing issued on January 20, 1989 by Michael 
R. Walsh, Esq., Acting Regional Director for the First 
Region of the National Labor Relations Board (the Board). 

The Complaint, based on a charge and an amended 
charge filed on December 1, 1988" and January 17, 1989, 
respectively, alleges that Since on or about November 28 
the Employer refused to bargain with the Union as 
exclusive collective-bargaining representative of an 
appropriate unit of employees”’, in violation of Section 
8(a)(5) and (1) of the National Labor Relations Act, as 
amended (the Act), by refusing to execute a written 
collective-bargaining agreement and by withdrawing 


= All dates hereafter are in 1988, unless otherwise 
indicated. 


- | granted General Counsel's oral motion at the hearing to 
amend the Complaint so the unit description would read: "Al! 
production and maintenance employees (as defined in Section | 
of the [parties'] 1985-1988 contract) employed by the Employer 
at its Hudson, Massachusetts facility, but excluding all office 
clerical employees, guards and supervisors as defined in the 
Act.” 

All parties agree this unit is appropriate for 
collective-bargaining. | so find. 


92a 


recognition from the Union as bargaining agent for those 
unit employees. 

The Employer filed a timely Answer to the 
Complaint. The Answer admitted certain allegations, but 
denied the Employer committed the alleged 
unfair labor practice. 

All parties were given full opportunity to produce 
relevant evidence through witnesses and documents; to 
examine and cross-examine witnesses; and to make oral 
arguments. Post-hearing briefs were timely received from 
Counsel for the General Counsel and counsel for the 
Employer. Based upon my observation of the conduct and 
demeanor of the witnesses, and the record as a whole, | 
make the following: 


Findings and Conclusions 
I. Jurisdiction 


Jurisdiction is uncontested. The Employer, a 
corporation engaged in business as a metal fabricator, has 
had an office and place of business in Housing, 
Massachusetts at all material times. During the calendar 
year immediately before Complaint issuance, the Employer 
sold and shipped products, goods and materials exceeding 
$50,000 in value from its Housing facility directly to points 
outside of Massachusetts; and, in the same period and at 
the Housing facility, purchased and received products, 


93a 


goods and materials exceeding $50,000 in value directly 
from points outside of Massachusetts. 

The Employer admits, the record reflects, and | 
find, that it is an employer engaged in commerce within the 
meaning of Section 2(2), (6) and (7) of the Act. 

All parties agree, the record reflects, and | find, the 
Union is a labor organization within the meaning of 
Section 2(5) of the Act. 


Il. The Issue 


Did the September-November, 1988 collective 
bargaining negotiations between the Employer and Union 
result in an agreement to which they were bound and which 
precluded the Employer from lawfully withdrawing 
recognition from the Union based upon an assertion of 
good-faith doubt of the Union's majority status? 

1 shall find a collective-bargaining agreement 
between the Employer and Union came into existence on 
November 27, 1988 and that, consequently, the Employer's 
admitted November 28 withdrawal of recognition from the 
Union was unlawful. 

| find the stated question encompasses the principal, 
and dispositive, issue of the instant case. As noted above, 
the Employer admitted it withdrew recognition from the 
Union. But the Employer asserts that action was based 
upon objective considerations which caused it to have a 
good-faith doubt of the Union's majority status. Both 


94a 


Counsel for the General Counsel and for the Employer 
vigorously, and fully, litigated the sufficiency and 
timeliness of the withdrawal of recognition. 

In view of my disposition of the principal issue, | 
conclude no useful purpose would be served by a 
discussion and analysis of the good-faith doubt issue. See 
Belcon, Inc., 237 NLRB 1341, 1346 !1981) where the 
Board left undisturbed Judge Myatt's explicit conclusion it 
is unnecessary to deal with that issue in situations where 
the facts establish a union's acceptance of 
collective-bargaining proposals before an employer 
withdraws its offer™. 

Ill. The Alleged Unfair Labor Practice” 


i | am mindful that Bickerstaff Clay Products, Co., Inc.. 
286 NLRB No. 27 (1987), enf. den. 871 F.2d 980 (11th Cir. 
1989), in which the Board held an acceptance which preceded 
offer withdrawal established a binding agreement, contains 
Judge Robertson's and the Board's treatment of the good-faith 
doubt issue. No reason for such discussion in Bickerstaff is 
apparent. 

Inasmuch as the Board. in Bickerstaff, did not overrule 
well-establishéd precedent holding irrelevant an emplover's 
good-faith doubt of union majority status once agreement on a 
contract's substantive terms has been reached (North Bros. Ford, 
Inc., 220 NLRB 1021, 1022 (1975); Utility Tree Service. Inc.. 
215 NLRB 806, 807 (1974)). | consider it proper, in all the 
instant circumstances, to eliminate the good-faith doubt issue 
from my further consideration. 

- The operative facts are substantially undisputed. Where 


95a 
A. Background 


The Board certified the Union as the exclusive 
collective-bargaining representative of the employees 
within the appropriate unit described in footnote 2, above, 
in 1977. Since that time, the Union and Employer 
negotiated four successive collective bargaining 
agreements which applied to those unit employees. The 
most recent of those contracts was due to, and did, expire 
on September 25, 1988. 

Generally, the relationship between the contracting 
parties was uneventful through the years. The Union 
conducted no strikes and pursued no grievances or 
arbitrations until the instant dispute. 


B. Scenario of the Present Dispute 
The Employer and Union began negotiations for a 
new collective-bargaining agreement on September 21. 
Robert Thomas, International Representative/General 
Organizer; Local Business Agent (then Local President), 
David Mortimer; and Steward Joseph Parenti comprised 


material variations exist, they shall be resolved. My description 
of facts in this, Section III of the decision, is a composite of 
undisputed testimony, documentary evidence and stipulations. 
Not all evidence, or argument based on it, is reported. Omitted 
matter is deemed irrelevant, superfluous or of no probative value 
to the principal issue. 


96a 


the Union's negotiating team. Attorney John D. O'Reilly 
lll; Gerald C. Sauer, the Employer's Controller; and Plant 
Supervisor Manlio DeGrandis were the Employer's team. 
The Union presented its written proposal for a new 
contract. Some agreements, characterized as preliminary, 
were reached but major substantive subjects remained 
unresolved. 
The next bargaining session occurred on September 
30. The Employer presented its written contract proposals. 
Extensive discussion ensued regarding wages, medical 
insurance premiums and pension plan. There is 
disagreement among Thomas, Mortimer and Sauer as to 
whether or not the negotiators reached total agreement on a 
new contract's terms during this session. This disagreement 
need not be resolved. | find it irrelevant because it is 
undisputed that a vote among the Union membership was 
taken immediately following the bargaining session that 
day, and whatever was presented to them had been rejected. 
The negotiating teams again met on October 4 or 
5. They reviewed their respective positions upon the 
contract issues. At one point, Thomas met privately with 
attorney O'Reilly. Thomas testified (without contradiction) 
he suggested that if the Employer, in effect, would adopt a 
Union contract proposal as its own, there would be no need 
for the negotiating committee to submit the proposal to the 


i Thomas testified the meeting was on October 4. Sauer 


claimed it was on the following day. There is no need to resolve 
this difference. 


97a 


Union membership for a vote. O'Reilly did not accede to 
this suggestion. 

Another negotiating session was held on October 
13. The Employer modified its proposal on health 
insurance premiums to address the apparent reason for 
membership rejection on September 30, but also reduced 
its wage proposal. The Union negotiators said they. could 
not agree to these proposals but nonetheless would submit 
them to a membership vote, at a meeting already scheduled 
for that evening, without a recommendation for acceptance. 

At that evening's Union meeting, the Union 
membership voted to reject the Employer's October 13 
proposal, and voted to strike. A strike began on October | 4. 

On October 18, the negotiating teams met in the 
presence of a federal mediator. The Union made another 
proposal for medical insurance premiums and wages. The 
Employer's bargaining team made no commitment 
concerning those proposals. The parties met again on 
October 26, but no progress was made toward agreement 
upon a new contract. 

On November 17, the negotiating teams met. The 
mediator was present. The Employer presented numerous 
proposals. Oral proposals were made on medical insurance 
premiums, wages and overtime. Written proposals were 
made which related to grievance arbitration, supervisory 
performance of bargaining unit work, and management 
rights. The written proposals contained extensive changes 


98a 


in provisions of the recently-expired collective-bargaining 
agreement. 

The Union team requested a caucus to study the 
proposals. Upon examination, the team decided more time 
was needed. They asked for adjournment of that bargaining 
session. The mediator advised the Employer's team of this 
request. Sauer testified the Union negotiators “stormed by” 
the Employer's team. Thomas and Sauer agree the Union 
did not expressly reject the Employer's November 17 
proposals; and Sauer, during his Cross-Examination, 
acknowledged that the Employer had not removed those 
proposals from the bargaining table on that date. 

On or about November 20, Thomas telephoned 
attorney O'Reilly. Thomas asked whether there would be 
any advantage to sitting down and negotiating to arrive at 
an agreement. O'Reilly said he did not envision any change 
in the Employer's position. There is no evidence to show 
either that Thomas said the Union rejected the Employer's 
November 17 proposals or that O'Reilly said those 
proposals had been withdrawn. Sauer testified O'Reilly 
reported this telephone conversation to him but Sauer, even 
then, acknowledged no instructions were given to O'Reilly 
to withdraw the proposals. 

After his November 20 conversation with O'Reilly, 
Thomas telephoned Mortimer and instructed him to contact 
the employees, inform them what occurred, and 
recommend they accept the November 17 proposals and 


99a 


end the strike. Mortimer complied. Mortimer testified he 


reached 8-10 employees. 

On November 26, Mortimer reported to Thomas 
that the employees he polled agreed to accept the 
November 17 proposals and return to work. 

On November 27, Thomas sent a telegram, signed 
with Mortimer's name, to Auciello, as follows: 


"After careful consideration the proposed contract 
submitted by your company on November |7 1988 
to Local Union 501 has (sic) unanimously ratified 
by our negotiating committee. The strike at your 
plant has concluded as of this date and employees 
have been advised to work on Monday November 
28, 1988." 


Auciello received the Union's telegram on 
November 27. The next day, O'Reilly telegraphed the 
Union, stating: 


“Employer position in response to your notice of 
November 27 is as follows: 1. Employer offer of 
November |7 was rejected by Local 50! and is no 
longer open for unilateral acceptance. 2. In any 
event your claimed ratification (sic) limited to 
negotiating (sic) committee and excluding rank 
and file membership is insufficient. Employer now 
has reason to believe that Local 501 no longer 


— | 


100a 


represents a majority of employees in the 
appropriate unit and therefore disavows any 
obligation to carry on further negotiations." 


The strike ended as stated in the Union's November 
27 telegram, but the Employer has remained steadfast in its 
refusal to sign a collective-bargaining agreement 
containing the terms of the Employer's November 17 
proposals and in its withdrawal of recognition from the 
Union. 


C. Analysis 
(1) The Ratification Issue 


The Employer, in part, contends that ratification of 
negotiated contract terms by the applicable bargaining unit 
employees was a pre-condition to the fornication of a 
collective-bargaining agreement with the Union. The 
General Counsel argues that the instant circumstances 
show ratification was not a requirement for an enforceable 
agreement to come into existence.”' 


91 


The Employer also urges that, even if ratification were 
not needed to establish a contract, the offer which the Union 
purportedly accepted had been withdrawn prior to acceptance. 
This argument will be addressed further below - 


10la 


The evidence regarding past practice of ratification, 
and what was said and done in that connection during the 
1988 negotiations is critical to resolution of this case. 
Thomas and Mortimer testified with respect to ratification 
practices with the Employer. Ralph duciello, Employer's 
vice-president for Production, and Sauer, testified as to the 
Employer's perspective of ratification. I credit the 
testimony of each of these witnesses, especially respecting 
ratification. Each of them vas direct, forthright and candid. 
The relevant evidence regarding ratification follows. 

It is undisputed that neither the Ironworkers’ 

International Constitution nor the by-laws of the Local 
Union contains any provision regarding ratification of 
collective-bargaining agreements. Mortimer acknowledged 
the terms agreed-to at the bargaining table in each of the 
three previously-negotiated contracts were submitted by the 
Union's negotiating committee to the membership for a 
vote, He said the agreements were ratified "as a matter of 
course”. 
Thomas explicitly denied the Union negotiators 
ever told their Employer counterparts that membership 
ratification was needed “before there would be a final 
contract" during the 1988 negotiations (Tr.26). He was 
unchallenged in that connection. 

Auciello initially testified, in general terms, that the 
"Union committee always stated that they must have a 
ratification of the men"  (Tr.162). During 
Cross-Examination. however, Auciello explained that he 


102a 


had not personally participated in the negotiations, but 
relied upon Sauer for reports. Then, Auciello conceded that 
Sauer did not inform him that the Union negotiators said 
that ratification was needed before the parties had an 
agreement. Instead, Auciello testified he had been advised 
the Union committee was going to make recommendations 
to the membership for a vote, and that was consistent with 
past practice. 

Sauer, referring to the negotiations conducted in 
years before 1988, was asked and answered questions as 
follows, during his direct examination: 


"Q. Did they (the Union) reach agreement with 
your committee across the table and then express a 
need to have that agreement ratified? 


A. That is correct 


Q. And did they, in fact, go through the ratification 
process in each of these negotiations? 


A. Yes, they had... 
Q. And did they, subsequent to the ratification 


process, report back to management the results of 
the ratification vote? 


A. That is true.” (Tr. 392). 


103a 


Regarding the 1988 negotiations, Sauer (during his 
direct examination) testified that "...after we reached an 
to go back and have the agreements that we have made 
across the table ratified by the rank and file” (Tr. 393). 
However, during Sauer's Cross-Examination, he conceded 
that Thomas "...did not say if there wasn't ratification there 
would be no contract" (Tr. 420). 


In sum, I find the ratification evidence shows: 


a. no written mandate existed which 
required proposed collective bargaining agreements to be 
submitted to Union membership votes before those 
agreements could become binding; 


b. no explicit discussions occurred between 
the Employer and Union during the 1988 negotiations by 
which the Union told the Employer that membership 
ratification was needed to establish a contract;” 

c. the evidence that the Union submitted 
contract terms to membership votes in negotiations before 
= Indeed, i conclude Thomas’ October 4 or 5 solicitation of 
an Employer proposal which would not be subject to Union 
membership vote tends to support the view that the Employer 
had been told implicitly that ratification was not a condition 
precedent to a binding agreement. 


104a 


1988, and during the 1988 negotiations, is insufficient basis 
to conclude that the bargaining history shows ratification 
was a precondition to reaching a binding agreement in the 
totality of circumstances in this case. 

Some of that evidence was presented by Auciello as 
pure hearsay and in generalized terms. Hence, | find it 
unpersuasive. 

Sauer's testimony that Union representatives said 
they would submit contract terms to membership 
ratification in years before 1988 is the strongest evidence 
supporting the Employer's contention. This is especially 
true when viewed in the light of the fact (as has been 
shown) that at least two membership votes were taken in 
1988. Nonetheless, | conclude the mere submission to 
membership votes falls short of making ratification a 
requirement of the formation of a binding agreement. 

The Board has consistently held that where there 
was no evidence of an explicit agreement between the 
negotiating parties about union ratification, the formality of 
such a vote by the union membership is not required as the 
foundation of a binding collective-bargaining agreement. 
Newtown Corporation, 280 NLRB 350 (1986); Consumat 
Systems, Inc., 273 NLRB 410, 413 (1984); Martin J. Barry 
Company, 241 NLRB 1011, 1013 (1978); C & W Lektra 
Bat Co., 209 NLRB 1038, 1039 (1974), enfd. 513 F.2d 200 
(6th Cir., 1975). 

In Childers Products Company, 276 NLRB 709 


(1985), more compelling circumstances existed for finding 


105a 


ratification a requirement of contract formation than in the 
case before me. The parties, in Childers, signed a 
memorandum of agreement containing the terms agreed-to 
by the negotiators. That memorandum ended with the line 
"THIS AGREEMENT SUBJECT TO RATIFICATION", 
although no one discussed the meaning of the quoted 
sentence and there was no discussion of ratification during 
the negotiations. No ratification vote was taken by the 
union membership. 

The Board left undisturbed Judge Nations’ 
observation that "The condition precedent of ‘ratification’ 
means ratification as defined by the Union in its internal 
procedures. There was no understanding established by the 
‘parties during negotiations concerning what the Union 
meant by ratification” (276 NLRB at 711). The Board 
affirmed the conclusion that those circumstances supported 
a finding that the method of ratification was within the 
union's exclusive control and sustained the finding that a 
vote of the union's executive committee satisfied the 
ratification issue in Childers.” 

| find the instant case analogous to Childers. In both 
cases, the parties had no explicit discussion concerning the 


= The principle of union self-determination of sufficiency 
of ratification is well-established. See Zayre Department Stores, 
289 NLRB No. 153 (1988); M_& M Oldsmobile, Inc., 156 


NLRB 903, 905 (1966); North Country Motors, Lid., 146 NLRB 
671 (1964). 


106a 


ratification process; no ratification procedure was 
mandated by the union constitution or by-laws;™ no formal 
ratification vote was taken by the members on the offer 
which the union accepted;” and the agreement was 
accepted by a vote of some body of the union (here, the 
Union's negotiating committee; in Childers, the executive 
committee). | conclude application of the decisional 
precedent cited above militates in favor of finding the 
instant facts show ratification by the Union members was 
not required to form a binding collective-bargaining 
agreement in the instant case. 

Finally, | conclude the Employer's reliance on the 
Union's submission of contract terms to membership votes 
in negotiating years before 1988, and even during the 1988 
negotiations, as establishing such ratification votes a 
precondition to contract formation, is misplaced. Even 
union negotiator’s remarks regarding intention to submit 
contract terms to a vote by which employer's negotiators 
"felt" or “understood” ratification was a precondition to a 


- This observation is unaffected by the fact that the 
Childers union constitution contained language regarding 
ratification, while no ratification language whatsoever appears in 
the instant case. The Childers language clearly is discretionary. 

a " Arguably, Mortimer’s polling of members during the 
week before acceptance can comprise a ratification vote. If so, 
the instant Employer is divested of its argument that the 
membership did not vote to ratify a contract. 


107a 


binding agreement, were insufficient to make it so (Seneca 
Environmental Products, 243 NLRB 624, 627 (1979). 

Based upon all the above, | find that the evidence in 
the instant case, when assessed in light of the applicable 
precedent,” does ot show that ratification by the Union's 
membership was a prerequisite to the formation of a 
collective-bargaining agreement between the Employer and 
Union. | therefore find, in the circumstances of the instant 
case, a unanimous vote of the Union's negotiating 
committee could effectively accept a pending offer for a 
collective-bargaining agreement. 

These findings, however, do not end the inquiry. It 
is equally important to determine whether or not the 
Employer's November 17 proposals remained in existence 
as a contract offer when the Union signified its unanimous 
“ratification”. 

(2) Withdrawal of Recognition 


There is no dispute that the Employer's extensive 
oral and written proposals of November 17 effectively 
comprised a complete contract. However, the Employer, 


= Apparently believing in the efficacy of its position, the 
Employer has cited no authority to support its contentions 
regarding ratification. In addition to studying the cases | have 
cited above, | have examined cases which eight support the 
Employer's position contained in an exhaustive analysis of this 
subject by Board Chairman Stephens" concurring opinion ~ 
NLRB No. 65 (1989). 


contrary to the General Counsel and Union, argues its 
proposals were rejected when the Union team “stormed” 
out from the November 17 negotiations,” and there was no 
offer pending that the Union could have accepted” by the 
Union on November 27. 

Under Board law, the formation of 
collective-bargaining agreements is not necessarily 
controlled by technical rules of contract law. Ben Franklin 
National Bank, 278 NLRB 986, fn.2 (1986). The Board's 
policy regarding offer and acceptance of 
collective-bargaining agreement terms was summarized by 
Judge Harmatz in Pepsi Cola Bottling Company of Mason 
City, Jowa, 251 NLRB 187, 189 (1980), enfd. 659 F.2d 87, 
90 (8th Cir. 1981), as follows: 


"soll complete package proposal made on behalf of 
either party through negotiations remains viable. 
and upon acceptance in tote must be executed as 
part of the statutory duty to bargain in good faith, 
unless expressly withdrawn prior to such 
acceptance, or defeased by an event upon which 


5 | recognize the Employer seeks to justify its withdrawal 
of recognition by asserting its good-faith doubt-of-majority 
argument. For reasons discussed above, | find it unnecessary to 
deal with this argument in this analysis. 

That the language of the Union's November 27 telegram 
constitutes an acceptance is unchallenged. 


109a 


the offer was expressly made contingent at a time 
prior to acceptance." 


The Eighth Circuit's enforcement decision approved 
this policy (see footnote 4, the Court's decision), and 
restated it this way: 


"Under this policy (of the National Labor Relations 
Board), an offer, once made, will remain on the 
table unless explicitly withdrawn by the offeror or 
unless circumstances arise which would lead the 
parties to reasonably believe that the offer had been 
withdrawn" (Footnote omitted). 


Clearly, there is neither evidence nor contention 
that the instant Employer expressly withdrew its November 
17 contract proposals any time before the Union's 
November 27 acceptance telegram. Thus, the focus turns to 
an examination of whether or not the evidence supports a 
conclusion that some event occurred which "defeased" the 
proposals, or from which the parties could “reasonably 
believe” they had been withdrawn. I conclude the record 
does not contain sufficient evidence from which it can be 
found that the November 17 proposals were no longer open 
for acceptance on November 27. 

As noted above, the Employer theorizes there was 


no offer open for acceptance. The only evidence to support 
such a theory shows the Union team "stormed" away from 


110a 


the November 17 bargaining session. However, there is no 
evidence that any member of the Union team made any 
contemporaneous remarks, during the team's angry exit 
from that session, which could be interpreted as a rejection 
of the Employer's proposals. 

Moreover, | find the contents of attorney O'Reilly's 
conversation with Thomas on or about November 20 
illuminating, and contrary to the Employer's position. No 
evidence was presented to show either that there was an 
express withdrawal of the November 17 proposals during 
that phone discussion or that anything was said Which 
indicates either of the parties believed the Union's 
November 17 actions constituted circumstances which 
formed a foundation of a reasonably based conclusion the 
proposals had been withdrawn. If the Employer believed its 
proposals had been rejected, | find it reasonable to expect 
something to that effect would have been said during the 
Thomas O'Reilly phone conversation. 

Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to 
the Employer, it is arguable that the Union's November 17 
actions reasonably give rise to a conclusion the Employer's 
proposals had been rejected. Such conclusion, however, 
would not compel adoption of the Employer's position. 

There is nothing in the Board's or Court's Pepsi 
Cola decision which licenses or contemplates the kind of 
unilateral judgment the Employer espouses in this case. As 
1 understand the Pepsi Cola language, the special 
circumstances which might permit a determination that 


llla 


contract offers have been withdrawn are those from which 
both parties to negotiations could reasonably draw the same 
conclusion. No party has cited, nor has my independent 
research uncovered, any cases which-disengage parties 
from the statutory collective-bargaining scheme simply 
upon their separate opinions and surmise of the effects of 
the other's conduct. 

Moreover, even assuming the Employer unilaterally 
could presume its proposals had been rejected, and that 
presumption were correct, it is clear that the initial 
rejection could be revoked at any time before an effective 
withdrawal. This is so because federal labor policy and 
principles encourage the formation of collective-bargaining 
agreements as a Stabilizing factor in labor-management 


relations (Pepsi Cola, supra; Penasquitos Gardens, Inc., 236 
NLRB 994, 995 (1978), enfd. 603 F.2d 223 (9th Cir. 1979). 


In conclusion, I find the Employer's November 17 
proposals were open for acceptance on November 27 and 
the Union's November 27 telegram constituted their 
acceptance before withdrawal so as to create a binding 
collective-bargaining agreement between those parties. 
Accordingly, | also find the Employer's November 28 
withdrawal of recognition untimely, as it occurred during 
the term of the contract which became effective the 
previous day (Consumat Systems, Inc., supra, fn.4 and 
cases cited therein; Belcon, Inc., supra). 

Upon the basis of the above factual findings and 
upon the entire record in the case, | make the following: 


112a 
IV Conclusions of Law 


1. Auciello Iron Works, Inc. is an employer 
engaged in commerce within the meaning of Section 2(6) 
and (7) of the Act. 


2. Shopmen's Local Union No. 501, a/w 
International Association of Bridge, Structural and 
Ornamental Iron Workers (AFL-CIO) is a _ labor 
organization within the meaning of Section 2(5) of the Act. 


3. All production and maintenance employees, 
including working foremen, engaged in the fabrication of 
iron, steel, metal, and other products, or in maintenance 
work in or about the vicinity of the Employer's Hudson, 
Massachusetts facility, but excluding all office clerical 
employees, guards and supervisors as defined in the Act 
(except working foremen) constitute a unit appropriate for 
collective bargaining within the meaning of Section 9(b) of 
the Act.” 


4. Ratification, by the Union's general membership, 
of terms for collective-bargaining agreements between the 
Employer and Union involved in this case is not required to 
form a binding collective-bargaining agreement. 


99 


This unit description conforms to the parties’ agreement 
(See footnote 2, above). 


113a 


5. The Employer's November 17, 1988 proposals 
for a collective-bargaining agreement remained pending for 
acceptance on November 27. 


6. The Union's November 27, 1988 telegram 
constituted acceptance of the Employer's November 17 
proposals and created a collective-bargaining agreement 
which the parties are bound to sign. 


7. The Employer's November 28, 1988 withdrawal! 
of recognition from the Union was untimely. 


8. By failing to sign a _ collective-bargaining 
agreement containing the terms of the November |7 
proposals, the Employer engaged in, and is engaging in, a 
refusal to bargain in violation of Sections 8(a)(5) and (1) of 
the Act. 


9. By having withdrawn recognition from the Union 
on November 27, 1988, the Employer engaged in, and is 
engaging in, a refusal to bargain in violation of Sections 
8(a)(5) and (1) of the Act. 


10. The unfair labor practices identified above in 
Conclusions of Law paragraphs 8 and 9 affect commerce 
within the meaning of Section 2(6) and (7) of the Act. 


1l4a 


V. The Remedy 


The unfair labor practices found require that the 
Employer be ordered to cease and desist from continuing 
them and to take certain affirmative action designed to 
effectuate the policies of the Act. 

To rectify the Employer's unlawful failure to sign 
and implement a collective-bargaining agreement, and its 
untimely withdrawal of recognition, | find it necessary to 
order the Employer, upon the Union's request, to reduce to 
writing, sign, and retroactively implement the 
collective-bargaining agreement which | have found was 
created on November 27, 1988. 

Also, I will order the Employer to make whole all 
employees to whom the aforesaid collective-bargaining 
agreement applies for any loss of wages and other benefits 
suffered as a result of the Employer's failure to sign and 
give timely effect to that agreement. Those wages and 
benefits, if any, shall be computed in accordance with the 
Board's formula in Ogle Protection Service, 183 NLRB 682 
(1970), with interest computed under New Horizons for the 
Retarded, 283 NLRB 1173 (1987). 

Further, the order will require the Employer to 
refrain from, in any like or related manner, interfering with, 
restraining and coercing employees in the exercise of their 
rights which the Act guarantees. 

Finally, the Employer will be ordered to post an 
appropriate Notice to Employees. 


115a 


On the above findings of fact, conclusions of law, 
and the entire record, | issue the following recommended: 


ORDER'™ 


Auciello lron Works, Inc., its officers, agents, 
successors and assigns, shall: 


1. Cease and desist from: 


(a) Withdrawing recognition from the Union as the 
exclusive __ collective-bargaining representative of 
employees in the bargaining unit found appropriate, and 
described in Conclusion of Law paragraph 3, above. 


(b) Failing and refusing to sign and implement the 
collective-bargaining agreement which has been found to 
have been created on November 27, 1988. 


- In the event no exceptions are filed as provided in 
Section 102.46 of the Rules and Regulations of the National 
Labor Relations Board, the findings, conclusions and 
recommended Order herein shall, as provided in Section 102.48 
of the Rules and Regulations, be adopted by the Board and 
become its findings and conclusions and Order, and all 
objections thereto shall be deemed waived for all purposes. 


116a 


(c) In any like or related manner, interfering with, 


restraining or coercing employees in the exercise of the 
rights guaranteed them by Section 7 of the Act. 


2. Take the following affirmative action necessary 
to effectuate the policies of the Act: 


(a) On the Union's request, reduce to writing, sign 
and implement retroactively to November 27, 1988 the 
collective-bargaining agreement which the Union accepted 
on that date. 


(b) Make whole all employees to whom the 
November 27, 1988 collective-bargaining agreement 
applies, including such employees who may have left the 
payroll since that date, for any loss of wages or other 
benefits suffered by reason of the Employer's failure to sign 
that collective-bargaining agreement and its withdrawal of 
recognition from the Union. Monies due under _ this 
make-whole provision are to be computed according to the 
formulas described in the Remedy section above. 


(c) Preserve and, upon request, make available to 
the Board or its agents, for examination and copying, all 
payroll records, social security payment records, 
timecards, personnel records and reports, and al] other 
records necessary and relevant to determine the amounts 
owing under the terms of this Order. : 


notice, on forms provided by the Regional Director for 
Region | of the Board, after being duly signed by 
shall be posted 


be taken by the Employer to insure that said notices are not 
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. 


(e) Notify the Regional Director for Region | of the 
Board, in writing, within 20 days from the date of this 
Order, what steps the Employer has taken to comply with 
it. 


Dated at Washington, D.C. Norman Zanikel 
November 24, 1989 Administrative Law Judge 


- In the event that the Board's Order is enforced by a 


judgment of a United States Court of Appeals, the words in the 


notice reading "POSTED BY ORDER OF THE NATIONAL 
LABOR RELATIONS BOARD" shall be changed to read 
"POSTED PURSUANT TO A JUDGMENT OF THE UNITED 
STATES COURT OF APPEALS ENFORCING AN ORDER 
OF THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD". 


The Act gives employees the following rights: 


To organize; 
To form, join, or assist any union; 


To bargain collectively throu 
daly aoe dhaten y gh representatives of 


To act together for other mutual aid or protection; 


To choose not to e ej , 
activities. ngage in any of these protective 


119a 


WE WILL NOT unlawfully withdraw recognition from, 
or refuse to bargain with, SHOPMEN'S LOCAL UNION 
NO. 501 a/w INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF 
BRIDGE, STRUCTURAL AND ORNAMENTAL IRON 
WORKERS (AFL-CIO) as the exclusive 
collective-bargaining representative of employees in the 
following appropriate un't: 


All production and maintenance employees, 
including working foremen, engaged in the 
fabrication of iron, steel, metal, and other 

ts, or in maintenance work in or about the 
vicinity of our Hudson, Massachusetts facility, but 
excluding all office clerical employees, guards, 
and supervisors as defined in the Act (except 
working foremen). 


WE WILL NOT, in any like or related manner, interfere 
with, restrain or coerce our employees in the exercise of 
any of the rights described at the top of this notice. 


WE WILL, upon request of the above-named union, pul 
in writing, sign and put into effect, retroactively to 
November 27, 1988 the collective-bargaining agreement 
which the union accepted that date. 


WE WILL make whole, with interest, all employees to 
whom the November 27, 1988 collective-bargaining 


120a 


agreement applies, for all lost wages and other benefits 
they may have suffered as a result of our failure to sign an 
agreement containing our November 17, 1988 proposals 
and from our withdrawal of recognition from the Union 
on November 28, 1988. 


AUCIELLO IRON WORKS, INC. 


Dated: By: 


(Representative) (Title) 


This is an official notice and must not be defaced by 
anyone. 


This notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive days 
from the date of posting and must not be altered, defaced, 
or covered by any other material. Any questions 
concerning this notice or compliance with its provisions 
may be directed to the Board's office, 6th Floor, Thomas 
P. O'Neil, Jr. Federal Building, 10 Causeway Street, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1072, Telephone Number 
617-565-6700. 


