Supreme Court of the Unit 


In The 


October Term, 1995 
+ 


SAUL ORNELAS and ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA, 


v. Petitioners, 


UNITED STATES, 


Respondent. 
+ 


On Writ Of Certiorari 


To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Seventh Circuit 


* 
JOINT APPENDIX 


* 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 
Room 5614 
United States Department 
of justice 
10th St. and Constitutional Av. N. W. 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-4283 


Brian W. GLEASON 

230 W. Wells Street 

Suite 702 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53203 

(414) 277-5076 

Counsel for Petitioner Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma 


Rosert G. LeBewr 
Sryter, Kosticn, LeBer 

Dosrosx! & McGuire 
100 East Wisconsin, Suite 1700 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202-4114 
(414) 276-1233 
Counsel for Petitioner Saul Ornelas 


Petition For Certiorari Filed July 17, 1995 


Certiorari Granted June 6, 1995 


COCKLE LAW &RIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 


OR CALL COLLBCT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Decision and Order of District Court, denying 
motions to su statements and evidence, 
dated March 9, 1993 


Petitioners’ motion for reconsideration and 


inspection of automobile dated March 11, 1993.... 


Partial transcript of March 11, 1993 oral rul 


Judgment of Conviction of Saul Ornelas 


Published Decision and Order of the United States 
Aggods. (st the Seventh — 


Court of 
February 10, 1994, vacating judgments and 
remanding to the district court 


trate judge for credibility determination of 
— of officer Luedke, dated 


Decision and Order of the district court, dated 
September 20, 1994 


TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued 


Page 
Unpublished Decision and Order of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, 
nne... , 91 
judgment-Without Oral Argument, of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, 
Gated eee e. e eee, 93 


SELECTED DOCKET ENTRIES * 


The docket numbers are those used in Ismael Ornelas- 
Ledesma’s case. The docket numbers for Saul Ornelas are 
in brackets. 


Date Number 


12-30-92 12 Deft.’s motion to suppress seizure of 
items from the 1981 Olds. and the 
statement of the ceft. taken at the 
scene & later that day at the station- 


house. (No supporting brief). 


12-31-92 [12] Deft's statement on motions. 


123192 [13] Deft's motion to suppress state- 
ments; Memorandum in support of 


motion. 


12-31-92 [14] Deft. notice of motion and motion to 
suppress and exclude physical evi- 
dence; memorandum in support of 


motion. 


1-11-93 14 Govt’ memorandum in response to 


deft.’s pretrial motions. 


1-12-93 [20] Deft's reply; affidavit of deft. 


11493 16 Deft.’s reply to Gov't memorandum 
in response to deft.’s motion to sup- 
press the seizure of items from the 
1981 Olds and the statements of the 
deft. taken at the scene and later at 


the stationhouse. 


1-15-93 18 Deft’s motion to supplement reply 


brief. 


1-15-93 
1-21-93 


1-22-93 


1-25-93 


[22] 
24 


2 


Affidavit of Saul Ornelas. 


HEARING (RLB) Evidentiary hear- 
ing. Interpreter (C. Ward) swore. 
Govt. addresses crt. as to contested 
facts. Crt. finds Gov't. has not ful- 
filled burden as to 6.03. Witness test. 
given. Gov't. offers Ex. 1, 2, & 2A. 
Exhibits and transcripts received. 
Crt. admits exh. 3 & 4. Gov't. objects 
as to #4. 


HEARING (RLB) Evidentiary hear- 
ing cont d. Gov't. addresses crt. as to 
Ex. 2A. Crt w/allow deft. to listen to 
original tape. Witness test. given. 
Gov't offers Ex. 6 & 6A. Atty LeBell 
objects. Integrity of tape in question. 
Crt. w/accept Ex. 6 and 6A. Govt. 
Ex. 5 received. Deft. offered Ex. D. 
Crt. allows. Ex. B. offered and 
received. Ex. 7 offered and admitted. 
Ex. F. G. & H. offered and admitted. 
Ex. I & J offered and admitted. 
Gov't. objects. 

HEARING (RLB) Evidentiary Hear- 
ing Contd. Govt. moves to quash 
subp. of witness Allen & docs. Crt. 
holds motion in abeyance. Crt. will 
not order hard copy of NADDIS ck. 
on 12/11/92 Exh. 12 offered Govt. 
objects. Crt. will allow. Defts. seeks 
metallurgist expert. Crt. directs 
motions made to RTR. [District 
Court judge]. BRIEFS due 2-9-93 at 
5:00 p.m. Atty Gleason seeks until 
1-29-93 to obtain expert & supple- 
ment. Crt. w/allow further evidence. 


1-28-93 


2-8-93 


2-9-93 


2-9-93 


2-12-93 


2-17-93 


2-18-93 


43 


1310 


135 


136 


3 


Counsel W/ make proffer to Govt. 
Briefing W/ remain as set. 


HEARING (RLB) Evidentiary hear- 
ing re: screw. Crt. has conferred 
w/Govt. and counsel. Govt. pro- 
duced screw indicated at previous 
hrg. Parties believe should be admit- 
ted into evidence. Govt. waives deft. 
presence. Atty Gleason h/no objec- 
tions. Govt. offers and crt. receives 
screw as Ex. AA. Stipulated by Govt. 
that screw has no rust. Crt. exam- 
ined-can see no rust. Deft. W/D 
motion to have screw analyzed. 


Brief of Ismael Ledesma in support 
of motion to suppress statements 
and items seized f/automobile. 


Govt. memo in response to deft. pre- 
trial motions. 

Deft. s brief in support of motion to 
suppress statements and items 
seized from the automobile. 


RECOMMENDATION (RLB). to 
Judge Randa RECOMMEND an 
order DENYING deft’s motion to 
suppress seizure of items f/ 1981 
Olds. & statements of deft. Objection 
t/be filed on or before 2/19/93 at 
8:30. 


Deft’s Objections to Magistrate 
Judge’s Recommendations. 


Govt's objections to Magistrate 
Judge’s Recommendations. 


2-19-93 


3-9-93 


3-11-93 


3-11-93 


3-11-93 


5-20-93 


5-21-93 


31 


35 


[41] 


37 


Deft. objections to Magistrate recom- 
mendations. 


ORDER (RTR) that defts’ objections 
to Mag.’s recommendations be 
OVERRULED; Defts’ motions to 
suppress certain post-arrest state- 


ments and physical evidence be 
DENIED. 


HEARING (RTR) Deft. motion for 
reconsideration is DENIED. Deft. 
enters conditional guilty plea. -— R. 
11(a)(2) to count 1 of the indictment. 
ADJUDGED GUILTY. Sentencing set 
for 5-20-93 at 10:00 a.m. in rm. 253. 
Mr. Gleason's request for transcripts 
is GRANTED. Deft. remanded to 
custody. 


HEARING (RTR) Change of plea. 
Interpreter present. Deft’s motion 
for reconsideration is DENIED. Deft. 
enters a conditional plea R.11(a)(2) 
to court [sic] 1 of the indictment. 
ADJUDGED GUILTY. Sentencing set 
for 5/20/93 at 2:30 p.m. in rm. 253. 
Deft. remanded to custody. 


Defts’ motion for reconsideration 
and inspection of Automobile. 


HEARING (RTR). Sentencing: 60 
months imprisonment. 
* * SUPERVISED RELEASE 4 
yrs. „ „„ „ 


JUDGEMENT (RTR) in a criminal 
case. E.O.D. 5/28/93. 


5-28-93 


5-28-93 


6-29-93 


6-29-93 


6-29-93 


6-30-93 


6-30-93 


2-10-94 


3-15-94 


3-29-94 


[45] 


59 


HEARING (RTR) Sentencing. SENT: 
Ct. 1-63 mos. imprison- 
ment. * * * SUPERVISED RELEASE: 4 
yrs with conditions. 


AMENDED JUDGMENT (RTR) in a 
criminal case. * * * 


Transcript of proceedings held on 
1-21-93. 


Transcript of proceedings held on 
1-22-93. 


Transcript of proceedings held on 
1-25-93. 


Transcript of proceedings held on 
1-28-93. 


Transcript of change of plea f/Saul 
Ornelas held on 3-11-93 which con- 
tains court ruling on motion for 
reconsideration. 


DECISION OF SEVENTH CIRCUIT. 
Vacated and remanded to district 
court. 


ORDER by Judge Rudolph T. Randa. 
Consistent with the 7th Circuit's 
remand order, the matter shall be 
referred to Magistrate Bittner for 
purposes of determining the cred- 
ibility of Officer Luedke’s testimony 
regarding the loose door panel. 
(kmf). [Entry date 3/17/94]. 


POST-REMAND RECOMMENDA- 
TION by Mag. Judge Robert L. Bit- 
tner to the Honorable Rudolph T. 
Randa concerning Defendants’ 


4-7-94 


4-8-94 


9-20-94 


4-18-94 


4-18-94 


60 


61 


62 


A 4 eR ee a ae a 


Motions to Suppress. It is RECOM- 
MENDED that the U.S. District 
Judge enter an order GRANTING 
deft. Saul Ornelas’ motion to sup- 
press and exclude physical evidence. 
It is FURTHER RECOMMENDED 
that the U.S. District Judge enter an 
order GRANTING that aspect of 
deft. Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma’s 
motion to suppress items seized 
f/the 1981 Oldsmobile. 


Government's OBJECTIONS to the 
Mag. Judge’s Post-Remand Recom- 
mendation Re: Deft. Motion to Sup- 
press. (kmf) [Entry date 4/12/94]. 


OBJECTIONS to Magistrate Judge's 
Post-Remand Reconsideration by 
defendants Saul ORNELAS and 
Ismael L. ORNELAS. 


DECISION AND ORDER: (RTR). The 
Government's objection to the Mag- 
istrate recommendation is sustained 
and the defendants’ motions to sup- 
press are denied. 


ORDER of the United State [sic] 
Court of Appeals Filed Circuit Rule 
53 order PER CURIUM [sic]. 
AFFIRMED. Posner, Flaum, Manion. 
(94-3349, 94-3350]. 


Terminated on the Merits after Sub- 
mission Without Oral Hearing; 
Affirmed, Written, Unsigned, 
Unpublished, Posner, authoring 
judge; Flaum, Manion. [94-3349 
94-3350]. 


— la 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF 


AMERICA, Case No. 92-Cr-243 
Plaintiff, 
* MAGISTRATE 
SAUL ORNELAS and JUDGE'S 
RECOMMENDATION 


ISMEAL [sic] 
LEDESMA ORNELAS, 


Defendants. 


TO THE HONORABLE 
RUDOLPH T. RANDA 
AND ORDER 


NATURE OF THE CASE 
(Filed Feb. 12, 1993) 


On December 15, 1992 a federal grand jury sitting in 
this District returned a one (1) count indictment against 
defendants Saul Ornelas (hereinafter referred to as Saul) 
and Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas (hereinafter referred to as 
Ismeal), charging them with violating 21 U.S.C. 
§ 841(a)(1) and 18 U.S.C. § 2 by knowingly and inten- 
tionally possessing, with intent to distribute, a mixture 
containing cocaine. 


The defendants appeared before this Court on 
December 17, 1992 for arraignment, entering pleas of not 
guilty. Pursuant to the pretrial scheduling order, the 
defendants filed various pretrial motions which are ready 
for resolution and will be addressed herein. Previously, 
the defendants’ motions to compel discovery were denied 


by this Court’s order of January 15, 1993, which was 
upheld on appeal by Judge Randa. 


MOTIONS TO SUPPRESS 


Defendants Saul and Ismeal move the Court for issu- 
ance of orders suppressing evidence seized on December 
11, 1992 from their persons and a 1981 Oldsmobile bear- 
ing State of California license plate number 2YOY835, 
which was parked in front of room 4 of the Suburban 
Motel, 4600 South 27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
They contend their Fourth Amendment rights to be free 
from unreasonable searches and seizures were violated 
when law enforcement officers subjected them to an 
investigatory stop, without “reasonable suspicion”; 
searched the Oldsmobile without their consent and, with- 
out probable cause, conducted an intrusive search of the 
interior of the vehicle’s right rear door by removing a 
plastic vent cover. Both defendants also seek suppression 
of statements obtained from them while they were in 
custody at the City of Milwaukee Police Department 
(hereinafter referred to as MPD) on the grounds such 
statements were obtained in violation of their Miranda 
rights and were involuntary. 


These motions were the subject of an evidentiary 
hearing conducted by the Court on January 21, 22, and 
25, 1993. At the hearing Milwaukee County Deputy Sher- 
iffs (hereinafter referred to as MCDS) Michael Pautz, Lyle 
Luedke, Gil Pagan, Donald Hurrle, Roger R. Wiggins, and 
United States Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement 
Administration (hereinafter referred to as DEA) Special 
Agent (hereinafter referred to as SA) James Allen 


appeared and testified on behalf of the government. A 
supplemental evidentiary hearing was convened on Janu- 
ary 28, 1993 to admit into evidence a Phillips screw which 
had been removed from the plastic vent cover of the right 
rear door of the Oldsmobile, and to place upon the record 
the parties’ stipulation that no rust appeared on the 
screw. Based on the testimony and evidence adduced at 
such hearings, as well as having considered the briefs 
and arguments of the parties, this Court makes its find- 
ings of fact and proposed dispositions of such motions. 


Findings of Fact 


On Friday, December 11, 1993 MCSD [sic] plain 
clothes Detective Michael Pavtz, a twenty (20) year vet- 
eran who has been assigned to the Drug Enforcement 
Unit for two (2) year veteran who has been assigned to 
the Drug Enforcement Unit for two (2) years, was 
engaged in a routine survey of motels located along 
South 27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin looking for drug 
trafficking activity. At the Suburban Motel, 4600 South 
27th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, he observed a 1981 
two (2) door Oldsmobile automobile with California 
license plates 2YOY835 parked in front of room 4. Based 
upon his experience and training in drug interdiction, 
Pautz knew an older two (2) door GM vehicle is often 
used to transport drugs and California is a source state 
for controlled substances; consequently, he contacted his 
dispatcher to check on the license plate. The dispatcher 
advised Pautz the vehicle was listed to one Miguel 
Ornealas of 830 North 16th Street, San Jose, California 
with an additional name of “Ledesma.” However, Pautz 
was not sure whether the dispatcher indicated the name 


10 


“Ledesma” came before or after the name “Ornealas.” 
After speaking with the dispatcher, Pautz spoke with the 
motel clerk who disclosed, at 4:00 a.m. that morning, an 
individual named Ismeal Ornelas had checked into room 
4 with another individual, without prior reservations, 
and was due to check out at 11:00 a.m. 


Pautz then requested his partner, MCDS plain clothes 
Detective Donald Hurrle, meet him at the motel. Upon 
Hurrle’s arrival in an unmarked car approximately fifteen 
(15) to twenty (20) minutes later, Pautz briefed him about 
the Oldsmobile and the occupants of room 4. Pursuant to 
Hurrle’s suggestion, Pautz contacted the Milwaukee DEA 
office and asked for a Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs 
and Information Systems (hereinafter referred to as 
NADDIS) check on the names Ismeal Ornelas and Miguel 
Ledesma Ornealas. A short time later, Pautz was advised 
both names appeared on NADDIS and was given the 
following information: Miguel Ledesma Ornealas, a/k/a 
Miguel Ledesma-Lemus, with a date of birth September 
29, 1945, 5’6’, 150 pounds, Hispanic male was a heroin 
dealer from El Centro, California; Ismeal Ornelas, Jr., 
from Tuscon, Arizona was a 1,000 kilogram a month 
cocaine dealer. Pautz is not familiar with the geography 
of California and did not know that San Jose and El 
Centro, California are 600 miles apart. Upon receiving the 
NADDIS information, Pautz and Hurrle decided to con- 
duct surveillance of room 4 of the Suburban Motel and to 
summon to the scene MCDS Detective Lyle Luedke, the 
narcotics dog handler for the Drug Enforcement Unit, 
because they suspected the Oldsmobile contained drugs. 


Shortly after 9:30 a.m. Luedke, in plain clothes, 
arrived in an unmarked car at the scene, together with 


11 


the narcotics detection dog. In the K-Mart parking lot 
across the street from the Suburban Motel, Detective Hur- 
rle advised Luedke they were conducting surveillance of 
room 4 of the Suburban Motel which they believed was 
occupied by a possible drug courier, Ismeal Ornelas, and 
another individual, whose identity was unknown. He 
was further advised checkout time for room 4 was 11:00 
a.m. and, if time permitted, the exterior of the Oldsmobile 
should be “sniffed” by the drug detection dog. 


Not long after Luedke arrived, Pautz departed the 
scene; Hurrle and Luedke repositioned themselves on the 
same side of the street at the Suburban Motel, because 
heavy traffic had obscured their view from the parking 
lot, and continued to conduct surveillance of room 4 from 
their separate cars which were parked approximately 250 
yards away. After approximately forty-five (45) minutes, 
Hurrle observed an individual, later identified as Saul, 
open the hood of the Oldsmobile, tinker briefly under the 
hood, and start the ignition. He then returned to the room 
to pick up luggage and loaded it into the trunk. The other 
individual, later identified as Ismeal, exited room 4 and 
assumed a position in the front passenger seat of the 
Oldsmobile while Saul went briefly into the motel office. 
Shortly thereafter, Saul returned to the vehicle and posi- 
tioned himself in the driver's seat. 


At this point, the officers drove their separate 
unmarked vehicles to parking spaces on either sides of 
the Oldsmobile. However, the position of their cars did 
not box in the Oldsmobile and prevent it from leaving the 
scene. Both officers were dressed in plain clothes. Hurrle, 
who had no visible gun, proceeded to the driver’s side of 
the vehicle and Luedke, who had a gun visible but not 


12 


drawn, proceeded to the passenger side. Hurrle identified 
himself as a law enforcement officer, asked the occupants 
of the vehicle whether he could speak to them, and 
inquired whether they were in possession of any illegal 
drugs or contraband. Both occupants responded, almost 
simultaneously, they had nothing illegal or anything like 
that. In response to a request for identification, both Saul 
and Ismeal produced identifying documents. Luedke 
reviewed the California driver’s license produced by 
Ismeal, listing Ismeal’s residence as Martinez, California. 
Ismeal responded in the affirmative to Luedke’s inquiry 
whether he had just arrived from California. Luedke did 
not realize there was a discrepancy between the NADDIS 
report listing Ismeal Ornelas as being from Tucson, Ari- 
zona and the fact the Ismeal before him was apparently 
from California. The identification documents produced 
by Saul and Ismeal were retained by the law enforcement 
officers. At Hurrle’s request Saul, the driver, consented to 
have the officers look inside the vehicle. In fact, Saul 
opened the trunk of the Oldsmobile with a key and held 
the trunk lid up to allow Hurrle to search it and the 
luggage inside. While the trunk was being searched, Saul 
was very calm and Ismeal was also calm, but shaking. 


When Hurrle announced he had completed the 
search of the trunk, with negative results, Luedke pro- 
ceeded to the passenger area of the vehicle and checked 
to see whether the back seat was loose. Upon finding it 
was not, he examined the right rear quarter panel near 
the handle. He found this panel to be loose. Based upon 
his training, Luedke suspected the panel had been 
removed and contraband was hidden inside. Luedke tes- 
tified he then observed the vent area of the door, noticing 


13 


the presence of rust in the groove of the Phillips screw 
used to attach the vent cover, which led his to believe the 
vent cover had recently been removed. Luedke then 
released the screw, dismantled the vent area of the door, 
and exposed a cavity approximately five (5) inches high 
and four (4) inches wide which contained a paper bag in 
which he felt a hard block. After unsuccessfully attempt- 
ing to remove the bag through the vent opening, Luedke 
removed the interior panel of the right rear door, 
retrieved the paper bag, and told Hurrle he had “found 
something.” Luedke tore open the bag, revealing a block 
of cocaine wrapped in aluminum foil and tape. 


At that point, the defendants were handcuffed, 
placed under arrest, and placed in separate cars. Some- 
time after the cocaine was found, Luedke had his dog 
sniff the Oldsmobile, but no other cocaine was detected. 
At the scene, Hurrle advised Ismeal of his Miranda rights 
after he was placed in Hurrle’s car, although he was not 
questioned until approximately two (2) hours later at the 
MPD. 


Upon arrival at the MPD, Ismeal was taken to an 
interrogation room approximately eight (8) by ten (10) 
feet in size, where he remained in leg irons for approx- 
imately an hour. At 1:08 p.m., Pautz again advised Ismeal 
of his Miranda rights and Pautz and Hurrle began to 
interview Ismeal. Shortly after the commencement of the 
interview, which was taped, Hurrle stated to Ismeal: 


I want to tell you if you cooperate with us we 
can make you one promise and one promise 
only . . . we will speak on your behalf to the 
Assistant District Attorney of the U. S. Attorney 
or to the Court if necessary and advise them 


14 


that you cooperated with us, o.k. We cannot at 
this point tell you that you are not going to jail. 
We can’t tell that you're going to get a lesser 
sentence because you cooperated with us. All 
we can tell you is one thing. We will speak on 
your behalf. We will tell them that you cooper- 
ated with us. That could mean a whole lot and 
more than likely will mean a lot to those people. 


Sometime later in the interview, Hurrle told Ismeal “We'll 
tell the DA or the United States Attorney that you told us 
something and we found out later that it was a flat out lie 
and then you don’t get in any deals more than likely.” 
During the course of the interview, Ismeal stated he 
understood his Miranda rights, never asked for an attor- 
ney, he did not appear to be under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs, he was cooperative and experienced no 
difficulty communicating with the officers in English. The 
interview ended at 1:45 p.m. 


At approximately 1:30 p.m. MCDS Gil Pagan, a 4-1/2 
year veteran assigned to the Drug Enforcement Unit since 
September 1991 whose native language is Spanish and 
has been interpreting in an unofficial capacity for thirty- 
two years and in an official capacity since August 8, 1988, 
albeit without any formal training in interpretation, 
advised Saul of his Miranda rights using a standard 
English advice of rights cards which he translated into 
Spanish. After Pagan interpreted each right from English 


into Spanish, Saul stated he would be willing to cooper- 
ate. 


About 2:00 p.m. Hurrle and Pautz entered the four- 
teen (14) by ten (10) conference room where Saul and 


15 


Pagan had been waiting and the interview of Saul com- 
menced. Pagan acted as interpreter throughout most of 
the interview; however, there were times during the 
course of the interview where Saul understood questions 
posed to him by Hurrle and responded in English with- 
out the assistance of Pagan. Saul was advised that the 
only thing law enforcement officers would do for him, if 
he decided to cooperate, was to inform the D.A. or the 
Court of his cooperation, but that they did not guarantee 
him anything. During the course of the interview, Saul 
was coherent and fairly calm, although he seemed con- 
cerned about his situation. During the course of the inter- 
view, the deputies engaged in banter among themselves 
which was not translated into English by Pagan. Pautz 
asked, “Do they have courts in Mexico or do they have 
standard procedures.” Hurrle responded “Due process? 
A wall?” In return, Pagan added, “Seven muskets in front 
of you?” The interview of Saul during which he made no 
incriminating statements lasted approximately thirty (30) 
minutes. 


At approximately 2:45 p.m. Luedke reinterviewed 
Ismeal because he wanted to know how the cocaine got 
into the right rear quarter panel of the Oldsmobile 
information which neither defendant had disclosed dur- 
ing their interviews. At the commencement of the inter- 
view, which was conducted in a five (5) by seven (7) foot 
room containing a desk, two (2) chairs, and an ashtray, 
Luedke advised Ismeal of his Miranda rights by reading 
verbatim from an advice of rights card. Pautz was present 
during the interview. No threats or promises were made 
to Ismeal and he was allowed to smoke. His demeanor 
was very solemn. Throughout the interview, he stated he 


16 


understood his rights and proceeded to make a statement 
that Saul had placed the cocaine in the cavity of the right 
rear quarter panel door. 


At the hearing MCDS Sergeant Roger R. Wiggins, a 
twenty (20) year veteran who has been second-shift 
supervisor of the Communications Bureau for four (4) 
years, testified his bureau routinely runs Department of 
Motor Vehicle computer checks using state license plate 
numbers to obtain the owner’s name, residence, and the 
make of car to which the license is listed. He stated 
additional information can be obtained by making an 
administrative request. On January 19, 1993 Wiggins 
made a license check and an administrative inquiry on 
the Oldsmobile. The initial request revealed the vehicle 
belonged to “Ornelas Miguel Ledesma” of San Jose, Cali- 
fornia. The administrative request showed the owner of 
the vehicle to be Miguel Ornelas, also known as 
“Ledesma Miguel Ornelas”; an updated San Jose, Califor- 
nia street address; the owner's sex; date of birth; height; 
weight; hair color; and eye color. 


Officer Pagan reviewed the administrative request 
and stated the alternative name listed for Miguel Ornelas 
was for a person named “Miguel Ornelas-Ledesma.” He 
further testified the majority of Hispanics use their 
father’s name first and then their mother’s name. 


Analysis 


Although the government initially disputed the 
defendants’ expectation of privacy in the Oldsmobile, 
during the course of the evidentiary hearing, it conceded 
both defendants had the requisite expectation of privacy 


17 


to allow them to assert that their Fourth Amendment 
rights had been violated by the search of the vehicle. 
Consequently, the threshold issue in this case is whether 
the defendants were subjected to a seizure by law 
enforcement officers. The law is well established that an 
encounter between a law enforcement officer and a citi- 
zen implicates the Fourth Amendment only if the officer 
seizes the citizen. United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 
544, 555 (1980); Terry v. Ohio, 391 U.S, 1, 19 (1968). If a 
seizure does not occur; and therefore, the encounter is 
consensual in nature (limited to questioning about an 
individual's identity and requesting identification), then 
police do not need justification for this contact. INS v. 
Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 216-17 (1984); United States v. Dyer, 
784 F.2d 812, 815-16 (7th Cir. 1976); United States v. Borys, 
766 F.2d 304, 310-11 (7th Cir. 1985), cert. denied, 474 US. 
1082 (1986). The test for determining whether a police- 
citizen contact rises to the level of a Fourth Amendment 
seizure is an objective one. United States v. Espinosa- 
Alvarez, 839 F.2d 1201, 1205 (7th Cir. 1988); United States v. 
Pavelski, 789 F.2d 485 (7th Cir.), cert. denied. U.S. 
107 S.Ct. 322 (1986). This formulation is whether, based 
on the totality of circumstances, a reasonable person 
would believe his freedom of movement is restrained or 
believes he is at liberty to disregard a police officer's 
request for information. If the latter, then a seizure has 
not occurred. United States v. Espinosa-Alvarez, 839 F.2d at 
1205. 


In order to assess the reasonableness of the seizure, 
this Court must weigh the circumstances on the Fourth 
Amendment “scale” for police/citizen encounters. See 
United States v. Chaidez, 919 F.2d 1193, 1197 (7th Cir. 1990). 


18 


“[A] person has been ‘seized’ within the meaning of the 
Fourth Amendment. only if, in view of all of the 
circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable per- 
son would have believed that he was not free to leave.” 
Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 U.S. 567, 573 (1988) (citations 
omitted). Recently the Court of Appeals for this Circuit 
summarized the three (3) categories for police/citizen 
encounters in relation to the Fourth Amendment as fol- 
lows: 


The first category is an arrest, for which the 
Fourth Amendment requires that police have 
probable cause to believe a person has commit- 
ted or is committing a crime. Beck v. Ohio, 379 
U.S. 89, 85 S.Ct. 223, 13 L.Ed.2d 142 (1964). The 
second category is an investi „ 

is limited to a brief, — te 
This is also a Fourth Amendment “seizure”, but 
the officer need only have specific and articula- 
ble facts sufficient to give rise to a reasonable 
suspicion that a person has committed or is 
committing a crime. United States v. Brignoni- 
Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 881-82, 95 S.Ct. 2574, 
2580-81, 45 L.Ed.2d 607 (1975); Terry v. Ohio, 392 
US. 1, 88 S.Ct. 2868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968). The 
third category involves no restraint on the citi- 
zen’s liberty, and is characterized by an officer 
seeking the citizen’s voluntary cooperation 
through non-coercive questioning. This is not a 
seizure within the meaning of the Fourth 
Amendment. United States v. Mendenhall, 446 
U.S. 544, 553-55, 100 S.Ct. 1870, 1876-77, 64 


L.Ed.2d 497 (1980); Terry, 392 U.S. at 19, n.16, 88 
S.Ct. at 1879, n.16. 


United States v. Johnson, 910 F.2d 1506, 1508 (7th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied. U.S. 111 S.Ct. 764 (1991). See also, 


19 


United States v. Adebayo, No. 91-2138, slip op. at 8 (7th Cir. 
Feb. 5, 1993). 


“So long as a reasonable person would feel free to 
disregard the police and go about his business, the 
encounter is consensual and no reasonable suspicion is 
required.” United States v. Williams, 945 F.2d 192, 195 (7th 
Cir. 1991). “A person has been ‘seized’ within the mean- 
ing of the Fourth Amendment only if, in view of all the 
circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable per- 
son would have believed that he was not free to leave.” 
United States v. Withers, 972 F.2d 837, 841 (7th Cir. 1992) 
(citations omitted). 


The distinction between a consensual encounter and 
a stop is one of degree. Relevant factors include whether 
the encounter occurred in a public or private place, 
whether the suspect consented or refused to talk to the 
police, whether the police informed the suspect that he 
was not under arrest and was free to leave, whether the 
police removed the suspect to another area, whether the 
suspect felt capable of refusing to consent to the search, 
and whether the suspect eventually departs the area 
without hindrance. See United States v. Withers, 972 F.2d at 
842. Other factors in this determination include: “The 
threatening presence of several officers, the display of a 
weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the 
person of the citizen, or the use of language or the tone of 
voice indicating that compliance with the officer's 
request might be compelled.” United States v. Withers, 972 
F.2d at 842 (quoting United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 
544, 554-55 (19800. Additionally, the “lengthy” retention 
of documents, such as identification and airline tickets, is 


20 


a factor in determining whether a stop has occurred. See 
United States v. Withers, 972 F.2d at 842. 


Here, the encounter between the law enforcement 
officers and the occupants of the 1981 Oldsmobile was 
initially a Terry stop. Within moments of the encounter, 
Hurrle was in possession of their identification docu- 
ments, questioning them as to whether they had drugs in 
the car, and requesting permission to search the vehicle. 
The defendants were never told they were not under 
arrest or that they were free to leave. At the time they 
approached the defendants, the law enforcement officers 
had knowledge of “specific and articulable facts which, 
when taken together with the rational inferences from 
those facts”, could reasonably cause them to conclude, in 
light of their experiences, that criminal activity was afoot. 
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21 & 30 (1968). Pautz specifically 
testified it had been his experience that vehicles similar to 
the Oldsmobile are used to transport narcotics. In addi- 
tion, Pautz learned the registered owner of the vehicle 
was from a source state, the owner’s name came back on 
NADDIS as being a drug trafficker, and the name of 
Ismeal Ornelas, Jr. came back on NADDIS as also being a 
drug trafficker. An additional factor contributing to the 
reasonable suspicion of drug trafficking was the defen- 
dants’ 4:00 a.m. check-in to the motel. Consequently, this 
Court concludes the defendants were subjected to an 
investigatory detention, based on reasonable suspicion, 
and the seven (7) to ten (10) minute detention until the 
cocaine was discovered was reasonable. See Piska v. City 
of Stevens Point, Wis., 823 F.2d 1168, 1176 (7th Cir. 1987) 
(ten [10] minute stop reasonable); United States v. Davies, 
768 F.2d 893, 902 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1008 


21 


(1985) (forty-five [45] minute stop reasonable); United 
States v. Kapperman, 764 F.2d 786, 792 (11th Cir. 1985) (ten 
[10] minute stop reasonable). 


The next question to be addressed is whether the 
Fourth Amendment was violated by the law enforcement 
officers’ search of the Oldsmobile. The Fourth Amend- 
ment permits law enforcement officers to conduct a war- 
rantless search, without probable cause, if an authorized 
individual voluntarily consents to the search. Florida v. 
Jimeno, _. U.S. 111 S.Ct. 1801, 1803 (1991); Schneck- 
loth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 219 (1973). The burden is 
upon the government to demonstrate, by a prepon- 
derance of the evidence under the totality of the circum- 
stances, that consent is freely and voluntarily given. 
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 222-27. 


The record before the Court clearly establishes con- 
sent to search the Oldsmobile. Saul indicated the law 
enforcement officers could search the vehicle and neither 
defendant placed any restrictions on the areas the officers 
could search or, in the course of the search, asked them to 
stop. However, under United States v. Garcia, 897 F.2d 
1413, 1419-20 (7th Cir. 1990), police may not dismantle 
parts of a car body to search for hidden compartments 
when they have merely obtained permission to “look in 
the car” for illegal drugs. Unless the police have probable 
cause to believe the car contains drugs concealed in hid- 
den compartments, the opening of door panels is “inher- 
ently invasive and extends beyond consent given.” United 
States v. Garcia, 897 F.2d at 1420. Here, Luedke’s clear 
testimony was that rust within the groove of the head of 
the Phillips screw holding the plastic vent cover in place 
caused him to believe it had been removed and drugs 


22 


were concealed within the door panel. But, the screw 
itself belies this testimony. The record discloses no evi- 
dence from which Luedke could conclude that a hidden 
panel contained contraband. Consequently, the Court 
finds there was not probable cause to dismantle the 
panel. 


Even though the search was beyond the scope of the 
consent and was not justified by independent probable 
cause, the cocaine found will not be suppressed as evi- 
dence under the inevitable discovery exception to the 
Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule of Nix v. Williams, 
467 U.S. 431, 433 (1984), which holds if the prosecution 
can establish by a preponderance of evidence that the 
vidence ultimately or inevitably would have been dis- 
covered by lawful means, even if no violation of any 
constitutional provision had taken place, then the evi- 
dence should be received. The stated rationale for the 
doctrine is that the interest of society in deterring unlaw- 
ful police conduct and the public interest in having juries 
receive all probative evidence of a crime are properly 
balanced by putting the police in the same, not a worse 
position, than they would have been if no police error or 
misconduct had occurred in those circumstances where 
evidence would have been discovered independent of a 
constitutional violation. Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. at 444. 
The court further stated that, under this doctrine, the 
prosecution is not required to prove the absence of bad 
faith as such a requirement would result in withholding 
from juries relevant and undoubted truth that would 
have been available to police absent any unlawful police 
activity. Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. at 445. 


23 


This Court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
that regardless of the government's good or bad faith, the 
cocaine would have inevitably been discovered any way. 
This Court bases its conclusion upon the inevitability of a 
canine sniff of the Oldsmobile which does not compro- 
mise any legitimate interest in privacy and, therefore, is 
not a Fourth Amendment search. See United States v. 
Vasquez, 909 F.2d 235, 238 (7th Cir. 1990) (citing cases). 
Luedke’s trained drug detection dog was waiting at the 
scene in his vehicle. Clearly, the defendants would not be 
allowed to depart from the Suburban Motel without their 
vehicle being “sniffed” if cocaine was not otherwise dis- 
covered. See United States v. Buchanan, 910 F.2d 1571 (7th 


Cir. 1990). 


The final issue to be addressed is the admissibility of 
the statements obtained from Saul and Ismeal. The gov- 
ernment has indicated it does not intend to introduce into 
evidence any statements made by Saul as a part of its case 
in chief. Thus, the sole issue as to Saul is the voluntari- 
ness of his statements under Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 
412 U.S. 218, 227 (1973), in the event the government 
intends to introduce his statement for impeachment pur- 
poses. 


In Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 226 (1973), 
the United States Supreme Court detailed the factors to 
be considered when evaluating whether a defendant's 
“will was overborne” in the giving of statements: 


[T]he Court has assessed the totality of all the 
surrounding circumstances - both the charac- 
teristics of the accused and the details of the 
interrogation. Some of the factors taken into 
account include the youth of the accused, his 


24 


lack of education, or his low intelligence, the 
lack of any advise to the accused of his constitu- 
tional rights, the length of detention, the 
repeated and prolonged nature of the question- 
ing, and the use of physical punishment such as 
the use of physical punishment such as the 
deprivation of food or sleep. 


(Citations omitted.) Although Hurrle told Saul he would 
bring any cooperation on his part of the attention of 
prosecutors and/or the Court, there is no prohibition on 
the buying of information with honest promises of con- 
sideration. See United States v. Rutledge, 900 F.2d 1127, 
1130 (7th Cir.), cert. denied. US. __, 111 S.Ct. 203 
(1990). The police are allowed to play on a suspect's 
ignorance, his anxieties, his fears, and his uncertainties; 
they are just not allowed to magnify those fears, uncer- 
tainties, and so forth to the point where rational decision 
becomes impossible. See United States v. Rutledge, 900 F.2d 
at 1130 (7th Cir.); United States v. Harris, 914 F.2d 927, 933 
(7th Cir. 1990). There is no evidence the statement 
obtained from Saul was the result of his will being over- 
borne. Thus, there is no basis for suppression of the 
statements of Saul. 


Nor is there any basis for suppression of the state- 
ments obtained from Ismeal. Ismeal was advised of his 
constitutional rights, pursuant to Miranda v. Arizona, 384 
U.S. 436 (1966) and made a knowing and intelligent 
waiver of those rights as required by Moran v. Turbine, 475 
U.S. 412 (1986). The record does not disclose that the 
statements which Ismeal seeks to suppress were obtained 
by overbearing his will. See Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 
U.S. 218, 226 (1973). 


25 


In this case, Ismeal made a knowing and intelligent 
decision to cooperate with law enforcement authorities 
and to provide them with certain information. Although 
Ismeal was told that any cooperation on his part would 
be brought to the attention of prosecutors and/or the 
Court, there is no evidence this representation overbore 
his free will. Since Miranda and its progeny are designed 
to protect criminal defendants from coercive police tactics 
which would produce involuntary confessions, they 
afford no protections to criminal defendants who, of their 
own volition, decide to make statements and otherwise 
cooperate with authorities. 


In sum, this Court concludes no Fourth Amendment 
violation occurred when law enforcement officers 
stopped Saul and Ismeal. Furthermore, although the 
search of the Oldsmobile exceeded the scope of the con- 
sensual search, the cocaine would have been inevitably 
discovered and, therefore, is not subject to suppression. 
Finally, Ismeal’s statements were not obtained in viola- 
tion of his constitutional rights and Saul’s statement was 
voluntary. Accordingly, this Court will recommend the 
defendants’ motions to suppress evidence and statements 
be denied. 


SAUL’S MOTION FOR SEVERANCE 


Saul moves the Court for issuance of an order, pur- 
suant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 14, severing his trial from that of 
Ismeal relying upon Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123 
(1968) which holds admission of a codefendant’s confes- 
sion at a joint trial where the codefendant does not testify 
and, therefore, cannot be cross-examined, violates a 


26 


defendant's Sixth Amendment right to confrontation. In 
the alternative, Saul seeks dismissal of the indictment. 


In response the government indicates it has con- 
cluded it is not possible to redact Ismeal’s confession to 
delete reference to Saul in a manner which does not still 
clearly implicate Saul. Consequently, the government 
concedes severance of the defendants’ trials is necessary. 
Accordingly, Saul’s motion for severance will be granted. 


CONCLUSION 


NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY RECOM- 
MENDED that the United States District Judge enter an 
order DENYING defendant Saul Ornelas’ motion to sup- 
press and exclude physical evidence; 


IT IS FURTHER RECOMMENDED that the United 
States District Judge enter an order DENYING defendant 
Saul Ornelas’ motion to suppress statements; 


IT IS ALSO RECOMMEDED that the United States 
District Judge enter an order DENYING defendant 
Ismeal Ledesma Ornelas’ motion to suppress seizure of 
items from the 1981 Oldsmobile and the statements of the 
defendant; and, 


IT IS ORDERED that defendant Saul Ornelas’ 
motion for severance be and hereby is DENIED. 


Written objections to the foregoing recommendations 
and orders may be filed in duplicate with the Clerk of 
Court on or before February 19, 1993 at 8:30 a.m. Failure 
to file a timely objection shall result in a waiver to your 
right to appeal. 


27 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin this 12th day of Feb- 
ruary, 1993. 
BY THE COURT: 


/s/ Robert I. Bittner 
ROBERT L. BITTNER 


United States Magistrate 
Judge 


28 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


-Vs- Case No. 92-CR-243 


ISMEAL ORNELAS LEDESMA and 
SAUL ORNELAS, 
Defendants. 


DECISION AND ORDER 
(MAR - 9 1993) 


This matter comes before the Court on objections 
filed by the defendants, Ismeal Ornelas Ledesma 
(“Ismeal”) and Saul Ornelas (“Saul”), to the Recommen- 
dations issued by Magistrate Judge Robert L. Bittner 
denying defendants’ motion to suppress certain state- 
ments and physical evidence. For the following reasons, 
defendants’ objections are overruled and the Magistrate's 
Recommendation is affirmed, although the Recommenda- 
tion as to the suppression of physical evidence is affirmed 
on grounds somewhat different than these expressed by 
Magistrate Bittner. 


Magistrate Bittner’s Recommendation thoroughly 
explains the nature of the case and his corresponding 
findings of fact, which the Court incorporates here by this 
reference. In the interests of brevity, and having read the 
parties’ initial briefs before the Magistrate and subse- 
quent written objections, the Court summarily affirms the 
Magistrate’s recommendations regarding (1) the finding 


29 


of reasonable suspicion for a Terry-stop; (2) the finding of 
consent for the vehicle search; and (3) the denial of both 
defendants’ motions to suppress their post-arrest state- 
ments. With respect to the foregoing issues the Court 
simply adopts the reasoning contained in Magistrate Bit- 
tner s Recommendation, along with the factual findings 
he relied upon in reaching those conclusions.' Thus, the 
only question remaining is whether the cocaine seized 


With one exception (the question whether Officer 
Luedke’s gun was visible as he approached the defendants’ 
vehicle the parties agree that it was not), none of the parties 
attack the basic accuracy of the facts as found by Magistrate 
Bittner, although both defendants dispute the legal conclusions 
reached by the Magistrate based on those facts. For example, 
defendant Ismeal points to several facts which he feels are 
important to the issues but which the Magistrate did not 
address, and also disputes the Magistrates’s characterizations 
of some of the underlying testimony and evidence. (Ismeal’s 
Objection at 2-10.) Defendant Saul does the same, particularly 
with respect to the decision on the motion to suppress his post- 
arrest statements. (Saul Objection at 4-5), and then simply incor- 
porates the arguments and facts contained in his initial briefing, 
which are essentially the same facts and characterizations of 
testimony stressed by Ismeal in his objection. (Saul Objection at 
2.) The Court has taken into consideration the additional facts 
and differing characterizations raised by the defendants in 
these documents and finds that, even if true, they do not affect 
the Court’s decision to affirm Magistrate Bittner’s Recommen- 
dation on the three issues referenced above. The Court therefore 
adopts the Magistrate's factual findings as its own, with the 
exception of his finding that Officer Luedke’s gun was “visible 
but not drawn” as he approached the defendants’ vehicle. (Mag- 
istrate Recommendation at 5-6.) The Court, having read the 
ubjections of record and the transcript of Officer Luedke’s testi- 
mony, hereby finds that Officer Luedke’s gun was not visible as 
he approached the defendants’ vehicle. 


30 


from the defendants’ vehicle must be suppressed as the 
result of an invalid search. 


I. SUPPRESSION OF PHYSICAL EVIDENCE. 


Magistrate Bittner found that removing the door 
panel to find the cocaine at issue was a search that went 
outside the scope of the defendants’ initial consent to 
search the vehicle, and further that the search could not 
be justified on grounds of probable cause. (Magistrate 
Recommendation at 15.) The Magistrate nonetheless 
denied the motions to suppress on grounds of inevitable 
discovery, finding that the police had a sniffer dog pre- 
sent at the scene which would have been used by the 
officers to find the cocaine if their own search proved 
unsuccessful. (Id. at 16.) The Court does not reject the 
Magistrate's holding regarding inevitable discovery?, but 


Under the doctrine of inevitable discovery, evidence 
obtained by unlawful means will not be excluded if the 
tion can establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
same information inevitably would have been discovered by 
alternate lawful means which the police were actively pursuing 
prior to the misconduct. See generally, Nix u Williams, 467 US. 
431 (1984). Here, the Magistrate found, and this Court concurs, 
that the officers had summoned a sniffer dog and dog handler to 
the scene prior to the search, and that the officers would have 
used the dog if the search had not proved successful. (Magis- 
trate Recommendation at 16-17.) The Magistrate also found that 
a canine sniff would have found the cocaine at issue. (Id.) The 
defendants now object to this latter finding, arguing that there 
was no evidence submitted during the suppression hearing 
regarding the reliability of canine sniffs in general, or of sniffs 
by this dog in particular. (Saul’s Objection at 2-3; Ismeal’s Objec- 
tion at 15-16.) The Magistrate apparently did not consider this 
question, perhaps because neither defendant raised the issue in 


31 


finds that holding unnecessary in view of the Court's 
belief that the facts found by Magistrate Bittner establish 
probable cause to remove the door panel at issue and 
search the compartment behind it. 


The United States Supreme Court has cautioned 
lower courts not to become too technical or mechanical in 
their probable cause determinations: 


As the Court frequently has remarked, 
le cause is a flexible, common-sense stan- 
dard. It merely requires that the facts available 
to the officer would “warrant a man of reason- 
able caution in the belief” . that certain items 
may be contraband or stolen property or useful 
as evidence of a crime; it does not demand any 
showing that such a belief be correct or more 
likely true than false. A “practical, nontechni- 
cal” probability that incriminating evidence is 
involved is all that is required. . “The process 
does not deal with hard certainties, but with 
probabilities. Long before the law of proba- 
bilities was articulated as such, practical people 
formulated certain common-sense conclusions 
about human behavior; jurors as factfinders are 
permitted to do the same - and so are law 
enforcement officers. Finally, the evidence thus 
collected must be seen and weighed not in terms 
of library analysis by scholars, but as under- 
stood by those versed in the field of law 
enforcement.” 


their post-hearing briefs, or perhaps because both defendants’ 


briefs seemed to admit the same by stating that “[djogs have 
been trained to sniff the exterior of cars and do react or alert to 
cocaine hidden in car bodies and in trunks.” (See Saul’s Brief at 
19; Ismeal’s Brief at 25-26.) 


32 


Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 742 (1983). (Citations omit- 
ted.) 


The Seventh Circuit requires the same flexibility. 
“Probable cause exists if the facts and circumstances 
within [the officers’] knowledge and of which they had 
reasonable trustworthy information [are] sufficient in 
themselves to warrant a man of reasonable caution in the 
belief that an item subject to seizure will be found in the 
place to be searched.” United States v Garza-Hernandez, 
623 F.2d 496, 499 (7th Cir. 1980). “Probable cause is thus 
more than bare suspicion, but less than virtual certainty.” 
Id. “As the term itself implies, probable cause exists if the 
probability is that the thing sought is in the place to be 
searched; probabilities are to be assessed in the light of 
practical experience and the practical inferences to be 
drawn from known or reliable facts.” Id. “Government 
agents are entitled to reasonably rely on their special 
knowledge and expertise in assessing probabilities and 
drawing inferences.” Id. 


In cases involving a vehicle search, “[p]robable cause 
exists when the facts and circumstances would lead a 
reasonably prudent person to believe that the vehicle 
contains contraband.” United States v. Strickland, 902 F.2d 
937, 942 (11th Cir. 1990). “The facts and circumstances 
upon which a finding of probable cause is based include 
“the sum total . and the synthesis of what the police 
have heard, what they know, and what they observe as 
trained officers.” Id., at 942-43. Moreover, in cases involv- 
ing a Terry-stop based upon reasonable suspicion, infor- 
mation gathered after the stop may be added to 
information gathered before the stop for purposes of 
determining whether there is probable cause, and as such 


33 


the reasonable suspicion relied upon in making the stop 
may ripen into probable cause to search. See generally, 
United States v. Van Lewis, 409 F. Supp. 535, 542 (E.D. 
Mich. 1976); United States v. Avalos-Ochoa, 557 F.2d 1299, 
1303 (9th Cir. 1977). 


The Magistrate’s decision on the probable cause issue 
focused upon the accuracy of one fact, ie, whether Offi- 
cer Luedke was correct in his belief that a screw attaching 
the air vent to the door panel was rusted, giving rise to 
his belief that the panel had been recently removed. After 
the screw was produced and the parties stipulated to the 
fact that it was not rusted, the Magistrate ruled that there 
was no probable cause to search because “[t}he record 
disclose[d] no evidence from which Luedke could con- 
clude that a hidden panel contained contraband.” (Magis- 
trate Recommendation at 15.) 


The Magistrate’s ruling would appear to run contrary 
to his own factual findings, and in any event does not 
consider the totality of the circumstances leading up to 
the removal and search of the door panel. The defendants 
and their car were singled out during a routine survey of 
motels conducted for the express purpose of looking for 
drug trafficking activity. (Magistrate Recommendation at 
3.) The vehicle involved was a 1981 two (2) door Old- 
smobile, an older GM model which is often used by drug 
traffickers to conceal contraband. (Id.) The car had Cali- 
fornia license plates, and its owner was listed as residing 
in California, a source state for controlled substances. 
(Id.) There were two individuals travelling together in the 
car, and they had checked into the motel at four o clock in 
the morning, without reservations. (Id.) By itself this 
“drug courier profile”, as the defendants call it, may not 


34 


constitute reasonable suspicion or probable cause. But 
then two NADDIS checks were run on the names of the 
car owner and the individual listed in the motel's regis- 
try, and both names turned up hits on known drug 
dealers“ (Id. at 4.) These hits, combined with the drug 
courier profile, clearly gave rise to a reasonable suspicion 
that drug trafficking activity was afoot and that the vehi- 
cle contained contraband of some kind. This reasonable 
suspicion became probable cause when Officer Luedke 
found that the right rear door panel of the car was loose, 
leading him to suspect that the panel had been removed 
and that contraband was hidden inside. (Id. at 6-7; Tran- 
script of Off. Luedke’s Testimony at 15-16.) 


Much has been made of the fact that there appeared to be 
some minor discrepancies between the names and addresses of 
the individuals who turned up on the NADDIS check, and the 
names which the officers had actually obtained during their 
investigation. For instance, the name on the motel registry was 
“Ismeal Ornelas”, and Ismeal’s drivers license, which he pro- 
duced prior to the search, indicated that he lived in California. 
The NADDIS hit, however, was for an individual named 
“Ismeal Ornelas, It.“, who was listed as being a resident of 
Arizona. Similarly, defendants allege that the proper Hispanic 
translation of the name given to the officer as the owner of the 
vehicle was Miguel Ornelas-Ledesma, whose residence was lis- 
ted as San Jose, California. The NADDIS hit was for a Mieuel 
Ledesma-Ornelas, whose residence was listed as El Centro, ¢ al- 
ifornia. Focusing on these discrepancies as a basis for defeating 
probable cause introduces requirements of certainty and abso- 
lute correctness into the analysis that were expressly proscribed 
by the Supreme Court in Texas v. Brown. It also ignores the fact 
that drug traffickers may be highly mobile, that the names at 
issue are virtually identical, that the names are associated with 
individuals fitting a drug courier profile, and that the names are 
further associated with a vehicle containing a loose door panel. 


35 


Thus, considering the totality of the circumstances, 
including the drug courier profile, the two NADDIS hits, 
and the lose door panel, this Court finds that an officer of 
reasonable caution would be justified in the belief that 
contraband would be found behind the right rear door 
panel.“ This conclusion is further supported by decisions 
from the Seventh Circuit finding that the amount of prob- 
able cause necessary for the police to do something, such 
as conduct a search, “depends on how deeply they invade 
the zone of privacy”, United States v. Concepcion, 942 F.2d 
1170, 1173 (7th Cir. 1991), and that “the reasonable expec- 
tation of privacy that persons may have in their autos is 
usually of a lesser magnitude than privacy expectations 
that inhere in other types of property.” Garza-Hernandez, 
623 F.2d at 500. Given this lower expectation of privacy, 
and the confluence of the above facts and circumstances, 
the officers clearly had probable cause to remove the door 
panel.“ 


* The fact that the screw holding the air vent to the door 
panel was not rusted, as Officer Luedke had testified, does not 
destroy probable cause. According to his own testimony, 
Luedke already had reason to believe the panel had been 
removed, and contraband hidden inside, by virtue of the fact 
that the panel was loose. (Luedke Transcript at 15-16; Magistrate 
Recommendation at 6-7.) 


° Of course, the above analysis only resolves the probable 
cause issue, which is only half of the analysis under the Fourth 
Amendment. Even with probable cause, officers must first 
obtain a warrant to search, unless the circumstances fall within 
one of the exceptions to the warrant requirement. Here, the 
exception is obvious, i.e., the “automobile exception”. The 
“automobile exception” allows the warrantless search of a vehi- 
cle where probable cause exists to believe that the vehicle con- 
tains contraband or evidence of criminal activity. United States v. 


36 


NOW THEREFORE, BASED ON THE FOREGO- 
ING, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT: 


1. The defendants’ objections to the Magistrate's 
Recommendation are overruled, and the defendants’ 
motions to suppress certain post-arrest statements and 
physical evidence are denied; and 


2. No objection being taken to the Magistrate’s 
Order granting Defendant Saul Ornelas’ motion for sever- 
ance®, the same is affirmed. 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, this 9th day of 
March, 1993. 


SO ORDERED, 


/s/ Rudolph T. Randa 
HON. RUDOLPH T. RANDA 
U.S. District Judge 


McGuire, 957 F.2d 310, 314 (7th Cir. 1992). The exception is 
justified by the vehicle’s ready mobility and the lesser expecta- 
tion of privacy people have in their automobiles. United States v. 
Gallman, 907 F.2d 639, 641 (7th Cir. 1990). 


6 As Defendant Saul Ornelas correctly points out, the Mag- 
istrate’s Order contains a typographical error on the last page, 
which states that the defendant’s motion for severance was 
“denied” rather than “granted”. The analysis contained on the 
page preceding the type makes it clear that Magistrate Bittner 
was granting the motion, not denying it, and that the statement 
on the following page was in error. 


37 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff, 


Case #92-CR-243 
VS. 


ISMAEL ORNELAS LEDESMA, and 
SAUL ORNELAS, 
Defendants. 


MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION AND 
INSPECTION OV AUTOMOBILE 


(Filed Mar. 11, 1993) 


This court in its Decision and Order of March 9, 1993, 
received at the Law Offices of Brian Gleason on March 11, 
1993 makes a determination that there existed probable 
cause to believe that drugs were hidden inside the car's 
body on the basis of testimony on the part of detective 
Luedke that the, “right rear door panel of the car was 
loose, leading him to suspect that the panel had been 
removed and that contraband was hidden inside.” 


Luedke’s testimony, at 16, was as follows: 
Q.- What, if anything, did you discover when 
you were physically inspecting the inside panel? 


A.— I discovered that a portion of that panel 
approximately ten inches by six inches appeared 
to be or didn’t appear but physically felt like it 
was somewhat loose. 


Q. Based upon your training and experience, 
what if anything did that mean to you? 


38 


A I considered it was a possibility that that 
panel had been removed and there could be 
something concealed in that area. 


The magistrate’s finding of fact at 6, states in relevant 
part, “[H]e examined the right rear quarter panel near the 
handle. He found this panel to be loose. Based upon his 
training, Luedke suspected the panel had been removed 
and contraband was hidden inside. Luedke testified he 
then observed the vent area of the door, noticing the 
presence of rust in the groove of the Phillips screw used 
to attach the vent cover, which led him to believe the vent 
cover had been removed.” 


It is clear that in this portion of the opinion the 
magistrate is merely reciting the testimony, not adopting 
the testimony as a clear finding. We know this because in 
his “Analysis” section, beginning at page 10, the magis- 
trate sifts through the testimony and attaches credibility 
determinations. 


As to the testimony of Luedke, concerning the rusty 
screw head, the magistrate states at 15, “Here, Luedke’s 
clear testimony was that rust within the groove of the 
head of the Phillips screw holding the plastic vent cover 
in place caused him to believe it had been removed and 
drugs were concealed within the door panel. But, the 
screw itself belies this testimony. The record discloses no 
evidence from which Luedke could conclude that a hid- 
den panel contained contraband. Consequently, the Court 
finds there was not probable cause to dismantle the 
panel.” 


The magistrate earlier referenced the testimony about 
the door panel being loose, and later makes a finding that 


39 


there was “no evidence from which Luedke could con- 
clude ...” It is obvious that the magistrate similarly made 
a credibility determination concerning Luedke’s testimony 
about the panel being, “somewhat loose.” Tr. at 16. 


Prior to the magistrate’s decision and after the “rusty 
screw being produced in court, on February 5, 1993 attor- 
ney Robert LeBell, counsel for Saul Ornelas was finally 
permitted access to the car. The government had canceled 
an earlier request. As stated in Ismael Ormelas Ledesma’s 
Brief in Support of Motion to Suppress Statements and 
Items Seized from the Automobile, dated February 6, 
1993, Mr. LeBell “was able to examine the car’s interior, 
the area in question felt the same as the equivalent area 
on the driver’s side and felt no different that he would 
expect it to feel given the composition of the material. 


“If the government asserts that probable cause exists 
to search the interior of the car‘s body based on this 
earlier testimony of detective Luedke, this counsel would 
request the government produce the car in the Marshal’s 
garage, which is a part of the federal court house, for the 
purpose of the magistrate judge and/or his law clerk 
personally inspecting the alleged “loose” area and again 
making a record of the findings.” 


The government's brief of February 9, 1993, at 11, 
makes the argument that the panel was loose and “this 
was sufficient probable cause to allow the officer to 
remove the vent cover to look inside the area.” 


The magistrate was faced by testimony of Luedke 
concerning the rusty screw which he knew to be a lie and 
counsel's assertions that the panel not being loose and 
an invitation to bring the car to the courthouse. His 


40 


credibility determination that “The record discloses no 
evidence from which Luedke could conclude that a hid- 
den panel contains contraband” has now been rejected by 
this court. 


Given that this court determination that the reason- 
able suspicion outlined by the alleged drug courier pro- 
file only ripened into probable cause to search the 
interior of car’s body by virtue of adopting Luedke’s 
testimony that the panel in question was in fact “loose,” 
both counsel would move that the auto in question be 
brought to the Marshal’s garage and that this court or his 
law clerk and all parties jointly inspect the car to make a 
record as to the panel. 


All parties had done a similar inspection in the mag- 
istrate’s chambers concerning the screw, which dramati- 
cally changed the court’s opinion concerning the 
detective’s credibility. Given Mr. LeBell’s assertion con- 
cerning his earlier inspection, the interests of justice 
require such a joint examination for the purpose of estab- 
lishing a firm record on this critical fact. 


Dated at Milwaukee, WI this 11th day of March, 1993. 


/s/ Robert G. LeBell 
Robert U. LeBell, Counsel for Saul Ornelas 
250 E. Wisconsin Ave. Suite 1900 
Milwaukee, WI 53203 
414-276-1233 


/s/ Brian W. Gleason 
Brian W. Gleason, Counsel for 
Ismael Ornelas Ledesma 
230 W. Wells St. Suite 702 
Milwaukee, WI 53203 
414-277-5076 


41 
Docket # 48-Transcript of 3-11-93, pages 2-5, Eastern Dis- 
trict of Wisconsin. 


Title omitted in printing. 


TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS 


[2] THE CLERK: Case No. 92-CR-243, United States 
versus Saul Ornelas. Called for a change of plea. May I 
have the appearances, please? 


MS. FLEMING: Good afternoon, Your Honor. 
Penelope Fleming, Assistant United States Attorney, 
appearing on behalf of the Government. Also seated at 
counsel table is Lisa Cichocki from Probation and Parole. 


MR. LEBELL: Good afternoon, Judge. Attorney 
Robert LeBell appearing on behalf of Saul Ornelas, and 
also Connie Ward is here as a translator. 


THE COURT: Okay. We will swear the inter- 
preter. 


(Whereupon the Interpreter, Connie Ward, was 
sworn in.) 


THE COURT: Okay. This case is here as is the 
case of the co-defendant after this case, at 3 o'clock, for 
purposes of taking of a plea pursuant to Plea Agreement 
reached before the Court came out; however, it was 
served and I take it the Government was served with a 
motion for reconsideration. It’s titled Motion for Recon- 
sideration and Inspection of Automobile. Has the Gov- 
ernment been served? 


MS. FLEMING: Your Honor, I have -I received 
a copy a few minutes ago. 


42 


THE COURT: All right. And the motion request 
[3] that the court reconsider what it decided in the review 
de novo, review of the Magistrate’s decision relative to a 
variety of motions that were filed and heard prior to their 
appearance and the Court summarily affirmed the Magis- 
trate’s recommendations relative to the finding of reason- 
able suspicion for a temporary stop, the finding of 
consent for the vehicle search, the denial of Defendant's 
motion to suppress or post arrest statement, and the 
question upon which the reconsideration is based is the 
one involving whether the cocaine seized from the Defen- 
dant’s vehicle would or should have been suppressed as 
a resuit of invalid search. 


The Court conducted its analysis and in that analysis 
did not reject the Magistrate’s holding regarding the fact 
that, through the doctrine of inevitable discovery, that the 
cocaine in question - that which was seized - would have 
been discovered in any event, but went on to find that 
based on the totality of the circumstances and its reason- 
ing outlined in its decision, that the search could be 
validated and was validated on other considerations. 


Motion for reconsideration is one which highlights 
the fact that the - this Court in its de novo review relied 
upon the testimony of Officer Luedtke who said at one 
point that he felt - physically felt a loose panel. And that 
the argument is that Judge Bittner in ruling on officer 
Luedtke’s testimony found that there was nothing in the 
[4] records and this was at page fifteen of Magistrate 
Bittner’s ruling and page five of the Court’s ruling - 
where the Magistrate said that there was no probable 
cause to search because “the records disclosed no evi- 
dence from which Luedtke could conclude that a hidden 


43 


panel contained contraband.” The Court is asked that its 
decision based upon Luedtke’s testimony and factoring 
that into the totality of the circumstances is one which 
should be reversed because it disregards Magistrate Bit- 
tner’s findings. The Court doesn’t deem it to be that. The 
the Court finds that it can and did rely upon what Officer 
Luedtke stated. The fact that there has been a request in 
this motion for reconsideration for an inspection of the 
automobile by the Court and counsels - Mr. LeBell hav- 
ing done so and found that his inspection disclosed that 
there wasn’t the loose panel, or that none of the panels 
or that the particular panel, the specific panel, that was 
testified to by Officer Luedtke as being loose was not 
loose and not apparently somewhat loose upon being 
physically felt. That examination the Court finds is not 
necessary because regardless of what the Court would 
find at the- any subsequent inspection, the fact of the 
matter is that the records reviewed by the Court and 
testimony of Officer Luedtke is one which discloses that 
in his estimation and his opinion and by his calculation 
and his view and his belief When as he testified he felt 
the panel or observed the panel and engaged the panel, 
that it appeared, [5] quote, to be or didn’t appear but 
physically felt like it was somewhat loose, close quote. 


In addition, —- so the Court's not going to reconsider 
its judgment. It’s put that on the record as an explanation 
as to why, one, but two, the Court in its decision and 
order indicated that it was sustaining as it indicated on 
page three of its decision and order that it does not 
reject the Magistrate 's holding regarding the inevitable 
discovery but finds that holding unnecessary in view of 
the Court's belief as just indicated. And the Court in a 


44 


footnote to that decision I think explains thoroughly and 
carefully the reason why it’s not going to disturb that. 
That fact that that holding - the fact that the Court found 
it unnecessary in view of its other decision certainly finds 
that there is a basic for this case to proceed at this 
juncture on the guilty pleas. So for those reasons we will 
proceed to the taking of the guilty pleas. 


Now, in that connection, the Court has a Plea Agree- 
ment which was signed by Mr. Ornelas, Mr. LeBell, Mr. 
Fryatt, the U.S. Attorney, and Miss Fleming. And the 
Court will have Mr. Ornelas sworn at this time. Mr. 
Ornelas, would you please raise your right hand? 


THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 


SAUL ORNELAS, having been first duly sworn, 
on oath testified as follows: 


THE COURT: Now, Mr. Ornelas, you have been 


45 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
Eastern District of Wisconsin 
(Filed May 21, 1993) 


UNITED STATES JUDGMENT IN A 
OF AMERICA CRIMINAL CASE 
vs. (For Offenses Committed On 
ISMAEL ORNELAS. or After November 1, 1987) 
LEDESMA Case Number: 92-CR-243 
Brian W. Gleason 
t's Attorney 


Penelope C. Fleming _ 
Assistant US. Attorney 


THE DEFENDANT: 

[x] pleaded guilty to count one 

[ ] was found guilty on count(s) after a plea of not 
guilty. 


Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such 
count(s), which involve the following offenses: 


Title & Nature of Date Offense Count 
Section Offense Concluded Number(s) 
21 USC. possession December 1 


§§ 841(a)(1) with intent 11, 1992 
18 U.S.C. s 2 to distribute 
cocaine 


The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 
through 5 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed 
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 


46 


mme defendant has been found not guilty on count(s) 
and is discharged as to such count(s). 


Count — is dismissed on the motion of the United 
States. 


[x] It is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special 
assessment of $ 50.00 for count One which shall be 
due [] immediately [x] as follows: prior to the expi- 
ration of this sentence 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall 
notify the United States Attorney for the district within 
30 days of any change of name, residence, or mailing 
address until all fines restitution, costs, and special 
assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 


Defendant's Soc. Sec. No. May 20, 1993 
612-46-6929 & 564-77-1676 Date of Imposition 


of Sentence 
Defendant's Date of Birth: 
October 14, 1968 /s/ Rudolph T. Randa 
Signatu udicial 
Defendant's Mailing Address: — ä 
Racine County Jail Hon. Rudolph T. Randa 
717 Wisconsin Avenue US. District Judge 
Defendant's kesiden Judicial Officer 
Address: 5/21/93 
Date 
IMPRISONMENT 


The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of 
ö ˙— 0 
a term of 60 months 


47 


[x] The court makes the following recommendations to 
the Bureau of Prisons: that the defendant serve his 
sentence at a facility near San Jose, California 


[x] The defendant is remanded to the custody of the 
United States Marshal. 


J The defendant shall surrender to the United States 
Marshal for this district. 


a.m. 
at p.m. on 
as notified by the United States Marshal. 


the defendant shall surrender for service of sentence 
at the institution designated by the Bureau of 
Prisons, 


fore 2 p.m. on 
notified by the United States Marshal. 
ified by the probation office. 


RETURN 
I have executed this judgment as follows: 


with a certified copy this judgment. 


Defendant delivered on to at 


United States Marshal 
By 


Deputy Marshal 


48 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
Eastern District of Wisconsin 
(Filed Jun. 11, 1993) 


UNITED STATES AMENDED 
OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A 
ve. CRIMINAL CASE 


SAUL ORNELAS (For Offenses Committed On or 
After November 1, 1987) 


Case Number: 92-CR-243 
Robert G. LeBell 
Defendant’s Attorney 


Penelope C. Fleming 
Assistant U.S. Attorney 


THE DEFENDANT: 
[x] pleaded guilty to count one 


! was found guilty on count(s) after a plea of not 
guilty. 


Accordingly, the defendant is adjudged guilty of such 
count(s), which involve the following offenses: 


Title & Nature of Date Offense Count 
Section Offense Concluded Number(s) 
21 U.S.C. possession December 1 


§§ 841(a)(1) with intent 11, 1992 
18 U.S.C. § 2 to distribute 
cocaine 


The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 
through 6 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed 
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. 


49 


[ ] The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s) 
and is discharged as to such count(s). 


Count — is dismissed on the motion of the United 
States. 


[x] It is ordered that the defendant shall pay a special 
assessment of $ 50.00 for count One which shall be 
due [ ] immediately [x] as follows: prior to the expi- 
ration of this sentence 


IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall 
notify the United States Attorney for the district within 
30 days of any change of name, residence, or mailing 
address until all fines restitution, costs, and special 
assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. 


Defendant's Soc. Sec. No. May 28, 1993 
393-02-2916 Date of Imposition 
f 
Defendant's Date of Birth: ames 
June 28, 1968 /s/ Rudolph T. Randa 
Signature of Judicial 
Defendant's Mailing Address: "Dencer — 


Hon. Rudolph T. Randa 


U.S. District Judge 
Name Til e 


Defendant's Residence judicial Officer 
Address: 
pros fi 6/11/93 
Begonia Street Date 
caster, California N 
IMPRISONMENT 


The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of 
the United States Bureau of Prison to be imprisoned for a 
term of 63 months 8 


50 


[x] The court makes the following recommendations to 
the Bureau of Prisons: that the defendant serve his 
sentence at Lompoc, California 


[x] The defendant is remanded to the custody of the 
United States Marshal. 


{ ] The defendant shall surrender to the United States 
Marshai for this district. 


a.m. 
at p. m. on 
[ ] as notified by the United States Marshal. 


The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence 
at the institution designated by the Bureau of 
Prisons, 


before 2 p.m. on 
6] as notified by the United States Marshal. 
| ] as notified by the probation office. 


RETURN 


I have executed this judgment as follows: 


Defendant delivered on to at ; 
with a certified copy this judgment. 


United States Marshal 
By 


Deputy Marshal 


51 


SUPERVISED RELEASE 


Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall 
be on supervised release for a term of four (4) years . 


While on supervised release, the defendant shall not 
commit another federal, state, or local crime and shall not 
illegally possess a controlled substance. The defendant 
shall comply with the standard conditions that have been 
adopted by this court (set forth below). If this judgment 
imposes a restitution obligation, it shall be a condition of 
supervised release that the defendant pay any such resti- 
tution that remains unpaid at the commencement of the 
term of supervised release. The defendant shall comply 
with the following additional conditions: 


[x] The defendant shall report in person to the proba- 
tion office in the district to which the defendant is 
released within 72 hours of release from the custody of 
the Bureau of Prisons. 


[ ] The defendant shall pay any fines that remain 
unpaid at the commencement of the term of supervised 
release. 


[x] The defendant shall not possess a firearm or destruc- 
tive device. 


[x] Pursuant to the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, the 
defendant shall not illegally possess any controlled sub- 
stance. Such possession will result in revocation of the 
supervised release term and the defendant shall serve 
one-third of the term of supervised release in prison. 


[x] The defendant is to cooperate with the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service at the direction of the proba- 
tion officer. 


52 


STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION 


While the defendant is on supervised release pur- 


suant to this judgment, the defendant shall not commit 
another federal, state or local crime. In addition: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


6) 


7) 


8) 


9) 


the defendant shall not leave the judicial district 
without permission of the court or probation officer; 


the defendant shall report to the probation officer as 
directed by the court or probation officer and shall 
submit a truthful and complete written report within 
the first five days of each month; 


The defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries 
by the probation officer and follow the instructions 
of the probation officer; 


the defendant shall support his or her dependents 
and meet other family responsibilities; 


the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occu- 
pation unless excused by the probation officer for 
schooling, training, or other acceptable reasons; 


the defendant shall notify the probation officer 
within 72 hours of any change in residence or 
employment; 


the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of 
alcohol and shall not purchase, possess, use, distrib- 
ute, or administer any narcotic or other controlled 
substance, or any paraphernalia related to such sub- 
stances, except as prescribed by a physician; 


the defendant shall not frequent places where con- 
trolled substances are illegally sold, used, distrib- 
uted, or administered; 


the defendant shall not associate with any persons 
engaged in criminal activity, and shall not associate 


10) 


11) 


12) 


13) 


[x] 


53 


with any person convicted of a felony unless 
granted permission to do so by the probation officer; 


the defendant shall permit a probation officer to 
visit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere 
and shall permit confiscation of any contraband 
observed in plain view by the probation officer; 


the defendant shall notify the probation officer 
within seventy-two hours of being arrested or ques- 
tioned by a law enforcement officer; 


the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to 
act as an informer or a special agent of a law 
enforcement agency without the permission of the 
court; 


as directed by the probation officer, the defendant 
shall notify third parties of risks that may be occa- 
sioned by the defendant's criminal record or per- 
sonal history or characteristics, and shall permit the 
probation officer to make such notification and to 
confirm the defendant's compliance with such noti- 
fication requirement. 


* * „ 


STATEMENT OF REASONS 
The court adopts the factual findings and guideline 
application in the presentence report. 
OR 


The court adopts the factual findings and guideline 
application in the presentence report except (see 
attachment, if necessary): 


54 


Guideline Range Determined by the Court: 


[x] 


Total Offense Level: 24 


Criminal History Category: 1 


Imprisonment Range: 51 to 63 months 
Supervised Release Range: 4 to 5 years 
Fine Range: $ 12,500.00 to $ 1,000,000.00 


[x] Fine is waived or is below the guideline 
range, because of the defendant's inability 


to pay. 
Restitution: $ 


] Full restitution is not ordered for the follow- 
ing reason(s): 


The sentence is within the guideline range, that 
range does not exceed 24 months, and the court 
finds no reason to depart from the sentence called 
for by the application of the guidelines. 


OR 


The sentence is within the guideline range, that 
range exceeds 24 months, and the sentence is 
imposed for the following reason(s): 


OR 


The sentence departs from the guideline range 


I upon motion of the government, as a result of 
defendant's substantial assistance. 


] for the following reasons: 


55 


UNITED STATES of America, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 


V. 


Ismael ORNELAS-LEDESMA and Saul Ornelas, 
Defendants-Appellants. 


Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405. 


United States Court of Appeals, 
Seventh Circuit. 


Argued Dec. 10, 1993. 
Decided Feb. 10, 1994. 


Before POSNER, Chief Judge, and FLAUM and 
MANION, Circuit Judges. . 


POSNER, Chief Judge. 


Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma and Saul Ornelas were con- 
victed of illegal possession of a controlled substance with 
intent to distribute it and were sentenced to 60 and 63 
months in prison, respectively. The appeal challenges the 
denial of their motion to exclude from evidence the 
cocaine seized from “their” 1981 Oldsmobile. We say 
“their” Oldsmobile, although it was registered to some- 
one else, because the government does not question their 
right, akin to that of a tenant, bailee, borrower, or other 
lawful occupier or possessor, to object to the seizure. The 
cases are quicker to draw the analogy in the case of the 
driver of a vehicle, United States v. Garcia, 897 F.2d 1413, 
1418-19 (7th Cir.1990); United States v. Soto, 988 F.2d 1548, 
1553 (10th Cir.1993); United States v. Miller, 821 F.2d 546, 
548-49 (11th Cir.1987), than in the case of a passenger, 
Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S. 128, 148-49, 99 S.Ct. 421, 433, 58 
L.Ed.2d 387 (1978); United States v. Lechuga, 925 F.2d 1035, 


56 


1037, 1041 n. 3 (7th Cir.1991); United States v. Roberson, 6 
F.3d 1088, 1091 (5th Cir.1993), but the government does 
not ask us to make that distinction here. 


The defendants argue that the stop which led to their 
consenting to the search of the car violated the Fourth 
Amendment, invalidating the consent and hence the 
search; and that independently of this the seizure of the 
drugs, which was from the inside of the door of the car, 


violated the Fourth Amendment because, even if a super- 


ficial search of the car was proper as an incident of the 
stop, the officers needed and lacked probable cause to 
open the compartment and seize its contents. 


Police officers in Milwaukee keep a regular watch on 
motels, looking for drug runners. Cruising through a 
motel parking lot one day in 1992, a detective named 
Pautz, a two-year veteran of the Milwaukee County Sher- 
ift's Drug Enforcement Unit, spotted a 1981 two-door 
Oldsmobile with a California license plate. Pautz was 
interested. Two-door General Motors cars of that vintage 
are believed by law enforcement authorities to be drug 
traffickers’ favorites (though not their only favorites, 
United States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675, 682 n. 3, 105 S.Ct. 
1568, 1573 n. 3, 84 L.Ed.2d 605 (1985); United States v. 
Ocampo, 890 F.2d 1363, 1366 (7th Cir.1989)) because it is 
easy to conceal drugs in them. And California, like other 
states on the eastern, western, and southern borders of 
the United States, is a state from which drugs are shipped 
to other states, a “source” state. So Pautz called up his 
dispatcher on his car radio and asked him to find out 
whom the car was registered to. Now in fact it was 
registered to “Ornelas, Miguel Ledesma,” of San Jose, 
California, who may or may not be related to one of the 


57 


defendants. But we do not know what exactly the dis- 
patcher told Pautz or what exactly Pautz understood - 
whether it was “Miguel Ledesma Ornelas” or “Miguel 
Ornelas Ledesma.” Confusion on this score is under- 
standable, though not justifiable. Spanish naming con- 
ventions are confusing to non-Hispanic Americans. When 
a Hispanic has two surnames, such as Ornelas Ledesma 
or Ledesma Ornelas, the first is his father’s last name and 
the second his mother’s maiden name. The first is pri- 
mary, and the second subordinate - exactly the reverse of 
the middle and last names of non-Hispanics. To a His- 
panic, therefore, “Ornelas, Miguel Ledesma,” would 
denote Miguel Ornelas Ledesma rather than, as a non- 
Hispanic would expect, Miguel Ledesma Ornelas. But if 
the motor vehicle authorities, the dispatcher, or Pautz 
were unfamiliar with Spanish naming conventions (and 
Pautz testified that he was unfamiliar with them), 
“Ledesma” and “Ornelas” could easily get reversed. 


Pautz, believing that he had the name of the car's 
registered owner, entered the motel and checked the reg- 
istry, which showed that an Ismael (not Miguel) Ornelas 
had registered at 4:00 a.m. and had been accompanied by 
another man. Pautz then called his partner, Detective 
Hurrle, to join him. When Hurrle arrived, the two officers 
called the Milwaukee office of the Drug Enforcement 
Administration and asked it to run a NADDIS check on 
Miguel Ledesma Ornelas from San Jose and on Ismael 
Ornelas. NADDIS (Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Infor- 
mation System) is a computerized compilation of the 
federal Drug Enforcement Administration’s information 
on known and suspected drug traffickers. NADDIS 
reported two “hits.” One was on Miguel Ledesma 


58 


Ornelas, also known as Miguel Lemus-Ledesma, identi- 
fied by NADDIS as a heroin dealer in El Centro, Califor- 
nia, which is hundreds of miles from San Jose, the 
residence of the registered owner of the car. The other 
“hit” was on Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, Arizona, 
reported by the computer to be a 1000-kilogram-per- 
month cocaine dealer, although no “wants” or warrants 
were outstanding against him. The officers did not 
attempt to obtain descriptions of the two suspected 
dealers, neither of whom in fact is one of or, as far as we 
know, related to the defendants. 


Because the car was an older GM two-door, because 
its occupants had checked in at the motel at 4:00 a.m. 
without having made reservations in advance, because 
there were two persons rather than just one and at least 
one of them was Hispanic, and because they apparently 
had come from a “source state” and of course because 
of the “hits” on similar or identical names - the officers 
decided to stop and question the men when they left the 
motel. At this point a third officer arrived, Luedke, bring- 
ing with him a drug-sniffing dog; and Pautz left. After a 
time, two men emerged from the motel and entered the 
Oldsmobile. The officers parked their cars on either side 
of it. Hurrle tapped the window on the driver’s side, 
identified himself as a police officer, and asked both men 
for identification. Saul Ornelas, who was in the driver's 
seat, produced a driver’s license in that name; Ismael 
Ornelas-Ledesma, who was in the front passenger’s seat, 
produced a driver’s license in the name of Ismael 
Ornelas, residing in Martinez, California. Hurrle asked 
whether there were any drugs in the car. The occupants 
said “no.” Hurrle asked them for permission to search the 


~ 


59 


car, and they gave their permission. The two men were 
not placed under arrest but the government concedes that 
a reasonable person in their position would not have felt 
free to leave. So the encounter was a so-called “Terry 
stop” (after Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 
L.Ed.2d 889 (1968)), Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 U.S. 567, 
573, 108 S.Ct. 1975, 1979, 100 L.Ed.2d 565 (1988); INS v. 
Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 216, 104 S.Ct. 1758, 1762, 80 L.Ed.2d 
247 (1984); United States v. Adebayo, 985 F.2d 1333, 1338-39 
(7th Cir.1993), a semi-arrest that is lawful under the 
Fourth Amendment if but only if the officers had a “rea- 
sonable suspicion supported by articulable facts” that the 
persons stopped were engaged in criminal activity. United 
States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7, 109 S.Ct. 1581, 1585, 104 
L.Ed.2d 1 (1989). 


Officer Luedke inspected the interior without canine 
assistance and noticed a loose panel on the passenger s 
door. One of the screws by which the panel was fastened 
to the door was Luedke testified - rusty. To him this 
meant that it had been removed recently. He didn’t 
explain why, but maybe the idea is that the removal of the 
screw would have scraped off its chrome coating, which 
protected it from rusting. Suspecting that drugs were 
concealed behind the panel, Luedke pried it open. His 
hunch was correct; there was a package containing two 
kilograms of cocaine wrapped in aluminum foil and 
paper. Ornelas and Ornelas-Ledesma were then arrested. 


Clearly, were it not for the NADDIS hits, the officers 
would not have had grounds for reasonable suspicion that 
the defendants were drug traffickers. Not only is every 
circumstance on which the officers relied other than the 


60 


hits innocent taken by itself - many Americans (approx- 
imately one in eight) are Californians, many Californians 
are Hispanic, many Americans drive two-door General 
Motors cars, many people check into motels very late at 
night (or early in the morning), many travel in pairs 
rather than alone, and many do not make advance reser- 
vations — but the confluence of these circumstances is 
pretty innocuous as well, especially since many of the 
circumstances are correlated rather than independent. 
Hispanics are disproportionately concentrated in Califor- 
nia, and having on average lower incomes than non- 
Hispanic Americans are doubtless more likely than other 
Americans to drive two-door rather than four-door cars, 
older rather than newer cars, and American rather than 
foreign cars. They are more likely to drive than to fly and, 
we imagine, less likely to make reservations in advance at 
motels, since cheap motels don’t advertise much or have 
800 numbers. Nothing is more common than for people 
taking long trips to drive until they're tired and then 
often at very odd hours - to check in at the nearest motel, 
of course without a reservation. And people who drive 
long distances late at night prefer to have someone with 
them. Because the “suspicious” circumstances (other than 
the NADDIS hits) are so strongly correlated with each 
other, were they considered sufficient by themselves to 
justify a stop the practical consequence would be that a 
very large proportion of all Hispanic Americans would be 
vulnerable to being stopped on suspicion of drug traffick- 
ing. Hispanics would be second-class citizens in the eyes 
of the police. Although a brief investigatory stop is less 
intrusive than an arrest, it is sufficiently redolent of 


61 


police-state tactics for courts to insist in the name of the 
Fourth Amendment that its use be circumscribed. 


So we must ask what the NADDIS hits added to a 
“drug courier profile” that seems only a little better than 
a dragnet for Hispanics. It would be nice to know some- 
thing about NADDIS, but the government successfully 
opposed the defendants’ efforts to obtain discovery 
aimed at determining the character and reliability of the 
information in the NADDIS data base, and as a result the 
record is bare of evidence about it. At argument the 
government's lawyer, while saying that she has used 
NADDIS herself, disclaimed any knowledge about the 
system except how to access it. We do not know how 
many names are in it currently, where exactly the names 
come from, whether any of the information inputted into 
the system is screened for reliability before being entered, 
whether anyone checks to make sure that errors are not 
made in inputting information, whether information is 
updated systematically, and (a closely related question) 
whether information discovered to be stale or inaccurate 
is removed from the system. Although a number of judi- 
cial opinions mention NADDIS in passing obviously it 
is widely used in drug enforcement - we have found no 
considered judicial assessment of its reliability, although 
we have found occasional judicial expressions of concern 
about that reliability. United States v. $7,850 United States 
Currency, 7 F.3d 1355, 1358 (8th Cir.1993); United States v. 
$215,300 United States Currency, 882 F.2d 417, 419 and n. 2 
(9th Cir.1989) (per curiam); United States v. Saperstein, 723 
F.2d 1221, 1232 (6th Cir. 1983). 


Maybe NADDIS is no better than a vast compendium 
of rumors, errors, and libels: garbage in, garbage out. 


62 


That seems unlikely. It would not be heavily used by 
drug enforcement authorities if it were merely a random 
sample of the American population. Which is not to say, 
however, that it is highly reliable; concern that it may not 
be is heightened by the (scanty) secondary literature, 
which depicts NADDIS as an unselective, unweeded 
repository of unsubstantiated allegations, often dated. 
See UPI Release, “VIP Names in Drug Agency’s Com- 
puter Files,” July 3, 1984; Vanessa Jo Grimm, “Behemoth 
DEA Database Tracks Drug Smugglers,” Government Com- 
puter News, July 8, 1991, p. 85. According to the UPI 
Release, as of 1984 NADDIS contained 1.5 million names, 
obtained from debriefings of informants and suspects and 
from surveillance and intelligence reports of various law 
enforcement agencies. 


As an example of NADDIS’s possible unreliability, 
we note that according to it Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, 
a 1000 kilogram a month dealer a large dealer is not 
wanted by any law enforcement authority in the country. 
Maybe that Ornelas (who is neither Saul Ornelas nor 
Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma nor the registered owner of the 
Olds) died years ago or is some practical joker’s or des- 
perate informant’s fictional creation or is an honest man 
falsely accused by an enemy. Because the reliability of 
information stored in NADDIS is unknown, that informa- 
tion must, on the record before us, be reckoned no more 
reliable than that of an informant not known to be reli- 
able. Therefore, since an uncorroborated tip from such an 
informant cannot by itself furnish probable cause for an 
arrest or search, Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 227, 103 
S.Ct. 2317, 2326, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983), an unverified, 
uncorroborated entry in NADDIS cannot do so either. 


63 


United States v. $7,850 United States Currency, supra, 7 F.3d 
at 1358; United States v. $215,300 United States Currency, 
supra, 882 F.2d at 419 and n. 2; United States v. Saperstein, 
supra, 723 F.2d at 1232. The issue here, it is true, is not 
probable cause, but reasonable suspicion, because we are 
dealing with a stop rather than an arrest. But the 
Supreme Court has held that an uncorroborated anony- 
mous tip, even when it comes from law enforcement 
authorities, does not by itself justify a stop. United States 
v. Hensley, 469 U.S. 221, 232, 105 S.Ct. 675, 682, 83 L.Ed.2d 
604 (1985). The statement in United States v. Troka, 987 
F.2d 472, 474 (7th Cir.1993), that “the police department 
was a reliable source,” must be understood in context 
(the police department was a reliable source in the circum- 
stances of that case ), rather than as a quixotic effort to 
overrule the Supreme Court. 


That cannot be the end of our analysis, however. 
NADDIS furnished two tips, not one. “Ismael Ornelas,” 
the name on the motel registry, was very similar to 
“Ismael Ornelas, Jr.,“ the name in NADDIS. And while 
the names Miguel Ornelas Ledesma and Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas are as different from each other as Francis Scott 
Key and Francis Key Scott, the names could easily have 
been reversed in entering them in the computer, just as 
“Jr.” could easily have been left off a motel registry. So 
there was some reason to believe that the registered 
owner of the Olds was the Miguel Ornelas Ledesma, or 
Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, identified by NADDIS as a 
suspected drug dealer. Even if NADDIS is not terribly 
reliable, some or for that matter many entries in it may be 
accurate or at least approximately so. And the fact that 
both the registered owner of the car and the name on the 


64 


motel registry corresponded more or less to names of 
suspected drug dealers in the NADDIS database was 
impressive. One “hit” might well be coincidence; it was 
much less likely that two - one corresponding to the 
name in the hotel registry, presumably that of either the 
driver or the passenger; the other to the name of the 
registered owner, who might or might not be one of the 
two men in the motel - were, though this depends in part 
on how common the names “Ornelas” and “Ledesma” 
are. Paradoxically, the very unreliability of NADDIS (if it 
is unreliable) might strengthen the inference that the two 
men in the Olds were involved in the drug trade; invert- 
ing last and middle names is just the kind of mistake that 
one would expect in a carelessly maintained database. A 
mistaken premise can furnish grounds for a Terry stop, if 
the officers do not know that it is mistaken and are 
reasonable in acting upon it. Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 
177, 184-86, 110 S.Ct. 2793, 2799-2800, 111 L.Ed.2d 148 
(1990); United States v. De Leon-Reyna, 930 F.2d 396, 399 
(Sth Cir.1991) (en banc) (per curiam); United States v. 
Walraven, 892 F.2d 972, 974-75 (10th Cir.1989). 


The tips were mutually corroborating; and the other 
circumstances on which the officers relied (the make and 
type of the car, the state it came from, etc), insufficient as 
they were by themselves to create a suspicion reasonable 
enough, substantial enough, to justify the infringement of 
personal liberty that is brought about by an investigative 
stop, may, when taken together with the NADDIS “tips,” 
have tipped the balance in favor of a finding of reason- 
able suspicion. United States v. Esieke, 940 F.2d 29, 34 (2d 
Cir.1991), and United States v. Morin, 665 F.2d 765 (5th 
Cir.1982), factually similar cases although stronger for the 


65 


government, so suggest. And the Supreme Court held in 
Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 110 S.Ct. 2412, 110 L.Ed.2d 
301 (1990), that an anonymous tip can create reasonable 
suspicion if corroborated. The form the corroboration 
took in that case was verification of a prediction made by 
the informer, but there is no magic in a particular form of 
corroboration. The circumstances that first aroused 
Pautz’s suspicions were corroborative of the “anonymous 
tips” furnished by NADDIS in the sense that they made it 
likelier than otherwise that NADDIS was, in this instance 
anyway, accurate. Standing alone, the drug courier pro- 
file that first aroused Pautz’s suspicions was very little. 
Standing alone, one NADDIS “hit” could not, in the 
absence of any evaluation of NADDIS’s reliability, be 
thought much either. The second “hit,” however, added 
to the credibility of the first; and together the profile and 
the “hits,” though still not enough evidence of crime to 
furnish probable cause to search the car, could satisfy the 
lesser showing required for a Terry stop. 


Although the question is close, we conclude that the 
district court did not commit clear error in holding that 
there was a lawful stop. And clear error is the test; the 
proposition that review of a district court’s determination 
of reasonable suspicion (if it is a Terry stop) or probable 
cause (if it is an arrest, search, or seizure) is plenary, 
embraced in such cases as United States v. Jaramillo, 891 
F.2d 620, 626 (7th Cir.1989), is no longer tenable after 
United States v. Spears, 965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir.1992), where, 
overruling inconsistent precedents, this court held that 
the standard for judicial review of determinations of 
probable cause was clear error. There is no basis for 
distinguishing in this regard between probable cause and 


66 


reasonable suspicion. They are adjacent points on a con- 
tinuum. 


Since the stop was lawful, we need not decide 
whether, had it been unlawful, the defendants’ consent to 
search would nevertheless have been valid even though 
(a relevant factor, though not a decisive one, Schneckloth 
v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 231-33, 249, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 
2049-51, 2059, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973)) the officers failed to 
advise the defendants of their right not to consent. United 
States v. Valdez, 931 F.2d 1448, 1451 (11th Cir.1991); United 
States v. Valencia, 913 F.2d 378, 381 (7th Cir.1990). But we 
do not think the denial of the motion to suppress the 
drugs seized from the door of the Olds can be upheld on 
the basis of the record compiled in the district court. The 
government does not argue that a Terry stop justifies so 
intrusive a search. The only lawful purpose of a search 
incident to a Terry stop is to protect the officers from the 
danger that the persons they have stopped will reach for 
a weapon, Minnesota v. Dickerson, __ U.S. __, 113 
S.Ct. 2130, 2136, 124 L.Ed.2d 334 (1993); Michigan v. Long, 
463 U.S. 1032, 1049-51, 103 S.Ct. 3469, 3481-82, 77 L.Ed.2d 
1201 (1983), and ordinarily and here the officers do not 
have to dismantle a car to satisfy themselves on that 
score. Nor does the government argue that the consent to 
search that Ornelas and Ornelas-Ledesma gave the officers 
was consent to dismantle the car. United States v. Garcia, 
supra, 897 F.2d at 1419-20; but cf. United States v. Pena, 920 
F.2d 1509, 1515 (10th Cir.1990). The seizure was lawful, 
therefore, only if the search yielded information that gave 
Officer Luedke probable cause to believe that contraband 
was secreted behind the loose panel. If so, no search 
warrant was required, even for a search that would 


67 


require taking the car apart. United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 
798, 102 S.Ct. 2157, 72 L.Ed.2d 572 (1982). 


In arguing that there was probable cause for the 
search that discovered the drugs secreted in the car door, 
the government places great weight on the loose panel 
and the rusty screw. But the screw was not rusty. The 
magistrate judge to whom the motion to suppress was 
referred for a recommended ruling looked at the screw 
and found no indication of rust. The screw is in the 
appellate record and we have looked at it ourselves. 
There is not the slightest trace of rust or of anything that 
looks like rust. It is a Phillips screw and the head contains 
scratches that suggest it might have been removed and 
reinserted, but Luedke was adamant that it was signs of 
rust that caused him to believe that the panel had been 
removed recently and then put back in place. Having 
inspected the screw, the magistrate judge naturally disbe- 
lieved Luedke’s testimony that the screw had looked 
rusty. Without discussing the bearing of Luedke’s testi- 
mony about the loose panel on the issue of probable 
cause, the magistrate judge concluded that the seizure of 
the drugs had not been supported by probable cause. But 
noting the presence of the drug-sniffing dog, he found 
that the drugs would have been discovered anyway and 
therefore upheld the seizure on the ground of inevitable 
discovery. Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 104 S.Ct. 2501, 81 
L.Ed.2d 377 (1984). 


The district judge upheld the seizure, too, but not on 
the magistrate judge’s ground but rather on the ground 
that the allegedly loose panel alone, which the magistrate 
judge had not discussed, furnished probable cause. The 
government defends Luedke’s testimony about the rust 


68 


by arguing that it was dark inside the car (though it was 
broad daylight) and maybe the screw looked rusty 
though it wasn’t; we are more accustomed to being told 
of the remarkable eyesight of the police that enables them 
to see tiny objects at great distances in the dark. United 
States v. Sophie, 900 F.2d 1064, 1073 (7th Cir.1990); United 
States v. Gilliard, 847 F.2d 21, 24 (1st Cir.1988); cf. United 
States v. Pinto-Mejia, 720 F.2d 248, 262 (2d Cir.1983). In 
any event, the magistrate judge was not required to 
believe Luedke or recast his testimony in a believable 
form. 


The magistrate judge concluded that Luedke did not 
have probable cause to seize the drugs; the district judge 
concluded that he did. Can we uphold the district judge’s 
determination, in view of this disagreement? The stan- 
dard for judicial review of a determination of probable 
cause is, as we have noted already, clear error; and this is 
so whether the determination is made by a magistrate 
judge or by a district judge. United States v. Spears, supra; 
United States v. Adebayo, 985 F.2d 1333, 1337 n. 2 (7th 
Cir.1993). A qualification is necessary, however, for the 
case in which the magistrate judge, rather than determin- 
ing probable cause en route to issuing a warrant later 
challenged by a motion to suppress evidence seized pur- 
suant to it, is merely recommending the disposition of a 
motion referred to him by a district judge to suppress 
evidence obtained as a result of a search, or an arrest, 
made without a warrant. In the first case, the relation 
between district judge and magistrate judge is that of 
reviewing court to court of first instance, and the usual 
standard of appellate review of findings of fact and of the 
application of a legal standard to such findings applies. 


69 


In the second case - which is our case - not only may the 
district judge (with inapplicable exceptions) “accept, 
reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the [magistrate 
judge’s] findings or recommendations,” 28 U.S.C. 
§ 636(b)(1); he is required “to make a de novo determina- 
tion of those portions of the [magistrate judge’s] report or 
specified proposed findings or recommendations to 
which objection is made.” Id. 


The question whether the district judge’s power of de 
novo determination authorizes him to reject a magistrate 
judge’s finding of credibility, without the district judge's 
hearing the witness himself, was left open in United States 
v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667, 681 n. 7, 100 S.Ct. 2406, 2415, 65 
L.Ed.2d 424 (1980), though with a broad hint, picked up 
in Proffitt v. Wainwright, 685 F.2d 1227, 1237, 1241 (11th 
Cir.1982), that the answer is “no.” See also Grassia v. 
Scully, 892 F.2d 16, 19-20 (2d Cir.1989); but cf. LoConte v. 
Dugger, 847 F.2d 745, 750 (11th Cir.1988). We need not 
answer the question here. Rather than reject the magis- 
trate judge’s finding that Luedke’s testimony about the 
rusty screw should not be believed, the district judge 
found probable cause for the seizure in a part of Luedke’s 
testimony that the magistrate judge had not relied upon 
the testimony that the panel was loose. A number of 
cases, illustrated by United States v. Lugo, 978 F.2d 631, 
637 (10th Cir.1992), treat a loose door panel as a telltale 
sign of drug running - but not as sufficient in itself to 
constitute probable cause. (In United States v. Garcia, 
supra, 897 F.2d at 1416, the officers saw packages peeping 
out from behind the loose panel.) The facts of this case 
show why. The car was eleven years old when Officer 
Luedke conducted the search. We mean no disrespect to 


70 


Detroit in observing that the interior of a 1981 Olds 
unlike that of a Rolls Royce is apt to be rather worn and 
battered after eleven years. The fact that a door panel is 
loose does not by itself create a reasonable likelihood that 
the panel conceals a secret compartment containing con- 
traband. State v. Swanson, 172 Ariz. 579, 838 P.2d 1340, 
1345-48 (App.1992). Here as in most cases there was 
more, but not much more: mainly the NADDIS “hits” of 
unproven reliability. 


We need not decide, however, whether the NADDIS 
hits (remember that there were two, and that this 
enhances their reliability), plus the fact that the defen- 
dants fit the drug courier profile, plus a loose door panel 
add up to probable cause - whether in other words the 
loose panel could turn reasonable suspicion into probable 
cause. For we do not know whether Luedke’s testimony 
about the door panel should be believed. The only judi- 
cial officer who heard him testify was the magistrate 
judge, who failed to indicate whether he believed the 
testimony. Since the magistrate judge disbelieved a 
closely related part of Luedke’s testimony, and the dis- 
trict judge did not overturn that credibility finding, it can 
hardly be assumed that the magistrate judge would surely 
have believed Luedke’s testimony about the door panel, 
or that if he had disbelieved it would surely have been 
reversed by the district judge. Nor did the latter base his 
determination on a viewing of the car; there was no 
viewing. Even if, contrary to Proffitt, and to decisions 
involving the parallel case of administrative review of 
administrative law judges’ credibility determinations, 
e. g. Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 495-97, 
71 S.Ct. 456, 468-469, 95 L.Ed. 456 (1951); NLRB v. Augusta 


71 


Bakery Corp., 957 F.2d 1467, 1475-76 (7th Cir.1992); Ortiz- 
Salas v. INS, 992 F.2d 105, 108 (7th Cir.1993), a district 
judge can reject a magistrate judge's determinations of 
credibility without hearing the witnesses’ testimony him- 
self, we do not think that he can be permitted to ignore 
the issue of credibility altogether. We do not think that he 
can accept challenged testimony given before another 
judicial officer without giving a reason for resolving the 
issue himself rather than referring the matter for initial 
determination by the other officer. 


This oversight would be academic if the magistrate 
judge’s alternative ground for upholding the seizure - 
inevitable discovery by Luedke’s dog was so clearly 
correct that we could uphold it without the benefit of the 
district judge’s views, as in United States v. Lewis, 621 F.2d 
1382, 1387 (5th Cir.1980). We cannot. No evidence was 
presented concerning the dog's capabilities. For all we 
know he is an infallible sniffer of two kilograms of 
cocaine wrapped and hidden behind the door panel of a 
car; but we cannot take judicial notice of this fact. We 
don’t know and have not been told anything about this 
dog except his name (Merlin), although our own research 
reveals that a Milwaukee drug-sniffing dog named Mer- 
lin, presumably the same beast, has on at least one occa- 
sion detected drugs in a piece of luggage when there 
weren't any. Schaefer v. United States, 656 F.Supp. 631, 632 
(E.D.Wis.1987). If Merlin is that good, no doubt he could 
sniff the cocaine in the door of the defendants’ car, but 
the government has not had the audacity to argue that a 
dog who can detect nonexistent drugs is an infallible 
inevitable discoverer of existent drugs. We may be too 
hard on Merlin; maybe he sniffed the residue of drugs in 


72 


the luggage in the Schaefer case; maybe it was a different 
dog with the same name. But the government in its brief, 
without going so far to confess error on the magistrate 
judge’s alternative ground (that is, inevitable discovery), 
does not defend it, even though defendant Ornelas had 
attacked it at some length in his opening brief. The gov- 
ernment does not, for example, respond to Ornelas’s 
damaging quotation from the testimony of Detective Hur- 
rle: “I don’t know if he [the dog] necessarily would have 
hit on this particular cocaine.” (To which it can be added 
that we don’t know whether the dog would have been 
directed to sniff in or about the car if Luedke’s search had 
disclosed no suspicious circumstances.) We cannot affirm 
on a ground that has been waived, Crane v. Indiana High 
School Athletic Ass'n, 975 F.2d 1315, 1319 (7th Cir.1992); 
Frederick v. Marquette Nat'l Bank, 911 F.2d 1, 2 (7th 
Cir.1990), and the government has waived the defense of 
inevitable discovery by failing to defend the magistrate 
judge’s determination. Perhaps it did this because it 
believed that the determination could not be defended. It 
put all its eggs in the probable-cause basket, and the eggs 
are broken. 


The motion to suppress should not have been denied, 
though it is open to the government on remand to ask the 
district judge either to hear Luedke’s testimony on the 
loose panel himself (or at least view the car’s interior) or 
refer the matter to the magistrate judge for a determina- 
tion of the credibility of that testimony. If Luedke’s testi- 
mony is disbelieved, the motion to suppress should be 
granted. If it is believed, the district court must decide 
whether the loose panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS 
tips as corroborated by the circumstances that first 


73 


aroused Officer Pautz’s suspicions, adequately estab- 
lished probable cause to believe that drugs were con- 
cealed behind the panel. The court may wish to consider 
the evidence of the loose panel (if that evidence is 
believed) in conjunction with the Philips screw. For while 
it is plain that it is not rusty, it does look as if it had been 
scratched in just the way one would expect if it had been 
removed and reinserted, though its appearance could we 
suppose reflect its removal by Officer Luedke or other 
handling since. The test for probable cause is objective. It 
is not what the officer in question actually believed but 
what a reasonable officer in his position would have 
believed. Scott v. United States, 436 U.S. 128, 138, 98 S.Ct. 
1717, 1723, 56 L.Ed.2d 168 (1978); Mahoney v. Kesery, 976 
F.2d 1054, 1057-58 (7th Cir.1992). A reasonable officer 
would not have believed the screw rusty but might have 
believed it showed (other) evidence of having been 
removed and reinserted. That is a matter to be explored 
on remand. 


The judgments of conviction are vacated and the case 
is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. The other grounds raised by the appellants have 
too little merit to warrant discussion. 


VACATED AND REMANDED. 


74 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 


-Vs- Case No. 92-CR-243 


ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA 
and SAUL ORNELAS, 


Defendants. 


ORDER 


(Filed Mar. 15, 1994) 


This matter comes before the Court on defendants’ 
joint request for a status conference to determine the 
procedure on remand. The Court sees little reason for a 
status conference. The 7th Circuit issued clear instruc- 
tions in this regard: 


The motion to suppress should not have 
been denied, though it is open to the govern- 
ment on remand to ask the district judge either 
to hear Luedtke’s testimony on the loose panel 
himself (or at least view the car interior) or refer 
the matter to the magistrate judge for a deter- 
mination of the credibility of that testimony. If 
Luedtke’s testimony is disbelieved, the motion 
to suppress should be granted. If it is believed, 
the district court must decide whether the loose 
panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS tips as 
— by the circumstances that first 
arou icer Pautz's suspicions, adequatel 
established probable cause ~4 believe — — 
were concealed behind the panel. 


75 


United States of America v. Ismael Ornelas- Ledesma, et. al., 
Slip Opinion at 15 in Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, dated Febru- 
ary 10, 1994 (7th Cir. 1994). Defense counsel has indicated 
to the Court that the Government is unwilling to settle 
the matter and intends to proceed. Therefore, consistent 
with the 7th Circuit’s remand order, the matter shall be 
referred to Magistrate Judge Robert L. Bittner for pur- 
poses of determining the credibility of Officer Luedtke’s 
testimony regarding the loose door panel and, if said 
testimony is found to be credible, for purposes of deter- 
mining whether that testimony, in conjunction with the 
NADDIS tips as corroborated by the drug courier profile, 
established probable cause to search. 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, this 15th day of 
March, 1994. 
SO ORDERED, 


/s/ Rudolph T. Randa 
HON. RUDOLPH T. RANDA 
U.S. District Judge 


76 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES Case No. 92-CR-243 


OF AM 
ERICA, MAGISTRATE JUDGE'S 
Plaintiff, POST-REMAND 
RECOMMENDATION TO 


THE HONORABLE 
ISMAEL ORNELAS- RUDOLPH T. RANDA 


LEDESMA and SAUL RE: DEFENDANTS’ 


ORNELAS, MOTIONS TO 
Defendants. SUPPRESS 


(Filed Mar. 29, 1994) 


V. 


NATURE OF CASE 


On February 12, 1993 this Court issued a recommen- 
dation on motions to suppress physical evidence filed by 
defendants Saul Ornelas and Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma. In 
addressing the defendants’ motions to suppress, this 
court concluded the defendants were lawfully subjected 
to an investigatory detention based upon reasonable sus- 
picion and clearly consented to a search of the 1981 
Oldsmobile. However, this Court further concluded that, 
under governing case law, the consent did not extend to 
the door panels and a search of those door panels was not 
supported by requisite probable cause, because the testi- 
mony of Milwaukee County Deputy Sheriff Lyle Luedke, 
regarding the presence of rust in the groove of the Phil- 
lips screw used to attach the vent cover to the door, was 
not credible. Nonetheless, this Court recommended 
denial of the defendants’ motions to suppress evidence, 


77 


since the seizure of cocaine fell within the inevitable 
discovery exception to the Fourth Amendment exclusion- 
ary rule of Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 433 (1984). 


Swsequently, in a March 9, 1993 order, United States 
District Judge Rudolph T. Randa considered the defen- 
dants’ objections to the recommendation and ruled the 
holding regarding inevitable discovery was unnecessary, 
because the facts found by this Court established proba- 
ble cause to remove the door panel vent cover and search 
the compartment behind it. Thereafter, Judge Randa 
accepted conditional pleas of guilty, pursuant to Fed. R. 
Crim. 11(a)(2), from the defendants who then appealed 
the adverse suppression decision. 


The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit issued a 
decision in the matter on February 10, 1994 vacating the 
defendants’ judgments of conviction and remanding the 
case for further proceedings consistent with its opinion 
which holds: 


The motion to suppress should not have 
been denied, though it is open to the govern- 
ment on remand to ask the district judge either 
to hear Luedke’s testimony on the loose panel 
himself (or at least view the car’s interior) or 
refer the matter to the magistrate judge for a 
determination of the credibility of that testi- 
mony. If Luedke’s testimony is disbelieved, the 
motion to suppress should be granted. If it is 
believed, the district court must decide whether 
the loose panel, in conjunction with the 
NADDIS tips as corroborated by the circum- 
stances that first aroused Officer Pautz’s suspi- 
cions, adequately established probable cause to 
believe that drugs were concealed behind the 


78 


panel. The court may wish to consider the evi- 
dence of the loose panel (if that evidence is 
believed) in conjunction with the Philips screw. 


United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al, Nos. 93-2356, 
93-2405 (slip op. at 15) (7th Cir. Feb. 10, 1994). On March 
15, 1994 Judge Randa, in turn, referred the matter to this 
Court for further proceedings in accord with the direc- 
tions of the Court of Appeals. 


DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 


In its recommendation, this Court made the follow- 
ing findings of fact: 


When Hurrle announced he had completed the 
search of the trunk, with negative results, 
Luedke proceeded to the passenger area of the 
vehicle and checked to see whether the back 
seat was loose. Upon finding it was not, he 
examined the right rear quarter panel near the 
handle. He found this panel to be loose. Based 
upon his training, Luedke suspected the panel 
had been removed and contraband was hidden 
inside. Luedke testified he then observed the 
vent area of the door, noticing the presence of 
rust in the groove of the Phillips screw used to 
attach the vent cover, which led him to believe 
the vent cover had recently been removed. 
Luedke then released the screw, dismantled the 
vent area of the door, and exposed a cavity 
approximately five (5) inches high and four (4) 
inches wide which contained a paper bag in 
which he felt a hard block. 


(Emphasis added.) (February 12, 1993 Recommendation 
at 6.) 


79 


Officer Luedke’s testimony as to the screw was found 
by this Court to be incredible, in light of the undisputable 
condition of the screw itself. Nonetheless, except for the 
rule of Falsus In Uno Falsus Tu Omnibus, I have no reason 
not to believe the panel was loose. Thus, | accept as 
credible Luedke’s testimony that the panel was loose. 
However, the loose panel alone, given the age of the 
Oldsmobile, is not probative evidence of the fact it neces- 
sarily had been recently removed. See United States v. 
Ornelas-Ledesma, et al. Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 13 
(observing the interior of a 1981 Oldsmobile, unlike that 
of a Rolls Royce, is apt to be rather worn and battered 
after eleven [11] years). 


So what else is there besides the loose panel to estab- 
lish probable cause that the compartment had recently 
been opened and contained contraband. Answer: Only 
the two (2) NADDIS “hits” and the questionable “drug 
courier” profile consisting of the facts the defendants 
were Hispanic Californians driving a two-door General 
Motors car who had checked into a motel very early in 
the morning, traveled as a pair rather than alone, and had 
not made advance reservations. See United States v. 
Ornelas-Ledesma, et al. Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 5 
(“confluence of the circumstances is pretty innocu- 
ous especially since many of the circumstances are 
correlated rather than independent”). The NADDIS com- 
puter reports showed a “hit” on Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas, also known as Miguel Lemus-Ledesma, identi- 
fied by NADDIS as a heroin dealer in El Centro, Califor- 
nia, which is hundreds of miles from San Jose, the 
residence of the registered owner of the car; and a second 
“hit” on Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, Arizona who was 


80 


reported to be a 1,000 kilogram per month cocaine dealer, 
although no “wants” or warrants were outstanding 
against him. Thus, the NADDIS reports are so convoluted 
and mismatched that they are of little probative value in 
the probable cause determination. Consequently, the only 
evidence in the probable cause calculus is the loose panel, 
a weak drug courier profile, and inconclusive MADDIS 
“hits.” There is just not enough evidence for a reasonable 
law enforcement officer to believe the door compartment 
contained contraband, as opposed to being a mere sign of 
an aging General Motors automobile. See State v. Swanson, 
838 Pad 1340, 1345-48 [Ariz. App. 1922) (no probable 
cause to believe evidence of crime would be found in the 
space behind door panels; the screws of which appeared 
to have been tampered with and were loose, where only 
other facts were defendant became nervous when the 
officer opened the vehicle door, and supposed “drug 
courier profile” consisted of facts that defendant and his 
passenger were traveling east on an interstate highway in 
a rental car with electronic paging equipment and a cellu- 
lar phone). Missing are any additional indicia requisite to 
a finding of probable cause, as noted in the following 
cases. See United States v. Lugo, 978 F.2d 631, 637 (10th Cir. 
1992) (suggesting probable cause to search behind door 
panels may have existed because totality of circumstances 
suggested the hidden space contained contraband: defen- 
dant was armed, traveling interstate, did not have lug- 
gage or other articles normally associated with such a 
trip; displayed noticeable interest in locking his truck 
after being told by officers not to; had a weapon within 
easy reach along with a fully loaded clip, and additional 
ammunition on the floor of the trunk; and there was a 


81 


loosened door panel with a creased edge indicating some- 
one had accessed the cavity inside); United States v. Pena, 
961 F.2d 333, 339 (2nd Cir. 1992) (defendant entitled to 
evidentiary hearing on whether probable cause existed 
for search of door panel where facts in addition to those 
furnishing reasonable suspicion for investigatory deten- 
tion were “asserted discovery of an empty bag and screw- 
driver in the back seat of detained automobile”); United 
States v. Arango, 912 F.2d 441, 447 (10th Cir. 1990), cert. 
denied, 499 U.S. 924 (1991) (probable cause for arrest 
where officers noticed truck bed did not seem right 
because it was very shallow, after lifting the tailgate 
corner of a rubber mat covering truck bed, observed that 
truck bed had apparently been modified; their knocks on 
truck bed suggested hidden compartment was running 
beneath the bed; and defendant had inadequate amount 
of luggage for purported two [2] week vacation); United 
States v. Garcia, 897 F.2d. 1413, 1419 (7th Cir. 1990) 
(upholding search of door panels when, while conducting 
consensual visual search, officers noted lack of window 
cranks and door handles mismatched and ill fitting 
screws on the door panels, and spotted packages inside 
the door while looking through the window opening); 
United States v. Thomas, 787 FSupp. 663, 684 (E.D. Tex. 
1992), aff'd without op., 983 F.2d 1062 (Sth Cir. 1993) (prob- 
able cause to open exterior side panels of vehicle based 
on drug sniffing dog's strong alert); Munguia v. State, 737 
S.W.2d 658, 660 (Ark. App. 1987) (marijuana residue on 
car floor boards and loose fitting door panel warranted 
reasonable belief additional marijuana would be found in 


door panel). 


82 


In its opinion, the Court of Appeals also suggested 
the Court might wish to consider the evidence of the 
loose panel in conjunction with the Phillips screw which, 
upon examination by the Appellate Court, “looked as if it 
had been scratched in just the way one would expect if it 
had been removed and reinserted”, though also noting its 
appearance could “reflect its removal by Officer Luedke 
or other handling since.” United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, 
et al, Nos. 93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 15. However, the 
parties orally stipulated to resolution of the matter based 
upon the prior record. 


Review of that record discloses Luedke “used a small 
pocket-type knife to remove the Philips screw from the 
plastic vent cover” (Tr. 156). Luedke further testified “a 
closer examination of that screw indicated there was rust 
in the area of the Philips head of the screw” (Tr. 155-156). 
When the screw was brought to this Court for examina- 
tion, it was contained in a film canister which was fitted 
with cotton (Tr. 423). The record regarding the condition 
of the screw and the source of any scratches on it which 
the Court of Appeals observed is inconclusive. Based on 
the parties’ stipulation, this Court has not reexamined the 
screw and the record is insufficient for this Court to make 
a determination of when or how the screw was scratched. 
Consequently, any scratches on the screw have no impact 
on this Court’s determination that there was not probable 
cause for the search of the door panel. 


It may be that, based upon this Court’s recom- 
mended disposition of the defendants’ motions to sup- 
press, Judge Randa may decide the record regarding the 
scratches on the screw requires further development. 


83 


However, due to the fact the defendants, whose appear- 
ance would be requisite at a supplemental evidentiary 
hearing, pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 43(a), are confined 
in California, necessitating two (2) to three (3) weeks 
advance notice of an evidentiary hearing in this District 
so they could be transported here by the United States 
Marshal, it is impossible for me to conduct such a hearing 
by reason of my March 31, 1994 retirement from the 
bench. 


In sum, this court finds testimony of Officer Luedke 
regarding the loose panel is credible, but that testimony 
combined with the other factors which contributed to 
reasonable suspicion to stop the defendants, did not 
establish probable cause to search the door panel.’ The 
record regarding the scratches on the screw is inconclu- 
sive and does not contribute to this Court’s probable 
cause calculus. Consequently, this Court will recommend 
that the defendants’ motions to suppress physical evi- 
denced be granted. 


In its February 12, 1993 recommendation, this Court also 
found there was not probable cause for a search of the door 
panel. However, it recommended the defendant’s motions to 
suppress be denied, based upon its finding that discovery of the 
cocaine in the door panel fell within the inevitable discovery 
exception to the exclusionary rule. This finding was not 
defended on appeal by the government and, consequently, has 
been waived. United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, et al., Nos. 
93-2356, 93-2405, slip op. at 15. 


84 


CONCLUSION 


NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY RECOM- 
MENDED that the United States District Judge enter an 
order GRANTING defendant Saul Ornelas’ motion to 
suppress and exclude physical evidence; and, 


IT IS FURTHER RECOMMENDED that the United 
States District Judge enter an order GRANTING that 
aspect of defendant Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma’s motion to 
suppress items seized from the 1981 Oldsmobile. 


Your attention is directed to 28 US.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) 
and (C) and Local Rule 13.03 (E.D. Wis.), whereby written 
objections to the foregoing recommenaation may be filed 
in duplicate with the Clerk of Court within ten (10) days 
hereof. Failure to file a timely objection shall result in a 
waiver to your right to appeal 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin this 29th day of 
March, 1994. 


/s/ Robert L. Bittner 
ROBERT L. BITTNER 
United States 
Magistrate Judge 


85 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
EASTERN DISTRICT OF WISCONSIN 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff, * 
-Vs- Case No. 92-CR-243 


SAUL ORNELAS and 
ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA, 


Defendants. 


DECISION AND ORDER 
(Filed Sep. 20, 1994) 


This matter comes before the Court on remand from 
the Seventh Circuit for purposes of additional fact-find- 
ing and reconsideration of the probable cause issue. The 
facts of the case, with one addition, are as stated in the 
initial Magistrate’s recommendation dated February 12, 
1993, which the Court adopts and incorporates here by 
this reference. 


On February 12, 1993, Magistrate Judge Robert L. 
Bittner issued a recommendation that defendants’ 
motions to suppress the cocaine at issue be denied. The 
Magistrate’s recommendation was not based on the exis- 
tence of probable cause. Rather, the Magistrate found that 
the case fit within the “inevitable discovery” exception to 
the probable cause requirement. In a decision dated 
March 9, 1993, this Court upheld the Magistrate's recom- 
mendation, but on different grounds. This Court found 
that the drug courier profile, the two NADDIS hits and 


80 


the loose door panel, constituted probable cause to 
remove the door panel and search for drugs. The defen- 
dants entered conditional pleas and appealed the sup- 
pression issue. The Seventh Circuit vacated the decision 
on grounds that this Court incorrectly thought the Magis- 
trate had ruled upon the credibility of Officer Luedtke’s 
testimony concerning the loose door panel. The Circuit 
Court then gave explicit instructions regarding what was 
to be done on remand: 


The motion to suppress should not have been 
denied, though it is open to the government on 
remand to ask the district judge either to hear 
Luedtke’s testimony on the loose panel himself 
(or at least view the car interior) or refer the 
matter to the magistrate judge for a determina- 
tion of the credibility of that testimony. If 
Luedtke’s testimony is disbelieved, the motion 
to suppress should be granted. If it is believed, 
the district court must decide whether the loose 
panel, in conjunction with the NADDIS tips as 
corroborated by the circumstances that first 
aroused Officer Pautz’s suspicions, adequately 
established probable cause to believe that drugs 
were concealed behind the panel. 


United States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d 714, 721-22 (7th 
Cir. 1994). 


On remand, this Court again referred the matter to 
the Magistrate for purposes of making an initial deter- 
mination regarding the credibility of Officer Luedtke’s 
testimony and the existence of probable cause. The Mag- 
istrate found Officer Luedtke’s testimony regarding the 
loose door panel credible, and this Court accepts that 
finding. The Magistrate further found, however, that 


87 


adding the loose door panel to the drug courier profile 
and the two NADDIS hits was not sufficient to establish 
probable cause. This is contrary to the Court's original 
conclusion, which found that “reasonable suspicion 
became probable cause when Officer Luedtke found that 
the right rear door panel of the car was loose.” 


The Court acknowledges that the issue is a close one, 
but weighing the evidence “not in terms of library anal- 
ysis by scholars, but as understood by those versed in the 
field of law enforcement,” see Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 
742 (1983), the Court is compelled to reach the same 
conclusion. Both the Seventh Circuit and the Magistrate 
raised concerns regarding the broad brush of drug cou- 
rier profiles, the reliability of the NADDIS system, and 
the significance of a loose door panel in a 12-year old car 
from General Motors. Viewed individually, these facts 
may be unremarkable. They become more meaningful 
when, in a specific case, they converge and form around 
two specific individuals. That is what happened here. The 
question is whether, based on that confluence of facts, 
Officer Luedtke was reasonable and justified in his belief 
that drugs lay within the defendants’ car door. In answer- 
ing this question, the law says that Officer Luedtke and 
his actions are not to be judged in hindsight. This means 
that his search is not justified by the fact that he was 
right, it also means that his search is not invalid simply 
because the names on the two NADDIS hits were not 
absolutely identical to the names provided, or because 
the addresses did not match up, or because the other 
information he relied upon was relatively innocuous 
when considered alone. The test is one of flexibility and 


common sense, requiring only “practical, nontechnical 
probabilitſies]!“ Id. 


This case strikes the Court as an example of how 
common sense translates into good and constitutionally 
valid police work. As the Seventh Circuit noted, “Mil- 
waukee police keep a regular watch on motels, looking 
for drug runners,” Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d at 715. This 
makes sense, and this is what the officers were doing here 
when they discovered defendants’ older model, two-door 
GM car with source state license plates. A routine survey 
thus became a hunch. An examination of the motel regis- 
try showed that the car was driven by two men who 
checked into the motel at 4:00 a.m. without advance 
reservations. The hunch thus grew stronger.' Then a 
NADDIS check on the registered owner of the vehicle 
scored a hit on a known or suspected heroin dealer, 
although the addresses did not match up. The hunch 
ripened into generalized suspicion. A NADDIS check on 
the name listed in the motel registry also scored a hit on a 
prolific cocaine dealer, although the addresses again did 
not match up and there was a “Jr.” designation appended 
to the name retrieved by NADDIS. Nonetheless, two 
NADDIS hits on names virtually identical to those uncov- 
ered by the officers were too impressive to be coinciden- 
tal. Generalized suspicion thus became reasonable 
suspicion directed at two specific individuals. After the 


! While the Seventh Circuit recognized these facts as inno- 
cent taken by [themselves],” Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d at 716, 
they do not preclude the officers from developing their intu- 
ition. 


89 


resulting Terry-stop, one of the suspects produced identi- 
fication containing the name of the NADDIS cocaine 
dealer. Suspicions were confirmed and reinforced, Officer 
Luedtke asked for permission to search the vehicle, Con- 
sent was given. During a general search of the interior, 
Officer Luedtke discovered a loose door panel near the 
right rear seat. 


What was Officer Luedtke to do? At this juncture, 
every additional step turned up additional information 
which dispelled doubt about the innocent nature of the 
facts and made the officers’ suspicions stronger and more 
probable. Should Officer Luedtke have stopped at that 
point simply because a loose door panel on a 12-year old 
car, considered by itself, is likely to be a common occur- 
rence? Or, does Officer Luedtke view the loose panel as 
the accumulated evidence directs him to view it, as his 
experience has told him to view it, and as a number of 
cases have also viewed it: “[A]s a telltale sign of drug 
running”? Id. at 720.2 A competent police officer removes 
the door panel. He removes it because it is the final fact 
in a string of unbroken facts which establishes the proba- 
ble cause equation. 


NOW THEREFORE, BASED ON THE FOREGO- 
ING, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT: 


1. The Government's objection to the Magistrate's 
recommendation is sustained and the defendants’ 
motions to suppress are denied. 


2 See Magistrate's Recommendation dated February 12, 
1993 at 6-7 (“Based upon his training, Luedtke suspected the 
panel had been removed and contraband was hidden inside). 


90 


Dated at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, this 20th day of 
September, 1994. 


SO ORDERED, 
/s/ Rudolph Randa 


HON. RUDOLPH T, RANDA 
U. S. District Judge 


91 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 

Submitted March 2, 1995 
Decided April 18, 1995 


Before 
Hon. Richard A. Posner, Chief Judge 
Hon. Joel M. Flaum, Circuit Judge 
Hon. Daniel A. Manion, Circuit Judge 


Unirep Starts or AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
Nos. 94-3349, 94-3350 v. 


Appeal from the 
United States District 
Court for the Eastern 
District of Wisconsin. 


Saut Ornetas, Ismaet No. 92 CR 243 
Ornetas Lepesma, Rudolph T. Randa, 
Judge. 


meee ee eee eee — 


Defendants-Appellants. 


Order 


This is a sequel to the decision of this panel in United 
States v. Ornelas-Ledesma, 16 F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 1994), and 
familiarity with that decision is assumed. Briefly, we held 
that the district court had erred in denying the defen- 
dants’ motion to suppress the fruits of a search of their 
automobile without making a determination of the cred- 
ibility of Office Luedke’s testimony that the panel behind 
which he found the drugs was loose. We remanded with 
directions to determine whether the panel was loose; if it 
was not, to grant the motion; and if it was, to consider 


92 


whether the loose panel, in conjunction with other sus- 
picious circumstances discussed in our opinion, estab- 
lished probable cause for the search. 


On remand, the district judge referred the issue of 
Luedke’s credibility to the magistrate judge before whom 
Luedke testified and who had recommended that the 
motion be granted. Without granting a new hearing, the 
magistrate judge reported that he believed Luedke had 
testified truthfully about the loose panel. The district 
judge then determined that when the loose panel was 
considered in conjunction with the other circumstances, 
the search was indeed supported by probable cause. 


The defendants appeal. Our review is deferential. 
The district judge’s finding of probable cause may be set 
aside only if clearly erroneous. We do not find clear error. 
The district judge’s opinion, although brief, adequately 
reviews the circumstances on which the decision to 
search the car was based and explains why taken as a 
totality they gave the officers probable cause to conduct 
the search. The judgment of the district court must there- 
tore be, and it is, 


AFFIRMED. 


93 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
For the Seventh Circuit 
Chicago, Illinois 60604 
JUDGMENT - WITHOUT ORAL ARGUMENT 
Date: April 18, 1995 


BEFORE: Honorable RICHARD A. POSNER, 
Chief Judge 


Honorable JOEL M. FLAUM, Circuit Judge 
Honorable DANIEL A. MANION, 
Circuit Judge 
Nos. 94-3349 and 94-3350 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 


SAUL ORNELAS and 
ISMAEL ORNELAS LEDESMA, 


Defendants-Appellants. 


Appeals from the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of Wisconsin 
No. 92 CR 243, Rudolph T. Randa, Judge 


The judgment of the District Court is AFFIRMED, in 
accordance with the decision of this court entered on this 
date. 


94 


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


7 
— 


No. 95-5257 


Saul Ornelas and Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma, 
Petitioners 
V. 


United States 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI to the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. 


ON CONSIDERATION of the motion for leave to 
proceed herein in forma pauperis and of the petition for 
writ of certiorari, it is ordered by this Court that the 
motion to proceed in forma pauperis be, and the same is 
hereby, granted; and that the petition for writ of certiorari 
be, and the same is hereby, granted limited to Question 1 
presented by the petition. 


November 6, 1995 


