Be 


No. 95-244 SEP 13 1995 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


CHUCK QUACKENBUSH, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER 
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, IN His CAPACITY AS 
LIQUIDATOR AND TRUSTEE OF THE MISSION 
INSURANCE COMPANY TRUST, MISSION NATIONAL 
INSURANCE COMPANY TRUST, ENTERPRISE INSURANCE 
COMPANY TRUST, HOLLAND-AMERICA INSURANCE 
COMPANY TRUST AND MISSION REINSURANCE 
CORPORATION TRUST, 

Petitioner, 
vs. 

ALLSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY, 
Respondent. 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 


BRIEF IN OPPOSITION TO PETITION 
FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


JosePH D. LEE* 

MUNGER, TOLLES & OLSON 
355 South Grand Avenue 
Suite 3500 
Los Angeles, California 90071 
(213) 683-9100 


Attorneys for Respondent 
Allstate Insurance Company 


*Counsel of Record 


Bowne of Los Angeles, Inc., Law Printers (213) 627-2200 


i 


RESPONDENT'S STATEMENT OF 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Whether an order remanding a removed action to 
state court based on the Burford abstention doctrine is 
reviewable by appeal, and not merely by mandamus, under 
the collateral order doctrine established in Cohen v. Benefi- 
cial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949). 


2. Whether an action at law which seeks only money 
damages, and no equitable relief, can present the excep- 
tional circumstances necessary for a federal court to decline 
to exercise its jurisdiction based on Burford abstention, or 
instead whether Burford abstention is appropriate only in 
equitable proceedings. 


a 
4 
: 
| 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS AND 
RULE 29.1 STATEMENT 


The Appellant in the Ninth Circuit and 
here is Allstate Insurance Company. The anne 
Ninth Circuit was John Garamendi, Insurance Commis- 
sioner of the State of California, in his capacity as Liquida- 
tor of Mission Insurance Company, Mission National 
Insurance Company, Enterprise Insurance Company, Hol- 
land-America Insurance Company, and Mission Reinsur- 
ance Corporation. Chuck Quackenbush, the Petitioner here 
is the statutory successor to Mr. Garamendi. , 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


QUESTIONS PRESENTED .........----- 500005 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS AND 
RULE 29.1 STATEMENT ...... 6... 0 esse eeees 


OPINIONS BELOW ....... 1.666 c ccs 
JURISDICTION ........6555: jeaeevouces cadens 
STATUTES INVOLVED ..... .. 6... e cence eens 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE......... 655-0055 
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT ...........5.6555: 


ARGUMENT 20... cccccccccccccccecccsesvesees 


THE DISTRICT COURT'S REMAND ORDER 
WAS A COLLATERALLY FINAL ORDER 
WHICH GAVE RISE TO A RIGHT OF APPEAL 


THE NINTH CIRCUIT'S ABSTENTION ORDER 
IS CONSISTENT WITH THIS COURT'S 
PREVIOUS RULINGS AND WITH THE 
CURRENT TREND IN THE CASELAW ...... 


CONCLUSION 2... ccc ccc cece cece reeceeeceeees 


1] 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases 

Page 

Ainsworth v. Allstate Ins. Co., 634 F. Supp. 52 (W.D. 
BED, GRD cncccccdccceceetesccecesteacdecess 5 

Alabama Public Service Comm'n v. Southern Ry. 
Se Ff & Fo | Rp rT 24 


American Re-Insurance Co. v. Insurance Comm'r of 
California, 527 F. Supp. 444 (C.D. Cal. 1981) .. 4 


Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 U.S. 315 (1943) ..... passim 


Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 US. 
SEG CIGD ccccccccscccecccceecs 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 17 


Colorado River Water Conservation Dist. v. United 
States, 424 U.S. 800 (1976) ......... 12, 18, 19, 21, 26 


Coopers & Lybrand v. Livesay, 437 U.S. 463 (1978) 13 
Corcoran v. Ardra Ins. Co., 842 F.2d 31 (2d Cir. 


PRs ccccccecteceseccneuececcensccosesess 9, 15, 16 
Costle v. Fremont Indem. Co., 839 F. Supp. 265 (D. 

Wes GE oon cuneewcdameanuséenceamannanssses 23 
C-Y Dev. Co. v. City of Redlands, 703 F.2d 375 (9th 

Gah GED Kccccsnecdsdéensccameseccensccons 18 


In Re Delta American Re Insurance Co., 900 F.2d 
890 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 890 (1990) 4,5 


Doughty v. Underwriters at Lloyd's, London, 6 F.3d 


Ge GUNG Se noccccccecscouccocescee: 9, 16,17 
Duane v. Government Employees Inc. Co., 784 F. 
Supp. 1209 (D. Md. 1992) ............cccneee 23 


Excess & Casualty Reinsurance Ass'n v. Insurance 
Comm 'r of California, 656 F.2d 491 (9th Cir. 


PETE cccccccescccccescccccccccccescesccese 3 
Foster v. Chesapeake Inc. Co., 933 F.2d 1207 (3d 
Cir.), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 908 (1991) ........ 14 


Vv 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 
Page 
Fragoso v. Lopez, 991 F.2d 878 (ist Cir. 1993).... 23 
Garamendi v. Allstate Ins. Co., 47 F.3d 350 (9th Cir. 
Sie centenseekeeb onc eecetcesencedeseeses passim 
Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co. v. Huffman, 319 
MP i ccecedsckdcevacodedbénences 24 
Hager v. Davis Transport, Inc., 901 F.2d 1470 (8th 
SL DEE bc dad dnbddecddacnsiadss c6ebuéecees 5 
Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp. v. Epstein, 370 
Pic ccccdnckdacdddéecdasedsonce 12 
Karl Koch Erecting Co. v. New York Convention Ctr. 
Dev. Corp., 838 F.2d 656 (2d Cir. 1988) ....... 15 
McDermott Int'l v. Lloyds Underwriters of London, 
944 F.2d 1199 (Sth Cir. 1991) ................ 14, 15 
Melahn v. Pennock Ins., Inc., 965 F.2d 1497 (8th Cir. 
Di eculdiieteesshdéanehstnnseanneuks 14, 15, 21 


Minot v. Eckardt-Minot, \3 F.3d 590 (2d Cir. 1994) 15, 16 


Mobil Oil Corp. v. City of Long Beach, 772 F.2d 534 
Dt Mi cnccudndetechensasedhaceedeeke 18 


Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. 
Ss Ge ee © GE ebecceccocesoccecess passim 


New Orleans Public Service, Inc. v. Council of City of 
New Orleans, 491 U.S. 350 (1989)... ......... passim 


Pas v. Travelers Ins. Co., 7 F.3d 349 (3d Cir. 1993) 14 
Pelleport Investors, Inc. v. Budco Quality Theatres, 


Inc., 741 F.2d 273 (9th Cir. 1984)............. 13,14 
Regis Assocs. v. Rank Hotels (Management) Lid., 
894 F.2d 193 (6th Cir. 1990) ..............05. 14 


Ruhlin v. New York Life Ins. Co., 304 U.S. 202 
GREED cc ccccecescccecooccescacscecounccens 20 


vi 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases 
Page 
Salve Regina College v. Russell, 499 U.S. 225 (1991) 20 
Schlagenhauf v. Holder, 379 U.S. 104 (1964) ..... 17 
Thermtron Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer, 423 U.S. 
SBE CIDTED . ccccccccccccccceccccccecs 6, 8, 11, 12, 15 
University of Md. v. Peat Marwick Main & Co., 923 
P26 BBS (96 Gide. IBGE) .ncccccccccccccccsess 18, 23 
West v. American Tel. & Tel. Co., 311 U.S. 223 
CIDEB) .ncccccccccccesccccccccececes : re i 20 
Wol v. Mutual Life Ins. Co., 51 F. 
he Che 1995) —_ ” tite iseende 14, 21, 22, 27 
Younger v. Harris, 401 U.S. 37 (1971) ........... 24, 25 
Statutes 
Federal Anbditration Act, 9 U.S.C. §§ 1-16........ 2, 5, 19 
DEIDE. BOD cccccccccccssccccencvcedsecsces 16 
McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1011-1015...... 2 
I UE ccccccecncecncdctsscesessccesds 12, 13, 16 
RE BONE cccccccccccecccccccccscpeseseeses 5 
I cn ctvenidilidanansiecsdiacion 2,6, 11, 15 
Rules 
Supreme Court Rule of Procedure, Rule 14.1(f)....... 2 
Other Authorities 


E. Chemerinsky, FEDERAL JURISDICTION § 12.3 at 
GED GEE ovcccccccecccccnccsocdscessences 13 


Vii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Other Authorities 


Page 


R. Jacks, Arbitration & Insurer Insolvencies: The 
Triumph of Common Sense Over Abstract 
Principle, in ABA NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON 
INSURER INSOLVENCY, LAW & PRACTICE OF 
INSURANCE COMPANY INSOLVENCY at 260, 261 
SU obs badidbuiicbel Vdwdiiescméedeeddceese 19 


H. Kramer, The Nature of Reinsurance, at 1-3, in R. 
Strain (ed.), REINSURANCE (1980) ........... 3 
Spector, When Your Reinsurance Partner Goes Bust, 


in Best’s Review: Property-CASUALTY INs. 
See ET dduntindedGaltubucdaetencdcccecse 19, 20 


19 C. Wright, A. Miller, & E. Cooper, Feperat 
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE: JURISDICTION § 4507 
PEED APUGRECUKOd dabannibsabedeuecesehene 20 


No. 95-244 
In the 


Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


CHUCK QUACKENBUSH, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER 
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, IN His CAPACITY AS 
LIQUIDATOR AND TRUSTEE OF THE MISSION 
INSURANCE COMPANY TRUST, MISSION NATIONAL 
INSURANCE COMPANY TRUST, ENTERPRISE INSURANCE 
COMPANY TRUST, HOLLAND-AMERICA INSURANCE 
COMPANY TRUST AND MISSION REINSURANCE 
CORPORATION TRUST, 

Petitioner, 
vs. 

ALLSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY, 


Respondent. 


On Petition For Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Ninth Circuit 
BRIEF IN OPPOSITION TO PETITION 
FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


Respondent Allstate Insurance Company (“Allstate”) 
respectfully submits this brief in opposition to the Petition 
for Writ of Certiorari filed by Petitioner Chuck Quacken- 
bush, Insurance Commissioner of the State of California, as 
the Liquidator of the Mission Group of Insurance Compa- 
nies (“the Liquidator’). 


2 


OPINIONS BELOW 


Allstate does not disagree with the citations to the 
opinions below contained in the Petition. In addition, All- 


state reproduces as Appendix | the order of the Ninth 
Circuit issued on February 14, 1992 denying the Liquida- 
tor’s motion to dismiss the appeal below. 


JURISDICTION 


Allstate agrees with the statement of jurisdiction con- 
tained in the Petition. 


STATUTES INVOLVED 


In addition to those statutes cited in the Petition, 
Allstate identifies 28 U.S.C. § 1447 and the Federal Arbitra- 
tion Act, 9 U.S.C. §§ 1-16, as statutes involved in this case. 
Those provisions are set forth in Appendix 2 hereto. 


Allstate disagrees with the Liquidator’s assertion that 
the McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1011-1015, and 
the cited provisions of the California Insurance Code (Pet. 
Cert., at 2) are involved in this case within the meaning of 


this Court’s Rule 14.1(f). 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This is a civil damages action filed by the California 
Insurance Commissioner as liquidator of five members of 
the Mission Group of Insurance Companies (“Mission ). 
The lawsuit was filed in Los Angeles Superior Court in 
June 1990 against Allstate and several other companies that 
had reinsured Mission affiliates.’ The dispute vis-a-vis 


'The term “reinsurance” refers to the practice by which one insurer 
spreads its insurance risk by assigning (or “coding ) portions of its = 
to other insurance companies acting as reinsurers. Typically, the 


a tee 


3 


Missionand Allstate arises from Allstate’s having been both 
reinsured by Mission and a reinsurer of Mission under more 
than five thousand separate reinsurance agreements entered 
into during the period of November 1976 to August 1984. 
The Liquidator seeks to recover reinsurance balances of 
approximately $7 million allegedly due from Allstate as a 
reinsurer of Mission. Allstate disputes the balances claimed 
from it, contending, among other defenses, that Allstate is 
entitled to set off approximately $24 million in reinsurance 
balances that are due Allstate from Mission as Allstate’s 
reinsurer.’ 


Though this action was filed by the California Insur- 
ance Commissioner in his capacity as liquidator of Mission, 
the lawsuit is a straightforward commercial reinsurance 
dispute. The claims asserted by the Liquidator are entirely 
derivative of those held by Mission before its insolvency. 
The Liquidator contends, principally, that Allstate breached 
its contractual obligations to Mission by failing to pay 
reinsurance balances that are due. Based on this allegation, 
the Commissioner’s complaint states claims for breach of 
contract, tortious breach of the covenant of good faith and 
fair dealing, tortious denial of the existence of contract, and 
declaratory relief. 


Just as important, the only remedy sought by the 
Liquidator is an award of money damages for the reinsur- 


reinsurers agree to assume a percentage of the risk under an insurance 
policy or class of policies in return for a corresponding share of the 
premiums. See generally H. Kramer, The Nature of Reinsurance, at 1-3, 
in R. Strain (ed.), REINSURANCE (1980). 


*The $7 and $24 million figures consist of three categories: paid 
losses, reserves established for known claims, and reserves for “incurred 
but not reported” claims (known in the industry as “IBNR"), that is, 
claims for losses that have been incurred but have not been reported by 
the insured. 


4 


ance balances allegedly due.’ Thus, this lawsuit presents no 
risk of interference with any state administrative proceeding 
or policy. Indeed, the only impact this case can have on the 
liquidation of Mission is that, if the Liquidator prevails, 
there will be marginally more money available to distribute 
to Mission’s creditors than the $1.2 billion the Liquidator 
has reportedly collected from other reinsurers. 


In fact, the California Insurance Commissioner rou- 
tinely files collection actions like this case in state and 
federal courts throughout the country. For this reason, the 
California Superior Court order appointing the Commis- 
sioner as Mission’s liquidator expressly empowers him to 
bring suits “in other state courts” to recover assets on 
Mission’s behalf.* The federal courts, over a period of years, 
have asserted jurisdiction repeatedly over precisely such civil 
collection suits by liquidators of insolvent insurers — includ- 
ing suits by the California Insurance Commissioner secking 
to recover reinsurance balances due an insolvent insurer.” 


*The Commissioner also prays for the functionally equivalent 
remedy of a declaration as to the parties’ respective liability under the 
reinsurance agreements at issuc. 

“See “Order Appointing Liquidator and Restraining Order” in- 
cluded in Appendix E to the Petition for Certiorari at page 119a. 
Paragraph 13 of this Order provides: 

[The] liquidator is hereby authorized to initiate such equitable or 

legal actions or proceedings in this or other states as may appear to 

him necessary to carry out his function as liquidator. 
Appendix at 12la (emphasis supplied). 

*See, e.g. American Re-Insurance Co. v. Insurance Comm'r of 
California, 527 F. Supp. 444 (C.D. Cal. 1981) (diversity suit brought by 
a reinsurer seeking declaratory relief against the California Insurance 
Commissioner as receiver for an insolvent insurer); Excess & Casualty 
Reinsurance Ass'n v. Insurance Comm'r of California, 656 F.2d 491 
(9th Cir. 1981) (interpleader suit brought by a reinsurer secking a 
determination of who should receive reinsurance proceeds upon the 
insolvency of a reinsured company); Jn Re Delta America Re Insurance 


5 


Allstate removed this action on August 2, 1990 to the 
United States District Court for the Central District of 
California on the basis of diversity of citizenship.° Allstate 
then moved under the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. 
§§ 1-16, to compel arbitration of the Liquidator’s claims 
against it based on arbitration agreements contained in 
virtually all of the reinsurance agreements between Allstate 
and Mission.’ The District Court ordered the motion off 
calendar to consider first whether the action should proceed 
in the federal court. 


Co., 900 F.2d 890 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 890 (1990) (rever- 
sing order remanding to state court suit brought by Kentucky Insurance 
Commissioner to recover reinsurance proceeds due insolvent insurer); 
Hager v. Davis Transport, Inc., 901 F.2d 1470 (8th Cir. 1990) (suit by 
Iowa Insurance Commissioner seeking to recover unpaid premiums due 
insolvent insurer, action removed to federal court by defendant insurer); 
Ainsworth v. Allstate Ins. Co., 634 F. Supp. 52 (W.D. Mo. 1985) (suit 
by Missouri receiver of two insolvent insurers to recover reinsurance 
balances; defendants removed action to federal court, which ordered 
arbitration). 

*There were 19 reinsurers named as defendants in the Superior 
Court lawsuit against Allstate. Of these defendants, ony two — Allstate 
and the Insurance Company of North America (INA) — were ever 
served. Allstate removed the Superior Court action to federal court on 
the ground that there was diversity jurisdiction vis-a-vis Allstate and the 
Commissioner and the claims asserted against Allstate were separate 
and independent of the claims alleged against non-diverse defendants, 
permitting removal under 28 U.S.C. § 1441(c). Subsequently, the 
Commissioner filed a notice of dismissal of all non-diverse defendants. 
This led Allstate and INA to file a supplemental petition to remove 
based on complete diversity between the plaintiff and the remaining 
defendants. . 

"Arbitration agreements are contained in each of the large reinsur- 
ance “treaties” entered into between Allstate and Mission. These 
reinsurance treaties, some 67 in number, cover large classes of business, 
and give rise to the vast majority of the reinsurance balances in dispute. 
The other reinsurance agreements, covering a single, large risk, are 
known as “facultative certificates”; virtually all of these agreements also 
contained provisions for binding industry arbitration. 


6 


On July 3, 1991, the District Court entered an order 
remanding the case to Los Angeles Superior Court. The 
District Court’s remand order, while rejecting most of the 
Liquidator’s arguments in support of his remand motion, 
concluded that it was proper to abstain from exercising 
jurisdiction over this case under Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 
U.S. 315 (1943). The District Court emphasized that a 
central issue in this case is Allstate’s defense of set-off, i.e., 
that Allstate is entitled to set off balances due it from 
Mission against the balances the Commissioner secks to 
recover on Mission’s behalf. Noting that this issue was 
controlled by state law and that the Los Angeles Superior 
Court had developed an “intimate familiarity” with the law 
in this area, the District Court concluded that Burford 
abstention was warranted. 


Allstate timely appealed from the remand order. All- 
state’s notice of appeal prayed that, in the event the appeal 
were found not to lie, it be treated as a petition for writ of 
mandamus. After the parties’ opening briefs had been filed, 
the Insurance Commissioner moved for an order dismissing 
the appeal and peremptorily denying the petition for writ of 
mandamus on the ground that no abuse of discretion could 
be shown. The Ninth Circuit denied the motion to dismiss, 
noting that “[b]ecause the remand order was not based on 
jurisdictional grounds, the prohibition on appellate review 
imposed by 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d) does not apply.” Febru- 
ary 14, 1992 Order (attached as Appendix 1) at 1-2 (citing 
Thermtron Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer, 423 U.S. 336, 
345-52 (1976)). The Ninth Circuit’s order did not resolve 
the question of whether review was available by appeal or 
mandamus, referring this issue “to the merits panel for such 
consideration as it deems appropriate.” Jd. at p.2. 


Oral argument was held before the Ninth Circuit on 
November 5, 1993. On February 2, 1995 the Ninth Circuit, 
in a unanimous opinion, reversed the order of remand. The 


7 


Ninth Circuit first concluded that Allstate’s appeal from the 
remand order was proper. The Ninth Circuit noted that, in 
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 
460 U.S. 1, 11-13 (1983), this Court had held that some 
“orders declining to exercise jurisdiction may be appeal- 
able” under the collateral order doctrine established in 
Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp. Noting that 
Moses H. Cone held that “an order staying a federal action 
pursuant to abstention... qualifies as an appealable final 
collateral order,” the Ninth Circuit concluded “that a re- 
mand order based on abstention” likewise is “a final collat- 
eral order that is reviewable on appeal.” Garamendi v. 
Allstate Ins. Co., 47 F.3d 350, 353 (9th Cir. 1995). 


Having found that the remand order was properly 
appealable, the Ninth Circuit then concluded that absten- 
tion was not appropriate in this case. Noting that the 
Commissioner merely sought to recover money damages on 
behalf of Mission and did not seek any equitable relief that 
might interfere with the ongoing proceedings for the liquida- 
tion of Mission, the Ninth Circuit concluded that abstention 
under Burford was not justified. Relying on the carefully 
chosen words of this Court’s opinions in a series of Burford 
abstention cases, the court below concluded that Burford 
abstention — long recognized as a power of federal courts 
sitting in equity — should not be extended to simple actions 
at law for the recovery of money damages. Any other result, 
the Ninth Circuit concluded, would contravene the federal 
courts’ “virtually unflagging” obligation to exercise the juris- 
diction conferred upon them by the Constitution. 47 F.3d at 
356 (quoting New Orleans Public Service, Inc. v. Council of 
City of New Orleans, 491 U.S. 350, 361 (1989)). 


On February 16, 1995, the Commissioner filed a peti- 
tion for rehearing and suggestion for rehearing en banc, 
arguing for the first time that the Commissioner in fact 
secks equitable relief, namely a declaration of the parties’ 


respective liability. On May 19, 1995, the Ninth Circuit 
denied rehearing. The Court’s order noted that the Commis- 
sioner had not previously argued that its declaratory relief 
claim was equitable in nature and therefore could not be 
heard to raise this argument for the first time in a petition 
for rehearing. (See Pet. Cert., Appendix C.) 


SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 


Neither of the issues on which the Liquidator urges this 
Court to grant review, Allstate submits, justifies intervention 
at this time by the nation’s highest court. On the first issue 
identified by the Liquidator — the appealability of remand 
orders — there is substantial unanimity in the Courts of 
Appeals. In the wake of this Court’s ruling in Thermtron 
Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer, 423 U.S. 336, 345-52 
(1976), the lower courts have uniformly recognized that 
many orders of remand — namely, those not based on 
defects in removal procedure — are subject to appellate 
review. The courts likewise are in agreement that at least 
some remand orders are reviewable by appeal, and not 
merely by mandamus. For instance, every Circuit Court to 
consider the issue has held that remand orders based on a 
forum selection clause contained in an agreement between 
the litigants represents a final order on a collateral matter 
permitting appeal under Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan 
Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949). 


The Liquidator argues, however, that the Circuit 
Courts are not fully in agreement on whether remand orders 
based on abstention qualify for appeal under the collateral 
order doctrine. The Ninth Circuit below held that they do, a 
ruling that seems compelled by this Court's holding in 
Moses H. Cone that an order staying a federal court suit 
based on abstention is a final, appealable order. With con- 
siderable reluctance, the Second Circuit seven years ago 
reached a contrary conclusion, expressly noting that it felt 


9 


bound to follow earlier circuit precedent that seemed incon- 
sistent with the holding in Moses H. Cone. Corcoran v. 
Ardra Ins. Co., 842 F.2d 31 (2d Cir. 1988). More recently, 
in Doughty v. Underwriters at Lloyd's, London, 6 F.3d 856 
(Ist Cir. 1993), the First Circuit held that a particular 
abstention-based remand order was not appealable, notwith- 
standing the holding of Moses H. Cone. But the First Circuit 
went out of its way to note that “there is no absolute rule 
either prohibiting or permitting immediate appellate review 
of remand-related orders under the Cohen rubric,” and that 
“courts must apply the multi-pronged Cohen test to cach 
remand order (or, at least, to each type of remand order) in 
an individualized, case-specific manner.” 6 F.3d at 862 
(emphasis in original). Thus, in future First Circuit deci- 
sions, many and perhaps all abstention-based remand orders 
may be found to be appealable on their particular facts. 


The other issue the Liquidator urges as a basis for 
granting review is whether the Ninth Circuit correctly held 
that Burford abstention does not apply in garden-variety 
civil damages actions like this one. For several reasons, this 
issue does not afford a basis for intervention by this Court at 
the present time. As a starting point, the Liquidator would 
not have the Court even reach this issue, since the Liquida- 
tor contends that Allstate should not have been permitted to 
appeal from the remand order. To the extent, therefore, 
there is any merit to the appealability issue, it casts doubt on 
whether the Court would be called upon even to consider 
the seemingly weightier issue of whether Burford abstention 
should be extended to garden-variety civil damages actions. 


In any event, as demonstrated below, the Ninth Cir- 
cuit’s holding on the abstention issue is compelled by a 
series of decisions by this Court, culminating in New 
Orleans Public Service, Inc. v. Council of City of New 
Orleans, 491 U.S. 350 (1989) (“NOPST"). The essence of 
the Burford abstention doctrine is that in exceptional cases a 


10 


federal court may decline to exercise its jurisdiction to avoid 


court level for the present time. Since this Court’s decision 
in NOPSI, the Ninth Circuit has held that Burford absten- 


equitable arena. But if developments turn out otherwise and 


the circuits fail to reach accord on the scope of this 
abstention doctrine, there will be ample opportunity at that 
time for this Court to intervene. 


ARGUMENT 
L 


THE DISTRICT COURT’S REMAND ORDER WAS A 
COLLATERALLY FINAL ORDER WHICH GAVE 
RISE TO A RIGHT OF APPEAL. 


The first ground urged by the Liquidator in support of 
the Petition for Certiorari arises from the Ninth Circuit's 
holding that the District Court’s order of remand is appeal- 
able under the collateral order doctrine. For several reasons, 
Allstate submits, this holding does not present a basis for 

On its face, 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d) seems to preclude 
appellate review of remand orders. That section provides 
that such orders are “not reviewable on appeal or other- 
wise.” However, since this Court's decision in Thermtron 
Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer, 423 U.S. 336, 345-52 
(1976), it has been settled that “only remand orders issued 
under [28 U.S.C.] § 1447(c) and invoking the grounds 
specified therein — that removal was improvident and with- 
out jurisdiction—are immune from review under 
§ 1447(d).” Id. at 346. Allstate knows of no decision, and 
the Liquidator cites none, even sugge*ting that a remand 
order based on abstention is one issued under sec- 
tion 1447(c) which is immune from all forms of appellate 
review. 

Thus, the only issue of potential controversy here is 
whether remand orders based on abstention are reviewable 
by appeal, and not merely by mandamus. As the Court of 
Appeals noted below, in Thermtron this Court initially 
suggested that mandamus was the appropriate means of 


——— Se 


12 


appellate review in suci) circumstances. 47 F.3d at 353, 
citing Thermtron, 423 U.S. at 352-53. As the Ninth Circuit 
went on to note, however, this Court later recognized — in 
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 
460 U.S. | (1983) — that some orders of abstention may 
properly be appealed as final orders under the collateral 
order doctrine of Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 
337 U.S. 541 (1949). 47 F.3d at 353. 


In Moses H. Cone, this Court held that an order staying 
a federal case on the basis of Colorado River’ abstention was 
directly appealable. 460 U.S. at 9-13. The Court reasoned 
that “a stay of the federal suit pending resolution of the state 
suit meant that there would be no further litigation in the 
federal forum,” and therefore the defendant was “ ‘effec- 
tively out of [federal] court.’” 460 U.S. at 10-11 (quoting 
Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp. v. Epstein, 370 U.S. 713, 
715 n.2 (1962) ). As a result, the Court concluded, the order 
of stay was a final order appealable under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. 
460 US. at 13. 


The stay order in Moses H. Cone also qualified for 
appeal, the Court held, under the Cohen collateral order 
doctrine. The Court noted that the factors “required to show 
finality” under the Cohen rule are as follows: 


To come within the ‘small class’ of decisions 
excepted from the final judgment rule by Cohen, 
the order must [1] conclusively determine the 
disputed question, [2] resolve an important issue 
completely separate from the merits of the action, 


"Colorado River Water Conservation Dist. v. United States, 424 
U.S. 800 (1976). 


13 


and [3] be effectively unreviewable on appeal 
from a final judgment. 


460 US. at 11-12 (quoting Coopers & Lybrand v. Livesay 
437 U.S. 463, 468 (1978) (footnote omitted)). The stay 


order, this Court concluded, met each of these three 
requirements. 


As the Ninth Circuit observed, an order of remand 
even more clearly satisfies the three prongs of the Cohen 
test. Indeed, if anything a remand order more clearly puts 
the parties “effectively out of federal court” than does an 
order merely staying the federal proceeding. Likewise, when 
Burford abstention is invoked in a lawsuit commenced in a 
federal court, it typically results in an order of dismissal,’ 
which then is appealable as a final order under 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1291. Thus, it would be anomalous at best if an order of 
remand based on abstention were not reviewable by appeal, 
when equivalent abstention rulings resulting in stay or dis- 

It therefore comes as no surprise that the Ninth Cir- 
cuit, relying principally on Moses H. Cone, concluded that 
the District Court’s remand order here gave rise to a right of 
appeal under the collateral order doctrine. The Ninth Cir- 
cuit’s ruling finds considerable support in previous rulings, 
both within the Ninth Circuit and by other circuits, dating 
back more than a decade. In Pelleport Investors, Inc. v. 
Budco Quality Theatres, Inc., 741 F.2d 273 (9th Cir. 1984), 
the Court of Appeals held that a remand order based on a 
“substantive decision on the merits apart from any jurisdic- 
tional decision” — namely, the enforceability of a forum 
selection clause contained in a contract between the par- 
ties — is appealable under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 as a collaterally 


* See generally E. Chemerinsky, FEDERAL JURISDICTION § 12.3 at 
612 (1989) (Burford abstention “requires the federal court to dismiss 
the case”). 


14 


final order. 741 F.2d at 276. Several other circuits have 
endorsed this rule. See McDermott Int'l v. Lloyds Underwrit- 
ers of London, 944 F.2d 1199, 1203 (Sth Cir. 1991) (“we 
review the district court’s remand order, which the court 
issued pursuant to [a forum selection clause in] the parties’ 
contract, on appeal under Cohen's collateral order doc- 
trine”); Foster v. Chesapeake Ins. Co., 933 F.2d 1207, 1211 
(3d Cir.), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 908 (1991) (“an order 
remanding a case pursuant to a forum selection clause is 
‘final’ for purposes of... the collateral order doctrine”’); 
Regis Assocs. v. Rank Hotels (Management) Lid., 894 F.2d 
193, 194 (6th Cir. 1990) (appeal lies from order remanding 
action based on forum selection clause, under rule that “a 
remand order is reviewable on appeal when it is based on a 
substantive decision on the merits of a collateral issue as 
opposed to just matters of jurisdiction”). Most recently, the 
Eighth Circuit — permitting a direct appeal from an order 
declining to lift a previously-imposed stay on federal pro- 
ceedings — broadly held that oo nee See ee 
staining because of a parallel state proceeding. . 
appealable under the collateral-order doctrine.” Wolfson v. v. 
Mutual Benefit Life Ins. Co., 51 F.3d 141, 144 (8th Cir. 
1995). This holding is not without a touch of irony here, 
since Wolfson is the decision on which the Liquidator 
principally relies in urging this Court’s review of the Ninth 
Circuit’s ruling on the merits of whether abstention was 
proper in this case. 


The Liquidator contends that two decisions — one in 
the First and the other in the Second Circuit — are not in 


accord with the foregoing views, and that this divergence 
supports the grant of certiorari.'° The Second Circuit deci- 


The Liquidator does not rely on two other decisions which, 
discussing the issue only briefly, conclude that remand orders based on 
abstention are reviewable by mandamus rather than appeal. Pas v. 
Travelers Ins. Co., 7 F.3d 349, 353 (3d Cir. 1993); Melahn v. Pennock 


15 


sion on which the Liquidator relies, Corcoran v. Ardra Ins. 
Co., 842 F.2d 31 (2d Cir. 1988), did hold that a remand 
order based on abstention should be reviewed by mandamus 
rather than appeal. 842 F.2d at 34-35. It has been ques- 
tioned whether this ruling was consistent with another 
Second Circuit case, Karl Koch Erecting Co. v. New York 
Convention Ctr. Dev. Corp., 838 F.2d 656, 658-59 (2d Cir. 
1988), allowing a direct from a remand order based 
on a forum selection clause.'’ And in Corcoran v. Ardra, the 
Second Circuit regarded the kind of suit before it as present- 
ing a powerful case for the review by appeal that it felt 
reluctantly bound not to allow. As the Second Circuit 
stated: “Under the surrender-of-federal-jurisdiction test 
used in Moses Cone, we wonder whether it can logically or 
prudently remain the rule that a reviewable remand order 
(i.e., one whose review is not barred by § 1447(d)) is not 
reviewable by direct appeal.” 842 F.2d at 34. 


Moreover, the most recent Second Circuit decision on 
point appears to limit Corcoran v. Ardra to its facts. In 
Minot v. Eckardt-Minot, 13 F.3d 590 (2d Cir. 1994), the 
Second Circuit permitted a direct appeal from an absten- 
tion-based order of remand, issued because related child 
custody issues were pending in state court. See 13 F.3d at 
593. The Second Circuit found that Corcoran v. Ardra did 
not compel a different result, since “Corcoran explained that 
when a district court’s remand conclusively determines a 


Ins., Inc., 965 F.2d 1497, 1500-01 (8th Cir. 1992). Both decisions base 
their ruling on Thermiron, failing to address this Court's later holding in 
Moses H. Cone that stay orders based on abstention are appealablie. 
Thus, as the Liquidator appears to recognize, neither decision can be 
said to present a meaningful conflict with the Ninth Circuit's decision 
below. 


'' See McDermott Int'l v. Lloyds Underwriters of London, 944 F.2d 
at 1203 n.5 (“We think that Corcoran [v. Ardra] was wrongly 
decided ...[T]}he Corcoran court did not adequately distinguish Kari 
Koch Erecting Co... .”). 


16 


collateral question (such as where the merits of a litigation 
will be resolved), that decision is appealable under the 
collateral-order doctrine.” Jd. The court concluded that 
“{s]ince the remand order in this case conclusively deter- 
mined that a state court would decide the merits of the 
underlying dispute, direct appeal of the remand decision is 
appropriate.” /d. Based on this language, it seems clear that 
the Second Circuit would have allowed an appeal in the 
present case, just as the Ninth Circuit did.'? 


The only other decision on which the Liquidator relies 
is Doughty v. Underwriters at Lloyd's, London, 6 F.3d 856 
(Ist Cir. 1993). As a practical matter, it is far from clear 
that Doughty represents any actual coaflict with the Ninth 
Circuit. Doughty first holds that a remand order is not a 
“final order” under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, a question not 
reached by the Ninth Circuit, which held only that an 
abstention-based remand order is appealable as a collater- 
ally final order under Cohen. Compare Doughty, 6 F.3d at 
860-62 with Garamendi, 47 F.3d at 353. While Doughty 
ruled that the remand order before the court did not qualify 
for direct appeal under the collateral order doctrine, the 


"The Second Circuit apparently found Corcoran v. Ardra distin- 
guishable because the defendants there had removed the action on the 
basis of 9 U.S.C. § 205, which permits removal of any state court action 
relating to “an arbitration agreement or award falling under the [ Foreign 
Arbitral Awards] Convention,” and the federal court had not ruled on 
the question of whether the defendants were entitled to compel arbitra- 
tion under the Convention. Thus, the remand order in Corcoran v. Ardra 
“return[ed] to the state court the threshold question of where the 
underlying dispute is to be decided.” Minot, 13 F.3d at 593 n.1. 
Although Allstate also seeks to compel arbitration, Allstate removed the 
present case on the basis of diversity jurisdiction, not 9 U.S.C. § 205. 
Thus, there is an independent basis for federal jurisdiction here unre- 
lated to Allstate’s motion to compel arbitration. On these facts, it seems 
clear that the Second Circuit would recognize a right of appeal from an 
abstention-based remand order. 


17 


First Circuit did not adopt a blanket rule that such orders 
never are appealable. Instead, the First Circuit held that: 


[T]here is no absolute rule either prohibiting or 
permitting immediate appellate review of remand- 
related orders under the Cohen rubric. . . . Rather, 
courts must apply the multi-pronged Cohen test to 
each remand order (or, at least, to each type of 
remand order) in an individualized, case-specific 
manner. 


Id. at 862 (emphasis in original). 


This holding leaves open the substantial possibility that, 
in practice, the First Circuit may permit subsequent appeals 
in remand orders based on abstention, as application of the 
three-part Cohen test may dictate in a given case. As a 
practical matter, therefore, the First Circuit’s decision may 
represent no departure, or only a minimal departure, from 
the views expressed by the Ninth Circuit panel. At a 
minimum, it would be prudent to await further doctrinal 
developments in the First Circuit, which will demonstrate 
the degree, if any, to which the decisions of the First and 
Ninth Circuits are in conflict. 

Even if there were a conflict among the circuits regard- 
ing the appealability of abstention-based remand orders, 
that conflict would have little practical impact on the 
resolution of like cases. Whether review is had by appeal or 
by mandamus may not affect the ultimate outcome at the 
appellate level. In the Ninth Circuit, for instance, decisions 
to abstain— once the “requirements for the abstention 
doctrine being invoked” are mei — are reviewed on appeal 
for abuse of discretion. Garamendi, 47 F.3d at 354. An 
abuse of discretion standard is also employed in mandamus 
review. Schlagenhauf v. Holder, 379 U.S. 104, 110 (1964). 
In either case, the courts have recognized that a substan- 
tially heightened abuse of discretion standard should apply. 


18 


In light of the obligation of the federal courts to exercise the 
jurisdiction conferred on them except in the most excep- 
tional cases, “there is little or no discretion to abstain in a 
case which does not meet traditional abstention require- 
ments.” Mobil Oil Corp. v. City of Long Beach, 772 F.2d 
534, 540 (9th Cir. 1985) (quoting C-Y Dev. Co. v. City of 
Redlands, 703 F.2d 375, 377 (9th Cir. 1983)); accord 
University of Md. v. Peat Marwick Main & Co., 923 F.2d 
265, 269-70 (3d Cir. 1991) (“The determination of whether 
this case falls in the area within which the district court may 
exercise discretion [to abstain] is therefore a matter of law, 
reviewable on a plenary basis.”) Thus, even if the Circuit 
Courts eventually diverge on the question of whether re- 
mand orders based on abstention are reviewable by appeal or 
only by mandamus, this does not necessarily betoken any 
material disparity in the resolution of the ultimate issue 
presented — namely whether abstention was proper. 


It is to that question that Allstate now turns. 


Il. 


THE NINTH CIRCUIT’S ABSTENTION ORDER IS 
CONSISTENT WITH THIS COURT’S PREVIOUS 
RULINGS AND WITH THE CURRENT TREND IN 
THE CASELAW. 


The starting point for any examination of whether a 
District Court should abstain from hearing a dispute within 
the jurisdiction conferred upon it is to recognize that absten- 
tion is an extraordinary step that can be justified only in very 
rare circumstances. This Court has emphasized the “virtu- 
ally unflagging obligation of the federal courts to exercise 
the jurisdiction given them.” Colorado River Water Conser- 


19 


vation Dist. v. United States, 424 U.S. 800, 817 (1976). This 
Court likewise has held: 


The doctrine of abstention ... is an extraordinary 
and narrow exception to the duty of a District 
Court to adjudicate a controversy properly before 
it. Abdication of the obligation to decide cases can 
be justified under this doctrine only in the excep- 
tional circumstances where the order to the parties 
to repair to the State court would clearly serve an 
important countervailing interest. 


Moses H. Cone, 460 U.S. at 14 (quoting Colorado River, 
424 USS. at 813). 


Moses H. Cone also established another controlling 
principle: “[T]he presence of federal law issues must always 
be a major consideration weighing against surrender” of 
jurisdiction by the federal district court. 460 U.S. at 26. This 
observation could hardly be of more obvious import here, 
since the federal law issue present in Moses H. Cone is the 
identical federal law issue presented here — whether 
arbitration of the plaintiff's claims must be ordered under 
the Federal Arbitration Act. 


The fact that Allstate removed this case based on the 
federal court’s diversity jurisdiction is also a relevant factor 
in addressing the Burford abstention issue. First, this case is 
a paradigmatic one for invocation of diversity jurisdiction: 
Allstate is an out-of-state defendant which prefers to litigate 
against a state official in federal rather than state court.'’ 


'’ See R. Jacks, Arbitration & Insurer Insolvencies: The Triumph of 
Common Sense Over Abstract Principle, in ABA NATIONAL INSTITUTE 
ON INSURER INSOLVENCY, LAW & PRACTICE OF INSURANCE Com- 
PANY INSOLVENCY at 260, 261 (1986) (“state rehabilitators and 
liquidators prefer to resolve disputes between insurers and their reinsur- 
ers in a friendly forum where they can expect to be treated with 
something more than normal deference”); Spector, When Your Rein- 


20 


The grant of diversity jurisdiction gave Allstate the right to 
choose between these forums. Second, the fact that the 
Liquidator’s claims arise under state law does not distin- 
guish this case from any other diversity action, and therefore 
by itself affords no basis for abstention. Federal courts 
decide state law issues, clear and unclear, in every diversity 
case. As this Court recently reaffirmed, “ ‘[a]pplication of 
the ‘State law’ to the present case ... does not present the 
disputants with duties difficult or strange.’”” Salve Regina 
College v. Russell, 499 U.S. 225, 227 (1991) (quoting 
Ruhlin v. New York Life Ins. Co., 304 U.S. 202, 208-09 
(1938)). In fact, a body of jurisprudence has developed 
specifically to aid the federal courts in determining how, in 
the absence of a controlling state court decision, the highest 
court of the state would resolve a particular legal issue. See 
generally 19 C. Wright, A. Miller, & E. Cooper, FEDERAL 
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE: JURISDICTION § 4507 (1982).'* 


While the foregoing principles formed the backdrop for 
the Ninth Circuit’s opinion below, an equally fundamental 
premise was the gist of its ruling. As the Ninth Circuit 
observed, this Court’s decisions supporting abstention under 
Burford have confined that abstention doctrine to equitable 
proceedings rather than actions at law for the recovery of 
money damages. In an opinion that even the Liquidator 
acknowledges was “narrowly focused” (Pet. Cert. at 11), 


surance Partner Goes Bust, in BEst’s REVIEW: PROPERTY-CASUALTY 
Ins. Ep. (1986) (noting that in lawsuits to recover balances due 
insolvent insurers, “liquidators enjoy an enormous home field advan- 
tage” in their own state courts). 


'*For instance, more than 50 years ago this Court instructed that: 


Where an intermediate appellate state court rests its considered 
judgment upon the rule of law which it announces, that is a datum 
for ascertaining state law which is not to be disregarded by a federal 
court unless it is convinced by other persuasive data that the highest 
court of the state would decide otherwise. 


West v. American Tel. & Tel. Co., 311 U.S. 223, 237 (1940). 


21 


the Ninth Circuit found that abstention was improper be- 
cause “the power of federal courts to abstain from exercising 
their jurisdiction, at least in Burford abstention cases, is 
founded upon a discretion they possess only in equitable 
cases.” 47 F.3d at 355-56. 


The Liquidator urges this Court to review this holding 
based on an inter-Circuit conflict allegedly created by a 
single decision: Wolfson v. Mutual Benefit Life Ins. Co., 51 
F.3d 141 (8th Cir. 1995). Wolfson involved an appeal from 
a District Court order declining to lift a stay on an ERISA 
action against an insolvent insurer. The plaintiff, Wolfson, 
sought to recover benefits due under an employee welfare 
benefits plan established by the defendant insurer. The 
insurer was placed into rehabilitation proceedings, leading 
the District Court to stay the ERISA action. The Eighth 
Circuit affirmed the stay, finding both Burford and Colorado 
River abstention principles to support such a ruling. See 51 
F.3d at 145. 


In so holding, the Eighth Circuit emphasized that the 
action was one against the insolvent insurer which sought 
“to establish a claim against the assets being administered 
by the state court.” 51 F.3d at 146. The court distinguished 
a separate category of cases — ones like the present action 
against Allstate “in which the insolvent insurer or its re- 
ceiver has asserted a claim in the federal action which, if 
successful, will enhance the insolvent’s estate.” Jd. at 145. 
The Eighth Circuit noted that it had recently “refused to 
abstain” in such a case because, among other grounds, 
“adjudication of that claim in federal court would neither 
interfere with the receiver’s control of the insolvent nor 
frustrate in any way the state’s interests in the insolvency 
proceeding.” Jd. (citing Melahn v. Pennock Ins., Inc., 965 
F.2d 1497, 1506-07 (8th Cir. 1992). 


Thus, Wolfson unambiguously supports the result 
reached by the Ninth Circuit below. Nor does Wolfson 


_ _ 


22 


present a significant doctrinal conflict with the Ninth Cir- 
cuit’s decision. Wolfson’s only discussion of whether Bur- 
ford abstention should be extended to civil damages actions 
came in a single paragraph at the end of the opinion, in 
which the court observed: 


We think it unwise to make rigid distinctions 
between legal and equitable claims in the merged 
federal system, particularly for claims such as 
those under ERISA whose historical antecedents 
are unclear. No doubt abstention is less apt to be 
appropriate when the federal plaintiff seeks moncy 
damages, but we do not read the Supreme Court's 
abstention jurisprudence as completely foreclosing 
abstention in money damage cases. 
Id. at 147 (citation omitted). 


These brief observations hardly afford a basis for this 
Court’s intervention. To begin with, as already seen, 
Wolfson affirms the Eighth Circuit's rejection of Burford 
abstention in most civil damages actions by liquidators of 
insolvent insurers, the kind of case presented here. Thus, 
Wolfson and Garamendi v. Allstate do not present an 
instance of like cases being decided differently, one hall- 
mark of Supreme Court review. 


Moreover, as the above-quoted language makes clear, 
the Eighth Circuit’s holding emphasizes the fact that the 
claim before it arose under ERISA, and that such statutory 
claims cannot readily be classified as legal or equitable in 
nature. To this extent, Wolfson does little more than suggest 
a possible corollary to the Garamendi v. Allstate holding, 
namely that Burford abstention might apply in cases that 
defy ready definition as equitable or legal. It remains to be 
seen whether the Ninth Circuit will embrace such a corol- 
lary, or instead will strictly apply an “equity only” rule. The 


23 


Ninth Circuit had no occasion to consider that issue here, 
since this case is clearly one at law. 

Likewise, it largely remains to be seen how other 
Courts of Appeals will rule with respect to the application of 
Burford abstention in legal, equitable, and statutory pro- 
ceedings. To the extent other circuits have addressed this 
issue in the wake of NOPSI, they all seem to be in accord 
with the Ninth Circuit's ruling in Garamendi, as the Ninth 
Circuit noted below. See 47 F.3d at 356; see also See 
Fragoso v. Lopez, 99\ F.2d 878, 882 (ist Cir. 1993) (in a 
commercial tort action, “we think it is highly questionable 
whether the court is one ‘sitting in equity’ to which Burford 
abstention might be available”) (footnote omitted); Univer- 
sity of Md. v. Peat Marwick Main & Co., 923 F.2d 265, 271 
(3d Cir. 1991) (rejecting Burford abstention on the ground, 
among others, that “[h]ere, unlike Burford and the other 
Supreme Court cases involving the Burford doctrine, the 
action was at law, not in equity, and sought money dam- 
ages”); Costle v. Fremont Indem. Co., 839 F. Supp. 265, 270 
(D. Vt. 1993) (holding that Burford abstention is inappro- 
priate in action between reinsurer and state insurance com- 
missioner, as liquidator of insolvent insurer, since “the 
NOPS]1 distillation limits abstention under Burford to courts 
sitting in equity”); Duane v. Government Employees Ins. 
Co., 784 F. Supp. 1209, 1223 (D. Md. 1992) (same). 

That the weight of authority so strongly inclines toward 
limiting Burford abstention to equitable proceedings can be 
readily explained: This Court's opinions, culminating in 
NOPSI, dictate precisely such a conclusion. The Ninth 
Circuit traced the evolution of this Court's decisions, see 47 
F.3d at 354-56, and there is no need to repeat that discus- 
sion in detail here. As the Ninth Circuit noted, see 47 F.3d 
at 355, Burford itself made it clear that the abstention 


24 


doctrine it announced was to be applied in equitable 
proceedings: 
Although a federal equity court does have jurisdic- 
tion of a particular proceeding, it may, in its sound 
diserttion ... refuse to enforce or protect legal 
rights, the exercise of which may be prejudicial to 
the public interest. 
319 U.S. at 317-18 (quotation marks and citations omitted; 
emphasis supplied). See also Alabama Public Service 
Comm'n v. Southern Ry. Co., 341 U.S. 341, 350-51 (1951) 
(“a federal court of equity ... should stay its hand in the 
public interest when it reasonably appears that private 
interests will not suffer”) (emphasis supplied; quoting Great 
Lakes Dredge & Dock Co. v. Huffman, 319 U.S. 293, 297-98 
(1943)). 


As the Ninth Circuit noted, this Court has expanded 
some abstention doctrines to “special” classes of damages 
cases. See Garamendi, 47 F.3d at 355 & n.11. But any 
ambiguity regarding the application of Burford abstention to 
run-of-the-mill damages actions such as the present case 
was laid to rest in NOPSI. There, New Orleans Public 
Service, Inc. was challenging a utility ratemaking order of 
the New Orleans City Council. The Council's order partially 
denied NOPSI’s request for a rate increase to reflect costs 
incurred in construction of a nuclear reactor. NOPSI filed a 
state court lawsuit for review of the ratemaking order. It also 
filed a parallel federal court lawsuit, seeking declaratory and 
injunctive relief on the ground that the order was preempted 
by federal law providing for oversight by the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission of the cost allocation. The District 
Court abstained under Burford and Younger v. Harris," and 
the Fifth Circuit affirmed. This Court reversed, holding that 
— whatever the state’s interest in the outcome of the pro- 


S401 U.S. 37 (1971). 


25 


ceeding — the federal court action simply did not present 
the potential interference with state administrative proceed- 
ings to justify federal court abstention. 491 U.S. at 372-73. 


Most important for present purposes was NOPSI's 
delineation of the parameters of Burford abstention. The 
Court’s re-articulation of the Burford abstention doctrine 
began with the observation that “a federal court sitting in 
equity must decline to interfere with the proceedings or 
orders of state administrative agencies” when the requisites 
for Burford abstention are otherwise met. 491 U.S. at 361 


(emphasis supplied). See also id, 491 U.S. at 360 (noting 
that in Burford, this Court concluded that “the exercise of 


ST ee ee ee ee 
District Courts” should be declined) (emphasis 


supplied). 


More fundamentally, this Court in NOPS/] emphasized 
that the Burford abstention doctrine — as a narrow excep- 
tion to the “ ‘virtually unflagging’ ” obligation of the federal 
courts “to adjudicate claims within their jurisdiction” — 
merely confers 

discretion in determining whether to grant certain 

types of relief... Thus, there are some classes of 

cases in which the withholding of authorized equi- 
table relief because of undue interference with 

State proceedings is the ‘normal thing to do.’ 

Id., 491 U.S. at 359 (citations omitted; quoting Younger v. 
Harris, 401 U.S. 37, 45 (1971)). Such discretion has no 
application in a typical action at law, in which the only relief 
sought is an award of money damages. 

Instead, civil damages actions simply do not afford a 
basis for a federal court to abstain from exercising its 
jurisdiction under Burford. As this Court emphasized in 
NOPSI, the fundamental principle underiying Burford ab- 
stention is one of avoiding undue interference with state 


oon EOE LL 


26 


administrative proceedings or orders. See 491 U.S. at 361- 
62. For instance, in Burford, there was an impermissible 
danger of federal interference because the federal court was 
being asked to disapprove the Texas Railway Commission's 
administrative approval of a permit to drill four oil wells, 
when the state had developed “its own elaborate review 
system for dealing with the geological complexities of oil 
and gas fields.” Colorado River, 424 U.S. at 815 (discussing 
Burford, 319 U.S. at 326). 

Thus, in Burford, the federal court’s intervention 
threatened to overturn the state Railway Commission's 
attempt to maintain an intricate balance in the allocation of 
drilling rights. That risk is simply absent in a typical lawsuit 
for damages. No such improper interference would have 
been presented, for instance, if the Texas Railway Commis- 
sion had filed a civil damages action in federal court, as the 
receiver of an insolvent drilling company, to recover pay- 
ments due from third parties. This, of course, is just what 
the Liquidator seeks to do here. 


CONCLUSION 


The Petition for Certiorari fails to show facts that 
justify intervention by this Court. There is substantial una- 
nimity among the circuits on the appealability of remand 
orders in general, and it is uncertain to what extent there is 
any conflict regarding the appealability of abstention-based 
remand orders specifically. Indeed, pending further develop- 
ments in the First Circuit, it may turn out that in practice 
there is no divergence among the lower courts on this issuc. 

If the Liquidator’s position on appealability of the 
remand order were correct, this Court would never even 
reach the other issue on which this Court’s review is urged 
— the more substantive issue of whether Burford can justify 
abstention in this straightforward commercial damages ac- 
tion. For this reason alone, this case is not an appropriate 


H 
H 
A 
af 
A 


tial una- 
nimity among the lower courts. Only the Eighth Circuit's 
decision in Wolfson might be said to depart from the 
prevailing view. But the Wolfson court was careful to limit 
its holding to ERISA cases against the insolvent insurer, as 
opposed to actions at law filed by the insolvent insurer's 
liquidator to recover monies on the insolvent’s behalf. It is a 
telling point that Wolfson — in acknowledging that Burford 
affords no basis for abstaining from civil collection actions 
filed on behalf of insolvent insurers — actually supports the 
result reached by the Ninth Circuit below. 

The Liquidator’s Petition for Certiorari should be 
denied. 


DATED: September 11, 1995 
Respectfully submitted, 


MUNGER TOLLES & OLSON 
Joseru D. Lee 


Attorneys for Respondent 
Allstate Insurance Company 


APPENDIX 1 
MEMORANDUM TO CLERK 
I certify that the judges concerned concur in this order 
and authorize its filing. 
WILLIAM A. NORRIS 
United States Circuit Judge 


No. 91-55855 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


JOHN GARAMENDI,* Insurance Comm. of 
the State of California, in his capacity as liquidator of 
MISSION INSURANCE COMPANY, ¢t al., 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
A. STATE INSURANCE, 
Defendant-Appellant, 
and 
INSURANCE COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA, 


Defendant. 
Filed February 14, 1992 
Cathy A. Catterson, Clerk, U.S. Court of Appeals 
DC# CV-90-4713-WMB 
Central California 
ORDER 
Before: NORRIS and LEAVY, Circuit Judges 


*John Garamendi has been substituted for Roxani Gillespie pursuant 
to Rule 43(c)(1) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure. 


2a 


Appellant’s motion for an extension of time within 
which to file opposition to appellee’s motion to dismiss the 
appeal is granted. The opposition shall be filed as of Janu- 
ary 22, 1992, the date it was received. 


This appeal arises from an order remanding on absten- 
tion grounds. Because the remand order was not based on 
jurisdictional grounds, the prohibition on appellate review 
imposed by 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d) does not apply. See 
Thermtron Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer, 423 U.S. 336, 
345-52. Accordingly, the motion to dismiss is denied. How- 
ever, because it is not clear whether this appeal should be 
more properly treated as a petition for writ of mandamus, we 
refer the papers filed in connection with the motion to 
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction to the merits panel for such 
consideration as it deems appropriate. 

Appellant’s opening brief and appellee’s answering brief 
have been filed. The due date for the reply brief set out in 
this court’s November 6, 1991 order is vacated. The reply 
brief shall be due 14 days from the date of this order. This 


appeal is ready for calendaring. 


3a 


APPENDIX 2 
28 U.S.C. § 1447. Procedure after removal generally 


(a) In any case removed from a State court, the 
district court may issue all necessary orders and process to 
bring before it all proper parties whether served by process 
issued by the State court or otherwise. 


(b) It may require the removing party to file with its 
clerk copies of all records and proceedings in such State 
court or may cause the same to be brought before it by writ 
of certiorari issued to such State court. 


(c) A motion to remand the case on the basis of any 
defect in removal procedure must be made within 30 days 
after the filing of the notice of removal under section 
1446(a). If at any time before final judgment it appears that 
the district court lacks subject matter jurisdiction, the case 
shall be remanded. An order remanding the case may 
require payment of just costs and any actual expenses, 
including attorney fees, incurred as a result of the removal. 
A certified copy of the order of remand shall be mailed by 
the clerk to the clerk of the State court. The State court 
may thereupon proceed with such case. 


(d) An order remanding a case to the State court from 
which it was removed is not reviewable on appeal or other- 
wise, except that an order remanding a case to the State 
court from which it was removed pursuant to section 1443 of 
this title shall be reviewable by appeal or otherwise. 


(¢) If after removal the plaintiff seeks to join addi- 
tional defendants whose joinder would destroy subject mat- 
ter jurisdiction, the court may deny joinder, or permit 
joinder and remand the action to the State court. 


4a 


FEDERAL ARBITRATION ACT 
9 U.S.C. §§ 1-16 


§ 1. “Maritime transactions” and “commerce” defined; 
exceptions to operation of title 


“Maritime transactions”, as herein defined, means 
charter parties, bills of lading of water carriers, agreements 
relating to wharfage, supplies furnished vessels or repairs to 
vessels, collisions, or any other matters in foreign commerce 
which, if the subject of controversy, would be embraced 
within admiralty jurisdiction; “commerce”, as herein de- 
fined, means commerce among the several States or with 
foreign nations, or in any Territory of the United States or in 
the District of Columbia, or between any such Territory and 
another, or between any such Territory and any State or 
foreign nation, or between the District of Columbia and any 
State or Territory or foreign nation, but nothing herein 
contained shai! 2pply to contracts of employment of seamen, 
railroad employees, or any other class of workers engaged in 
foreign or interstate commerce. 


§ 2. Validity, irrevocability, and enforcement of agree- 
ments to arbitrate 


A written provision in any maritime transaction or a 
contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to 
settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter arising out of 
such contract or transaction, or the refusal to perform the 
whole or any part thereof, or an agreement in writing to 
submit to arbitration an existing controversy arising out of 
such a contract, transaction, or refusal, shall be valid, 
irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as 
exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract. 


Sa 


§ 3. Stay of proceedings where issue therein referable to 
arbitration 


If any suit or proceeding be brought in any of the courts 
of the United States upon any issue referable to arbitration 
under an agreement in writing for such arbitration, the court 
in which such suit is pending, upon being satisfied that the 
issue involved in such suit or proceeding is referable to 
arbitration under such an agreement, shall on application of 
one of the parties stay the trial of the action until such 
arbitration has been had in accordance with the terms of the 
agreement, providing the applicant for the stay is not in 
default in proceeding with such arbitration. 


§ 4. Failure to arbitrate under agreement; petition to 
United States court having jurisdiction for order to compel 
arbitration; notice and service thereof; hearing and 
determination 


A party aggrieved by the alleged failure, neglect, or 
refusal of another to arbitrate under a written agreement for 
arbitration may petition any United States district court 
which, save for such agreement, would have jurisdiction 
under Title 28 in a civil action or in admiralty of the subject 
matter of a suit arising out of the controversy between the 
parties, for an order directing that such arbitration proceed 
in the manner provided for in such agreement. Five days’ 
notice in writing of such application shall be served upon the 
party in default. Service thereof shall be made in the 
manner provided by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
[USCS Rules of Civil Procedure]. The court shall hear the 
parties, and upon being satisfied that the making of the 
agreement for arbitration or the failure to comply therewith 
is not in issue, the court shall make an order directing the 
parties to proceed to arbitration in accordance with the 
terms of the agreement. The hearing and proceedings, under 
such agreement, shall be within the district in which the 
petition for an order directing such arbitration is filed. If the 


6a 


making of the arbitration agreement or the failure, neglect, 
or refusal to perform the same be i issue, the court shall 
proceed summarily to the trial thereof. If no jury trial be 
demanded by the party alleged to be in default, or if the 
matter in dispute is within admiralty jurisdiction, the court 
shall hear and determine such issue. Where such an issue is 
raised, the party alleged to be in default may, except in cases 
of admiralty, on or before the return day of the notice of 
application, demand a jury trial of such issue, and upon such 
demand the court shall make an order referring the issue or 
issues to a jury in the manner provided by the Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedure [USCS Rules of Civil Procedure], or 
may specially call a jury for that purpose. If the jury find 
that no agreement in writing for arbitration was made or that 
there is no default in proceeding thereunder, the proceeding 
shall be cismissed. If the jury find that an agreement for 
arbitration was made in writing and that there is a default in 
proceeding thereunder, the court shall make an order sum- 
marily directing the parties to proceed with the arbitration in 
accordance with the terms thereof. 


§ 5. Appointment of arbitrators or umpire 


If in the agreement provision be made for a method of 
naming or appointing an arbitrator or arbitrators or an 
umpire, such method shall be followed; but if no method be 
provided therein, or if a method be provided and any party 
thereto shall fail to avail himself of such method, or if for 
any other reason there shall be a lapse in the naming of an 
arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire, or in filling a vacancy, 
then upon the application of either party to the controversy 
the court shall designate and appoint an arbitrator or arbitra- 
tors or umpire, as the case may require, who shall act under 
the said agreement with the same force and effect as if he or 
they had been specifically named therein; and unless other- 
wise provided in the agreement the arbitration shall be by a 
single arbitrator. 


~ et ee - 


7a 


§ 6. Application heard as motion 


Any application to the court hereunder shall be made 
and heard in the manner provided by law for the making and 
hearing of motions, except as otherwise herein expressly 
provided. 


§ 7. Witnesses before arbitrators; fees; compelling 
attendance 


The arbitrators selected either as prescribed in this title 
or otherwise, or a majority of them, may summon in writing 
any person to attend before them or any of them as a witness 
and in a proper case to bring with him or them any book, 
record, document, or paper which may be deemed material 
as evidence in the case. The fees for such attendance shall 
be the same as the fees of witnesses before masters of the 
United States courts. Said summons shall issue in the name 
of the arbitrator or arbitrators, or a majority of them, and 
shall be signed by the arbitrators, or a majority of them, and 
shall be directed to the said person and shall be served in the 
same manner as subpoenas to appear and testify before the 
court; if any person or persons so summoned to testify shall 
refuse or neglect to obey said summons, upon petition the 
United States district court for the district in which such 
arbitrators, or a majority of them, are sitting may compel the 
attendance of such person or persons before said arbitrator 
or arbitrators, or punish said person or persons for contempt 
in the same manner provided by law for securing the 
attendance of witnesses or their punishment for neglect or 
refusal to attend in the courts of the United States. 


§ 8. Proceedings begun by libel in admiralty and seizure of 
vessel or property 

If the basis of jurisdiction be a cause of action other- 
wise justiciable in admiralty, then, notwithstanding anything 
herein to the contrary, the party claiming to be aggrieved 


8a 


may begin his proceeding hereunder by libel and seizure of 
the vessel or other property of the other party according to 
the usual course of admiralty proceedings, and the court 
shall then have jurisdiction to direct the parties to proceed 
with the arbitration and shall retain jurisdiction to enter its 
decree upon the award. 


§9. Award of arbitrators; confirmation; jurisdiction; 
procedure 


If the parties in their agreement have agreed that a 
judgment of the court shall be entered upon the award made 
pursuant to the arbitration, and shall specify the court, then 
at any time within one year after the award is made any 
party to the arbitration may apply to the court so specified 
for an order confirming the award, and thereupon the court 
must grant such an order unless the award is vacated, 
modified, or corrected as prescribed in sections 10 and 11 of 
this title. If no court is specified in the agreement of the 
parties, then such application may be made to the United 
States court in and for the district within which such award 
was made. Notice of the application shall be served upon the 
adverse party, and thereupon the court shall have jurisdic- 
tion of such party as though he had appeared generally in 
the proceeding. If the adverse party is a resident of the 
district within which the award was made, such service shall 
be made upon the adverse party or his attorney as prescribed 
by law for service of notice of motion in an action in the 
same court. If the adverse party shall be a nonresident, then 
the notice of the application shall be served by the marshal 
of any district within which the adverse party may be found 
in like manner as other process of the court. 


§ 10. Same; vacation; grounds; rehearing 


(a) In any of the following cases the United States 
court in and for the district wherein the award was made 


9a 


may make an order vacating the award upon the application 
of any party to the arbitration — 


(1) Where the award was procured by corruption, 
fraud, or undue means. 


(2) Where there was evident partiality or corruption in 
the arbitrators, or cither of them. 


(3) Where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in 
refusing to postpone the hearing, upon sufficient cause 
shown, or in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material 
to the controversy; or of any other misbehavior by which the 
rights of any party have been prejudiced. 


(4) Where the arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so 
imperfectly executed them that a mutual, final, and definite 
award upon the subject matter submitted was not made. 


(5S) Where an award is vacated and the time within 
which the agreement required the award to be made has not 
expired the court may, in its discretion, direct a rehearing by 
the arbitrators. 


(b) The United States district court for the district 
wherein an award was made that was issued pursuant to 
section 580 of title 5 may make an order vacating the award 
upon the application of a person, other than a party to the 
arbitration, who is adversely affected or aggrieved by the 
award, f the use of arbitration or the award is clearly 
inconsistent with the factors set forth in section 572 of 
title 5. 


§ 11. Same; modification or correction; grounds; order 


In either of the following cases the United States court 
in and for the district wherein the award was made may 


10a 


make an order modifying or correcting the award upon the 
application of any party to the arbitration — 


(a) Where there was an evident material miscalcula- 
tion of figures or an evident material mistake in the descrip- 
tion of any person, thing, or property referred to in the 
award. 


(b) Where the arbitrators have awarded upon a matter 
not submitted to them, unless it is a matter not affecting the 
merits of the decision upon the matter submitted. 


(c) Where the award is imperfect in matter of form 
not affecting the merits of the controversy. 


The order may modify and correct the award, so as to 
effect the intent thereof and promote justice between the 


parties. 


§ 12. Notice of motions to vacate or modify; service; stay 
of proceedings 


Notice of a motion to vacate, modify, or correct an 
award must be served upon the adverse party or his attorney 
within three months after the award is filed or delivered. If 
the adverse party is a resident of the district within which 
the award was made, such service shall be made upon the 
adverse party or his attorney as prescribed by law for service 
of notice of motion in an action in the same court. If the 
adverse party shall be a nonresident then the notice of the 
application shall be served by the marshal of any district 
within which the adverse party may be found in like manner 
as other process of the court. For the purposes of the motion 
any judge who might make an order to stay the proceedings 
in an action brought in the same court may make an order, 
to be served with the notice of motion, staying the proceed- 
ings of the adverse party to enforce the award. 


lla 


§ 13. Papers filed with order on motions; judgment; dock- 
eting; force and effect; enforcement 


The party moving for an order confirming, modifying, 
or correcting an award shall, at the time such order is filed 
with the clerk for the entry of judgment thereon, also file the 
following papers with the clerk: 


(a) The agreement; the selection or appointment, if 
any, of an additional arbitrator or umpire; and each written 
extension of the time, if any, within which to make the 
award. 


(b) The award. 


(c) Each notice, affidavit, or other paper used upon an 
application to confirm, modify, or correct the award, and a 
copy of each order of the court upon such an application. 


The judgment shall be docketed as if it was rendered in 
an action. 


The judgment so entered shall have the same force and 
effect, in all respects, as, and be subject to all the provisions 
of law relating to, a judgment in an action; and it may be 
enforced as if it had been rendered in an action in the court 
in which it is entered. 


§ 14. Contracts not affected 


This title shall not apply to contracts made prior to 
January 1, 1926. 


§ 15. Inapplicability of the Act of State doctrine 


Enforcement of arbitral agreements, confirmation of 
arbitral awards, and execution upon judgments based on 
orders confirming such awards shall not be refused on the 
basis of the Act of State doctrine. 


l2a 


§ 16. Appeals 
(a) An appeal may be taken from — 


(1) an order — 


(A) refusing a stay of any action under section 3 
of this title, 

(B) denying a petition under section 4 of this title 
to order arbitration to proceed, 

(C) denying an application under section 206 of 
this title to compel arbitration, 

(D) confirming or denying confirmation of an 
award or partial award, or 

(E) modifying, correcting, or vacating an award; 


(2) an interlocutory order granting, continuing, or 
modifying an injunction against an arbitration that is 
subject to this title; or 


(3) a final decision with respect to an arbitration 
that is subject to this title. 


(b) Except as otherwise provided in_ sec- 
tion 1292(b) of title 28, an appeal may not be taken from 
an interlocutory order — 


(1) granting a stay of any action under section 3 of 
this title; 


(2) directing arbitration to proceed under section 4 
of this title; 


(3) compelling arbitration under section 206 of this 
title; or 


(4) refusing to enjoin an arbitration that is subject 
to this title. 


? a> >. ‘ 
et See ae Le ae 


