Supreme Court, w.S. 
*>|,LED 


6B 41985 UN Sa Wl 
—_—__=_= EE ae 
Iu the Supreme Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, 
ET AL., PETITIONERS 


v. 


CiTy OF NEW YORK, ET AL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 


Drew S. Days, ITI 

Solicitor General 
FRANK W. HUNGER 

Assistant Attorney General 
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER 

Deputy Solicitor General 


MALCOLM L. STEWART 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


MARK B. STERN 

MICHAEL S. RAAB 
Attorneys 
Department of Justice 
Washington, D.C. 20530 
(202) 514-2217 


ssn 
SS STS 


QUESTION PRESENTED 


Whether the decision of .he Secretary of Commerce not 
to undertake a statistical adjustment to the 1990 census 
violated the Constitution. 


(1) 


II 


PARTIES TO THE PROCEEDINGS 


Petitioners, defendants below, are: United States De- 
partment of Commerce; Ronald H. Brown, Esq., As 
Secretary of the United States Department of Commerce; 
Everett Ehrlich, As Under Secretary for Economic Affairs 
of the United States Department of Commerce; Bureau of 
Census; Harry Scarr, As Acting Director of Bureau of 
Census; William J. Clinton, As President of the United 
States; Dan Glickman, As Secretary of Agriculture; 
Donna E. Shalala, As Secretary of Health and Human 
Services; Henry Cisneros, As Secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development; Robert B. Reich, As Secretary of 
Labor: Federico Pehla, As Secretary of Transportation; 
Richard W. Riley, As Secretary of Education. 

Respondents, plaintiffs below, are: City of New York; 
State of New York: City of Los Angeles; City of Chicago; 
City of Houston; Dade County, Florida; United States 
Conference of Mayors; National League of Cities; League 
of United Latin American Citizens; National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People; Marcella Max- 
well; Donald H. Elliott: John Mack; Olga Morales: 
Timothy W. Wright, IIl; Raymond G. Romero; Antonio 
Gonzales: Athalie Range; Jerry Alan Wood: Carolyn Sue 
Lopez: City of Atlanta, Georgia; Maynard Jackson, In- 
dividually, and as the Mayor of the City of Atlanta: 
Florida House of Representatives: Florida State Confer- 
ence: Miguel A. De Grandy; Willye Dennis; Mario Diaz- 
Balart; Dr. Charles Evans; Rodolfo Garcia, Jr.; Bollowy 
L. “Bo” Johnson; Alfred J. Lawson, Jr.; Willis Logan, Jr.; 
Johnnie McMillan; Alzo J. Reddick; Peter Rudy Wallace: 
T.K. Wetherell: State of Texas; City of Phoenix, Arizona: 
State of New Jersey: State of Florida; City of Cleveland, 
Ohio; City of Denver, Colorado: City of Inglewood, Cali- 
fornia; City of New Orleans, Louisiana; City of Oakland, 
California; City of Pasadena, California; City of Phila- 
delphia, Pennsylvania; City of San Antonio, Texas; City 


of San Francisco, California; Broward County, Florida; 
State of Arizona; City of Baltimore, Maryland; City of 
Boston, Massachusetts; City of Long Beach, California; 
City of San Jose, California; Los Angeles County, Cali- 
fornia; San Bernadino County, California; District of 
Columbia; Navajo Nation; State of New Mexico; City of 
Tucson, Arizona; Council of Great City Schools. By 
virtue of Rule 12.4 of this Court, the State of Wisconsin 
and the State of Oklahoma, intervenor-defendants below, 
and Donnald K. Anderson, As Clerk of the United States 
House of Representatives, a defendant below, are also 
respondents in this Court. 

The following were parties to the proceedings in the 
district court, but were not parties to the proceeding in 
the court of appeals: People of the State of California 
ex rel. Daniel E. Lungren, Attorney General; and County 
of Hudson, New Jersey. 


— Pi et ' 
a 
eS! 


=e 
a re 


“2 ar _ 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
ET ST EE = TA eR AE 1 
RRR SS es ae a. 2 
Constitutional ond peru provisions iavelved . 2 
Ps sa ee an a ee eS cee ea 2 
Reasons for granting the petites _ ne ate 14 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Anderson V. City of Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 
EONS EET ae Al eee . 20 
Baldrige v. Shapiro, 455 US. 345 (1982) _.......16, 19, 21 
Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. Vv. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 462 U.S. 87 (1983) 19 


City of Detroit Vv. Franklin, 4 F.3d 1367 (6th Cir. 
1993), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1217 (1994)... 4, 13, 19, 


27, 28 
Cuomo V. Baldrige, 674 F. Supp. 1089 (S.D.N.Y. 
es Ee Maen eee 5 
Franklin Vv. Massachusetts, 112 Ss. Ct. 2767 
(1992) ..-.......15, 16, 17, 19, 24, 28, 29 
Karcher Vv. Daggett, 620 S. 725 (1983) 11, 12, 20 
Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, 499 
U.S. 360 (1989) . 18 
Thomas Jefferson Univereity v. Shalala, 14 S. Ct. 
2381 (1994) . 19 


Tucker V. United ‘States Dep't of Commerce, 958 
F.2d 1411 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 407 
. (1992) . 13, 19, 27 
United States Dep't of Commerce v. ‘Mentena, 503 
ae 21, 22, 23, 29 
United States Dep't of Labor Vv. Triplett, 494 U.S. 
| Sa RE Sa A SRC DR, Re 28 
Village of Arlington Heights Vv. Metropolitan 
Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252 (1977)... 24, 25, 26 
Washington V. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976) .... 24, 26 


(Vv) 


VI 


Constitution, statutes and rule: Page 
U.S. Const.: 
Art. I, §2, Cl. 3 (Apportionment Clause). 2, 14, 
16, 19, 21, 23 
Art. 1, §8, Cl 18 (Necessary and Proper 
el RS aS a PLR ae OL 2 
Amend. XIV,§2.......... uv 2, 16, 21 
Administrative Procedure Act, 5 US . 106 
(2) (A). - rome ND os 10 
Census Act, BUS c. let sce.: 
13 U.S.C. 141 .. AES ae eae ee 14 
1I3US.C.141(a) | sila 2, 3, 4, 19, 22 
I a aa 2,3 
13 U.S.C. 181 ...... A IL Ps ihe ch 14 
he ES 2 
2 U.S.C. 2a(a) ...... 3 
2 U.S.C. 2a(b) ....... ta er ree 3 
FR ERR eee 20 
Miscellaneous: 
55 Fed. Reg. 9841 (1990) ............................................. 27 
RO | ES Se , 4 
D. Freedman, Adjusting the 1990 Census, 252 
Science 1233 (1991) . i toa 7 
27 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doe. 6 (1991) | 3 


Iu the Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 


UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, 
ET AL.. PETITIONERS 


v. 


Ciry oF NEW YORK, ET AL. 


PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 


The Solicitor General, on behalf of the United States 
Department of Commerce, et al., respectfully petitions for 
a writ of certiorari to review the judgment of the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in this 
case.’ 

OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1-40)° 
is reported at 34 F.3d 1114. The opinions of the district 
court (Pet. App. 41-95, 96-120, 121-134) are reported 
at 822 F. Supp. 906, 739 F. Supp. 761, and 713 F. Supp. 


' Petitions for a writ of certiorari filed by the State of Wisconsin 
and the State of Oklahoma have been docketed in this Court as 
Nos. 94-1614 and 94-1631, respectively. 


* References to “Pet. App.” are to the appendix to the petition for 
a writ of certiorari filed in No. 94-1614. 


(1) 


2 


48. The decision of the Secretary of Commerce (Pet. 
App. 135-415) is published at 56 Fed. Reg. 33,582. 


JURISDICTION 


The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on 
August 8, 1994. The petition for rehearing filed by the 
State of Oklahoma was denied on December 12, 1994. 
Pet. App. 419-421. The petition for rehearing filed by 
the State of Wisconsin was denied on January 4, 1995. 
Pet. App. 416-418. On March 27, 1995, Justice 
Ginsburg extended the time Within which to file a petition 
for a writ of certiorari to and including May 4, 1995. 
On April 25, 1995, Justice Ginsburg further extended 
the time within which to file to and including June 3, 
1995. The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 
28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


Article I, Section 2, Clause 3, of the United States 
Constitution; the Fifth Amendment and Section 2 of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution; 2 U.S.C. 2a; 
and 13 U.S.C. 141(a) and (b) are reproduced in rele- 
vant part at Pet. App. 422-425. 


STATEMENT 


1. The Constitution requires a decennial census for 
the purpose of determining the number of Representa- 
tives to which each State is entitled. Article I, Section 2, 
Clause 3 (the Apportionment Clause) provides that 
“Representatives * * * shall be apportioned among the 
several States * * * according to their respective Num- 
bers,” and directs that “[t}he actual Enumeration shall 
be made within three Years after the first Meeting of 
the Congress of the United States, and within every sub- 
sequent Term of ten Years, in such Manner as they shall 
by Law direct.” See also Amend. XIV, § 2 (“Represent- 
atives shall be apportioned among the several States 


3 


according to their respective numbers, counting the whole 
number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not 
taxed.”’). 

Congress has assigned to the Secretary of Commerce 
the responsibility for conducting the decennial census and 
has vested the President with the responsibility for estab- 
lishing and reporting the apportionment of Representa- 
tives following completion of the census. The Census 
Act provides that the decennial census shall be conducted 
by the Secretary of Commerce “in such form and content 
as he may determine, including the use of sampling 
procedures and special surveys.” 13 U.S.C. 141(a). 
Congress has, however, prescribed a strict timetable for 
the census. The population of the United States is to be 
determined as of April | of the census year. The 
“tabulation of total population by States” for the purpose 
of apportionment of Representatives is to be completed 
and reported to the President within nine months after 
the April | census date. 13 U.S.C. 141(b). Within a 
week of the beginning of the first session of Congress 
following the census, the President must transmit to Con- 
gress a statement showing “the whole number of persons 
in each State * * * and the number of Representatives to 
which each State would be entitled” under the statutorily 
prescribed formula for apportioning Representatives. 2 
U.S.C. 2a(a). Within IS days of the receipt of that 
Statement. the Clerk of the House must “send to the 
executive of each State a certificate of the number of 
Representatives to which such State is entitled under this 
section.” 2 U.S.C. 2a(b). Following the 1990 decennial 
census, the President transmitted the statement of the 
apportionment of Representatives required by 2 U.S.C. 
2a(a) to Congress on January 3, 1991. 27 Weekly 
Comp. Pres. Dec. 6 (1991). 

2.a. The 1990 decennial census was conducted in 
accordance with an claborate, multi-staged procedure 
designed to locate and identify each housing unit in the 
country and to enumerate each person in those units by 


4 


means of a system replete with rechecks and cross- 
checks.” Although those processes resulted in an ex- 
traordinary rate of success, many persons were not 
counted. The Secretary of Commerce originally estimated 
that the census enumeration failed to count arm>roxi- 
mately 2.1° of the population. Pet. App. 158. It was 
subsequently determined, however, that that estimate 
significantly overstated the undercount, and the Census 
Bureau represented at the trial in this case that the under- 
count was 1.6% of the population. /d. at 58 n.12.* 

It is undisputed that the undercount varies among 
population subgroups. Pet. App. 138-139, 158. Mem- 
bers of racial minorit’es are undercounted at a greater 
rate than nonminority residents. /bid. A differential 
undercount also exists, however, among various other 
subgroups. For example, men are missed at a higher 
rate than women, the young are missed at a higher rate 
than the elderly, and renters are missed at a higher rate 
than homeowners. DX 1, at 457-458. 


* This process included the development of comprehensive maps 
of each block in the United States, the identification of housing 
units on each block, test censuses and post-enumeration survey 
tests, the actual enumeration (including multiple contacts with 
each household that did not return a census questionnaire), and 
pre- and post-census review by state and local governments. See 
generally Pet. App. 319-332; City of Detroit v. Franklin, 4 F.3d 
1367, 1376 (6th Cir. 1993) (“the Census Bureau's efforts to conduct 
as accurate a census count as possible are extraordinary”), cert. 
denied, 114 S. Ct. 1217 (1994). > 


‘In January 1998, Barbara Bryant, then the Director of the 
Census Bureau, estimated that the undercount might be in the 
range of 0.9% to 1.2%. 58 Fed. Reg. 75 (1993). The Commerce 
Department now believes, however, that 1.6 is the correct esti- 
mate of the undercount. That 1.6% undercount is approximately 
the same as the undercount in the 1980 census. Pet. App. 58 n.12. 


*The decision of the Secretary of Commerce estimated that 
“Blacks appear to have been undercounted in the 1990 census by 
4.8°, Hispanics by 5.2%, Asian-Pacific Islanders by 3.1%, and 
American Indians by 5.0%.” Pet. App. 138-139. 


5 


b. The problem of the overall undercount and differ- 
ential undercounts among demographic groups led the 
Secretary of Commerce to consider a statistical adjust- 
ment to the 1980 decennial census. Ultimately, however, 
no adjustment was undertaken. That decision not to ad- 
just was challenged in a number of lawsuits. None was 
successful. The action brought by the State of New York 
resulted in a trial, and the suit was not resolved until 
1987. Cuomo vy. Baldrige, 674 F. Supp. 1089, 1104 
(S.D.N.Y. 1987). 

In the same year that litigation regarding the 1980 
census finally concluded, the Department of Commerce 
announced that no statistical adjustment would be made 
fer the 1990 census. In the following year, plaintiffs filed 
this suit, seeking to compel an adjustment to the 1990 
census for all purposes for which the census is used, 
including the apportionment of Representatives among 
the States and the distribution of federal funds. The de- 
fendants included the President, the Secretary of Com- 
merce, the Census Bureau and its Director, and the Clerk 
of the House of Representatives.“ 

In July 1989. the parties entered into a stipulation 
under which the defendants agreed to reconsider the 
adjustment question and to reach a decision by July 15, 
1991. Defendants also agreed to conduct a_ post- 
enumeration survey (PES) of at least 150,000 house- 
holds in order to generate data on which a statistical 
adjustment could be based.’ In accordance with the stip- 


*On February 8, 1989, counsel for the Clerk of the House of 
Representatives entered into a stipulation providing that the Clerk 
“neither obiects nor consents to the relief requested by the plain- 
tiffs in their complaint and takes no position with respect to the 
questions involved in this litigation.” Stipulation Regarding Par- 
ticipation of Defendant Donnald K. Anderson at 1-2. The Clerk 
agreed to be bound by any judgment entered in the case and accord- 
ingly was “relieved of any obligation to answer the complaint or 
otherwise participate in this litigation.” Jd. at 2. 


7The PES, which was conducted in July 1990, involved an 
attempt to identify all individuals living in a sample of more than 


6 


ulation, the Secretary of Commerce also adopted eight 
guidelines that he would consider in deciding whether to 
order an adjustment of the 1990 census totals. Plaintiffs 
challenged those guidelines, but the district court sus- 
tained them. Pet. App. 96-120. 

c. On July 15, 1991, the Secretary of Commerce 
issued his determination that the census headcount would 
not be statistically adjusted. Pet. App. 135-415. At the 
outset, the Secretary explained that the crucial question 
is not whether an adjustment would improve accuracy in 
terms of absolute numbers at the national level, but 
whether adjusted numbers would provide an improved 
account of the way the population is distributed among 
the States and their subdivisions. See id. at 141, 146- 
147, 161, 184. He noted that this focus on “distribu- 
tive” rather than “numeric” accuracy follows from the 
constitutional purpose of the census, which is to appor- 
tion Representatives among the States, and the other uses 
of the census, including intrastate electoral redistricting 
and the distribution of federal funds. See id. at 141, 184, 
200-201. The Secretary also stated that, in accordance 
with the guidelines, the unadjusted figures would be re- 
garded as the most accurate unless the adjusted numbers 
were shown to be more accurate. /d. at 184.* 


168,000 housing units across the United States in order to deter- 
mine whether those persons had been properly counted and located 
in the census. The Census Bureau placed persons in the PES in 
one of 1392 categories, called “post-strata,”’ defined by five varia- 
bles: age, sex, race, location, and home tenure (owner vs. renter) ; 
the Census Bureau then calculated the rate at which each post- 
stratum was accurately counted in the census. Data obtained from 
the PES were then used to evaluate the accuracy of the original 
census and, through the use of a complex methodology involving 
numerous statistical assumptions and models, to generate adjusted 
population estimates. See Pet. App. 332-346. 


* Guideline One stated that “/t|}he Census shall be considered 
the most accurate count of the population of the United States, at 
the national, State and local level, unless an adjusted count is 


7 


The Secretary acknowledged that a statistical adjust- 
ment would be likely to increase the numeric accuracy 
of the census. Pet. App. 184-185, 200. He concluded, 
however, that the adjusted figures had not been shown to 
increase distributive accuracy, and that in fact “the evi- 
dence provided by the Census Bureau tends to support 
the superior distributive accuracy of the actual enumera- 
tion.” Jd. at 185. In support of his determination, the 
Secretary analyzed a variety of statistical disputes regard- 
ing the accuracy of the proposed adjustment. His deci- 
sion explained, in considerable detail, that the adjustment 
process consisted of a series of statistical assumptions, 
each of which was susceptible to error.” The Secretary 
noted as well that the difficulty of his decision was in- 
creased by the “diversity of opinion among [his] ad- 
visors.” Jd. at 140. The Secretary noted that “[t}he 
Special Advisory Panel split evenly as to whether there 
was convincing evidence that the adjusted counts were 
more accurate. There was also disagreement among the 
professionals in the Commerce Department, which in- 
cludes the Economics and Statistics Administration and 
the Census Bureau.” Pet. App. 140. 

The Secretary also analyzed at length the efforts made 
to estimate the relative accuracy of the adjusted and 
unadjusted numbers. Pet. App. 185-200. That inquiry 
focused largely on the Census Bureau’s “loss function 


shown to be more accurate.” Pet. App. 151. The Secretary explained 
in his July 15, 1991, decision that “!t|he true population counts 
cannot be observed. However, classical statistics provides a stand- 
ard way of approaching the required inference. In accordance 
with Guideline One, we take as a working (null) hypothesis that 
the actual enumerations in fact better characterize the true popula- 
tion. The adjusted counts are an alternative measure and the 
question is whether the available evidence permits us to reject 
the hypothesis that the census better describes the true population.” 
Id. at 184. 


*For a concise description of the adjustment process, see 
D. Freedman, Adjusting the 1990 Census, 252 Science 1233 (1991). 


8 


model,” which was developed to measure the “loss” from 
using the census as compared to the “loss” from using an 
adjusted count.” The Secretary concluded that the loss 
function analysis involved so many uncertainties that its 
utility was questionable.” /d. at 188-192. 

In the Secretary’s view, however, the analysis tended 
to show that the adjusted figures were less accurate than 
the unadjusted count at every level from the state level 
down. In this :egard, the Secretary noted that the Bu- 
reau’s initial loss function analysis had significantly over- 
stated the distributive accuracy of the adjusted figures at 
the state and local levels, where the census is actually 
used for apportionment and funding. See Pet. App. 141. 
The Secretary pointed out that the origina! loss function 
analysis appeared seriously to underestimate the vari- 
ances, or estimates of sampling error, in the adjusted 
data. /d. at 190-191. The Census Bureau’s Undercount 
Steering Committee had reported that the relevant vari- 
ances were understated by a factor in the range from 1.7 
to 3. Ibid. The Secretary concluded that even if the 
variances were increased only by a factor of 2. a figure 
at the low end of the Bureau’s range, “the proportional 
shares of about 28 or 29 states would be worsened by 
an adjustment in terms of distributive accuracy.” /d. at 


'" The loss is the difference between each count and the “true 
population.” Pet. App. 188-189. The “true population” is, of course, 
unknown. /bid. Indeed, the purpose of an adjustment is to arrive 
at an estimate of the “true population.” To deal with that problem, 
the Bureau attempted to create a hypothetical “true population” by 
taking the proposed adjusted figures and attempting to correct 
them for various “biases” or errors. See id. at 186-187. The census 
and the adjusted counts were then compared to the estimated “true 
population.” 


'! The Undercount Steering Committee expressed that conclusion 
in an Addendum issued on June 27, 1991—less than three weeks 
before the Secretary was required, under the stipulation, to an- 
nounce his decision for or against adjustment. See Pet. App. 190. 


9 


191: see id. at 74.° The record further showed that, 
even before the variance correction, an adjustment was 
estimated to worsen the distributive accuracy of 11 of 
the 23 metropolitan areas in cities with 500,000 or more 
inhabitants, including the City of New York. /d. at 
191.“ The Secretary expressed concern about the still- 
fluid nature of the Department's analysis of the raw data 
and about the possibility that additional analysis follow- 
ing a decision to make a statistical adjustment would 
further erode the basis for such an adjustment. See id. 
at 144. 


12 Census Bureau research following the Secretary's decision, as 
presented at trial, confirmed the Secretary’s conclusion that the 
variances were underestimated. Tr. 1914-1915. Based on that 
research, the Bureau's Chief Mathematician testified at trial that, 
contrary to his original recommendation to the Secretary, he no 
longer favored the adjustment proposed for the Secretary’s consid- 
eration in 1991. Tr. 1920-1921. 


18 Moreover, although the adjustment was in large part proposed 
to remedy the disproportionate undercount of minorities, the admin- 
istrative decision explained that the driving force for an adjustment 
may not have been the undercount at all. The decision noted that 
“lo}ne would hope that the predominant determinant of the adjust- 
ment would be the number of people missed in tae census,” so that 
“areas with high miss rates get high adjustments.” Pet. App. 173. 
The decision revealed, however, that the areas with the three 
highest omission rates in fact had very different adjustment rates. 
To a large extent, it turned out, the proposed adjustment was 
driven by attempts to correct for overcounting in certain areas 
and certain respects. /bid. The administrative decision suggested 
the lack cf a firm basis for finding a direct correlation between a 
State’s percentage of minority residents and how it fares under an 
adjustment. Thus, the undercount rate for Montana was higher 
than that of New York. See id. at 194. Indeed, despite its rela- 
tively large proportion of minorities, New York’s share of the 
population would actually have decreased as a result of the pro- 
posed adjustment. See Administrative Record (A.R.), App. 10, 
Table 5. 


10 


The Secretary also emphasized that even very small 
changes in the assumptions utilized in developing the 
adjustment methodology would shift seats in the House 
of Representatives. For example, “[o]ne expert found 
that among five reasonable alternative methods of cal- 
culating adjustments, none of the resulting apportion- 
ments of the House were the same, and eleven different 
states either lost or gained a seat in at least one of the 
five methods.” Pet. App. i42; see also id. at 218. The 
decision noted as well the gravity of departing from the 
200-year practice of relying upon unadjusted figures to 
apportion Representatives among the States. The Secre- 
tary stated that “[d]ecisions that may be nearly equally 
defensible from a technical standpoint may have very 
different outcomes which can be known in advance of 
the decisions,” thereby creating the danger of actual 
or perceived “manipulation of the census for partisan 
gain.” Id. at 236-237. 

3. Following the Secretary’s decision, the district court 
permitted extensive discovery and then set the case for 
trial. The trial lasted 13 days, involving numerous wit- 
nesses and thousands of pages of exhibits. At the con- 
clusion of the trial, the district court granted judgment 
for the governmental defendants, using the “arbitrary and 
capricious” standard of the Administrative Procedure Act 
(APA), 5 U.S.C. 706(2)(A). See Pet. App. 65-66." 
The court examined the Secretary’s consideration of each 
of the guidelines adopted pursuant to the stipulation and 


At a prior stage of the litigation, the district court had con- 
cluded that “Article I, § 2 requires that the census be as accurate 
as practicable.” Pet. App. 109 (brackets and internal quotation 
marks omitted). The court adhered to that conclusion in its final 
ruling. See id. at 68. The court made clear, however, that its 
application of that standard would reflect deference to the Secre- 
tary’s resolution of disputed technical and policy questions. See 
ibid. (test is “whether the Secretary's decision was arbitrary and 
capricious in light of the requirement that the decision provide 
the most accurate census practicable”). 


11 


concluded that his consideration of each was reasonable. 
In particular, the court found that “[t}he Secretary's deci- 
sion to focus on distributive, rather than numeric, ac- 
curacy was consonant with the constitutional goal of 
assuring the most accurate census practicable, given the 
census’s function as a standard by which to distribute 
political representation and economic benefits.” /d. at 
77-78. The district court also explored several of the 
underlying statistical controversies. Although the court 
stated in passing that it probably would have ordered an 
adjustment if it had been called upon to decide the issue 
de novo (id. at 89), it found no basis to set aside the 
Secretary's determination. 

4. On appeal to the Second Circuit, plaintiffs did not 
contest the district court’s determination that the Secre- 
tary’s decision against adjustment was not arbitrary or 
capricious. They argued instead that the district court 
should have analyzed the adjustment issue de novo be- 
cause the outcome of the decision affected the allocation 
of seats in the House of Representatives and thus raised 
constitutional concerns. The court of appeals rejected 
the argument for de novo review. Pet. App. 23, 34. 
The court stated, however, that “both the nature of the 
right and the nature of the affected classes are factors 
that traditionally require that the government's action be 
given heightened scrutiny: the right to have one’s vote 
counted equally is fundamental and constitutionally pro- 
tected, anc the unadjusted census undercount dispro- 
portionately disadvantages certain identifiable minority 
groups.” /d. at 33. The court noted that in “one person- 
one vote” challenges to intrastate congressional district- 
ing plans, a court must first determine “whether the popu- 
lation differences among districts could have been re- 
duced or eliminated altogether by a good-faith effort to 
draw districts cf equal population.” /d. at 36-37 (quot- 
ing Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. 725, 730 (1983)). In 
that setting, if a court determines that a good-faith effort 
has not been made, “the State must bear the burden of 


12 


proving that each significant variance between districts 
was necessary to achieve some legitimate goal.” /d. at 
37 (quoting Karcher, 462 U.S. at 731). 

Applying the same analysis here, the court of appeals 
concluded that “plaintiffs carried ‘her burden of proving 
that the Secretary's refusal to adjust .he census in accord- 
ance with the PES did not reflect an effort to achieve 
equality as nearly as practicable.” Pet. App. 38. The 
court reached that conclusion by focusing on “the Secre- 
tary’s acknowledgement” that use of the adjusted popula- 
tion estimates likely would increase the overall numeric 
accuracy of the census at the national level and would 
reduce the disproportionate undercount of minorities. 
Ibid. The court further stated that the Secretary “gave 
other factors priority over achievement of greater accu- 
racy” at the national level by, inter alia, “valuling] ‘dis- 
tributive accuracy’ over numerical accuracy.” /hid. It also 
expressed the view that the Secretary's declaration that an 
adjustment should not be made unless it would result in 
greater distributive accuracy implied that the Secretary 
did not make the requisite good-faith effort in light of the 
improved count of the total national population and the 
improved absolute count of minorities. /hid.; see also id. 
at 38-39." 

The court of appeals concluded that 


plaintiffs amply showed that the Secretary did not 
make the required effort to achieve numerical ac- 
curacy as nearly as practicable, and that the burden 
thus shifted to the Secretary to justify his decision 


' The court of appeals also noted the Secretary's concern that 
an adjustment that did not clearly provide a more accurate account 
of the distribution of the population would introduce fears of 
political manipulation. The court stated that that concern reflected 
a belief that “eliminating the possibility of manipulation of statis- 
tical surveys in the future was more important than using the 
admittedly unmanipulated 1990 PES to achieve a more accurate 
overall count.” Pet. App. 38. 


13 


not to adjust the census in a way that the [district] 
court found would for most purposes be more accu- 
rate and would lessen the disproportionate counting 
of minorities. The Secretary's decision not to make 
that adjustment is subject to scrutiny not under 
an arbitrary-and-capricious standard of review but 
rather under the more traditional standard applicable 
to an equal protection claim that a fundamental 
right has been denied on the basis of race or 
ethnicity. While precise equality is a goal that at 
the national level may be illusory, there must be a 
good-faith effort to approach that goal as nearly as 
is practicable, and the substantive question becomes 
what choice should be made among imperfect alter- 
natives. When the official answer is that it is prefer- 
able to undercount minorities, that answer must be 
supported by an official showing that that result (a) 
furthers a governmental objective that is legitimate, 
and (b) is essential for the achievement of that 
objective. 
Pet. App. 39-40. The court of appeals accordingly va- 
cated the judgment of the district court and remanded the 
case “for further proceedings not inconsistent with this 
opinion.” Jd. at 40. 

Judge Timbers dissented. He expressed agreement with 
the decision and reasoning of the district court and noted 
that the majority’s holding was in conflict with the deci- 
sions of two other courts of appeals. Pet. App. 40 (citing 
City of Detroit v. Franklin, 4 F.3d 1367 (6th Cir. 1993), 
cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1217 (1994); Tucker v. United 
States Dep't of Commerce, 958 F.2d 1411 (7th Cir.), 
cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 407 (1992)).”* 


™ The States of Wisconsin and Oklahoma filed petitions for 
rehearing with suggestions of rehearing en banc. The court of 
appeals denied both petitions. Pet. App. 416-421. 


14 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE PETITION 


In considering whether the 1990 census figures should 
be statistically adjusted, the Secretary of Commerce re- 
ceived sharply conflicting recommendations from inde- 
pendent advisors and from subordinates within his own 
Department. The question for this Court is not whether, 
on balance, the Secretary made the appropriate determina- 
tion as a matter of statistics or policy, but whether his 
decision not to make an adjustment was within the range 
of constitutionally permissible options. As we demon- 
strate below, it was. 

Resolution of the technical and policy disputes bearing 
on the adjustment determination is substantially entrusted 
to the Secretary's expert judgment and discretion, and 
judicial review must reflect appropriate deference to his 
decision. Such deference is mandated by generally ap- 
plicable principles of administrative law. It is required 
as well by the broad delegation of authority expressed in 
the Constitution itself,-which states that the census shall 
be conducted “in such Manner as [Congress] shall by Law 
direct.” Art. I, § 2, Cl. 3, and in the Census Act, which 
authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to conduct the 
decennial census “in such form and content as he may 
determine,” 13 U.S.C. 141(a). And it is required by the 
compelling interest in the finality of the President's ap- 
portionment of Representatives among the States in 
January 1991, which was based on the unadjusted census 
data. 

Secretary Mosbacher’s July 15, 1991, decision against 
adjustment of the 1990 census figures was reasonable and 
consistent with applicable constitutional standards. We 
agree with the court of appeals that the Constitution 
and the Census Act do not bar a statistical adjustment of 
census data. See Pet. App. 23-26; 13 U.S.C. 141 (de- 
cennial census), 181 (intercensal population data). And 
our disagreement with the court of appeals, we empha- 
size. does not concern the need for census procedures 


i ee 


15 


that are free from racial discrimination. Credible evi- 
dence that either the enumeration of the population or 
the decision against adjustment was tainted by a dis- 
criminatory motive would raise grave constitutional con- 
cerns. There was, however, no such showing here. More- 
over, the court of appeals’ analysis reflects a fundamental 
misunderstanding both of the bases for the Secretary's 
decision and of the governing constitutional principles. 
For that reason—and because two other courts of ap- 
peals, in contrast to the court below, have rejected con- 
Sstitutional challenges to Secretary Mosbacher’s decision 
not to adjust the 1990 census figures—review by this 
Court is warranted. 

1. The Secretary's decision not to undertake an ad- 
justment of the 1990 census figures rested primarily on 
three determinations. First, the Secretary concluded that 
distributive rather than total numeric accuracy should be 
of paramount importance in deciding whether to make 
an adjustment. Second, the Secretary determined that the 
unadjusted census figures would “be considered the most 
accurate count of the population of the United States, 
at the national, State, and local level, unless an adjusted 
count is shown to be more accurate.” Pet. App. 151. 
Finally, the Secretary concluded that the adjusted figures 
had not been shown to impro:e distributive accuracy 
and that adjustment was therefore not warranted." 


'T Pursuant to the stipulation and guidelines, see pages 5-6, supra, 
the Secretary's 1991 decision also discussed in detai! several other 
factors bearing on the decision not to adjust: We believe that the 
Secretary's consideration of those factors was “consonant with, 
though not dictated by, the text and history of the Constitution.” 
Franklin Vv. Massachusetts, 112 8. Ct. 2767, 2778 (1992). However. 
disputes concerning the propriety of those aspects of the Secretary's 
decision are not central to this case for present purposes. Although 
the Secretary believed that such factors as encouraging participa- 
tion in future censuses and the fear of actual or perceived political 
manipulation lent further support to the decision against adjust- 
ment, he stated unequivocally that the adjusted figures had not 
been shown to improve the accuracy of the census in the relevant 


lf, 


The first two determinations are policy decisions that a 
court may review “to the extent of determining whether 
the Secretary's interpretation is consistent with the consti- 
tutional language and the constitutional goal of equal 
representation.” Franklin v. Massachusetts, 112 S. Ct. 
2767, 2777 (1992)."" The third is an exercise of tech- 
nical judgment that is properly reviewable, if at all, only 
under a deferential “arbitrary and capricious” standard. 
Each of the three determinations easily withstands judicial 
scrutiny. 

a. As the district court recognized, “[t}he Secretary's 
decision to focus on distributive, rather than numeric, 
accuracy was consonant with the constitutional goal of 
assuring the most accurate census practicable, given the 
census’s function as a standard by which to distribute 
political representation and economic benefits.” Pet. App. 
77-78. The constitutional purpose of the census is to 
determine the apportionment of Representatives among 
the States, U.S. Const. Art. I, § 2, Cl. 3, which is to be 
based on their “respective numbers, counting the whole 
number of persons in each State.” Amend. XIV, § 2. 
Even a dramatic undercounting of the population would 
not threaten the goal of fair apportionment so long as 
each State’s share of the total population was accurately 
determined. Conversely, a precise estimation of the na- 
tion’s total population is of no value in the apportionment 


(i.e., distributive) sense. Moreover, such factors as concerns about 
future participation and actual or perceived political manipulation 
are not irrelevant to the overall, long-term accuracy of the census. 
Cf. Baldrige v. Shapiro, 455 U.S. 345, 353-354 & n.8, 361 & n.17 
(1982). 


1® Respondents have not contended that the text of the Constitu- 
tion compels the Secretary to employ adjusted figures or reflects a 
preference for that result. Their contention instead has been that 
use of a statistical adjustment is necessary to further the constitu- 
tional goal of equal representation. 


—— —_— 


17 


process if the States’ respective shares of that population 
are inaccurately estimated. Thus, the Secretary's focus 
on distributive rather than numeric accuracy was “con- 
sistent with the constitutional language and the constitu- 
tional goal of equal representation.” Franklin, 112 S. Ct. 
at 2777. Indeed, in the court of appeals, plaintiffs spe- 
cifically stated that they “agree (as do, for that matter, 
all experts on either side of the adjustment question) 
that it is distributive accuracy that is of paramount im- 
portance for the constitutional and legal purposes for 
which the census is conducted.” Pltfs’ C.A. Reply Br. 
14 n.4, 

b. Similarly, the Secretary’s determination that un- 
adjusted figures would be considered the most accurate 
absent a contrary showing was a judgment “consonant 
with, though not dictated by, the text and history of the 
Constitution.” Franklin, 112 §. Ct. at 2778. In light of 
the 200-year practice of relying on unadjusted figures, it 
was surely permissible to conclude that those figures 
should be treated as the most accurate unless alternative 
numbers were shown to be better. Cf. id. at 2777-2778 
(noting importance of historical practice); id. at 2785 
(Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judg- 
ment) (“The ‘usual residence’ policy that has guided the 
census since 1790 provides a further standard by which 
to evaluate the Secretary's exercise of discretion.”). Nor 
could “the constitutional goal of equal representation,” id. 
at 2777, plausibly be thought to require the Secretary to 
use adjusted figures that he has not found to be more 
accurate than the unadjusted numbers. In any event, the 
Secretary did not simply determine that proponents of 
adjustment had failed to prove the greater distributive 
accuracy of adjusted figures. Rather, he affirmatively 
concluded that “the evidence provided by the Census 


18 


Bureau tends to support the superior distributive accuracy 
of the actual enumeration.” Pet. App. 185.” 

c. The district court held that the Secretary “was 
neither arbitrary nor capricious” in concluding that the 
superior distributive accuracy of the adjusted figures had 
not been demonstrated. Pet. App. 77. That holding was 
correct. As Census Director Bryant observed in her 
recommendation to the Secretary in favor of an adjust- 
ment, “[{a]djustment is an issue about which reasonable 
men and women and the best statisticians and demo- 
graphers can disagree.” Jd. at 59. The Secretary engaged 
in exhaustive analysis of the pertinert evidence. however, 
and his resolution of disputed technical questions is re- 
viewable only under an extremely deferential standard. 
See Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, 490 
U.S. 360, 377-378 (1989) (where “analysis of the rele- 
vant documents requires a high level of technical ex- 


19 The court of appeals suggested in-passing that the Secretary 
regarded the adiusted and unadjusted numbers as equally accurate 
(see Pet. App. 38) and asserted that the adjusted figures would 
improve accuracy for the areas in which up to two-thirds of the 
population resided (see id. at 39). Those characterizations of the 
record reflect a basic misreading of the Secretary's decision and 
the evidence at trial. The two-thirds figure was an original esti- 
mate provided by the Census Bureau using its “loss function 
model.” The Secretary’s decision explained in considerable detail 
that the loss function model had failed to take into account vari- 
ances that the Undercount Steering Committee subsequently re- 
ported to be significantly understated. See id. at 185-192. As the 
district court explained, “when the Secretary employed a statistical 
variance toward the low end of the acceptable range envisioned by 
the {Undercount Steering Committee|, he found that the propor- 
tional shares of 28 or 29 states would be worsened by adjustment.” 
Id. at 74. As noted above, subsequent research by the Census 
Bureau and further evidence presented at trial demonstrated that 
the original loss function analysis substantially overstated the 
accuracy of the adjusted data. See pages 7-9 & note 12, supra. The 
court of appeals’ reliance on data that the Secretary had specifically 
corrected underscores the error of its analysis. 


oF 


19 


pertise, [courts] must defer to the informed discretion of 
the responsible federal agencies”) (internal quotation 
marks omitted); see also Thomas Jefferson University v. 
Shalala, 114 §S. Ct. 2381, 2387 (1994): Baltimore Gas 
& Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Inc., 462 U.S. 87, 103 (1983).% The Secretary’s deci- 


“Two courts of appeals have concluded, in rejecting constitu- 
tional challenges to the Secretary's decision against adjustment, 
that the Apportionment Clause “does not authorize lawsuits founded 
of disagreement with the Census Bureau's statistical methodology” 
because such a lawsuit “invokes no judicially administrable stand- 
ards.” Tucker v. United States Dep't of Commerce, 958 F.2d 1411, 
1418 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 407 (1992); accord City 
of Detroit v. Franklin, 4 F.3d 1367, 1375-1378 (6th Cir. 1993), 
cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1217 (1994). On the other hand, it might 
plausibly be argued that, in light of “the constitutional goal of 
equal representation,” Franklin, 112 S. Ct. at 2777, the Secretary’s 
use of an irrational statistical methodology that affects the appor- 
tionment of Representatives among the States is subject to judicial 
scrutiny. Cf. id. at 2786 n.22 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and 
concurring in the judgment). 

There is no basis, however, for respondents’ contention in the 
court of appeals that the central statistical issue in this case— 
whether use of the adjusted figures would have improved the 
distributive accuracy of the census——should have been resolved by 
the district court de novo on the ground that the case involves a 
constitutional claim. Although issues pertaining to the accuracy 
of the census implicate constitutional values, resolution of the 
statistical dispute in this case does not involve the interpretation 
of a constitutional text. Rather, it involves an exercise of technical 
expertise to which judicial deference is required. Such deference 
is especially appropriate as a constitutional matter in light of the 
broad discretion vested in Congress by the Apportionment Clause’s 
provision that the census be conducted “in such Manner as [Con- 
gress| shall by Law direct,” Art. I, § 2, Cl. 3; see Baldrige, 455 U.S. 
at 361, and by the broad delegation of authority by Congress 
contained in the Census Act, see 13 U.S.C. 141(a) (Secretary shall 
conduct the decennial census “in such form and content as he may 
determine”). Finally, de novo resolution by the district courts of 
the question whether an adjustment would increase distributive 
accuracy would create the possibility of inconsistent findings by 


20 


sion, based on that analysis, was within the range of con- 
stitutionally permissible choices. That is especially so in 
light of (1) the need for the Secretary to make a deci- 
sion by the July 15, 1991, deadline (to which respond- 
ents stipulated in the district court and which they did 
not challenge below), and (2) the Secretary’s determina- 
tion that the state of the administrative record and the 
various expert evaluations of it were not at that time 
sufficiently settled to permit him to make a decision in 
favor of adjustment with the degree of confidence he 
believed was appropriate for such a significant departure 
from past practice. See Pet. App. 140-141, 144. 

2. The court of appeals regarded the Secretary’s 1991 
decision against adjustment of the 1990 decennial census 
as analogous to a State’s decision to create congressional 
districts of unequal size. Under this Court’s precedents, 
a demonstration that disparities in the size of congres- 
sional districts within a State are “not the product of a 
cood-faith effort to achieve population equality means 
* * * that the burden shift[s] to the State to prove that 
the population deviations in its plan were necessary to 
achieve some legitimate state objective.” Karcher v. 
Daggett, 462 U.S. 725, 740 (1983). In the present case. 
the court of appeals concluded that “plaintiffs amply 
showed that the Secretary did not make the required 
effort to achieve numerical accuracy as nearly as prac- 
ticable,” and that “the burden thus shifted to the Secre- 
tary to justify his decision not to adjust the census in a 
way that the [district] court found would for most pur- 
poses be more accurate and would lessen the dispropor- 
tionate counting of minorities.” Pet. App. 39. 

The court of appeals thus treated the Secretary’s dect- 
sion as suspect on the basis of (a) the Secretary’s ac- 
knowledgment that an adjustment would probably im- 


courts in different jurisdictions—each reviewable on appeal only 
under the “clearly erroneous” standard of Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 52(a). See Anderson vy. City of Bessemer City, 470 
U.S. 564, 573-576 (1985). 


Se NON ey Le ee Be eh OA ne Con de et tee ee le we 


— 


21 


prove total numeric accuracy at the national level, (b) 
a purported district court finding that the adjusted figures 
“would for most purposes be more accurate,” Pet. App. 
39, and (c) the uncontested fact that the undercount 
of racial minorities was greater than the undercount of 
nonminority residents. The court of appeals’ analysis 
does not withstand scrutiny. 

a. Any effort to ensure that congressional districts 
in different States are precisely equal in population “is 
constrained by three requirements. The number of Rep- 
resentatives shall not exceed one for every 30.000 per- 
sons; each State shall have at least one Representative: 
and district boundaries may not cross state lines.” United 
States Dep't of Commerce v. Montana, 503 U.S. 442. 
447-448 (1992). Within those constraints, responsibility 
for implementation of the constitutional goal of equal 
representation lies both with Congress (which must ap- 
portion Representatives among the States “according to 
their respective Numbers,” Art. I, § 2, Cl. 3: Amend. 
XIV. $2) and with the States themselves (which are 
required, in conducting intrastate districting, to create 
districts of essentially equal size). 

The judicial roles in the two contexts are. however. 
quite distinct. This Court has held that Congress's “ap- 
parently good-faith choice of a method of apportionment 
of Representatives among the several States ‘according 
to their respective Numbers’ commands far more defer- 
ence than a state districting decision that is capable of 
being reviewed under a relatively rigid mathematical 
standard.” Montana, 503 U.S. at 464. The Secretary's 
statistical and policy judgments in the conduct of the 
census are entitled to at least as much deference as Con- 
gress’s selecticn of a method for apportioning Represent- 
atives on the basis of census data. That is so because 
Coneress. in the exercise ef its broad “discretion” re- 
gardine the census. Baldrige, 455 U.S. at 361. has di- 
rected the Secretary to conduct the decennial census “in 


22 


such form and content as he may determine,” 13 U.S.C. 
141(a), and because the constitutional text and purposes 
furnish even less guidance with respect to the manner 
and details of enumerating the population in the first 
place than they do with respect to the apportionment 
of Representatives among the States on the basis of that 
enumeration. 

The court of appeals failed to accord the requisite 
deference to the Secretary's judgment. Indeed, it entirely 
failed to explain how the goal of equal representation 
for equal numbers of people in the several States could 
be better served by focusing on the total numeric accu- 
racy of the census figures at the national level. Numeric 
accuracy does not answer the critical question for adjust- 
ment purposes, namely, whether the States’ respective 
shares of the total population would be more accurately 
determined. Distributive accuracy does. As the district 
court recognized, “[t]he Secretary’s decision to focus on 
distributive, rather than numeric, accuracy was consonant 
with the constitutional goal of assuring the most accurate 
census practicable, given the census’s function as a stand- 
ard by which to distribute political representation and 
economic benefits.” Pet. App. 77-78. 

The court of appeals nonetheless concluded that “the 
Secretary did not make the required effort to achieve 
numerical accuracy as nearly as practicable.” and that the 
Secretary's failure to maximize numeric accuracy gave 
rise to a burden of explanation akin to that imposed upon 
a State that intentionally creates legislative districts of 
unequal size. Pet. App. 39-40. The two situations, how- 
ever, are very different. Unlike in cases involving the 
drawing of legislative districts within a State on the basis 
of a given set of data, the myriad policy and statistical 
judgments required in assembling, evaluating. and decid- 
ing whether (or how) to adjust these data in the first 
place are not “capable of being reviewed under a rela- 
tively rigid mathematical standard.” Montana, 503 US. 


23 


at 464. Moreover, in light of the varying measures of 
accuracy and equity and the competing claims of the 
States in the apportionment of Representatives—as well as 
the Constitution’s plenary grants of authority to Congress 
in the Apportionment Clause and the Necessary and 
Proper Clause, Art. I, § 8, Cl. 18—the Secretary's “ap- 
parently good-faith choice of a method” for determining 
the respective populations of the States, pursuant to broad 
discretionary authority conferred on him by Congress, 
“commands far more deference than a state districting 
decision.” Montana, 503 U.S. at 464. 

b. The district court stated (without explaining pre- 
cisely what it meant) that it was “satisfied that for most 
purposes the [post-enumeration survey (PES)] resulted in 
a more accurate—or to be statistically fashionable, a less 
inaccurate—count than the original census.” Pet. App. 
59. The court also stated (without substantial explana- 
tion) that “were this Court called upon to decide this 
issue de novo, | would probably have ordered the adjust- 
ment.” Jd. at 89. The district court did not, however, 
set aside the Secretary’s determination that the distributive 
accuracy of the census would not have been improved by 
an adjustment. There is consequently no basis for the 
court of appeals’ statement (id. at 38) that “the findings 
of the district court * * * plainly show that plaintiffs 
carried their burden of proving that the Secretary’s re- 
fusal to adjust the census in accordance with the PES 
did not reflect an effort to achieve equality as nearly as 
practicable.” 

c. The court of appeals also referred repeatedly to the 
disproportionate undercount of racial minorities (see, e.¢., 
Pet. App. 33, 38, 39, 40), invoking that differential as a 
basis for its conclusion that the Secretary's decision not to 
adjust should be reviewed “under the more traditional 
standard applicable to an equal protection claim that a 
fundamental right has been denied on the basis of race or 
ethnicity.” /d. at 39-40, The court of appeals was simply 


24 


wrong, however, in asserting that “[e]qual protection 
analysis requires that heightened scrutiny be given to the 
Secretary’s decision to adhere to an acknowledged under- 
count that concededly impacts minority groups more 
severely than nonminority groups.” Pet. App. 34. To the 
contrary, establishment of an equal protection violation 
based upon racial discrimination requires proof of a dis- 
criminatory purpose. Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 
239-245 (1976). The intentional undercounting of racial 
minorities in the conduct of the census (and in the re- 
sulting apportionment of Representatives) would be a 
matter of grave concern to the integrity of our democratic 
process. The courts would be open to consider such 
claims under the analytical framework followed in Village 
of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Dev. Corp., 
429 U.S. 252 (1977), and its progeny, and to afford 
relief where appropriate, see Franklin, 112 S. Ct. at 2776- 
2777 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). 

In this case, however, neither the court of appeals nor 
the district court found that either the Secretary or other 
federal officials acted for the purpose of reducing the 
electoral power of (or otherwise disadvantaging) minority 
residents. Nor do the evidentiary considerations identi- 
fied in Arlington Heights suggest a basis for such a claim. 
The Secretary’s decision against adjustment was fully in 
keeping with historical practice, a fact that suggests a 
lack of discriminatory intent. Compare Arlington Heights, 
429 U.S. at 267 & n.16 (abrupt departures from prior 
policy in ways that disadvantage minorities may constitute 
evidence of discriminatory motivation); id. at 270 (de- 
fendant “has applied [its] policy too consistently for [the 
Court] to infer discriminatory purpose from its application 
in this case”).*' Secretary Mosbacher’s extensive explana- 


“! The Court in Arlington Heights also observed that “|d/epar- 
tures from the normal procedural sequence also might afford 
evidence that improper purposes are playing a role.” 429 U.S. at 


25 


tion published in the Federal Register sets out a host of 
race-neutral reasons for his decision not to adjust. Com- 
pare id. at 268 (“The legislative or administrative history 
may be highly relevant, especially where there are con- 
temporary statements by members of the decisionmaking 
body, minutes of its meetings, or reports.”). And the 
government's extraordinary efforts to enumerate minor- 
ity residents * and to identify persons who initially failed 
to return questionnaires also belie any inference that 
Census officials pursued a deliberate policy of under- 
counting minority residents.” 


267. In the present case, the Secretary departed from customary 
procedures only by devoting enhanced consideration to the possi- 
bility of a statistical adjustment and explaining his ultimate 
decision in greater detail. 


*2 In her recommendation to Secretary Mosbacher, Census Direc- 
tor Bryant stated (DX 1, at 1121-1122): 


For the 1990 census, the Census Bureau mounted the most 
extensive effort ever to enumerate Blacks and other minorities. 
This included the hiring of 280 community outreach workers 
who worked in communities two years before census taking; 
involvement of 56,000 community organizations —mostly minor- 
ity but also city and state Complete Count Committees; out- 
standing cooperation from Black and Spanish language media 
in running public service announcements and programs about 
the importance of the census; and the hiring of follow-up 
enumerators from minority populations, bilingual and multi- 
language enumerators, and residents of public housing projects 
and American Indian reservations to enumerate persons in 
their neighborhoods. Despite this effort, the undercount dif- 
ferential was not reduced below its historical level. 


** “The Census Bureau followed up every housing unit for which 
a questionnaire was not returned,” Pet. App. 327; its nonresponse 
follow-up policy required Bureau enumerators “to make up to six 
attempts to contact a household member and complete a census 
questionnaire,” id. at 328. The Bureau also developed special pro- 
cedures directed at individuals—such as residents of group quar- 
ters, transients, military personnel, homeless persons, and parolees 
and probationers—who the Bureau believed were particularly likely 
to be missed. See id. at 326, 330-331. The Bureau's “Were You 


26 


A disparate impact upon racial minorities, though not 
itself sufficient to establish a constitutional violation, may 
sometimes furnish evidence of discriminatory purpose. 
See Arlington Heights, 429 U.S. at 265-266; Davis, 426 
U.S. at 242. In the present case, it is undisputed that 
racial minorities were disproportionately undercounted in 
the 1990 census. wl neither the Secretary nor the dis- 
trict court found (and plaintiffs did not show) that a 
failure to adjust the census totals would in turn have a 
disparate racial impact with respect to the proper alloca- 
tion of Representatives among the States, the only con- 
stitutionally prescribed use of census data. There likewise 
was no such finding with respect to either the proper 
distribution of federal funds or the accurate drawing of 
congressional or legislative districts (a matter that is in 
any event the responsibility of the States, not the federal 
government). Indeed, as we have noted above (see pages 
7-9. supra), Secretary Mosbacher concluded that he 
could not confidently determine that an adjustment would 
improve the distributive accuracy of the census even as 
a general matter. In light of the substantial evidence of 
legitimate nonracial reasons for the Secretary’s decision 
against adjustment. a disparate racial impact at the 
numeric level is clearly insufficient to establish a con- 
stitutional violation. 

3. The court of appeals’ decision warrants review by 
this Court. 

a. As the dissenting judge in the court of appeals 
observed (Pet. App. 40), the Sixth and Seventh Circuits 
have rejected constitutional challenges to the Secretary's 
determination that the 1990 census figures should not be 


Counted?” campaign provided individuals who believed that they 
had been missed with an additional opportunity for inclusion in the 
census. /d. at 330. Finally, units of local government were per- 
mitted to challenge the housing unit or group quarters count for 
any block; each of the country’s 51 largest cities challenged at 
least some blocks, and eight cities challenged over 2000 blocks. 
Id. at 332. 


27 


Statistically adjusted. Thus, the court in Tucker v. United 
States Dep't of Commerce, 958 F.2d 1411, 1418 (7th 
Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 407 (1992). concluded 
that “merely by directing congressional apportionment in 
accordance with the decennial census, Articie I, section 
2, clause 3 does not authorize lawsuits founded on dis- 
agreement with the Census Bureau’s statistical methodol- 
ogy.” The Sixth Circuit relied on Tucker in concluding 
that “[t}he plaintiffs’ claim to a census adjustment in- 
vokes no judicially administrable standards” because ad- 
judication of the claim would require the court “to take 
sides in a dispute among statisticians, demographers, and 
census officials concerning the desirability of making a 
Statistical adjustment to a census headcount.” City of 
Detroit Vv. Franklin, 4 F.3d 1367, 1378 (6th Cir. 1993), 
cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 1217 (1994) (quoting Tucker, 
958 F.2d at 1418). Moreover, this case is one of sub- 
stantial national importance because of the possibility 
that the litigation could culminate in an order to re- 
apportion the House of Representatives (and the Elec- 
toral College). or in a judicially imposed requirement 
that the 1990 census data be adjusted in a manner that 
would result in a redistribution of federal funds among 
the States.” 


** We do not suggest that an actual reapportionment of Repre- 
sentatives (and presidential Electors) would be an appropriate 
remedy at this late date (halfway through the decade governed by 
the 1990 decennial census) even if the district court were to 
conclude on remand that, under the court of appeals’ analysis, 
Secretary Mosbacher committed an error of constitutional dimen- 
sion in 1991 in deciding not to make a statistical adjustment to 
the 1990 census. 


*° Guideline Three required that the adjusted figures be derived 
through “pre-specified” procedures. See Pet. App. 213-214, 215-217. 
As the Secretary explained in announcing the guidelines, “{t)}his 
guideline specifie[d| that a set of procedures for generating pro- 
posed adjusted counts [would| be determined in advance of receiv- 
ing the 1990 post-enumeration-survey estimates.” 55 Fed. Reg. 
9841 (1990). Thus, while the Secretary recognized the existence 


28 


b. The court of appeals in this case did not squarely 
hold that the Secretary's decision against adjustment vio- 
lated the Constitution. Rather, it remanded the case to 
the district court for a determination whether the Secre- 
tary’s decision “(a) furthers a governmental objective 
that is legitimate, and (b) is essential for the achievement 
of that objective.” Pet. App. 40. Although the inter- 
locutory posture of the case might in other circumstances 
weigh against review by this Court, we believe that under 
the unusual circumstances now presented, review is war- 
ranted at this stage of the proceedings. 

i. If the Court denies certiorari now and further pro- 
ceedings must commence in the district court under the 


of a variety of defensible adjustment methodologies, see page 10, 
supra, the Secretary was ultimately presented with a choice 
between the unadjusted census and a single set of adjusted figures. 
If Secretary Mosbacher had authorized the particular adjustment 
proposed for his consideration in July 1991, and those adjusted 
figures had been made the basis for a rcapportionment of Repre- 
sentatives among the States, the result would have been a loss 
of one Representative each for Wisconsin and Pennsylvania and 
a gain of one Representative each for California and Arizona. 
See Pet. App. 17, 250-251. 

The large majority of the plaintiffs in this case, however, are 
States other than Arizona or California, or municipalities or resi- 
dents of States other than Arizona or California. Although many 
of those plaintiffs may have suffered injury-in-fact due to the 
impact of the Secretary's decision upon the distribution of federal 
funds, cf. City of Detroit, 4 F.3d at 1274-1375, there is a substan- 
tial question whether plaintiffs outside Arizona and California may 
contest the allocation of Representatives among the States or 
invoke a heightened standard of review based upon the purported 
effect of the Secretary's decision upon the right to vote. See 
United States Dep't of Labor v. Triplett, 494 U.S. 715, 720 
(1990) (“Ordinarily, of course, a litigant must assert his own legal 
rights and interests, and cannot rest his claim to relief on the 
legal rights or interests of third parties.) (internal quotation 
marks omitted); cf. Franklin, 112 S. Ct. at 2776 (plurality opin- 
ion) (Massachusetts lacked standing to challenge accuracy of 
census data absent allegation that it would have been allocated 
an additional Representative if different data had been used). 


29 


Second Circuit's erroneous analysis (subject to further 
review in the court of appeals and this Court), this case 
may well remain unresolved at or near the time of the 
1996 presidential and congressional elections. That un- 
certainty could be avoided if this Court grants review at 
this time. Compare Montana, 503 U.S. at 445 (Court 
ordered expedited briefing and argument “[i]n view of 
the importance of the issue and its significance in [1992] 
congressional and Presidential elections” ). 

ii. No further proceedings in the lower courts are 
needed to clarify the issues presented or to render the 
case suitable for resolution by this Court. As explained 
above, the Secretary's decision against adjustment was 
based upon his determinations that (1) distributive rather 
than numeric accuracy was of paramount importance, 
(2) the unadjusted figures would be treated as the most 
accurate unless adjusted numbers were shown to be bet- 
ter, and (3) the proposed adjustment had not been shown 
to improve distributive accuracy. No extensive factual 
record is needed for this Court to decide whether the first 
two determinations were “consistent with the constitu- 
tional language and the constitutional goal of equal rep- 
resentation,” Franklin, 112 S. Ct. at 2777, and the 
district court has already concluded, based on a careful 
analysis of the administrative record and on testimony 
and exhibits introduced during a lengthy trial, that the 
third determination was not arbitrary or capricious. Re- 
spondents did not challenge the latter conclusion on 
appeal, and nothing in the Second Circuit's decision calls 
it into question. Given the terms of the court of appeals’ 
remand, further proceedings in the district court are un- 
likely to assist this Court in its review of the relevant 
issues. 


30 
CONCLUSION 


The petition for a writ of certiorari should be granted. 
Respectfully submitted. 


Drew S. Days, III 
Solicitor General 


FRANK W. HUNGER 
Assistant Attorney General 


EDWIN S. KNEEDLER 
Deputy Solicitor General 
MALCOLM L. STEWART 
Assistant to the Solicitor General 


MARK B. STERN 
MICHAEL S. RAAB 
Attorneys 


JUNE 1995 


wv. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFrice, 1995 367147 20082 


. 
Py 
, 
s f . 
. : . ; | 
- 
| é 
< 
. 
‘ 
. 
| . 
. : 
P ° bey ¥ J , 
- 
. * . | 
° 
* { f 
' : ? : 
. J ; ) | 
: me 
. : : ) . 
F — , 
‘ ° : ir : 7 
| | ; : t , > 
: . < ‘ ast is 
>. , =F 
. . ‘ , ; ren Ae 
* . po. | . 
. ‘ 3 
* 
a 
~ ’ > J e2 
* _~ : . ‘ 
a sale . 
. 
* ‘ . | 
. : . : | 
‘- . ee 
. AS Si 


“ 2. ———— 


