94141 9 FEB 1 4 1995 
NO. 


DEFICE OF THE CLERK 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT 
OF THE 
UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


TANA WOOD, Superintendent, a 
Petitioner, 


Vv. 


DWAYNE EARL BARTHOLOMEW, 
Respondent. 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


CHRISTINE O. GREGOIRE 
General 


Attorney 
State of Washington 


THORNTON WILSON 
Assistant Attorney General 
Counsel of Record 


Attorney General's Office 

C cons Divisi 

P. O. Box 40116 

Olympia, Washington 98504-01 16 
(360) 586-1445 


a) 


i 
QUESTION PRESENTED 
Does the Due Process Clause, as applied in Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), require prosecutors to disclose 
information that neither is admissible in evidence nor will lead 
to admissible evidence, if the information may affect the 
preparation or presentation of the defense? se 


PROVISIONS sf » | eS | F =e Fe mee ff FF se Fs OF Oe Om Om 
; 


A. The Ninth Circuit's Decision Conflicts with Brady, 
which Holds that Suppression of Information Does 
Not Violate Due Process Unless the Information Is 
Admissible in Evidence. ............... 


Regarding 
Information that Is Not Admissible in Evidence. 
C. This Court Should Grant Certiorari Because the 
Ninth Circuit’s Decision Reduces the Defendant's 
Burden of Proof to Mere Speculation. ....... 


D. The Ninth Circuit’s Decision Effectively Imposes 
a Constitutional Discovery Rule on Prosecutors. . 


11 


14 


22 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 
Alexander v. McCotter, 
Vee Ca Gs GE oc cco vt dea eiwidise o 21 
Arizona v. Youngblood, 
Se Us ccsece enc ea €6kuune 12, 22 


Bartholomew v. Wood, 
34 F.3d 870 (9th Cir. 1994) 1, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 18, 21, 23 


Blackmon v. Scott, 

ee ee ee 15 
Brady v. Maryland, 

Se ee 6 6 x 0 Swe hae ed cee 7-18, 20-23 


Brecht v. Abrahamson, 
U.S. 113 S. Ct. 1710, 


123 L. Ed. 2d 353 SS ne ee 19 
California v. Trombetta, 
es viceticu Sa viccéaee 12, 14 


Cuevas v. Henderson, 
801 F.2d 586 (2nd Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 


ae ee ee 21 
Cuyler v. Sullivan, 

ist accke chap wad cnwens 21 
Giglio v. United States, 

EE 6. 6c ch bccedoboetweunuss 12 
Kyles v. Whitley, 

No. 93-7927 (argued 11/7/94) ............ 11, 12, 18 
Mooney v. Holohan, 

I so wc ce be ean ewobeakbacds 12 
Moore v. Illinois, 

ee Es 0 6s b'e no's 6 SERA wees 12 


v 

Napue v. Illinois, 

360 U. Ss. 1, Pre evivrrrerin ok 12 
Nelson v. Nagle, 

995 F.2d 1549 (lith Cir. 1993) .........2 50s 15 
O'Neal v. McAninch, 

No. 93-7407 (argued 10/31/94) .........55 eee 19 

v. Ritchie, 

) ) © a reeeee ie 12, 18, 19, 23 
Pyle v. Kansas, 

PPPOE occ ce Pescccceccdecdecnn 12 
Scarpa v. Dubois, 

pk by | PPT ES TEETER 21 


State v. Bartholomew, 
98 Wash. 2d 173 P.2d 1170 (1982), vacated and 


remanded on other grounds sub nom. 

Washington v. Bartholomew, 463 U.S. 862 (1983) ..... 6 
Strickland v. Washington, 

SE Cc cectcecicceeesevuseee’ 21 
Teague v. Lane, 

SP EES Gn cc ceceesdsCeccusdwons 16 
United States v. Agurs, 

KR Ee 11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 22 
United States v. Arias Villanueva, 

je 4 eee ae 16 
United States v. Asubonteng, 

895 F.2d 424 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 

— Gree rer ere rere eTe 21 
United States v. Bagley, | 

Ge ee ew cc cccccces 9, 12-14, 18, 22, 23 


United States v. Bencs, 


vi 


United States v. DeLuna, 


ee ee, gn 5 o he Saws O06 ah 15 
United States v. Derr, 

990 F.2d 1330 (D.C. = ee 16 
United States v. Driscoll, 

970 F.2d 1472 (6th Cir. 1992) ..............2.4.. 21 
United States v. Hartmann, 

tg FS ea ee 15 
United States v. Jackson, 

Pe ae PE BOE cc cc cedcvewecsceed 21 
United States v. Kennedy, 

890 F.2d 1056 (9th Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 

Se EE cc ec tccéesecceevioess 15, 16 
United States v. Oliver, 

I, i wg ow elm ee 16 
United States v. Oxman, 

740 F.2d 1298 (ist Cir. 1984), vacated 

on other grounds, 473 U.S. 922 (1985) ........... 14 
United States v. Pedraza, 

pe 5 15, 21 
United States v. Phillip, 

ee eer 16 
United States v. Ramos, 

Be Pe GED bce cc cecsecevces 15, 21 
United States v. Ranney, 

Va ae GEE Ce HN bcc ccc cccceccvege 15 
United States v. Valenzuela-Bernal., 

EE oc, bo no 6 6 6b 6 Swe 12, 18, 20 
United States v. Zillges, 

See eee ee ee Ge ME co ccc ccedceccebces 21 


vii 
Weatherford v. Bursey, 

I 23 
Statutes & Regulations 
RE Oi e svi ci ben stecceecvs 2 
ee was ile chl 2 
Wash. Rev. Code § 9A.32.030(1)(a) ...........005- 3 
Wash. Rev. Code § 9A.32.030(1)(c) ....... see eens 3 
Wash. Rev. Code § 9A.32.040.............00 000) 3 
Wash. Rev. Code § 10.95.020 .............00 000 3 
Wash. Rev. Code § 10.95.0830 .............000055 3 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


TANA WOOD, Superintendent, 


Petitioner, 
Ve 
DWAYNE EARL BARTHOLOMEW, 
Respondent. 
PETITION FOR A WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


Petitioner respectfully prays that a writ of certiorari issue 
to review the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Ninth Circuit in this case. 

I, OPINIONS BELOW 

The opinion of the Court of Appeals is reported at 34 
F.3d 870 (9th Cir. 1994) and appears at Appendix A. The 
opinion of the Dicuict Court for the Western District of 
Washington, which was not published, is at Appendix B. 


2 
Il. JURISDICTION 
The judgmem of the Court of Appeals was entered on 
September 6, 1994. Petitioner’s timely petition for rehearing 
with suggestion for rehearing en banc was denied in an order 
entered November 16, 1994. The jurisdiction of this Court is 
invoked under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). 


Ill. CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY 
PROVISIONS 


The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution provides, in pertinent part: “. . . nor shall any 
State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due 
process of law... .” 

Title 28, Section 2254(a) of the United States Code 
provides: 

The Supreme Court, a Justice thereof, a circuit 

judge, or a district court shall entertain an 

application for a writ of habeas corpus on behalf 

of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment 

of a State court only on the ground that he is in 

custody in violation of the Constitution or laws 

or treaties of the United States. 

IV. STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

Dwayne Bartholomew was convicted by jury verdict in 
Washington state court of aggravated first degree murder and 
sentenced to life without parole. On August 1, 1981, 
Bartholomew shot and killed a Tacoma laundromat attendant, 


Paul Turner, in the course of a robbery. On August 5, 1981, 


3 
Rodney Bartholomew told the police that his brother, Dwayne 
Bartholomew, had committed the crime. Following his arrest, 
Dwayne Bartholomew admitted that he had robbed the 
laundromat and that he had shot Turner. Although he had fired 
two shots, he claimed the shooting was accidental. 

Bartholomew was charged with aggravated first degree 
murder. The sentence for this crime is either death or life 
without the possibility of parole. Wash. Rev. Code § 10.95.030. 
To prove aggravated murder, the prosecution had to show 
(among other elements) that the murder was premeditated. 
Wash. Rev. Code §§ 9A.32.030(1)(a), 10.95.020. If the 
prosecution failed to show that the killing was premeditated, 
Bartholomew could have been convicted only of felony murder. 
Wash. Rev. Code § 9A.32.030(1)(c). The sentence for this 
crime is life with the possibility of parole. Wash. Rev. Code § 
9A.32.040. The proof at trial thus focused on whether the 
killing was premeditated or accidental. 

Before trial, the prosecution conducted polygraph 
examinations of Rodney Bartholomew and his girlfriend, Tracy 
Dormady, who had been with Rodney when Dwayne committed 
the murder. Rodney was asked two relevant questions: (1) "Did 
you in any way help Dwayne to rob the laundromat on August 
1, 19817", and (2) "On August 1, 1981, at any time were you 
and Dwayne inside the laundromat at the same time?" Rodney 


4 


answered in the negative to both questions. His answers were 
consistent with his earlier statements to the police. The 
polygrapher, however, concluded that Rodney’s reactions to the 
questions indicated deception. 

Ms. Dormady was also asked two relevant questions: (1) 
"Did you in any way help Dwayne rob the laundromat on August 
1, 19817", and (2) "Did you at any time on August 1, 1981, 
hold Dwayne’s gun?" Ms. Dormady answered in the negative 
to both questions, again consistently with her statements to the 
police. The polygrapher concluded that her answers were 
truthful. 

The prosecution did not inform the defense of the 
polygraphs before trial because the Washington Supreme Court 
had held that polygraphs are inadmissible as evidence, and 
because the prosecutor did not believe that polygraphs could 
accurately determine whether a witness was lying. 

At trial, Rodney Bartholomew testified that he and Tracy 
Dormady went to the laundromat on the evening of August 1, 
1981, to do their laundry. Dwayne Bartholomew was sitting in 
his car in the parking lot when they arrived. While waiting for 
the laundry, Rodney sat with Dwayne in his car. Dwayne told 
Rodney that he intended to rob the laundromat and “leave no 
witnesses." Rodney and Tracy left the laundromat shortly 
thereafter. Soon after they arrived at Ms. Dormady’s house, 


5 

Dwayne Bartholomew arrived. Tracy asked him if he had killed 
the attendant and Dwayne said “he had put two bullets in the 
kid’s head." Tracy also testified that she had heard Dwayne say 
he intended to leave no witnesses. Rodney and Tracy both 
testified consistently with their statements to the police and their 
answers to the polygraph questions. 

Bartholomew’s counsel cross-examined both Rodney and 
Tracy vigorously. In particular, counsel challenged their 

The prosecution also put on evidence that the gun 
Dwayne used could not be discharged accidentally. 
Bartholomew’s pistol was a single-action revolver. To fire such 
a gun, Bartholomew had to do two things: he needed to cock the 
hammer, which required him to pull the hammer a full one and 
7/16 inch from its stop back to the firing position; and he had to 
pull the trigger. Bartholomew testified that, as to the first shot, 
he had pulled the hammer back, but did not intend to pull the 
trigger. However, Bartholomew fired two shots. This means 
that, after shooting once, Bartholomew must have intentionally 
pulled the hammer back, and again pulled the trigger. 
Bartholomew thus took at least one purposeful shot at the victim. 

Dwayne Bartholomew was the only defense witness. He 
testified that he went to the laundromat intending to rob it. He 
admitted he had threatened the victim with his gun and forced 


6 
him to lie on the floor. He testified that while he was removing 
the money from the till, his gun accidentally fired, discharging 
a bullet into the victim’s head. He claimed that as he fled with 
$237 from the robbery, the gun accidentally fired a second time. 

Dwayne denied telling Rodney and Tracy that he 
intended to leave no witnesses. He also testified that Rodney 
had assisted in the robbery. According to Dwayne, Rodney 
waited outside the laundromat until it closed. He then persuaded 
the attendant to unlock the doors on the pretense of having to use 
the bathroom. This allowed Dwayne to follow Rodney into the 
laundromat. After Rodney had left, Dwayne proceeded with the 
robbery. 

The jury found Bartholomew guilty of aggravated first 
degree murder. After the guilt phase of the trial, the defense 
discovered that the polygraphs existed, and moved for a new 
trial. The trial court denied the motion because polygraphs were 
inadmissible under Washington law. The Washington Supreme 
Court affirmed the trial court’s decision regarding the 
polygraphs. State v. Bartholomew, 98 Wash. 2d 173, 654 P.2d 
1170 (1982), vacated and remanded on other grounds sub nom. 
Washington v. Bartholomew, 463 U.S. 862 (1983). Dwayne 
Bartholomew ultimately was sentenced to life without the 
possibility of parole. 


7 


In habeas corpus proceedings in the District Court, 
Bartholomew claimed, among other things, that the failure of the 
prosecution to divulge the polygraph results before trial violated 
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). In an evidentiary 
hearing, Bartholomew’s trial attorney and Rodney Bartholomew 
both testified. The trial attorney said that he was well aware that 
Rodney may have been lying, and that disclosure of the 
polygraph would not have changed his pretrial investigation, his 
trial strategy, or his cross-examination of Rodney Bartholomew. 
Upon examination by Bartholomew’s habeas counsel, Rodney 
again affirmed that he had not helped Dwayne with the crime, 
and that he had testified truthfully at trial. The entire transcript 
of Rodney’s examination — totalling five pages — is attached as 
Appendix C. Bartholomew’s habeas attorney did not develop 
any evidence from his examination of Rodney, or from any other 
source, that would support a conclusion that disclosure of the 
polygraph would have led to new evidence or a better cross- 

The District Court held that Bartholomew had not proved 
either that disclosure of the polygraphs would have led to 
evidence admissible at trial, or that he had been prejudiced by 

The Court of Appeals reversed. It recognized that the 
polygraphs were inadmissible as evidence under Washington law, 


8 
and that the polygraphs themselves were thus not Brady 
evidence. The Court held, however, that nondisclosed 
information could violate Brady, even if it were inadmissible, if 
the information could have improved the “preparation or 
presentation” of the defendant’s case: 


Bartholomew's ability to prepare and present his 


34 F.3d at 875. 
Although Bartholomew had presented no evidence 
whatever that the polygraph would have led to adiaissible 
evidence, or that his defense would have been improved in any 
way, the Court speculated that the polygraph result "would 
likely” have strengthened the cross-examination of Rodney and 


9 

Tracy. 34 F.3d at 874. The Court said that trial counsel 
“likely” would have taken Rodney's deposition. Had there been 
a deposition, the Court said that trial counsel “might” have 
succeeded in obtaining an admission from Rodney that he was 
lying, or “likely” would have obtained information useful to a 
cross-examination. 34 F.3d at 875-76. The Court did not, 
however, identify one piece of admissible evidence that the 
defense could have used in cross examination, because 
Bartholomew did not prove such evidence existed. 

V. REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 

This Court should grant the writ to clarify whether the 
due process clause, as applied in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 
83 (1963), requires prosecutors to disclose information that 
neither is admissible in evidence nor leads to admissible 
evidence. Brady and its progeny discuss whether evidence is 
“materia! either to guilt or punishment," and indicate that the 
obligation to disclose is limited to admissible evidence. Brady, 
373 U.S. at 87. However, this Court later suggested in United 
States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 683 (1985), that evidence is 
“material” if the “preparation or presentation” of the defense 
would have been different had the evidence been disclosed. In 
reliance on this language in Bagley, the Ninth Circuit expanded 
Brady to require disclosure of all information — whether 


10 
admissible or not — that may affect the “preparation or 
presentation” of the defense. 

Because this Court has never conclusively established 
whether Brady's obligation to disclose is limited to admissible 
evidence, the Courts of Appeals are uncertain about the 
application of Brady. Some Circuits hold that the suppressed 
information itself must be admissible evidence. Other Circuits 
hold that the suppressed information, if not itself admissible, 
must lead to admissible evidence. And in this case, the Ninth 
Circuit found a Brady violation even though no admissible 
evidence was identified. 

Review is also appropriate because the Ninth Circuit 
speculated on whether the polygraph information could have 
changed the course of trial. Speculation regarding prejudice is 
contrary to the burden of proof for both Brady claims and habeas 
relief. Finally, the Ninth Circuit's decision effectively imposes 
a constitutional discovery rule on prosecutors who, to avoid 
reversal on appeal, will need to disclose all information they 
receive regarding a criminal case. This Court has expressly held 
that Brady does not create a constitutional discovery rule. This 
Court should grant review to clarify its previous decisions 
regarding Brady, to reaffirm the defendant's burden of proof, 


11 
and to provide a single, comprehensive standard for the courts 
to apply. The decision of the Ninth Circuit should be reversed’. 


The Ninth Cireuit’s Decision Conficts with 
Brady, which Holds 
Seerinadion Dees Net Vielate Due Process 
Unless 


> 


373 U.S. at 87 (emphases added). In Brady's state court appeal, 
the Maryland court ruled that the suppressed evidence was 
admissible only for purposes of Brady's sentence, not his guilt. 
As this Court explained in United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 
105-106 (1976), Brady held that the evidence was not material 


precisely because it was inadmissible with regard to guilt: 


' ‘This Court is also considering the application of Brady in Kyles v. 
Whitley, No. 93-7927. Alhough both Kyles and this case involve the 
“materiality” standard of Brady, this case addresses a separate ambiguity in 
Brady. Kyles addresses how severe an effect on the defense must be to be 
*material;” this case addresses what information must be disclosed. 


12 


the outcome on the issue of guilt but could have 
affected Brady’s punishment. It was material on 
the latter issue but not the former. 


(Emphases added; footnote omitted.) 

This Court’s other decisions regarding Brady claims all 
involve evidence that is admissible either on direct examination 
or on cross-examination. Mooney v. Holohan, 294 U.S. 103, 
112 (1935), Pyle v. Kansas, 317 U.S. 213, 216 (1942), and 
Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 269 (1959), which preceded 
Brady, each involved the prosecution’s knowing use of perjured 
testimony. The cases following Brady similarly discuss the due 
process implications of the suppression of evidence. See Giglio 
v. United States, 405 U.S. 150 (1972); Moore v. Illinois, 408 
U.S. 786 (1972); United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 105-106 
(1976); United States v. Valenzuela-Bernal, 458 U.S. 858 
(1982); California v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479 (1984); United 
States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 674 (1985); Pennsylvania v. 
Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39 (1987); Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U.S. 
51 (1988); and Kyles v. Whitley, No. 93-7927. 

Although Brady and its progeny refer solely to 
admissible evidence, the Ninth Circuit held that withholding the 
inadmissible polygraph violated Brady because it may have had 
an effect on the "preparation or presentation” of Bartholomew’s 
defense. 34 F.3d at 875. The Court of Appeals cited United 
States v. Bagley, supra, as its authority. In discussing whether 


13 
suppressed evidence is “material,” the plurality opinion in Bagley 
stated that a reviewing court may consider “any adverse effect 
that the prosecutor's failure to respond might have had on the 
preparation or presentation of the defendant’s case." 473 U.S. 
at 683. 

The Ninth Circuit took this language out of context. 
Bagley does not hold that suppression of inadmissible 
information can violate due process. To the contrary, Bagley 
emphasized that its holding involved suppression of evidence, an 
element entirely missing from Bartholomew's case: 


473 U.S. at 675 emphasis added; footnote deleted). Further, in 
its sole statement on the issue here presented, this Court said that 
Brady is pot violated merely because information may have an 
effect on the preparation or presentation of the defense: 


United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. at 112 n. 20. The Ninth 
Circuit’s decision thus takes Bagley out of context, and conflicts 
both with Agurs and the holding of Brady itself that suppressed 
information is not material unless it is admissible evidence’. 
This Court should grant certiorari to clarify that the duty to 
disclose under Brady is limited to admissible evidence. 


B. Certiorari Is Necessary to Guide the Courts of 
to Information tat Ie Rot Admissible i 
Evidence. 

The Courts of Appeals apply Brady in widely different 
ways. The First, Third, Fifth, Seventh, Tenth, and Eleventh 
Circuits follow the express language of Brady, and require 
disclosure only of information that itself is admissible in 


evidence. United States v. Oxman, 740 F.2d 1298, 1311 (ist 


? ‘This Court has also held that duc process is not necessarily violated 


even when evidence is withheld. In California v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479, 
488-89 (1984), the prosecution destroyed arguably exculpatory evidence. 
Citing Agurs, the Court held that due process does not require the State to 
preserve all evidence. The state must preserve evidence only when it possesses 
an exculpatory value that is apparent before # was destroyed, and is of such a 
nature thet the defendant would be unable to obtain comparable evidence by 
other reasonably available means. 467 U.S. at 488-489. If the prosecutor in 
Bartholomew had destroyed rather than suppressed the poly graph, Bartholomew 
would not be entitled to relief under this test. 


15 


Cir. 1984) (“In order to be material, evidence suppressed must 
have been admissible at trial"), vacated on other grounds, 473 
U.S. 922 (1985); United States v. Ranney, 719 F.2d 1183, 1190 
(ist Cir. 1983) (“Inadmissible evidence is by definition not 
material, because it never would have reached the jury and 
therefore could not have affected the trial outcome"). Other 
cases that reach the same result are United States v. Ramos, 27 
F.3d 65, 71 (3rd Cir. 1994); Blackmon v. Scott, 22 F.3d 560, 
564 (Sth Cir. 1994); United States v. Hartmann, 958 F.2d 774, 
790 (7th Cir. 1992); United States v. Pedraza, 27 F.3d 1515, 
1527 (10th Cir. 1994); Nelson v. Nagle, 995 F.2d 1549, 1555 
(11th Cir. 1993); and United States v. DeLuna, 10 F.3d 1529, 
1534 (11th Cir. 1994). 

Other Circuits hold that Brady is violated when the 
suppressed information is not admissible but would lead to 
admissible evidence. Before its decision in Bartholomew v. 
Wood, the Ninth Circuit consistently had held that “To be 
material under Brady, undisclosed information or evidence 
acquired through that information must be admissible.” United 
States v. Kennedy, 890 F.2d 1056, 1059 (9th Cir. 1989), cert. 


16 

denied, 494 U.S. 1008 (1990). See also United States v. Arias 
Villanueva, 998 F.2d 1491, 1506 (9th Cir. 1993) (no Brady 
violation where the undisclosed information is "blatant hearsay 
that would have been inadmissible at trial"); United States v. 
Phillip, 948 F.2d 241, 250 (6th Cir. 1991) (videotape was not 
Brady material because it was inadmissible hearsay and would 
not lead to admissible evidence); United States v. Oliver, 908 
F.2d 260, 262 (8th Cir. 1990) (information requested must lead 
to the admission of “otherwise undiscoverable” evidence); United 
States v. Derr, 990 F.2d 1330, 1335 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (no Brady 
claim because the “evidence” was inadmissible hearsay and 
would not have led to admissible evidence). 

None but the Ninth Circuit, however, have held that 
information violates Brady when it neither is admissible nor will 
lead to admissible evidence. Besides Brady itself, one Circuit's 
decision directly conflicts with the Ninth Circuit’s he’ding. In 
United States v. Bencs, 28 F.3d 555 (6th Cir. 1994), Bencs 


3 In Bartholomew, the Ninth Circuit cites Kennedy but ignores its 
limitation to admissible evidence. 34 F.3d at 875. Thus, until the Ninth 
Circuit's decision in Bartholomew, state and federal prosecutors were under no 
constitutional obligation to disclose clearly inadmissible information, such as 
polygraph results. Under Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 301 (1989), a habeas 
corpus case cannot announce a “new rule” of criminal procedure unless the 
new rule falls within one of two narrow exceptions. Id. at 310-313. The new 
rule announced in Bartholomew is particularly egregious, because the 
prosecutor testified that he did not disclose the polygraph because it was not 
admissible in evidence, and the Washington Supreme Court affirmed the 
conviction for the same reason. This is exactly the detriment that Teague 
prohibits. 


17 
claimed that his trial preparation was hindered because Brady 
evidence had been disclosed during trial. Relying on United 
States v. Agurs, supra, which held that suppression of 
information does not violate Brady if its only effect is on trial 
preparation, the court held that Bencs had not stated a valid 
claim. 28 F.3d at 561. 


Brady is effective precisely because it is limited to 
admissible “evidence” that is “favorable” to the defense. 
Because its criteria are objective, Brady provides a reliable, 
predictable standard for prosecutors and the courts to determine 
whether certain information must be disclosed to the defense. 
The Ninth Circuit has abandoned Brady’s objective standard and, 
as the next sections will show, its decision both encourages 
speculation on harm to the defense, and imposes a constitutional 
discovery rule on prosecutors. This Court should grant 
certiorari to resolve the confusion among the Circuit Courts, and 


reaffirm Brady as a workable, objective standard. 


18 


¢. This Court Should Grant Certiorari Because 
the Ninth Circuit’s Decision Reduces the 
Defendant’s Burden of Proof to Mere 


Speculation. 

The Ninth Circuit’s extension of Brady to information 
that may affect the preparation or presentation of the defense 
reduces the defendant’s burden of proving harm to a mere 
speculation. This result is shown in the Bartholomew decision 
itself, where the Court patently speculated as to the possibility 
that Bartholomew could have improved the preparation or 
presentation of his defense. 

On review of Brady claims, the defendant bears the 
burden of establishing that the withheld information contains 
"material evidence.” Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 58 
n. 15; United States v. Valenzuela-Bernal, 458 U.S. 858, 867 
(1982). Evidence is "material" only if a reasonable probability 
exists that, had it been disclosed, the result of the trial would 
have been different. United States v. Bagley, supra*. A 

“possibility” of a different result is insufficient: “The mere 
possibility that an item of undisclosed information might have 
helped the defense . . . does not establish "materiality" in the 


* Again, this Court's pending decision in Kyles v. Whitley, No. 93-7927, 
will address the petitioner's burden of proving the materiality of suppressed 
evidence. 


19 

constitutional sense." United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. at 109- 
110; quoted by Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 58 n. 15°. 
Bartholomew claimed that his counsel, armed with the 
polygraph result, could have taken Rodney’s deposition and that 
the deposition may have uncovered evidence that could have led 
to a better cross-examination. At the evidentiary hearing, 
however, Bartholomew’s counsel was armed with the polygraph 
result, and questioned Rodney about it. Despite his knowledge 
of the polygraph, the entire transcript of Rodney Bartholomew’s 
testimony spans only five pages. Appendix C. Bartholomew’s 
counsel failed to develop one additional piece of evidence 
favorable to the defense. He failed even to identify one 
additional question that could have been helpful on cross- 
examination. To the contrary, Rodney testified, once again, that 

his trial testimony had been truthful®. 
Despite the lack of any evidence of prejudice, the Court 
of Appeals nonetheless concluded that Bartholomew had shown 
that the suppressed polygraph had an adverse effect on the 


. Similarly, habeas relief may not be granted if there is merely a 
“reasonable possibility” that trial error contributed to the verdict. Brecht v. 
Abrahamson, U.S. __, __, 113 S. Ct. 1710, 1721, 123 L. Ed. 2d 353 
(1993). In O'Neal v. McAninch, No. 93-7407, this Court will decide whether 
& habeas petitioner bears the burden of proving that a trial error prejudiced the 


. Again, Bartholomew's trial attorney testified that he was aware that 
Rodney may have been lying, and that the polygraph would not have changed 
his cross-examination of Rodney Bartholomew. 


20 
“preparation or presentation” of the defense. The Court then 
concluded that this possibility created a "reasonable probability" 
that the result of the trial would have been different. The Ninth 
Circuit’s decision was entirely speculative and must be 
reversed’. 

In United States v. Valenzuela-Bernal, 458 U.S. 858 
(1982), the Court expressly rejected a similar attempt by the 
Ninth Circuit to speculate as to the effect a prosecutor’s decision 
had on the defense. 458 U.S. at 862-863, and n. 4. The 
prosecutor had deported a witness to a crime. The defense 
claimed that the witness might have provided exculpatory 
testimony, but did not prove what the witness would have said 
if he had been called. Despite this lack of proof, the Ninth 
Circuit held that deporting the witness violated due process 
because the witness had a "conceivable benefit" to the defense. 
This Court held that the Ninth Circuit’s test was far too 
speculative, because it eliminated the defendant’s burden of 


7 When Brady is limited to evidence that is admissible at trial, the courts 
need not speculate about the harm to the defense. If the petitioner identifies 
withheld evidence, the reviewing court may gauge whether the new evidence 
creates a “reasonable probability” that the jury would have reached a different 
verdict, by weighing the new evidence against the evidence at trial. By 
comparison, when withheld information — such as the polygraph in this case - 
- is not admissible, the court cannot directly gauge the effect the information 
may have had on the trial. Although the suppression may have affected the 
preparation and presentation of the defense, the defendant cannot show an 
effect on the result of trial unless he or she also proves that some new evidence 
could have been presented to the jury. Thus, the Ninth Circuit's decision 


inevitably encourages speculation. 


21 
proving harm. The Ninth Circuit’s decision in Bartholomew 
commits the same error, using different language. 

The other Circuit Courts of Appeals, unlike the Ninth 
Circuit, refuse to grant relief on speculation. United States v. 
Ramos, 27 F.3d 65, 71 (3rd Cir. 1994), thought it “unwise to 
infer the existence of Brady material on speculation alone." The 
Sixth and Seventh Circuits also hold that "A due process 
standard which is satisfied by mere speculation would convert 
Brady into a discovery device and impose an undue burden on 
the district court." United States v. Driscoll, 970 F.2d 1472, 
1482 (6th Cir. 1992); United States v. Jackson, 780 F.2d 1305, 
1313 (7th Cir. 1986). In United States v. Pedraza, 27 F.3d 
1515, 1527 (10th Cir. 1994), the Court rejected the defendants’ 
Brady claims because they provided no evidence to support their 
assertion that withheld tapes would have furthered their 
defense’. 


. A petitioner that claims ineffective assistance of counsel also must prove 
that there was a “reasonable probability” that the deficient performance 
prejudiced the defense. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984); 
Cuyler v. Sullivan, 466 U.S. 335, 350 (1980). To show prejudice, speculation 
is not enough. A petitioner must prove specific instances in which counsel's 
failures affected his trial. Scarpa v. Dubois, 38 F.3d 1, 11-16 (ist Cir. 1994); 
United States v. Zillges, 978 F.2d 369, 373 (7th Cir. 1992); Alexander v. 
McCotter, T75 F.2d 595, 602 (Sth Cir. 1985); Cuevas v. Henderson, 801 F.2d 
586 (2nd Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 480 U.S. 908 (1987); United States v. 
Asubonteng , 895 F.2d 424, 429 (7th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, sub nom. Rivers 
v. United States, 494 U.S. 1089 (1990). 


22 


Bartholomew introduced no proof whatever that the 
failure to disclose the polygraph affected his trial. The Ninth 
Circuit’s ruling effectively eliminates the burden of proving 
prejudice from the defendant, contrary to the decisions of this 
Court and all other Circuits. The Court should grant the petition 
for certiorari to establish the proper standard for review of Brady 
claims. 


D. The Ninth Circuit’s Decision Effectively 
Imposes a Constitutional Discovery Rule on 
Prosecutors. 


United States v. Bagley, supra, emphasized that not 
every suppression of information causes such a miscarriage of 
justice: "a rule that the prosecutor commits error by any failure 
to disclose evidence favorable to the accused, no matter how 
insignificant, would impose an impossible burden on the 
prosecutor and would undermine the finality of judgments.” 473 
U.S. at 675 n. 7. Similarly, Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U.S. 
51 (1988) reviewed “what might loosely be called the area of 
constitutionally guaranteed access to evidence” and emphasized 
that the Court had consistently "rejected the notion that a 
‘prosecutor has a constitutional duty routinely to deliver his 
entire file to defense counsel.’"” Jd. at 55. See also United 
States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. at 106, 111. As these cases show, 
Brady did not create a constitutional discovery rule. 


Leticaiien ee oo ey 


23 

The Ninth Circuit’s decision in Bartholomew, however, 
effectively requires the prosecution to disclose all information in 
its possession to the defense. If the test is whether the withheld 
information had an effect on the preparation or presentation of 
the defense, the prosecution can gauge its obligation to disclose 
only if it fully understands the defense case. Under the 
adversary system of justice, however, the prosecution’s ability 
to discover the defense case is limited — and an overly intrusive 
attempt to do so can itself violate due process. Weatherford v. 
Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 559 (1977). Even if the prosecutor 
investigates the possible defense strategies, Bartholomew invites 
reviewing courts to second-guess the prosecutors, and speculate 
whether the nondisclosed information would have affected the 
defense in some fashion. To avoid reversal, therefore, the 
prosecution will effectively be required to release all information 
to the defense. This is directly contrary to the command of this 
Court in United States v. Bagley, supra, and Pennsylvania v. 
Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 59. This Court should grant certiorari to 
reaffirm that Brady does not impose a constitutional discovery 
rule. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

The Ninth Circuit’s decision in Bartholomew conflicts 
with Brady, and carries Brady’s obligation to disclose farther 
than all other circuits. Its decision will lead directly to 


24 
speculation regarding harm to the defense, and will create a 
constitutional discovery rule. Both results are directly contrary 
to commands from this Court. The Court should grant certiorari 
to review, and reverse, the decision of the Ninth Circuit. 
RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED 


CHRISTINE O. GREGOIRE 
Attorney General 


THORNTON WILSON 
Assistant Attorney General 
Counsel of Record 


A-l 
APPENDIX A 


FOR PUBLICATION 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 


No. 93-35549 
D.C. No. CV 91-5102-RJB 


OPINION 
DWAYNE EARL BARTHOLOMEW, 


Petitioner-Appellant, 


Vv. 


TANA WOOD, Superintendent of the 
Washington State Penitentiary, 


Respondent-Appellee. 
Appeal from the United States District Court 
for the Western District of Washington 
Robert J. Bryan, District Judge, Presiding 


Argued and Submitted 
April 8, 1994—Seattle, Washington 


Filed September 6, 1994 


Before: Eugene A. Wright, Thomas Tang, and 
Stephen Reinhardt, Circuit Judges. 


Opinion by Judge Reinhardt 


A-2 


SUMMARY 


Criminal Law and Procedure/Due Process 

The court of appeals reversed a district court order 
denying a petition for writ of habeas corpus, remanding with 
instructions. The court held that prosecutors violated due 
process by failing to disclose in advance of trial that a witness 
who gave crucial testimony on a key issue had previously taken, 
and failed, a polygraph test. 

Appellant Dwayne Bartholomew robbed a laundromat. 
During the course of the robbery, he shot and killed the 
attendant. A critical issue at trial in state (Washington) court 
was whether the killing was premeditated. The crucial witnesses 
against Bartholomew were his brother, Rodney Bartholomew, 
and Rodney’s girlfriend, Tracy Dormady. Rodney and Tracy 
testified that Dwayne had told them he intended to rob the 
laundromat and leave no witnesses. Dwayne’s defense was that 
Rodney had been involved in the robbery and that Rodney and 
Tracy were lying to protect themselves. 

Dwayne was convicted and sentenced to death. Later, 
he discovered that Rodney had taken a polygraph test and had 
given what appeared to be untruthful answers to questions 
regarding whether he had helped Dwayne rob the laundromat 


So Re a a ee lh ee hee OE Le Oe 


A-3 
and whether he and Dwayne had been together inside the 
laundromat on the night of the robbery. During trial the 
prosecution had failed to disclose the testing; the prosecution 
later conceded that tests had been administered and that the state 
had suppressed the results. 

Following U.S. Supreme Court review, The Washington 
Supreme Court remanded for retrial of the penalty phase under 
a narrowed construction of the death penalty statute. The 
defense offered the results of Rodney’s polygraph test and also 
challenged other items of evidence. This time, the jury returned 
a verdict of life imprisonment without parole, the more lenient 
of the two sentences it could impose. 

Dwayne Bartholomew petitioned to the district court for 
habeas relief, contending that the state violated due process by 
failing to disclose the test results prior to trial of the guilt phase 
and that he received ineffective representation of counsel. The 
district court denied his petition, holding that he failed to show 
prejudicial errors by his attorney and failed to show that 
disclosure of the test results to his attorney would have had a 
reasonable likelihood of affecting the verdict. 

[1] In a case such as this, a defendant need show only 
that there is a reasonable likelihood that the degree of conviction 
would have been lower, not necessarily that he would have been 
exonerated, if the material had been disclosed. 


A4 

[2] The results of the test were favorable to 
Bartholomew’s defense; they bore directly on the credibility of 
the most significant witnesses, and [3] they supported his theory 
of the case. 

[4] The state argued that the test results would not have 
been material if they had been admissible, since there was other 
evidence tending to show premeditation. This contention is not 
persuasive, since the results might have served to impeach Tracy 
Dormady’s testimony. [5] Further, Rodney and Tracy’s 
testimony was the only direct evidence of premeditation 
presented by the prosecution at the guilt phase. Failure to 
disclose material which could impeach, or lead to the 
impeaching, of that testimony necessarily undermines confidence 
in the outcome of the trial. 

[6] Even if the polygraph results were not admissible, 
they were material. Failure to disclose the results clearly 
impaired Bartholomew’s ability to prepare and present his case. 
[7] Had his attorney known of the test results, he would have 
had a stronger reason to pursue investigation of Rodney’s story. 
[8] A vigorous examination of Rodney in a pretrial deposition 
would likely have uncovered a variety of conflicting statements 
which could have been used quite effectively in cross- 


examination at trial. 


A-5 
[9] Because the prosecution’s disclosure failure 
undermines confidence in the verdict, due process was denied, 
and reversal is warranted. 


COUNSEL 
Timothy K. Ford, MacDonald, Hoague & Bayless, Seattle, 
Washington, for the petitioner-appellant. 


Thornton Wilson, Assistant Attorney General, Olympia, 
Washington, for the respondent-appellee. 


OPINION 
REINHARDT, Circuit Judge: 

Dwayne Bartholomew, a Washington State prisoner, was 
convicted of aggravated first degree murder. Although he was 
originally sentenced to death, the Washington Supreme Court 
reversed his sentence, and after a sentencing retrial he received 
a sentence of life without possibility of parole. Upon exhausting 
his remedies in the state courts, he brought this habeas corpus 
petition, which the district court denied. On appeal, 
Bartholomew claims that the state violated due process by failing 
to disclose that its crucial witness on the issue of premeditation 
had failed a polygraph test. He contends that, if the prosecution 
had disclosed the information, he would likely have been 


A-6 
convicted of simple rather than aggravated first-degree murder. 
Had Bartholomew been convicted of the lesser murder charge, 
he would, at an elderly age, become eligible for parole. Instead, 
because of the degree of his conviction, he is ineligible for 
release from prison at any time during his lifetime. 

Because the state has admitted that it did not disclose the 
adverse results of the polygraph test administered to its key 
witness, and because that failure undermines confidence in 
Bartholomew’s conviction of the aggravated offense, we reverse 
and order the district court to issue a writ directing the state 
either to grant Bartholomew a new trial on the question of 
premeditation or to reduce the degree of the conviction to simple 
first degree murder. 

I, 

On August 1, 1981, Dwayne Bartholomew robbed a 
Tacoma laundromat. During the course of the robbery, he fired 
two shots with a .22 caliber pistol. One bullet struck and killed 
the attendant, while the other was found lodged in a counter near 
the body. Bartholomew confessed to committing the robbery and 
to firing the fatal shot. He has never challenged the 
voluntariness or validity of this confession. At trial and on this 
appeal of the denial of his habeas petition, Bartholomew's claims 
have revolved around a single, narrow issue: whether he had the 
requisite mens rea to be convicted of aggravated first degree 


A-7 
murder under Washington law (which requires premeditation), 
or whether he could only have been convicted of simple first 
degree murder (for which a felony-murder theory is sufficient).' 
Bartholomew asserts that he did not have the premeditated intent 
to kill the laundromat attendant. 

The crucial witnesses against Dwayne Bartholomew were 
Dwayne’s brother Rodney and Rodney’s girlfriend, Tracy 
Dormady (who was pregnant with Rodney’s child at the time 
Dwayne committed the crime). Rodney and Tracy’s testimony 
provided the only direct evidence that Dwayne had the 
premeditated intent to kill: they testified that he had told them he 
intended to rob the laundromat and leave no witnesses. Dwayne 
Bartholomew’s defense centered on the assertion that Rodney had 
been involved in the robbery and that Rodney and Tracy were 
lying, out of self-interest, about the part of their testimony upon 
which the state relied to establish Dwayne’s premeditation. 

After the trial at which he was convicted and sentenced 
to death, Dwayne discovered that, at the request of the 
prosecution, Rodney and Tracy had submitted to polygraph 
examinations. The results of Tracy’s test were inconclusive, but 
Rodney’s suggested that he was untruthful when he gave negative 


‘Under Washington law, aggravated first degree murder is punished by 
death or by life imprisonment without possibility of parole. First degree 
murder is punished by life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. 


A-8 

answers to the two relevant questions: whether he in any way 
helped Dwayne to rob the laundromat, and whether he and 
Dwayne had at any point been inside the establishment at the 
same time on the night of the robbery. Although the state’s 
attorney has asserted throughout the entire course of these 
proceedings that the prosecution maintained an open-file 
discovery policy, the existence of these examinations, and their 
results, had not been disclosed to the defense. Indeed, the 
prosecution initially denied that any tests took place.’ However, 
it eventually conceded that the tests had indeed been administered 
and that the state had suppressed the results. 

Dwayne Bartholomew moved for a new trial, in part on 
the basis of the newly-discovered polygraph results, but the trial 
court denied the motion. On appeal, the Washington Supreme 
Court affirmed Bartholomew’s conviction. See State v. 
Bartholomew (Bartholomew I), 654 P.2d 1170 (Wash. 1982). It 
rejected his claim that the state violated due process by failing to 
disclose Rodney’s polygraph results. Although the court 
affirmed Bartholomew’s conviction of aggravated first-degree 


2When Dwayne Bartholomew's new counsel first moved for a new trial, 
the prosecutor stated: 


I can give an answer right now. There weren't any 
polygraphs and there wasn't any deal; so, so much for that. 


(Trail Tr. 620). 


A-9 

murder, it reversed his death sentence because it held that the 
Washington death penalty statute was unconstitutional as applied. 
It adopted a narrowing construction of the statute and remanded 
for a retrial of the penalty phase under the narrowed 
construction. The state sought review of this decision in the 
U.S. Supreme Court, which vacated the Washington Supreme 
Court’s decision and remanded for reconsideration in light of 
Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862 (1983). See Washington v. 
Bartholomew, 463 U.S. 1203 (1983). On remand, the 
Washington Supreme Court adhered to its earlier decision and 
remanded for a penalty retrial. See State v. Bartholomew 
(Bartholomew II), 683 P.2d 1079 (Wash. 1984). The 
Washington Supreme Court held that the polygraph results would 
be admissible on remand. See id. at 1088-89. 

After the decision in Bartholomew II, the county 
prosecutor determined that the evidence did not support a 
sentence of death under the narrowing construction adopted by 
the state Supreme Court. The prosecution and defense filed a 
joint motion for a sentence of life imprisonment without parole. 
Because the trail judge doubted that the prosecutor could decline 
to seek the death penalty at so late a stage of the proceedings, he 
appointed special counsel to argue that the state lacked discretion 
to do so. After hearing argument from both parties and the 
special counsel, the trail court denied the joint motion and 


A-10 

ordered that a new sentencing hearing take place. The 
prosecution and defense appealed. In a six-to-three decision, the 
Washington Supreme Court held that "(t]he prosecution has no 
right, statutory or constitutional, to usurp the jury’s functions to 
determine mitigation in this case, and make the decision whether 
the defendant should live or die." State v. Bartholomew 
(Bartholomew III), 710 P.2d 196, 200 (Wash. 1985) (emphasis 
in original). Thus, the court remanded “with instructions that 
the prosecutor present this case to a sentencing jury for trial of 
the penalty phase of this case." Id. 
| The penalty retrial occurred in the fall of 1986. The 

defense offered the results of Rodney Bartholomew’s polygraph 
test. It also challenged several other items of evidence that had 
been introduced at the original penalty trial. The jury returned 
a verdict of life imprisonment without parole, the more lenient 
of the two sentences it was free to impose. 

After exhausting his state remedies, Bartholomew filed 
this federal habeas petition in the District Court for the Western 
District of Washington in 1991. Among other claims, the 
petitioner alleged that the state had violated due process by 
failing to disclose the polygraph results to the defense prior to 
trial of the guilt phase and that Bartholomew’s trail counsel had 
been ineffective because he failed to discover that the polygraph 
tests had been conducted and he failed to undertake a sufficient 


A-11 
investigation of the operation of the gun used in the robbery. 
After an evidentiary hearing, the district court denied the 
petition. It held that Bartholomew had failed to show that any 
errors on the part of his attorney prejudiced his defense. It also 
held that he had failed "to show that disclosure of the results of 
the polygraph to defense counsel would have had a reasonable 
likelihood of affecting the verdict.” The district court granted a 
certificate of probable cause, and Bartholomew filed this appeal. 

I. 

Bartholomew contends that the state violated the Due 
Process Clause when it failed to disclose that Rodney 
Bartholomew had failed the lie detector test. See Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). The state concedes that it failed 
to disclose the test or its results, and there is little doubt that the 
results of the test were favorable to Dwayne Bartholomew. 
However, the state argues that the polygraph results were not 
material to the question of the degree of Bartholomew’s guilt 
because polygraph results are generally inadmissible under 
Washington law, and because Rodney and Tracy’s testimony was 
not the only evidence tending to show premeditation. We reject 
these arguments. Having reviewed the state court record, we 
conclude that there was a reasonable probability that 
Bartholomew would have been convicted of simple instead of 


A-12 
aggravated first degree murder if the polygraph results had been 
disclosed.’ 

[1] In Brady, the Supreme Court held that "the 
suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an 
accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is 
material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good 
faith or bad faith of the prosecution." Jd. at 87. By its terms, 
Brady’s holding was limited to cases in which the defendant 
made a request for the suppressed evidence. However, the 
Supreme Court made clear in United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 
97 (1976), that the failure to disclose material and favorable 
evidence will violate due process even when the defendant makes 
no request for the material. Subsequently, in United States v. 
Bagley, 473 U.S. 667 (1985), the Court explained the meaning 
of the term "material." “[E]vidence is material,” the Court said, 
“only if there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence 
been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would 
have been different. A ’reasonable probability’ is a probability 
sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome." Jd. at 682 
(plurality opinion); accord id. at 685 (White, J., concurring). 
As Bagley makes clear, a defendant need only demonstrate a 
reasonable probability that "the result of the proceeding would 


*Because we conclude that the writ must issue on the basis of the Brady 
violation, we need not reach Bartholomew's other claims. 


A-13 

have been different." To satisfy this standard, a defendant will 
not always have to show a reasonable probability that he would 
have been exonerated if the material had been disclosed. In a 
case such as the present one, it is sufficient to establish a 
reasonable likelihood that the degree of conviction would have 
been lower. Cf Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 59 
(1985)(holding, in context of ineffective assistance challenge to 
a guilty plea, that a defendant need only show “a reasonable 
probability that, but for counsel’s errors, he would not have 
pleaded guilty and would have insisted on going to trial"). 

[2] There is little doubt that the results of Rodney 
Bartholomew’s polygraph test were favorable to the defense of 
Dwayne Bartholomew. If they were admissible, the information 
would clearly have been of substantial import. In United States 
v. Brumel-Alvarez, 991 F.2d 1452 (9th Cir. 1993), we explained 
that "Brady information includes ’material . . . that bears on the 
credibility of a significant witness in the case.’ Jd. at 1461 
(quoting United States v. Strifler, 851 F.2d 1197, 1201 (9th Cir. 
1988), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1032 (1989))(ellipsis in Brumel- 
Alvarez). The polygraph results bore directly on the credibility 
of the most significant witnesses in the case, Rodney 
Bartholomew and Tracy Dormady. Rodney and Tracy provided 
the only direct evidence of premeditation — they stated that 
Dwayne announced that he intended to leave no witnesses to the 


A-14 
robbery. Any facts that would provide a basis to impeach this 
statement were clearly favorable to Dwayne’s defense. 

[3] Moreover, the polygraph results directly supported 
Dwayne’s theory of the case: he claimed that Rodney had 
participated in the crime and was lying to protect himself, and 
that Tracy was lying to protect Rodney, the father of her child. 
Dwayne’s attorney vigorously argued this theory to the jury, but 
he had no support for it other than Dwayne’s obviously self- 
serving statement. Had Dwayne been able to introduce evidence 
of the polygraph tests, or even to use the results as a basis for 
further investigation, his attack on Rodney and Tracy’s 
credibility would likely have been demonstrably stronger. 

[4] The state argues, however, that the polygraph results 
would not have been material even if they had been admissible, 
because Rodney’s testimony was not the only evidence tending 
to show premeditation. We find this contention unpersuasive. 
The state first notes that at trial it offered the testimony of Tracy 
Dormady and of Stanley Bell, both of whom related statements 
of Dwayne’s that indicated that he had intentionally shot the 
attendant. However, as explained above, the polygraph results 
would have served to impeach Tracy’s testimony just as they 
would have Rodney’s — if he had a motive to lie to protect 
himself, she had a motive to lie to protect him as well. As to 
Bell, he testified only at the penalty phase; his testimony could 


A-15 
not have influenced the finding regarding premeditation made by 
the jury at the guilt phase, and that is the only finding regarding 
premeditation that occurred in this case. 

[5] The state also notes that it introduced evidence 
regarding the single-action design of the gun. At trial, the state 
argued that two volitional acts were necessary to cock and fire 
the gun. However, Dwayne’s attorney presented a plausible 
theory that the gun went off accidentally. As a result, the 
significance of the gun design evidence was disputed. In any 
event, that evidence was not so persuasive that we can say that 
Rodney and Tracy’s testimony was unimportant to the jury’s 
decision. Their testimony constituted the only direct evidence of 
premeditation presented by the state at the guilt phase of the 
trial. The failure to disclose material which would have 
impeached Rodney and Tracy’s credibility (or which would 
likely have led to evidence impeaching their credibility) 
necessarily undermines confidence in the outcome of the trial, 
even if circumstantial inferences from the design of the murder 
weapon would have been sufficient to support the verdict. The 
test is not whether there is sufficient other evidence to support 
a verdict, but whether we can be confident that the jury would 
have returned the same verdict had the Brady violation not 
occurred. See Lindsey v. King, 769 F.2d 1034, 1042-43 (Sth 
Cir. 1985)(holding that the failure to disclose evidence 


A-16 

impeaching one of the two eyewitnesses caused sufficient 
prejudice to undermine confidence in the outcome, even though 
the other witness’s testimony supported the verdict by itself). 

[6] The district court appears to have assumed that the 
polygraph results would have been material if they had been 
admissible.‘ The judge appears to have rested his denial of 
Bartholomew’s petition on the state’s argument that the 
polygraph results were not admissible under Washington law, 
and thus that they did not satisfy Brady’s materiality 
requirement.’ As the district court noted, the Washington state 
courts have held that polygraph results are generally inadmissible 


even for impeachment purposes absent a stipulation of the 
parties. See, e.g., State v. Ellison, 676 P.2d 531, 535 (Wash. 


“In a very similar case, the Third Circuit held that the failure to disclose 
the oral reports of a polygraph examiner created a reasonable likelihood that 
the outcome of the proceeding would have been different, where these reports 
cast doubt on the credibility of a key prosecution witness. See Carter v. 
Rafferty, 826 F.2d 1299, 1309 (3d Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 1011 
(1988). 


“The district court stated: 


The petitioner also presents persuasive argument and 
evidence that the prosecutor should have advised defense 
counsel of the results of the witnesses’ polygraph tests. 
Petitioner fails, however, to show that evidence was 
withheld. The information withheld only possibly could 
have led to some admissible evidence. He fails to show 
that disclosure of the results of the polygraph to defense 
counsel would have had a reasonable likelihood of affecting 
the verdict. 


(emphasis in original). 


A-17 

Ct. App.), review denied, 101 Wash.2d 1010 (1984). We need 
not, however, determine whether Dwayne Bartholomew could 
have introduced the polygraph results, for we conclude that the 
non-disclosed polygraph test satisfied Brady’s materiality 
requirement whether or not it was admissible. In United States 
v. Kennedy, 890 F.2d 1056 (9th Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 494 
U.S. 1008 (1990), we stated that "[t]o be material under Brady, 
undisclosed information or evidence acquired through that 
information must be admissible." Id. at 1059 (emphasis added). 
The Kennedy court noted that "in determining the materiality of 
undisclosed information, a reviewing court may consider ‘any 
adverse effect that the prosecutor’s failure to respond might have 
had on the preparation or presentation of the defendant’s case.’" 
Id. (quoting Bagley, 473 U.S. at 683)(emphasis added). The 
failure to disclose the polygraph results clearly impaired Dwayne 
Bartholomew’s ability to prepare and present his case. Under all 
of the circumstances, that impairment was sufficient to 
undermine confidence in the outcome. 

[7] Dwayne Bartholomew’s trial attorney conducted a 
minimal investigation of Rodney’s credibility, doubtless because 
there appeared to be no evidence to corroborate Dwayne’s 
account of Rodney’s participation in the crime. Had counsel 
known of the polygraph results, he would have had a stronger 
reason to pursue an investigation of Rodney’s story. He likely 


A-18 
would have attempted to interview Rodney and Tracy before 
trial. He likely would have taken Rodney’s deposition and 
probably Tracy’s, as he was entitled to do under the state 
criminal rules. See Wash. Super. Ct. Crim. R. 4.6(a); Habeas 
Tr. 67. 

[8] At a deposition, Dwayne’s counsel could have asked 
Rodney about the polygraph results and might well have 
succeeded in obtaining an admission that he was lying about his 
participation in the crime and about his brother’s actions on the 
night in question. Such an acknowledgment would have been 
admissible to impeach Rodney if Rodney gave inconsistent 
testimony at trial. Even if counsel did not succeed in provoking 
so damaging a response, any thorough questioning at the time of 
deposition would likely have elicited a variety of less crucial 
statements inconsistent with Rodney’s trial testimony. Indeed, 
after the trial was over and Dwayne discovered the polygraph 
test, Rodney related at least two contradictory accounts regarding 
the number of times he sat for the polygraph examination. 
Immediately after the first trial, Rodney told one of Dwayne’s 
attorneys that "[hje was told there was a problem with the results 
on two questions and asked to come back for additional 
examination. Rodney indicated that he did not return for any 
additional examination." Tufts Affidavit at 1. In the district 
court, however, Rodney stated that he did come back for a 


A-19 
second test, and that he was under the influence of drugs at the 
time of the first test. See Habeas Tr. 86. These inconsistencies 
demonstrat* ‘hat a vigorous examination of Rodney Bartholomew 
in a pretrial deposition would likely have uncovered a variety of 
conflicting statements which could have been used quite 
effectively in cross-examination at trial. In a close case such as 
this, the Brady violation could well have made the difference. 
| ml. 

[9] Given the closeness of the issue of premeditation, the 
likelihood that disclosure of the polygraph results would have led 
to other admissible evidence undermining Rodney Bartholomew's 
and Tracy Dormady’s credibility creates a reasonable probability 
that the jury would have convicted Dwayne Bartholomew of 
simple rather than aggravated first degree murder had the state 
disclosed those results. Because the prosecution’s failure to 
disclose that information undermines confidence in the verdict, 
we conclude that the state violated the Due Process Clause. 
Accordingly, we reverse. The district court is instructed to 
issue an alternative writ ordering the state to afford Bartholomew 
a new trial on the issue of premeditation within a reasonable 


“Because we have concluded that the polygraph results were “material” — 
that is, that their suppression caused prejudice to the defense — it necessarily 
follows that the prosecution's failure to disclose this information *"had 
substantial and injurious effect or influence in determining the jury's verdict.’” 
Brecht v. Abrahamson, 113 S. Ct. 1710, 1722 (1993)(quoting Kotteakos v. 
United States, 328 U.S. 750, 776 (1946)). 


A-20 
period of time or to reduce his degree of conviction to simple 
first degree murder. 
REVERSED. 


B-1 
[FILED] 
[April 12, 1993] 
APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
WESTERN DISTRICT OF WASHINGTON 
AT TACOMA 


CASE NO. C91-5102B 


FINDINGS OF FACT AND ORDER DENYING 
PETITION FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS 


DWAYNE EARL BARTHOLOMEW, 
Petitioner, 
v. 


JAMES BLODGETT, 
Respondent. 


Petitioner Dwayne Earl Bartholomew was convicted of 
aggravated first degree murder and sentenced to death. On 
Appeal, Mr. Bartholomew’s sentence was reduced to life without 
parole. State v. Bartholomew, 98 Wash. 2d 173 (1982). He 
now petitions this court for a writ of habeas corpus alleging that 
his constitutional rights were violated in the state courts. 

The court has considered the records and files herein and 
has read the transcript of Mr. Bartholomew’s trial and 
sentencing. The court conducted an evidentiary hearing and 


B-2 
heard the argument of counsel, and has considered post-hearing 
memoranda. The court is fully advised. 
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 

In his original petition, Mr. Bartholomew presented 17 
issues. Thirteen of those issues claim, in different ways, that 
Mr. Bartholomew did not receive the reasonably effective 
assistance of counsel. Therefore, Petitioner claims a violation of 
the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Two of 
Mr. Bartholomew’s claims allege that he was denied due process 
of law under the Fifth Amendment, because (1) the prosecutor 
failed to inform the defense of results of polygraphs taken by 
prosecution witnesses, and (2) the prosecutor should not have 
used the testimony of those witnesses without disclosure of the 
results of the polygraphs. The polygraph tests indicated some 
deception on the part of a key prosecution witness. 

Other issues raised by Mr. Bartholomew in his Petition 
for Writ of Habeas Corpus were abandoned before hearing. 

BASIC LAW 

In a habeas corpus proceedings, the federal courts can 
intervene in the state judicial process only to correct errors of 
constitutional magnitude. See generally, Engle v. Isaac, 457 
U.S. 1141 (1983). The petitioner has the following burden of 


proof: 


B-3 


To be cognizable under section 2254, an error 
must be "a fundamental defect which inherentiy 


results in a complete miscarriage of justice,’ and 
it must present "exceptional circumstances where 


the need for the remedy afforded by the writ of 
habeas corpus is apparent. 


Carlson v. Hong, 707 F.2d 367, 368 (9th Cir. 1983)(citations 
omitted). 

INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL 

The Sixth Amendment standard for effective assistance 
of counsel at trial has been established on numerous occasions by 
the U.S. Supreme Court. Generally, a defendant’s right has 
been violated when "counsel’s unprofessional errors so upset the 
adversarial balance between defense and prosecution that the trial 
was rendered unfair and the verdict rendered suspect." 
Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U.S. 365, 374 (1986). A two 
prong test tests a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel: 


First, the defendant must show that 
counsel’s performance- was deficient. This 
requires showing that counsel made errors so 
serious that counsel was not functioning as 
“counsel” as guaranteed the defendant by the 
Sixth Amendment. Second, the defendant must 
show that the deficient performance prejudiced 
the defense. This requires showing that 
counsel’s errors were so serious as to deprive 
the defendant of a fair trial, whose result is 
unreliable. 


Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984). Counsel’s 
performance must be evaluated on the record as it existed at the 


B-4 
time of the performance, so that judicial scrutiny is not distorted 
by effects of hindsight. Id, at 689. 

Petitioner presents convincing evidence and arguments 
that his attorney fell below the standards of criminal defense 
attorneys in like situations, particularly in the preparation for 
trial and sentencing. Petitioner fails, however, in his attempt to 
show that this attorney’s performance prejudiced him, denied 
him a fair trial, or upset the adversarial balance. The result of 
the trial is reliab'e. 

FAILURE TO INFORM DEFENSE; USE OF WITNESSES 

“The proper role of the criminal prosecutor is not simply 
to obtain a conviction, but to obtain a fair conviction." Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 87 (1963)(emphasis in original). 
Generally, a failure to disclose exculpatory material “requires 
three findings: (1) that evidence was suppressed; (2) that this 
evidence was favorable to the accused; and (3) that the evidence 
was material either to guilt or punishment." Smith v. Black, 904 
F.2d 950 (Sth Cir. 1990)(citations omitted). 


The prejudice to a defendant’s right to a fair 
trial is even more palpable when the prosecutor 
has not only withheld exculpatory evidence, but 
has knowingly introduced and argued false 
evidence. ... [A] prosecutor’s presentation of 
tainted evidence is viewed seriously and its 
effects are exceedingly carefully scrutinized. A 
new trial is required ’if there is any reasonable 
likelihood that the false [evidence] could have 
affected the judgment of the jury.’ 


B-5 
Brown v. Borg, 951 F.2d 1011, 1015 (9th Cir. 1991)(citations 
evidence that the prosecutor should have advised defense counsel 
of the results of the witnesses’ polygraph tests. Petitioner fails, 
however, to show that evidence was withheld. The information 


evidence. He fails to show that disclosure of the results of the 
polygraph to defense counsel would have had a reasonable 
likelihood of affecting the verdict. 
CONCLUSION 

Petitioner fails to show that the results of his proceedings 
were effected by these lapses. The most that is shown is that it 
is possible that the results would have been different, had 
defense counsel done more, or had the prosecutor timely advised 
defense counsel of the polygraph results. Such speculation 
cannot be the basis of a finding of "a fundamental defect which 
inherently results in a complete miscarriage of justice." The 
petition must be denied. 

Now, therefore, it is hereby 

ORDERED that Dwayne Earl Bartholomew’s Petition 
for Writ of Habeas Corpus is DENIED. 


B+ 
The Clerk of the Court is instructed to send uncertified 
copies of this Order to all counsel of record and to any party 
appearing pro se at said party’s last known address 
DATED this 12th day of April, 1993. 


ls/ 
Robert J. Bryan 
United States District Judge 


[Filed] 
(January 13, 1993] 


APPENDIX C 
From Transcript of Trial (on Evidentiary Hearing) before the 
Honorable Robert J. Bryan, United States District Judge, Docket 


No. C91-5102B, December 22, 1992, 1:51 p.m., beginning on 
page 84, reported by Julaine V. Ryen. 


RODNEY BARTHOLOMEW, PLAINTIFF’S WITNESS, 
SWORN OR AFFIRMED. 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


BY MR. FORD: 
Q. Would you state your name and spell it for the court 


reporter, please. 

A. Rodney Leroy Bartholomew. 

Q. And are you related to Dwayne Bartholomew? 

A. Yes. Brother. 

Q. You were present on the night in July 1981 — I think it 


was August Ist, 1981 — when Paul Edward Turner was killed, 
isn’t that right? 

A. I was at the laundromat, yes. 

Q. And you saw Dwayne that night, is that right? 

A. Yes. In a parking lot. 

Q. And you and Dwayne had committed robberies together 
prior to that occasion, had you not? 

A. When I was living at my dad’s and I was about 15. 


C-2 
Q. And Dwayne talked to you about the robbery prior to the 
commission of it, isn’t that right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And you testified at trial about his discussions with you 
in the car prior to the robbery, isn’t that right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Prior to testifying in the trial, you were given a 


polygraph examination? 

A. Several. 

Q. And were you told what the results of those polygraph 
examinations were? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. Do you remember who it was that gave you the 
polygraph examination? 

A. No, sir. 


Q. Did he tell you that when you answered that you had not 
assisted Dwayne with the robbery that the polygraph indicated 
that you were not telling the truth? 
A. No, sir; not to my knowledge. 

THE COURT: Pull that mike down a little bit, 
would you, Mr. Bartholomew. 

Thank you. 

Q. (By Mr. Ford) Do you remember him asking you 
whether you had helped Dwayne in the robbery? 


C-3 
A. I don’t remember the questioning, sir. 
Q. Did you know that when he asked you whether or not 
you and Dwayne had been in the laundromat together and you 
said you had not been in the laundromat with Dwayne that the 
polygraph indicated you were not telling the truth? 
A. No, sir. This is twelve years ago. I tried to put a lot of 
this stuff behind me. It was pretty tenseful back then. 
Q. Do you remember being asked by the polygraph 
examiner to return and have another test done after the one that 
you were first given? 
Yes, Ido. There is a reason for it, sir. 
And did you go back? 
Yes, sir. 
You went back for a second polygraph examination? 
Yes, sir. 
And when was that, do you recall? 
No, I don’t, sir. I was under the influence of drugs, is 


> O>O > O > 


why he wanted to recast me again. 

Q. And you told him that at the time? 

A. Yes, I did. He asked me if I had taken any drugs or 
drank the last 24 hours. I said, yes, I have. 

Q. And did he administer the test to you that day? 

A. Yes, he did it anyway. Then he rescheduled another 
one, to my knowledge. 


C4 
Q. And then you came back a second time, is your 
recollection? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And it was the same tester? 
A. I believe so. To my knowledge. 
Q. And then at the end of that test, did he tell you what the 
results were? 
A. No, sir. I don’t recall anybody telling me what the 
results were. 
Q. And did he ask you at the end of that second test to 
come back another time? 
A. Sir, I don’t remember exactly. 
Q. Did you ever consult a lawyer with regard to the 
possibility that you could be charged in this homicide? 
A. No reason to, sir. 
Q. So when the police officers were questioning you, they 
did not tell you that you had failed a polygraph examination? 
A. Nobody ever told me I failed a polygraph. 


Q. To this day? 

A. To this day. 

Q Did you ever speak with Dwayne’s lawyer prior to the 
trial? 

A. Never. 

Q. Did you ever see him prior to the trial? 


C-5 


A. No, not that I can remember. It’s twelve years ago. 
Q. But you know you never talk to him before the trial? 


A. As far as I know, I did not, sir. 


MR. FORD: That’s all the questions I have. 


Thank you. 
CROSS-EXAMINATION 
BY MR. WEISSER: 
Q. Mr. Bartholomew, do you remember testifying at your 
brother’s trial in 1981? 
A. Yes, I do. 
Q. And at that time, do you recall being sworn to tell the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, or words to that 


effect? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Did you lie under oath on that day? 

A. No, I did not, sir. 

Q. Did you tell the truth at your brother’s trial? 
A. Yes, sir. 


MR. WEISSER: Thank you. 

THE COURT: Anything further? 

MR. FORD: Nothing further, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Bartholomew. 


You may be excused. 
THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir. 


