No. 


~ Supreme Court, Us. 
"1 FILED 


95-5257 JAN 22 1996 


CLERK 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA AND SAUL ORNELAS, PETITIONERS 


We 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CTRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR 


THE UNITED STATES 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solici 6 ] 


JOHN C. KEENEY 
Act j Assi b Att 5 } 


MICHAEL R. DREEBEN 
Deputy Solicitor General 


CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 
ee he Solici 
General 


JOEL M. GERSHOWITZ 


QUESTION PRESENTED 
Whether the court of appeals, accepting as not clearly 
erroneous the facts the district court found, was required to 
review de novo the district court’s conclusion that those facts 
provided reasonable suspicion justifying an investigatory stop 


and probable cause to search. 


(I) 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95-5257 
ISMAEL ORNELAS-LEDESMA AND SAUL ORNELAS, PETITIONERS 
Vv. 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE UNITED STATES 


OPINIONS BELOW 
The order of the court of appeals affirming petitioners’ 
convictions (J.A. 91-93) is unreported, but the judgment is noted 
at 52 F.3d 328 (Table). The earlier opinion of the court of 
appeals vacating the convictions and remanding for further 
proceedings (J.A. 55-73) is reported at 16 F.3d 714. The 
recommendations of the magistrate judge (J.A. 7-27, 76-84) and 
the opinions of the district court (J.A. 28-36, 74-75, 85-90) are 
unreported. 
JURISDICTION 
The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on April 


18, 1995. The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on 


2 
July 17, 1995, and was granted on November 6, 1995 (J.A. 94). 
The jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1). 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION INVOLVED 
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
provides: 

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches 
and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall 
issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or 
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized. 

* STATEMENT 

After entering conditional guilty pleas in the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin, petitioners 
were convicted of possessing cocaine with intent to distribute 
it, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1). Petitioner Ornelas- 
Ledesma was sentenced to 60 months’ imprisonment and petitioner 
Ornelas was sentenced to 63 months’ imprisonment, each term to be 
followed by four years’ supervised release. J.A. 4-5, 45-46, 48- 
51. On petitioners’ appeal from the denial of their motion to 
suppress cocaine found behind a side panel in their car, the 
court of appeals vacated the judgments of conviction and remanded 
for further. proceedings. J.A. 55-73. On remand, the United 
States magistrate judge recommended that the motion to suppress 
be granted, J.A. 76-84, but the district court sustained the 
government’ objection to the magistrate judge’s recommendation 


and denied the suppression motion, J.A. 85-90. The court of 


appeals affirmed. J.A. 91-93. 


3 

1. The facts are undisputed.’ On December 11, 1993, 
Detective Pautz of the Milwaukee County Sheriff’s Office was 
making a routine survey of the motels along South 27th Street in 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, looking for drug trafficking activity. In 
one of the motel parking lots he spotted a 1981 two-door 
Oldsmobile with a California license plate. Based on his 
training and experience in drug interdiction, Pautz knew that 
narcotics traffickers often use older two-door General Motors 
cars because it is easy to conceal drugs in them, and that 
California is a "source" State from which drugs are shipped to 
other States. J.A. 9, 56. Pautz radioed his dispatcher to find 
out to whom the car was registered. The dispatcher responded 
either that the registered owner of the car was Miguel Ledesma 
Ornelas or Miguel Ornelas Ledesma; Pautz was unsure whether the 
dispatcher indicated that the name "Ledesma" came before or after 
the name "Ornelas." J.A. 9-10, 56-57. 

Believing that he had the name of the car's registered 
owner, Detective Pautz entered the motel and checked the 
registry, which showed that an Ismael (not Miguel) Ornelas and 
another man had registered at 4:00 a.m. without reservations. 
Pautz called for his partner, Detective Hurrle, to join him at 
the motel parking lot. After Hurrle arrived, the two officers 


asked the local office of the federal Drug Enforcement Agency 


. The facts in this statement are drawn from the factual 
findings of the magistrate judge, J.A. 9-13, 79, as adopted by the 
district court, J.A. 28, 86, and affirmed by the court of appeals, 
J.A. 56-59, 92. 


+ 
(DEA) to run a check, through its Narcotic and Dangerous Drug 
Information System (NADDIS), on Miguel Ledesma Ornelas from San 
Jose and on Ismael Ornelas.* NADDIS reported two "hits," ji.e., 
records of known or suspected criminal activity. One identified 
Miguel Ledesma Ornelas (also known as Miguel Lemus-Ledesma), a 
48-year-old Hispanic male, five feet six inches tall and weighing 
150 pounds, as a suspected heroin dealer from El Centro, 
California. The other identified Ismael Ornelas, Jr., of Tucson, 
Arizona, as a suspected 1, 000-kilogram-per-month cocaine dealer. 
The officers did not attempt to obtain further descriptions of 
the two suspected dealers. They summoned the handler of the 
narcotics-detecting dog for the Drug Enforcement Unit, Detective 
Luedke. When Luedke arrived, Hurrle informed him of the 
information the officers had obtained, and Pautz left for another 
assignment. J.A. 10-11, 57-58. 

As detectives Hurrle and Luedke observed from their cars in 
the motel parking lot, two men left the motel and entered the 
Oldsmobile. Detective Hurrle approached the car, identified 
himself as a police officer, asked whether he could speak with 
them, and inquired whether they had any illegal drugs or 
contraband. Both men denied possessing anything illegal. Hurrle 
then asked the men for identification. Saul Ornelas, the driver, 
produced a driver’s license in that name. Ismael Ornelas- 
Ledesma, who was in the front passenger seat, produced a 


. NADDIS is a computerized compilation of DEA’s information 
on known and suspected drug traffickers. J.A. 57. 


_— 


5 
California driver’s license in the name of Ismael Ornelas with a 
Martinez, California, address. Hurrle asked them if he could 
search the car, and they consented to the search. J.A. 11-12, 
58-59. 

Detective Hurrle searched the trunk, and Detective Luedke 
(without the aid of the drug-sniffing dog) searched the interior 
of the car. During his inspection, Luedke noticed a loose right 
rear interior panel on the passenger side of the car. One of the 
screws used to fasten a vent cover to the panel was, according to 
Luedke, rusty, and he believed that the rust indicated that the 
screw had recently been removed.’ Luedke removed the screw and 
dismantled the vent area, removed the loose panel, and uncovered 
a package containing two kilograms of cocaine. The officers 
arrested petitioners. J.A. 12-13, 59; Tr. 155-159. 

2. Petitioners filed pre-trial motions to suppress the 
cocaine found in the car. The magistrate judge recommended that 
the motions be denied. J.A. 26. The magistrate judge first 
determined that the investigatory stop of petitioners was 
justified by reasonable suspicion that "criminal activity was 
afoot." J.A. 20. The magistrate judge relied on the officers’ 
experience that cars like the 1981 Oldsmobile are often used for 
transporting drugs, and their knowledge that petitioners’ car was 


registered in a “source” State for narcotics, that petitioners 


’ The court of appeals stated that Luedke did not explain 
the basis for his inference, but that "maybe the idea is that the 
removal of the screw would have scraped off its chrome coating, 
which protected it from rusting." J.A. 59. 


6 
had checked into the motel at 4:00 a.m. without reservations, and 
that the car owner’s “name came back on NADDIS as being a drug 
trafficker, and the name of Ismael Ornelas, Jr. came back on 
NADDIS as also being a drug trafficker." Jbid. 

The magistrate judge next determined that petitioners had 
validly consented to the search of the car, but that the consent 
did not extend to the removal of the interior panel. J.A. 21. 
Because the magistrate judge’s own examination of the screw 
revealed no rust, he did not credit Luedke’s testimony that the 
rusty screw led him to believe that the panel had been removed to 
store drugs. J.A. 21-22.‘ The magistrate judge thus 
recommended that the district court hold that the search behind 
‘the panel was not supported by the requisite probable cause. 
J.A. 22. He nonetheless recommended denial of the suppression 
motions because, under the inevitable discovery exception to the 
exclusionary rule, the drug-sniffing dog would have detected the 
drugs. J.A. 22-23. 

The district court accepted the magistrate judge’s 
recommendation that the suppression motion be denied, but on a 
different theory. J.A. 28-35. The court agreed with the 
magistrate judge that the investigatory stop and consent search 
were valid, J.A. 28-29, but concluded that it was unnecessary to 
invoke the inevitable discovery doctrine because, in its view, 


the search behind the door panel was supported by probable cause, 


The parties stipulated to the fact that the screw was not 
rusty. See J.A. 33. 


ae 


7 
J.A. 30-31. The district court stated that the magistrate 
judge’s probable cause ruling “does not consider the totality of 
the circumstances leading up to the removal and search of the 
door panel." J.A. 33. In the district court’s view, the model, 
age, and “source” State of origin of the car, and the fact that 
two men traveling together checked into the motel at 4:00 a.m. 
without reservations, formed a “drug courier profile," which, 
together with the two NADDIS hits and the loose interior car 
panel, amounted to probable cause to remove the panel and search 
for drugs. J.A. 33-34. 

3. The court of appeals, following its holding in United 
States v. Spears, 965 F.2d 262 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 § 
Ct. 502 (1992), applied a clear-error standard of review to the 
district court’s determinations of reasonable suspicion and 
probable cause. J.A. 65-66. Spears had noted (965 F.2d at 269) 
that, in Jllinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 236, 238-239 (1983), 
this Court stated that courts should not conduct de novo review 
of the sufficiency of affidavits supporting the issuance of 
warrants, but instead should review such affidavits to determine 
only whether the issuing magistrate had a "substantial basis" for 
finding probable cause. Spears extended that form of deferential 
review (which it equated to review for clear error) to appellate 
review of a district court’s finding of probable cause in a 
nonwarrant case. 965 F.2d at 269-270. The court in Spears 
recognized that probable cause is "a legal conclusion, dependent 


solely on a factual analysis: the facts are what the police knew 


8 

and did; the finding of probable cause is a conclusion that those 
facts meet the legal criteria for probable cause." Jd. at 270. 
It nonetheless concluded that, "[b]ecause there is little to 
distinguish a magistrate’s probable cause determination in a 
warrant case and a district judge’s probable cause determination 
in a nonwarrant case, appellate review should be the same for 
both." Ibid. In either case, "(i]t is the front-line judicial 
officer * * * who conducts the initial inquiry," and “an 
appellate panel should not substitute its judgment in either 
case." Jd. at 271.° 

The court of appeals held that the district court did not 
err in this case by ruling that the stop was supported by 
reasonable suspicion, although it regarded the question as 
"close." J.A. 65.° Because the reliability of the information 
stored in NADDIS had not been established in this case, the court 
treated a NADDIS hit as no more reliable than a tip from an 
informant not known to be reliable. Accordingly, the court found 
the NADDIS hits to be insufficient to support a stop unless 
corroborated by other facts. J.A. 62. The court concluded, 


however, that the detectives had sufficient corroboration to 


° The Spears court observed that, "(b]ecause this decision 
changes the law of this circuit, we have circulated this opinion to 
all active judges * * *. A majority of the judges has voted not to 
rehear the case en banc." 965 F.2d at 269 n.2. 


. Spears addressed only the standard of review of probable- 
cause determinations, but in this case the court of appeals applied 
the clear-error standard to the reasonable-suspicion determination 
as well, observing that "(t)here is no basis for distinguishing in 
this regard between probable cause and reasonable suspicion. They 
are adjacent points on a continuum." J.A. 65-66. 


9 
establish reasonable suspicion. J.A. 64. The corroborative 
facts included the make and age of the car, its "source" State 
origin, the 4:00 a.m. motel check-in without advance 
reservations, and the fact that the two NADDIS hits, although 
ultimately proving to have identified individuals other than 
petitioners, reasonably appeared to the officers at the time to 
be mutually reinforcing. J.A. 59-60. The court explained that 
both the names in NADDIS were “very similar" to the names on the 
motel registry and car registration, and that the ways in which 
they were not identical were readily explained: "Jr." could have 
been left off Ismael Ornelas’ name in the motel registry, and 
Miguel Ornelas Ledesma’s last names could have been reversed in 
entering them in the computer. J.A. 63. In the court of 
appeals’ view, "the fact that both the registered owner of the 
car ang the name on the motel registry corresponded more or less 
to names of suspected drug dealers in the NADDIS database was 
impressive." Id. at 64. 

The court of appeals rejected the district court’s probable 
cause analysis, however, concluding that the denial of the 
suppression motion could not be upheld "on the basis of the 
record compiled in the district court." J.A. 66. In the court 
of appeals’ view, the key fact informing the district court’s 
probable cause ruling was Detective Luedke’s testimony that the 
car’s right rear interior panel was loose, ibid., but the 
magistrate judge ruled on alternative grounds "*(w] ithout 


discussing the bearing of Luedke’s testimony about the loose 


10 
panel on the issue of probable cause," J.A. 67.’ The court of 
appeals accordingly vacated the convictions and remanded the case 
to the district court for a determination of the credibility of 
Luedke’s testimony about the loose panel. If the district court 
were to credit that testimony, the court of appeals instructed, 
it must determine whether “the loose panel, in conjunction with 
the NADDIS tips as corroborated by the circumstances that first 
aroused Detective Pautz’s suspicions, adequately established 
probable cause to believe that drugs were concealed behind the 
panel." J.A. 72-73. 

4. On remand, the district court referred the case to the 
magistrate judge for an initial determination. J.A. 74-75. 
Before the magistrate judge, the parties stipulated to resolution 
of the matter on the existing record. J.A. 82. The magistrate 
judge expressly accepted the credibility of Detective Luedke’s 
testimony that the car’s interior panel was loose, but concluded 
that “the loose panel alone, given the age of the Oldsmobile, is 
not probative evidence of the fact it necessarily had been 
recently removed." J.A. 79. The NADDIS hits and other factors 
alone were not, in the magistrate judge’s view, sufficient to 
establish probable cause to remove the panel. J.A. 79-83. He 


accordingly recommended that the suppression motion be granted. 


7 


The court held that the government had waived on appeal 
the claim, accepted by the magistrate judge, that the presence at 
the scene of the drug-sniffing dog ensured that the drugs 
inevitably would have been discovered. J.A. 72. In any event, the 
court of appeals believed the inevitable-discovery claim could not 
be supported in the absence of evidence regarding the dog’s 
capabilities and intended use. J.A. 71-72. 


11 
J.A. 83, 84. 

The district court accepted the finding that Luedke’s 
testimony was credible. J.A. 86. It rejected, however, the 
magistrate judge’s recommended disposition and instead denied the 
suppression motion. While stating that "the issue is a close 
one," the district court again reached the conclusion that the 
facts established probable cause. J.A. 85-90. The court 
commented that, "[v])iewed individually," the conformity with the 
drug courier profile, the NADDIS hits, or the loose panel "may be 
unremarkable," but "[t])hey become more meaningful when, in a 
specific case, they converge and form around two specific 
individuals." J.A. 87. The district court viewed the loose 
panel as “the final fact in a string of unbroken facts which 
establishes the probable cause equation." J.A. 89. 

S. On appeal after remand, the court of appeals upheld 
under the “clear error” standard the district court’s 
determination that the removal of the door panel was supported by 
probable cause. J.A. 91-93. The court stated that the district 
court’s opinion "adequately reviews the circumstances on which 
the decision to search the car was based and explains why taken 
as a totality they gave the officers probable cause to conduct 
the search." J.A. 92. 

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT 

A court of appeals should apply a de novo standard of review 

to a trial court’s holding of whether the facts known to law 


enforcement officers add up to the reasonable suspicion or 


12 
probable cause required to justify the search or seizure in 
question. 

Probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations turn 
on an evaluation of whether the totality of the circumstances 
give rise to an objectively reasonable basis for conducting a 
search or seizure. Each inquiry has two components. First, the 
historical facts known to the officers must be established. 
Second, once those facts are established, a judgment must be made 


whether it was objectively reasonable under the known 


circumstances to draw the conclusion that criminal conduct likely 
would be brought to light by conducting an investigatory stop or 
search. The second step in the analysis goes beyond the realm of 
finding facts, and requires a legal judgment about the 
constitutionality of the search or seizure. 

Under conventional standards for determining the scope of 
appellate review, the trial court’s determination of reasonable 
suspicion or probable cause to support a warrantless search is 
subject to de novo review. While factual findings are reviewed 
only for clear error, courts of appeals customarily conduct 
plenary review of the governing legal standards. Courts of 


appeals also conduct plenary review of so-called mixed questions 


of law and fact when that process is necessary to develop the 
meaning of a legal standard and to ensure its consistent 
application. Those considerations strongly support de novo 
review in the present context. The analysis here parallels that 


conducted by the Court in Thompson v. Keohane, 116 S. Ct. 457, 


13 
465, 467 (1995), in which the Court held that, in federal habeas 
proceedings, "independent," rather than deferential, review 
applies to determinations of whether a suspect was in custody for 
purposes of Miranda warnings. De novo review also accords with 
this Court’s cases, which have in a wide variety of settings 
subjected probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations 
to independent, plenary review. 

The advantages that normally justify de novo appellate 
review are fully applicable here. First, the exposition of the 
Fourth Amendment standard of reasonableness depends on the 
process of case-by-case elaboration in the appellate courts. 
Second, the development of the law at the appellate level gives 
guidance to law enforcement officers and promotes consistent 
outcomes in the trial courts. Third, the considerations favoring 
de novo review have special force where, as here, a 
constitutional right is concerned. 

Nothing in this Court’s decisions suggests that deference is 
owed to a trial judge’s finding that a warrantless search was or 
was not justified by the requisite level of suspicion. In 
Lilinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983), this Court held that 
after-the-fact review of a neutral magistrate’s determination to 
issue a search warrant should be conducted deferentially, and 
that the warrant should be upheld "so long as the magistrate had 
a ‘substantial basis for . . conclud[ing])’ that a search would 
uncover evidence of wrongdoing." Jd. at 236. That conclusion 


reflected the "preference to be accorded to warrants" under the 


14 

Fourth Amendment, id. at 237 n.10; it has no application to 
appellate review of a district court’s determination of the 
validity of a warrantless search or seizure. Similarly, this 
Court’s decisions approving deferential review of legal issues 
that involve supervision of litigation, events occurring before 
the trial court, or mixed questions of fact and law such as 
negligence that are traditionally administered by juries, are 
inapplicable to the constitutional conclusion, rendered by the 
courts, of whether a warrantless search was justified. That 
conclusion requires a balance of law enforcement needs against 
privacy interests, and it calls for plenary appellate review. 

The court of appeals in this case did not apply a de novo 
standard, but instead approved the stop and search in question 
based on deferential, clear-error review of the district court’s 
conclusions. In our view, both the stop and search, if reviewed 
under a de novo standard, should be upheld as supported by the 
requisite levels of suspicion. Because the court of appeals has 
not yet applied the de novo standard to the facts found here, 
this case should be remanded to that court for application of the 


proper standard of review. 


15 
ARGUMENT 
IN REVIEWING A DISTRICT COURT’S DETERMINATION OF WHETHER 
REASONABLE SUSPICION OR PROBABLE CAUSE EXISTED FOR A WARRANTLESS 
SEARCH OR SEIZURE, A COURT OF APPEALS SHOULD APPLY A DE NOVO 
STANDARD 


A. Reasonable Suspicion And Probable Cause Are Objective Legal 
Conclusions Based On The Totality Of The Circumstances 


The investigative stop of petitioners was permissible under 
the Fourth Amendment if supported by reasonable suspicion, Terry 
v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), and the warrantless search of their 
car was valid if based on probable cause, California v. Acevedo, 
500 U.S. 565, 569-570 (1991); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 
132, 158-159 (1925). The standards for both reasonable suspicion 
and probable cause depend on a determination, given the totality 
of the circumstances, of whether an objectively reasonable law 
enforcement officer would have justification for the stop or 
search at issue. United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 418 
(1981) (reasonable suspicion); Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 
230-231 (1983) (probable cause). Each inquiry requires a two- 
step analysis: first, an identification of all the pertinent 
facts known to the law enforcement officers conducting the stop 
or search, and, second, an evaluation of whether, as a matter of 
objective reasonableness, that information adds up to reasonable 
suspicion or probable cause to believe that the stop or search 
will uncover contraband or evidence of a crime. 

It is well established that the second step of determining 
probable cause requires more than just a factual analysis; it 


requires, instead, an appraisal of the totality of the 


16 
circumstances under an objective, legal standard. Gates, 462 
U.S. at 230, 238. Probable cause exists where "the facts and 
circumstances within [the law enforcement officers’) knowledge 
and of which they had reasonably trustworthy information [are] 
sufficient in themselves to warrant a man of reasonable caution 
in the belief that" the search will yield evidence of a crime. 
Carroll, 267 U.S. at 162. The probabilities with which the 
concept is concerned "are the factual and practical 
considerations of everyday life on which reasonable and prudent 
men, not legal technicians, act." Brinegar v. United States, 338 
U.S. 160, 175 (1949). The substantive standard reflects an 
appropriate deference to law enforcement officers: the facts 
must be evaluated not as an average citizen would understand 
them, but from the perspective of an officer “versed in the field 
of law enforcement." Gates, 462 U.S. at 232, quoting Cortez, 449 
U.S. at 418. 

The reasonable suspicion standard closely parallels the 
objective framework for analyzing probable cause, but because an 
investigative stop is less intrusive than a search, the 
suggestion that crime, contraband, or evidence of crime may be 
present need not be as strong. United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 
422 U.S. 873, 880 (1975); Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 330 
41990). Reasonable suspicion to stop exists when, based on the 
totality of the circumstances, "the detaining officers * * * have 
a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the 


particular person stopped of criminal activity." Cortez, 449 


17 
U.S. at 417-418. Like probable cause, reasonable suspicion is 
not an historical fact; it is a legal conclusion, measured by an 
objective constitutional standard. Terry, 392 U.S. at 21-22; 
Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417-418; Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 52 n.2 
(1979). 


B. The Ultimate Conclusion In Nonwarrant Cases Of Whether 
Reasonable Suspicion Or Probable Cause Exists Is Subject To 


De Novo Appellate Review 
1. The standards of appellate review generally applicable 


to questions of fact and questions of law are well established. 
Appellate courts "“accept([) findings of fact that are not ‘clearly 
erroneous’ but decid(e) questions of law de novo." First Options 
of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 115 S. Ct. 1920, 1926 (1995); see 
Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U.S. 552, 558 (1988). Appellate 


deference to a trial court’s findings of fact is mandated in the 
civil context by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 52(a), which 
provides that a trial court’s findings of fact "shall not be set 
aside unless clearly erroneous." In the context of federal 
habeas corpus review of state court judgments, Congress has 
conferred a presumption of correctness, subject to enumerated 
exceptions, on state courts’ findings of fact. 28 U.S.C. 
2254(d). There is no similar express rule governing direct 
appeals in criminal cases, but this Court applies the clearly 
erroneous standard to findings of fact in the criminal setting as 
well. Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 145 (1986); see also 
Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 365-366 (1991) (plurality 


Opinion). In contrast, appellate courts are generally free to 


18 
conduct a de novo review of legal conclusions, and it is their 
principal function to do so. Salve Regina College v. Russell, 
499 U.S. 225, 231-232 (1991). Under a de novo standard, 
appellate courts must "make an independent determination" of the 
legal conclusions of the lower courts. United States v. First 
City National Bank, 386 U.S. 361, 368 (1967); Salve Regina 


College, 499 U.S. at 231. 
The traditional standards of review of fact and law serve 


systemic goals of “doctrinal coherence and economy of judicial 
administration." Salve Regina College, 499 U.S. at 231. The 
application of the clearly erroneous standard to questions of 
fact recognizes that trial judges are “usually in a superior 
position to appraise and weigh the evidence." Zenith Radio Corp. 
v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100, 123 (1969); see also 
Thompson v. Keohane, 116 S. Ct. 457, 465 (1995); Miller v. 
Fenton, 474 U.S. 104, 114 (1985). The district courts have 
“unchallenged superiority” in factfinding, Salve Regina College, 
499 U.S. at 233, because their energy and resources are primarily 
devoted to the time-consuming tasks associated with hearing 
evidence and finding facts. They seldom, however, have the 
opportunity for extensive reflection on legal issues. Courts of 
appeals, in contrast, are institutionally structured to focus 
principally om deciding legal issues. They hear arguments but do 
not face the burdens of taking evidence, and they enjoy the 
benefits of a “collaborative juridical process that promotes 


decisional accuracy." Jd. at 232. In addition, the coherent 


19 

development of a body of law requires appellate courts to 
establish controlling principles and to demonstrate the meaning 
of those principles through their consistent application across a 
range of varying factual contexts. Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 467. 

There is no dispute that the underlying factual 
circumstances that bear on reasonable suspicion and probable 
cause determinations are issues of fact, reviewable under the 
deferential clearly erroneous standard. This Court has defined 
factual findings as "basic, primary, or historical facts: facts 
‘in the sense of a recital of external events and the credibility 
of their narrators,’”" Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 464, quoting 
Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293, 309 n.6 (1963). Findings 
regarding what information was known to officers conducting a 
stop or a warrantless search, and when and how they learned it, 
are factual in that sense, and thus, under the clear-error 
standard, may not be reversed unless “the reviewing court on the 


entire evidence is left with the definite and firm conviction 


that a mistake has been committed." United States v. United 
States Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 395 (1948); see also Anderson v. 
City of Bessemer City. 470 U.S. 564, 573-574 (1985) (discussing 


when error is “clear” and giving trial court choice between two 
permissible views of the evidence). 

The ultimate determination of probable cause or reasonable 
suspicion, however, is not a factual matter. Courts must decide 
as a matter of law whether the facts supply the requisite quantum 


of suspicion to render a search or seizure "reasonable" under the 


20 
Fourth Amendment. Probable cause and reasonable suspicion are 
judged under an objective standard, measured by what a reasonable 
person would conclude; those determinations are not controlled by 
the subjective state of mind of the officers conducting the 
search. See Terry, 392 U.S. at 21-22; Gates, 462 U.S. at 231; 
Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, S507 (1983) (plurality opinion). 
Here, as elsewhere, the reasonable person is a "legal construct," 
calling for a judgment that goes far beyond determination of 
“what happened."* In the Fourth Amendment setting, that 
construct requires a judgment about the degree of information 
needed to justify the intrusion in question. The courts must 
give content to the general concepts of reasonable suspicion and 
probable cause in a manner that "“safeguard(s) citizens from rash 
and unreasonable interferences with privacy and from unfounded 
charges of crime," while "“giviing) fair leeway to enforcing the 
law in the community’s protection.” Brinegar, 338 U.S. at 176. 
In addition, the conclusion whether probable cause or reasonable 
suspicion existed in a particular case not only provides the rule 
of decision for the case at hand, but also establishes guidance 
for public officials and courts confronted with similar 


circumstances in the future. 


* Antilles $.S. Co. v. Members of Am. Hull] Ins. Syndicate, 
733 F.2d 195, 204 (2d Cir. 1984) (Newman, J., concurring) ("[I)f 
the law’s hypothetical reasonable person were to appear in the 
courtroom as a deus ex machina and respond to an inquiry as to what 
he or she thought the terms [of the contract) meant, the answer 
would be a matter of fact in the traditional sense-- an observable, 
recordable historical event. But the law’s reasonable person has 
not yet appeared on the witness stand of any courtroom. That 
person remains a legal construct."). 


21 

Probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations might 
be characterized as “mixed question(s] of law and fact." 
Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 465.*° As between a legal and a mixed 
question, however, the precise characterization is not crucial, 
because mixed questions, too, are typically subject to de novo 
review. A standard of "independent review" is generally applied 
to “mixed question(s) of law and fact," so that the appellate 
courts may elaborate the meaning of precedent and explicate 
underlying “legal values" through case-by-case review. Id. at 
464 n.9, 465, 467; see also Miller, 474 U.S. at 109; Strickland 
v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 698 (1984); Bose Corp. v. Consumers 
Union of United States, Inc., 466 U.S. 485, 501 (1984); Cuyler v. 


Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 342 (1980); Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 
188, 193 n.3 (1972). 


2. This Court’s recent decision in Thompson, involving a 
mixed question of law and fact closely analogous to the Fourth 
Amendment issues here, reinforces the conclusion that the 
reasonable suspicion and probable cause determinations should be 
reviewed de novo. To determine whether a suspect is "in custody” 
for Miranda purposes, a court must, applying "the totality of the 
circumstances," determine “how a reasonable man in the suspect’s 


position would have understood his situation." Berkemer v. 


* A mixed question is one "in which the historical facts are 
admitted or established, the rule of law is undisputed, and the 
issue is whether the facts satisfy the statutory standard, or to 
put it another way, whether the rule of law as applied to the 
established facts is or is not violated." Pullman-Standard v. 
Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 289 n.19 (1982). 


22 
McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 442 (1984). Citing the applicable 
"reasonable man" standard, the respondents in Thompson argued 
that the "in custody" inquiry was factual. The Court rejected 
that argument, stressing the distinction between the first step, 
“identification of the ‘totality of the circumstances,’" and the 
second, evaluation of whether those circumstances, "if 
encountered by a ‘reasonable person,’ would * * * add up to 
custody as defined in Miranda." 116 S. Ct. at 466. The Court 
accordingly concluded that the presumption of correctness that 
attaches to state court factual determinations under 28 U.S.C. 
2254 (d)\ does not apply to Miranda custody determinations. See 


} 


also mibler. 474 U.S. at 112 ("(T)he ultimate question whether, 


under the totality of the circumstances, the challenged 
confession was obtained in a manner compatible with the 
requirements of the Constitution is a matter for independent 
federal determination."). 

Reasonable suspicion and probable cause determinations 
entail the same two-step approach of viewing the "totality of the 
circumstances” through the eyes of a "reasonable person,” and 
there is no basis for treating the ultimate constitutional 
question of objective reasonableness differently here from the 
Court’s treatment of the Miranda custody question in Thompson. 
In sum, whether the second step of the probable cause inquiry is 
viewed as a legal or a mixed question, it involves a 
determination, unanswerable by simple recourse to the facts, 


concerning whether the known information justified a reasonable 


23 
conclusion that a search was sufficiently likely to turn up 
evidence of a crime. As such, it should be reviewed de novo. 

3. This Court has expressly indicated that probable cause 
determinations regarding warrantless searches or arrests are to 
be accorded independent appellate review. In Ker v. California, 
374 U.S. 23 (1963), the petitioners challenged, for lack of 
probable cause, the legality of a warrantless search made 
incident to their arrest. Before reviewing the evidence bearing 
on the existence of probable cause, the Court addressed the 
question of the applicable standard of review, commenting that, 
"“(w)hile this Court does not sit as in nisi prius to appraise 
contradictory factual questions, it will, where necessary to the 
determination of constitutional rights, make an independent 
examination of the facts, the findings, and the record so that it 
can determine for itself whether in the decision as to 
reasonableness the fundamental -- j.e., constitutional -- 
criteria established by this Court have been respected." Id. at 
34. Conducting its own de novo review, the Court then proceeded 
"to examine the entire record including the findings of 
California’s courts to determine whether the evidence seized from 
petitioners was constitutionally admissible under the 
circumstances of thle) case." Jbid. 

In another warrantless search case, Beck v. Qhio, 379 U.S. 
89 (1964), the Court relied on Ker for the same principle. The 
Court reiterated that it had a responsibility to make an 


“independent examination” of the record to resolve the ultimate 


24 

question of whether the constitutional standard of probable cause 
was satisfied. Id. at 92, quoting Ker, 374 U.S. at 34.*° See 
also Elkins v. United States, 364 U.S. 206, 223-224 (1960) (in 
discarding the "silver platter" doctrine that allowed use in 
federal trials of evidence seized by state agents without 
probable cause, the Court stated that, "[i]n determining whether 
there has been an unreasonable search and seizure by state 
officers, a federal court must make an independent inquiry, 
whether or not there has been such an inquiry by a state court, 
and irrespective of how any such inquiry may have turned out"). 

In many cases, the Court has, without expressly articulating 
the applicable standard of review, conducted a careful, detailed 
examination of the established facts to determine whether they 
amounted to reasonable suspicion or probable cause. For example, 
in Carrol] v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925), the Court 
approached the determination of probable cause as if it were 
deciding the issue afresh, posing for itself the question "was 
there probable cause?" and examining the facts in detail, id. at 
159-161, rather than simply asking whether the district court’s 
determination was clearly erroneous. Similarly, in Brinegar v. 


United States, 338 U.S. 160, 165-171 (1949), the Court observed 


= Both Ker and Beck involved direct review of probable 
cause rulings made by state courts instead of federal district 
courts. But the Court’s requirement in those cases of independent 
appellate review is equally applicable to review of federal court 
determinations. As the Court stated in Bose Corp., 466 U.S. at 
499, it would “pervert the concept of federalism for this Court to 
lay claim to a broader power of review over state-court judgments 
than it exercises in reviewing the judgments of [the lower) federal 
courts." See also Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 369 (plurality opinion). 


25 

that the facts were "substantially undisputed," id. at 162, and 
itself addressed "(t]he crucial question * * * whether there was 
probable cause for Brinegar’s arrest," id. at 164. The district 
court had held that the officers lacked probable cause when they 
began to chase petitioner’s car, and the court of appeals 
affirmed.** This Court, however, made its own detailed analysis 
of the facts and arrived at the opposite conclusion. The Court 
viewed the case as "indistinguishable" from Carroll, and held 
that it "necessarily follows" that the lower court’s decision 
must be reversed if Carrol] “is to continue in force." Id. at 
171. The Court expressly rejected the practical results that 
clear-error review would tolerate: "In the absence of any 
significant difference in the facts, it cannot be said that the 
Fourth Amendment’s incidence turns on whether different trial 
judges draw general conclusions that the facts are sufficient or 
insufficient to constitute probable cause." Ibid.” 

Cases involving reasonable suspicion also reflect a long- 
established mode of review that can only be described as de novo. 
In Terry v. Qhio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), this Court itself 


= The lower courts had, however, rejected the suppression 
motion on the alternative grounds that petitioner’s admission after 
his car was stopped provided probable cause for the search. 338 
U.S. at 163. 


= Probable cause determinations are also reviewed de novo 
in civil suits to recover damages for warrantless searches 
allegedly conducted without probable cause. In determining whether 
a government offic ». is entitled to qualified immunity, reviewing 
courts determine as a matter of law whether, given the established 
facts, a reasonable officer could have believed there was probable 


cause to search. Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 641 (1987). 


26 
“examine([d) the conduct of Officer McFadden in this case to 
determine whether his search and seizure of petitioner were 
reasonable." Id. at 27. In doing so, the Court did not defer to 
the trial court’s determination, see id. at 8, but instead drew 
its own independent conclusion, stating: "We think on the facts 
and circumstances Officer McFadden detailed before the trial 
judge a reasonably prudent man would have been warranted in 
believing petitioner was armed and thus presented a threat to the 
officer’s safety while he was investigating his suspicious 
behavior." Jd. at 28. 

Similarly, in United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 418-421 
(1981), this Court itself reviewed the fects in detail and 
arrived at an independent conclusion regarding the presence of 
reasonable suspicion. The Court posed the question as "whether, 
based upon the whole picture, * * * experienced Border Patrol 
officers[) could reasonably surmise that the particular vehicle 
they stopped was engaged in criminal activity,” and determined 
that, “({o)]n this record, they could so conclude." Id. at 421- 
422. In United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1 (1989), the Court 


emphasized its own role in reviewing the facts: “In evaluating 
the validity of a stop such as this, we must consider ‘the 
totality of the circumstances -- the whole picture.’" Id. at 8, 
quoting Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417 (emphasis added). And in Alabama 
v. White, 496 U.S. 325 (1990), the Court again arrived at an 
independent conclusion based on its analysis of the established 


facts, stating that, "(c)ontrary to the court below, we conclude 


27 

that when the officers stopped respondent, the anonymous tip had 

been sufficiently corroborated to furnish reasonable suspicion 

that respondent was engaged in criminal activity." Id. at 331- 

332. Again, the Court made no determination whether the lower 

court had made any clear errors. In none of these probable cause 

or reasonable suspicion cases did the Court suggest a need for 
deference to the district court, or imply that anything other 
than an independent determination of the ultimate issue was 
appropriate on appellate review. 

Cc. The Precedential a Of Reasonable Suspicion And 
Probable Cause Conclusions, And The Need For Consistent 
Standards To Guide Official Conduct, Support A De Novo 
Standard Of Review 
This Court has noted “the practical truth that the decision 

to label an issue a ‘question of law,’ a ‘question of fact,’ ora 

‘mixed question of law and fact’ is sometimes as much a matter of 

allocation as it is of analysis." Miller, 474 U.S. at 113-114, 

citing Monaghan, Constitutional Fact Review, 85 Colum. L. Rev. 

229, 237 (1985). The classification of an issue as factual or 

legal may “turn[) on a determination that, as a matter of the 

sound administration of justice, one judicial actor is better 

positioned than another to decide the issue in question." 474 

U.S. at 114. See also Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 465 (referring to 

“practical considerations that have prompted the Court to type 

questions * * * as ‘factual issue(s)’"); First Options of 

Chicago, 115 S. Ct. at 1926 (referring to "respective 

institutional advantages” that affect "the reviewing attitude 


that a court of appeals takes toward a district court decision") ; 


28 
Pierce, 487 U.S. at 559-560; Bose Corp., 466 U.S. at 501-502 
(identifying factors relevant to drawing the distinction between 
law and fact). 

Those institutional considerations favor de novo review 
here. First, de novo review is appropriate because of the 
importance of the appellate court’s "function as an expositor of 
law" regarding reasonable suspicion and probable cause. Miller, 
474 U.S. at 114. The necessarily general nature of the 
reasonable suspicion and probable cause standards means that 
defining what conduct falls within constitutional bounds remains 
a task to be carried out through individual decisions. The 
Fourth Amendment reasonableness standards are not "susceptible of 
Procrustean application." Ker, 374 U.S. at 33. Rather, as the 
Court stated in Jerry, 392 U.S. at 29, the limitations imposed by 
the Fourth Amendment “will have to be developed in the concrete 
factual circumstances of individual cases." 

This Court has recognized that where, as here, "the content 
of the rule is not revealed simply by its literal text, but 
rather is given meaning through the evolutionary process of 
common-law adjudication,” the standard should be treated as one 
of law subject to de novo appellate review. Bose Corp., 466 U.S. 
at 502; see Miller, 474 U.S. at 114 (where the "relevant legal 
principle can be given meaning only through its application to 
the particular circumstances of a case, the Court has been 
reluctant to give the trier of fact’s conclusions presumptive 


force and, in so doing, strip a federal appellate court of its 


29 
primary function as an expositor of law"); see also United States 
v. McConney, 728 F.2d 1195, 1200 (9th Cir.) (en banc), cert. 
denied, 469 U.S. 824 (1984); Monaghan, supra, 85 Colum. L. Rev. 
at 229, 273-276. Given a standard of objective reasonableness, 
the purely legal function of saying "what the law is" can be 
accomplished only by applying the basic standard to a series of 
closely related situations and thereby elaborating that standard. 
The exercise of decisional power in individual cases is, in 
circumstances such as these, "the process through which the rule 
itself evolves and its integrity is maintained." Bose Corp., 466 
U.S. at 503. 

A second, and closely related, functional principle that 
favors de novo review in this context is the need to give 
guidance to law enforcement officers to enable them to apply the 
constitutional standards consistently across the wide range of 
individual cases. The several decisions of this Court, and the 
body of case law developed by the federal courts of appeals, are 
the central means of spelling out the requirements of Fourth 
Amendment, providing guidance for law enforcement personnel, and 
reconciling conflicting trial court approaches. "([TJhe 
protection of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments can only be 
realized if the police are acting under a set of rules which, in 
most instances, makes it possible to reach a correct 
determination beforehand as to whether an invasion of privacy is 
justified in the interest of law enforcement." New York v. 


Belton, 453 U.S. 454, 458 (1981) (internal quotation marks 


30 
omitted). As this Court recently confirmed in Thompson, "the law 
declaration aspect of independent review potentially may guide 
police, unify precedent, and stabilize the law," and those 
effects "serve legitimate law enforcement interests." 116 S. Ct. 
at 467. 

This Court’s decisions illustrate how case-by-case review of 
reasonable suspicion and probable cause determinations refine 
those standards and give rise to principles of general 
application to subcategories of Fourth Amendment cases. For 
example, the Court has offered guidance regarding the permissible 
weight to give certain recurring types of potentially suspicious 
activity, such as mere association with a known offender, United 
States v. Di Re, 332 U.S. 581, 593 (1948), flight upon the 
approach of police officers, Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 66 
(1968), and presence in neighborhood known to be frequented by 
drug users, Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 52 (1979); see generally 


2 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 3.6, at 29-74 (2d ed. 1987). 
Standards have also emerged regarding the permissible scope of a 


search of an automobile. See, e.g., California v. Acevedo, 500 
U.S. 565 (1991) (probable cause to search a container authorizes 
search even in the absence of probable cause to search automobile 
in which container is found); United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798 
41982) (probable cause to search a vehicle authorizes search of 
containers and packages therein); see generally 3 W. LaFave, 
Supra, §§ 7.1-7.5, at 1-145. And courts have dealt with such 


issues as the relevance of an offender "profile" to the issue of 


31 

reasonable suspicion. United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. at 10. 

It is through the development of such subsidiary standards that 

the general Fourth Amendment reasonableness standards gain 

specific content, and are subject to consistent administration by 
lower courts and law enforcement personnel. 

Third, the considerations favoring de novo review carry 
special weight where a constitutional right is concerned. As the 
Court stated in the First Amendment context in Bose Corp., "the 
constitutional values protected by the rule make it imperative 
that judges -- and in some cases judges of this Court -- make 
sure that it is correctly applied." 466 U.S. at 502. Indeed, 
the Court has referred to independent review as a "duty of 
constitutional adjudication." Haynes v. Washington, 373 U.S. 
$03, 515 (1963). The Constitution has the same meaning in the 
hands of different law enforcement personnel and different 
district courts. "(Djeferential appellate review," however, 
would “invite[) divergent development of * * * law," Salve Regina 
College, 499 U.S. at 234, and disparate application of 
constitutional principles. 

D. Neither Jllinois v. Gates Nor Other Decisions Of This Court 
Support A Deferential Standard Of Review For District Court 
Determinations Of The Validity Of Warrantless Searches And 
Seizures 
1. Im adopting the clear-error standard of review for 

district court determinations of whether a warrantless search was 

supported by probable cause, the Seventh Circuit relied on 

Dilinois v. Gates. supra. United States v. Spears, 965 F.2d 262, 

269-272 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. S502 (1992); J.A. 65- 


32 
66, 92 (citing Spears). In Gates, the Court reaffirmed the 
"traditional standard" of deferential review of a magistrate’s 
determination that an affidavit was sufficient to establish 
probable cause for the issuance of a warrant. 462 U.S. at 236. 
Gates clarified that under that approach the affidavit is 
reviewed only to ensure that the magistrate had a "substantial 
basis" for issuing the warrant. Jd. at 238-329. Because the 
probable cause standard is the same in both warrant and 
nonwarrant cases, the Seventh Circuit concluded that "(i]t would 
be anomalous to require a more searching review of a district 
judge’s probable cause determination" in nonwarrant cases than of 
a magistrate’s decision to issue a warrant. Spears, 965 F.2d at 
270. The court of appeals thus held that a "clearly erroneous" 
standard should be applied in both contexts. J[bid. 

The Seventh Circuit’s reliance on Gates is misplaced. The 
"substantial basis" test of Gates reflected “the Fourth 
Amendment's strong preference for searches conducted pursuant to 
a@ warrant.” 462 U.S. at 236. The Court reasoned that, "[{i)f the 
affidavits submitted by police officers are subjected to the type 
of scrutiny some courts have deemed appropriate, police might 
well resort to warrantless searches, with the hope of relying on 
consent or some other exception to the Warrant Clause that might 
develop at the time of the search." Ibid. The Court added that 
“the possession of a warrant by officers conducting an arrest or 
search greatly reduces the perception of unlawful or intrusive 
police conduct." Ibid. For those reasons, the Court indicated 


33 
that a reviewing court’s duty is “simply to ensure that the 
magistrate had a ‘substantial basis for .. . conclud[ing]’ that 
probable cause existed." Jd. at 238-239. 

Gates’s description of the "preference" for warrants, and 
the deferential review of magistrate determinations, is grounded 
in substantive Fourth Amendment principles long recognized by 
this Court. See United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102, 106, 
109 (1965) (because "in a doubtful or marginal case a search 
under a warrant may be sustainable where without one it would 
fall,” the resolution of — a case "should be largely 
determined by the preference to be accorded to warrants"); United 
States v. Watson, 423 U.S. 411, 423 (1976) (law enforcement 
officers’ "judgments about probable cause may be more readily 
accepted where backed by a warrant issued by a magistrate") ; 
United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 914 (1984) ("[Wle have thus 
concluded that the preference for warrants is most appropriately 
effectuated by according ‘great deference’ to a magistrate’s 
determination."). The reasoning of Gates, however, is not 
applicable to the allocation of functions between a district 
court and court of appeals in the review of warrantless searches 
and seizures. There is no reason grounded in Fourth Amendment 
doctrine to give leeway on appeal to a district court’s after- 
the-fact conclusion that probable cause existed for a warrantless 
search, with the resulting potential for restriction of an 
individual’s constitutional rights. Nor is there reason for 


appellate deference to a trial court’s after-the-fact conclusion 


34 
that probable cause was lacking, with the resulting potential for 
injury to law enforcement interests and society’s stake in the 
availability of lawfully obtained evidence in a criminal 
prosecution.” Fourth Amendment policy supports giving 
appropriate deference to the magistrate’s determination to 
encourage the use of warrants. It does not, however, favor 
district court determinations over those of appellate courts on 
the ultimate determination of the constitutionality of a 
warrantless search or seizure. In sum, while there is a sound 
doctrinal basis for the meantend adopted in Gates, no 
corresponding principle supports appellate deference to a trial 


court’s decision upholding or invalidating a warrantless search 


or seizure.*™ 


= Under 18 U.S.C. 3731, the government may appeal "from a 
decision or an order of a district court() suppressing or excluding 
evidence * * *." See United States v. Ceccolini, 435 U.S. 268, 271 
n.1 (1978); 4 W. LaFave, gupra, § 11.7(b), at 509-512. 


“* The Court in Gates did state, in passing, that "[(t])here are 
so many variables in the probable-cause equation that one 
determination will seldom be a useful ‘precedent’ for another." 
462 U.S. at 238 n.11. That statement was not a holding of Gates, 
nor was it addressed to what standard of review appellate courts 
should apply to district court determinations of probable cause in 
nonwarrant cases (an issue that was not presented in Gates). 
Rather, it was made in the context of explaining the Court’s 


established by our decisions in {[v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 
(1964)] and Spinelli") . As iscussed above, the Court’s 
determinations of probable cause and reasonable suspicion issues 
have provided guidance to lower courts and law enforcement 
officers, and have harmonized results reached in different cases on 
Similar facts. Gates cast no doubt on the line of cases in this 
Court (see pages 22-27, gupra) that had applied independent, rather 
than deferential, review to lower court determinations of the 


35 

2. Other cases in which this Court has accorded 
deferential, clear-error review to questions extending beyond the 
historical facts are also inapplicable in this setting. Those 
cases fall into three main categories: those dealing with 
supervision of litigation on factbound issues, those that are 
heavily dependent on credibility determinations relating to an 
individual’s subjective state of mind, and those involving mixed 
questions of law and fact that are traditionally decided by 
juries. None of those circumstances is present here. 

In Cooter & Gell v. een Co. 496 U.S. 384, 399 (1990), 
the Court acknowledged that, in reviewing a district court’s 
decision imposing sanctions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
11, “({ljegal issues are raised in considering whether a pleading 
is ‘warranted by existing law or a good faith argument’ for 
changing the law and whether the attorney’s conduct violated Rule 
11." The Court nonetheless concluded that deferential review of 
Rule 11 decisions is appropriate. Similarly, in Pierce v. 
Underwood, 487 U.S. 552, 557-563 (1988), the Court held that an 
abuse-of-discretion standard applies to all aspects of review of 
district courts’ attorneys’ fees determinations under the Equal 
Access to Justice Act, even though the question whether the 
government’s litigating position was “substantially justified" 
has legal elements. Jd. at S60. 

The Court in both cases held that those fact-bound issues 


involving the supervision of litigation before the district 


validity of warrantless searches and seizures. 


36 
courts were ill-suited to de novo appellate review. As the 
Pierce Court explained, "[b)y reason of settlement conferences 
and other pretrial activities, the district court may have 
insights not conveyed by the record, into such matters as whether 
particular evidence was worthy of being relied upon, or whether 
critical facts could easily have been verified by the 
Government." 487 U.S. at 560; see Cooter & Gell, 496 U.S. at 
403-404. An appellate court could not easily familiarize itself 
with litigation events not appearing in the record, nor would the 
effort be justified in view of the limited precedential value of 
the result: the questions in these cases are "multifarious and 
novel," and "little susceptible, for the time being at least, of 
useful generalization.” Pierce, 487 U.S. at 562; Cooter & Gell, 
496 U.S. at 404. 

The litigation-supervision rationale is inapplicable here. 
Probable cause and reasonable suspicion are not matters relating 
to the proper conduct of litigation before the district courts, 
but are matters of constitutional privacy rights and effective 
law enforcement; as discussed above, the utility of the 
development of constitutional precedent in this area is 
substantial. 

The second line of cases in which this Court has applied a 
deferential standard of review to nominally legal questions 
"extending beyond the determination of ‘what happened’*" includes 
such issues as “competency to stand trial (e.9g., Maggio v. 


Fulford, 462 U.S. 111, 117 (1983) (per curiam)); and juror 


37 


impartiality (e.g., (Wainwright v.] Witt, 469 U.S. [(412,] 429 
((1985)]); Patton v. Yount, 467 U.S. 1025, 1036 (1984); Rushen v. 
Spain, 464 U.S. 114, 120 (1983))." Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 464 
(parallel citations omitted). The Court in Thompson described 
those determinations as essentially factual, and thus entitled to 
a presumption of correctness for purposes of Section 2254(d), 
because they deal with largely subjective standards, whose proper 
resolution “depends heavily” on "credibility findings whose basis 
cannot be easily discerned from an appellate record." 116 S. Ct. 
at 465. Because "the critical events," Miller, 474 U.S. at 117, 
surrounding the determination of juror impartiality and defendant 
competency -- @€.g., juror voir dire and the court’s first-hand 
observation of the defendant in a competency proceeding -- take 
place “in open court," Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 466, quoting 
Miller, 474 U.S. at 117, it is appropriate to accord the judgment 
of the trial court, as “jurist-observer,”" presumptive weight, 
Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 465. 

Probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations, in 
contrast to competency and juror bias, involve application of an 
objective standard to out-of-court events and information known 
to officers at an earlier time. A trial court has no "first- 
person vantage” on those events, Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 466, and 
its “superior capacity to resolve credibility issues is not 
dispositive," jd. at 465. Like the Miranda custody decision in 
Thompson, the Fourth Amendment reasonableness standards are 


objective, and thus different in character from determinations of 


38 
juror bias or competency to stand trial, which depend heavily on 
assessing the subjective state of mind of the juror or the 
defendant .** 

Finally, it is traditional in our legal system to entrust 
“reasonable person" determinations in negligence cases to the 
trier of fact, subject only to deferential review. See Cooter & 
Gell, 496 U.S. at 402. As this Court explained in Thompson, 
however, the basis for that tradition lies in the entrustment of 
most negligence issues to juries, which are invited "to apply 
community standards" and whose decisions "cannot be reduced to 
anything approaching a definite rule." 116 S. Ct. at 466 n.13. 
Probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations, however, 
are made by "(j)udges alone,” and “they do so with a view to 
identifying recurrent patterns, and advancing uniform outcomes." 
Ibid. Moreover, the reasonableness of a search or seizure is not 
solely a function of community standards, but turns on a 
“balancing of competing interests" embodied in the Fourth 
Amendment. See Michigan v. Summers, 452 U.S. 692, 700 n.12 
(1981). The task of "hold{[ing) the balance true" is for the 


courts. Gates, 462 U.S. at 241. 


ad The Thompson Court also observed that, "in fathoming the 
state of mind of a potential juror or a defendant in order to 
answer the questions, ‘Is she free of bias?,’ ‘Is he competent to 
stand trial?,’ the trial court makes an individual-specific 
decision, one unlikely to have precedential value." 116 S. Ct. at 
466. Reasonable-suspicion and probable cause determinations, 
however, like the determination of custodial status at issue in 
Thompson, do have "law-clarifying benefits," and carry precedential 
weight. Jd. at 466 n.14. 


~ <a eer 


39 
* * © 

Applying a de novo standard to the ultimate legal questions 
whether reasonable suspicion and probable cause were present on 
the established facts of this case, we believe that both the stop 
and search were constitutionally valid and should be upheld. The 
court of appeals, however, stated that it reviewed the reasonable 
suspicion and probable cause determinations only for clear error. 
J.A. 65-66, 92. Because the questions whether, under a de novo 
standard, the officers’ reasonable suspicion and probable cause 
determinations should be sustained were not presented in the 
petition for certiorari (nor do petitioners discuss or request 
that this Court decide those issues, see Br. 42), this Court 
should vacate the judgment below and remand the case to the court 
of appeals for application of the currect standard. Sup. Ct. 


Rule 24.1(a); see, e.g., Thompson, 116 S. Ct. at 467; Miller, 474 
U.S. at 118. 


40 
CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the court of appeals should be vacated and 


the case remanded to the court of appeals for further 
proceedings. 
Respectfully submitted. 


DREW S. DAYS, III 
Solici e } 


JOHN C. KEENEY 
Act j Assi : 5 } 


MICHAEL R. DREEBEN 
D ty Solic: e } 


CORNELIA T.L. PILLARD 
or ~~ 
General 


JOEL M. GERSHOWITZ 
Attorney 


JANUARY 1996 


