* Supreme Court, U.S. 
f FILED 
FEB 20 1996 
No. 95-354 
CLERK 


In The 


Supreme Court of the United States 
October Term, 1995 


* 


JAMES O’CONNOR, 


Petitioner, 
vs. 


CONSOLIDATED COIN CATERERS CORP, 
Respondent. 


* 


On Writ Of Certiorari 
To The United States Court Of Appeals 
For The Fourth Circuit 


* 


REPLY BRIEF OF PETITIONER 


* 


PAUL ALAN Levy 
ANNA DALy ALAN B. Morrison 
Georce Daty, P.A. Pusuic Crmzen Limcation 
Suite 226, Group 

101 N. McDowell Street 1600 20th Street, NW 
Charlotte, NC 28205 Washington DC 20009 
Telephone: (704) 333-5196 Telephone: (202) 588-1000 


Counsel of Record 
for Petitioner 


Georce Daty* 


COCKLE LAW BRIEF PRINTING CO., (800) 225-6964 
OR CALL COLLECT (402) 342-2831 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


2 ) rrrrr rrr Tt Trt ee 
e eee eee 


a. 


If The Replacement’s Age Is To Be Considered At 
All, It Should Suffice That The Replacement Is 
Younger, Without Deciding The Extent Of The 
ene ee ee ere 


The Court Should Decline To Reformulate The 
McDonnell Douglas Prima Facie Case Presump- 
tion Because There Are No Pertinent Distinctions 
Between A Title VII Refusal-To-Hire Case Such 
As McDonnell Douglas And The ADEA Firing- 
And-Replacement Case Presented Here......... 


The Issues Of Whether Petitioner Presented A 
Direct Or Circumstantial Case, And Whether 
Petitioner Was More Qualified Than His Replace- 
ment, Are Not Before The Court; If They Were, 
Ample Evidence Was Presented ................ 


/ eres 


ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


Cases Cirep 
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242 (1986) . 


Bodenheimer v. PPG Indus., Inc., 5 F.3d 955 (5th Cir. 
199 09 . a 6 „ „ %%%% , ( 


Collier v. Budd Co., 66 F.3d 886 (7th Cir. 1995) 


Corbin v. Southland Intern. Trucks, 25 F.3d 1545 
(1ith Cis. 10 „% 


Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 
(0% sun anenE 9, 


Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins, 113 S. Ct. 1701 (1993) . 
Hughes v. Brown, 20 F.3d 745 (7th Cir. 1994) 
Keyes v. School Dist. No. 1, 413 U.S. 1898 (1973) .. 


Kralman v. Illinois Dept. of Veteran's Affairs, 23 F.3d 
150 (7th Civ. 1 % „„%%́b. 


Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003 (ist Cir. 1979) 


McCorstin v. United States Steel Corp., 621 F.2d 749 
(Sth Cie. 1960)... „%% 


McDonnell Douglas v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973)..... 


Meinecke v. H&R Block of Houston, 66 F.3d 77 (Sth 
Cie. 1995) ù/%n%ceor;nn „ «2 


Meiri v. Dacon, 759 F.2d 989 (2d Cir. 1985) 
Rosenthal v. Walker, 111 U.S. 185 (1884)........... 


Sondhi v. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., No. 
93-17207, 1995 U.S. App. Lexis 31263, at *15-16 


(9th Cir. Aug. 1, 1995) 


Page 


ooo 9 


10, 11 
Ty 


iii 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES - Continued 


Page 

St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 113 8. Ct. 2742 

EE EEE ̃è²Ä— . e eee eee 1,9 
Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324 (1977)......... 4 
Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Thurston, 469 U.S. 111 

e ’T‚ EE EET eee 11 
Walker v. Nations Bank of Florida N. A., 53 F.3d 1548 

r ũ ⁵mm! sees chécccccccccccccce: 7 
Wallis v. J. R. Simplot, 26 F.3d 885 (9th Cir. 1994) 7 
STATUTES 
ee eee eee eee ee eee 6 
Orner AUTHORITIES 
Fishman, Jones On Evidence (7th ed., 1992)........... 10 
ees ca cewecsescecoccecesoes 16 


REPLY ARGUMENT 


Review was granted in this case solely to consider 
whether, in an age discrimination case, the plaintiff must 
show, as part of his prima facie case! under McDonnell 
Douglas v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), that her or his 
replacement was a person who was younger than age 40, 
the minimum age for employees to be protected against 
age discrimination. Nonetheless, respondent devotes the 
large majority of its brief to seeking affirmance on a 
Question Presented in the Petition that was not accepted 
by the Court - whether summary judgment was proper 
against petitioner even if his replacement was under age 
40. Although we do not believe the latter question is 
properly before the Court, we will address it, in Section 3 
of this brief, after replying to respondent's brief discus- 
sion of the issue that has been accepted for review.? 


Respondent acknowledges that, as we argued in our 
opening brief, the purpose of the McDonnell Douglas 
scheme is to establish a framework for deciding whether, 


! The amicus Chamber of Commerce points out, Br. 6 n.3, 
that petitioner's brief (and indeed every other brief filed) used 
the phrases “prima facie case” when what was more precisely 
meant was “presumption.” But, since the Court continues to use 
“prima facie case” for the McDonnell Douglas presumption, so 
also will petitioner. See, St. Marys Honor Center v. Hicks, 113 8. 
Ct. 2742, 2751 (1993). 


2 The brief of the respondent's amicus Equal Employment 
Advisory Council strays even further from the question 
presented in its claim that petitioner seeks to avoid showing 
that he was performing at a satisfactory level. Petitioner 
acknowledges his obligation in that regard and believes that he 
has met that burden as defined in McDonnell Douglas. This issue 
is also addressed very briefly in Section 3 of this brief. 


if the defendant offers no non-discriminatory explanation 
for its adverse employment decision, the fact-finder could 
properly infer a discriminatory motive. In our opening 
brief, we argued first that the McDonnell Douglas scheme 
does not require any showing about the characteristics of 
the employees who were hired or retained in place of the 
discrimination plaintiff, and second that, even if charac- 
teristics of the replacement should be considered at this 
stage, the only question should be whether the replace- 
ment was younger than the plaintiff, not whether the 
replacement was too young to be protected by the ADEA 
at all. In this reply brief, we begin by addressing each of 
these questions, and then respond to the various alternate 
grounds for affirmance of the decision below that are 
presented by respondent and its amici. 


1. If The Replacement’s Age Is To Be Considered 
At All, It Should Suffice That The Replacement 
Is Younger, Without Deciding The Extent Of 
The Difference. 


Assuming that it is necessary to consider at least 
some of the characteristics of the replacement employee 
at all, respondent argues that, as a matter of experience, 
almost all replacements will be younger than the alleged 
victims of age discrimination. Accordingly, it contends, 
no inference of discrimination can be drawn merely 
because a younger person took the job of an older one. Br. 
at 25. Instead, it argues, the Court should allow a prima 
facie case only when there is a bright line between the 
plaintiff and the replacement. Because membership vel 
non in the protected class is a bright line that has an 
explicit basis in the statute, respondent argues that this 


— — — 


should be the fact that makes or breaks an ADEA prima 
facie case. 


There are several difficulties with that approach. 
First, to the extent that it considers characteristics of the 
replacement, together with the statistical likelihoods that 
replacements will have certain characteristics, it calls into 
question the utility of McDonnell Douglas in many Title 
VII cases. Thus, for example, more than 80% of the Amer- 
icans are white, and so, statistically speaking, when a 
black employee is replaced it is more likely than not that 
the replacement will be white. Similarly, in national ori- 
gin discrimination cases, when an Italian-American 
employee is replaced, it is quite likely that the new 
worker will be of some other national origin. And most 
workers do not exercise their rights under Title VII; thus, 
when a worker who exercises those rights is replaced or 
passed over (the precise facts in McDonnell Douglas), it is 
quite likely that the worker who is hired or retained will 
be one who did not exercise his or her rights under the 
statute. These likelihoods, however, do not warrant dis- 
carding the McDonnell Douglas scheme in race, national 
origin, or retaliation cases under Title VII. 


Nor is there a good reason to hold that a McDonnell 
Douglas prima facie case must include proof of particular 
degrees of age differential. The defect identified by the 
Fourth Circuit here was that petitioner’s replacement was 
40, which it considered to be “too old” to enable him to 
establish a prima facie case, whereas if his replacement 


3 The brief of the National Retail Federation, at 1-2, assures 
the Court that younger employees really are better. Its argument 
is with Congress, however. 


had been 39, he would have met his burden. But if the 
purpose of the test is to assure that only permissible 
inferences of discrimination are allowed to go forward, it 
is difficult to justify ruling as a matter of law, in two cases 
with identical facts except that the replacement in one is 
39 and the other 41, that an age discrimination plaintiff 
aged 65 would be entitled to proceed in one but not in the 
other. Indeed, under respondent's analysis, because age 
40 is the magic dividing line, the two replacements could 
be born within a week of one another, and the results 
different, so long as the date of replacement fell between 
their two birthdays. Thus, so far as the Fourth Circuit 
drew a sharp line at age 40, that line is wholly irrational 
in terms of the permissibility or not of drawing an infer- 
ence of discrimination regarding the defendant’s conduct. 


There is no reason to import these matters into the 
prima facie case. To be sure, the fact that the replacement 
worker was over 40 can be argued to the fact finder as 
evidence to support an inference of no discrimination. 
And, of course, as the age of the replacement worker 
approaches that of the plaintiff, the inference of age dis- 
crimination grows progressively weaker, just as it grows 
stronger as the gap in ages increases. But these matters 
are best considered in conjunction with justifications that 
the employer articulates in response to the plaintiff's 
prima facie case. 


The addition of a requirement of showing anything at 
all about the replacement creates opportunities for dis- 
criminatory employers to find a replacement who will 
insulate them from liability. The employer can simply 
hire an older replacement until the threat of suit passes. 
Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003, 1013 n.9 (1st Cir. 1979). 


A large employer with a small minority contingent could 
dismiss all its minority employees and require that the 
remaining employees take up the slack. Meiri v. Dacon, 
759 F.2d 989, 996 n.9 (2d Cir. 1985). Discrimination in the 
workplace is varying and manifold in its manifestations, 
and the rule proposed by respondent would inflexibly 
prevent plaintiffs from making a case of discrimination 
even when discrimination in fact occurred. 


The amicus Chamber of Commerce's plea for a bright 
line, ten-year difference should also be rejected. Apart 
from the dubious authority for the Court to draw bright 
lines comparable to a statute of limitations when Con- 
gress has not done so, there is nothing magical about a 
ten year difference in terms of the intent of the employer. 
To be sure, the extent of the age difference between the 
hired and fired will often be highly probative of a dis- 
criminatory intent or lack of one, but in the end that 
difference is only one factor that will be weighed by the 
jury along with the rest of the evidence. More impor- 
tantly, a ten year dividing line would be a blueprint for 
evasion: just replace the fired worker with someone less 
than 10 years younger, and keep doing it forever. The 
only dividing line that the law allows is that the hired 
worker be younger than the fired worker; everything else 
goes to the strength of the inference. 


The addition of a requirement of showing replace- 
ment characteristics is also inadequately general to serve 
as an element of a presumption. The McDonnell Douglas 
presumption is artfully designed to be available to all 
who may be affected by unacknowledged discrimination. 
Adding a “substantially younger” requirement, for an 
example, will make the presumption underinclusive 


because not all cases of actual discrimination will involve 
a substantially younger replacement. The Fourth Circuit 
rule is so especially underinclusive as to be irrational in 
its coverage. It is underinclusive particularly for older 
claimants, who are less likely to be replaced by persons 
under 40. See, McCorstin v. United States Steel Corp., 621 
F.2d 749, 754 (Sth Cir. 1980) (“Because of the value of 
experience, rarely are sixty-year olds replaced by those 
under forty”). It is irrational because it bears no relation 
whatever to the prohibitions of the ADEA, which pro- 
hibits discrimination against “any individual” on the 
basis of “such individual's age,” 29 U.S.C. § 623(a)(1), not 
discrimination vis-a-vis persons under 40. 


The various suggested additional fourth elements 
will just create more litigation without assuring any 
greater reliability. A “substantially younger” require- 
ment, for example, would soon produce a different age 
difference in every circuit and would be uncertain and 
uneven in its application. A discharged employee may 
not know who replaced him, much less know whether a 
complex reorganization was discriminatory. In large com- 
panies the replacement may be selected by a person other 
than the terminator, and in this circumstance the replace- 
ment's age has no evidentiary force at all. Our national 
policy against employment discrimination requires that 
the presumption of discrimination be kept simple and 
inclusive, to maximize relief to victims of unlawful 
employment discrimination.“ 


* Respondent, but not any of its amici, appears to claim that 
four circuits have recently held in favor of the under-40 
requirement. Br. at 21-22. None of the cited cases so held. As for 


2. The Court Should Decline To Reformulate The 
McDonnell Douglas Prima Facie Case Presump- 
tion Because There Are No Pertinent Distinc- 
tions Between A Title VII Refusal-To-Hire Case 
Such As McDonnell Douglas And The ADEA 
Firing-And-Replacement Case Presented Here. 


Respondent argues that it is necessary to consider the 
age of the replacement employee because, if the replace- 
ment is close in age to the plaintiff, that makes it much 
less likely that the age of the plaintiff was the reason for 
his adverse treatment. Appealing to the fact that the 
reason for the McDonnell Douglas scheme was to eliminate 
the most likely justifications for discharge, and thus 


Meinecke v. H&R Block of Houston, 66 F.3d 77 (5th Cir. 1995), 
Respondent quotes only a portion of the case. The Court clearly 
says in the same paragraph which respondent incompletely 
quotes that “replace[ment] by someone younger” is sufficient. 
66 F.3d at 83. As for Walker v. NationsBank of Florida N. A., 53 F.3d 
1548, 1556 (11th Cir. 1995) (Title VII), the quoted statement is 
dictum because the replacement was age 24. The Eleventh 
Circuit adheres to the “younger” rule when the issue is 
presented. Corbin v. Southland Intern. Trucks, 25 F.3d 1545, 1549 
(11th Cu. 1994) (ADEA). Respondent cites Hughes v. Brown, 20 
F.3d 745 (7th Cir. 1994) (Title VII), but it is dictum because a 
person of a different race was given the promotion at issue. The 
law of the Seventh Circuit is, as held in the later case of Kralman 
v. Illinois Dept. of Veteran's Affairs, 23 F.3d 150, 155 (7th Cir. 1994), 
that a “younger” replacement is all that must be shown. Finally, 
Respondent cites Sondhi v. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., No. 
93-17207, 1995 U.S. App. Lexis 31263, at *15-16 (9th Cir. Aug. 1, 
1995), an unpublished decision. Petitioner does correctly quote 
this case; but Sondhi itself erroneously claims that its rule 
derives from Wallis v. J. R. Simplot, 26 F.3d 885, 891 (9th Cir. 
1994). The Wallis requirement was, however, “replace[ment] by 
a substantially younger employee.” 


avoid the need to litigate frivolous or weak cases, respon- 
dents suggest that this is a good addition to the prima 
facie case. 


We have no doubt that there are a variety of pieces of 
evidence that might make it less likely that the employer 
had a discriminatory reason for its action. But if courts 
are willing to consider the age of the beneficiary of the 
discrimination, then it is, indeed, somewhat difficult to 
see why other characteristics of the beneficiary should 
not be considered. Why not the question of how good a 
worker he is? Why not his daily production statistics? 
Surely, everything that will eventually become relevant to 
the ultimate question of discrimination can be imported 
into the construction of the prima facie case. 


What this line of analysis ignores, however, is that 
the genius of the prima facie case is its very simplicity. 
The prima facie case focuses on objective characteristics 
of the plaintiff, which can easily be shown by the plaintiff 
based on his own knowledge, and without substantial 
discovery, in deciding whether the case should go for- 
ward to the next stage at which the employer must pro- 
vide responses which, in turn, must be evaluated in light 
of the evidence. 


The elements of the McDonnell Douglas prima facie 
case were not idly formulated. The unanimous Court that 
formulated them did not include any element looking to 
the characteristics of the person who ultimately filled the 
job or any other matter of defense, despite that the record 
presented strong defense evidence of job-related criminal 
conduct by the applicant. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. 


Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Likewise, in Furnco Construc- 
tion Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978), a unanimous Court“ 
again held that the presumption did not require any 
showing of qualifications of persons who got the job or 
other matters of employer defense, despite the 
employer’s showing that it had hired 16% black brick- 
layers in a labor market that had only 5.7% available 
black bricklayers. 438 U.S. at 571-2. Replacement charac- 
teristics were not inadvertently omitted, but were omitted 
because they were not needed in order to eliminate “the 
two most common reasons on which an employer might 
rely,” lack of qualifications and lack of vacancy. Teamsters 
v. United States, 431 U.S. 324, 358 n.44 (1977). Matters of 
defense were relegated to a later stage in the proof 
scheme. The Court has recently again indicated, in a 
hypothetical strikingly similar to the case at bar, that the 
presumption applies without consideration of defensive 
matters. In St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 113 S.Ct. 2742, 
2750-51 (1993), the Court posed a hypothetical in which a 
black job applicant was rejected by a black decision- 
maker. Rejection by a decisionmaker of the same race is 
substantially equivalent, in terms of evidentiary weight, 
to replacement by a substantially younger worker; yet the 
presumption there applied was as originally formulated 
in McDonnell Douglas, and the race of the decisionmaker 
thus was not an element of it. 


5 Justice Marshall wrote a separate concurring and 
dissenting opinion for himself and Justice Brennan in which he 
explicitly agreed with the Court’s opinion on the prima facie 
case issue. 438 U.S. at 582. 


10 


Respondent and its amici argue that characteristics of 
the replacement employee must be added to the prima 
facie ADEA case, but they do this without attempting to 
say why this case is different from McDonnell Douglas in 
any relevant aspect. There is nothing about the ADEA as 
opposed to Title VII, or about a failure-to-hire case as 
opposed to a firing-and-replacement case, that should 
disturb the presumption so carefully laid down in 
McDonnell Douglas. No opposing brief states any material 
difference between these cases. Certainly the two most 
common reasons for not hiring or for dismissing an 
employee are the same in both cases. 


A presumption is a set of facts which has been judi- 
cially or legislatively determined to create an inference if 
the set of facts is proven by a preponderance of the 
evidence. Fishman, Jones On Evidence, § 4.2, at pp. 301-02 
(7th ed., 1992). A presumption is a crystallized inference. 
Presumptions are created for one or more of three main 
reasons: to correct an imbalance resulting from one 
party’s superior access to proof; for reasons of social or 
economic policy; and based on inherent probability. Ibid., 
§§ 4:4-4:8. All three reasons are promoted by the McDon- 
nell Douglas presumption. First, the Court has specifically 
identified inherent probability as one reason for the 
McDonnell Douglas presumption. Furnco, 438 U.S. at 577 
(“these acts are more likely than not based on the 
consideration of impermissible factors”) (emphasis 
added). Second, in many cases, especially those involving 
large employers, a claimant will not know the age of his 
replacement, so lack of access to proof is another reason 
for not requiring any showing of characteristics of the 


11 


replacement. The presumption promotes procedural fair- 
ness by ensuring that discrimination plaintiffs have their 
day in court despite the often insuperable difficulty of 
obtaining direct evidence of discriminatory intent. Trans 
World Airlines, Inc. v. Thurston, 469 U.S. 111, 121 (1985). 
Third, the strong national policy against employment 
discrimination underlies the presumption. Cf., Keyes v. 
School Dist. No. 1, 413 U.S. 189, 208 (1973). 


Presumed facts are not always true; some properly 
addressed, stamped and mailed letters fail to reach their 
destination. Rosenthal v. Walker, 111 U.S. 185 (1884). Nev- 
ertheless, the presumption creates a legal inference in the 
absence of evidence to the contrary. So too, the termina- 
tion of a qualified protected employee, without explana- 
tion, from a position that the employer needed to have 
filled, creates a legitimate suspicion that the termination 
was motivated by discrimination on the basis of age. 
McDonnell Douglas and Furnco indicated that no showing 
of replacement characteristics or any other matter of 
defense needed to be shown initially by the claimant. 
Those cases have weighed the risk of error and decided 
that it is more than overbalanced by the employer's 
opportunity to make a rebuttal showing of its reasons. No 
reasons have been advanced as to why the Court should 
change this basic judgment. 


In sum, we urge the Court to reaffirm this basic 
teaching of McDonnell Douglas, that none of the charac- 
teristics of the replacement need to be considered, mak- 
ing it unnecessary to consider the remaining arguments 
in this reply brief. 


12 


3. The Issues Of Whether Petitioner Presented A 
Direct Or Circumstantial Case, And Whether 
Petitioner Was More Qualified Than His 
Replacement, Are Not Before The Court; If They 
Were, Ample Evidence Was Presented. 


The circuit court held that petitioner had not made 
out a prima facie case because his replacement was not 
under 40. The circuit court then held that the case should 
not be analyzed as a reduction in force, and further that 
petitioner had produced insufficient direct and circum- 
stantial evidence. The Petition for Certiorari presented 
the “under-40” question and the direct and circumstantial 
evidence question. There was no Cross-Petition. Review 
was granted only on the “under-40” question. Respon- 
dent now seeks to have the Court affirm on the issue 
which the Court declined to hear, and which neither 
petitioner nor the EEOC have briefed, arguing that peti- 
tioner presented no direct or circumstantial evidence 
beyond the age difference between petitioner and his 
replacement and indeed that petitioner lacked sufficient 
qualifications by comparison with his replacement. Br. 
36-38. Amicus Equal Employment Advisory Council joins 
in this surprise attack as well, arguing that no prima facie 
case can be shown unless the claimant “was performing 
up to his employer’s legitimate expectations.” Br. at 14, 
quoting Collier v. Budd Co., 66 F.3d 886, 889 (7th Cir. 1995). 
These questions are not before the Court. Certiorari was 
not granted on them, and the EEOC now has no oppor- 
tunity to brief them. It is neither fair nor appropriate to 
allow them to be injected into the case at this point. 


If these questions were before the Court, however, 
ample direct and circumstantial evidence was presented 


13 


that petitioner had been discriminated against on account 
of his age and that he was more qualified than his 
replacement. 


Petitioner showed a 12-year history of successful per- 
formance as a manager, R.53 at attached Trial Exhibit 1, 
and particularly a successful performance in 1989, the 
year before he volunteered to move to Charlotte to take 
over a troubled division. His 1989 year-end performance 
evaluation, by Ed Williams, the man who fired him eight 
months later, was “commendable minus.” R.53 at 
attached Trial Exhibit 4. In respondent's lexicon com- 
mendable” means “a seasoned employee who is looked 
upon as a production or conceptual leader within an 
area.” R.53 at attached Trial Exhibit 3. Petitioner received 
the largest performance bonus in the company for 1989. 
R.53, Plaintiff's Affidavit 4. Six months later Williams 
began to make age-biased remarks to him. Most tellingly, 
in the latter part of July 1990, Williams said, “O’Connor, 
you are too damn old for this kind of work.” R.49 at 
attached O’Connor Dep. I, 47. This remark could have 
been made immediately after Williams decided to dis- 
charge Petitioner.® 


Respondent claimed that Petitioner was not even 
considered for the new job because Williams had earlier 
reduced his territory. See, Pet. App. 12., 56 F.3d at 547 


* The too damn old” remark occurred “in the latter part of 
July.” R.49 at attached O’Connor Dep. I. 46. Williams testified 
that his boss, Ted Arts, called in “late July” with the directive to 
reorganize. R.48, Williams Affidavit 19. (Unfortunately 
Petitioner's Brief failed to make clear, at 4, that Ted Arts was the 
President of Canteen Corporation and Williams’ boss.) 


14 


(1995). But, Williams testified that he considered peti- 
tioner to be a candidate for the August job. 


In making my management selections [per Arts’ 
directions], I considered the capabilities of . . . 
Finnell and the three 4Cs District Managers who 
reported to me in North Carolina. 


R.48, Williams Affidavit 1 13. And, according to a com- 
pany memorandum written by Williams, the reason for 
the July reduction in petitioner's territory was to “allow a 
more even distribution of the present volume” and had 
nothing to do with his performance. R.55 at attached Trial 
Ex.13. 


Respondent proffered no evidence of any reason for 
its reorganization and admitted that petitioner's division 
had improved during his tenure. Pet. App. 12, 56 F.3d at 
547. Petitioner also showed that he was replaced by a 40 
year old with a less outstanding work history. Finnell's 
prior “competent minus” rating meant that he was per- 
forming on the low side of competent. Also, Williams had 
not supervised Finnell since the end of 1989. R.48, 11 6, 7. 


Petitioner thus presented both direct and circumstan- 
tial evidence of age discrimination. Direct evidence is 
“evidence which, if believed, would prove the existence 
of a fact . without any inference or presumptions.” 
Bodenheimer v. PPG Indus., Inc., 5 F.3d 955, 958 (5th Cir. 
1993), quoted at Pet. App. 16, 56 F.3d at 548. The ultimate 
facts that petitioner must prove are that his age moti- 
vated Williams to discharge him. See, Hazen Paper Co. v. 
Biggins, 113 S. Ct. 1701, 1706 (1993). Williams’ statement, 
“O'Connor, you are too damn old for this kind of work,” 


15 


made shortly after Williams’ decision to terminate peti- 
tioner, is direct evidence that petitioner's age motivated 
Williams to terminate him. This is earwitness testimony. 
No inferences are required. Petitioner heard Williams 
confess his unlawful motive. Arguably petitioner has ear- 
witness testimony only as to Williams’ intent, and only 
“smoking gun” (circumstantial) evidence of the connec- 
tion between his intent and his action — Williams did not 
say “O’Connor, you are too damn old for this kind of 
work and therefore you're fired” — but the difference is 
academic. Either direct or circumstantial evidence suf- 
fices, and the circumstances readily allow the corpus 
delicti inference to be made here because the discrimina- 
tory remark could have been made immediately after the 
decision to terminate was reached. See, n.6, supra. 


The courts below faulted petitioner because he pro- 
duced no “context” for Williams’ remark. Pet. App. 31, 
829 F. Supp. at 158; Pet. App. 18, 56 F.3d at 549. But, there 
may have been no context. Williams may have simply 
made the remark and then realized what he had said and 
immediately left. The circuit court then reasoned that this 
assumed absence of context meant that petitioner had 
fatally failed to show “nexus” between Williams’s intent 
and action. Id. The circuit court thus managed to dismiss 
the “smoking gun” remark by faulting petitioner for not 
showing what may never have happened, and also by 
isolating its consideration of this remark from all the 
other evidence in the case The “nexus” requirement as 


? The circuit court never considered whether the evidence 
in its totality made out a prima facie case of direct or 
circumstantial evidence. 


16 


applied by the circuit court so seriously constricts consid- 
eration of the proof that practically a signed confession is 
required to show liability. 


Of course there must be some reasonable connection 
between Williams’s intent and his action to support the 
inference that the one caused the other. Causation must 
be shown; but it was amply shown on this record taking 
the evidence in the light most favorable to petitioner and 
not resolving any material issues of fact, as required by 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. A reasonable jury could have found that 
Williams made his July remark at the office during busi- 
ness hours; that he abruptly left after confessing to an 
unlawful motive and being reprimanded by the Human 
Relations Manager, indicating a realization of having con- 
fessed to an unlawful motive; that he made the decision 
to terminate petitioner at about that same time; that he 
made a summer-long series of age-biased remarks; that 
petitioner was performing competently; that the geo- 
graphic reassignment was done “to allow a more even 
distribution of the present volume” and not because of 
petitioner’s performance; and that petitioner was more 
qualified than Finnell. “A fair-minded jury could return a 
verdict for the plaintiff on [this] evidence.” Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252 (1986). 


* 


8 The circuit court resolved conflicts in the evidence as to 
two crucial issues of fact: why Williams reduced petitioner's 
territory in July, Pet. App. 14, and why Williams discharged 
Petitioner in August, Pet. App. 12. The court also reached these 
resolutions without considering the pretext evidence of Williams’ 
summer long series of age-discriminatory remarks. The 
employer’s rebuttal was folded into Petitioner's presumptive 
case, but Petitioner’s evidence of pretext was omitted. 


17 


CONCLUSION 


The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fourth Circuit should be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, this 19 day of February, 1996. 


Georce DAA 

ANNA DALy 

Georce Daty, P.A. 

101 North McDowell Street, 
Suite 226 

Charlotte, North Carolina 28205 

Telephone: (704) 333-5196 


Paut ALAN Levy 

ALAN B. Morrison 

Public Citizen Litigation Group 
1600 20th Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20009 
Telephone: (202) 588-1000 


*Counsel of Record 
for Petitioner 


