IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE 
OCTOBER TERM, 1994 


No. 94-1614 (6) 
STATE OF WISCONSIN, Petitioner 


v. 
CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


No. 94-1631 
STATE OF OKLAHOMA, Petitioner 


Vv. 
CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


No. 94-1985 (<3 
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, 
et al., Petitioners 


v. 
CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


ON PETITIONS FOR WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR 
THE SECOND CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION 


Paul A. Crotty 
Corporation Counsel of the City of New York 
100 Church Street 

New York, New York 10007 

(212) 788-0800 


Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 
Counsel of Record 


July 3, 1995 


BEST AVAILABLE COPY) 


7 Ano 


(Continuation of Cover Page) 
Of Counsel: 


Robert S. Rifkind 

Cravath, Swaine & Moore 

Worldwide Plaza 

825 Eighth Avenue 

New York, New York 10019 

(212) 474-1000 

Attorney for Respondents the City of New York, 
the City of Los Angeles, the City of San 
Francisco, the City of San Jose, the City of Tucson, 
the City of Long Beach, the City of Pasadena, 

the City of Inglewood, the County of Los Angeles, 
the County of Broward and the Navajo Nation 


7 


Peter L. Zimroth 

Arnold & Porter 

399 Park Avenue 

New York, New York 10022 
(212) 715-1000 


Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 


Louis M. Solomon 

Solomon, Zauderer, Ellenhorn, Frischer & Sharp 
45 Rockefeller Plaza 

New York, New York 10111 

(212) 956-3700 

Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 


(Continuation of Cover Page) 


Dennis C. Vacco 

Attorney General of the State of New York 
Barbara Mehiman 

Assistant Attorney General 

New York State Department of Law 

120 Broadway 

New York, New York 10271 

(212) 416-8249 

Attorney for Respondent the State of New York 


Dan Morales 

Attorney General of the State of Texas 
Javier P. Guajardo 

Special Assistant Attorney General 

P.O. Box 12548 

Capitol Station 

Austin, Texas 78711 

(512) 475-4405 

Attorney for Respondent the State of Texas 


James K. Hahn 

City Attorney of the City of Los Angeles 
Jessica F. Heinz 

Assistant City Attorney 

200 North Main Street 

Los Angeles, California 90012 

(213) 485-4288 

Attorney for Respondent the City of Los Angeles 


(Continuation of Cover Page) 


DeWitt W. Clinton 

County Counsel of the County of Los Angeles 
Ada Treiger 

Deputy County Counsel 

500 West Temple 

Hall of Administration 

Los Angeles, California 90012 

(213) 974-1861 

Attorney for Respondent County of Los Angeles 


COUNTER-STATEMENT OF 
QUESTION PRESENTED 


After determining that plaintiffs had proved by 
conclusive evidence that (a) adjusted census data prepared 
by the Bureau of the Census would increase the accuracy of 
the census and (b) the decision of the Secretary of 
Commerce rejecting use of those data did not reflect a 
good-faith effort to render a census as accurate as 
practicable, the court of appeals remanded the case to the 
district court to give the Secretary an opportunity to show 
that his decision against adjustment was essential to 
achievement of a legitimate governmental objective. The 
question presented is whether this Court should grant 
interlocutory review of the court of appeals’ order before 
the factual record is complete, before either court below has 
determined the Secretary’s decision to be unconstitutional 
and before either court has considered an appropriate 


remedy. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............... iii 
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT .............- 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE .............. 7 
Proceedings Below .........--++-++- 17 
REASONS FOR DENYING THE PETITION .... . 28 
1. The Petitions Fail to Present Unusual 
Circumstances Warranting Interlocutory 
NS t's 5 ao oe oe a eee ee ee 28 
2. The Decision of the Court of Appeals, 
Which Vacated the Judgment of the District 
Court and Remanded the Case for Further 
Proceedings, Was Correct ............ 37 


3. There Is No Conflict among the Courts of 
Appeals to Warrant Review by This Court . . 52 


ele a: re a ee ee 61 


-ii- 


TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 


CASES: Page 

j i v. Jac V 

T. & K. R. Co., 

ES ge po ee ee ee 29 
Baker v. Carr, 

oo ae een 25 
Buckley v. Valeo, 

See oe ee oe 50 n.8 
City of Detroit v. Frankl 


4 F.3d 1367 (6th Cir. 1993), cert, 


denied, US. 1145S. Ct. 
II as teas hss ost kb ca: 53, 57-60 


City of Detroit v. Franklin. 
800 F. Supp. 539 (E.D. Mich. 1992), 
aff'd, 4 F.3d 1367 (6th Cir. 1993), cert. 


denied, US. _,114S. Ct. 
EE ee 58 


Brothers & Co., 
ee eee 29 


-lli- 


J. Truett Payne Co. v. Chrysler 


Motors Corp., 
6 Fe Fe eer mancrc 34 


Karcher v. Daggett, 
462 U.S. 725 (1983) .......... 25, 27, 47, 48 


Tucker v. United States 


Department of Commerce, 

958 F.2d 1411 (7th Cir.), cert. 

denied, U.S. ___, 113 S. Ct. 407 

Pe cise cnetiak ous 53, 55-57, 59-60 


Department of Commerce, 

135 F.R.D. 175 (N.D. Ill. 1991), aff'd, 
958 F.2d 1411 (7th Cir.), cert. 

denied, US. __, 113 S. Ct. 407 


v. Montana, 
Se ee OD <0 ice 6 id hots BSP EE 26, 47 


Virginia Mili it as 
U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 2431 (1993) 28-29, 32-33 


Washi v. Davis, 
ee es ee CE a a ic.c 6 COW we oe ees 49 


Wesberry v. Sanders, 
I oo i a 47 


-jv- 


CONSTITUTION AND STATUTE 


United States Constitution: 


a Pn wk he dd bs we wwe 56-58 

RD 35h Sp temas ott 50 n.8, 56, 60 

Pee 6 a's Wee wee ew ee eds 50 n.8 
Statute 


Administrative Procedure Act, 
5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A) ......... 24, 34, 56 n.12 


MISCELLANEOUS 


C. Citro & M. Cohen (eds.), 


The Bicentennial Census: New, 
irections i (1985) . 19n4 


National Research Council, 
Modernizing the U.S. Census (1995) ...... 7 n.2 


R. Stern, E. Gressman, S. Shapiro & 
K. Geller, Supreme Court Practice (1993)... .. 29 


IN THE 


B. Vobejda, “Administration Lets Census SUPREME pie ho THE ee STATES 
Ruling Stand; Decision Awaits OCT TERM, 
on Use of Adjusted Numbers,” 
Woshinenem Post (September 22, 1994) ... 32n.6 No. 94-1614 


STATE OF WISCONSIN, Petitioner 
v. 
CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


No. 94-1631 
STATE OF OKLAHOMA, Petitioner 
Vv. 
CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


No. 94-1985 
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, 
et al., Petitioners 
Vv. 


CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Respondents. 


ON PETITIONS FOR WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO 
THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR 
THE SECOND CIRCUIT 


BRIEF FOR THE RESPONDENTS IN OPPOSITION 


Respondents the City of New York, the State of 
New York, the State of Texas, the City of Los Angeles, the 


City of San Francisco, the City of San Jose, the City of 


-Vi- 


Tucson, the City of Long Beach, the City of Pasadena, the 
City of Inglewood, the County of Los Angeles, the County 
of Broward and the Navajo Nation respectfully request that 
the petitions for writs of certiorari to review the judgment 
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second 


Circuit in Nos. 94-1614, 94-1631 and 94-1985" be denied. 


Preliminary Statement 
The 1990 decennial census, as reported by the 
United States Department of Commerce (“Department”), 


reflected an undercount of the national population. Not all 


' The petition in No. 94-1614, State of Wisconsin v. 
City of New York, et al. (“Wisc. Pet.”), was filed by the 
State of Wisconsin on April 3, 1995. The petition in No. 
94-1631, State of Oklahoma v. City of New York, et al. 
(“Okla. Pet.”), was filed by the State of Oklahoma on April 
4, 1995. The petition in No. 94-1985, United States 

e aie Ww et 
al. (“U.S. Pet.”), was filed by the United States on June 5, 
1995. Upon application, the Clerk of the Court on April 
24, 1995 extended the time of respondents to file a brief in 
opposition to all petitions to and including May 31, 1995 
and, upon further application, on June 1, 1995 extended 
that time to and including July 3, 1995. 


2. 


areas or groups of Americans were equally affected: as in 
previous censuses, the undercount was differentially severe 
among members of racial and ethnic minorities. 

Having anticipated, based on its experience with 
previous censuses, that a differential undercount would 
occur in the 1990 census and recognizing that a differential 
undercount undermines the accuracy of census data when 
used to allocate political representation or government 
funds, the Bureau of the Census (“Bureau”) designed and 
executed, as part of the 1990 census, procedures that would 
have permitted a statistical adjustment of the census to 
correct for the differential undercount. The Bureau 
prepared and reviewed adjusted census data that, in the 
Bureau’s analysis, ameliorated the differential undercount. 

In June 1991 the Bureau concluded that the adjusted 
census data were more accurate than the unadjusted counts, 


and the Director of the Bureau recommended to the 


Secretary of Commerce (“Secretary”) that the 1990 census 
be adjusted on the basis of the data the Bureau had 
prepared. In July 1991 the Secretary issued a formal 
decision rejecting the recommendation of the Bureau’s 
director that the census be adjusted, as well as the Bureau's 
expert judgment that the adjusted data had been shown to be 
more accurate. 

Plaintiffs challenged the Secretary’s decision, 
alleging that, as the Bureau had concluded, the adjusted 
data had been clearly shown to be more accurate, that the 
Secretary’s contrary determination had not been made in 
good faith, and that as a consequence residents of adversely 
affected jurisdictions were being denied the political 
representation to which they were entitled, a claim of 
constitutional dimension. After extensive discovery and a 
13-day trial, the district court found that plaintiffs had 


shown the adjusted data to be more accurate; but, having 


concluded that it was empowered to conduct only a limited 
review of the Secretary’s decision, the court entered 
judgment for defendants because the Secretary’s decision 
was not “so beyond the pale of reason as to be arbitrary or 
Capricious.” 

On appeal, plaintiffs argued that, in light of the 
constitutional claim presented, the district court should have 
reviewed the Secretary’s decision de novo. The court of 
appeals rejected that argument. But, following the 
teachings of this Court on the standard of review for 
governmental decisions determining the allocation of 
political representation and the conduct of the census, the 
court of appeals concluded that the Secretary’s decision 
should have been subject to a higher level of scrutiny than 
that applied by the district court. Upon plaintiffs’ showing 
that the adjusted census data were more accurate and that 


the Secretary’s decision against adjustment was not made in 


good faith, the court of appeals held, the burden of proof 
shifted to the Secretary to show that use of the unadjusted 
count as the census was essential to the achievement of a 
legitimate governmental objective. The court of appeals 
vacated the judgment of the district court and remanded for 
further proceedings. 

Petitioners now seek review of that interlocutory 
order. The petitions fail, however, to show the existence 
of such unusual circumstances as would warrant issuance of 
writs of certiorari before final judgment. The decision of 
the court of appeals is a straightforward application of well- 


established precedent from this Court. Nor is the court of 


appeals’ decision in conflict with the decisions of two courts _ 


of appeals that, on quite different facts, rejected cases 


seeking to compel other adjustments of the census. 


Pater " 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

a. Error in the unadjusted census. Inevitably, 
the decennial census is subject to considerable error.’ 
Appendix to Petition for Writ of Certiorari in No. 94-1614 
(“Pet. App.”), at 46; see also Transcript of Trial (“Tr.”), 
at 80-88. For the 1990 census the Bureau has estimated 
that the unadjusted census counts reflect 25 million, and 
perhaps as many as 32 million, errors involving erroneous 
inclusion or exclusion of persons: persons counted who 
should not have been or counted two or more times 
(“erroneous enumerations”) and persons not included who 
should have been (“gross omissions”). Pet. App. 259; see 


also Tr. 83-84. For any given block, the census count is 


* For a historical account of census-taking in the United 
Siates, including efforts to deal with census error, see M. 
Anderson, The American Census: A Social History (1988). 
For a summary of recent research and planning for 2000, 


see National Research Council, Modernizing the U.S. 
Census (1995). 


.% 


not, and is not meant to be, especially reliable. Tr. 1315- 


1316. 


“Net undercount” in the census is the difference 
between gross omissions and erroneous enumerations. Pet. 
App. 49, 261; Tr. 89-92. Where net undercount is 
differentially disiibuted geographically, it systematically 
compromises the accuracy of census data for allocating 
electoral representation and funding. The most serious 
systematic error affecting the decennial census is the 
differential undercounting of members of minority groups. 
Pet. App. 49-50. For the 1990 census, the undercount rate 
for blacks was 4.8%, for Hispanics 5.2%, for Asian/Pacific 
Islanders 3.1% and for American Indians 5.0%. Pet. App. 
50. On any estimate of the net national undercount, those 
rates significantly exceed the average undercount rate for 
the American population. Taking the Department’s current 


estimate, the undercount rate for blacks was three times the 


alll 


national average, undercount rates for Hispanics and 
American Islanders were even worse, and the undercount 
rate for Asian/Pacific Islanders was nearly twice that of the 
nation as a whole. Because members of minority groups 
are not evenly distributed geographically, the consequence 
of the differential undercount is that areas in which 
members of minority groups are concentrated are 
systematically deprived of political representation and 
funding they would otherwise have received. Pet. App. 46, 
50; Tr. 92, 1197-1198. 

b. Development _of the __Post-Enumeration 
Survey. The problem of differential undercount in the 1990 
census was neither new nor unexpected. By the 1950’s, the 
Bureau and academic researchers had developed reliable 
techniques of demographic analysis (monitoring national 
population change through records of births, deaths, 


immigration and emigration) and were able to confirm 


differential undercounts of blacks in the 1940 and 1950 
decennial censuses. Pet. App. 39, 49-50; Tr. 496, 506. 
By the 1960 census, additional population research advances 
allowed the Bureau to begin to evaluate the census’s 
deficiencies through “dual-system estimation ” Pet. App. 
7. To simplify, dual-system estimation involves the use of 
a second survey to assess the completeness of an original 
count: a sample is drawn from the population to have been 
counted, the percentage of the sample actually counted is 
determined and an estimate of undercount is made on the 
basis of the portion of the sample found not to have been 
reached. Pet. App. 51; Tr. 506-507. Dual-system 
estimation checks were incorporated into the 1960 and 1970 
census processes; along with demographic analysis at the 
national level, the Bureau’s dual-system estimation 
confirmed the persistence of differential undercounting. 


Pet. App. 52. In 1980 the Bureau designed and executed 


-10- 


the “Post-Enumeration Program” (“PEP”), a more 
ambitious version of the evaluative procedures that had been 
used to measure undercount in the previous two decennial 
censuses. Pet. App. 50 n.3. The PEP, like demographic 
analysis, showed another severely differential undercount in 
the 1980 census. Pet. App. 50. 

Bureau personnel were troubled by the persistence 
of the differential undercount. To them, as to outside 
researchers, it had become plain that no combination of 
“outreach” programs and energetic canvassing would 
alleviate the problem. Tr. 506, 1291-1292. By 1984 the 
Bureau had embarked on a systematic sesserche program to 
develop a more ‘sophisticated dual-system estimation 
technique that would be usable not only to evaluate the 
extent of census coverage deficiencies but to correct them 
and thereby improve the accuracy of the count. Tr. 516- 


521. The technique, based upon improvements in the 1980 


-|]- 


PEP, was named the “Post-Enumeration Survey” (“PES”). 
Tr. 1297. In congressional testimony and appearances 
before professional organizations in 1986 the Bureau’s 
senior staff reported on the successes of their developing 
design; simultaneously, test censuses allowed the Bureau to 
ascertain that individual components of the PES, and the 
PES overall, functioned as intended. Pet. App. 50-53; Tr. 
621-622, 1298-1301, 1307-1308. 

c. Commencement _of _this __litigation. 
Development of the PES as a technique for adjustment was 
retarded, however, in 1987, when the Department of 
Commerce intervened and announced in a press release that 
the 1990 census would not be statistically corrected. Pet. 
App. 52-53; Tr. 1326. The Department's press release was 

——never supplemented by any formal presentation of the 
reasons underlying it: in broad terms, without reference to 


the differential undercount, the Department stated merely 


-12- 


that the 1990 count was expected to reach 99% of the 
national population. Tr. 1327-1332. The PES would still 
be conducted, but its sampling design would not be 
specifically calibrated for use in adjustment and further 
development of adjustment techniques would be suspended. 

In November 1988 the first of the three consolidated 
lawsuits giving rise to the petitions was filed, City of New 
York, et aJ. v. United States Department of Commerce, et 
al., in the United States District Court for the Eastern 
District of New York. A broad coalition of state, county, 
city, Organizational and individual plaintiffs alleged that the 
decision to leave the 1990 census unadjusted would 
predictably result in a differential undercount of members 


of minority groups.’ Plaintiffs moved for a preliminary 


> Two other cases, initiated in 1992 in other 
jurisdictions, were later transferred to the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of New York and 


consolidated with the earlier-filed action. Pet. App. 61 
n.14. 


-13- 


injunction to ensure that, pending the outcome of the 
litigation, the PES would be conducted in a manner that 
would permit its use for adjustment. 

On July 17, 1989, the day scheduled for commencement 
of a hearing on the motion for a_ preliminary 
injunction, defendants agreed to a stipulation under which, 
inter alia, the decision against adjustment was vacated and 
the PES restored to a size (ultimately involving a sample of 
approximately 400,000 Americans) that would make it 
usable for adjustment. Defendants also agreed to reconsider 
the question of adjustment with an open mind and without 
prejudgment, to publish guidelines that would articulate the 
considerations they intended to apply in deciding whether to 
adjust, to release uncorrected census results (if at all) only 
with a cautionary indication to recipients that the numbers 
were subject to adjustment to correct for undercounting and 


to appoint a special advisory panel comprising eight 


-14- 


members, four of whom would be selected by the Secretary 
from a list of seven to be proposed by plaintiffs and four of 
whom would be selected independently by the Secretary. 
Pet. App. 96-120. 

In the spring of 1990 defendants promulgated 
guidelines in purported compliance with the 1989 
stipulation. Plaintiffs challenged the guidelines on the 
grounds that they reflected an impermissible bias in favor 
of the unadjusted count, that they reflected an intention to 
predicate the adjustment decision on factors other than 
accuracy and that they failed to set forth the technical 
considerations (as opposed to generalized statements of 
policies) that defendants would weigh in their decision. The 
district court upheld the guidelines. Pet. App. 96-120. 
Limiting itself to consideration of whether the guidelines 
satisfied the 1989 stipulation -- i.e., forgoing consideration 


of whether the guidelines satisfied constitutional 


-15- 


requirements -- the court found that, although “[d]efendants 
[had] done the bare minimum” and “the issue [was] indeed 
close, defendants [had] satisfied their obligations thus far.” 
Pet. App. 116. 

Both the 1990 census and the PFS, conducted as 
part of the census, took place as scheduled. As anticipated, 
and as discussed above, the uncorrected census was affected 
by a severely differential undercount. 

The -Bureau—determined that the differential 
undercount in the uncorrected census could be substantially 
ameliorated through adjustment. Pet. App. 59. The 
Bureau’s director, Barbara E. Bryant, formally 
recommended to Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher that the 
1990 census be adjusted. Pet. App. 59. 

d. é ision. Secretary 
Mosbacher rejected that recommendation. At the outset of 


his decision, he acknowledged the net undercount and the 


-16- 


ee ere ee eee Ye ae 


ier. 


severely differential undercount in the uncorrected census. 
Pet. App. 138-139. The Secretary acknowledged too that 
the Bureau had found that adjustment would improve 
distributive accuracy for places containing two-thirds of the 
national population. Pet. App. 141-142. He conceded that 
“the PES was a generally high-quality survey that was well- 
executed” and that “[t}here is little doubt that the PES 
detected an overall undercount in the census and a 
differential undercount at the national level by race and 
ethnic origin.” Pet. App. 169. Nonetheless, the Secretary 
decided against adjusting the census to correct for the 
differential undercount. 
Proceedings Below 

5. On Secretary Mosbacher’s announcement of 
his decision, plaintiffs challenged his refusal to accept the 
recommended adjustment. In May 1992, after extensive 


discovery, the district court presided over a 13-day trial, at 


ih 


which testimony was offered from 14 statisticians and 
demographers. Pet. App. 61. 

The evidence at trial demonstrated that the Bureau's 
own research, which formed the basis for its director's 
| recommendation in favor of adjustment, showed that the 
adjusted counts provided superior distributive (as well as 
numeric) accuracy. Plaintiffs demonstrated (and the point 
has not been contested by respondents) that adjustment 
would alleviate the differential undercount of minorities, 
improving distributive accuracy for demographic groups’ 
shares of the population. Pet. App. 94-95; Tr. 1197-1198. 

The basis for the Bureau’s conclusion, and thus the 
heart of plaintiffs’ case, included comparison of the 
adjusted and unadjusted data with demographic analysis, Tr. 
883-895; evaluation of potential sources of error in the 
PES, Tr. 250-251, 646-648, 1500-1502; confirmation that 


patterns of undercount described by the PES corresponded 


-18- 


2 bdhieteetunn's 


iets ees 


with Bureau experts’ expectations, based upon decades of 
study of the problem of differential undercount, Tr. 645, 
1543-1547; and systematic comparison of errors in the 
adjusted and unadjusted counts (“loss function analysis”), 
Tr. 596-601, 925-970.* 

The Bureau’s analyses showed that adjustment would 
dramatically increase the accuracy of the census. Tr. 935- 
970. The analyses proved that adjustment would increase 
numeric accuracy, of course, but, more important, they 
showed dramatic increases in distributive accuracy in terms 
of the apportionment of the House of Representatives, 
demographic groups as shares of the national population, 
States as proportions of the nation, components of states as 


proportions of their respective states and areas of the nation 


* For a general discussion of the application of loss 
function analysis to the decision whether to adjust the 
census, see C. Citro & M. Cohen (eds.), The Bicentennial 

: New Directi 278-292 
(1985) (Plaintiffs’ Exhibit 2). 


-19- 


in various size categories as proportions of the nation. 
Those analyses, and testimony explaining and expanding 
upon them, were introduced into evidence at trial. Id. 

At trial, plaintiffs also showed that the Secretary’s 
characterization of the Bureau’s analyses betrayed either a 
misunderstanding or misuse of the data. For example, the 
Secretary reported that the Bureau’s analysis showed that 
adjustment would “worsen” accuracy for 21 states (in terms 
of shares of the national population) and, with a 
modification of the Bureau’s analysis, would “worsen” 
accuracy for 28 or 29 states. But that report reflected two 
fundamental errors: the Secretary was ignoring both the 
magnitudes and the probabilities of the errors. Adjustment 
would most clearly improve distributive accuracy where it 
has the greatest impact, in states such as California and 
Wisconsin that have very large relative undercounts or 


overcounts. In states with small relative under- or 


ee the A ATE ee Lt ge a lc At Me 


overcounts, i.e., where the difference between the 
unadjusted and the adjusted shares is small, it is less clear, 
but also less important, whether adjustment represents an 
improvement in distributive accuracy. Many of the states 
that the Secretary said would be “worsened” by adjustment 
would in fact be virtually unaffected: adjustment would 
have changed their shares of the national population too 
little for any practical impact in terms of representation, 

funding or anything else. Ignoring the constitutionally 
primary purposes of the census and the indisputable 
improvement in census accuracy adjustment was shown to 
have for those purposes, the Secretar,’ focused on potential 

errors of no constitutional moment. Pet. App. 77. See Tr. 

993-1075. And many of the states that the Secretary said 

would be “worsened” had probabilities of improvement 
that, though less than even, were not far from it. The 


Secretary ignored the fact, clearly presented in the Bureau’s 


-21- 


analyses, that the large improvements to be achieved from 
adjustment were much more likely than the marginal 
“disimprovements.” Tr. 995, 1001-1075. The Secretary 
also ignored the fact that the places clearly improved 
contained the great majority of the nation’s population.° 
Referring specifically to the Bureau’s analyses (and 
the Secretary’s interpretation of them), the district court 
stated, “This Court is satisfied that for most purposes the 
PES resulted in a more accurate -- or to be statistically 
fashionable, less inaccurate -- count than the original 
census,” Pet. App. 59, and found that “plaintiffs have made 
a compelling attack . . ., and the Secretary has conceded 
that the objective criteria used to measure the adjusted 


counts show a greater numeric accuracy at the national level 


5 In the court of appeals, the United States conceded 
the defects just mentioned in the Secretary's attempted 
analysis of the number of states whose shares could be 
expected to be improved or worsened by adjustment. 
Federal Appellees’ Court of Appeals Brief 47 n.16. 


-22- 


and that the Census Bureau estimates of distributive 
accuracy marginally favor the adjusted counts,” Pet. App. 
77. The district court agreed with plaintiffs that 
“adjustment is statistically feasible, and would improve the 
quality of the counts for most purposes while ameliorating 
the profoundly disturbing problem of differential 
undercount,” Pet. App. 94-95, and stated that, “were this 
Court calied upon to decide this issue de novo, I would 
probably have ordered the adjustment,” Pet. App. 89. But 
the court concluded that its role was limited to determining 
whether the Secretary’s decision was arbitrary and 
capricious, Pet. App. 90-91, when measured against the 
Secretary's Guidelines, see Pet. App. 69. So limited, the 
court determined that “the Secretary’s decision not to adjust 
is [not] so far beyond the pale of reason as to be arbitrary 
or capricious,” Pet. App. 89. Although the court undertook 


no independent analysis of the constitutionality of the 


-23- 


Secretary’s decision, the court concluded, based on its 
finding that the Secretary’s decision was not arbitrary or 
capricious that the decision “does not violate the 
[Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A) 
(“APA”)], the Constitution, the [July 1989] Stipulation, or 
any statute.” Pet. App. 94. 

2. On appeal, plaintiffs argued that the district 


court had adopted the wrong standard for review of the 


Secretary’s decision. Plaintiffs contended that the 
Secretary’s decision affected constitutional rights, because 
the differential undercount had been shown to result in a 
malapportionment of the House of Representatives and to 
affect intra-state redistricting, and that the district court’s 
deferential review of his decision was therefore erroneous. 


Plaintiffs argued that the district court should have reviewed 


the Secretary’s decision de novo. 


-24- 


The court of appeals agreed with plaintiffs that the 
lower court had erred in the deference it accorded the 
Secretary but rejected plaintiffs’ argument for de novo 
review. The court of appeals reasoned that, since this case 
involves claims that the unadjusted census deprives citizens 
of equal votes by diluting the voting strength of residents of 
areas with high undercount, the Secretary’s decision was to 
be reviewed under a line of analysis that begins with Baker 
y. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962), and continues through 
Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. 725 (1983). Pet. App. 26- 
31. That line of cases, according to the court of appeals, 
(1) requires that, as near as practicable, one person’s vote 
must be worth as much as another’s; (2) holds that the right 
to vote is impaired by dilution as well as by complete 
disenfranchisement; and (3) imposes upon States the 
obligation to make a good-faith effort to achieve the goal of 


one-person, one-vote. Pet. App. 31. The court of appeals 


-25- 


concluded that the same reasoning applies, mutatis 


mutandis, to federal decisions bearing on equality of 
representation. Because of separation of powers 
considerations, the court of appeals determined, de novo 
review would be inappropriate _ Pet. App. 34. And 
because of constitutional constraints, precise equality of 
populations in congressional districts cannot be maintained 
across state lines. Nonetheless, the court of appeals 


reasoned that recent decisions of this Court, including 


United States Dep’t of Commerce v. Montana, 503 U.S. 
442, 463-464 (1992), and Franklin v. Massachusetts, 
U.S. __, 112 S.Ct. 2767, 2777 (1992), teach that a gooJ- 
faith effort to achieve equality of voting power as nearly 2s 
is practicable is required of federal officials in the discharge 
of responsibilities to conduct and report the census. Pet. 


App. 34-35. 


“ en ero 


oa ee ee ee ee 


Ain, 


ii. 


Biss 


Applying Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. at 730-731, 
the court of appeals held that the burden was initially on 


plaintiffs to show that the Secretary had failed to make a 
good-faith effort to achieve a census as accurate as 
practicable. Pet. App. 36-37. The court held that plaintiffs 
had met that burden by demonstrating that the adjusted 
counts were generally more accurate, especially with 
respect to alleviating the differential undercount of 
minorities, and by showing that the Secretary had declined 
to adopt the more accurate adjusted counts because he 
remained uncertain about distributive accuracy at some 
smaller geographic levels. Pet. App. 38-39. 

Following Karcher, 462 U.S. at 740, the court of 
appeals concluded that plaintiffs’ proof sufficed to shift the 
burden to the Secretary to show that use of the less accurate 
unadjusted census data “(a) furthers a governmental 


objective that is legitimate, and (b) is essential for the 


-27- 


achievement of that objective.” Pet. App. 37, 40. The 
court of appeals remanded the case to permit the Secretary 


to essay that demonstration. 


REASONS FOR DENYING THE PETITION 


3. The Petitions Fail to Present Unusual 
Circumstances Warranting Interlocutory 
Revie 


The petitions seek interlocutory review by this 
Court. As the United States recognizes, “The court of 
appeals in this case did not squarely hold that the 
Secretary’s decision against adjustment violated the 
Constitution.” U.S. Pet. 28. Nor did the court of appeals 
discuss appropriate relief to be awarded by the district 
court, should that court on remand find in favor of 
plaintiffs. Ordinarily, the writ of certiorari is not granted 
to review interlocutory orders. See Virginia Military 
Institute v. United States, U.S. __, 113 S.Ct. 2431 


-28- 


eee. Vets Med RR DR Tent tee a Gk OF thet 


(1993) (Scalia, J., concurring) (“We generally await final 
judgment in the lower courts before exercising our 
certiorari jurisdiction”) (collecting cases). Issuance of a 
writ of certiorari in cases presented for review of 
interlocutory orders is confined to instances in which review 
“iS necessary to prevent extraordinary inconvenience and 
embarrassment in the conduct of the cause.” American 
Construction Co. v. Jacksonville, T. & K. R. Co., 148 
U.S. 372, 384 (1893). “[E)xcept in extraordinary cases, 
the writ is not issued until final decree.” Hamilton-Brown 
Shoe Co. v. Wolf Bros. & Co., 240 U.S. 251, 258 (1916). 
See R. Stern, E. Gressman, S. Shapiro & K. Geller, 
Supreme Court Practice § 4.18, pp. 195-198 (1993). 
Wisconsin and Oklahoma do not, in their petitions, 
acknowledge that they seek review of an interlocutory 
order; accordingly, they present no extraordinary 


circumstances to justify issuance of the writs they seek. 


-29- 


The United States, by contrast, admits that “the 
interlocutory posture of the case might in other 
circumstances weigh against review by this Court,” but 
suggests that “unusual circumstances” warrant review now. 
U.S. Pet. 28. 

The United States identifies only two “unusual 
circumstances” to justify the grant of certiorari at this stage 
of the litigation. First, the United States argues that the 
failure to grant review will mean that “this case may well 
remain unresolved at or near the time of the 1996 
presidential and congressional elections, [which] could be 
avoided if this Court grants review at this time.” U.S. Pet. 
29. Obtaining two extensions of time in the process, the 
United States delayed until June 1995 to file a petition for 
review of the court of appeals’ decision, rendered in August 
1994: were the United States seriously committed to 


expedited resolution of this case, its prompt filing of a 


petition for certiorari would have permitted denial of the 
petition for interlocutory review, remand to the district 
court and review by this Court after final judgment before 
the 1996 elections. Having acted tardily, the United States 
should not now be heard to invoke an exigency of its own 
making as a basis for interlocutory review. In any event, 
this case was also unresolved at the time of the 1992 
presidential and congressional elections (at which time the 
case had been tried to the district court and a decision after 
trial was pending) and at the time of the 1994 congressional 
elections (at which time the case had been decided by the 

court of appeals and petitions for rehearing filed by the 

states of Wisconsin and Oklahoma were sub judice). The 

United States cites nothing to suggest that any uncertainties 
created by the pendency of the district court’s decision in 

1992 or the existence of the unreviewed court of appeals 


decision in 1994 created any extraordinary inconvenience or 


x} - 


embarrassment for anyone at all, let alone petitioners in 
particular.° 

The second putatively “unusual circumstance” the 
United States identifies is that “[nJo further proceedings are 
needed to clarify the issues presented or to render the case 
suitable for resolution by this Court.” U.S. Pet. 29. Far 
from being unusual, however, that is the status petitioners 
can commonly claim in cases in which a court of appeals 
vacates the judgment of a district court and remands for 
further proceedings. That was, for example, the situation 
in Virginia Military Institute, in which the court denied a 
petition for certiorari after the court of appeals had vacated 


the judgment of the district court in favor of Virginia 


© Indeed, the situation in the fall of 1994 was more 
uncertain than it is now, since it was understood then that 
the federal defendants would probably not be seeking 
review of the court of appeals’ decision. See B. Vobejda, 
“Administration Lets Census Ruling Stand; Decision Awaits 
on Use of Adjusted Numbers,” Washington Post 
(September 22, 1994), at A18. 


- Se 


Military Institute and remanded the case for determination 
of an appropriate remedy. Concurring in the denial of the 
petition for certiorari, Justice Scalia noted his view that it 
was “prudent” to defer review until “the litigation below 
has come to final judgment.” 

Similar prudence is appropriate here. The United 
States offers as the question presented by its petition that of: 
“Whether the decision of the Secretary of Commerce not to 
undertake a statistical adjustment of the 1990 census 
violated the Constitution.” U.S. Pet. i. But the United 
States also acknowledges that the court of appeals did not 
“squarely” address that question. U.S. Pet. 28. And 
although the district court summarily concluded that the 
Secretary’s decision did not violate the Constitution, inter 
alia, Pet. App. 94, the thrust of that court’s analysis was 
directed at determining whether the decision was arbitrary 


and capricious in light of the Secretary’s guidelinés and 


-33- 


under the APA, Pet. App. 61-91. Thus, if this Court grants 
the pending petitions, it will be (on the United States’ own 
view of the case) the first tribunal to consider whether the 
Secretary’s decision violated the Constitution. Because this 
Court does not “ordinarily address for the first time . . . an 
issue which the Court of Appeals has not addressed,” J. 
Truett Payne Co. v. Chrysler Motors Corp., 451 U.S. 557, 
568 (1981), respondents submit that that is not a basis for 
the prudent exercise of certiorari jurisdiction. 

Other related considerations yield the same conclusion. 
The present state of the record, despite the United States’ 
assurances, requires at least some modest additions. 
Consider, for example, the question of the Bureau’s best 
current estimate of overall undercount in the uncorrected 
1990 census. In its petition, the United States first 
acknowledges that the Secretary of Commerce estimated the 


overall undercount to be 2.1% of the national 


population. U.S. Pet. 4, citing Pet. App. 158. Then the 
United States says that the Bureau subsequently 
“represented at the trial in this case that the undercount was 
1.6% of the population." U.S. Pet. 4, citing Pet. App. 58 
n.12. The cited source is in the trial court’s opinion, but 
not from the trial: it reflects the district court’s reading of 
a newspaper story that appeared in December 1992, more 
than a half year after the trial ended and the record closed. 
Next, citing a 1993 publication by Barbara E. Bryant, then 
Director of the Bureau, the United States says the Bureau 
subsequently lowered its estimate of the undercount to 0.9% 
to 1.2%. U.S. Pet. 4.4. Finally, citing no source at all, 
the United States asserts that, “The Commerce Department 
now believes, however, that 1.6% is the correct estimate of 
the undercount.” 

The United States is not prepared to stipulate that — 


the outcome of a remand is a foregone conclusion. The 


-35- 


Second Circuit imposed upon the Secretary, on remand, a 
precisely stated burden: to show that the decision against 
adjustment “(a) furthers a governmental objective that is 
legitimate, and (b) is essential for the achievement of that 
objective.” Pet. App. 40. That burden, to be sure, is more 
onerous than what the district court required of the 
Secretary. But the United States has not claimed that the 
standard dictates the result. We do not believe it can be 
inferred from the United States’ silence in its petition that, 
on remand, the United States will deem itself bound to 
confess judgment. On the contrary, we believe that this 
Court should have the benefit of the United States’ proffer 
and its disposition by the lower courts. 

Finally, no court has yet considered what, if any, 
relief would be appropriate upon plaintiffs’ proof of their 
claims. The United States has specifically reserved at least 


the argument that, even were the case remanded to the 


oe 


district court and the district court to enter judgment in 
favor of plaintiffs, an order requiring reapportionment of 
the House of Representatives would be inappropriate. U.S. 
Pet. 27 n.24. There is no suggestion in any of the 
petitions, nor anywhere else in the record, that this case is 
one in which interlocutory review is needed to protect 
petitioners against injuries that would occur as a 
consequence of the entry of a final judgment in plaintiffs’ 
favor and that could not be completely redressed through 
full review after final judgment in keeping with this Court’s 
usual practice. 

2. The Decision of the Court of Appeals, 


Which Vacated the Judgment of the 
District Court and Remanded the Case for 


Further Proceedings, Was Correct __ 
Petitioners’ argument that no further proceedings are 
necessary before review of the court of appeals’ decision 


rests fundamentally on the claim that that decision is so 


obviously and grievously flawed that it merits immediate 


x... 


reversal. The United States purports to identify three major 
defects in the court of appeals’ decision: that the court of 
appeals erroneously preferred numeric to distributive 
accuracy and rejected the Secretary’s well-reasoned reliance 
on distributive accuracy, U.S. Pet. 22; that the court of 
appeals had no basis for its conclusions that plaintiffs had 
shown the adjusted data to be more accurate and that 
plaintiffs had shown the Secretary’s contrary determination 
did not reflect an effort to achieve the most accurate census 
practicable, U.S. Pet. 23; and that the court of appeals 
wrongly mandated heightened scrutiny of the Secretary’s 
decision merely because that decision had a racially 
disparate impact, U.S. Pet. 23-26. In fact, the court of 
appeals’ decision reflects no misunderstanding of the 
Secretary’s decision or the record of the case and no 


departure from this Court’s precedents. 


-38- 


a. There is not, and never has been, any dispute in 
this litigation (or among experts on the adjustment issue) 
that distributive accuracy is the object of adjustment. 
Virtually all of the loss function analyses conducted by the 
Bureau and presented at trial were comparisons of 
distributive accuracy. See Pet. App. 366 (Bureau used 
“loss function analysis to assess the accuracy of the 
distributions of population across states, places, and 
counties for the adjusted and unadjusted census”). That is 
apparent from the district court’s opinion, which explicitly 
accepts the primacy of distributive accuracy, Pet. App. 77, 
and, equally explicitly, finds that the Bureau’s analyses 
demonstrated the superior accuracy of the adjusted counts 
“for most purposes,” Pet. App. 59. The parties’ dispute 
over those analyses was not over whether distributive 
accuracy was the appropriate criterion for decision. Rather, 
the dispute was over whether the Secretary, by rejecting the 


-39- 


Bureau’s analyses of « stributive accuracy ir favor of his 
own interpretations of xe data, decided against the most 
distributively accurate census practicable. See Pet. App. 
21. 

The United States asserts that the court of appeals, 
erroneously preferring numeric to distributive accuracy, 
faulted the Secretary for his contrary preference, while 
“entirely fail[ing] to explain how the goal of equal 
representation for equal numbers of people in the several 
States could be better served by focusing on the total 
numeric accuracy of the census figures at the national 
level.” U.S. Pet. 22 (emphasis in original). But that 
assertion misstates the court of appeals’ analysis. The 
critical paragraph in the court of appeals’ decision, in which 
the court explained the basis for its conclusion that the 
Secretary’s judgment was not made in good faith, is as 


follows: 


In the present case, the findings of the 
district court . . . plainly show that plaintiffs 
carried their burden of proving that the 
Secretary’s refusal to adjust the census in 
accordance with the PES did not reflect an 
effort to achieve equality as nearly as 
practicable. Those findings are supported 
by, imter alia, the Secretary’s 
acknowledgement that the PES-indicated 
adjustments would likely not only make the 
census more accurate nationally, but would 
also reduce the disparate impact of the 
Census’ inaccuracies on minority groups, and 
that he gave other factors priority over 
achievement of greater accuracy. For 
example, he stated that he valued 
“distributive accuracy” over numerical 
accuracy; and in stating that an adjustment 
would not be made because it would not 
result in greater distributive accuracy, the 
Secretary revealed that he would decline to 
make the generally improving adjustment 
that would lessen the disproportionate 
undercounting of minorities if it would result 
in a distribution of Representatives that 
would be different from the present 
distribution, although just as accurate. 


Pet. App. 38 (emphasis in original). The court of appeals 
did not state that it concluded numeric accuracy was more 


important that distributive accuracy. Rather, the court gave 


-41- 


it as the Secretary’s conclusion that residual uncertainty 
about what he called “distributive accuracy” was more 
important than certainty about “lessen{ing] the 
disproportionate undercounting of minorities” -- which he 
called “numeric accuracy.” 

The Bureau had developed the PES as a census 
adjustment technique precisely because of a concern for the 
distributive consequences of differential undercounting of 
members of minority groups. Pet. App. 50-51. If 
members of minority groups were evenly distributed 
throughout the nation, the differential undercount would 
have had no consequences in terms of representation or 
funding. But they are not so distributed: they are 
concentrated in certain areas. Pet. App. 17. That is why 
the differential undercount has “deleterious effects on the 
accuracy of census counts” and “unfair results aris[e] from 


such inaccuracy,” Pet. App. 50. 


-42- 


The Secretary conceded that the “PES-adjusted 


estimates reflect more accurately the total population and 


.” Pet. App. 
146 (emphasis supplied). With that concession, the 
Secretary also conceded (albeit tacitly) that, ceteris paribus, 
adjustment would improve the distributive accuracy of the 
census. The Secretary himself chose to describe that 
consequence, misleadingly, as only “[iJmproved numeric 
accuracy,” Pet. App. 147. The court of appeals, by 
contrast, recognized the distributive (i.e., geographically 
differential) consequences of the differential undercount: 
“The impact of the differential undercount was naturally 
more severe in those areas in which racial and ethnic 
minorities were more concentrated.” Pet. App. 17. The 
court of appeals’ decision reflects a primary concern with 
the distributive consequences of the undercount; 


understandably, the decision does not present a justification 


-43- 


for a preference for numeric accuracy, because the decision 
reflects no such preference. 

b. The United States discounts as unexplained 
the district court’s several findings that the adjusted data 
had been shown to be more accurate. U.S. Pet. 23. But 
the district court’s statement that it was “satisfied that for 
most purposes the PES resulted in a more accurate” census, 
Pet. App. 59, follows a description of how the Bureau 
measured error in the PES and compared the accuracy of 
the adjusted and the unadjusted counts, id. That analysis 
formed the basis for the district court’s further statement 
that, had it been considering the issue de novo, it “would 
probably have ordered the adjustment.” Pet. App. 89. 
Those findings provide a solid basis for the court of 
appeals’ conclusion that plaintiffs had shown the adjusted 


counts to be more accurate. 


Because it confined itself to determining whether 
“the Secretary’s conclusions under each guideline” were 
arbitrary and capricious, the district court did not set aside 
the Secretary’s decision. Pet. App. 89. Deferring to the 
Secretary’s authority both to set the criteria for decision by 
creating the guidelines and to decide the adjustment issue by 
applying his guidelines, the district court concluded that 
“under Guideline One, the presumption of accuracy runs in 
favor of the original census count,” Pet. App. 84, and thus 
that the Secretary’s decision would stand unless plaintiffs 
demonstrated the superior accuracy of the adjusted counts 
both (1) at every level mentioned in Guideline One, and (2) 
for every reasonable definition of accuracy, Pet. App. 78. 
Invoking that high standard, the district court deferred to 
the Secretary’s interpretation of the loss function analysis 
for states and his stated concern about the absence of 


“direct evidence” for improvement of distributive accuracy 


-45- 


for places of under 100,000 persons.’ Pet. App. 78. In the 
district court’s view, all of the evidence that had satisfied 


that court that the adjusted counts were more accurate, Pet. 


’ The Secretary’s ostensible concern about the absence 
of “direct evidence” for places of under 100,000 population 
disregarded the Bureau’s conclusions that “adjusted counts 
are generally more accurate” for small areas and the 
specific results of Bureau analyses showing improved 
distributive accuracy for “metropolitan places of less than 
25,000, 25,000-49,000 and 50,000 or more, and for 
nonmetropolitan places less than 25,000 and 25,000-49,000 
in total,” Pet. App. 192. 

Another ostensible concern mentioned by the 
Secretary -- that adjustment would worsen distributive 
accuracy for 11 of 23 cities with populations over 500,000, 
Pet. App. 141 -- was not discussed at trial because 
defendants there never relied upon it. In stating that 
concern the Secretary’s decision repeats both of the 
mistakes identified with respect to the Secretary’s report 
that adjustment would “worsen” distributive accuracy for 
more than twenty states -- disregard of both magnitude and 
probability of error. See above, pp. 20-22. Moreover, the 
loss function analysis for large cities considers only the 
cities’ relative shares of the population living in such cities 
-- not the cities’ shares of the national population or of their 
respective states. Large cities do not compete directly (let 
alone exclusively) with one another for representation or 
funding. The comparison, even if properly executed, thus 
involves a factor of no constitutional (or other legal) 
significance. 


App. 59, was insufficient to overcome the powerful 
presumption created by Guideline One. 

The court of appeals disapproved the district court’s 
extreme deference. Following this Court’s teaching in 
Montana, 503 U.S. at 460-464, and on the analysis therein 
of the line of authority that runs from Wesberry v. Sanders, 
376 U.S. 1 (1964), through Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. 
725 (1983), the court of appeals observed that the 
requirement of a “good-faith effort” to achieve equality, 
where allocation of political representation is at issue, is 
imposed on federal, as well as state, actors. The court of 
appeals recognized that constitutional constraints on the 
apportionment of the House of Representatives mean that 
“the goal of precise equality in voting power is ‘illusory for 
the Nation as a whole,’” Pet. App. 35 (quoting Montana, 


503 U.S. at 463), but concluded that “[tJhe impossibility of 


-47- 


achieving precise mathematical equality is 20 excuse for not 
making this mandated good-faith effort.” Pet. App. 35. 
Applying the analytic framework of Karcher, 462 
U.S. at 730-731, the court of appeals accepted the district 
court’s finding that the adjusted counts had been shown to 
be more accurate, Pet. App. 21-22, and proceeded to the 
question of whether plaintiffs had carried their burden of 
showing the decision to use less accurate data “was not the 
product of a good-faith effort to achieve equality,” Pet. 
App. 37. In considerable detail, the court of appeals 
spelled out the bases for its determination that plaintiffs had 
carried that burden. Pet. App. 38-39. 
Despite the United States’ argument, U’S. Pet. 16- 
17, nothing in Franklin v. Massachusetts is to the contrary. 
Franklin holds that the standard for reviewing a decision by 
the Secretary concerning conduct of the census is 
“consisten[cy] with the constitutional language and the 


. 3 an Alte abe. 
Oe OF ee mt AGN Rtg te AA em OS a 


constitutional goal of equal representation.” Franklin, 112 
S.Ct. at 2777 (emphasis supplied). The court of appeals 
explicitly applied the Franklin standard in determining that 
the Secretary was “required to make a good-faith effort to 
achieve the Constitution’s plain objective of equal 
representation for equal numbers of people.” Pet. App. 35. 
G. The court of appeals did not proceed in 
contravention of Washington v. Davis , 426 U.S. 229 
(1976). Citing Washington, the court explained that 
“[a]lthough for most types of equal protection claims, a 
plaintiff must show that the government’s discrimination 
was intentional, the Supreme Court has not imposed such a 
requirement in any of the cases involving apportionment.” 
Pet. App. 35-36 (citations omitted). In such cases, a 
plaintiff is required to show only “that the governmental 
entity failed to make a good-faith effort to achieve equal 


districts as nearly as practicable.” Pet. App. 36. The court 


of appeals also explained that the right sought to be 
vindicated in apportionment cases is one of equal 
protection.* Pet. App. 31. 

The racial and ethnic character of the differential 
undercount is relevant because it establishes that the 
uncorrected census compromises the equality of allocations 
of political representation based thereon. The court of 
appeals stated that, “[iJn general, if a law alleged to 
infringe a certain right directly would require a heightened 
degree of scrutiny, heightened scrutiny should also be given 
when the law is alleged to infringe that right 
discriminatorily.” Pet. App. 33. The heightened scrutiny 
is occasioned by the nature of the right infringed, not by the 
fact of direct or discriminatory infringement. Thus, the 


court of appeals did not conclude that heightened scrutiny 


8 “Equal protection analysis in the Fifth Amendment 
area is the same as that under the Fourteenth Amendment. 


Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 93 (1976). 
-50- 


was warranted simply because the differential character of 
the undercount peculiarly affects minorities. And surely a 
decision that impairs equal representation is subject to no 
lower scrutiny simply because a disproportionate number of 
those whose voting strength is diluted are members of 
minority groups. 

By recasting the issue as one involving the necessity 
of proving intent, the United States avoids any discussion of 


the court of appeals’ actual analysis.? Notably, though 


” The United States, admitting that “it is undisputed that 
racial minorities were disproportionately undercounted in 
the 1990 census,” then argues that it has not been shown 
“that a failure to adjust the census totals would in turn have 
a disparate racial impact with respect to the proper 
allocation of Representatives among the States, the only 
constitutionally prescribed use of census data.” U.S. Pet. 
26. In terms of the apportionment of the House, the 
adjustment considered by the Secretary in 1991 would have 
shifted two seats, one from Wisconsin to California, one 
from Pennsylvania to Arizona. In each instance, a seat 
would have shifted from a state with a disproportionately 
white population and lower-than-average undercount to a 
state with a disproportionately non-white population and 
greater-than-average undercount. Thus, on average, 
adjustment would have increased the representational 


-51- 


proclaiming that the decision against adjustment was made 
without discriminatory animus, the Untied States fails to 
assert that it was made in a good faith effort to enhance 
census accuracy. Similarly, the United States fails to 
explain what legitimate governmental objective reliance 
upon the unadjusted count is essential to achieve. On 
remand, the United States will have the opportunity to 
complete the record in this case by proffering such an 


explanation. 


3. There Is No Conflict among the Courts of 
Appeals to Warrant Review by This Court 


Dissenting in the court of appeals below, the late 
Judge Timbers stated that “[t]he only two other circuits that 


have ruled on this issue have agreed with Judge 


strength of areas with higher concentrations of minorities. 
Obviously, the shifted seats might have been filled by white 
Representatives. But the Constitution guarantees only that 
electoral power will be allocated to constituencies on a 
racially-neutral basis, not that the racial composition of any 
legislature will reflect national demographic proportions. 


-52- 


a on 


me a ten ed tet 


McLaughlin,” citing City of Detroit v. Franklin, 4 F.3d 
1367 (6th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, U.S. ___, 114 S.Ct. 
1217 (1994); Tucker v. United States Dep’t of Commerce, 
958 F.2d 1411 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, U.S. ___, 113 
S.Ct. 407 (1992). Judge Timbers thus described the Second 
Circuit’s decision as “creat[ing] a conflict among the 
circuits.” Pet. App. 40. 

It is true that neither the Sixth nor the Seventh 
Circuit ordered that the census be statistically adjusted or 
held that the Secretary’s decision violated the Constitution. 
But neither did the Second Circuit order an adjustment or 
conclude that a constitutional violation had occurred. In 
fact, examination of the relevant decisions reveals that, 
notwithstanding the dissent in the Second Circuit, the three 
cases addressed different issues under different analyses; 
there is no conflict among them, certainly none that 


warrants review now by this Court. 


-53- 


Tucker was the first of the three cases to be 
decided." While the census, including the PES, was still 
being conducted, and thus before Secretary Mosbacher had 
announced his decision concerning adjustment, the Tucker 
plaintiffs sought an order that the census be adjusted by 
unspecified means to correct for undercounting in Illinois."' 
Tucker v. United States Dep’t of Commerce, 135 F.R.D. 
175, 176 (N.D. Ill. 1991). The district court, concerned 


10 It was not, of course, the first to be filed. The 
present case was filed first, in 1988. Tucker was filed in 
1990, and City of Detroit in 1991. The earlier decision in 
Tucker is attributable to the decision of the plaintiffs in that 
case to seek adjustment of the census without waiting for 
Secretary Mosbacher’s decision. 


'! The Tucker plaintiffs did not, and could not, 
challenge the apportionment of the House of 
Representatives, because no plausible correction for 
undercount in the 1990 census would have added a seat to 
(or, for that matter, subtracted a seat from) Illinois’ 
delegation. To the extent that the Tucker plaintiffs 
complained that they had been denied federal 
representation, see Tucker, 135 F.R.D. at 176, their 
complaint was that they were underrepresented vis-a-vis 
residents of other parts of Illinois. 


-54- 


ali iad 


0} ©, < 


that the outcome of that case might differ from that in other 
litigation, found the action non-justiciable. Id., 135 F.R.D. 
at 181-182.. 

The Seventh Circuit affirmed, on other grounds. 
That court of appeals rejected the district court’s conclusion 
that the case was non-justiciable as presenting a political 
question, Tucker v. United States Dep’t of Commerce, 958 
F.2d at 1415, but affirmed the result, holding that plaintiffs’ 
suit was barred by the intended-plaintiff doctrine, id., 958 
F.2d at 1416. In the view of the Seventh Circuit, the 
Tucker plaintiffs could not show that, even assuming a 
violation of a constitutional or statutory right, they were 
“within the class of persons who have been given a right to 
litigate the violation.” Id. (emphasis in original). In 
arriving at that result, the Seventh Circuit determined only 
that “Article I, section 2, clause 3 [(“Apportionment 


Clause”)] does not authorize lawsuits founded on 


-55- 


disagreement with the Census Bureau’s - statistical 
methodology.” Id., 958 F.2d at 1418. The Seventh Circuit 
did not have before it, and so did not consider, a challenge 
to the Secretary’s decision under the Fifth Amendment.” 
In discussing its application of the intended-plaintiff 
doctrine, the Seventh Circuit suggested that the same 
doctrine would bar Massachusetts’ suit, which later reached 
this Court in Franklin v. Massachusetts. Obviously, this 
Court did not follow the Seventh Circuit’s approach, and 
Wisconsin admits that “this Court’s decision in Franklin v. 
Massachusetts —_ doubt on Tucker’s specific holding,” 
Wisc. Pet. 16, while the United States does not even 


'? Indeed, the court of appeals’ decision in Tucker 
mentions the Secretary’s decision only once, in a passing 
reference during a preliminary statement of the background 
of the case. And while it is arguable that the Seventh 
Circuit also considered the viability of a challenge under the 
APA, see id., 958 F.2d at 1416, in context it is clear that 
the court had in mind a general challenge to the technique 
of census-taking adopted by the Bureau, not a specific 
challenge to the Secretary’s actual decision. 


-56- 


hit 


describe the holding in Tucker and that in this case as being 
in conflict, U.S. Pet. 26-27. Moreover, in light of Franklin 
v. Massachusetts, no petitioner here suggests that this Court 
adopt the Seventh Circuit’s application of the intended- 
plaintiff doctrine. In any event, the specific proposition for 
which all three petitions cite the court of appeals’ decision 
in Tucker ~ that the Apportionment Clause does not per se 
authorize a suit founded on nothing more than a 
disagreement with the Bureau’s census methodology” -- 
conflicts with nothing in the Second Circuit’s decision. 
Like Tucker, City of Detroit was a local case, 
brought by the City of Detroit and its mayor to compel an 


adjustment or revision of the census for Michigan alone. '* 


' Wisc. Pet. 17, Okla. Pet. 13, U.S. Pet. 27. 
‘* As with the Tucker plaintiffs, the Cj 


-§7- 


City of Detroit v. Franklin, 800 F. Supp. 539, 540 (E.D. 
Mich. 1992). Affirming the trial court’s grant of summary 
judgment, id., 800 F. Supp. at 542-547, the Sixth Circuit 
held that: (1) with respect to plaintiffs’ claims concerning 
intra-state redistricting, they lacked standing, because the 
State was at liberty to use other than federal census data for 
redistricting and there was thus no causal nexus between the 
challenged (census-taking) conduct and the asserted 
(representational) injury, City of Detroit, 4 F.3d at 1372- 
1374; and (2) with respect to plaintiffs’ claims concerning 
federal funding, the Apportionment Clause per se did not 
create “a right to census accuracy,” and an adjustment of 
Michigan alone, leaving other states untouched, would not 
increase the overall accuracy of the census, id., 4 F.3d at 
1375-1378. While the court of appeals in City of Detroit 
did refer to the Secretary’s decision, it did so only to 


argued that Michigan alone should receive adjusted census 
figures. City of Detroit, 4 F.3d at 1377. 


-58- 


buttress the point that a special adjustment for Michigan 
would be “impractical,” id. at 1378. 

Once again, no petitioner suggests that this Court 
adopt the Sixth Circuit’s standing analysis." Oklahoma and 
the United States cite the Sixth Circuit’s quotation, City of 
Detroit, 4 F.3d at 1378, of language from Tucker, 958 F.2d 
at 1418, that a “claim to a census adjustment invokes no 
judicially administrable standards.” That language, 
however, is part of the Seventh Circuit’s analysis of the 
intended-plaintiff doctrine, as applied to the case before that 
court, and is inapplicable to the present case. Notably, the 
United States never argues that either the Sixth or the 


'S Wisconsin, despite having observed that the 
continuing vitality of the Seventh Circuit’s decision in 
Tucker is questionable and that the Sixth Circuit’s decision 
in City of Detroit “follow[s] Tucker’s reasoning,” Wisc. 
Pet. 17, suggests that the Second Circuit should have 
considered plaintiffs’ ability to use the adjusted data for 
intra-state redistricting but does not suggest that that 
consideration (whatever its result) would have affected 
plaintiffs’ standing. Wisc. Pet. 17-18. 


-§9- 


Seventh Circuit was correct in concluding that a claim to a 
census adjustment can never be said to invoke judicially 
administrable standards -- certainly the United States makes 
no such argument about the claim presented here. Given 
the nature of the claim before the Sixth Circuit, there is 
nothing in City of Detroit, any more than in Tucker, that 
conflicts with the Second Circuit’s decision. 

Neither Tucker nor City of Detroit involved a claim 
affecting the national apportionment of the House of 
Representatives, neither considered a challenge under the 
Fifth Amendment to the Secretary’s decision, and certainly 
neither addressed the standard of review appropriate upon 
such a challenge. Although all three courts of appeals dealt 
generally with matters of census adjustment, they were 
presented with very different questions: the different 
substantive results reflect those differences, not a conflict 


among the circuits. 


CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the petitions for writs of 
certiorari in Nos. 94-1614, 94-1631 and 94-1985 should be 


denied. 


Respectfully submitted. 


Paul A. Crotty 

Corporation Counsel of the City of New York 
100 Church Street 

New York, New York 10007 

(212) 788-0800 


Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 
Counsel of Record 


Robert S. Rifkind 

Cravath, Swaine & Moore 

Worldwide Plaza 

825 Eighth Avenue 

New York, New York 10019 

(212) 474-1000 

Attorney for Respondents the City of New York, 
the City of Los Angeles, the City of San 
Francisco, the City of San Jose, the City of Tucson, 
the City of Long Beach, the City of Pasadena, 

the City of Inglewood, the County of Los Angeles, 
the County of Broward and the Navajo Nation 


61- 


Peter L. Zimroth 

Arnold & Porter 

399 Park Avenue 

New York, New York 10022 

(212) 715-1000 

Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 


Louis M. Solomon 

Solomon, Zauderer, Ellenhorn, Frischer & Sharp 
45 Rockefeller Plaza 

New York, New York 10111 

(212) 956-3700 

Attorney for Respondent the City of New York 


Dennis C. Vacco 

Attorney General of the State of New York 
Barbara Mehlman 

Assistant Attorney General 

New York State Department of Law 

120 Broadway 

New York, New York 10271 

(212) 416-8249 

Attorney for Respondent the State of New York 


Dan Morales 

Attorney General of the State of Texas 
Javier P. Guajardo 

Special Assistant Attorney General 

P.O. Box 12548 - 
Capitol Station 

Austin, Texas 78711 

(512) 475-4405 


Attorney for Respondent the State of Texas 


62- 


James K. Hahn 

City Attorney of the City of Los Angeles 
Jessica F. Heinz 

Assistant City Attorney 

200 North Main Street 

Los Angeles, California 90012 

(213) 485-4288 


_ Attorney for Respondent the City of Los Angeles 


DeWitt W. Clinton 

County Counsel of the County of Los Angeles 
Ada Treiger 

Deputy County Counsel 

500 West Temple 

Hall of Administration 

Los Angeles, California 90012 

(213) 974-1861 

Attorney for Respondent County of Los Angeles 


July 3, 1995 


-63- 


