~ . PILED 
CC) 8B SBEsEP 7 199% 
F ; NOPE OF THE Cheng 
IN THE 


Supreme Court Of Che United States 


OCTOBER TERM 1995 


JASON RICHARDS and FANNIE HILL, 
Petitioners, 


V. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 
and BIRMINGHAM-JEFFERSON CIVIC 
CENTER AUTHORITY, 
Respondents. 


PETITION FOR WRIT FOR CERTIORARI TO THE 
SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 


BRIEF OF PETITIONER 


WILLIAM J. BAXLEY 

JOEL FE. DILLARD 

Baxley, Dillard, Dauphin & McKnight 
2000 Sixteenth Avenue South 
Birmingham, Alabama 35205 

(205) 939-0995 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
Jason Richards and Fannie Hill 


i 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 


Can Alabama, by interpretation of its state case law 
pertaining to res judicata, deny plaintiffs’ never-before- 
presented, and never-before-heard, federal constitutional 
claims without denying them due process of law and 
equal protection of the laws? 


We contend that it cannot, and that the Alabama Su- 
preme Court's reversal of a trial court’s order denying 
summary judgment below — unless reversed by this Hon- 
orable Court, after a grant of the writ — will effectively 
deny these plaintiffs any opportunity to ever be heard 
upon meritorious federal constitutional claims. 


Does the convoluted exemption scheme described in 
Alabama Justice Maddox’ dissenting opinion — attacked 
by plaintiffs for the first time ever in the case at bar — 
warrant reversal of the Alabama Supreme Court's deci- 
sion in the case at bar, after a grant of the writ, on fed- 
eral equal protection and due process grounds? 


We contend that it does. 


CERTIFICATE OF INTERESTED PERSONS 


Respondents’ Counsel 


Petitioners’ Counsel 


Respondents 


Trial Judge 


Petitioners 


Supreme Court of Alabama 


Edwin A. Strickland 
Charles S. Wagner 
Jeffrey M. Sewell 
William Slaughter 
Charlie D. Waldrep 
Thomas L. Stewart 


William J. Baxley 
Joel E. Dillard 


Jefferson County, Alabama 
Birmingham-]efferson Civic 
Center Authority 


Hon. John Rochester 


Jason Richards 
Fannie Hill 

and a class of similarly 
situated persons 


Hon. Sonny Hornsby 
Hon. Hugh Maddox 
Hon. Reneau Almon 
Hon. Janie L. Shores 
Hon. J. Gormon Houston 
Hon. Mark Kennedy 
Hon. Kenneth F. Ingram 
Hon. Ralph Cook 

Hon. Terry Butts 


No other persons are known to have participated di- 
rectly or indirectly in the appeal of this matter. 


in 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED ......00csssccssosscssrssesvessssesessesossesees i 
CERTIFICATE OF INTERESTED PERSONS .................. ii 
TITLE TT CE TT 
ET Be I Et iscccnecescnsctndensscecctasccscsssssccesosess iv 
STATEMENT OF THE GROUNDS OF 
ITT tna tirntttatetantnceasagnednatebnsagescscabegecescconsesntenns I 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ...........:cccscccccesserseeeees tecendiie | 
Sinn electra inaeinsepeeatatescanennennbedecgincatnensuccezetenenees % 
SI cnteinetienenrtttrnadiinenndpedensscnsscsessaseessanectesenncebecstes 7 


APPENDIX FILED WITH PETITION .. Separately bound 


iv 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases: 
Allegheny Pittsburgh Coal Company, Inc. 

v. County Commission of Webster County, 

West Virginia, 488 U.S. 336 (19B9) oc cccccceeecees 10, 12 
Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 

Sy a, es eieimemreee 6, 7, 8,9 
Chase National Bank v. Norwatk, 

ne, Ce CI nee creatinine hii pemtetareemsmaintions 9 
Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 

gt EE ed En at 10, 12 
F. S. Guano v. Virginia, 253 U.S. 412 (1920)... 10 
Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 

gL 8 SE Se ee 8. 10,12 
Martin v. Wilks, 490 U.S. 755 (1V9BQ) oo. ccccccccccccccccecees 9, 10 
Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. v. Ward, 

es ee Arcecetnccstinatinbiinditionentntshatietiientio 11, 12 
Nordlinger v. Hahn, 

Le A ae oe a N 10 
Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S, 202 (1982) .....ccccccrccceereeeserenseeeeennees 10 
Whhy, Inc. v. Borough of Glassboro, 

Gf IE. i ae 11,12 
Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 62 (19B2) .......0... eee ve 11 
Other Authority: 


United States Constitution, Amendment XIV, § | 


l 
STATEMENT OF GROUNDS OF JURISDICTION 


The jurisdiction of this Honorable Court is invoked 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1254 because this Petition is from 
a decision of the Supreme Court of Alabama in a civil 
case. 


(i) Date of the decision: March 31, 1995 

(ii) Application for Rehearing Overruled: June 9, 1995 

(iii) No cross petition has been filed 

(iv) Jurisdiction is based on 28 U.S.C. §1254(1) and 
Rule 10.1(c) of the Rules of the Supreme Court. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


(1) Nature of Case, Course of Proceedings and Disposi- 
tion 

On May 20, 1988 the Alabama Supreme Court decided 
Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 270 (Ala. 1988), 
rejecting three separate challenges to the county occupa- 
tional tax here in issue on state law grounds. The same 
three state law issues had been decided adversely to the 
challengers in a state trial court, prompting that appeal. 
(R. 265-269). Bedingfield, supra, was not a class action, and 
did not decide any federal question in the trial or appel- 
late court, 

On April 21, 1992 Jason Richards and Fannie Hill filed 
a class action complaint in state court, attacking the ex- 
emption scheme built into the same county occupational 
tax, and claiming that the exemption scheme denied 
them due process of law and equal protection of the laws 
under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States, and under parallel provisions of the 
Constitution of Alabama. 

A motion for summary judgment, based upon a de- 
fense of res judicata, claimed to result from the 
Bedingfield decision, was filed in the trial court on June 4, 
1992. 


2 


On April 8, 1993 Jefferson County was granted sum- 
mary judgment upon all. state law claims, but summary 
judgment was denied as to petitioners’ federal constitu- 
tional claims. (R 392-394) Jefferson County and an inter- 
venor tax recipient, Birmingham-Jeflerson Civic Center 
Authority, appealed the trial court's denial of summary 
judgment upon federal constitutional claims to the Ala- 
bama Supreme Court. (R. 425-428). 


The Alabama Supreme Court reversed the trial court 
on March 31, 1995 and overruled an application for re- 
hearing June 9, 1995. 

(11) Statement of Facts with References to Record 

In Bedingfield, which appears in the appendix as well as 
the record on appeal, the Alabama Supreme Court de- 
cided that Jefferson County Ordinance 1120 — the occu- 
pational tax here in issue — was not illegal because (1) a 
statute authorized the county to levy the occupational tax 
(2) the statute was general, rather than local legislation, 
and (3) the statute authorizing levy of the tax provided 
also for its collection. (R 231-235). Neither the trial 
court's decision in that case nor the decision of the Su- 
preme Court of Alabama in that case contained any ref- 
erence to whether the Act and the county ordinance vio- 
lated any provision of the Federal Constitution. (R. 231- 
235, 265-269). Neither addressed nor decided the validity 
of the exemption scheme built into the tax. (R. 232-235, 
265-289). 

The county taxing ordinance appears in the appendix 
and the record (R. 30-31). 

Jason Richards, a law firm courier and Fannie Hill, a 
domestic servant employed in commercial buildings, rep- 
resent a sub-class of claimants who subsequently attacked 
the county taxing ordinance on behalf of themselves and 
all other non-federal employees who pay the tax. (R. 1- 
18) (Federal employees subject to the tax comprise yet 


8 


another separate sub-class which is not involved in this 
appeal). Richards’ and Hill's complaint appears in the 

and the record on appeal. (R. 1-18). They spe- 
cifically claim “this action involves a violation of fed- 
eral law for which 42 U.S.C. § 1983 provides a remedy” 
(R. 2), and allege that “[t}he occupational tax by its 
terms, and in actual practice, exempts from its levy, col- 
lection and payment businesses and vocations or occupa- 
tions listed at Chapter 12, Article 2, Title 40, Code of Ala. 
1975, as amended, which range from attorneys, certified 
public accountants, dentists and physicians to blueprint 
makers, casket manufacturers, pig iron storage operators, 
lightning rod installers and snuff retailers, and it includes 
a specific exemption for domestic servants in private 
homes.” (R. 8) A complete list of exempted persons ap- 
pears in the text of our argument, and in the dissent to 
the decision of the Alabama Supreme Court to which this 
petition is directed. Richards and Hill go on to complain 
that “[b]y its terms and in actual practice, it taxes all 
federal employees, including all United States District 
Judges in the Northern District of Alabama, all Circuit, 
District and Probate Judges in Jefferson County, and an 
array of other occupations, including couriers, secretar- 
ies, skilled and unskilled laborers, police officers, busi- 
ness executives, teachers and domestic servants not em- 
ployed in private homes.” (R. 8) Richards and Hill com- 
plain that “the net effect, dollarwise, of the occupational 
tax is an absurdity which allows, by way of example, physi- 
cians and attorneys earning hundreds of thousands of 
dollars a year to pay a license fee of $150.00 or less and 
avoid the occupational tax — which would otherwise be 
levied at more than ten times the amount of the license 
fee paid by these high income professionals” (R. 9) and 
conclude that “[t)he array of persons subject to the tax, 
on its face and in actual practice, is arbitrary and capri- 
cious, and discriminatory in a manner which defies logic 


4 


and... [t}he array of persons subject to the occupational 
tax, and the concomitant disparity in taxes paid by and 
between occupations in Jefferson County, Alabama which 
fall within and without the burden of the occupational 
tax render it irrational, unduly burdensome, and viola- 
tive of the equal protection clause and the due process 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution 
of the United States.” (R. 9) Finally, they claim “the occu- 
pational tax is so arbitrary and irrational, as described 
herein, as to violate the due process clause of the Four- 
teenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States, both on its face and in its application to both 
classes of taxpayers bringing this action.” (R. 14.) 

As the dissenting opinion of the Alabama Supreme 
Court in the case at bar makes clear, no claim remotely 
similar to these was presented to, heard by, or decided by 
either the trial court or the Alabama Supreme Court in 
Bedingfield, supra. (R. 231-235, 265-269). 


ARGUMENT 
(1) Scope of Review 
Richards and Hill, who are not members of a suspect 
or quasi-suspect class, must establish that the exemption 
scheme attacked here as violative of the Fourteenth 
Amendment fails this Honorable Court's “minimum ra- 
tionality” test for tax exemptions. Hooper v. Bernalillo 
County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612 (1985). 


(Il) Amplification of Reasons for Allowance of Writ 
A. Petitioners’ Federal Claims should Not Have Been 
Precluded 

In Martin v. Wilks, 490 U.S. 755 (1989) this Honorable 
Court held that parties who are neither designated as 
parties nor served with process in prior litigations which 
proceed to judgments are not precluded from pursuing 


5 


subsequent, independent claims of unlawful discrimina- 
tion under the United States Constitution. In Martin, 
supra, Justice Rehnquist, writing for a majority of this 
Honorable Court, stated the exact principle of law which 
applies to the claims of Richards and Hill: “Joinder as a 
party, rather than knowledge of a lawsuit and an oppor- 
tunity to intervene, is the method by which potential par- 
ties are subject to the jurisdiction of the court and bound 
by a judgment or decree.” 490 U.S., at 765, 


In reaching this conclusion, Justice Brandeis’ wisdom 
from Chase National Bank v. Norwalk, 291 U. S. 451 
(1934), was invoked: 


“The law does not impose upon any person ab- 
solutely entitled to a hearing the burden of vol- 
untary intervention in a suit to which he is a 
stranger... Unless duly summoned to appear in 
a legal proceeding, a person not a privy may rest 
assured that a judgment recovered therein will 
not affect his legal rights.” /d., at 441, 


This appears elementary, particularly in a state like Ala- 
bama, which has adopted rules of civil procedure which 
are virtually a mirror image of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure. Yet, this fundamental right of any litigant was 
trammelled by the logic of the Alabama Supreme Court 
in the case at bar, 

Bedingfield, supra, was not a class action, The Bedingfield 
plaintiffs did not purport to represent anyone but them- 
selves, and they neither presented nor had decided any 
federal constitutional claims. Indeed, the Bedingfield ac- 
tion was not only a state law test of the legality of the 
occupational taxing ordinance and its enabling legisla- 
tion, but was also filed and decided before collection of 
the tax began. If Richards and Hill had tried to intervene 
in Bedingfield to protest its exemption scheme, they would 
have lacked standing. It would have been impossible for 


6 


them to complain about exemptions when no one - 
themselves included — was paying the fax. 

Simply stated, a majority of the Alabama Supreme 
Court chose to ignore the legal rights of Richards and 
Hill to have their day in court upon the irrationality of 
the occupational tax’s exemption scheme, preferring to 
analyze their effort so to do as if they were privies of the 
Bedingfield plaintiffs, and as if the Bedingfield plaintiffs had 
presented federal constitutional claims which had been 
decided adversely by the Alabama trial and appellate 
courts. The record on appeal refutes that analysis. It in- 
vites application of Martin, supra, and its admonitions to 
parties like Jefferson County to invoke joinder of parties 
and claims like this one in the first action if they wish to 
preclude subsequent parties with wholly separate claims 
from being heard. 


B. The Irrational Exemption Scheme In Issue Here Is 
Unconstitutional 


The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment commands that no State shall deny to any 
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the 
laws. Nordlinger v. Hahn, 505 U.S. 1 (1992). And while 
the Equal Protection Clause does not forbid reasonable 
classifications, it does keep governmental decisionmakers 
from treating differently persons who are in all relevant 
respects alike. F. S. Guano Co. v. Virginia, 253 U. S. 412, 
415 (1920), Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202 (1982). And even 
where — as here — persons discriminated against do not 
fall in a suspect or quasi-suspect classification, the Equal 
Protection Clause forbids irrational means to serve legiti- 
mate ends. Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U. 
S. 432, 442 (1985). 

This Honorable Court summarized application of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the case at bar in the F. S. 
Guano case, supra: 


7 


But the classification must be reasonable, not 
arbitrary, and must rest upon some ground of 
difference having a fair and substantial relation 
to the object of the legislation, so that all per- 
sons similarly circumstanced shall be treated 
alike.” 

253 U.S., at 412 


This Court's rationality test specifically applies to tax 
exemption schemes. Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 
472 U.S. 612 (1985). 


By this petition, we invite this Honorable Court to re- 
visit its decisions forbidding discriminations arbitrarily 
and irrationally imposed upon Vietnam war veterans who 
are newcomers to a state, rather than their more tenured 
brethren, Hooper, supra, upon recent real property pur- 
chasers rather than those who have managed to hold 
onto real property longer, Allegheny Pittsburgh Coal Com- 
pany, Inc. v. County Commission of Webster County, West Vir- 
ginia, 488 U. S. 336 (1989), upon disabled group home 
residents, rather than their better advantaged neighbors, 
Cleburne, supra, wpon foreign corporations rather than 
their domestic counterparts, Metropolitan Life Insurance 
Co. v. Ward, 470 U. S. 869 (1984), WHHY, Inc. v. Borough 
of Glassboro, 393 U. S. 117 (1968), and upon recently ar- 
riving Alaskans seeking state oil reserve dividend distribu- 
tions rather than their neighbors of longstanding vin- 
tage, Zobel v. Williams, 457 U. S. 55 (1982), and to then 
decide that the convoluted, cockamamie exemption 
scheme which is Jefferson County’s cannot stand. It is an 
exemption scheme which completely exempts a bizarre 
collection of persons who happen to be employed by or 
as: 


utility companies; freight lines and equipment 
companies; electric companies; gas companies; 
railroads; telephone companies; telegraph com- 


8 


panies; express companies; financial institu- 
tions; insurance companies; abstract companies; 
acetylene gas and carbide manufacturers; add- 
ing machine, calculating machine and comptro- 
meter businesses; advertising companies; air 
conditioning plant and equipment businesses; 
amusement parks; architects; attorneys; auction- 
eers; automobile dealers; automobile accessory 
dealers; automobile garages and shops; automo- 
bile storage garages; tire retreading shops; bar- 
bers; baseball parks; battery shops; beauty par- 
lors; bicycle and motorcycle dealers; blueprint 
makers; bond makers; bottlers; bowling alleys; 
iron, railway supply, furnace supply and mining 
supply brokers and agents; broom, brush and 
mop manufacturers; cereal and soft drink retail- 
ers and wholesalers; certified public accoun- 
tants; Cigar, cigarette and cheroot retailers and 
wholesalers; circus operators; cleaning and 
pressing establishments; coal and coke dealers; 
coffin and casket manufacturers, dealers and 
agents; collection agencies; commission mer- 
chants or merchandise brokers; concert and 
musical entertainers; persons engaged in dis- 
counting notes, mortgages and conditional sales 
contracts; construction companies or contrac- 
tors; cotton buyers; cotton compress operators; 
millers; persons operating cotton warehouses; 
credit agency personnel; persons operating 
creosoting businesses; delicatessen shops; den- 
tists; detectives; film developers and printers; di- 
rectory printers; refrigerator dealers; embalm- 
ers; engineers; owners and operators of fertil- 
izer factories; damaged and close out goods 
salesmen; fireworks dealers; fortunetellers; 
palmists, clairvoyants, astrologers, phrenologists 
and crystal gazers; fruit dealers; gasoline station 
and pump operators; glass salesmen; golf course 
operators; hat cleaners; fur dealers; horse, ro- 


9 


deo, dog and pony show operators; horse and 
mule dealers; ice cream manufacturers; inn- 
keepers; junk dealers; launderers; sleight-of- 
hand artists; lightning rod installers; lumber 
dealers and jobbers; lumberyard operators; ma- 
chinery repair shops; manicurists; hairdressers; 
uphosterers; doctors, chemists, bacteriologists, 
and roentgenologists; persons engaged in the 
photocopy business; miners; monument and 
tombstone sellers; motion picture operators; 
oculists, optometrists and opticians; osteopaths 
and chiropractors; operators of packing houses 
and cold storage plants; pawnbrokers; peddlers 
and itinerant vendors; photographers; musical 
instrument salesmen; pig iron storage opera- 
tors; pistor and knife dealers; playing card sales- 
men; plumbers, steamfitters and tin shop opera- 
tors; pool halls, owners of racetracks and ath- 
letic fields; radio salesmen; real estate brokers 
and agents; restaurant, cafe and cafeteria opera- 
tors; roadhouses, nightclubs and public dance 
halls; sandwich shops, barbecue stands, ham- 
burger and hot dog stands; sawmills; scientists 
naturopaths and chiropodists; sewing machine 
salesmen; shooting gallery operators; shotgun 
and rifle dealers; skating rink operators; solicit- 
ing brokers; stock and bond brokers; street fair 
and carnival operators; syrum and sugar factory 
operators; theater, vaudeville and variety show 
operators; ticket scalpers; tourist camp opera- 
tors; tractor, road machinery and trailer dealers; 
trading stamp merchants; freight carriers; tran- 
sient dealers, vendors and peddlers; turpentine 
stillers; vending machine operators; veterinar- 
ians; warehouse operators; wax factory opera~ 
tors and waste grease and animal by-product. 
purchasers and receivers (See Code of Alabama 
1975, Legislative Manuscript Volume 6, Title 
40, Chapter 12 and Ordinance 1120 at R. 33), 


~ 


10 


yet faxes average wage earners, laborers and all other per- 
sons who are not by other laws required to pay paltry 
license fees (five dollars for manicurists, twenty five dol- 
lars for neurosurgeons). We respectfully submit that it is 
impossible for Jefferson County or the State of Alabama 
to articulate a rational basis for exempting doctors and 
lightning rod installers, dentists and fortune tellers, attor- 
neys and crystal ball gazers, and neurosurgeons and dog 
and pony show operators, to name but a few, from a 
substantial occupational tax while imposing the same tax 
on working stiffs like Richards and Hill. Moreover, Hill 
asserts that, as a domestic servant working in commercial 
buildings, she does the exact same sweeping and mop- 
ping that her colleagues who are domestic servants in 
private homes do (R. 386), yet she pays that tax while 
they enjoy complete exemption. 


This exemption scheme could not be more irrational 
or arbitrary if it also exempted left handed men with 
freckles and green eyed women who refuse to eat broc- 
coli. It goes far beyond the irrationality bounds this Hon- 
orable Court declared to be the line of demarcation be- 
tween constitutional and unconstitutional classification 
in Hooper, Allegheny Pittsburgh, Cleburne, Metropolitan Life, 
and WHHY, supra. 


CONCLUSION 


Important federal constitutional claims arising from a 
patently irrational and arbitrary exemption scheme, 
never before reviewed or decided, will be effectively pre- 
cluded forever unless this Honorable Court grants the 
writ, reverses the Supreme Court of Alabama, and allows 
Hill and Richards a day in court. 


Wherefore, Petitioners request that their Petition be 
granted, that the decision of the Alabama Supreme 


Court be reversed, and that the case be remanded for 
trial. 


Respectfully submitted, 


/s/ William J]. Baxley 


William J. Baxley 


/s/ Joel E. Dillard 


Joel E. Dillard 

Attorneys for Petitioners 

BAXLEY, DILLARD, 
DAUPHIN & McKNIGHT 

2000 Sixteenth Avenue South 

Birmingham, Alabama 35205 

(205) 939-0995 


APPENDIX 


A-l 
SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 


OCTOBER TERM, 1994-95 


1930255 


—— —-— 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham- 
Jefferson Civic Center Authority 


v. 
Jason Richards, et al. 


Appeal from Jefferson Circuit Court 
(CV-92-3191) 


ALMON, JUSTICE. 

This appeal by permission is from the denial of a sum- 
mary judgment in a declaratory judgment action brought 
on behalf of two classes of taxpayers against Jefferson 

sounty. The taxpayers sought to have Act 406, 1967 Ala. 
Acts, and Jefferson County Ordinance 1120, adopted in 
1987, declared unconstitutional. Act 406 authorizes the 
Jefferson County Commission to levy a county occupa- 
tional tax on all persons who earn wages in the County 
and who are not required to pay the state business li- 
cense tax. Ordinance 1120 levies the county occupational 
tax at the rate of .005 (/, of 1%) on all eligible income 
earned in the county, exempting persons who pay the 
state business license tax and domestic servants employed 
in private homes. The complaint was filed by two classes 
of taxpayers: the “Foley-Dykes” class, which represents all 
Federal employees subject to the tax, and the “Richards- 
Hill” class, which represents all non-Federal employees 
subject to the tax. The complaint alleges that Act 406 and 
Ordinance 1120 violate the equal protection and due 


A-2 


process provisions of the Federal and State constitutions, 
and, with regard to the class of Federal employees only, 
the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. § 111 et seq. The plaintiffs sought 
that the Act and the ordinance are made unconstitu- 
tional by what they call the arbitrary and irrational char- 
acter of the exemptions. The Birmingham-Jefferson Civic 
Center Authority (“BJCC”) was allowed to intervene, as- 
serting as its interest $10 million per year of occupational 
tax proceeds that have been pledged to the BJCC for a 
20-year period to repay BJCC special tax bonds that are 
not outstanding in the principal amount of over $123 
million. 

The County moved for a summary judgment, contend- 
ing that all of the claims, except for the Federal employ- 
ees’ Buck Act claim, are barred by the doctrine of res 
judicata, based on the action that was the subject of this 
Court's opinion in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 
2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). The trial court entered a summary 
judgment for the County on all State constitutional 
claims, but denied the motion for summary judgment 
with regard to the Federal constitutional and statutory 
claims, stating: 

“In Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 
1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor the 
Alabama Supreme Court determined whether 
Alabama Act No. 406 (Alabama Legislature 
1967), authorizing the tax in question, or Jeffer- 
son County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson 
County Commission 1987), imposing the tax in 
question, violates the equal protection clause of 
the United States Constitution by creating an 
unreasonable, unjust and improper classifica- 
tion of citizens subject to the tax, while exempt- 
ing certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, 
irrational and unjust manner.” 


A-3 


Pursuant to Rule 5, Ala. R. App. P., we granted the 
County permission to appeal the denial of the summary 
judgment. The issue before us is whether the trial court 
correctly held that the Federal constitutional claims are 
not barred by the doctrine of res judicata and thus cor- 
rectly denied the summary judgment on these claims. 

The doctrine of res judicata is a well-established prin- 
ciple of law: 


“The elements of res judicata, or claim pre- 
clusion, are (1) a prior judgment on the merits, 
(2) rendered by a court of competent jurisdic- 
tion, (3) with substantial identity of the parties, 
and (4) with the same cause of action presented 
in both suits. Hughes v. Allenstein, 514 So. 2d 
858, 860 (Ala. 1987).” 


Dairyland Insurance co. v. Jackson, 566 So, 2d 723, 725 (Ala. 
1990). 


“If those four elements are present, any claim 

that was or could have been adjudicated in the 

prior action is barred from further litigation.” 
Id.; Crutcher v. Wynn, 591 So, 2d 453, 454 (Ala. 1991); Ex 
parte McCracken, 576 So. 2d 664, 665 (Ala. 1991); Wood v. 
Tricon Metals & Services, Inc., 548 So. 2d 138, 140 (Ala. 
1989); Trimble v. Bramco Products, Inc., 351 So. 2d 1357 
(Ala. 1977). 


“In general a judgment is res judicata not 
only as to all matters litigated and decided by it, 
but as to all relevant issues which could have 
been but were not raised and litigated in the 
suit.” 

Heiser v. Woodruff, 327 U.S. 726, 735 (1946) (citations 
omitted). 

The appeal in Bedingfield arose from two complaints 
that were consolidated in a single action. One complaint 


AA 


was filed by Hoyt Bedingfield, Jr., individually as a tax- 
payer, and also in his capacity as acting director of fi- 
nance of the City of Birmingham and by the City of Bir- 
mingham. The Bedingfield/Birmingham complaint re- 
quested a judgment declaring 


“that ordinance No. 1120 adopted by the Jeffer- 
son County Commission is void and invalid, and 
if necessary, that Act No. 406 by the Ala- 
bama Legislature in 1967 and approved by the 
Governor on September 7, 1967, is void and in- 
valid to the extent that it supports any compre- 
hensive occupational tax on all persons working 
in Jefferson County.” 


Among the grounds alleged in that complaint were that 
“Act 406 is a violation of the equal protection require- 
ments and provisions of the federal and state constitu- 
tion,” and that “Act 406 is vague and ambiguous and 
therefore is a violation of the due process requirements 
of the state and federal constitution.” 

The second complaint sought declaratory and injunc- 
tive relief “against the action of the Jefferson County 
Commission levying an occupational tax on employees of 
Jefferson County.” It was filed by three persons “in their 
individual capacity” as “employees within Jefferson 
County.” In addition to several other allegations of viola- 
tions of due process and equal protection principles, the 
complaint alleged that the tax 


“constitutes a denial of equal protection in vio- 
lation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the 
United States Constitution. Said Act 
fessional occupations required by State law to be li- 
censed but does not exempt other professional and 
nonprofessional occupations. ” 
(Emphasis added.) This allegation is the substance of the 
allegations made in the complaint now before the Court. 


A-5 


The complaint that is the subject of this appeal asks 
the circuit court to “declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional, as depriving plaintiffs of due process of law 
and equal protection of the laws” guaranteed under the 
United States and Alabama Constitutions, The same 
cause of action was presented in both actions. Both were 
actions for declaratory judgments challenging the consti- 
tutionality of the Jefferson County occupational tax. Both 
complaints alleged violations of the equal protection and 
due process provisions of the State and Federal constitu- 
tions. The appellate briefs in Bedingfield argued an equal 
protection issue regarding the fact that Act No. 406 ap- 
plied only to counties with a population of 500,000 or 
more. Bedingfield was decided, both by the circuit court 
and by this Court, on other State constitutional grounds, 
but the Federal and State equal protection and due pro- 
cess claims were pleaded, and it is at least true that they 
“could have been adjudicated.” Dairyland Ins. Co. v. Jack- 
son, 566 So, 2d 723, 725 (Ala. 1990). Furthermore, they 
arguably were adjudicated, because they were grounds 
stated as a basis for relief, and a final judgment denying 
relief was affirmed. 


“Res judicata applies not only to the precise legal theory 
presented in the prior case, but to all legal theories and 
claims arising out of the same nucleus of operative fact.” 
NAACP v. Hunt, 891 F. 2d 1555, 1561 (11th Cir, 1990) 
(citations omitted). 


“[A] party ... is not at liberty to split up his 
demand and prosecute it by piecemeal, or 
present only a portion of the grounds on which 
special relief is sought, and leave the rest to be 
presented in a second suit, if the first fail. There 
would be no end to litigation if such a practice 
were permissible.’ Baltimore Steamship Company v. 
Vernon Philips, 274 U.S. 316 [47 S.Ct. 600, 71 
L.Ed.2d 1069] (1926).” 


A-6 


Century 21 Preferred Properties, Inc. v. Alabama Real Estate 
Comm'n, 401 So. 2d 764, 768 (Ala. 1981) (per Jones, J., 
with three Justices concurring and two Justices concur- 
ring in the result). 

The only other element of res judicata that is at issue is 
“substantial identity of the parties,” see Dairyland, supra. 


“The second set of persons whom res judicata 
applies is composed of those persons who are or 
were in privity with the parties to the original 
suit. ... Privity is defined as ‘a relationship be- 
tween one who is a party of record and a 
nonparty that is sufficiently close so a judgment 
for or against the party should bind or protect 
the nonparty.’ ... Privity exists where the 
nonparty’s interests were represented ad- 
equately by the party in the original suit. ... 
Privity also exists where a party to the original 
suit is ‘so closely aligned to a nonparty’s interest 
as to be his virtual representative.’ United Mer- 
chants & Mfrs., Inc. v. Sanders, 508 So. 2d 689, 
692 (Ala. 1987).” 


NAACP v. Hunt, supra, at 1560-61 (citations omitted). See 
also Century 21, supra. The taxpayers in the Bedingfield 
action adequately represented the interests of the taxpay- 
ers here, and the respective taxpayers’ interests are not 
only closely aligned — they are essentially identical. The 
“substantial identity of the parties” element of res judicata 
is met here. 

The wisdom of disallowing successive attacks on the 
county tax on grounds that could have been pursued and 
adjudicated in the initial challenge is demonstrated by 
the BJCC’s motion to intervene, which recites that it is- 
sued two series of bonds in 1989 to expand and improve 
the civic center. The motion continues: 


“[PJursuant to that certain Pledge and Appro- 
priation Agreement between the Defendant Jef- 


A-7 


ferson County and the intervenor, said Defen- 
dant appropriated, pledged and agreed to pay a 
portion of the proceeds of the Occupational 
Tax [at] issue in this matter to the BJCC for 
repayment of the Series 1989 and Series 1989B 
Capital Outlay Special Tax Bonds issued by the 
BJCC in twenty (20) annual payments of 
$10,000,000.00 beginning in the year 1989 and 
ending in the year 2008.” 


In 1989, the county and the Authority, in pledging the 
uccupational tax revenue and issuing the bonds, could 
have relied on Bedingfield as authoritatively establishing 
that the county occupational tax was not unconstitutional 
for the reasons asserted by the Bedingfield plaintiffs. To 
allow a challenge now that was pleaded and could have 
been adjudicated in Bedingfield would not only violate the 
res judicata principles discussed above, but would also im- 
properly interfere with the operations of the county and 
the BJCC and undermine the security of the bonds, to 
the detriment of the bondholders. 

For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the circuit 
court incorrectly held that Bedingfield v. Jefferson 
County, 527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), did not, by the 
operation of the doctrine of res judicata, bar this action. 

REVERSED AND REMANDED. 

Shores, Kennedy, Cook, and Butts,* []., concur. 

Maddox, J., dissents. 


*Although Justice Butts was not a member of this 
Court when this case was orally argued, he has listened to 
the tape of oral argument and has studied the record. 


A-8 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic Center Au- 
thonity v. Jason Richards, et al. 


MADDOX, JUSTICE (dissenting). 

The elements of the doctrine of res judicata have been 
precisely set out by this Court in Wheeler v. First Alabama 
Bank of Birmingham, 364 So. 2d 1190, 1199 (Ala. 1978), 
where this Court said: 


“The elements of res judicata are as follows: 
(1) prior judgment rendered by court of com- 
petent jurisdiction; (2) prior judgment ren- 
dered on the merits; (3) parties to both suits 
substantially identical; and (4) same cause of ac- 
tion present in both suits.” 


See also Dominey v. Mathison, 292 Ala. 293, 293 So. 2d 471 
(1974), and my dissenting opinion in Century 21 Preferred 
Properties, Inc. v. Alabama Real Estate Comm'n, 401 So. 2d 
764, 770 (Ala. 1981). Even a cursory examination of this 
doctrine as applied to the facts of this case reveals that it 
has no application to this case. In this dissent, I will make 
a brief statement of the facts and will state the principle 
of law I think should be applied to sustain the trial 
court's order. 


The majority holds that these plaintiffs are bound by 
the judgment rendered in Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), where the City of Birming- 
ham challenged the constitutionality of Act No. 406 and 
the validity of a county ordinance establishing an occupa- 
tional tax. 


The trial judge, in denying the defendant's motion for 
a summary judgment in this case (that motion being 
based on the ground that the action was barred by the 
doctrine of res judicata), issued an order in which he con- 
cluded, in part, that “[i]n Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 


527 So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor. 


A-9 


{this Court] determined whether Act No. 406 (Alabama 
Legislature 1967), authorizing the tax in question, or Jef- 
ferson County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson County 
Commission 1987), imposing the tax in question, violates 
the equal protection clause of the United States Constitu- 
tion by creating an unreasonable, unjust and improper 
classification of citizens subject to the tax, while exempt- 
ing certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, irratio- 
nal and unjust manner.” The trial judge also determined 
that “[i]n Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 1270 
(Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor [this Court] de- 
termined whether the tax in question violates the Buck 
Act (4 U.S.C. § 111) as it pertains to federal employees.” | 
agree with the trial court on both points. 


In concluding that the trial judge was correct, I have 
examined the pleadings in Bedingfield and the order en- 
tered by the trial judge in that case and I have studied 
the opinion issued by this Court in Bedingfield, a case in 
which I participated. I have also carefully considered the 
argument of Jefferson County that “the claims in this 
case arise from the same nucleus of operative fact as the 
claims made in Bedingfield and [that] because the evi- 
dence necessary to support both claims is identical, it is 
axiomatic that the fourth element of res judicata is satis- 
fied,” and I have given careful consideration to the views 
of my colleagues expressed in the majority opinion, and 
my only comment is that if the “same cause of action 
presented in both suits” element of the res judicata doc- 
trine is so easily satisfied, then it could be extended ad 
infinitum and would establish a precedent that could 
close the courthouse doors to other plaintiffs in other 
cases who might find themselves faced with the rule of 
law herein established. I think that the Court is establish- 
ing a bad precedent. 


My opinion that Bedingfield does not bar the claims 
presented in this case is the same as that of the tial 


A-10 


judge: that this Court, in Bedingfield, did not adiudicate 
these claims, or any claim similar to them. The West Pub- 
lishing Company synopsis in Bedingfield succinctly states 
what that case was about, and the issue it adjudicated: 


“City challenged constitutionality of county 
ordinance establishing occupational tax. The 
Circuit Court, Jefferson County, Braxton L. 
Kittrell, Jr., J., upheld ordinance, and appeal 
was taken. The Supreme Court, Beatty, J., held 
that: (1) statute authorized county to levy occu- 
pational tax; (2) statute was general rather than 
local legislation; and (3) statute authorizing levy 
of tax provided for collection of such tax.” 


527 So. 2d at 1270. Where in the Bedingfield opinion is 
there an adjudication of the federal constitutional claims 
the plaintiffs raise in the instant action? Neither the or- 
der of the trial judge nor the opinion of this Court con- 
tains a single reference to whether the Act and the 
county ordinance violate any provision of the Federal 
sonstitution. 

It is true that the plaintiffs, in Bedingfield, did allege in 
their complaint that “[i]f Ordinance No. 1120 were au- 
thorized by Act 406, then Act 406 is unconstitutional 
based upon any one of the following grounds: . .. . B. Act 
406 is a violation of the equal protection requirements 
and provisions of the federal and state constitutions.” But 
I ask this question: Is the mere making of such an allega- 
tion in a complaint sufficient to satisfy the “same cause of 
action presented in both suits” element of the res 
judicata doctrine? I think not, especially when the 
adjudicatory orders of the trial court, and of this Court, 
affirmatively show that the issues in Bedingfield involved 
whether Act No. 406 was a general law or was a local law 
because the Act was applicable oniy to counties with a 
population of 500,000 or more. 


A-11 


But even assuming that the federal equal protection 
claim was presented and adjudicated in Bedingfield, the 
plaintiffs in this case are attacking the exemption scheme 
contained in Ordinance No. 1120, which exempts a num- 
ber of occupations from the occupational tax.' Clearly, 


‘Ordinance 1120 taxes the gross receipts of any person who en- 
gages in or follows any “vocation, occupation, calling and profes- 
sion,” but exempts from its definition of “vocation, occupation, call- 
ing and profession” the following: utility companies; freight lines 
and equipment companies; electric companies; gas companies; rail- 
roads; telephone companies; telegraph companies; express Compa- 
nies; financial institutions; insurance companies; abstract companies, 
acetylene gas and carbide manufacturers; adding machine, calculat- 
ing machine, and comptometer businesses; advertising companies; 
air condition plant and equipment businesses; amusement parks; 
architects; attorneys; auctioneers; automobile dealers; automobile 
accessory dealers; automobile garages and shops; automobile storage 
garages; tire retreading shops; barbers; baseball parks; battery shops; 
beauty parlors; bicycle and motorcycle dealers; blueprint makers; 
bond makers; bottlers; bowling alleys; iron, railway supply, furnace 
supply, and mining supply brokers and agents; broom, brush, and 
mop manufacturers; cereal and soft drink retailers and wholesalers; 
certified public accountants; cigar, cigarette, and cherott retailers 
and wholesalers; circus operators; cleaning and pressing establish- 
ments; coal and coke dealers; coffin and casket manufacturers, deal- 
ers, and agents; collection agencies; Commission merchants or mer- 
chandise brokers; concert and musical entertainers; persons en- 
gaged in discounting notes, mortgages, and conditional sales con- 
tracts; construction Companies or contractors; cotton buyers; cotton 
compress operators; millers; persons operating cotton warehouses; 
credit agency personnel; persons operating creosoting businesses; 
delicatessen shops; dentists; detectives; film developers and printers; 
directory printers; refrigerator dealers; embalmers; engineers; do- 
mestic servants employed in private homes; owners and operators of 
fertilizer factories; damaged and close out goods salesmen, fireworks 
dealers; fortunetellers, palmists, clairvoyants, astrologers, phrenolo- 
gists and crystal gazers; fruit dealers; gasoline station and pump op- 
erators; glass salesmen; golf course operators; hat cleaners; fur deal- 
ers; horse, rodeo, and dog and pony show operators; horse and mule 
dealers; ice cream manufacturers; innkeepers; junk dealers; launder- 


A-12 


that claim was not presented or adjudicated in Beding- 
field. 

Jefferson County and BJCC argue that even if the 
plaintiffs’ claims were not previously raised or adjudi- 
cated in the Bedingfield case, the claims are barred, never- 
theless, because “any claim that was or could have been 
adjudicated in the prior action is barred from further 
litigation.” Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 So. 2d 
723, 725 (Ala. 1990). Stated differently, the County and 
BJCC contend that the theory on which the plaintiffs 
bring this action could have been asserted in the 


ers; sleight-of-hand artists; lighting rod installers; lumber dealers and 
jobbers; lumberyard operators; machinery repair shops, manicurists; 
hairdressers; upholsterers; doctors, chemists, bacteriologists, and 
roentgenologists; persons engaged in the photocopy business; min- 
ers; monument and tombstone sellers; motion picture operators; 
oculists, optometrists, and opticians; osteopaths and chiropractors; 
operators of packing houses and cold storage plants; pawnbrokers, 
peddlers and itinerant vendors; photographers; musical instrument 
salesmen; pig iron storage operators; pistol and knife dealers; play- 
ing card salesmen; plumbers, steamfitters and tin shop operators; 
operators of pool halls, owners of racetracks and athletic fields; radio 
salesmen; real estate brokers and agents; restaurant, cafe, and cafete- 
ria operators; operators of roadhouses, nightclubs, and public dance 
halls; sandwich shops, barbecue stands, hamburger and hot dog 
stands; sawmills; scientists, naturopaths and chiropodists; sewing ma- 
chine salesmen; shooting gallery operators; shotgun and rifle deal- 
ers; skating rink operators; soliciting brokers; stock and bond bro- 
kers; street fair and carnival operators; syrup and sugar factory op- 
erators; theater, vaudeville, and variety show operators; ticket scalp- 
ers; tourist Camp operators; tractor, road machinery, and trailer deal- 
ers; trading stamp merchants; freight carriers; transient dealers, ven- 
dors, and peddlers; turpentine stillers; vending machine operators; 
veterinarians; warehouse operators; wax factory operators and waste 
grease and animal by-product purchasers and receivers. See Ordi- 
nance 1120, § 1(B) and § 2; §§ 40-12-40 through 40-12-180, § 40-12- 
50, § 40-12-52 through 40-12-55, §§ 40-12-57 through 40-12-60, § 40- 
16-6, and § 27-4-9, Ala. Code 1975. 


A-13 


Bedingfield case and that this action is therefore due to be 
dismissed. 

The test for determining whether two cases involve 
substantially the same cause of action is whether the 
same evidence would support a recovery in both actions. 
Barber v. Fields, 624 So. 2d 532, 536 (Ala. 1993); Vaughan 
v. Barr, 600 So. 2d 994, 996 (Ala. 1992); Waters v. Jolly, 
582 So. 2d 1048, 1053 (Ala. 1991); Garris v. South Alabama 
Production Credit Ass'n, 537 So. 2d 911, 914 (Ala. 1989); 
Dominex, Inc. v. Key, 456 So. 2d 1047, 1054-55 (Ala. 1984); 
Wheeler v. First Alabama Bank of Birmingham, 364 So. 2d 
1190, 1200 (Ala. 1978). In Barber v. Fields, this Court re- 
versed a summary judgment entered on res judicata 
grounds where both the former and the latter cases in- 
volved the city water service but the claims in the latter 
case, which pertained to the removal of water meters, was 
not litigated in the former case, which involved a claim 
that the city’s refusal to extend water service to the 
plaintiff's land was a violation of her right to equal pro- 
tection of the laws. Barber, 624 So. 2d at 536. In Vaughan 
v. Barr, this Court reversed a judgment entered on res 
judicata grounds where both the former case and the 
latter case involved the same land and landowners but 
the former case, which involved a boundary dispute, was 
“based on different theories” and “require(d| different 
evidence” from that required in the latter case, which 
involved a claim of an easement by necessity. Vaughan, 
600 So. 2d at 996. 


Although this case and the Bedingfield case involve Act 
406 and Ordinance 1120, the similarity there ends, be- 
cause the evidence necessary to prove the claims asserted 
in this case, and the legal arguments in support of those 
claims, will be very different from those in Bedingfield. 
Here, the plaintiffs allege that the exemptions to the tax 
violate their equal protection rights under the Federal 
Constitution. The Federal employees are permitted to 


A-14 


maintain their Buck Act claims. How are their claims dif- 
ferent from those of the non-Federal employees who 
claim equal protection violations? In each case, the plain- 
tiffs apparently are citizens of the United States who are 
claiming protection of their rights under Federal consti- 
tutional and statutory provisions. The foundation of their 
claims, the Federal Constitution, is the same. 


| have carefully examined the arguments of Jefferson 
County and those of BJCC, and I recognize the impor- 
tance of this case to those entities, but | think the law is 
against them. The plaintiffs’ claims in this case are just 
different from those presented in Bedingfield, and the evi- 
dence necessary to prove their claims will be very differ- 
ent from the evidence used to prove the claims asserted 
in Bedingfield. \n fact, the issues presented in Bedingfield 
were largeiy legal issues relating to the classification be- 
tween counties of 500,000 or more in population and 
counties of less than 500,000 in population and to the 
question of whether Act 406 violated the Alabama Consti- 
tution, and there is no mention in Bedingfield of any Fed- 
eral constitutional claims adjudicated in either the trial 
court or this Court. 


Based on the foregoing, | believe that the fourth ele- 
ment of the doctrine of res judicata as set forth in 
Dairyland Insurance Co. v. Jackson, 566 So. 2d 723, 725 
(Ala. 1990) (“the same cause of action presented in both 
suits”), is not present in this case; I believe that the trial 
judge correct concluded that the plaintiffs could main- 
tain their action. 


A-15 
SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 


IMPORTANT INFORMATION REGARDING SECOND 
COPY OF RECORD ON APPEAL AND EXHIBITS 


RETURN OF SECOND COPY OF RECORD ON AP- 
PEAL: 

In the event a second copy of the record has been filed 
pursuant to Rule 30(g), Alabama Rules of Appellate Pro- 
cedure, any party or attorney desiring to receive the sec- 
ond copy of the record should make a written request to 
the Clerk of the Supreme Court within 30 days from date 
of decision. Otherwise, the second copy of the record will 
be destroyed. 


RETURN OF EXHIBITS: 

Any party or attorney may make a written request to 
the Clerk of the Supreme Court for return of exhibits 
prior to the expiration of the periods set out in the 


records retention schedule of the Supreme Court of Ala- 
bama as indicated below. 


DESTRUCTION OF EXHIBITS: 


Pursuant to the Records Retention Schedule of this 
Court, all original exhibits contained in separate volumes 
of the record on appeal, or sent to the Court under sepa- 
rate cover (including charts, maps, depositions, and 
physical exhibits) will be destroyed as follows: 


At the end of one year — _ Destroy all exhibits in 
after decision affirmed cases. 
At the end of two years — Destroy all exhibits in 


after decision reversed Cases. 


A-16 


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA 
June 9, 1995 


1930255 


Jefferson County and the Birmingham-Jefferson Civic 
Center Authority v. Jason Richards, et al. (Jefferson: CV- 
92-3191) 


NOTICE 
The application for rehearing filed in this cause is 
overruled. No opinion written on rehearing. 
ALMON, ].— Shores, Kennedy, Cook and Butts, |J., 
concur; 


Maddox, J., dissents 


I, Robert G. Esdale, as Clerk of the Supreme Court of 
Alabama, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a full, 
true and correct copy of the instrument(s) herewith set 
out as same appear(s) of record in said Court. 


Witness my hand this 9 day of Jun, 1995. 


/s/ Robert G. Esdale 


Robert G. Esdale 
Clerk, Supreme Court 
of Alabama 


A-17 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


JASON RICHARDS and 
FANNIE HILL, individually 
and on behalf of all employees 
of the United States of 
America, who are subject to 
the Jefferson County, Alabama 
occupational tax which is 
more particularly described 

by this complaint; and 
GEORGE DAVID DYKES and 
JOAN FOLEY DYKES, 
individually and on behalf of 
all employees of the United 
States who are subject to the 
Jefferson County, Alabama 
occupational tax which is 
more particularly described 

by this complaint; 


PLAINTIFFS, 
VS. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, a 
political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, and RANDY 
GODEKE, individually and in 
his official capacity as Director 
of the Department of Revenue 
for Jefferson County, Alabama, 
and as successor in office to 

C. H. Ritchie, former Director 
of the Department of Revenue 
for Jefferson County, Alabama 


DEFENDANTS. 


* 


* 


CIVIL ACTION NO. 
CV-92-03191 


A-18 
ORDER 


After a consideration of the law, statutes, legal evi- 
dence and argument of counsel for the parties the Court 
finds that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment as 
to certain claims raised hy the Plaintiffs due to the doc- 
trine of res judicata, but that certain of Plaintiffs’ claims 
should not be dismissed. The Court FINDS as follows: 


1. In Beddingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 1270 
(Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor the Alabama Su- 
preme Court determined whether Alabama Act No. 406 
(Alabama Legislature 1967), authorizing the tax in ques- 
tion, or Jefferson County Ordinance No. 1120 (Jefferson 
County Commission 1987), imposing the tax in question, 
violates the equal protection clause of the United States 
Constitution by creating an unreasonable, unjust and im- 
proper classification of citizens subject to the tax, while 
exempting certain citizens from said tax in an arbitrary, 
irrational and unjust manner. 

2. In Beddingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So. 2d 1270 
(Ala. 1988), neither the trial court nor the Alabama Su- 
preme Court determined whether the tax in question 
violates the Buck Act (4 U.S.C. §111) as it pertains to 
federal employees. 


3. The trial court in Beddingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 
So. 2d 1270 (Ala. 1988), did in fact consider the constitu- 
tionality of Alabama Act No. 406 and Jefferson County 
Ordinance No. 1120 as it relates to the Constitution of 
Alabama of 1901 and found “nothing” in said Act to be 
“repugnant” to such a degree as to invalidate the Act, 
and further did not find Ordinance No. 1120 to be “in- 
valid”. (Order of Judge Braxton Kittrell, Specially Sitting, 
CV-87-504-465 and CV-87-504-469, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, December 11, 1987). 


Thus the state constitutional issues in this matter have 
been previously adjudicated. 


A-19 


Accordingly, Summary Judgment is GRANTED in favor 
of Defendant, and against Plaintiffs as to Counts Three 
and Four of the Complaint based on the doctrine of res 
judicata. Summary Judgment is DENIED as to Counts 
One and Two. 


Done and Ordered this 8th day of April, 1993. 


/s/ John E. Rochester 


JOHN E. ROCHESTER 
CIRCUIT JUDGE 
SPECIALLY SITTING 


A-20 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, ALABAMA 


JASON RICHARDS and 
FANNIE HILL, individually 
and on behalf of all employees, 
excluding employees of the 
United States of America, who 
are subject to the Jefferson 
County, Alabama occupational 
tax which is more particularly 
described by this complaint; 
and GEORGE DAVID DYKES 
and JOAN FOLEY DYKES, 
individually and on behalf of 
all employees of the United 
States who are subject to the 
Jefferson County, Alabama 
occupational tax which is more 
particularly described by this 
complaint; 


Plaintiffs, 
vs. 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, a 
political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, and RANDY 
GODEKE, individually and in 
his official capacity as Director 
of the Department of Revenue 
for Jefferson County, Alabama, 
and as successor in office to 

C. H. Ritchie, former Director 
of the Department of Revenue 
for Jefferson County, Alabama 


Defendants. 


* 


CIVIL ACTION NO. 
CV9203191 


A-21 
COMPLAINT 


Plaintiffs, by and through their undersigned counsel, 
complain and allege as follows: 


JURISDICTION AND VENUE 


1. Jurisdiction of this Court is invoked pursuant to 
Rule 57, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure and 42 U.S.C. 
1983, as this is a civil action arising under the laws and 
Constitution of the United States. Th.s action involves a 
violation of federal law for which 42 U.S.C. 1983 provides 
a remedy, and to which Rule 37 of the Alabama Rules of 
Civil Procedure is applicable. A question of intergovern- 
mental immunity arising under the Buck Act, 4 U.S.C. 
101, et seq, is presented by Plaintiffs Dykes individually, 
and on behalf of all similarly situated federal employees. 
Venue lies in the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, the tax challenged by this action being levied and 
collected by Jefferson County, Alabama, against and from 
plaintiffs, and similarly situated class members within Jef- 
ferson County, Alabama. 


PARTIES 


2. Plaintiff Jason Richards is a courier privately em- 
ployed by a law firm in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is 
a resident citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; Fannie 
Hill is a domestic servant privately employed in commer- 
cial building sin Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a resi- 
dent citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; they bring this 
action individually on their behalf, and in a representa- 
tive capacity on behalf of all other employees in Jefferson 
County, Alabama, other than employees of the United 
States of America, who have been subject to the levy, 
collection and payment of taxes established by Jefferson 
County Ordinance 1120, commonly known as the Jeffer- 
son County Occupational Privilege Tax (“the occupa- 


A-22 


tional tax”) since January 1, 1988. George David Dykes is 
a Reclamation Specialist employed by the United states 
of America in the Office of Surface Mining, Department 
of the Interior in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a 
resident citizen of Jefferson County, Alabama; Joan Foley 
Dykes is a Registered Nurse employed by the United 
States of America in the Department of Veterans’ Affairs 
in Jefferson County, Alabama, and is a resident citizen of 
Jefferson County, Alabama; they bring this action indi- 
vidually on their own behalf, and in a representative ca- 
pacity on behalf of all other employees of the United 
States of America, who have been subject to the levy, 
collection and payment of the occupational tax since 
January 1, 1988. Plaintiffs Jason Richards, Fannie Hill, 
and Joan Foley Dykes have been required by their em- 
ployers to pay the occupational tax at all times relevant to 
these proceedings, continuously since January 1, 1988, 
when the occupational tax became effective. Plaintiff 
George David Dykes was required by his employer to pay 
the occupational tax for approximately one year after 
enactment of the occupational tax, after which he re- 
fused to continue to do so, based upon the authorities 
cited herein. 


CLASS ACTION AVERMENTS 


3. This lawsuit is brought by plaintiffs as a class action, 
on their own behalf and on behalf of all others similarly 
situated, under the provisions of Rule 23(a) and Rule 
23(b)(1) of the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure for 
injunctive and declaratory relief, and for an order award- 
ing members of the plaintiff classes compensatory dam- 
ages in sums equal to the amounts of taxes illegally lev- 
ied, collected and paid by them, and for relief incident 
and subordinate thereto, including costs and attorneys 
fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1988, and such other authori- 
ties as shall be determined applicable to this action. 


A-23 


4. The classes represented by plaintiffs in this action, 
and of which plaintiffs themselves are members, consist 
of all persons subject to the occupational tax, both fed- 
eral and non-federal employees, who have been subject 
to its levy, collection and payment since January |, 1988, 
when the occupational tax became effective. 


5. The exact number of members of the classes, as 
herein identified, is not known, but it is estimated that 
there are thousands of members of each class. The 
classes are so numerous that joinder of individual mem- 
bers herein is impracticable. 


6. There are common questions of law and fact in the 
action that relate to and affect the rights of each member 
of the classes represented by the named plaintiffs and the 
relief sought is common to both classes, namely a decla- 
ration that the occupational tax is unconstitutional. 


7. The claims of plaintiffs, who are representatives of 
the class herein are typical of the claims of the classes 
they represent, in that the claims of all members of the 
classes, including plaintiffs, depend on a showing of the 
unconstitutionality of the occupational tax in a manner 
which is beneficial to each. There is no conflict as be- 
tween any individual named plaintiff and any other mem- 
ber of either class with respect to this action, or with 
respect to the relief sought herein. The Dykes Class of 
federal employees are beneficiaries of federal and state 
statutes which prohibit discrimination in a manner which 
is consistent with the general prohibition of discrimina- 
tion applicable to the Richards/Hill Class of non-federal 
employees, and both classes are protected equally by the 
equal protection and due process clauses of the Four- 
teenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United 
States, and the state laws cited herein. 

8. The named plaintiffs are the representative parties 
for their respective classes, and are able to, and will, fairly 
and adequately protect the interests of the classes they 


A-24 


represent. The attorneys for plaintiffs are experienced 
and capable in litigation in the field of constitutional, tax 
and civil rights claims, and have successfully represented 
claimants in other litigation of this nature. 


ALLEGATIONS OF FACT 


9. On or about January 1, 1988, Defendant Jefferson 
County levied and began collecting, and Plaintiffs and 
the classes they represent began involuntarily paying, the 
occupational tax, which was described by Defendant as a 
“license or privilege tax on natural persons engaged in 
any vocation, occupation, calling or profession who are 
not required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 
the state or county.” A copy of the occupational tax ordi- 
nance is attached to this complaint, and made a part 
hereof as Exhibit A. 


10. The occupational tax is calculated as one-half of 


one percent of the gross earnings of plaintiffs and mem- 
bers of both classes, but is characterized by Defendant as 
a license or privilege tax, rather than an income tax. 
Specifically the taxing ordinance provides: 


It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in 
or follow any vocation occupation, calling or 
profession as defined in Section | within the 
County on and after the Ist day of January, 
1988, without paying license fees to the County 
for the privilege of engaging in or following 
such vocation, occupation, calling or profes- 
sion, which license fees shall be measured by 
one-half percent (1/2%) of the gross receipts of 
each such person. 


11. The taxing ordinance also defines gross receipts 
and compensation, as follows: 


The words “gross receipts” and “compensation” 
shall have the same meaning, and both words 


A-25 


shall mean and include the total gross amount 
of all salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses or 
other money payment of any kind, or any other 
considerations having monetary value, which a 
person receives from or is entitled to receive 
from or be given credit for by his employer for 
any work done or personal services rendered in 
any vocation, occupation, calling or profession, 
including any kind of deductions before “take 
home” pay is received; but the words “gross re- 
ceipts” and compensation shall not mean or in- 
clude amounts paid to traveling salesmen or 
other workers as allowance or reimbursement 
for traveling or other expenses incurred in the 
business of the employer, except to the extent 
of the excess of such amounts over such ex- 
penses actually incurred and accounted for the 
by employee to the employer. 


12. The occupational tax carves out of its scope, by 
way of its definition of “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” a substantial array of persons, as follows: 


The words “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” shall mean the doing of any kind of 
work, the rendering of any kind of personal ser- 
vices, or the holding of any kind of position or 
job within Jefferson County, Alabama, by any 
clerk, laborer, tradesman, :nanager, official or 
other employee, including any non-resident of 
Jefferson County who is employed by any em- 
ployer as defined in this section, where the rela- 
tionship between the individual performing the 
services and the person for whom such services 
are rendered is, as to those, services, the legal 
relationship of employer and employee, includ- 
ing also a partner of a firm or an officer of a 
firm or corporation, if such partner or officer 
receives a salary for his personal services ren- 
dered in the business of such firm or corpora- 


A-26 


tion, but they shall not mean or include domes- 
tic servants employed in private homes and shall 
not include businesses, professions or occupa- 
tions for which license fees are required to be 
paid under any General License Code of the 
County or to the State of Alabama or the 
County by any of the following: Chapter 12, Ar- 
ticle 2, Title 40; Sections 40-21-50, 40-21-52, 53, 
54 and 55; 40-21-57, 58, 59 and 60; 40-16-6; and 
27-4-9 of the Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 


and also includes within its ambit all federal employees 
represented here by Plaintiffs Dykes, as follows: 


The words “vocation, occupation, calling and 
profession” shall also mean and include the 
holding of any kind of office or position either 
by election or appointment, by any federal, 
state, county or city officer or employee where 
the services of such official or employee are ren- 
dered within Jefferson County, Alabama. 


13. The occupational tax broadly defines “employer” 
to “mean and include any person, business, firm, corpo- 
ration, partnership, association or any other kind of orga- 
nization who or that employs any person in any vocation, 
occupation, calling or profession in Jefferson County, 
Alabama, within the meaning of subsection (B) of Sec- 
tion | of this Ordinance.” (This subsection is set forth in 
full at paragraph 12 of this complaint). Defendant, by 
and through its Director of Revenue and County Attor- 
ney, has interpreted “employer” to include the United 
States of America, and “employee” to include all federal 
employees in Jefferson County, including all United 
States District Judges in the Northern District. 


14. The occupational tax by its terms, and in actual 
practice, exempts from its levy, collection and payment 
businesses and vocations or occupations listed at Chapter 
12, Article 2, Title 40, Code of Ala. 1975, as amended, 


— 


A-27 


which range from attorneys, certified public accountants, 
dentists and physicians to blueprint makers, casket manu- 
facturers, pig iron storage operators, lightning rod in- 
stallers and snuff retailers, and it includes a specific ex- 
emption for domestic servants employed in private 
homes. By its terms and in actual practice, it taxes all 
federal employees, including all United States District 
Judges in the Northern District of Alabama, all Circuit, 
District and Probate Judges in Jefferson County, and an 
array of other occupations, including couriers, secretar- 
ies, skilled and unskilled laborers, police officers, busi- 
ness executives, teachers and domestic servants not em- 
ployed in private homes. 

15. The net effect, dollarwise, of the occupational tax, 
is an absurdity which allows, by way of example, physi- 
cians and attorneys earning hundreds of thousands of 
dollars a year to pay a license fee of $150.00 or less and 
avoid the occupational tax — which would be levied at 
more than ten times the amount of the license fee paid 
by these high income professionals. In all cases, the occu- 
pational tax imposes upon those citizens against whom it 
is levied and collected a percentage of income tax which 
is substantially more than the license fees paid by simi- 
larly situated persons exempted from its burden. 


16. The occupational tax, on its face and in actual 
practice, is arbitrary and capricious, and discriminatory 
in a manner which defies logic and, insofar as federal 
employees are concerned, 4 U.S.C, 111. The array of per- 
sons subject to the occupational tax, when compared 
with the array of persons exempted from the tax, and the 
concomitant disparity in taxes paid by and between occu- 
pations in Jefferson County, Alabama which falls within 
and without the burden of the occupational tax, render 
it irrational, unduly burdensome, and violative of the 
equal protection clause and the due process clause of 


A-28 


Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States. 


17. The content, nature and characteristics of the em- 
ployment of Plaintiffs Dykes, Richards and Hill, and all 
the members of the classes they represent, are neither 
reasonably, rationally or fairly different, nor profession- 
ally distinct, from the content, nature and characteristics 
of the employment of the above described persons ex- 
empt from the occupational tax, and the economic bur- 
den thrust upon them by Defendant, relative to those 
exempted, is substantial and absurd. 

18. The irrationality and unconstitutionality of the oc- 
cupational tax is well known to the Defendant's officers 
and agents responsible for its administration and collec- 
tion, and has resulted in their adoption of a policy of 
further exemption from its levy and collection federal 
employees who refuse to pay it. This pay-if-you-wish 
policy is itself arbitrary and capricious, irrational, indica- 
tive of Defendant's callous disregard of the constitutional 
rights of other federal and private employees from whom 
the tax is collected, and demonstrative of Defendant's 
cognizance of the constitutional defects complained of 
herein. 

19. Plaintiffs aver that unless Defendant is enjoined 
and restrained by the court from enforcing the occupa- 
tional tax ordinance, they will suffer economic injury. 


COUNT ONE 
DYKES CLASS BUCK ACT CLAIMS 
AND FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS 
20. Plaintiffs Dykes, individually and on behalf of the 
above described class of employees of the United States 
which they represent, claim Defendants, a political subdi- 
vision of the State of Alabama and its Director of Rev- 
enue, acting by and through their County Attorney, and 


A-29 


such other administrative officers as have acted and con- 
tinue to act in concert with them, were and are acting 
under color of a statute, ordinance, regulation, custom 
or usage of the State of Alabama in subjecting its citizens 
described herein to a deprivation of rights, privileges or 
immunities secured by the Constitution and laws of the 
United States, specifically 4 U.S.C. 111 and the due pro- 
cess and equal protection clauses of the Constitution of 
the United States. 

21. The occupational tax violates the equal protection 
guaranties of the Fourteenth Amendment to tie United 
States Constitution and 4 U.S.C. 111 by unreasonably and 
arbitrarily favoring the above described state, local and 
private employees who are exempted from its purview in 
the unequal manner described above while taxing the 
similarly situated federal employees represented by Plain- 
tiffs Dykes as described herein. 

22. The occupational tax has been previously chal- 
lenged in this court on non-federal and other state law 
grounds, and, its measurement by a percentage of pay or 
compensation for personal service as described by 4 
U.S.C. 111 notwithstanding, been declared to be a li- 
cense or privilege tax rather than an income tax. 
Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). 
In the trial court in Bedingfield, supra, the plaintiff initially 
asserted that the occupational tax was, under state law, 
an illegal income tax; the trial court rejected that claim, 
and it was abandoned on appeal. 

23. Plaintiffs Dykes and their similarly situated federal 
employee class members also claim the occupational tax 
is so arbitrary and irrational, as described herein, as to 
violate the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment to the Constitution of the United States, both on its 
face and in its application to both classes of taxpayers 
bringing this action. 


A-30 


COUNT TWO 
RICHARDS/ HILL CLASS FEDERAL CLAIMS 


24. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill, individually and on 
behalf of the class of non-federal employees they repre- 
sent, claim Defendants, a political subdivision of the 
State of Alabama, and its Revenue Commissioner, acting 
in concert with their County Attorney, and such other 
administrative officers as have acted and continue to act 
in concert with them, were and are acting under color of 
a statute, ordinance, regulation, custom or usage of the 
State of Alabama in subjecting or causing its citizens de- 
scribed herein to a deprivation of rights, privileges or 
immunities secured by the Constitution and laws of the 
United States, specifically the equal protection clause of 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States. 


25. The occupational tax violates the equal protection 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution 
of the United States by discriminating against Plaintiffs 
Richards and Hill, and the class of similarly situated non- 
federal employees they represent, a class against whom it 
has been and is now levied and collected, in a manner 
which is not only arbitrary and irrational, as described 
herein, but which also creates an unjust, unreasonable 
and improper classification of citizens subject to the tax. 
There is no legitimate difference between Plaintiffs 
Richards and Hill, and the class of non-federal employees 
they represent and the above described exempted em- 
ployees which is related to any legitimate government 
object or purpose, and the arbitrariness and capricious- 
ness of selection of the Richards/Hill class by Defendant 
to pay the occupational tax is clear upon the face of the 
taxing ordinance and in its implementation by Defen- 
dant. Persons engaged in the same businesses as Richards 
and Hill, and the members of the class they represent are 
granted exemption privileges by Defendant under em- 


A-31 


ployment conditions which are the same as those experi- 
enced by Richards, Hill and the Richards/Hill class, 
while the Richards/Hill class is contemporaneously, arbi- 
trarily and unreasonably — in the context of the equal 
protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Constitution of the United States — taxed. 

26. The occupational tax has been previously chal- 
lenged in the state courts on other state law grounds, 
and, measurement by a percentage of pay or compensa- 
tion for personal service notwithstanding, been declared 
to be a license or privilege tax rather than an income tax. 
Bedingfield v. Jefferson County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). 
In the trial court in Bedingfield, supra, the plaintiff initially 
asserted that the occupational tax was, under state law, 
an illegal income tax; the trial court rejected that claim, 
and it was abandoned on appeal. Additionally, these fed- 
eral constitutional claims are joined in this action with 
federal Buck Act claims which present a related federal 
statutory question under federal law. 


27. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill and their similarly situ- 
ated non-federal employee class members also claim the 
occupational tax is so arbitrary and irrational, as de- 
scribed herein, as to violate the due process clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the 
United States, both on its face and in its application to 
both classes of taxpayers bringing this action. 


COUNT THREE 
DYKES CLASS PENDENT STATE LAW CLAIMS 
28. Plaintiff Dykes, individually and on behalf of the 
above described class of employees of the United States 
which they represent, claim the occupational tax violates 
Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3, which provides that 
the salaries, fees, commissions or other income of offic- 
ers or agents of the United States or its agencies and 


A-32 


instrumentalities or its contractees, received from the 
United States or from its agencies and instrumentalities, 
shall be subject to income taxes levied by the state of 
Alabama as other income is taxed, but without discrimi- 
nation, and only to the same extent and in the same 
manner as other income is taxed, insofar as the State of 
Alabama may be constitutionally or legally authorized to 
tax such income. 


29. The Alabama Constitution prohibits cities and 
counties from collecting income taxes, hence Defend- 
ant’s designation of the occupational tax as a license or 
privilege tax, despite its measurement by a percentage of 
gross income or gross receipts. 

30. The occupational tax, as a license tax measured by 
a percentage of gross income or gross receipts, autho- 
rized by a general law of the State of Alabama, is never- 
theless subject to the “without discrimination” prohibi- 
tion of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3, and that code 
section's requirement that it be collected “only to the 
same extent and in the same manner as other income is 
taxed.” Plaintiffs Dykes and the class of federal employ- 
ees they represent, based upon the above described alle- 
gations regarding persons exempted from paying the oc- 
cupational tax, aver that they have been discriminated 
against and required to pay taxes to a different extent 
and in a different manner from their incomes in viola- 
tion of Code of Ala. 40-18-3 and the due process and 
equal protection provisions of the Constitution of Ala- 
bama of 1901. 


COUNT FOUR 
RICHARDS/HILL CLASS PENDENT STATE CLAIMS 


31. Plaintiffs Richards and Hill, individually and on 
behalf of the class of non-federal employees subject to 
the occupational tax which they represent, aver that the 


A-33 


occupational tax discriminates against non-federal em- 
ployees, as described above, in a manner which violates 
the due process and equal protection provisions of the 
Constitution of Alabama of 1901. 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, Plaintiffs pray that the Court grant and 
eward them the following relief: 


A. That a hearing be set as soon as practicable after 
commencement of this action, under Rule 23(c) (1), Fed- 
eral Rules of Civil Procedure, to determine by order 
whether this action is to be maintained as a class action, 
and whether certification should be conditional, and 
whether the Richards’ and Dykes’ classes should be certi- 
fied as sub-classes pursuant to Rule 23(c)(4)(B), Ala- 
bama Rules of Civil Procedure. 


B. That the Court declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional, as depriving plaintiffs of due process of law 
and equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, vio- 
lative of intergovernmental immunity secured by 4 U.S.C. 
111, violative of the due process and equal protection 
clauses of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and viola- 
tive of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 40-18-3. 


C. That the Court declare the occupational tax uncon- 
stitutional in its application to plaintiffs, depriving them 
of due process of law and equal protection of the laws 
under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States, violative of intergovernmental immu- 
nity secured by 4 U.S.C. 111, violative of the due process 
and equal protection clauses of the Constitution of Ala- 
bama of 1901, and violative of Code of Ala. 1975, Section 
40-18-3 by virtue of Defendants’ policy of allowing taxpay- 
ers who disagree with the tax to disregard it while insist- 
ing upon its payment by those who cannot persuade their 


A-34 


employers to cease payroll deductions or who otherwise 
lack the necessary clout with Defendants to prevent its 
levy and collection. 


D. That the Court award plaintiffs, as compensatory 
damages suffered as a result of Defendant's deprivations 
of the constitutional rights described herein, a sum equal 
to the amount of tax each has paid to the Defendant 
since January 1, 1988. 

E. That the Court enjoin and restrain Defendant from 
continued deprivations of the constitutional rights de- 
scribed herein by way of the occupational tax. 

F. That the Court allow plaintiffs and their counsel all 
costs in this proceeding and payment of a reasonable 
attorneys fee, determined by 42 U.S.C. 1988 and/or pur- 
suant to equitable common fund principles to attorneys 
for plaintiffs and the classes represented by them. 

G. That the Court award plaintiffs such other and 
further relief as the Court, after a full hearing, deems 
appropriate. 


BAXLEY, DILLARD & DAUPHIN 


/s/ William J. Baxley 
WILLIAM J. BAXLEY 


/s/ Joel E. Dillard 


JOEL E. DILLARD 

Attorneys for Plaintiffs 

2000 Sixteenth Avenue South 
Birmingham, Alabama 35205 
(205) 939-0995 


A-35 
Plaintiffs’ Addresses 
c/o Baxley, Dillard & Dauphin 
2000 16th Avenue South 
Birmingham, AL 35205 


Defendants’ Addresses 

Jefferson County 

c/o Edwin A. Strickland 

County Attorney 

214 Jefferson County Courthouse 
Birmingham, AL 35263 


Randy Godeke, Director 


Jefferson County Department of Revenue 
100-A Courthouse 


Birmingham, AL 35263 


A-36 


IN THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR JEFFERSON COUNTY 
TENTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT, ALABAMA 


JASON RICHARDS, et al., 
Plaintiffs, 
CASE NO. CV 92-3191 


JEFFERSON COUNTY, et al., 


Defendants. 


ANSWER 
Come now the Defendants, Jefferson County, Ala- 
bama, a political subdivision of the State of Alabama, and 
Randy Godeke, individually, and in his official capacity as 
Director of the Jefferson County, Alabama, Department 
of Revenue, and for answer to the Complaint state as 
follows: 


FIRST DEFENSE 
Admission and Denial 


|. For answer to paragraph | of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs attempt to invoke the jurisdic- 
tion of this Court pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, 4 U.S.C. 
§ 101 and Rule 57, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure. 
Defendants admit that Jefferson County, Alabama, is the 
proper venue for this case. 

2. For answer to paragraph 2 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants demand strict proof in that Defendants are without 
knowledge or information sufficient to from a belief as to 
the truth of the allegations regarding residence and em- 
ployment of Jason Richards, Fannie Hill, George David 


A-37 


Dykes and Joan Foley Dykes. Defendants state that they 
are without sufficient information to form a belief as to 
the truth of the remaining allegations of paragraph 2 of 
the Complaint and demand strict proof. 


3. For answer to paragraph 3 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs attempt to invoke the provi- 
sions of Rule 23, Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure. 


4. For answer to paragraph 4 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that Plaintiffs are subject to the Jefferson 
County occupational tax. 


5. For answer to paragraph 5 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that there are numerous taxpayers. 


6. For answer to paragraph 6 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants deny that the Jefferson County occupational tax is 
unconstitutional. 


7. For answer to paragraph 7 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants deny that the occupational tax is unconstitutional. 
Defendants state that they are without information and 
belief as to any conflicts which may or may not exist 
between Plaintiffs and demand strict proof. 


8. For answer to paragraph 8 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants state that they are without knowledge or informa- 
tion sufficient to form a belief as to the truth of the 
allegations contained therein and demand strict proof. 


9. For answer to paragraph 9 of the Complaint, Defen- 
dants admit that on or about January 1, 1988, Jefferson 
County, Alabama, began to levy and collect the occupa- 
tional tax. Defendants deny that Plaintiffs paid said tax 
involuntarily. For answer to the remaining portion of 
paragraph 9 of the Complaint, Defendants plead the lan- 
guage of the occupational tax ordinance which is at- 
tached hereto as Exhibit “A” and Act No. 406, Legislature 
1967, attached as Exhibit “B.” 

10. For answer to paragraph 10 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 


A-38 


County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit “A” and which speaks for itself. 

11. For answer to paragraph 11 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 
County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit :A” and which speaks for itself. 


12. For answer to paragraph 12 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants plead the plain language of the Jefferson 
County occupational tax which is attached hereto as Ex- 
hibit “A” and which speaks for itself. 

13. Admitted. 


14. For answer to paragraph 14 and 15, Defendant 
states as follows: 

The Jefferson County Occupational Tax Ordinance 
No. 1120 comports with the express authority granted to 
the Jefferson County Commission by Act No. 406, Legis- 
lature of Alabama, 1967 (“Act No. 406”). Act No. 406 
reflects an acknowledgment of the Alabama Legislature 
that numerous person, corporations, firms, associations 
or entities were already required by State law to pay a 
license or privilege tax to either the State of Alabama or 
to the County pursuant to Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51; 
Sections 176, 177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429 and 
826 in Title 51 of the Code of Alabama of 1940, as 
amended. Act No. 406 authorized the County Commis- 
sion to levy a license or privilege tax upon any person, 
corporation, firm, association or other entity and busi- 
ness, vocation, occupation, calling or profession that is 
not required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 
either the State of Alabama or the County by any of the 
foregoing provisions of the Code of Alabama. 

The legislature in Section 6, Act No. 406, further lim- 


ited the authority granted to the County Commission by 
declaring that: 


A-39 


Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied by 
the governing body of the county on any person 
for engaging in any business shall be at a rate 
which is in excess of the rate of license or privi- 
lege tax levied by the largest municipality of the 
county on the same or similar type business ac- 
tivity. 

Accordingly, the Jefferson County Occupational Tax 
ordinance incorporates the same exclusions from its pro- 
visions as are required by Act No. 406. Further, the Jeffer- 
son County Occupational Tax Ordinance specifically ex- 
cludes “domestic servants employed in private homes” 
for the reason that such persons are excluded from the 
occupational tax of the City of Birmingham which is the 
largest municipality located in Jefferson County, as re- 
quired by Section 6, Act No. 406, above. 


15. Defendants deny paragraphs 16 and 17. For fur- 
ther answer thereto, Defendants assert that federal em- 
ployees engaged in a business, vocation, occupation, call- 
ing or profession are treated exactly the same as all other 
persons without regard to the nature of their employer. 
That is, only those federal employees that are not re- 
quired by law to pay any license or privilege tax to either 
the State of Alabama or the County by any of the forego- 
ing quoted provisions are subject to the occupational tax. 


The purpose of Act No. 406 was to authorize the 
County to impose a license or privilege tax upon persons 
who are engaging in such businesses, vocations, occupa- 
tions, callings and professions without paying any license 
tax through either the State or County. 


Additionally, the rate of the Jefferson County Occupa- 
tional Tax is exactly the same for all persons subject 
thereto. Said rate is .05 percent of the gross receipts of 
such persons earned in Jefferson County. There is no 
difference in rate between persons employed by the fed- 


A-40 


eral government and all other persons who are subject to 
the tax. 


16. Defendants deny paragraph 18. For further answer 
Defendants assert that Defendants have instituted a rea- 
sonable and orderly procedure to effect collection of the 
occupational tax. Substantial start up work and effort has 
been required to develop the required information so as 
to identify those persons subject to the tax and to initiate 
tax withholding procedures by employers in the County. 
Substantial efforts were required to achieve such with- 
holding action by the federal employers in Jefferson 
County. No exceptions from the tax beyond those re- 
quired by Act No. 406 have been established or allowed. 
A program to collect arrearages from persons who have 
failed or refused to pay the tax as required by law is 
ongoing. 

17. Defendants deny paragraph 19. 

18. For answer to paragraph 20 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants deny that they have deprived Plaintiffs of any 
right, privilege or immunity secured by the Constitution 
or laws of the United State of America. 

19. Denied. 


20. For answer to paragraph 22 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants admit that the occupational tax at issue in this 
case has been previously challenged in the state courts 
on both federal and state constitutional claims. Defen- 
dants aver that the occupational tax at issue in this case 
has already been held constitutional by the Alabama Su- 
preme Court in the case Beddingfield v. Jefferson County, 
527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). Further, that the Plaintiffs in 
Beddingfield had the opportunity to appeal the Bedding- 
field decision of the Alabama Supreme Court to the Su- 
preme Court of the United State, which opportunity said 
Plaintiffs failed to pursue and thereby waived and for- 
feited and which decision of the Alabama Supreme 


A-41 


Court is now a matter adjudged and conclusive upon and 
res judicata to all of the rights of Plaintiffs asserted 
herein. Defendants deny the remaining allegations of 
paragraph 22 of the Complaint. 

21. Denied. 


22. For answer to paragraph 24 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants deny that they have deprived Plaintiffs of any 
right, privilege or immunity secured by the Constitution 
or laws of the United States of America. 


23. Denied. 


24. For answer to paragraph 26 of the Complaint, De- 
fendants admit that the occupational tax at issue in this 
case has been previously challenged in the state courts 
on both federal and state constitutional claims. The Ala- 
bama Supreme Court has held that the occupational tax 
at issue in this case is constitutional. Beddingfield v. Jeffer- 
son County, 527 So.2d 1270 (Ala. 1988). Defendants deny 
the remaining allegations of paragraph 26 of the Com- 
plaint. 

25. Denied. 

26. Denied. 

27. Denied. 

28. Denied. 

29. Denied. 


30. Defendants deny each and every remaining allega- 
tions of the Complaint and demand strict proof thereof. 


SECOND DEFENSE 
Res Judicata 
Defendants plead the affirmative defense of res 


judicata as a complete or partial bar to the causes of 


action set forth in the Complaint. 


A-42 
THIRD DEFENSE 


Collateral Estoppel 
Defendants plead the affirmative defense of collateral 
estoppel to the causes of action set forth in the Com- 


plaint. 


FOURTH DEFENSE 
Non Claim Statute 


Defendants plead the Alabama non claim statute as a 
complete or partial bar to the relief requested in the 


Complaint. 


FIFTH DEFENSE 
Laches 


Defendants plead the defense of laches as a complete 
or partial bar to the causes of action set forth in the 


Complaint. 


SIXTH DEFENSE 
Statute of Limitations 


Defendants plead the applicable statute of limitations 
as a complete or partial bar to the relief sought in the 


Complaint. 


SEVENTH DEFENSE 
No Deprivation of Federally Protected Right 
Defendants aver that Plaintiffs have not been deprived 


of any right, privilege or immunity secured by the Consti- 
tution or laws of the United States of America. 


EIGHTH DEFENSE 
Voluntary Payment 


Defendants aver that all_payments made by named 
Plaintiffs have been voluntary. 


A-48 


NINTH DEFENSE 
No Buck Act Violation 


Defendants plead the provisions of 4 U.S.C. § 106 as a 
defense to Plaintiffs’ Buck Act claims. 


TENTH DEFENSE 
Immunity 
Defendant, Godeke, pleads the defense of immunity 


whether absolute, qualified, good faith or discretionary 
function. 


ELEVENTH DEFENSE 
Waiver 


Defendants plead the affirmative defense of waiver as a 
complete or partial bar to the causes of action set forth 
in the Complaint. 


TWELFTH DEFENSE 
General Defenses 


1. Defendants assert that the Complaint fails to state a 
cause of action upon which relief can be granted. 

2. Defendants plead good faith in all their dealings 
with Plaintiffs. 

3. Defendants plead the general issue. 


/s/ Edwin A. Strickland 


EDWIN A. STRICKLAND 

County Attorney 

214 Jefferson County 
Courthouse 

716 North 21st Street 

Birmingham, AL 35263 

(205) 325-5688 


A-44 
/s/ Jeffrey M. Sewell 


JEFFREY M. SEWELL 

Assistant County Attorney 

214 Jefferson County 
Courthouse 

716 North 21st Street 

Birmingham, AL 35263 

(205) 325-5688 


/s/ Charles S. Wagner 


CHARLES S. WAGNER 

Assistant County Attorney 

214 Jefferson County 
Courthouse 

716 North 21st Street 

Birmingham, AL 35263 

(205) 325-5688 


A-45 


CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 


I have served a copy of the foregoing ANSWER on 
counsel for all parties, by placing same in the U.S. Mail, 
postage prepaid and properly addressed, this the 29 day 
of May, 1992. 


/8/ Jeffrey M. Sewell 


JEFFREY M. SEWELL 
Assistant County Attorney 


cc: William J]. Baxley 
Joel E. Dillard 
Baxley, Dillard & Dauphin 
2000 - 16th Avenue South 
Birmingham, AL 35205 


Thomas L. Stewart 

Gorham, Waldrep, Stewart, Kendrick, 
Bryant, Battle & Alfano 

2101 - 6th Avenue North 

Suite 700 

Birmingham, AL 35203 


A-46 


Act No. 406 
AN ACT 


To authorize the governing body of any county of the 
state having a population of 500,000 or more, according 
to the last or any subsequent Federal census, to levy a 
business or privilege tax upon any business, vocation, oc- 
cupation, calling or profession for which a license or 
privilege tax is not required for either the State of Ala- 
bama or the county by the laws of the State of Alabama, 
and to limit the amount of any such business or privilege 
tax. 


Be It Enacted by the Legislature of Alabama: 


Section 1. This Act shall apply to any county of the 
State of Alabama having a population of 500,000 or 
more, according to the last or any subsequent federal 
census, and to no other county. 


Section 2. As used in this Act, the following words and 
terms have the meanings hereby ascribed to them; “the 
county” means a county subject to this Act; “the govern- 
ing body” means the governing body of the county, 
whether it be a county commission, board of revenue or 
other governing body; “person” includes any natural per-- 
son, corporation, firm, association or other entity; and 
“business” includes business, vocation, occupation, call- 
ing or profession; “license or privilege tax” shall not in- 
clude any sales or use tax. 


Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to equalize the 
burden of taxation by authorizing the county to impose a 
license or privilege tax upon persons now engaging in 
certain businesses without paying any license tax thereon 
to either the state or county. 

Section 4. The governing body of the county is hereby 
authorized to levy a license or privilege tax upon any 
person for engaging in any business for which he is not 
required by law to pay any license or privilege tax to 


A-47 


either the State of Alabama or the county by any of the 
following Article 1, Chapter 20, Title 51; Sections 176, 
177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429, and 826 in Title 51 
of the Code of Alabama of 1940 as amended. 

When a person is engaged in more than one business 
for one or more of which a license or privilege tax is 
required to be paid to the State or the county but for one 
or more of which no license or privilege tax is required 
to be paid to the State or county, the county governing 
body shall have the authority to levy a license or privilege 
tax upon that business, or those businesses, for engaging 
in which such person is not required to pay any license 
or privilege tax to the State or county. 


Section 5. The tax hereby levied shall be paid to that 
officer or employee of the county chargeable with the 
duty of collecting license or privilege taxes payable to the 
county. 


Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied by the 
governing body of the county on any person, for engag- 
ing in any business shall be at a rate which is in excess of 
the rate of license or privilege tax levied by the largest 
municipality of the county on the same or similar type of 
business activity. 


Section 7. It is hereby provided that all laws or parts of 


law in conflict with provisions of this Act are hereby re- 
pealed to the extent of such conflict. 


Section 8. The provisions of this Act are severable; and 
should any part of this Act be declared unconstitutional 
or void, such declaration shall not affect the remaining 
provisions. 

Section 9. This Act shall become effective upon its ap- 
proval by the Governor or upon its otherwise becoming a 
law. 

Approved September 7, 1967. 


Time: 10:37 A.M. 


A-48 


ORDINANCE NO. 1120 


An Ordinance to establish a license or privilege tax on 
persons engaged in any vocation, occupation, calling or 
profession in Jefferson County who is not required by law 
to pay any license or privilege tax to either the State of 
Alabama or the County as set out herein. 


BE IT RESOLED AND ORDAINED by the Jefferson 
County Commission as follows: 


Section 1. DEFINITIONS. That the following words, 
when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meaning 
ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indi- 
cates or requires a different meaning: 


(A) The word “person” shall mean any natural person. 
Whenever the word “person” is used in any clause pre- 
scribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or 
imprisonment, the work as applied to a partnership or 
other form of unincorporated enterprise shall mean the 
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corpora- 
tions shall mean the officers and directors thereof. 


(B) The words “vocation, occupation, calling and pro- 
fession” shall mean and include the doing of any kind of 
work, the rendering of any kind of personal services, or 
the holding of any kind of position or job within Jeffer- 
son County, Alabama, by any clerk, laborer, tradesman, 
manager, official or other employee, including any non- 
resident of Jefferson County who is employed by any em- 
ployer as defined in this section, where the relationship 
between the individual performing the services and the 
person for whom such services are rendered is, as to 
those services, the legal relationship of employer and em- 
ployee, including also a partner of a firm or an officer of 
a firm or corporation, if such partner or officer receives a 
salary for his personal services rendered in the business 
of such firm or corporation, but they shall not mean or 
include domestic servants employed in private homes 


A-49 


and shall not include businesses, professions or occupa- 
tions for which license fees are required to be paid under 
any General License Code of the County or to the State 
of Alabama or the County by any of the following: Chap- 
ter 12, Article 2, Title 40; §§40-21-50, 40-21-52, 53, 54 and 
55; 40-21-57, 58, 59, and 60; 40-16-6; and 27-4-9 of the 
Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 


(C) The words “vocation, occupation, calling and pro- 
fession” shall also mean and include the holding of any 
kind of office or position either by election or appoint- 
ment, by any federal, state, county or city officer or em- 
ployee where the services of such official or employee are 
rendered within Jefferson County, Alabama. 


(D) The word “employee” shall mean and include any 
person engaging in or following any vocation, occupa- 
tion, calling or profession within the meaning of subsec- 
tion (B) of Section | of this Resolution and Ordinance. 


(E) The word “employer” shall mean and include any 
person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, associa- 
tion or any other kind of organization who or that em- 
ploys any person in any vocation, occupation, calling or 
prefession in Jefferson County, Alabama, within the 
meaning of subsection (B) of Section 1 of this Ordi- 
nance. 

(F) The words “gross receipts” and “compensation” 
shall have the same meaning, and both words shall mean 
and include the total gross amount of all salaries, wages, 
commissions, bonuses or other money payment of any 
kind, or any other consideration having monetary value, 
which a person receives from or is entitled to receive 
from or be given credit for by his employer for any work 
done or personal services rendered in any vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession, including any kind of de- 
ductions before “take home” pay is received; but the 
words “gross receipts” and “compensation” shall not 
mean or include amounts paid to traveling salesmen or 


A-50 


other workers as allowance or reimbursement for travel- 
ing or other expenses incurred in the business of the 
employer, except to the extent of the excess of such 
amounts over such expenses actually incurred and ac- 
counted for by employee to the employer. 

(G) The word “licensee” shall mean and include any 
person required to file a return or to pay a license fee 
under this ordinance. 

(H) The word “county” shall mean Jefferson County, 
Alabama. 

(1) The words “Director of Revenue” shall mean the 
Director of Revenue of Jefferson County, Alabama. 


(J) The singular shall include the plural and vice 
versa, and the masculine shall include the feminine and 
the neuter. 


Section 2. LICENSE FEES REQUIRED. It shall be un- 
lawful for any person to engage in or follow any vocation, 
occupation, calling or profession as defined in Section | 
within the County on and after the Ist day of January, 
1988, without paying license fees to the County for the 
privilege of engaging in or following such vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession, which license fees shall be 
measured by one-half percent (1/2%) of the gross re- 
ceipts of each such person. 

Section 3. WHERE WORK DONE OR SERVICES PER- 
FORMED BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE 
COUNTY, In cases where compensation is earned as a 
result of work done or services performed both within 
and without the county, the license fees required under 
this Ordinance shall be computed by determining upon 
the Oath of the employer, or if required by the Director 
of Revenue upon the oath of the employee, that percent- 
age of the compensation earned from the proportion of 
the work which was done or performed within the 
County. 


A-51 


Section 4. EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD LICENSE 
FEES AND FILE RETURNS. Each employer shall deduct 
from each payment due each employee the amount of 
the license fees measured by one-half per centum (1/ 
2%) of the compensation due each employee beginning 
on the Ist day of January, 1988. The payments required 
to be made on account of such deductions by employers 
shall be made monthly to the County for the monthly 
periods ending January 31, February 28, March 31, April 
30, May 31, June 30, July 31, August 31, September 30, 
October 31, November 30 and December 31st of each 
year, on or before the twentieth day of the month next 
following the end of each such monthly period, and each 
employer shall at the same time make a return in con- 
nection therewith on a form made available to such em- 
ployer by the Director of Revenue at the office of the 
Director of Revenue, provided that, if the total amount 
deducted from payments made to or due all employees 
of an employer is less than fifty ($50.00) dollars during 
each calendar month of the previous calendar year, then 
such employer may elect, for the current calendar year, 
to remit such deductions to the County for the quarterly 
periods ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th 
and December 31st of such following calendar year, on 
or before the twentieth day of the month next following 
the end of each such quarterly period, and each such 
employer shall at the same time make a return in con- 
nection therewith on a form made available to such em- 
ployer by the Director of Revenue at the office of Direc- 
tor of Revenue. Provided, however, that the failure or 
omission by any employer to deduct such license fees 
shall not relieve an employee from the payment of such 
license fees and compliance with the requirements for 
making returns as provided in this Ordinance, or with 
any regulations promulgated under this Ordinance. Each 
employer shall file in the office of the Director of Rev- 


A-52 


enue on or before January 31, of each year a return on a 
form made available by said Director of Revenue, at the 
office of said Director of Revenue, which return shall 
show the gross amount of compensation of each em- 
ployee, the amount of license fees deducted and paid by 
such employer for all or any part of the preceding calen- 
dar year and the last known address of each such em- 
ployee. Each employer shall keep accurate records of all 
such compensation, deductions, license fees, payments 
and returns. Such records shall be kept and maintained 
by each such employer for not less than five (5) years 
subsequent to the date such compensation was earned. 


Section 5. RETURNS TO BE FILED BY EMPLOYEES. 
When a monthly or quarterly return, as required by Sec- 
tion 4 hereof is not filed by an employer and the license 
fees are not paid to the County by such employer 
monthly as herein provided, the employee for whom no 
return has been filed and no payment has been made 
shall file a return with the Director of Revenue on or 
before the Ist day of the second month next following 
the end of each such monthly or quarterly period, show- 
ing in said return his gross receipts subject to license fees 
for such month or quarter, and he shall also file a return 
with the Director of Revenue on or before January 31st 
of each year thereafter in which his employer has failed 
to file any monthly or quarterly return required in the 
preceding calendar year, showing on said return the 
gross receipts subject to license fees during the preced- 
ing calendar year. If for any reason all license fees of a 
person subject to the provisions of this Ordinance were 
not withheld by his employer from his gross receipts, 
such person shall file each return required by this Sec- 


tion on a form obtainable at the office of the Director of 


Revenue. In addition to the gross receipts earned by him, 
such return shall show such other pertinent information 
as may be required by the Director of Revenue. Each 


A-53 


person making a return required by the Section shall, at 
the time of filing thereof, pay to the County the amount 
of license fees due under this Ordinance; provided, how- 
ever, that any portion of the license fees deducted at the 
source shall be deducted on the return and only the 
balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of 
filing said return. Each employee shall keep accurate 
records of all such compensation, deductions, license 
fees, payments and returns. Such records shall be kept 
and maintained by each such employee for not less than 
five (5) years subsequent to the date such compensation 
was earned. 


Section 6. DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF REV- 
ENUE. It shall be the duty of the Director of Revenue to 
collect and receive all license fees imposed by this Ordi- 
nance and to keep records showing the amounts received 
by him from each employer. All moneys received by the 
Director of Revenue shall be deposited in a duly ap- 
proved depository. 


Section 7. INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE DI- 
RECTOR OF REVENUE. The Director of Revenue or 
any agent or employee designated by him is hereby au- 
thorized to examine the books, papers and records of 
any employer or supposed employer, or of any license or 
supposed license, in order to determine the accuracy of 
any return made, or if no return was made to ascertain 
the amount of license fees due under the terms of this 
Ordinance by such examination. Each such employer or 
supposed employer or licensee or supposed licensee shall 
give to the Director of Revenue, or to his duly authorized 
agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportuni- 
ties for the making of such examination and investiga- 
tion. The Director of Revenue is hereby authorized to 
examine any person under oath concerning any gross 
receipts which were or should have been shown in a re- 
turn, and to this end he may compel the production of 


A-54 


books, papers, records and the attendance of all persons 
before him, whether as parties or as witnesses, whom he 
believes to have knowledge of such gross receipts or com- 
pensation. 


Section 8. REGULATIONS MAY BE PROMUL- 
GATED. The Director of Revenue may prescribe, adopt, 
promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regula- 
tions not in conflict with this Ordinance relating to any 
matter or thing pertaining to the administration and en- 
forcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, including 
but not limited to provisions for the re-examination and 
correction of returns as to which overpayment or under- 
payment is claimed or found to have been made, and the 
regulations so promulgated shall be binding upon all lic- 
ensees and employers. - 


Section 9. INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL. 
Notwithstanding any resolutions and ordinances to the 
contrary, any information gained by the Director of Rev- 
enue or any other official or agent or employee of the 
County as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings, 
or verifications required or authorized by this Ordinance 
shall be confidential, except for official purposes, or in 
accordance with proper judicial order, or the enforce- 
ment of this Ordinance, and any person or agent divulg- 
ing such information, except as herein permitted, shall 
upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than 
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or to imprisonment of 
not exceeding thirty (30) days, or to both such fine and 
imprisonment. 


Section 10. INTEREST AND PENALTIES. 


(A) All license fees imposed by this Ordinance 
which are delinquent, that is, which remain unpaid after 
they become due shall, subject to the provisions hereinaf- 
ter set out, bear interest at the rate of twelve percentum 


A-55 


(12%) per annum, and any person who has failed to pay 
such license fees when the same became due shall, sub- 
ject to the provisions hereinafter set out, also be charged 
a penalty of ten percentum (10%) of the amount of such 
unpaid license fees. Any person or employer who fails or 
refuses to withhold any license fees payable under this 
Ordinance, or who fails to pay such fees after withhold- 
ing the same to the County at the time it is due, as pro- 
vided under the provisions of Section 4 hereof, shall be- 
come liable to the County for such fees, as well as for the 
interest thereon at the rate of twelve percentum (12%) 
per annum, and for the aforesaid penalty. Provided, how- 
ever, that the minimum penalty imposed against such 
person or employer shall be Three Dollars ($3.00). Pro- 
vided the Director of Revenue, if a good and sufficient 
reason is shown for the failure to pay the tax within the 
time required, may waive or remit the penalty and inter- 
est, or a portion of either, upon payment of the tax due. 
(B) Any person or employee who shall fail, neglect 
or refuse to pay a license fee as by this Ordinance re- 
quired, or any employer who shall fail to withhold said 
license fees, or to pay over to County such license fees, 
penalties or interest imposed by this Ordinance, or any 
person required to file a return under the provisions of 
Section 5 of this Ordinance, who shall fail, neglect or 
refuse to file such return, or any person or employer who 
shall refuse to permit the Director of Revenue or any 
agent or employee designated by him, in writing, to ex- 
amine his books, records and papers for any purpose 
authorized by this Ordinance, or who shall knowingly 
make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or who 
shall attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the full 
disclosure of the amount of gross receipts or compensa- 
tion in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any 
part of a license fee, shall upon conviction be subject to 
punishment within the limits of and as provided by law 


A-56 


for each offense. Such punishment shall be in addition 
to the penalties imposed under subsection (A) of this 
secuion, 

Section 11. EXTENSION OF TIME FOR MAKING RE- 
TURN. The Director of Revenue, for good cause, may 
extend the time for making any return required under 
the provisions of this Ordinance, but the time for filing 
any such return shall not be extended for a greater pe- 
riod than thirty (30) days from the day such return is due 
to be made and shall not prevent penalty and interest 
from accruing during the period of such extension. 

Section 12. USE OF LICENSE FEES. All money de- 
rived from license fees under the provisions of this Ordi- 
nance shall be paid to the General Fund of the County 
and expended as authorized by law. 

Section 13. SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Or- 
dinance are severable. If any provision, section, para- 
graph, sentence or part thereof, or the application 
thereof to any employer or licensee or class or persons, 
shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision 
shall not affect or impair the remainder of the Ordi- 
nance, it being the legislative intent to ordain and enact 
each provision, section, paragraph, sentence and part 
thereof, separately and independently of each other. 

Section 14. REPEAL OF RESOLUTION AND ORDI- 
NANCES. All resolutions and ordinances or parts of reso- 
lutions and ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance 
are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 


Section 15. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall 
be in full force and effect on and after January |, 1988, 
and from year to year thereafter, until repealed. 


A-57 


Hoyt BEDDINGFIELD, Jr., in his capacity as the acting 
director of finance of the City of Birmingham, et al. 
v. 
JEFFERSON COUNTY, et al. 
87-316. 
Supreme Court of Alabama. 
May 20, 1988. 

City Challenged constitutionality of county ordinance 
establishing occupational tax. The Circuit Court, Jeffer- 
son County, Braxton L. Kittrell, Jr., J., upheld ordinance, 
and appeal was taken. The Supreme Court, Beatty, J., 
held that: (1) statute authorized county to levy occupa- 
tional tax; (2) statute was general, rather than local legis- 
lation; and (3) statute authorizing levy of tax provided 
for collection of such tax. 

Affirmed. 


BEATTY, Justice. 

This is an appeal by Hoyt Beddingfield, Jr., as acting 
director of finance of the City of Birmingham, and the 
City of Birmingham from a judgment upholding a Jeffer- 
son County ordinance, specifically Ordinance No. 1120, 
establishing an occupational tax. We affirm. 

The action was filed on October 19, 1987, and was 
consolidated for tial with the case of Carolyn Phillips, et 
at. v. Jefferson County Commission. 

Ordinance No. 1120 levies a license or privilege tax on 
natural persons engaged in any vocation, occupation, 
calling, or profession who are not required by law to pay 
any license or privilege tax to the state or county. This 
tax was promulgated by Jefferson County under the au- 
thority of Act No. 406, approved September 7, 1967, Acts 
of Alabama 1967, at 21-23. Pertinent sections thereof are 
quoted below: 


A-58 


“AN ACT 


“To authorize the governing body of any 
county of the State having a population of 
500,000 or more, according to the last or any 
subsequent Federal census, to levy a business or 
privilege tax upon any business, vocation, occu- 
pation, calling or profession for which a license 
or privilege tax is not required for either the 
State of Alabama or the county by the laws of 
the State of Alabama, and to limit the amount 
of any such business or privilege tax. 

“Be It Enacted by the Legislature of Alabama: 

“Section |. This Act shall apply to any county 
of the State of Alabama having a population of 
500,000 or more, according to the last or any 
subsequent federal census, and to no other 
county. 


“Section 3. The purpose of this Act is to 
equalize the burden of taxation by authorizing 
the county to impose a license or privilege tax 
upon persons now engaging in certain busi- 
nesses without paying any license tax thereon to 
either the state or county. 

“Section 4. The governing body of the county 
is hereby authorized to levy a liceswse or privi- 
lege tax upon any person for engaging in any 
business for which he is not required by law to 
pay any license or privilege tax to either the 
State of Alabama or the county by any of the 
following: Article 1, Chapter 20, Tithe 51; Sec- 
tions 176, 177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 429, 
and 826 in Title 51 of the Code of Alabama of 
1940 as amended. 

“When a person is engaged in more than one 
business for one or more of which a license or 
privilege tax is required to be paid t the State or 
the county but for one or more of which no 


A-59 


license or privilege tax is required to be paid to 
the State or county, the county governing body 
shall have the authority to levy a license or privi- 
lege tax upon that business, or those businesses, 
for engaging in which such person is not re- 
quired to pay any license or privilege tax to the 
State or county. 

“Section 5. The tax hereby levied shall be 
paid to that officer or employee of the county 
chargeable with the duty of collecting license or 
privilege taxes payable to the county. 

“Section 6. No license or privilege tax levied 
by the governing body of the county on any per- 
son, for engaging in any business shall be at a 
rate which is in excess of the rate of license or 
privilege tax levied by the largest municipality 
of the county on the same or similar type of 
business activity.” 

Allegations of unconstitutionality made below were de- 
nied by the defendants. Following discovery, testimony 
taken in open court, and stipulation, the Jefferson Cir- 
cuit Court upheld the ordinance, and this appeal fol- 
lowed. Because a number of issues are presented here, 
weshall treat them seriatim. 


Did Act No. 406 manifest a legislative intent to autho- 
rize Jefferson County to levy an occupational tax? 

Plaintiffs’ argument here is multifaceted. First, they 
contend that the stated purpose of the Act is to authorize 
a tax only upon “certain businesses,” and not “occupa- 
tions.” Further, plaintiffs argue that § 6 of Act No. 406 
does not permit a privilege tax “which is in excess of the 
rate of license or privilege tax levied by the largest mu- 
nicipality of the County on the same or similar type of 
business activity,” meaning that Jefferson County could 


A-60 


not implement the Act by levying a tax in excess of that 
which had been levied by Birmingham. Because Birming- 
ham had no such privilege tax in 1967, plaintiffs argue, 
any county tax under Act No. 406 would offend the Act. 
Finally, according to plaintiffs, the county's own imple- 
mentation of the Act when it was enacted in 1967, as only 
a licensing code authorizing licensing of certain busi- 
nesses, gives weight to the limiting nature of Act No. 406. 


We must respectfully reject these argument. While we 
are mindful that taxing statutes are to be strictly con- 
strued, State v. Seals Piano Co., 209 Ala. 93, 95 So. 451 
(1923), it does not offend that principle to uphold this 
statute. Indeed, the express language of the Act autho- 
rizes the county “to levy a business or privilege tax upon 
any business, vocation, occupation, calling or profes- 
sion.” When the intention of the legislature is so appar- 
ent from the face of a statute that there can be no ques- 
tion as to its meaning, there is no room for construction. 
American Institute of Psychotherapy v. Alabama Board of Exam- 
iners in Psychology, 410 So.2d 54 (Ala. 1982). Thus, § 4 is 
to be read as authorizing a privilege tax “upon any per- 
son for engaging in any business [or occupation].” 

Municipal licensing authority has existed at least since 
the Code of 1907, see Code of 1975, § 11-51-90. Birming- 
ham originally adopted its licensing code as early as 
1916, and in 1967 it had an extensive catalog of business 
categories subject thereto. However, it was not until 1970 
that Birmingham itself adopted Ordinance No. 70-76, 
providing for a license fee for occupations and profes- 
sions. Given the fact that Birmingham had possessed the 
authority under state law to impose an occupational 
privilege tax since 1907, it is clear that by § 6 of Act No. 
406 the legislature, cognizant of that power, decided to 
restrict the county's authority to a maximum as estab- 
lished by Birmingham's occupational privilege tax. It is a 
fundamental principle that the legislature, in enacting a 


A-61 


statute, is presumed to have full knowledge and informa- 
tion on prior and existing law on the subject of the stat- 
ute. Ex parte Love 513 So.2d 24 (Ala. 1987). Thus, we 
cannot agree with plaintiffs that Act. No. 406 required 
Jefferson County to implement its authority contempora- 
neously thereunder, or lose it altogether. The Act itself 
contains no such limiting language. True, Jefferson 
County did not implement the “occupational” aspect of 
the statute until 1987. Nevertheless, the authority to do 
so continued. ' 


Finally, we are not persuaded by plaintiffs’ argument 
that, in construing Act No. 406, this Court should defer 
to the county's alleged contemporaneous interpretation 
of the Act. Because we do not find the Act doubtful in its 
meaning, we need not resort to an alleged contempora- 
neous interpretation by the county. 


Is Act No. 406 unconstitutional as violating limitations 
on local legislation as explained in Peddycoart v. City of 
Birmingham, 354 So.2d 808 (Ala. 1978)? 

According to plaintiffs, Act No. 406 violates the man- 
date of Peddycoart in two respects: (1) the general laws of 
Alabama have preempted the field of license and privi- 
lege taxation to prevent reliance upon local legislation, 
ana thus Act No. 406 violates Section 105 of the Constitu- 
tion; and (2) the population classification of Act No. 406 
(500,000 or more), which makes it a “bracket bill,” lacks 
a reasonable relationship with the statute's purpose. 


Commenting upon peddycoart in Freeman v. Purvis, 400 
So.2d 389 (Ala. 1981), this Court stated: 


' By stipulation, it was established that, while Birmingham itself 
adopted its license code as early as 1916, and possessed an extensive 
license code in 1967, it did not establish its occupational tax until 
1970. 


A-62 


“We must point out, however, that following 
the Peddycoart decision which was released on 
January 13, 1978, two amendments to the Ala- 
bama Constitution of 1901 were ratified by the 
people: Amendment No. 375, ratified on No- 
vember 20, 1978, and Amendment No. 389, rati- 
fied on November 4, 1980. Because the latter 
Amendment is pertinent, we quote it here: 


“Any statute that was otherwise valid and 
constitutional that was enacted before 
January 13, 1978, by the legislature of this 
state and was a general act of local applica- 
tion on a population basis, that applied 
only to a certain county or counties or a 
municipality or municipalities of this state, 
shall not be declared invalid or unconstitu- 
tional by any court of this state because it 
was not properly advertised in compliance 
with section 106 of this Constitution. 

“All such population based acts shall for- 
ever apply only to the county or counties or 
municipality or municipalities to which 
they applied on January 13, 1978, and no 
other, despite changes in population.’ 


“The effect of this Amendment was to vali- 
date all ‘bracket bills’ enacted without advertis- 
ing before January 13, 1978, the date of the 
Peddycoart decision, and which were not other- 
wise unconstitutional . . .” 


A-63 


of relationship between its purpose and the expressed 
population classification. As observed in Dearborn v. 
Johnson, 234 Ala. 84, 173 So. 864 (1937), on that subject, 
much is left to legislative discretion in fixing that classifi- 
cation and in recognizing that purpose. In Coach v. 
Rodgers, 253 Ala. 533, 45 So.2d 699 (1950), this Court 
reviewed a number of its decisions that had upheld 
“bracket bills” of substantial minimum, but no maxi- 
mum, population classifications: 


“We have numerous decisions which give il- 
lustration to the principle. We will not under- 
take to analyze them all, but only such as seem 
to shed light upon the instant suit. In the case 
of Wages v. State, 225 Ala. 2, 141 So. 707 708 
{1932], this Court was dealing with an act simi- 
lar to the one here involved. By its terms it had 
application to counties having a population of 
three hundred thousand or more according to 
the last or any subsequent federal census. The 
Court there undertook to apply the principle 
which we have stated above. The act was held to 
be general, although it then applied only to Jef- 
ferson County. We quote from that opinion as 
follows: ‘The wisdom of the law and the neces- 
sity for its enactment and the classification 
adopted were addressed to the lawmaking body. 
It may be well said, this body understood and 
appreciated the necessity of furnishing protec- 
tion to the people in the matter legislated upon 
in the act, in the larger and more populous 
counties of the state, which was not necessary or 


Act No. 406 was approved in 1967, well before the date 
of the Peddycoart decision of January 13, 1978, and, as a 
general law of local application, was validated by Amend- 
ment 389 even though it was not advertised under Sec- 
tion 106 of the Constitution of 1901. 

Even under pre-Peddycoart standards, Act No. 406 must 
survive a constitutional attack based on a supposed lack 


practicable in the smaller counties.’ 


“We have numerous cases which bring out 
that application of the principle wherein it was 
observed that counties of large population may 
reasonably be supposed to be differently served 
in many respects than counties of smaller popu- 
lation and there is sometimes drawn a distinc- 


A-64 


tion between a classification based upon a mini- 
mum population and a classification based 
upon a population with both a minimum and a 
maximum limit. The case of State ex vel. Shirley v. 
Lutz, 226 Ala. 497, 147 So. 429 [1933], brings 
out that distinction. That case was dealing with 
an act regulating the business of plumbing in 
counties having a population of 100,000 or 
more according to the last or any subsequent 
federal census. The Court emphasized the dif- 
ferent principles applicable when there is only a 
minimum but not a maximum number. When 
there is only a minimum, the Court thought a 
more liberal application of the principle should 
be made. 


“In the Opinion of the Justices, 249 Ala. 511, 31 
So.2d 721, we were responding to a legislative 
inquiry as to a proposed act applicable to coun- 
ties of 400,000 population or more according to 
the last or any subsequent federal census, which 
would require the payment to such counties of 
a license tax of one cent on each gallon of gaso- 
line. We thought there was a reasonable rela- 
tion of the subject matter of the Act to counties 
of such population because we thought that in 
large counties the load of traffic on the high- 
ways by reason of such population justified the 
legislature in providing additional income in or- 
der to take care of its effect.” 


It is clear from the terms of Act No. 406 that its pur- 
pose was to provide more populous counties with a 
source of revenue by authorizing them to impose a privi- 
lege Or license tax. The record establishes, if common 
sense does not, that needs and demands for services 
made upon county governments keep pace with urban- 
ization and increases in population, necessitating new 


A-65 


opportunities for revenue. It follows that populous coun- 
ties experience greater demands for costly services than 
those sparsely populated. In this case, therefore, the req- 
uisite relationship was established. Peddycoart, supra. 


Is Act No. 406 unconstitutional under § 105, Constitu- 
tion of 1901? 

Plaintiffs maintain that Act No. 406 is constitutional 
under Section 105, Constitutional of 1901. The pertinent 
part of that section states that “[n]o special, private, or 
local law . . . shall be enacted in any case which is pro- 
vided for by a general law.” Plaintiffs reason that Act No. 
406 is infirm under that provision because of the prior 
enactment of Article I, Chapter 20, Title 51, Code of 
1940, now Article Il, Chapter 12, Title 40, Code of 1975, 
which provides: 


“Every person, firm, company, corporation or 
association, receiver or trustee, but not a gov- 
ernmental subdivision, engaged in any business, 
vocation, occupation, calling or profession 
herein enumerated or who shall exercise any 
privilege hereinafter described for which a li- 
cense or privilege tax is required shall first pro- 
cure a state license, and a county license when 
so required, and shall pay for the same or shall 
pay for the exercise of such privilege the 
amounts hereinafter provided, and comply with 
all other provisions of this title.” 


Section 40-12-40, Code of 1975. 


Act No. 406, as we have stated, is a general law, not a 
local law; thus Section 105 is inapplicable. 


Finally, plaintiffs contend that Act No. 406 fails for 
want of an express provision therein for the collection of 
an occupational tax. Plaintiffs argue further that a read- 


A-66 


ing of Act No. 406 to so provide would violate Section 
104(15) of the Constitution of 1901, which prohibits the 
enactment of a local law “[rjegulating either the assess- 
ment or collection of taxes.” 


For the reasons previously discussed, Act No. 406 is a 
general, not a local, law; hence, this provision, Section 
104(15), is inapplicable. And, as the trial court found: 


“The Courts have long held that there is a 
distinction between the terms ‘assessment’ and 
‘levy’ and held that ‘assessment,’ as used in Sub- 
division (15), relates to property taxes rather 
than privilege taxes. Opinion of the Justices, 266 
Ala. 363, 369, 96 So.2d 634 (1957) (quoting 
Standard Oil Co. v. Limestone County, 220 Ala. 
231, 234-235, 124 So. 523 (1929).” 


Moreover, the grant of authority to “levy a license or 
privilege tax upon any person” in § 4 of Act No. 406 was 
in itself authority to collect such a tax. Cf., Syracuse Trust 
Co. v. Board of Supervisors, 13 N.Y.S.2d 390 (Sup.Ct.), af- 
firmed, 258 A.D. 17, 15 N.Y.S.2d 920 (1939); to “levy” is to 
“collect” a tax. Black’s Law Dictionary (5th ed. 1979) at 
816. 
Let the judgment be affirmed. 


AFFIRMED. 


TORBERT, C.]., and MADDOX, , 
JONES, ALMON, SHORES and 
ADAMS, |]J., concur. 


