       
               
        
            
             
             
             
               
            
              
              
         
             
           
            
           
              
            
             
           
           
           
           
          
               
           
            
            
             
             
             
           
           
               
             
              
              
           
             
           
              
           
             
           
           
            
            
               
             
           
           
   
                 
          
             
            
           
             
        
  
   
   
  
    
   
   
 
   
   
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
  
  
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
 
   
 
  
  
   
    
  
  
  
   
   
 
  
  
  
    
 
THIRTY-NINTH CONGRESS. Sess . I. Ch . 184, 200. 1866. 173
fifth section of an act entitled “ An act to establish the judicial courts of
the United States,” passed September twenty-fourth, seventeen hundred
and eighty-nine, the defendant, if charged with an offence bailable by the
laws of such State, shall not be released from custody until a final judg-
ment upon such writ, or until a bond, with sufficient sureties, in a reason-
able sum, as ordered and approved by the State court, shall be given;
and if the offence is not so bailable, until a final judgment upon the writ
of error. Writs of error in criminal cases shall have precedence upon
the docket of the Supreme Court of all cases to which the government of
the United States is not a party, excepting only such cases as the court,
at their discretion, may decide to be of public importance.
Sec . 70. And be it further enacted, That this act shall take effect,
where not otherwise provided, on the first day of August, eighteen hun-
dred and sixty-six, and all provisions of any former act inconsistent with
the provisions of this act are hereby repealed: Provided, however, That
all the provisions of said acts shall be in force for collecting all taxes,
duties and licenses properly assessed or liable to be assessed, or accruing
under the provisions of acts, the right to which has already accrued or
which may hereafter accrue under said acts, and for maintaining and con-
tinuing liens, fines, penalties, and forfeitures incurred under and by virtue
thereof, and for carrying out and completing all proceedings which have
been already commenced, or that may be commenced, to enforce such
fines, penalties, and forfeitures, or criminal proceedings under said acts,
and for the punishment of crimes of which any party shall be or has been
found guilty : And provided further, That whenever the duty imposed
by any existing law shall cease in consequence of any limitation therein
contained before the respective provisions of this act shall take effect, the
same duty shall be, and is hereby, continued until such provisions of this
act shall take effect; and where any act is hereby repealed, no duty im-
posed thereby shall be held to cease, in consequence of such repeal, until
the respective corresponding provisions of this act shall take effect: And
providedfurther, That all manufactures and productions on which a duty
was imposed by either of the acts repealed by this act, which shall be in
the possession of the manufacturer or producer, or of his agent or agents,
on the day when this act takes effect, the duty imposed by any such for-
mer act not having been paid, shall be held and deemed to have been
manufactured or produced after such date; and whenever by the terms
of this act a duty is imposed upon any articles, goods, wares, or mer-
chandise, manufactured or produced, upon which no duty was imposed by
either of said former acts, it shall apply to such as were manufactured or
produced, and not removed from the place of manufacture or production,
on the day when this act takes effect. And the commissioner of internal
revenue, under the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, is author-
ized to make all necessary regulations and prescribe all necessary forms
and proceedings for the collection of such taxes and the enforcement of
such fines and penalties -for the execution of the provisions of this act.
Sec . 71. And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the
commissioner of internal revenue to have this act, and the acts to which
it is amendatory, published in at least one German newspaper in each 
of the States of the Union where such paper may be published.
Appro ve d, July 13, 1866.
CHAP. CC. —An Act to continue inforce and to amend “An Act to establish a Bureau
for the Relief of Freedmen and Refugees,” andfor other Purposes.
Pe it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America dn Congress assembled, That the act to establish a bu-
reau for the relief of freedmen and refugees, approved March third, eigh-
teen hundred and sixty-five, shall continue in force for the term of two
years from and after the passage of this act.
United States,
defendant is not
to be released
until, &c.
1789, ch. 20, § 25.
Vol. i. p. 85.
If offence is
not bailable.
Writs of error
in criminal cases
to have certain
precedence on
docket of su-
preme court.
When this act
shall take effect.
Repeal of in-
consistent laws.
Provisions of
former laws to
be in force for
certain purposes.
Certain duties
under existing
laws to continue.
Certain duties
not to cease,
though law is
repealed.
Manufactures,
&c. in possession
of manufactur-
ers, when this
act takes effect,
on which duty
has not been
paid, or was not
imposed, to be
deemed to have
been manufac-
tured after such
date.
Commissioner
may make regu-
lations, and pre-
scribe forms and
proceedings.
Tax law to be
published in cer-
tain German
newspapers.
July 16, 1866.
1865, ch. 90.
Vol. xiii. p. 507.
Act establish-
ing bureau for 
relief of freed-
men, &c. con-
tinued in force for
two years.

      
             
              
            
            
         
           
        
             
           
              
           
             
           
             
          
               
           
            
             
              
              
             
           
              
            
              
           
           
             
           
                
             
           
       
             
             
          
             
              
            
             
            
               
            
            
               
             
            
             
           
           
             
              
            
           
               
               
 
   
    
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
THIRTY-NINTH CONGRESS. Sess . I. Ch . 200. 1866.174
Sec . 2. And be it further enacted, That the supervision and care of
said bureau shall extend to all loyal refugees and freedmen, so far as the
same shall be necessary to enable them as speedily as practicable to be-
come self-supporting citizens of the United States, and to aid them in
making the freedom conferred by proclamation of the commander-in-
chief, by emancipation under the laws of States, and by constitutional
amendment, available to them and beneficial to the republic.
Sec . 3. And be it further enacted, That the President shall, by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoint two assistant commis-
sioners, in addition to those authorized by the act to which this is an
amendment, who shall give like bonds and receive the same annual sal-
aries provided in said act, and each of the assistant commissioners of the
bureau shall have charge, of one district containing such refugees or freed-
men, to be assigned him by the commissioner with the approval of the
President. And the commissioner shall, under the direction of the Pres-
ident, and so far as the same shall be, in his judgment, necessary for the
efficient and economical administration of the affairs of the bureau, appoint
such agents, clerks, and assistants as may be required for the proper con-
duct of the bureau. Military officers or enlisted men may be detailed for
service and assigned to duty under this act; and the President may, if in
his judgment safe and judicious so to do, detail from the army all the offi-
cers and agents of this bureau; but no officer so assigned shall have
increase of pay or allowances. Each agent or clerk, not heretofore author-
ized by law, not being a military officer, shall have an annual salary of
not less than five hundred dollars, nor more than twelve hundred dollars,
according to the service required of him. And it shall be the duty of
the commissioner, when it can be done consistently with public interest,
to appoint, as assistant commissioners, agents, and clerks, such men as
have proved their loyalty by faithful service in the armies of the Union
during the rebellion. And all persons appointed to service under this
act and the act to which this is an amendment, shall be so far deemed in
the military service of the United States as to be under the military ju-
risdiction, and entitled to the military protection of the government while
in discharge of the duties of their office.
Sec . 4. And be it further enacted, That officers of the veteran reserve
corps or of the volunteer service, now on duty in the Freedmen’s Bureau
as assistant commissioners, agents, medical officers, or in other capacities,
whose regiments or corps have been or may hereafter be mustered out of ser-
vice, may be retained upon such duty as officers of said bureau, with the
same compensation as is now provided by law for their respective grades;
and the Secretary of War shall have power to fill vacancies until other
officers can be detailed in their places without detriment to the public ser-
vice.
Sec . 5. And be it further enacted, That the second section of the act
to which this is an amendment shall be deemed to authorize the Secre-
tary of War to issue such medical stores or other supplies and transpor-
tation, and afford such medical or other aid as here may be needful for the
purposes named in said section: Provided, That no person shall be deemed
“ destitute,” “ suffering,” or “ dependent upon the government for support,”
within the meaning of this act, who is able to find employment, and
could, by proper industry or exertion, avoid such destitution, suffering, or
dependence.
Sec . 6. Whereas, by the provisions of an act approved February
sixth, eighteen hundred and sixty-three, entitled “ An act to amend an act
entitled ‘ An act for the collection of direct taxes in insurrectionary dis-
- tricts within the United States, and for other purposes,’ approved June
‘ seventh, eighteen hundred and sixty-two,” certain lands in the parishes
1 of St. Helena and Saint Luke, South Carolina, were bid in by the United
i States at public tax sales, and by the limitation of said act the time of
Supervision
and care of bu-
reau to extend to
all loyal refugees
and freedmen.
Two assistant
commissioners
to be appointed.
Bonds and
salaries.
Duties.
Agents, clerks,
and assistants.
Military offi-
cers and men
may be detailed
for service.
All officers and
agents of bureau
may be detailed
from army, but
without increase
of pay, &c.
Salaries of
agents and
clerks.
Soldiers to be
appointed when
it can be done,
&c.
All persons ap-
pointed under
this act to be
under military
jurisdiction.
Officers of vet-
eran reserve
corps now in
bureau may be
retained.
Medical stores,
supplies, and
aid.
Who not to be
deemed “ desti-
tute,” “ suffer-
ing,” or “ de-
pendent,” &c.
Sales made to
“ heads of fami-
lies of the Afri-
can race” by the
tax commis-
sioners for South

      
            
          
           
           
               
              
            
            
              
           
            
             
           
           
          
             
             
            
           
          
                
             
              
            
              
            
             
             
               
            
          
         
             
            
           
             
           
             
   
               
            
              
            
                
              
              
             
            
           
             
          
            
           
            
            
            
            
                 
            
 
  
   
  
   
  
 
  
    
 
   
   
   
    
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
    
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
THIRTY-NINTH CONGRESS. Sess . I. Ch . 200. I860. 175
redemption of said lands has expired ; and whereas, in accordance with
instructions issued by President Lincoln on the sixteenth day of Septem-
ber, eighteen hundred and sixty-three, to the United States direct tax
commissioners for South Carolina, certain lands bid in by the United
States in the parish of Saint Helena, in said State, were in part sold by
the said tax commissioners to “ heads of families of the African race,” in
parcels of not more than twenty acres to each purchaser; and whereas,
under said instructions, the said tax commissioners did also set apart as
“ school farms ” certain parcels of land in said parish, numbered on their
plats from one to thirty-three, inclusive, making an aggregate of six
thousand acres, more or less: Therefore, be it further enacted, That the
sales made to “ heads of families of the African race,” under the instruc-
tions of President Lincoln to the United States direct tax commissioners
for South Carolina, of date of September sixteenth, eighteen hundred and
sixty-three, are hereby confirmed and established; and all leases which
have been made to such “ heads of families,” by said direct tax commis-
sioners, shall be changed into certificates of sale in all cases wherein the
lease provides for such substitution ; and all the lands now remaining un-
sold, which come within the same designation, being eight thousand acres,
more or less, shall be disposed of according to said instructions.
Sec . 7. And be itfurther enacted, That all other lands bid in by the United
States at tax sales, being thirty-eight thousand acres more or less, and now
in the hands of the said tax commissioners as the property of the United
States, in the parishes of Saint Helena and Saint Luke, excepting the
“ school farms,” as specified in the preceding section, and so much as may
be necessary for military and naval purposes at Hilton Head, Bay Point,
and Land’s End, and excepting also the city of Port Royal, on Saint
Helena Island, and the town of Beaufort, shall be disposed of in parcels
of twenty acres, at one dollar and fifty cents per acre, to such persons and
to such only as have acquired and are now occupying lands under and 
agreeably to the provisions of General Sherman’s special field order,
dated at Savannah, Georgia, January sixteenth, eighteen hundred and
sixty-five; and the remaining lands, if any, shall be disposed of in like
manner to such persons as had acquired lands agreeably to the said
order of General Sherman, but who have been dispossessed by the res-
toration of the same to former owners: Provided, That the lands sold in
compliance with the provisions of this and the preceding section shall
not be alienated by their purchasers within six years from and after the
passage of this act.
Sec . 8. And be it further enacted, That the “ school farms ” in the
parish of Saint Helena, South Carolina, shall be sold, subject to any
leases of the same, by the said tax commissioners, at public auction, on or
before the first day of January, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, at not
less than ten dollars per acre; and the lots in the city of Port Royal, as
laid down by the said tax commissioners, and the lots and houses in the
town of Beaufort, which are still held in like manner, shall be sold at
public auction ; and the proceeds of said sales, after paying expenses of
the surveys and sales, shall be invested in United States bonds, the in-
terest of which shall be appropriated, under the direction of the commis-
sioner, to the support of schools, without distinction of color or race, on
the islands in the parishes of Saint Helena and Saint Luke.
Sec . 9. And be it further enacted, That the assistant commissioners for
South Carolina and Georgia are hereby authorized to examine all claims
to lands in their respective States which are claimed under the provisions
of General Sherman’s special field order, andto give each person having
a valid claim a warrant upon the direct tax commissioners for South
Carolina for twenty acres of land; and the said direct tax commissioners
shall issue to every person, or to his or her heirs, but in no case to any
assigns, presenting such warrant, a lease of twenty acres of land, as pro-
Carolina con-
firmed.
1863, ch. 21.
Vol. xii. p. 640.
Leases, when
may be changed
into certificates
of sale.
Lands now un-
sold, how to be
disposed of.
Other lands in
parishes of Saint
Helena and Saint
Luke bid in at
tax sales, except
‘‘school farms,”
&c. to be dis-
posed of in par-
cels;
to whom, in
what quantity,
and for what
price may be
sold.
Lands so sold
not to be alien-
ated within six
years.
“ School
farms” in the
parish of Saint
Helena to be sold;
how, when, and
for what price.
Lots in Port
Royal and lots
and houses in 
Beaufort.
Proceeds of
sales how in-
vested and ap-
plied.
Assistant com-
missioners to
examine claims
under General
Sherman’s spe-
cial field order.
Valid claims
to have warrants
for twenty acres.
Lease.

      
                 
             
             
              
               
               
            
            
             
            
             
            
              
            
               
  
            
          
          
             
             
              
        
              
    
            
             
           
            
              
              
            
            
            
          
            
        
            
           
            
             
          
          
             
  
             
          
              
          
           
             
            
             
             
          
           
            
             
  
   
  
   
    
 
 
   
   
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
 
   
    
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
  
  
 
 
    
  
   
 
THIRTY-NINTH CONGRESS. Sess . I. Ch . 200 1866.176
vided for in section seven, for the term of six years ; but at any time
thereafter, upon the payment of a sum not exceeding one dollar and fifty
cents per acre, the person holding such lease shall be entitled to a certifi-
cate of sale of said tract of twenty acres from the direct tax cornmis-
sioner or such officer as may be authorized to issue the same; but no
warrant shall be held valid longer than two years after the issue of the
same.
Sec . 10. And be it further enacted, That the direct tax commissioners
for South Carolina are hereby authorized and required at the earliest day
practicable to survey the lands designated in section seven info lots of
twenty acres each, with proper metes and bounds distinctly marked, so that
the several tracts shall be convenient in form, and as near as practicable
have an average of fertility and woodland; and the expense of such
surveys shall be paid from the proceeds of sales of said lands, or, if
sooner required, out of any moneys received for other lands on these
islands, sold by the United States for taxes, and now in the hands of the
direct tax commissioners
Sec . 11. And be it further enacted, That restoration of lands occupied
by freedmen under General Sherman’s field order dated at Savannah,
Georgia, January sixteenth, eighteen hundred and sixty-five, shall not be
made until after the crops of the present year shall have been gathered
by the occupants of said lands, nor until a fair compensation shall have
been made to them by the former owners of such lands, or their legal
representatives, for all improvements or betterments erected or construct-
ed thereon, and after due notice of the same being done shall have been
given by the assistant commissioner.
Sec . 12. And be it further enacted, That the commissioner shall have
power to seize, hold, use, lease, or sell all buildings and tenements, and
any lands appertaining to the same, or otherwise, formerly held under
color of title by the late so-called confederate states, and not heretofore
disposed of by the United States, and any buildings or lands held in trust
for the same by any person or persons, and to use the same or appropri-
ate the proceeds derived therefrom to the education of the freed people;
and whenever the bureau shall cease to exist, such of said so-called con-
federate states as shall have made provision for the education of their
citizens without distinction of color shall receive the sum remaining unex-
pended of such sales or rentals, which shall be distributed among said
states for educational purposes in proportion to their population.
Sec . 13. And be itfurther enacted, That the commissioner of this bu-
reau shall at all times co-operate with private benevolent associations of
citizens in aid of freedmen, and with agents and teachers, duly accredited
and appointed by them, and shall hire or provide by lease buildings for
purposes of education whenever such associations shall, without cost to
the government, provide suitable teachers and means of instruction ; and 
he shall furnish such protection as may be required for the safe conduct
of such schools.
Sec . 1-1. And be it further enacted, That in every State or district
where the ordinary course of judicial proceedings has been interrupted
by the rebellion, and until the same shall be fully restored, and in every
State or district whose constitutional relations to the government have
been practically discontinued by the rebellion, and until such State shall
have been restored in such relations, and shall be duly represented in the
Congress of the United States, the right to make and enforce contracts,
to sue, be parties, and give evidence, to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold,
and convey real and personal property, and to have full and equal benefit
of all laws and proceedings concerning personal liberty, personal security,
and the acquisition, enjoyment, and disposition of estate, real and personal,
including the constitutional right to bear arms, shall be secured to and en-
joyed by all the citizens of such State or district without respect to race
Persons holding
lease to have
certificate of
sale.
No warrant to
be valid for over
two years.
Lands desig-
nated in section
seven to be sur-
veyed into lots of
twenty acres
each, &c.
Restoration of
lands occupied
by freedmen un-
der General
Sherman’s field
order not to be
made until, &c.
Commissioner
may hold and
sell all lands and
buildings held
by the so-called
confederate
states and not
disposed of, &c.
Proceeds how
applied.
When bureau
ceases to exist,
unexpended
sums to go
where.
Commissioner
to co-operate
with private be-
nevolent associa-
tions in aid of
freedmen, &c.;
to provide
buildings and
furnish teachers
and protection.
Immunities
and rights of all
citizens declared
in certain States
and districts.

      
            
           
            
            
            
           
             
          
          
            
            
             
            
            
              
           
              
             
             
            
            
            
               
             
      
 
     
    
     
       
  
            
          
                
           
          
      
            
     
  
    
       
  
          
                
            
           
             
           
  
             
  
   
       
  
    
  
  
 
  
   
   
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
  
    
 
THIRTY-NINTH CONGRESS. Sess . I. Ch . 200. 1866.
or color, or previous condition of slavery. And whenever in either of
said States or districts the ordinary course of judicial proceedings has
been interrupted by the rebellion, and until the same shall be fully re-
stored, and until such State shall have been restored in its constitutional
relations to the government, and shall be duly represented in the Congress
of the United States, the President shall, through the commissioner and
the officers of the bureau, and under such rules and regulations as the
President, through the Secretary of War, shall prescribe, extend military
protection and have military jurisdiction over all cases and questions con-
cerning the free enjoyment of such immunities and rights, and no penalty
or punishment for any violation of law shall be imposed or permitted be-
cause of race or color, or previous condition of slavery, other or greater
than the penalty or punishment to which white persons may be liable by 
law for the like offence. But the jurisdiction conferred by this section
upon the officers of the bureau shall not exist in any State where the
ordinary course of judicial proceedings has not been interrupted by the
rebellion, and shall cease in every State when the courts of the State and
the United States are not disturbed in the peaceable course of justice, and
after such State shall be fully restored in its constitutional relations to the
government, and shall be duly represented in the Congress of the United
States.
Sec . 15. And be it further enacted, That all officers, agents, and
employes of this bureau, before entering upon the duties of their office
shall take the oath prescribed in the first section of the act to which this
is anamendment; and all acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the pro-
visions of this act are hereby repealed.
SCHUYLER COLFAX,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
LA FAYETTE S. FOSTER,
President of the Senate pro tempore.
In th e Hou se of Repr esen ta tiv es, U. S.,
July 16, 1866.
The President of the United States having returned to the House of
Representatives, in which it-originated, the bill entitled “An act to con-
tinue in force and to amend i An act to establish a bureau for the relief
of freedmen and refugees,’ and for other purposes,” with his objections
thereto, the House of Representatives proceeded, in pursuance of the
Constitution, to reconsider the same ; and
Resolved, That the said bill pass, two thirds of the House of Repre-
sentatives agreeing to pass the same.
Attest: EWD. McTHERSON,
Clerk H Reps, U. S.
In th e Sen at eof th e Uni ted Sta te s,
July 16, 1866.
The Senate having proceeded, in pursuance of the Constitution, to re-
consider the bill entitled “ An act to continue in force and to amend ‘ An
act to establish a bureau for the relief of freedmen and refugees,’ and 
for other purposes,” returned to the House of Representatives by the
President of the United States, with his objections, and sent by the House
of Representatives to the Senate with the message of the President re-
turning the bill;
Resolved, That the bill do pass, two thirds of the Senate agreeing to
pass the same.
Attest: J. W. FORNEY,
Secretary of the Senate, U. S.
vo l. xiv. 12
177
Certain states
or districts to be
under military
protection and
jurisdiction.
No discrimi-
nation on ac-
count of race
or color or
previous condi-
tion of slavery.
Jurisdiction of
bureau not to ex-
ist in certain
States, and
to cease in
every State
when, &c.
All officers, &c. 
of bureau to take
oath.
Repealing
clause.
