

No. 36.--Hawkins H. Nunn vs. The State of Georgia.







[ Back | Home ]

[Cite as Nunn v. State, 1 Ga. (1 Kel.) 243 
(1846).]

No. 36.--Hawkins H. Nunn vs. The State of Georgia.



An indictment, founded upon a presentment of the 
grand jury, need not be sent again before that body for its action thereon.

It is the duty of the clerk to spread out in 
full upon the minutes of the court, every presentment of the grand 
jury.

A law which merely inhibits the wearing of certain 
weapons in a concealed manner is valid. But so far as it cuts 
off the exercise of the right of the citizen altogether to bear arms, 
or, under the color of prescribing the mode, renders the right itself 
useless--it is in conflict with the Constitution, and void.

This was a bill of indictment, founded upon a 
presentment of a grand jury at Sumpter Superior Court, against he plaintiff in 
error, for a high misdemeanor, for having and keeping about his person, and 
elsewhere, a pistol, the same not being such a pistol as is known and used as a 
horseman's pistol, under an act of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, 
entitled "An Act to guard and protect the citizens of this State against the 
unwarrantable and too prevalent use of deadly weapons," assented to on the 25th 
December, 1837; upon which bill was endorsed by the solicitor-general, that the 
same was "founded on the presentment of a grand jury."--The bill of indictment, 
so made out and endorsed, as founded upon presentment, &c, had not at any 
time been sent out to a grand jury, and found a true bill: that the only 
evidence of there having been a presentment made in said case was a paper, 
purporting to be a presentment of the grand jury for the November Term, 1844, of 
said court, and an entry made upon the minutes of the court for the said term, 
as follows, to wit:

  
   "The State       )
                    )
      vs            ) High Misdemeanor."
                    )
"Hawkins H. Nunn    )

And the names of the grand jurors inserted in the 
said paper, purporting to be the presentment, were the names of the grand jurors 
of said term.(p.244)

At May Term, 1846, of said Superior Court, the said bill of 
indictment came on to be tried before Judge Warren; when the plaintiff in error 
having been arraigned, and plead not guilty by his counsel, moved to quash the 
indictment on the following grounds:

1st. That the before-recited statute of the State of Georgia, 
assented to on the 25th of December, 1837, under which said indictment was 
found, is contrary to, and in violation of, the Constitution of the United 
States of America.

2d. That said statute is contrary to, and in violation of, the 
Constitution of the State of Georgia.

3d. That the indictment does not show and charge that the defendant 
below carried the pistol, with the having and keeping of which he is charged, 
secretly.

4th. That there is no sufficient legal evidence of record upon the 
minutes of the court, at the term at which the presentment, upon which said 
indictment is framed, purports to have been made, that said presentment ever was 
in fact made by the grand jury, or delivered into court.

5th. That the bill of indictment was never sent before any grand jury 
for action upon it.

6th. That said statute is void for uncertainty, and for the 
absurdity and contradiction in its different provisions.

All of which said grounds were overruled by the court below; and the 
plaintiff in error excepted. George Dykes, a witness for the State, was then 
introduced, and proved that on the 4th day of November, 1844, the plaintiff in 
error, in said county of Sumpter, had a pistol in his hand, which was not a 
horsemen's pistol, but a breast pistol. And thereupon, after argument, the judge 
of the court below charged the jury that the aforesaid statute was 
constitutional and of force, and if they believed that the defendant had the 
pistol, they should bring in a verdict of guilty. To which the plaintiff in 
error also excepted.

Dudley and Crawford and T.C. Sullivan, for the 
plaintiff in error,

Contended, 1st. That the act of 1837, under which 
the indictment in this case was framed, is contrary to the Constitution of the 
U.S.--Prin. Dig. 900, 2d Amendment; Patrol 
law Prin. Dig. 774; Militia Law U.S. Ing. Dig. 
596; Ib. Georgia, Prin. Dig. 588; 4 
Wheaton 2d Condensed Reps. Supreme Ct. 326; 9 
Wheat. 562; 1 Ala. Rep. New Series 614; 
2d Litt. 90; 3 Blackf'd 229.

2d. That said act is contrary to the Constitution of the State of 
Georgia.--Prin. Dig. 904; 17 sec. 
1st art. Constitution.

3d. The indictment does not charge that the pistol was carried 
secretly.--Pamphlet Laws of 1837, p.90; Prin. 
Dig. 774.

4th. That there was no sufficient legal evidence that the 
presentment had been made and delivered into court by the grand jury. Our 
statute requires the clerk to keep minutes of all the proceedings in the court, 
(Prin. Dig. 428,) and presentments should either be entered 
at full length on the minutes, or such an entry should be made as to show 
conclusively that the presentment had been made. Such an entry as made in this 
case, to wit: "The State vs. Hawkins H. Nunn, high misdemeanor," is 
insufficient.

5th. That the indictment was never acted on by the grand 
jury.--Prin. Dig. 659; 14 division 5th 
sec. 3 Blk. Com., 4 Com. Dig. 645, note u.; 
1 Chit. Cr. Law 162-3; Stephen Crim. 
Law.

6th. Said statute is void for its absurdities and conflicting 
provisions.--Pamphlet Laws, 1837, page 90.(p.245)

Wm. J. Patterson, Sol. 
Gen. for the State.

Before the court will declare an act of the 
Legislature unconstitutional, a case must be presented in which there can be no 
rational doubt.--1 Ala. Rep. 612, New 
Series; 1 Cowen Rep. 550; 1 Com. 
Law Rep. 146. There was sufficient legal evidence of the 
presentment.--4 Phillips' Ev. 1068-1074; Roscoe's 
Crim. Ev. 186. It was not necessary for the grand jury to act upon 
the bill of indictment, predicated as it was on a special presentment.--1 
Chit. Crim. Law, 162; 4 Blk. Com. 301.

By the Court.--Lumpkin, Judge.

This was an indictment for a high misdemeanor, 
founded upon the presentment of a grand jury in Sumpter Superior Court.

At May term, 1846, the defendant, being arraigned, pleaded not 
guilty, and moved to quash the proceeding on the following grounds, to wit: 1st 
and 2d. Because the act of 1837, under which he was prosecuted, was contrary to 
the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia.

3d. Because the indictment does not show and charge that the 
defendant (below) carried the pistols secretly, with the having and 
keeping of which he is charged in the indictment.

4th. Because there is no sufficient evidence of record that said 
presentment ever was made by a grand jury, or delivered into court.

5th. Because the bill of indictment was never sent before any grand 
jury for action upon it.

6th. Because the act of 1837 is void for uncertainty, and the 
absurdity and contradictions in its different provisions.

All these objections being overruled by Judge Warren, they are now 
presented in the bill of exceptions for the determination of the Supreme 
Court.

The view taken by us of the first grounds submitted to our 
consideration, will dispose finally of this case: still, as there are several 
important points of practice contained in some of the other grounds, and which 
are properly before us, and have been fully discussed by counsel, we deem it 
advisable to express our opinion respecting them.

In the opinion of this court, it is not necessary that an 
indictment, founded upon presentments, should be referred to the grand jury for 
the further action of that body. A presentment is the notice taken already by 
the grand jury of any offence, from their own knowledge or observation, and into 
which it is their duty to inquire. And although the party cannot be put to 
answer it until it is delivered into court, and an indictment framed thereon by 
the proper officer, still, it is never sent back to the grand inquest to be 
acted on a second time.--Burn's J. Presentment; 1 
Chitty's Crim. Law, 163. Neither is it indispensably necessary 
that the whole presentment be spread upon the minutes of the court, 
with the action of the jury thereon. The endorsement on the paper itself, of 
file in the office, or the signatures of the body, or of the foreman, in the 
name of himself and his fellows, aided by the testimony of the solicitor and 
clerk, would be sufficient. It is, however, a highly useful and safe practice, 
and a duty required to be performed, no doubt, by the law, that the whole 
presentment be put upon the minutes.

It is always with unfeigned reluctance that we approach a question 
involving the constitutionality of a state law. It is made our duty, however, 
(p.246)in the present case, and we should be 
unworthy of the exalted station we occupy, if we were to shrink from its 
performance.

There are certain fundamental principles appertaining to questions 
of this character, which should never be overlooked. I will state a few of them, 
and then proceed to examine the statutes in controversy.

It ought seldom or ever to be decided, in a doubtful case, 
that a law is void for repugnance to the Constitution. And it is not on slight 
implications and vague conjectures that the Legislature is to be pronounced to 
have transcended its powers. On the contrary, the opposition between the law and 
the Constitution should be such, that the judges feel a clear and strong 
conviction of their incompatibility with each other. The presumption is in favor 
of every legislative act, and the whole burden of proof lies on him who denies 
its constitutionality. These doctrines have been repeatedly advanced by the 
highest judicatory in the nation.--See 6 Cranch, 
128; 4 Wheaton, 625; 12 
Ib. 436.

The act of 1837 was passed to guard and protect the citizens of the 
State against the unwarrantable and too prevalent use of deadly 
weapons.

Section 1st enacts, "that it shall not be lawful for any merchant or 
vendor of wares or merchandize in this State, or any other person or persons 
whatever, to sell, or to offer to sell, or to keep or to have about their 
persons, or elsewhere, any of the herein-after-described weapons, to wit: Bowie 
or any other kinds of knives, manufactured and sold for the purpose of wearing 
or carrying the same as arms of offence or defence; pistols, dirks, sword-canes, 
spears, &c., shall also be contemplated in this act, save such pistols as 
are known and used as horseman's pistols," &c.

Section 2d, prescribes the punishment.

Section 3d, makes it the duty of all civil officers to be vigilant 
in carrying the act into full effect, &c.

Section 4th, disposes of the fines arising under the act, and 
exempts sheriffs and other officers, therein named, from its provisions while in 
the actual discharge of their respective duties. It then declares, that no 
person or persons shall be found guilty of violating the before-recited act, who 
shall openly wear, externally, bowie-knives, dirks, tooth-picks, spears, and 
which shall be exposed plainly to view. It allows vendors or any other 
persons to sell any of the aforesaid weapons, which they then owned or had on 
hand, "till the first day of March next ensuing its date."

There is great vagueness in the wording of this statute. It would 
seem to have been the intention of the Legislature to make the proviso in 
the 4th section as broad as the enacting clause in the 1st. But such is not the 
fact. Pistols and sword-canes are inserted in the 1st, and omitted in the 4th 
section; and tooth-picks are mentioned for the first time in the proviso, 
in the 4th section. Were we disposed to criticise language, an ample field is 
here spread out before us. It might be insisted, and with much plausibility, 
that even sheriffs, and other officers therein enumerated, 
might be convicted for keeping, as well as carrying, any of the 
forbidden weapons, while not in the actual discharge of their respective duties. 
And yet it is hardly to be supposed, that it was expected of sheriffs, 
constables, marshals, overseers and patrols, to procure a new supply of arms for 
each successive service, and throw them away when it was accomplished: 
for they dare not sell or otherwise dispose of them after March, 1838. It is the 
plain and literal meaning of the act, too, (p.247)that no person should be found guilty of selling or 
offering to sell, or keeping or having about their persons, or elsewhere, bowie 
or any other kind of knives, pistols, dirks, sword-canes, or spears, who 
shall openly wear, externally, bowie-knives, dirks, tooth-picks, and 
spears, and which shall be exposed plainly to view. But this would be an 
absurdity too glaring to impute to the wisdom of that body.

What, then, is the obvious purpose of the Assembly, to be deduced 
from the whole act, deviating a little, as we are at liberty to do, from the 
literal meaning of its language, and looking to the subject matter, to 
which the words are always supposed to have regard, and the reason and spirit of 
the act? It prohibits bowie-knives, dirks, spears, (and it may be, 
tooth-picks,) from being sold, or secretly kept about the person, or 
elsewhere; and it forbids, altogether, the use, or sale, or keeping, of 
sword-canes, and pistols, save such pistols as are known and used as horseman's 
pistols, &c. Now, the defendant, Hawkins H. Nunn, was indicted and 
convicted of a high misdemeanor, "for having and keeping about his person, 
and elsewhere, a pistol, the same not being such a pistol as is known and used 
as a horseman's pistol."

It is not pretended that he carried his weapon secretly, 
but it is charged as a crime, that he had and kept it about his person, and 
elsewhere. And this presents for our decision the broad question, is it 
competent for the Legislature to deny to one of its citizens this privilege? 
We think not.

This question has occasionally come before the courts of the Union 
for adjudication. In Bliss vs. The Commonwealth, (2 
Littell's Rep. 90,) the 
defendant was indicted, on the act of the Legislature "to prevent persons from 
wearing concealed arms." It provides that any person in the Commonwealth, who 
shall, after its passage, "wear a pocket-pistol, dirk, large knife, or sword in 
a cane, concealed as a weapon, unless when traveling on a journey, shall be 
fined in any sum not less than one hundred dollars; which may be recovered in 
any court having jurisdiction of like sums, by action of debt, or on presentment 
of a grand jury."

The indictment, in the words of the act, charges Bliss with having 
worn, concealed as a weapon, a sword in a cane.

Bliss was found guilty of the charge, and a fine of one hundred 
dollars assessed by the jury, and judgment was thereon rendered by the court. To 
reverse that judgment, Bliss appealed to the Supreme Court, by a majority of 
which (Judge Mills dissenting) the judgment was reversed.

The argument in this case turned mainly on the 23d 
section of the 10th article of the Constitution of Kentucky, which 
provides "that the right of the citizens to bear arms in defence of themselves 
and the State, shall not be questioned."

The attorney-general did not contend that it would be competent for 
the Legislature, by the enactment of any law, to prevent the citizens from 
bearing arms; but a distinction was taken between a law prohibiting the exercise 
of the right, and a law merely regulating the manner of exercising that right. 
And while the former was admitted to be incompatible with the Constitution, it 
was insisted that the latter was not so. And under that distinction, and by 
assigning the act in question a place in the latter description of laws, its 
consistency with the Constitution was attempted to be maintained.(p.248)

But the court say, "that the provisions of the act in question do 
not import an entire destruction of the right, will not be controverted; for 
though the citizens are forbid wearing weapons, concealed in the manner 
described in the act, they may nevertheless bear arms in any admissible form. 
But to be in conflict with the Constitution, it is not essential that the 
act should contain a prohibition against bearing arms, in every possible form. 
It is the right to bear arms, that is secured by the Constitution, and whatever 
restrains the full and complete exercise of that right, though not an entire 
destruction of it, is forbidden by the explicit language of the 
Constitution."

"If, therefore, the act in question imposes any restraint on the 
right, immaterial what appellation may be given to the act, whether it be an act 
regulating the manner of bearing arms, or any other, the consequence in 
reference to the Constitution is precisely the same, and its collision with that 
instrument equally obvious."

"And can there be entertained a reasonable doubt, but the provisions 
of the act import a restraint on the right of the citizens to bear arms? The 
court apprehends not. The right has no limits, short of the moral power of the 
citizens to exercise it, and in fact consists of nothing else but the 
liberty. Diminish that liberty, therefore, and you necessarily restrain the 
right; and such is the diminution and restraint which the act in question most 
indisputably imports, by prohibiting the citizens bearing weapons. In truth, the 
right of the citizens to bear arms has been as directly assailed by the 
provisions of this act, as though they were forbid carrying guns on their 
shoulders, swords in scabbards, or when in conflict with an enemy, were not 
allowed the use of bayonets. And, if the act be consistent with the 
Constitution, it cannot be incompatible with that instrument for the Legislature 
by successive enactments to entirely cut off the exercise of the right of the 
citizens to bear arms. For in principle there is no difference between a law 
prohibiting the wearing concealed arms, and a law forbidding the wearing of such 
as are exposed; and, if the former be unconstitutional, the latter must be so 
likewise."

The conclusion at which the court arrived was, that an act to 
prevent persons from wearing even concealed weapons is unconstitutional and 
void.

In the State vs. Reid, (1 Ala. Rep. 612,) the 
same question came up, but was differently adjudged; thus verifying the old 
truth, "tot homines, quot sententiae,"--so many men, so many 
opinions!

By the first section of the act of Alabama (passed 
1838-1839) it is declared, "that if any person shall carry concealed 
about his person any species of fire-arms, or any bowie knife, Arkansas 
tooth-pick, or any other knife of the like kind, dirk, or any other deadly 
weapon, the person so offending shall, on conviction thereof before any court 
having competent jurisdiction, pay a fine not less than fifty, nor more than 
five hundred dollars, to be assessed by the jury trying the case; and be 
imprisoned for a term not exceeding three months, at the discretion of the judge 
of said court."

Under this section, the defendant was indicted in the Circuit Court 
of Montgomery, for carrying concealed about his person a certain species of 
fire-arms, called a pistol, contrary to the form of the statute. The defendant 
pleaded not guilty, and insisted, that the law under which he was 
prosecuted, was contrary to the constitution of Alabama, which declares, "that 
every citizen has a right to bear arms in defence of himself and the 
State."--23d sect. 1st art. of the 
Constitution.(p.249)

Collier, Chief Justice, says: "The question recurs, does the act "to 
suppress the evil practice of carrying weapons secretly," trench upon the 
constitutional rights of the citizen? We think not.

"The Constitution, in declaring that every citizen has the right to 
bear arms, in defence of himself and the State, has neither expressly nor by 
implication denied to the Legislature the right to enact laws in regard to 
the manner in which arms shall be borne.

"We do not desire to be understood as maintaining, that in 
regulating the manner of bearing arms, the authority of the Legislature has no 
other limit than its own discretion. A statute which, under the pretence of 
regulating, amounts to a destruction of the right, or which 
requires arms to be so borne as to render them wholly useless for the purpose of 
defence, would be clearly unconstitutional. But a law which is merely intended 
to promote personal security, and to put down lawless aggression and violence, 
and to this end prohibits the wearing of certain weapons in such a manner as is 
calculated to exert an unhappy influence upon the moral feelings of the wearer, 
by making him less regardful of the personal security of others, does not come 
in collision with the Constitution.

The same point arose in the case of The State vs. 
Mitchell.--3 Black. Rep. 229. 
There the defendant was indicted under a statute of Indiana, which is as 
follows: "Every person, not being a traveler, who shall wear or carry a dirk, 
pistol, sword in a cane, or other dangerous weapon, concealed, shall, 
upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred 
dollars."--Laws of Indiana, ed. of 1831, p.192.

The court decided that this act was not contrary to the Constitution 
of that State, which declares that "the people have a right to bear arms for the 
defence of themselves and the State."

It is true, that these adjudications are all made on clauses in the 
State Constitutions; but these instruments confer no new rights on the 
people which did not belong to them before. When, I would ask, did any 
legislative body in the Union have the right to deny to its citizens the 
privilege of keeping and bearing arms in defence of themselves and their 
country?

If this right, "inestimable to freemen," has been guarantied to 
British subjects, since the abdication and flight of the last of the Stuarts and 
the ascension of the Prince of Orange, did it not belong to our colonial 
ancestors in this western hemisphere? Has it been a part of the English 
Constitution ever since the bill of rights and act of settlement? and been 
forfeited here by the substitution and adoption of our own Constitution? No 
notion can be more fallacious than this! On the contrary, this is one of the 
fundamental principles, upon which rests the great fabric of civil liberty, 
reared by the fathers of the Revolution and of the country. And the Constitution 
of the United States, in declaring that the right of the people to keep and bear 
arms, should not be infringed, only reiterated a truth announced a century 
before, in the act of 1689, "to extend and secure the rights and liberties of 
English subjects"--whether living 3,000 or 300 miles from the royal palace. And 
it is worthy of observation, that both charters or compacts look to the same 
motive, for the irrespective enactments. The act of 1 
William and Mary, declares that it is against law to raise or keep 
a standing army in the kingdom, in time of peace, without the consent of 
Parliament, and therefore places arms in (p.250)the hands of the people; and our Constitution assigns as 
a reason why this right shall not be interfered with, or in any manner abridged, 
that the free enjoyment of it will prepare and qualify a well-regulated 
militia, which are necessary to the security of a free State.

I am aware that it has been decided, that this, like other 
amendments adopted at the same time, is a restriction upon the government of the 
United States, and does not extend to the individual States. The court held 
otherwise, however, in the case of the People vs. Goodwin, 
(18 John. Rep. 200) and Chief Justice Spencer, who delivered its 
opinion, says: "The defendant's counsel rely principally on the fifth article of the amendments to the Constitution of the United 
States, which contains this provision: 'Nor, shall any person be 
subject, for the same offence, to be twice put in jeopardy of life or 
limb.' It has been urged by the prisoner's counsel, that this 
constitutional provision operates upon State courts--proprio vigore. This 
has been denied on the other side. I am inclined to the opinion, that 
the article in question does extend to all judicial tribunals, whether 
constituted by the Congress of the United States or the States individually. The 
provision is general in its nature and unrestricted in its terms; and the sixth 
article of the Constitution declares, that that Constitution shall be the 
supreme law of the land, and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, 
any thing in the constitution or laws of any State to the contrary not 
withstanding. These general and comprehensive expressions extend the 
provisions of the Constitution of the United States, to every article which is 
not confined by the subject matter to the national government, and is equally 
applicable to the States. Be this as it may, the principle is undeniable, 
that no person can be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb for the same 
offence."

The language of the second amendment 
is broad enough to embrace both Federal and State governments--nor is there 
anything in its terms which restricts its meaning. The preamble which was 
prefixed to these amendments shows, that they originated in the fear that the 
powers of the general government were not sufficiently limited. Several of the 
States, in their act of ratification, recommended that further restrictive 
clauses should be added. And in the first session of the first Congress, 
ten of these amendments having been agreed to by that body, 
and afterwards sanctioned by three-fourths of the States, became a part of the 
Constitution. But admitting all this, does it follow that because the people 
refused to delegate to the general government the power to take from them the 
right to keep and bear arms, that they designed to rest it in the State 
governments? Is this a right reserved to the States or to 
themselves? Is it not an inalienable right, which lies at the bottom of 
every free government? We do not believe that, because the people withheld this 
arbitrary power of disfranchisement from Congress, they ever intended to confer 
it on the local legislatures. This right is too dear to be confided to a 
republican legislature.

Questions under some of these amendments, it is true, can only arise 
under the laws and Constitution of the United States. But there are other 
provisions in them, which were never intended to be thus restricted, but were 
designed for the benefit of every citizen of the Union in all courts and in all 
places; and the people of the several States, in ratifying them in their 
respective State conventions, have virtually adopted them (p.251)as beacon-lights to guide and control the action of 
their own legislatures, as well as that of Congress. If a well-regulated militia 
is necessary to the security of the State of Georgia and of 
the United States, is it competent for the General Assembly to take away this 
security, by disarming the people? What advantage would it be to tie up the 
hands of the national legislature, if it were in the power of the 
States to destroy this bulwark of defence? In solemnly affirming that a 
well-regulated militia is necessary to the security of a free 
State, and that, in order to train properly that militia, the unlimited 
right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not 
be impaired, are not the sovereign people of the State committed by this pledge 
to preserve this right inviolate? Would they not be recreant to themselves, to 
free government, and false to their own vow, thus voluntarily taken, to suffer 
this right to be questioned? If they hesitate or falter, is it not to concede 
(themselves being judges) that the safety of the States is a matter of 
indifference?

Such, I apprehend, was never the meaning of the venerated statesman 
who recommended, nor of the people who adopted, this amendment.

The right of the people peaceably to assemble and petition the 
government for a redress of grievances; to be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures; in all criminal 
prosecutions, to be confronted with the witness against them; to be publicly 
tried by an impartial jury; and to have the assistance of counsel for their 
defence, is as perfect under the State as the national legislature, and 
cannot be violated by either.

Nor is the right involved in this discussion less 
comprehensive or valuable: "The right of the people to bear arms shall not be 
infringed." The right of the whole people, old and young, men, women and boys, 
and not militia only, to keep and bear arms of every description, not 
such merely as are used by the militia, shall not be 
infringed, curtailed, or broken in upon, in the smallest degree; and 
all this for the important end to be attained: the rearing up and qualifying a 
well-regulated militia, so vitally necessary to the security of a free State. 
Our opinion is, that any law, State or Federal, is repugnant to the 
Constitution, and void, which contravenes this right, originally 
belonging to our forefathers, trampled under foot by Charles I. and his two 
wicked sons and successors, reestablished by the revolution of 1688, conveyed to 
this land of liberty by the colonists, and finally incorporated conspicuously in 
our own Magna Charta! And Lexington, Concord, Camden, River Raisin, 
Sandusky, and the laurel-crowned field of New Orleans, plead eloquently for this 
interpretation! And the acquisition of Texas may be considered the full fruits 
of this great constitutional right.

We are of the opinion, then, that so far as the act of 1837 seeks to 
suppress the practice of carrying certain weapons secretly, that it is 
valid, inasmuch as it does not deprive the citizen of his natural right 
of self-defence, or of his constitutional right to keep and bear arms. But that 
so much of it, as contains a prohibition against bearing arms openly, 
is in conflict with the Constitution, and void; and that, as the 
defendant has been indicted and convicted for carrying a pistol, without 
charging that it was done in a concealed manner, under that portion of the 
statute which entirely forbids its use, the judgment of the court below must be 
reversed, and the proceeding quashed.
