(;) 
[ »uoreme Court, us. 


FILED 


NO. 95- 95 ° 48 9s: 2; 1995 


INTHE ENCE OF THE cieRK 


Supreme Court of the Anited States 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN 
COMMITTEE AnD DOUGLAS L. JONES, AS TREASURER, 


v. Petitioners, 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Respondent. 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


*Jan Witold Baran 
Thomas W. Kirby 
Carol A. Laham 
Michael E. Toner 
Scott S. Harris 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 429-7000 


Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 


September 21, 1995 


i 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED 


1. Do the limitations imposed by 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d) of the 
Federal Election Campaign Act (‘‘FECA” or ‘‘Act’’) on the right 
of political parties to make expenditures ‘“‘in connection with 
the general election campaign of a candidate”’ violate the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution, either facially or 
as applied? 


2. Should the limitations that § 441a(d)(3) places on ‘“‘any 
expenditure in connection with the general election campaign 
of a candidate”’ be construed to restrict a political party's 
advertising ‘that involves a clearly identified candidate and an 
electioneering message,’’ even where, as here, (i) the party has 
not coordinated with its candidate (or even selected a candi- 
date), (ii) the self-proclaimed ‘‘candidate”’ that is ‘‘involved’’ in 
the political advertisement is an incumbent congressman and 
has not been nominated by- the opposing party, and (iii) the 
supposed “‘electioneering message’’ does not include ‘“‘express 
advocacy” of the election or defeat of anyone, but merely 
makes statements that a reasonable person might regard as 
tending to ‘“diminish’’ support for the ‘‘candidate’’? 


3. Did the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Cir- 
cuit err in giving Chevron deference to two advisory opinions 
of the Federal Election Commission where (i) FECA, 2 U.S.C. 
§ 437(b), forbids the Commission to establish any ‘‘rule of law”’ 
without following rulemaking procedures, and (ii) the two opin- 
ions give no explanation of their conflict with an earlier 
opinion? 


ii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PAGE 
QUESTIONS PRESENTED ......... 6... see eues i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ..... 2... - 26 secu ee eees ii 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ............ sess eee v 
OPINIONS AND ORDERS BELOW .............. l 
JURISDICTION 2... cc ccccccccccccvccseccees 2 
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
INVOIWED 2. ccc ccc cccccccccccccccvccces 2 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE ......... 65s eeees 2 
REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT........... 6 


I. 


SECTION 441a(d)(3) UNCONSTITUTIONALLY 
RESTRICTS THE COLORADO PARTY'S CORE 

FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS OF FREE 

SPEECH AND FREE ASSOCIATION ......... 8 


A. The Colorado Party’s Expenditures To 
Advocate Election Of Its Candidates Are 


B. Section 441a(d)(3) Severely Restricts The 
Colorado Party’s Core First Amendment 


C. The Restrictions Imposed By § 441a(d)(3) 
Serve No Compelling Governmental Interest. 12 


LIKEWISE, § 441a(d)(3) AS APPLIED TO THE 
COLORADO PARTY IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL ... 17 


IF IT WERE CONSTITUTIONAL, § 441a(d)(3) 

WOULD RESTRICT ONLY COORDINATED 
EXPENDITURES FOR EXPRESS ADVOCACY OF 

THE ELECTION OR DEFEAT OF A CLEARLY 
IDENTIFIED CANDIDATE IN THE GENERAL 
oe re er ee re 20 


PAGE 
A. The Court Of Appeals Should Have Followed 
This Court’s Construction Of Identical 


Disregarding This Court's Rulings ....... 23 


September 6, 1995 Order of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Denying 


the Colorado Party’s Suggestion for Rehearing 
DT Ce o6¢00 60 oS uebae bbeedeeeoeeee la 


APPENDIX B 


August 11, 1995 Order of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Ordering 
the FEC to File a Response to the Colorado 


Party's Suggestion for Rehearing En Banc..... 3a 
APPENDIX C 


June 23, 1995 Opinion of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit........ 5a 


APPENDIX D 


August 30, 1993 Order and Memorandum of 
Decision of the United States District Court for 
the District of Colorado ..............505. 22a 


APPENDIX E 

April 10, 1989 FEC Letterto Baran ......... 48a 
APPENDIX F 

January 17, 1989 FEC Letter to Baran ....... 50a 


PAGE 
APPENDIX G 
June 23, 1988 FEC Letter to Baran.......... 56a 
APPENDIX H 
November 10, 1987 FEC Letter to Baran...... 62a 
APPENDIX I 
November 13, 1986 FEC Letter to Baran...... 72a 
APPENDIX J 
nn «6 odine 6b06:0 6000 ee Oe 80a 
APPENDIX K 
Code of Federal Regulation Provisions........ 89a 
APPENDIX L 
Colorado Party Radio Advertisements and 
Pamphlets Concerning Congressman Wirth... . . 92a 


v 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

CASES 

Austin v. Michigan Chamber of 


Commerce, 494 U.S. 652 (1990) ....... 


Brock v. L.R. Willson & Sons, Inc., 
773 F2d 1377 (D.C. Cir. 1985)......... 


Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976)...... 


Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. NRDC, 
Ge Ge ee GIS co cece wececocccece 


Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of 
Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290 (1981)......... 


Eu v. San Francisco County Democratic 
Central Comm., 489 U.S. 214 (1989) .... 


FEC v. Democratic Senatorial Campaign 
Comm., 454 U.S. 27 (1981)........... 


FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, 
Inc., 479 U.S. 238 (1986) ............ 


FEC v. National Conservative Political 
Action Comm., 470 U.S. 480 (1985) ..... 


First Nat'l Bank v. Bellotti, 
435 U.S. 765 (1978) ............055. 


Helvering v. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, 
293 U.S. 84 (1934)... 0... eee wees 


Kusper v. Pontikes, 414 U.S. 51 (1973) ... 


Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414 (1988)... .. 
Rosario v. Rockefeller, 410 U.S. 752 (1973) 


Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991) .... 


Tashjian v. Republican Party of Conn., 
Ee 


9,15 


24 


11, 15, 21 


11, 12, 13, 16 


18, 19 


vi 


CASES 
Transcanada Pipelines, Lid. v. FERC, 
24 F3d 305 (D.C. Cir. 1994) .......... 


United States v. National Treasury 
Employees Union, 115 S. Ct. 1003 (1995) 


CONSTITUTION 
United States Constitution, Amendment ! .. . 


United States Constitution, Amendment V.. . 
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 


BS UBC. § GBICEMA). . ccc ccccccccces 
2 U.S.C. § 434(cX1)....... oceccccces 
2 U.S.C. § 434(e) (repealed) ........... 


2 U.S.C. § 434(f) (repealed)............ 
BD Ge OSD Ob oseedctoscveeses 


2US.C. §437F 2... ccc cece cre ccceee 
2 U.S.C. § 437f(b) .. 2.22 ee eee ee eee 
2 U.S.C. § 437f(CM1) .. 2. ee eee eens 
2 U.S.C. § 438(d) .. 6. 2 ee ee eee eee 
ZBUBC. § 441O 0. cc cccccccccccccee 
2 U.S.C. § 44la(d) .. 2... eee eee eee 
2 U.S.C. § 44la(d)(3) ........--2-0ee- 
2US.C.§ 441D 0... eee ee eee eee 
18 U.S.C. § 608(e)(1) (repealed) ........ 


18 U.S.C. § 608(f) (repealed)........... 
Be Cae e GEEED co cecccccccéeseeoce 


11 C.FR. § 110.7(b)(4) ........-.-4--- 


vii 


120 Cong. Rec. $5411 (daily ed. Apr. 8, 
BRUED ccc rsccesvveessosescsccces 


Alexander, Herbert E., Financing Politics 
CEG DEED Sweetman eesceebescesccs 


FEC Press Release (Sept. 1995) ......... 


FEC Advisory Opinion 1978-46, Fed. 
Election Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) (1978) . . 


FEC Advisory Opinion 1984-15, Fed. 
Election Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) (1984) . . 


FEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, Fed. 
Election Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) P5819 
(| Prey tT rere ee eee 


Campaign Act: Anomalies and 


GR ope ccbectbodececeeveccccees 


Huckshorn, Robert J., & John F. Bibby, State 
Parties in an Era of Political Change in 
The Future of American Political Parties 
(Joel L. Fleishman ed. 1982) .......... 


Price, David E., Bringing Back the Parties 
CEE obese cee dewevasesbcecveces 


10 


16 


17 


viii 


MISCELLANEOUS 

Sabato, Larry J., The Party’s Just Begun 
CORE oc 6's oe bie 408-0 604.6 6U bw keees 

S. Rep. No. 689, 93d Cong., 2d Sess. (1974) 


Sorauf, Frank J., & Scott A. Wilson, 
Campaigns and Money: A Changing Role 
Sor the Political Parties? in the Parties 
Respond (L. Sandy Maisel ed. 1990) ..... 


1974 US.C.CA.N. .....2 2c e cece eens 


PAGE 


16 
14 


16 
14 


IN THE 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


No. 95- 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN 
COMMITTEE AND DOUGLAS L. JONES, AS TREASURER, 
Petitioners, 


v. 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Respondent. 


ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI 


The Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee 
and Douglas L. Jones as Treasurer' respectfully petition this 
Court for a writ of certiorari to review the judgment in this case 
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. 


OPINIONS AND ORDERS BELOW 


The September 6, 1995, order of the court of appeals deny- 
ing the Colorado Party’s suggestion for rehearing en banc, with 
three judges favoring rehearing and one recusal, is unreported 
and is reproduced at Appendix (“‘App."’) 1a-2a bound with this 


1 All parties to this case are identified in the caption. The Treasurer is a 
nominal party. For simplicity, the petitioners will be referred to collec- 
tively as ‘Colorado Party” or “Party.” In papers below, the term “‘State 
Party” was sometimes used. 


2 


petition. The June 23, 1995 panel opinion reversing the district 
court is reported at 59 F3d 1015 and is reproduced at 
App. 5a-21la. The August 30, 1993 order and memorandum of 
decision of the United States District Court for the District of 
Colorado dismissing the complaint of the Federal Election 
Commission (‘“‘FEC’’ or ‘‘Commission’’) is reported at 
839 F Supp. 1448 and is reproduced at App. 22a-37a. 


JURISDICTION 


The court of appeals entered judgment in this case on 
June 23, 1995. On September 6, 1995, the court of appeals 
denied the Colorado Party’s suggestion for rehearing en 
banc. This petition is being filed within 90 days of the date the 
court of appeals entered judgment. The jurisdiction of this 
Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1) (1988). 


CONSTITUTIONAL AND 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS INVOLVED 


This case involves the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, which reads: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establish- 
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise 
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press, or of the right of the people to peaceably assem- 
ble, and to petition the Government for a redress of 
grievances. 


The statute involved in this case is the Federal Election Cam- 
paign Act of 1971, as amended (‘‘FECA” or “‘Act’’), 2 U.S.C. 
§§ 44la(d) (1988), 437f(b) (1988), and 437f(c)(1) (1988). 
The statutory provisions are set out in their entirety at 
App. 80a-89a. 


STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


In the Spring of 1986, the Colorado Party publicly criticized 
statements by then-incumbent Democratic Congressman Tim 


3 


Wirth. At this time, the November, 1986 general elections were 
over six months away and neither party had selected a nominee 
for the United States Senate. However, Congressman Wirth had 
indicated his intent to seek the Democratic Party’s nomination 
for Senate and was using the resultant publicity to advance his 
political agenda. 


The Colorado Party produced and aired three radio adver- 
tisements and published two pamphlets challenging the verac- 
ity of Congressman Wirth’s statements. App. 93a-106a. 
Consistent with FECA, donors to the Colorado Party were pub- 
licly disclosed, the funds did not come from corporations or 
unions, and contributions were limited to no more than $5,000 
per contributing individual. 


One of the three Colorado Party’s radio advertisements, enti- 
tled ‘Wirth Facts #1,” which ran in early April, stated in full: 


Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central 
Committee 


Here in Colorado we’re used to politicians who let you 
know where they stand, and I thought we could count 
on Tim Wirth to do the same. But the last few weeks 
have been a real eye-opener. I just saw some ads where 
Tim Wirth said he’s for a strong defense and a balanced 
budget. But according to his record, Tim Wirth voted 
against every new weapon system in the last five years. 
And he voted against the balanced budget amendment. 


Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he 
doesn't have a right to change the facts. 


App. 93a. The text of the other advertisements, all of which are 
very similar, appear at App. 94a-106a. 


On June 12, 1986, the Colorado Democratic Party com- 
plained to the FEC alleging that the Colorado Party’s expendi- 
tures to air the radio messages and publish the pamphlets 
exceeded the Colorado Party’s expenditure limits under 
§ 441a(d)(3) of FECA. That provision limits expenditures that a 


4 


national or state party can make “‘in connection with the gen- 
eral election campaign of candidates for Federal office."’ 
App. 85a-86a. More than two years later, the FEC concluded, by 
a vote of 5-1, that the cost of “Wirth Facts #1”’ constituted 
expenditures which, when aggregated with the Colorado 
Party’s other spending, exceeded the limit of § 441a(d)(3). 
App. 56a-61a. The FEC dismissed the allegations regarding the 
other two radio ads and the two pamphlets because of a 3-3 
deadlock vote.” 


On July 5, 1989, the FEC filed a de novo civil action in the 
United States District Court for the District of Colorado seeking 
to fine the Colorado Party. App. 38a-47a. On August 30, 1993, 
the district court granted the Colorado Party’s motion for sum- 
mary judgment and dismissed the FEC’s complaint. App. 
22a-37a. Drawing on this Court’s precedent construing the 
term “in connection with’’ under the FECA, the district court 
ruled that § 441a(d)(3) limits only expenditures for ‘“‘express 
advocacy”’ and that “Wirth Facts #1” did not expressly advo- 
cate the election or defeat of any candidate. App. 28a-35a. The 
district court also ruled swa sponte that the Colorado Party’s 
counterclaim that § 44la(d)(3) was unconstitutional was 
“‘moot’’ and dismissed the Colorado Party’s constitutional chal- 
lenge. App. 35a-36a. 


On appeal, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Tenth Circuit reversed and remanded and instructed the 
district court to enter judgment in favor of the FEC and to 
determine an appropriate civil penalty. App. 21a. “Giving def- 
erence to the FEC’s interpretation,’’ the panel ruled 
(App. 16a-17a) that § 44la(d)(3)’s “in connection with the 
general election campaign’’ language applies to party spending 
that ‘‘involves a clearly identified candidate and an election- 
eering message, without regard to whether that message con- 


2 The FEC needs the votes of four commissioners to proceed. See 
2 U.S.C. § 437c(c) (1988). 


5 


The panel ruled (App. 17a) that “Wirth Facts #1’ was 
directed at a clearly identified candidate because Mr. Wirth had 
informed the FEC of his intent to seek a Senate seat, even 
though he had not been nominated by his party. It also ruled 
(App. 17a-19a) that the advertisement contained an election- 
eering message, despite the fact that the advertisement aired 
months before either party selected its Senate nominee. The 
panel based this ruling (App. 18a) on its view that a reasonable 
person would think that the advertisement tended to “‘dimin- 
ish" public support for Mr. Wirth and to “garner support’’ for 
“the unnamed [and unselected] Republican nominee.’ The 
panel was silent as to how “‘Wirth Facts #1”’ differed from the 
Colorado Party’s other radio ads and published pamphlets con- 
cerning Congressman Wirth which the FEC had determined 
were not subject to § 441a(d)(3)’s expenditure limitations. 


The court of appeals rejected the Colorado Party’s as applied 
and facial constitutional challenges to § 441la(d)(3). 
App. 19a-21a. Noting that the ‘primary purpose”’ of the contri- 
bution and expenditure limitations in the Act is to “‘prevent 
corruption or the appearance of corruption,” the panel stated 
(App. 20a) that ‘‘[t]he same reasoning the Supreme Court [has] 
used to uphold the constitutionality of other contribution limi- 
tations applies when analyzing the constitutionality of limits on 
coordinated expenditures by political committees.’’ Despite the 
FEC’s failure to present any credible evidence that state parties 
corrupt candidates for federal office — and the Colorado 
Party’s production of affirmative evidence to the contrary — 
the court of appeals, without citation er evidence, concluded 
(App. 20a) that ' 


party expenditures, particularly pre-primary, often are 
controlled by incumbent officeholders. We cannot say 
the dangers of domination that underlay the Supreme 
Court’s acceptance of the constitutionality of contribu- 
tion limits are not present in political party 
expenditures. 


6 


Ironically, the Colorado Party is being prosecuted by the gov- 
ernment for criticizing an “incumbent officeholder.”’ 


Lacking factual support for a corruption rationale, the panel 
(App. 20a-21a) upheld the constitutionality of § 441a(d)(3) in 
part because the restrictions on political party expenditures 
‘ ‘equalize the relative ability of all citizens to affect the out- 
come of elections’”’ and help ‘‘cap campaign costs and 
increase accessibility to our political system.’’ The panel 
(App. 21a) mistakenly relied on Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 
56-67 (1976), per curiam, which in fact rejected these grounds. 


On August 7, 1995, the Colorado Party timely filed a sugges- 
tion for rehearing en banc. Four days later, the court of appeals 
ordered the FEC to file a response to the Party's suggestion 
(App. 3a). On September 6, 1995, a divided court of appeals 
denied the Colorado Party’s suggestion (App. la-2a). Judges 
Baldock, Ebel and Kelly voted to grant rehearing en banc, and 
Judge Lucero was recused (App. 2a). 


The court of appeals’ ruling deeply and unjustifiably impairs 
the Colorado Party’s First Amendment rights of association and 
expression. The Party now seeks a writ of certiorari from this 
Court. 


REASONS FOR GRANTING THE WRIT 


Few matters of federal law can be more important than 
those establishing how our political system will operate and 
how our political representatives will be selected. Such matters 
are the subject of this petition. 


This case presents a First Amendment challenge to an 
extraordinary statute, § 44la(d) of FECA, which directly but 
variously limits the ability of political parties to support their 
own candidates and officeholders or oppose candidates and 
officeholders from other parties. To this end, the statute 
imposes caps on the amount that can be spent by a party, with 
the amount per state varying with state population. Although 
the limitations nominally apply only to expenditures that are 


i te ec ee 


i ne. Ee eene - 


7 


coordinated with a party candidate, the statute is applied on the 
premise that every party expenditure is so coordinated. 


The FEC claims that these restrictions are necessary because 
a party’s influence over its candidates inherently is corrupting, 
but it has offered neither a congressional finding nor record 
evidence to support its claim. The court of appeals more accu- 
rately suggests (App. 20a-21la) that the restrictions were 
enacted to equalize the ‘‘voices’’ of competing political views 
and to reduce political expenditures overall; however this Court 
has rejected those objectives as a basis for curtailing First 
Amendment freedoms. 


In Buckley 424 U.S. at 59, 60 n.67, this Court expressly 
reserved the question of whether § 441a(d)(3) violates the First 
Amendment, noting in response to question 3(e) that the First 
Amendment issues certified by the lower court with respect to 
§ 608(f), now § 441a(d), had not been advanced by the appel- 
lants. This case presents that reserved First Amendment issue. 
It should be resolved. 


This case is also important because of the sweeping con- 
struction given the challenged statute by the court of appeals. 
This Court and every other lower court to consider the issue 
uniformly have held that, to minimize concerns of overbreadth 
and vagueness, all references to expenditures “in connection 
with” a federal election and similar terms used in the FECA 
must be construed to apply only to the “express advocacy”’ of 
the election or defeat of an identified candidate. 


In the present case, by contrast, the court of appeals ruled 
(App. 1 la-12a) that political speech by political parties merits 
less protection than speech by banks, corporations, trade 
unions, and the like. Thus, the panel held (App. 16a-17a) that 
the statutory limitation on party expenditures in connection 
with an election should be read broadly to limit every party 
“electioneering message’’ that ‘involves a clearly identified 
candidate” ‘‘without regard to whether that message consti- 
tutes express advocacy.”’ 


8 


The court of appeals (App. 17a) made clear that an office- 
holder can become a protected ‘‘candidate’’ merely by 
announcing that intent to the FEC, even though the party's 
nominating process has not even begun. Also, it made clear that 
an electioneering message is one that “‘would leave a reader (or 
listener) with the impression that [the sponsoring party} sought 
to ‘diminish’ public support for [the self-proclaimed candidate | 
and ‘garner support’ for the unnamed’’ future nominee of the 
speaking party (App. 18a). Thus, critical statements about the 
official performance of a congressman without any associated 
request to vote for or against anyone, are restricted. And the 
court of appeals found its test satisfied as to speech occurring 
in early April, even though the general election would not be 
until November. 


Thus, so long as a member of the House of Representatives 
announces an intent to seek reelection, he or she can be largely 
shielded from critical commentary by the opposing party. Other 
office holders, by announcing a candidacy, will be similarly 
shielded. This unprecedented interference with the political 
speech of political parties goes to the heart of our system of 
governance and merits the consideration of this Court. 


Finally, this case presents important issues of administrative 
and election law. The court of appeals here gave Chevron def- 
erence to a view arguably stated in two of three FEC advisory 
opinions, without considering that FECA prohibits the use of 
advisory opinions to establish rules of law. 


I. SECTION 441la(d)(3) UNCONSTITUTIONALLY 
RESTRICTS THE COLORADO PARTY'S CORE FIRST 
AMENDMENT RIGHTS OF FREE SPEECH AND 
FREE ASSOCIATION. 


The basic problem with a statuite that, facially and as 
applied, restricts political speech by political parties, including 
speech intended to support party candiidates, is that it strikes at 
the heart of the First Amendment. Even assuming such a statute 
could be justified, the evidence would have to be rigorous and 
compelling. No such justification has been offered here. 


9 


A. The Colorado Party's Expenditures To Advocate 
Election Of Its Candidates Are Protected Speech 
And Association At The Core Of the First 
Amendment. 


‘{S ]ince virtually all meaningful political communications 
in the modern setting involve the expenditure of money,” 
expenditures for political speech are speech protected at the 
core of the First Amendment. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 11; Austin 
v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U.S. 652, 657 
(1990) (citation omitted) (‘‘[T]he use of funds to support a 
political candidate is ‘speech’ . . . ‘at the core of our electoral 
process and of the First Amendment freedoms.’ ’’). Thus, 
expenditures to discuss public officials and candidates for pub- 
lic office is afforded “the broadest protection’ from govern- 
mental restriction. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 14. 


The First Amendment also guarantees a core “right to asso- 
ciate with the political party of one’s choice’ and to work 
through such political associations ‘‘for the advancement of 
beliefs and ideas." Tashjian v. Republican Party of Conn., 
479 U.S. 208, 214 (1986) (citations omitted); Kusper v. Pon- 
tikes, 414 U.S. 51, 57 (1973) (“‘[R]ight to associate with the 
political party of one’s choice is an integral part of this basic 
constitutional freedom.’’) 

First Amendment rights of free speech and association are 
mutually dependent, as ‘‘[t]he two rights overlap and blend; to 
limit the right of association places an impermissible restraint 
on the right of expression,’’ and vice versa. Citizens Against 
Rent Control v. City of Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290, 300 (1981) 
(striking ordinance limiting contributions to committees that 
favor or oppose ballot measures as an impermissible restraint 
on freedom of association). 


B. Section 441la(d)(3) Severely Restricts The 
Colorado Party's Core First Amendment Rights. 


Section 441a(d)(3) of the Act prohibits “‘a State commit- 
tee of a political party, including any subordinate committee of 


10 


a State committee’ from making “‘any expenditure in connec- 
tion with the general election campaign of a candidate for Fed- 
eral office’’ over a specified dollar amount.® This restriction on 
a State party s a >ility to advocate the election of its own candi- 
date strikes ai ine very heart of the First Amendment's guaran- 
tees of free speech and association, for the primary way a 
political party can achieve its goals in the political process is to 
promote its candidates.‘ 


In Buckley, the Court held that ‘‘[a] restriction on the 
amount of money a person or group can spend on political 
communication during a campaign necessarily reduces the 
quantity of expression.”’ 424 U.S. at 19. The Court reasoned 
that ‘‘[bjeing free to engage in unlimited political expression 
subject to a ceiling on expenditures is like being free to drive an 
automobile as far and as often as one desires on a single tank of 
gasoline.” Jd., at 19 n.18. Buckley leaves no doubt that “the 
Act's contribution and expenditure limitations both implicate 
fundamental First Amendment interests."’ Jd. at 23. The Court 
expressly reserved in Buckley the question of whether the 
expenditure limits imposed on political parties by § 441a(d) 
violate the First Amendment. Jd. at 59 n.67.° The court of 
appeals acknowledged this. App. at 20a, n.11. 

The First Amendment interests implicated here — the Colo- 


rado Party’s right to spend its financial resources to advocate 
the election of its candidates or to oppose other candidates — 


3 The expenditure ceiling set by § 441a(d)(3) varies from state to state, 
and was $103,248.54 for the 1986 Senate election in Colorado. See FEC 
Record | (Apr. 1986). 

* Freeman, Political Party Contributions and Expenditures Under 
the Federal Election Act: Anomalies and Unfinished Busi- 
ness, 4 Pace L. Rev. 267, 288 (1988) (“[T]o restrict [the parties’] . . . 
ability to support their candidates is to restrict the only form of political 
expression that has any meaning to a major political party.’’). 

> The Court rejected a claim that 18 U.S.C. § 608(f), the predecessor of 
2 U.S.C. § 441 a(d), violated the Fifth Amendment. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 
58-59 nn. 66 & 67. No First Amendment challenge to what is now 
§ 44la(d) was before the Court in Buckley. 


a 


2 ee oe 


ll 


are much greater than those implicated by the contribution 
limits upheld in Buckley. In Buckley, the Court reasoned that a 
limit on the amount of a political contribution to a candidate is 
of comparatively less constitutional significance than an expen- 
diture limitation because “‘[a] contribution serves as a general 
expression of support for the candidate and his views, but does 
not communicate the underlying basis for the support."’ Buck- 
ley, 424 U.S. at 21. “The quantity of communication . . . 
does not increase perceptibly with the size of [the] contribu- 
tion,"’ and ‘the transformation of contributions into political 
debate involves speech by someone other than the contribu- 
tor.”” Id. 


The limit on the Colorado Party’s expenditures at issue 
here, by contrast, directly restricts the quantity and quality of 
the Colorado Party’s political expression by forbidding the Col- 
orado Party from communicating directly to the public its 
express support for its candidates. 


The distinction between contributions and expenditures has 
led the Court to strike limits on ‘‘independent expenditures”’ as 
unconstitutional abridgments of the First Amendment in four 
contexts. See Buckley, 424 U.S. at 52 (striking limits on inde- 
pendent expenditures by individuals and by candidates); FEC 
v. National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. 
480, 497-501 (1985) (striking restrictions on independent 
expenditures by political action committees); FEC v. Massa- 
chusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U.S. 238, 268 (1986) 
(MCFL) (striking restrictions on independent expenditures by 
incorporated political organizations). 


FEC regulations forbid the Colorado Party from making 
“independent expenditures.’"® The Colorado Party maintains 


® 11 CER. § 110.7()(4) (1995) bars party committees from making 


dinated”’ with any candidate. In this case, there were no candidates for the 
Colorado Party to coordinate with because it was so early in the election 
year. 


12 


that it should be permitted to make unlimited ‘‘coordinated 
expenditures’ in support of or in opposition to candidates just 
as other groups are permitted to make unlimited ‘‘independent 
expenditures.’ Yet all of the Colorado Party's expenditures in 
support of its congressional candidates are subject to the limi- 
tations contained in § 441a(d)(3). The result is ironic and illogi- 
cal: The Colorado Party (like all state parties) is the only 
political group that does not have the right to spend unlimited 
amounts of money in support of its candidates. The restriction 
is as unconstitutional as are the restrictions on other groups’ 


C. The Restrictions Imposed By § 441a(d)(3) Serve 
No Compelling Governmental Interest. 


The government bears the burden of proving that 
§ 441a(d)(3)’s restriction on the Colorado Party's core First 
Amendment freedoms is strictly necessary to serve a compel- 
ling governmental interest and that the restriction is narrowly 
tailored to that interest. Eu v. San Francisco County Demo- 
cratic Central Comm., 489 U.S. 214, 228 (1989); National 
Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. at 498. Such 
a demonstration requires actual evidence; the government 
cannot meet its burden by merely asserting a ‘hypothetical 
possibility."" Buckley, 424 U.S. at 498; United States v. 
National Treasury Employees Union, 115 S. Ct. 1003 
(1995) (“NTEU’”’).? 


The only governmental interest recognized by the Court as 
sufficient to justify restrictions on political contributions is the 


’ This past Term, this Court elaborated on the government's burden 
when it seeks to regulate core First Amendment Rights: 

[When the Government defends a regulation on speech as a means 
to redress past harms or prevent anticipated harms, it must do more 
than simply ‘posit the existence of the disease to be cured’... . It 
must demonstrate that the recited harms are real, not merely con- 
jectural, and that the regulation will in fact alleviate those harms in a 
direct and material way. 


NTEU, 115 S. Ct. at 1017 (1995) (citation omitted). 


i i 


13 


prevention of actual or apparent corruption of elected officials. 
Buckley, 424 U.S. at 53. The Court has further defined the kind 
of “corruption” recognized as compelling in National Con- 
servative Political Action Committee: ‘*The hallmark of cor- 
ruption is the finaricial quid pro quo: dollars for political 
favors.’ 470 U.S. at 497. 


During the Colorado Party's direct‘challenge to the constitu- 
tionality of the statute below, the government presented no 
evidence that § 441a(d)(3)’'s limits on speech and association 
are necessary to prevent quid pro quo arrangements between 
political parties and their elected officials. The FEC asserted an 
anti-corruption rationale, but made no evidentiary demonstra- 
tion that the limits are in any way tailored to achieve that 
presumed goal. The court of appeals also did not identify any 
evidence of party corruption. 


The court of appeals sought to overcome the FEC’s inade- 
quate corruption showing by ruling (App. 20a-21a) that 
§ 44la(d)(3) serves to ‘‘equalize the ability of all citizens to 
affect the outcome of elections [and to] cap campaign costs 
and increase accessibility to our political system.’’ The court of 
appeals mistakenly said (App. 21a) that Buckley endorsed 
these objectives. However, Buckley held (424 U.S. at 48-49, 
57) and Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414 confirmed at 426, n.7: 


[T}he concept that government may restrict the speech 
of some elements of our society in order to enhance the 
relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First 


[T]he mere growth in the cost of federal election cam- 
paigns in and of itself provides no basis for governmen- 
tal restrictions on the quantity of campaign spending 
and the resulting limitation on the scope of federal 


campaigns. 


In fact, there is no evidence that modern political parties 


“corrupt’”’ elected officials by making quid pro quo vote-buy- 
ing arrangements. The limits themselves, which are based on 


14 


state populations, refute an “anti-corruption’’ purpose. For 
example, a political party in California (or another large state 
like New York, Florida, Texas, Pennsylvania or Illinois) may 
spend over $1 million dollars under the § 441a(d)(3) “‘limit,”’ 
almost ten times more than a Colorado party. See FEC 20 
Record 3 at 5 (Mar. 1994). It is not that Colorado parties are 
ten times more corrupt than California parties. These limits 
simply cap spending arbitrarily. Political parties in states larger 
than Colorado can and do spend over $1 million without the 
actuality or appearance of corruption. Thus, there is no logical 
nexus between the limits and the purported governmental 
interest. 


In addition, the legislative history of § 441a(d)(3) reflects no 
deliberation or evidence on the corruptive effects of political 
parties. Quite to the contrary, the legislative history reflects a 
very positive view of political parties and their role in the politi- 
cal process.* The only justification reflected in the legislative 
history for the limitations in § 441a(d)(3) is an arbitrary desire 
for across-the-board expenditure limits, without regard for the 
necessity of each limit. Indeed, the sole purpose identified to 
justify party expenditure limits was to support campaign spend- 
ing ceilings, and they were subsequently held unconstitutional.® 


® See, e.g., 8. Rep. No. 689, 93d Cong., 2d Sess. 7-8 & 15 (1974), 
reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5593-94 & 5601. 


| ° The only reason Congress identified to justify party expenditure lim- 


campaign spending ceilings. See 120 Cong. 
Rec. 5411-15 (daily ed. Apr. 8, 1974) (statements of Sens. Clark, Brock, 
Cannon) (discussions regarding amendment No. 1102, lifting limits on 
parties, and amendment No. 1152, reimplementing limits on parties). 


Buckley v. Valeo subsequently struck campaign spending ceilings 
and rejected their underlying rationale of effecting a level playing field, 
but party spending limits remained in effect despite removal of their 
raison d'etre. 424 U.S. at 54. Thus, party expenditure limitations are 
merely a vestige of an illegitimate rationale — the equalization of political 


Reena > 


~~ i. a Se 


15 


Second, the Colorado Party is allowed by law to accept con- 
tributions only from individuals or political committees (not 
corporations or unions), and only in amounts less than $5,000 
per year.!° It accepts contributions from diverse sources. It 
must and does publicly report all such receipts, as well as all of 
its expenditures. Given these restraints, there is no demonstra- 
ble (or even apparent) threat of corruption, and certainly no 
threat so substantial as to justify an outright limitation on politi- 


cal speech. 


Third, the voluntary nature of the Colorado Party per se 
precludes any potential for corruption. The Court has expressly 
noted that restrictions on independent expenditures are unjus- 
tifiable for entities ‘‘akin to voluntary political associations.’ 
Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U.S. 652, 
661 (1990), MCFL, 479 U.S. at 263. The Colorado Party's 
candidates voluntarily choose to associate with it and to repre- 
sent it, and may choose to disassociate from the party at any 
time. Thus the Colorado Party is not merely “‘akin’’ to a volun- 
tary political association; it is one, and it has precisely the 
“essential features’’ that Austin say exempt even a corporation 
from limits on expenditures. Jd. at 662-63. 


Fourth, the Colorado Party’s candidates seek and obtain 
nomination on the basis of each candidate’s voluntary associa- 
tion with the prevailing party views. Even where there may be 
policy disagreements between the candidate or elected official 
and the Colorado Party, the candidate’s choice to support the 
party’s position is not evidence of the kind of quid pre quo 
“corruption’’ described in Buckley. In upholding the right of 
political action committees to make unlimited independent 
expenditures, the Court has stated that 


[t]he fact that candidates and elected officials may alter 
or reaffirm their own positions on issues in response to 


10 The State Party may also receive transfers from other party commit- 
tees, but those committees also cannot accept corporate funds and other- 
wise are subject to donation limitations. See 2 U.S.C. §§ 44la & 441b. 


16 


political messages paid for by the PACs can hardly be 
called corruption, for one of the essential features of 
democracy is the presentation to the electorate of vary- 
ing points of view. 


National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. at 
498. This reasoning, which the Court applied to third-party 


“special interest’’ groups, logically applies to the broader- 
based political parties with even stronger force.’ 


Fifth, there is ample evidence that the limitations on the 
Colorado Party imposed by § 441la(d)(3) actually engender 
corruption by encouraging candidates to rely disproportion- 
ately upon independent expenditures and contributions from a 
vast number of third-party ‘special interest’ groups, thus tying 
elected officials more closely to narrow, self-interested groups 
than to their own broad-based political party.’ Unshackling 
political parties would ‘‘reduce the candidate’s dependence on 


'! See Rosario v. Rockefeller, 410 U.S. 752, 769 (1973) (Powell, J., 
dissenting) (‘‘Political parties in this country traditionally have been char- 
acterized by a fluidity and overlap of philosophy and membership.’’). 

12 See Larry J. Sabato, The Party's Just Begun at p. 223 (1988) (‘The 
less party money there is available, the more candidates wil] have to rely 
on PAC money; the more resources the parties can share with their 
nominees, the less officeholders will be indebted to special interest 
groups.’’); Robert J. Huckshorn & John F. Bibby, State Parties in an Era 
of Political Change in The Future of American Political Parties at 
p. 91 (Joel L. Fleishman ed. 1982) (“The act imposes expenditure and 
contribution limits on the support that can be provided by parties to 
candidates. As a result, congressional and senatorial candidates must rely 
heavily on nonparty sources for funds.’’); F. Christopher Arterton, Politi- 
cal Money and Party Strength in The Future of American Political 
Parties at p. 118 (Joel L. Fleishman ed. 1982) (“‘{T]}he most detrimental 
aspects of the law for political parties come about through the advantages 
open to institutional competitors.'’) (collecting data); Frank J. Sorauf & 
Scott A. Wilson, Campaigns and Money; A Changing Role for the 
Political Parties? in The Parties Respond at p. 191 (L. Sandy Maise! ed. 
1990) ([PJolitical parties’] financial role does not appear very great 
relative to that of other actors.’’) (collecting data). 


et ae ee en A i el a: NL i A EI st OEE my 


17 


outside contributions and thereby counteract the coercive pres- 
sures and attendant risks of abuse to which the Act’s contribu- 
tion limitations are directed.’’'* Buckley, 424 U.S. at 53 
(footnote omitted). 


In conclusion, the FEC’s assertions below concerning ‘‘back- 
door’ contributions are wholly unsupported by any legislative 
history or record evidence and are, in fact, untrue. Parties can 
accept only certain limited donations. Moreover, parties simply 
do not and by their nature cannot corrupt their own candidates, 
and thus there is no justification for the restrictions imposed by 
§ 441a(d)(3). At the same time that the court of appeals sug- 
gests (App. 20a) that political parties ‘‘often are controlled by 
incumbent officeholders,’’ the Colorado Party is being prose- 
cuted by the government for criticizing an “incumbent office- 
holder.’’ Section 44la(d)(3) should be declared 
unconstitutional to permit the Colorado Party, and all political 
parties, to exercise unfettered First Amendment rights. 


Il. LIKEWISE, § 441a(d)(3) AS APPLIED TO THE 
COLORADO PARTY IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL. 


On appeal, the Colorado Party contended that applying 
§ 441la(d)(3)'s expenditure limit to ‘““Wirth Facts #1” in the 
manner the FEC suggested (and the court of appeals adopted) 
unconstitutionally discriminated based on the content of the 
Party’s speech and that § 441a(d)(3) was impermissibly vague. 


Restrictions on First Amendment rights that discriminate 
based on content are strongly disfavored, unless there is a 
nexus between the content discrimination and a compelling 


13 See Herbert E. Alexander, Financing Politics at p. 172 (4th ed. 
1993) (‘Strengthening the role of the political parties is one way to offset 
some of the influence of PACS .. . Currently some candidates may 
receive hundreds of thousands of dollars in the aggregate from PACs, yet 
the law prevents parties from competing by providing candidates with 
similar large amounts.’’); David E. Price, Bringing Back the Parties at 
p. 260 (1984) (“[Lifting party limits) would give added advantages to 
parties vis-a-vis PACs and make the parties and candidates less reliant on 
immoderate direct-mail appeals.’’). 


18 


governmental interest. First Nat'l Bank v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 
765, 784-85 (1978) (‘In the realm of protected speech, the 
legislature is constitutionally disqualified from dictating the 
subjects about which persons may speak and the speakers who 
may address a public issue . . . Such power in government to 
channel the expression of views is unacceptable under the First 
Amendment.’’) (citations omitted). 


In addition, ** ‘[bJecause First Amendment freedoms need 
breathing space to survive, government may regulate in the 
area only with narrow specificity’ ’’ and must provide clear 
notice and guidance to political participants. Buckley, 424 U.S. 
at 41, n.48 (citation omitted). If the government is permitted to 
do otherwise, 


vague laws may not only ‘trap the innocent by not pro- 
viding fair warning’ or foster ‘arbitrary and discrimina- 
tory application’ but also operate to inhibit protected 
expression by inducing ‘citizens to steer far wider of the 
unlawful zone . . . than ifthe boundaries of the forbid- 
den areas were clearly marked.’ 


Id. (citations omitted). 


The court of appeals’ deference to the FEC’s “‘interpreta- 
tion’’ of § 441a(d)(3) results in content-based censorship. For 
example, the FEC, without explanation, and by a 3-3 vote, 
concluded that the Colorado Party may advertise without 
restriction if the tag lines of its advertisements said 

That's not the way we do things in Colorado. You can't 
change the facts, Tim [] 


(App. 105a) but (without explanation and by a 5-1 vote) con- 
cluded that the following language was subject to a spending 
limit: 
Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he 
doesn't have a right to change the facts. 


(App. 93a). Thus, content controls, and there is no connection 
between such content-based limitation of protected speech and 


a a 


19 


the FEC’s purported governmental interest of preventing cor- 
ruption. Therefore, § 441a(d)(3), as applied to the Colorado 
Party, unconstitutionally discriminates based on the content of 
the Party's speech. First Nat’l Bank, 435 U.S. at 784.'* 


Furthermore, the government's standard is so vague that the 
only sure way to satisfy it is for a political party to avoid criti- 
cism of any officeholder who may be considered a candidate. In 
order to comply with the limits, the Colorado Party and other 
political parties must evaluate implied as well as express ‘‘elec- 
tioneering messages” and must divine whether a voter or a 
government official might find a given message sufficient to 
motivate, in whole or in part, a vote for or against an incumbent 
officeholder. In addition, parties will have to make prospective 
assessments of who the likely candidates might be and what 


opposition might emerge. 


The court of appeals did not account for key facts in the 
record. It failed to note: (1) that the Colorado Party not only 
aired ‘“Wirth Facts #1" but also aired other radio advertise- 
ments and published pamphlets criticizing Congressman Wirth; 
and (2) that after nearly ten years of litigation, the FEC could 
not articulate a factual or legal distinction between “Wirth 
Facts #1" and the other advertisements and pamphlets that the 
Colorado Party produced and which were dismissed by virtue of 
an evenly-deadlocked agency. 


In essence, the court of appeals leaves the Colorado Party 
and other state political parties with a ‘‘totality of the circum- 
stances’’ test in which the application of § 441a(d)(3)’s restric- 
tions can never be known in advance without subjective 
governmental review and approval. Given the above, 
§ 441a(d)(3) as applied here is hopelessly and unconstitution- 
ally vague. 


14 Moreover, it is unclear whether the court of appeals even considered 
the Colorado Party's contention that § 441la(d)(3) as applied was an 
unconstitutional content-based restriction. Only one sentence in the 
panel's 20-page opinion addressed this issue. See App. 21a. 


20 


Ill. IF IT WERE CONSTITUTIONAL, § 441a(d)(3) 
WOULD RESTRICT ONLY COORDINATED 
EXPENDITURES FOR EXPRESS ADVOCACY OF 
THE ELECTION OR DEFEAT OF A CLEARLY 
IDENTIFIED CANDIDATE IN THE GENERAL 
ELECTION. 


7 The court of appeals interpreted § 441a(d) so broadly that 
it has the practical effect of shielding government officeholders 
and others from critical commentary by the opposing party at 
any time prior to a federal election, provided they have indi- 
cated an intent to run. The effect is particularly acute with 
respect to members of the House of Representatives, who face 
election every two years, and who generally are candidates for 


reelection until and unless they announce for another office or 
retire. 


| To reach this unfortunate result, the court of appeals 
(i) discounted highly pertinent rulings of this Court, including 
one case construing the very same language in similar and 
adjacent sections of the same statute, (ii) denied the obvious 
First Amendment concerns that its construction presents, and 
(iii) purported to defer to a hazy FEC view it detected in two of 
three private advisory opinions that, under 2 U.S.C. § 437f, 
cannot establish a “‘rule of law.”’ In each of these respects, the 
court of appeals erred. 


A. The Court Of Appeals Should Have Followed 
This Court’s Construction Of Identical Language 
From The Same Statute. 


Section 441a(d)(3) limits expenditures by national and 
state political parties ‘in connection with the general election 
campaign of a candidate for Federal office in a State who is 
affiliated with such party.” It is one of several similar FECA 
provisions that have been construed by this Court. All of the 


other provisions of law have been given the same narrowing 
construction. 


For example, another section of FECA, 2 U.S.C. § 441b, 
restricts expenditures by national banks, corporations, or labor 


21 


organizations “‘in connection with any election to any [federal] 
political office.’ To avoid constitutional issues of vagueness 
and overbreadth, this Court held that the “‘in connection with” 
language applied only to “express advocacy’’ of the election or 
defeat of an identified candidate. MCFL 479 U.S. at 249. 


MCFL adopted its express advocacy standard from the nar- 
rowing construction given to several portions of FECA in Buck- 
ley. For example, former § 608(e)(1) of FECA restricted 
certain independent expenditures “relative to” a candidate for 
federal office. Buckley interpreted the ‘‘relative to’’ language 
to encompass only “expenditures for communications that in 
express terms advocate the election or defeat of a clearly identi- 
fied candidate for federal office." Jd. at 44. Similarly, former 
§ 434(e) and (f) of FECA (now § 434(c)(1)) restricted political 
‘contributions or expenditures’ "’ made “‘ ‘for the purpose 
of . . . influencing’ ’’ the nomination or election of candidates 
for federal office. Jd. at 77. Again the Court applied a narrowing 
construction, holding that this encompassed only contributions 
or expenditures for express advocacy. 424 U.S. at 74-75. 


The court of appeals in this case discounted these rulings. 
Citing Helvering v. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, 293 U.S. 84, 
87 (1934), it pointed out that identical words in a statute may 
be found in ‘“‘such dissimilar connections as to warrant the 
conclusion that they were employed . . . with different 
intent.’’ To show such “dissimilar connections,” the court of 
appeals reasoned that, since the FEC treats all party spending 
as coordinated with the party's candidate, the expenditure limit 
imposed by § 441la(d)(3) really is a contribution limit, and 
Buckley holds that contributions may be regulated more freely 
than the ‘‘expenditures’’ such as MCFL and Buckley involved. 


This is an extremely weak reed. Buckley itself required 
express advocacy with respect to both “contributions and 
expenditures” regulated by former § 434(e). Jd. at 74 (empha- 
sis added). Moreover, the language of § 441a(d)(3) expressly 
limits ‘“‘expenditures,”’ even if they may have some aspects of a 
contribution in some cases. The “‘in connection with’’ language 


22 


of § 441a(d)(3) serves the same descriptive and limiting func- 
tion as the identical language construed in MCFL and the paral- 
lel ‘‘relative to’ language construed in Buckley. Also, the 
language of § 441a(d)(3) presents the same issues of vague- 
ness and overbreadth as the language this Court has inter- 
preted ’to require express advocacy. These circumstances do 
not show that § 441a(d)(3) has such a ‘‘dissimilar connections’’ 
from the other similar provisions of FECA as to suggest a 
different meaning. 


B. The Broader Interpretation Adopted By The 
Court Of Appeals Raises Serious Constictiona 


The surprising result of the court of appeals’ analysis is 
that political speech by a political party is more highly 
restricted than political speech by a corporation. Moreover, the 
restriction strikes at the core function of a political party, limit- 
ing its discussion of incumbent office holders from the oppos- 
ing party. The restriction is not limited to a few months during a 
general election, but encompasses any period of time during 
which an officeholder is a candidate under FECA.'5 


These extraordinary restrictions on political speech are not 
supported by any legitimate congressional finding, much less a 
finding that this Court’s precedents would accept as authorita- 
tive. Indeed, when the FEC was unable to find any support for 
an anti-corruption rationale, the court of appeals suggested 
(App. 20a-21a) that the true purpose of § 441a(d)(3) is “‘to 
equalize the ability of all citizens to affect the outcome of elec- 
tions [and to] cap campaign costs." Historically, the court of 
appeals probably is right, but such justifications were expressly 


18 Under § 431(2)(A) of FECA, a person is a “candidate” raising 
or spending $5,000. According to a recent FEC press release. the 
435 House incumbents raised $45.5 million during the first six months of 
1995. See Sept. 1, 1995 FEC Press Release at 1. Thus, virtually all current 
House incumbents are candidates for the 1996 elections. 


23 


repudiated in Buckley, 424 U.S. at 48-49, 57, and Meyer, 486 
U.S. at 426 n.7 (1988). 


At minimum, therefore, the court of appeals erred in failing 
to recognize that its expansive interpretation of § 441la(d)(3) 
raises serious constitutional issues that could be minimized by 
applying the express advocacy standard developed by this 
Court. 


C. The FEC Advisory Opinions Do Not Justify 
Disregarding This Court's Rulings. 

Having rejected the rulings of this Court, the court of 
appeals concluded that it “must defer’’ to the FEC’s expansive 
view of § 44la(d)(3) purportedly reflected in two advisory 
opinions, FEC Advisory Opinion 1984-15, Fed. Election Camp. 
Fin. Guide (CCH) 9 5766 (1984) and FEC Advisory Opinion 
1985-14, Fed. Election Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5819 
(1985). In fact, it substantially overread both of those advisory 
opinions. But beyond that, it committed two more fundamental 
errors. 


First, the panel uncritically assumed that Chevron, U.S.A, 
Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837 (1984), mandates deference to any 
statement of position by the FEC. In fact, Chevron is clear that 
its delegation of authority to agencies must be consistent with 
what congress mandated and intended. Jd. at 844. Here, 
because Congress was very concerned as to how the FEC might 
exercise its authority, it inserted into § 437f(b) of FECA the 
following provision: 

Any rule of law which is not stated in this Act or in 
chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26 may be initially 
proposed by the Commission only as a rule or regula- 
tion pursuant to procedures established in sec- 
tion 438(d) of this title. No opinion of an advisory 
nature may be issued by the Commission or any of its 
employees except in accordance with the provisions of 
this section. 


24 


The provisions of § 438(d) referred to require the FEC to 
give advance notice of any such ‘‘rule of law’’ to Congress in the 
form of a statement setting out the proposed rule and providing 
‘a detailed explanation and justification.” Jd. This was not done 
with the advisory opinions on which the court of appeals relied. 
Moreover, § 437f(c)(1) of FECA provides that advisory 
opinions should not be extended beyond “‘any specific transac- 
tion or activity which is indistinguishable in all its material 
aspects.”’ Id. 


When the FEC acts in other ways, particularly by rulemak- 
ing, it may be entitled to Chevron deference. This Court has 
said that the FEC is the type of agency that may merit defer- 
ence. See FEC v. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Com- 
mittee, 454 U.S. 27, 37 (1981). However, the FEC has no 
authority to establish general principles or rules of law using 
advisory opinions and thus it was legal error for the panel to 
rely on those opinions. 


Beyond this, the court of appeals expressly noted (fn. 7) that 
the two opinions it relied upon were inconsistent with an earlier 
opinion, FEC Advisory Opinion 1978-46, Fed. Election Camp. 
Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5348 (1978) that ‘appears more restric- 
tive,’’ that is, requires express advocacy. However, the court of 
appeals concluded (at n.7) that Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173, 
186-87 (1991), compelled it to “give the current view defer- 
ence if the current construction is reasonable.” In fact, the 
cited portion of Rust makes clear that the current view must not 
only be reasonable in itself, but it also must provide a reason- 
able explanation for the agency's change in position. Jd. See 
also Transcanada Pipelines, Lid. v. FERC, 24 F.3d 305, 310 
(D.C. Cir. 1994); Brock v. L.R. Willson & Sons, Inc., 773 F.2d 
1377, 1381 (D.C. Cir 1985). The two opinions to which the 
court of appeals deferred do not even acknowledge, much less 
explain, their differences in analysis from the earlier opinion. 


*Jan Witold Baran 
Thomas W. Kirby 
Carol A. Laham 
Michael E. Toner 
Scott S. Harris 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 429-7000 
Attorneys for Petitioners 
*Counsel of Record 
September 21, 1995 


la 


APPENDIX A 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-1433 
93-1434 
(D.C. No. 89-N-1159) 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Plaintiff-Counter-Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant, 
v. 
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL 


CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, 


DOUGLAS JONES, 
Defendants-Counter-Claimants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees. 


ORDER . 
Entered September 6, 1995 


Before SEYMOUR, Chief Judge, MOORE, ANDERSON, 
TACHA, BALDOCK, BRORBY, EBEL, KELLY, HENRY, 
BRISCOE, LOGAN Circuit Judges and REED*, 
District Judge. 


*The Honorable Edward C. Reed, Jr., Senior United 
States District Judge, United States District Court for 


the District of Nevada, sitting by designation. 


This matter comes on for consideration of appellants/cross- 
appellees Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee 
and Douglas Jones’ suggestion for rehearing in banc. 

In accordance with Rule 35(b), Federal Rules of Appellate 
Procedure, the suggestion for rehearing in banc was 


2a 


transmitted to all of the judges of the court who are in regular 
active service. The court having been polled on the suggestion 
for rehearing in banc, Rule 35, Federal Rules of Appellate 
Fela agns aupetion See scheasing io bane te denied. 
udges Baldock, Kelly voted to grant rehearing. 

Lucero is recused. — 


Entered for the Court 
PATRICK FISHER, Clerk 


Deputy Clerk 


3a 


APPENDIX B 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT 


———— 


Nos. 93-1433 
93-1434 
(D.C. No. 89-N-1159) 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Plaintiff-Counter-Defendant /Appellee/ 
Cross-Appellant, 


Vv. 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN 
COMMITTEE, DOUGLAS JONES, 
Defendants-Counter-Claimants-Appellants/ 
Cross-Appellees. 


ORDER 
Filed August 11, 1995 


Before HENRY and LOGAN, Circuit Judges, and REED*, 
District Judge* 


* The Honorable Edward C. Reed, Jr., Senior United States 
District Judge, United States District Court for the District 


of Nevada, sitting by designation. 


Within ten days of the date of this order, the Federal Election 
Commission shall file a response to the petition for rehearing in 
banc filed by the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign 
Committee and Douglas Jones. 


4a 


Entered for the Court 
PATRICK FISHER, Clerk 


Deputy Clerk 


PUBLISH 


UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
TENTH CIRCUIT 


Nos. 93-1433 & 
93-1434 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 

Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant/ 

Appellee/Cross-Appellant, 

Vv. 
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN 
COMMITTEE, DOUGLAS JONES, 

Defendants/Counter-claimants/ 
Appellants/Cross-Appellees. 


Appeals from the United States District Court for the 
District of Colorado 
(D.C. No. 89-N-1159) 


Jan Witold Baran (Thomas W. Kirby, Carol A. Laham and Lee E. 
Goodman, also of Wiley, Rein & Fielding, Washington, D.C., 
with him on the briefs) for the Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee and Douglas L. Jones. 


Richard B. Bader, Associate General Counsel (Lawrence M. 
Noble, General Counsel, and Rita A. Reimer, Attorney, also of 


Federal Election Commission, Washington, D.C., with him on 
the briefs) for the Federal Election Commission. 


6a 


Before HENRY and LOGAN, Circuit Judges, 
and REED, District Judge.° 


LOGAN, Circuit Judge. 


The Federal Election Commission (FEC) appeals from the 
dismissal on the merits of its underlying suit filed against the 
Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee and its 
treasurer, Douglas L. Jones (collectively the Committee) 
alleging violations of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 
1971 (FECA), 2 U.S.C. §§ 431-442. The Committee cross- 
appeals from the dismissal as moot of its counterclaim 
challenging the constitutionality of the FECA expenditure 
limitations. We hold that the Committee expenditures at issue 
did violate the coordinated expenditure limitation in 2 U.S.C. 
§ 441a(d)(3). We also reach the constitutional issue and hold 
that § 441a(d)(3) does not violate the Committee's First 
Amendment rights. 


This action stems from the 1986 United States senatorial 
campaign in Colorado, and pre-election spending by the 
Committee. In January 1986, then-congressman Timothy E. 
Wirth had registered with the FEC as a candidate for the 
Democratic nomination for the U.S. Senate. Several months 
later, but before either political party had nominated senatorial 
candidates, the Committee spent $15,000 for a radio 
advertisement directed at Wirth’s announced candidacy 
(“Wirth Facts #1).! This spending prompted the Colorado 
Democratic Party’s administrative complaint with the FEC 


“The Honorable Edward C. Reed, Jr., Senior United States District 
Judge, United States District Court for the District of Nevada, sitting by 
tesi 
’ Wirth Facts #1 read: 
Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee. 
(footnote continues) 


7a 


alleging that it was an ‘‘expenditure in connection with’’ the 
general election campaign of a candidate for federal office in 
violation of the spending limits set out in FECA § 441a(d)(3). 


The FEC made a probable cause determination that the 
Committee violated the FECA. When the parties were unable to 
reach a settlement the FEC filed suit. The FEC alleged that the 
Committee failed to report the amount spent on the anti-Wirth 
publicity as an ‘‘expenditure in connection with’’ the general 
election campaign, in violation of FECA §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 
434(b)(6)(B)(iv), and 44la(f). The Committee 
counterclaimed, alleging that the FECA was an unconstitutional 
infringement on its First Amendment rights. In ruling on the 
parties’ cross motions for summary judgment, the district court 
dismissed the underlying action after finding no FECA 
violation, and dismissed the counterclaim as mooted by its 
merits ruling. These appeals followed. 


We first address whether the district court correctly con- 
cluded that the Committee did not violate the FECA. We review 
de novo a district court’s grant of summary judgment using the 
same legal standards as the district court. Clark v. Haas 
Group, Inc., 953 F2d 1235, 1237 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 113 
S. Ct. 98 (1992). 


(footnote continued) 
Here in Colorado we're used to politicians who let you know where 
they stand, and I thought we could count on Tim Wirth to do the 
same. But the last few weeks have been a real eye-opener. | just saw 
some ads where Tim Wirth said he’s for a strong defense and a 
balanced budget. But according to his record, Tim Wirth voted 
against every major new weapon system in the last five years. And 
he voted against the balanced budget amendment. 
Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he doesn’t have a 
right to change the facts. 

I Jt. App. 95-96. 


A 


The FECA regulates contributions made to federal candi- 
dates and political parties, and expenditures made by persons 
and political committees. It also imposes recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements. The Committee acknowledges that it is 


subject to the FECA as a federally registered cc mmittee of the 
Colorado Republican Party. 


The statute limits monetary contributions and expenditures 
by state and national political party committees as follows: 


(d) Expenditures by national committee, State 
committee, or subordinate committee of State commit- 
tee in connection with general election campaign of 
candidates for Federal office 


(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law 
with respect to limitations on expenditures or limita- 
tions on contributions, the national committee of a 
political party and a State committee of a political party, 
including any subordinate committee of a State commit- 
tee, may make expenditures in connection with the gen- 
eral election campaign of candidates for Federal office, 
subject to the limitations contained in paragraphs 
(2) and (3) of this subsection. 


(3) The national committee of a political party, or a 
State committee of a political party, including any 
subordinate committee of a State committee, may not 
make any expenditure in connection with the general 
election campaign of a candidate for Federal office in a 
State who is affiliated with such party which exceeds— 


(A) in the case of a candidate for election to 
the office of Senator, or of Representative from 
a State which is entitled to only one Representa- 
tive, the greater of— 


9a 


(i) 2 cents multiplied by the voting age 
population of the State (as certified under sub- 
section (e) of this section); or 


(ii) $20,000. 


2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(1) and (3). A state political party committee 
may assign to a designated agent (including a nationa’ ~rty 
committee) the right to make the expenditures the state p. 

could have made. See FEC v. Democratic Senatorial Cam- 
paign Committee, 454 U.S. 27, 41-43 (1981) (DSCC). Here the 
Committee expended funds on the anti-Wirth publicity after 
assigning to the National Republican Senatorial Committee the 
authority to make all of the expenditures—$103,248—it was 
allowed under § 441a(d)(3) for the 1986 U.S. Senate election. 
See | Jt. App. 4, 14; I id.473. The Committee did not report the 
$15,000 anti-Wirth publicity expense under 2 U.S.C. 
§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv),? instead characterizing it as an expense for 
‘Voter Information to Colorado Voters—Advertising.’’ [I App. 
478, 1 A. The narrow issue is whether the anti-Wirth publicity 
expense was an “expenditure in connection with the general 
election campaign” pursuant to § 441a(d)(3) and should have 


22 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H\(iv) reads in part: 
(b) Contents of reports 
Each report under this section shall disclose— 


(4) for the reporting period and the calender year, the total 
amount of all disbursements, and all disbursements in the following 
categories: 


(H) for any political committee other than an authorized commit- 
tee— 
(i) contributions made to other political committees; 
(ii) loans made by the reporting committees; 
(ili) independent expenditures; 
(iv) expenditures made under section 441a(d) of this title; and 
(v) any other disbursements. 


10a 


been reported accordingly. If so, the Committee exceeded the 
§ 441a(d)(3) monetary ceiling. 


As relevant here, the FECA addresses two types of campaign 
expenditures: independent and coordinated.’ A coordinated 
expenditure is one made “in cooperation with or with the con- 
sent of a candidate, his agents, or an authorized committee of 
the candidate.” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 47 0.53 (1976). 
See also 11 C.FR. § 110.7(b)(4). Because political parties are 
considered incapable of making independent expenditures, the 
district court correctly found that the anti-Wirth publicity 
expense was a coordinated expenditure. See DSCC, 454 U.S. at 
29 n.1. If that spending was an “‘expenditure[] in connection 
with” the campaign it was subject to the monetary limitations 
at § 441a(d). Jd. The district court concluded that the Commit- 
tee’s coordinated expenditure on the anti-Wirth publicity was 
not made in connection with the 1986 Colorado senatorial cam- 
paign, and therefore was not subject to the § 44 1a(d)(3) limits. 


The FECA does not clearly manifest the meaning Congress 
intended to attach to the “expenditures in connection with” 
language in § 44la(d)(3). Acknowledging that there were no 
controlling or persuasive cases interpreting that section, the 
district court relied upon FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for 
Life, 479 U.S. 238 (1986) (MCFL), and its interpretation of 


3 An independent expenditure is “‘made without cooperation or consul- 
tation with any candidate, or any authorized committee or agent of such 
candidate, and which is not made in concert with, or at the request or 
suggestion of, any candidate, or any authorized committee or agent of 
such candidate." 2 U.S.C. § 431(17); see also § 44la(a)(7)(A)-(B). 


lla 


FECA § 441b. Section 441b* restricts the contributions and 
expenditures of national banks, corporations, or labor organi- 
zations. The Supreme Court in MCFL considered whether Mas- 
sachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., a nonprofit, nonstock 


corporation, by financing a newsletter urging voter support for 


* 2 USC. § 441b provides in relevant part as follows: 

(a) It is unlawful for any national bank, or any corporation organ- 
ized by authority of any law of Congress, to make a contribution or 
expenditure in connection with any election to any political office, or in 
connection with any primary election or political convention or caucus, 
held to select candidates for any political office, or for any corporation 
whatever, or any labor organization, to make a contribution or expendi- 
ture in connection with any election at which presidential and vice presi- 
dential electors or a Senator or Representative in, or a Delegate or 
Resident Commissioner to, Congress are to be voted for, or in connection 
with any primary election or political convention or caucus held to select 
candidates for any of the foregoing offices, or for any candidate, political 
committee, or other person knowingly to accept/or receive any contribu- 
tion prohibited by this section, or any officer or any director of any 
corporation or any national bank or any officer of any labor organization 
to consent to any contribution or expenditure by the corporation, 
national bank, or labor organization, as the case may be, prohibited by 
this section. 

(b)(2) For purposes of this section and section 791 (h) of Title 15, 
the term ‘contribution or expenditure’’ shall include any direct or indi- 
rect payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money, or 
any services, or anything of value (except a loan of money by a national or 
State bank made in accordance with the applicable banking laws and 
regulations and in the ordinary course of business) to any candidate, 
campaign committee, or political party or organization, in connection 
with any election to any of the offices referred to in this section, but shall 
not include (A) communications by a corporation to its stockholders and 
executive or administrative personne! and their families or by a labor 
organization to its members and their families on any subject; (B) non- 
partisan registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns by a corporation 
aimed at its stockholders and executive or administrative personne! and 
their families, or by a labor organization aimed at its members and their 
families; and (C) the establishment, administration, and solicitation of 
contributions to a separate segregated fund to be utilized for political 
purposes by a corporation, labor organization, membership organization, 
cooperative, or corporation without capital stock. 


12a 


identified pro-life candidates, violated the ‘‘independent spend- 
ing’’ limitations in § 441b. Jd. at 241. Interpreting the term 
“expenditure in connection with any election’’ the Court held 
that the expenditure ‘‘must constitute ‘express advocacy’ in 
order to be subject to the prohibition of § 441b.11."’ Id. at 249. 

MCFL relied upon the Buckley opinion’s interpretation of a 
limitation on independent expenditures ‘‘relative to”’ a clearly 
identifiable candidate. To avoid invalidating on vagueness 
grounds what was then FECA § 608(e)(1), the Buckley Court 
held the term encompassed only ‘‘expenditures for communi- 
cations that in express terms advocate the election or defeat of 
a Clearly identified candidate for federal office.’’ Buckley, 424 
U.S. at 44. The opinion clarified in a footnote that this construc- 
tion would restrict the application to ‘“‘communications con- 
taining express words of advocacy of election or defeat, such as 
‘vote for,’ ‘elect,’ ‘support,’ ‘cast your ballot for,’ ‘Smith for 
Congress,’ ‘vote against,’ ‘defeat,’ ‘reject.’”’ Jd. n.52. MCFL 
adopted the same definition, referencing the same footnote, for 
purposes of § 441b’s independent spending limitation. 479 
U.S. at 249. 


The district court, noting the identity of the ‘expenditures in 
connection with’ language in § 441b and in § 443a(d)(3), 
concluded that the anti-Wirth publicity was not express advo- 
cacy and therefore not governed by the 44 1a(d)(3) limitations. 
The district court relied in part on a common law rule of statu- 
tory construction that identical words used in different sections 
of the same statute generally should be given the same mean- 
ing. However, the Supreme Court has also stated that “‘the 
presumption readily yields to the controlling force of the cir- 
cumstance that words, though in the same act, are found in 
such dissimilar connections as to warrant the conclusion that 
they were employed in the different parts of the act with differ- 
ent intent.’’ Helvering v. Stockholms Enskilde Bank, 293 
U.S. 84, 87 (1934). 


Further, we cannot overlook a significant distinction 
between Buckley and MCFL and the instant case. The Buckley 


13a 


opinion distinguished between independent expenditures— 
regulated by then FECA § 608(e)(i)—and coordinated expendi- 
tures. The Buckley opinion unequivocally stated that controlled 
or coordinated expenditures are treated as ‘contributions 
rather than expenditures’’ under the FECA.’ 424 U.S. at 
46-47 & n.53. Although Buckley found the ceiling on indepen- 
dent expenditures failed to serve substantial enough govern- 
ment interests to be constitutional, it reached the opposite 
conclusion as to the limitations on expenditures by national or 
state political parties. Jd. at 55-59 & n.67 (‘Does 18 U.S.C. 
§ 608(f) (1970 ed., Supp. IV) violate [constitutional] rights, in 
that it limits the expenditures of national or state committees of 
political parties in connection with general election campaigns 
for federal office? Answer: NO, as to the Fifth Amendment 
challenge advanced by appellants.”"). Buckley accepted the 
FECA's treatment of expenditures by national and state com- 
mittees of political parties as contributions, as have subsequent 
opinions of the Supreme Court. See DSCC, 454 U.S. 27, 29 n.1 
(1981) (‘Party committees are considered incapable of making 
‘independent’ expenditures in connection with the campaigns 
of their party’s candidates. The Commission has, by regulation, 
forbidden such ‘independent’ expenditures by the national and 
state party committees.”’). Similarly, MCFL made the same dis- 
tinction when interpreting the meaning of independent expen- 
diture limits in § 441b. MCFL, 479 U.S. at 259-60. 


Subsequent amendments to the FECA include ‘expressly 
advocating” into the definition of independent expenditures. 
See 2 U.S.C. § 431(17). Coordinated expenditures of political 
parties, however, are not defined in this manner. See id. 
§ 431(9)(B)(ix); of id. § 431(8)(B)(v), (x), (xii) (what is not a 
contribution). This is some evidence of congressional intent 
that the phrases are not intended to have the same meaning. 


The distinction between independent expenditures and polit- 
ical party expenditures that are deemed to be contributions, 


5 Coordinated expenditures are treated as campaign contributions that 
must be reported pursuant to § 441a(a)(7)(B)(i). 


l4a 


and their different treatment by the Supreme Court, negates the 
necessity that ‘expenditures in connection with’ be construed 
identically in different sections of the FECA. However, the 
meaning of ‘expenditures in connection with” is not perfectly 
clear, else the Court in MCFL would not have had to cabin its 
meaning under § 441(b) in the manner it did. The question then 
becomes whether we must construe the phrase as narrowly as 
the Supreme Court did in MCFL in order to uphold its validity. 


Cc 


The FEC has issued advisory opinions interpreting the 
“expenditures in connection with” phrase in § 441a(d)(3) in a 
manner different than that adopted by the district court and 
urged upon.us by the Committee. We believe this is an appro- 
priate circumstance in which to follow the Supreme Court's 
admonishment that “‘if the statute is silent or ambiguous with 
respect to the specific issue, the question for the court is 
whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible con- 
struction of the statute.’’ Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 837, 843 (1984) (foot- 
note omitted); see also DSCC, 454 U.S. at 37 (the FEC, a 
bipartisan body, is “precisely the type of agency to which defer- 
ence should presumptively be afforded’’).¢ 


FEC Advisory Opinion 1984-15 addressed questions raised 
by the Republican Party regarding spending for a series of 
television ads denigrating the potential Democratic presidential 
candidates, relating to an upcoming election. The FEC 


® We note that one of the reasons the Buckley opinion gave for its 
“express advocacy”’ restrictive interpretation of 608(e)(1)'s ‘relative to”’ 
language was that most who were subject to the statute’s criminal sanc- 
tions had no right to obtain an advisory opinion of the FEC. See 424 
U.S. at 40 n.47. It noted that only candidates, federal office holders and 
political committees had that right. Id. Section 441a(d), at issue before 
us, applies only to political committees; thus all to whom it applies can 
secure advisory opinions from the FEC. 


15a 


responded to a specific question whether such spending was 
within the limitations of § 441a(d). 


These advertisements effectively advocate the defeat of 
a clearly identified candidate in connection with that 
election and thus have the purpose of influencing the 
outcome of the general election for President of the 
United States. See generally Advisory Opinion 
1978-46. Therefore, expenditures for these advertise- 
ments benefit the eventual Republican presidential can- 
didate and are made with respect to the presidential 
general election and in connection with the presidential 


general election campaign. 


A.0. 1984-15, Fed. Elec. Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5766 
(May 31, 1984) (footnote omitted). The opinion then con- 
cluded that the spending in question was a coordinated expen- 
diture subject to the limitations in § 441a(d)(2). 


Advisory Opinion 1985-14 responded to questions from a 
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee regarding 
proposed publicity focusing on a number of congressmen, not 
all with announced opposition candidates. A.0. 1985-14, Fed. 
Elec. Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5819 (May 30, 1985). The 
opinion endorsed Advisory Opinion 1984-15 with its construc- 
tion of § 44la(d) as regulating expenditures that ‘‘both 
(1) depicted a clearly identified candidate and (2) conveyed an 
electioneering message.’’’ 


The FEC has “primary and substantial responsibility for 
administering and enforcing” the FECA. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 
109. The FEC argues that its construction of § 441a(d) as 
regulating political committee expenditures depicting a clearly 


’ Advisory Opinion 1978-46 appears more restrictive; it can be read to 
adopt the express advocacy position. A.0. 1978-46, Fed. Elec. Campaign 
Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5348 (Sept. 5, 1978). But even if the more recent 
decisions represent a change in position by the FEC we must still give the 
current view deference if the current construction is reasonable. Rust v. 
Sullivan, 500 U.S. 176, 186-87 (1991). 


16a 


identified candidate and conveying an electioneering message 
is a reasonable one to which we must defer. Viewing the party 
expenditures as contributions, as we must, we agree. 


[T]he primary interest served by the Act is the prevention 
of corruption and the appearance of corruption spawned by the 
real or imagined coercive influence of large financial contribu- 
tions on candidates’ positions and on their actions if elected to 
office." DSCC, 454 U.S. at 41. The Supreme Court cases have 
distinguished between the potential for corruption that 
attaches to contributions and coordinated expenditures, and 
those that might develop from independent expenditures, find- 
ing less inherent risk in the latter. Our analysis, therefore, with 
respect to controls on coordinated expenditures and contribu- 
tions under § 441a is different than that required for § 441b. 


Section § 441a(d) addresses the concern that large contribu- 
tors to political parties will exert undue influence on a candi- 
date if elected to office. The monetary ceiling on coordinated 
expenditures by political organizations diminishes the potential 
of such undue influence but preserves the important role of 
political parties. See DSCC, 454 U.S. at 41. In contrast, the 
purpose behind § 441b is to prevent corporate and labor 
expenditures from effectively acting as ‘‘political war chests”’ 
on behalf of candidates, because these organizations could use 
funds “‘amassed in the economic marketplace . . . (for] unfair 
advantage in the political marketplace.’’ MCFL, 479 U.S. at 
257. The FECA thus provides different regulations tailored to 
different perceived evils.* Independent expenditures are theo- 
retically unlimited but such expenditures in excess of low limits 
must be reported, along with identification of those who con- 
tributed more than $200. Contribution limits still apply. Giving 
deference to the FEC’s interpretation, we hold that 
§ 441a(d)(3) applies to coordinated-spending that involves a 
clearly identified candidate and an electioneering message, 


5 We have already discussed how subsequent FECA amendments have 
adopted the ‘“‘express advocacy”’ criteria to differentiate between inde- 
pendent and coordinated expenditures. 


17a 


without regard to whether that message constitutes express 
advocacy. 


D 


The Committee does riot seriously contest that the anti- 
Wirth publicity was directed at a clearly identified candidate. 
“Wirth Facts #1" referenced Wirth’s senatorial aspirations and 
challenged his personal integrity and campaign statements in 
the context of the current election. Wirth was not yet the 
Democratic nominee, but the FECA regulates coordinated 
expenditures made before the primary election. A.0. 1984-15, 
Fed. Elec. Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5766. The Commit- 
tee’s objective to elect the eventual Republican candidate is not 
diminished because a Democratic nominee has not emerged. 
See Buckley, 424 U.S. at 79 (major purpose of expenditures by 
candidates and political committees “‘is the nomination or elec- 
tion of a candidate’’). 


We next consider whether “Wirth Facts #1"’ contained an 
electioneering message.!° Advisory Opinion 1984-15 examined 
proposed television advertising by the Republican National 
Committee that would ‘‘question or challenge the candidate's 
statements, position, or record.’’ The FEC concluded that the 


clear import and purpose of these proposed advertise- 
ments is to diminish support for any Democratic Party 
presidential nominee and to garner support for whoever 


9 See also 2 U.S.C. S 431(18) which reads: 
The term “clearly identified” means that— 
(A) the name of the candidate involved appears; 
(B) a photograph or drawing of the candidate appears; or 
(C) the identity of the candidate is apparent by unambiguous 
reference. 

10 We agree with the district court that the message in “Wirth Facts 
#1" would not constitute express advocacy within the narrow definition 
of Buckley and MCFL. It lacks the express words ‘vote for’’ or “vote 
against,” or words of similar import, although it comes close when the ad 
suggests that an identified candidate distorted his voting record. 


18a 


may be the eventual Republican Party nominee. These 
advertisements relate primarily, if not solely, to the 
office of President of the United States and seek to 
influence a voter's choice between the Republican Party 
presidential candidate and any Democratic Party nomi- 
nee in such a way as to favor the choice of the Republi- 
advocate the defeat of a clearly identified candidate in 
connection with that election and thus have the purpose 
of influencing the outcome of the general election for 
President of the United States. Therefore, expenditures 
for these advertisements benefit the eventual Republi- 
can presidential candidate and are made with respect to 
the presidential general election and in connection with 
the presidential general election campaign. 


A.0. 1984-15, Fed. Elec. Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 9 5766 
(citation and footnotes omitted). The next year, the FEC relied 
upon that construction in rendering Advisory Opinion 1985-14 
to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee stating 
that *‘[e}lectioneering messages include statements ‘designed 
to urge the public to elect a certain candidate or party.’ A.0. 
1985-14, Fed. Elec. Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5819 (quot- 
a v. United Auto Workers, 352 U.S. 567, 587 


Any reasonable reading of ‘‘Wirth Facts #1,’ which included 
the notation of Republican Party sponsorship, would leave the 
reader (or listener) with the impression that the Republican 
Party sought to “diminish” public support for Wirth and “‘gar- 
ner support’’ for the unnamed Republican nominee. “Wirth 
Facts #1” unquestionably contained an electioneering mes- 
sage. We conclude that the anti-Wirth publicity was an ‘‘expen- 
diture in connection with” the 1986 Colorado senatorial 
election because it named both a clearly identifiable candidate 
and contained an electioneering message. The Committee, 
therefore, violated the FECA by making a 
§ 441a(d)(3) expenditure after delegating to the National 


19a 


Republican Senatorial Committee the authority to spend all of 
the Committee's available funding for the 1986 Colorado Sen- 


ate race. 


We next consider the Committee's constitutional challenges 
to the FECA. The Committee asserts that the monetary caps in 
§ 441a(d)(3) violate its First Amendment guarantees of free- 
dom of speech and association. The Committee focuses on the 
alleged absence of a compelling governmental interest served 
by the restrictions in § 441a(d)(3) and also asserts that the 
statute discriminates based upon content. The FEC’s position 
is that Buckley and later cases endorse distinctions between 
independent expenditures and contributions, and that other 
FECA contribution ceilings have consistently been upheld as 
constitutional by the Supreme Court. We agree with the FEC 
that § 441a(d)(3) is a permissible burden on speech and 
association. 


The primary purpose of the contribution and expenditure 
caps in the FECA are to prevent corruption or the appearance 
of corruption. Buckley 424 U.S. at 25-26. The FECA starts from 
the premise that political committees may make only minimal 
expenditures in connection with campaigns, § 441a(a) (dollar 
limits on contributions), then creates one exception at 
§ 441a(d)(3) (coordinated expenditure limits for certain politi- 
cal committees made in connection with federal election cam- 
paigns). DSCC, 454 U.S. at 28-29 n.1; 11 C.FR. § 110.7(b); see 
also 2 U.S.C. § 431(14)-(16). This exception allows for greater 
monetary support by political parties than would otherwise be 
permitted by § 44la(a). The coordinated expenditures permit- 
ted by § 441a(d)(3) are treated for purposes of reporting and 
monetary limitations as contributions from the political com- 
mittee to the candidate, § 441a(7)(B)(i); see also 
§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), and fall within the contribution ceilings 
contained in § 4.4la(a). See Buckley, 424 U.S. at 46; FEC v. 


20a 


Nationai Political Action Committee, 470 U.S. 480, 492 
(1985) (NCPAC). 


The same reasoning the Supreme Court used to uphold the 
constitutionality of other contribution limitations applies when 
analyzing the constitutionality of limits on coordinated expend- 
itures by political committees.'! The opportunity for abuse is 
greater when the contributions (or in the instant case, coordi- 
nated expenditures) derive from sources inherently aligned 
with the candidate, rather than with independent expenditures. 
See Buckley, 424 U.S. at 26-27; NCPAC, 470 U.S. at 497. The 
Committee, stressing the benefits of party discipline and the 
broad interests of party success, argues that the dangers of 
domination of candidates by large individual donors do not 
apply to party expenditures. But party expenditures, particu- 
larly pre-primary, often are controlled by incumbent officehold- 
ers. We cannot say the dangers of domination that underlay the 
Supreme Court’s acceptance of the constitutionality of contri- 
bution limits are not present in political party expenditures. 
The members of Congress who enacted this law were surviving 
veterans of the election campaign process, and all were mem- 
bers of organized political parties. They should be considered 
uniquely qualified to evaluate the risk of actual corruption or 
appearance of corruption from large coordinated expenditures 
by political parties. This case is, therefore, ideally postured for 
deference to the congressional will. 


The Supreme Court has endorsed the government's interest 
in curtailing large campaign contributions as legitimate. In 


1! We acknowledge that Buckley upheld then 18 U.S.C. § 608(f) as 
constitutional when challenged as discriminatory under the Fifth Amend- 
ment, and not the First Amendment, which is the basis for the Commit- 
tee’s constitutional challenge here. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 59 n.67. 
However, MCFL adopted much of the reasoning in Buckley in analyzing 
the First Amendment challenges to § 441b. We do not, therefore, discount 
the importance of Buckley in the context of our First Amendment 
analysis. 


2la 


addition to preventing corruption or the appearance of corrup- 
tion, these restrictions ‘‘equalize the relative ability of all citi- 
zens to affect the outcome of elections,”” Buckley, 424 U.S. at 
26, and to a degree cap campaign costs and increase accessibil- 
ity to our political system. Jd. The Court has distinguished 
between restrictions on contributions and restrictions on inde- 
pendent expenditures and then invalidated spending restric- 
tions while upholding contribution limits. Jd. at 58-59. 


By treating coordinated expenditures as contributions, the 
FECA effectively precludes political committees from literally 
or in appearance, ‘‘secur[ing] a political quid pro quo from 
current and potential office holders."’ Jd. at 26-27. Contribution 
limits regulate the quantity of political speech, but do not fore- 
close speech or political association. We do not see this mone- 
tary cap as content based; it is rather a consequence of the 
funding source. We uphold as constitutional, against the Com- 
mittee’s First Amendment challenge, the spending limits in 
§ 441a(d)(3). 


We REVERSE and REMAND with instructions that the dis- 
trict court enter judgment in favor of the FEC, and for a deter- 
mination under 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(6) of the appropriate civil 
penalty. 


— 


22a 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 89 N 1159 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Plaintiff, 


v 
COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL 
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, et al., 


Defendanis. 


ORDER AND MEMORANDUM OF DECISION 


This case involves alleged violations of the Federal Elec- 
tions Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, 2 U.S.C.A. 
§§ 431-456 (West 1985) (the “‘Act’’). Plaintiff Federal Election 
Commission sued Defendant Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee and its treasurer, Douglas L. Jones, 
claiming that defendants had failed to report a certain payment 
as an ‘‘expenditure,” as required by 2 U.S.C.A. § 441la(d)(3). 
Plaintiff seeks declaratory, civil, and injunctive relief under the 
Act. The matter comes before the court on (1) “Defendants’ 
Motion for Summary Judgment’’ filed May 15, 1990, and 
(2) “Plaintiffs Motion for Summary Judgment” filed July 6, 
1990. Jurisdiction is based on 28 U.S.C.A. § 1345 (West 1976). 


FACTS 


Defendant Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Com- 
mittee (the ‘‘Committee’’) is an unincorporated political associ- 
ation. It works to advance the goals and values of the 
Republican Party in the State of Colorado. (Defs.' Statement of 


23a 


Undisputed Facts and Supp. Exs. { 1 [filed May 15, 1990) 
{hereinafter ‘“‘Defs.' Statement’’], admitted at P|. Fed. Election 
Comm'n's Resp. to Defs.’ Statement of Undisputed Facts and 
Supp. Exs. 4 1 [filed July 6, 1990) [hereinafter ‘Pl.'s Resp. to 
Defs.’ Statement’’ }.) It is the federally-registered committee for 
the Republican Party in Colorado and is therefore (as it 
acknowledges) subject to the Act. 


Section 44 1a(d)(3) of the Act limits the amount which such a 
committee may expend ‘‘in connection with the general elec- 
tion campaign of a candidate for federal office."’ 2 U.S.C.A. 
§ 441a(d)(3). In 1986, the Committee assigned its yearly right 
to make expenditures under the Act to the National Republican 
Senatorial Committee. (Defs.’ Statement 1 16, Ex. 4 [Defs’ 
Resp. to Pl.'s Req. for Admis.], admitted at P1.'s Resp. to Defs.’ 
Statement 17 15-16.) The Committee thereafter paid $15,000 
for a radio advertisement, entitled ‘“Wirth Facts #1'’ [hereinaf- 
ter ‘the Advertisement”’], the text of which follows: 


Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central 
Committee 


Here in Colorado we're used to politicians who let you 
know where they stand, and | thought we could count 
on Tim Wirth to do the same. But the last few weeks 
have been a real eye-opener. | just saw some ads where 
Tim Wirth said he’s for a strong defense and a balanced 
budget. But according to his record, Tim Wirth voted 
against every new weapon system in the last five years. 
And he voted against the balanced budget amendment. 


Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he 
doesn't have a right to change the facts. 


(Defs.’ Statement 1 7, admitted at Pl.'s Resp. to Defs.’ State- 
ment 49 4-7.) 


The Committee devised “Wirth Facts #1" as a response to a 
series of television advertisements featuring then-Congress- 
man Wirth. These advertisements were sponsored by the Com- 
mittee for Tim Wirth, Inc. (Pl. Fed. Election Comm'n's Mem. of 


24a 


P & A. in Supp. of P1.’s Mot. for Summ. J. and in Opp'n to Defs.’ 

Summ. J. Mot. at 6 [filed July 6, 1990] [hereinafter ‘‘Pl.'s 

Mot.’’].) The Advertisement ran between April 4 and 13, 1986, 

four months before the August Democratic primary and seven 

months before the November general election. (Defs.’ State- 

ES ee SS ep te Oa Cee 
4-7.) 


The Committee is required by section 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) to 
make quarterly or monthly reports which must contain any 
section 441(b)(3) expenditures. See 2 U.S.C.A. 
§ 434(a)(4)(A)(i). In the Committee's quarterly report, it listed 
the $15,000 paid for the Advertisement as an operating 
expense—not as a section 441a(d)(3) expenditure—and identi- 
fied it as “voter information to Colorado voters—advertising.” 
(Defs.’ Statement, Ex. 12 at 3 [Defs.’ Br. for Fed. Election 
Comm'n Proceedings].) On June 12, 1986, the Colorado Dem- 
ocratic Party filed an administrative complaint with the Federal 
Election Commission (““Commission’’), alleging, inter alia, that 
defendants’ expenditure for the Advertisement violated the Act. 
On January 10, 1989, the Commission determined there was 
probable cause to believe defendants had violated sec- 
tions 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B)(iv), and 441a(f) of the 
Act. When settlement negotiations failed, the Commission insti- 
tuted this civil action. 


The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment on 
plaintiff's claim that defendants failed to comply with the Act. 
Defendants maintain section 441a(d)(3) does not apply to the 
money paid for the Advertisement because it was not an expen- 
diture ‘in connection with” the general election of a candidate 
for federal office. (Defs.’ Mem. in Supp. of Defs.’ Mot. for 
Summ. J. at 6-7 [filed May 15, 1990] [hereinafter ‘“‘Defs.’ 
Mot.”’}].) Defendants also assert a counterclaim alleging that 
section 441a(d)(3) is unconstitutional. No material facts are in 
dispute. Because | find that plaintiff has failed to demonstrate 
the Advertisement was “in connection with” the general elec- 
tion of a candidate for federal office, | grant defendants’ motion 


25a 


for summary judgment and deny plaintiffs motion. | therefore 
need not, and do not, reach defendants’ challenge to sec- 


tion 441la(d)(3)’s constitutionality. 
ANALYSIS 


Pursuant to rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Proce- 
dure, summary judgment may be granted where there is ‘‘no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and the .. . moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.’ Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 2511 
(1986). The burden of establishing the nonexistence of a genu- 
ine issue of material fact is on the moving party. Celotez 
Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 321, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 2552 
(1986). In a case where a party moves for summary judgment 
on an issue on which he would not bear the burden of persua- 
sion at trial, his initial burden of production may be satisfied by 
showing the court that there is an absence of evidence in the 
record to support the nonmoving party’s case. Jd., 477 U.S. at 
321, 106 S. Ct. at 2552. Once the moving party has met this 
initial burder. of production, the burden shifts to the nonmov- 
ing party to establish that there is a triable issue of fact. A 
triable issue of material fact exists only where “there is suffi- 
cient evidence favoring the nonmoving party for a jury to return 
a verdict for that party.” Merrick v. Northern Natural Gas Co., 
911 F2d 426, 429 (10th Cir 1990). If the nonmoving party 
cannot muster sufficient evidence to make out a triable issue of 
fact on his claim, a trial would be useless and the moving party 
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Anderson, 
477 U.S. at 250, 106 S. Ct. 2511. 


Section 44la(d)(3)of the Act is at the center of this 
dispute. It provides: 


The national committee of a political party, or a State 
committee of a political party, including any 
subordinate committee of a State committee, may not 


make any expenditure in connection with the general 
election campaign of a candidate for Federal office in 


26a 


a State who is affiliated with such party which 
exceeds— 


(A) in the case of a candidate for election to the office 
of Senator .. . , the greater of— 


(i) 2 cents multiplied by the voting age population 
of the State... ; or 


(ii) $20,000... 


2 U.S.C.A. § 441a(d)(3) (emphasis added). Because the Com- 
mittee assigned the full amount of expenditures permitted by 
section 44 1a(d)(3) to the National Republican Senatorial Com- 
mittee, see Federal Election Comm'n v. Democratic Senatorial 
Campaign Comm., 454 U.S. 27, 39-40, 102 S. Ct. 38, 46 
(1981) [hereinafter DSCC], it no longer had the right to make 
section 441a(d)(3) expenditures. As a consequence, the Com- 
mittee’s expenditure of $15,000 for the Advertisement, if made 
“in connection with” the general election campaign, was a 
violation of the spending limits established by section 
441a(d)(3). 


Two types of expenditures are regulated under the Act: coor- 
dinated and independent. A coordinated expenditure is one 
made in cooperation with, or with the consent of, a candidate, 
his agents, or an authorized committee of a candidate. Buck- 
ley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 47 n.53, 96 S. Ct. 612, 647 n.53 
(1976). An independent expenditure is one made without the 
knowledge or permission of a candidate, his agent, or his cam- 
paign committee. Jd. See 2 U.S.C.A. § 431(17). Coordinated 
expenditures are considered ‘‘contributions’’ under sec- 
tion 441a(a)(7)(B)(i); as such, they may be more freely limited 
than independent expenditures. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 48, 96 S. 
Ct. at 647-48; Federal Election Comm'n v. National Conserva- 
tive Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. 480, 491, 105 S. Ct. 
1459, 1466 (1985) [hereinafter NCPAC]. In Buckley, the Court 
upheld as constitutional the limitations on contributions to can- 
didates and struck down as unconstitutional limitations on 
independent expenditures. NCPAC, 470 U.S. at 491, 105 S. Ct. 


27a 


at 1465. See also Federal Election Comm'n v. Massachusetts 
Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U.S. 238, 260, 107 S. Ct. 616, 630 
(1986) [hereinafter MCFL] (‘‘We have consistently held that 
restrictions on contributions require less compelling justifica- 
tion than restrictions on independent spending.’’); California 
Medical Ass'n v. Federal Election Comm'n, 453 U.S. 182, 194, 
196-97, 101 S. Ct. 2712, 2720, 2724-25 (1981) (same). 


Expenditures by party committees are considered to be coor- 
dinated expenditures subject to the monetary limits of sec- 
tion 44la(d). DSCC, 454 U.S. at 27 n.1, 102 S. Ct. at 40 n.1.! 
Party committees have been deemed incapable of making inde- 
pendent expenditures in connection with the campaigns of 
their party's candidates. DSCC, 454 U.S. at 27 n.1, 102 S. Ct. at 
40 n.1. See also TEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, 1 Fed. Elec- 
tion Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5819 (July 18, 1985); FEC 
Advisory Opinion 1984-15, 1 Fed. Election Campaign Fin. 
Guide (CCH) 9 5766 (Aug. 16, 1984). 


The Commission has the ‘“‘primary and substantial responsi- 
bility for administering and enforcing the Act,’’ and has ‘‘exten- 
sive rulemaking and adjudicative powers." Buckley, 424 U.S. at 
109-10, 96 S. Ct. at 677-78. When interpreting the Act, the 
Commission's interpretation is presumptively entitled to defer- 
ence. DSCC, 454 U.S. at 38, 102 S. Ct. at 45. The Commission 
has, by regulation, forbidden independent expenditures by 
national and state party committees. See 11 C.FR. 
§ 110.7(B)(4) (1981). 


! Defendants point to a passage in Buckley which classifies 2 U.S.C.A. 
608(f) (West 1970) (recodified as section 441a/d]) as an “expenditure 
ceiling,’’ as opposed to a contribution limitation. According to defend- 
ants, this reference suggests the Court considered section 441la(d) to 
regulate independent expenditures. It is unc ear how referring to sec- 
tion 44la(d) as an “expenditure’’ limitation necessarily suggests the 
section regulates independent expenditures. In light of the Court and 
Commission's other pronouncements, and the fact that this reference is 
dicta, see Buckley, 424 U.S. at 58 n.66-67, 96 S. Ct. at 653 n.66-67, I do 


not find this singular reference persuasive. 


28a 


Defendants suggest that because no Republican candidate 
had been nominated, the expenditure was necessarily ‘‘inde- 
pendent,’ not “‘coordinated.’’ However, for purposes of deter- 
mining whether an expenditure is coordinated or independent 
it is irrelevant whether a candidate has been nominated at the 
time the expenditure is made. See FEC Advisory Opinion 
1984-15, 1 Fed. Election Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5766 
(Aug. 16, 1984). “[NJothing in the Act, its legislative history, 
Commission regulations, or court decisions indicates that coor- 
dinated party expenditures must be restricted to the time 
period between nomination and the general election.”’ Jd. Orga- 
nizations whose major purpose is the nomination or election of 
a candidate ‘‘are, by definition, campaign related,”’ Buckley, 
424 U.S. at 80, 96 S. Ct. at 663, regardless of whether a specific 
candidate has been nominated. Based on Supreme Court prece- 
dent and the Commission’s interpretation of the statute, I find 
that the Committee's expenditure was coordinated. It was made 
on behalf of the Republican candidate, whomever that might 
be; and it is irrelevant that no particular person had been 
designated. 


The Committee's expenditure would nevertheless not be sub- 
ject to section 441a(d)(3) limitations unless the expenditure 
was made ‘‘in connection with’’ the general election campaign 
of a candidate for federal office. No controlling or persuasive 
authority has interpreted the phrase ‘“‘in connection with’’ in 
the context of section 441la(d)(3). The Court, however, has 
interpreted the phrase “in connection with’”’ in the context of 
section 441b, which, like section 441a(d)(3), regulates contri- 
butions and expenditures. In MCFL, the Court held that ‘‘an 
expenditure must constitute ‘express advocacy’ in order to be 
subject to the prohibition of § 441b."’ MCFL, 479 U.S. at 249, 
107 S. Ct. at 623. See also Buckley, 4:.4 U.S. at 80, 96 S. Ct. at 
663. ‘The normal rule of statutory construction assumes that 
identical words used in different parts of the same act are 
intended to have the same meaning.’’ See Sullivan v. Stroop, 
496 U.S. 478, 484, 110 S. Ct. 2499, 2504 (1990); Sorenson v. 
Secretary of Treasury of the United States, 475 U.S. 851, 860, 


29a 


106 S. Ct. 1600, 1606 (1986):; Bamson v. United States, 81,6 
F.2d 549 (10th Cir.), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 896, 108 S. Ct. 229 
(1987) (when the same words are used in different sections of 


the same law, they will be given the same meaning). 


This rule of statutory construction is usually followed where 
different parts of the same act have a similar purpose, as do 
sections 441a(d)(3) and 441b. Both sections 441a(d)(3) and 
441b are intended to regulate contributions and expenditures 
of multi-person organizations. While section 44 1a(d) regulates 
expenditures by national committees, state committees, or 
subordinate committees of the state committees, section 441b 
regulates expenditures by national banks, corporations, or 
labor organizations. Since I examine the statute as a whole, | 
find the Court’s interpretation of ‘‘in connection with’’ in the 
context of section 441b to be persuasive of my interpretation of 
the samme words in section 441a(d)(3). 


Plaintiff urges the court to adopt the Commission's interpre- 
tation of “in connection with’’ which would require the Adver- 
tisement to contain a “clearly identified candidate’’ and an 
“electioneering message.’’ FEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, 1 
Fed. Election Campaign Fin. Guide (CCH) 1 5819 (July 18, 
1985). According to plaintiff, section 441b differs significantly 
from section 441la(d)(3), in that 441b regulates independent 
expenditures, whereas section 441a(d)(3) regulates coordi- 
nated expenditures. Although Buckley acknowledges that coor- 
dinated expenditures may be more freely regulated than 
independent expenditures, it does not follow that the identical 
words, when used with reference to coordinated expenditures, 


should be given a more expansive interpretation. 


The Supreme Court’s decision in Buckley suggests just the 
opposite. When examining the intrusiveness of the statute’s 
regulations on first amendment freedoms, the Court found that 
a limitation on coordinated expenditures was justified in order 
to stem “‘the reality or appearance of corruption in the electoral 
process.’ Buckley, 424 U.S. at 46, 96 S. Ct. at 647-48. 


30a 


Although the Court found the justification for regulating coor- 
dinated expenditures outweighed the infringement on the First 
Amendment, this conclusion does not create a carte blanc for 
expansive regulation of coordinated expenditures. On the con- 
trary, the fact that section 441a(d)(3) implicates first amend- 
ment freedoms argues for adoption of the more narrowly 
defined ‘‘express advocacy” interpretation in order to minimize 
intrusions.? Moreover, as Buckley notes, the limitation on con- 
tributions by state: political committees, “‘[rJather than under- 
mining freedom of association, . . . enhances the opportunity 
of bona fide groups to participate in the election process.” 
Buckley, 424 U.S. at 33, 96 S. Ct. at 642. Given that the effect 
of the regulation is to enhance the political freedom of commit- 
tees, I find that the “express advocacy” standard, which is a 
less intrusive limitation on a committee's freedom, is consistent 
with the Act’s purpose. I do not find any compelling justifica- 
tion within the Commission's advisory opinion, nor in plain- 
tiff's argument, for expanding Buckley's carefully 
circumscribed exception to its prohibition against regulation of 
freedom of speech. 


The Commission does not point to any other section of the 
statute where the courts have given the language “in connec- 
tion with’’ the expansive interpretation the Commission advo- 
cates in this case. In fact, the courts have consistently 
interpreted “‘in connection with" as requiring “‘express advo- 
cacy.’ See Federal Election Comm'n v. Furgatch, 807 F.2d 
857, 864 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 850, 108 S. Ct. 151 


2 A narrow interpretation of the words “in connection with” also 
addresses the constitutional concerns raised by defendants. Defendants 
contenc that if al] expenditures by state commit. ves were deemed contri- 
butions subject to section 441a(d)(3), then they would not be free to 
speak in favor of their candidates. (Defs." Mem. in Opp'n to P1.'s Mot. for 
Summ. J. and in Reply to P1.'s Opp'n to Defs.’ Mot. for Summ. J. at 4 [filed 
July 25, 1990] [hereinafter “Defs.’ Reply’’].) By adopting a more nar- 
rowly defined inte-pretation of ‘in connection with,” state political com- 
mittees remain free to engage in speech which does not expressly 
advocate the election of its candidates. 


3la 


(1987); Federal Election Comm'n v. Central Long Island Tax 
Reform, 616 F.2d 45, 53 (2nd Cir. 1980).? In Orloski v. Federal 
Election Commission, 795 F.2d 156 (D.C. Cir. 1986), the Com- 
mission itself advocated the adoption of the “express acdvo- 
cacy’’ interpretation of “in connection with” in the context of 
section 441b(a). In adopting the Commission's interpretation, 
the D.C. Circuit noted: 


[T]he FEC’s interpretation is consistent with Buckley, 
in which the Supreme Court held that under the first 
amendment, the phrases ‘for the purposes of influenc- 
ing any election” and “in connection with any election’’ 
must be defined as the “express advoca{cy] [of] the 
election or defeat of a clearly-identifiable candidate,” a 
definition that was subsequently incorporated into the 
Act. See 2 U.S.C. § 431(17). To be sure, the Court 
limited these definitions to those provisions curtailing 
or prohibiting independent expenditures. This defini- 
tion is not constitutionally required for those statutory 
provisions limiting contributions, see Buckley, 424 U.S. 
at 78-80, 96 S. Ct. at 663-64. Nonetheless the fact that 
the Court in Buckley formulated these definitions for 
this statutory language demonstrates that the FEC’s 
similar interpretation of the same language is logical, 


3 In United States v. International Union UAW-CIO, 352 US. 567, 
587, 77 S. Ct. 529, 550 (1957), the Court interpreted “in connection 
with’’ in the context of a predecessor to the current Act, which prohibited 
corporate or union contributions or expenditures to be used “‘in connec- 
tion with" any election for federal office. Jd., 352 U.S. at 568, 77 S. Ct. at 
530. The Court held that the “in connection with" found in the statute 
was understood to proscribe “the expenditure of union dues to pay for 
commercial broadcasts that are designed to urge the public to elect a 
certain candidate or party."’ Jd., 352 U.S. at 587, 77 S. Ct. at 550. It is 


subsequently adopted the language used in International Union UAW. 
CIO, 1 decline to do so in this case. 


32a 


reasonable, and consistent with the overall statutory 
framework. The fact that the FEC adopted this inter- 
pretation for all relevant statutory provisions, even 
where not constitutionally required, only adds to its 
reasonableness for it enhances the consistency and 
evenhandedness with which the FEC ultimately 
administers the Act. 


Orloski, 795 F-2d at 166-67 (emphasis added). See also FEC 
Advisory Opinion 1978-46, 1 Fed. Election Campaign Fin. 
Guide (CCH) 1 5348 (Oct. 5, 1978) (suggesting that sec- 
tion 441a(d) requires “express advocacy’’). 


The “thoroughness, validity, and consistency of an agency’s 
reasoning are factors that bear upon the amount of deference to 
be given an agency's ruling.” NCPAC, 454 U.S. at 35, 102 S. Ct. 
at 44; Adamo Wrecking Co. v. United States, 434 U.S. 275, 287 
n.5, 98 S. Ct. 566, 573 n.5 (1978). I do not find the Commis- 
sion’s suggested interpretation of ‘‘in connection with” to be 
entitled to deference where it is neither thorough nor consistent 
with either its own previous rulings or the courts’ holdings. I 
conclude that “express advocacy” is required in order for a 
coordinated expenditure to be “‘in connection with” the general 
election campaign of a candidate for federal office under 
section 44la(d)(3). 


Having made this determination, I must decide whether the 
Advertisement constituted “‘express advocacy.” The Court has 
adopted a bright-line test for identifying speech which consti- 
tutes “express advocacy,” recognizing that: 

[T]he distinction between discussion of issues and can- 
didates and advocacy of election or defeat of candidates 
may often dissolve in practical application. Candidates, 
especially incumbents, are intimately tied to public 
issues involving legislative proposals and governmental 
actions. Not only do candidates campaign on the basis 
of their positions on various issues, but campaigns 
themselves generate issues of public interest. 


33a 


Buckley, 424 U.S. at 42, 96 S. Ct. at 645. See Furgatch, 807 
F.2d at 860; Federal Election Comm'n v. National Organiza- 
tion for Women, 713 F. Supp. 428, 432 (D.D.C. 1989). The 
Court defined “‘express advocacy” as “express words of advo- 
cacy of election or defeat, such as ‘vote for,’ ‘elect,’ ‘support,’ 
‘cast your ballot for,’ ‘Smith for Congress,’ ‘vote against,’ 
‘defeat,’ or ‘reject.’ Buckley, 424 U.S. at 46 n-52, 96 S. Ct. at 
647 n-52. Speech is “advocacy” if it ‘presents a clear plea for 
specific action, and . . . it must be clear what action is advo- 
cated." Furgatch, 807 F.2d at 864. Speech which is merely 
informative would not be considered “‘advocacy.”’ Jd. When 
determining whether speech constitutes “express advocacy,” 
the focus is on the actual wording used. Buckley, 424 U.S. at 
42, 96 S. Ct. at 646. 


The Advertisement does not contain any words which 
expressly advocate action. At best, as plaintiff suggests, the 
Advertisement contains an indirect plea for action. The Adver- 
tisement concludes with ‘“Tim Wirth has the right to run for the 
Senate, but he doesn’t have the right to change the facts.”’ Even 
assuming the Advertisement indirectly discourages voters from 
sup” orting Wirth, it does not contain the direct plea for specific 
action required by Buckley and Furgatch. 


According to plaintiff, the surrounding circumstances sug- 
gest the Advertisement was, in fact, a plea for action. The 
Advertisement identified Wirth by name and position, referred 
to his senate candidacy, responded to Wirth’s own campaign 
advertisements, and said ‘‘paid for by the Colorado Republican 
State Central Committee.” (Pl.'s Mot. at 15.) At the time the 
Advertisement ran, plaintiff maintains, Wirth was the only cred- 
ible announced Democratic candidate for Senate. Jd. In addi- 
tion, the public “‘knew”’ the sponsor of the Advertisement, i.e., 
the Republican party, would eventually nominate a candidate. 
Thus, the Advertisement implicitly urged the public both to vote 
against Wirth and to support whomever the Republican candi- 
date would be. Plaintiff also points to contemporaneous press 
statements of Howard “Bo”’ Callaway, then hairman of the 


34a 


Colorado Republican Party, concerning the state committee's 
general purpose which allegedly leave ‘‘no doubt that the intent 
of the ad was to attack Mr. Wirth’s candidacy for the Senate.” 
(PI.’s Mot. at 10-11, 17-18.) 


I do not believe this type of indirect urging constitutes 
“express advocacy” under the Buckley analysis. Buckley 
adopted a bright-line test that expenditures must ‘‘in express 
terms advocate the election or defeat of a candidate” in order to 
be subject to limitation. Faucher v. Federal Election Comm'n, 
928 F2d 468, 471 (1st Cir. 1991). In adopting a bright-line 
approach, the Court noted the difficulty in interpreting the 
meaning and effects of words: 


[W]hether words intended and designed to fall short of 
invitation would miss that mark is a question both of 
intent and of effect. No speaker, in such circumstances, 
safely could assume that anything he might say upon 
the general subject would not be understood by some as 
an invitation. In short, the supposedly clear-cut distinc- 
tion between discussion, laudation, general advocacy, 
and solicitation puts the speaker in these circumstances 
wholly at the mercy of the varied understanding of his 
hearers and consequently of whatever inferences may 
be drawn to his intent and meaning. Such a distinction 
offers no security for free discussion. In these condi- 
tions it blankets with uncertainty whatever may be said. 
It compels the speaker to hedge and trim. 


Buckley, 424 U.S. at 43, 96 S. Ct. at 646 (quoting Thomas v. 
Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 535, 65 S. Ct. 315, 325 [1945]). In 
adopting the “express advocacy” standard, the Court sought to 
protect issue advocacy. “In a republic where the people are 
sovereign, the ability of the citizenry to make tiformed choices 
among candidates for office is essential. . . . Discussion of 
public issues and debate on the: qualifications of candidates are 
integral to the operation of the system of government estab- 
lished by our Constitution.” Buckley, 424 U.S. at 14-15, 96 S. 


35a 


Ct. at 632. Trying to determine whether the surrounding cir- 
cumstances, coupled with the implications of the Advertise- 
ment, constitute “express advocacy” leads to the type of 
semantic dilemma which the Court sought to avoid by adopting 
a bright-line rule. I decline to blur Buckley's bright-line rule by 
interpreting the Advertisement's criticism of Wirth as ‘express 
advocacy."’ Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to 
plaintiff, I find that the Advertisement does not call for the type 
of “express advocacy” required by Buckley. Because I con- 
clude that no reasonable trier of fact could find for plaintiff on 
the basis of the evidence presented, defendants are entitled to 
summary judgment as a matter of law. Masushita Elec. Indus. 
Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587 (1986). 


With regard to plaintiff's motion for summary judgment, the 
analysis of whether the Advertisement constitutes “express 


advocacy” is the same. Defendants allege that the Advertise- 
ment neither contains a direct plea for action, nor conveys 
support for a particular candidate. According to defendants, 
the Advertisement simply informed the public about the politi- 
cal record of an incumbent Colorado congressman; it did not 
advocate voting for or against any political candidate. (Defs.’ 
Mot. at 7.) In addition, the Advertisement was broadcast seven 
months before the general election—before either party had 
chosen its candidate. (Defs.’ Reply at 10.) Defendants claim 
Wirth’s senate candidacy was referenced in the Advertisement 
only for the purpose of identifying his statements. (Defs.’ Reply 
at 9.) Plaintiff fails to adequately rebut these claims. Accord- 
ingly, plaintiffs motion for summary judgment is denied. 


Conclusion 


Because I find that the expenditure for the Advertisement 
was not “in connection with” the general election of a candi- 
date for federal office, it was not subject to section 44la(d)(3) 
limitations and did not violate the Act. Since I am able to resolve 


the dispute on statutory grounds, I do not reach defendants’ 


36a 


challenge to the constitutionality of section 44la(d)(3). Defend- 
ants cannot avoid this result by posturing the constitutional 
issue as an independent counterclaim. It is therefore 


ORDERED as follows: 


(1) Plaintiffs motion for summary judgment is DENIED; 
and 


(2) Defendants’ motion for summary judgment is 
GRANTED. All claims against defendants are dismissed. 
Defendants’ counterclaim is DISMISSED as moot. 


Dated this 30th day of August, 1993. 
BY THE COURT: 


EDWARD W. NOTTINGHAM 
United States District Judge 


37a 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


Civil Action No. 89 N 1159 


_— 1993, was mailed to the following on August 30. 


Kenneth E. Kellner, Esq. 
Deed it Poet ne 
999 E Street, N.W 
Washington, D.C. 20463 
Attorneys for Plaintiff 
Jan Witold Baran, Esq. 
Cul A Labon, Be, 
WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W 
, D.C. 20006 
Attorneys for Defendants 


JAMES R. MANSPEAKER 
CLERK 


By 


Deputy Clerk 


IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLORADO 


CIVIL ACTION NO. 89-N-1159 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
999 E Street, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20463 
(202) 376-8200, 


Vv. 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL 
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, 
1275 Tremont Place 
Denver, Colorado 80204 
(303) 893-1776, 


and 


DOUGLAS L. JONES, AS TREASURER, 
1275 Tremont Place 
Denver, Colorado 80204 
(303) 893-1776, 
Defendants. 


COMPLAINT FOR DECLARATORY, INJUNCTIVE 
AND OTHER APPROPRIATE RELIEF 


JURISDICTION 


1. This action seeks declaratory, injunctive and other appro- 
priate relief pursuant to the express authority granted the Fed- 
eral Election Commission (“‘Commission” or “FEC") by 
provisions of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as 
amended (‘‘Act’’) or FECA’), codiiled at 2 U.S.C. 


§§ 437d(a)(6) and 437g(a)(6)(A). This court has original juris- 

diction over this suit pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1345 as an action 

brought by an agency of the United States expressty authorized 

to sue by an act of Congress. 

VENUE : 
2. Venue is property found in the District of Colorado, in 


accord with 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(6)(A), as the defendants can be 
found, resice or transact business in this district. 


THE PARTIES 
eee 


administration, 
tion, and civil enforcement of the Federal Election Campaign 
Act of 1971, as amended. See generally 2 U.S.C. $§ 437c(b)(1), 
437d(a) and 437g. The FEC is authorized to institute investiga- 
tions of possible violations of the Act, 2 U.S.C. $§ 437g(a)(1) 
and (2), and has exclusive jurisdiction to initiate civil actions in 
the United States district courts to obtain judicial enforcement 
of the Act. 2 U.S.C. §§ 437c(b)(1) and 437g(a)(6). 


5. Defendant Douglas L. Jones is the treasurer of the Colo- 


rado Republican Federal Campaign Committee. See 2 U.S.C. 
§§ 432(a), 432(c), and 434(a)(1). 
STATUTES 


40a 


for the United States Senate in that State who is affiliated with 
such party which exceeds the greater of 2 cents multiplied by 
the voting age population of the State or $20,000. 


7. 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) states that political commit- 
tees must report to the Commission, for the reporting period 
and the calendar year, the total amount of expenditures made 
under 2 U.S.C. § 441la(d). 


8. 2 U.S.C. § 434(6)(6)(B)iv) states that political commit- 
tees (other than the authorized committees of candidates) must 
report to the Commission the name and address of each person 
who receives any expenditure from the reporting committee 
during the reporting period in connection with an expenditure 
under the reporting period in connection with an expenditure 
under 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d), together with the date, amount, and 
purpose of any such expenditure as well as the name of, and the 
office sought by, the candidate on whose behalf the expenditure 
is made. 

9. 2 U.S.C. § 44la(f) states, inter alia, that no political 
committee shall knowingly make any expenditure in violation 
of 2 U.S.C. § 441a, and no officer or employee of a political 
comumittee shall knowingly make any expenditure on behalf of a 
candidate in violation of any limitation imposed on contribu- 
tions and expenditures under 2 U.S.C. § 44la. 


ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS 


10. On June 12, 1986, M. Buie Seawell filed an administra- 
tive complaint on behalf of the Colorado State Democratic 


lated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). The 
basis of this finding was that it appeared that the State Party 


4la 


and its treasurer had made a disbursement for a radio advertise- 
ment that appeared to be an expenditure in connection with the 
general election for United States Senator from Colorado in 
1986, and thus said expenditure appeared to be subject to the 
limitations of 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A); the State Party and its 
treasurer, however, had not reported these expenditures in 
accordance with 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 
434(b)(6)(B)(iv). An investigation was initiated. 


11. By letter dated November 13, 1986, the State Party and 
its treasurer were notified of the Commission's reason to 
believe findings of November 5, 1986. 


12. The Commission's General Counsel notified the State 
Party and its treasurer by letter dated November 10, 1987, thar 
the General Counsel was prepared to recommend that the Com- 
mission find probable cause to believe that they had violated 
the Act, and provided them with a brief stating the position of 
the General Counsel on the legal and factual issues of the case. 
See 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(3). The State Part: and its treasurer 


were provided an opportunity to respond. 


13. On June 14, 1988, the Commission, by the affirmative 
vote of at least four of its members, found probable cause to 
believe that the State Party and its Treasurer violated 2 U.S.C. 


$§ 434(b)(4)(H)(tv), 434(6)(6)(B)(iv), and 44 1a(f). 


14. By letter dated June 23, 1988, the State Party and its 
treasurer were notified of the Commission's probable cause to 
believe findings of June 14, 1988, and a proposed conciliation 
agreement directed to the State Party and its treasurer was 
enclosed. 


15. The Commission's General Counsel notified Douglas L. 
Jones by letter dated September 28, 1988, that the General 
Counsel was prepared to recommend that the Commission find 
probable cause to believe that Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer of 
the State Party, had violated the Act, and provided him with a 
brief stating the position of the General Counsel in the legal and 


42a 


factual issues of the case. See 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(3). Douglas L. 
Jones, as treasurer, was provided an opportunity to respond. 


16. On January 10, 1989, the Commission, by the affirma- 
tive vote of at least four of its members, found probable cause 


violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(6)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B)(iv), 
and 441a(f). 


17. By letter dated January 17, 1989, the State Party and 
Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer, were notified of the Commis- 
sion's probable cause to believe findings of January 10, 1989, 
and a proposed conciliation agreement directed to the State 
Party and Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer, was enclosed. 


18. The Commission endeavored for a period of not less than 
thirty (30) days to correct the violation by informal methods of 
conference, conciliation and persuasion, and to enter into a 
conciliation agreement with the defendants in accordance with 
2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(4)(A). 


bers, authorized, pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(6)(A), the 
filing of a civil suit against the defendants in the United States 
District Court. 


20. Thereafter, the defendants were notified by letter dated 
April 10, 1989, of the Commission's authorization of the instant 
civil action. 


21. 1.e Commission has met all of the jurisdictional prereq- 
uisites for filing this suit. 


STATEMENT OF CLAIM 
COUNT 1 


22. Plaintiff incorporates by reference the allegations con- 
tained in paragraphs 1 through 21, inclusive. 


43a 


23. Defendants were Prohibited by 2 U.S.C. 
§ 441a(d)(3)(A), from making expenditures in connection with 
the 1986 general election campaign of a candidate for United 
States Senator from Colorado in excess of an amount equal to 
2 cents multiplied by the voting age 
which amount was $103,248. 


24. Defendants assigned their right to make expenditures 
pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A) in connection with the 
1986 general election campaign for United States Senator from 
Colorado to the National Republican Senatorial Committee. 


$15,000 to pay for a radio advertisement, knows os “Wine 
Facts 1." The text of this advertisement was as follows: 


“Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central 
Committee. 


“Here in Colorado we're use [sic] to politicians who let 
you know where they stand, and I thought we could 
count on Tim Wirth to do the same. But the last few 
weeks have been a real eye-opener. I just saw some ads 
where Tim Wirth said he’s for a strong defense and a 


“Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he 
doesn’t have a right to change the facts.” 


26. “Wirth Facts #1” was aired during the period between 


44a 


the office of United States Senator, and ran in the general elec- 
tion as the opponent of the Republican party candidate for 
United States Senator. 


27. Defendants’ expenditure of $15,000 to pay for the radio 
advertisement known as ‘Wirth Facts #1’’ was made in con- 
nection with the 1986 general election for the United States 
Senate in Colorado. 


28. Defendants’ expenditures of $15,000 to pay for ““Wirth 
Facts #1"’ was an expenditure made by the State committee of a 
political party that was subject to 2 U.S.C. § 44la(d). 


29. Defendants did not report to the Commission their 
expenditure of $15,000 pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 44la(d) as 


required by 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)C(iv). 


30. Defendants’ failure to report to the Commission their 
expenditure of $15,000 pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d) violated 


2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(A) (iv). 
COUNT 2 


31. Plaintiff incorporaies herein by reference the allegations 
contained in paragraphs 1 through 21, and 23 through 28, 
inclusive. 


32. Defendants were required by 2 U.S.C. 
§ 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) to report to the Commission the name and 
address of each person who received any expenditure from the 
State Party during the reporting period in connection with an 
expenditure under 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d), together with the date, 
amount, and purpose of such expenditure, as well as the name 
of, and office sought by, the candidate on whose behalf the 
expenditure was made. 


33. Defendants did not report to the Commission, with 
respect to their expenditure for ‘““Wirth Facts #1,’’ the name 
and address of each person who received said expenditure from 


45a 


_ the State Party, the date, amount, and purpose of such expendi- 


ture, as well as the name of, and office sought by, the candidate 
on whose behalf the expenditure was made. 


34. Defendants’ failure to report to the Commission the 
name and address of each person who received any expenditure 
from the State Party during the reporting period in connection 
with an expenditure under 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d), together with the 
date, amount, and purpose of such expenditure, as well as the 
name of, and office sought by, the candidate on whose behalf 
the expenditure was made, violated 2 U.S.C. 


§ 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 
COUNT 3 


35. Plaintiff incorporates herein by reference the allegations 
contained in paragraphs 1 through 21, and 23 through 28, 
inclusive. 


36. Defendants’ expenditure of $15,000 in connection with 
the 1986 general election for U.S. Senator from Colorado pur- 
suant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d) was in excess of the limitation on 
the amount of such contributions set forth at 2 U.S.C. 
§ 441a(d)(3)(A)(i), in that defendants had assigned their right 
to make expenditures pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A) in 
connection with the 1986 general election campaign for United 
States Senator from Colorado to the National Republican Sena- 
torial Committee, and therefore defendants could not longer 
make such expenditures. 


37. Defendants violated 2 U.S.C. § 441la(f) by making an 
expenditure in excess of the limitation set forth at 2 U.S.C. 
§ 4412e(d)(3)(A)(i). 


PRAYER FOR RELIEF 


WHEREFORE, the plaintiff Federal Election Commission 
prays that this Court: 


(1) Declare that defendants the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Douglas L. Jones, as 


46a 


treasurer, violated 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) by failing to 
report an expenditure made pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 


§ 441a(d). 


(2) Declare that defendants the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Douglas L. Jones, as 
treasurer, violated 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) by failing to 
report an expenditure made pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 
§ 441a(d). 


(3) Declare that defendants the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Douglas L. Jones, as 
treasurer, violated 2 U.S.C. § 441a(f) by making an expen- 
diture in connection with a general election campaign for 
federal office in excess of a limitation set forth at 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la. 


(4) Assess against defendants the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Douglas L. Jones, as 
treasurer, a civil penalty of the greater of five thousand 
dollars ($5000) or an amount equal to 100 percent of the 
amounts involved in each of the violations committed, pur- 
suant to 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(6)(B), for which defendants 
shall be jointly and severally liable; 


(5) Permanently enjoin each defendant from similar 
future violations of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 
1971, as amended; and 


47a 


(6) Award the plaintiff Federal Election Commission 
such other and further relief as the Court deems 
appropriate. 


Respectfully submitted, 


Lawrence M. Noble 
General Counsel 


Richard B. Bader 
Associate General Counsel 


Ivan Rivera 
Assistant General Counsel 


Charles W. Snyder 
Attorney 


July 5, 1989 FOR THE PLAINTIFF 


FEDERAL ELECTION 
COMMISSION 

999 E Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20463 

(202) 376-8200 


48a 


APPENDIX E 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
Washington, D.C. 20463 


April 10, 1989 
Jan W. Baran, Esquire 
Wiley, Rein & Fielding 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
RE: MUR 2186 
Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee and 


Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer 


Dear Mr. Baran: 


You were previously notified that on January 17, 1989, the 
Federal Election Commission found probable cause to believe 
that Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer of the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee, violated 2 U.S.C. 
$§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B) (iv), and 441a(f), provisions 
of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, in 
connection with the above-i:aptioned matter. This 
determination followed the Com-nission’s June 14, 1988, 
finding of probable cause tc’ Weljeve that the *Colorado 
Republican Federal Campaign ‘Committee violated these 
sections of the Act. 


As a result of our inability to settle this matter through 
conciliation within the allowable time period, the Commission 
has authorized the General Counsel to institute a civil action for 
relief in the United States District Court. 


Should you have any questions, or should you wish to settle 
this matter prior to suit, please contact Ivan Rivera, Assistant 


49a 


General Counsel, at (202) 376-8200, within five days of your 
receipt of this letter. 


Sincerely, 


Lawrence M. Noble 
General Counsel 


50a 


APPENDIX F 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
Washington, D.C. 20463 


January 17, 1989 
Jan Baran, Esquire 
Wiley, Rein & Fielding 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Re: MUR 2186 
Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee and 
Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer 


Dear Mr. Baran: 


On June 14, 1988, the Federal Election Commission found 
that there is probable cause to believe the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, as 
treasurer, violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 
434(b)(6)(B)(iv) and 441la(f), provisions of the Federal 
Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, in connection 
with an expenditure made for Wirth Facts #1 that exceeded the 
Act's limits at 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d). Additionally, on 
September 12, 1988, the Commission denied your Motion for 
Reconsideration of Probable Cause. 


On September 29, 1988, based upon the fact that your 
clients had changed its treasurer prior to the Commission's 
probable cause determination, the Office of the General 
Counsel provided you with a supplemental brief regarding the 
General Counsel’s intention to recommend to the Commission 
that there is probable cause to believe the current treasurer 
violated the above-noted sections of the Act. 


On January 10, 1989, the Commission found that there is 
probable cause to believe Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer of the 
Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee, violated 2 
U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) and 441a(f). 


5la 


The Commission has a duty to attempt to correct such 
violations for a period of 30 to 90 days by informal methods of 
conference, conciliation, and persuasion, and by entering into a 
conciliation agreement with a respondent. If we are unable to 
reach an agreement during that period, the Commission may 
institute a civil suit in United States District Court and seek 
payment of a civil penalty. 


Enclosed is a conciliation agreement that the Commission 
has approved in settlement of this matter. If you agree with the 
provisions of the enclosed agreement, please sign and return it, 
along with the civil penalty, to the Commission within 10 days. | 
will then recommend ‘hat the Commission approve the 
agreement. Please make your check for the civil penalty 
payable to the Federal Election Commission. 


If you have any questions or suggestions for changes in the 
enclosed conciliation agreement, or if you wish to arrange a 
meeting in connection with a mutually satisfactory conciliation 
agreement, please contact Patty Reilly, the attorney assigned to 
this matter, at (202) 376-5690. 


Sincerely, 


Lawrence M. Noble 
General Counsel 


Enclosure 
Conciliation Agreement 


52a 
BEFORE THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 


In the Matter of 
Colorado Federal Campaign + MUR 2186 
Committee and Douglas L. Jones 
as treasurer 
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT 


This matter was initiated by a signed, sworn, and notarized 
complaint by M. Buie Seawell on behalf of the Colorado State 
Democratic Party. An investigation was conducted, and the Fed- 
eral Election Commission (“‘the Commission’’) found probable 
cause to believe that the Colorado Republican Federal Cam- 
paign Committee and Douglas L. Jones, as treasurer, (‘‘Respon- 
dents’’) violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 
434(b)(6)(B)(iv), and 44 1a(f). 

NOW, THEREFORE, the Commission and the Respondents, 
having duly entered into conciliation pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 
§ 437g(a)(4)(A)(i), do hereby agree as follows: 

I. The Commission has jurisdiction over the Respondents, 
and the subject matter of this proceedings. 


Il. Respondents have had a reasonable opportunity to 
demonstrate that no action should be taken in this matter. 


Ill. Respondents enter voluntarily into this agreement with 
the Commission. 


IV. The pertinent facts in this matter are as follows: 


1. Respondent, the Colorado Republican Federal Cam- 
paign Committee, is a political committee within the mean- 
ing of 2 U.S.C. § 431(4), and is the federal account of the 
Colorado Republican State Central Committee. 


2. Respondent, Douglas L. Jones, is the treasurer of the 
Colorado Federal Campaign Committee. 


53a 


3. Respondents assigned their ability to make coordi- 
nated party expenditures to the National Republican Sena- 
torial Committee (“‘NRSC"’) on January 10, 1986. 


4. Respondents’ assignment precluded them from mak- 
ing any section 44la(d) expenditures, however, in 
April 1986, Respondents aired a radio ad entitled Wirth 
Facts #1 that contained the statement “Tim Wirth has a 
right to run for the Senate, but he doesn’t have a right to 
change the facts,”’ that was a section 44 1a(d) expenditure. 
The cost of this Ad was $14,549.23. 


5. Respondents’ reports on file with the Commission 
failed to report any expenditures made pursuant to section 
441a(d). 


6. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A)(i), the National 
Committee of a political party, or a state committee of a 
political party, including any subordinate committee of a 
state committee, may not make any expenditures in con- 
nection with the general election campaign of a candidate 
for federal office in a state who is affiliated with such party, 
which exceeds in the case of a candidate for election for 
the Office of Senator, 2 cents multiplied by the voting age 
population of that state. The 1986 limitation for the Colo- 
rado Senate general election was $103,248.54. 


7. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(f), political committees 
are prohibited from making expenditures exceeding the 
Act's limitations. 

8. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), political 


committees are required to report the total amount of all 
disbursements made under section 44 1a(d). 


9. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(6)(B)(iv), political 
committees are required to report the name and address of 
each person who receives any expenditure from such com- 
mittee in connection with an expenditure under section 
441a(d), together with the date, amount and purpose of 


54a 


the expenditure as well as the name of, and office sought 
by, the candidate on whose behalf the expenditure is made. 


V. 1. Respondents assigned to the NRSC its entire section 
441a(d) limit, and were precluded from making any expendi- 
tures under this section. Respondents then made a section 
441a(d) expenditure in violation of 2 U.S.C. § 441a(f). 


2. Respondents failed to report the total amount of their 
section 44la(d) expenditures in violation of 2 U.S.C. 


434(b)(4)(H)(iv) . 


3. Respondents failed to itemize their section 
44la(d) expenditures in violation of 2 U.S.C. 


§ 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 


VI. 1. Respondents will amend their reports to comply with 
the Act's above-noted reporting requirements. 


2. Respondents will pay a civil penalty to the Federal 
Election Commission in the amount of Four Thousand dollars 
($4,000), pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(5)(A). 


Vil. The Commission, on request of anyone filing a com- 
plaint under 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(1) concerning the matters at 
issue herein or on its own motion, may review compliance with 
this agreement. If the Commission believes that this agreement 
or any requirement thereof has been violated, it may institute a 
civil action for relief in the United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia. 


VII. This agreement shall become effective as of the date 
that all parties hereto have executed same and the Commission 


has approved the entire agreement. 


X. This Conciliation Agreement constitutes the entire agree- 
ment between the parties on the matters raised herein, and no 


55a 


other statement, promise, or agreement, either written or oral, 
made by either party or by agents of either party, that is not 
contained in this written agreement shall be enforceable. 


FOR THE COMMISSION: 


56a 


APPENDIX G 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
Washington, DC 20463 


June 23, 1988 


Jan Baran, Esquire 
Wiley, Rein & Fielding 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 


Dear Mr. Baran: 


On June 14, 1988, the Federal Election Commission found that 
there is probably cause to believe the Colorado Republican Fed- 
eral Campaign Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, as treasurer, 
violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) and 
44 1a(f), provisions of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, 
as amended, in connection with an expenditure made for Wirth 
Facts #1 that exceeded the Act’s limits at 2 U.S.C. § 44la(d). 


The Commission has a duty to attempt to correct such viola- 
tions for a period of 30 to 90 days by informal methods of 
conference, conciliation, and persuasion, and by entering into a 
conciliation agreement with a respondent. If we are unable to 
reach an agreement during that period, the Commission may 
institute a civil suit in United States District Court and seek 
payment of a civil penalty. 


Enclosed is a conciliation agreement that the Commission 
has approved in settlement of this matter. If you agree with the 
provisions of the enclosed agreement, please sign and return it, 
along with the civil penalty, to the Commission within 10 days. I 


57a 


will then recommend that the Commission approve the agree- 
ment. Please make your check for the civil penalty payable to 
the Federal Election Commission. 


If you have any questions or suggestions for changes in the 
enclosed conciliation agreement, or if you wish to arrange a 
meeting in connection with a mutually satisfactory conciliation 


agreement, please contact Patty Reilly, the attorney assigned to 
this matter, at (202) 376-5690. 


58a 


BEFORE THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
In the Matter of 


Colorado Federal Campaign , MUR 2186 
Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, 
as treasurer 
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT 


This matter was initiated by a signed, sworn, and notarized 
complaint by M. Buie Seawell on behalf of the Colorado State 
Democratic Party. An investigation was conducted, and the Fed- 
eral Election Commission (“the Commission’) found probable 
cause to believe that the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign 
Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, as treasurer, (““Respondents’’) 
violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B) (iv), and 
44la(f). 


NOW, THEREFORE, the Commission and the Respondents, 
having duly entered into conciliation pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 
§ 437g(a)(4)(A)(i), do hereby agree as follows: 


I. The Commission has jurisdiction over the Respon- 
dents, and the subject matter of this proceeding. 


Il. Respondents have had a reasonable opportunity to 
demonstrate that no action should be taken in this matter. 


III. Respondents enter voluntarily into this agreement 
with the Commission. 


IV. The pertinent facts in this matter are as follows: 


1. Respondent, the Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee, is a political committee within 
the meaning of 2 U.S.C. § 431(4), and is the federal 
account of the Colorado Republican State Central 
Comumnittee. 


2. Respondent, Vincent Zarlengo, is the treasurer of 
the Colorado Federal Campaign Committee. 


59a 


3. Respondents assigned their ability to make coordi- 
nated party expenditures to the National Republican 
Senatorial Committee (‘““NRSC’’) on January 10, 1986. 


4. Respondents’ assignment precluded them from 
making any section 44la(d) expenditures, however, in 
April 1986, Respondents aired a radio ad entitled Wirth 
Facts #1 that contained the statement ‘“Tim Wirth has a 
right to run for the Senate, but he doesn’t have a right to 
change the facts,’’ that was a_ section 
44la(d) expenditure. The cost of this Ad was 
$14,549.23. 


5. Respondents’ reports on file with the Commission 
failed to report any expenditures made pursuant to sec- 
tion 441la(d). 


6. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A)(i), the 
National Committee of a political party, or a state com- 
mittee of a political party, inclucing any subordinate 
committee of a state committee, may not make any 
expenditures in connection with the general election 
campaign of a candidate for federal office in a state who 
is affiliated with such party, which exceeds in the case of 
a candidate for election for the Office of Senator, 2 cents 
multiplied by the voting age population of that state. The 
1986 limitation for the Colorado Senate general election 
was $103,248.54. 


7. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(f), political commit- 


tees are prohibited from making expenditures exceeding 
the Act’s limitations. 


8. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), political 
committees are required to report the total amount of all 
disbursements made under section 441a(d). 


9. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(6)(B)(iv), political 
committees are required to report the name and address 
of each person who receives any expenditure from such 


60a 


committee in connection with an expenditure under sec- 
tion 441la(d), together with the date, amount and pur- 
pose of the expenditure as well as the name of, and office 
sought by, the candidate on whose behalf the expendi- 
ture is made. 


V. 1. Respondents assigned to the NRSC its entire sec- 
tion 441a(d) limit, and were precluded from making any 
expenditures under this section. Respondents then made a 
section 44la(d) expenditure in violation of 2 U.S.C. 


§ 44la(f). 


2. Respondents failed to report the total amount of 
their section 441la(d) expenditures in violation of 2 U.S.C. 


434(b)(4)(H)(iv). 


3. Respondents failed to itemize their section 
44la(d) expenditures in violation of 2 U.S.C. § 


434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 


VI. 1. Respondents will amend their reports to comply 
with the Act’s above-noted reporting requirements. 


2. Respondents will pay a civil penalty to the Fed- 
eral Election Commission in the amount of Four Thousand 
dollars ($4,000), pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(5)(A). 


Vil. The Commission, on request of anyone filing a com- 
plaint under 2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(1) concerning the matters 
at issue herein or on its own motion, may review compli- 
ance with this agreement. If the Commission believes that 
this agreement or any requirement thereof has been vio- 
lated, it may institute a civil action for relief in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia. 


Vill. This agreement shall become effective as of the 
date that all parties hereto have executed same and the 
Commission has approved the entire agreement. 


IX. Respondents shall have no more than thirty (30) 
days from the date this agreement becomes effective to 


6la 


comply with and implement the requirements contained in 
this agreement and to so notify the Commission. 


X. This Conciliation Agreement constitutes the entire 
agreement between the parties on the matters raised 
herein, and no other statement, promise, or agreement, 
either written or oral, made by either party or by agents of 
either party, that is not contained in this written agreement 
shall be enforceable. 


FOR THE COMMISSION: 


Lawrence M. Noble Date Date 
General Counsel 


FOR THE RESPONDENTS: 


Vincent Zarlengo, treasurer Date 
Colorado Republican Federal 
Campaign Committee 


62a 
APPENDIX H 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
Washington D.C. 20463 


November 10, 1987 


Jan Baran, Esquire 
Wiley, Rein & Fielding 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
RE: MUR 2186 
Colorado Federal Campaign 
Committee and 
Vincent Zarlengo, as 
treasurer 
Dear Mr. Baran: 


Based on a complaint filed with the Federal Election Com- 
mission on June 12, 1986, and information supplied by your 
clients, the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee 
and Vincent Zarlengo, as treasurer, the Commission, on Novem- 
ber 5, 1986, found that there was reason to believe your clients 
violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 
Additionally, on June 9, 1987, the Commission found reason to 
believe your clients violated 2 U.S.C. § 44la(d)(d)(A). The 
Commission instituted an investigation of this matter. 


After considering all the evidence available to the Commis- 
sion, the Office of the General Counsel is prepared to recom- 
mend that the Commission find probable cause to believe that a 
violation has occurred. Please note that the General Counsel's 
recommendation for probable cause to believe regarding exces- 
sive section 44la(d) spending cites to both 2 U.S.C. 


§§ 441la(f) and 441(d). 
The Commission may or may not approve the General Coun- 


sel's recommendations. Submitted for your review is a brief 
stating the position of the General Counsel on the legal and 


63a 


factual issues of the case. Within 15 days of your receipt of this 
notice, you may file with the Secretary of the Commission a 
brief (10 copies if possible) stating your position on the issues 
and replying to the brief of the General Counsel. (Three copies 
of such brief should also be forwarded to the Office of the 
General Counsel, if possible.) The General Counsel's brief and 
any brief which you may submit will be considered by the 
Commission before proceeding to a vote of whether there is 
probable cause to believe a violation has occurred. 


If you are unable to file a responsive brief within 15 days, you 
may submit a written request to the Commission for an exten- 
sion of time. All requests for extensions of time must be submit- 
ted in writing five days prior to the due date, and good cause 
must be demonstrated. In addition, the Office of the General 
Counsel ordinarily will not give extensions beyond 20 days. 


A finding of probable cause to believe requires that the Office 
of the General Counsel attempt for a period of not less than 30, 
but not more than 90 days, to settle this matter through a 


conciliation agreement. 


Should you have any questions, please contact Patty Reilly, 
the attorney assigned to handle this matter, at (202) 376-5690. 


Sincerely, 


Lawrence M. Noble 
General Counsel 
Enclosure 
Brief 


64a 


BEFORE THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
In the Matter of 


Colorado Federal Campaign MUR 
Committee and Vincent 2188 


Zarlengo, as treasurer 


GENERAL COUNSELS BRIEF 


I. STATEMENT OF THE CASE 


This matter arose from a complaint filed by M. Buie 
Seawell on behalf of the Colorado State Democratic Party. The 
complaint alleged the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign 
Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, as treasurer, (‘‘State Party’’) 
failed to report expenditures made for the purpose of influenc- 
ing the 1986 general election. Specifically, the complaint noted 
four communications paid for by the State Party that negatively 
portrayed 1986 Democratic Senatorial Candidate Tim Wirth. 
Because these communications were said to be designed to 
influence voters to cast their ballots against Tim Wirth, the 
complaint alleged these communications were subject to the 
limitations of section 44la(d), and thus were required to be 
reported as section 441la(d) expenditures. 


On November 5, 1986, the Commission found reason to 
believe the State Party and its treasurer violated 
§§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) by failing to allocate 
and itemize one of these communications’ as a section 
441la(d) expenditure. Additionally, based on information 
received in the course of the investigation, on June 2, 1987, the 
Commission found reason to believe the State Party exceeded 


1 The Commission's reason to believe notification referred to this Ad 
as the ‘Defense Radio Ad.” The State Party’s response to the Commis- 
sion’s Interrogatories reveals the Ad was entitled ‘“Wirth Facts #1.’ This 
latter designation is used for the purposes of this brief. 


65a 


the limitations of section 44 1a(d)(3)(A).? This latter determina- 
tion recognized that the State Party had assigned its ability to 
make coordinated party expenditures to the National Republi- 
can Senatorial Committee (‘‘NRSC"’), and that the NRSC had 
made such expenditures on the State Party's behalf up to the 
limitation of section 44la(d). Accordingly, the State Party's 
expenditure for Wirth Facts #1, made at a time when it was 
without an applicable section 44 1a(d) coordinated party limita- 
tion, constitutes an excessive expenditure. 


Il. ANALYSIS 


A. The Facts 


It is undisputed that on April 2, 1986, the State Party made an 
expenditure of $15,000 to the Colorado Media Group, Inc. for a 
radio production entitled ‘“Wirth Facts #1.° The text of this Ad 
was as follows: 


Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Cen- 
tral Committee. 


Here in Colorado we're use [sic] to politicians 
who let you know where they stand, and | 
thought we could count on Tim Wirth to do the 
same. But the last few weeks have been a real 
eye-opener. I just saw some ads where Tim 
Wirth said he’s for a strong defense and a bal- 
anced budget. But according to his record, Tim 
Wirth voted against every major new weapon 


2 The Commission found reason to believe Respondents violated 2 
U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A). This section establishes limits for coordinated 
party expenditures, while section 441a(f) prohibits political committees 
from making expenditures exceeding the Act's limitations. Accordingly, 
the General Counsel's probable cause recommendation is that the State 
Party made coordinated party expenditures at a time when it lacked the 
ability to make such expenditures, in violation of both 2 U.S.C. 
$§ 44la(f) and 441la(d). 

8 Because the State Party overpaid for the Ad, on April 25, 1986, the 
vendor provided it with a $400.77 refund. 


66a 


system in the last five years. And he voted 
against the balanced budget amendment. 


Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but 
he doesn’t have a right to change the facts. 


The Ad aired over numerous Colorado radio stations prior to 
the August 12, 1986, primary election and followed the State 
Party's previously noted assignment of its section 44 1 a(d) limi- 
tation to the NRSC.‘ To date, the State Party has never reported 
any section 441la(d) expenditures. As discussed below, the Ad 
constitutes an expenditure subject to the limitation of 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(d). 


B. The Law 


Purusant to 2 U.S.C. § 44la(d)(3)(A)(i), the national com- 
mittee of a political party, or a state committee of a political 
party, including any subordinate committee of a state commit- 
tee, may not make any expenditures in connection with the 
general election campaign of a candidate for federal office in a 
state who is affiliated with such party which exceeds, in the case 
of a candidate for election to the Office of Senator, 2 cents 
multiplied by the voting age population of that state. The 1986 
limit for the Colorado Senatorial race was $103,248. Political 
committees are prohibited from making expenditures exceed- 
ing the Act’s limitations. 2 U.S.C. § 441la(f). The Act further 
requires political committees to report the total amount of all 
disbursements made under section 44la(d). 2 U.S.C. 
§434(b)(4)(H)(iv). Political committees are also required to 
report the name and address of each person who receives any 
expenditure from the committee in connection with an expendi- 
ture under section 44la(d), together with the date, amount, 
and purpose of the expenditure, as well as the name of, and 
office sought by, the candidate on whose behalf the expenditure 
is made. 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 


* The Office of the General Counsel does not contest the validity of this 
authorization. 


67a 


Additionally, the Commission has permitted state parties to 
assign their section 441a(d) limitations to the national party. 
See Federal Election Commission v. Democratic Senatorial 
Committee, 454 U.S. 27 (1981). The effect of this assignment 
is that the national party makes section 441la(d) expenditures 
on behalf of the state party. Such an authorization must be 
writing and be made prior to the time when the authorizing 
party has exhausted its section 441 a(d) limit. 


In its advisory opinions, the Commission has addressed the 
issue of whether certain communications are subject to the 
limitations of section 44la(d). The Commission has consist- 
ently taken the position that expenditures are subject to the 
limitations of section 44la(d) where they are made for the 
purpose of influencing the general election, depicit a clearly 
identified candidate, and convey an electioneering message. As 
developed below, because all three of these criteria have been 
met, Wirth Facts #1 is subject to the limitation of section 
441a(d), and thus, the State Party exceeded the Act’s expendi- 
ture limitations. 


1. The Expenditure was in Connection With the General 
Election 


In determining whether or not expenditures are made for the 
purpose of influencing the general election, the Commission 
has concluded that section 44 1a(d) expenditures are not neces- 
sarily restricted to the time period between nomination and 
election. See A.0. 1984-15. Rather, where a candidate appears 
assured of his or her party’s nomination, the general election 
campaign, at least from the political party’s perspective, may 
begin prior to formal nomination. The Commission has further 
concluded that such general election expenditures may be 
made in instances where the expending party is not certain of 
its own nominee. It is only necessary that the expenditures 
benefit the person eventually nominated by that party. Jd. 
Therefore, if Tum Wirth was assured of his party’s nomination 
prior to when the expenditure for Wirth Facts # 1 was made, 


68a 


the State Party's anti-Wirth expenditure was for the general 
election. 


Tim Wirth was assured of his party’s nomination when Wirth 
Facts #1 was aired in April, 1986. Mr. Wirth was the only 
Democrat actively seeking his party's nomination.® The Colo- 
rado Democratic Party, as the complainant in this matter, con- 
sidered Mr. Wirth to be the Democratic candidate in the general 
election prior to his formal nomination. See Complaint at pp. 2 
and 5. Moreover, the State Party’s own political director was 
quoted in a new account attached to the complaint stating 
“Wirth has been getting a free ride, while our candidates are 
involved in primary races.’’ Complaint at I. Accordingly, the 
anti-Wirth Ad was aired when Tim Wirth was assured of his 
party nomination, and thus constitutes a general election 
expenditure. 

2. Wirth Facts #1 Was An Expenditure For A Clearly 

Identified Candidate 


There also cannot be a dispute that the Ad referred to a 
clearly identified candidate. Under the Act and the Commis- 
sion’s Regulations, a candidate is clearly identified in a commu- 
nication if the name of the candidate involved appears, or his or 
her likeness appears, or if his or her identity is apparent by 
unambiguous reference. 2 U.S.C. § 431(18) and 11 C.FR. 
§ 106.1(d). See also A.O. 1985-14. The Ad refers to a person 
named ‘“Tim Wirth” who is attempting to convince Colorado 
voters of something suggested to be untrue. Tim Wirth is fur- 
ther identified as an individual running for Senate. Therefore, 
because Wirth Facts #1 names Democratic Senatorial Candi- 
date Tim Wirth, he is a clearly identified candidate in the Ad 


within the meaning of the Act and the Regulations. 


5 The State Party's response to the complaint noted news accounts 
referring to the possible candidacy of an unemployed college student who 
lacked a formal organization and who allegedly made expenditures total- 
ling $600 to challenge Tim Wirth for the Democratic nomination. This 
rumored candidacy with minimal spending does not undercut the cer- 
tainty of Mr. Wirth’s nomination. 


69a 


3. The Ad Contains An Electioneering Message 


The Commission has further required that for an expenditure 
to be subject to section 441a(d) it must contain an election- 
eering message. An electioneering message includes state- 
ments ‘designed to urge the public to elect a certain candidate 
or party." United States v. United Auto Workers, 352 U.S. 567, 
587 (1957); see also A.0. 1984-15, A.0. 1985-14; A.O. 
1984-62.° As discussed below, the context and content of this 
Ad leads to the conclusion that it contains an electioneering 
message. 


An examination of the context in which the Ad ran shows that 
Wirth Facts #1 aired in April, 1986, after Tim Wirth had 
announced his Senate candidacy and at a time when it was clear 
that no other person would actively seek the Democratic nomi- 
nation. The area where the Ad aired is also relevant. The Ad 
played on 19 Colorado radio stations and was directed solely to 
people in that state. Thus, the Ad was directed to the class of 
persons who could cast their ballots for or against Tim Wirth. 
Moreover, according to news accounts attached to the com- 
plaint, the Ad circulated at a time when the State Party’s politi- 
opposition, unlike the potential Republican nominees. 


The content of the Ad itself also illustrates that it contained 
an electioneering message. The Ad addresses Tim Wirth’s posi- 
tions on defense spending and the balanced budget. Respon- 
dents acknowledge these to be issues of great concern to the 
people of Colorado. As Respondents concede in their response, 
there is no question that the Ad critizes Tim Wirth’s record. 
Indeed, Wirth Facts #1 references Mr. Wirth’s record in Con- 
gress and juxtaposes that record with alleged inconsistences 
regarding his positions on defense spending and balanced 


70a 


budget, issues set forth by Mr. Wirth in his campaign ads. 
Moreover, the Ad explicitly notes that while running for Senate 
Mr. Wirth is “changing the facts.’’ In short, attacks on the 
credibility of a candidate regarding issues of acknowledged 
public concern, based on his record and circulated in the state 
in which the candidate is running, lead to the obvious conclu- 
sion that the message of the Ad is that the candidate is dishon- 
est and that voters should not support such a candidate but 
should instead support his opponent. Consequently, Wirth 
Facts #1 falls within the United Auto Worker's standard ‘n that 
it is “designed to urge the public to elect a certain candidate or 
party,’’ and thus constitutes an electioneering message. 


4. Summary 


As demonstrated above, Wirth Facts #1 was a general elec- 
tion expenditure depicting a clearly identified candidate and 
containing an electioneering message. Therefore, it was an 
expenditure subject to the limitation of section 441la(d). 
Because the State Party had assigned its ability to make coordi- 
nated party expenditures to the NRSC, and because the NRSC 
made such expenditures, the State Party was precluded from 
making any additional section 441a(d) expenditures. The State 
Party’s subsequent section 44la(d) expenditures, therefore, 
exceeded the limitation of sections 441a(d) and 44 1a(f). More- 
over, the State Party failed to report any section 
44la(d) expenditures in violation of 2 U.S.C. 
§§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). Accordingly, this 
Office recommends that the Commission find probable cause to 
believe the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee 
and Vincent Zarlengo, as treasurer, violated 2 U.S.C. 
§§ 44la(d), 44la(f), 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv). 


7la 


IV. RECOMMENDATION 


Find probable cause to believe the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee and Vincent Zarlengo, as trea- 


surer, violated 2 U.S.C. § 434(b)(4)(H)(iv), 434(b)(6)(B)(iv), 
44)a(d) and 44la(f). 


Date Lawrence M. Noble 
General Counsel 


72a 


APPENDIX I 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 
Washington, D.C. 20463 


November 13, 1986 


Jan Baran, Esquire 
Wiley & Rein 

1776 K Street N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 


RE: MUR 2186 
The Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee 
and Vincent Zarlengo, 
as treasurer 


Dear Mr. Baran: 


The Federal Election Commission previously notified your 
clients of a complaint alleging violations of certain sections of 
the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended (‘‘the 
Act’’). A copy of the complaint was forwarded to your clients at 
that time. 


Upon further review of the allegations contained in the com- 
plaint, and information supplied by your clients, the Commis- 
sion, on November 5, 1986, determined that tiiere is reason to 
believe that your clients have violated provisions of the Act. 


Specifically, it appears that the disbursements made by your 
clients for a radio advertisement discussing defense issues (See 
Complaint at Attachment C) were found to be expenditures in 
connection with the general election for senator in the State of 
Colorado, and thus appear to be subject to the limitations of 2 
U.S.C. § 441a(d)(3)(A). Thus, the Commission found reason to 
believe the Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee 
and its treasurer violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 
434(b)(6)(B)(iv). Additionally, the Commission considered 


73a 


allegations regarding other ads noted in the complaint, but 
failed to pass a motion to find reason to believe your clients 
violated 2 U.S.C. §§ 434(b)(4)(H)(iv) and 434(b)(6)(B)(iv) in 
connection with these ads. 


Your response to the Commission's initial notification of this 
complaint did not provide complete information regarding the 
matters in question. Please submit answers to the enclosed 
questions and the requested documents within fifteen days of 
receipt of this letter. Statements should be submitted under 
oath. 


If you are interested in pursuing pre-probable cause concilia- 
tion, you should so request in writing. See 11 C.FR. 
§ 111.18(d). Upon receipt of the request, the Office of General 
Counsel will make recommendations to the Commission either 
proposing an agreement in settlement of the matter or recom- 
mending declining that pre-probable cause conciliation be pur- 
sued. The Office of General Counsel may recommend that pre- 
probable cause conciliation not be entered into at this time so 
that it may complete its investigation of the matter. Further, 
requests for pre-probable cause conciliation will not be enter- 
tained after briefs on probable cause have been mailed to the 
respondent. 


Requests for extensions of time will not be routinely granted. 
Requests must be made in writing at least five days prior to the 
due date of the response and specific good cause must be 
demonstrated. In addition, the Office of General Counsel is not 
authorized to give extensions beyond 20 days. 


This matter will remain confidential in accordance with 2 
U.S.C. §§ 437g(a)(4)(B) and 437g(a)(12)(A) unless you notify 
the Commission in writing that you wish the matter to be made 
public. 


74a 


If you have any questions, please contact Patty Reilly, attor- 
ney assigned to this matter, at 376-8200. 


Sincerely, 
Joan D. Aikens 
Chairman 
Enclosures 
Procedures 
Questions and Document 
Request 


75a 
BEFORE THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 


In the Matter of 
MUR 2186 
QUESTIONS AND 
DOCUMENT REQUEST TO: The Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign 


Committee and Vincent 
Zarlengo, as treasurer 


As used in these questions and request, the terms listed 
below are defined as follows: 


1. The terms “‘and’’ and “‘or’’ shall be construed dis- 
junctively or conjunctively as necessary to bring within the 
scope of this request any answers or documents which may 
be otherwise construed to be out of its scope. 


2. “Identify” or “‘identity’’ with respect to individuals 
shall mean the full name, last known residence address of 
such individual, the last known place of business where 
such individual is or was employed, and the title of the job, 
office or position held. 


The Commission requests that you answer the following 
questions. 


1. The complaint in MUR 2186 contains at Attach- 
ment C the text of a radio ad (‘‘The Ad’’) discussing 
defense issues “Paid for by the Colorado Republican 
State Central Committee.’’ For the Ad state: " 


| 


a. The cost of the Ad. : 
b. Who paid for the Ad. 


c. If Ad was paid for by the Colorado Republican 
Federal Campaign Committee, state whether the 
cost of the Ad or any portion of the Ad has been 


76a 


included in reports to the Federal Election Com- 
mission, and if so, specify where in the reports. 


d. Identify the vendor(s) from whom the Ad was 
purchased. 


2. State whether the Colorado Republican Federal Cam- 
paign Committee’s “‘allocated share of overhead 
expenses”’ as reported on its reports filed with the 
Federal Election Commission contains any amounts 
expended in connection with the Ad noted in your 
responses to questions 1. If so, specify all amount(s) 
expended. 


77a 


DESCRIPTION OF PRELIMINARY PROCEDURES 
FOR PROCESSING COMPLAINTS FILED WITH THE 
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 


Complaints filed with the Federal Election Commission 
shall be referred to the Enforcement Division of the Office of 
General Counsel, where they are assigned a MUR (Matter 
Under Review) number and assigned to a staff member. Within 
5 days of receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall notify, in 
writing, the respondent listed in the complaint that the com- 
plaint has been filed and shall include with such notification a 
copy of the complaint. Simultaneously, the complainant shall be 
notified that the complaint has been received and will be acted 
upon. The respondent(s) shall then have 15 days to demon- 
strate, in writing, that no action should be taken against hirm/ 
her in response to the complaint. 


At the end of the 15 days, the Office of General Counsel shall 
report to the Commission making a recommendation(s) based 
upon a preliminary legal and factual analysis of the complaint 
and any submission made by the respondent(s). A copy of 
respondent’s submission shall be attached to the Office of Gen- 
eral Counsel’s report and forwarded to the Commission. This 
initial report shall recommended either: (a). that the Commis- 
sion find reason to believe that the complaint sets forth a possi- 
ble violation of the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA) and 
that the Commission will conduct an investigation of the mat- 
ter; or (b). that the Commission finds no reason to believe that 
the complaint sets forth a possible violation of the Federal 


Election Campaign Act (FECA) and, accordingly, that the Com- 
mission close the file on the matter. 


If, by any affirmative vote of four (4) Commissioners, the 
Commission decides that it has reason to believe that a person 
has committed or is about to commit a violation of the Federal 
Election Campaign Act (FECA), the Office of General Counsel 
shall open an investigation into the matter. During the investi- 
gation, the Commission shall have the power to subpoena docu- 
ments, to subpoena individuals to appear for deposition, and to 


78a 


order answers to interrogatives. The respondent(s) may be 
contacted more than once by the Commission during its 
investigation. 

If, during this period of investigation, the respondent(s) indi- 
cate a desire to enter into conciliation, the office of General 
Counsel staff may begin the conciliation process prior to a 
finding of probable cause to believe a violation has been com- 
mitted. Conciliation is an informal method of conference and 
persuasion to endeavor to correct or prevent a violation of the 
Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA). Most often, the result 
of conciliation is an agreement signed by the Commission and 
the respondents. The Conciliation Agreement must be adopted 
by four votes of the Commission before it becomes final. After 
signature by the Commission and the respondent(s), the Com- 
mission shall make public the Conciliation Agreement. 


[If the investigation warrants], and no conciliation agree- 
ment is entered into prior to a probable cause to believe find- 
ing, the General Counsel must notify the respondents of this 
intent to proceed to a vote on probable cause to believe that a 
violation of the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA) has 
been committed or is about to be committed. Included with the 
notification to the respondents shall be a brief setting forth the 
position of the General Counsel on the legal and factual issues 
of the case. Within 15 days of receipt of such brief, the respon- 
dents may submit a brief posing the position of the respon- 
dent(s) and replying to the brief of the General Counsel. Both 
briefs will then be filed with the Commission Secretary and will 
be considered by the Commission. Thereafter, if the Commis- 
sion determines by an affirmative vote of four (4) Commission- 
ers, that there is probable cause to believe that a violation of the 
FECA has been committed or is about to be committed concilia- 
tion must be undertaken for a period of at least 30 days but not 
more than 90 days. If the Commission is unable to correct or 
prevent any violation of the FECA through conciliation the 
Office of General Counsel may recommend that the Commis- 
sion file a civil suit against the respondent(s) to enforce the 


79a 


Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA). Thereafter, the Com- 
mission may, upon an affirmative vote of four (4) Commission- 
ers, institute civil action for relief in the District Court of the 
United States. 


See 2 U.S.C. § 437g, 11 C.FR. Part 111 


80a 
APPENDIX J 
TITLE 2 U.S.C. § 441a (1994) 


Limitation on contributions and expenditures 


(a) Dollar limits on comtr ‘butions. 

(1) No person shall make contributions— 

(A) to any candidate and his authorized political com- 
mittees with respect to any election for Federal office 
which, in the aggregate, exceed $1,000; 

(B) to the political committees established and main- 
tained by a national political party, which are not the autho- 
rized political committees of any candidate, in any 
calendar year which, in the aggregate, exceed $20,000; or 

(C) to any other political committee in any calendar 
year which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000. 

(2) No multicandidate political committee shall make 
contributions— 

(A) to any candidate and his authorized political com- 
mittees with respect to any election for Federal office 
which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000; 

(B) to the political committees established and main- 
tained by a national political party, which are not the autho- 
rized political committees of any candidate, in any 
calendar year, which, in the aggregate, exceed $15,000; or 

(C) to any other political committee in any calendar 
year which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000. 

(3) No individual shall make contributions aggregating 
more than $25,000 in any calendar year. For purposes of this 
paragraph, any contribution made to a candidate in a year 
other than the calendar year in which the election is held with 
respect to which such contribution is made, is considered to 
be made during the calendar year in which such election is 
held. 

(4) The limitations on contributions contained in para- 
graphs (1) and (2) do not apply to transfers between and 


8la 


among political committees which are national, State, dis- 
trict, or local committees (including any subordinate com- 
mittee thereof) of the same political party. For purposes of 
paragraph (2), the term ‘‘multicandidate political commit- 
tee’’ means a political committee which has been registered 
under section 433 of this title for a period of not less than 6 
months, which has received contributions from more than 
50 persons, and, except for any State political party organiza- 
tion, has made contributions to 5 or more candidates for 
Federal office. 

(5) For purposes of the limitations provided by paragraph 
(1) and paragraph (2), all contributions made by political 
committees established or financed or maintained or con- 
trolled by any corporation, labor organization, or any other 
person, including any parent, subsidiary, branch, division, 
department, or local unit of such corporation, labor organiza- 
tion, or any other person, or by any group of such persons, 
shall be considered to have been made by a single political 
committee, except that 

(A) nothing is this sentence shall limit transfers 
between political committees of funds raised through joint 
fundraising efforts; 

(B) for purposes of the limitations provided by para- 
graph (1) and paragraph (2) all contributions made by a 
single political committee established or financed or main- 
tained or controlled by a national committee of a political 
party and by a single political committee established or 
financed or maintained or controlled by the State commit- 
tee of a political party shall not be considered to have been 
made by a single political committee; and 

(C) nothing in this section shall limit the transfer of 
funds between the principal campaign committee of a can- 
didate seeking nomination or election to a Federal office 
and the principal campaign committee of that candidate 
for nomination or election to another Federal office if 


82a 


(i) such transfer is not made when the candidate is 
actively seeking nomination or election to both such 
offices; 

(ii) the limitations contained in this Act on contribu- 
tions by persons are not exceed by such transfer; and 

(iii) the candidate has not elected to receive any funds 
under chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26. 

In any case in which a corporation and any of its subsidiaries, 
branches, divisions, departments, or local units, or a labor 
organization and any of its subsidiaries, branches, divisions, 
departments, or local units establish or finance or maintain or 
control more than one separate segregated fund, all such sepa- 
rate segregated funds shall be treated as a single separate seg- 
regated fund for purposes of the limitations provided by 
paragraph (1) and paragraph (2). 

(6) The limitations on contributions to a candidate 
imposed by paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall 
apply separately with respect to each election, except that all 
elections held in any calendar year for the office of President 
of the United States (except a general election for such 
office) shall be considered to be one election. 

(7) For purposes of this subsection— 

(A) contributions to a named candidate made to any 
political committee authorized by such candidate to accept 
contributions on his behalf shall be considered to be con- 
tributions made to such candidate; 

(B) (i) expenditures made by any person in co-opera- 
tion, consultation, or concert, with, or at the request or 
suggestion of, a candidate, his authorized political commit- 
tees, or their agents, shall be considered to be a contribu- 
tion to such candidate; 

(ii) the financing by any person of the dissemination, 
distribution, or republication, in whole or in part, of any 
broadcast or any written, graphic, or other form of cam- 
paign materials prepared by the candidate, his campaign 


83a 


committees, or their authorized agents shall be consid- 

ered to be an expenditure for purposes of this para- 

graph; and 

(C) contributions made to or for the benefit of any can- 
didate nominated by a political party for election to the 
office of Vice President of the United States shall be con- 
sidered to be contributions made to or for th. benefit of the 
candidate of such party for election to the office of Presi- 
dent of the United States. 

(8) For purposes of the limitations imposed by this sec- 
tion, all contributions made by a person, either directly or 
indirectly, on behalf of a particular candidate, including con- 
tributions which are in any way earmarked or otherwise 
directed through an intermediary or conduit to such candi- 
date, shall be treated as contributions from such person to 
such candidate. The intermediary or conduit shall report the 
original source and the intended recipient of such contribu- 
tion to the Commission and to the intended recipient. 

(b) Dollar limits on expenditures by candidates for office 


of President of the United States. 


(1) No candidate for the office of President of the United 
States who is eligible under section 9003 of title 26 (relating 
to condition for eligibility for payments) or under section 
9033 of title 26 (relating to eligibility for payments) to 
receive payments from the Secretary of the Treasury may 
make expenditures in excess of — 

(A) $10,000,000 in the case of a campaign for nomina- 
tion for election to such office, except the aggregate of 
expenditures under this subparagraph in any one State 
shall not exceed the greater of 16 cents multiplied by the 
voting age population of the State (as certified under sub- 
section (e) of this section), or $200,000; or 

(B) $20,000,000 in the case of a campaign for election 
to such office. 

(2) For purposes of this subsection— 

(A) expenditures made by or on behalf of any candidate 
nominated by a political party for election to the office of 


84a 85a 


Vice President of the United States shall be considered to with general elect‘m campaign of candidates for Federal 


be expenditures made by or on behalf of the candidate of office 


such party for election to the office of President of the 
United States; and 
(B) an expenditure is made on behalf of a candidate, 
including a vice presidential candidate, if it is made by— 
(i) an authorized committee or any other agent of 
the candidate for purposes of making any expenditure; 
or 
(ii) any person authorized or requested by the candi- 
date, an authorized committee of the candidate, or an 
agent of the candidate, to make the expenditure. 
(c) Increases on limits based on increases in price index. 
(1) At the beginning of each calendar year (commencing 
in 1976), as there become available necessary data from the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, the 
Secretary of Labor shall certify to the Commission and pub- 
lish in the Federal Register the percent difference between 
the price index for the 12 months preceding the beginning of 
such calendar year and the price index for the base period. 
Each limitation established by subsection (b) of this section 
and subsection (d) of this section shall be increased by such 
percent difference. Each amount so increased shall be the 
amount in effect for such calendar year. 
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)— 

(A) the term “‘price index’’ means the average over a 
calendar year of the Consumer Price Index (all items— 
United States city average) published monthly by the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics; and 

(B) the term “‘base period” means the calendar year of 
1974. 

(d) Expenditures by national committee, State committee, 
or subordinate committee of State committee in connection 


(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law with 
respect to limitations on expenditures or limitations on con- 
tributions, the national committee of a political party and a 
State committee of a political party, including any 
subordinate committee of a State committee, may make 
expenditures in connection with the general election cam- 
paign of candidates for Federal office, subject to the limita- 
tions contained in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. 

(2) The national committee of a political party may not 
make any expenditure in connection with the general elec- 
tion campaign of any candidate for President of the United 
States who is affiliated with such party which exceeds an 
amount equal to 2 cents multiplied by the voting age popula- 
tion of the United States (as certified under subsection (e) of 
this section). Any expenditure under this paragraph shall be 
in addition to any expenditure by a national committee of a 
political party serving as the principal campaign committee 
of a candidate for the office of President of the United States. 

(3) The national committee of a political party, or a State 
committee of a political party, including any subordinate 
committee of a State committee, may not make any expendi- 
ture in connection with the general election campaign of a 
candidate for Federal office in a State who is affiliated with 
such party which exceeds— 

(A) in the case of a candidate for election to the office of 
Senator, or of Representative from a State which is entitled 
to only one Representative, the greater of— 

(i) 2 cents multiplied by the voting age population of 
the State (as certified under subsection (e) of this sec- 
tion); or 

(ii) $20,000; and 
(B) inthe case of a candidate for election to the office of 

Representative, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner in 
any other State, $10,000. 


86a 


(e) Certification and publication of estimated voting age 


natn 


During the first week of January 1975, and every subse- 
quent year, the Secretary of Commerce shall certify to the 
Commission and publish in the Federal Register an estimate 
of the voting age population of the United States, of each 
State, and of each congressional district as of the first day of 
July next preceding the date of certification. The term ‘‘vot- 
ing age population’’ means resident population, 18 years of 
age or older. 

(f) Prohibited contributions and expenditures. 

No candidate or political committee shall knowingly 
accept any contribution or make any expenditure in violation 
of the provisions of this section. No officer or employee of a 
political committee shall knowingly accept a contribution 
made for the benefit or use of a candidate, or knowingly 
make any expenditure on behalf of a candidate, or knowingly 
make any expenditure on behalf of a candidate, in violation of 
any limitation imposed on contributions and expenditures 
under this section. 

(g) Attribution of multi-State expenditures to candidate's 


87a 
Title 2 U.S.C. § 437f (1994) 


Advisory opinions 
(a) Requests by persons, candidates, or authorized com- 


mittees; subject matter; time for response. 


(1) Not later than 60 days after the Commission receives 
from a person a complete written request concerning the 
application of this Act, chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26, or 
a rule or regulation prescribed by the Commission, with 
respect to a specific transaction or activity by the person, the 
Commission shall render a written advisory opinion relating 
to such transaction or activity to the person. 

(2) If an advisory opinion is requested by a candidate, or 
any authorized committee of such candidate, during the 
the requesting party, the Commission shall render a written 
advisory opinion relating to such request no later than 
20 days after the Commission receives a complete written 
request. 

(b) Procedures applicable to initial proposal of rules or 


regulations, and advisory opinions. 

Any rule of law which is not stated in this Act or in chapter 95 
or chapter 96 of title 26 may be initially proposed by the Com- 
mission only as a rule or regulation pursuant to procedures 
established in section 438(d) of this title. No opinion of an 

» population in such which reasonably be advisory nature may be issued by the Commission or any of its 
pth tn ey eet ttgertmg employees except in accordance with the provisions of this 
(h) Senatorial candidates. section. ve 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, amounts (c) Persons entitled to rely upon opinions; scope of protec- 
totaling not more than $17,500 may be contributed to a tion for good faith reliance. 
candidate for nomination for election, or for election, to the (1) Any advisory opinion rendered by the Commission 
United States Senate during the year in which an election is under subsection (a) of this section may be relied upon by- 
held in which he is such a candidate, by the Republican or (A) any person involved in the specific transaction or 
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, or the national activity with respect to which such advisory opinion is 
committee of a political party, or any combination of such rendered; and 
committees. 


expenditure limitation in each State. 

The Commission shall prescribe rules under which any 
expenditure by a candidate for presidential nominations for 
use in 2 or more States shall be attributed to such candidate's 
expenditure limitation in each such State, based on the vot- 


88a 


(B) any person involved in any specific transaction or 
activity which is indistinguishable in all its material aspects 
from the transaction or activity with respect to which such 
advisory opinion is rendered. 

(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, any per- 
son who relies upon an provision or finding of an advisory 
opinion in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 
(1) and who acts in good faith in accordance with the provi- 
sions and findings of such advisory opinion shall not, as a 
result of any such act, be subject to any sanction provided by 
this Act or by chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26. 

(d) Requests made public; submission of written com- 
ments by interested public. 

The Commission shall make public any requests made under 
subsection (a) of this section for an advisory opinion. Before 
rendering an advisory opinion, the Commission shall accept 
written comments submitted by any interested party within the 
10-day period following the date the request is made public. 


89a 
APPENDIX K 


11 C.FR. CH. 1 
(1995) 


§ 110.7 Party committee expenditure limitations (2 U.S.C. 
441a(d)). 


(a)(1) The national committee of a political party may make 
expenditures in connection with the general election campaign 
of any candidate for President of the United States affiliated 
with the party. 


(2) The expenditures shall not exceed an amount equal to 


2 cents multiplied by the voting age population of the United 
States. 


(3) Any expenditure under this paragraph (a) shall be in 
addition to-- 


(i) Any expenditure by a national committee of a political 


party serving as the principal campaign committee of a 
candidate for President of the United States; and 


(ii) Any contribution by the national committee to the 
candidate permissible under § 110.) or § 110.2. 


(4) The national committee of a political party may make 


expenditures authorized by this section through any designated 
agent, including State and subordinate party committees. 


(5) The national committee of a political party may not make 
independent expenditures (see part 109) in connection with the 
general election campaign of a candidate for President of the 
United States. 


(6) Any expenditures made by the national, state and 
subordinate committees of a political party pursuant to 11 CFR 
110.7(a) on behalf of that party's Presidential candidate shall 
not count against the candidate's expenditure limitations under 
11 CFR 110.8. 


90a 


(b)(1) The national committee of a political party, and a 
State committee of a political party, including any subordinate 
committee of a State committee, may each make expenditures 
in connection with the general election campaign of a candidate 
for Federal office in that State who is affiliated with the party. 


(2) The expenditures shall not exceed-- 


(i) In the case of a candidate for election to the office of 
Senator, or of Representative from a State which is entitled to 


only one Representative, the greater of-- 


(A) Two cents multiplied by the voting age population of the 
State; or 


(B) Twenty thousand dollars; and 


(ii) In the case of a candidate for election to the office of 
Representative, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner in any 
other State, $10,000. 


(3) Any expenditure under paragraph (b) shall be in addition 
to any contribution by a committee to the candidate 
permissible under § 110.1 or § 110.2. 


(4) The party committees identified in (b)(1) shall not make 
independent expenditures in connection with the general 
election campaign of candidates for Federal office. 


(c) For limitation purposes, State committee includes 
subordinate State committees. State committees and 
subordinate State committees combined shall not exceed the 
limits in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. To ensure compliance 
with the limitations, the State committee shall administer the 
limitation in one of the following ways: 


(1) The State central committee shall be responsible for 
insuring that the expenditures of the entire party organization 
are within the limitations, including receiving reports from any 
subordinate committee making expenditures under paragraph 
(b) of this section, and filing consolidated reports showing all 
expenditures in the State with the Commission; or 


9la 


(2) Any other method, submitted in advance and approved 
by the Commission which permits control over expenditures. 


(2 U.S.C. 438(a)(8), 441a, 441d, 44le, 441f, 441g, 441h, 
441i) 


[41 FR 35948, Aug. 25, 1976, as amended at 45 FR 15119, 
Mar. 7, 1980: 45 FR 27435, Apr. 23, 1980; 45 FR 43387, 
June 27, 1980} 


92a 
APPENDIX L 


RADIO ADVERSTISEMENT 


Text of the First Republican Anti-Wirth Radio Spot, re: defense. 
Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee 


Here in Colorado we're use to politicians who let you know 
where they stand, and I thought we could count on Tim Wirth to 
do the same. But the last few weeks have been a real eye- 
opener. I just saw some ads where Tim Wirth said he’s for a 
strong defense and a balanced budget. But according to his 
record, Tim Wirth voted against every major new weapon sys- 
term in the last five years. And he voted against the balanced 
budget amendment. 


Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he doesn't have 
the right to change the facts. 


93a 
PAMPHLET 


“It’s absolutely criminal the amount of money this country is 
spending on defense.”’ 


Congressman Tim Wirth 
The Rocky Mountain News 
May 29, 1983 


Tim Wirth is the kind of politician who wants it both ways. He 
wants the liberal, anti-defense crowd back in Washington to 
know that they can count on him when it comes time to kill any 
effort to modernize our military. That’s why in Congress, he's 
voted against every major new weapons system in the past five 
years. But back here in Colorado he wants folks to believe that 
he thinks America should have the best system of national 
defense that money can buy. Which is the real Tim Wirth? 
Check the record inside. 


You can’t change the facts, Tim. 
Tim Wirth Says He Wants A Strong Defense For America? 
Then Why Doesn't He Vote That Way? 


Tim Wirth is spending a lot of money these days to try and 
convince people in Colorado that he really wants our country to 
have a strong, modern military ready to defend our borders and 
our friends abroad. 


) NO _ Wirth voted against the Strategic Defense Initiative 
program to protect America against Russian 
missiles (Congressional Quarterly 164. June 28, 
1985) 

{x} NO _ Wirth voted against building the new B-1 bomber to 
replace the outmoded B-52's that have been in our 
airforce since the Korean War (Congressional 
Quarterly 148. May 23, 1984) 

&) NO Wirth voted against funding important defense 


weapons 48 times since 1975 (The Congressional 
Record) 


94a 


Thousands of dollars in slick television ads may change a few 
minds, but it can’t challenge the facts. 
Take a look at how Tim Wirth has voted on issues in Congress 
that directly affect the strength of our defense systems. 
YES Wirth sponsored legislation to allow people who 
objected to the military not to have their tax dollars 
pay for national defense (HR 3032 July 17, 1985) 
YES Wirth voted to protect draft dodgers from having 
their college aid cut off by the Federal Government. 
(Congressional Quarterly 211, July 28, 1982) 
YES Wirth voted to cut $108 million from civil defense 
programs designed to protect our military person- 
nel (Congressional Quarterly 215 July 29, 1982) 
[Photos Omitted in Printing] 


95a 


RADIO ADVERTISEMENT 


[The following is a transcript of the Republican party ad re: Tim 
Wirth and telephones, first aired on KOA Radio, May 2, 
7:25 a.m.]} 


**s* 
Ringing phone. 
Voice: ““When it comes to telephone service, a lot has changed 
in the last few years—none of it for the better.”’ 
Operator Voice: ‘“Thank you for calling the telephone company. 
Please hold.” 


Voice: ‘Before Tim Wirth thought it would be a good idea to 


break up the phone company, you could solve your problems 
with a single call. Now, you buy your phone at the hardware 
store, long distance from one company, local service from 
someone else, and pay three separate bills. | guess Tim Wirth 
didn’t think about that when he was leading the fight to bust up 
the best telephone system in the world.” 


Operator Voice: “Equipment, service, or billing?” 
Voice: ““Well, I'm not sure.” 
Operator Voice: ““‘Then please continue holding.”’ 


Voice: “One thing is obvious: Tim Wirth’s bright ideas about 
breaking up the phone company have led to higher rates, and 
lots of confusion. So it’s no surprise Tim Wirth is trying to deny 
his role in the AT&T breakup. He may get away with that in 
Washington, but people in Colorado have long memories. You 
can't change the facts, Tim.”’ 


Operator Voice: “‘Are you stil] there?” 


Voice: ‘Just tell the folks this spot was paid for by the Colorado 


Dial tone. 


96a 


PAMPHLET 


Confused About The Break Up Of The Telephone Company? 


The Voter Education Project 

Colorado Republican Party 

Denver, Colorado 

Everyone | have spoken with thinks that the AT&T divestiture 
has been a disaster and that the Congressman (Tim Wirth) had 


a lot to do with it . . . if people hold him personally responsi- 

ble for the telephone break up, he’s going to have big 
problems.” 

Columnist David Ethan Greenberg 

The Denver Post 

January 12, 1986 


Tim Wirth does have big problems. 


People in Colorado are having big problems getting the 
kind of phone service they deserve and at a fair price. 


With Tim Wirth’s support and encouragement 
America’s phone system was broken up. 


The result is that we all pay more and pay for things we 
used to get for free, like directory information. 


Tim Wirth wants you to forget the role he played in 
busting up AT&T. 


He wants you to believe that it’s all a mistake and he had 
nothing to do with it. 


It won't work. 
Coloradans are smarter than that. 


You can’t change the facts, Tim. 
Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee 


97a 


So Is The Man Who Worked The Hardest To Make It 
Happen Congressman Tim Wirth 


A lot of people wonder why it was necessary to bust up 
one of the most efficient communications systems in 
the world, the telephone company. 


Now a lot of folks are hopping mad over poor service, 
confusing choices between companies and most of all, 
HIGHER PHONE BILLS!! 


What about the man who did more than any other mem- 
ber of the U.S. House of Representatives to try and 
make it happen? 


Well, like a lot of politicians, Tim Wirth starts to 
change his tune when things go wrong. 


As the chairman of the key Congressional subcommit- 


tee responsible for the legislation to break up AT&T, 
Tim Wirth called the splitting up of the national phone 


network, “a positive first step.” 


Today, with people discovering what tearing apart the 
phone company means in terms of their pocketbooks 
and peace of mind. Tim Wirth is singing a new song. 


It was all “‘unnecessary,” he says. ““Too far, too fast."’ 


That's the style of some politicians. They wheel and deal 
and when things turn sour, they want you to forget they 
ever had anything to do with it. 


It may be fashionable in Washington, D.C. to turn your 
back and walk away from a mess you helped create. 


That's not the way we do things in Colorado. 
You can’t change the facts, Tim. 


98a 


RADIO ADVERTISEMENT 


[The following is a transcript of a State Committee radio broad- 
cast discussing Congressman Wirth’s position on telecommuni- 
cations policy] 


Ringing phone. 


Voice: ‘“When it comes to telephone service, a lot has changed 
in the last few years—none of it for the better.” 


Operator Voice: ‘“Thank you for calling the telephone company. 
Please hold.”’ 


Voice: ““Before Tim Wirth thought it would be a good idea to 


break up the phone company, you could solve your problems 
with a single call. Now, you buy your phone at the hardware 
store, long distance from one company, local service from 
someone else, and pay three separate bills. I guess Tim Wirth 
didn’t think about that when he was leading the fight to bust up 
the best telephone system in the world.” 


Operator Voice: “Equipment, service, or billing?” 
Voice: ‘“Well, I'm not sure.” 
Operator Voice: ““Then please continue holding.” 


Voice: ‘One thing is obvious: Tim Wirth’s bright ideas about 
breaking up the phone company have led to higher rates, and 
lots of confusion. So it’s no surprise Tim Wirth is trying to deny 
his role in the AT&T breakup. He may get away with that in 
Washington, but people in Colorado have long memories. You 
can’t change the facts, Tim.” 


Operator Voice: “‘Are you still there?”’ 


Voice: “Just tell the folks this spot was paid for by the Colorado 
Republican State Central Committee.”’ 


Dial tone. 


99a 


RADIO ADVERTISEMENT 


[The following is a transcript of the State Committee's radio 
broadcast discussing Congressman Wirth’s positions on 
defense } 


Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee 


Here in Colorado we're use to politicians who let you know 
where they stand, and I thought we could count on Tim Wirth to 
do the same. But the last few weeks have been a real eye- 
opener. I just saw some ads where Tim Wirth said he’s for a 
strong defense and a balanced budget. But according to his 
record, Tim Wirth voted against every major new weapon sys- 
tem in the last five years. And he voted against the balanced 
budget amendment. 


Tim Wirth has a right to run for the Senate, but he doesn’t have 
a right to change the facts. 


100a 


RADIO ADVERTISEMENT 


[The following is a transcript of a State Committee radio broad- 
cast discussing Congressman Wirth’s position on telecommuni- 
cations policy and on the credibility of his statements on the 
issue } 

Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee 


There is a lot of controversy over Tim Wirth and the telephone 
break-up. He says he didn’t have anything to do with it. So 
what's the issue? Credibility, that’s the issue. Prior to the break- 
up, Congressman Wirth held twenty five official hearings, gen- 
erated eight volumes of hearing transcripts, sponsored two 
versions of telephone break-up legislation and then Wirth even 
wrote a letter to the Federal Judge saying the Wirth Bill 
H.R. 5158 gave “legislative sanction to the divestiture.’’ That's 
what Tim Wirth said. And AT&T just told the Rocky Mountain 
News ‘“Wirth may have said later that breaking up the phone 
company was a bad idea, but as far as we could tell that’s what 
his bill ultimately would have done.’’ So what's the issue when it 
comes to Tim Wirth and the phone company? Credibility. Tim 
Wirth’'s credibility. Tim Wirth can continue to leave out facts 
about his role, but he can't change the facts.” 


10la 


PAMPHLET 


Tim Wirth Says He Wants A Strong Defense For America? 
Then Why Doesn't He Vote That Way? 


Tim Wirth is spending a lot of money these days to try and 
convince people in Colorado that he really wants our country to 
have a strong, modern military ready to defend our borders and 
our friends abroad. 


x NO Wirth voted against the Strategic Defense 
Initiative program to protect America against 
Russian missiles (Congressional 
Quarterly 164. June 28, 1985) 

SI) NO Wirth voted against building the new B-1 
bomber to replace the outmoded B-52's that 
have been in our airforce since the Korean War 
(Congressional Quarterly 148. May 23, 1984) 

NO Wirth voted against funding important defense 
weapons 48 times since 1975 (The 
Congressional Record) 


Thousands of dollars in slick television ads may change a few 
minds, but it can't challenge the facts. 


Take a look at how Tim Wirth has voted on issues in Congress 
that directly affect the strength of our defense systems. 


X) YES Wirth sponsored legislation to allow people 
who objected to the military not to have their 
tax dollars pay for national defense (HR 3032 
July 17, 1985) 

SI) YES Wirth voted to protect draft dodgers from hav- 
ing their college aid cut off by the Federal Gov- 
ernment. (Congressional Quarterly 211, Ju- 
ly 28, 1982) 


102a 


YES Wirth voted to cut $108 million from civil de- 
fense programs designed to protect our militu- 


ry personnel (Congressional Quarterly 215 Ju- 
ly 29, 1982) 


[Photos Omitted in Printing] 


“It's absolutely criminal the amount of money this country is 
spending on defense."’ 


Congressman Tim Wirth 
The Rocky Mountain News 
May 29, 1983 


Tim Wirth is the kind of politician who wants it both ways. He 
wants the liberal, anti-defense crowd back in Washington to 
know that they can count on him when it comes time to kill any 
effort to modernize our military. That's why in Congress, he's 
voted against every major new weapons system in the past five 
years. But back here in Colorado he wants folks to believe that 
he thinks America should have the best system of national 
defense that money can buy. Which is the real Tim Wirth? 
Check the record inside. 


You can't change the facts, Tim. 


103a 
PAMPHLET 


Confused About The Break Up Of The Telephone Company? 


The Voter Education Project 


Colorado Republican Party 
Denver, Colorado 


So Is The Man Who Worked The Hardest To Make It 
Happen Congressman Tim Wirth 


A lot of people wonder why it was necessary to bust up 
one of the most efficient communications systems in 


the world, the telephone company. 


Now a lot of folks are hopping mad over poor service, 


choices between companies and most of all, 
HIGHER PHONE BILLS!! 


What about the man who did more than any other mem- 
ber of the U.S. House of Representatives to try and 


make it happen? 


Well, like a lot of politicians, Tim Wirth starts to 
change his tune when things go wrong. 


As the chairman of the key Congressional subcommit- 
tee responsible for the legislation to break up AT&T, 
Tim Wirth called the splitting up of the national phone 
network, “a positive first step." 

Today, with people discovering that tearing apart the 
phone company means in terms of their pocketbooks 
and peace of mind. Tim Wirth is singing a new song. 


It was all ‘““unnecessary,"’ he says. ““Too far, too fast.”’ 


104a 
That's the style of some politicians. They wheel and deal 
and when things turn sour, they want you to forget they 
ever had anything to do with it. 


It may be fashionable in Washington, D.C. to turn your 
back and walk away from a mess you helped create. 


That's not the way we do things in Colorado. 
You can’t change the facts, Tim. 


105a 


Everyone I have spoken with thinks that the AT&T divestiture 
has been a disaster and that the Congressman (Tim Wirth) had 


a lot to do with it . . . if people hold him personally responsi- 
ble for the selephone break up, he’s going to have big 
problems.” 


Tim Wirth does have big problems. 


People in Colorado are having big problems getting the 
kind of phone service they deserve and at a fair price. 


With Tim Wirth’s support and encouragement 
America’s phone system was broken up. 


The result is that we all pay more and pay for things we 
used to get for free, like directory information. 


Tim Wirth wants you to forget the role he played in 
busting up AT&T. 


He wants you to believe that it’s all a mistake and he had 
nothing to do with it. 


It won't work. 
Coloradans are smarter than that. 


You can’t change the facts, Tim. 
Paid for by the Colorado Republican State Central Committee 


