‘OR RRGUMEND 7 PILED 
Wy, APR 5 1996 


No. 95-489 


-__o Ooo SOOO 


Supreme Court, U.S. 


: 


In THE 
Suprene Court of the United States 


OCTOBER TERM, 1995 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE 
and DouGLas L. JONES, as TREASURER, 
Petitioners, 
Vv. 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 
Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


JAN WITOLD BARAN 
Counsel of Record 
THOMAS W. KIRBY 
CAROL A. LAHAM 
MICHAEL E. TONER 
Scott S. HARRIS 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 429-7000 


April 5, 1996 Attorneys for Petitioners 


WILeon - Eras Printing Co., Inc. - 789-0096 - WasHINGTON, D.C. 80001 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


ZABLE CF ACSC cecicccssrcctnsedicintictnnscsctasaiasitinnes 


. 


II. 


ITT. 


THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT ESTAB- 
LISHED THAT PARTY SPENDING LIMITA- 
TIONS ARE NECESSARY TO ACHIEVE A 
COMPELLING INTEREST AND ARE NAR- 
ROWLY TAILORED TO THAT INTEREST... 


A. Party Spending Limitations Are Not Neces- 
sary To Prevent Corruption Or The Appear- 
Sele GE I acta ciscenphbbctticcinctiiimetnine 


B. Party Spending Limitations Are Not Neces- 
sary To Prevent Circumvention Of The Can- 
didate Contribution Limits ............................. 


C. Amici Theories About “Soft Money” Are 
Unfounded And Irrelevant .......................-........ 


THE § 44la(a) (2) CONTRIBUTION LIMITA- 
TION, EMPHASIZED FOR THE FIRST TIME 
IN THE GOVERNMENT'S BRIEF, DOES NOT 
GOV EES SENE COI ccectntnlicsicaiitmtmersenteencgeniowene 


A. The Colorado Party’s Counterclaim Addresses 
gg | ETERS AES SON Ree MO DOSE ee 


B. The Government’s Complaint Similarly Rests 
On The Claim That Expenditures For 
“Wirth Facts #1” Exceeded The Limits Of 
§ 441a(d), Not § 441a(a) (2) -...........0000.-..... 


C. The Government’s New Interpretation Of 
FECA Is Inconsistent With The Language 


Of The Statute And Its Implementation........ 


THE GOVERNMENT UTTERLY FAILS TO 
ADDRESS THE SIGNIFICANT VAGUENESS 
CONCERNS ASSOCIATED WITH THE FEC’S 
“ELECTIONEERING MESSAGE” STAND- 
BEND wivincmecssstnsinteteensiatinmnniatomadaiieasiaadgents 


Page 


» se 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 
Cases Page 
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 418 U.S. 601 (1978) .......... 15 
Buckley v. Valeo, 42A U.S. 1 (1976) —................... passim 


Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 887 (1984), reh’g denied, 


Statute 


Pg ete ga a 18 
FEC v. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Comm., 
RIES RE re 18 
FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 
Re ee ee ee 18, 15 
FEC v. National Conservative Political Action 
Comm., 470 U.S. 480 (1985) 2... cccccceceeenes 2,38 
Igneri v. Moore, 898 F.2d 870 (2d Cir. 1990) ......... 3 
Maine Right to Life Comm. v. FEC, 914 F. Supp. 
ERNE 5s 5 TA EE cee 16 
Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 497 U.S. 62 
TS Se eS ee 3 
Shelton v. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479 (1960) ioaliiaieidimeeen 2 
United States v. Congress of Industrial Org., 335 
I St 19 
- United States v. National Treasury Employees 
T’nion, 115 S.Ct. 1008 (1995) 200... ec eeeneee 2 
I a races 10 
ETE TT passim 
A LS Es ae 5 
CC EAL - 12 
ad csarercinccarenincetinmeammmmenenne 5 
a ld tn arscstrsntceremidpnettcgnenest 10 
ES ee 11 
a a 5 
Te 
i a ERT Sa passim 
hh SE passim 
a ER ED ca a i) 
i TT CC 18, 14 
a 11 
TT 14 


Cc  , 16 


ili 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES—Continued 


Page 
11 C.F.R. § 102.5 .......... 6 
11 C.F.R. § 106.1 (a) 12 
11 C.F.R. § 106.5 6 
11 C.F.R. § 110.7 (b) (4) 10 
Miscellaneous 
119 Cong. Rec. 814724 (daily ed. July 25, 1973)... 3 
FEC 22 Record 4 (Apr. 1996) ......-..-.cccccccecceeeeceeee 3,5 
FEC Advisory Opinion 1980-108, Fed. Election 
Comp. Fin. Guide (CCH) 9 5557 (1980) 11 
FEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, Fed. Election 
Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) (1985) 0000000000000... 12, 17 
FEC Advisory Opinion 1989-25, Fed. Election 
Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) 4 5978 (1989) ........... 11 
FEC General Counsel’s Brief Matter Under Review 
AERTS I i) 


Frank Swoboda & Thomas Edwall, “AFL-CIO En- 
dorses Clinton, Approves $35 Million Political 


Program,” Washington Post, Mar. 26, 1986........ 19 
Watergate Special Prosecution Force Report 60 
ES MEET dalaichdndeetentearttesnnnetichntnanhaesttittemaaiinemen nee 8 


—— inte 


In THE 
Supreme Court of the United States 


OcToBer TERM, 1995 


No. 95-489 


COLORADO REPUBLICAN FEDERAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE 
and DouGLas L. Jones, as TREASURER, 
= Petitioners, 


FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, 


Respondent. 


On Writ of Certiorari to the 
United States Court of Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit 


REPLY BRIEF FOR PETITIONERS 


Petitioner Colorado Republican Federal Campaign 
Committee (“Colorado Party” or “Party”) submits this 
Reply to the Brief for the Respondent Federal Election 

The government does not—and really cannot—dispute 
that: 

* The right of political parties to speak out in con- 
nection with federal elections lies at the very heart 
of the First Amendment. 


* By limiting political parties to spending pennies- 
per-voter in connection with federal elections, 
$44la(d) of the Federal Election Campaign 
Act (“FECA”) severely curtails that core First 
Amendment right.’ 

1 All statutory references are to Title 2 of the United States 
Code, unless otherwise noted. The government disputes whether 


2 

* The purposes reflected in § 441a(d)’s legislative 
history—to reduce and equalize political speech— 
are unconstitutional. 

* There is no legislative finding or record evidence 
that limiting political party speech to pennies-per- 
voter prevents corruption or the appearance of 
corruption. 

* No opinion of the FEC discusses the constitutional 
issues raised by its vague “electioneering message” 
standard, nor is the FEC entitled to deference on 
constitutional matters. 

* The district court correctly found that “Wirth 
Facts #1” was not “express advocacy.” 

The government and its supporting amici assert that 
political parties must be muzzled to prevent actual corrup- 
tion or the appearance of corruption. The justification 
for such restrictions, however, has not been established. 

I. THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT ESTABLISHED 

THAT PARTY SPENDING LIMITATIONS ARE 

NECESSARY TO ACHIEVE A COMPELLING IN- 

TEREST AND ARE NARROWLY TAILORED TO 

THAT INTEREST. 


The government cannot meet its heavy burden of justi- 
fying an infringement on core First Amendment rights by 
merely “posit{ing] the existence of the disease” called 
political corruption. United States v. National Treasury 
Employees Union, 115 S. Ct. 1003, 1016 n.18, 1017 
(1995) (noting record evidence produced by govern- 
ment). Instead, it must show that the alleged harms are 
real, and that the statute directly alleviates those harms. 
Id. Moreover, it must show that the statute is narrowly 
tailored and that less drastic measures will not suffice. 
FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Comm., 
470 U.S. 480, 496 (1985) (“NCPAC”); see also Shelton 
v. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479, 488 (1960). The government’s 
defense here does not meet these standards. 


the party-spending limit is imposed by § 44la(d), but does not 
dispute the existence or severity of the limit. 


3 


A. Party Spending Limitations Are Not Necessary 
To Prevent Corruption Or The Appearance Of 
Corruption. 


government speculates (Br. 34) that party leaders 


evidence that this has been a problem or that the potential 


injury is of a sufficient magnitude to justify sharply re- 
stricting the Colorado Party’s fundamental First Amend- 


ment rights.* 


* Contrary to the government’s assertion (Br. 40 n.33), the Colo- 
rado Party has not “abandoned” its argument that the population- 
based expenditure formula under § 441la(d) belies an anti-corrup- 
tion purpose. As demonstrated by limits recently announced by the 
FEC, the parties are permitted to spend $1,409,249 in connection 
with 1996 Senate races in California, but only $170,932 in Colorado. 
See FEC 22 Record 4 at 15 (Apr. 1996) If the underpinning of 
§ 441a(d) were really that political party speech “corrupts” can- 
didates, it stands to reason that such corruption would be taking 
place on a massive scale in California and other large states todzy. 


* The government identified no evidence that modern political 
parties are actually corrupt or have the appearance of corruption. 
Amicus Common Cause (Br. 16) erroneously alleges that the Water- 
gate Special Prosecution Force (“WSPF”) found corruption be- 
tween the Republican party and ITT Corporation. In fact, the 


The two cases cited by the government for the proposition that 
parties can corrupt are far removed from this case. Justice 
Stevens’ dissent in Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 497 U.S. 
62 (1990), addressed the potential for corruption through patron- 
age practices, and Jgneri v. Moore, 898 F.2d 870 (2d Cir. 1990), 
concerned financial disclosure requirements for state employees. 
In neither case were the speech rights of parties at stake. 

Contrary to the Respondent’s argument (Br. 32 n.22), the legis- 
lative history of FECA contains evidence concerning the corruptive 
potential of large family-member contributions. See, ¢.g., 119 
Cong. Rec. $14724 (daily ed. July 25, 1973); Brief of Common 
Cause in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976), at 73. 


4 


Unable to show any quid pro quo abuses involving 
modern political parties, the government (Br. 35) defines 
as “corrupt” anyone “who seeks to exercise ‘coercive in- 
fluence’ over the formulation of public policy [even if] 
motivated solely by a concern for the common good.” 
By “coercive influence” the government means threatening 
to withhold party support. This argument assumes that 
parties have a duty to support candidates with whom they 
disagree. But refusing to speak out in favor of a candi- 
date with whom one disagrees is not “corruption,” it is 
democracy. See Brief of American Civil Liberties Union, 
at 14-17. 


The government’s new definition of corruption would 
condemn much classic democratic activity. Granting or 
withholding editorial support, endorsements, grassroots 
organizing and the like all are “coercive” in this sense. 
As this Court has repeatedly emphasized, “corruption” 
sufficient to justify infringing core political speech must 
involve “the financial quid pro quo: dollars for political 
favors,” or at least the appearance of such corruption. 
See NCPAC, 470 US. at 497; see also Buckley v. Valeo, 
424 U.S. 1, 26-27 (1976). In fact, the broad “corrup- 
tion” rationale now suggested by the government is merely 
a euphemism for the impermissible goals of reducing 
and equalizing political speech.* 


B. Party Spending Limitations Are Not Necessary 
To Prevent Circumvention Of The Candidate Con- 
tribution Limits. 


The government also speculates that limiting political 
party speech is necessary to prevent evasion of FECA’s 


*The amicus brief submitted on behalf of various states 
(“States’ Brief”) naturally expresses an interest in protecting 
“the integrity of the electoral process” in those states. See Br. 
10-16. Despite the important constitutional difference between an 
expenditure by a political party and a contribution to a party, 
however, the States’ Brief analyzes only the effect of large contri- 
butions allegedly prevalent in some states. This analysis is wholly 
irrelevant to the party spending limits at issue here. 


5 


limits on contributions to candidates. This is inconsistent 
with FECA’s legislative history, which shows that the 
party limits were intended to complement the restrictions 
on expenditures that this Court struck down as uncon- 
stitutional attempts to reduce and equalize speech. See 
Colorado Party Opening Brief at 26-27. 


Moreover, the government’s theory ignores the stringent 
limitations that FECA imposes on contributions to parties 
for use in federal elections. As is discussed in the Colo- 
rado Party’s Opening Brief (at 5), those contributions 
can come only from individuals and registered commit- 
tees, are limited in amount, and cannot be earmarked for 
a particular candidate without counting as a direct con- 
tribution to that candidate (§ 44la(a)(8)). Thus, the 
most that the government can hypothesize (Br. 42) is 
that an individual “might” have an “expectation” that his 
or her publicly disclosed, limited contribution to a politi- 
cal party ultimately would benefit a candidate. Such an 
attenuated relationship resulting from multiple political 
support is not a compelling or even legitimate interest 
warranting a limit on the political speech of parties to 
pennies-per-voter.® 


* Amicus Common Cause argues (Br. 10-11) that party spending 
limits are necessary to prevent Senate candidates from becoming 
beholden to donors who, notwithstanding § 441a(a) (8), can contri- 
bute up to $120,000 ($20,000 per year) to a national party during a 
candidate’s six-year term in addition to the $2,000 statutory maxi- 
mum to the candidate. This argument is misleading on several 
levels. First, individuals may not contribute $20,000 per year to a 
state political party like the Colorado Party. See § 441a(1) (C) 
(limiting annual contributions to $5,000). Second, individuals are 
limited to making $25,000 in total contributions to campaigns, PACs 
and party committees in any given year. § 44la(a) (3). Therefore, 
although an individual may contribute up to $20,000 per year in 
unearmarked funds to a national party, the individual would con- 
sequently be limited to contributing $5,000 to all other parties, 
PACs, and campaigns. Further, Common Cause ignores the impact 
of inflation on FECA’s party-spending limits during the last two 
decades. In 1974 dollars, the Colorado Party’s $5,000 contribution 
limit is worth only $1,618.12 today; the $20,000 limit to national 
parties is worth only $6,472.48. See FEC 22 Record 4 at 15 (Apr. 


6 


C. Amici Theories About “Soft Money” Are Unfounded 
And Irrelevant. 


Recognizing that the contributions that parties can 
accept for federal purposes are too restricted to pose any 
risk of corruption, amici suggest that so-called “soft 
money” could provide an avenue for corruption. 


“Soft money” is a nonlegal term that refers to funds 
that, by definition, are not and lawfully may not be used 
in connection with federal elections. See 11 C.F.R. 
§ 106.5. These funds are not “contributions” or “expendi- 
tures” under FECA but are subject to state regulation." 


The government has not embraced amici’s “soft 
money” theory. None of the funding for “Wirth Facts 
# 1” was “soft money.” Nor, despite imaginative refer- 
ences by the Brennan Center for Justice (Br. 7, 10) to 
“bleeding” of “soft money” into federal campaigns, 
(which is illegal) is there any evidence that “soft money” 
is used for federal election purposes. The strict account- 
ing required by FECA, see 11 C.F.R. §§ 102.5 & 106.5, 
makes such “bleeding” highly unlikely. 


Amici’s theory is that large donations of soft money 
can be used to addict a political party. The amici specu- 
late that, once the party is addicted, the donor then can 
use the threat of withholding “soft money” to induce the 
party to spend additional “hard money” to support a 
particular candidate. Amici hypothesize that, when the 
candidate is informed of this, he or she will confer im- 
proper benefits on the “soft money” donors. Obviously, 
this supposed route to corruption is exceptionally atten- 
uated and inefficient. 


More importantly, amici’s theory ignores the fact that, 
regardless of the outcome of this case, the total amount 


1996). Finally, Common Cause did not cite a single example of such 
a contribution pattern in the 20 years of FECA. 


*So far as the Party can determine, several of the six states 
joining in the States’ Brief do not limit party speech. 


7 


of party speech in federal elections—the supposed vehicle 
for “soft money” corruption—will remain constrained by 
the parties’ ability to raise money under FECA’s existing 
contribution limits. Such contributions are the only law- 
ful source for party expenditures in federal elections. 
“Soft money” does not corrupt federal candidates, and if 
it did Congress and/or the states would have to regulate 
it directly in a constitutional manner before limiting party 


speech." 


Il. THE § 44la(a)(2) CONTRIBUTION LIMITATION, 
EMPHASIZED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE 
GOVERNMENT'S BRIEF, DOES NOT GOVERN 
THIS CASE. 


For the first time in this proceeding, the government 
asserts (Br. 14-16) that this case is governed not by the 
expenditure limits of § 441a(d)(3), but by the contribu- 
tion limits of § 44la(a)(2). Remarkably, during the last 
ten years no FEC pleading, memorandum, or brief relied 
upon § 441a(a)(2); none of the lower court opinions 
analyzed this case under § 441a(a)(2); and none of the 
amicus briefs supporting the government discuss § 44a 
(a)(2). In truth, § 441a(a)(2) is a red herring. 


A. The Colorado Party’s Counterclaim Addresses Only 
§ 441a(d). 


Party expenditures in connection with federal elections 
are regulated only by § 44la(d), not by § 441a(a)(2) 
or any other provision. Section 441la(d)(1) provides: 


* Nor is there any validity to the argument pressed in the States’ 
Brief (2-3, 24-25) that striking down party spending limits would 
“eviscerate” public financing of elections. Any ruling in this 
case will apply only to limits upon party spending in US. House 
and Senate races, where no public financing system exists. But 
even if party-spending limits were invalidated for those elections 
with public financing, both the federal and state governments have 
viable methods—many already in place—to check any potentially 
corruptive influence of contributions to the parties. Obviously, 
protecting public funding systems cannot justify limiting party 
speech to the extent the goal of such public funding schemes is to 
reduce and equalize speech. 


Notwithstanding any other provision of law with 
respect to limitations on expenditures or limitations 
on contributions, the national committee of a polit- 
ical party and a State committee of a political party, 
including any subordinate committee of a State com- 
mittee, may make expenditures in connection with 
the general election campaign of candidates for Fed- 
eral office, subject to the limitations contained in 
paragraphs (2) or (3) of this subsection. (emphasis 
added ) 


The Party’s counterclaim seeks a declaratory judgment 
“that the limits on its expenditures in connection with the 
general election campaign . . . imposed by 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(d) are unconstitutional... .” J.A. 68. It alleges 
that the Colorado Party “could and would have made 
expenditures directly in connection with the general elec- 
tion . . . that exceeded the limits established by 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(d), but for the deterrent and chilling effect” of 
those limits. /d. Thus, solely at issue in the Party’s 
counterclaim is the right to speak by making expenditures 
governed by § 441la(d). 


The Colorado Party’s counterclaim attacks only the 
limits imposed by § 44la(d), and it does so on the 
grounds that those limits improperly restrict the ability of 
political parties to communicate with their members and 
the public. Holding that the limits imposed by § 441aTd) 
unduly restrict party expenditures could not possibly sup- 
port imposing even more stringent limits under § 44la 
-€a)(2). In sum, § 441a(a)(2) has nothing to do with 
the Colorado Party’s counterclaim. 


B. The Government’s Complaint Similarly Rests On 
The Claim That Expenditures For “Wirth Facts 
#1” Exceeded The Limits Of §44la(d), Not 
§ 441a(a)(2). 


The FEC’s enforcement action also stands or falls on 
the claim that the expenditures for “Wirth Facts #1” 
were “in connection with” a federal election and, hence, 
violated the limits established by § 44la(d). The prob- 


9 


able cause finding that authorized this lawsuit accepted 
the recommendation of the FEC General Counsel to find 
a violation of § 44la(d). See FEC General Counsel's 
Brief, Matter Under Review 2186 (Nov. 6, 1987). Like- 
wise, the probable cause letter that the FEC sent to the 
Party pursuant to the statutorily mandated conciliation 
process gave notice of a claimed violation of “the Act’s 
limits at § 441a(d).” J.A. 181-84. Neither asserted a 
violation of § 441a(a)(2). 


The FEC’s district court complaint does not even men- 
tion § 441a(a)(2), but instead relies upon a claimed vio- 
lation of § 441a(d). J.A. 51-60. The Colorado Party's 
Answer pleaded that the Party “has not violated 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(f) because its disbursements for ‘Wirth Facts 
#1’ are not subject to 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d) limits.” J.A. 
67. The papers before the trial court and the court of 
appeals all treated as determinative the issue of whether 
the expenditures were “in connection with” a federal elec- 
tion within the meaning of § 441a(d), and both lower 
courts proceeded on that theory. 


C. The Government’s New Interpretation Of FECA 
Is Inconsistent With The Language Of The Statute 
And Its Implementation. 


Not only is the government’s argument that the Colo- 
rado Party violated § 441a(a)(2) new to this litigation, 
but that view has no basis in law. The text, structure. 
and historical application of FECA make clear that politi- 
cal party speech—regardless of its content—never impli- 
cates § 44la(a)(2)’s contribution limits. Speech by a 
party is limited, if at all, only by § 44la(d). The gov- 
ernment’s assertion that § 441a(a)(2) applies to party 
speech seeks to paint this case as one concerning con- 
tributions rather than expenditures in order to avail itself 
of the lower constitutional scrutiny afforded contributions 
in Buckley." 


* The government’s use of this distinction is unduly formalistic. 
The First Amendment does not speak of “contributions” as less 


10 


FECA contemplates three categories of political party 
spending, each with its own legal ramifications. First, 
where a party transfers money or some other tangible 
thing directly to a candidate, that transfer is treated as 
a “contribution.” § 431(8)(A). Like any other political 
committee, a political party is permitted to make only 
$5,000 in such contributions per election under § 44la 
(a)(2). Second, where a party makes an expenditure “in 
connection with” a federal election without providing any 
direct transfer to the candidate, that “expenditure” is sub- 
ject to the limits of §44la(d) ($103,248.54 for the 
1986 Colorado Senate race). Finally, where a political 
party does not make a direct transfer to a candidate and 
does not make an expenditure “in connection with” a 
federal election, FECA imposes no limit at all. 


The government’s new litigation position—never 
adopted by the FEC or even advocated below— is that 
the first two of these categories are exactly the same (Br. 
4 n.6 & 18 n.15) and that § 44la(d) merely authorizes 
additional “contributions.” The government’s view is 
based upon two provisions: (1) § 44la(a)(7), which 
generally treats an expenditure made in coordination with 
a candidate as a contribution to the candidate; and (2) 
11 C.F.R. § 110.7(b)(4), which provides that expendi- 
tures by a party in connection with a federal election 
cannot be “independent expenditures.” 


Speech by a party, however, is never a “contribution” 
to a candidate. Section 44la(a)(7), “a provision of law 
with respect to limitations on contributions,” simply does 
not apply to political parties by operation of § 44la 
(d)(1), which states: 


Notwithstanding any other provision of law with 
respect to . . . limitations on contributions, . . . a 


protected than “expenditures.” The Court in Buckley relied on 
the differing functions and characteristics of the types of disburse- 
ments before it. Regardless of how labelled, party speech under 
§ 44la(d) has the essential characteristics of expenditures. See 
Colorado Party Opening Brief at 35-36. 


11 


State committee of a political party .. . may make 
expenditures in connection with the general election 
campaign of candidates for Federal office... . 


Thus, party “expenditures” are not subject to “contribu- 
tion” limits.* 


Recognizing this clearly expressed intent of Congress, 
the FEC has previously stated that § 441a(a)(2) does 
not apply to communications by the parties. FEC regu- 
lations provide that expenditures under the pennies-per- 
voter formula of § 441a(d)(3) “shall be in addition to 
any contribution by a committee to the candidate permis- 
sible under § 110.1 or § 110.2 [which implement the con- 
tribution limit].” 11 C.F.R. § 110.7(b)(3). 


The view that party contributions are distinct from 
party expenditures has also been recognized in FEC 
Advisory Opinions—which the government treats as pre- 
cedent. For example, FEC Advisory Opinion 1989-25, 
Fed. Election Camp. Fin. Guide (CCH) € 5973 (1989), 
notes that: 


Such limited expenditures may be made in consulta- 
tion and cooperation with the candidates, but are 
not considered contributions to them. See 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(a)(7)(B) and 11 C.F.R. 110.7(b)(3), 
(b)(4). In addition, these limited expenditures may 
be made “[nJotwithstanding any other provision of 
law with respect to limitations on expenditures. . . .” 
2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)(1). 


*The Respondent in this Court apparently presumes that the 
Party asks for all of §44la(d) to be declared unconstitutional. 
Throughout this litigation, however, the Colorado Party has argued 
only that the limits imposed by § 441a(d) on spending for Senate 
elections, found in subsection (3), violate the First Amendment. 
See Defendants’ Answer and Counterclaims, J.A. 68 (“The State 
Party seeks a declaratory judgment pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2201 
that the limits on its expenditures in connection with the general 
election campaign for the Office of United States Senator from the 
mene of Colorado imposed by 2 U.S.C. §44la(d) are unconstitu- 
tional. ...”). 


12 


Id. at 11,582 (emphasis added). See also FEC Advisory 
Opinion 1980-103, Fed. Election Camp. Fin. Guide 
(CCH) 45557 (1980) (while “moneys disbursed to the 
individual congressional candidates are contributions from 
the State party . . . subject to the $5,000 contribution 
limit,” the party may also make expenditures “in connec- 
tion with the general election” within the limits of 
§ 441a(d)(3)). 


In fact, FEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, from which 
the government discerns its § 44la(a)(2) analysis, sup- 
ports the same conclusion. Though the party speech at 
issue in Advisory Opinion 1985-14 was remarkably sim- 
ilar to the speech at issue here, that opinion addressed 
only the application of the expenditure limitations in 
§ 441a(d)(3). While the opinion also considered whether 
the expenditures would be “attributable” to certain candi- 
dates under 11 C.F.R. § 106.1(a), the attribution anal- 
ysis referred to allocating the costs of general anti- 
Republican advertisements to the party expenditure 
limits (i.e., under § 441a(d)(3)) ffor the particular Dem- 
ocratic candidates who would benefit from the advertise- 
ments. J.A. 274. This analysis had absolutely nothing 
to do with the contribution limits of § 441a(a)(2). In 
fact, the Advisory Opinion specifically notes (J.A. 273 
n.5) that the “expenditure” limits are “in addition to the 
limitation on contributions by DCC’C pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 
§ 44la(a)(2)(A).” 


One simply cannot speak intelligibly of coordination 
between political parties and candidates. Because candi- 
dates are nominated by and are members of parties and 
because the very purpose of parties is to support candi- 
dates, they have no choice but to coordinate.” This does 
not mean, however, that political parties and candidates 


Because § 441a(d)(1) specifically exempts political parties 
from this “coordination” inquiry, this case will have no effect on 
application of the coordination inquiry to other entities such as 
PACs, labor unions, and corporations, which are not covered by 
§ 441a(d) (1). The government’s statememt to the contrary (Br. 22) 
does not take this distinction into account. 


13 


have identical political views or that parties have nothing 
to say about public issues other than what candidates may 
say. To the contrary, parties are vitally interested in pub- 
lic issues and Congress assumed that parties would speak, 
both on issues and candidates, without being deemed to 
have made a “contribution.” Indeed, the government 
acknowledges (Br. 3) that at the very least “generic” 
speech is “not subject to the Act's contribution limits,” 
nor is party speech that does not contain an “electioneer- 
ing message.” 


Ill. THE GOVERNMENT UTTERLY FAILS TO AD- 
DRESS THE SIGNIFICANT VAGUENESS CON- 
CERNS ASSOCIATED WITH THE FEC’S “ELEC- 
TIONEERING MESSAGE” STANDARD. 


The government contends (Br. 44-45) that “people of 
common intelligence” would have no difficulty under- 
standing that “Wirth Facts #1” contains an “ - 
ing message.” Beyond that conclusory statement, how- 
ever, the government fails to provide any definition of its 
“electioneering message” standard or to offer any mean- 
ingful distinction between “Wirth Facts #1” and the 
Colorado Party's other radio ads and pamphlets. These 
failures demonstrate in and of themselves that the con- 
struction of § 44la(d)(3) advocated by the government 
is unconstitutionally vague. 


FEC vv. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc. 
(“MCFL”), 479 U.S. 238 (1986), held that the First 
Amendment requires § 441b(a)'s prohibition on corpo- 
rate expenditures “in connection with” a federal election 
to be limited to “express advocacy” as defined in Buckley. 
Using identical language, § 441a(d)(3) forbids the Colo- 
rado Party from making any expenditures “in connection 
with” a federal election that exceeds a pennies-per-voter 
limit. 

The government concedes (Br. 9 & 25-26) that its 
“electioneering message” standard is broader than the 


14 


“express advocacy” test."" The government cites no evi- 
dence that Congress intended the “in connection with” 
language of § 44la(d) to have a different meaning than 
its statutory twin in § 441b(a), nor does it deny that a 
eS eS SS See ee 
First Amendment. Nevertheless, the government urges 


this Court to adopt an unconstitutionally vague “election- 
eering message” standard that, so far as appears, the FEC 


formulated without discussion or even awareness of First 
Amendment standards.” In so doing, the government 
offers no reason why political parties are entitled to less 
clarity than corporations.” 


11 The government declined to appeal the trial court’s ruling that 
“Wirth Facts #1” was not “express advocacy.” See Colorado Party 
Opening Brief at 3 n.3. The Colorado Party’s Opening Brief (40-41) 
demonstrated that while the government represents (Br. 3) that 
generic appeals such as “Support Republicans for Congress” are not 
subject to FECA’s contribution limits, the FEC has sought to 
expand the scope of the “express advocacy” test. Ignoring this 
Court’s bright-line test, the Commission has determined: 

[M)essages such as “Vote Democratic” or “Vote Republican” 
will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis to determine whether 
they constitute express advocacy under the criteria set out in 
11 CFR 100.22(b). 


J.A. 251. Such a free-wheeling approach is contrary to this Court's 
teachings. 


12 None of the advisory opinions on which the government relies 
for the “electioneering message” standard even mention the First 
Amendment. The government has pointed to no other authority for 
its standard. 


% The government’s reliance (Br. 21-22) upon post-Buckley 
amendments to FECA to argue that Congress actually supports 
the “electioneering message” standard is unpersuasive. While Con- 
gress did not change the scope of § 44la(d)(3) at the time it 


for “independent expenditures” because Buckley ruled that such a 
limiting construction was required by the Constitution. Because 
Buckley did not address the constitutionality of § 44la(d) (3) under 
the First Amendment, there was no Supreme Court ruling to codify. 

Nor do the post-Buckley amendments support the government’s 
contention (Br. 30-31 n.21) that §44la(d)(3) has an anti- 


15 


The government claims (Br. 44-45) that people of 
“common intelligence” usually will be able to determine 
whether particular speech contains an “electioneering 
message,” and that an FEC advisory opinion is available 
where the standard is unclear. It asserts that this is suffi- 
cient under Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 607 
(1973). This argument fails at several levels. 


First, Buckley expressly rejects a standard of “adequate 
notice to a person of ordinary intelligence,” holding that 
“(where First Amendment rights are involved, an even 
‘greater degree of specificity’ is required.” Id. at 77 (em- 
phasis added). Thus, the level of clarity that the govern- 
ment claims for its “electioneering message” standard is 
legally inadequate. 

Second, the government's “electioneering message” 
standard blurs the critical distinction between advocacy 
of issues and advocacy of candidates. The core concern 
of the “express advocacy” test is to assure that issue 
advocacy is not chilled, even if some candidate advocacy 
must be allowed. See MCFL, 479 U.S. at 249 (discuss- 
ing and applying the Buckley “express advocacy” test). 
As was explained in a recent opinion striking down the 
FEC’s rulemaking attempt to import an electioneering 
message concept into the express advocacy test: 


[Under Buckley and MCFL,} FEC restriction of 
election activities was not to be permitted to intrude 
in any way upon the public discussion of issues. 
What the Supreme Court did was draw a bright line 
that may err on the side of permitting things that 
affect the election process, but at all costs avoids re- 
stricting, in any way, discussion of public issues. . 

The advantage of this rigid approach, from a First 
Amendment point of view, is that it permits a 
speaker or writer to know from the outset exactly 


___ Cat is porated and what & pectin’. 


corruption purpose. The government has cited no congressional 
finding or concern that parties are corruptive. 


16 


Maine Right to Life Comm. v. FEC, 914 F. Supp. 8, 12 
(1996) (invalidating 11 C.F.R. § 100.22(b)(2)). 


The inherent difficulties with the government's “elec- 
tioneering message” standard are starkly illustrated by the 
facts of this case. The Colorado Party’s radio and print 
materials all discussed issues raised by the conduct of the 
same incumbent Congressman, Timothy E. Wirth. They 
were disseminated at the same time and shared a common 
objective. All were identified as coming from the Party. 
Yet only “Wirth Facts #1” is said to embody an “elec- 
tioneering message.” ™* 


The government argues (Br. 45) that any vagueness 
concerns relating to the “electioneering message” standard 


are remedied through the FEC’s advisory opinion process. 
This argument is untenable. This Court has never held 
that a scheme of advance licensing of political speech 
cures an unconstitutionally vague standard. Nor is such 
a scheme practical in this context. Political discourse is 
immediate and fluid, while the FEC may take up to 60 
days to issue an advisory opinion. 11 C.F.R. § 112.4(a). 
By the time the need for FEC advice is perceived, a 
request for an advisory opinion is prepared, and the FEC 
issues an opinion, the vital political moment often will 


have passed. 


14 In the lower courts the government was unable to suggest any 
basis for distinguishing “Wirth Facts #1” from the Colorado 
Party’s other similar ads and brochures. See Colorado Party’s Cer- 
tiorari Reply Brief at 3. In this Court the government offers two 
grounds of distinction (Br. 44 n.36). First, it says that only “Wirth 
Facts #1” “expressly” referred to Wirth’s Senate Campaign. Yet 
the others ads and brochures also referred to statements then being 
made by the Wirth Campaign. Second, the government cites a 
press statement (J.A. 147-48) by the Colorado Party’s Chairman. 
It never explains why that statement matters, but the statement 
applies equally to all of the Party’s ads. The government cannot 
claim that a reasonable person, knowing that “Wirth Facts #1” 
would be condemned, confidently could conclude that the other 
ads and pamphlets would be permissible. An express advocacy 
standard would permit suca a judgment. 


As the Colorado Party Chairman testified: 


A political party is designed to do a lot of things. 
Among them is to help candidates . . . . For federal 
candidates, which come under the FEC, there are 
rules that to the average nonlawyer state chairman 
are so complex and so difficult that many people 
just say I just won't play in that league. 


J.A. 215 (emphasis added). The government’s regrettable 
adherence to the vague “electioneering message” standard 
compounds the problem, and the FEC has given no indi- 
cation that it recognizes the serious constitutional con- 
cerns that this creates.” In order not to be unconstitu- 


1 See, e.g., FEC Advisory Opinion 1985-14, J.A. 267-74 (dead- 
locking on whether an advertisement critical of the Reagan Admin- 
istration’s defense spending contained an “electioneering message” 
where the ads closed by saying “Vote Democratic”). 


% The government also asserts (Br. 43-44) the non sequitur 
that the “electioneering message” standard is appropriate because 
§ 44la(d) is “not an additional restriction.” The Colorado Party 
rejects the government’s peculiar view that a political party has 
no right to speak absent an act of grace by Congress. But even 
if the government’s premise were true, the Party still would be 
See oe ee ee oe 

is not. 


17 The government apparently does not dispute that courts may 
not defer to agency rulings which, like the “electioneering mes- 
sage” standard, raise serious constitutional concerns and conflict 
with Supreme Court precedent. See Colorado Party’s Opening 


18 


tionally vague, § 441a(d) must be limited to communica- 
tions that satisfy this Court’s bright-line “express advo- 
cacy” test.” 

CONCLUSION 


The First Amendment interests implicated by this case 
are profound.” A political party is nothing more than a 
group of people associated to promote public policies they 
believe in. They adopt a name for their group and hold 
themselves out to the public under that name. In order 
to promote their beliefs effectively, they nominate one of 
their own members for public office and support that in- 
dividual’s campaign with the expectation that the nominee 
will advance their shared beliefs. To deprive parties of 


Brief at 41-46. Indeed, the only case cited by the government in 
support of deference being afforded to the FEC is FEC v. Demo- 
cratic Senatorial Campaign Comm., 454 U.S. 27 (1981), in which 
the agency’s decision not to prosecute actually expanded First 
Amendment rights. Conspicuously absent from the government's 
brief is any discussion of Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources 
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 887 (1984). Moreover, contrary to 
the government’s assertion (Br. 25 n.19), the Colorado Party did 
argue below that the FEC’s advisory opinions did not merit defer- 
ence. See Colorado Party Certiorari Reply Brief at 2 n.2. 


18 Even if §441a(d) (3) is limited to “express advocacy,” the 
Colorado Party’s facial challenge to the political party spending 
limits would remain. The Party seeks to vindicate its constitu- 
tionally protected right to engage in unlimited express advocacy. 


19 As noted in the Colorado Party’s Opening Brief (at 3), § 441a(d) 
does not even permit the Party to pay to send one first-class mail- 
ing to every party member in Colorado. While the government 
correctly notes that parties may distribute certain materials to 
members if accomplished through “volunteer activities” (Br. 40 
n.82), FEC regulations are so complex and restrictive as to make 
it often impractical for parties to comply. See, ¢.g., J.A. 215. For 
instance, the regulations do not permit mailings to be accomplished 
by commercial vendors or from lists maintained by commercial 
vendors, which are the most cost-effective means of reaching mem- 
bers and voters. As the Chairman of the Colorado Party testified 
(J.A. 215), the difficulty of interpreting what constitutes “volun- 
teer activity” also leads many parties to avoid relying upon the 
“volunteer activity” exception altogether. 


19 


the right to advocate expressly the election of their candi- 
dates robs them of their very purpose for being. 


In ruling on campaign finance laws in the last 20 years, 
this Court has shown a sensitivity to such weighty inter- 
ests. For instance, while recognizing that expenditures 
and contributions both implicate core First Amendment 
rights, the Court has given heightened scrutiny to expendi- 
ture limitations because of their more significant impact 
on speech. While limiting the ability of unions and busi- 
ness corporations to influence elections, the Court has 
consistently safeguarded the rights of individuals, candi- 
dates, PACs and other political organizations to speak 
without limit on electoral issues.” 


What the Colorado Party seeks is a similar sensitivity 
to its interests. Though the government’s novel contribu- 
tion analysis tries to obscure the issue, there remains one 
principle at the core of this case: political party spending 
limitations, no matter how they are implemented, silence 


2 Even unions and business corporations have wider latitude 
to engage in unlimited speech than do political parties, as they 
may communicate to the general public so long as that speech 
falls short of “express advocacy,” and is not coordinated with any 
federal candidate. See MCFL, 479 U.S. at 249. Moreover, while a 
party may not even send one letter to each of its members without 
violating § 441a(d), there is no limit upon a union’s use of com- 
pulsory dues to communicate with its members, regardless of 
whether the communication is “express advocacy,” and regardless 
of whether the communication is coordinated with candidates. See 
United States v. Congress of Industrial Org., 335 U.S. 106 (1948). 
As noted in the Colorado Party’s Opening Brief (at 6-7 n.5), the 
AFL-CIO has recently announced a $35 million campaign targeting 
candidates for the House of Representatives, which will be financed 
by a mandatory assessment on all member unions regardless of 
whether individual members prefer those candidates. See Frank 
Swoboda & Thomas Edsall, “AFL-CIO Endorses Clinton, Approves 
$35 Million Political Program,” Washington Post, Mar. 26, 1996, 
at A6. This unlimited spending is in addition to the spending by 
the separate segregated fund of the AFL-CIO noted in the govern- 


ment’s brief. 


20 


vital political speech for no discernable purpose. As such, 
they are unconstitutional. 


* * ok * 


For the reasons stated herein and in the Colorado 
Party’s Opening Brief, the Party respectfully requests that 
the judgment below be reversed. 


Respectfully submitted, 


JAN WITOLD BARAN 
Counsel of Record 
THOMAS W. KIRBY 
CAROL A, LAHAM 
MICHAEL E. TONER 
Scott S. HARRIS 


WILEY, REIN & FIELDING 
1776 K Street, N.W. 


Washington, D.C. 20006 
(202) 429-7000 


April 5, 1996 Attorneys for Petitioners 


